"The #1 Computer Game Magazine PS/2 Warp aming on our Tu is nings of lory rontlines SP Baseball Hardball IV more "


"« Triad is a truly awesome game!\" But don't take our word for it. RISE QETRIAD DARK EUR \"Rise of the Triad is sure to have every DOOM freak in the world lining up just to drool all over it) Interactive Entertainment. \"Rise of the Triad provides everything an action gamer could want.\" — Computer Game Review \"This game is the most multiplayer-friendly product we've seen. DeathMatch will never be the same again. -Computer Gaming World DWUBIECARE TOBA 323 Tdunt your opponents with RemoteRidicule during 11-player network games. ONUDBPBOUTD:237 An industry first Violence Level Adjustmer with password-only gel gore if you want it TUTUMIABIDI CUI Die as one of five unique characters (mal & female) on over thirty levels of action! This is the game you've been waiting for An all-out blast-fest. Th. unrelenting blood and fire rampage of you most twisted night mares. With ten incredibl vicious weapons, yo annihilate the enemy Your machine gun blast holes in the walls, Spark and metal fly as you blow apart everything in sight. Mass destruction Circle Reader Service #43 has never been this fun! INCORPORATED Created by Apogee Software, Ltd, and distributed by Formen Inc. 7641 E. Gray Rd, Scottsdale, AZ, 85260 (800) 263-2390 Available on disk and CD. Supports serial, modem, and 11-player network (individual or team) play. (body bags not included) "


"BIZARRE ADVENTURES THE BIZAR thee Schnidele Woodruff and the Scho He doesn't know who he is. He's not sure where he is. And he can't get the Schnibble out of his head. And he come soon A challenging screwball adventure... it's no walk in the park. Join our unlikely hero Woodruff on his preposterous quest to find his kidnapped stepfather, save the Boozook civilization, and try to remember just who the heck he is. Caution: This game may be too rapid-fire funny for the humor impaired. For your copy, see your local software dealer or call 1-800-757-7707. SIERRA Curcle Reader Service #122 01995 SIC Online In Bellevue, WA 98007 All rights T WA "


"FLY! cou theater One kind of short time ago, we set out o create a new kind of flight imulator. One that would bring ou the beauty, the feel, and the challenge of flying. It's a special eeling, a bond all pilots share, rom barnstormers to fighter ocks. To fly. To be in the air. To master the airplane. Flight Unlimited TM brings you into this exclusive fraternity where it's not about tracking needles or flying vectors, but about feeling the vind or the gut-wrenching ensation of a perfectly executed -naproll. Where you can fly with no limits. The Feel We use a unique physics -ystem known as RealTime Computational Fluid Dynamics co simulate the motion of airplanes n flight. t puts you in the cockpit of a real plane, able to fly any maneuver, do any. ching a real plane can technology allows us to use aerial photographs to create photo-realistic, 3D texture-mapped landscapes of actual locations. You'll fly over spectacular scenery, seeing what the world looks like from above. The Challenge Flying is a thrilling experience. It's fun. It's challenging. Even dangerous. It's definitely an acquired skill. So, we created 30 on-line lessons that will teach you how to fly. From the basics to complex aerobatic maneuvers, your instructor will fly with you, talking you through your lessons, building your skills. And then, to make it even more fun, we added unique 3D cockpit modes, multiple camera views, a host of other features as well as 50 aerial race courses that will test your ability and give you that adrena line rush that comes only from competition. S FIGHT 1o. The Beauty Dur new mageScaping\" UNLIMITED Available in major retail outlets or order direct 1(800) 360-7455 Looking Glass Technologies 01995 Looking Glass Technologies, Inc. Looking Glass and Flight Unlimited are registered trademarks of Looking Glass Technologies, Inc., Cambridge, MA "


"«At last game players have access to a realistic flight sim with that all too rare element of fun.\" -Edge Magazine \"It produced a rush that Microsoft's venerable Flight Simulator could not approach.» -San Diego Union-Tribune 'This could be the revolutionary flight simulator that takes you out of the wind tunnel and puts you in the air.» Computer Gaming World PC CD ROM Distributed by Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. eserved Circle Reader Service #299 "


"The Legend Returns. ungeon EQUUS IN ZIT BORHO TOTAL ZHUB Years ago, it set the standard for role playing games. Now, just when the nightmares are starting to fade, it's back ... and it's bigger and badder than ever. Introducing Dungeon Master II: The Legend of Skullkeep. From its storm ravaged villages to trap-filled dungeons you'll face creatures and characters that actually think for themselves and react to your actions. It's the most realistic role-playing world ever created. Where real-time combat combines with finely-tuned traps and puzzles to test your logic and reflexes to the limit. Featuring an all new version of the interface that defined point-and-click, 3-D sound effects and stunning visual effects, it's the ultimate quest of magic, dungeons and monsters. Dungeon Master II. You'll be its prisoner once again. TORHAM EZ2UUS 220 prisoner once again. Tlaplats Available for your IBM PC and Macintosh. See your local software relailer or call 1-800-909-GAME. BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.  1995 Interplay Productions and Software I leaven, Inc. All Rights Reserved. DUNGEON MASTER is a trademark of Software Heaven, Inc., Circle Reader Service #258 17922 Fitch Avenue, Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 "


"EFTL ,  | || "


"FEATURES 32 SNEAK PREVIEW! X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP Chris Lombardi dives into the sequel to last year's top-rated X-COM! and tries his webbed hand at intercepting Unidentified Swimming Objects. 36 SNEAK PREVIEW! MECHLORDS Assassination, combat, diplomacy and economics form New World's intrigue-rich, politically sensitive universe of mechanized warfare and neo-feudal space conquest. Alan Emrich and Johnny Wilson uncover the dark underside of the latest strategy game from Sim Tex. 64 Get The Big Picture By Playing Games On Your TV 42 Victory In Europe-A 50th Anniversary WWII Wargames Special 42 SPECIAL SECTION: VICTORY IN EUROPE Fifty years after the historic Allied victory, Terry Coleman takes readers on a computer game \"tour of duty\" through the entire European Theater of War. If you've ever wondered which computer game covers which battles or campaigns the best, this is a \"must read\" article. From the opening Blitzkrieg through the Fall of Berlin, CGW gives you the right kind of intelligence to recreate these important events. 64 PLAYING ON THE BIG SCREEN Tired of that 14\" monitor? John Brassil discusses the advantages and disadvantages of using NTSC converters to connect your computer to a large screen television. Join Brassil in asking, \"TV or Not TV?\" 80 OS/2 WARP FACTOR You've seen the television ads. Now, hear from gaming expert Jerry Golick about OS/2 WARP's potential for true 32-bit computer gaming. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD APRIL 1995 ADVENTURE / ROLE-PLAYING 36 Murder, Mayhem And Metal Monstrosities in MECHLORDS E 88 SCORPIA'S STING Tired of paying for 900 hint lines and hint books in order to finish a game you paid $50 for? So is Scorpia! 92 SCORPIA'S MAIL If you need to: shed a little light on the subject of NOCTROPOLIS; stay out of the WAKE OF THE RAVAGER; pick up the right kind of lore to succeed in DRAGON LORE; or discover the right kind of hospitality for THE 7TH GUEST, you've come to the right place. 94 COMMANDER BLOOD Long after most gamers have forgotten Mindscape's original CAPTAIN BLOOD, the new Mindscape brings its sequel to market. Peter Olafson returns with us to those thrilling days of yesteryear. 106 CYCLONES Mark Clarkson places his targeting reticle on CYCLONES. SSI's new first-person shooter provides gamers with an adventure reminiscent of H.G. Wells' classic War of the Worlds. 110 RETRIBUTION Humanity's defense has gone drastically wrong and Martin Cirulis suggests it will take more than flying spaceships and driving tanks to make things right again. "


"114 STAR REACH Jeff James reports that all aliens are created equal when it comes to the space vessels in Interplay's new game of galactic conquest. 118 DIGGERS We dispatched a mole to report on the underground goings-on in Millenium Media's DIGGERS, and Jason Kapalka found a LEMMINGS in disguise. 122 STRATEGY! TIE FIGHTER: DEFENDER OF THE EMPIRE Mission-by-Mission pointers transcribed from an illicit document intercepted by Jason Kapalka, including a sidebar on bonus goals. 32 SPORTS 132 ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT and HARDBALL IV Jim Gindin considers two possible replacement players to compensate for this year's absent baseball season. TERROR FROM THE SIMULATIONS DEEP 139 BOGEY'S BAR & GRILL Frustrated by feverish buttonhunting in the heat of combat? Join Tom «KC\" Basham as he explores voice recognition systems for flight sims. 142 WINGS OF GLORY Origin's WINGS OF GLORY celebrates the glory of the \"War to End All War\" with the Strike game to end all Strike games. Martin Cirulis reports. 148 STRATEGY! ACES OF THE DEEP Veteran submariner Kevin Turner takes you deeper into ACES OF THE DEEP than you ever thought you could fathom. TIE Fighfer Tactics For Defender Of The Empire 122 STRATEGY / WARGA MES 157 BROADSIDES & GRIPESHOT Alan Emrich urges wargamers to discover the spirit of giving in order to recruit prospective computer gamers. 160 FRONT LINES It's back to the future time as Patrick Miller considers Impressions' new \"beer and pretzels» game of advanced tank warfare. DEPARTMENTS 12 EDITORIAL Try Before You Buy 16 INTERFACE The Gamers Talk Back 20 READ.ME The Latest Buzz, Whir, And Click 182 SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Downloads To Discover 186 HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Inside Artificial Opponents 192 ADVERTISER INDEX Where To Find Games 166 OPERATION EUROPE The Koei game system fails to take a beachhead, to reviewer Terry Coleman's chagrin. 170 GAZILLIONAIRE Teamsters in space! Do you have what it takes to run an interplanetary shipping empire? Arinn Dembo tells you how you can in Spectrum HoloByte's new trading game. 174 SIMTOWER This new game from Maxis allows you to run a vertical SIMCITY a la Robert Silverberg's The World Inside. Paul Schuytema fills in the big picture. 178 THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE 2 Jason Kapalka juryrigs a review a la Rube Goldberg for Jeff Tunnell's latest game of gadget grappling and widget wrestling. 194 UNDER THE HOOD Game Installation Made Easier 203 HALL OF FAME All-Time Great Games 204 THE TOP 100 Readers Rate The Top Games 206 PATCHES Game Files To Kill Bugs Dead 208 THE RUMOR BAG Rex Mus "


"ATLANTIS VER TUTTE Hinta IT'S HERE AND IT'S POWERFUL! OVE. THE PERFECT GENERAL || is an unbeatable strategic and tactical experience with stunning graphics, intuitive interface and the sharpest artificial intelligence ever. THE PERFECT GENERAL || provides you with a superior challenge and brilliance that is unsurpassed in the computer gaming world. Feel the power as you command missions in the most exciting eras of world conflict. Airpower controls the sky, Rockets hit their mark, and tanks rumble across barren terrain as you lead your armies to victory on any one of the thrilling fields of battle. 5 levels of difficulty from novice to expert take you through historically and technically accurate encounters with the enemy. Modem and null-modem play capabilities let you choose your competitor. Master the intensity of nations at war. We proudly present to you the invincible sequel to the Perfect General... THE PERFECT GENERAL II. Created by: QUANTUM QUALITY PRODUCTIONS, INC. A Division of American Laser Games, Inc. 4801 Lincoln Rd. NE  Albuquerque, NM 87109 Sales Information: 505-880-5447 Circle Reader Service #355 "


". Two GRAPHICAL OPTIONS FOR GAME PLAY  ZOOM IN FOR A TACTICAL VIEW, OR ZOOM OUT FOR A STRATEGIC VANTAGE  TACTICAL AIR SUPPORT ST  GREAT NEW WEAPONRY LIKE ELEPHANT TANKS, MACHINE GUNS CMOBILE), MACHINE GUN NESTS AND MANY MORE FULL BLOWN CAMPAIGNS  VASTLY IMPROVED COMPUTER OPPONENT  A MULTITUDE OF THE MOST EXOTIC SCENARIOS You'u EVER ENCOUNTER A NEW AND BRILLIANT GAME SCORING HISTORY SOUNDFONTTM TECHNOLOGY & DIGITIZED SOUNDS FOR A REALISTIC COMBAT ENGAGEMENT  LIVE ACTION VIDEO OF STRATEGIES FROM MILITARY GENERALS O NEW AND DIFFERENT SCENARIOS! PERFECT GENERAL "


"lay with thousands of gamers on the Information Super Highway and lose yourself in the graphic adventures and traditional games offered on the Multi-Player Games Network. MPG-NET gives you something you just can't find on a floppy disk...another human mind. Whether you like fantasy role-playing, 3D action, war simulation or card games, MPG-NET offers games 24 hours a day, seven days a week with players from all over the globe. PLAY GAMES WORLDWIDE ON THE INFORMATION SUPER HIGHWAY. Operation Market Garden Kingdom of Drakkar LINK Warlords of the Apocalypse Fief Quest War Room SE2 Empire Builder FOR 00020000 BDE011801303 MPG-Net Lobby VUE ACCESS THROUGH INTERNET FOR ONLY $200 per hour 2 "


"In December 1994, MPG-NET goes  Download files from our database all graphic! No more text menus. No and read the latest in gaming news, headaches trying to log on. It's never updates and stories from other been easier to be on-line! members. It's as easy as visiting your hometown library! Here's what else you'll find:  The Persona Creation Room-lets you  Electronic Bulletin Boards filled generate a face to match your on-line with the latest adventure reports and personality! discussions by gamers from all over the world!  Conference Rooms-have real-time conversations with people all over the  Electronic Mail-send and receive world and see more than just their messages with all your friends and words, you'll get a chance to see what plan when to meet and play your they look like! favorite game! MPG-Net News  More games than you've ever seen before! MPG-NET can be accessed with a local phone call from over 600 cities in the USA and 40 nations worldwide. All you need is a modem, a phone line and a computer to join the fun! Call our 800 number from 9am to 8pm Eastern time on weekdays to receive our free starter kit. MPG-NET-twenty four hours a day, seven days a week, bringing you games that will take you out of this world! Call now: 1-800-GET-GAME. DMPG-NETNEWS BAS TELO Conference Table Electronic Database SALOT TENBen E HILL B ESL 42 20232BOL Conference Room DI LIBISEM TOUR DU Electronic Mail Persona Creation Room DI Access Room wws TANTALUS 1994 MPG-NET, Inc. Multi-player Games Network and MPG-NET are service marks of MPG-NET, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Empire Builder is a Irademark of Mayfair Games, Inc. Operation Market-Garden and Star Cruiser are trademarks of GDW Games, Inc. Fielquest and Warlords of the Apocalypse are trademarks of the Dreamers Guild. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. MPG-NET Your Multi-Player Games Networks 1-800-GET-GAME Circle Reader Service #250 The Dreamers Guild "


"Rants & Raves Radio Ways The Virtues Of «Try Before You Buy» Computer Games by Johnny L. Wilson ost of us do not buy comlimited to those who know where to find taste of what they could experience on a pact discs by their covers. it), nothing does for computer games the broader playing field. Somehow, I firmly We either know the artists equivalent of what radio does for the believe that publishers would net more by reputation, have lis recording industry. new sales than they would lose with such a tened to the album at a \"sharenet\" option. friend's house, or have NETWORK PROGRAMMING This so-called \"sharenet\" option could heard some of the album With the rush of networkable computer be implemented in several ways. First, on the radio. There isn't much risk with games, the problem has been exacerbatpublishers could opt for the razor blade regard to the purchasing decision. You baed. In order to discourage gamers from approach. Every packaged version of the sically know what you're getting when you installing one copy of a game throughout game would include the \"sharenet\" levels plunk your plastic or cash on the counter. an entire network, most networkable on the original CD. If anyone wanted to With a computer game, however, you games have copy protection for the comadd the networkable option and additionoften don't know what you're getting. munications module of their game. So, in al levels, they could buy a separate disk or Playable demos, limited versions of the order for me to play networked MAGIC pay a download fee to get the network opgames, are relatively rare, so you find CARPET with colleagues during our coffee tion. Second, publishers could put everyyourself having to filter your purchase debreak, we would all need our own copies thing on the CD in the same way cision through feature lists on of the game. That's not a problem in the as they currently do, but only the box, critical relong run. Gamers should purchase their require the copy protection views from magaown copies of games they wish to play. to come into play bezines and/or H owever, the problem is convincing my yond certain levels. on-line services colleagues that they want to play netThird, publishers that you can worked MAGIC CARPET. Having to ante up could use a scheme trust, and word $50 or $60 to see if a networkable game is like IBM's Uniloc sysof mouth. It's a cool experience or not can be a relativetem. The Uniloc systough to expely high hurdle to surmount. Wouldn't it tem allows publishers rience the full be wiser to include a limited network verto encode each CD SO impact of a sion of a game in each box? Publishers that certain files cannot game without could put a couple of different unprotectbe accessed without buying it, and ed levels, scenarios or racetracks into each registering the software. most stores no networkable game, just to give gamers a Once the fee is paid, a longer have genercode is given to remove ous return policies. the encryption. The upWith the exception of per levels of each netshareware (and that is workable game could Illustration by Brian Clarke 12 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  APRIL 1995 "


"Build a Railroad Empire with Iron Horses and an Iron Will! ANYC JNYC 1830 M3 ES Roll against history's greatest! HISTORY STOOR B:0 Railroads & Robber Barons Welcome to the 19th Century! With immigrants pouring in, America is poised for explosive westward growth. Magnates famed for their greed and business acumen rush to cash in. Can you handle the challenge? Lay track, build stations, purchase trains, and manipulate stocks to build an empire of iron and steel. History's greatest Robber Barons will try to stop you by undercutting your lines and buying out your stock. Your only weapons are money and trains. Will your empire succeed or fall under the wheels of the competition? ACCEPT CANCEL Break through the competition! Actul seruens may vary Italiens Aitor AS The Avalon Hill CD ROM COMING SOON Available on PC Compatibles, 386 or better, 4 MB of Ratn, 3.5\" Hiph Game Company SIMTUX Denuity Poppy. Moure, VGA color graphics. Sound Support for Sound DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. Elaster AW32. Sound Blaster 16. Sound Blaster Pro and Compatible 4517 Harford Road Baltimore, MD 21214 Pro Audio Spectrum and Roland. 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons can be found in computer game stores near you. For order information or for the name of a retailer near you, call 1-800-999—3222. Ask for Dept. CGW 1 Circle Rearler Service #295 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD have Uniloc encryption. Then, if gamers liked the sharenet version, they could telephone in their registration and receive access to the rest of the networkable portion of the game. Fourth, publishers could release \"Multiplayer Packs\" of their games which, for an additional fee (say $20 or so?) would feature the full version of the game plus stripped-down, network-only versions of the game for two or three friends. In this way, I could have competition with my friends or colleagues and, if they liked the game, they might end up purchasing full versions in order to improve their skill and destroy me in the future. It seems to me that this would be a win-win proposition for both gamers and publishers. Gamers would get to try before they buy\" and publishers would get to protect their investments. What could make more sense? State of the Magazine: We can't do a lot about the \"uy before you buy\" approach ourselves, but we can help with your buying decisions. This month, we have introduced our first Computer Gaming World Score Card. So many readers have asked for a comprehensive listing of the star ratings given by our editors that we have put together an alphabetical list from those games rated during the last six months. We will be publishing the list regularly and hope that you find it of real value. Remember, the star ratings are the consensus ratings of CGW's full eclitorial staff. They do not always agree with the opinions of the reviewers or the consensus of a majority of our readers, but are always provided after significant deliberation (you can't believe the heated debates that occur between our editors each and every month). To get maximum benefit from the card, just tear it out along the perforation and fold it along the scored edges. Then, you have a wallet-sized reference tool that you can carry with you on your next shopping expedition. Happy value hunting! The #1 Computer Game Magazine APRIL 1995, NUMBER 129 Founder Russell Sipe Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Terry Coleman Allen Greenberg George Jones Interchange Editor Alan Emrich Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games), Tom Basham (Simulations) Contents are copyrighted by Zill-Davis Publishing Co., 1995, Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. bscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in US dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-1450 within the US and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604.1.164 or fax to (303) 604-7465 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Editorial Ollices: 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6.00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Zilt-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 Internet: 76703.622 compuserve.com CompuServe (76703,692) Telephone: (714) 283-3000 America On-Line: CGW Fax: (714) 283-31-14 Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW For advertising information only, call: ImagiNATION: Box 1048 Lee J. Uniacke, (714) 285-3000 x11 HOW DO WE RATE? The Guide To CGW's Review Rating System * Outstanding: That rare game that gets it all right. The graphics, sound, interface, and, of course, the game play come together to form a Transcendent Gaming Experience. For quality reprints in quantities of 100 or more, contact REPRINT SERVICES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. 315 5th Avenue N.W.. St. Paul, MN 55112. (612) 582-3800, FAX (612) 633-1862. * Very Good: A quality game that succeeds in many areas. May have minor problems, but is still worth your time and money, especially if you're interested in the subject matter/genre. Average: A mixed bag. Can often be a game that reaches for the stars, but falls short in significant areas. Can also just be a game that does what it does well, but lacks flair or originality. ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY Chairman and CEO: Eric Hippeau President, Consumer Media Group: J. Scott Briggs Executive Vice President: Mike Edelbart President, Computer Intellegence/InfoCorp: Bob Brown President, International Media Group: J.B. Holston III Senior Vice President. Circulation: Baird Davis Senior Vice President: Rachel Greenfield Vice President, Assistant to the Chairman: Tom McGrade Vice President, Business Manager: T.L. Thompson Vice President, Circulation Services: James F. Ramaley Vice President, Corporate Research and Analysis: Elda Vale Vice President, Controller and Treasurer: Timothy Mitchell Vice President, Creative Services: Herbert Stern Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary: 1. Malcolm Morris Vice President, General Manager: Bruce W. Bourne Vice President, Human Resources: Rayna Brown Vice President, Marketing and Development Group: Herbert Stern Vice President, Production: Roger Herrmann Vice President, Technology: Bill Machrone Chief Information Officer: Wellington Y. Chin Executive Director, Information Systems: Owen Weckley Executive Director, Marketing Services: Jim Manning Production Director: Walter ). Terlecki Director of Licensing: Jean Lamensdorf Director of Public Relations: Gregory Jarboe Weak: A game with serious problems. May be buggy, may not have much play value, may be ill-conceived—and you may want to think twice about buying it. Abysmal: That rare game that gets it all wrong. Usually a buggy, incomplete, and/or valueless product. 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"The graphics in today's games look just like photos. If you'd rather play movies than watch a slide show, you'd better get them developed on a Falcon. \"If you want to go all out for games, the Falcon is the best bet for your money,\" -Paul C. Schuytema, Computer Gaming World The Pentium 90 they sent me is a beautiful plece of work, primarily because they don't go with the lowest bidder when buying standard componentry. 96% Overall Score\" Ted Chapman, Computer Game Review intele inside THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE TM If you need the fastest computer performance for your gaming, personal, or business software, you need to fly a Falcon! The MACH VP-90 MHz Pentium $2,995 Standard features as of 2/1/94: To Order Call: Intel Pentium M 90 MHz Processor 100% Compatible with All IBM PC Software 1-800-258-6778 Falcon PCI Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache 64 Bit PCI Graphics Board with 1 Megabyte 16.8 Million Colors! VISA, MasterCard & Discover Accepted Falcon PCI Bus Enhanced IDE Hard Drive Controller Financing Available On Approved Credit. 8 Megabytes of RAM expandable to 128 1.44 Floppy Drive 540 Megabyte Enhanced IDE 8ms Hard Drive with 128K Cache 195 ms QUAD-Speed CD-ROM Drive NEW! Creative Labs SoundBlaster 16 & Shielded Multimedia Speakers CH Products FlighiStick PRO 4 Button Joystick with Viewing Control CH Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport Mini Tower Caso with 250 Watt UL approved power supply 15\" Digital Non-Interlaced Super VGA Monitor, .28dp, Edgo-lo-Edge Display -NEW 101 Key Keyboard, 3 Button Serial Mouse MS-DOS, Windows\" (latest versions) & 10 free games on CD-ROM! One Year Parts & Labor Warranty, One Year On-site Service UL, CSA, TUV and FCC class B certified FALCON NORTHWEST 16550 UARTS. Temperature sensitve lans, Customized BIOS' and many other unique features! COMPUTER SYSTEMS Each MACH V is custom built to meet your specific needs. There are hundreds ol options to choose from. When you're ready to buy, please call us for the latest quote. 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 rademarks are the property of their respective owners Circle Reader Service #141 "


"Interface LETTERS FROMC GW READERS 00 Movie Player helaamde om Elle hle Help Edi Movie Window Embedding Options Foto Copy Paste con Tot Show More Chiper Cyle Caption Roanh.NOV Parte Play Snection Only Land around Movie Urs Marie Potte Care Stop Al End Save An Dam Bestore le beau Sie Dulle sue Loop black and fouth MYSTERY ratings (to which I am opfacing page 112 called The Com#2 — I was curious as to RELIGION posed), you could make the puler Gaming World Score Card why, when speaking of characI recently purchased MYST ratings more useful by includthat lets you create a wallet-sized ters, he mentions \"her\" and and absolutely love the game. ing them for games listed in buying guide. You can carry it \"she\" only. Does this mean But an interesting fact turned your \"Top 100 Games.\" For with you to your local software that a female is the only kind up when I played one of the each game on the list that was store to make sure you don't pick of character you can play in movies that make up the game reviewed in a «post ratings\" isup the wrong game on the right the game? I hope not! This with another QuickTime playsue of CGW, I would like to subject or forget the title of a may appeal to some, but I myer. The file in question is see the rating highly recommended game. self-even in fantasy-prefer x:\\qtw\\channel\\holoamth.mov While we're talking about to be a male. (I have nothing (where x is your CDratings, though, we would against men who like to fantaROM drive). If like to reiterate that the size about being a woman, but you play this file Ele summary box is not the rethis is not a fantasy of mine.) backwards, an viewer's impressions. It is Mark Hocking ominous phrase labeled \"The Editors Oxnard, CA can be heard. Speak» because it reflects RUSH LIM a consensus rating by Johnny Wilson responds: The BAUGH UNDERour staff: purpose of the DAGGERFALL sneuk STANDS! Frankly, As for Mr. Bond, did preview was to offer a taste of I almost died laughwe say \"Larry Bond?\" what you can expect later this ing when I heard it. MYST that we meant \"James year. A review would have been I guess the people at Bond.\" Yeah, that's it! impossible because the product isCYAN were having That's the ticket. And nl finished enough to talk about some fun that day. I'd MYST-ERT we weren't talking play balance, difficulty and pacjust like to end with aboul HARPOON! It was ing. Since it is a sequel, however, kudos to all the makers even lesss MOONRAKER. Yeah, we just misI could talk about what was differof MYST and the peoand a reference spelled it. Okay, we know that ent from THE ELDER SCROLLS: ple at CGW. Dittos, to the issue number where the \"former\" doesn't mean «retired.\" ARENA in terms of character genRush. rating was given. I think it We just slipped a cog on that one. eration, interface design and the Lee Betzenberger would be extremely useful to game's projected approach to the State College, PA compare the initial reviewer's REVERSE SEXISM story. We will, of course, review impressions, as given in the Why someone would buy anthe game when it is released. Frankly, we were skeptical at first. stars,\" to the readers' impresother computer game magaAs for the use of feminine proYour letter reminded us of the old sions as contained in the polls. zine (aside from just nouns in the article, this did not Beatles hoax where you played a I also have one minor quibas an add-on to reflect a limited song backwards and heard, \"Paul ble concerning your biograCGW) is beyond me. is dead!\" We checked it out, phy of Larry Bond in the Hall (Blind ignorance?) though, and found out that you of Fame comments about Anyway, thanks for were right! If you use QUICKTIME HARPOON. While he is a foryour hard work. 2.0's movie player and choose mer Naval ollicer, he did not Now, why I \"Embedding Options\" within the serve long enough to retire gave Johnny L. Edit menu, you can click on \"Loop from the Navy. Wilson's DAGGERBack & Forth.\" This will play the Jamie Adams FALL preview a movie file forward and backward. Fairfax, VA C+ rather than Not only does the holoamth.mov what I usually file play the phrase, but the monYou are definitely not the first to give his reamth.mov acts as a dillo. ask for a list of our ratings. views—an A+: Many readers have requested #1 I was HAVE A BLAST such a list and we've come up expecting As long as you continue the with an interesting way of promore of a repolicy of providing capsule viding it. Check out the insert view; and MYST-ERIOUS UTTERANCE There are some files in MYST that sound like gibberish and, when played backwards, make even less sense: \"Rush Limbaugh Understands.\" san AT: # I was CHARACTER CORNER THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL Will feature a wide assortment of characters to play from all genders, races and character classes. 16 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"\"One Must Fall 2097 is the best fighting game available for the PC, bar none\" COMPUTER GAME REVIEW ONE MUST FALL 7209 Supports dual joystick head-tohead combat in 5 unique arenas 11 robots with over 120 frames of 3D animation per robot! Win cash for repairs, upgrades training & buying new moves Run out of cash and your repairs are over \"MOVE OVER, DOOM, FOR 32 ONE MUST FALL: 2097 IS A SURE WINNER!» GAMEBYTES Are you tired of PC beat-em-up games that don't live up to their hype? PC Gamer says \"this is a truly excellent game\" and \"you won't be disappointed\" with One Must Fall 2097. PC Answers calls it \"outstanding\", PC Home calls it \"a must\" and PC Gamer says it \"plays brilliantly\". Computer Game Review says One Must Fall 2097 is \"fast, furious and fun above and beyond the call of duty\". PC Gamer also calls it «the definitive\" and \"most awesome beat-'em-up on the PC\". Try our games on Even people who tend to not like fighting games seem to enjoy the sheer CompuServe just playability and fun of One Must Fall. GO EPIC Play head-to-head against your friends or fight your way through increasingly difficult tournaments. Use your winnings to upgrade, trade robots and purchase training in an attempt to defeat diverse enemies with unique personalities. Features multi-channel, metal-crushing sound effects and heart-pounding digital music. One Must Fall 2097 is only $39. Or, get the game, the 60-page OMF Strategy Guide and a color poster for only $49. NOT AVAILABLE IN STORES CALL 1-800-972-7434 TO ORDER!  Please add $4 s&h. Visa, Mastercard and checks accepted. MD residents add 5% sales tax. Every order includes a bonus shareware game. In UK/Europe call Epic MegasGames UK Ltd. at +44 (0)1767-260903. Epic MegaGames Inc. 3204 Tower Oaks Blvd #410. Rockville MD 20852  (301) 983-9771  Fax (301) 299-3841 TRY THE SHAREWARE VERSION TODAY! On CompuServe GO EPIC and visit the Epic Forum or call Exec-PC BBS at (414) 789-4360 or on the Internet ftp any of our shareware games from ftp.um.edu in the /msdos/games/epic directory. 12 "


"On March 3, 1992, Frank and Mora Tubman tried an 05/ platform with a fragmented hard drive. design where you would have to nouns. It was not intended to offend rating system says that a fivehour for the hard-cores) and play a female character. Interestanyone, but I hoped that their usage star game is \"rare,\" four then swap disks so the movie ingly enough, however, there would have a slight jarring effect games (WING COMMANDER III, can continue. One does not have been many computer role that might sensitize us all to the fact MAGIC CARPET, FRONT PAGE have to continuously swap playing games where players, that modern English does discrimi SPORTS: FOOTBALL PRO '95, disks during gameplay. So, in whether male or female, were male against females. For whut it's and NASCAR RACING) received fact, you only swap disks 3-4 forced to play a male character. I worth, I primarily play male churthis \"rare\" rating! Either times through the entire wrote the article using female proacters. However, I recognize that it games have reached their movie (depending on how nouns as both an exercise and an is possible to learn a lot about dispeak in quality and have no many times you want to watch experiment. It was a personal excrimination and patronization room for improvement, or you the funeral scene). This was a ercise to remind me that we serve through digital cross-dressing in a need to add a six-star possibil good question Brian asked female gamers as well as male role-playing game, especially onity! I believe a little explanaand I know a lot of people are gamers, even though female line role-playing games. Finally, I tion is in order. confused by it. CGW readers are a decided mihope I can get back in the A+ colReuven Weiser Chris Schoenfeld nority. I also thought the reverse umn in this issue. West Orange, NJ New Hampshire of traditional usage might be welcomed by members of this minority RAREAS Considering that those reviews Not anymore. Thanks for the folas a refreshing change of pace. A FINE WINE were written in December and that low-up. It was also an experiment to see I love your magazine, but one many publishers plan for their if anyone actually noticed the imthing from your January issue very best games to be released in The overkeerd versatility of the Commodore 64 DUTERWERIN A SCK TAU. plied sexism in one's choice of prodisturbed me. Although your December, we don'l think the number of five star The 5th Wave games is odd. For By Rich Tennant everything there is a balance, however. There are likely to be many months, like running Strike Commander through Windows on March, in which the majority of games are below the threePRK ENNANT star median. NOTAWAVECD COMPHILE MANDER This is about the 5th Wave In the February cartoon in the January, 1995 issue, Brian A. issue. The Commodore 64 was Libby, a CDthe best game machine of the ROMless gamer 1980s and more versatile than (and our hearts any clone machine ever ingo out to all of vented. I, like many others, them), asked if switched reluctantly to a clone CDs had to be as software became less and swapped back less available for the 64. and forth in WING Anyone who remembers the COMMANDER III horrors of the clones before in order to play the 286 will agree. The days of the game. Well, carefree computing are gone. you didn't really Now, I spend most of my time answer the quesworrying about viruses, comtion very well, as patibility, and buying hardyou compared it ware at a fast enough rate to to disk-swapping keep up with the games. games that came If you really want to dry your before the hard hat, just remove the fan from The harddisk, seeking power from whatever disk. As you know your 486 and start cooking. SOUICE, began tapping appliances throughout WCIII is not like Nick Bassett this at all, as you Vienna, Austria the household electrical system, eventually play the game for sucking time itself from the wall clocks, a week or so as Or maybe an original Pentium? thrusting the couple into an irreversible time-loop? | you work through the movie (ok, an 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD APRIL 1995 "


"the Power behind the Power could be you! In the next energy starved millennium, you will command one of four empire building, power grabbing megacorps. These cutthroat behemoths will stop at nothing to control mankind's vital THE energy supplies. POWER BEHIND Explore, build, expand, and plot your way to global THE POWER energy dominance. Only one can triumph as the undisputed PowerHouse. FIGHT FOR FUEL And the others...? Check out the recycling bin. Fred YT DEREN 2092122 De Features: 9 Energy types Superb SVGA graphics Windows CD-ROM only Impressions  Live video: ENN News!  Build and Explore Speech Global economic and Cutting edge R&D political models  1995 Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234 Cambridge Massachusetts 02142 IBM PC screenshots may vary Circle Reader Service #78 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Horror Plot, Puzzles And Pyrotechnics Lead The Way On Sierra's '95 Roster a result, made a major modifilethal, the player-as-wife must cation. She changed the movesolve the house's mystery and ment screen for the on-screen save her own life. characters to take advantage David Holm (Street Soldiers) of the cinematic fast-cut. The plays the husband and is result, they hope, will be building up quite a portfolio movie-quality production valas an inter-actor. He also played Sam Jenkins in Electronic Arts' NocTROPOLIS. He feels that he's VICTORY, VICTORIA Victoria Morsel, PHANTASMAGORIA's leading done some of lady, says that acting in a computer game is a stretch for his best work her. We see why. The authentic opera house at right will ever in PHANprovide one of the backgrounds in GABRIEL KNIGHT II: A BEAST TASMAGORIA. WITHIN. Digitized photos enhanced by traditional computer \"I get to really artists provide an extra lustre. act 'big' in some places, Don't ever let Roberta Williams There is no doubt that a ues with quality game play. going all the way from Allhear you call PHANTASMAGORIA synergy has developed bePHANTASMAGORIA is a horror American husband to crazed an \"interactive movie.\" She will tween Williams and Maris. story revolving around the evil maniac.\" Victoria Morsel smile a half-smile, breathe out Maris has added to the game house concept. A happy, lov(Random Factor, early appeara barely audible sigh, and insist experience by adding new ing couple move into their ances on the Martin television that, \"It's a game. It has plotcamera angles to the producdream home, an eccentric series) plays the wife and feels and puzzles, just like my other tion. This induced Sierra's 3-D mansion built by a famous like acting in a game is the games. It just uses movie-style modelers to go back and renstage magician. In a matter of toughest of all. «I just finished graphics.\" Indeed, Williams is der different close-ups of the days, with each day equal to a a lilm up in Canada, and it determined not to be seduced backgrounds of the earlier \"chapter,\" the evil within the was much easier than this.\" by the film qualities of the prorooms. In turn, Williams rehouse begins its work. Amidst Since Williams has made ject, having brought in veteran cently looked at some of the hallucinations, hauntings and some design changes in the action director Peter Maris film footage that has been ina hideous transformation of game to make better use of (Viper, Diplomatic Immunity) to tegrated into the game and, as her husband from loving to the digitized film footage and handle the on-set direction and leave her to concentrate on the WOLF PARK FOR GABRIEL KNIGHT game. Such collaboration II: A BEAST WITHIN Sierra's artists seems certain to bring out will use enhanced photographis to standing results, since the use suggest the supernatural background of camera angles, lighting and where lycanthropic transformations occur. special effects in rough footage appear more sophisticated than we've seen in other socalled \"interactive movie\" products. 20 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Readers' PLAYING LATELY? N Here are the games that your fellow players are blowing the most time with. Let us know which game you've been playing the most by writing the name of your current addiction in the \"Playing Lately?\" blank of the CGW Top 100 ballot (page 145). Results for CGW #127, February 1995 TOPO 2. 4. 5. 6. Wing Commander 3 (Origin). Master of Magic (MicroProse) X-COM: UFO Defense (Micro Prose) DOOM II (id Software) Panzer General (SSI) TIE Fighter (LucasArts) US Navy Fighters (Electronic Arts) NASCAR Racing (Papyrus/Virgin) Front Page Sports Football Pro 95 (Sierra) Magic Carpet (Electronic Arts) 9 . 10. improve the game's pacing, any estimated ship date for PHANTASMAGORIA would be premature. Suffice it to say that the game is getting better every day and that it will be better in both game and movie quality as a result. Other work occurring at Sierra includes their Fall release of GABRIEL KNIGHT II: A BEAST WITHIN. Jane Jensen has written a seven chapter screenplay in which the action and puzzle-solving shifts between Gabriel and his lovely assistant, Grace. The action takes place in a photo-realistic Germany rather than a painted world. In the story, appropriately underscored by thematic segments of Wagner's Tannhauser, Gabriel finds himself torn between his family inheritance of fighting evil and his desire to be seduced by it (much like the spiritual versus sensual interplay in the Wagnerian opera). An intriguing underpinning of lycanthropy adds extra spin, just as voodoo ritual enlivened the original. POLICE QUEST: S.W.A.T. is another sequel in the works. Tammy Dargan is continuing to work with former LAPD Chief Darryl Gates on this project. The game sports photo-realistic, high-resolution graphics, but the big news is that the game design is mission-based, not procedural. Gamers will have the feeling of moving through a career rather than focusing on one particular case, as in POLICE QUEST: OPEN SEASON. The game will feature four separate scenario environments with four different events to take place in each \"When I started \"TIE FIGHTER may playing Doom, I had Notable Quotes be the most ento buy a Pentium 90. thralling, spectacular. Now that I have US Wit, wisdom and caustic quips explosive game I've NAVY FIGHTERS, I may from gaming's harshest critics ever played. Here's to be in the market for a LucasArts for consisused F-14 or F/A-18.\" tently producing high-quality entertainment Paul Whitelock, Denver CO software. If every software company operated as \"I am taking a sabbatical from Darth Vader's they do, we could finally trash our TV sets.\" Tom Polseno, Sutton MA fleet to save humanity (and Angel) from the Kilrathi. Need I say more?\" They've made games since DOOM II?! Dr. Milton Ong, Chicago, IL Chris Paul, Eureka, CA PANZER GENERAL is the wargame I've been There was a time when Origin seemed to be looking for. I don't want to worry about how losing its grip on the market. But with WING many rounds each grunt has in his clip. I want to COMMANDER 3, they've come full circle. I wonder have FUN!\" where Origin will take us next? Kenneth Fiester, Crofton, MD John Bateman, Jacksonville, FL environment plus four different character perspectives in which to play them. So far, PQ: S.W.A.T. looks like it could be the most interesting of all the PQ series. The latest SPACE QUEST centerpiece of the wacky seproduct is also well underway. ries. The formula for fun is The artwork depicting the still there with weird arcade aliens invading the galaxy is games, Catch-22 situations wilder than ever, but janitorand insane dialogue adding hero Roger Wilco is still the to the mix. APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 21 "


"READ.ME Return To Krondor Raymond E. Feist Finds A New Home For The Riftwar Saga RHYMOND E. FEIST SILVERTHORN BETRAYAL OF KRONDOR was ing that the game stayed true the classic \"snowball\" game: to his fictional universe. \"I the longer it was out, the wanted to make sure that anymore popular it became. Set thing that had my name on it in the colorful world of Ray-was of excellent quality,\" Feist mond E. Feist's Riftwar Saga stated in a recent interview. and boasting a unique and reThere's no doubt in anyfreshing style of gameplay, one's mind that the collaboraBETRAYAL AT KRONDOR ention was a success. The only deared itself to adventure and question on the mind of role-playing gamers alike. gamers since then has been: The game was designed by \"Where's the sequel?\" Dynamix, with Feist acting as Feist recently confirmed a very active contributor that production has begun on Feist's input was a constant the next KRONDOR computer throughout the design, ensurgame, entitled RETURN TO Betrayau vai ondor Intel Offers 486s Pentium Performance Overdrive Chips Kick 486s Into High Gear Owners of low-end 486 ma33MHz motherboard users, chines probably know the Intel plans to release an frustrations of trying to run 83MHz version by the middle processor-intensive games of this year. with their once robust but now PC Week Labs evaluated the under-powered machines. If 63MHz version (January 23rd you've got a need for Penissue) and found the most imtium-class speed, Intel may provement when upgrading have the solufrom a slower tion. Their new processor. There PENTIUM OVERis some improveDRIVE PROCESSOR ment if you're uswill convert a ing a faster 486SX-25, -DXprocessor like an 25, and -DX/2Intel DX4, but it 50 into a won't be as draPentium for less matic. A \"cool\" than $500. feature of the If you've got an Intel OVERPentium OVERDRIVE unit is its DRIVE-compatible 25 MHZ built-in cooling fan. motherboard, the PENTIUM The 25MHz version of the OVERDRIVE PROCESSOR will PENTIUM OVERDRIVE is priced run at two and a half times at $449. For more informathe clock speed of your existtion, contact Intel at (800) ing machine, or 63MHz. For 583-3373. KRONDOR and scheduled to be player character will be introreleased sometime in 1996 by duced, from whose perspec7th Level. Why 7th Level and tive the game will be played. not Dynamix? According to While the folks at 7th Level Feist, the initial sales of the are still making design decioriginal game were not as sions-like whether or not to strong as Dynamix would have use full-motion video-both liked, and they decided that a parties agree that the game sequel, which Feist \"really should keep the general feel wanted to do,\" was not worth of the original. Since Dynamix the investment. Fortunately owns the code for the original, for all parties, unit sales did and since the new game will pick up thanks to word of most likely be programmed mouth and the release on CDfor Windows, 7th Level will ROM. At that point, Dynamix have to start development reconsidered their sequel from scratch. plans, but it was too late \"First we want to equal the Feist was already looking for a Dynamix product,\" Feist statnew publisher. ed, and then we will improve RETURN TO KRONDOR's plot upon it.\" Feist's role will rewill focus on a Krondor in main as it was with Dynamix: which evil deeds are brewing, he'll be consulted by the develincluding a gruesome murder opment team on a regular baat the beginning of the game. sis to ensure that the new game As players attempt to solve the will have the proper \"look and mystery, they will run into a feel.\" While the graphics, the slew of other problems, inmusic, and the character imcluding a potential Holy War ages will all be improved upon, in which they will play an inte Feist's thrust is content, congral role in solving. In additent, content. \"We're shooting tion to the original BETRAYAL for an even better storyline cast of characters (including than BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR, Prince Arutha, who will play a with an even richer environmore prominent role), a new ment than before.\" 22 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"HOW DOES IT FEEL TO DRIVE THE FASTEST STOCK GARS ON EARTH? VA plasti kote OU PONT 24 G INC TAKE A TEST DRIVE! For a free demo, see below* LWDOG NASCAR OD YEAR Suda IT FEELS LIKE THIS. IM NASCAR BERTA It's pure No wonder NASCAR is the world's brute force. #1 motorsport. 700 horse And now Papyrus introduces power monsters that can blast you past NASCAR RACING. A simulation so 200 MPH in a couple of heartbeats. Or put you real, you'll think you need a roll cage. against the wall in a careless instant. The officially licensed NASCAR simulation. You'll race on 9 different NASCAR-sanctioned tracks. Drive the world's hottest stock cars -against top NASCAR drivers. They may blow you off the track at first. But practice, practice, practice. You'll start moving up. PAPYRUS | 77 MAANA L Watkins Glen International Fuel Tires Epollera Suspension Gears Option! Done SMOKIDO E OS > \"Knock-down gorgeous» The real look. Papyrus' excluThe real feel. We've duplicated Realistic danger. Hit a wall on CD-ROM. That's what PC sive 3-D Super Texture technology real-car behavioreverything from and you'll know it. Sparks shower, Gamer said about our crisp, clear gives you TV-like realism on speed to engine setup, tire condition, parts fly off, wham! You may be SVGA graphics. (Sept. '94) Looks everything from cars to terrain to fuel load, and more. able to go on, or it may mean back so real you can almost smell track-side billboards. Even the paint P lus, you control spoiler angles, to the garage. By the way, It's one burning rubber. jobs and decals are authentic tire types, camber, gear ratios, thing running solo but racing plus, you can custom-paint your suspension stiffness, you name it. in a crowded field, you need eyes *For a free demo disk: car your way. The combinations are endless. on the front, sides and back of Call 1-800-836-1802 ($5.95 for shipping And so is the fascination. your head. and handling). Or, download a demo from Papyrus' BBS (617-576-7472), from CompuServe (GO PAPYRUS), or from Internet (ftp.std.com). Available in stores in November just in time for Christmas! Visit your local retailer. Or call 1-800-836-1829 ext. 650 System Requirements: CD-ROM Version: Dlak Version: Double-spin CD-ROM drive 380 33MHz or greater. 4MB RAM, MS-DOS VGA: 386 33MHz or greater, 4MB RAM, MS-DOS 5.0 or Distributed later, VGA hard drive with BMB tree. 5.0 or later, VGA, hard drive with 15MB free. exclusively worldwide SVGA: 486 66MHz or grealer, 8MB RAM, MS-DOS 5.0 \"Most major sound cards supported or later, VGA, hard drive with BMB free From the perfectionists who brought you IndyCar Racing. Entertainment, Inc. IBM PC screens shown Actual screens may vary NASCAR is a registered trademark of the National Association for Stock Car Auto INTERACTIVE 18061 Fitch Avenue Papyrus' \"phenomenal\" IndyCar Racing has won almost every Racing, Inc. NASCAR Racing is officially loansed by NASCAR. Papyrus is a registered trademark of Papytus Design Group, Inc entertainment Irvine, CA 92714 major award in the business. Guess what will win this year. Circle Reader Service #153 PAPYRUS "


"READ.ME Speed: 3460 Controls Blaster Engines SLIPSTREAM 5000 ed. The story we've all heard before: set in the not-so-disAs we revved the engine of our tant future, you are placed in futuristic hovercraft racer in the role of rookie driver on Our only real wish, a feature entist gets greedy, hires an Gremlin's latest combat drithe top international circuit. which the designers are planarmy of thugs, takes over the ving action game, goose The gameplay, ning on adding, is that there island, and starts hoarding the bumps ran down our necks. however, debe little bonus \"goodies\" scatsap, the Richards' and the ill Would this fiwomen parts signifitered around the tracks like of the world find themselves in cantly. The weapon power-ups and turbo a fix. meat is the booster strips that would give The fix to this fix is you, championour ships some instant accelerdear gamer, who must hire a ship circuit, ation. Even modem and netteam of mercenaries and wipe where you work play will be included. the island clean of this trash. race in There's only one potential You'll lead squads of eight nine difdrawback, race fans: a Penmercenaries in a sector-by-secferent intium will be required to keep tor, small-arms war to retake this warrior on the road. the island. As if that wasn't a ternational big enough job, you also have settings from Colorado to JAGGED ALLIANCE to fund the operation by leadEgypt to the ing the sap gathering and protra Speed 270mon Amazon. The What would happen if you cessing operation. You must amount of took Micro Prose's X-COM, hire workers to tap the sap and prize money sucked out the aliens, injected guards to protect the workers, you win in more \"personaliand then convert the healthy each race will ty\" and role-playmedicinal substance into determine ing elements, deadly arms how well and then threw you'll be able the thing onto to fix your a jungle isship, and land? You'd whether or probably get HOVERING FOR THE TITLE Not only do speedracers have to not you can something worry about smashing into natural and man-made obstacles purchase the resembling like the Pyramids and the Grand Canyon, but they also have to Seeker missile Sir-Tech's watch out for the rocket in the tail pipe trick. that your enelongmies have awaited nally be the sci-fi racing combeen dying for. Each of the game of tactical manbat sim we've been waiting races takes place in an entirely to-man combat, JAGGED ALfor? Could Gremlin actually different atmosphere: race in LIANCE. gather the ingredients of sucColorado and you'll be twistThe island is INDIKWA ZO cess: a fairly realistic arcadeing and turning along the Metavira, home style driving model, a true Snake River canyon; race in of a rare tree three dimensional environthe Amazon and you'll have whose sap is a key ment, and a high-powered vines slapping your windcomponent of a slug-fest? Many have tried and screen. life-saving drug failed, but from what we have We were amazed at the texJack and Brenda seen so far, it looks like SLIPture-mapped polygon graphRichards, a faSTREAM 5000 might actually ics and how fast they zipped ther-daughter have a good shot at accomaround the simulation of medical research plishing what it sets out to. motion is excellent. As we team, have been SAP, CRACKLE, POP Tree hugging takes on a whole new The beta we tested lacked were driving, we found ourharvesting the sap mean Harvesung the sap meaning in JAGGED ALLIANCE, where successful squad level intelligent drivers and multiselves twisting and ducking in for the good of tactics are needed to overcome a hostile rabble and save ple weapons that worked, yet our seats, an excellent sign for humankind. But an island of precious life-saving sap. it still kept several of us riveta first-person action game. when a fellow sciEngines Blaster controls SUMARI ETARELOR BONE GRUNTY motion 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"SHORT TAKES ON GAMES UNDERGOING BETA TESTING AND SOON TO BE RELEASED PIPELINE ESTIMATED RELEASE DATES BASED ON THE LATEST INFORMATION FROM GAME DEVELOPERS NAME OF GAME, COMPANY ... .......... RELEASE DATE tind you, if any tongue could coach that far. I bet you d soon le! fiue ou TENT TITLE RISD Do you know what happened here? for your mercs. CAUGHT, anti-hero Jack T. the two participate in the The tactical combat system Ladd spent much of his time same story, each is presented is sophisticated, improving on evading death and taxes. In with an entirely different set X-COM's combat in many the opening seconds of that of puzzles so that playing the ways. While the action isn't as game's sequel, Jack suddenly adventure through twice will up-close-and-personal as in Xfinds himself confronted by a clearly be a worthwhile expeCOM, JAGGED ALLIANCE has large and very serious spacerience. more personality. Your mercs ship which leaves little doubt. Much of the bickering beare well-developed characters as to its intentions. Thus, tween the two clearly with unique histories, and they Jack is points to a love/hate rewill communicate with lationship, and one can you during a batonly speculate as to tle, telling you via how long it will take digitized speech before the two recogwhen they've sightnize their attraction ed an enemy or for each other. when they've run out However, while of .45 ammo. The we wait for the relacombat is phased (not tionship to resolve \"real time\") with hidden enemy movement that will pause for \"opHave you round us some fuel yet? portunity fire.\" It's very Ut not louering myself by talking to you... well executed, the only captured, possible drawback being that and his innoline-of-sight is not readily apcence is replaced parent, so it's difficult to tell by GUILTY, the when an enemy can be hit or continuing adwhen your men are safely beventures of an hind cover. intergalactic As in X-COM, your mercs rogue. TAINTED TONGUES Sarcastic wit and sexual innuendo will be able to lob grenades, Claiming create a Spaceballs-like atmosphere in GUILTY by crouch into the brush, and Jack's collar is Psygnosis. fire a huge arsenal of Ysanne Anweaponry, but JAGGED ALdropath, a cocky Federation itself, Jack and Ysanne must LIANCE offers even more posPolice Officer who takes no recover lost fuel for their sibilities, like tossing stones small pride in the capture. spaceship while investigating to distract enemy guards, The story and the dialogue a mysteriously silent planet swimming across rivers, setreally open up, however, they find in the process. Jack ting and diffusing explosives, once Jack discovers that begins by simply searching for using tools to repair broken Ysanne is female. Sexuallyfuel, while Ysanne takes on machinery, picking locks, charged comments fly in all the job of explorer. In this and much more. directions, and the game sudway, GUILTY presents two difJAGGED ALLIANCE appears to denly splits into two fragferent adventures related by a be a deep, sophisticated game ments. Players may either common story. that will keep tactical combat take the role of Jack, as they while the original game's fans, and maybe even roledid in the first game, or they unique interface has been players, locked, cocked and may choose Ysanne's shoes. largely left untouched, Divide ready to rock. There is no switching beBy Zero has promised that tween characters once the GUILTY, which will be released GUILTY game begins. Each one has by Psygnosis, will include voichis or her own problems to es on the CD-ROM to suppleIn Divide By Zero's advendeal with, and is often atment the already-present ture game INNOCENT UNTIL odds with the other. While word-balloons. ABSOLUTE ZERO Domark ......5/95 ACES OF THE DEEP 2 Sierra ...11/95 AIRSHIP Mindscape ......... 6/95 ALLIED GENERAL SSI ........ 04/95 AWFUL GREEN THINGS QQP ....7/95 BATTLES IN TIME QQP ........7/95 BEYOND SQUAD LEADER AH .. 02/95 CELEBRITY POKER New World 4795 CHESSMASTER 5000 Mindscape 9/95 COMMAND & CONQUER Virgin .4/95 DAGGERFALL Bethesda ....6/95 EARTHSIEGE 2 Sierra ........ 11/95. EMPIRE II New World .........7/95 FRANKENSTEIN Interplay .....02/95 FULL THROTTLE LucasArts.... 4/95 GUILTY Psygnosis ........... 4/95 HARVESTER Merit .5/95 HEROES MIGHT & MAGIC New World JAGGED ALLIANCE Sir Tech .....4/95 LANDS OF LORE 2 Virgin .....02/95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT Domark.. 4/95 LOST ADMIRAL 2 QQP .........4/95 MAGIC: THE GATHERING MicroProse .............02/95 MARCO POLO T-Motion .......02/95 MECHLORDS New World ....... 7/95 NETWORK CIVILIZATION MicroProse... 5/95 NBA LIVE EA NEW HORIZONS Koei ....... PERFECT GENERAL 2 QQP -... 4/95 PHANTASMAGORIA Sierra ... 02/95 POWERHOUSE Impressions ....4/95 PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL '95 MicroSports ..............5/95 SILENT HUNTER SSI ........02/95 SLIPSTREAM 5000 Gremlin ... 4/95 STAR NET Mindscape .........4/95 STAR TREK: TNG Spectrum .....4/95 STONEKEEP Interplay ....... 02/95 TANK COMMANDER Domark ....4/95 THE PURE WARGAME QQP ... 4/95 THIRD REICH Avalon Hill ......6/95 THUNDERSCAPE SSI ..........5/95 TOP GUN Spectrum HoloByte .. 7/95 X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP MicroProse..... WETLANDS New World ........5/95 .5/95 .6/95 APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 25 "


"READ.ME Download From The Rich, Upload To The Poor CGW Visits The Set Of Interplay's CYBER HOOD COWARD THE DUCK This unlucky duck is both goosed and \"shot\" during the filming of CYBERHOOD. Brian Gaskill (right) is used to working with a different kind of chick on TV's Models Inc. ent. Gigabyte As more and more computcalls CYBERHOOD a \"satirical footage of a myriad er game manufacturers take on the cultural phenomof bikini-clad women choose to go the route of digenon of cyberspace\" because massaging a man who itized video with live actors, he feels that he and Michael appeared to be having the editors at CGW find Conti, the producer whom intimate relations with themselves invited to more Olson refers to as the \"David a duck, we found ourand more \"Hollywood\" movie Lynch of computer gaming,\" selves very much inshoots. At Interplay's shoot were able to dream up a virclined to believe Olson's for their upcoming CYBERtual world unlike anything yet pledge to provide someCYBERHOOD. Bria HOOD game, we were able to seen on a computer screen. thing really different. with a omien sit down with Martin Olson, CYBERHOOD's story, loosely We went on to ask Olpen. \"In a one of the game's primary based on the Robin Hood son about the differences TV show or special, there is a script writers. His comedic legend, traces a son's rebelbetween scripting for TV and fluid, linear continuity of the writing and producing credits lious quest for his father, who for computer game scripts. plot from one point to the have included Roseanne, segruns a huge virtual reality enHe said that the main diffinext. For CYBERHOOD, alments on the Tonight Show vironment called The Vortex, culty in scripting games was though there is a specific beStarring Johnny Carson, and a place where anything and worrying about a web of plots ginning and a specific several cable specials. Olson everything goes. Having seen and subplots that might hapending, the middle has considerably more bulk, which basics would change: I'd start meant that there is lot of siThe with a compelling story about multaneous plot developinteresting people who live in ment in there.\" While Olson an exciting environment. The finds this appealing from the player would be the hero of the creative end, he went on to If you've ever played the unlikeFinally, immerse the player in story, and the outcome would say that things can get a bit ly hero in Eric the Unready, you'll a geography populated by depend on his or her actions. frustrating in that, much like have an appreciation for designer other similarly equipped play. The things that would a conventional storyline, Bob Bates' blend of legend, spoofers. Once all this is in place, change would be the way in there is a limit on what will fit and bad late-night TV. Bates also go away for a while, and then which the characters and enviand what won't. Olson expedesigned Sherlock Holmes: Riddle return later to see if they have ronment were presented, and rienced this first hand: his of the Crown Jeuels (1988) and invented religion. the way in which the player ininitial script of 500+ pages Arthur: The Quest for Excalibur After he had given us the type of teracted with them. The geog had to be condensed to (1989) for Infocom and Time answer we've grown to expect, he raphy would be a visually around 200. \"But that isn't a Quest (Legend, 1997), and he's offered a more serious answer. A convincing reality. The char great departure from the been involved in every major Leg. First of all, I don't think the acters would be holographical norm,\" he stated. end concoction since he founded ly filmed actors projected into While CYBERHOOD is similar the company. We thought we'd the virtual environment so the to most \"live-action\" games in risk getting a straight answer out player sees them come and go that it will use a cast of televiof him when we asked: if gamers as if they were real. The playersion performers (Brian Gaskill had unlimited processing power would be able to move across of Models Inc. is the star) and and you had an unlimited budget, this geography, manipulate second-tier actors and actresswhat kind of u gume would you items within it, and communi es, this game does appears to design? cate with the NPCs using voice depart from the norm. Its First, encase the player in a recognition and the world's Twin Peaks style and wit, and full body suit. Hook up input first completely accurate nat its rather surreal symbolism devices to simulate visual, aurural language parser. became clear when we saw a al, gustatory, olfactory and tacThe result would be a game shot of a rather short man tile sensations. Next, induce so fulfilling that the player massaging a blow up doll. amnesia and implant memowouldn't want to return to CYBERHOOD is scheduled to ries of a manufactured past. real life. be released in time for the '95 holidays. 26 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Facilid Wisdon We Took Out the VIVA KIT For Microsoft Windows GOLD MEDALLION Trash! Our Shareware CD Tired of shareware CDs that make you sort through garbage to find a few good games? Then go with Gold Medallion! Our CDs are packed with only top-quality shareware hits. You'll recognize their names. All killers! No fillers! PC Head Dips MIND BENDER Game Pack CD  680 VOA ! MIND BENDER Their Shareware CD TE Sple Girl Il af en Bhd Wir har AB Our CDs are the most user friendly around. Gold Medallion's exclusive menu system makes things so easy for you: Get the whole family of Gold Medallion CDs at your local software store! tolerer bre DOMU Stale facri 12 te 1) IIM rentrale 1 glans IH Groes Yrad Sell Sur All Mare Ty IND te il lates Solid Gold CDs. All hits. No filler. That's why we call them  Just highlight and press Enter to install!  Get instant access to all programs without using DOS commands!  Get a quick description of any program before you install it!  Remove any program in a flash!  GOLD SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #44 "


"READ.ME COPY COPYCOPY The Inside Flap PC PILOT Offers Ground Schooling To Rookie Flyers The Complete Guide to Computer Aviation No, this isn't a guide to flycomers, as well as offering ting into flight sims ing without offending anysome suggestions on what or are wondering if body. PC PILOT actually does kind of equipment might best you should begin, live up to its name as a commeet your flight sim committhen this relatively plete guide to flight sims on ment. The rest of the book inexpensive volume the PC, current up to about six covers all of the most popular could make your life months ago. The guide is basiflight sims available, reviewing both easier and cally for beginners, but it does one or two per chapter and more enjoyable. contain useful information for then returning to some of the PC Pilot: The Comgamers who have a couple of old-time classics in one plete Guide to Computsims under their belts and are overview chapter. Smith adds er Aviation By Steve thinking of getting down to enough historical anecdotes Smith; Published by some serious silicon flying on the aircraft being simmed AVON; 170 pgs. Author Steve Smith opens to keep things from getting $10.00 with a couple of useful chapboring, and his own critiques ters on hardware definitions of the sims are pretty solid. and considerations for newAll in all, if you are just getFROM TAKE-OFF TO TOUCHDOWNYOU ARE IN CONTROL STEVE SMITH TLDLOL) Wompin' In A Winter TINDIHARURES Hinterland Hinterland CGW Articles Have New On-Line Index; Interview With X-COM Designer On Web An index of articles appeardex, with asterisks representing in Computer Gaminging rating stars: World in 1995 is now available on ZiffNet. The file contains 5th Fleet (Feb 95, pg. 168) **** an index of features, reviews, Armored Fist (Jan 95, pg. 194) *** previews, and other articles appearing in January and Dawn Patrol (Jan 95, pg. 202) ***1/2 February issues of CGW. The ASCII file is downloadable so If you haven't seen the that you can use your word CGW Internet Web site, you'll processor's search function to find articles, reviews and vifind references to games. brant screen shots waiting for Note that there may be more you there. This month we also than one entry per name. o present a feature interview The index can be found in with Julian Gollop, co-designLibrary 1, General Files of the er of X-COM. Contributing CGW Forum on ZillNet. GO writer Jeff James talks with GAMEWORLD, navigate to Mr. Gollop about life, liberty the libraries and search for and the pursuit of aliens in Xthe file n ame COM, X-COM: Terror From \"CGWX95.TXT.\" The Deep and, you heard it Here is an example of what here first, X-COM 3. Check it you will see in the on-line Inout at \"http://www.ziff.com/\". Pack A Fur-Lined Turban With Your MAGIC CARPET Expansion Disk Fans of Bullfrog's MAGIC promise to be tougher this CARPET (published by Electime around, too, so it's a tronic Arts) will have their good thing carpeteers will turbans in a tangle to learn that an add-on disk with a new environment, 25 new levels, and a new spell is currently in the works. Entitled HIDDEN WORLDS, this disk will replace the arid desert landscapes of CARPETS IN THE COLD The heat of battle should the original game warm you up to the frozen tundra in Magic CARPET: with a gorgeouslyHIDDEN WORLDS. rendered landscape of snow and ice. Most of the have a brand new spell on monsters will remain the their side: the Homing Metesame, only tougher, but the or. With a projected release castles and buildings in the date of early April, gamers game are being redrawn in orwon't have to wait too long to der to better fit the new arctic re-enter one of the more origmotif. The flying opponents inal games of the past year. 28 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Never Lose Sight Of How Pinball Should Be Played. CERTO A truly great pinball game is more than great graphics and spectacular sounds, more than the latest arcade features like 3D ramps and three multi-ball play, more than fast ball movement and precise flipper control, and it's more than being able to see the whole playfield at once so you can aim your shots. A great pinball game has that unique quality of playability and neverending challenge that keeps you coming back for...just one more game and a shot at your new high score! Washington Post-\"Crystal Caliburn perfectly captures the essence of a great pinball machine.\" New York Times -\"The realism is striking... [Crystal Caliburn] will be at the top of Silicon Santa's gift list this year.\" ALBACKPOT Inside Mac Games \"ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR\" EXCALIBURUTE PERSHING HARD GULP HERED EXCALITUR CTROLYCAR SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: BONUS BUITI EXTRA ALL OBAMI Computer Game Review\"Crystal Caliburn sets a new standard. For realistic pinball on a computer, there's nothing like this game.\" Pussy om AS LORE Electronic Entertainment\"Crystal Caliburn is simply the best, most realistic, most challenging pinball simulation for the Macintosh yet.\" (Rating: 9 out of 10) MACINTOSH: 13\" or larger monitor, 256 colors, and 4MB RAM WINDOWS: 386 or faster processor, Windows 3.1, 256 SVGA monitor, 4MB RAM. Supports SoundBlaster and other Windows compatible sound cards. GAMES Magazine-\"You'll forget you're playing on a two-dimensional computer screen... the realism is astonishing.\" MacUser-\"Electronic pinball's Holy Grail.\" (Rating: 4 1/2 out of 5) Solid State FINBALL CrystalCaliburn WINDOWS TM Crystal Caliburn From the creative genius of Little Wing, developer of TRISTANTM and Eight Ball DeluxeTM for Macintosh. Available from your favorite retailer or mail-order catalog. Interactive DEMO on AOL and CompuServe Three NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS! OPINBALL Crystal Caliburn StarPlay Productions, Inc.  PO Box 217. Greeley, Colorado 80632-0217  Tel 303.447,9562  Fax 303.447.2739 TM Crystal Caliburn and Tristan are trademarks of LittleWing CO. LTD. Other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"READ.ME NOV he Axis M les staff ofis EDIATTO in de RENEGADE: standard gruff admiral, but became THE BATTLE FOR the heart of the game is in a vortex JACOB'S STAR space. There, the SVGA for the Apparently, SSI has gone all graphics are gorgeous, and Wehrmacht, as out with their initial entry veterans will feel right at Paulus' Sixth Army found itinto the crowded action/adhome in the cockpit, blasting self facing a seemingly endless venture-in-space genre. Maraway at large, incredibly destream of Russian reinforcecessful tranvelous high-resolution, 3-D tailed ships that rival those in ments. Most games have tried sition from the relagraphics and a driving techWING COMMANDER III. to focus either on the in-city tively low unit density of North no-club soundtrack Sometimes, though, the fighting, or the strategic Africa to the enormous provide combat seems almost too envelopment of the Axis smooth and too clean. forces involved in the That is, it doesn't feel campaign. In STALINrushed and gritty like GRAD, Atomic and Avalspace combat (or anyon Hill try to be all combat) should. Still, things to all we loved the fact that wargamers, as the you can pop in music game operates on CD-ROM's while in three different scales. space. We found Operationally, each blowing away enemy fighters hexagon can represent eiat 1:00 in the morning to ther one or three kilometers, Luscious SVGA cockpit views and a Pink Floyd's Comfortably Numb and gives a feel roughly equivIt can be a long, cold winter for the booming soundtrack give RENEGADE an to be particularly liberating alent to playing OPERATION trapped German 6th Army in Avalon unearthly sheen. IBM CD-ROM, $59.95. Circle CRUSADER. The tactical scale Hill's STALINGRAD. Reader Service #1. goes down to 400 meters/hex, some serious sizzle for this STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS INC., which allows for more detailed manpower expended on the game. The storyline is basic, SUNNYVALE, CA, (800) 245. firefights in the Red BarriRussian steppes. Macbut the space combat is where 4525. cades Factory and Mamayevintosh/IBM CD-ROM, $59.95. RENEGADE really llexes its Kurgan, the Little Round Top Circle Reader Service #2. muscles. You're the typical STALINGRAD of the Eastern Front. The AVALON HILL GAME COMPANY, demoted pilot sent to the farWith the possible exception of packaging and graphic look BALTIMORE, MD, (800) 999. away star of Jacob, which sudthe Battle of Britain, no camare typically impressive 3222. denly becomes the keypaign was more decisive than AH/Atomic fare, but gamers territory in the war versus the the German drive on Stalinwill have to decide for themBRETT HULL HOCKEY evil empire. You face the grad. This medium-sized facselves whether the WORLD AT Using the same scrolling perrequisite briefings with the tory town on the Volga River WAR system can make a sucspective and rapid-fire action SCOTON PUSH START SUFROM MORTAL KOMBAT II looks of a winner, OO WINS Sometimes it's nice to simply combining authentic stop thinking and kick the arcade style graphspit out of something. For 16ics and lightning bit gamers, this is no probfast gameplay. All lem: blood, gore, and high 12 fighter are inflying drop-kicks go hand included, and fans of hand with their systems. But the red stuff will PC gamers have been left out be happy to know in the cold. Finally, with MORthat the secret, TAL KOMBAT II, it looks as if yet destructive Fatalities, Basomebody's gotten it right, balities, and Friendship namely Acclaim. This sidemoves all appear to be here, fighting game has the initial as do the secret characters. Make sure you have a fourbutton gamepad, however, or you're bound to be frustrated. Acclaim is particularly proud of the sound effects in MK II, which are at least as good as the arcade machine, if not better. Is it too late to ask for modem/network play? IBM, $59.95. Circle Reader Service #4. ACCLAIM ENTERTAINMENT, OYSTER BAY, NY, (516) 6248888. Mortal Kombat II finally does justice to arcade-style fighting games on the PC. 30 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  APRIL 1995 "


"THESE JUST IN, REVIEWS TO FOLLOW In e me la 9:14 their fast, fluid E coverage to find out. IBM there was better documentaPC, $59.95. Circle Reader tion and a more coherent orService #3. ganization to D!ZONE. For ACCOLADE, SAN JOSE, CA, example, it's difficult to fig(408) 985-1700. ure out which shots on goal than even the D!ZONE Los Angeles Kings goalies A little more face. We are a little conthan simple as Eleccerned with the difficulty in shovelware and a tronic Art's NHLPA '95, Acsetting up offensive plays, little less than a colade's BRETT HULL HOCKEY and the passing does seem to coherent product just might be a contender for be a bit less precise, albeit is the best way to the digitized Stanley Cup. more realistic. But all things describe this comThe players are big and wellprehensive rendered, and DOOM/DOOM II utility-packed CD-ROM. If your Doom-lust is wandering, try giving motions on our Presenting 900 new levels it a 900-level charge with D.ZONE. 33 MHz 486 and a cornucopia of editing means that nearly utilities for the sound effects, everyone will be music, graphics and PWAD utility does what without acable to enjoy the files of our favorite first-pertually browsing the documenaction. Furtherson bloodfest, this Wizardtation of each program; a more, Al Michael's Works product appears to simple interface and a solid play-by-play seems have it all, including one of table of contents could have particularly smooth Al Michaels' play-by-play spices the acthe best multiplayer shells solved this problem. But still, and well suited to the on-ice tion as you face off in BRETT HULL HOCKEY. we've ever seen. D!ZONE alat $29.95, the price is right, action. Our initial impression lows you to not only tinker and if you're looking to add is that offensively-minded with the settings of each value to your Doom experiplayers will love this game, considered, this appears to game, but to also store moence, you'd be a demon's unbut those looking for more be a worthy challenger to the dem opponents from all over cle to ignore this disc. IBM realistic NHL action probably reigning champ. Is BRETT the country in a single dialCD-ROM, $29.95. Circle won't. In our first few games, Hull HOCKEY better than ing directory. Power and diReader Service #5. 10-8 scores were the norm, NHLPA '95? Stay tuned to versity of the utilities aside, WIZARD WORKS, MINNEAPOLIS, and there were usually more next month's in-depth sports however, we did wish that MN, (612) 559-5301. D-DAY: OPERATION the success of the invasion opOVERLORD eration riding on your Sometimes, you want a long, shoulders. The simuimmersive entertainment exlation sports SVGA perience like Gone with the graphics and a fairly Wind. Other times, you just decent flight model. want to plop in front of the You are sent up on tube and watch Gilligan's quick and dirty missions Island. D-DAY: OPERATION in one of three aircraft: a OVERLORD, in flight simulation Spitfire, Typhoon or P-51 terms, is more akin to the latMustang, against such ter. The light flight sim action stalwart aerial foes as Me-109s takes place during the first few and Focke-Wulf 190s. You hours before the troops hit the may also be sent on search beaches of Normandy, with and destroy missions against patrol boats and coastal batteries. The 3-D models of aircraft are outstanding—they almost look photo-realistic. On the down side, the documentation is a bit terse, and an extremely clumsy interface gets in the way of the action. IBM CDROM, $39.95. Circle Reader Service #6. VIRGIN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT, INC., IRVINE, CA (800) 874-4607. How you fly the unfriendly skies in D-DAY makes a huge difference in the Normandy invasion. APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 31 "


"CLAWS 2! Just When You Thought It Was Safe To Go Back In The Water, MicroProse Unleashes A New Menace in X-COM 2: TERROR FROM THE DEEP by Chris Lombardia O BE FRANK, I'M A LITTLE SUSPICIOUS OF THE WILD SUCCESS OF MICROPROSE's X-COM. AT first, I was completely taken in, as many fellow gamers were, by the game's tactical, man-to-man combat, which was made even more absorbing by the strategic over-game that tied the tactical battles together. Yes, I was hooked, addicted, found myself staring into the face of a pre-dawn clock on several occasions. But once I was able to break away and step back from it all, XCOM's success smelt a bit fishy. Consider: X-COM seemed to come out of nowhere. Its release was not preceded by an enormous marketing campaign with an enormous amount of hype. It had no video demo playing in the front window of Babbages, it wasn't advertised 12 months in advance on glossy foldout magazine inserts, it had no flashing point-of-purchase kiosks. It didn't come in a box designed by origamists from the school of Abstract Expressionism. It featured no full motion video starring the best TV actors of the 80s; it had no voice-overs. It offered neither Super VGA graphics, nor General MIDI support. It wasn't Doom-like, MYST-like, or otherwise like a hit game from the previous season; it didn't steal the best features from several other successful games. It wasn't even on a CD-ROM! In short, if you plugged X-COM's variables into the success formula\" currently in use by the majority of large game companies, you'd come up with a big fat, goose egg. According to the prevailing wisdom, there's no way X-COM could survive in today's gaming marketplace. And yet it sold and sold, and gamers played on and on. What's one to think about this anomaly? Those prone to conspiratorial paranoia might suggest that X-COM was itself an attack from outer space, a virus carefully crafted to weaken and capture human minds. That would be a cosmic bit of irony. Those of a more sober tone would be harder pressed for an explanation. Could it be that the (alleged) creators of X-COM, England's Mythos Games and MicroProse UK, have a clearer understanding of what gamers, especially gamers of the strategic bent, really want? Do they understand that what we need is not Lee Majors' voice-acting or a 15 minute 3D-Studio introduction that has little to do with actual gameplay? Do they understand that gamers would gladly exchange two minutes of full-motion video for two hours of interactive entertainment? Hmm. I'm afraid both theories are little outlandish. SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development 32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"ok@0 Tracey Remmington HIGIT SHOULOER LEET SHOULOLA RIGHT LEFT HANO ROK PACK construction of base facilities (like alien-detection devices, research laboratories, containment rooms for captured foe, etc.), direct the research activities of your scientists, and put together a team of soldiers fit to face the alien hordes. But it's not just a desk job, it's an adventure, since you must also lead your soldiers in tactical, man vs. alien, combat missions. ROLLING BOC GROUND I'M GOING UNDER Whoever created X-COM, and for whatever reason, they're up to the same old tricks in the sequel, X-COM 2: TERROR FROM THE DEEP. The designers have taken the exact same game engine (core guts) and interface used in the original X-COM, and added new artwork, new weapons, and a new storyline to create a familiar game in unfamiliar surroundings. In this respect, X-COM and X-COM 2 have the same relationship as Doom did to its sequel, DOOM 2. X-COM 2 also finds the aliens up to their same old tricks. Having been driven from our solar system through the previous efforts of the X-COM team, the aliens have decided to switch to Plan B, the motto of which, when loosely translated from the alien tongue, reads: \"When the going gets tough, the tough go surfing.\" The aliens have taken to the water, setting up bases of operation under the depths and reviving an ancient evil that was apparently waiting in the wings for millennia for Plan B to take effect. Several decades after their thrashing at the hands of the puny humans, the aliens are back to have another go—and boy are they miled. They've set up ambushes along major sea lanes, they're terrorizing port cities and abducting humans, and they're gathering supplies to who-knows-what evil end. To the defense-guess who:EESTIKET WATER WORLD MODDIED SQUADDIE X-COM 2 squaddies come stock with dive suit and fins, but no armor worth mentioning, For veterans, it should all sound pretty faYou must recover alien weaponry and research its miliar so far. What are the differences? mysteries to upgrade your equipment. Well, since this scenario is set under the sea, so will your bases and most of your transport aircraft have been redesigned as activities. At the highest level of magnifiwatercraft, bearing appropriate names like cation, the global view looks the same as \"Triton\" and \"Hammerhead.» When your before. But zoom in further on the contisubs meet an alien vessel, ship-to-ship nents and you'll notice that the major combat is identical to that of X-COM, as RElantic #234 you must still choose a basic combat stance FONSO A GO (Cautious, Standard, Aggressive) and fire ODDD away, except with torpedoes and sonic beams instead of missiles and guns. TOLER SORS TEORIATICHE TOUT SUR LE UNOJIRI RESORT TERSE TRRISTER EUROSCHAU SZIAS CLOSEAPER ASUS LUNECAS TOPAD 6:12.30 Secsinal Shorts I DIVE, 9 TO 5 Once you've sent an alien craft to the ocean floor, you'll have to go after it with your team of X-COM S.E.A.L.s. Squeezed into their dive suits and totting harpoon WHERE'S THE WET BAR? Base placement and facility guns and Hydro-Jet Cannons, the X-COM layout are still a part of your X-COM management tasks. squaddies will pour out of their transport submarine ready to hunt for alien hides. landlocked cities of the world have disapHere, in the tactical battles, you'll see the p eared, and that the political situation most difference between X-COM 1 and 2, has changed a bit. Where you would see but the difference is certainly not in the France, England, Saudi Arabia, and other control interface, which hasn't been familiar political bodies in the previous changed a mote. All of the commands to game, you'll now find the Euro-Syndicate, move, turn, crouch, and fire are here, the Egyptian Cartel, Neo-Japan, and the identified by the same icons. You'll give Brazilian Union. Chicago and Moscow your orders to your squaddies, and then have disappeared in favor of port cities it's the aliens' turn for \"Hidden Movelike Fort Severn (Canada), Vladivostok, ment.\" It's still the best tactical combat Reykjavik, Accra, and Darwin, Australia. game to date, bar none. Furthermore, a look at the oceans reveals The difference is in the surroundings, a rough geography of the sea floor and the terrain where many of your squaddies the identification of the major islands of will meet the end of their short, terrorthe world, the Azores, Falklands, Galapafilled lives. The terrain seems much more gos, Mauritius, Seychelles, and so on. detailed and intricate, with lots of colorful So when you're asked to choose the location of your first base, don't try clicking on terra firma-you'll get a rude response. No, you must plunk your base into the clrink, the Atlantic or Pacific Oceans being the best places to start. Bases look and act E 111 the same (you must still design the layout Sear Hour of your facilities), but some names have been changed to reflect the new watery setting: radar detectors turn sonar, cntryways become airlocks, and the staging area for ACES OF THE DEEP 2000 Sub-to-sub battles between craft become \"sub pens.\" torpedo-spewing craft replace the air interceptions of Obviously, the interceptor and troop the original game. THE GAME REMAINS THE SAME From the orbital view, the X-COM interface looks exactly the same. Zoom in on the planet, though, and you'll quickly notice that the tide of focus has shifted from the continents to the ocean and coastal regions. 112:11 :50 new and improved X-COM anti-alien organization. Those who have played X-COM will know the drill. But for those who've yet to be captured, oh fortunate ones, we'll explain. Your job, as leader of the X-COM international anti-terrorism team, is to set up bases around the globe in order to interdict alien vessels, stop alien assaults on cities, and eventually, hunt down alien bases and blast their scaly hides off the planet. In managing bases, you must order ALIEN SUB KITI APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 33 "


"ocean plant-life, rock formations, and sand couldn't decide whose brains to suck out canth\" tanks armed with your choice of dunes that obstruct line-of-sight and profirst. Let's hope that the intelligence of these mounted cannon will all have a home in vide cover for lurking horrors. In some locreatures had not yet been finished. your arsenal. The only trick to this cations there are signs of ancient What does a soldier have to fight back weaponry is that some of it only works uncivilizations (Atlantis? Lemuria? Mu?), with? The usual assortment of weapons derwater, a fact that can leave your soldiers structural foundations, crumbling columns, that progress in strength as you research high and dry in land-based missions. and statues of long-dead rulers and gods. more advanced technology. Just as in XAnother new addition and complicaThe illusion of being underwater is ention introduced in hanced by the greenish-hue of the palette X-COM 2 is the and the quickly dissipating trail of bubbles \"linked mission.\" traced by weapons fire-a nice touch. The idea is that in Not all battles take place underwater, some missions, you however. The aliens will attack cargo ships, may fight through a so you'll have to fight through dark, landscape only to cramped quarters where death can come find that there is yet through many port holes. You'll also find another region to yourself protecting civilians in port towns investigate. So, for and on South Sea isles with small bungaA LD 1901 example, you might lows and multi-level colonial mansions. In EVRA investigate an alien general, the combat landscapes are larger, ibaura Kaymizi crash site only to or at least seem so because the landscape is find that you've happened upon an entrance to an alien base. Once the crash DEATH AT 20K LEAGUES site mission is finished, you must continue The tactical battles into the base. Bringing extra men and extake place in many tra ammo to every mission might be a different settings. good strategy to adopt. Above we find an X-COM squad starting a UNSOLVED MYSTERIES mission aboard a Of course, all the missions are linked in that hijacked ship. they eventually lead to a conclusion, the ultiElsewhere, it's open mate showdown with the ultimate Bad Aanbola season for alien hunting Guys. Just as you had to go off-world to finOnz.o0 @ on the ocean floor. ish off (well, almost) the aliens in X-COM, Shoji Wantsui so the successful leader in X-COM 2 may 2 . have a shot at finishing the aliens once and so cluttered with for all. Where the story leads, I don't know, houses, palm trees, but you don't have to push the gray matter and hills. Combat is too hard to figure out that the ruins of ancertainly more cient cities and the re-awakening of an antreacherous because cient evil might be connected. Could we be of this. heading towards a conclusion that unites Atlantis, UFOs, Stonehenge, cattle-mutilation, THIS IS YOUR the Psychic Friends Network, and disco muOPPONENT'S sic into a grand unified conspiracy theory? BRAIN A play through X-COM 2 will reveal all. As if the landscape FAAN LED All, that is, except the mystery of the doesn't make a na on anomaly of the game's success. Once squaddie's life diffiTracey Remmington again, with X-COM 2 MicroProse is recult enough, the leasing a game without the frills and aliens have also become a little smarter, or COM, here you start with the equivalent of \"multimedia enhancements\" that the so the Micro Prose programmers promise. pea-shooters—the harpoon gun—and no common wisdom knows are necessary for In the preview version of the software, I was armor at all. You'll have to suffer through success in today's game marketplace. Miunable to tell just how smart they had be several missions, and lose several good solcroProse is releasing this game on the come. While one breed of alien (the \"aquadiers, before you uncover the alien secrets strength of its extended gameplay in a toid,\" cousin of the \"sectoid\") seemed more of underwater armor and develop a sturdy proven game system and nothing more. wily-continually firing at my squaddies and standard-issue weapon. Once the technoIf this sort of behavior continues, an inthen retreating into the brush, forcing me logical ball gets rolling, however, the blessvestigation will be in order. We'll have to to expose my men in order to chase it—othings of warfare science will rain from keep a close eye on the planned X-COM er aliens stood around or did the \"X-COM heaven. Gauss weaponry, enhanced 3 when it finally rolls out of Britain. Shuffle,\" pacing back and forth as if they grenades, torpedo launchers, and \"CoelaOr is it Betelgeuse? 34 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"QUAD SQUAD YOU CAN'T DRIVE CD-ROM BETTER THAN THIS. Education. Fire up young imaginations with the Diamond Multimedia Kit 3000. You get a blazing fast quad-speed CD-ROM drive-plus six mind-expanding CD-ROM titles that'll captivate your kids for hours. Software such as Alphabet Blocks Arthur's Birthday, and others teach math, language, music, and more. Entertainment Value. Turn on state-of-the-art quad-speed CD-ROM power with the affordable Diamond Multimedia Kit 4000. And tune into an unlimited entertainment experience. Blast off on fantastic journeys. Explore the world of multimedia with 11 of today's hottest game titles, plus the Compton Interactive Encyclopedia\" 1995. Quicken mpton's weralis  Expedia Home Business. Put your small Office on a solid financial foundation with the Diamond Multimedia Kit 6000 Including quad speed CDROM power and some of today's most popular business applications, including Quicken Deluxe 4.0, Expresso Calendar, and Visio Home MYST Loaded. Multimedia doesn't get any bigger and bolder than this. In the Diamond Multimedia Kit 5000. you get sizzling quad-speed CD-ROM power, plus more than 30 of today's hottest CD-ROM titles. Test your skill and wits against the likes of Sim City 2000,\" MYST,\"\"Rebel Assault\"plus dozens more. You may never sleep again! AISUUA Why settle for just a double-or triple-speed CDROM drive when you can get blazing quad-speed power and everything else you need with one of Diamond's Quad Squad Kits. Including a fast quadspeed CD-ROM drive for smooth, realistic video, Wave Table upgradable sound card with window-rattling, 16-bit stereo quality, and speakers. Plus best-selling CD-ROM titles. There is a Quad Squad Kit for everyone-an Educator Kit for kids; a kit for Small Office and Home office (SoHo); another that's pure Games; and one that's Loaded to the hilt! Each kit comes with a 1-year warranty and unlimited technical support. For details, call 800-4-MULTIMEDIA, dial our FAX-Back service at 800-380-0030, or see your dealer. And start driving Diamond's Quad Squad Kits today! MULTIMEDIA KIT MULTIMEDIA KITU Quidhen is a registered trademark of intuit, Inc. 1994 Intuitine Mystis a tradukot Cyan, Inc. 1933 Rebel Assault 1993 Lucas Ast Enceitainment Company Use under authorvation Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia is a trademark of Compton's Neweste. All the trade Names references are the service mai, trademark of registered trademarks of their respective owners Dumonder the right to change specifications without notice Copyright 1995. Damond Multimedia Systems Inc. DIAMOND COMPUSA awami i MIRO GENER ELEKTEK Frys FUTURESHOP (CDW) MULTIMEDIA (Formerly Diamond Computer Systems, Inc.) EGGHEAD SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #77 "


"Spies, Damn Spies, and Sadistics Combat And Conspiracy In A Feudal Future: New World's MECHLORDS by Alan Emrich and Johnny L. Wilson SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development ARCUS WAS NOT 17 ALL. DISPLEASED WITH THE ASSASIN'S PERFORMANCE. FROM HER INITIAL SINUOUS, SEDUCTIVE MOTION TO the wild, unexpected climax, she had shown herself worthy of her street name—Spider Queen. The articulated blade had risen from its sheath under her fingernails, the point of carotid penetration coming even as Luca's breaths had groun shorter, the ducal envoy's uncontrolled exclamations more nonsensical. Luca must have thought that first second of pain merely spice to his satisfaction, though the ejaculate of blood which ensued proved the anticlimax of his life. No, it was Marcus' own performance in ordering the assassination with which he was displeased. He had hired the Spider Queen to kill Luca because the ducal envoy had been an inconvenient rival, privy to far too much of the duke's business. Marcus had intended to remove a rival, but through miscalculation, all had backfired. Luca's brother Cesare had managed to transform his late sibling into an imperial martyr by positioning the assassination as the work of terrorists from a rival house. As a result, Cesure's star was rising and Marcus' star descending. Marcus knew that Cesare was far too clever not to realize that Marcus had set the assassination plans in motion and, as a result, he knew that it wouldn't be long before Cesare sought revenge. His ascendancy made things far too hot within the ducal court for Marcus and, consequently, made that oul-system assignment look for more attractive than ever before. So, Marcus Faber, one of the most famous of House Drakka's inner court, assumed the rank of planetary administrator. No, Marcus wasn't at all pleased with the aftermath of his plot. He could only hope that his new planetary assignment might somehow pave the way for a glorious return. If not, he might never wear that coveted ducal ring or wield the power to which he believed himself born. You must never forget who you are in MECHLORDS, the new strategic epic from New World Computing and SimTex Software. Your goal is to have your player character become the duke of a neo-feudal realm or \"house.\" To do so, you will have to master logistics for both civilian and military purposes, tactics for battles on planetary surfaces, and court intrigue-both 36 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"BUZZ77777 ZEEZZZZZZ 777777777 ZZZZZZZZZ T COMING 1. Q 1 5 9 5 ELLE THE \"HIVE 1995 Trimarku Interactive. Circle Reader Service #41 "


"SPORT STEIE Marcus likes to live fost ond Hithout restraint. He feels that Mith a little effort on his part NOH his will be able to greb position of power that will allow hint to 3i+ back and rop the YsHards. CANCEL Funding: overt diplomacy and SELECT A nOSLE has oriental cultures and militaristic socicovert spying and eties, but the computer games based on espionage. If you that universe have failed to offer any real get carried away reason for being loyal to one house or anwith one facet of the JELAS BERSE other, much less any reason for enlisting game to the excluin the service of one house over another. sion of the others, In MECHLORDS, SimTex has utilized their you could find yourMarcus Faber concept of offering different strengths self, like the characand abilities for each house, much as ter in our fiction, on MOO gave different abilities to different another noble's hit alien races and MOM gave different adlist. vantages to different forms of magic. Yet, Fortunately, you FAMOUS MECHLORDS goes its ancestors one better. have plenty of op GAME DIFFICULCY CUSTOMID You cannot simply figure out which house tions at your disposhas the best advantages and go with that al. Would COURT FABERITE Marcus Faber is one of three nobles that you could you house. You must consider that you are choose as your player character from House Drakka. expect anything less competing against computer players withfrom the ambitious in your own house, so you must simultadeveloper who led SELECEA PLANCE TO COLONI you to struggle for galactic domination in nized, imperialistic MASTER OF ORION, lord over fantasy emuniverse with impires in MASTER OF MAGIC (both from Miproving technology. Cucrent Location croProse), and put railroad robber In BATTLETECH, you -orierriajor 2 barons on track with a computerized renimprove your standdition of Avalon Hill's 1830? ing by improving This time around the myth-making your battle prowess. Orion Major 2 15.0 parsecs). block, SimTex has managed to coalesce a In MECHLORDS, you BATTLETECH-like universe of Great Housenhance your stand Environnant Kia heroist Scores Organics: Abundent Chicals: Scares es, giant mechanized robots piloted by ing in a variety of outposts Pilon and Krokus heroic individuals, political intrigue, and ways which include 20 HC CONFIStion: 100 turns Mission Build and defend O FUI UMP alien bad guys into a game that is both commanding small similar to and different than their previunit battles, building ous games. It may seem like they've plaup planetary giarized from BATTLETECH and their economies, sabotagMISSION INSIDIOUS Each mission is quickly described and its potential for previous works, but it is more like they ing buildings, selling failure or success rated as a difficulty level. have taken a kitchen-tested strategy gamcontraband drugs ing recipe and added their own motivaand slaves, and framing, blackmailing or neously use the house advantages against tional spice in order to arouse the jaded assassinating rivals. Although both games other houses, and use your own strategy gaming palette. MECHLORDS is less about are mission-driven, the campaign and and intrigue against those who have the the knightly jousts between dueling role-playing elements of MECHLORDS ensame advantages as you. Plus, there is an 'mechs in BATTLETECH's universe of lost sure that you can't be satisfied with mere intricate alliance structure in which each technology, and more about planning, ly beating the scenarios. The scenarios are house has natural alliances and declared building, plotting and fighting in a balkameans to a more complex end. enemies. This must also be thrown into the mix. CHOOSE LANDING FORCES HOUSES The houses or cultures of MECHLORDS PRE-FAB BUILDINGS LANDING VEHICLES DIVIDED are easily described. It has the obligatory Panor Flant vehicie \"Wiper MECHLORDS has taksamurai society, House Talos (roughly en the idea of a equivalent to House Draconis in BATbalkanized futuristic \"TLETECH and receiving a 10% bonus when society with its endealing with merchants, reflecting the tratropic reduction to dition of zaibatsu or oriental business alneo-feudalism and liances). It also features the mandatory given it an additionroyal court, House Ordeus (roughly al twist, both beyond equivalent to House Davion in BATBATTLETECH's near\"TLETECH and consequently, has a training equivalent cultures advantage for tank and 'mech pilots, just and the game sysas Davion had the best warriors in the 255 Her CONTRIBUTE EILOTE DESIGN O tems of MASTER OF previous universe). But, MECHLORDS ofREQUISITION FORM Each mission begins with your selection of the building ORION and MASTER fers more. House Arilon is the epitome of complexes and vehicles needed to accomplish it. OF MAGIC. The BATfree enterprise and receives a 25% bonus TLETECH universe in scientific research. House Athena is Chodardul Foto -korehouse Il fility Nechs Hydroponics Facility 38 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"ALONE THE DARK THE GOLD'S BEEN UNEARTHED, NOW ONLY SECRETS REMAIN... Win a trip to Tombstone addle-up for an adventure in the Wildest West ever. Buy Alone in the Dark 3 and you may find yourself in the town too tough to die!\" Register by June 15, 1995, and you could be off on one of three week-long trips for two to Tombstone's gold mines, authentic saloons, and infamous OK Corral. You could also win 15 l.Motion CD-ROMs and 75 hint books. Alone in the Dark 3 will also take you on a 3D adventure to the ghost town of Slaughter Gulch, where the cast and crew of Hill Century Studios' latest production have vanished. As supersleuth Edward Carnby, you'll enjoy up to 70 hours solving puzzles and dodging outlaws as you uncover their mysterious disappearance. So sharpen your spurs and get ready for the draw... with Alone in the Dark 3 you can't imagine how wild the West can get. 4 1. MOTION Your Wild West adventure is now available on PC CD-ROM. It's Windows compliant and Sound Blaster compatible. For more information or contest rules, call: 800-443-3386. Circle Reader Service #70 "


"TROLEL governed by female telepaths, so all MECH WITH A MISSION funds in order to grease the pathway to Athenian pilots receive a 10% To build up your prestige you must sucmission success by purchasing extra offensive defensive bonus to reflect their cessfully completing missions. At any equipment. You can also examine the ability to anticipate the moves of their engiven time, you have eight star systems pilots assigned to each vehicle. on your map and eight potential misNext, you select the landing zone by pire trading in slaves, contraband and sions for which to volunteer. Some misplacing crosshairs on a strategic map of drugs. As a result of their strength on sions involve building up a planet the planetary surface and clicking. The frontier worlds, they get a 20% bonus in economically or establishing a base, and strategic map allows you to know roughly mine and refinery production. House some are strictly strike missions where the location of structures, mineral and Krakus is a non-human society consisting you destroy another house's complexes. chemical concentration, and enemy of six races. forces prior to landing. After that, it is Its members are STATUS COM phased movement combat that will restronger and have a mind you of the tactical combat in MAS30% construction TER OF MAGIC. bonus when buildVehicle Factory ing houses and FAMILIAR PHASES vehicles. The combat is not the only thing that will Looming over the remind you of an earlier SimTex game. empire of Houses is Veterans of the MASTER games may be the external threat amused at these common threads. For inof an evil alien race. stance, even though it «Don't drink, The aliens are like a don't smoke\" (What do it do?), Adamanforce of nature, attium is back as the metal of choice when tacking Houses prospecting the galaxy, just as Crysx is without prejudice GAME TECH PILOTS DESIGN NEXT the jewel among gems. Likewise, many of and bringing opUTOPIA Building construction is handled similarly to that in SIM CITY, with the technologies in MASTER OF ORION, inportunity for both foundation tiles placed according to taste. cluding the Gauss Cannon and Mass Drigain and loss. Alver, have been sprinkled among the though your assismyriad of interesting new technologies tance in dealing with alien incursions is such as a Corona SIMUS Com 42.000 mer good for the empire (as well as your repGenerator and utation), there might be times when you Magna Launcher. would stay your helping hand-like when We're keeping our the aliens attack a sector of space domieyes open for some nated by a powerful rival house. mention of Klackons, but have yet to YOU CHARACTER, YOU! see hide or scale of At the beginning of the game, cach noREPAIR SCRAP: the lizardmen. ble will have the House advantage speDRIAN CUORE All of these small cific to its culture, as well as a single similarities between special ability of your own choosing. MECHLORDS and These special characteristics include the previous SimWealthy (starting with more money GAMELLTECH PILOTSI DESIGN NEXT Tex games mean and receiving 1 free MegaCredit per nothing unless turn automatically). Ambassador GO CARTS Vehicle movement is handled via point and click, using \"GOTO\" MECHLORDS is simi(diplomatic expertise plus 10 extra commands. lar in the most imvotes in the court), and Security Adviportant respects: sor (ability to carry out internal investiAll are rated for difficulty such that easiaddictiveness and replayability. From gations and external spy operations), er missions reflect less severe interferwhat we've seen, there will be little difamong others. ence from other houses and more ference between the late nights spent Initially, your character does not directemphasis on building a planet's econowith MECHLORDS and those with MASTER ly control his House's scientific research, my than on combat. More difficult misOF ORION. It has the richness of options diplomacy, or military strategy. Instead, sions reflect stiffer opposition and more and flexibility to keep you coming back these are controlled by computer-conemphasis on combat. to try this idea or that strategy. And it trolled personalities until you have Each mission begins with the requisihas the strong empire-building appeal achieved enough influence to dominate tion of equipment. You can choose prethat portends a long life on gamer's these policy-making activities. In other fab buildings and complexes, as well as hard drives. If SimTex and New World words, at the outset, the game plays you. vehicles, or equip each vehicle with extake the time to carefully balance and After achieving some prestige and influ isting technology. Each mission has limtune the game, their House will emerge ence, you play the game. ited funds, but it may be to your as a very powerful player in the strategy advantage to kick in some personal game universe. Finn Major BODI MOUSS: 2 JORD OPATROL 40 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"What are you waiting for? DESCENT \"This game kicks a hell of \"Wow! At last! A true Doom KILLER!!!!!!\" Patrick Simmons, Compuserve 72017,2374 a lot of ass!\" Fire Boy1 AMERICA ONLINE \"The nasty computer game with graphics that change as if the player is moving in \"With the six-degrees of freedom, true 3-D three dimensions.\" game engine, Descent has set the new The Wall Street Journal standard that all other 1st person shoot-emups must now live up to.\" Jon Saloga, Compuserve 72712,450 \"Descent is an incredible game. Descent is to Doom as Doom Sensory \"Descent Kicks BUTT!\" was to Wolfenstein.\" overload Rick Johnson, Compuserve 74431,1624 -Al Hunt, Compuserve in 360° 3D. \"Doom with a Jet Pack... It's not like playing \"The weapons are aweWelcome to an arcade game, it's like being in one.\" some, the game play is awesome, the DescentTM 30 levels of Electronic Entertainment motion sickness is awesome... the most mind-bending, Eric Rose, Compuserve 71221,2660 stomach-churning action game ever. Featuring true \"Descent is superb \"Cool game, just need to find my 3-Dimensional worlds with light Apogee Dramamine to play it.\" source shading, texture mapping, \"The sensation of speed is amazing, and the Mike Hulen, Compuserve 74023,3004 3-D morphing, directional sound effects and sizzling music, this is 3D texture mapped graphics make this \"Holy Bat farts, Batman... I have never game a genuine joy to behold.\" technology taken to the limit. experienced an enemy intelligence anyYou begin deep below the surface PC Gamer where NEAR the way these robots act. of Lunar Base I where an unknown alien They peek, they fire, they chase you, they race has taken over the chasm of the Post \"It's Doom with a twist, a turn, and a take cover, they wait.\" Terran Mining Corporation. Lunge straight gravity free flip\" Marty Peralta, Compuserve 74147,33 down mine shafts, twist around never-ending Computer Gaming World tunnels and fight your way past robotic menaces in an environment that's truly 360 3-D...move up, move down shoot everything everywhere. Hang \"Played it ... and I have one thing to say. onto your senses (and your lunch) as you drop Wow.\" straight down mine shafts on a ride that'll leave you Sir Ryck AMERICA ONLINE ENVIRONMENT spinning. \"If you still have Doom loaded on your HD  1995 Parallax Software. And what's the good of losing your mind if you can't you're just wasting space.\" All rights reserved. Descent is a share the experience with your friends? Descent invites you trademark of Interplay Productions. Big Joe d, AMERICA ONLINE and your buddies to dive into the action together with head-tohead combat and cooperative two-player modem and eight\"Fantastic graphics, incredible 3-D animation, player network support. support for modems and LANs, music, you name it. The best I have ever seen.\" Challenge yourself and experience Jon Yardney, Compuserve 70563,2311 BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" what everyone's talking about! Interplay Productions 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 Coming March 17th to a store near you. For IBM and compatibles. (800) 969-GAME SCORE: 2200 LASEL LOSEL 30 twisting levels full of mechanical monsters and hidden secrets. Highly advanced A.I. with creatures that plot, wait and ambush from all sides. Explosive 3D, multidirectional sound effects and blazing musical scores. TM D E S Circle Reader Service #76 "


"A RCTI Victorvin Europe RAND MONALLY POPULAR MAP OF E U R O P E WAR AT SEA ACES OF THE DEEP GREAT NAVAL BATTLES I & II KRIEGSMARINE U-BOAT WOLFPACK SCALE 1:17,868,000 1 Inch 2:2 Statute Mlles 1 Centimeter = 179 Kilometers Sundell Hacks Start Graphic by Ron Meckler BLITZKRIEG TO THE BATTLE OF BRITAIN Moray KA Orest GRE L. Licking Norck ficha Kate Atha Cliath BATTLEFRONT BATTLE OF BRITAIN 2 PANZER GENERAL TANKS! THEIR FINEST HOUR WW2 AIR FORCE COMMANDER DS A TL ALI D-DAY AND BEYOND ravenhage sterda RL RG Stectie Br lisakyker W ittenberge under Ben 15yHICE Pai Orick Pasimaks LIVELG o CE Matt Magdeburts Dorted Dundo! SEAS  Skoblast  THE BIG PICTURE en tous les letop Versailles PARIS Olarte TTOOS Where Cla Verdes 3 alca Surat CLASH OF STEEL plast BATTLEFRONT BATTLES IN NORMANDY CLASH OF STEEL D-DAY: THE BEGINNING OF THE END GOLD-JUNO-SWORD M-4 MARKET-GARDEN MARKET-GARDEN ONLINE PANZER GENERAL PATTON STRIKES BACK TANKS! UTAH BEACH WESTERN FRONT 110-143 FR Polter Beller Karlsrose CLASH OF STEEL HIGH COMMAND Xuncle STORM ACROSS EUROPE THE BIG THREE THIRD REICH Vele Late M01 BE Livorno 24 25 CORSICA ADRIAT? celor SCLIA NORTH AFRICA G. Cada DE Strait of a DECISION IN THE DESERT KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT OPERATION CRUSADER PANZER GENERAL ROMMEL AT GAZALA ROMMEL AT TOBRUK c by Spa Kors "


"* 50 Years Later SIBERS Retrospectives Tour of Duty For Computer Wargamers by Terty Lee Coleman La perin Bothnia Krjati I.. Na Serdust EASTERN FRONT Veterio Chap* sontero liais BATTLEFRONT FIRE BRIGADE KAMPFGRUPPE PANZER STRIKE SECOND FRONT STALINGRAD TANKS! TIGERS ON THE PROWL VELIKIYE LUKI WAR IN RUSSIA Xile * SKYA Jap Salve Sukhinobi ORIEL 0 gital martes Bialystok.. slogt P urulan brutal herectora Piul Baras kost n early 1942, the chance that the Allies would defeat the Axis seemed optimistic, perhaps even naive. US battleships lay at the bottom of Pearl Harbor. The British were driven out of Singapore, the island fortress which had seemed all but invincible mere months before. As Douglas MacArthur llelt the fallen Philippines, his vow to return seemed almost hollow to the thousands of Americans who would suffer in Japanese prisoner-of-war camps for years to come. In Europe, German forces had conquered Poland, France, the Low Countries, the Balkans and Norway. After surviving the Russian winter, the German Sixth Army became embroiled in a long and bitter struggle for Stalingrad, and the tide began to turn... World War II is an endlessly fascinating subject for wargamers. When the war began, bi-planes were still employed in many of the world's air forces. Tanks resembled inflated armored cars, and sported more machine guns than cannonwhich was somewhat less detrimental than it could have been, since they often faced cavalry during the early days of the blitzkrieg. Weapons technology developed, as the war went on, to include radar, sonar, portable rocket launchers, jet aircraft, guided missiles, and even atomic bombs. And the mighty battleship was superceded as queen of the waves by the far-reaching strike capability of the aircraft carrier. Even more than the equipment, however, wargamers find the personalities of WWII to be compelling-quite simply some of the greatest commanders in history. Who wouldn't thrill to give the order, as Eisenhower, to \"Go in\" at D-Day, or to race through Western Europe like Patton, chasing the enemy before you, until all that stops your progress is lack of fuel? In the broadest sense, WWII, despite its incredible carnage, appeals to us on a very basic level. Unlike the confused and muddled \"police actions\" of today, WWII offers a clear-cut conflict of good versus evil where, ironically enough, even the hated enemy is to be grudgingly respected for his professionalism and military prowess. Despite a lot of criticism, wargames have often treated the touchy subject of playing from the Axis side very tastefully, a good case in point being the recent PANZER GENERAL (SSI). With this in mind, it seems only fitting that CGW pay tribute to the 50th Anniversary of the Allies' Victory in Europe. Within this guide, each theater of war is discussed according to its unique strategic considerations and interest as a wargame. Then, we have listed major battles within each theater along with our recommendations, listed in parentheses, for the best games in which to recreate those battles. Finally, we offer a critical evaluation of major games based on the particular theater. Now, join us as we reflect upon those games which chronicle the greatest and most terrible conflict in world history. Lack Belotti k te Luba Luts Zitto Itoya Y reak Berdiedes otepal Visita Cerke! Use Sement. Proin ves tler Sentet Us P orking Gele RON NI AB o Pregul Sistea Bucuresti Garcia BLAC BULGARIA STAR 'RA PER REECE Kaises ras 1942 Map Photo by Paul Kennedy (MSON "


"From Blitzkrieg To The Battle Of Britain eptember 1, 1939: The Polish govupon you, as the next Rommel or Guderian, When first released, TANKS! had gorernment, unwilling to cede land to pull off one military miracle after another. geous artwork, an easy-to-learn system, which would reunite Germany with Through a clever system of prestige points, and a number of famous battles. But it was East Prussia, deploys its armed you earn more important assignments, and not a serious tactical study, and, even conforces in defiance of Hitler's demay even have the opportunity to knock sidered as a pure strategy game, contained mands. But the Polish Army, which had England, Russia or even the US out of the several flaws which seriously affected blunted Soviet expansion only a decade gameplay. Losses at the far carlier, would be swept from the field in a reaches of the battlefield, for inmere fortnight. It was the beginning of the stance, influenced the morale of blitzkrieg, and it changed forever the way units many miles away. Artillery we view mobile warfare. support was clumsy, and the inIn most wargames, the Fall of Poland is terplay between the various but a puzzle to be solved on the way to arms just wasn't in sync. The more notable conquests, as in the beginnew version of Tanks! available ning turns of CLASH OF STEEL (SSI) or from David Landrey's Novastar HIGH COMMAND (360 Pacific). PANZER Games contains necessary fixes GENERAL (SSI) actually devotes two scenarwhich make the France 40 sceios to the Polish campaign. Even though nario a much more enjoyable the deck is stacked in favor of the Gercontest, as Panzers thrust toward mans, the strict timetable and annoying Paris much more realistically. Polish cavalry and air units make this a The Fall of France camgood start for a campaign. paign is a showcase for the best CLASH OF STEEL gives a good look at the parts of PANZER GENERAL's de\"phony war\" between the fall of Poland sign. Despite the abstractions, and the conquest of the Low the game does a great job of Countries. Whether you opt Major Battles/Campaigns: Warsaw, The Balkans (PANZER showing that the Allied tanks for an early conquest of GENERAL); Low Countries, Operation Seelowe (THE PURE WARGAME, of 1940 were individually suFrance, or simply secure your PANZER GENERAL); Fall of France (PANZER GENERAL, TANKS!); Norway perior to German armor. Poor northern flank in historical (PANZER GENERAL, CLASH OF STEEL); Descent on Crete (PURE historical tactics, such as trying to bludfashion, the improved Al of WARGAME, BATTLEFRONT); Battle of Britain (THEIR FINEST HOUR) geon through the Maginot line, are punversion 1.1 keeps the tension ished, and air superiority is very much in up, as France may try for an early sortie war. As you move from battle to battle in a question. The Allies take chances and ofinto Germany campaign, each of your core units gains exten make unexpected counter-thrusts, The best operational treatment of the perience, adding an element of role-playing making this a good solitaire, as well as complex Norway invasion is found in PANZto this fresh and exciting game. two-player, game. ER GENERAL. An intact Royal Navy, plenty of An even more accessible game can be British reinforcements, and the difficulties of A REPLAY OF WWI IT WASN'T found in the GREATEST BATTLES OF THE an amphibious assault into rough terrain The most intriguing campaign of the blitz 2011 CENTURY scenario set for THE PERmake this a difficult, nail-biting experiyears has to be the Fall of France. The FECT GENERAL. Based on a tabletop game ence-one of the best single battle scenarios French in 1940 were overconfident, assumby Bruce Williams Zaccagino, this endurof any WWII game. All of the battle scenaring that the Maginot Line of fortifications ing QQP design is an abstract, but very ios are enjoyable and include such rarities as would present an insurmountable obstacle good, introduction to the hobby. The the Axis conquest of the Balkans, but PANZER to the Germans. The Germans outflanked WWII battles included are well-balanced GENERAL's campaigns capture the flavor of the French through the Ardennes forest, for two human generals, but the Al of this the early war years like nothing before, albut were woefully short of fuel and supplies sequel seems as lacking as in the original. lowing you to view the conflict from the unat the time the French surrendered. This You need only contrast the Guderian Forcertain perspective of the war years, ratherollers a tremendous opportunity for makward scenario from this game with France than with the comfortable hindsight of histoing your own \"what-if\" scenarios, some1940 from PANZER GENERAL to see how far ry. The enjoyable tension of the game is thing for which WARGAME CONSTRUCTION computer game design has come in the largely due to the sense of urgency placed SET II: TANKS! is eminently suited. past couple of years. ALL ILLUSTRATIONS BY ROGER MACGOWAN 44 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"THE MOST CELEBRATED STRATEGY GAME IN HISTORY GOES ON-LINE. INTRODUCING SID MEIER'S CIVNET! SID METERS CIWE EXPERIENCE SID MEIER'S ST-SELLINO CIVILIZATION ONLINE d. An Empire To Stand e Test Of Time BROEROSE CIVILIZATION HAS COME TO THE INTERNET. Experience the best-selling Sid Meier's Civilization as a multiplayer Windows game! With Sid Meier's CIVNET play on-line via the Internet, over a local network or go head-to-head by modem. Build the Pyramids and the Great Wall. Conquer Earth or an undiscovered planet. Play history's greatest leaders and your friends in any combination, up to seven players at once! Broadcast messages simultaneously to your opponents. Become allies with some. Taunt others. You decide. Because once you get your hands on Sid Meier's CIVNET\", Civilization will never be the same. 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. Circle Reader Service #298 MICROPROSE 1995 MicroProse. All rights reserved. "


"SSG'S BATTLEFRONT series, though simitorical\" of the alternate-history scenarlarly dated, is still worth a look. The design is on the market. OVER THE REICH focuses on command control of an odd sort. Operation Seelowe is a common \"what-if\" As commander, you select orders for each battle, appearing in nearly all of the games formation, then watch as the AI carries out listed above. That the German's plan to in Charlie Moylan's FLIGHT COMMANDER 2 your commands. But the Al of this Roger vade England remained hypothetical had was a most rare bird-a strategy Keating/lan Trout collaboration doesn't less to do with the English Channel than wargame of aerial combat. Big Time come close to the standards of their later the brave men of the Royal Air Force. The Software's next campaign finds them games like WARLORDS II, and often leaves battle over Britain was the first, and the OVER THE REICH, which brings to bear gamers feeling like marionettes dancing on most decisive, air campaign in history. J.D. Webster's experience as a former a puppeteer's string. This game has a very Odd, then, that it should occupy such a military aviator and board wargame deentertaining Crete scenario, because the small place on our gaming shelves. signer. Even hardcore wargamers find game's confusing system helps capture the BATTLE OF BRITAIN 2 is one of the few titles themselves daunted by the bookkeepspirit of the frantic paratroop landings. The covering this conflict. Rather than a typical ing involved in Webster's detailed and original set plus add-on disks can be had at Deadly Games' light first-person simulator, very realistic designs, so Moylan plans bargain prices through mail order houses, this is an operational view of the airwar from to hide the tedious elements underbut control freaks should shy away. the perspective of the Marshal of Her neath the slick interface used in FC2. A better choice for ripcord fans would Majesty's Royal Air Force. The research is The game covers the air war over Gerbe THE PURE WARGAME from QQP, a thorough, and the losses of pilots and aircraft many from 1943-45, including everymuch less abstract game than its title imring true. The system is based loosely on thing from bombing missions with plies. The development of paratroop acJohn Butterfield's award-winning solitaire B-17s to early interception flights by tions is traced throughout WWII with a board game RAF, but this computer descen Me-163 Komets. Each mission begins surprisingly detailed order of battle. The dant features even less activity for the player. operationally with squadron movecombat system stresses morale and mobiliIn RAF, the decisions were spaced out so that ment, then allows you to resolve tactical ty, leading to tense, fluid situations in each card flipped over only added to the ten combat in FC2 style, with extended many scenarios. Along with the inevitable sion, like a good game of stud poker. BOB 2 campaigns and mission generator battle of Crete, the game allows you to asmakes things so seamless that the tension is planned for inclusion as well. sault the supposedly impregnable Belgian replaced by sterility. Those looking for a fortress of Eben Emael, a treat rarely availquick Windows game might enjoy it, but the why does the design render this dynamic able in wargames, board or computerboard game is more exciting. useless, by representing all squadronsbased. Folkestone, based on German A different campaign feel is evoked by whatever their size—by one plane? Worst of plans to invade England, is the most \"hisImpressions' WW2 Air FORCE COMMANDER, all, the crucial effects of weather are not even a playable game marred by included. Prospective pilots should route to huge reality gaps. In this version another landing strip, regardless of the low of WWII, we find that even price and minimal hardware requirements. Poland had radar in 1939. All A much more rewarding flight may be weather aircraft must have been had with THEIR FINEST HOUR, still available years ahead of their time, since from LucasArts in a CD package of flight sorties occur around the sims. Though its luster has somewhat fadclock-even in the dead ed, in its day, the bit-mapped graphics of night. The struggle freed gamers from the starkness of simple between the quantipolygons. Its near limitless play options are what keep this from being a museum piece. Flying from either the British or German side, you accumulate kills and medals throughout a campaign, as the fate BRITISH BULLDOGS, FRENCH PASTRIES of Britain hangs in the balance. You can fly PANZER GENERAL, TANKS! and THE PURE WARGAME as either a pilot or crew member, which, all show how differently things could have along with the mission builder, adds greatgone on the Western Front of 1940. ly to replayability. THEIR FINEST Hour is a great game which still has enough historical value to satisfy all but the most ardent simulationists. If you ever wonder why Me109s should never fly close escort, simply tative superiuse the \"combat film\" VCR-type feature ority of the (which this game was among the first to Luftwaffe and use) to tape your aerial experiments. Or, the qualitative you could just read the manual—a maredge of the RAF velous blend of historical background, is the key to the game documentation and sound tactical Battle of Britain, so advice worthy of any aspiring Sea Lion. LO 1L Ganedations Check Units Unit Mode CArmfields Air Strikes Ant. Barnase CHex Cntrol Reports Unit Haiti Un Hart EndTurn Group Attack Exit to Dos >OOD HILGARIA "


"IT'S NOT IF. IT'S WHEN. 486, Pentium, PowerMac... No matter how fast your PC is, it can't outrun a power problem (Get Uninterruptible...starting at $119) ust don't have the time for power problems on your PC? Don't worry. They'll always make the time for you. It's not if a power problem will occur, but when. Due to household appliances, poor wiring, bad weather or even other office equipment, power problems are as inevitable as death and taxes. IN THE NEXT THREE MONTHS, MORE THAN 30,000,000 PCS WILL BE HIT BY POWER PROBLEMS... In fact, you have better odds of winning the lottery than of escaping the sting of power problems on your PC. One study discovered a typical PC is hit over 100 times a month, causing keyboard lockups, hard drive damage, and worse. And since sags and blackouts represent more than 85% of power problems likely to un APC APC UNINTERRUPTIBLE POWER MEANS OVER 3,000,000 SATISFIED APC USERS... SAFE DATA, HAPPY COMPUTERS \"This is the best contputer related purchase I have crer made! Has saved me hours Sealed no-maintenance internal battery of reprogramming... provides instant power in event of sag or Carol Intine, Wizard Assoc. blackout protecting your data from loss Site wiring fault indicators \"We reduced our Surge protection backed automatically diagnose mantenance costs the first by up to a $25.000 dangerous wiring conditions year by 50%.it repairs of insurance policy protects Home office user Don Traux valuable computer Audible and visual p ene.\" krone's first hand about APC hardware from loss alarms alert you to Valentin Gonzales, l'izer reliability: \"It ought to be power problems Filters remove \"Our server Wang agentest the law to hwy a cletromagnetic Signals your poject when it lost potre... computer without an APC interference computer, saves your data (APC messed up all the data files. Back-UPS 250. I recently had software required) I took your days 10 Tecover. u direct lightning hit righ But we dowt't rr ntore outside the house...NY Since got ... computer mener blinked.\" Tony Chen, Deanza Systems \"We were werking on state bid when the poster APC lets me sleep henter at w off APC Band the day might. Hoze much would Raw AC Safe AC and year and future.hu sno pue's of data sed you pay to get back that one thanks to APC.\" file you worked all day to complete for the boss toho Ravi lyer, Software Galleria APC Uninterruptible Power Supplies provide instant battery gets on the plane at 8:00 \"A power surge did 4.11: You should assume backup to protect your data from loss and your hard drive from significant damage to all of that you'll buy a UPS, Hot damage. Units are even hacked by up to $25,000 in lifetime Or systems except those that it's sonte luxury item surge protection insurance. protected by APC The APC R. Morella, Westinghouse is e andanasged...\" \"A poser surge wiped out hit your computer, standard surge suppressors are C. Jeffrey C. Jeffrey Eng. the FAT tables on all I'C's literally powerless to protect you. And a study in a APC Inis turtally no protected by APC Note minated dom e in our recent PCWeek showed that the largest single hane APC installed on all.. corporate netek... Craig Post, Comm. Tech. cause of data loss is bad power, account Kit Roemer, Scarle Corp. \"Before I purchased the UPS ing for almost as much dara loss as all \"Pour went out while I had to put that lost theo Processing Pyroll! If not for hard drun's at S1000, With other causes combined. APC products...HO M hand W out! rities in to yours.\" PROTECT YOURSELF BEFORE Suzi Higgsunt, OST Inc S. Foretan, LSP YOU KICK YOURSELF... Get instantaneous battery backup Solutions FREE 60-PAGE power from an APC Uninterruptible HANDBOOK What are the causes and effects Power Supply and prevent keyboard lockof power problems? The most ups, data loss, and hard disk crashes. Common power protection mistakes? Call for your free Surge protection performance is even handbook today! Please reference Dept RI. backed by up to a $25,000 Lifetime Equipment Protection Guarantee. Ask for APC at your computer reseller today or call for your FREE handbook. Starting at just $119, an APC UPS is serious protection no serious computer user should MAGAZINE be without Back-UPS 4 0 0 AMERICAN POWER CONVERSION 800-800-4APC UKCHOICE APC TVTICROSOFT WINDOWS COMPATIBLE AMERICAN POWER CONVERSION PC World \"Don't make chances...ger Top 20 the womate protection... Upgrade from APC. PCWorld Circle Reader Service #233 401-788-2797 fax / 800-347-FAXX faxback 132 Fairgrounds Rd., W. Kingston RI 02892 USA A publicly traded company (NASDAQ: APCC) W PC Trademarks the "


"Desert Fox Hunt enerals Auchinlek, Montgomery, adding to play value. While the and Patton all won campaigns in occassional copy can be found the North African desert, yet none in bargain bins, this is not a tihave the almost mystical appeal of tle to start your WWII desert Erwin Rommel, The Desert Fox. collection with. Daring, charismatic and inspiring, he Two older games that have paved the way for a new kind of mobile aged a little better are ROMMEL warfare which would hardly be surpassed AT GAZALA and ROMMEL AT EI. until the Israeli Army (and later ALAMEIN. Simulations Canada's Schwartzkopf) elevated it to a deadly art notorious lack of graphics works form. Gamers trying to capture the essence well here, like old black-andof the Desert Fox's campaigns, however, white silent films. As a campaign often find themselves lost in a sandstorm study, the combat is akin to a of poor design and documentation. naval action, with the ebb and Tobruk: The very name conjures images flow dependant on realistic of strength, of struggles in a faraway land. command control and fog-ofSeveral games have tried to capture the war restrictions. For a different spirit of the many battles fought around take, you might also try SSG's this strategically located port, but few BATTLES FOR NORTH AFRICA, anhave succeeded. other in the Battlefront system. Even the British engineers, those fortiNovastar Games fying maniacs, couldn't have saved has re-released Major Battles/Campaigns: Tobruk (PANZER GDW's epic ROMMEL: BATTLES FOR TO KNIGHTS OF THE GENERAL), Gazala (ROMMEL AT GAZALA, OPERATION BRUK. It tried to succeed on both tactical DESERT, but despite CRUSADER); El Alamein (ROMMEL AT EL ALAMEIN, tent yourself with the and operational levels, failing miserably the game's many PANZER GENERAL); Operation Torch (PANZER eminently entertainon both counts. Incredibly, the game was awards, it hasn't GENERAL): The \"big picture\" in CLASH OF STEEL ing PANZER GENERAL, so overloaded with detail that it dwarfed aged well. CGW also shows the limited resources available to or for more robust even high-end board wargames in comfound the interface both sides without bogging down in minutiae. historical flavor, pick plexity, withawkward when reup a copy of OPERAleased, and time has made the static and TION CRUSADER. This marriage of Atomic BLOOD & SAND Auchinlek and ponderous pace of play even more apparand Avalon Hill results in one of the Rommel duel from exotic Bir el Gubi ent. Pass this one by for some finest views of desert warfare ever conto Tobruk in OPERATION CRUSADER, the Kroegel/Landrey Civil War fare instead. ceived, and is remarkably well-focused best desert WWII game to date. When riding a tank down memory and stimulating. Designers Young and lane, it's hard to ignore Sid Zabalaoui (V FOR VICTORY) are released (019 Meier's old DECISION IN THE from their European shackles, and their DMOEO DESERT. Ed Bever's research prosystem proves much more suited to the -vides a solid base upon which free-wheeling conflicts of the African Meier can work luis usual gamesands. Supply, reconnaissance, and play magic. The importance of weather rules are appropriately intricate, supply, mechanized overruns and but the elegant interface makes them less other aspects of desert warfare are obtrusive-combat and air missions are a blended well enough to give a breeze. Even the sequence of play has a broad but accurate view of the streamlined feel, supported by excellent campaign, while also being vastly documentation and sumptuous SVGA entertaining. Fans of Sin MEIER'S graphics—all of which give the appearCIVILIZATION will hardly be sur-ance of a lean and mean Panther ready to prised that this design has held roll down the coast to Alexandria. A good up so well, despite its dated look. Al much better than V FOR V), plus one If you can't take the big graphic step of the best systems for e-mail play, make backwards, you have two choices: Conthis a must for any aspiring Desert Fox. out File Options Staff Duties Planning Phare the Shotto 48 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"GO HEAD TO HEAD WTITI AN AR WARRIOR. FOR REAL. LT. COLONEL ROBERT \"MOUSE\" SHAW VETERAN F-16 TALCON PILOT AND GENIE USER HE'S JUST ONE OF HUNDREDS WHO ARE ATING TO TAKE YOU ON -ON GENE MULTIPLAYER GAMES. If you're a box sim pilot, it's time to fight for game every time. Not into sims? GEnie feareal. Time for multiplayer Air Warrior on tures 21 other multiplayer games, including GEnie. With up to 100 aces online at a role playing games and casino games. To time-some of them real fighter jocks— sign up online, turn on your modem and you'll have the dogfight of your life. And dial 1-800-638-8369. Enter JOINGENIE at because all Genie multiplayer games feathe prompt. When asked for the offer code, ture real opponents, you'll play a different enter RAP234. FOR UP TO 17 FREE GAME HOURS* CALL 1-800-638-9636 TDD 1-800-238-9172 (FOR THE HEARING IMPAIRED) \"Some restrictions apply. Must be over 18 years of age to subscribe For games to be free of charge for up to 17 hours, user must observe the following: play in non-prime time (between 6PM and 8AM EST), access speed must be set at a maximum of 2400 baud; user must dial into a local access node, remain solely in gaming area. Otherwise, normal Genie usage fees may be incurred during the 17 hour complimentary period. This offer is in lieu of all other otters, and is for new subscribers only. Additional long-distance phone charges may apply. Available in US and Canada only. Offer expires 12/31/95. CyberStrike and GemStone Il are trademarks of Simutronics Corporation, Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation. Harpoon is a trademark of Game Designers Workshop, Inc. All other names are trademarks or service marks of their respective owners. AIR WARRIOR HARPOON GEMSTONE III FEDERATION 11 CYBERSTRIKE GEnie OUR GAMES BLOW EVERYBODY ELSE'S AWAY! Circle Reader Service #30 "


"War At Sea aval actions in the European theSVGA graphics, complete ater of WWII lack the grand sweep with pyrotechnic exploof those in the Pacific. After WWI, sions and gun flashes, are the Versailles treaty reduced the better than ever. German fleet to a mere shell, so Otherwise, fleet admithere would be no Jutland-like showdown in rals are reduced to the the Atlantic. Mediterranean conflict centext-based naval simulatered on escorts for transports and supplies tions of Simulations Canasent from Italy to North Africa; but even da. KRIEGSMARINE: then, Italian vessels were more inclined to TACTICAL NAVAL stay in port than in battle formation. COMBAT IN THE Major Battles/Campaigns: Barents Sea, For surface combat in the Western HemiATLANTIC: 1939Hunt For The Bismarck, Narvik Coast (all sphere during WWII, there is really only one 1945 features a vaGREAT NAVAL BATTLES), U-Boat Actions (Aces place to turn: The GREAT NAVAL BATTLES seriety of scenarios of the art. It's hard to tell OF THE DEEP, U-BOAT) ries from SSI. GNBI looks a bit dated now which are largely for whom this product is but is still quite good. Although it may occaplayed by sending intended: It can't chalsionally bog down in excessive detail, GNBI and receiving radio messages alter establishlenge the best games in terms of realism, still offers enough solid entertainment to ing rules of engagement and plotting moveand it certainly lacks the sheer fun of balance the frustration. The numerous exment on a map. KRIEGSMARINE doesn't have SILENT SERVICE II, the Pacific Theater subpansion disks, SUPER SHIPS OF THE ATLANTIC, any bells and whistles, but it is very enlightmarine simulation from MicroProse. I'd AMERICA IN THE ATLANTIC, and SCENARIO ening as a command simulation. hate to think that Mac gamers have to setBUILDER, add both historical and hypotheti While surface ship commanders may tle for a rehashed 4-year old product just cal ships, several new missions, and better, find scarce waves on which to set sail, sub to get their submarine fix. sorely needed, campaign AI. GNB2 strictly captains will find several silicon opponents The quintessential undersea simulation covered the Pacific Theater and was a huge to fill their periscope sights. Deadly is certainly ACES OF THE DEEP, which so audisappointment. The overhauled AI still had Games' U-BOAT is a simple, light simulator thentically creates the dark and cramped huge strategic deficiencies, and the minutiae which is actually more realistic than it at environs of a WWII German sub that you swelled to the point where gameplay basicalfirst appears. Audio feedback drives the suspect Dynamix of conspiring with clausly capsized and sank. Though the upcoming game, as you listen for the propeller noistrophobic architects in the design. The AI GNB3 is also Pacific-oriented, it will offer an es of enemy ships, the launching of torpeof the enemy escorts is incredible, the torimproved interface, scenario editor, and does, the reports of your crew, or the pedoes are modeled accurately, and the ship editor. Also, its dreaded excampaign mode is as close to the life of a plosion of a U-boat captain as anyone could wish. The nearby depth CD version has interviews with Otto charge. Even Kretschmer and other U-boat commanSEABIRD'S EYE-VIEW the sparse ders, one of the best example of \"multiSubmariners will have their graphics add media enhancement\" we've seen yet. fill of undersea action with to the auUpcoming products include the add-on ACES OF THE DEEP and SILENT thentic feel missions disk from ACES OF THE DEEP, HUNTER. of Rene Vidwhich will allow you to sink Allied tonnage mer's sll in the Mediterranean and command the Degree cessful game advanced Type XXI U-boat. Also, SSI's design. upcoming SILENT HUNTER, with its lightNovalogsourced graphics (modeled from detailed ic's WOLFPACK has received a photos of the interior of a U-boat), looks facelift, and it is now available on like it will be a Pacific counterpart to ACES Mac CD. WOLFPACK was somewhat OF THE DEEP. In addition to the extensive unique when released (allowing torpedo and dive models, the game even you to command either subs or esincludes detailed views of each harbor you corts), but the graphic and gamesail into. In any case, naval enthusiasts will play enhancements still leave this have plenty of WWII sub sims to fuel their game way behind the current state combative fires for the upcoming year. Font "


"THE MEEK TRULY WILL INHERIT THE EARTH. BECAUSE THAT'S WHERE THEY'LL ALL BE BURIED. In the not-so-distant future, there will be new weapons. New communications. New technologies. And with it, new rulers who are more ruthless than ever before, with the same goal that's been around for centuries world domination. Command & Conquer is coming soon. Which side will you be on? Curious? Contact Westwood Studios on the Internet at info@Westwood.com or at WWW@Westwood.com Westwees Virgin COMMAND & CONQUER is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc.  Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Circle Reader Service #25 "


"All Violent On The Eastern Front iven that Operation Barbarossa was trenched, more numerous defenders. Worse, One data-intensive design that works the largest land campaign ever unthe strategic Al has severe problems, which well as both a simulation and a game is dertaken, both in terms of men, often come into play just as the action is heatHPS Simulations' TIGERS ON THE PROWL. materiel and sheer geography, it is ing up. WAR IN RUSSIA, the follow up, reSince its original release, designer Scott hardly surprising that there are moved some of the more unrealistic aspects Hamilton has improved the interface suffimore games available on this subject than of SECOND FRONT, but tried to do so much ciently to make this worth the steep learnany other WWII exercise. ing curve. The treatment of The stereotypical image of Opertraining, morale and other \"soft\" ation Barbarossa is that of a lean, factors add a lot to the WWII feel, mean, professional German Army particularly in scenarios set late in running rampant over a lumberthe war, where the outnumbered ing, bumbling Soviet behemoth. Wehrmacht must coordinate difficult The best gaming example of this delaying actions and counterwas Chris Crawford's EASTERN thrusts. The detailed rules include: FRONT, wherebelieve it or notflames which spread according to the Al for the Russian side was reprevailing winds (giving \"firefights\" stricted to 8K of memory. During a whole new meaning); penetration, testing, it was found that the Russangle of impact, and deflection of ian units were retreating toward the shell hits; suppression fire; night German lines. Since this made the engagements; and the difficulties of Al a tougher opponent-i hardly acquiring targets on smoke-lilled more competent-Crawford wisely battlefields before the advent of left it in. Recent Eastfront games high-tech sensing devices. For these claim to have left the EASTERN reasons and because of its strong FRONT days behind; but to chalcomputer opponent, TIGERS is a filenge the mostly hardcore gamers nalist for CGW's Premier award for who retrace the treadmarks of von Best Wargame of 1994. Manstein or Zhukov, the AI still has Before the advent of TIGERS ON a way to go. THE PROWL, the owner of the ultraOddly enough, one Al that has realistic Eastfront throne was FIRE held up reasonably well is Gary BRIGADE. Panther Games started out Grigsby's venerable KAMPFGRUPPE. as a boardgame Although respected on the Apple Major Battles/Campaigns: Barbarossa (CLASH OF STEEL, producer, but and IBM, the game reached its PANZER GENERAL), Kiev (KAMPEGRUPPE, FIRE BRIGADE), the rules to their pinnacle on the Amiga, with stereo explothat it lost the ele Budapest, Caucasus, Moscow, Kursk, Sevastopol (all wargames even sions adding a lot to the enjoyment. The gance that had PANZER GENERAL), Drive On Stalingrad (CLASH OF STEEL, tually became so variety of units-Wespe self-propelled arbeen Grigsby's STALINGRAD); Also, TIGERS ON THE PROWL does an excellent complicated tillery, T34/85 tanks, Hetzer tank destroystrength. Hard job of recreating just about any major Eastfront battle. that even harders, and even flame-throwers—all helped ware information core gamers to make this the first WWII tactical comdominates over were intimidatputer game that could be taken seriously. command and control considerations, or ed. So, Dave O'Connor adapted his CLIIf you can ignore the graphics, it's still fun even reliability. For instance, the T34/85 is MACS movement, combat and command to go for Kiev one more time. inferior on both attack and defense to the control system from Trial of Strength to the Other re-releases from the SSI \"Grigsby Tiger tank, even though the latter had badly computer. The IBM views of Kiev and the Files\" are more of a mixed bag. SECOND sloped armor and suffered chronic mechanisurrounding area look dated, but the Mac FRONT's division-level scale serves up the cal breakdowns. For a great strategic-level and Amiga graphics are still pretty good huge expanse of Russia in manageable form, Grigsby game, try his magnum opus PACIFIC (considering the game came out in 1987). but has single units taking out well-enWAR instead. Operationally, FIRE BRIGADE plays a lot like a 52 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


":: IT'S JUST A MATTER OF TIME.... : THE JOKRNEY MAN PROJECT BURIED IT TIME COMING SOON ON CD-ROM FOR MAC AND PC FOR MORE INFORMATION CALL 1-800-943-3664 The Journeyman Prajectand Buried in lime are trademarks of Presto Studios loc. Sanctuary Woods is registeredtagd Ferrertainmentstrademarked by Sun Wooste Multimedia. 1994 Pagesto Studios. Oircle Reader Service #363 "


"complex SSG game—not surprisingly, since ings in wargamers. The gorgeous SVGA STEEL PANTHERS SSG's Keating and Trout gave freely of their graphics form a backdrop for the quintestime and advice. A lot of the information sentially boring Russian campaign. Alwhich gamers take for granted in later dethough the basic system is sound, If you've ever played a tactical signs, such as in V FOR V, was present in earthe unit scale is inappropriate wargame, chances are, you're faly form here, with lots of reports and various here. The pace of the game is miliar with Panzerblitz and the intelligence available from the front. The sluggish, with one of the most inhost of imitators it spawned. Avalfighting around Kiev in 1943 is portrayed ept computer opponents for any major re on Hill never got around to publishing through a number of scenarios, playable lease. Unless you absolutely have to own a computer version, but SSI did a good from either the German or Russian side. every Atomic design, pass this one by. job of capturing that same spirit with The research is very good, and the Al—with STALINGRAD is another matter entirely, as PANZER STRIKE, which included an edithe help of a few tricks-provides a good it features three different scales in the same tor to create your own small-unit WWII enough opponent to capture the essence of game: One and three kilometers for opera engagements. Over seven years later, the campaign. What's really amazing is that tions, while the tactical view is 400 meters STEEL PANTHERS brings Gary Grigsby's a game this old supports modem play. It per hexagon. Multiple scales in wargames design up to current standards, while predates PANZER GENERAL by seven years in are often like split-level houses: they look maintaining the fun of the original. In having role-playing elements, as you receive cool when you put your money down, but, fact, the game feels a lot like a squadcommuniqués, medals and sometimes even once sold, the designer doesn't have to wor level PANZER GENERAL, with leaders dismissals, from Stalin or Hitler. So why was ry about the waste of space...or tripping over gaining promotions and experience as n't Fire BRIGADE a tremendous hit? It was ill-placed stairs (or rules systems) while you they move through a campaign. Linesimply too far ahead of its time, especially acclimate to your new environment. Where of-sight is handled cleanly, and there for the limited IBM of yesteryear. With a as CRUSADER kept the unit density low and are a wide variety of unit types, includfresher interface, better graphics and a hotthereby gave the Al a fighting chance, STAL ing engineers, Panzerfaust squads, and ter topic than Kiev, this system might still INGRAD is so huge that the computer oppo of course, tons of tanks. The scenarios have some potential. nent simply can't mount a coherent defense. range from France 40 and Berlin 45 to Of course, the best-known operational I'm sure that there will be gamers who will Stalingrad and even the Pacific, but the system to date has been Atomic Games' V rhapsodize over STALINGRAD, seduced by the feel is Eastfront through and throughFOR VICTORY, soon to be re-released by familiar game system, the sexy graphics and which means a lot of potential enjoyAvalon Hill. VELIKIYE LUKI is a fine examthe chance to refight one of the great battles ment for Panzer freaks everywhere. ple of why this series raises ambivalent feelof history. But while I applaud the design team for trying to be innovative, I but pretty accurate, view of the danger can't help but feel that this system has Paulus' 6th Army was in when it allowed itseen better days. self to be tied down in building-to-buildAlthough many strategic-level ing fights against a very determined games sputter when attempting to Russian opponent-an excellent two-playrecreate campaigns, CLASH OF STEEL er contest. is a notable exception. The latThe most accessible game for any est version improves the gamer interested in the Eastern Front is Russian defense so well PANZER GENERAL. Surprisingly, the simple learning curve doesn't compromise the EAS AI, which is more competent than in many JOSTATO) games of much greater complexity. The intent is obviously to emphasize playability GABOO Barri over realism, and it doesn't always work perfectly. Kursk is a wild armored melee, closer to the German ideal of the battle, instead of the minefield-rich horror that the Wehrmacht had little chance of winO prending af ning. But at its best, PANZER GENERAL offers a widely eclectic array of battles for STALINGRAD X 3 Gamers that Barthe Eastfront connoisseur. Sevastopol intromay relive the drive to barossa duces the Black Sea fleet, Caucasus is a the Volga (clockwise from is no classic slugfest, and Budapest shows both above) operationally in natos longer a German defensive brilliance and the CLASH OF STEEL, try grand cakewalk monolithic sweep of the Russian offensive. tactics in Atomic's 400 3313 0 for the Moscow has a bit of everything: aerial meters/hex STALINGRAD, or Germans. struggles, desperate tank duels, fortificaget down-and-dirty at The Drive tions galore, and the infamous Russian squad level with Gary on Stalinrocket artillery, all of which combine to Grigsby's STEEL PANTHERS. grad offers a make this a fine stand-alone battle, or the very broad, fitting climax to any Russian campaign. "


"BEST NEW GAME AT WINTER CES 1994 ELECTRONIC GAMING ZAG WORD GAME OF ALL TIME QQP: Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. \"A word game that you can't put down\"... ***Non-stop entertainment for the whole family\"... \"A unique word game with adventures as well\"... Shhh... It's a secret... We cannot disclose the hidden word, it's up to you to solve it. In addition to the myriad of word puzzles, Zig Zag, offers another exciting twist to the game, a word, game adventure. The solution is near, each puzzle brings you closer to completing the grand adventure. Right letter and location, you got a Zig ... Right letter ... you got a Zag. A few letters to go.. Can you deduce the word before the puzzle ends? Prepare your deductive powers as you embark on the ultimate word puzzle adventure game!  Intuitive Interface  Enormous built in Dictionary Player History  On-line Hints  4, 5, 6, & 7 Letter Words & Numbers \"Zig Zag\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #354 "


"D-Day And Beyond y mid-1944, the Axis had been possible to drive driven out of North Africa, the the Allies off the Russians were reclaiming hunbeaches with a litdreds of miles of lost territory, tle luck, or for the and the Italians were well on their Allies to break out way to being out of the war. Yet Germany of the beachhead still controlled France, The Low Counearly and race totries, the Balkans, Denmark and Norway. ward Paris. Both Having learned from their capture of Sicisides have several ly, the Allies planned an even bigger operopportunities to ation to break the back of the Third attack and deReich: D-Day, the most ambitious amfend, making for phibious assault in history. an excellent twoEvery strategic-level WWII game must have a D-Day of sorts, but to get the feel Major Battles/Campaigns: D-Day Landings of the Normandy invasions, an opera(UTAH BEACH); Breakout & Pursuit (BATTLES IN tional approach is best. Impressions NORMANDY); Operation Market-Garden (MARKETNORMANDY. The same caveats apply here takes this almost to extremes with D-DAY: GARDEN); Battle of the Bulge (BATTLEFRONT, PANZER as in the parent BATTLEFRONT system, but THE BEGINNING OF THE END. The system GENERAL): Fall of Berlin (PANZER GENERAL, TANKS!) there are several battles here not found in is pretty much BLUE & THE GRAY meets any other notable game, in particular the Eisenhower, with all the micro-managing savage fighting on Omaha beach. that entails. Now, there is a certain viscerplayer contest. The packaging is excellent. If the SSG system doesn't simulate conal thrill to pushing tank units forward to particularly the documentation, which is fusion on the battlefield well enough to meet the enemy, but moving them all inthorough and remarkably candid about suit your tastes, try MARKET GARDEN, andividually-especially after large numthe strengths and weaknesses of the game other good game in the V FOR VICTORY sebers are ashore-quickly becomes system. If you've ever wondered where Opries. Regardless of whether you play from tedious. If you have the patience, D-DAY ERATION CRUSADER and STALINGRAD had the British or German viewpoint, chaos has a much better Al than other their origins, UTAH BEACH is a worthwhile, reigns throughout, with pockets of desperGrabowski designs, and the shorter sceenjoyable romp through gaming history. ate firefights scattered about the battlenarios are fun in two-player mode (hot. If you are among those who can never field. That the game is actually interesting seat only, no modem). get their fill of tanks, give Deadly and fun to play despite all this is a tribute A more traditional approach comes Games' M-4 simulation a try. The firstto the design, which includes several enfrom Atomic Games, where GOLD-JUNOperson graphics are weak, but the audio hancements over UTAH BEACH. Because of SWORD and UTAH BEACH look amazingly includes enough authentic-sounding rathe nature of the battle and the complexilike board wargames-only better. GJS dio chatter to give you more than enough ties involved in simulating it, this is not a was the last of the V FOR VICTORY series, images of approaching enemy armor. game for novices, but it remains the best but was released too soon by 360 Pacific The scenarios are OK, but the campaign way to appreciate this controversial camto be the jewel it could have been. The gives a fun mini-tour through 1944 paign. Although MARKET GARDEN was computer opponent is poor, and even France and Belgium, including small acsomewhat buggy when released, this with two human generals, the German tions unavailable in any other game. The should be taken care of in the upcoming forces are so outclassed that the game simcopious feedback includes medals, prore-release by Avalon Hill. Those who are ply isn't enjoyable, despite the obvious motions and replacements, enough to on-line could try a different approach to technical achievements of the design. keep any gunner's 75mm warm, happy OPERATION MARKET GARDEN, the MultiWith UTAH BEACH, however, the conand ready for instant Windows action. Player Games Network conversion of cept was still fresh, and the designers' en Although the V FOR V series does cover GDW's boardgame. The double-blind asthusiasm for their subject translated into a the post-D-Day fighting, to really get the pects, tedious in the boardgame, are suwonderful game. The AI, while not great, essence of fighting in the bocage, you're perbly suited to the on-line format versus put up a decent fight, and it was actually better off with SSG's ancient BATTLES IN another human general. 56 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"KINGDOM The Far Reaches Experience the Magic. Live the Adventure. KINGDOM KINGDOM h aces The Far Reaches ong ago, in a Land of Five Kingdoms, the amulet known as The Hand was shattered into five pieces and hidden throughout the Far Reaches. Dark magic spread and the evil wizard Torlok began his reign of terror and suffering. Now, the fate of the Five Kingdoms rests on Lathan, the last of the Argent Kings. Help him fulfill ancient prophecy as you set out on an interactive adventure like nothing before. From the creator of Dragon's Lairt comes an all new fantasy adventure. With epic animation and a lush score from musicians who are best known for their song arrangements written for Walt Disney Feature Animation; it's an incredible experience for the entire family.  Different story line each time you play.  Over 57,000 hand-painted animation cels are captured in full-motion video making this a stunning visual journey.  Professional voice actors bring the story to life.  Simple point and click controls, with multiple difficulty levels make play equally thrilling for players of all levels. Now Available for DOS CD-ROM See your local retailer, or call (714) 553-6678  1994 Interplay Productions and Virtual Image Productions. The 3DO Compatibility Symbol and 3DO are trademarks of The 3DO Company. Dragon's Lair is a trademark of Starcom. All other trademarks are properties of Interplay Productions. All Rights Reserved. 3DO COROM *Coming soon to the 3DO Entertainment System and CD-ROM for Macintosh. Circle Reader Servira #175 "


"we U tar Dell Play Phi Regardless of the outcome of OperaGerman advance at Bastogne. This is 5) The Last Blitzkrieg tion Market-Garden, the Allied push to scenario does artificially restrict the acthe Rhine was inevitable. Part of the tion, but is one of those rare duels-to-the breakout from the beachheads is coydeath actually worth the trouble. The vicThe major complaint I have ered in the scenarios found in Garytory conditions are simple but reasonable: about WWII computer games is that Grigsby's WESTERN FRONT (SSI), but the Hold the town of Bastogne, and destroy as they don't handle breakthroughs by same reservations apply as in SECOND much enemy armor as possible. For quick mechanized forces as well as their FRONT. There are no comprehensive and dirty action, this has been little sur boardgame counterparts. SSG is trying studies of, say, Patton and the Third passed in the past seven years. The up to change all that with their upcoming Army as yet, but the sequel to PANZER coming THE LAST BLITZKRIEG promises to title THE LAST BLITZKRIEG. Roger KeatGENERAL may take care of this wargambe the BATTLEFRONT of the '90s, but in the ing and lan Trout designs always seem ing dilemma (see page 62). Until then, meantime, Bastogne will serve as a good to have a strong computer opponent, we must be content with scenarios of the appetizer. which should be augmented by the new Battle of the Bulge, one of the most-simChris Crawford's PATTON STRIKES BACK operational Al developed specifically ulated subjects in all of wargaming. (Broderbund) was a noble experiment, at for this game. Six scenarios and a cam(Noted boardgame designer Danny tempting to provide an entertaining game paign cover the Battle of the Bulge in Parker has forged a career from virtualwith a teaching tool on the Battle of the beautifully rendered SVGA detail. The ly nothing but Bulge games.) Whether Bulge. Problem is, the \"coffee-table book Operations Point system gives a fluid the Germans, in retrospect, could have on a computer\" approach used here does feel as each battle commences, while won seems largely irrelevant. Even n't give enough insight into the Bulge-if penalties from combat, terrain, etc., although the British, Canadians and other you want a good WWII educational CD, low for the infamous traffic jams so imAllied forces were involved, the Bulge is try NORMANDY: THE GREAT CRUSADE by portant to slowing the German remembered largely as an American batThe Discovery Channel instead. The elu advance. The aim of the designers is to tle. This viewpoint is reflected by most sive \"rest of us» that Crawford was report make this both realistic and accessible, games on the subject, which center on edly trying to reach ended up confused by and they're certainly off to a great start. the fighting around Bastogne. the clunky combat and movement sysOnce again we find that older is often tems, with novices and grognards alike secretly assembled forces launched at the better, as BATTLEFRONT does a good job of quickly coming to the conclusion that as a Allied lines in the last German offensive. showing the stubborn US resistance to the game, PATTON strikes out. Like a punch-drunk prizefighter past its Although it doesn't contain the overt prime, the Wehrmacht tries to land one last multimedia elements of PATTON, the haymaker. But the US Army had matured Bulge of PANZER GENERAL is both eerie into one of the great fighting forces of the and strangely compelling, especially modern era, and generally proves more when played as part of a campaign. Bethan a match for its opponent. The best cause of the ambitious timetable imwinning strategy is not readily obvious, posed by the German General Staff, making this a battle worth visiting again it's easy to feel the sense of desand again. peration which gripped the The Fall of Berlin, as seen in PANZER GENERAL, is more backs-to-the-wall action; but this time, the inevitability of the Allied victory makes for a sobering scenario. It should be played as such from both the German, and, if you can convince someone to let you pound on them, h cians LOVELG from the Allied perspective in a two-playODBE er game. If you must play solitaire, PANZER GENERAL has an incredible number of exotic weapons, such as the Me-262, which can sustain interest even while your forces are being justly pummeled by the victorious Allies. SUMMER VACATION The V The TANKS! version of a crumbling LS FOR VICTORY tour begins in Berlin offers a viable alternative. The June on the beaches of fighting around the city seems to have a Normandy, moves to grittier feel, which is actually helped by scenic wartime Paris, and the lack of graphic sheen when compared ends with stormy Holland to PANZER GENERAL. Moving Sherman in September, courtesy of tanks through the streets of Berlin, having UTAH BEACH, GOLD-JUNOjust vanquished the last of the German reSWORD and MARKET-GARDEN. sistance, is an important close to any wargamer's tour of Europe. Cherbourg IN dor kula Arra! eta chest R este Charles Pne G. T's! Octante PARIS os tes Ascere Stra Na Lane e liens start outies  "


"DEVELOPERS NETWORK CD Dial in, make new friends... and kill them. OCCURRENCE ONE OVER 5000 PILES OVER 500 MEGABYTES OF DOOM ADD-ONS, UTILITIES, AND SUPPORT FOR DOOM II All the wads, all the editors, all the sounds, all the patches, all the utilities... Play Network Doom or Doom II in groups of up to four. Play Cooperatively or Death Match Modem support 14.4k to 28.8k baud: 8-1-N Chat areas DoomWare includes: More than 20 Doom front ends, Doom loaders, wadrunners, Doom menuing shells and wad managers, such as D! WadGod, DOOMLaunch, and DOOMLoader. Editing tools such as Doom Editing Utility (DEU), DeuTex, EdMap for creating and editing new Doom levels for your own entertainment or converting Doom I levels for Doom II. Underground documentation for all the Doom Game file specifications, cheat codes, strategies for single player, cooperative, or DeathMatch. Client software for accessing the multiplayer networks, head-2-head modem play, and Doomoriented BBS's. An archive of historical Doom shareware from id Software, thousands of add-on levels, new graphics, sounds and hacks. DoomWare's CDGofer interface allows you to rapidly browse the entire contents of the CD, view file descriptions while browsing, extract, copy, and print-all from within the program. Or play directly from the CD. Online gamer's cyber mall Coming Soon: Heretic and Descent Download area with patches, demos, bug fixes, shareware, add-ons FREE ISSUE and trial subcription I to PCGamer when you sign up. Featuring APCi Multiplayer Game ServerTM Order your copy today! DoomWare CD ........$34.95 DoomWare Bundle .....$72.95 DoomWare & Doom 1l (full version) CDs [bundle available by mail-order only! Also available at retail outlets For dealer inquiries, call 802-247-4250 ZOTE O TOMST 1 West Seminary Street, Brandon, VT 05733 PLAYHET 1-800-382-5656 PREMIUM MULTIPLAYER NETWORK Chigago node: 708.833.0129 Detroit node: 810.816.9191 Information: 800.PLAYNET MasterCard/VISN Diner's Club/check/money orders accepted * Shipping and handling included. All orders shipped within 24 hours DoomWare requires registered verson of Doom or Doom II Doom and Doom Il are registered trademarks of id Software. Inc.  1995 CyTech Codehouse Circle Reader Service #344 Doom and Doom II are registered trademarks of id Software. Inc.  1995 GameNet. Inc. "


"The Big Picture lighting through the rubble of Stalof mobilization. The scenaringrad or silently descending, ios aren't quite up to CLASH chutes unfurled, to drop down on OF STEEL standards, but Crete, is a wonderful challenge. there is always a place for a Completing a campaign in PANZER good beginner's game, and GENERAL is undeniably satisfying. Yet as any THE BIG THREE will have just wargamer knows, there is an irresistible alabout anyone campaigning lure to fighting \"The Whole War.\" Several across Europe in record games have tried to harness that siren call, time. Let's hope that this but their success has been as varied as that modest success inspires of the WWII participants themselves. Steven Jones to be more amFor a good introduction to WWII, you bitious with his next design. could do a lot worse than THE BIG THREE. Of course, too much ambiBig Time Software's brainchild has been tion can get you in trouble, revamped by Alliance, and now has an AI which is exactly what hapto go along with the improved graphics. pened to SSI's STORM ACROSS EUROPE. For games ever released for the computer. The The Windows format offers more than just instance, each of the warring countries are sequence of play makes that of PACIFIC WAR bug-free gameplay, as the simple but efrated for \"Stalin Sanity\" or some other lalook accessible by comparison. The ecofective interface also keeps the learning bel, which measures their insulation from nomic sub-system is a game unto itself, and curve to a bare minimum. The style of politics. The German political advantage is the diplomatic AI seems to rely more on play is a combination of Axis & Allies, Third ridiculous-simply because they are the obfuscation than devious back-stabbing. Reich and just enough World in Flames to bad guys, I suppose—as they can invade Worst of all, after struggling through the add spice, as gamers deal with diplomacy, nominal allies like Spain or Sweden with overbearing documentation, you find that strategic combat, supply and the problems impunity. There's nothing wrong with the heart of the game, the combat system, \"what-if\" options, especially in a strategicsimply doesn't work well enough to justify level game, but STORM ACROSS EUROPE of the level of detail. While two players can ten doesn't make you pay for the struggle along, it's doubtful anyone will consequences of your actions. A weird mix have the patience to fight through an entire of abstractions (tactical air points) and war, and the AI is sadly inept. unneeded complexity (lots of naval Another complex game with AI woes is rules, with little resulting action) hoping to finally emerge, wraith-like, from makes for a poor simulation of the mists which have shrouded its troubled WWII, and a worse game. transition to IBM shores. It's easy to pick 360 Pacific increased the on TWRD REICH, because the Al for the simulation ante with High Atari ST and Amiga versions was even COMMAND, by taking the worse than that of High COMMAND. The old Colorado Computer pleasant surprise is that the IBM version Creations product and may actually do justice to this boardgame CARDBOARD CUTOUTS fleshing it out classic from Avalon Hill. As it currently Units in THE BIGTHREE with SVGA stands, the computer has separate Al for Feet (above) sport icons, graphics and a strategic plans, tactically relevant objectives, scle while the IBM version toolbar interand the destruction of enemy troops. Unend of THIRD REICH (right) face. Such like former conversions, the IBM game will no uses familiar military quo niceties could include virtually all of the board game's Fra symbols. Both games not, however, will seem like family to will seem like family to rules, in the hopes that some of their mindlessen the imany board wargamer. and very Antwerp 3-4 numbing complications will be tempered pact of one of by the computer format. Even so, this is not the most needgoing to be an easy game to learn. You just lessly complex won't have to worry about losing a game Miten Auta Sive Sald Map Ware DE_ 1992 q \" "


"TO CREATE THE ULTIMATE STAR WARS EXPERIENCE WE HAD TO SET QUR SIGHTS A LITTLE HIGHER. DARK FORCES FIRST PERSON FIREPOWER IN THE STAR WARS UNIVERSE. AVAILABLE NOW ON CD-ROM. LUCAS Aris Dark Forces game 1994 Lucasfilm Ltd. and LucasArts Entertainment Company. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. Star Wars is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Ltd. Dark Forces is a trademark of Lucasfilm Ltd. The LucasArts logo is a registered trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company CHECK OUT THE DARK FORCES DEMO ON THE LUCASARTS BBS AT (415) 257-3070 "


"ALLIED GENERAL SSI's designers may not be wargaming deities, but they have risen to at least patron saints after the release of PANZER GENERAL. The forthcoming sequel, ALLIED GENERAL, mates the core of the best-received wargame in nearly a decade with a unique multiple perspective. You may fight as either a Russian, British or American general, where you will have to develop flexible tactics to maximize the effectiveness of the variety of different troops and equipment for each army. This approach goes beyond even PANZER GENERAL in giving an overall view of WWII in Europe, and also offers even more opportunity for role-playing. After running the Germans out of North Africa, for instance, you could either retire as a war hero, or like Montgomery, go after more glory at DDay. While there will be little change in the main game engine, more feedback will be provided through individual unit histories, complete with battle performance ratings for each formation. Better multimedia enhancements promises new life for those pintsized archival WWII films, and Allied invasion plans call for voice-overs rivaling those of their German counterpart. Over 30 new scenarios and several campaigns are planned for inclusion, with the game's release scheduled in time for Christmas '95, so save those Liberty dimes! A B because your opponent points out how you violated Rule 37.5.3B, just as you were about to capture Berlin. The old graphics (mostly white) are included for grognards, with a new colored map for novices (as though an inexperienced player would even attempt this game). If noted ASL guru Bob McNamara can pull this off, he should receive the Royal Cluster of Avalon; he'll already have the gratitude of every diehard WWII gamer. With all due respect to the other games listed above, there is no doubt that if you want to fight the entire war, from the stormy Atlantic, to the scorching North African desert, to the frozen steppes of Russia, CLASH OF STEEL is still the best overall. Some games are more realistic, and others have more dazzling graphics, but few games in any genre deliver more of what they promise. In a fairly simple package, CLASH OF STEEL shows why Malta is so important to the outcome of the North African campaign. The Italians are hard to use properly in the Mediterranean, as they should be. The naval and strategic bombing rules are abstract, but integrate seamlessly with the rest of the design. Similarly, the Russian winter rules may be criticized as inelegant, yet it's difficult to argue with how well they work. The entire game is designed for effect, which can result in some inaccuracies, but these are far from the egregious excesses of other strategic WWII games. At least with CLASH OF STEEL, it's obvious how and why events unfold; the feedback is good for both veteran and novice alike, and brings them back for more. If it weren't for CLASH OF STEEL, it's doubtful that there would be a PANZER GENERAL; or at least PANZER GENERAL wouldn't be as good as it is. To all those gamers who struggle on IBM, Mac and Windows beaches, fight in polygon-generated planes, shoot from silicon tanks, and cajole tired and often-pixelated infantry to capture each objective in their path, we can only hope that your next gaming tour of duty will be as exhilarating as ours was. See you at the 75th Anniversary of the Allied Victory in Europe... Oooooocco Occo moocomomond commons A Wargaming Tour Of WWII In Europe Game Year Theatre/Period Graphics Realism Solo 2-Player Replay Overall Value ACES OF THE DEEP 1994 War At Sea AA A N/A A BATTLES FOR NORTH AFRICA 1987 North Africa BBBATTLEFRONT 1986 Blitz, East, D-Day B-BBBBATTLES IN NORMANDY 1987 D-Day D+ B+ B+ B BATTLE OF BRITAIN 2 1994 Blitz C-BC+ N/A CCCLASH OF STEEL 1993 The Big Picture BB+ AD-DAY: BEGINNING OF END 1994 D-Day C B DECISION IN THE DESERT 1985 North Africa B+ AFIRE BRIGADE 1987 East GOLD-JUNO-SWORD 1993 D-Day GREAT NAVAL BATTLES 1992 War At Sea B+ B BB GNB SCENARIO DISKS 1993 War At Sea GREAT NAVAL BATTLES II 1994 War At Sea ACCBHIGH COMMAND 1993 The Big Picture A C+ D+ C+ KAMPFGRUPPE 1985 East D B + B B+ KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT 1985 North Africa D D + D D KRIEGSMARINE 1989 War At Sea B B+ B+ M-4 1993 D-Day BNA MARKET-GARDEN 1992 D-Day B B+ MARKET GARDEN ONLINE 1994 D-Day B B+ AOPERATION CRUSADER 1994 North Africa AAA PANZER GENERAL 1994 All PANZER STRIKE 1987 East D+ B BB+ PATTON STRIKES BACK 1990 D-Day BC+ C C ROMMEL AT EL. ALAMEIN 1986 North Africa N/A BBROMMEL AT GAZALA 1987 North Africa N/A BB+ ROMMEL AT TOBRUK 1985 North Africa FDSECOND FRONT 1992 East STALINGRAD 1995 East A C+ B+ STORM ACROSS EUROPE 1989 The Big Picture C+ C TANKS! 1994 Blitz, D-Day, East B THE BIG THREE 1995 The Big Picture BB THEIR FINEST HOUR 1989 Blitz N/A N/A TIGERS ON THE PROWL 1994 East AU-BOAT 1993 War At Sea NA B+ B+ UTAH BEACH 1992 D-Day AB+ A B+ AVELIKYE LUKI 1992 East B+ B C CD CWAR IN RUSSIA 1993 East B C+ B BC C+ WESTERN FRONT 1992 D-Day B B+ WOLFPACK 1990 War At Sea D+ D NA NA D D WW2 AIR FORCE CMDR. 1993 Blitz BD+ CCD CN/A N/A <MODO. & commodo Locomo B+ munom COM   >q  om OM 62 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Silverload Welcome To Silverload, A Devil Of A Town. Folks don't come to Silverload much anymore. A'int been no silver here in years. And when they do come, they don't stay any longer than they have to. Missing persons? No, mister, a'int never seen no missing persons. Of course, folks here don't pay much attention to strangers. Have a look around? Can't say anybody will stop you from looking around, mister. Except the last man who came here looking for kin is buried over there on that hill. VIC TOKAI INC. 22904 Lockness Ave. Torrance, CA 90501 PC CD-ROM  1995 Millennium Interactive Limited Circle Reader Service #376 "


"Photo by Sue Zurawik 20 9902199 KUR Tired of playing games on a dinky little 14\" monitor? Thinking about spending several hundred dollars to take the big jump to a 17\" display? Don't break out the plastic yet! Odds are that you already have a video display that's 25, 27, 32 inches or even larger located right in your living room. That's right, your TV. by John Brassil with Mike Owen V OR NOT TV? THAT IS THE QUESTION, ONE WHICH WE WILL ATTEMPT TO ANSWER IN OUR REview of some hardware that transforms the VGA (Video Graphics Array) output from your PC to the National Television Standards Committee (NTSC) format used by televisions in North America. These hardware devices, generally known as \"NTSC converters,\" are either external devices that sit outside your computer like an external modem, or \"bus cards\" that you insert into your bus slots exactly as you would a sound or video card. With a simple installation, you could be getting the Big Picture. But would you want to? As you'll see in our reviews, NTSC converters work fairly ture games might not. With a quality TV well for gaming, delivering a decent picset, reading text on-screen is fine, but with ture on a quality TV set. But there are otha lower quality screen, text can get washed er issues than visual quality to consider. A out and grainy, and can strain the eyes. big one is logistics. To play games on your TV will require that you bring your TV to BEHIND THE SCREENS the computer or your computer to the TV. How does the NTSC conversion technoloIf you've got a spare TV in the house that gy work? One of the reasons the PC to you can tote into your den, you're set. If NTSC process works at all is that PC moniyou've got an enormous TV in the living tors and TV sets have the same 4:3 aspect room that can't be moved, then you've got ratio of width to height, as opposed to a to truck your computer and all its periphmovie theater screen, which is 16:9. The erals, which can be a hassle. Laptop comdifference between the film format and the puters work best in this case. TV format is the reason for the black bars Another issue is the type of games you seen on \"letterboxed\" movies and the want to play. Graphically intense games slightly distorted pictures of movies relike Doom or NASCAR RACING work very leased on tape. In the PC to TV converwell on the TV, but text-intensive advension, there is very little picture distortion 64 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


".... Play to win and save yourself some money. Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER CALLMACALINE GAMES RATED CAMRUTEB DOOM II EXCLUSIVE COVERAGE! SAVE UP TO 4.7% Feature Reviews Pagan Djia) (iL. Dragonsphere Great Naval Beatles II AEGIS In-Depan Strategies F-14 Fleet Defender Aces Over Europe Merchant Prince Sneak Preview Aces of the Deep Secrets of the Computer Game Developers Make the ultimate move III for serious gamers who know the score when it comes to buying computer gaming magazines. Subscribe to Computer Gaming World now and save up to 47%! Score points and cosmic savings now with Computer Gaming World. We're worlds apart from any other computer game magazine.  One year/12 issues $27.94. YOU SAVE 41%! . Two years/24 issues $49.97. YOU SAVE 47%! Savings based on annual cover price of $47.40. Every monthly issue brings you exclusive first looks at the hottest, newest games... the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive environments. Plus winning strategies, master clues, in-depth reviews — all the help you need to pump up your system and play out your fantasies on this planet and beyond. CALL NOW TO SAVE UP TO 47% 1-800-827-4450 To ensure savings, mention this code to the operator who answers your call: 4295. "


"ZAP COMPUTER GAMES FROM PC TO BIG-SCREEN TV BRINGS YOUR FAVORITE GAMES TO LIFE-ON THE BIG SCRE SPECIAL OFFER FREE GAMES INSIDE GINS due to this similarity in aspect ratios. A TV using the NTSC system has 525 lines of resolution and displays 60 frames per second, with two frames per field. This means the TV display is interlaced, drawing every other line on the screen 60 times a second. As anyone who has ever used an interlaced monitor knows, this causes the screen to flicker, which is fine for the constantly moving images that TV normally delivers, but can be very apparent on a static screen display from a computer. It is also worthwhile to note that 525 lines of TV resolution translates to about 465 pixels of screen height and 620 of width, so adjustments must be made to the NTSC signal in order to fit all of the PC's 640x480 screen. Most of these NTSC converters support true color VGA (16.7 million colors); there are a few that only support 256-colors, but that really isn't much of a drawback for gamers, since there are very few products currently on the market that use more colors than that anyway. Input to a TV set is mainly designed to be through RCA composite or S-Video (also known as Super VHS or S-VHS) jacks. The RCA jacks are single-pin connectors like those found in stereo systems, and combine chrominance (color) and luminance (brightness) information in the same signal. A four-pin approach allows the Svideo signal to separate the chrominance and luminance components, resulting in improved picture quality. If your TV is an older model that doesn't have input jacks, you will need to use a Radio Frequency (RF) converter to change the signal so it can be fed through the antenna leads, but be aware that this will result in further degradation of picture quality. For our tests we used a 26\" Mitsubishi CS-2610R model television with RCA composite and S-VHS inputs. Our test computer was an IBM PC clone with a Di. amond STEALTH 24 VLB video card with IMB of video memory. The STEALTH 24 uses the S3 86C805 chipset, which worked with all the units except one. Just for grins we also hooked up a Toshiba 4600C laptop through its external VGA connector, and it produced essentially the same results as our desktop system. direct mail. Besides being the smallest combinations to control TV or monitor (palm-sized) unit we looked at, it's also output, left/right and up/down picture adthe least expensive, selling for about $70 justment, and horizontal overscanning, less than the next cheapest unit. There's which is used to make the displayed imalso a ZAPPER bundle available which inage take up the entire screen instead of cludes three games (PRINCE OF PERSIA, leaving borders on the left and right edges of the picture. However, several of the games we tried took control of the keyboard , In the rendering the hot-keys inoperative. This problem was common to all the units we tested, so we found it to be a good idea to adjust the screen positioning before using a game. We were able to get Apogee's MONSTER BASH (an EGA game) working, but it only displayed on the left half of the screen. As it turned out, the only converter which used the full screen for EGA games was the TV CODER (below). We were finally able to view graphics by connecting a Toshiba laptop to the GAME ZAPPER. When connected to the Toshiba laptop through its external VGA connector, text mode was not JETFIGHTER II and SPECTRE CHALLENGER) enabled, but MASTER OF ORION looked for about the same price. great! Finally, some output from a game! Installation of this external unit was a It only worked with the laptop's display breeze, as it was for all the external units turned off, however. we tested. There were pictures of all the inFor more information, contact ADS at (800) cluded components to accompany the text 888-5244. in the manual, including diagrams of all the required connections. The cable from ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS the VGA connector that would normally go to the monitor is replaced by a Y-cable that TV ELITE has connections for both the converter and a PC monitor. The converter has output Our next product was another ADS prodconnections for composite and S-video TV uct, the TV ELITE, which has a street price input. All the units we tested supported of about $139 for the internal version and both of these output types. $219 for the external. Hardware setup The first setup we tried was the RCA was fast and easy, and the documentation (Composite Video Signal) connection, was very similar to that provided with the which provided virtually unreadable text GAME ZAPPER. The converter unit is largin DOS. Unfortunately, with the Diamond er-about the size of a portable CD playStealth card, this muddled text mode was er-and includes outputs for both the all we could get out of the GAME ZAPPER. monitor and TV directly from the Installing the software was quick (about adapter. A small plastic tool is provided 90 seconds) and easy. Included was a for adjusting the output brightness of the README file which explained the video unit. Darker pictures on the TV make the problems we were having. The GAME ZAPscan lines less noticeable, improving apPER is incompatible with Diamond pearance on the TV screen. The TV disSTEALTH CARD), Orchid FAHRENHEIT, and play was noticeably lighter on all the cards using Tseng ET4000c and converters we tested using the factory deET4000w chipsets. Three software drivers fault brightness settings, so having this were provided, none of which corrected kind of feature available is a definite plus, the incompatibility problem. The memoalthough the TV's brightness control can ry resident (TSR) programs used hot-key serve the same purpose. ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS GAME ZAPPER The first product we reviewed was the GAME ZAPPER from Advanced Digital Systems, which sells for about $78 through 66 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Coming April 1995. TM SKINERGICECENJARI A Looking Glass Technologies Production Do looking Glass H ole jos inc Camond MA lenda Novo looung Glass and the castrative logos are trademarks of licoking Glass Technologies, Inc. Al monteserva "


"Unfortunately, the hardware-intensive approach of the CTV has some significant drawbacks. The overscan mode filled up the screen all right, but at a noticeable loss in picture quality, and underscanning cuts off a significant portion of the display area. The vertical adjustment button doesn't allow scrolling up or down, just a 40-line jump in either direction. The picture quality just wasn't as good as some of the other units we tested. For more information, contact AlTech at (800) 882-8184 KUTOLO INPOT ProPC/TVP gamePlayerTV But HIVE tv ELITE ILITE REMOTE-MOUSE AITECH Again, we tried the RCA connection highest of the group. This one initially first. Software installation for this product appeared to be the cream of the crop, GAMEPLAYER TV requires Windows (it is possible to just with the same approximate physical dicopy the DOS driver from the install disk mensions as the TV Elite and TGP, and We also looked at another AlTech prodif you don't need or want the Windows also features vertical adjustment and unuct, the GAMEPLAYER TV, one of two interversion) and offers hardware summary inder/overscan controls built into the unit. nal units in the review. The street price formation in addition to the install proA \"freeze\" button also keeps the current for this unit is about $189. Besides the gram. The FLICFREE DOS driver image on the TV while the monitor disNTSC conversion, the card also has a mentioned in the manual has been replay changes, a feature handy for the Yamaha OPL.2 chip, enabling it to act as a placed by the file ELITEVDO, as debusiness presentation market at which 12-bit monophonic sound card providing scribed in the README file. A the CTV is aimed. An RF converter is Sound Blaster 2.0 and AdLib emulation. Windows-based driver called VGA2TV is also built into the unit, making this the In fact, most of the manual is devoted to also provided. Note that while the GAME only converter to directly support RF describing the installation and use of the ZAPPER required a TSR program to work Windows Sound System utiliproperly, it's not necessary to load one for ties which come with the GAMEthe TV ELITE. However, screen adjustPLAYER TV. The video software ments and flicker reduction aren't possiprovided was none other than ble without it. the DOS and Windows versions The games we tried looked pretty good of our old friend FLICFREE. on the TV. There was a bit less color satuSeeing this, we checked the ration than others, but the difference in FCC ID for the card, and sure size more than made up for it. Doom, for enough, «JRS-FCN-1025\" is instance, was a much more \"in your face\" about as close as you can get to experience. RAPTOR, the shareware shootthe ID of the TV ELITE and TV er from Apogee, also looked very nice on GAMER PLUS. the big screen. One thing that might be The testing we did on the helpful is to find an extension for the keyvideo features of the card proboard to allow a little separation from the duced essentially identical reTV. This would have the dual benefit of sults to the TV ELITE and the making the scan lines less noticeable and TV GAMER PLUS, which is what reducing radiation exposure from the we had expected. Although it cathode ray tube. When we tried the Asconversion. Also included in the pack. was a bit out of scope, we disabled the teroids game from Microsoft's ARCADE age are cables and adapters for Macinsound card already in the PC and hooked FOR WINDOWS, we got some noticeable tosh computers and a cable TV input the GAMEPLAYER TV's audio output directshadowing, but switching to S-video input switcher ly into the television's sound system. We fixed that problem. Although not absolutely required, Winhad no problems using the default setFor more information, contact ADS at (800) dows and DOS drivers that allow horizontings, and the sound quality was actually 888-5244. tal and vertical display adjustment are not too bad from the TV's built-in speakincluded. However, these are the only ers. We didn't load or use the Windows functions performed through the software sound driver and Audio Accessories, since AITECH drivers, so options like TV output togprograms like the Audio Recorder and MULTIPRO CTV gling and flicker reduction are not avail. Talking Calculator are a bit off-topic for able. The instructions in the manual are a this review. But they're there for those Our next stop on the converter trail was bit thin in spots, but do an adequate job who are interested. a look at the AITech MULTIPRO CTV, of addressing installation and trouFor more information, contact AlTech at with a street tag of about $239, next-tobleshooting. (800) 882-8184. 68 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Explore The Secrets Of An Ancient Civilization Lost In Time. Discis Entertainment presents an ELOI Production ewels vacle Indulge yourself in a 3-D animated world, with seductive music, captivating sounds and oracular voices. Resolve the tasks set before you and go on to greatness. Fail and be lost forever! Discover hidden chambers and test your skills of logic and reason with interactive and intricate puzzles. CD-ROM GAME FOR WINDOWS AND MACINTOSH AVAILABLE NOW AT YOUR FAVORITE RETAILER OR CALL 1-800-567-4321 Circle Reader Service #58 Unlock the fascinating secrets of an ancient and long forgotten civilization. Actual screen images from the game. "


"ur TRVAA Tee u BLASTER CREATIVE CREATIVES CREATIVE LAUS photo negative of the original image, and Like the MULTIPRO CTV, this unit CREATIVE LABS Gamma corrections which adjust the apworked fine with all the games we tried, TV CODER parent brightness, as well as the ability to but like the other hardware-only solution, create user-defined configurations. These the picture quality just wasn't as crisp as The other internal unit we looked at was changes are made to the VGA output some of the other units. The other benefit the TV CODER from Creative Labs. It sells stream, so the results can be seen on both of the AVERKEY 3 is that it will support for about $139. The TV CODER is the only the TV and the computer monitor, if one 800x600 on NTSC units, although the converter we tested that supports both is connected. NTSC display conversion results in a large NTSC and PAL (the European TV for All these adjustments can also be made chunk of the screen not being displayed. mat). In fact, the software provided allows in DOS, either from the command line for more information, contact ADDA Techfor selection of three types of NTSC and with the TVSET utility, or the TSR popnologies at (510) 770-9899. three types of PAL, although there's no deSCREEN WRAP scription in the Each of the units we looked at has its manual of what the own strengths and weaknesses. The Video different types are. In GAME ZAPPER has a low price, but doesn't general, though, the support several popular video cards. The manual was the best of TV-ELITE and TV GAMER Plus both do the bunch, with a wellan adequate job, but don't have much in organized, professionTVCoder the way of extra features. The plus and al layout. minus on the MULTIPRO CTV is a hardThe picture quality ware-intensive solution that also features from the TV CODER Macintosh support, but with little flexiwas as good or better bility and so-so picture quality. The than any of the units GAMEPLAYER TV is a one-stop solution to we tested. What really audio and video upgrade for a basic PC, set the TV CODER but the mono FM synthesis sound-card apart from the other feature might not be that big of a deal in converters, however, a world that's increasingly stereoand was the installation wavetable-oriented. The TV CODER has and utility software some nice software utilities and PAL supthat came with it. Besides a slight glitch up TVADJUST, although it's hard to conport, but lacks the convenience of the exdeciding which floppy drive to use, the inceive of using the CLUT functions ternal units we tested. The AVERKEY 3 stallation program ran smoothly, automatwithout the Windows interface. doesn't use any of your precious memoically updating the boot files and inserting For more information, contact Creative ry, has a neat infrared remote, but falls an automatic installation script in the Labs, Inc. al (800) 998-1000. short in picture clarity and has the highWIN.INI file for the Windows utilities. est price tag as well, although there is a We were quite surprised to initially see $149 model available that doesn't inthe TV display in black and white, and alADDA TECHNOLOGIES clude the remote. though we finally did get color output, it AVERKEY 3 Which unit you choose depends on took a bit of experimenting with the \"Colyour particular needs and preferences. or-Run Frequency\" slider and the \"Signal Finally, we looked at another hardware-only The TV ELITE and TV CODER both seem Type\" buttons (NTSC-M is what eventualsolution, the AVERKEY 3 from ADDA Techto cover the essentials quite well, and at ly gave us color). Playing with the \"Horinologies, which goes for $269 through diabout $140, provide a big-screen thrill zontal Alignment\" slider got us into big rect mail, making it the most expensive of you just can't get from a PC monitor. trouble, though, since it garbled and then the products we tested. This unit also comes For those fortunate souls out there with blanked the Windows display, a problem with some Windows-based presentation softa high-end TV, being able to use the which we were only able to correct byware, but it isn't required for the unit to Picture in Picture (PIP) feature to swap deleting and reinstalling the TV CODER function properly. The neat thing about the between output from the computer and software. There are also check boxes for AVERKEY 3 was that all the controls are built the TV tuner means you can squeeze in color output and toggling the TV display into an infrared remote, so it's possible to a few rounds of X-Com during commeron and off. adjust the picture from across the room. In cials. It will also save some bucks on an The other neat Windows utility was the fact, you have to use the remote, since there external monitor for a laptop if you can Color Lookup Table (CLUT), which alare no controls on the unit itself. There are pry the rest of the family away from the lows mapping of input RGB values to outbuttons for power on/off, panning, width Simpsons. put. This process is hard to describe, but control, screen position, brightness, overTV or not TV? Well, it depends on the it uses an X(input)-Y(output) graph to scan, freeze frame, three sharpness levels, quality of your TV and just how large you create a color line for the Red, Green and saving the current settings or resetting to can handle Doom demons. As for me, to Blue components of the signal. Besides factory defaults, and a unique \"zoom\" feaparaphrase a popular tune (Fade in the default CLUT provided, there's also a ture that magnifies a portion of the screen Sting's voice) \"I want my... I want my...I Reverse, which looks essentially like a to twice its normal size. want my big 1V.\" 70 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"ba COGN WANTED OUR WANTED POLSE Downlu Hunter NASTY DAN HANDSOME HARRY TM COLON WANTED WANTED ILASTY D2 EL LOCO NAIT THE CACTUS KID CAN YOU COLLECT THE BOUNTY ON ALL FOUR OF THE MOST CUNNING OUTLAWS IN THE TERRITORY? heller in PC CD-ROM An Old West outpost needs your help to clean up the town. Be quick on the draw and careful how you shoot to collect the most bounty and upgrade your weapon from a sia-shooter to a shotgun. The Last Bounty Hunter automatically adjusts gameplay to keep it challenging -the belter you are, the barter il gets. Try your skill against fast draw world record-bolder Wes Flowers in American Laser Games' largest live-action production to date. The PC GAMEGUN will let you experience the arcade sensation on your personal computer. IBM OR COMPATIBLE PC GAMEGUN the pe farPC GAMEGUN MERICAN MERICAN compatible with all American Laser Games live action shooters. LASER GAMES, INC 4801 LINCOLN ROAD NE / ALBUQUERQUE, NM 87109 505-837-5447 Circle Reader Service #60 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. Hoe ter oss Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10245 PO Box 234 Dept 10245 Rochester, VT 05767 PLAYBOY RE YSTIE TROTOS of USS TICONDEROGA' As Commander you have a NAVY Missle Cruiser to help you challenge enemies World Freedom. Travel around the world with this real time game that can make exper-ienced Com-manders sweat. CD $34 \"THE WOMEN OF PLAYBOY MULTIMEDIA SCREEN SAVER Hundreds of sensuo US images from five decades of Playboy Magazine: playmates, magazine covers, cartoons, bunnies, and fine art.CD $23 W04071118 'METALTECH: BATTLE DROME' is a virtual reality combat arena where strategy and tactics count as much as firepower. Mighty Herculan robots fight one to one for power, pride and money. Offers ten Herc chassis and a broad weapons arsenal. CD $37 SICISTA LICONDEROGA FREE IOYORN LucasArts Full Throttle/Dark Forces Demo CD 'UNDER A KILLING MOON Transports you to the virtual world of the detective Tex Murphy. New features allow you to save and splice scenes together. An amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually and aurally stunning. CD 549 \"LINKS PRO BIG HORN Course Disk' Bighorn's 6.888 yard championship golf course is a stunning achievement by renowned architect Arthur Hills. The first six holes offer a varety of elevations. The sixth hole. Bighorn's signature hole, is a 505 yard par 4. $19 (UNDER LINKS bons COURSE Request your FREE LucasArts Full Throttle/Dark Forces Demo CD with any in stock CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Request must be made at time of order. Valid from 3/1/95 to 4/30/95 or while supplies last. Quantities limited a IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $24 CD-ROM DRIVES 4 Plex Quad Spd Driv $459 4 Plex 4x Spd Ext (nc)$559 4Plex 4x Drv W Cntrl $479 Digital Edge 3x Int CD $699 NEC 4XE Mitispn Ext $489 NEC 4XI Multispin $405 NEC 4XI W Intric Kit S489 Real Magic CD Upgrd $599 Snd Bistr Omni (4X) $412 Teac Spr Quad (4x) $342 S49 SPEAKERS Altec ACS 100.1 Spkr $103 Altec ACS 150 Subwfr$109 Audphl Rfrnc 10A Spk $122 Audphl Rimc 30A Spk $189 Audphl SW 20A Sbwfr$ 139 Jazz J-306 Speakers $32 Jazz J-702 Speakers $96 Jazz J-901 Mini-Sbwir $225 Labtec CS-1400 Spkrs $99 Labtec CS-1000 Spkrs $59 Labtec CS-800 Spkrs $32 Lablec CS-600 Spkrs $24 Sony SRS-PC30 Spkrs $58 Snd Glxy BX2 WSpkrs $29 Snd Glxy NX2 wspkrs $49 Yamha SBS 300 Spkrs $08 $19 $34 $42 CONTROLLERS Auto Cockpit $159 Avenger Space Ball $169 CH Flight Stick Pro $57 CH Flight Stick $35 CH Game Card 3 Auto $25 CH Pro Pedals $75 CH Pro Throttle $89 CH Trackball Pro $85 CH Virtual Pilot Pro $75 Cybrman Flight Cockpit $219 Fight Stk Pro XWg Bndi$72 Gravis Phoenix Joystck $83 Joyswitch $38 Logitech WingMan $45 Logitech Wing Man Ext $45 Notebook Gameport $42 PC Virtual Golf Club $119 Thrustmsir DCS (T1) $111 Thrustmastr F16 TOS $111 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thrustmastr FCS(MK2) $59 Thrustmaster Gm Crd $25 Thrustmaster Rddr CS $99 Thrstmstr WonCnt Sys $94 Universal Cockpit $219 VFX 1 Virtual Headgr $949 7th Guest 2 Limited CD $50 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD$51 7th Guest CD $44 Adv Willie Beamish $24 Adv Willie Beamish CD S24 Alien Virus CD $38 Alone in the Dark 2 $34 Alone in the Dark 3 CD $48 Alone in the Dark CD $46 Amazon $35 Arc of Doom WIN CD $35 Atmosfear CD $34 Bneath a Steel Sky CD $33 Big Red Adventure CD $40 Bioforge CD $44 Blackthorne or CD $29 Blake Stone or CD $29 Blind Date CD $38 Blood Society CD $34 Bloodnet $39 Blown Away WIN CD $39 Blue Force or CD $19 Body Count or CD $29 Brain Dead 13 CD $38 Buccaneers CD $48 Bureau 13 CD S 39 Burn Cycle CD $39 Campn Cartographer S46 Castle Wolfenstein CD $42 Central Intelligence CD $25 Chaos Continuum CD S29 City 2000 CD $20 Club Cyberlesque CD S29 Commander Blood CD $44 Companions of Xanth $32 Comps of Xanth CD $33 Conan CD $26 Conspiracy CD $30 Corridor 7 or CD $29 Creature Shock CD S48 SOUND CARDS AdLib Sound Card $29 Adv Gravis Ultrasnd $119 Adv Gravis Ultra ACE $36 Adv Gravis UltraMax $169 Pro Audio Spctrm Pls $89 Pro Audio Studio 16 $119 Sound Blaster Value S57 Sound Blastr 16 Vlue $105 Snd Bistr Gamblst 16 $379 SB 16 ASP WSCSI-2 $196 Sound Blastr 16 MCD $142 Snd Bistr Voice Assist 542 SoundMan 16 $99 Snd Scp 16 Bit Witbl $159 Vivid 3D Plus Sound $72 Vivid 3D Pro $105 Critical Path WIN CD $19 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 Cyberia CD $45 Cyberwar CD $48 Daedalus Encountr CD $46 Damnesia CD $36 Dark Forces CD $47 Dark Seed 2 $42 Dark Seed CD $39 Day of the Tentacle Day of Tentacle CD $42 Death Gate CD $32 Defcon O CD $39 Digital Dreamware CD $24 Dinonauts CD $29 Dinonauts WIN S24 Discworld or CD $35 Doom 2 Cictrs Ed CD $52 Doom 2: Hell on Earth $42 Doom 2 CD $44 Doom Ware CD Dracula $32 Dracula Unleashed CD $39 Dragonsphere or CD $25 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreamweb $34 Dune CD $29 Ecstatica CD $35 EM $24 Entombed CD $38 Evolution or CD S29 Extractors CD $34 Flash Traffic CD $39 Flashback CD $38 Fortrs of Dr. Radiaki CD $32 Frankenstein CD $46 Freelancer 2120 $35 Freelancer 2120 CD 541 Full Throttle CD S42 G-Force S19 G-Nome or CD $43 Gabriel Knight $29 Gabriel Knight CD $42 Gadget CD $45 Gateway 2 or CD S29 Gateway Clctn 182 CD $36 Gender Wars CD GrailQuest $21 Guy Spy CD $29 Hand of Fale S24 Hand of Fale CD $39 Harvester CD $44 Heaven and Earth $32 Hell Cab CD $42 Heretic 2 CD $46 Hired Guns $36 Hook $32 I Have No Mouth or CD$44 In Extremus $42 Inca 3 CD $39 Inherit the Earth S32 Inherit the Earth CD $25 Iron Helix CD $56 Jagged Alliance $46 Johnny Mnemonic CD $44 Jonny Quest S26 Journeymn Projct 2 CD $48 Jurassic Park S29 King's Quest 5 VGA $32 King's Quest 5 WN CD $41 King's Quest 6 CD $45 King Quest 6 OEM CD $29 KingQuest 6 Upgrd CD S24 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Quest 7 CD WN $49 King's Ransom or CD $33 Kingdom O' Magic CD $54 Labyrinth of Time CD $24 Lands of Lore 2 $42 Lands of Lore 2 CD $46 $54 Last Dynasty CD $33 Laura Bow 2 CD S24 Laura Bow 2: Lawn Mower Man 2 CD $49 Legend of Kyrandia S24 Lend of Kyrandia 3 CD $39 Legnd of Kyrandia CD $32 Leisure Suit Larry 5 S24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $39 Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD $44 Leisure Suit Larry 7 CD$44 Leisure Larry Anth CD $47 Little Divil CD Loadstar CD $49 Lost Eden Lost Eden CD $39 Lunicus CD $42 MTV Club Dead CD $39 Maabus CD $32 Madness of Roland CD $29 Man Enough CD $34 Mission Critical CD $34 Morph Man CD $29 Myst CD $46 Nerves of Steel or CD $22 Nibelrung Ring Cycle 339 Night Trap CD $48 No World Order CD $24 Noctropolis CD $47 Nomad or CD Opratn Body Count CD $29 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Pagemaster CD S44 Pepper's Adv in Time $29 Phantasmagoria CD $49 Pitfall $38 Pitfall CD $38 Police Quest 3 VGA S24 Police Quest 4 & WIN $38 Police Quest 4 CD $44 $36 VIDEO CARDS Reel Magic Vid Upgrd S299 Speedstr Pro SE VLB $179 Stealth 64 Video Card $219 CGW 4951 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US 84 par ordut Mato Giuada PR HILAK, APO, FPO Super order Warldwide Batman S6 per fem Handling $2 por shipment Hasrdware ordera muy require additional shipping charges. All sales final. Call for datais. Visa, MC and Discover accepted Checks held 4 weeks Money Orders under $200 same as cash COD 58 Defectives replaced with some product. Most items shipped same day Shipping times may vary. Price/ availability may change FREE GAME OFFER* See detalls below of Migil, at stay 'HEROES OF MGHT & MAGIC You must conquer the world through the strategic use of resource management and battle savvy. Features up to three customizable computer controlled warlords, stunning super VGA graphics, and dynamic sound. CD $34 THRUSTMAS TER F-16 TQS You've got one of the best flight simulators on the market and the software is more sophisticated than the best the military had just a few years ago, but you're still using your keyboard to fly it? With the 'TQS\" you'll be flying that bird from an F-16 Cockpit! User con figurable, thumb trackball, fore and aft throttle movement, dogfight switch and throttle tension adjustment. $111 AVENGER SPACEBALL Say later to the clunky. herky jerky action of keyboard mouse and joy stick play! Enter the next generation of super cyber-dynamics. Spin on a dime Slip and slide. Duck. Dive. Unbelievable breakthrough! $169 A Strateyic Quest MARIRAFT SPACE SIRENS YILLATE CYBER SEX SIMULATOR OWCSHUNIANS WARCRAFT Enter the world of WarCraft, a mystical land where evi orcs and noble humans battle for survival. Destroy the orcish hordes or aush the weakling humans...the choice is yours. With an ingenious arsenal of weaponry and powerful magic. CD $39 benuine VR SEXE SPACE SIRENS' As a space privateer you are lured by the irresistible song of the Space Sirens emanating from a mysterious space station. You must fulfill their every desire or reman a sex slave on the sta tion forever. Your objective search and fulfill. CD 549 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a freo IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Mar 1st to Apr 30th or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order SPEND $60 Airbome Ranger 525, Falcon 3 Scen 2 MG 29 3.5, GNB Scenario Builder 3.5.Gunship 5.25. Power Hits Sports 3.5/5.25. Charge of the Light Brigade 5.25, Chess Net WIN 3.5/5.25. Conquered Kingdoms Soon 13.5. Pirates 5.25, Railroad Tycoon 3.5 SDI 525 SPEND $100 Battle Chess WIN 3.5/5.25, Battles of Destiny 3.5, Bridgo 7.0 3.5, Cohort 23.5, Dragon Force 3.5/5.25. Earth Invasion WIN 3.5, Kronolog: Nazi Paradox 3.5, MacArthur's War 3.5, Mega Traveller 5.25, Roturn of Phantom 3.5, Silent Service 23.5, Sony SRS9 Speakers SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5, Command HQ 3.5, Dungeon Master 3.5/5.25, Falcon 3.0 3.5, F15 Strike Eagle 2 3.5, Flight Sim Toolkit 3.5, Microleague Baseball Manager's Challango 3.5, Simon the Sorcerer 3.5. Ultima Underworld 2 3.5. Warlords 5.25 NAME ON IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $36 844 $44 $34 839 $16 S19 Police Quest 5 CD S48 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $29 Psimaster CD S44 Psychotron CD $36 Psychotron MPEG CD $38 Quarantine $35 Quarantine CD $39 Quest for Glory 3 S24 Quest for Glory 4 CD $44 Quest for Glory 4 $29 Quest for Glory 5 CD 544 Rex Nebular $36 Relentless CD S44 Return to Zork or CD $44 Return to Zork w/Anth $44 Return to Zork CD S45 Riddle of Master Lu CD$48 Riftwar Legacy VGA $23 Rise of the Triad CD $42 Rise of Triad:Dark War $35 Robocop 3 $32 Robot City CD $46 Scroll CD $38 Sea Legends CD $44 Secrt Monkey Island 2 $21 Secrt Monky Island CD S21 Secret Monkey Island $25 Secrets of Stargate CD $28 Shadow of Comet CD 537 Shadows of Cairn CD $39 Silverload CD 38 Simn the Sorcrer 2 CD $37 Skull Cracker CD S41 Slaughterhouse 5 CD $46 Space Quest 4 VGA $28 Space Quest 6 CD $45 Spce Shp Brainlock CD$49 Spaceship Warlock CD $29 Spawn $42 Star Reach $36 Star Trk: TNG Clctr CD $79 Star Trk:25th Ann. $26 Star Trk:25th Ann.CD $49 Star Trk:Jdge Rites CD S42 Star Trk:Star Fit Acad $48 StarGate $38 StereoWorld CD $39 System Shock System Shock CD $47 Tek War CD $46 Terminator 2029 CD $29 Terminator Rampage 542 Terminatr Rampag CD $34 Terra Nova CD $48 Terror of the Deep CD $36 The Dig $40 The Dig CD $42 Journeyman Projet CD $32 The Trial $44 Thief of Dreams $42 Touche $39 Trouble is my Biz CD $46 Tuneland CD $48 U.S. President CD $32 Undra Killing Moon CD$49 Virtuoso CD $39 Vortex CD $45 Voyeur CD $46 Walker $32 Wetlands CD $29 Who Killed Sam Rupert $24 Witchaven CD 546 Wolf:Hnt Be Huntd CD $39 Woodruff & Schnibble S32 Wrath of Gods CD WN $44 Yserbius $26 Zombie Dino CD $30 Zonked $25 Zorro or CD $39 500 CC Race Bike $29 Novastorm CD $34 Alien 3 $29 Out of this World WIN $19 Alien Breed $19 Oxyd Magnum $36 Animation Classics 2 $42 Pick'n Pile $19 Atari 2600 Action Pack $25 Pinball Fantasies $29 Breakthru WIN $35 Pinball Illusions or CD $29 Cannon Fodder CD $22 Pinball Worlds or CD $35 Corpse Killer CD $48 Power Rangers CD S25 Creepers $24 Ralden $29 Crime Patrol CD $35 Raiden CD S36 Crystal Caliburn WIN $29 Rebel Assault CD $44 Crystal Skulls CD $40 Revolution X CD $45 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Rise of the Robots S45 Dragon's Lair CD $34 Rise of the Robots CD $48 Dragons Lair 2 CD $39 Royal Flush Pinball CD $30 Drug Wars CD $35 Silverball 2 $19 Eight Ball Deluxe $31 Sink or Swim or CD $19 Fast Attack $46 Slam City CD $48 Fire & Forget Sleepwalker $21 Glider 4.0 $29 Soccer Kid $19 Gobliiins 3 $19 Soccer Kid CD $25 Gorg CD $19 Space Ace 2 Hammer Slammers CD $46 Space Ace CD $38 Ishar 3 $33 Space Ace MPEG CD $42 Jump Raven CD $42 Space Pirates CD $39 Jurassic Park CD $25 Street Fighter 2 $19 Lode Runner or CD $39 Street Fight 2 Cmp CD$22 Mad Dog McCree CD $35 Street Fight Comp. CD$22 Magnaflux Runner $29 Striker S46 Mario's Gme Gllery CD $25 Striker CD $46 Mega Man X $23 Spr Arcade Games CD $16 Metal & Lace NR13 $27 Supreme Warrior CD $48 Metal & Lace Upgrade S5 T2:Arcade Game Mickey Mania CD $39 Take-A-Break Pinball $19 Microcosm CD Tetris Gold CD $32 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Time Pockets CD $46 Mirage Thunder Titan $16 Monty Python's Waste $48 Tubular Worlds $36 Mortal Kombat $24 Ultimate Pinball or CD $34 Mortal Kombat 2 CD $46 Who Shot Johny Rock $34 Circle Reader Service #54 AD & D Cictrs Pack CD $35 ADD Cletrs Edition 3 $19 Al-Qadim S42 AlQadim CD $39 Alien Legacy Alien Legacy CD $39 Arborea Journey $34 Arena $39 Arena CD $45 Brandish Brandish Brandish CD $34 Cobra Mission $29 Cyclones CyClones CD $39 Cyber Space CD $38 CyberJudas CD $48 Daemonsgate $19 Daemonsgate CD Dark Queen Krynn Ed $16 Dark Sun 2 $47 Dark Sun 2 CD $49 Dark Sun $47 Dark Sun CD $49 Darklands $19 Darksun Character Ed $16 Demon Hunter S42 Devil's Gate CD $40 Disciples of Steel S34 Dragon Lore CD $47 Dungeon Master $19 Dungeon Master 2 $38 Dungeon Master 2 538 Dungeon Master 2 CD 338 Elder Scrolls 2 CD $48 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of Beholder 3 $19 Eye of Beholder 3 Edit $16 Gateway Savg Frontier $32 Hell CD $45 Hero's of Might& Magic $34 Hexx: Heresy of Wizard $29 Hunters of Ralk CD $54 Ishar 3 CD $33 Kingdoms CD S40 Knights of Xentar CD $38 Knights of Xentar Lands of Lore $34 Lands of Lore CD $41 Legacy:Realm Of Ter $39 Legend of Valor $36 Lord of the Rings 2 CD $38 Lord of the Rings CD $33 Lord of Rings Vol 1 Ed $16 Lord of Rings Vol 1 Ed $16 Lord of Rings Vols 1&2 S19 Lords of Midnight CD $48 Loremaster $19 Magic Candle 2 Editor $16 Menzoberranzan Menzoberranzan CD $47 Might & Magic 3 $24 Might & Magic 3 $24 Might & Magic 4 $19 Might & Magic 5 $19 Pirates Gold S19 Pools of Darkness Protostar $19 Ravenloft 2 CD Ravenloft $48 Ravenloft CD S49 Realms of Arkania $25 Red Crystal $19 Return to Ringwrld CD $44 Riftwar Legacy CD $23 Rings Medusa Gld CD $23 Robinson's Requiem $33 Robinson Requiem CD $33 Rome:Pathway to Pwr $29 $47 $34 $38 $39 $23 COW 4952 "


"CHIPS&BITS INC. Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10245 PO Box 234 Dept 10245 Rochester, VT 05767 STALINGRAD 'RISE OF THE TRIAD: DARK WAR' Every sec ond is precious. The world is doomed... unless you can change its fate. You're a commando who usally eats terrorists for lunch. But this bunch ain't going down easy! Offers 30 levels & eye-poppin' graphics. CD 542 'THRUSTMAS TER XL ACTION CONTROLLER Offers advanced functionality enjoyed by flight sim enthusiasts. Features three instant response buttons, action trigger, 4-way thumb switch pistol grip & glow-in-the-dark buttons. $24 'STALINGRAD Russia, November 1942: After five months of advances the German army has settled in for winter. But the Red Army has other plans and Stalin is about to hand Hitler his first major defeat Command the Red Army or German Wahrmacht CD $39 FREE STRATEGY PLUS ! RENEGADE You're the best they've got and its up to you to command your squadron against an invasion of the Terrin Government. Super VGA first person bat tles and multiple skill levels. You can also listen to your own CD's as you play. CD 545 VIRTUAL VALERIE VALERIE 2 The queen of cybersex is back! Virtual Valerie 2 is the ultimate in cyberotica and the embodiment of every red-blooded technophile's deepest desires! Sophisticated 3D modeling, tantalizing animation, erotic sound effects, and a sizzling music score combine to create a mind blowing sextravaganza like nothing you've ever seen before! $42 Receive an issue of Strategy Plus magazine FREE with any in stock software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from 3/1/95 to 4/30/95 or while supplies last. Quantities limited. SEU IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM EDUCATION IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS Rome:Pathway to Pwr $29 Shadow Caster CD S19 Sherlock Holmes 1 CD $29 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $29 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD $39 Skyrealms Jorune CD $39 Star Reach CD $36 Star Trail CD Star Trail Speech Pack $18 Star Trail S41 Star Trk:Deep Spce CD $41 Star Trk:Deep Spce CD 541 Star Trek: TNG CD 548 Stonekeep CD $44 Stronghold S19 Summoning $16 Sprhero L.gue Hobokn $34 Sword of China $42 Syndicate $37 Syndicate Plus CD $40 Thunderscapo CD $48 Treasure Savge Frntier $19 Ultima 10 CD $54 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Series CD $29 Ultima 8 CD Ultima 8: Pagan $26 Ultima 9: Ascension $52 Ultima 9:Ascension CD $52 Ultima Underworld 1&2 $29 Ultima Underworld 182 S29 Ultima Uworld 2 S19 Ultima Uworld Stygian $21 Unlimited Adventures $19 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 5 ODCP $19 Wizardry 6 $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $19 World of Xeen CD $40 12 Road to Gettsyburg $48 Annabel Dream Egypt $52 Castle of Dr Brain $19 Children Writing&Publ $42 Civil War $34 Daily Number Busters $30 EcoQuest Search $29 EcoQuest VGA Fatty Bear's Birthday $32 Frantic Factory WIN $24 Honorable Gd to Math $24 Island Of Dr. Brain $29 Island of Dr Quandry $26 Lst Chance to See CD $12 Linkword-Spanish S6 Multimedia: Vivaldi CD $24 Pacific Theater $19 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Prnt Shp Dix Bus Grph $26 Professr Zany's Guide $29 Putt Ptt Goes to Moon $42 Putt Ptt Goes to Mn CD$34 Putt Pult's Funpack CD$34 Putt Putts Fun Pak $19 Quarky Quaysoo's Sci $29 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secrt Isind Dr. Quandry $29 Stickybear Reading $24 Alone in Dark 3 Guide S16 Arena $16 Armored Fist Guide $16 BattleTech Battle Bk $9 Beavis & Butt-Head Bk $9 Bioforge $12 Blackthorne Guide $16 Blue Force: Next of Kin $12 Brain Lord Player Guide 59 Bubsy 1 & 2 Book $12 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $12 Civilization $16 Colonization: Guide S16 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot S10 Curse of Azure Bonds $12 Cyberia Guide $16 Cyclones $12 Dark Queen of Krynn $12 Dark Sun 2 $12 Dark Sun $12 Day of the Tentacle $12 Doom 2 Guide $16 Doom 2 Survival Guide $12 Doom Battlebook $14 Double Dragon 5 Book $9 Dracula Unleashed $16 Dragon Lore Guide S16 Dungeon Master $12 Dngeon Mastr 2 Guide S16 Dynamx Grt Wr Planes $16 Ecco Dolphin Book $9 Eye of the Beholder $12 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $12 Fatal Distractns Guide $26 Final Fantasy 3 Guide S11 Fleet Defender Guide $16 Flights of 13 Mike $16 Gabriel Knight $10 Gateway Savge Frntier $12 Gobliiins $10 Goblins 2 $10 Gold Rush $10 Gunship 2000 $16 Hand of Fate $12 Harpoon 2 Guide $19 Hell Official Guide $16 Heretic Official Guide S16 Inca 2 $10 Indi Jones 4 $12 Indy Jones Grix Adv S12 Inherit the Earth $12 It's an NBA Jam Thing $9 Jagged Alliance S16 Jet Fighter 3 Guide $16 Jetfighter 2.0 S16 King's Quest 4.6 each $10 King's Quest 7 $17 Laura Bow 2 Hint Bk $10 Legend of Kyrandia 3 $12 Leisure Larry 1-6 each $10 Lemmings /disk $18 Lion King Game Book $9 Lode Runner Guide $16 Loom $12 Lord of the Rings V1 $14 Lord of the Rings V2 $12 LucasArts Adv Book $16 LucasArts Air Combat $16 Lulia Official Players $9 Madden Football 94 $12 Master of Magic Guide $16 Master of Orion Guide $16 Matrix Cubed $12 Mechwarrior 2 Guide $16 Menzoberranzan $12 Msoft Arcade Guide $16 Msoft Golf 2.0 Guide $16 Msoft Spce Sim Guide $16 Might & Magic 3-5each S16 Might & Magic Guide $16 Mortal Kombat Secrets $9 NBA Showdown Guide $12 NHL Hockey 94 Guide $12 Outpost Strategy Guide $16 Pacific Strike Playtester$14 Panzer General 1 or 2 $16 Police Quest 3 S10 Pool of Radiance $12 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Book $16 Power Monger Strat. $16 Powermonger S10 Primal Rage Arcade $12 Privateer Playtester's $14 Protostar S12 Quest For Clues 2 or 3 $21 Quest for Clues 5 or 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 or 4 $10 Quest for Glory Guide $19 Questbusters 2 $18 Questbusters Clues Bk $18 Ravenlolt 2 $12 Ravenloft $12 Realms of Arkania $16 Rebel Assault Insiders $16 Return to Zork $10 Sam and Max S12 Sea Wolf Guide $16 Secret Monkey Island S12 Secret Monkey Island 2$12 Secret Silver Blades $12 Sega Games Guide Bk S12 Shadow Caster $14 Shadow of Comet Guid S16 Sherlock Holmes Guide$16 Sim City 2000 Guide $16 Sim Earth $16 Sim Farm Guide $16 Sim Tower Guide $16 Simlife Strategy Bk $16 Simn the Sorcerer Hint $12 Skyrealms of Jorune $12 Space Quest 2-4 each $10 Star Crusader Guide $16 Star Trail $16 Star Trek: 25th Ann $12 Star Trek: Judge Rites $12 Stonekeep Guide $16 Strike Commander Bk $16 Stunt Island $16 Subwar Guide $16 Summoning $12 Super Street Fighter 2 $9 System Shock $12 The Dig Guide $16 Tie Fighter Guide $16 Treasures Savg Frntier $12 Aikman Flbl Player Gd $9 Tunnels & Trolls $12 Ultima 6 $10 Ultima 7 Ultima 7 & Underwrld II $16 Ultima 8 Guide S16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss$12 Ultima Underworld 2 S12 Under A Killing Moon $16 V Victory $16 Virtua Racing Guide $9 Wing Armada Playtstrs $12 Wing Commander 3 $18 Wing Commandr Armd $12 Wings of Glory $12 Wizardry 6 $12 Wizardry 7 $16 X-COM Official Guide $16 X-Wing Collectors CD $16 X-Wing Official Strat S16 $12 IBM HINT BOOKS 7th Guest 2: 11th Hour S16 A-Train $16 Aces Over Europe $16 Across the Rhine Guid $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Aircombt Pacific Guide $16 Al-Qadim: Genie Curse $12 Alien Legacy Guide $16 Alone in the Dark 2 $10 CGW 4053 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING US 64 per order Mail to Canada, PA, HL AKAPO FPO $4 per order. Worldwide airmail S6 per fom Handling $2 por shipmentu Hasrdware orders may require additional shipping charges All sales final, Call for dainis Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 wapki Money Ortlers under $200 same as cash. COD $8. Defectives replaced with samu produit Most toms shipped same day: Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. * FREE GAME OFFER* See detalls below 1174 BIOFORGE Suipped of memo ry, artificially enhanced with both human and alien technology you are an untrace able assassin for Mondite's master stroke. Your interaction advances the story as you take your 3D actor through a dramatic action-packed adventure, CD 544 'THE PURE WARGAME: DEATH FROM ABOVE'Designed to give you full control of an extremely accurate rendition of the greatest airborne assaults in WW2 Offers command of Axis or Allied forces & authentic Battalion insignias. $29 DE TE92 302 30322 'BLOOD BOWL'A mighty roar fills the stadium as the players take to the field! Across the length & breadth of the Warhammer World, teams of armored warriors battle to the death in great arenas. Offers a broad weapons arsenal. CD $34 Boardgame $45 LO cop DARK FORCES *DISCWORLD Bridging between dragons and wizards and the humor of today you'll be the hero that battles the mighty dragon to save a leading city. It's the last hope for this tattered city and your only advantage is... you're not dead. CD $35 \"DARK FORCES You must capture the Death Star plan and infiltrate the Empire's secret facility where a new army of mechanized super stormtroopers must be stopped. Features richly detailed 3D environments and first person perspective. CD $47 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a treo IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Mar 1st to Apr 30th or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND S60 Airbome Ranger 525, Falcon 3 Seen 2 MG 29 3.5, GNB Sconano Bulder 3.5 Gunship 5.25, Power Hits Sports 35/5.25, Charge of the Light Brigade 5.25, Chess Net WIN 3.5/5.25. Conquerod Kingdoms Scon 13.5. Pirates 5.25, Railroad Tycoon 3.5, SDI 5.25 SPEND S100 Battio Chess WIN 3.55 25, Battles of Destiny 3.5Bridge 7.0 35 Cohort 235, Dragon Force 3.5/5.25, Earth Invasion WIN 3.5, Krom olog: Nazi Paradox 3.5, MacArthur's War 3.5, Mega Traveller 5.25, Return of Phantom 3.5. Silent Service 23.5. Sony SRS9 Speakers SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5. Command HO 3.5, Dungeon Master 3.5/5.25, Falcon 3.0 3.5, F15 Striko Eagle 2 3.5. Flight Sim Toolkit 3.5, Microleague Baseball Manager's Challange 3.5, Simon the Sorcerer 3.5. Ultima Underworld 23,5. Warlords 5.25 IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS $40 $38 $34 $54 S25 Air Combat Classics $19 Their Finest Hour Battle Hawks Secret Weap of Luftwaff All Star Sports Coll CD $23 Award Bundle S44 Awrd Winng Wargmes $39 EArts Top 10 Pck CD $32 Flcon 3.08Tmastr FCS 99 5 Foot 10 Pck V1 CD $29 5 Foot 10 Pck V2 CD $29 Intrply's 10 Yr Anth CD S24 Mind Shadow, Tass Time. Bard's Tale, Wastland, Dragon Wars, Battle Chess, Lord of the Rings Casties, Star Trek 25 Anv, Out of this World King's Quest Anth CD S54 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Command HQ. Red Storm Rising F-15 Strike Eagle Lemming's 1 & 2 CD $28 Lst Treasurs Infocm 2 $25 Border Zone, Plundered, Hearts, Bureaucacy, Cutthroats, Hollywood Hi, Jinx, Seastalker, Sherlock Holmes: Riddle of Crown Jewis, Wishbringer, Nord and Bert, Trinity Lucas Classic Advntrs $19 Indiana Jones: Secret of Monkey Island 1. Manic Mansion Maximum Ovrkll W/Dsk $39 Megafortress MegaPak $38 Merit CD Megapck CD S18 Mindscape 10 Pack CD$34 Mindscape 10 Pack CDS34 PGA Tour Golf World Tour Tennis Bundle CD $19 Perfect General Trilogy S34 Perfect General Greatest Battles of 20th C WWII Battles Populous 2 Powermonger Bundle CD S19 Power Games 3 CD $31 Power Hits: Battletech $22 Battletech 1, Battletech 2. Mech Warrior Power Hits:Btletech CD$19 SSI's Fantasy Fest CD $39 Space Quest Anth CD $48 Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle $29 Spellcasting Bndle CD $28 Star Control Cicin CD $19 Strike Commander Privateer Bundle CD $43 Take Ten CD $44 Task Force 1942 W Red Storm Rising CD $35 The Victory Pack $39 Top 50 Gams DOS CD $26 Top 50 Games WN CD $26 Turning Point $29 Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $29 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Ultima 4 Ultima 5 Ultima 6 Wng Commndr 182 CD$32 Wing Commandr 1 CD S29 Wizardry Trilogy 2 $33 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Zool Bundle (182) CD $19 1st Encounters $29 D-Day: Oper Ovrird CD $39 1st Encounters CD S29 Dawn Patrol $40 A320 Airbus $29 Dawn Patrol CD AH-64 B Longbow $54 Delta V $39 Absolute Zero CD $40 Delta V CD $32 Aces Over Europe $32 Descent Aces of the Deep $44 Descent 2.0 CD $46 Aces of the Deep CD $47 Descent CD $38 Aces of Deep Mission $29 Dream Web CD Aces of the Pacific $39 Elite Plus $19 Aces of the Pacific CD $39 European Racers CD $29 Aces over Europe CD $38 Evasive Action $28 Across the Rhine CD 547 Evolver $38 Air Combt Pacific 1942 $19 F117A Stealth Fighter $23 Air Cmbt Pac.1942 Gld $48 F15 Strike Eagle 2 $18 Air Cmbt Series:USNF $47 F15 Strike Eagle 3 CD $48 Air Havoc Control CD $39 F15 Strike Eagle III $34 Air Warrior 2 $34 FA 18 Hornet Air Warrior 2 CD $34 FA 18 Hornet CD $54 Air Warrior SVGA $34 Falcon 3 Son 3 FA-18 Air Warrior SVGA CD $35 Falcon 3.0 S29 Armored Fist $43 Falcon 4.0 CD Armored Fist CD $47 Falcon Gold CD $52 Army Air Corps: 1942 $48 Fast Attack CD $48 Art of the kill Fighter Duel Pro 2 $33 Assignment Miami S9 Fighter Wing $39 Battle of Britain 2 WIN $34 Fighter Wing CD $39 Battlecruiser 3000 S43 Fleet Dindr F14 Tomcl $42 Battlecruiser 3000 CD $48 Fleet Defender Gld CD $48 Chopper Pack CD $38 Fleet Defender Scen 1 $32 Chopper Strike $48 Flight Light $19 Chopper Strike CD $52 Flight Light CD $19 Combat Air Patrol $29 Flight Sim Toolkit $19 Combat Air Patrol CD $29 Flight Sim Toolkit CD $39 Combat Classics 2 Flight Sim Toolkt Scn 2 19 Confirmed Kill CD $44 Flight Sim Toolkit WW2 $19 Cyber Race $19 Flight Unlimited CD $48 Cyber Race CD $32 Fly the Grand Canyon $19 Cyclemania CD Fly the Grand Canyon $29 D-Day: Opor Ovrlrd CD $39 Flying Circus $39 Circle Reader Service #54 Formation Attack CD $48 Formula 1 S24 Frontier Elite 2 $19 Grand Canyon Scenery$16 Great Naval Battles 2 S44 Great Naval Buls 2 CD $39 Great Naval Battles CD $42 Great Naval Battles CD $42 Great Naval Bils Scen $16 Gunship 2000 VGA $32 H.A.W.C. H.A.W.C. CD $35 Harrier Assault SVGA S47 Harrier Assault CD $35 Indy Car Racing $30 Indy Car Racing Add 1 $22 Indy Car Racing Add 2 $22 Inferno $44 Inferno CD $44 Iron Angel CD $44 Jet Fighter 3 $41 Jet Fighter 3 CD $47 Jet Pack CD $39 Jump Jet $22 Jump Jet Aces Pack $46 Kawasaki Super Bikes $24 Lawn Mower Man CD $35 Life and Death S19 Life and Death 2 $24 Lode Runner $36 Lunar Command $19 M1 Tank Platoon 2 $44 M1 Tank Platoon Cissc $19 MA:Sherman Tank Sim $34 Magic Carpet CD 342 Maxmum Ovrkl Bndl $42 Mech Commander $42 Mech Commander CD $42 Mech Force CD $39 Mechwarrior 2 $46 Mechwarrior 2 $46 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on $18 Mechwarrior 2 CD $46 Megafortress Msn Dsk $26 Megarace CD S39 Metaltech: Battledrome $32 Metaltech 2: Spch Pck $20 Metaltech 2: Msn Dsk $29 Metaltech: Earth Siege $46 Metitch:Earthsiege CD $47 MiG 29 $39 MS FIt Sim 5 Europe $26 MS FIt Sm 5 L.Vegas $33 MS FIt Sim 5 Portland $33 Msoft Flight Sim 5 $29 Microsoft Flight Sm 5.0 544 Microsoft Flight Sim 6 $45 Msoft Flight Sim 6 CD $54 Msft Sim Flight Shop $36 Msft Sm Flight Shp CD 544 Msoft Space Sim 1.0 944 Mig 29 Fulcrum Mig 29 Gold CD Mule 2 Nascar Racing Nascar Racing CD Operation Combat PT Boat Simulator Pacific Strike $25 Pacific Strike Spch Pk $12 Phoenix Fighter CD $49 Power Boat Sim 3 $46 Privateer Privateer CD $19 Privateer Special Ops $19 Privateer Spcial Ops 2 $22 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Rally $29 Reach for the Skies $19 Real Weather Pilot S14 $49 * ** S48 CGW 4954 "


"CHIPS&BITS INC. Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10245 PO Box 234 Dept 10245 Rochester, VT 05767 les 6 Pavendito STONE PROPHET \"RAVENLOFT: STONE PROPHET Escape the dreaded realm of HarAkir before its legendary ruler, the ancient mummy Anhkelepot, awakens! An allnew adventure in the vast, complex Ravenloft game with a new spell management system. CD $39 JETFIGHTER 3 Heart pounding, you see thick smoke billowing out of your right engine. The stick bites into your white knuckle grip. nothing could be more real than Jetfighter 3. Gripping alarms digitized voices, engine noise, and incredible scenery. CD $47 \"FALCON 3.0 Fly Falcon 3.0 through 3 explosive campaigns in Panama, Kuwait and Isreal or train in the Nevada desert. FREE MIG 29 with Falcon 3.0 purchase. Must make request at time of order. Offer subject to change without notice. $29 JETFIGHTER II Spectrum Holobyte FREE Under vorld WAND INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT .ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2: Labyrinth of Worlds' The Guardian strikes again, encasing the building in a gigantic blackrock gem. He offers the imprisoned heroes a simple choice: proclaim him ruler of all Britannia, or starve. $19 \"WANDERLUST merc UST lessly sent to the outer reaches of cyber space, your quest is to retum to reality. In order to retum, you must find the key that will unlock the doors to new encounters within this vast oasis of high-tech decadence. Amazing 3-D rendered environments coupled with tantalizingly beautiful women could very well make you want to stay for eternity. CD $44 CONQUERED KINGDOMS INCLUDED! Request your FREE Interactive Entertainment Episode 9 with any in stock CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Request must be made at time of order. Valid from 4/1/95 to 5/30/95 or while supplies last. Quantities limited, IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $32 S19 $58 $32 $36 $34 $48 40 Real Weather Pilot S14 Red Baron Tnk Kir CD $39 Red Baron W/Msn Bidr S29 Red Storm Rising $14 Renegade CD $45 Retribution $35 Retribution CD $32 Sailing Sm 3 E. Coast $39 Sailing Sm 3 W. Coast $39 Sailing Simulator 3 $52 Sea Wolf $19 Sea Wolf CD $44 Seal Team $26 Seal Team CD Seaworthy CD $18 Shuttle $26 Shuttle CD S24 Silent Hunter CD Silent Service 2 $16 Silent Steel S46 Slipstream 5000 CD $40 Space Clipper S42 Spectre VR CD $39 Spectre Virtual Reality $35 Speed Racer $17 Star Base $42 Star Crusader $33 Star Crusader CD $39 Starlord $39 Stim Slum $42 Strike Commander $26 Strike Commander CD $19 Strke Cmndr Spel Ops1$22 Strike Cmndr Spch Pk $19 Sub Battle Simulator $12 Sub Battle Simulator 2 $39 Sub War 2050 $33 Sub War 2050 Plus CD $40 Subwar Scenario Disk $19 SuperKarts $39 Superkarts CD $39 TFX CD $36 TFX:Tactcal Fight Exp $35 Tank Cmndr Ntwrk CD $44 Task Free Admiral Pck $39 Test Drive 3:Passion $19 The Big One $29 The Big One CD S26 Tie Fighter $45 Tie Fighter Mission 1 $19 Tie Fighter Mission 2 $19 Top Gun CD $40 Tornado $48 Tomado CD $39 Tower $42 Tower CD $44 Train Engineer $29 U-Boat 2 $36 Ultrabots CD $19 Ultrabots Sanctn Earth $19 Voice Commandr Bndl $18 Wing Commander $18 Wing Commander 2 $26 Wing Cmndr 2 Dlx CD 519 Wing Commandr 3 CD $53 Wing Commandr Acad $18 Wng Cmnder Armada $47 Wng Comndr Armd CD $47 Wings of Glory CD $40 Wolf Pack $20 Woll Pack CD $28 World Circuit 2 $42 World Circuit 2 CD S44 World Circuit CD $39 X-Wing $39 X-Wing Collector's CD 546 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $19 X-Wing Dsk 2 $19 Yeager's Air Combt CD$19 Zephyr CD $28 All Amricn Cige Ftbl 94 $38 Barkley:Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball for Windows $46 Blood Bowl or CD $34 Brett Hull Hockey '95 $42 ESPN Baseball $36 ESPN Bsball Tonight $38 ESPN Football $39 ESPN Hockey $39 Empire Soccer '94 $29 FIFA Internatnl Soccer $36 Front Pge Ftbll Pro '95 $44 Front Page Sport Bsbl 544 Gone Fishin' CD $39 Hardball 4 & CD $34 Jck Nicklaus Gold Bear $34 Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $39 Links Pro 486 CD $49 Microsoft Baseball CD $51 Microsoft Golf 2.0 CD $45 Microsoft Golf CD 548 MS Golf for Windows $48 Mike Ditka Power Fibil S NBA Jam S44 NFL Chllenge Prem Ed $59 NFL Coachs Clb Ftbil 2544 NFL Super Bowl CD $39 NHL Hockey $43 NHL Hockey '95 CD $40 PGA Tour Golf 486 CD $47 Picture Perfect Golf CDS42 Pro Tennis Cup $38 Road to the Final 42 $38 Road to Final 4 2 CD $43 Skins Game at Bighorn S40 Time Out Sprts Bsktbll $39 Tony LaRussa Bsebl 3 $48 Troy Aikman Ftball CD $49 Ultimate Football CD $45 Uncesry Roughnss'95 $34 1830:RR&Robbr Baron $34 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train $34 Advanced Civilization $34 Airbucks 1.2 $26 Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Archon Ultra $32 Arctic Baron or CD $29 Baldies Battle Bugs $37 Battle Isle 2200 CD $34 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Battles in Time $35 Black Beard or CD $34 Breach 3 or CD 534 Caesar $24 Campaign 2 Castles 2 CD $48 Celtic Tales or CD $39 Chessmastr 4000 Trbo $36 Civilization Colonization or CD $46 Colonization Gold CD 548 Conquered Kngdom 2 $36 Conqueror $46 Conquest $36 Crisis in the Kremlin $29 Darklegions or CD $38 Dead Zone CD $52 Deadline CD $38 Detroit $39 Discovery Stp Clumbus $34 Dominus $25 Dune $21 Dune 2 $28 Empire 2 or CD $42 Empire Builder S36 Empire Dix Mstr Ed CD $22 Fantasy Empires CD 542 Fantasy Fiefdom CD $48 Feudal $39 Flight Commandr 2 CD $38 Front Lines or CD $39 Gazillionaire WIN CD S29 Genesia $39 Genghis Khan 2 $34 Global Domination S34 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet or CD $34 Great Naval Btles 3 CD$34 Hammer of Gods CD $39 Hannibal S26 High Seas Tradr or CD $39 Hollywood Mogul WIN $38 Humans CD Jagged Alliance CD $46 Jutland CD $29 Kingdoms of France Kingdoms of Germany $34 Kingmaker $32 Koshan Conspiracy $29 Legions WIN $34 Lemmings 3 or CD $35 Lords of the Realm CD $39 Lost Admiral 2 $39 Machiovelli The Prince $40 Master of Magic $39 Master of Magic CD $39 Master of Orion $40 Master of Orion CD $40 MechLords CD $35 Merchant Prince Millenium Auction CD $46 Navy Strike New Horizons New Horizons CD $34 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 S34 Onslaught WIN $39 Operatn Crusader CD $39 Outpost WIN $38 Patrician or CD $36 Pax Imperia $39 Perfect General 2or CD$35 Pizza Tycoon $40 Populous 2 $25 Power House WIN CD $39 Rags to Riches $36 Reunion or CD $33 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdms 2 $24 Rmance of 3 Kingdm 3 $39 Rmance of 3 Kingdm 4 $39 Second Conflict WIN $34 Serf City: Life is Feudal $37 Sid Meir's Civil War Sim Ant Sim City 2000 Sim City CD $47 Sim Earth CD Sim Town or CD $34 SimClassic Collection $44 SimClassic Clctn WIN 544 Sim Tower or CD $33 Space Miner $36 Space Raiders CD $42 Star Control 3 CD $39 Starship Troopers $39 The Complete UMS $49 Theme Park or CD S39 Transport Tycoon $48 USS Ticonderoga $34 Ultimate Domain $36 Ultimate Domain CD $36 Victory or Defeat WIN 342 Vikings 2 $36 Walls of Rome $39 Warcraft or CD Worlds of War CD $48 X-Com:Terror of Deep S40 X-Com: UFO or CD $38 $34 $39 CGW 4955 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $t per order Mail to Canada PR, HIAK, APOI FPO S4 per order Worldwide airmail S6 par itom Handling $2 per shipment Hardware ardats may require additional shipping charges. All sales final Call for details Visa MC and Discover accepted. Chocka held 4 wools Money Orders under $200 shine 18 cash COD SB Datectives toplaced with same proche Molitoms shipped same day: Shipping limas may vary. Price availability may change FREE GAME OFFER* See detalls below DECIDC THC FATE OF HUMANITY Tullaa JUTLAND' Command a fearsome dreadnought and fight for control of the No. & So. Atlantic for the German Imperial Fleet or the British Royal Navy. Stunning SVGA graphics digitized video and sound effects and Historically accurate combat. CD $29 MORTAL KOMBAT 2 Fight 7 new characters with improved graphics and sound. Offers 40 new special moves, new interactive backgrounds, 12 new finishing moves more challenging game play, 12 friendship moves & 2 new hidden characters.CD 546 AUEN LEGACY The silent planets of a distant sun glimmer and Swirl before you. Trillions of miles behind are the shattered remnants of Earth. You command the seedship U.N.S. Calypso in search of a lost human colony so you can save your civilization. S39 MURTAL KUMBAR LEGACY ILKKA Kingmaker STAR TREK TUOMEN \"KINGMAKER' Step back in history to the time of the War of the Roses. In England, racked by civil war, the Crown hangs by a thread and the throne is there for the taking. Features high quality digital graphics and adjustable difficulty levels. $32 'STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT RITES' You are being watched By what, it is not known. A WW1 triplane is heading for you at warp 9 and your sensors report file forms on a dead planet. The tension increases as you encounter a mysterious world. $19 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Feb 1st Mar 31st or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order, SPEND $60 Airbome Ranger 5.25, Falcon 3 Scon 2 MG 29 3.5. GNB Scenario Builder 3.5 Gunship 5.25, Power Hits Sports 3.5/5.25, Charge of tho Light Brigade 5.25, Choss Net WIN 3.5/5.25, Conquered Kingdoms Scen 13.5. Pirates 5 25, Railroad Tycoon 3.5, SDI 5.25 SPEND $100 Battle Chess WIN 3.5/5.25. Battles of Destiny 3.5. Bridge 7.0 3.5. Cohort 23.5, Dragon Force 3.5/5.25, Enrth Invasion WIN 3.5, Kron olog: Nazi Paradox 3.5. MacArthur's War 3.5, Mega Traveller 5.25 Rotum of Phantom 3.5, Silent Service 2 3.5, Sony SRS9 Speakers SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5, Command HO 3.5, Dungeon Master 3.5/5.25. Falcon 3.0 3.5. F15 Strike Eagle 2 3.5. Flight Sim Toolkit 3.5. Microleague Baseball Manager's Challango 3.5 Simon the Sorcerer 3.5. Ultima Underworld 23.5, Warlords 5.25 BA Games IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET $10 $39 $39 $6 3D Gme Creation Syst $45 Assault Poker CD $29 Battle Chess CD $45 Bobby Fischer's Chess $34 Bridge 8.0 $32 Bridge Baron Win $34 Bridge Deluxe 2 $29 Brdge Dx 2 W/O.Sharif $43 Bridge Deluxe CD $43 Chessmaniac 5 Bin&1 $34 Chessmaster 3000 CD $46 Clockwerx WIN or CD $34 Cowboy Casino 2 CD $34 Gambit V 1.5 CD $39 Game Maker 3.0 $48 Game Maker 3.0 CD $48 Game Wizard Pro S32 Grandmastr Chess CD $32 Incredible Machine 2 $38 Klik & Play WIN CD $42 Knight Moves CD $34 Knight Moves WIN $34 Lucky's Casino Advntr $34 Magic the Gathering $40 Mega Maze CD $28 Pinball Arcade CD $34 Pinball Dreams $29 Scrabble Deluxe CD $25 Shanghaii CD Solitaire Deluxe WIN $25 Solitaires Journey 2 $36 Star Wars Chess $38 Trivia Madness CD $28 Trivial Pursuit CD $34 USCF Chess CD $37 Universal Neverlock $38 Video Cube CD Virtual Pool CD $40 Wheel of Fortune CD $32 Xplora Deluxe CD $62 Aegis:Guardian of Fit S46 Aide de Camp American Civil War V3 $24 Battle Stations S20 Bitle Tank Barbarossa $29 Battle Tank Kursk $29 Battle of Austerlitz S24 Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic $29 Battle of the Bulge $39 Battleship Bismark $26 Beyond Squad Leader $45 Big 3 CD $24 Blitzkrieg or CD Blue & the Grey or CD $39 Campaign $32 Carrier Strike Carriers at War $39 Carriers at War 2 $39 CincPac CD $39 CincPac: Midway Civil War: 1861-65 CD $40 Cmmand and Conquer S48 D-Day: The Beginning $39 Dreadnoughts Deluxe S59 Fields of Glory Fifth Eskadra $29 Fifth Fleet or CD $39 Fleet Med $27 Flight Commander 2 $38 Gettysburg WIN CD $42 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $29 Harpoon 2 Dix CD $42 Harpoon 3 CD $39 Harpoon Classic CD $26 Harpoon Clasc WN CD $28 High Command $29 Iron Cross $29 Kriegsmarine Kursk Campaign $39 Kursk Campaign S29 7th Guest 2 Demo CD $6 Last Blitzkrieg $40 ATP P Flight Simulator $9 Long Lance $29 Acquire $9 Main Bil Tnk C. Germn $29 Air Force Commander $9 Main Bil Tnk Mid East $29 Allied Forces $9 Malta Storm $29 Alone in the Dark $12 Man of War $36 Assignment Miami $9 Mare Nostrum $26 Austrulitz Midway $24 Banzai Moscow Campaign $36 Bard's Tale Constructn $12 Napoleonics $34 Baseball Facts Northern Fleet $36 Battle Chess WIN Operation Crusader $36 Battle Command $6 Operation Europe CD $34 Blake Stone Episode 1 $9 Operation Overlord $36 Blue Max Aces Grt Wr S9 Pacific Storm Midway $29 Bodycello CD $6 Pacific Storm Solomon $36 Budo:Art of Ninja 35 $9 Panzer General or CD $39 Captain Blood $9 Point of Attack $32 Castle Wolfenstein SW $6 Red Sky Morning $36 Castles Northrn Camps $12 Return to Falklands $28 Challenge of 5 Realms S12 Rising Sun $24 Champions of Krynn $12 Rommel at El Alamein S36 Charge of Light Brigade S9 Rommel at Gazala $36 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Seventh Fleet S36 Conquests Robin Hood S12 Stalingrad $39 Covert Action Stalingrad Campaign $36 Crime City $12 Stalingrad PCMC CD $39 CyberStrike S12 Tac Ops WIN $40 Darklands $12 The Great War $39 Demon Blue Third Reich or CD $34 Descent Shareware $6 Tigers on the Prowl $42 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $9 USS Ticonderoga CD $34 Dr Thorp's Mini Blackjck $6 VVictory Market Gardn $29 Dragon Lord VVictory:Ulah Beach $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclds $12 VVictory: Velikye Luki $29 EMotion $6 Victory at Sea Erotic Virtual Smplr CD $12 War in the Falklands $24 Falcon 3 Scen2 MiG 29 $9 Wargme Cnstructn SI 2$39 Fighting for Rome $12 Warpoint $36 Flames of Freedm $12 Circle Reader Service #54 Goldtree Buildings $10 Goldtree Characters $10 Greens $12 Gunship $12 Harrier Assault HD $12 Hearts $12 Heretic Shareware CD S12 Horde $12 Hoyle's Book Gmes V3 $12 Humans.Insult to Injury S9 Interactive Adult Smpir $12 Internatnal Sports Chall $9 Internatnl Sports Chinge S6 Killing Cloud $6 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Last Chnce to See CD $12 Lightspeed $9 Line in the Sand $12 Linkword-Spanish Lost Vikings $9 ML 1950s World Series $9 ML 1960s World Series $9 ML 1970s World Series $9 M League Teams each.. $9 Magic Candle 3 $9 Marianas Trkey Shoot $12 MegaFortress $12 Mega Traveller.Zhodani 59 M League Bsbl Seasn ea$9 NFL Chll 91 Pre Ssn S6 NFL Chling All Star Tms $6 NFL Video Football $12 Never Mind New Facilities Locator $9 On Target S6 One Must Fall Sharewre $6 Operation Combat $12 Pixis Adult Sampler CD $6 ProFtball Analyst 92 Ed $6 Puzzle Gallery 1 $9 Return of the Phantom $12 Return to Zork Anth CDS12 Rings of Medusa Rotox Rules of Engagement $9 SDI Sentinel Worlds 1 Sex Planet CD Shadow Sorcerer Space Vegetables S6 Sporting Triangle $3 Stanford Wongs Poker $9 Star Legions S12 Star Trk TNG CD Demo $6 Stellar 7 CD S12 Storm Across Europe $12 Street Atlas USA CD $5 Sub Battle Simulator S12 Taking of Beverly Hills $6 Tales Magic S12 Task Force 1942 S12 Taste of Erotica Smpir 2 S8 Tste of Erotica Smp CD S8 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Terminator 2029 S12 Terran Envoy Test Drive 3: Road & Car $6 The Tinies S12 Tie Break Tennis $9 Tom Landry Ftball Dix $12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Top 100 Gmes V. 2 CD$12 Under Fire $12 Vaxine $9 Virtual Vivid CD S8 Wacky Wheels Shrewre $6 War in the Gulf ar in the Gulf $12 War of the Lance $9 World Circuit $12 Xiphos $37 $6 $9 S6 $9 $39 3 S6 CGW 4956 "


"CHIPS&BITSINC. Forte de garanterar Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10245 PO Box 234 Dept 10245 Rochester, VT 05767 ungeon DUNGEON MASTER II There's More to fear than ever before in 'The Legend of Skullkeep'. This new world is alive with creatures and actions that will occur with or without you. Stunning sound effects, real time combat. CD $38   PYTHON'S COMPLETE WASTE OF TIME' You'll face a series of challenges on a quest to discover the secret of Intergalactic Success. Watch new comedy or highlights from the TV episodes. CD $48 JCOMPLEMENTE 'GRAVIS PHOENIX FLIGHT & WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM' 24 programmable buttons for joystick and keyboard controls. Preconfigured settings for the most popular games. $83 FREE SHIPPING! 'STAR TREK TECHNICAL MANUAL' You now have clearance to roam the Enterprise at your will. You are welcome to investigate even the most highly restrict ed areas. 360 degree visuals actual sets and props. CD $39 \"CANNON FODDER' Shoot first. Ask questions later. And don't forget to wash your hands afterwards. Obviously it's difficult to think that a game about war could be lighthearted. But that's exactly what made it #1 in the U.K. 24 missions including 126 levels. CD $22 U.SS ENTERPRISE MEC-ITED Place an order for an out of stock software item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. SE OFRUTTERTOP LET LENTER CDI HARDWARE CDI SHOOTERS CDI MOVIES CDI MOVIES 3DO ADVENTURE 3DO KICK & PUNCH $44 $22 Clayfighter 2 $46 Rise of the Robots $52 Samurai Showdown $52 Spr St Fighter 2 Turbo $59 Way of the Warrior $52 CD-I 200 Magnavox $359 CD-220 Philips $399 CD-1450 Magnavox $289 CD-I 550 Magnavox $479 CD-I Game Pad $29 CD-I Infrard Rmote Cnt $39 CD-I Mouse $46 CD-1 Roller Controller $54 CD-I TouchPad $26 CD-I Trackerball $59 Alien Gate $26 Chaos Control Chaos Control $44 Earth Command $44 Mad Dog McCree $52 Mad Dog McCree & Gn$72 Mad Dog McCree Microcosm $44 Mystic Midway 1 $26 Mystic Midway 2 $26 $24 $24 $52 S22 $24 $54 3DO ROLE PLAYING $24 $58 $22 $46 $39 $52 $29 Dragon Tales Lore Hell Ishar 3 Slayer Syndicate CDI ADVENTURE CDI STRATEGY $29 Quigley Down Under $24 Raging Bull $24 Rainman $24 RoboCop 1 $24 RoboCop 2 Rocky Silence of the Lambs $24 Sliver $22 Star Trek 1 $24 Star Trek 2 $22 Star Trek 3 $24 Star Trek 4 $24 Star Trek 5 $24 Star Trek 6: $22 Steamy Windows $29 The Black Stallion $24 The Firm $22 The Secret of Nimh $22 Thelma and Louise $24 Top Gun $22 Trading Places $24 Wayne's World 2 $22 Wayne's World $22 White Christmas S22 You Only Live Twice $24 Alone in the Dark $46 BIOS Fear $52 Blade Force $54 Corpse Killer $52 Creature Shock $54 CyberWar S54 Daedalus Encounter Demolition Man Doom $56 Dragons Lair 2 $52 Flashback $46 Horde $52 Immercenary $54 Killing Time $52 Kingdom:Far Reaches $46 Myst $59 Rebel Assault $52 Robinson's Requiem $52 Shadow Caster $52 Space Ace $52 Space Pirates $49 Star Trek TNG Vikings $46 Virtuosa $52 $54 3DO SIMULATIONS $52 $54 $44 $29 A Fish Called Wanda $22 A View to a kill $24 Addams Family Addams Family Values S22 Annie Hall Apocalypse Now Baby Boom Benny & Joon Beverly Hills Cop 3 S24 Black Rain Blond Justice Bull Durham $24 Carrie $24 Cone Heads $22 Dances With Wolves $22 Diamonds are Forever $24 Dr. No $22 Fatal Attraction $24 For Your Eyes Only $24 From Russia With Loves22 Goldfinger $22 Hannah and Her Sister $24 Hunt for Red October $22 Immortal Desire $29 Indecent Proposal $22 Lassie $24 Live and Let Die $24 Married to the Mob $24 Mississippi Burning $24 MoonRaker $24 Moonstruck $24 Naked Gun 2 1/2 $22 Naked Gun 33 1/3 $24 Naked Gun $22 Of Mice and Men $24 Overboard $24 Patriot Games $22 Pink Panther $24 Planes, Trains,& Auto's $22 Posse $22 $52 $52 $56 7th Guest Digital Video $52 Alice in Wonderland $44 Burn Cycle $46 Creature Shock $48 Dark Castle $34 Dragon's Lair 2 $44 Dragon's Lair $44 Effacer $26 Escape frm Cyber City $44 Flintstones/Jetsons $32 Hotel Mario $44 Inca $44 Kether $44 Kingdom Digital Video $44 Laser Lords Link: The Faces of Evil $44 Litil Devil Digital Video $44 Lords of the Rising Sun $44 Lost Eden $48 Return to Cyber City $58 Space Ace $52 The Apprentice $32 Third Degree $36 Thunder in Paradise $56 Voyeur $44 Zelda's Adventure $44 Zelda:Wand of Gameln $44 $34 Axis & Allies $44 Backgammon $30 Battleship $30 Caesar Wrld of Gamblg$44 Clue 2 DV $46 Clue Clue 2 $46 Connect Four $26 Defender of the Crown $34 Defender of the Crown $34 Dimo's Quest $32 Jeopardy $36 Jeopardy $36 Jigsaw $36 Joker's Wild! $36 Joker's Wild Jr.! $36 Joker's Wild! $36 Mega Maze $30 NFL Instant Replay $44 NFL Trivia Ching 94/95 $44 NFL Trivia Challenge S44 NFL Trivia Ching 94/95 $44 Name That Tune S36 Pinball $30 Sargon Chess $36 Tetris $30 Text Tiles $30 Flying Nightmares Magic Carpet Megarace Need for Speed Off World Interceptor Quarantine Road Rash Rock & Roll Racing Top Gun Trance Mission Wing Commander 3 3DO SHOOTERS $56 $48 $54 $56 $54 3DO HARDWARE $49 $52 3DO SPORTS 6 Button Control Pad $26 Control Pad Goldstar $36 Control Pad Panasonic $39 Digital Video CD Adaptor MPEG Panasonic $239 Digital Video CD Adaptor MPEG Goldstar $199 Flight Stick Pro $99 Gun $44 Mouse $42 System Goldstar $399 System Panasonic $399 Burning Soldier Crime Patrol CyberClash $52 Drug Wars $52 Mad Dog McCree 2 $54 Microcosm $52 NovaStorm $52 PO'ed $52 Police Nauts $52 Pyramid Intruder Shock Wave Star Blade $54 Who Shot John Rock $52 ESPN Baseball $52 FIFA Internatnl Soccer $52 Jammit! $49 Madden Football $49 PGA Tour Pebble Beach Golf Slam City Slope Style Wicked 18 Golf Winning Post $52  556 COW 2957 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US 8per order Mail to Canada PR, HL AK APO, FPO 54 per order Worldwide airmail SG per im Handling $2 per shipment Hardware Orders may require additional shipping charges. All sales final. Call for details Visa, MC and Discover accepted: Checks hold a wooks Money Orders under $200 samens cash COD $8 Dolectivos replaced with samo product Most lleme shipped same day Shipping limos may vary Price/ availability may change FREE GAME OFFER* See detalls below 125 cuper ons MaGic CarPet Rafllmonds & Robber Marcons SUPERKARTS' Test your go kart skills against top drivers on 16 tracks to become SuperKarts champion of the world. Incredibly smooth, with 60frames-a-second action! Exclusive RT3D graphics engine gener ates extraordinary fast and realistic. CD $39 \"1830 RAILROADS &   ER BARONS Welcome to the 19th century! With immigrants pouring in, America is poised for explosive westward growth. Magnates famed for their greed and business acumen rush to cash in. CD $34 \"MAGIC CARPET Fly through breathtaking worlds on a magic carpet in your quest to become ruler of Arabia. When a wizard war splits the continent into many islands, you step in as Grand Vizier. Offers fantastic 3D flight dynamics and 20 hazardous missions.CD 542 EN GUIDE MULTIMEDIA CROSSWORDS like \"VAMPIRE'S KISS' Journey through the corridors of the vampire's ancient virtual 3D castle. Astounding interactive graphics allow you to search for the secret passageway that leads to the vampire's private cham. ber. Your actions determine the outcome, but beware of things that go bump in the night they just might suck more than your blood! CD $49 YERERAS 'TV GUIDE'S MULTIMEDIA CROSSWORDS Crosswords with a twist! Solve puzzles never before with more than 1,800 video, photograph, and music clues. These CD-ROMs cover a variety of topics.CD $19 *FREE GAME OFFER Spond tho spocified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offor subject to change or cancellation without notico. Valid from Feb 1st Mar 31st or while supplies inst. Roquest must be made at time of order. SPEND $60 Airbome Ranger 5.25, Falcon 3 Scen 2 MG 29 3.5, GNB Scenario Builder 3.5.Gunship 5.25. Power Hits Sports 3.5/5.25. Charge ol the Light Brigade 5.25, Choss Net WIN 3.5/5.25, Conquered Kingdoms Scon 13.5, Pirates 5.25, Railroad Tycoon 3.5, SDI 5.25 SPEND $100 Battle Chess WIN 3.5/5.25, Battles of Destiny 3.5, Bndge 7.0 3.5, Cohort 2 3.5, Dragon Force 3.5/5.25, Earth Invasion WIN 3.5. Kronolog: Nazi Paradox 3.5, MacArthur's War 3.5, Mega Traveller 5.25 Return of Phantom 3.5, Silent Service 23.5, Sony SRSO Speakers SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5, Command HO 3.5, Dungeon Master 3.5/5.25, Falcon 3.0 3.5. F15 Strike Eagle 23.5. Flight Sim Toolkit 3.5, Microleague Baseball Manager's Challange 3.5, Simon the Sorceror 3.5. Ultima Underworld 2 3.5. Warlords 5.25 3DO STRATEGY IBM ADVENTURE NOT FOR KIDS JAGUAR NEO GEO $52 $52 $34 $52 $69 $28 $39 $54 BrainDead 13 $52 Cyberia $46 Dinopark Tycoon Family Feud Fun 'n Games GEX $52 Grandest Fleet $56 Gridders $36 Incredible Machine $52 Lemmings Chronicles $52 Lemmings Chronicles $52 Panzer General $59 Pataank $52 Perfect General $56 Real Pinball $52 Shanghaii $52 Star Control 2 $52 Star Wars Chess $54 Station Invasion $40 Station Invasion $40 Theme Park $52 Twisted $54 $52 $32 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE NOT FOR KIDS NOT FOR KIDS Girlfriend Nikki CD $49 Secrets Interactive CD $35 Girlfriend Suzie Sinfully Yours CD $29 Girlfriend Teri CD $46 Sizzle CD Group Therapy CD $39 Sorority House CD $34 Harvester CD $44 Space Sirens CD $49 Heidi's Girls Spy Club CD $49 Hell CD $45 Starware Gift Pack CD $59 Heretic 2 CD $46 Steamy Windows CD $25 Hidden Agenda CD $39 Super Models Go Wild $39 Immortal Desires CD $25 Surfer Girls CD $39 Indiscretion CD $36 Texas Table Dance CD$39 Intimate Journey CD $24 Ultimate Teasers CD $26 Kama Sutra CD $38 Urotsukidoji Collection $59 Ladies Clb Pokr Night $26 Vampire's Kiss CD $49 Legend 4 CD $25 Velvet Dreams CD $35 Loads of Fun CD Virtual Director CD $49 Man Enough CD $34 Virtual Valorie 2 CD $42 Mark of Zara CD $38 Virtual Vixens CD $39 Mask CD $25 Virtually Yours CD $49 Midnight Stranger CD $45 Volcano CD $34 Mind Teazzer CD $32 Voyeur CD $46 Mustang Interact CD $49 Wanderlust CD $44 Mind Shadows CD $25 Wicked Whispers CD $34 Night Trips 2 CD $25 Winner Takes All CD $39 Night at the Drive-In $26 Novel Desires CD $33 JAGUAR Neurodancer CD $45 Neuropak CD $59 Jaguar CD System $149 Nick Steele P.I. CD $59 Jaguar System $249 Nightwatch Inter CD $39 Air Car Wars $52 Nightwatch Inter 2 CD $39 Alien Vs Predator $56 Paradise Club CD $39 Arena Football $54 Parlor Games CD $25 Baldy CD $52 Phantasmagoria CD $19 Barkley Basketball CD $52 Pleasure Zones CD $33 Batman Forever $59 Princess of Persia CD $34 Battle Morph CD $52 Quarantine CD $39 BrainDead 13 CD $52 Racquelle Releasd CD $34 Brett Hull Hockey $59 Rimfire Pacific Video $32 Cannon Fodder $54 Scissors N' Stones CD $29 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $39 Circle Reader Service #54 7th Gst 2: 11th Hr CD $51 Adventure of Mikki Finn$39 After Dark Trilogy CD $33 Amateur Models 2 CD $30 Amorous Asian Girls $32 Animated Fants 2 $34 Animation Temp $28 Bambi & Friends Anim $29 Best of Inferno CD $39 Bst of the Barlw Affairs $32 Bst of Bst 2: Gris on Gil $29 Best of the Best 3 $34 Beverly Hills 90269 CD $28 Bikini Beach CD $44 Blond Fever CD $36 Bloodnet $39 Busting Out CD $39 CD Collectables $26 Candy Stripers CD $29 Cat and Mouse CD $39 Club Cyberlesque CD $29 Cyber-Peep Inter CD $19 Dangerous Blondes CD$29 Danish Girls Exlusive 1 $25 Desktop Voyeur 1 CD $49 Deva X CD Digital Dancing CD $32 Digital Seduction CD $34 Doom 2 Dream Girl CD $28 Dream Machine CD $54 Endangered CD $29 Fantasies Inter CD $35 Forever CD $26 Fox Pack CD $37 Full Motion Production $29 Girls Frm The Big East $39 Girls Games CD $32 Girls of Mardi Gras CD $39 Girlfriend Maria $39 Chaos Agenmda CD $52 Club Drive $49 Creature Shock CD Demolition Man CD $52 Doom $59 Double Dragon 5 $52 Dragon's Lair CD $52 Dragon Dune Flight for Life Flashback $52 Gunship 2000 Hardball 3 Hammer Head $59 Horrorscope $54 Hover Strike $52 Iron Soldier $54 Kasumi Ninja $59 Pinball Dreams $54 Power Drive Rally Primal Rage $58 RayMan $58 Rise of the Robots $59 Star Raiders 2000 CD $52 Syndicate Tempest 2000 Tiny Toon Adventure $52 $57 Cyber Lip CD $69 Fatal Fury 2 CD $69 Fatal Fury CD 569 Fatal Fury Special CD $69 Fight Fever CD Football Frenzy CD 569 Ghost Pilots CD $69 Gururin CD 569 Karnov's Revenge CD $69 King of Fighters 94 CD $69 King of Monsters 2 CD $69 King of Monsters CD $69 Last Resort CD $69 League Bowling CD $69 Magician Lord CD $69 Mutation Nation CD 569 Nam 1975 CD $69 Ninja Combat CD $69 Ninja Commando CD $69 Panic Bomber CD $69 Puzzled CD Riding Hero CD $69 Robo Army CD $69 Samurai Shwdwn 2 CD 569 Samurai Showdwn CD $69 Sengoku 2 CD $69 Sengoku CD $69 Soccer Brawl CD $69 Spin Master CD $69 Street Hoop $199 Super Sidekicks 2 CD $69 Super Sidekicks CD $69 Super Spy or CD $69 Thrash Rally CD $69 Top Hunter CD Top Player Golf or CD 569 View Point CD $69 Windjammers CD 569 World Heroes 2 Jet $69 World Heroes 2 CD 369 $69 $49 $58 $52 $44 NEO GEO $32 3DO ADVENTURE NOT FOR KIDS American Blond $32 Blind Spot $32 Blond Justice $32 Blond Justice $32 Blondage Cheating $32 Immortal Desire $32 Intimate Journey $32 Love Bites $32 Mask $32 Neurodancer $39 Sex $32 Steamy Windows $32 Super Models Go Wild $32 Voices in My Bed $32 $69 Neo Geo CD System $569 3 Count Bout CD $69 Aero Fighters 2 CD $69 Alpha Mission 2 CD $69 Andro Dunos CD $69 Art of Fighting 2 CD $69 Art of Fighting CD $69 Blue's Journey CD $69 Burning Fight CD $69 Crossed Swords CD 569 CGW 4958 "


"A Gamer's View Of OS/2 WARE IBM's New 32-bit Operating System Is A Real Workhorse, But Does It Have Time To Play.? by Jerry Golick Your on-ramp to the information superhighway New! OS/2) OS 2 S/2 PLUS INTERNET, FAX. 18M WORKS MULTIMEDIA & MORE HAVE BEEN A USER OF IBM's OS/2 OPERing the machine to load a new ATING SYSTEM FOR ABOUT TWO YEARS configuration is not the worst NOW, USING IT MOSTLY FOR MY WORK. I thing in the world, it is certainly really like the capabilities of this operan inconvenience I could do ating system when it comes to things without. like communication and integration. But Even more irritating is havwhen it comes to games I've been a dieing to interrupt a game of hard DOS veteran. I've never found a reaDoom for work! Not only do I son to run games under OS/2 (or any have to stop playing, but I then BonusPak other non-DOS operating system), since it have to reboot the machine so seems that if a game has been written to that I can get to my work envirun under DOS there's no reason to add ronment. When I'm on the the additional headaches of an extra operphone with someone, the delay ating system. Besides, DOS seems to be becomes frustrating. the fastest operating system around for Let's face it. The DOS interhigh-speed action games and simulations face is not the world's most atwhen using IBM-compatible machines. As tractive. While typing a result, my hard drive is set up with OS/2 commands might be considered Version 3 Uses Your Existing DoS and Windows for business and DOS for pleasure, and fun by some, it's something else rarely do the twain meet. But all that may that I could do without. One of the reaby allowing you to define dillerent DOS be changing. You see, I've been Warped. sons for the popularity of graphical envienvironments that are specific to the ronments like Microsoft's Windows or needs of a program. You can give one WHY WARP? IBM's OS/2 is the fact that you can do so game EMS memory and another XMS. But before I tell you about IBM's new much without having to type commands. You can choose the type of graphics enviOS/2 WARP, an enhanced version of OS/ 2 D oes WARP solve all of these DOS probronment you want. In fact, you can have a let me tell you about my problems using lems? No, not all of them. But it solves separate AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONDOS for games. If you're like me you enough of them to make it worth a look. FIG.SYS for each game. There's no need probably have a stack of \"boot disks\" be. Depending on what you are trying to do, to play around with memory managers beside your machine. Games can be very WARP can be a great help. cause WARP manages the memory for you. picky about the memory configuration Let's start with the problem of multiple To simplify things a bit, WARP comes that they want to run in, and while rebootboot disks. OS/2 eliminates this problem with a number of preset configurations OS/2. Warp 80 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"You destroyed their base on Mars. You thought that was the end of them. But deep beneath the Earth's raging seas, their fury boils with a vengeance. Your worst nightmare is just beginning! From the makers of X-COM UFO Defense comes a new evolution of evil. TERROR FROM THE DEEP MICROPROSE 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on 3.5\" HD and on CD-ROM.  MicroProse. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #351 "


"09 Sym 20.2. P XW OPOT Shutter version 1.11 Ene Eda Select Options Window Help M : 20 geles W ein 10 DOS settings. DOS (4 screen DO3 dow whose W!FOS 2 indo Sme vescian DOS keyboard selling 003 memory settings DOS mouse and touch screen settings DOS printer settings DOS vkle settings Other DIOS settings  All DOS Settings Sutto S C OPA. Wired Color Palette Schane Palette Font Palette Sound Selective Uninstall Create Liity 2. editor Prats The following information wit be used in the search Make changes, then select OK. Selective is Highlight to programu want to add to your Desktop if the Drives: Use a programs you want to add are not on the list, setoct \"Other Program. Select OK when you are ready to add the program 6:10521 to your Desktop Prog System Setu Programs Wing (DoSDAGASISWARREXL Doom (DOS) DANGAH SIDOONIDOOM.EXE Doom (005) DAOAMESIDOO ZOOMZEXE Laplink 3 (005) DAILL3ULL 3 EXE Quicken (DOS) D:VOUICKENSTOEXE SimCity 2000 (DOS) DYGAMESISC200018C2060.EXE The Incredible Machine (08) DAGAME SVACHINVESTIMEXE WordPerfect 5.1 (ODS) DAIWPSOWP.EXE Bu for many popular games. After selecting Windows users will have to the \"Add Programs\" icon, WARP will scan spend some time learning your hard drive looking for any DOS, another graphical interWindows, or OS/2 programs that are in face, and might even find the database. If found, WARP automaticalit easier to use. I strongly ly sets up the correct icons/settings for suggest that new users take each one. the provided tutorial and Of course in some cases you may want that you don't forget about to go back to DOS, WARP offers two ways the right mouse button. AlStart minimized 082 Yo window of doing this. Without getting into a long most every operation that explanation, the end result is that if you you want to perform can want \"vanilla\" DOS, you can have it. be done via the mouse. Most DOS games perform best in a full WARP also offers some neat screen environment, which is accomways to customize the in de Delaut Help k Cancet Hop plished easily enough, and when you are terface for your own needs. running under WARP a simple keystroke For instance, you can creSET UP FOR THE KILL OS/2 Warp offers an enormous number of combination (either <CNT>-<ESate your own desktop icons options when setting up the environment for a specific program. For CAPE> or <ALT>.<ESCAPE>) will and custom menus for those icons. every program, you can determine memory, video display, and You can control settings, among others. even have D A multiple desktop configuon-line buzz over this game has become rations-one for games quite a roar lately, due to its deep, adand one for work. dicting gameplay. In addition, a native version of SIMCITY is available, Sim Crie WARP AND THE 2000 is in the works, and there has even SERIOUS GAMER been some talk of a popular game that What about games and rhymes with \"room.\" There are also ESTRE WARP? If you play a lot of many native shareware games currently flight simulators and in circulation. high-speed action games, and you don't have a very GAMING AIN'T EVERYTHING OK o mer Programs... Cancel Help high-end processor, you Are there other reasons to give WARP a may find yourself going try, even if you still go back to DOS for back to vanilla DOS pretty your games? You bet. WARP comes with PRE-CONFIGURATION OS/2 Warp comes packaged with a number of often. Most of these something called the Bonus Pack. It's preset configurations for games. When you add a program to your processor-intensive games basically a value-added set of programs desktop, Warp will scan your hard drive looking for programs that work faster without OS/2, intended to show what WARP can do. match its database. If a match is found, the program will be automatically configured for optimum OS/2 performance. and some won't work at One of the programs is the Internet Acall since OS/2 has some cess Kit (IAK). It provides single click problems take you back to the OS/2 interface. Dewith games that use Propending on how you have arranged tected Mode. On the oththings, your game will either be suspender hand, if you mostly ed or active until you get back to it. One play strategy games, WARP interesting side effect of this feature is is great. Put another way, that you can have multiple games runWARP is fine if you don't ning at the same time. This means you need high-speed graphics. can quickly switch between games as the To avoid these speed mood strikes you. So, while you're waitand compatibility issues, ing for your opponent at the other end of games must be proMindennapewa Megevare the telephone line to take his turn in Emgrammed specifically for PIRE DELUXE, you can shoot a couple of OS/2, and such \"native\" holes of golf. This also means that my games are finally begingamus interruptus problem is solved. ning to appear. GALACTIC When my work duties call on short noCIVILIZATIONS from Startice, I just \"hot-key\" back to OS/2, do mydock Systems is an OS/2 TIE ON THE WINDOW After a simple configuration, LucasArt's X-WING work. and flip back into the game where only game. It's something runs in its own Waro window. However, as with most high-speed DOS I left off. Very handy! like a combination of games. X-WING will run much faster in a full DOS screen than in a What can I say about the interface? You MASTER OF ORION and SID desktop window will either like it or you won't. I like it. MEIER'S CIVILIZATION. The Select Oiona Open Shutter Version ERe Edit Select Options Window Help TEN DS 19 c ome a Speaker OSO NAS Pinball Robert Faire Private e Golck Pilates Eine Unttrey Golck Pint e rva Sanays Private Fits 1. Sy In't for 82 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


". GO AHEAD — SHOOT YOUR COMPUTER! Tired of chasing moving targets on computer shooting games with a mouse? With the PC GAMEGUN from American Laser Games, you can be fast, accurate and have a blast. The PC GAMEGUN is a light-gun peripheral which lets you interface by pointing at the screen and shooting. In addition to American Laser Games' full-motion, live-action shooting games, other game manufacturers are programming titles to be PC GAMEGUN compatible. Mad Dog McCreem Mad Dog II: The Lost GoldTM Who Shot Johnny Rock Space PiratesTM Crime Patrol Drug Wars and upcoming title The Last Bounty Hunter\" are all enhanced by using the PC GAMEGUN instead of a mouse. Speed up response time and boost your enjoyment of computer-based shooting games with the PC GAMEGUN. Suggested retail price ranges from $54.95 to $64.95. Look for it in stores this May Duug Wang DAS Bounty CRIME Hunter PATROL MERICAN LASER GAMES, INC 4801 LINCOLN ROAD NE / ALBUQUERQUE, NM 87109 Circle Reader Service #61 PC GAMEGUN is a trademark of American Laser Games, Inc. All rights reserved. 505-837-5447 "


"Conquest Of The «Natives\" GEDO CIVIabong access to the Internet. You get all your four megabytes of RAM, I would suggest you are eagerly awaiting the release of favorite Internet programs like Gopher, eight as a minimum. The installation WINDOWS 95. Well, while you wait (and Telnet, FTP, NewsReader and others. A program is simple and flexible, with wait) for the Microsoft release, know multimedia mail package called Ultimail both a quick installation option and an that there are other operating system is also included. But my favorite is the advanced option that allows you to set options, and that OS/2 Warp may be the Web Explorer, a graphical interface to up a boot manager and partitioned dribest among them. With it, you can play the World Wide Web (WWW). The ves. And the price is nice—you can get a many of your DOS/Windows games, exWWW is a multimedia, hypertext-based copy for less than $100. plore the Internet, and even get some chunk of the Internet that contains From the numbers, it's likely that work done. In other words, you can get more information than you could ever most of you own Windows, and some of Warped. dream of. It grows bigger everyday. Web Explorer allows users to explore the Web from within OS/2, is extremely easy to use, and a lot of fun. Many game companies maintain WWW links so you can get the latest info about your fa There are a couple of native OS/2 Also as in CIVILIZATION, technology is vorite games. But beware! You can games, but one in particular has made built upon technology, and it can be difspend a great deal of time, and conse quite a stir. GALACTIC CIVILIZATIONS from ficult to determine what you need to requently money, exploring the Web. Stardock Systems (distributed by Adsearch in order to get to the advanced Once you start exploring you never vanced Idea Machines, 801-572-4018) is \"good stuff. know where you may end up. a conquest game in the style of MASTER The game was originally release in EuAccess to the Internet is provided by OF ORION and SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION. rope, and the European version does not IBM's Advantis network, and it can get Like most games of this type, you start contain a rule book; instead, the entire expensive. However, the same program with a single colony ship and a megalomanual has been made available as oncan be used to link up to your own Inter maniacal desire to control the galaxy line help that is loaded with the game. You can select the galaxy size that you Since GALACTIC CIVILIZATION can be one. (For those who are more technically want to play in and the number of oppoplayed in a WARP window, you can easily minded, the interface currently supports nents you want to play against (from one flip back and forth. The North American SLIP, with PPP to be available by the to five). The computertime you read this.) controlled players can WARP also comes with a graphical also be assigned \"personfront-end to CompuServe, similar to the ality\" profiles which WinCim interface for Windows. The two range from evil to friendprimary support areas for OS/2 on Com ly. Each star system will puServe are OSPUSER and OS2SUP have between 0 and 12 PORT. In OSZUSER you can find a planets, some of which section called \"Fun and Games,\" which is may be suitable for coloa good place to ask your game-related nization. questions when it comes to making them Once you establish a work (or not work) under WARP. colony you must decide Occasionally, WARP allows you to do how to develop its rethings that are simply impossible using sources. Beyond building DOS or Windows, like running X-WING ships and researching Sorry Fucopsar in a window on the WARP desktop. Un new technologies, you fortunately, not all games can be run in can also improve the WARP GETS CIVILIZED Stardock Systems' GALACTIC CIVILIZATIONS has made this fashion. By the way, I don't suggest planet with a wide variety a lot of noise in the OS/2 gaming world. Its addictive strategic play has trying to play X-Wing in a window unless of projects such as soil been compared to MicroProse's MASTER OF ORION and you have a very fast processor. enrichment, nano-techSo, is WARP for you? As I said, that de nology, schools, and even pends on what you are trying to do. I have an entertainment network to keep the version will include a manual, however, always felt that OS/2 was a great operating population happy. Quite a number of discussion groups system in terms of integration. Since you Of course, the computer opponents are going on at various on-line services can run DOS, Windows, and OS/2 applica have their own empire building dreams, including CompuServe, Internet, and tions at the same time, this means that you Even the \"friendly\" opponents expand others where you can pick up a variety of can build an interface that works the way quite rapidly. As in CIVILIZATION, you can tips. While I have not heard of an \"Offiyou want. If you're a high-speed action or form trade and political alliances. These cial Strategy Guide\" for GALACTIC CIVIsimulation player, however, you may want are important, especially in the early LIZATION, I am sure that one will be to stick to DOS. stages of the game, as they will help you coming, because this game is big In terms of system requirements, WARP avoid conflicts that you do not have the enough, smart enough, and, gosh darn wants a lot of disk space (about 50 resources to pursue. it, people like it! megabytes), and while it can run with EMBED Wa Papa 84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"WALA ZA AVANZANTE ADVANCED WAVE TABLE BY SOUND BLASTER. ACCEPT NO IMITATIONS. The New Sound Blaster AWE32 SoundFont technology, so you can add to the library of sampled sound effects and instruments. And the latest speech PS Introducing the wave of the future: the new Sound Blaster AWE32. It combines advanced wave table Sound LASTER synthesis, a powerful digital signal processor, and the hottest audio effects all on the same sound card. That's why it's the next generation PC sound standard. The Sound Blaster AWE32 puts the world's purest music synthesis technology (from E-mu Systems inside your PC. It also includes effecers like chorus and reverb for increased depth and richness. And QSound so you can technology, so you can navigate through all the major Windows applications using voice commands. Of course, it's a Sound Blaster. So it makes all your favorite games and software sound more outrageous than you ever imagined. All this sound technology could cost you thousands. But the new Sound Blaster AWE32 is only $399. No other sound BLASTER AWE32 card comes close. Sound position sounds in 3D. It even comes with downloadable O SOUND BLASTER AWE32 INCLUDES: SOUND BLASTER AWE32 GENERAL MIDI INTERFACE HSC INTERACTIVE SE TRUE 16-BIT CD SOUND THREE CD-ROM INTERFACES CREATIVE WAVESTUDIO 2.0 ADVANCED WAVEFFECTS MICROPHONE QSOUND CONTROL PANEL SYNTHESIS SOFTWARE INCLUDES: CREATIVE ENSEMBLE 32.VOICE POLYPHONY CAKEWALK APPRENTICE CREATIVE SOUNDO LE SAMPUNG SUBSYSTEM FOR WINDOWS CREATIVE MOSAIC interesting? Visit your local Creative Labs dealer. Or call 1-800-998-5227. CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. WAKE UP THE REST OF YOUR BRAIN.\" Suggested retail price 1994 Creative Technology Ltd Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster AWE32. Advanced Waveffects. Creative VoiceAssist, Creative TextAssist, Creative Ensemble. Creative WaveStudio, Creative Soundo'lland the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Us.mauities Creative Labs 1-800-998-5237 or 408-428 6600), International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd, Singapore. TEL. 65 773 0233 FAX 65 7730353. Circle Reader Service #53 "


"U R Lance U go to the 2 fix U find that the is going 2 U run from Fritz destroy the and b-come the HERO get READYSOFT MAY Mon. Tue. Wed. Thur. Sun. 14 2 12 | 13 Get your demo CD NOW! Available from leading retailers for $5.00 111 m o1011 | 120 PC CD-ROM . Sega CD . 3DO  Mac CD-ROM  MPEG Brain Dead 13 is a trademark of ReadySoft Incorporated. 1995 ReadySoft Incorporated. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Circle Reader Service #360 "


"ADVENTURE/RPG A Hint In Time SCRY SIGHT THESE ARE NOT by the letters I receive, and comments I have SHOULD HINT BOOKS HAPPY TIMES FOR read on-line, gamers are divided into two main GAMERS. OVER THE camps: those that think a hint book should be last year and a included with every adventure and role-playing BE REQUIRED half or so, game game, and those who think that they should be releases have tended able to finish a game without needing a hint to be few and far bebook in the first place. DOCUMENTATION FOR tween, and when something Hint books, and their partners, the outradoes come along, it is likely to be pretty but geously overpriced hint lines, are big business mediocre at best. Right now, we are in the midst now, but it wasn't always so. Back in the good ADVENTURE GAMES? of another drought; nothing new in the way of old days, when everyone had an Apple, Atari, adventure or role-playing games, as I write this, or Commodore computer, hint books didn't exis on the horizon. The barrel is not only empty, ist. If you were stumped by a puzzle, you it doesn't even have a bottom to scrape. worked it out on your own, or called the game So I am stuck with doing a Dreaded Editorial, company (where a real, live person answered and the subject of this one is hint books. Going your questions), or put the game on the shelf, unfinished. Many times, players opted for that last option: a lot of games just never got completed. It wasn't that gamers were  Science fiction has been a hot topic lately in the realms of the dumb; all of us, at one time crystal ball. For example, Robot City from Byron Preiss is based on an or another, come across a Isaac Asimov universe and the late writer's Laws of Robotics. The puzzle that gives us long pause for thought. A game forthcoming game will be a 3-D MYST-alike with more interaction. Unmay not be hard overall, but like MYST, this new world of adventure will be heavily populated, most adventures and even mostly with robots. The player's character is framed for a murder, role-playing games may wakes up with amnesia, and has to prove his innocence. In finding the have a section that is tough murderer, of course, he also finds a more dangerous plot afoot. (and tough can vary for each  Just after Hero Software alumni held a wake for the CHAMPIplayer). However, since getting help wasn't easy back ONS computer role-playing game, other software companies began then, and being stuck is a to express interest in licensing the system for their own games. frustrating experience, peo After the long delay on LucasArts' THE DIG, the graphic adventure ple put the game aside and co-written by Steven Spielberg, we were happy to discover that all the bought another one, hoping parts are almost complete and that it may be playable soon, even to do better next time. Also, the game market in though much of the game is still in rough form. the early days was small; hint books wouldn't have by Scorpia APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 87 "


"been very profitable to produce. Over time, that changed; as So, should game companies include hint books with the the number of computer gamers increased, hint books began games? Not really. For one thing, it would certainly raise the appearing on the scene. Today, a well-stocked computer store price of the game, and games aren't cheap to begin with. For is likely to have shelves full of hint books and strategy guides another, not everyone wants (or needs) a hint book. For a third, available. hint books take time to From the game comdo, which would delay pany's point of view, hint game releases even books and hint lines more (Nobody wants make a lot of sense: these that!). And the books things help people to and have their own disfinish a game, and thereadvantages. fore they are more likely The first is temptato continue buying tion. Once you have games in the future. If that book open, it takes you buy games and don't a lot of willpower not to complete most of them, keep turning the pages. sooner or later, you stop Just one little peek, and buying games. one more, and before Does that mean game long, you've read the companies deliberately whole thing almost publish hard games so without realizing it. they can squeeze some This can be demoralizextra cash from desperate gamers? I've seen that accusationing, especially if you hadn't really meant to do that when you made more than once, but I don't think there's any truth to it. first opened the book to find a particular hint. Games today aren't harder than they were ten years ago; it More insidious, however, is the \"why struggle?\" syndrome. would take some thought on my part to come up with any reThis strikes people who do have the self-discipline to not read cent title that was on a par with some of the old Infocom text the whole book at once. They come to a roadblock in the game. adventures in difficulty. However, it's pretty obvious that people Ten minutes, twenty minutes, an hour passes. They've made no want hint books, and the companies are just putting out what progress, and their eyes stray to the handy clue book. Why sufpeople want. fer? Why struggle? Why spend another hour agonizing, when a Gamers seem to have a low tolerance for fustration, coupled with a powerful drive to Get The Puzzle Solved, preferably Right Now. The UNIVERSAL Game Cheater! Consumer Information Catalog Cheat death with... The Greatest Thing Since Sliced Bread theinfinity MACHINE The Infinity Machine works with virtually ANY game. Our easy to use interface allows you to edit or freeze almost any game feature such as lives, gold, or energy in real time. Our slow-motion mode lets you breeze through the tough spots like no tomorrow! What are you waiting for? Start living today! No matter how you slice it, our free Consumer Information Catalog is great food for thought. The Catalog dishes up more than 200 free and low-cost government booklets on subjects you can really sink your teeth into -such as staying healthy, eating right, finding a job, getting federal benefits, using credit, buying a home, helping your kids, taking care of your car, and much, much more. To get your free copy, send your name and address to: Consumer Information Center Department GT Pueblo, Colorado 81009 OM $34.955. VINA REM Software U.S. 1359 FRANK DRIVE  MONROE, MICHIGAN 48161 TO ORDER, CALL 800-457-1161 Circle Reader Service #119 88 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 Apublic service ol this publication and the Consumer Information Center of the US General Services Administration "


"ERHERO SUP LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN — Captain Excitement aims and fires. A direct hit! 50 damage. Steroid Man, puzzled by the pain, attempts to scratch his head but misses. 2 33 21 13 28 3121 This zany melange is the first true comedy CRPG ever. Fast and furious! Scorpia, Computer Gaming World This ain't no standard RPG. Everything a Computer game should be, solid game play, good design, lasting play value and intelligent buzzles, a rousing success! Steve Honeywell, Computer Game Review Gleefully demented! The Washington Post Like the Justice League of America from the old DC Comics. This one's a keeper! Crammed with puns, sight gags and irreverent Parbs that skewer their targets, this game vill appeal to anyone with a sense of humor. Bill Holmes, CompuServe Online Reviews NLEGEND Not only meets, but beats the competition. Steve Wartofsky, Strategy Plus Circle Reader Service #145 ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY 1-800-658-8891 "


"fast peek into the book will get things best of it. They can log in to the service, for everyone. For instance, you might moving again? E post a question to other players, log off, whip through MALCOLM'S REVENGE in a Before long, the time between being then come back again a couple of hours couple of days, while your friend climbs stuck and consulting the book tends to later to look for an answer, which is the walls while trying to figure out how to shorten. It's so much casier to look up much cheaper than a hint line or book. get off the island. She, on the other hand, the answer than to sit tearing your hair \"The drawback is, you aren't guaranteed breezes past DEATH GATE and you're still out. You become less inclined to really to get an answer, especially i a game is wondering what to do about the glowing think about the puzzle, and more injust out and you happen to be ahead of Elves. Which is the harder game? Which clined to use the book to get past il, the pack, or everyone is stuck in the the easier? thus encouraging mental laziness, and same place you are. There is no perfect game for everyeven more frequent recourse to the What all this means is that by and one, no game that provides the same handy hints. This is also a common large, gamers are an impatient lot. I've level of challenge to all players. Eventuproblem with those games that include been playing computer games since ally, on Game X, or Game Y, or Game \"on-line hints\" that you can reference 1981, and the people I've known are by Z, you're going to be stuck, and stuck while playing no means stupid; in fact, they're brighter hard. So the various resources, the hint In this respect, the 900 numbers aren't than average. They just seem to have a books, the 900 numbers, the on-line quite so bad. The meter is always ticking, low tolerance for frustration, coupled community, and, yes, letters to Scorpia, and at 75-95 cents for the first minute, with a powerful drive to Get The Puzzle too, are actually a Good Thing. Like all 50-75 cents cach additional minute, ew Solved, preferably Right Now. This comGood Things, they should be used in people want to be on the phone any bination doesn't help if you're trying to moderation. Give yourself a chance first longer than is absolutely necessary. The resist hint books and 900 numbers. to solve the problem before taking the dial-ups can be good if you're really desAt the same time, we have a contradic easy way out. Thinking is hard work, perate and want to get by that one sticky tion here: while gamers complain they but nothing beats the satisfaction of finpoint to finish the game. Otherwise, at \"need\" hint books to complete Game X, ishing a game without a hint book or those rates, you're better off buying a hint they also complain that games are betelephone in hand. And if, in the end, book (if available), since three or four coming too easy. «I bought Game X on your mind just blanks out, don't feel calls can easily add up to the book price Monday and finished it in two days,\" guilty about needing a nudge. We do (if not more!). they grumble. all, now and then; let's be happy there On-line gamers probably have the The trick is that Game X isn't the same are many ways to get one. The Complete The Complete Accessory Pack Featuring: OVER 150 ADDITIONAL LEVELS! Map creators & editors! Sound & graphics utilities! All new sounds & graphics! Doom loaders & front ends! Information files! Cheat codes & hints! Accessory Pack Featuring: Y Volume II 600 ALL-NEW LEVELS!! Map creators & editors! Loaders & front ends! Sound & graphics utilities! Information files! All New sounds & graphics! Cheat codes & hints! The Complete The Complete Finished DOOM* & DOOM II Already? Then you need to check out these: The Complete DOOM Accessory Packs. 4 CDs full of new levels, map editors, graphics and sound patches, utilities, loaders, tons of info files (including cheat codes), and much, much more! Any 1 disc.....$19.95 Any 2 discs...$34.95 ALL 4 DISCS.....$59.95 To Order call: The MARKetplace 800-289-1 ROM CDROM Specialists 314-521-4862 10431 WEST FLORISSANT 314-321-4002 ST. LOUIS, MO 63136 VISA/MC/DISC/AMEX/COD by MODERN MICROW ARE *requires registered version Featuring: Accessory Pack 1750 ALL NEW VOLUME IV LEVELS FOR Featuring: Accessory Pack 150 ALL NEW VOLUME II LEVELS FOR and 500 ALL NEW LEVELS FOR plus: DOOM Dozens of Graphics and Sound Patches! Map Editors and Utilities and morell! and 350 ALL NEW LEVELS FOR plus: DOOM Dozens of Graphics and Sound Patches! Map Editors and Utilities and more!!! 90 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"OETKIAL Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2 Edition COMMUTER GAME Ravenloft STONE PROPHET AD&D Horror RolePlaying Rises Again! Escape the dreaded realm of Har Akir before the ancient mummy Anhktepot awakens and ends your stay himself This all-new adventure in the RAVENLOFT game world has more puzzles than any other AD&D computer game! Treacherous dungeons abound. New monsters lurk around every turn. New tactics make combat more challenging. Now you can even fly, which adds a whole new twist to battles, High-res VGA graphics produce the visual quality of SuperVGA without an SVGA card. Add an eerie, digitized musical score and sound effects, and you'll be wrapped up in this exciting game for hours on end! Available on CD-ROM for IBM & Compatibles. To order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAY with VISA/MASTERCARD (North America only). 298 SRL SCREENS SHOWN: IBM 256-COLOR HI-RES VGA DISPLAYS. ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, RAVENLOFT, the TSR logo, and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR Inc. 1995 TSR. Inc.  Strategic Simulations, Inc., A Mindscape Company. All rights reserved. "


"GAME HINTS Game Hints For Nothing And Your Tips For Free Een wandering around searching for that fourth statuette so they can free King Richard from his shroud. Hey, it's not really that hard. It's easy! In fact, as easy as 1 + 1 = 2. Once you see that, things should open up and you'll soon be on your way to saving the king. Wake of The Ravager: Here is a handy tip for dealing with the air drakes when you're on the quest for the Lyre of The Winds. Put a mage as the party leader and cast either Globe or Minor Globe of Invulnerability so you can waltz up the path without damage from the traps. Walk slowly as you near the end and stop when you hear a click. Now chuck an arrow at the nearest drake. For some reason, this sets them off to fighting against ACH DAY I HEAD TO that, you have to visit each other. Just wait for the dust to settle, \"THE MAIL, ROOM, AND the Hieroglyphics and do it again. Eventually, only one EACH DAY I'm reRoom (with your little drake will be left and he's easy to take minded how few mousie) under the Dog out. Unfortunately, this trick won't work games have been Fort. If you're finding it with the second group of drakes down by released lately. Nothing a bit too dark down the nest, but your party will be in good much has come along since there, perhaps some shape for that combat if you let the first Christmas, and many of the forest clearance in the group kill themselves ofl. letters in my box are mostly right direction will Dragon Lore: Having a little (maybe about older games. brighten things up for not a little) difficulty getting that cog But before we get to the hints, I've you; in fact, it can help a hole lot. house door open? Perhaps you haven't got to answer a question that keeps Ultima 8—Pagan: Paying a visit to the found a nearby secret entrance yet that popping up in your letters. I do my best Sorcerers is not easy. You can't just go leads to a small set of passageways. It isn't to personally answer every letter (with there on your own; you have to be sent by easy to see unless you look closely at the an SASE!) I receive asking for hints. Devon or you'll never reach them. The wall, and even then, you need a certain Many of you have asked why I don't only way is to unleash havoc on the world spell to open the way. If you haven't obcharge money for this service. Well, the by freeing Hydros from her prison down tained a new spell recently, a visit to the way I see it, the predicament of the in the caverns (and no, she won't keep mushroom city is in order. Picking the stumped gamer is bad enough as it is. her word to teach you Tempest spells, so right flower will go a short way to helping Most games aren't cheap to begin with, don't expect any gratitude from her). you with that. and if you don't want to spend $10 and Then you can chat with Devon again and Ultima VII—Serpent Isle: Passing the up (mostly up) for a hint book or call be on your way to the fire mages. Knight's Test is an important part of the the overpriced 900 numbers, how are Noctropolis: Here you are on the trail game, and some players are finding you going to get help? of Top Hat under the opera house and themselves a bit stuck there. The claw is The main point of all my articles, be you've come to a dead end in the boiler easy enough to get, but the ashes elude they mail columns, reviews, or walkroom; actually, it's not so much a dead them. If that's the case, it's likely you throughs, is to help out other gamers, end as an obstacle in the form of a locked missed a secret wall somewhere. Someand answering individual questions is door. Forget about finding a key or where, say, in the vicinity of a certain assimply an extension of that. I've thrown breaking down the door. What you need sassination attempt. Check out that area, my share of money away on dogs, and is right there in the room, it's just very and you should soon be on your way to been stuck plenty of times myself. If I can dillicult to see. I suggest examining that joining the Knighthood. help you get around those obstacles, that boiler very carefully. And that's about it for this look into gives me more satisfaction than any Menzoberranzan: Some folks are havthe mail bag. In the meantime, if you amount of dollars. Okay? So now let's get ing a hard time finding the \"right-hand need help with an adventure or roleto the good stuff! hammer head\" on level two of the Dwarplaying game, you can reach me in the Malcolm's Revenge: So you're standven temple. Well, if you're looking for an following ways: ing at those big cat statues and wonderactual hammer, you're gonna be looking On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG. ing which gem goes where. With six gems forever. What you want is more symbolic On Genie: Type \"Scorpia\" to reach the and six statues, that makes for a lot of triin nature. Possibly a closer look at the map Games Round Table. al and error experiments (a whole lot!), for level two will make that clearer, providBy US mail (enclose a self-addressed, so I don't recommend that method foring you've been all around the area. stamped envelope if you live in the U.S.): solving the puzzle. It's much easier if you Lands of Lore: Up on level three of Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, know beforehand what goes where. For Scotia's lair, there are some poor souls New York, NY 10028. 92 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"\"Relentless is a visual orgy a truly spectacular experience for fun-seeking gamers...\" Electronic Entertainment «Get this game, you'll be amazed.\" Computer Gaming Review \" If you're buying only one game, make it Relentless.\" Computer Player \" It's a remarkable thing to see.» PC Gamer he year \"...one of the most innovative games Computer Gaming World RELENTLESS TWINSEN'S ADVENTURE Check out the interactive demo on America Online by using keyword Relentless Don't have America Online? Just call 1-800-827-6364, ext. 10007 for free software and a free 10-hour trial membership. ADELINE ELECTRONIC ARTS INTERNATIONAL Adelina Sottware International. All rights reserved. Adeline Software International and its logo are trademarks of Adeine Software International SA Relentless Twiliser's Adventure is a trademark of Adeline Software International Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts Circle Reader Service #55 "


"REVIEW Blood in the Saddle Again An Old Hero Returns In Mindscape's COMMANDER BLOOD by Peter Olafson ATTITUDE EY, A PROMOTION IS A PROMOTION. breaking game. Oh, sure, this quest to auto-parts store in Bangor. CAPTAIN BLOOD EVIDENTLY HAS capture Blood's five clones was written off That should be a clue. Unlike CAPTAIN GOTTEN SOME RESPECT FROM HIS by some as one of those Weird French BLOOD, which was a straight adventure with betters and been kicked upstairs. Adventures that an undercurrent \"The fake plants, the ceramic mug seemed to descend COMMANDER BLOOD of humor, the sewith \"I (heart) beagles\" written on the on the US market en Price: $69.95 quel is essentially side, the little Toblerone-shaped desk masse in the late '80s System a light-hearted sign, the pictures of his clones-all stuffed and early '90s. But its Requirements: romp. The eneinto a cardboard box for the big move. esoteric depth made IBM compatible mies may threatNow it's Commander Blood to you, son. room for it in a cor486 or better, en to blow you 4 MB RAM However, this is one of those dubious ner of my heart, and VGA graphics, out of the heavpromotions that find you doing more or it put its claws into 10 MB hard ens in 10 seconds less the same job in more amiable sur-me like a nestling cat drive space and counting, but roundings. The Commander's not ridand hung on. I available, 2x they can't count. ing a desk. For Mindscape's new couldn't have shaken CD-ROM and Your computer's CD-ROM game, French developers Miit loose if I wanted to. mouse; supports SoundBlaster and name is Honk, compatible sound cards. crofolie's ((CQ) and Cryo The developers and if you ask Protection: None have resurrected the hero of haven't bothered to Developers: Microfolie's and Cryo him to recount the 7-year-old CAPTAIN draw any conspicu Publisher: Mindscape Inc. recent events, he BLOOD adventure game for ous links between Novato, CA needles you to rea charming, breezy explothe two games. In (415) 883-3000 port his help ration of the cosmos. COMMANDER back to Bob. Back in 1988, CAPTAIN BLOOD, you simply find yourself the (Jeez. What a geek.) BLOOD was a decaretaker of galactic magnate Bob And what are you doing when the cidedly ground Morlock. He peers from his icy cabigame starts? You're watching TV. So net (a Cryobox) through misty eyes, much for seriousness. after all, he's 300,000-and-some-odd Actually, Bob is mostly serious. He may years old-like an old guard dog of be an elemental creature-cum-corporate uncertain disposition. titan, but he's old and he has regrets. He But excuse me one sec here. Bob has it all; he just wants to understand it, Morlock? This does not sound and he's too weak to do it alone. Specifilike a futuristic, sci-fi, cally, he wants to see the Big Bang, and Zardoz sort of characyou, as Commander Blood, are going to ter. This does not get him there. sound like a However, as in Maine, so in hostile Rock of Ages. Scrut-occupied territory: Can't get there This sounds from here. Driving Mr. Bob across time like someone and space to that primal explosion-in who, were theory, the beginning of the universenames per proves to be rather involved. Black holes mitted to will open the path. You don't know assign deswliere those holes are, and thereby tinies, should hangs the tale. by rights own And here the game system most a one-third echoes that of CAPTAIN BLOOD-bouncshare of an ing around Bob's universe in a space94 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Hummit lenne, SA Some Thingy Are Better Left Dead and Buried. LUTUS Its spell petrified a citypopuladecajoled a prince of Ancient Egypt to spread the cult of the dark god, llyarlithotep, and ensured that the blood of the serpent people ankthrough the veins of all his descenderrus, Centuries would pass) and it would be buried at the end of a long, lust tunnel in atemple/beneath the unsuspecting city of Alexandra But in 1920, one Yussuf Al Rashid begins to dig a Hiding place for his ill-begotten money and unearths the 2,000 year old magical scroll which sets in motion an adventure which begins with deathi and could finish with the end of the world. HE VIC TOKAT ING  1995 Millennium Interactive Limited PC CD-ROM 22904 Lockness Ave. Torrance, CA 90501 Circle Reader Service #378 "


"PLANET: Venusia LIFE SUPPORT: BLE-Deluxe trol functions are planet, and an Orxx-a sort of porpoisequite simple, and as-torpedo-as-ambassador-is dispatched you'll find you can to the surface and makes for the settleplay the game hapment in cruise-missile fashion. It's so pily without instruceasy, I feel like a fool for even mentiontion. Navigation is ing it. (Initially, you'll want to activate the simply a matter of Orxx directly to watch it surge down its picking the planet tube in 3D.) you want on a 2D It's here, on approach to a planet, map and then that Mindscape's DRAGON LORE technolpulling a lever. ogy kicks in on a global scale and to Travel itself-blazes wonderful effect. The surface ripens of beautiful screengradually, details come to the focus and saver-like light that the whole routine has an easy sweep that sometimes recall makes the eventful appear natural. It's the climaxes of beautiful-like DRAGON LORE, COMMAN2001 and DER BLOOD is rarely less than beautiful. Brainstorm-is autoBut cinematic doesn't quite say it. (It matic, and lands doesn't mean anything these days anyGIVE'EM THE FINGER An imaginative interface allows you to navigate through the game and through space by using your virtual hand. Here in the Nav Room you can find out about distant planets and warp there almost instantly. EMMANDER, CAFES TOP MAAT MEA, craft called the Ark (which looks rather you in orbit over like a dragster engine as designed by your target. To anH.R. Giger), gradually learning the loswer a hail on the cation of new planets and new aliens radio, just jab a finwith special needs. A Scrut (a Cylon-like ger at the orange helmet head) wants a password. A connerf ball, which trary droid needs a battery. The rat bounces, titters at with an elephant's trunk would like you and calls up a something to eat, and that bubble-headvideo screen. ed salesman wants to see cash before Friendly, eh? You he'll talk merchandise. can also get Honk to You run the show from the hub of a subring you up to date per receptionist's desk-a circular conon game events if sole with stations for communications, you've lost track of interstellar travel, planetary stopover's what you've given to HONK IF YOU'RE IN A HURRY Listen to Honk, your trusty computer, to keep and a six-channel television. (At the start, whom. And if you from getting bogged down with characters like Bronko before they can there's not much on except commerdidn't save before help you. cials.) It's very neatly handled. You simquitting, or wereply move the mouse right and left to rudely interrupted in your game, invokway.) It moved me somehow. There was a whirl in a circle, and use a big blue hand ing \"Last\" in the \"Save\" menu will bring sense of arrival, and a sense that arrival (another holdover from CAPTAIN BLOOD) you back to where you were when the meant something. to click on the orange balls that activate computer went ofl. If only fleetingly. I have to note that the machinery And to visit a planet, well, click on the said movement is basically a movieHelping you out tightly scripted, with no exploration alis that personable, il Have a happy day. comrade, lowed. In CAPTAIN BLOOD, you could neurotic, computer explore the planet's surface. Yes, it was (for specific advice barren and rendered only in wire-frame and general inforuntil you actually landed. And, yes, you mation), and you were told via directional arrows where can summon Bob you'd find the resident alien. But you got himself from his there largely on your own hook, and it sleep in emergengave the game a sense of process. COMcies. (He's said to MANDER BLOOD, on the other hand, has a know all and more sense of someone else doing the work. than he lets on-but The same can be said for COMMANDER only lets it out in BLOOD's conversation options. You barely dribs and drabs behave to do a thing—just more pointing at fore he requires anHACKER MEETS HAWKER This cartoonish salesman can deliver the goods, and clicking on what you want to say. other visit with the but you'd better have credits when you go to Venusia, because they don't And it's here the game really runs afoul frozen veggies.) take American Express. of the spirit of CAPTAIN BLOOD. It's not Most of the conabout art of communication any more. 96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"ROGER WILCO IS BACK! SPACE QUEST 6 THE SPINAL FRONTIER Join farces with hundreds of your favorite outer-space heroes, past and present, in the most uproarious, outrageous Space Quest ever. No sci-fi movie, TV show or video game is exempt from the relentless comic parody of the spaced-out Space Quest creators. In this all-new adventure, Roger boldly goes where no computer game has gone before, from the distant reaches of the farflung planet.Polysorbate LX, to the close-up recesses of \"inner space.\" It'll take all the guts, nerve and backbone Wilco can muster, but this Roger's got half a mind to do it. And where there's a Wilco, there's a way! BORES COMING TO A CD-ROM DRIVE NEAR YOU. For your copy see your local retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 SI ERR A Circle Reader Service #271 .. Space Quest is a registered trademark of The Children's Museum of Indianapolis, Inc. and is used by license. 1995 Sierra On-Line, Inc. Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved. "


"See, I was games, the games have less and less to spoiled. CAPTAIN do with the art of communication.) The Bloop's chatting details of talk-or dungeon mapping, was driven by a for that matter-should not be seen as a full, 120-symbol burden on the player, but as a way of iconic language. drawing them into the process of play. You had to learn It's the difference between playing a the symbols, use game-being inside it, and taking its them properly to logic and rules into yourself-and simmake yourself unply playing with it from the exterior. derstood and to In most of COMMANDER BLOOD, you're make sense of the on the outside. And it's a beautiful outresponses. Once side, too. But it's cold out there in space. you got into the And the Commander, after all these years game, it felt as of service, deserves a little heat. JONESING FOR BIONIUM In one of the stranger game elements we've seen though you'd been gamers harvest energy chunks in this virtual stream in order to living in a foreign accumulate credits. land. Which, in a THE EDITORS SPEAK sense, you had COMMANDER BLOOD Oh, you can talk up a storm, and the been. You didn't so much play CAPTAIN RATING translation will come back in a kind of BLOOD the game as become immersed RATING  primitive English with the odd word in it, and that's the only way to play. PROS A pretty, easy to play graphic missing and \"me\" used for «1.\" But COMMANDER BLoop doesn't make that adventure with a unique interface. that's just window dressing. There is no kind of claim on my heart. It could CONS Resurrects the mythos of a struggle to make yourself understood, have, I'm certain, and I'm mystified as previous game but then fails to draw or to understand what you're told. Beto why the language elements were from its history and develop its best tween the Orxx and a universal transladropped rather than enhanced. (It's alfeatures. As a result, the game's not tor (named OLGA), you're covered. most ironic that, in an industry rushing all it could have been. Where's the art in this? to include more and more speech in POWERED SPEAKERS FOR THE POWER HUNGRY. Sit up. Lock up. Grab the stick. You need a set of Pull the trigger. Blast the YST-M5 powered Zurtrons. Escape monitored speakers. through hyperHungry for more? Just space. Then cool add a YST-MSW10 down with some hot powered subwoofer. jazz. Feel Call 1-800-333-4442 for the the sound? The launch base near you. Tell rush? The riffs? No? 'em you're power hungry. YAMAHA YAMAHA YAMAHA 1994 by Yamaha Corporation of America. All rights reserved. Yamaha, YST, and the Yamaha logo are registered trademarks of Yamaha Corporation of America. Lunicus Dame artwork provided courtesy of Cyberflix, Inc. Lunicus game available on CD-ROM. Yamaha Corporation of America, Computer Related Products, 6600 Orangethorpe Avenue, Buena Park, California 90620 Circle Reader Service #359 "


"Kind of Any attempt to show the multimedia entertainment of Shanghai: Great Moments within this flat space would be unfair. Showing snazzy pictures of our four innovative puzzle games for your whole family wouldn't capture the fun. Slick shots of inventors, artists and famous couples from the nine tile sets would just irritate your eyes Shimmering music notes, multi-colored butterflies and Saturns spinning off CDs would only insult your intelligence. So, here's an approach we know you will appreciate. SIHANGHAL Great Moments Demo 100%com ACTVK, You're welcome. SHANGHAI Great Moments Four Multimedia Tile-Matching Games For your Shanghai: Great Moments IBM CD-ROM demo and a coupon for $10 off the complete version, call 1 (800) 438-9998 or send a check or money order for $4.95 (S&H) payable to Activision with your name and address to: SHANGHAI DEMO Dept. CGW, PO, Box 65605, Salt Lake City, Utah 84165-0605. Ok, it's that shipping and handling thing again. You know the routine. You send us $4.95, we send you your \"FREE\" demo. But once you see this demo, you'll wish you'd paid twice that to overnight it. Activision is a registered trademark and Shanghai is a trademark of Activision, Inc. 1995 Activision, Inc. All rights reserved. ACTIVISION Circle Beader Sondico 121 "


"BIOFORGE COMPUTER Express BIOFORGE BATTLEDROME Since 1985 DIGESTALES ROUTE TOVOU 800-228-7449 Enter a lab set on ancient ruins. Archaeological work has been stopped by the machinations of a scheming scientist. There's a hostile alien on the prowl. High tension fills the Battledrome arena as HERCULANs fight one-on-one for power, pride, and money. Choose your HERC's weapons! NOW OPEN 24 HOURS ext. 351 IBM CD #34638 IBM CD #36998 PERSONALS NATIONALS PLANTAS GRAPHICS XPRESSION BLIND DATE THE BIG 3 CASINO MASTER W/KIT > VST VALUE PACKED 64-BIT $39 26 Get four of today's top ten PC game titles. Features Sound Blaster 16, double-speed CD-ROM drive, joystick, speakers and software. Experience all the angst of a first date. Sandi's the object of your affection, and to win her, you must choose the right responses The ultimate WW.Il strategy game. You control the action. Recreate the epic battles of Tobruk and Stalingrad. Open a second front on Normandy or Italy, IBM CD #38854 A powerful new version of Casino Master. Includes Blackjack, Craps, Roulette, Video Poker, Baccarat, Pai Gow Poker, Slots, Keno, and Red Dog HARDWARE #37128 MAC CD #36756 IBM CD #36755 MAC CD #36789 IBM CD #36781 28 37 37 37 39 37 19 35 45 39 35 30 26 ENTERTAINMENT 37040 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons 38957 5 Game Super Pak... 36.454 Sth Fleet 29238 AD&D Dark Sun: Shattered lands 35877 AD&D Dark Sun: Wake Ravager 34087 AD&D Genie's Curse 36068 AD&D Menzoberangan 34164 AD&D Ravenloft. Strahds Posses 31940 APBA Baseball WINDOWS 33336 Aces of the Deep 28445 Acos over Europe 34302 Advanced Civilization .... 37304 Aldo De Camp 37489 Alien 3 34695 Alien Logacy 35162 Alliance Flight Commander 2 30188 Alone in the Dark 33809 Alone in the Dark II 32011 Arcade ..... 33341 Atena Elder Scrolls.. 33708 Armored Fist 38608 Aloni 2600 Action Pack 36959 Award Winning Wor Gomes 33637 Axis the Gamecheater 36027 Barlo Bugs 28769 Bana Chess 4000 33857 Battle Cruiser 3000AD 38837 Battle of Antietom 34448 Battledromo... 21151 Bottles of Napoleon 38662 Beat the House 11575 Beyond Squod leader 24543 Bill Elliott Noscor Challenge 28358 Blackjack.. 36485 Blackbeard.. 36938 Blackthorne 36654 Blood Bowl 32548 Bram Stoker's Dracula 33738 Breach 3..... 35715 BreckThrul. WINDOWS 33941 Brett Hull 95 35580 Bridge Baron. WINDOWS 34935 Bridge Olympiod... 31466 Caesar's Palace . WINDOWS 38297 Cannon Fodder... 27743 Carrier Strike ... 31523 Carriers et Worl... 33047 Casino Lite: Omaho Hold'em 37676 Cosine Lite: Texas Hold'em 34267 Casino Master Gold. WINDOWS 37163 Cosinol. WINDOWS 34074 Celtic Tales: Bolor Evil Eye 20471 Centerfold Squares 32522 Chess Master 4000 Turbo. WINDOWS 37679 Chessnet 3 Club Edition ENTERTAINMENT 35677 Chessnet 3 Single Edition .... 26806 Civilization 36251 Classics Pinball .. 38649 ClockWerx WINDOWS 31593 Cobra Mission 37445 Collegiate Pennsylvania State WIN 37445 Collegiate Pennsylvania State WIN 37434 Collegiate UCIA WIN....... 37435 Collegiate Univ. of Florida WIN 37439 Collegiate Univ of Michigan.WIN 35717 Colonization 32930 Comanche & Mission Disk #1 32884 Command Starship 22035 Corridor 36303 Crystal Coliburn. WINDOWS 32369 Cyber Race 32966 Cyber Space 37566 Cyberstrike 36087 Cyclones. 38844 DIZone 33602 D Day: Operation Overlord 34028 D Day. The Beginning of End 33234 Daemonsgate 34162 Dark legions... 34765 Dawn Patrol 30897 Day of the Tentacle: Maniac 33334 Delta V 37076 Descent. 38295 Desert Strike .. 32010 Detail.... 34307 Disciples of Steel 36747 Discworld 37643 Dominus 33894 Doom I: Knee Deep in the Dead 35719 Doom Ile Hall on Earth 36791 Doom I: Hintbook 32967 DreamWeb... 30684 Dunell ........ 32978 Dungeon Master 2 35164 ETO D Day WINDOWS 35288 FIFA International Soccer 34272 Falcon 40 33664 Falcon: FA-18 Hornet 31442 Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary 31690 Falcon: Warthog A.10 3.0 36832 Fighter Wing 32880 Fleet Defender: F-14 . 35744 Fleet Defender: F-14 Scenario 36589 Flight Commander II. .. 32632 Flight Light 37558 Flight Sim: Caribbean Scenery 5.0 36695 Flight Sim: Europe #1 5.0... 37557 Flight Sim: Japan Scenery 5.0 32901 Flight Sim: Las Vegas 5.0.... 31728 Flight Sim: New York Scenery ENTERTAINMENT 31657 Flight Sim: Paris Scenery 36693 Flight Sim: Portland 5.0 31273 Flight Simulator 50 34277 Formula One Grand Prix 2 CALL 35772 Fortress of Dr. Rodicki 30373 Freddy Pharles 36247 Frontlines 34894 Front Page Sports Baseball .42 35314 Front Page Sports Football 95 42 32972 Frontier Elite il 35976 Frontier: 1st Encounter 30 32130 Gabriel Knight..... 33642 Game Maker 2.0 33739 Genghis Khan II 38607 Gettysburg: Turning Point 34001 Girlfriend Lisa 34436 Girlfriend Teri 36461 Glider 40. WINDOWS 37764 Goal '94... 36550 Gobliiins IV .. CALL 37081 Goldtree Engine 28300 Golf. WINDOWS , 34826 Golf Courses: Bant Springs. WINDOW 23 34827 Golf Courses: Mauna Kea WINDOWS....23 34828 Golf Courses: Pinghurst WINDOWS 23 36790 Good to Firm 33335 Grandes Fleet... 33704 Great Naval Batles Il.... 35444 Hammer of the Gods 32527 Hand of Fate 32594 HardBall ll Diamond Collect 34006 HardBall IV. 38076 HardBall IV MLPBA Addon ..16 32122 Harpoon II 35767 Harpoon Il Battleset #2 34284 Heavy Hockey CALL 37696 Heretic CALL 34761 Heroes of Might & Magic 35725 Hexx: Heresy of the Wizard 36245 High Seas Trader 27109 Hollywood Mogul WINDOWS 32 38601 Hudson City 37406 Ice Hockey 33325 Incall.. 36548 Incall.. 35349 Incredible Toons. WINDOWS 26926 Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis 31471 IndyCar Racing 35105 IndyCar: Circuits Expansion Pack 35106 IndyCar Indianapolis Speedway 34449 Inherit the Earth: Orb Quest 36393 Iron Cross 37703 Ishar 3: 7 Gates of Infinity 27314 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf.. 28696 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 15 ENTERTAINMENT 30628 lock Nicklaus Signature Tour 2... 38001 lack Nicklaus: Course Designer 38079 Jack Nicklaus: Golden Bear.. 31480 Jonged Alliance 36389 Jogged Alliance Addon. 34106 Jeopardy Deluxe 33993 Jeopardy Sports Edition 37203 Jet Fighter 35875 Jorune: Alien Logic ... 33741 Jurassic Park. 30672 Kasparov's Gambit 34303 Kingmakut 3.972 Klik n' Play WINDOWS 31420 lands of lore... 38189 last Blitzkrieg 37527 Legions WINDOWS 32785 Leisure Suit Lorry VI 36744 Lemmings Holiday '94.. 30372 Lemmings Il 27660 links 386 Pro 31444 Links: Belfrey Course SVGA 32478 links: Firestone Course SVGA 31507 links: Innisbrook Course SVGA 32479 links: Pebble Beach Course SVGA 30798 Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA 35319 Lode Runner 34029 Lords of the Realm... 33736 lost Admiral Il ... 26904 Lost Treasures of Infocom! 32881 Lucky's Casino Adventure.. 33501 M4 Sherman Tonk. WINDOWS 35741 Master of Magic ... 31433 Master of Orion .. . 28153 MochWarrior / BattleTech 1 & 11 32603 MechWarrior II.. 37284 Mega Man X. 31594 Motol & loce. PG13 37302 Metal Marines 34698 Metaltech Earth Siege 37988 Mindscape Game Pack WINDOWS 31816 More Incredible Machines 34658 Mortal Kombat / GamePad Bundle 38905 Mortal Kombat it ..... 36997 NASCAR Racing SVGA 36996 NBA Jam 33215 NCAA: Road to the Final Four 35937 NFL '95. WINDOWS 37092 Navy Strike 37763 One Nil 36365 Operation Body Count... 34451 Operation Crusader WINDOWS 37711 Operation Europe... 33340 Outpost WINDOWS 33464 Oxyd Magnum 38548 Pas In Time. .. 12 30 ALL 30 30 26 30 30 34 30 20 36 CALL 35 30 30 25 68 .19 .12. UNNO 26 CALL 26 21 28 32 30 "


"ARCOS Entombed GETALNI ORG THE BEST POINT. CD-ROM O Macintosh DOOM WELCO ARC OF DOOM ENTOMBED GADGET GETTYSBURG THE TURNING POINT $45 SEL Earth's on the brink of ecological chaos and Redmond Institute's Alpha Team is sent to investigate. Now they're missing, and it's up to you to find them. Play the role of an archaeologist, trapped in an ancient tomb. Navigate through puzzles, mazes, and deadly traps as you Hee your captor Alocomolive speeds through a retro-future world. Boarding the train, your journey through a spooky land begins. Only you have the keys to unlock the mystery. The Civil War game that simulates the entire 3-day battle on a grand tactical, demi-brigade scale. You ll experience the actual tactical feel of the battlefield. MAC CD #36912 IBM CD #36911 IBM CD #38235 MAC CD #38210 IBM CD #38196 IBM #38607 Magic CarPet FUN HOUSE EAST AFRICA ECO EAST AFRICA GAME BLASTER CD 16 MAGIC CARPET CD FUN HOUSE THE VIRTUAL SIMULATION GAME $43 $30 BINDES As Game Warden of Ethemba, rely on your intelligence, your rangers, and meager resources to manage this fictional East African game park. IBM CD#36383 Get four of today's top ten PC game titles. Features Sound Blaster 16, double speed CD-ROM drive, joystick, speakers and software. Over 1,100 of the newest and best games available for the Macintosh and PC/Windows. Get hours of fun with this dynamic spectrum of games. IBM CD #36853 Over 1,100 of the newest and best games available for the Macintosh and PC/Windows. Get hours of fun with this dynamic spectrum of games MAC CD #38974 IBM CD #38973 HARDWARE #21560 ENTERTAINMENT ENTERTAINMENT 25 25 96 18 ENTERTAINMENT 27287 Wing Commander I Deluxe .......... 32006 Wing Commander Il Special Operations.. 32106 Wing Commander Il w/Speech 25001 Wizardry 6: Bane of the Cosmic 26417 Wizardry 7: Crusader Dark Savant.. 26475 Wizardry Trilogy 11/11/t)... 32909 Wizardry Trilogy II (V/VI/VII) 36271 Wall: Hunter Be Hunted 34509 Wollenstein 3D 34590 Wallpack 27709 World Citeuil Grand Prix 33048 World Series Poker Adventure 37688 World Series of Poker Deluxe 32477 World War II: Battle South Pacific .. 38343 XCOM: Terror from the Deep 35215 XCOM: UFO Defense 28941 X Wing .......... .. 32034 X-Wing: B-Wing lour of Duty ... 30899 X Wing, Imperial Pursuit.. 34181 Zig Zag WINDOWS ... 36367 Zorro.. . 28 24619 USCF Chess 27431 Ultima Underworld! 23 32879 Ultima Vill. Pogan. 34434 Ultimate Domain... 29620 Ultrabols .... 35821 Universal Never lock for Gomes 39 36041 Unnecessary Roughness 195 32859 Victory at Sea .. 41 29779 Video Poker WINDOWS 33934 WW2 Air Force Commander 15 36708 Warcraft: Ores and Humans 34653 Wargame Construction Setll: Tanks 31521 Warlords il 25222 Warlords Il Scenario Editor 32510 Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WINDOWS 31643 When Two Worlds War 36785 Win Vegas Volume 1. WINDOWS 36786 Win Vegas Volume II. WINDOWS 36787 Win Vegas Volume III. WINDOWS 34939 Wing Armada.... 24006 Wing Communder .... .. 31509 Wing Commander Academy .... ......23 39 30 26 28 33 39 30 30 ENTERTAINMENT 33087 Pacific Air War: 1942 35739 Pacific Air War: 1942 Scenario 36480 Panzer General 31956 Pax Imperio 33735 Perfect General II 32948 Perfect General Trilogy 27151 Perfect General WWII Scenario 37096 Pilot's Choice Bundle 25088 Pinball Fantasies... 30098 Piralel Gold... 37083 Pizza Tycoon. WINDOWS 36057 Planet Soccer 37305 Point of Attack.. 32079 Police Quest IV 38118 Poolmaster-WINDOWS 29618 Populous 1 ... 30630 Prince of Persia II. 34655 Pro League Baseball 35573 Pure Wargame 35935 Quarantine. 32863 Quest for Glory IV 34596 Raiden 36384 Realms of Arkanio: Stor Trail 36386 Realms of Arkanio: Star Trail Addon 35355 Red Baron ..... 31630 Return to Zork.. 36598 Reunion 33938 Rise of the Robots WINDOWS 36936 Rise of the Trid 35236 Robinson's Requiem ..... 33330 Romance Three Kingdoms Ill 31343 Rules of Engagement Il... 33206 SSN-21: Sea Wolf 35590 Sabre Team .... 32979 Sam & Max Hit the Road 31730 Scenery Collection USA Eost 5.0 31731 Scenery Collection USA West 5.0 24751 Second Front 34656 Seri City 35316 Serious Soccer 34289 Shadow of the Comet 2 31510 Shadowcastor 35287 Shanghai I WINDOWS 24033 Shiloh. ... 30492 Sid Meier's Trilogy. 28694 Sierra Award Winning Bundle 26824 Sim Ant Classic 28868 SimAnt Classic WINDOWS 31457 SimCity 2000 34246 SimCity 2000 WINDOWS 38245 SimCity 2000 Urban Renewal Kit 33915 SimCity 2000: Great Disasters 31455 SimCity Classic WINDOWS 37042 SimClassic Collection... 37043 SimClassic Collection. WINDOWS .... 35 24473 SimEarth Classic 26503 SimEarth Classic. WINDOW 31454 Simform 25115 SimHealth 29724 Simlife Clossic 30833 Simlife Classic WINDOWS 32882 Simon the Sorcerer 36019 Solitaire Antics ... 22085 Solitaire Antics WINDOWS 37228 Solitaire Deluxe WINDOWS 28440 Space Quest V . 31656 Space Simulator.. 34764 Spaceward Hol IV. 29854 Spear of Destiny 34294 Spear of Destiny: Mission 2 34295 Spear of Destiny: Mission 3 33342 Spectre VR 33296 Spellcasting Party Pok 36483 Stalingrad 35723 Star Crusader 35940 Star Crusader Mission & Speech 33245 Star Reach 26706 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 31772 Star Trek: Judgment Rites 32808 Star Wars Chess 37309 StarGate 30926 Street Fighter II ..... 27188 Strike Commander ... 30608 Strike Commander Speech Pack 32114 Strike Commander Tactical #1 31886 Strip Poker Professional 35151 Sub Bamle Simulator 11 WINDOWS 33331 Subwar 2050 .. . 37091 Subwar 2050 Scenario 37282 Super Street Fighor II. 26041 Super Tetris ....... 32605 Super VGA Hartier 34383 Superhero League of Hoboke 33858 System Shock .... 34305 TFX: Tactical Fighter 3516 TacOps WINDOWS 31200 Terminator 2 Chess Wars 17179 Terminator 2029 31422 Terminator: Rampage... 32154 The Dig... 33332 Third Reich 32152 Tie Fighter 38236 Tio Fighter: Defenders .. 29906 Tigers on the Prowl 35308 Tony LaRussa Baseball 12.0.. 26142 Train Engineer WINDOWS 37084 Transport TycoonWINDOWS 38961 Transport Tycoon Scenario 37588 True Lies ..... . 36452 U Boat-WINDOWS.... 35 Complete on-line Catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express Internet-info@cexpress.com AOL Computer Express 41 34 800-228-7449 NOW OPEN 24 HOURS ext.351 35 40 39 32 .No surcharge is added to credit card orders. PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks accepted. Some items are not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% restocking fee. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typographical errors. Shipping and handling charges, please call for current offers. All prices are subject & VE C to change without notice. *Intl. orders welcome 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 Info : 508-443-6125 Fax: 508-443-5645 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"thomir Pilcher OfDOOM MERCTIC COMPUTER 2 COMPUTER Express GLIDER 4.0 0 HERETIC Glider 4.0 Since 1985 ni SASARE CALL 800-228-7449 w Pilot a paper airplane through hundreds of rooms of a mansion without crashing into furniture or other hazards. Obstacles include balloons, helicopters, and more. MAC CD #27555 IBM CD #36461 Cast eldritch spells from the tomes of Power, Wield fantastic weapons in your quest to destroy the undead and bestial horrors that slaughtered your race. IBM CD #37695 NOW OPEN 24 HOURS ext.351 VINCS QUEST Girlfriend LLLLLL DOZA end DIE UNDER A KILLING MOON WINGS OF GLORY KINGS QUEST GIRLFRIEND $54 $40 $45 $40 Tex Murphy, Private Investigator, is looking for a case to solve on the streets of Post-WWIII San Francisco. Look around for clues! IBM CD #32937 As American pilot in WWI, pil your wits and machine gun against the infamous German Hunter Squadrons in this gripping story, IBM CD#35405 Those wacky royals are at it again! Queen Valanice and Princess Rosella are lost a wild fantasy world that comes complete with a handsome stranger! IBM CD #35326 flonlaaks Enjoy conversations with a girlfriend living inside an apartment in your PCI Your girlfriend moves around, and responds to anything you say. IBM CD #38540 CD ENTERTAINMENT 50 3 30 38 50 34 28 31 53 38 44 CD ENTERTAINMENT 33683 10-Year Anthology Classics 32903 11th Hour 36593 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons 34888 5 Foot 10 Pok Volume 36091 5 foot 10 Pak Volumell.. 37686 5 Game SuperPok 38127 5th Flee! 29037 7th Guest 32855 AD&D Dark Sun: Shattered lands, 35978 AD&D Dark Sun: Woke Ravager 34161 AD&D Genie's Curse 36958 AD&D Menzoberronzon 34165 AD&D Ravenloft Strahds Posses 38162 Absolute Mayem.. 36009 Absolute Zero 38907 Aces Collection 35254 Aces of the Deep 34717 Acus cf the Positis. 34719 Aces over Europe ... 36729 Across the Rhine: 1944 38164 Advanced Civilization 33011 Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet 36757 Air Havoc Controller 35157 Air Worrior il 38967 Alice 35806 Alien Legacy 34944 Alien logic: Jorune 35527 All Star Sports Collection 37074 Alone in the Dark II 36911 Are of Doom 37596 Arena Elder Scrolls 35869 Armored Fist... 38582 Atari 2600 Action Pack 37039 Award Winning War Games 37199 Bottle Chess Compilation 37205 Bottle Cruiser 3000AD 36042 Bole Isle 2200 34650 Bantidroma 34422 Betrayal at Krondor 38854 Big 3 34638 BioForge Interactive Movie 38597 Blackbeard 38209 Blackthorne 35593 Blood Bowl 36939 Blown Away 37206 Bobbie Fischer Teaches Chess 38614 Braindeod 13 35948 Bureau 13 37517 Cadillacs & Dinosaurs 37200 Caesar's World of Gambling 34279 Cannon Fodder 36781 Casino Moster w/Kit 35442 Celebrity Poker 35420 ChessMaster 4000 Turbo 38011 Civilization Network 38568 Club Cyberlesque , 36016 Colonization. Sid Meier's.. 33497 Comanche & Mission Disk 1 37533 Commander Blood 33909 Companions of Xanth 34010 Complete Baseball '94 MPC 1.0 38673 Conquest of the New World 33658 Corridor 7.... 34659 Cowboy Casino 38483 Create Your Own Games 36884 Creature Shock 35100 Crime Patrol 35224 Crime Patrol 2 Drug Wors 35768 Cyberjudas 35736 Cyber Space 36477 Cyberia 37701 Cyberwar 36043 Cyclemanio 36279 Cyclones 38845 DIZone. 34973 D Day. Operation Overlord 33235 Doemonsgate 36302 Dark Forces 34163 Dark Legions. 38448 Darkride. 35738 Dawn Patrol 30880 Day of the Tentacle 36044 Deathgate. 36453 Delta V . 38831 Depth Dwellers 38675 Descent 36296 Desert Strike 36746 Discworld.... 36320 Doom It: Hell on Earth 36791 Doom I: Hintbook 38909 Dr. Brain I 31564 Dracula Unleashed... 37020 Dragon Lore: Chapter 1.. 31493 Dragon's Lair 35231 Dragon's Lair : Time Warp 38217 DreamWeb... 37702 Dungeon Master 2...... 36945 ESPN Baseball Tonight.. 35808 ESPN Let's Play Baseball 35809 ESPN: Let's Play Soccer 35812 ESPN: Let's Play Tennis 36749 Ecstatica 36525 Eight Ball Deluxe Pinball 35361 Empire Deluxe Masters Edition 31115 Eric the Unready 37985 Evasive Action Flight Sim MPC 4.0 31429 F-15 Strike Eaglo lll... 36731 FIFA International Soccer 38997 FX Fighter 347 40 Falcon Gold CD ENTERTAINMENT 35944 Family Feud 36293 Fantasy Fest 38617 Fantasy fiefdom 35769 Fighter Wing 34348 Five on 5 36918 Flash Traffic 35714 Fleet Defender: F.14 36591 Flight Commander 11 36699 Flight Shop 5.0... 36696 Flight Sim: Europe #1 5.0 37980 Flight Sim: Jupan Scenery 5.0 36092 Flight Sim Las Vegas 5.0 36094 Flight Sim: Portland 5.0. 36979 Flight Simulator 5.1. 36629 Flight Unlimited 38446 Flying Aces 35770 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki 35323 Freddy Pharkas 37328 Frontlines 35312 Front Page Sports Baseball 35315 Front Poge Sports Football 95 36392 Full Throttle... 35955 GT Cinema, Robe Tech Mocross 35962 GT Cinema Toxic Advenger 32784 Gabriel Knight 38196 Gadget 38104 Game Killer 37986 Game Pack III 34840 Gettysburg 37917 Go Digital 36551 Goblins IV . 36374 Grand Master Championship Chess 35618 Grandest Fleet..... 33701 Great Novolante il 38524 Grey Wolt: North Atlantic 31434 Gunship 2000 w/Scenario 34035 Hocker Chronicles .... 36463 Hacker Chronicles Il. 34149 Hand of Fate ... 38077 HardBalm: The Collection 36998 Hardball IV ... 35696 Harpoon Classic 21557 Harpoon Il 33905 Harvester 32458 Hell Cab 35946 Hell: A Cyberpunk Thriller 37695 Heretic 36246 High Seas Trader... 34421 Horde 37003 Ice Hockey 36549 Inca Ill . 35346 Incredible Machine 2 35350 Incredible Toons 31351 Indiana Fate of Atlantis 35721 Inferno CD ENTERTAINMENT 34759 Inherit the Earth... 37982 Inside the NCAA Basketball 33865 Iron Assault 31162 on Hello 37704 Ishor 3: 7 Gates of Infinity 37465 Isle of the Dead 38080 Jack Nicklaus: Golden Beat 36047 Jock Nicklaus Tout Collection 36328 Jagged Alliance 37895 Jommit 37204 Jet Fighter II 38800 Jewels of the Oracle 38730 Johnny Mnemonic 36297 Journeyman Project Turbol 36852 Kasparov's Gambit 34702 King's Quest Anthology 35326 King's Quest VII... 37202 Kingdom of the For Reaches 38231 Klik n' Play 35209 Knights of Xenfor .. 38965 Zone 32591 Labyrinth of Time 32526 lands of Lore 38913 lost Dynasty 33294 Lawnmower Man 36831 legend of Keyondial 35328 Leisure Suit Larry Anthology 36741 Lommings Chronicles 37754 Links 386 Pro 37707 il Divil 36459 Live Action Football 37291 toadstar 35322 Lode Runner 31348 Lord of the Rings 35711 lords of Midnight 37327 Lords of the Realm 35737 lost Eden . 38858 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 28012 Lost Treasures Infocom 38693 Lucas Arts X2 33703 MPEG-Dragon's loir 35363 MPEG. Psychotron 37939 MIV's Club Deod.. 38291 Meolus 38962 Machiavelli: The Prince MPC 35219 Mad Dog McCreell.. 35773 Moelstrom... 36853 Magic Carpet 37926 Magic: The Gathering 32595 Men Enough 34559 Munius Sports MPC 37567 Master of Mugic 38627 Mach Commander 34155 MechWarrior II .. 33310 Mego Race ... CALL 35 23 36 CALL 30 26 34 35 CALL 46 36 "


"\"The greatest goll game on the planet sungeon LAS VEGAS LITERATURE MOVIES Scary for Mikrol: Hight Simulator 5 $100 STOP JEOPARDY FLIGHT SIM: LAS VAGAS LINKS 386 PRO DUNGEON MASTER II BAO $200 $200 LINKS(386 $300 $30 $30 B22T 121Z Match wils with your friends or a computer opponent in the most realistic game version of the popular TV game show. Features video footage of host Alex Trebek IBM CD #34571 Photo-realistic scenery of Las Vegas and the surrounding area for Microsoft Flight Simulator 5. Features realistic 3D eleva tions of Las Vegas. Play championship golf at the famous Harbour Town Golf Links and Banff Spring Resort Course. The action includes simulated aerial fly-bys, digital & sound! IBM CD #37752 The Master of Dungeon games returns! Command a party of warriors through the most realistic role-playing world ever created! MAC CD #38664 IBM WIN #37702 IBM CD #36692 GOOD TO FIRN DARRI FORGES CYBERMAXX VR HEADGEAR HUDSON CITY DARK FORCES GOOD TO FIRM $33 Bring true visual reality home! Functions on myriad platforms, or as a l.v. substi tutel Includes high-fidelity stereo headphones, and twin LCDs. Player's Softwar The citizens of Hudson City need heroes like you to save them from the thieves, killers, and vicelords who are terrorizing the community IBM #38601 As a special agent for covert operations, you must save the galaxy from the Imperial Empire's grip. Infiltrate their Death Star battle station. IBM CD #36302 Starting with an empty stable and a million bucks, get set to make your mark in the racing world. As a trainer/stable owner you buy, train, and race your horses IBM CD #36790 HARDWARE #38163 CD ENTERTAINMENT 25 39 20 24 29 38 CD ENTERTAINMENT 35400 Warren Miller's Skiing Sofori. 32927 Wetlands 34573 Wild Blue Yonder 37085 Wild Blue Yonder 2 35874 Wing Commander Armode 36291 Wing Commander 1 / II Deluxe 34276 Wing Commander 36296 Wolf Wildlife Survival... 30408 Wolfpack 33088 World Circuit Grand Prix 38244 World Cup Golf Dorado Beach 37677 World Series Poker Adventure 37687 World Series of Poker Deluxe 33917 Wrath of the Gods... 38344 XCOM: Terror From the Deep 36940 X-Wing Collectors CD ROM 35439 Zephyr 37752 Zeppelin 35820 Zombie Dinos: Planet Zeltoid 38293 Zool2 36511 Zork Anthology 36366 Zorro 36754 Tornado 36292 Total Distortion 36697 Tower Controller 37565 Transport Tycoon 36685 Trivial Pursuit. 37538 U.S.S. Ticonderoga 36278 US Navy Fighters 27564 Ultimal. VI. 30925 Ultima Underworld I & .. 15416 Ultima Vill: Pagon w/ Speech 35712 Ultimate Football .. 37510 Ultimate Robot.... 32937 Under a Killing Moon 25500 Vegas Games Deluxe 33989 Videogame Solution 38592 Virtua Chess 38672 Virtual Pool 35816 Virtual Vogos Volume 1 38661 Virtuoso 37708 Vortex Guantum Gotell 36707 Voyeur 37910 Wanderlust 36701 Worcraft. Orcs and Humans 26 56 30 23 40 20 CD ENTERTAINMENT 38305 Metal Marines 34865 Metaltech Earth Siege 33532 Microcosm 31659 Microsoft Golf 34741 Mig 29 Gold.... 34796 Millennium Auction 37535 Mindscope 10 Pock 37536 Mindscape Sports Pack 36049 Mission Critical 95 34743 More Incredible Machine 38906 Mortal Kombot 38094 Ms. Meloverse.. 33204 Myst MPC... 35818 NASCAR Racing .. 37068 NFL's Greatest Plays 35863 NHL Hockey 95 ... 36755 National Lampoon Blind Date 35722 Noctropolis 36482 Novastorm 34317 Omar Sharif on Bridge Deluxe 2 36364 Operation Body Count 38593 Operation Crusader 38292 Operation Europe 38014 Orion Conspiracy 34173 Outpost 34864 Outpost Planet Pack 36280 PGA Tour Golf 486 38549 Poc In Time .. 37087 Pacific Air War: 1942 36481 Panzer General 36980 Peter Gabriel:Xplora! 34035 Phantasmagorio 36941 Phoenix Fighter 35005 Pinball Arcade 36773 Pitfall . 32791 Police Quest IV 38113 Poolmaster MPC 38628 Power Games Ill 35509 Prince \"Formerly Interactive 38299 Pro League Football 75th Anni 38874 Ps Master 35941 Quarantine 35332 Quest for Glory IV 36829 RELENTLESS: Twinsen's Adventure 34609 Raiden ...... 36385 Realms of Arkonia: Star Trail 32155 Rebel Assault.... 37024 Renegade: Jacob's Star 38969 Retribution... . 31705 Return to Zork 36917 Rise of the Robots 36937 Rise of the Triad. 38447 Rocket Boy 38.420 Rogarian Agonda 38123 Royal Flush CD ENTERTAINMENT 38865 SSN 21: Sea Wolf 35591 Sabre Team 32153 Som & Mox Hit the Road 30708 Scrabble Deluxe 28210 Secret Woupons Luftwaffe 28717 Secret of Monkey Island 38847 Secret of the Pyramids MPC 38864 Shadowcostur.. . 36934 Shadows of Cairn . 38583 Shanghai Great Moments 31518 SimAnt Enhanced 38160 SimCity 2000 Collection 31479 SimCity Enhanced 34086 SimEarth Enhanced 35753 SimFarm 36575 SimTown... 38627 Simon the Sorcerer 38732 Skulleracker 38988 Slam City 36960 Soccer Kid 37025 Sorority House 35225 Space Ace 35220 Space Pirates 34693 Spoce Quest Anthology 37287 Spaceship Warlock 34296 Spear of Destiny Super CD Pok 34608 Spectre VR. 33297 Spellcasting Party Pok 38129 Stalingrad 35724 Star Crusader 38208 Stur Reach 29366 Star Trek 25th Enhanced, 34021 Star Trek Collectibles Guide 34343 Star Trek DSN. The Hunt 37193 Star Trek: Judgment Rites 34278 Star Trek: Star Fleet Academy 34350 Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual 34568 Star Trek: TNG: A Final Unity 32547 Star Wars Chess 36893 Storekeep 37283 Street Fighet ll Compilation 36290 Strike Commander / Private 37090 Subwar 2050 Plus...... 34425 Superhero: league of Hoboken 35872 System Shock 33743 TFX:Tactical Fighter ... 37891 Toke Ten Pack 38456 Tank Commander 35018 Terminator: Rampage 33320 Tetris Gold Compilation.. 34916 Theme Park 38595 Third Reich 38876 Tony La Russa Baseball 3 38656 Top Gun 36496 Top Ten Pack.. 26 Complete on-line Catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express Internet-info@cexpress.com AOL Computer Express 30 CAL! 800-228-7449 NOW OPEN 24 HOURS ext.351 39 No surcharge is added to credit card orders. PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks accepted. Some items are not returnable. Returns require authorization and are subject to 15% restocking fee. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typographical errors Shipping and handling charges, please call for current offers. All prices are subject to change without notice. Intl. orders welcome 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 Info : 508-443-6125 Fax : 508-443-5645 Circle Reader Service #56 45 39 30 "


"WING COMMANDER IT 21 Jun COMPUTER KNIGHTS OF XENTAR WING COMMANDER III Since 1985 $53 Express 800-228-7449 Travel through the once peaceful land of Xentar, defending yourself from the legions of demons. Rest with seductive maidens before facing Demos. The stakes are high as you fend off the Kilrathi on all fronts! Command squadrons aboard the newly-christened TCS Victory NOW OPEN 24 HOURS ext.351 IBM CD #35209 IBM CD #34276 TROVANCED AAMULATOR SERIES O Ravenlofto EUROPEI, Scenery for Microsoft Might Simulator STONE PROPHET FURY THE PACIFICHE Arnah GREAT NAVAL BATTLES RAVENLOFT CRYSTAL CALIBURN FLIGHT SIM: EUROPE BAO che de 20 OPINBALL Crystal Caliburn $48 SEL TEL Get all the action and all the major American and Japanese ships and aircraft from Who's Pacific Theater, Create battles or modify existing ones. IBM #38602 Escape the dreaded realm of Har'Akir before the ancient mummy awakens and ends your stay himself! Features more puzzles than other AD&D computer game. IBM CD #34572 Pinball with an attitude! Features expert flipper control, spectacular sounds and authentic speech. Play multiball, or aim for the 3D ramps. MAC CD #33084 IBM #36303 Stunning scenery for Microsoft Flight Simulator 5. Explore Austria, Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands from the cockpit of your own aircraft IBM CD #36696 89 89 799 32 25 KIDS/FAMILY/HOME 35923 After Dark 3.0 WIN. ...30 38270 BOB CD 36627 Cartoon History of Universe CD .... ....30 33036 Creative Writer WIN... 33549 Design Your Own landscape WIN.. 36855 Encarta MPC Encyclopedia '95 CD .. 35749 Gift Maker WIN 35615 Lion King Print Studio WIN. 35281 MS DOS Upgrade 6.22. 37662 Managing Your Money 95 2.0 WIN 33528 Mayo Clinic Family Health CD 33 34986 Mayo Clinic Phormosis CD 33 37123 Metamorf 3-D 37156 Monty Python's Complete Woste CD 38207 NetCruiser Plus... JOYSTICKS/MICE 37035 Aero Mouse 37034 Aero Pen. 37036 AeroDuol 3D (Mouse and Pen 38163 Cyber Moxx VR Headgear Display .. 32883 Cyberman 3D Controller 29442 FX2000 Pistol Grip 33226 Flight Stand ......... 16439 Flight Stick ..... 31417 Flight Stick Pro IBM 27914 Flight Stick Pro MAC 31148 G Force Flight Yoke ... 37753 Game Zapper 24017 GameCard Ill Automatic 24018 GameCard Ill MCA Automatic 38124 Game Gun 35 42 26 .17 ...51 33 55 35 35 26 26 39 14 369 118 166 36 ! HAR CFAX:001-1 508-443-5645. Xu, CompuServeID: 7XX7.153\" HE U Fac illet, 4630NS ME L MACINTOSH TITLES 33603 11th Hour CD 31472 7th Guest CD 36011 Absolute Zero CD 38968 Alice CD 33864 Alone in the Dark 36912 Arc of Doom CD 36789 Cosino Master w/Kit CD 29214 Civilization 38569 Club Cyberlesque CD 33084 Crystal Culiburn. 33702 Dragon's Lair CD... 37227 Dungeon Master 2.. 33534 Empire Deluxe ..... 36590 Flight Commander !! 38210 Gadget CD 38522 Go Digital Volume ICD 35698 Harpoon Classic CD ... 25497 Harpoon ll . .. 35351 Incredible Toons ... 38731 Johnny Mnemonic CD 36298 Journeyman Project Turbo CD 37022 King's Quest VII CD 38966 L Zone CD... 33353 lawnmower Mon CD 33398 leisure Suit Larry VI 35257 Links Pro w/ Horbortown Cou 35321 Lode Runner 2015 Marathon 38570 Ms. Metoverse CD.... 32296 Myst CD 36756 National Lampoon Blind Date CD 38594 Operation Crusader 33824 PGA Tour Golf .. 35331 Phantasmagoria CD 34174 Police Quest IV 35135 Prince of Persia II 38110 Quantum Gate CD 34863 Quest for Glory IV 34581 Rebel Assault CD. 36935 Shadows of Coin CD.. 32616 SimCity 2000. 38294 SimCity 2000 Urben Renewal Kit 35754 Sim Tower 35755 SimTown CD ... 22090 Solitaire Antics ... 36484 Stalingrad. 36830 Stor Trek: 25th Enhanced CD 34351 Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual CD 38875 Super Wing Commander CD 35159 TocOps. 33912 U-Boot .. . 38174 Virtual Vegas Volume 1 CD 38480 Wanderlust CD 3B234 Warlords 37192 Wolfenstein 3-D .. JOYSTICKS/MICE 35104 Thrustmaster F-16 FICS 33779 Thrustmaster FCS MK MAC 38027 Thrustmaster FCS MKH IBM 33344 Thrustmaster Formula 11 29522 Thrustmaster Pro FCS 29863 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals IBM 33804 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals MAC 38156 Thrustmaster TQS for FICS 31258 Thrustmaster WCS Markli 38462 Virtual Pilot Pro 29434 Virtual Pilot Yoke... 36656 Wingman Extreme Joystick 36655 Wingman Joystick SOUND CARDS 37755 Aztech Sound Galaxy XIII. 33277 Aztech WaveRider 32 Wavelable 30823 Daytona PCMCIA Sound Card 16bit.. 28247 Gravis Ultrasound ..... 26292 Gravis Ultrasound Max 33725 Gravis UltraSound Midi Adapter 33240 Maui Wavetable Synth. Upgrade 36498 Monte Carlo Game Card 34189 Multisound Monterey 16 bit... 36771 Multisound Tohin 16 bit 31059 PortAble Sound Plus 32312 ReolMagic Multimedia Playback 38352 Reelmagic SCSI MPEG w/ Zork . 35366 Rio Soundcard 32031 Roland RAP 10 Audio Producer 35481 Roland SCPC Sound Modulo 36878 Roland SC 55MKII Sound Canvas 28019 Roland SCC1B GS SoundCard 35480 Roland SCD 10 DB Sound Canvas 35628 Roland SCD15 D Sound Convos.. 32530 Sound Blaster 16 MCD 32533 Sound Blaster 16 MCU ASP 32531 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2 32532 Sound Blaster 16 SCS2 ASP 34807 Sound Blaster 16 Value Edition 21735 Sound Blaster AWE32 37033 Sound Blaster AWE32 Lite 37027 Sound Blaster AWE32 Volue Ed. 34661 Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed 34660 Sound Blastor Value Edition 33751 Sound Mon Wove... 36587 Tropez 16bit Sound Card 36883 Video Blaster FS200 16 Bil 36580 Video Blaster R1300 16 Bit. 30931 Wave Blaster Daughter Board ........ 338 249 373 423 131 235 575 269 138 172 26 172 275 172 226 20 25 36828 Oregon Trail ICD 36968 Page Master CD .... 36538 People vs. OJ Simpson CD.. 34999 Piano Course I w/ Midi Cable 36030 Print Shop Deluxe WIN 31527 Publisher 2.0 WIN 36842 Quicken Deluxe 4.0 WIN.. 32960 SAT NEW Personal Trainer 2.0 ... 36803 Sports Ill Swimsuit CD 38678 Stacker Multimedia 4.0 WINDOWS 37887 Star Trek:TNG Screen Saver WIN 34170 Star Wars Screen Saver WINDOWS 36875 Virtual Guitar ... 21493 WinFax Pro 4.0 WINDOWS... 35647 Windows 95 4.0 35648 Windows 95 Upgrade 40 34081 Windows Upgrade 3.11... 33855 Gomeport 2000 Up to 8OMHz . 33292 Genovation Parallel Game Port 29404 Gravis Analog Pro Joystick... 38087 Gravis Combat Pack Pro 28366 Gravis Eliminator Card 27815 Gravis Gamepad 18M.. 32174 Gravis Gamepad MAC 30003 Gravis MouseStick II MAC 38108 Gravis NHL Hockuy '95 Pack 35133 Gravis Phoenix Control System 36886 Joyswitch 36562 Natural Keyboard. 35458 PC Golf System 35133 Phoenix Flight & Weapons Ctrl... 36876 Pro Pedals. 36970 Step On It Keyboard Pedals... 30825 Thrustmaster ACM Game Card... 92 208 38 42 35 .89 304 338 149 101 26 39 35 "


"DISCWORLD RENEGADE RISE OF THE TRIAD JAGGED ALLIANCE RISE OFTRIAD DARK WAR $42 MULE Help Rincewind, the bumbling wizard, in his quest to rid dragons from the magical lands of Discworld. Travel through an imaginative world of fantasy and timeSERI Get ready for the most intense space dogfight of your life! You're in command of a squadron of Renegade fighters in this allout war against the Terron Overlord. IBM CD #37024 A mind-blowing 3D mega-gamel Battle the evil Triad and destroy the transmitter to save Los Angeles from destruction, Features amazing first-person 3D action! IBM CD #36937 Role-playing at its best! 60 merce naries...60 voices...4,000+ lines of dialogue add to the drama as you attempt to foil the enemy. IBM CD #36388 IBM CD #36746 Doug Wans SIM TOWER HARDBA STAR TREK: A FINAL UNITY DRUG WARS HARDBALL 4 SIM TOWER S727 NEW! $55  XT GEERATION \"A Final Unity\" A Star Trek experience like none before! Assume command of this official inspec. tion tour and investigate the Starship Enterprise NCC-1701.D. From small town traffickers to organized cartels to international drug runners, you'll be involved with every aspect of the war against drugs IBM CD #35224 Batter up! Manage and play baseball with 700 real players in 28 realistic ballparks. Famed Sportscaster Al Michaels delivers the play-by-play. IBM CD #36998 Build a high-rise skyscraper, rent out space, satisfy your tenants and customers needs, and manage your property into a profitable commercial empire. MAC CD #35754 IBM CD #37593 IBM CD #34568 MONITORS 50 106 HARD DRIVES 38558 Lightning 365MB 11 MS IDE 191 38559 Lightning 365MB 1 IMS SCSI-MAC . 194 38970 ST3391 A INT 341MB Hard Disk 37823 ST5660A INT 545MB Hard Disk ........293 MEMORY/CPU UPGRADES 379 700 1096 304 297 .161 142 226 144 177 SPEAKERS 28122 ACS300 1 Speakers w/Subwoofer...233 36505 Jazz 1351 Speckers . 36504 Jazz)511 Speakers 36500 Jazz-590 Speckurs. 36501 Jazz 1702 Speckers 36503 Jerz) 818 Speakers 133 30730 Koss HD 6 MPC Speckers 36173 Kos HD-SO Speckers 32220 Lables CS 900 Speakers ... 32228 Labtec CS-1000 Speckers 48 30475 Partner 570 Speakers 246 30474 Partner 622 Speakers w/ Subwoofer 37714 Powered Subwoofer YSTMSW10 32101 Roland MA12CP Powerd Speckers 38308 Vivid 3D 37712 Vand3D Plus 38455 Vivid3D Pro... 450 1066 267 CALL VIDEO CARDS 28570 Boca Super VGA 36035 Boca VL-Bus SuperX 1MB Accel. 36036 Boca VL Bus SuperX 2MB Accel. 38290 Diamond Speedstar Game Kit ISA 38599 Diamond Speedstar Game Kit PCI 38598 Diamond Speedstar Game Kit VB 38288 Diamond Stealth Game Kit PCI 38133 Diamond Stealth 64 DRAM 2MB VIB 35691 Diamond Stealth 64 VRAM AMB PCI 29258 Graphics Ultra Pro EISA 2MB 29259 Graphics Ultra Pro ISA 2MB 29260 Graphics Ultra Pro MCA 2MB 36470 Graphics Ultra Pro PCI 2MB 31847 Graphics Ultra Pro VLB 2MB 37157 Graphics Xpression IMBISA 37182 Graphics Xpression 2MB ISA 38319 Graphics Xpression 213 VIB 38286 Kelvin MPEG SVGA IMB VLE 38287 Kelvin MPEG SVGA 2MB VLB 34615 Roy Magic Lite .... 201 473 303 32220 746 CALL CALL 570 Selets 35553 Alphascan 15 15' Monitor 35554 Alphascan 178 17' Monitor 35555 Alphascan LC 20\" Monitor 35552 Alphascon Plus 14\" Monitor 38152 Diamond Pro 14\" Monitor 38151 Diamond Pro 15FS 15' Monitor 38153 Diamond Pro 17\" Monitor 37863 H14860 14\" SVGA Color Monitor 37864 H15860 159 SVGA Color Monitor 37806 H17682 17\" SVGA Color Monitor 37861 HN4838P 14 SVGA Color Monitor 38390 MultiSync 2V 14\" Monitor ..... 32895 MultiSync 3FGE 15' Monitor .. MultiSync 3EGYES XP15 38366 MultiSync lens: XE15 or XP15.. 38387 MultiSync lens: XE 17 or XP17 38070 MultiSync XE15 15' Monitor ... 38072 MultiSync XP15 15 Monitor 35059 SyncMaster 14GL 14 28MM 35060 SyncMaster 15GL 15' 28MM 34223 SyncMaster 2E 14\" SVGA 39MM . 34222 SyncMaster 3E 14 SVGA 28MM 272 303 190 137 168 .224 331 604 272 272 153 213 213 319 CALI CALL ..91 36147 1X3 Simms Ons 14 Simma) 36136 1X9 Simms 70ns (4 Simms) 36149 4X9 Simms 70ms (4 Simma) 36176 72 Pin&MB Module 6Ons 36177 72 PinBMB Module 6 Ons 36555 72 Pin 16MB Module 6 Ons.. 36559 72 Pin 64MB Module 6 Ons 33620 Cyrix CX486DRX225/50 386DX25 31738 Cyrix CX486DRX233/66 386DX-33 34409 Cyrix CX486SRX225/50 386SX-25 35134 Overdrive 486DX 50 CPU 30884 Overdrive 4B6DX 50 CPU WO/OD 3150S Overdrive 486DX-66 CPU WO/OD 36727 Overdrive 4B6DX4,100 CPU 36728 Overdrive 486DX 4.100 CPU WO/OD 36725 Overdrive 486DX4.75 CPU 36726 Overdrive 4B6DX475 CPU WO/OD 38604 Overdrive PENT-63 379 699 318 .408 231 ...235 367 290 CALI CALI CALI CAL CALL CALL CALL CALL CALL 469 . Complete on-line Catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express Internet-info@cexpress.com AOL. Computer Express CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS 37007 3DO Blaster 35855 4PLEX Quad-speed INT w/Controler.. 36277 Aztech Explorer Deluxe EXT.. 355 38049 Aztech Galaxy Gome 2X MM Kit... 355 38051 Aztech Stellar Double MM Kit 196 35734 Aztech Voyager INT MultiMedia Kit.. 256 38048 Aztech Wave Rider 32 MM Kit 38050 Aztech Zota Starter MM Kit 125 38141 Diamond 1000 INT 250Ms CD ROM 355 38142 Diamond 4000 INT 250Ms CD ROM 438 37031 Digital Schoolhouse INT CDROM 277 30216 Discovery CD16 INT CDROM.. 261 37030 Edutainment CD16 EXT CDROM 534 307 46 Edutainment CD16 INT CDROM.. 424 21560 Game Blaster CD 16 36826 legend INT Kit w/6 Titles. 238 36267 Legend Internal Mult, Kit 320ms.. 302 38062 MultiSpin 2VI INT CDROM 179 38063 MultiSpin 3XP Plus EXT Kit 479 34923 MulNSpin 4XE EXT CDROM 503 38058 MultiSpin 4XI INT CDROM 38065 MultiSpin 4XI INT CDROM Kit 37028 Multimedia Office INT CD-ROM 534 35597 OmniCD 3X INT CDROM 267 37026 OmniCD 4X 415 31809 OmniCD Upgrade Kit Internal 181 34133 Reelmagic CD ROM Kit 646 38071 TEAC CD SSA INT CDROM Kit 350 38737 Toshiba EXT QuadSpeed Kit.. 675 38710 Toshiba INT QuadSpeed Kit 574 MODEMS/FAXES 31921 ACE 14.4 INT S/R Fax W/Voice 189 38281 Cardinal MVP144CC PCMCIA F/M.. 38276 Cardinal MVP144E 14.4EXT F/M 38277 Cardinal MVP1441F 14.4INT F/M . 38275 Cardinal MVP144WIN 19 2INTF/M 38279 Cardinal MVP288CC PCMCIA F/M.. 238 38278 Cardinol MVP2881 28.BINTF/M . 161 38280 Cardinal MVP288XF 28.BEXT F/M.. .178 37974 Connection Pro 19.2INT 14.dfox 90 37601 Courier DS 14.4 PCMCIA F/M 355 37602 Coutier DS 28.8 PCMCIA F/M 409 36433 Courier V 34 EXT 28.8 S/R Fax/Modem..433 36434 Courier V34 INT 28.8 S/R Fax/Modem 398 31908 Practical PM144HCHI INT Fax/Modem....89 31896 Practical PMI 4AMTII EXT Fox/Modem . 107 36266 Scout 28.8 VFCI VFost Fox/Modem......129 27993 Sportster 144 EXT Fax/Modem. 29176 Sportster 14.4 EXT MAC&FAX... 28367 Sportster 14 4 INT Fox/Modem 98 37599 Sportster 14.4 PCMCIA F/M.. 184 37600 Sportster 28.8 PCMCIA F/M . 355 37453 Sportster 28.8 V 34 EXT Fox/Modem 247 37455 Sportster 28.8 V 34 EXT MAC&FAX 260 37454 Sportster 28.8 V 34 INT Fox/Modem ... 230 31139 SuproComCord 144PCMCIA w/Fox 232 34802 SupraExpress 14.41 INT fox/Modem ... ..78 32317 SuprofoxModem 14.4 EXT MACINTOSH..178 26938 Suprofox Modem 14.4 EXT V.32815 178 32314 SuprofoxModem 14.4 INT V.32515 110 38528 SuprofoxModem 28.8 v.34EXT 206 38527 SuprofoxModem 28.8 .34EXT MAC.... .216 38529 SupraFox Modem 28.8 v.34INI .........182 800-228-7449 NOW OPEN 24 HOURS ext.351 402 No surcharge is added to credit card orders. PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks accepted. Some items are not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% restocking fee. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typographical errors. Shipping and handling charges, please call for current offers. All prices are subject to change without notice. Intl. orders welcome 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 Info : 508-443-6125 Fax : 508-443-5645 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"REVIEW The CyClones Of Doom It Takes A Cyborg To Kill A Cyborg In The DOOM-like CYCLONES by Mark Clarkson HIS MONTH'S \"HONESTY IN ADVERis not a slave to your movement, a la left hand while aiming and firing at a TISING\" AWARD GOES TO RAVEN DOOM. Rather, you must use your mouse moving target with your right. SOFTWARE AND SSI. THEIR MOST to aim and fire your weapons with one There's the usual assortment of recent release, a first person hand, while you use the numeric keypad weapons with which to perform radical apshooter, is called CYCLONES, and it to move, run, jump and set off explosive pendectomies: spiked fist, photon chainis indeed a clone-one of the many sires charges with the other. It's not as hard as gun, grenade launcher, etc., all selected of the reigning action game king, Doom. it sounds, and quickly becomes natural. with the number keys. But CYCLONES adds The set up to CYCLONES has a familiar Nor will you pick up items such as a few actions to your standard shooter ring: Evil aliens have ammo by repertoire. In addition to moving forward CYCLONES been studying our plansimply runand back and turning left and right, you et for decades. Six Price: $59.95 ning over can look up and down, and you can jump months ago, they atFloppy & CDthem; you've over, onto and off of things. tacked without warning, ROM got to click As half-man, half-machine, you're System Entire cities were devasRequirements: on them with equipped with a nifty Heads Up Display tated, and people were IBM compatible the mouse to which gives you your current heading, altikilled by the hundreds 486-33MHz or add them to tude, weapons, damage and health status. of thousands. Conven better (66MHz your inventoI found the heading information especialtional weapons had litrecommended) ry. To use ly helpful in getting around large levels. tle effect upon the alien 4 MB RAM, VGA items from graphics, 6 MB hard drive space, CD-ROM; armies of cyberneticallyyour inventoINSERT MODULE supports most major sound cards. enhanced clones (CyProtection: None ry-to boost A IN CONSOLE B Clones). The Developers: Raven Software your armor Whereas DOOM's own creators charactergovernments of Earth Publisher: SSI or activate a ize the essence of DOOM's gameplay as a proved unable to cope Sunnyvale, CA communicaslick WHACK-A-MOLE, CYCLONE's designwith the alien menace. (408) 737-6800 tions console, ers have tried to imbue it with a little Luckily, the scientists for exammore in the way of mental challenge. In of the lunatic fringe, working in a secret ple-you must select them again with addition to needing keys to unlock doors, laboratory in Wisconsin (I just report 'em, the mouse. you'll need power packs, communications I don't make 'em up) have developed a CYCLONES' mouse movement interface modules and other electronic goodies, special weapon to be used in the event of is one of the better I've seen in the firstwhich you then use with various control just such an alien invasion. That weapon person action arena. Even so, some panels throughout the game. On one levis you: the HAVOC unit. Half-man, halfmovements-jumping and running at el, you must restore an alien spaceship to machine, designed to go places and face the same time, for example-are imposfunctionality. To get into the control oes that would crush platoons of mere sible or nearly so using the mouse alone. room, you'll first have to restore power to mortals, you are humanity's last hope. Then again, there are some combinathe engines. Before you can do that, you'll Your mission: kill, kill. kill. tions that are nearly impossible even us. have to locate secret areas where you'll ing the keyboard. The <Shift> key lets find the keys to the storerooms. In the AIM AND FIRE you run, but I defy you to simultaneously storerooms are power modules for the The first thing you notice about CYCLONES hold down the <Shift> key and the <9> ship's engines. By \"plugging in the powis the targeting reticle. Weapon targeting key on your numeric keypad with your er modules, you power up the ship's en106 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"\"THIS is cool\" -Computer Gaming World 50 incredible levels to lay a path of destruction through 5/5 Rating Computer Gaming World—February 1995 94% Rating, Golden Triad Award Winner Computer Game Review—February 1995 Winner—1994 Best Breakthrough Game Electronic Entertainment-March 1995 Best Software Developer: Bullfrog Computer Player—January 1995 «The graphics are stunning, the sounds are amazing, the play is fast and furious.\" PC Gamer-February 1995 XDOLID 24 powerful spells like volcanos and lightning storms DATA DISK Magret COMING SOON! Hidden Worlds 8-player network compatible DATA DISK 25 Intense New Levels EVELDEUTE MaG RI PRODUCTIONS LTD Stunning 3D fractal landscapes that morphin real time ELECTRONIC ARTS ANIMATED VIOLENCE Magic Carpet, Bullfrog and the Bullfrog logo are trademarks of Bullfrog Productions. Lid. Electronic Arts and the Electronic Arts logo are trademarks of Electronic Arts Circle Reader Service #334 "


"gines, which in turn allows you to open from the Justice League of America: plug some speakers into your CD's headthe door to the control room, and so on. over-muscled dudes clad in bright red, phone jack. And of course all the time you are being blue and green uniforms, hurling balls of attacked by robots, laser towers and alien green fire. All that's missing is a snazzy THE DOWNCYED soldiers. This ain't KING'S QUEST, after all. logo on their chests. CYCLONES is not without its annoying CYCLONES provides some new twists in The monsters are sometimes crafty, shortcomings. There is no head-to-head movement as well. There are catwalks sometimes amazingly stupid. They'll mode, fast becoming de rigueur in today's and raised platforms that you can walk computer gameson or under. And how about holowalls? especially first-perThese holographic projections look like son shooters. And regular walls but they aren't really there; those who prefer they're illusions and you can walk right joystick control to through them. the mouse are out of luck. CADDY MAP On the CDCYCLONES' three-dimensional automap ROM version, each looks like the output of a cheesy mission is precedCAD/CAM program with floors, walls, ed by a live video ceilings, and doors displayed in garish briefing which concolors. You can turn each of these objects tains some of the on and off; in fact, you have to in order 1031 worst acting and to see inside rooms and corridors. With production quality the walls displayed you often can't see POINT AND SHOOT Blasting away the critters is a little easier in CYCLONES this side of a skin into the room in which you're standing; than in other first-person action games since you can aim your weapon all flick; I'm convinced with the walls turned off, you can't tell around the screen. at least one of the where one room actors was soused ends and another at the time. I would have greatly prebegins. You can ferred a simple text screen. Then each zoom in and out briefing ends by teasing you with a nice and rotate the map 2D, top-down floor plan of the level around its vertical you're about to attack. I would have loved axis, but you can't a copy of this map to actually use during turn it so that you the game. are looking down So where does CYCLONES stand in the on the level. Ultifield of DOOM-clone competitors? Squaremately, I would ly in the middle. It makes a few nice adhave preferred a ditions to the genre in the targeting plain old 2D, topmode, more challenging puzzles,\" and down map. 7 000 interesting graphics, but it also fails to One neat feadeliver the elements that we've come to ture of CYCLONES' SLUG THAT THUG As in Doom, when you're down to fighting with your hands, expect from these games-multiplayer automap is the tacyou're in deep trouble. To the left is your inventory and map buttons. games, a convincingly threatening envitical display, a litArmor level, health and amount of ammo in your weapon are at right. ronment, and a map mode that you can tle monochrome actually use. For the quest to save this monitor in one corner of the screen. By fire at you without realizing that they're world, only those most dedicated to the moving the mouse around the map, you hitting the corner of the wall, and will cause of first-person action need apply. can place your viewpoint inside any in fact sometimes shoot at you when area you've visited and see what the you're in a completely different room; THE EDITORS SPEAK character would see if he was standing you can hear their cries and the sounds in that spot. If you forget what that big of the fireballs smacking into the other CYCLONES room at the top of the map is, simply side of the wall. RATING click there and look at the monitor. In what's becoming a popular trend, (\"Oh yeah, that's the cafeteria.\") In the CYCLONES includes a digitally recorded PROS Independent weapon target\"is that a bug or a leature?\" departsoundtrack on the CD-ROM. This cer ing is a fresh twist, and the world is a ment: the map shows all the doors on a tainly provides a higher quality of music tad more interesting than most DOOM level, even the \"secret\" ones. than the FM synthesizer on board your clones. The monsters in CYCLONES range from average SOUND BLASTER clone, but those CONS The creatures aren't half as the ferocious four-legged \"pit bulls\" to without a direct CD-ROM/sound card terrifying as Doom's, there's no multithe eponymous CyClones and ultimately hookup won't hear it. That is, if you can't player game, and the map mode is an to the evil alien overlord himself. For the play music CDs through your sound card, experiment that fails miserably. most part, these guys look like rejects you won't hear the soundtrack unless you RATING 108 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"morum First there was DOOM. Now comes HERETIC! From the Publisher of DOOM ! A SWORD & SORCERY BATTLEFEST SO AWESOME, IT'S UNBELIEVABLE! [rom the publisher FEATURES of the shareware Supports up to 4 megahit DOOM players via network, comes a virtual 2 by modem world of medieval Cooperate with your buddies or massacre fantasy. The them in a bloody advanced 3-D deathmatch! graphics are so State-of-the-art real and everything 3-D, 360° smooth moves with such scrolling in real smoothness time for the fastest, you are there! deadliest combat! In HERETIC, Walk, run, fly! you'll cast Look all around, even u nd down!! eldritch spells Choose from 7 from the Tomes weapons and a of Power. host of magical Wield fantastic artifacts to cast weapons such mystical spells. as the Firemace Order HERETIC and Hellstaff. today and become All to destroy a believer: the undead 1-800-OD GAMES and bestial ($40 plus $5 S&H) horrors that On CD-ROM or 3.5\" disks for your slaughtered IBM PC/ Compatible, your race. By the spirits of your Elders, the Heretic must have his vengeance! SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #74 CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY SOFTWARE RSAC ADVISORY VIOLENCE Blood Heretic and Raven are trademarks of Raven Sollware, Inc. ODOM and id are trademarks olid Sollware Ine. 1994 id Software, Inc. All vidhts reserved "


"REVIEW Commander, Jr. Gremlin Interactive Takes A Shot At Space Combat With RETRIBUTION by Martin E. Cirulis THEN I FIRST SAW THE ADVERcolonizing and terra-forming everywhere story and action are indeed aspects of the TISEMENT FOR GREMLIN INwe could put a spaceship down. game, they both exist in quantities just TERACTIVE'S RETRIBUTION, Of course, we should have known there sufficient to force one to mention them. what I first noticed (other was going to be a price some time, and You basically wander through three than noting how much pride when we finally discover the truth, rooms of a space-station talking to your the designers seem to have in their ability through a fluke mishap in the Alien-Spyprissy flight controller, who boils down to define common English words) was the Delivery-System, that price turns out to be what the Commander is going on and on reference to killer aliens called Krellans. higher than your VISA bill after a weekabout; then you see your drop-ship engiAt first I thought these were our old end of playing AIRWARRIOR. The real skinneer, who sometimes gives you useful friends from the mostly defunct ny on the alien beneficence is that they are tactical advice in between testosterone-inSTARFLEET/STAR LE planning to use spired put-downs. Once you suffer GIONS line of games RETRIBUTION us as self-tending through this, you hop into your ship, go and a franchise res Price: $39.95, RETRIBUTION cattle for their vokick some butt, and then either go back urrection was at CD-ROM racious appetites, to the dropship for some quick talking hand. My disapSystem and they have heads over the vid-com or, if you successRequirements: pointment was keen IBM spread us out fully complete a \"campaign\" (the equivawhen I finally compatible across the galaxy lent of cleaning out a Star System in opened the colorful 386DX-40MHz to make us both WINGCOMMANDER), you return to the box to discover or better (486more plentiful space-station for more of the same upthese particular evil 33MHz and more vulnerclose and personal. aliens were neither recommended) able....not to There is no character-driven storyline 4 MB RAM (8 green nor particumention closer to here; all conversations are basically war MB recommended), VGA graphics, CDlarly amusing. What ROM; supports AdLib, Roland, Sound Krellan fast food updates and mission assignments, nothI did find was a Blaster and General MIDI compatible outlets. ing that couldn't be taken care of with British import in the sound cards. Since devious memos. And it is not exactly PBS level ditradition of the Protection: None alien jamming alogue either-your Commander can WING COMMANDER Developers: Gremlin Astro Productions techniques keep give you the «I hate sending you on a series, but with none Publisher: US Gold your station isomission no man could survive...\" speech San Francisco, CA of the style or tech(415) 693-0297 lated, it falls to on your way out the hatch, but if you renical skill that North you and your turn unsuccessful, he will still basically Americans have come to expect from short supply of fighting craft to both call you the biggest loser to ever don a their space combat sims. pummel the Krellans into submission spacesuit. Saving humanity is a tough gig and run interference while other ships without much affirmation these days. \"NEXT STOP, evacuate the human colonists, before The actual missions show the same DERIVATIVE CITY!\" they find themselves starring in an Unkind of limited imagination. For the most In a plot that roughly comes down to happy Meal. Oh yes, and if you have a part, campaigns will involve several misWING COMMANDER meets the Twilight moment, you might want to break sions against a single installation, and Zone's \"To Serve Man,\" you find yourself through the jamming and warn the rest you must never exceed your mandateaboard a human space station with a terriof humanity. the space corps seems to hate overble secret. It seems that when humanity Good thing the Krellans were nice achievers. Instead of one mission to was just at the brink of self-destruction enough to let us develop weapons that destroy the guard units, defenses, incomthrough warfare and eco-stupidity (Oh, could blow the heck out of them. ing transports and the base itself, the job you remember the bad ol' 1990s!), a has been divided for some kind of papergroup of insect-like aliens calling themCOMBAT CAKEWALK work reasons into separate tasks. First selves Krellans popped in to borrow some RETRIBUTION is technically a space combat you take out the guard units and return, sugar and incidentally solve all of our sim built around a very slight plotline in then you go out again and destroy the problems and bring us into a new golden the tradition of the COMMANDER series. I defenses, then back for a new mission to age. With their help we raced into space, use the word \"technically\" because, while destroy the transports...and so on, and so 110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"nations Amazing Animation Flighos 6 Scores Jurbo Boosters 1 ster's Elner's Deranged Kickboxing Cannibals SSS Bunnies Warriors Sounds Road Warrior Frolicki Magie Polio / Coor 40cis alverses VODNI Diverses Paralle pols Ssfuroj]04 Pits Uiens sayOUDT 005 paydon Our new game is all in your head. You're playing the most amazing game ever genres like arcade and strategy-even racing simulators. created. You're moving unheard-of characters Or start from scratch. Now point, click, and customizethrough your living room. You're riveted to the it's that easy. With hundreds of backgrounds, anima3-D graphics and rocking to the Heads up! tions, sound effects and characKlik & Play Demo! booming sound. There's just one thing: On CompuServe: go | ters, the possibilities are mind \"gambpub\" & select Maxis. This new game is all in your head. On AOL: enter keyword boggling. And because your creations \"Maxis! But spare the aspirin: There's a revolutionary work as stand-alone games, you can give new program that turns your head games into real them out to friends-and watch their heads spin. games. It's called Klik & Play. Start So open your mind to Klik & Play. And see what a with a set of ready-made games in heady experience making your own games can be. The Revolutionary Instant Game Creator. MAXIS Available for Windows and Windows CDO 1994 Furopress Software and Francois Lionet/Yves Lamourex. All rights reserved. Klik & Play is a trademark of Europress Software Maxis is a registered trademark of Sim Business For product, ordering or demo information, contact your local retailer or call 1-800-33-MAXIS. Circle Reader Service #371 "


"HP CiP  20  HO 5POMI SET INTE JERA TURSCHE ECT In cxo.al SRO GHFC DESTRUCTION AT 10 FEET in your many missions, you'll have to destroy ground targets as well as enemy air ships. Alas, you can't fly very high, and complicated maneuvers are out of the question. TANKS FOR NOTHING The view from the tank differs little from the fighter cockpit view. Likewise, the differences between the two are minimal, and they even carry the same weapons. on, until you finish what you could have perspective, this game has more in comdone all at once. But woe betide any pilot mon with ZAXXON than X-WING. Combat foolish enough to pick his own target! deep in darkest space is not to be your fate Killing out of order is as bad as failure in in RETRIBUTION; instead, your fighter misthe eyes of your retentive Commander. sions are completely in the realm of Of course, all this might be forgivable if ground attack, so much so that you cannot the combat was really all-out, laser-spitting, do anything other than rising and falling. shield-burning action. Guess what? It isn't. Your maneuvers are completely two-diNow we get to the part where I explain mensional; no loops or split-S's in this uniwhy this game is only \"technically\" a spaceverse. Enemy fighters function under the sim, because other than the fact that you same restriction, so dogfights resemble get into a vehicle and fight from a cockpit something out of CAR WARS instead of an aerial duel to the death. The game tries to cut a little new ground by introducing the need to fight some missions in a tank instead of a fighter, but all this really does is bring out the weakness of the game as you think, \"Gee, flying is just like driving a tank except the ride is smoother.\" Virtual Reality Real Reality 080 A PRIMER FOR REAL SIMS I realize that a lot of European software comes from that strange alternate dimension where BATMAN RETURNS can be the best selling computer game, and our usual standards do not apply....but RETRIBUTION is still a pretty rough pill to swallow, The graphics are from two or three years back, and the gameplay is just a step above video game status. This game might be suitable for a young gamer, someone you might want to introduce to goal-orientated games instead of the usual kill-everything-thatmoves kind, but anybody above 12 or so will probably be calling you after a couple of hours to see if you still have the receipt. As much as I'd like to say otherwise, it seems that the only real \"retribution\" here will be against anyone foolish enough to purchase a game on the strength of nice box art. = DS Virtual Vanessa is computer generated Girlfriend Maria is the real thing Virtual Dialog Real Dialog How most computer games want you How real people (and Girlfriends) talk: to talk Mouse clicking: D: Hello Maria! How are you? M: Great, Dave! How are you today? Hey Baby! What's your sign? D: I'm really depressed. M: I'm sorry to hear that. Why? Do you come here often? D: Harold is such a jerk. M: I'm sorry your boss is a jerk. What Don't I know you? can I do to make you feel better? D: You could kiss me. M: I just love kissing. Mmmm! Aren't you a famous model? D: I feel better already! Now, let's... When you're ready to experience something better than goofy virtual reality, just let us know. (800)324-AIVR 4 Girlfriend artificial intelligence games on disk or CD-ROM to pick from, rated G thru Adult. Step up from animations get the real thing! 709 Lingeo #106, Depi CG502, Richardson, TX 75087 USA (274)235-4999 THE EDITORS SPEAK RETRIBUTION RATING PROS Simple arcade action may appeal to the rookie star pilot in the house. CONS Not even close to the game it tries to be. HiVR 112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 Circle Reader Service #42 "


"Get Your Piece of the APOGES the world leader in action gaming ! From SACTION ENTERTAINMENT Adrenaline Pumping PC Games! * Six white-hot action hits! * Top-quality fully registered versions! * Sizzling graphics & sensational sound! * Top value all under $30! * Now available in stores for the first time! ELAN20 ALIENS DE Bto Hot off the press from the coolest game mags: \"There's more of just about everything ... Plenty to keep you on the edge of your seat!\" Electronic Entertainment \"Raptor's voracious gameplay eats other shooters for lunch.\" Computer Gaming World «... blows away most commercial games ...! The graphics will amaze you and the sound will astound you ... a super star!\" Interactive Entertainment \"Did you like Wolfenstein 3-D? If you did, you'll love Blake Stone.\" — PCM Magazine \"The first-person viewpoint and smooth movement will have you peering sideways into the monitor to see if there's another monster around the corner.\" PC Magazine \"Mystic Towers has the kind of gameplay that will devour entire evenings.\" Computer Gaming World \"Looking for something silly yet highly entertaining? Hocus Pocus will do just fine ... Give your brain a break, and enjoy 40 levels of sheer mindless mayhem.\" -Home Computing & Entertainment  Alien Carnage — Halloween Harry's awesome mega-battle against invading aliens! Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold — High-tech space station action featuring Blake in deadly combat with a mad scientist!  Raptor — The addictive, action-crazed, shoot 'em up warplane weaponry RAPTOR CALL OF THE SADOW Duke saga! MUSIC with  Duke Nukem II The world's most ruthless warrior \"kicks butt\" in a blast-fest with evil aliens!  Hocus Pocus A sorcerer's magical quest into dark and dangerous realms!  Mystic Towers — Fastpaced magical mystery fun with hilarious monsters! Form GEN INCORPORATED 7641 East Gray Road Scottsdale, AZ 85260 Circle Reader Service #368 Get all six at your local software store... NOW! "


"REVIEW Out Of Reach Interplay's STAR REACH Follows In The Path of Space Combat Tradition by Jeff James ALACTIC CONQUEST-AH, YES, THAT II, and MASTER OF ORION have all self viewing the gameworld from a faHOARY OLD CHESTNUT OF COMPUTdemonstrated that it is not the setting of miliar viewpoint, looking down on a ER GAMING. IT WAS THERE AT THE a space game that counts, but, as the field of planets which serve as the objecbeginning, when the original great space-farer Eric Clapton put it, it's tives and locations for starbases and hackers (may they code forever!) in the way that you use it.\" mining operations. Your alter-ego is played \"Space War\" on PDP computers represented in one of two ways. In in the '60s, and it will probably be there RACES FOR SPACES \"ship\" mode, you control a single starwhen computer gaming succumbs to enWhen the game opens, you can choose ship. In order to issue direct orders to a tropy and reaches heat death. from 22 different scenarios of varying planet, you must fly your ship-in a Into the rich heritage of galactic condifficulty levels. A few single-player tutostyle strongly reminiscent of Accolade's quest games comes the latest release rials will help you learn the ropes, while STAR CONTROL I & II-to that planet from developer Techtonics and publishlarger scenarios pit up to four players and slip into orbit. In this way you must er Interplay, the action-strategy game (with one or two human players) in a shuttle between planets, issuing orders STAR REACH. In keeping religiously with race to conquer dozens of planets. Once for the construction of your nascent tradition, the setting you've decided stellar empire. Your ship can be emof the game is drawn STAR REACH on a scenario, ployed in combat as well, making you a from Galactic Conyou can choose vital part of any combat action. In quest Script #1: Price: No SRP, which alien race \"phantom» mode, your vessel is reFloppy Centuries of inSystem you'll use to conplaced by a red crosshair that can be ternecine warfare Requirements: IBM quer the unimoved to select the planet you wish to and heated squab compatible 386verse. A total of give orders to. bling among hu 40Mhz or better, 4 seven sentient Each scenario has a different goal, so mans have given way MB RAM, VGA races are availyou'll have to adjust your strategy accordgraphics, 7 MB hard to peace and prosable, including ingly. In the first scenario, your goal is a drive space; supports perity, with humanithe insectoid straightforward one: simply establish a most major sound cards. ty finally \"getting it Protection: None Xanbari, the base on a neutral planet. After complettogether\" and begin # of Players: 1-2 (same computer) combative Cyning the easier scenarios, you can move on ning the exploration Developer: Techtonics od Legion, the to more difficult and taxing battles. In of the universe. AfPublisher: Interplay robotic Braquelsmaller scenarios, giving orders to two or ter years of uneventIrvine, CA lians and the three planets and planning minor offen(714) 553-6678 ful exploration, first lish-like Kathosives isn't too taxing, but in larger scenarcontact is made with dians. The inferios you'll find yourself suffering from an a hostile alien race. Instead of trading nally curious humans are also present, as extreme case of information overload. Algoods and good-will, the alien invaders are the Zinnl, a mysterious race of though you can create supply lines decide to swap weapons fire and armed gaseous beings. Gameplay is primarily (which ferry minerals, food or colonists soldiers with their new neighbors. one player versus the computer, albetween planets), you can't automate any Calling this setup \"hackneyed» is probthough two players can play at the same ship production processes. If you want to ably to be backneyed oneself. But of computer in a unique split-screen mode. build a massive fleet of warships, you course, being hackneyed is no sin in the Unfortunately, serial, modem and netmust go to each planet, issue the correct universe of space games. Games like work support aren't available. construction orders, then wait for the REACH FOR THE STARS, STAR CONTROLI & Once into a scenario, you find yourcraft to be built. After the vehicle has 114 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"You can hear your breath, your boots pounding on metal stairs. There's only one way out. 20 more feet.15...10. You're almost there when suddenly from out of nowhere & an 8-foot-tall green alien drops down and lunges at you with a spear, leaving you approximately.08 seconds to act. This may be a good time to mention the superior processing speed of a Power Macintosh. STRONY NERD SSRO ZORK PARISOBG MACPLAY For vastly superior game play, arm yourself with a Power Macintosh computer. It offers better graphics, smoother animation and, in some cases, the chance to meet those from cultures intriguingly unlike your own. In fact, games for Power Macintosh are like nothing on this planet. But see for yourself. Call 800-538-9696, and we'll be happy to tell you where you can get into a game. But not, alas, how to get out of it. Power Macintosh Apple \"When compared to the same pimes running in 68 pouvral Macinto computers 1995le Computer Inc. All rights rexel Aye, the Apple logo and Macintos are registered trademarks and fuer Macintos truckemurlople Computer, Inc. wames and logos of all games and are not all games folural are fremurks or register bademarks of their respe comanasA games sold furuly Circle Reader Service #27 "


"KATHOD sequences become for all players. It's not a major drawback, more of a chore but the opportunity to face off against than an engaging aliens using different weaponry and tacgame experience. tics would have been an invaluable addiThe only possible tion to gameplay. As is, combat simply saving grace is the devolves into a lackluster war of attrition, excellent imple with the player boasting the largest fleet mentation of conusually coming out on top. ENEMY PLANET: voys. If you send a STAR REACH does support the use of a group of fighters keyboard, joystick or mouse, but certain and troop transcontrol methods are restricted to cerports to attack a tain aspects of the game. For example, planet, the fighters mouse support is only offered during will protectively engame setup and configuration; once the circle the transgame begins, you're forced to direct KATHOD RAZE In \"ship mode\" you can personally lead attacks on enemy ports, shielding your legions by way of joystick or keyplanets. The quick-twitch action strongly resembles that of Accolade's STAR them from attack board. Hit the escape key during play, CONTROL series. The music that and a disk options menu will appear. accompanies the On this menu, only keyboard controls been constructed, you must repeat the game is a hard-driving score that will work. This sort of interface schizophreprocess all over again, frantically dashing bring out the warrior attitude required of nia seems totally unnecessary. from planet to planet while your computany successful planet-busting, ship-blastBut the biggest problem is that STAR er opponents marshal their forces. ing space general. Sound effects are used REACH adds very, very little to the Galactic Conquest genre. BUILDER OF WORLDS PLANET INFO: DEENRX It seems the deAt each planet you can build a variety of signers tried to BE structures, including your headquarters, mesh the best feabiospheres (for colonists), hydroponics EW tures of STAR CON(food), strip mines (minerals), ground TROL II and defenses, a starbase and a factory. Any MASTER OF ORION planet with a factory can produce a variinto one product, ety of vessels based on the amount of but in doing so money and minerals you have. Satellites they watered it all serve as orbiting defense platforms, down. What's while troop ships ferry your soldiers more, they failed to into enemy territory. Light fighters and imbue the game destroyers handle most of the ship-towith anything that ship combat duties, while scouts and remight give it a pair ships fulfill less combat-related DROP-IN INSPECTION In order to administer your empire in \"ship mode.\" unique spin and its roles. If you've built a starbase, you can you've got to drop into orbit around one of your developing planets. In own identity. While shuttle your ships off to the storage bay, \"phantom mode,\" a planet is just a mouse-click away. being derivative in a convenient holding place for vessels setup and apuntil they are needed. to good effect throughout the game, with proach is not a sin in these types of Once you've created your starfleet, you the digitized voice of your subordinates games, being derivative and dull in can send them off to invade the planets making occasional updates and angameplay is. In a genre as crowded as of your enemy and destroy his forces. In nouncements especially well done. The Galactic Conquest, the sin can be a ship mode, you can lend a helping hand same can't be said for the graphics, which deadly one. & to your computer-controlled forces, are functional, but rather dingy and colrocketing into the area at a tactically critorless. THE EDITORS SPEAK ical moment and turning the tide of the STAR REACH battle. As mentioned, the only ship that A GALAXY OF GLITCHES you can directly control is your own; durUnfortunately, STAR REACH suffers from a RATING Www ing a pitched firefight between dozens of number of shortcomings. Although all ships, attempting to issue individual orthe included races are purported to have PROS Split-screen two-player mode ders to your computer-controlled henchdifferent combat and production philoso and a fast-paced soundtrack are highmen-in real time-is a nightmare. phies, the fact that all aliens share the lights.... Factor in the small game window (which same vessel types is a bit disappointing. CONS ...while the klutzy interface, precludes you from seeing your foes unWhereas STAR CONTROL. II and MASTER weak arcade action and mediocre til you're practically on top of them) and OF ORION feature craft unique to certain graphics leave STAR REACH in the outthe propensity of the player's craft to get races, all the vessels and planetary im er reaches of space conquest games. blasted into space debris, and the arcade provements in STAR REACH are the same 116 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"There you are, flying through the air with the greatest of ease when the air-to-air missile locks on you and starts homing in. Let it close to 4 miles. Roll 90 degrees into it and start laying chaff and flares like crazy. It's still coming. Keep turning. G forces. Everythings going black. Turn harder or youre dog meat. Youre dog meat. Even a Power Macintosh can't do everything MICTV200 OUTE SUN FLASHBACK KSI.Ro AC PLAY *1 Games for the Power Macintosh computer have better graphics and smoother animation. Thanks to the sizzling processing speed of the PowerPC\"chip, they also deliver dismally timely, realistic payloads. To find out where you can take a test run, give us a call at 800-538-9696. Then go strap yourself into the cockpit of an F/A-18, and be prepared. The animation won't jump, but you may have to. Power Macintosh Apple \"Iben compared to the same games running on SK poured Macinthsbcomputers.  1995 Apple Computer Inc. All rights roumal Aletle Apple logo and Macintosh are registered nulemarks and Power Macmah ts a inademark of Apple Computer, hic PowerPC is a trademark of International Business Machines Corporation, a nder license therefrom. The product names and logos of all games are inademarks or registered inademarks of their respecte comptes All games sold separatech Circle Reader Service #28 "


"REVIEW Digging For Gold In Lemmings Lode DIGGERS Puts You In Charge Of The Dearest and Dimmest Characters Since LEMMINGS by Jason Kapalka ILLED AS «THE GAME OF DISCOVple flood pants, are lazy, shiftless bullies, jump, and dig (mostly dig) through the ERY, STRATEGY, AND ADVENTURE well-suited to settling labor disputes. vast play area. The documentation claims ON THE PLANET ZARG,\" Once all this union nonsense is done each zone takes up the equivalent of sevMillennium Media's DIGGERS with and you have your team of five miners eral hundred screens, and though I didn't could be more simply and accuassembled, you pick a patch of rock from verify this, it certainly seemed like it: you rately marketed, if not for copyright law, as the 34 territories of Zarg and send out can dig, and dig, and dig some more, for \"Subterranean Lemmings\" or \"Lemmings your five underpaid and uninsured ema very long time before reaching the limIV: The Strip Miners.\" Fans of Psygnosis ployees to start digging for gold, diaits of any zone. Switching between miners survival-challenged mammals will feel monds, rubies, and the rare but treasured is as simple as clicking on one of their right at home with purple Jennite. icons; individual miners can walk, run, DIGGERS' tiny spelunk DIGGERS In an attempt to jump, rest, dig, or use any mining tools ers. On the other Price: $39.95 prevent monopthey happen to be carrying. hand, gamers who felt Floppy, $49.95 olies, the Zargian Your objective is to unearth the various the best part of LEM CD-ROM government has valuable minerals hidden underground, MINGS was the \"Nuke\" System legislated that a then return with them to the Zargian button, which deto Requirements: second group of bank and barter them for \"Groads\" with nated the painfully IBM-compatible miners, conwhich you can buy mining devices to help cute horde in a spray 386DX-25 or better, VGA trolled by the you excavate further, and so on until you of technicolor pixels, graphics, 7 MB computer, will accumulate the sum of Groads necessary will instantly wish in hard drive also be deposited to complete the level. vain) that DIGGERS space (floppy), in the zone to Quickly you realize that this is more had a similiar \"Cave 2K hard drive space (CD-ROM), mouse; compete with complicated than the cutesy graphics In\" option supports Sound Blaster and Gravis you. The level is would suggest. The mines teem with danUltrasound sound cards. The game's setup terminated when gers, chief among them gravity. HeadProtection: None finds the player arrivDesigner: Toby Simpson you or your long plunges down hundred-foot shafts ing at the Planet Zarg Publisher: Millennium Media Group, Inc. opponent acare rather rough on the hired hands, deto pry the mineral Philadelphia, PA quire a suflicient spite any advantages in speed and effiriches from its virgin (800) UWANTIT amount of monciency. Similarly vexing are the problems soil. Alas, for the budey, or, more simof going up...for all their skill at digging ding capitalist, Zargian labor laws demand ply, when all of one side's diggers are downwards, your miners are quite incomthat entrepreneurs employ one of the four themselves terminated, either through petent at climbing. Thankfully, a miner native races for this task. The Habbish are their own clumsiness, the hazards of can teleport back to his home base at any cloaked thieves possessing mysterious Zargian flora and fauna, or the rigors of time, but then you have to face the chalpowers of teleportation. The demonic healthy free-market capitalism, e.g. sabolenge of going back down again. looking F Targs are actually quick-healing, tage, assault, and murder by dynamite. Occasionally, deposits of Jennite or steady workers, while the dwarvish Getting down to game play, the main other minerals can be seen just lying Grablins, cowards in combat, are the screen presents you with a side view of the about, seemingly ripe for the plucking. fastest diggers of all. The green Quarriors, terrain and your miniscule miners, much But most of the Planet Zarg's wealth is bearing a strong resemblance to Bruce like (surprise!) LEMMINGS. The screen hidden from the naked eye, and can only Banner's alter-ego, right down to the purscrolls to follow your workers as they run, be uncovered by moving mountains of 118 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"I Wish We Had Hodi 'n' Podj. Please God Let Me Be Adopted. Hot Diggety | Could Play Checkers All Night. OOOO 9900  19 arcade, card, word, casino and classic board games that can be played individually or as part of a bigger game. HODJ'N'PODJ  Fully animated introductory fairy tale. saxoy buncha games in a sy kinda yorliz HODS 'N PODJ A UNIQUE COMPILATION OF 19 ADDICTINO CAMES IN ONE, Throw all your favorite games into the same drawer and you end up with a bunch of missing pieces. But throw them onto a CD-ROM and you end up with Hodi 'n' Podj. It's got variety. It's got drama: two fair princesses kidnapped by the evil Salmigundee. It's got really weird names: like Salmigundee. But most of all Hodj 'n' Podj has what other games sorely lack: A SENSE OF HUMOR. Customize your games to be short and easy or long and hard.  Witty running commentary from the peanut gallery. Available for PC CD-ROM Coming soon for MAC CD-ROM  From Steve Meretzky, the award winning creator of Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" and Planetfall\" IBM PC software. Circle Reader Service #22 1095 Both Oure, loc. Ho w to Bille Owl. Tad Lord Vigilinti Ertainment. It Bets Gestion trainiako Belo Caras, los Vy rightend budnik Vogler. I. P W (ED) 1994 "


"dirt. Yes, as it eventually turns out, DIGminute or two will become bored; bored are strange anomalies: lifts will not supGERS is primarily a game of strip-mining miners take it on themselves to start digport mining machines, occasionally Much time will be spent watching your ging or walking randomly without regard bridges will fail to support diggers, rocks spelunkers digging, digging, slowly, slowwill not fall when the dirt ly, in long horizontal paths. Ker-chunk. KEZESS under them is removed. Ker-chunk. Ker-chunk. The game world is set up on an invisible grid of squares, CARNAGE IN A COAL MINE and diggers can only DIGGERS, like military service, is not all techange direction when they dium; but what isn't tedious is usually are smack in the center of a abrupt, frightening and lethal. Faithful if square, meaning that to not terribly bright, your diggers will change a digger's orders drown themselves in underground lakes, you must click on him refry in lava, leap to their doom, be depeatedly until he is in the voured by an assortment of carnivorous 0100 YO \"sweet spot.\" Very curiously, plants, animals, ghosts, and unidentifiable for a game whose premise is squidgy things, or even be impregnated DIG IT, BABY! Competing for precious resources against your competition between teams by face-hugger eggs straight out of Alien. opponent may put you in direct contact with the enemy. The of miners, there is no multiAnd then there are the competing miners slugging match that ensues is cute, but deadly. player support at all. Given to worry about. Combat on Zarg is a simthe monumental idiocy of ple, almost innocent affair-diggers simto safety. The novelty of seeing the digger the computer opponent, this is a serious ply waddle up to one another and punch you left topside go hurtling down a three omission. A multiplayer option would away—but still potentially deadly. mile shaft wears thin fairly quickly. Once have at least partially alleviated this flaw, An assortment of tools is available at the your five miners have been whittled down and anyway, who wouldn't want to try a company shop to help the lemming deathmatch? player with all of these After a time, all the Zargian terrain behazards. Bridges and gins to look the same. Yes, there are a boats can cross lakes and host of different geographies-desert, underground reservoirs. grassland, mountains, icescapes, isLifts, rail cars, and telelands-but when the majority of game porters can be built to time is spent underground, the differease the pain of subterence between palm trees and cacti beranean transit. There are comes moot. And underground, well, dirt drilling machines that KED looks pretty much the same no matter plow through the earth at IEEE where you are. a tremendous rate, and And so one is left, eventually, working explosives that can be 0100 THE out the logistics of an efficient strip-minused to clear obstacles or ing operation. Perhaps there is a successfoes. Unfortunately, all DELVING ELVES The rectangular tool bar gives you complete ful game to be made of this these gadgets cost Groads, control over your hard-working diggers. You've got to keep them premise-Sim City made civic planning forcing the player to on a tight leash, though, or they'll saunter off to their death. fun, after all—but DIGGERS is not it. The choose between buying cute graphics and concept make this look helpful tools and reducing his progress toto one or two it's easier to keep track of like a game for the younger set, but I wards completing the level, or slogging them, but then you have lewer hands with think it's safe to say the average 10-yearthrough with a minimum of extra devices. which to strip-mine. old will find little joy calculating the optiFortunately for the player, given the mum sweep pattern for clearing a block lethality and general difficulty of the LEMMINGS BURIES DIGGERS of dirt, while the sim-buffs who might engame, the computer opponent is just as the vast majority of DOOM-alike joy such a task will be turned off by the abysmally stupid. Computer-controlled games fall short of their model, DIGGERS goofy graphics and lapses in realism. diggers will often fall into holes and just fails to achieve the same level of fun as sit there, literally for hours if you have LEMMINGS, for several reasons. The THE EDITORS SPEAK the patience to watch, instead of teleportgraphics are uninspired and the sound DIGGERS ing home. Not once did I lose a game beactively boring, consisting of the odd RATING cause the computer acquired the blips, honks and tinkly music. The connecessary Groads before me, which trol scheme, which pretty much requires means that if the human player can avoid simultaneous manipulation of the mouse PROS An interesting concept with killing himself, he will always win-after and keyboard, could be described, if one huge play areas and some nifty long, long stretches of strip-mining. was in a generous mood, as \"novel.\" After chrome. Sadly, the greatest danger to the player many hours of strip-mining, I was not in CONS Awkward controls, tedious is the massive stupidity of his own men. a generous mood, and you won't be eigame play, and boring graphics steal Miners standing idle for more than a ther. For all its attention to physics, there the sparkle from this gem. ME 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"AAMION F Adilson. ACTIVISION CLASSICS AdMSON. PITFALL! RIVER RAID KABOOM! OS RIVER RAID S ACTK1510N AdeMOK ATARI 2600 ER FIGHTER AVION SEAQ ACTION FOR WINDOWS amBION 2015 FREEWI ALIVIO CHOPPER COMMAND GANUNIX IBM CD-ROM for Windows\" All The Games Your Mother Still Doesn't Approve Of. ACTIVISION You're older now... No more arcade over-nighters. Did the cartridge-thing. Now you're cutting-edge. Big man with a PC.  Introducing 15 original Atari 2600 video games together for the first time in Windows\"! The classic | RvR Rip KABoo  heart-racing action and nerve-wracking excitement you lived for. The riveting graphics, gripping_sound effects and addictive fun you remember.  What about Mom? Tell her you're running some numbers on your PC... fifteen of 'em. Available on CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks. SLADK ATARI 2600 ACTION HOIR ra TIDENS Oma com ANU IX FREEWAY CENTER FOR ADDICTIVE ENTERTAINMENT BM CD ROM Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. Atari 2600 is a trademark of Atari Inc. Windows is a trademark of the Microsoft Corporation.  1995 Activision, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #33 "


"STRATEGY To The Empire's Defense An Addendum to the Imperial Pilot's Secret Handbook by Jason Kapalka Illustration by Ocean Quigley (A partial copy of the following document ADVANCED TACTICS was found during inspection of pilots' quarters Flyers in the DEFENDER OF THE EMPIRE camaboard the Star Destroyer Invincible. Once paign will spend most of their time in the again the Imperial Information Bureau, on new TIE Defender, which, while certainly behalf of Lord Vader, urges anyone with the most advanced starfighter to date, is knowledge of the author or authors' identity to not invulnerable, particularly in the one step forward. A reward has been offered.) against-many missions you're required to ...necessitated the release of this, the upfly in it. Hence, a few new stratagems are dated edition of the Secret Handbook offered here to help even the odds. For example, pilots in search of unofficial Missile Defense: Even a Defender R&R should certainly peruse the latest with full shields cannot survive more than version of Commander Moonbarker's one hit from an advanced missile-a \"Budget Guide to Pleasure Palaces of Imbrand commonly used by Zaarin's traitorperial Space,\" as inter-species \"consorous forces. Thus it becomes necessary to tion\" laws have changed drastically in avoid those missiles. certain sectors of the Outer Rim. The easiest way to do this is to prevent In addition, veteran pilots now engaged the enemy from getting a lock on you in in the campaign code-named DEFENDER OF the first place. Ninety-degree turns at THE EMPIRE have requested more unofficial high speed are the best way to foil targettactical advice, which we are only too haping; bobbing and weaving, effective py to provide. Rookies beware! If you've against close-range laser fire, are next to never seen the interior of a TIE Advanced, useless against a ship targeting you from let alone a Defender, if your superiors further out. haven't let you in on the recent defection But sooner or later every pilot will hear of a certain highly-placed Admiral, if you the dreaded missile alert klaxon. When don't know about the plot to kidnap Emthis happens, hit the spacebar to lock peror Palpatine himself, it would be most onto the incoming missile. You then have unwise to read the following info. two options: you can accelerate to high speed and turn circles until the missile self-destructs, or you can shoot the missile. Simply dodging the missile is easier, but takes up a precious 20 to 30 seconds. Shooting it down is far more diflicult, but can save critical moments. Switch to single lasers and keep the missile on the outer edges of your radar screen until it passes you. Then turn and spray it with fire. Missile Attack: It can be difficult to hit enemies with missiles if they're already attacking you. When closing to missile range, press <z> to check your target's mission. If it's attacking you, firing missiles as you close will often result in the enemy blasting them with laser fire directed at your ship. A handy thing to remember is that your missiles will retain their lock for a second or so after you move the targeting reticle away from the enemy. Swing sharply away from the target ship right after you attain a lock; fire missiles a second later, and they will usually avoid the enemy's lasers. Tractor Beam Tricks: The new, improved tractor beam is, of course, useful for slowing enemy starfighters while you 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Sid Meier's COLONIZATION«Gold Multimedia Experience the thrill of Sid Meier's Colonization in multimedia! You're the Viceroy, leading a group of colonists into a New World of promise and peril. Watch settlers come alive as they speak to you via striking footage from famous historical sites. There's even more of the art and music that you loved in the original. With ColonizationTM Gold Multimedia, you can bring a powerful new nation to life. But choose the wrong plan of action and you're history. COLONIZATION @ 09:08 LAY) CD-ROM MULTIMEDIA The Landing of the Pilgrims at Plymouth, Mass. Dec. 22nd, 1620, Currier & Ives, 1876 Museum of the City of New York, The Harry T. Peters Collection. 1995 MicroProse. All rights reserved. MICROPROSE 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBMPC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. MICROPROSE Circle Reader Sonica #28 "


"fire lasers, but it has other uses that your And as an aside: nucommanding officers, with typical Impermor has it that the ial elliciency, will not inform you of until Secret Order has invery late in the campaign. augurated a new top When defending a large ship or instalrank, one beyond lation, watch for ships making attack runs \"The Emperor's on it. If you catch them in the tractor Hand.\" But this is beam as they make their approach, they not a safe topic for will be unable to turn in time to avoid public discussion... crashing headlong into the Star DestroyBATTLE 8 er, platform, or what have you. This will Mission 1: Here, damage the craft you are defending as in many of the slightly, but much less than a volley of missions you'll be torpedoes or a sustained laser-straling called to fly as a T 1X run, and it's quite pleasurable to imagine Defender pilot, TIE FLY-BY Two TIE Defenders on a fly-by of the starfighter manufacturing your foes' reactions as they yank in vain there is less danger plant that dominates Battle 8. at their joysticks... to you than to the A second useful trick will allow you to ships under your destroy ships quickly without attaining a protection. If time is an issue—and it certacking capital ships. Send them after the full missile lock. Activate the beam and tartainly is here—force all missile-armed at. Gunboats, dump all power to your enget an enemy with missiles. Fire after only tackers to break off their torpedo runs so gines, and take out the Corvettes with two a second or two of \"yellow\" blips, but mainyou can pick them off later at your heavy rockets apiece. Fire the rest of your tain the tractor lock on the ship, which will leisure. Approach the flights of TIE rockets at the Carrack Cruiser when it apbe unable to change course in time to Bombers in this mission with your lasers pears and a resupply shuttle will hyperavoid the minimally-guided missiles. on single-fire, and spray each ship with space in. Take out the enemy transports Energy Management: Veterans will be one or two shots. They'll peel away, givbefore reloading, ordering your wingmen familiar with the controls for changing the ing you time to deal with other threats. to cover you when necessary. Launch rockrecharge rate of shields, lasers, and enMission 2: Remember that resupply ets at the Cruiser from very close range gines. Remember, though, if your craft's shuttles almost always appear as soon as until its shields are down, then strafe it equipped with a with lasers. Keep your shield levels high so tractor beam, you you can take one or two missile hits from can use its energy as the Gunboats. well, redirecting it to Mission 4: Don't be afraid to use your the engines by hitmissiles here. Use them a lot. Whenever ting F8. there's a break in the action, reload. This And even many mission takes quite a while, and you may seasoned pilots ighave several minutes of dull waiting benore the fact that fore cach new Rebel attack wave. Don't you can transfer get bored or distracted: stick near the power back and Cargo Ferries and if you use time comforth from your pression, be ready to turn it off at a molasers and shields ment's notice. by hitting the <;> Mission 5: Target the platform's misand < > keys. By sile launcher first. Once it's disabled, setting both your FLY-BY SHOOTING The Defender packs heavy firepower in the form of power up shields and lasers and dogfight laser and shield quadlinked lasers, but in certain circumstances you're better off with a with the various Xand T-Wings. The recharge settings to single rapid-fire cannon. Rebels' new T-Wings are not exactly maximum at the state-of-the-art: they have only two lasers beginning of a mission, and then transferyou've exhausted your missile load. Try and a very weak shield. They're slightly ring all power from lasers to the shields, to use missiles on all the Corvettes, and faster than an X-Wing, but as you will you can achieve full double-shield strength press <2> to check which of the target learn, certainly not as hard to hit as an Ain less than a minute. ships is closest to entering hyperspace. Wing, Lock Transports Omega 1 & 2 in When making laser runs against large, memory and don't stray too far from armed ships, switching to single-fire will them. Save your missiles for craft targetMISSION STRATEGIES give you a higher rate of fire and make it ing the transports. Even for veterans, the DEFENDER OF THE easier to dodge during your approach. Mission 6: The main thing to worry EMPIRE campaign offers some tough chalMission 3: Forget your commander's about here is missing with more than one lenges. More than one hotshot ace has suggestion to send your wingmen after the of your mag pulse warheads. You need to ended up asking for reinforcements and Corvettes: your flightmates are apparently disable, first, the nearby Corvette, second, «Easy\" task assignments. Following, then, high-scoring graduates of the Imperial the Interdictor, and third, the Strike are a few tips for each of the new missions. Flight Academy, i.e. quite useless when atCruiser that hyperspaces in a bit later. 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"IT'S LIKE GOING BACK TO THE MESOZAIC ERA. ONLY THIS TIME YOU GET TO WALK UPRIGHT. It may be Eden, but a garden it's not Interact with over 12 different dinosaurs. It's a primeval land filled with rain forests, Lush, surrealistic graphics, cinematics and marshy plains and flesh-eating neighbors texture-mapped sequences Explore four different continents and seven named \"Rex. Not to mention a slew of types of terrain other dinosaurs, from the peaceful, grass60 minutes of original ambient CD-quality eating Brontosaurus to the brutal soundtrack and digitized speech. Velociraptor. In Lost Eden, you play Made by the same people who created DUNET Adam--not the first man on Earth, but CD-ROM Lost Eden. The only adventure strategy game that brings you back to Eden. possibly the last. That is, if you can't unite the Chamoor creatures of four continents against a tyrannical Tyrannosaurus Rex. The task is simple: Save mankind. If you're successful, you're a hero. If you fail. you're a fossil. CRYO Lost Edenis a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Copyright  Virgin Interactive Entertainment. Ltd. All rights reserved. Developed by Cryo Interactive Entertainment. Virgin Is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Circle Reader Service #24 "


"Charge your shields up, then redirect all power to the engines. The best angles from which to release the mag pulse torpedoes are either from directly behind the target ship, or while flying very close in a parallel course. BATTLE 9 Mission 1: There's a lot to do here, but for once your wingmen and the other Imperial pilots will help out. They'll disable Escort Carrier Jitte with minimal assistance, for example. Unfortunately, the Assault Transport that's supposed to take out the Cargo Shuttles will not-at least not in time. If you rush, and use four missiles, you can catch the Shuttle that's heading into hyperspace, but it may not be worth it. Destroy the remaining Shuttles as quickly as possible, then use missiles to take out the platform's launcher. Turn on the tractor beam and engage the remaining TIE Bombers. After you're done with them, the platform's shields will probably be down. Disable it and in between the target and the attacker and spray single-laser fire. As soon as the mission starts, turn to face the Assault Transports and dump all power to the engines. Use missiles on the enemy TIE Defenders. Even in a Defender, close Engine system is damaged and inoperative. T: 1x attacks on Assault THE LAST VIEW OF A DOOMED PILOT The TIE Defender manufacturing plant fender manufacturing plant Transports are in Battle 8 is a pretty sight. But this pilot's going to be getting more of an dangerous; use eyeful than he bargained for thanks to a dead steering mechanism. your tractor beam to make them then it's just a matter of eluding the crash into the Adarga. hordes of TIE Fighters until the capture Mission 3: A straightforward but operation is over. tough fight. Lock the Mharsup and G'Mission 2: The best way to intercept Nagnib into memory and take out their missiles aimed at someone else—the Star attackers-the transports first-and reDestroyer Adarga in this case—is to get member to re-acquire the G'Nagnib after Bonus Mission Goals For the TIE pilot who just can't please his superior officers enough, Tugs 8f9, 719, 6f9 and 5f9 complete mission here are the bonus objectives for each of the new missions. Destroy Corellian Corvettes Uhu 1 & 2 BATTLE 8 Destroy 100% of probe groups Keyhole 1 & 2 Mission 1: Destroy Nebulon B-2 Frigate Raptor Mission 3: Destroy 100% of all Transports Mission 2: 100% of Assault Transport group Tiger completes mission Destroy 100% of Assault Gunboat group Z-Mu Escort Shuttles Sigma 1-3 and Omega completes mission Destroy 100% of Tug group 2016 Inspect Modular Conveyor Z-Cod 1 & 2 Destroy at least one of TIE Advanced groups Z-Alpha, Capture Transport Z-Elpi Theta, Gamma Inspect Corellian Transport Coral Destroy at least one of TIE Bomber groups Z-Beta, Z-Eta Inspect 100% of Modified Corvette group Z-Oz Destroy at least one of TIE Defender group Z-Zeta Mission 3: None Mission 4: Destroy 100% of Rebel craft Mission 4: 100% of Cargo Ferry group Terry completes mission Freighter Mharsup completes mission Container Transport Contel completes mission Destroy Nebulon B Frigate Hunu Modular Conveyor Vendor completes mission Mission 5: Destroy 100% of all R-41 Starchasers 100% of Modular Conveyor group Dromii complete mission Destroy Strike Cruiser Intombe Mission 5: Assault Transport Leopard completes mission Mission 6: Destroy 100% of all Rebel craft Transports Omega 1 & 2 complete mission AND at least one Nami craft Escort Shuttle Sigma completes mission BATTLE 10 Disable Transport Blue Mission 1: Destroy 100% of Y-Wing group Boegis Inspect 100% of Modular Conveyor group Rampart Destroy 100% of T-Wing group Oro Mission 6: None Capture Corellian Transport Dhoora BATTLE 9 Mission 2: Utility Tug Rover survives Mission 1: 100% of all TIE Defenders completes mission Destroy 100% of TIE Defender groups Z-Alpha, Beta, AND 100% of Assault Transports completes mission Gamma, Delta 50% of TIE Defender group Delta complete mission Destroy Nebulon B-2 Frigate Z-Kopsh Capture Escort Carrier Jitte Destroy 100% of TIE Advanced groups Z-Eta, Theta, Zeta Capture Shuttles Upsilon 1 & 2, Lambda 1 & 2, Sigma 1 Mission 3: None Destroy A-Wing Red 5 Mission 4: Destroy Carrack Cruiser Prism Destroy 100% of B-Wing Blue Destroy Probe Yey Destroy 100% of X-Wing Gold Mission 5: Inspect Escort Shuttle Black Box Destroy 100% of A-Wing Red Mission 6: Destroy 100% of all X-Wings AND 100% of all A-Wings Mission 2: Imperial Star Destroyer Adarga completes mission Destroy Calamari Cruiser Independence Utility Tug 3f1 completes mission Destroy Strike Cruisers Lonsigar 1 & 2 126 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Gold. Greed. Gallantry. ZORRO A Cinematic Action Adventure 7 Sunshluckling, whip-Crucking wrentiire that is reminiscent of Prince of Persin.\" -Computer Player Magazine Capstone THE PINNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE IBM CD-ROM Circle Reader Service #207 To order call: (305) 373-7700. (800) 468-7226. BBS (305) 374-6872 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud . (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics . (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Zorro M and  Zorro Productions, Inc. Licensed by The Imagination Factory, "


"it finishes docking Watch out for the advanced missiles used by Zaarin's forces; your shields will have to be at near double strength to withstand a hit. Mission 4: Sure, 156 3002 you were never crazy about your wingmen, but at least they served Mission poused. Press any key to continue. T: 1x one useful purpose: APPROACH WITH CAUTION It's always risky approaching a Rebel platform drawing fire. Pretty from the topside, where defensive fire is heaviest. But the underside is well all the Rebel impossible to target, since the defensive missile launcher is located there. scum in this mission will be gunning for you and only you. Quickly eliminate as moded R-41 Starchasers, are about as many of the A-Wings as you can or you'll threatening as a sick taun-taun. The real be constantly harassed. Charge, then actidanger here is sensory overload: it can be vate tractor beams as you close to missile extremely difficult to pick out targets range; fire one missile after a moment or amidst the mines. Don't bother locking the two of \"yellow,\" then a volley of linked Corvettes into memory; just hit <T> until lasers. The Mharsup will almost certainly you've found the Transports, then kill be disabled, but make sure you eliminate them all swiftly with missiles. Mop up the the enemy Transports before they start R-41s and mines only after all six transdocking, or you're likely to blast the ports are eliminated. You can get some big freighter by accident. bonus points for blasting the Strike CruisMission 5: The pirates, with their outer, but it hyperspaces out fairly quickly, which means you'll have to use your missiles on it instead of the Transports. Mission 6: Try to take out the A-Wings before you head for the B-Wings attacking the convoy, or they'll make life very difficult. Make speed your priority here. If you dump all power to the drive, you can probably intercept the B-Wings before they launch torpedoes. Kill them with lasers if you can, since you'll want your missiles later on. Eliminate the XWings at your leisure, then dogfight with the Defenders—again, you want to conserve missiles. You'll have to do some fancy energy management to have a chance against the Defenders; you need to be able to both match their speed and maintain your tractor beam. Stick close to Mssan 2 and 3. Quite late in the mission, a flight of TIE Defenders will hyperspace in nearby and target them. Now, of course, is when those missiles will come in handy BATTLE 10 Mission 1: Back in an Assault Gunboat, but look on the bright side it could have been a TIE Fighter. First, lock the shuttle into memory and charge your shields. Park directly behind the Transport, and as soon as it disengages hit it with one missile, then immediately switch to ions and disable it. JFK WOUNDED 1 : C t 1 (Dallas, Texas) Shots rang out and the heart of a nation stopped yesterday afternoon in Dallas as an undetermined number of snipers shot at President Kennedy as his motorcade proceeded along Main Street. One of the bullets found it's way to President Kenne right arm, woundir Parkland Hospital was treated for wound, listed th stable, yet guar The wound is ing. Presid relen yesterday afternoon in an undetermined number of snipers sbm President New CD-ROM Gamel "


"TUTA RAPPLER 2341002 100 100 HULL Now target the watch out for T-Wings targeting you with shuttle and destroy missiles and dispose of them first. Do not any R-41s going afengage the enemy Defenders unless you ter it. Remember, have missiles left over, or a strong subconyou only have two scious desire for an honors funeral. lasers now, and are Mission 4: Thrawn's newest starfighter better off transferis at long last unveiled: the Missile Boat. ring laser power to Some old-timer pilots have expressed disthe engines. Use satisfaction with the new ship, claiming this missiles and tractor superweapon makes destroying the enebeam trick #2 to my...too easy?!? From where we stand, it scrub the pirate filth can never be too easy; moreover, the Emfrom the cosmos. TO CRACO pire's \"superweapons\" tend to have embarMission 2: Mission poused. Press any key to continue. rassing Achilles' heels. We would make Whatever you do, reference to a certain giant battle station SPECIAL DELIVERY, DON'T SHOOT! Mag pulse warheads will temporarily DO NOT try to here, but the Imperial Information Bureau disable a capital ship's systems. You have to get in good and close, dogfight the TIE though, to make sure the warhead isn't shot down by the ship's guns. has forbade the conjunction of the words Defenders in your \"Death\" and \"Star\" in casual conversation. Gunboat. You've In any case, the Missile Boat is no excepseen what that leads to from the other Mission 3: The most crucial momention to this rule, with its single laser makend of the gun. Kill them safely from a in this mission is right at the beginning, ing it practically useless in a dogfight. You distance. Make sure you've destroyed the when the T-Wings will launch rockets at must destroy the enemy at long range. ones attacking you (using tractor beam the Ulzepi. Immediately redirect all Note that with the improved radar system trick #2) before trying to reload. Note shield power to the engines, head for the you only need half as long to attain a misthat you can start accelerating while the Ulzepi, target her, hit <A> to see who's sile lock. If starfighters close to laser range, missile tug is still reloading you. Also attacking her, and swing away towards the hit <N> to engage your SLAM drives and note that any missiles fired during this pirate at the last moment. Spray lasers to get some distance. In this mission, keep a time will be automatically resupplied. wards the rockets; if you miss any, turn close eye on the Assault Gunboats. If Later, stick near Chemeti 2 and watch for back towards the Ulzepi and try to interthey're destroyed, you will be unable to disships attacking it. cept them as they home in. Later on, able the Strike Gruiser, and hence unable favorite CD-ROM outlet Available at your IN DALLAS sidential his the Sec RTS e hospit: area. cross ou on sto released from the hos within 24-hours and able to re 1964 REELECT What if JFK had lived? Imagine for a moment that President John F. Kennedy did not die from bis gunshot wounds in 1963...Now imagine that you are President John F. Kennedy. REELECT JFK is an exciting new CD-ROM game that places you in the Presidential hot seat during a fascinating alternate version of one of the most tumultuous passages in U.S. bistory. You assume the role of JFK and make decisions on the critical issues of 1964 Civil Rights, Vietnam, and other events. You have the dual task of getting reelected in 1964 and solving the mystery of the attempt on your life. Through sophisticated video integration, you will be immersed in an incredibly detailed visual and audio 3-D world of 1964. Have fun! A Role Playing Game You Are CD-ROM JFK Windows Distributed by: COMPTON'S QUADRA Quadra Interactive, Inc. 701 Palomar Airport Rd., 3rd Floor Carlsbad, CA 92009 INTERACTIVE PH(619) 931-4755. FAX(619) 931-0660) Circle Reader Service #150 * NEWMEDIA A Tribe Now Medict C um was a mother waar CINC Medi c NON andata16 al TE "


"to complete the and Interceptors will take out Y-Wing mission. group Gold Devil, leaving you free to Mission 5: The concentrate on annihilating the platform main problem and the mines. The mines are annoying; you'll encounter try to line up live or six in close proximihere is running out ty, fire one missile at each, then turn and of ammunition. engage the SLAM boosters to avoid the You'll need more volley of return fire. than 40 missiles, That concludes our latest installment of and definitely more tactical advice. Pilots hoping for a dramatic than 10 heavy space ending to the DEFENDER OF THE EMPIRE bombs. Lock Transcampaign should be warned that it turns port Omega into out as something of a cliffhanger. Rumor memory and keep Tou 1. three transports have launched from the cruiser T1x has it that the Imperial High Command is it safe. Ask for a realready drawing up plans for another camTOP-OF-THE-LINE The new Cygnus Missile Boat is a modified Assault load before you've paign. The Secret Handbook stall would Gunboat equipped with a SLAM Overdrive for temporary bursts of speed, exhausted your mislike to suggest \"Missiles, Missiles, Yet More four missile launchers, and up to 80(!) advanced concussion missiles. siles, and keep firMissiles» as a possible codename. ing while Omega Returning now to the ever-interesting resupplies you. With the tractor beam ingines, and engage SLAM overdrive. topic of inter-species \"consortion,\" we are stalled, your dogfighting capabilities are Once in range, recharge your shield and pleased to include in this edition Captain enhanced: an enemy caught in the beam start blasting the Defenders with missiles. Scar's illuminating new treatise on the will not be able to dodge a missile, even if If some become functional, turn on the subject, \"Wookie Nookie and Droid Dalyou fired it without a full lock. When entractor beam and kill them at short liance: One Man's Opinion\".... gaging the Carrack Cruisers, try to aprange. Next take out the platform's (Further sections of the traitorous document proach from the rear, and launch bombs launcher. When targeting individual are of no general interest. Once again the Inonly when very close. parts of a platform or capital ship, realize formation Bureau urges anyone with knowlMission 6: Your first priority is to deal that your missiles are not smart enough edge concerning the above text to do their duty with the Defenders. Set lasers to rechargto steer around the vessel if their target is and report to a ranking officer. There will be, ing, channel everything else to the enon the other side of it. The TIE Fighters we emphasize, no reprisals.) THE NEW EXCITING QUIZ GAME FROM SOFDEG, ING. $ 39.95 5&H $ 5.00 in FL add 6 % tax Four games in one with questions about the whole world Enter the world of education.\" For school and family. Programmed for ages 16 and up with multiple choices, different play levels, various skill levels. Select from a wide range of topics such as history, literature, art, music, sports, theater, movies, travel and more.Delve into the world of science and nature. Beautiful pictures and great sound accompany you as you match wits with your opponent whether it is computer or human. Have fun !! to order call toll free 1-800-631-5141 VISA 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD APRIL 1995 Circle Reader Service #310 "


"They madla us dinner NOW MAKE THEM TOAST. OU HATE THEM. IF REVENGE IS A DISH BEST LOGISCAPE TECHNOLOGY WITH DEEP HORIZON SERVED COLD, THEN NOTHING IS COOLER THAN ALLOWS YOU TO WREAK HAVOC OVER LAKES, RETRIBUTION. MOUNTAINS, AND VALLEYS ALL IN REAL TIME. THEY'VE BRED MILLIONS OF HUMANS THE CINEMATIC ANIMATION WITHIN FOR FOOD RETRIBUTION THE 11 MAJOR CAMPAIGNS WILL GIVE AND NOW IT'S PAYBACK TIME! YOU LOADS OF CHALLENGES BATTLING STRATEGY, ACTION, 100 MB OF THESE CANNIB-ALIENS ANIMATION AND DIGITIZED THEY WANT TO SERVE MAN SPEECH CREATE AN ENTHRALLING IT'S UP TO YOU TO STOP THEM. IF YOU ATMOSPHERE THAT IS RIPE FOR DEMAND SATISFACTION, YOU MUST HAVE YOUR REVENGE RETRIBUTION RETRIBUTION I THIN Distributed By AVAILABLE FOR PC CD-ROM Gremlin IRON 12 Retribution  1995 Gremlin Interactive Limited. All rights reserved. Front Street Publishing is a trademark of U.S. Gold, Inc. Circle Reader Service #32 "


"REVIEW Double Play Turn Two With Reviews of HARDBALL IV and ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT by Jim Gindin Allsport USA HERE WAS A LOT OF GOOD BASEBALL H ARDBALL IV is the latest entry in Acview. The game tries to scroll into differTHIS PAST SEASON. BROKEN colade's series of action-oriented baseball ent views of the outfield, but the motion RECORDS, THRILLING DIVISION RACES, games, featuring the most stunning sinis all done at once, providing an uneasy, and a World Series more exciting gle-screen graphics I've seen in a sports jerky view of plays in the outfield. Howevthan many in recent memory. Of game. All 28 major league ballparks are er, if it weren't for HARDBALL IV's stancourse, this didn't take place in the real included, which is groundbreaking in itdard-setting graphics, ESPN BASEBALL stadiums, which were empty except for sell, and each is intricately detailed. The TONIGHT would be among the best. Large the players pacing the dugouts in search artists put together more than 50 frames player sprites and realistic-looking play of bigger paychecks; it all happened in of animation for the pitching motion outcomes highlight this simulation. my stadium-built-for-one, my PC, where alone; eight frames of art detail the batthe ball players' digitized and animated ter's swing. But whereas most graphical FIELDING ERRORS counterparts played their hearts outgames scroll and twist their way into Ask any action-oriented ballplayer what played several seasons in fact-without a recreating a sport, HARDBALL. IV has no he or she finds lacking in a favorite game, thought of compensation. scrolling action. As a result, the few views and you'll likely hear the word \"fielding\" Yes, with the release of several solid of the action that are available look stunmumbled amongst other words I can't baseball packages, it was a good season ning in their SVGA detail, but the designprint here. Well, there's no relief here, for computer baseball. Now, as we turn ers have made some trade-ofls. because these two action games provide the corner of the New Year and head The concessions? Well, HARDBALL. IV typically weak fielding models. When the into what we all hope will be Spring isn't really a baseball simulation—it's more ball is hit, the game highlights one of Training, two new baseball games have of an action game. After your hitter your defenders and places a circle on the made their debuts, each adding some vamakes contact with the ball, the game will field where the ball will drop. ESPN BASEriety to the growing market of PC baseshift to one of three possible views of the BALL. TONIGHT provides more options and ball simulations. ballpark, cach centering on one of the the fielders are easier to control, but lowoutfield positions. The play will take ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT HARDBALL IV place in that screen. As a result, the outPrice: $59.95 field is about the same size as the infield, Price: $59.95 Floppy, $69.95 so you'll see force-outs at second base on Floppy and CDCD-ROM ROM HARDBALL4 line drives to the outfield. If the ball isn't System System Requirements: hit over the fence, it's likely a single with Requirements: IBM compatible only one base advancement possible. IBM TONIGHT 386-33MHz or Sony Imagesoft's ESPN BASEBALL compatible better (486TONIGHT opens with a digitized video se386-33MHz or 25MHz quence that will be familiar to viewers of better, 4 MB recommended). RAM, 18 MB hard drive space, SVGA ESPN's in-season nightly baseball show. 4 MB RAM (8 graphics; supports Sound BlasterMB recommended), 5 MB hard drive You might see the Twins turn the triple compatible sound cards; floppy version space, SVGA graphics, mouse, CD-ROM; play, or former Cincinnati manager Lou requires purchase of extra disk for supports Adlib, PAS, and Sound Blaster Pinella throw a tantrum. Announcer MLBPA players and stats. compatible sound cards. Chris Berman mans the studio while Dan Protection: None Protection: None Patrick calls play-by-play. Players: 1-2 (same computer and modem) Players: 1-2 (same computer) Developer: MindSpan Graphically, ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT Developer: Stormfront Studios Publisher: Accolade is much weaker than HARDBALL. IV. Player Publisher: Sony Imagesoft San Jose, CA Santa Monica, CA movement is awkward, and the ball dis(800) 245-7744 (800) 922-SONY appears a full frame before the bat is in 132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"NOTHING, NOTHING CAN PREPARE YOUR PC. LINS 2 FE FINISH HIM! COLONS LARS 02 SMOKE AWAITS LONSDI FRIENDSHIP FRIENDSHIP? CHOOSE YOUR EIGHTE SER ALL 12 KOMBAT WARRIORS? MORTAL KOMBAT THE LETTZIE ARCADE TRANSLATION IVOV NOTHING, NOTHING CAN PREPARE YOU...for the ultimate arcade translation of Mortal Kombat II, \"Finish Him\" with all the true graphics, character animations, CD-quality music and awesone sound f/x of the arcade blockbuster. Brutal special moves, Friendships, Babalities, hidden surprises, crushing combos and outrageous finishing moves are yours to kommand. Let the Kombat Kontinue!!! MORTAL KOMBAT Aliam MATURE NOW ON AGES 17+ PC CD-ROM MIDWAY. Aklaim ntertainment in c. MORTAL KOMBATO II &O 1994 Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. 1993 Licensed from Midway Manufacturing Company. All rights reserved. Acclaim is a division of Acclaim Entertainmont, Inc. Circle Reader Service #379 "


"U lang ET an enormous amount of always best to have someone warming up work into the pitching mod in the bullpen. el. Fastballs look like fastESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT handles balls and curveballs bend pitching in a far worse manner. Pitch sejust like they should. Most lection is limited to positioning your pitchers are allowed to hurler on the mound and then selecting throw four of the eight difa speed of slow, medium or fast. Once ferent pitches available in the pitch is thrown, you can cut it right, the game. Some pitchers, left or both, sort of like throwing a whillleball in a wind tunnel. LCHIVOS Power Contact BuntStrategy HEY BATTA BATTA! While ESPN BASEBALL'S graphics (right) are par for the course, HARDBALL IV (above) goes the extra mile with gorgeous SVGA pitcherbatter screens. 8 TL tec 4 HITS 6 TAKE PITCH BALLS STRIKES OUTS BASES EMPTY HITTING AWAY ESPN BASEBALL. TONIGHT allows players to position themselves laterally in the batter's box and swing high, low or in the middle of the strike zone. The ball disappears too early, and contact is best made when you start your swing at the precise moment that it appears to be too late to hit the ball. When contact is made, the game runs through an algorithm that determines the result based on the matchup between the pitcher and the hitter. This keeps results more on a par with real baseball, but lowers the action value of the program. er-quality graphics and poor scrolling effects detract from play. You can decide whether you want to control your fielders' movements and/or throwing, permitting a gradual learning process. like knuckleball specialist Charlie Hough, HARDBALL IV also gives you control of can only throw two or three. You select a player movement and throwing, control pitch, then the batter steps up to the plate. of throwing alone, or no arcade control A button press starts the windup, and then at all. Infield play is seemingly arbitrary: you move the joystick to pinpoint a locaafter the ball is hit, the game decides tion within a box just before the pitcher whether an infielder has a chance to finishes his windup. Each pitcher is given make the play. Sometimes a play looks a control rating that determines the acculike an easy ground out, but you are not racy of his original aim. Pitchers gradually allowed to use your shortstop. So while get tired during the game, and, if hit hard your initial reaction is to move your enough, will suddenly lose control all toshortstop right a couple of steps, you gether. This fatigue system is rather poorend up moving your center fielder out of ly designed, and the problem is position to hold the play to a single. exacerbated because it takes about one full Outfield play is very difficult. After the inning for a relief pitcher to warm up. It's ball is hit, the view shifts from behind the pitcher to the selected view of the out HLAADBALL4 Le beaders field, and this new view requires a second or more for Bank Piguer you to evaluate it. This often costs you a chance to move your outfielder into position. Outfielder movement is momentum-based, and 319 because of the unusual dimensions of the outfield, lateral movement is much easier than forward or backward movement. The result: you often miss what should be easy catches. Mastering FLAT STATS Stormfront's games usually have lots o' the idiosyncrasies of outfield stats, but ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT (right) is surprisingly play is certainly the key to deficient. HAROBALL IV (above) has more stats than in success in HARDBALL. IV. previous games, but their accuracy is suspect. evaluate the quality of the pitch and the timing of the swing. This means that once you get your timing down, lots and lots of hits result. After just a couple of full games, I was averaging about 30 hits per game for my team alone. Dedicated joystick sluggers will fare even better. As a pitcher, you had better throw every ball into the bottom third of the strike zone or you will give up a lot of home runs. Teom Pos VS R 1 Hitats. Matt 2 Crirtey, Ken maguriJell 4 Thomas.frank Bonds. Barre Belle. Ribert 7 McGriffred 9068 353 THE COLOR MEN Both games excel in the audio category. Al Michaels' voice calls the play-by-play for HARDBALL. IV. The play-calling is sometimes choppy and occasionally lags behind STATISTICAL LEADERS Batting Leaders 9 Calarraga, R. 10 Mitchell, Kevin BE SE ESPI FI Pos 18 R 3038 HR REI ingala 3.8 1 G 2 Beds, Barry orker 4 Thomas, Frank 1B 547 104 174 30 3* LE 604 03192 30 6 Dele Abert 7 W Malta 8 Patrete, Ratne OM Fred 10 Ron 0**** 2683788234585 B 10 | onww 12 urbe 13 Planter, Fre 14 Carter, 15 Patre Cean . AF 600 519 92 38 103 527 33 31 0 17 Tetes Mei 18 Tatab, Danny SRS 2 INSIDE PITCH HARDBALL'S designers put 460 BACK Team Stati s tid Pichert im Me 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"VRTUVNLV VEGAS PRESENTS WETAMERS PAGEANT BRIA 3 BRAINS Double Disc CD-ROM Game For MAC Windows & 3DO! a See A Demo & More At http://VirtualVegas.com ONLY COMPUTER 39.00 Espress Order Now 1.800.228.7449 Check Out Computer Express Online At http://cexpress.com:2700/ O SWITUAL VICA, M. Circle Reader Service #59 "


"Replay 1.1356OTO man rosters and that there Scott Bullett in 1993 and Atlanta's Jose SISTER are no injuries. The game Oliva in 1994 feature batting averages of is probably worst in the more than 2.000, and both hit about .970 stolen base department. in season replays. I haven't found any Witness speedy Jeff Conine way to alleviate this problem short of of Florida, 1-for-3 stealing trading them both to San Diego. bases in 1994. Even Neither game offers much of an opthough he's rated a 2 out posing manager, either. Both games are of 5 for speed, he manprone to unusual substitution patterns aged to steal 63 bases in and have trouble managing pitching staffs. ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT occasionally even allows a pitcher to REPLAYS DON'T LIE The instant replay in both re-enter a game. Again, games allows glory hogs to view and review their HARDBALL IV suffers from finest moments. ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT (right) gets a serious lack of realism. a nod for allowing you some camera positioning. You can watch a hitter lay down a perfect sacrifice the play action, but full player names and bunt, only to see that your realistic play descriptions add a lot to the runner has forgotten to simulation. ESPN BASEBALL. TONIGHT feaadvance to the next base. tures play-calling from Dan Patrick, which is a little out-of-sequence and poorly GAME SUMMARY timed in many cases, but it sounds very reHARDBALL IV is a remarkalistic. Adding player names would have the simulation. This total was among his able game graphically, but it is baseball improved the eflect. team's leaders, but hardly surprising conby analogy alone. Once you learn pitchsidering Padre Luis Lopez's 28 was the ing placement, outfield play and the timSTATISTICALLY SPEAKING league's lowest total among starting playing of the pitch, you will be able to Realism takes a hearty beating in the ers. Okay, enough bashing. HARDBALL IV control game results. With all the beauty HARDBALL IV dugout. The game offers was not meant for serious season replay. of the graphics and the play-by-play anonly a handful of player stats, basing Again, it's an action game and should be nouncing, though, it's easy to suspend repitching almost entirely on ERA and hittaken as nothing but. ality and enjoy the batting practice. ting entirely on batting average and ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT fares much E SPN BASEBALL TONIGHT is statistically home runs. The results are usually good better in the reality department, almore sound than its competition, but is for comedic relief. HARDBALL. IV also ofthough there is one rather glaring omisdefinitely not an action game. As a result, fers a quick season play feature, but you sion. Box scores are available neither the flaws and bugs in the computer's Al have to jump in every few minutes, move during nor after your game-an inexcusstand out much more. This game is an the schedule forward a week, and press able oversight. Baseball without box upgrade away from making it to the big the \"simulate\" button. The lineups never scores is like apple pie without the fruit. leagues. very from game to game, except for a \"The game doesn't compare statistically to And the quest for the ultimate baseball strict live-man pitching rotation. Backups statistics-based standouts PURSUE THE game goes on.... get about 50 ABs per season and New PENNANT 5.0 or STRAT-O-MATIC BASEBALL THE EDITORS SPEAK York Yankee third baseman Wade Boggs, 5.0, but it does provide a fairly realistic who played 93 of his team's 113 games in set of numbers. Batting averages are very ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT 1994, hitting .342 and winning a Gold low, as are ERAs for most pitchers. Even RATING Glove, isn't even listed as the Yankee the pitching disasters from Detroit can starting third baseman. You've got to put manage a sub-4.00 ERA for a year. You PROS Reasonably accurate statistics him there yourself. Ahem. can simulate a full season in just a few and easy play make this a good In my first simulated season, San Diego minutes on a high-end computer, and choice for the baseball novice. (47-70 and the worst record in the Major the computer manager will make a gen CONS Veterans will find it mediocre Leagues in 1994), ran away with its diviuine attempt to assign hitters a realistic in nearly every aspect. sion title and ended up defeating Toronamount of playing time. Pitchers in the to, 4-2, in the World Series. Five Padre bullpen have specific roles, and this may HARDBALL IV regulars hit better than .330 and Tony be the first game to offer realistic injury Gwynn hit .397 with 37 home runs (.394, durations. ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT in RATING 12 homers in 1994 play). San Diego's cludes full rosters (up to 40 players) from PROS Terrific look and feel, and a pitching was typical of league play as well, all 1993 and 1994 teams. You can make with starters gaining a lot of the saves and trades between teams, but you can not great action-game interface. the closer, Trevor Hoffman, pitching just eliminate players or edit statistics. This is CONS The statistics are a joke. Approach this one as a fun and easy acsix innings all year. Keep in mind that rather unfortunate, because the data ention game and nothing but. HARDBALL. IV season disks include only 25try people made mistakes. Pittsburgh's 136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Over 60 missions in all, making IRON ASSAULT the most actionpacked game of its kind. STRAP YOURSELF INTO Start with your choice of three thundering the cockpit of a 100-ton blasting bot. robots THEN PREPARE TO CRUSH power-hungry corporation. Four types of gameplay -Simulation, mission, combat and strategy With an appetite Earth. TO FIND EM you've got brains, camgrises un Hook up to a challenger's modem and go iron head to eras, coordinates and radars. Wirgin is a moderes tras head. TO NAIL EM, you've got the firepower ASSAUIT of an army. YOU'RE ONE ASSAULT WEAPON. they'd love to ban. reserved. Iron Assalt is a registered trademary of Wirgin Interactive Entertot, But first, they've got to stop you. s . Al so far rallitt OMul Exple terrain [mountains ice, desert and unban hell] transforms each mission into a new and grueling challenge. ESTADUATE 125 Crefft 3-D texture mapping, animated video and real robot models turn battle simulation into terrifying reality. Circle Reader Service #23 Candit KIDS TO ADULTS Animated Violence "


"CUTTING EDGE \"I can't shake him!» Cries your wing man as the MiG matches his every move. F-16 FLCS Fearlessly, you push the ThrustMaster. F-16 TQSH throttle forward and your Falcon roars to the rescue. The force of acceleration slams you into the ejection seat as you tear through the sky. Your skilled fingers dance over the fully programmable switches as your thumb works the TQS trackball. Your other hand tightens around the ThrustMaster. F-16 FLCS stick as you maneuver behind your enemy. Suddenly, the MiG falls into the funnel of your HUD. Squeezing the trigger, a lethal hail of cannon fire rips through his ship sending him down in flames. F-16 TQS. Unlimited Programmability Unparalleled Performance Uncompromising Reality THRUSTMASTER THE REALITY SPECIALISTS 10150 SW NIMBUS AVENUE PORTLAND, OR. 97223-4337 PHONE (503)639-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #161 "


"SIMULATION «Open The Bomb Bay Doors, Hal» BOGEYS You never saw eyes where they should be on the joysticks and GET HANDS-ON Dave, the cagey on the tailpipe of the bogey in your sites. Voice pilot in 2001, recognition isn't as expensive and futuristic as it type comonce was. It's available now, at an affordable price. WITH YOUR SIMS mands into a BAR & GRILI keyboard to is WATSON, I'VE GOT sue instructions A MISSILE LOCK! USING VOICE to his craft. The first product to function with any degree of Spoken words were all that was necessary for Halaccuracy is VOICE COMMANDER from Island Imagto acknowledge and subsequently, ignore coming. This small TSR program costs only $22, and RECOGNITION mands. Simulation buffs have long yearned for all it requires is a Sound Blaster-compatible the same ability in their games, but can we expect sound card, a microphone, and at least a 386DXour machines to react with any greater compli33 computer. No expensive sound cards or highSOFTWARE ance than Hali quality microphone are necessary. Naturally, a Obviously, the keyboard is still the favored microphone that will clip to your collar so you sidekick of the joystick in computer simulations can concentrate on the joysticks helps, but isn't But just because it's favored doesn't mean it's required. All you do is install the software, speak the best choice. We all know how difficult and each command \"phrase\" in the VOICE COMMANdistracting it can be to take your eyes of the DER library three times, and you're ready to roll. screen during an intense dogfight and try to I've spent quite a bit of time using VOICE COMfind that crucial key. MANDER with MicroProse's FLEET DEFENDER, and The alternative will keep your hands and your it works amazingly well. VOICE COMMANDER comes with a preprogrammed library of commands; it knows what keys a simulation accepts and Topping today's briefing is an advisory for those of you flying near assigns a word or phrase to Mission Studios airspace. Satellite recon indicates an unusually high each function such as \"chall,\" \"lares,\" or \"radar.\" Once level of activity as they prepare to launch the next modern combat you've \"trained\" the software simulation, JETFIGHTER III. Long-range radar has identified updated modto recognize your voice, no els of the F-16 Falcon, F/A-18 Hornet, and the F-22 Lightning II. The further training is required. latest version in the Jetfighter line boasts technology distilled from the VOICE COMMANDER recognizes military, including what Mission calls \"true texture mapping...no more most, if not all, commands acwarping or fringing.\" Military data has also been used to create JETcepted by the flight sims it FIGHTER III's terrain, which is expected to be highly detailed. The prodsupports. In fact, it supports more commands than would uct will feature smooth shading, haze and fog, transparencies (for be realistic in a sim; for insee-through clouds), and a texture-mapped 3D virtual cockpit (where stance, I could use \"radar\" to the gauges still function while the pilot scrolls the view around). activate the FLEET DEFENDER Those volunteering to fly in these craft will be flying in a United Na radar, but I choose not to in tions strike team against Argentina in their invasion of Chile. order to preserve realism. (continued on page 140) In order to have any sort of by Tom \"KC\" Basham APRIL 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 139      R    "


"CATALOG with every order SHIPPING on any three in-stock games (continental U.S. only) recognition accuracy, your speech patterns VOICE COMMANDER is not perfect-it can must be reasonably consistent. You must make mistakes. But for $22 plus a SOUND slur phrases like \"engaged defensive\" into BLASTER-compatible card with a microone word during the training stage as you phone jack and a microphone, it works would during game play. VOICE COMMAN pretly well; well enough to convince me DER does have some recognition problems that voice recognition isn't an expensive which seem to increase as the number of novelty or the stuff of science fiction stosyllables increase. Fortunately, you can reries. It's here, now. And it's something program any single command later. So, if software developers should begin to conyou find that \"Return to base\" is mistaken sider today, not next century. for \"engaged defensive\" you can reprogram that phrase without redoing them all. INTO THE SUNSET Despite how well VOICE COMMANDER Regrettably, I'm passing the torch of Boworks, I imagine very few of you have seen goy's Bar & Grill. I've thoroughly enjoyed or even heard of it. One reason is that only writing this column and corresponding four simulations are currently supported by with many of you, but the time for change VOICE COMMANDER: FLEET DEFENDER, F-15 has come to move on to other things. My STRIKE EAGLE III, F-117 STEALTH FIGHTER, wife and I are exploring new careers, and I will be unable to continue handling this column. I extend my thanks to all of you who took the time to write or e-mail words of encouragement. Check six! The editors would like to thank Tom for his hard work over the last year. We've enjoyed having him behind the bar and wish him luck in his new venture. But the battle must go on, and the next flight assignment will go to Denny Atkin, simulation \"DESIGNATE TARGET\" A simple voice command fanatic, former editor at Compute! magazine, replaces the old keyboard hunt and peck, and current Associate Editor of Omni. Look for freeing pilots to focus on the task at hand. Denny behind the bar next month. -Ed. FREE GAME with every order FREE NEWSLETTER GAMES One W. Seminary St., Brandon, VT 05733 8am-Midnight Eastern Time, Mon-Sat. 1-800-247-5447 THE BIG NEWS Sid Meier Interview MES and 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR. Why? Because, as peripheral companies like Thrustmaster have learned, game publishers usually don't receive keyboard replacements all that well. It usually means extra programming and development to provide support for the new device. The game publishers don't know if it really works all that well, nor do they know just how many people are really using it. Hence the first problem. Most people (game publishers and nongame publishers alike) usually see voice recognition as something coming down the road but not here yet, or a great idea but prohibitively expensive. Why spend the time providing support for voice recognition software that probably doesn't work and isn't supported by gamers? Thus, we find ourselves in a chicken/egg scenario: Nobody buys VOICE COMMANDER because only four products support it, but only four products support it because nobody owns it. Another problem is that the software has limited distribution. There's only one retail firm carrying VOICE COMMANDER at the moment, a mail order house called Flight Sim Central (800-477-SIMS). Don't expect voice recognition technology to revolutionize our hobby overnight. RADAR (continued from page 139) Onto other matters. We have a mole at MicroProse who reports that they are fast at work on a modern day strategic simulation, NAVY STRIKE, that puts you in command of an entire task force. NAVY STRIKE will place more emphasis on managing resources and mission planning, requiring you to concentrate on preparation as well as combat command of the task force. Highlights include combating chemical warfare in the Persian Gulf area and a Libyan regional scenario. Dynamic rules of engagement will shift according to the current political climate. Now, for you race car drivers who've been flipping pencils into the ceiling, eyes forward and listen up! Papyrus tells us they're busy porting over INDYCAR RACING and NASCAR to both Windows and Macintosh versions. So you'd better quit polishing your pistons and get those engines built, because your day will soon be at hand! Dismissed! Send me your current newsletter. Here's $2. Send me your catalog, $2 off coupon and newsletter Name Address City State, Zip  1995 Titan Games 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 A B CGW Circle Reader Service #117 "


"BAO Publishing Presents the Complete PC Aviation Experience. BAO Publishing, developers of Microsoft Flight SimulatorTM presents the ultimate flight simulation experience with BAO's Europe 1, Las Vegas Scenery, Flight Simulator Flight Shop and Tower, the most realistic ATC simulation available. Feel the tension mount (and the sweat start) as you direct heavy traffic from the tower at Chicago's O'Hare airport; take a chance and play the odds in Vegas as you complete a fly-by of the casinos and surrounding desert; proudly step back and admire your latest plane design with custom colors and graphics all ready for her maiden customized flight adventure or fly the Alps and discover Europe from the air. All this and more is possible with BAO. File your flight plan today and start your adventure. \"A sure bet for computer pilots who demand realistic scenery -Greg Harris, Editor of Full Throttle LAS VEGAS EUROPEI w Challenge your skills with a fly-by of Hoover Dam and other famous Las Vegas landmarks. Europe I includes over 100 airports with taxiways, moving objects, unique buildings and approach lights. Runkowe w Las Vegas Scenery offers you startling, realistic, 3D-level detail of Las Vegas and the surrounding desert. The scenery combines actual satellite images with special aerial and ground-base photography to faithfully recreate more than 4,000 square miles of the Nevada landscape. Tour scenic Lake Mead, the famous Vegas \"Strip\" or catch a stunning view of Hoover Dam, one of the man-made wonders of the world. You set the itinerary. Europe I lets you explore from the air the scenic countries of Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the Netherlands. You'll discover beautiful cities like Berlin, Munich, Vienna, Geneva and Amsterdam. All major roads, waterways, lakes, cities, the Alps and landmarks are realistically recreated including all IFR/VFR airports. Experience Europe from your own cockpit. \"Best of Show\" at C.E.S. -Awarded by Game Bytes Magazine FLIGHT SHOP TOWER An easy-to-use (windows-based) aircraft factory lets you design your own plane. You'll calmly choreograph the movement of incoming and outgoing air traffic high above Chicago's O'Hare airport. Flight Simulator Flight Shop puts the tools in your hands. You build, customize and paint ===== your own planes and a flight dynamics editor LAO allows you to specify the flying characteristics. Share your designs with other flight enthusiasts through BBS's such as CompuServe. Create your own flight plan and send it to the built-in Flight Service Station (FSS) and then hop in your flight simulator airplane for an ATC controlled flight. With Tower the responsibility is all yours! As here IBAD a tower controller, thousands of passengers will rely on your ability to make split-second decisions. You'll handle realistic aircraft takeoffs, landings and ground movements through a 360 degree panable window view. Based on FAA and Transport Canada's professional training simulation software, Tower puts you in the middle of all the action. See your local retailer or call: (217) 356-0188 t Simulator for more information Circle Reader Service 1293 (BAO Dnelopers of Microsof 01994 Bruce Artwick Organization, L. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Flight Simulator is a registered trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. Europe I was designed for BAO by Alting Software under license, and produced by the Bruce Artwick Organization, Lul, Tower is a trademark of Aviation Simulations, Inc., a joint venture of Wesson International, Inc. and Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. CompuServe is a registered trademark of CompuServe, Inc. BAO is a trademark of Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. "


"REVIEW Courage And Canvas Relive The Youth of Air Combat In Origin's WINGS OF GLORY by Martin E. Cirulis ORLD WAR I: A WAR SO BRUTAL lots more than riding through the skies of a tight spot. Together with the rest of AND POINTLESSLY WASTEFUL OF on a rickety charger of canvas and your squadron, you live a M.A.S.H.-esHUMAN LIFE THAT THEY HOPED wood, dueling other knights for possesque life of hijinks and horror between it would be the War to end all sion of the air. flying various missions that affect the wars. Unfortunately, all it A few years ago a burst of WWI course of your little part of the war. As seemed to do was set the stage for the flight sims was released, and after the you proceed, a plot of military espieven more horrific-but far more effiskies cleared, most gamers had picked onage unfolds, complete with spies and cient-disagreement known as WW II. their favorite and the market was pretty even a captured Fokker Tri-Plane Oddly enough, though, The Great War much locked down. Well, it seems that thrown in to mix things up a bit. All-indid not consist solely of the stench and technology has allowed Origin to follow all, your basic Origin plot. death in the trenches; the conflict also the golden rule: \"If you can't do any. Those expecting a story-line and execreated one other lasting impression. In thing new, do the same old thing better cution on the level of WING COMMANDER direct contrast to that dirt and despair, than anybody else.\" Their newest III, or even PRIVATEER, will be somewhat there came a legend of romance and light-sim-with-a-story, WINGS OF GLORY disappointed. Things here are far closer chivalry from high above: the dashing (WG), is centered on the golden age of to the level of STRIKE COMMANDER. While fighter aces in their canvas and wood maflight when humanity, having so rethere are the occasional \"War is hell\" chines. While the cently broken the statements and some interesting personal reality of aerial WINGS OF GLORY bonds of gravity, observations about the greater debacles combat in WWI Price: $79.95, decided they just of the war, this is still a pretty idealized was sometimes CD-ROM NGS had to try killing universe and most ugly little truths are more akin to a System each other with overlooked. deadly Punch and Requirements: their new toys. The character graphics are basic and Judy show than a IBM compatible the voice-acting minimal, to the point 486DX-33Mhz glorious flying CANVAS that the lovely French peasant-girl who or better joust between noCOMMANDER loiters about the field flirting and over(486DX-50Mhz ble knights, the rorecommended), In WINGS OF GLOhearing mission plans sounds more Orimantic image of 8 MB RAM RY, the player asental than Parisian. I guess Angel from the early fighter pi VGA graphics, sumes the role of the WING COMMANDER universe was busy lots refuses to die. 15 MB hard drive space, 2x CD-ROM; a young Amerithe weekend they taped the voices. The Nowhere is the supports AdLib, General MIDI, and Sound can flyer who has only other thing that may annoy some, Blaster-compatible sound cards. legend healthier Protection: None joined the Royal especially those of English ancestry, is than in the realm Designers: Bruce Adams, David Beyer Air Force, before that there seems to be some confusion of computer flight Publisher: Origin Systems the actual in between the portrayal of a dashing sims. While charg Austin, TX volvement of British Ace versus an utter git. ing about at Mach (415) 571-7171 America hersell, But even the basic story and bad char2 dodging SAM in the hopes of acterization seem to work in favor of this and teaching naughty third-worlders a finding adventure and glory while fightproduct, giving the game the feel of a stern lesson is always exciting, and ing the good fight. You find yourself as\"30s-era adventure movie starring Errol pushing your Mustang to the edge of signed to a squadron stationed at a Flynn, or perhaps Douglas Fairbanks. the envelope while you fight to prevent small airfield in deepest, darkest And besides, the story does what it is supthe nightmare of a Nazi-dominated France. On your wing is your dashing posed to do; it gives you a reason to go world is certainly morally satisfying, and cynical true friend Charles Dearout again and again to fly the beautifully nothing stirs the blood of most sim-piing, who is always ready to help you out rendered skies of WW 1. 142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Live the life of a top secret agent with the highly classified government team Bureau 13. Your mission is to investigate, contact, and if necessary, exterminate supernatural entities. Build your own team from confidential Bureau files, each character with his own unique and special abilities. The government has kept the widespread reports of paranormal incidents a secret for fear of mass hysteria. Are you prepared for what you might encounter? And can you deal with it when you do? Original music score complete with lyrics Puzzle solutions vary depending upon characters in your party Thrilling combat sequences with variable scenarios Complex puzzles require clever thinking and imagination Complete multi-media experience full of dazzling graphics Based on successful pen & paper roleplaying game by Richard Tucholka PC CD-ROM & PC Floppy INTERACTIVE BOI TWARE DISTRIBUTED ESY GAMETEK Take 2 Tataracino Software 1994 Take-Two Interactive Software, ina. Gamitek in a fopistered trademark of IE Inc. All dots reserved. Butonu 13 registered trademark I TITAO System Circle Reader Service #184 a registered trademark of Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc. "


"THE BEST ony. But hey, if we were worried about a hammerhead turn have been included. OF THE WORST OF TIMES the ground we'd be driving a tank sim. Along with all this chrome, more tradiWithout a doubt, WINGS OF GLORY is the And speaking of tanks, the ground war tional flight sim aspects are present as best-looking and sounding WW I flight is not totally forgotten, and often you will well. A good padlock-view option is of sim to date. From the beautifully renfind yourself bombing or strafing enemy fered with a nice twist: your view changes dered cockpit views to the groan of your units in support of some major historical as if you were actually twisting your head wings bending under the stress of a tight offensive. Though you really can't do instead of the angle changing instantaturn or climb, this game pulls out all the much to prevent a bloodbath for the Alneously. There are the traditional \"camstops to give you the feel of how it era\" views as well, and a VCR function was. that allows you to replay a flight from any Players will fly five different fightangle to see who did what to whom, and ers while in the service of the Allies: you can even re-enter the simulation at the Sopwith Pup and Camel, the any point. S.E.5a, the SPAD SXIII and even the classic Fokker Dr.I of Red Baron fame. With all reality options turned on, each of these planes handles in a fashion distinctive enough that you have lies, success always no doubts you have switched aircraft. allows you to think Many will find themselves choosing a fathings might have vorite fighter based not just on speed and been worse. And, firepower, but also handling. while the terrain is The graphical rendering of the planes simple, enemy around you is exquisite. Details are clear tanks and grounded and accurate down to pilot's scarves waving aircraft are up to in the wind, and the paint jobs are so beauthe graphical qualitiful that players will find themselves some ty of the air war. I 1:34 T E NENTER FLIGHT what bitter over the fact that this game was pleasantly surdoes not allow them to paint their own airprised to discover AIRCRAFTSMANSHIP Wing's aeroplanes are stunning in all their color and craft. Enemy aircraft are rendered well the dark rectangles detail. You've never flown, fought and died in such style. enough to make you think you are looking I was diving towards through a window into a realm of diving, on a bombing run resolved themselves As a sign that Origin wanted WINGS OF twisting model planes. And let's not even into recognizable A7V Totenkopfs. GLORY to be more of a real flight-sim than get into the Hindenberg-esque death a flying action game, they also included a thrves of the Zeppelins you will eventually YOU ARE THERE... very basic mission builder that allows playgun down, if you're lucky or skilled enough As in most things, pretty pictures are great, er to just fly for the heck of it, apart from to survive their incredible firepower. but the proof is usually in the details. WINGS the story hardwired into the game. While All this aircraft beauty does not slow OF GLORY doesn't disappoint there, either. this is not an especially powerful utility, the game down, but it appears that the Small aspects of the early flight experience you can still choose one of the four allied designers had to sacrifice ground detail are covered in surprising ways: for examplanes or the Fokker and fly a ground-atto achieve this. The land below is basicalple, you can actually gauge how close you tack or dogfighting mission against ranly grass or mud, with a few well rendered are to disaster by listening to how loud the dom targets. You also have the choice of trees or buildings to break up the monotgroan of your wings becomes under stress. playing in what has become the standard Players will be training program of Origin flight games, 8993/14 3 amazed that early the Gauntlet mode. This lets you lly aces managed to hit against ever increasing numbers of enemy anything at all with a aircraft that attack in waves of progressivesingle Vickers maly better fighter craft. chine gun plugging Of course, this is not to say that hardslowly away-not to core sim-jocks will be completely happy in mention the conthis world. While realism has an important stant jams, usually place in this game, with many nice touches just as you are about like aircraft center-of-gravity and fires to administer the caused by excessive engine-pulsing, there coup de grace to a has been a definite decision made with renoble opponent. gard to playability vs. realism. Origin Talk to Edmond Even such obscure chose to edit out some aspects of the real things as falling world that might make gameplay too dilliNPC-HQ The WINGS OF GLORY story unfolds under this ramshackle roof. The through the smoke cult or tedious to the average gamer. characterization and voice-acting aren't stellar, but they work. from your own damWhile aircraft will stall, it is never fatal unaged engine during less you are very low or your aircraft has LV/208 144 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"APACHE-GUNSHIP Armed and Dangerous SIMULATION 1984... \"Wild Bill\" Stealey and MicroProse introduce Gunship — the first attack helicopter simulation HY ALU APACHEGUNSHIP 1989.. Gunship 2000 arrives, incorporating the hottest technologies and graphics. INTERACTIVE MAGICE Now... Technology marches on. A new generation must lead the way. Who better to once again push the gaming envelope than the man who's been doing it all along? \"Wild Bill\" and Interactive Magic. Hot new 3-D visual technology Combat helicopter simulation for the serious sim fan and the first time helicopter gunner in arcade free-for-all level PC CD-ROM Outstanding high resolution low level terrain graphics with highly variable explosion graphics Great fun \"[Apache-Gunship is going to push all directions in serious combat air simulation to the limit, to produce a system even the most jaded veteran gamers are likely to drool over.\" Strategy Plus INTERACTIVE MAGIC D Digtal Integration INTERACTIVE MAGIC P.O. Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 For more information call 1-919-461-0722 Circle Reader Service #14  MicroProse, Gunship and Gunship 2000 are registered trademarks of MicroProse Inc. and are not affiliated with Interactive Magic. "


"Damaged en-. copies of RED BARON. And if unending gines do not realism even to the point of tedium is imget worse or portant to you, then perhaps you should catch fire, and avoid this newest offering from the Great although damAir War. Others may find the story-line a aged fuel lines little clichéd, and cry «Same old, same will eventual old»—and they may be right. force you to But if you long for the \"feel\" of the make an emerplanes, and images of the days when pilots gency landing, were Knights and you flew with the wind oil leaks have blasting in your face and bullets tearing never really afthrough stretched canvas all around you, fected my flight then this game is definitely for you. The time. Even sounds are here, the sights are here, and more unrealisso is the tension. There is enough realism tic is the way a to lend the world an authentic tone, but OH THE HUMANITY! A Zeppelin takes a lesson from the Hindenburg after being pilot is woundthe accent is on the experience and the pelted by machine-gun fire and primitive air-to-air rockets. ed. The screen excitement, make no mistake about it. goes red for a THE EDITORS SPEAK suffered serious damage to its control sursecond or two, and that's the end of it. faces. Also, planes famous for deadly snapHeck, nobody even comes out to hand WINGS OF GLORY spins are very well-behaved here. you a Band-Aid after the mission. RATING The only simplification that I felt took away from the simulation was in the damFACING THE DAWN PATROL PROS Best-looking, -sounding, and age model for aircraft, especially for your These and other decisions, especially the -playing game on the topic. own. Damage seems to be taken in \"hitones pertaining to flight-models, will un CONS Slight shortcuts on realism point\" increments; once absorbed, it has doubtedly cause many purists in the and hackneyed story may annoy an effect, but there doesn't seem to be flight-sim world to label WINGS OF GLORY some. much of a dynamic aspect to the process. fluff and turn grumpily back to their IHUNDERSEAI \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES Feedback System Used in Real Simulators NOW Arallable to the Public \"VIRTUAL UTOPIA!» Marc Dultz, STRATEGY PLUS HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1  800  8-THUNDER Whether its the whine of your Formula 1 Race Car theag of Sword against Sword, orderen GE our Jet Engines at full altetene hunderSeat lets you take QH A H b f realism! Compatible with ali soun d s and CD-ROM'S ThunderSeat Technologies 6330 Arizona Circle  Los Angeles, CA 90045 310  410-0022 FAX: 310 410-1569 Circle Reader Service #185 "


"Gunannte To make it more realistic, we'd have to kick dust in your face! LAN for the ultimate race — with up to 8 players at the same time! Visit your local software dealer today, or call 1-800-346-2300. On CD-ROM and 3.5 disks for IBM PC & Compatibles Distributed by GT Interactive Software With its advanced technology and powerful features, SUPERKARTS already makes all other racing games eat its dust: REVOLUTIONARY RT3D ENGINE so high-tech, it generates fully-textured 3D graphics in real time even on a 386 PC! MUR TAG get the best deals within the SMOOTH-AS-SILK ANIMATION that can go as high as 60 frames a second rivaling the hottest coin-op hits! 16 HEART-STOPPING TRACKS in different cities around the world. Each track features hidden shortcuts, power-ups, jumps, pitlanes, oil slicks and its own awesome music soundtrack*! APLUS 88 sec. MULTIPLE CAMERA PERSPECTIVES. Watch the action from practically any viewpoint by simply changing camera angles. FOR UP TO 8 PLAYERS ON LAN! You can play solo against intelligent computercontrolled drivers. Or against a friend using the simultaneous 2-player split screen. Best of all, get on an IPX-protocol #5229'an F arid Williams Williams Entertainment Inc. MANIC MEDIA Developed and published by Manic Media Productions Ltd. in association with Williams Entertainment Inc. SuperKarts: TM and  Manic Media Productions Ltd. All rights reserved. Distributed by and 1995 GT Interactive Software. All rights reserved. *CD version only. AP25040 61 22 AM S 10 SIC 49. DEC BOR EDE BOGO3 DOEKEN "


"STRATEGY Uber Alles Under The Waves How To Have A Long And Lethal Career In ACES OF THE DEEP by Kevin Turner AKEN SCENARIO BY SCENARIO, ACES it is critically important to take the time mended limited fuel, battery, and torpeOF THE DEEP IS A GREAT U-BOAT to select the level of realism. The level of does as the first options you explore, as it's SIMULATION. BUT WHEN YOU STRING realism is basically a level of difficulty seimportant to learn how to ration these asthe U-boat scenarios into an entire lection. If I could only impart one piece sets early in the career. Dud torpedoes career, then you truly get to expeof advice, it would be to start easy. Caadd a level of realistic frustration, as a perrience what separates ACES OF THE DEEP OF THE DEEP reers are very long, and there is ample reers are very long, and there is amplefect attack can be thwarted by a weapon from its contemporaries. An Aces career time to make the game more and more that will not perform as advertised. accurately depicts the rise and fall of the realistic. The first patrols should be conU-boatwaffen in WWII with an attention sidered a shakedown cruise. Learn the inGETTING THE PICTURE to historical detail that borders on the obterface and the capabilities of the U-boat As the boat leaves the slip, it's time to sessive. Once you've started in the U-boat without the added pressure of high levels start thinking about the Big Picture. The heyday, stealing candy from the naive Alof difficulty and the game will be much Big Picture is a term I use to describe the lied navy, and then felt the heavy hand of more enjoyable. Besides, the next career mental framework you must be in to sucAllied anti-submarine tactics slowly press can be played from start to finish at the ceed as a U-boat skipper. The Big Picture upon you, you cannot help but walk away highest level of realism, which is as close encompasses knowledge of the platform, with a better understanding of the war as to actually being there as possible without the enemy, and strategy. Knowledge of fought on and under the Atlantic. a commission in the Kriegsmarine. the platform includes knowing the max The career, once begun, will start the The realism options allect difficulty in speed, battery and fuel performance, player in a small, Type IID U-boat based two ways: making the enemy more capacrash dive lag time, and other characterin Bremen in 1939. This is the first of the ble and making the U-boat less automat istics of the boat. Knowledge of the eneeight time periods depicted. As you moveed. I would suggest that you increase the my would include its ASW advancements through these time periods, you'll see the two proportionally. Having the enemy at and capabilities, and as much about their development of the convoy system, antiexpert level, but the boat at the absolute attack methods as possible. Strategic submarine warfare (ASW) tactics, and the lowest level of realism, or vice-versa, will knowledge would include knowing the effects of the U.S. entry into the war. It is yield a skewed game. A balanced apbasic tenets of submarine warfare, like important to monitor time periods, as it proach is the most eflective way of enthe tactics of convoy attacks, how to set will enable you to understand what is gohancing the learning process and getting up and use the stern tubes, and surviving ing on in the war and, more importantly, on the right side of the learning curve. a depth charge attack. what to expect at sea. Spend the first patrol learning how to But more important to the Big Picture Once the decision to start a patrol is dive the boat and operate the interface. As is knowing what is going on all the time. made, the coordinates for the patrol area confidence builds, put more and more of There is nothing more frustrating than are given. But before leaving that screen, the realism options into play. I'd recomsetting up a great second attack on a 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"One extra large helping of urban reality, served up on a silver platter. Drop this silver platter in your And forget buying add-ons: the CD CD COLLECTION CD-ROM drive and feast your collection comes complete with all of eyes on the pièce de résistance of simulated games: the SimCity 2000's a la carte items. The Scenarios Volume 1: Take on Mount St. Melon's and 9 other disasters. SimCity 2000 CD Collection-three complete Urban Renewal Kit allows you to customize buildSimCity 2000 products on one CD. ings and graphics-you literally can paint the town. This cityscape is so real you can taste it. Go Scenarios Volume 1 makes it all too real-you'll ahead, expand your subway before breakfast. wrestle with 10 real disasters in 10 real U.S. cities. Urban Renewal Kit: Terraform your landscape after lunch. Reshape your Paint the town with c an your color-cycling animation. And bonus cities and scenarios further extend your S SIM CITY 2000 skyline before supper. And see it city limits. So dig in to the ultimate city simulator. The from a variety of delicious 3-D angles. SimCity 2000 CD Collection is now served. SIM CITY 200 MAX IS for Three SimCity 2000 Products on One CD. Available for DOS CD. O 1994 Sim.Business. All rights reserved. SimCity 2000 and Maxis are registered trademarks of Sim Business. For product or ordering information contact your local retailer or call 1-800-33-MAXIS. Circle Reader Service #372 "


"The best vantage Hitting the <Enter> key takes the boat point from which immediately to 1X time compression. to oversee a transit Whenever a plane or a ship is spotted on is not from the the geo plot, simply hit <Enter> and buy bridge, as some some time to think. rookies assume, Once the patrol area is reached, there Depth under reel but the \"geo plot.\" is no need to advise headquarters. Simply Death under Ree m eter The geo plot is my patrol in a pattern of your choosing with name for the over in the patrol area. Should boredom set head screen with in, new orders can be requested, but are the red ring that not necessary. At any time, at the capdenotes visibility tain's discretion, the patrol area can be range. Aircraft and left. Early in the war, I thoroughly recomships will appear mend that the fledgling submariner take on the geo plot to the west coast of England, particularly ACHILLES' KEEL Captains without a sense of the Big Picture may end up long before they the area from the southwest corner of like this one-stuck firmly in the mud at 199 meters. are sighted by the England to the end of the channel belookouts. tween England and Ireland to the north. large convoy, only to discover that the Transiting is usually done in high time Convoys galore arrive and depart from torpedoes from deck storage were never compression (unless you've got a lot of this area, making for a bountiful tonnage loaded. There is nothing more dangertime to kill), and I advise that when tranharvest. After 1941, avoid this area like ous than ignoring the damage control resiting the following rules be followed. the plague, as the depth is confining and ports during a sustained depth charge First and foremost, never leave the geo the ASW assets are plentiful and deadly. attack. Ignoring radio reports of convoy plot while in high time compression. Inmovements from other U-boats creates stead, go to IX time compression and do FORGET CHIVALRY, missed opportunities. The Big Picture what needs to be done, then return to the THIS IS WAR! means acting like, and thinking like, a Ugeo plot and crank up the compression with any luck, the patrol area will yield boat captain. again. Throughout the patrol, radio resome unescorted merchants, and hopeA good example of the importance of ports of convoy sightings will be coming fully a convoy will wander through. The the Big Picture is knowledge of the depth in. I recommend that the patrol area and patrol areas are assigned based on actual under keel—the distance from the Ushipping lanes, and boat's keel to the mud on the bottom of I recommend that the ocean. There are times when the patrol areas not be depth of seawater is less than 150 meters, abandoned premawhich means that any crash dive will land turely. This is espethe U-boat on the bottom of the sea, cially true later in stuck in the mud. (There are times when the career, when sitting on the bottom of the sea is a good mid-Atlantic patrol idea, but while diving to do so, make sure SET COURSE areas are not unthat the U-boat has no forward motion). common. RESUME There is one LAST ONE TO SPOT common mistake THE ENEMY DIES that is made when As the boat exits the harbor, it is time to a convoy is encounplot a course to a patrol area. Plotting a tered and attacked. course is done by setting up waypoints. THE TRANSIT SCOPE The best viewpoint during transit is from the \"geo Having spoken to a Early in the career, all the patrol areas plot.\" (Notice the sub ports on the coast of France that become available number of new will be centered around England. Simply later in the game.) ACES players, I have plot the easiest, fastest way to the patrol found that they all area. The trick to transiting is not in plotthe surrounding areas be memorized or want to sink the escorts. Nein! Ze denial of ting the course; the trick is simply to keep written down. That way, there is no need shipping to ze enemy is der primary mission! a close watch as the transit is taking place. to come out of the geo plot to find out if Nothing else should be considered. Keep Keeping a close watch while transiting the reported convoy is in range. Another chivalry in the closet with your other outis the key to finding easy, unescorted tarmethod is to use the fine chart that is moded ideas and feel no shame in sinkgets, as well as the key to seeing aircraft supplied with the game. Simply spreading unarmed merchants. Besides, the and escorts first. In the submarine serthe chart out, put a dime where the pagame awards no tonnage or extra credit vice, the saying is, «He who is found first, trol area is, and look to see if the spotted for sinking escorts, and tonnage is the dies first.\" Remember that stealth has alconvoy is within reach. Meanwhile, always key to a successful career. ways been the submarine's primary adlisten to the radio reports. Whenever I Should you decide to attack a convoy, vantage. Once that advantage is given am transiting, I keep an eye on the geo and the escorts have closed and forced away, the tables will completely turn. plot, with my finger on the <Enter> key. your U-boat into submerged evasion, 150 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Pirates! Gold Multimedia You're the ruthless captain, leading a crew of marauders aboard a 17th century Spanish galleon. Pillage Caribbean harbor towns. Bombard enemy ships with hull-crushing cannons. Plunder valuable treasures. But beware of scurvy rogues out for your loot. One wrong move, and you'll be walking the plank! Pirates! D D CD-ROM MULTIMEDIA 1995 Micro Prose. All rights reserved. Image courtesy of THE BETTMANN ARCHIVE. MICROPROSE MICROPROSE 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. "


"there are some key things to remember. them from other sailors: their damage misunderstood portion of the game. First of all, watch the geo plot. At the control ability. When a submariner is Should damage occur on the boat, it is easy levels of realism, the escorts will be awarded his dolphins, this signifies a critical that you immediately evaluate the visible, as will their sonar pulses. Watch comprehensive knowledge of the whole damage and react accordingly. There is no the red lines that spread out like wheel damage greater, or spokes; these denote bearing to a pingof more concern, ing escort. At high levels of realism, the than water in the red lines are all that appear. Now watch \"people tank.\" Any how the escorts attack. water that is not Having located the U-boat with active where it is supposed sonar, the escort will close on the target. to be should be of As the escort closes, but before the depth more concern than charges are dropped, the pinging of the any other casualty. radar will suddenly stop. At this time, The second most turn 90 degrees off the base course in eisignificant casualty ther direction. The deeper you are, the is chlorine gas, more time the depth charges will require which is caused by before going off, and the more time to the seawater getting clear the area. in the battery well While playing at high levels of realA GOOD DAY TO DIVE Planes like this Sunderland are very dangerous and and mixing with the ism, wait until the red spokes suddenly difficult to shoot down. Once you're spotted, it's best just to dive for cover. Tead-acid cells, but seem to change direction 180 degrees. this is ultimately beThis means a direct pass over the sub. boat and the systems that comprise the cause water is in the people tank. The end of the pinging, along with the boat. A machinist mate is going to know Should damage occur during a depth change of direction of the red spokes the Trim and Drain system as intimately charge attack, the watch officer will insignifies the time to make a fast move. as his own genitalia, but a sonarman with form you. The damage control screen will An increase of speed can be used to get dolphins will, in addition to his own speshow where the damage has occurred clear, but remember to limit the time of cial knowledge, be able to draw the Trim and help you evaluate its severity. Should the burst. and Drain system from memory, and the damage occur to one of the non-esWhenever possible, maintain heading show which valves are where. Why this sential systems such as the radio, count pointing directly at, or away from, an eslevel of cross training\"? A submarine is a yourself lucky. Should the damage occur cort (red spokes). Should one escort be very small place, and flooding can hapto the torpedo launching equipment, the moving more than others, it is closest to pen in a real hurry, sending you to a wapatrol will be shortened, but not your cayour boat. Pointing reer. Should the damage occur to one of the boat at the esthe systems that keeps water out of the cort limits the availpeople tank, find out if the damage is miable cross section U-BOAT nor, moderate, or critical, and the time that the sonar ping needed for repairs. has to return on. COURSE The speed at which water leaks into the Should more than DEPTH boat is directly proportional to the boat's one escort be close depth. Whenever water is leaking, stay aboard, simply TARGET out of the red zone of the depth gauge. SPEED keep moving, At that great of depth the bilge pumps Sound Mor changing direction will not work against the water pressure, Conroet beorg 950 and depth. When and some leakage in a U-boat is inenemy sonar is no evitable. Once in the yellow range, keep a longer getting a reclose eye on the depth. If the depth starts turn, get away from to decrease due to no action on your part, the area. The speed SPOKE TOO SOON The \"spoke\" of the red circle indicates a sonar \"ping\" in immediately move up to the green range. available will seem the spoke's direction. As the escort nears, and when the pinging stops, it's These actions will slow the leaking of wadead slow, but sitime for evasive maneuvers. ter and buy some much-needed time. lence is golden and The speed of the boat is another imstealth is the only defense. Getting brave tery grave even faster. Should the portant factor in an emergency. The and coming to periscope depth to fight sonarman discover flooding, there isn't planes, which help maintain control, are back will result in the untimely demise of enough time to run and find a machinist more effective the faster the boat is travthe U-boat, especially in high realism. mate or look up the system in a book. eling. Should the boat be traveling at 2 Don't get in the habit at low realism. The sonarman must isolate the flooding knots, the planes are going to have a and do whatever is necessary to keep minimal eflect. Should that speed be inDAMAGE CONTROL himself and his companions from dying. creased to 7 knots, the planes will have There's one thing that submariners are to the detriment of many ACES careers, much more effect. But the problems that especially good at, and that separates damage control is the most neglected and result from increased speed should renSPEED sta 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"ALPILLE BRANQ, CONTACT CONFIRMED.. POON HARA IN WESTPAC IM COLD WAR O 15 NEW SCENARIOS IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC INVOLVING THE UNITED STATES, RUSSIA, CHINA, VIETNAM, NORTH KOREA, SOUTH KOREA, JAPAN, INDONESIA, AUSTRALIA, AND MANY MORE! 15 NEW SCENARIOS SET IN THE COLD WAR ERA INVOLVING THE UNITED STATES, RUSSIA, NATO AND EASTERN BLOCK MILITARIES AS THEY EXISTED PRIOR TO THE FALL OF THE IRON CURTAIN Now.available for BM-Pound soon for Maclitosh, stom Three Sixty/Intracore Harpoon II is a cutting edge Modern Naval Warfare simulation that includes: Full motion clips from the Department of Defense High resolution military style tactical vector maps of the entire world simulating actual CIC display systems Neutral countries modeled with enforced rules of engagement Realistic weather modeling Formation and Mission Editors to control the behavior of your assets in a quick, easy, hands off approach To order call: (305) 373-7700  (800) 468-7226 BBS (305) 374-6872 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud  (508) 368-7139, US Robotics  (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Three-Sixty is a registered trademark of IntraCorp, Inc. Copyright  1995. All rights reserved worldwide. Harpoon is a registered trademark of GDW. BattleSet is a registered trademark of ACSI. Circle Reader Service #51 "


"DEAS MAXDORES Tarox 2020 der acceleration a last resort to stay alive. Should the planes or the torpedo accepting a new command is the opporAs speed is increased, your sonar effeclaunching equipment (tube doors and tunity to have a home port in France, tiveness goes out the window, leaving the torpedo tubes) be damaged, I advise which means that transiting the English boat relatively deaf. An increase in speed heading for port and calling in a patrol. Channel can be avoided. These French also means an increase in noise, and subAs much as I hate returning to port with ports also make transiting to any patrol marine rule number two clearly states unexpended ordnance, I hate losing a area in the Atlantic (and eventually the that \"Noise is bad!\" U-boat more. Caribbean) much easier, and less timeand fuel-consuming. UPWARD At some point in the career, a stafl job MOBILITY will be offered. This means that your caAs the career proreer has ended, and it will be placed in gresses, awards the record books as it stands. There is no and promotions penalty for turning down a new boat or a will be offered. Staff job, although I recommend that any The awards and new class boat be accepted. promotions are The career emulation in ACES OF THE ke based on four criDEEP is fascinating, addicting, and eduteria: tonnage, cational. You'll find yourself jumping tonnage, tonnage when an escort makes sonar contact, and realism. The and cursing the Allies for putting dings more tonnage in your boat. You'll find yourself elated sunk and the highas a convoy is successfully penetrated, SHE CAN'T TAKE ANY MORE! After tangling with several escorts, this boat is er the realism, the and relieved that a patrol has come to in rough shape. Only the most skilled and lucky captain could nurse her faster the promoan end. As your abilities increase and back to port. tions and awards you take on higher levels of realism, will arrive. You will you'll feel a profound sense of accomShould the damage be controlled and also gain the ability to skipper newer plishment-not because of your handyou survive the depth charge attack, classes of boats. These new boats will eye dexterity, or because the secrets of wait until all systems are back on line have inexperienced crews, but they will the game have been found, but because before attacking the convoy again. be more capable. One big advantage in now you possess the Big Picture. Introducing SHAREWARE SPECTACULAR CORTO DRS. MOBOOT Triad Wargame System TOP SHAREWARE GAMES ONLY $1.50 PER DISK TWS is the wargame system you have been waiting for! You have control of the battlefield and individual unit behavior using dozens of programmable parameters. Scrabble, Monopoly, Uno Mystery Manor Features Unit scripting language allows modification of individual aspects of unit behavior while using default behavior for other forces Design your own units or construct forces and scenarios from units provided with the system. Combine multiple unit types, scenarios and historical periods. Up to 32 forces or \"sides\" . Objectives, supply units, intelligence options available. User defined victory conditions. Define your own unit markers  Add sounds to individual weapon attacks Fanfares and graphics identify forces. Dozens of info functions allow you to see the battlefield from a unit's perspective in decision making scripts  Module cditor, maps, Strategy/Tactics module available. Example WWII tank battle included  Mapping compatible with the Triad Campaign System (TCS)  Combined TCS and TWS complete package also available System Requirements IBM/Comp with Window 3.1. Minimum 5 megs hard drive space 4 megs of RAM.  Doom  Multi-Dimensional . Another Planet and Tetris 3D  Duke Nukem 2 Theif Me with No Beer Flight Simulators  Eternam Gateworld  Roadwars 2000 Kiloblaster  Halloween Harry  Simulations of Risk, Major Stryker  Executioners  Lemmings  Stratsys  Kung Fu Louie  Spear of Destiny Hockey  Hugo's Whodonit  Jill of the Jungle  Megatron  Wofenstein 3D  Baseball  Redhook's Revenge  Blake Stone  Galactix PLUS Many,  3D Chess  Monster Bash  Bio Menace Many More FREE CATALOG INCLUDING WINDOWS, BUSINESS, UTILITIES EDUCATION, GRAPHICS Now you Can Have Your Own GIRLFRIEND... ... a sensuous woman living in your computer! GIRLFRIEND is the first VIRTUAL WOMAN. You can watch her, talk to her, ask her questions and relate to her. Over 100 octual VGA photographs allow you to see your girlfriend as you ask her to wear different outfits, and guide her into different activities. As a true artificial intelligence program GIRLFRIEND starts with a 3000 word vocabulary and actually grows the more you use it. She will remember your name, your birthday, and your likes and dislikes, GIRLFRIEND requires 7-10 MB of free space. We offer the ADULT VERSION containing 2 different girls, LISA and SUZY of a special price of only $69. (reg. price $120.) NEW! Voice Kit $29. Stimulating Games from Europe! Imported exclusively by 5 Software P*TRIS is the sophisticated version of the popular block game. You reveal stimulating pictures and movies while controlling the folling blocks. ORDER SG4 P*PIPE is the sophisticated version of the Windows hit Pipe for Windows. but you don't need Windows to run it-you attempt to build a pipeline while exposing pictures and movies MANY EXCITING LEVELS ORDER SGS MOZAIK allows you to reassemble the most exciting women on earth over 45 celebrities in this super ligsaw game. Use mouse or keyboard. ORDER SG6 Price: $35 each or order our SUPER GAME PACK at $89 for all 3 On CD-ROM: NEURODANCERS Interactive movie and game navigate through the NeuroNET in search of the NUERODANCERS. ORDER CD 86 On CD-ROM: 3D DREAMGIRLS See 3D images of the top glamour models-ZOOM and PAN feature-includes model statistics and contact infomretion. ORDER CD 59 On CD-ROM: SCISSORS AND STONES Interactive movie and high stakes game of chance. ORDER CD 89 CD-ROM PRICES: $59 Each or SUPER BUNDLE: 3 for $149 Our FREE CATALOG includes many more ADULT games, movies and pictures on both DISKS and CD-ROM ADD SA S/H  3.5\" Or FOREIGN ORDERS ADD $2/DISKIN PA ADD TAX  MUST STATE AGE OVER 21 YEARS. VISA/MC Orders Only: 800-243-1515 Ext. 6000L / 24 HRS / 7 DAYS FAX (215) 997-2571 Or CK/MO to:SeXXy Software, P.O.Box 220, Dept 600UI. Hatfield, PA 19440 Circle Reader Service #291 VISA MASTER CARD ORDERS (800) 784-1420. For info (904) 494-3165 OR SEND CHECK/MONEY ORDER FOR S79.00 + $5.00 S&H TO Nawu Triad Institute PO Box 11246 Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Circle Reader Service #253 154 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 93912-6295 1-800-983-4321 SPECTRUM D ELECTRONICS SARAS Doom 1-470 New Leve 35 Doam 1340 New Leves:35) Doorn 200/3.9 Doon Corrpanian 01 Doom Mania Draab heashed CDI Dragon's Lar 10 2:00) Dragon Lore) 05e/39 Dream W /5) Dune 239 Dungeon Masty 23.9 AgasYf dT. Ecstrica %PS%  35 16 47/38 14 50/45 48 42/39 36 42 19 IBM NEW In GuestCD lih Har00 183010035 1942 Padic ke War (35) SIOPAK Vd la 2.COM 5TH F 00/3.5 ATran Cansk 3.5 Absolute Mahem ! kes dhe Deep 2D/3.5) AOUD 9 Game Colectonico ADIDA OM 35 poto colectors 235 23 ADID Colectors Ed 300/35 ADID Dark Queen Kim3.3 DAD Dark Sin 200/35 ADEDEye Bendor 12. a 335 AOWD MenceramanC0/3.5 HOLD Pois d Radace(35) ADID Raven00/3.5) ADID Ratenloft Store Prophetic. ADID UNITA A1.3.5. Advanced Civicator /00/3.51 Ade De Camp3.5) A Haroc Catderico) Non Breed(3.5) Non Legacy00/3.5) Alen Logo Inne A American Colege Football) Alone in the Dak 100/3.5) More in the Dark 2.00/3.5) Arrazo Martian Men 3.5) Atbush at Sorino 00) Achan Lital35) Arena Daggertal 00/35) Arena: Elor Sats 1/35 Atrored Fist.00/35 Award Win Wargame w/3.5) B17 Flying Fares35 Bate Bugs 00351 Babe Ise 220000) Battecruiser 3000 AD.00/3.5) Beneath a Sted Sky Best of Magorose Betrayal at kondo C0/3.5 Evase contratado LETS 1 62,00) Hd! Lrks 8 Carse Disks Lion Kng Story Books Lade Runner 003.5 LOTR & Two Tower 3.5 Lads of Mr. Lads the Realm0D/3.5 Lost Eden Lost Vines3.9 Lucas Arts Adv. Pad3.9 (un C 5 urious CD Magic Carpet Mec Cande 300 Master of Mazc.00 3.5 Master d Orion CD 3.5 MechWarrior 200/3.5 MegaDoon 006 Lees Merchart Princess Metal Marines 3.5) Metaledt Batletom 3.9 Metatiedite arth Stage 1 /3.5) MAM.Cards de 35 MEMDarkside of Xeen 3.5 Men World of Xeenco Mlemim Auction CD) Mission Crtical Mortal Kombat 135 Mortal Kombat 2000/3.5) MS Space Smalo 1.013.5) MIVCL Dead 2) NASCARIOD/3.5) NBA Jamo/3.3) NCAA Road Fre 4 8235 Nerves of Steel 3.5) NL Poleague footal 75HCO NHL Hode 9500 Nett Om 13 a 141001 4113 than onththentic 8 47/39 H HNG Fronbar. Ehe ames/35 GREEBIESISCHEN GEWESpac RAKSAS Gooins 123 Bdag.00:35 OPEN: 6AM-11PM PST EVERYDAY AIRBORNE SHIPPING $4 UPS GRND SHIPPING $2 CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES AND (PER ORDER) PRODUCTS SOFTWARE ORDERS HANDLING $2 (PER SHIPMENT) OVER $125 RECEIVE FREE SHIPPING!! Shadow Ysertius3.5) Stke Commander 100 Herec Starks!:00 Synocate As.CD! Hist Sherlock Holmes Cors. Det 1300 Lrabots.00 nca la 2 SIGNs horedle Toons.co/3540/37 Wing Carmander 2 Deze) haara Jonestatis Kings Quest 16 SmCty 2000 Borus C SSICLASSICS CALL FOR ONER SM GAMES Lands allge Space Ice and Kra ! Space HDD 3.5 Batted determ Legend of Krande 2 Souce Quest 1500 Legac d ia 3 Special Faces:35/529 SSfanta festo Cortct Mode East Lesure Si Larry 5 a 6 Stainga0002.5) Gettysburg Turing Port Lost in me Karplyuppe Sat Corted 1.200 No Gresby Gary Maac Cande 2 a 3 Star Crusadel 851 Martan Dreams Star Resch 00/35) Mech Engate Master Magic STS lodzemnert Rites CD/3.5) Rebel Charge at Chidamanga Master doron Star TrekTech Manualco Redligting S3 Irch Second Front Stidt: Grant's Trai S3 Trekc25000) Sons d Lberty Storekeep.Co Noctopols Star Carmand Steet Fytu 235) Stelar Crusade Outpost Strategy Guide Sreet figte 2 CD PackICY StormAcross Europe Pacic Slike Plytester Subwa 20500/3.5) Panzer General Wargane Construction Set Summeriter Changelo Warship Perfect General 2 Summoning3.5) Western Front Poice Quest 13.04 Super Hero League 00 3.5 popuois 1&2 Super Street Fifter 235 Powermange SCENARIO DISKS Super Street Figter 2 Tuto Priced Persa 1 & 2 SIGA Hana (3/35) Battles of Napoleon 16 Privateer Playtestor's Sindicate3.5) Battles of Napoleon 18 10 ex Questi dues Books Aachecyd te Sadow System Soo 3.5 Take 10 CORONKI Wargane Cos Set 2:Tanks 1-22 15 ea quest for Gary 14Pmal   Kalkridom.cuno disks! R. Arkana Bade Destiny Task Force 191235 IBMUSED CD'S ONLY) R.Akania: Sy Trail Terminator 2029 D 00) Rebel Assau Terminator Rampanel(0/35) 43/40 7th Guest Return to Zork Theme ParkC/3.5 AD&D.Dak Sun 1 Savage Empre Third Reich D 3.9 Seget d Mankey Island 2 Te Fighter 35 ADED Ravenat Aegis: Guardian Fleet Shadow d the Comet Te Pieter Defender Empre35 Dark Legions Shadow Ysertius Tigers on te Row 3.5) Shadow Sacerer Tomado Operation Desert Sturm 0) Laid the Tentace Gabriel Knight Tory La Russa B8 3.00). Soace Quest 1.4. a 5 Toner Cartridad/351 Indiana Jones:Atlants Sa Crusade Transport Tycoon CD/3.5 Star Trek 25th Lesure Su Larry 6 Two Towers w/Fint Book 35 Lord of the Rngs Star Trek Judgement Rites Vora 16.00 Uome 635) Panzer Generd Suke Commande Poice Quest UT 7 Complete: SSV21 Sezact Utra Sepert Isa3.5) Storekeep Utra &Pagan: 35) Summar Utra & Speed 35 X-COM System Shock Ubra &Pagan woeech Lora Underworld 1.200 Ical more tiles and info Llorate Dornan 3.5 HINT BOOKS Ubra 7 Pat la 2 Utorate football Ubra 8 Ilth Hour Utrabots3.9 1942Padc kW Uorra Underad la 2 Under a King Moon Coi 1944. Across the fine Unde a Kiing Moon US Ney Figterslo Veld Dainess USS Ticondroga:00) Wing Commander k ADID Champions Ky ada Veld Darkness/35) Wing Commander 1&2 ADID Orse Aare Bonds Vir Victory 1,2,3, 400) ADID Gere's Curse Wing Commandr 3 Voyeur 001 ADD Dok Sn la 2 |  35 Wizardy Bre Comic frge Warcraf00/35 ADD.Eye Behdoy la 2 Wizardy 7. Crusaders DK ADIDEJe d te Benoide 3 Wargame Const Set 2TAKS Warlords 235) ADD Gateway Svg Frantir Warkads 2SCAWO Bd (35) ADIO tan Wax Works 5.29 ADULT ADVENTURE When Two Worlds War3.5) ADUD Pods d Radiance AD&D Ravent Wing Commande 1 D100) ADD Sedie Sker Buxdes Dream Machine W. Carmander 1620.00) ASD Treasure Savage Fraber Narodancer Wing Commande 300 Ngtwatch 2 Wing Corm Armada 1/3.5) Reas Guardian of the Fleet Seymore 12 Alen Loge Jorune Wing Comm Armada WNICO Hone in the Dark 1&2 Soace Srens Wings of Garyco) Vapre's Kss Armed Fist Wxy Tre 35 Vrtual Vaens 2 Bed's Tale 1.2.03   Battle Bugs CALL FOR MORE TIMES Wo Doble Storell Balfegruser 300010 Wolensten Missions lo 23.5 300 System . 30/22 Bachtiane Buck Rogers Castdown ADSD Sarp Wat te Gods.com Buck Rogers Matix Qubed Alone in the Dark X ComD3.5 FFA Soccer XCamera Deep 1/3.5) Immercenary X-Wing 0039 Contah bin Madden fortal Candar 7 Xwing Limperd Persuit 3.5 Lost Fles d Serlock Holmes Cyberia Xaving 2BWng3.57 Dagged ProRa Need for Speed Danseed Rebel Assart Zeopend) Retem Fre Zorroco Doom 1 Battle Book Road Rash EA CLASSICS Doom 2Battle Book Shock Wave Dracula Unleashed Star Cand 2 Cluck Yeager's Ar Corbat CD Dragon Lare Durreon Master 2 Super Street Fighter 2 Lost Fles d Sherlock Holmes.CD) F-14 Fleet Defender Super Wing Commander PGA Tor Gol Wold Tar Terris.com 15 Theme Park Falcon 30 Penhaus 2 Ftwenga Frat Page Baseball a Footbal 15e Wing Commander 3 Pevateer 101 Gitre Might WE ALSO SELL: EL I . Gobins 1,2, 3 Sidancasterio yes ATARI HAGUAR CROWS Diverse Hepoon 2 Hel i Sandro pre d Back Beard /3.5) Bore Stone Artské00/3.5) $HC Rebel Assaul Empire Debes 5 Enore Dix Master Ed.CO. ESIN Basebal Tonigt.C.3.5) ESN NBA 95 Aitore CD/3.5) ESPN Sintay Ngt Footrac Fleet Defender ID 23.5) FALLA Stealth Fighter 3.5 Falcon 3.035 Facon 3:01amadorco) Falcon Go CD) Fantasy Feldom ) Feks d Gay3.5) FFA Soccer D235 Fighter Wing CD/3.5) Flash Trattolo Flet Commander 2052 Flot Smulator TodkCD Flot Urimted 001 Famda 13.5 Fatress D Radel 02/35) Fredty Parkas(0/35 Front Page BBC0/35 front Page Footbal Po3.5 Front Page FB 9500/3.5 Fronbers 1st Encartes:00 /3.5 Fortres 25 Ful Trade Co Gerd Knight00/3.5) Gadget.com Gure Master.com) Gatewey 20035) Gazlorare Gernie525) Genghis Khan 15.251 Gengis Khan 235 GCA Gamesco Grbal Darreta 3.5) Gbis 300/35 Goks 400 God of the Sterica 3.5 Grandes Fleet00/3.5 Great War 1914 191835) Ginship 200039 Hammer of the Gods 100 Hardbal 3 Colecion)  2  Harpoon 235 Harpoon 2 Westpac Batdeset Harpoon Chssc Her to the Throne3.5 Hel: 00 Heroes Mgt & Marcio) Han CarmendD25 Har Seas Trader100/35) Hred Guns3.5 Herde/CD35 nca 1 a 200 naredble Madine 200/2.5 ndy Car Racing 3.5) nounspois Motor Speed3.9 ndy C Craits3.5) Hema (0) Het the EartiC0/3.5) ron Assautico ton Coss35) Ishar 300/3.5) Ised the Dead (D/3.5 Jammt00) edigte 3001 no Raverio) Kingdarefa Reaches/CD) Kremake (35) Kres Quest 16:00) Kings cuest 700 KK &A/01/35) Krights Xerta(135) Lands of Lae 100/25 Lora 6 Brett H Holm Great Bis 192 In Guest Wines of Gay 45/24 IncedPersas YWNG se Borney d ft Gym/35) Body Bows 35) Bm  /35) Brech 33.9 Butroe Cometa Polico  ) Cadilacs & Drosars Carmen fod /35 Camer Sk3.5 Carriers at W 35) Carrers at War Cons Kt3.5) Camers at War 23.5 Castes 2013/3.5) Catral reence Cvization3.52 viczban RR Tyc. DICO) Clash See 35) Colarizatan CD/35 Comanche Missons Command & Camer) Carmand H23.5 Carmander Bood.) Carronions a Xart CD/3.5) msors Corridor 70D/3.5 Creare Shock1001 Critical Patico) Crystal Calum35) bena|co) Serdas ter War.com Ocelangor ciones /39 ODayBeamgd the End DDay Operabon Overordos Daedalus Encaster Daeronsgate00/35 Dark Farces, Dark Leaans (0.235) Dan P' Descent35) Detot35 Disciples Steel35) DiscwO0D/3.5) Dorinus.co. Doom 19140 New Levels:35 ADUD Pods d Defness Norastom CD Operatin Crusada C)/3.5) pam time 5/ Ono Conspiracy 001 Outd this Watt Outpost00 3.5 Outpost Panel Padko Podc Sykes. 9 Pacc W839 Panzer Battesi35) xta Carea T35) Felect General Pertect General Burde35 Perted Ceneral 20/3,5) PGA Tor Gof Partasmagoria Phoenix Feter Pinball Acade . Prates Gobi (3.5) Fuza Tycoon /35 Purt of Attadt35) Price Quest 4.002.5 Prince of Persia 125 Privateer/Strike Comm.co Po League Baseball3.5 Ps Master (0) Psydda WN Pure Wargamel3.5 Quartum Gate Quarantine CO Quest iar Gary 400/3.5 Raiden0D3.5) Rarood Tycoon (35) Raroad Tycoon (3.5 Reach for the Sar:13.5 R. Arkana Bladed Destry35) R. Akania St Tra /315) Rebel Assar 001 Relerdess:Tunsen's Adv.COM Red Baron CD) Renagade Jacobs Starico Retribution (CD) Retumd te Phantom100/3.5 Return to Rngworld Rehim to Zak (D/3.5 Reunion 03.5' Ringwalo ! Rise of the Robots.00 3.9 Robinson's Reguem 00 3.5 Romence 3 Kogdans 335 Satre Team.0/3.5) Sam & Meat Ht te Rad 1/35) Secret of Markeys 20.5 Sert Ct/3.5. Sadowd Camico Shadow d he Caret.00 ? n; War 25 46/42 Betrayal at Mander nostri 3DO Cvization 29/15 3&&&TABESBERE&E 988 Rules d'Encesenet 2015 Untnantningen Granger i Legens35 Lasure Suit Lary 16:00 Leisure Sut Lary 610/3.5 43/38 PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE. DEFECTIVE ITEMS COVERED BY MANUFACTURER'S WARRANTY 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETCRNED & REFUSED ITEMS (CALL FOR RMA#). SHIPPING CHARGES ARE NON REFUNDABILE PAYMENT: MONEY ORDERS.CHECKSORDERSSHIPPED WITES CHECK CLEARSI.VISA. MASTERCARI.COD'S AIRBORNE SHIPPING $4(PER ORDER) $2 HANDLING (PER SHIPMENT) VISA Carecare SHIPPING: AIRBORNE $VORDERUPS GROUND $2/ORDER FOR SOFTWARECALL FOR HARDWARE). COD ADD $4 PER ORDER. HANDILIN: $2 PER ORDER. MOST ORDERS PLACED BY 2PM PST SHIP SAME DAY. SHIPPING TIMES NOT GUARANTEEI). WE SELL OVER 5.000 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAME PRODUCTS SO IF YOU DON'T SEE WIIAT YOUR LOOKING FOR PLEASE CALLES Circla Rondor Soruin #116 "


"MULTI-PLAYER INTERNET 2 pizza shpresoning DOUBLE YOUR POWER WITH TWO GAMES IN ONE! WINDOWS \"\"GAME 2 BOARD GAME , Goran DECOR SECTOR RO Ellery Help D. Crusher \"One of the best strategy games of the decade\". Sid Sackson, Games Magazine  Select human or computer opponents via Network or Modem  Single player versus Computer opponents  Play your friends on the Internet AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS ON 3.5\" DISK OR CD ROM POWER GAMES INTERNATIONAL Power Games International Inc. 280 W 4800 S. Murray. Utah 84107. Toll Free 1-800-671-6333 Tel: (801) 268-6773 . Fax: (801) 268-6961 Internet E-mail: info@powergames.com Cirela Dandar Sanvica #18 "


"STRATEGY/WARGAMES Value Added Gaming Options LIKE MOST BABY BOOMERS WHO BROADSIDES anymore, and when I do it's a matiTHERE'S MORE ARE SWELLING THE RANKS OF nee. Of course, it's the cost that WHAT I CALL \"THE GREYING keeps me away. Two people plus Guard,\" I remember fondly my movie munchies prices the cine MILEAGE IN SOME college days when I had less matic experience at a minimum of flab and more time to play $20, which works out to $10 per games. In those days, there was hour. A movie has to be pretty GAMES THAN JUST time to play every game—both GRIPESHOT compelling in order for me to drop turkeys and triumphs-and sathat kind of dough. vor the experience of each. Instead of renting home videos, ONE TRIP AROUND As family and work responsibilities have taken I buy them. I'm a bargain bin shopper and their toll in hours, I've been forced to be a little won't purchase many videos that are more than more selective. The shotgun approach of my col$20. On average, I drop about $13 on each. THE BLOCK lege days has been replaced with a high-powered However, because I'll watch a movie several rifle with a laser site which allows me to pick off times (at least five, unless it's something I the best gaming values for the time and money bought on impulse and is a real stinker), the invested. cost works out to about $2.60 per hour of enterThis selectivity has extended to other entertainment. I can live with that. tainment forms as well. I rarely go to the movies How do games stack up on the basis of dollars per hour of entertainment? Naturally, it depends on the game, but when it comes to the cream of the crop, gaming can be a cheap form of thrills. I like to see computer games that net out at under $1 per hour of First, congratulations are in order to SSI. Their PANZER play. In other words, when I GENERAL game has reached the pinnacle of your combined opin shell out $54 for a game, I'm ions and reached the lofty plateau of #1 on our Top 100 list. Yes, looking for two to three weeks a wargame beat out titles like X-COM and WING COMMANDER III. of fairly intense game play. For the record, there hasn't been a wargame at the top of our I'm sure we've all played comreader's poll since SSI's GETTYSBURG (now retired to CGW's Hall puter games that have of Fame) hit #1 in December of 1987. reached this lofty goal. (And, Expansions and upgrades keep on coming. Besides Bliz fortunately for us war and zard's (800-953-SNOW) recent release of a fairly comprehensive strategy gamers, there is geneditor for their WARCRAFT: ORCS & HUMANS, Impressions (617 erally a lot more replay value 225-0848) has also released the modem patch for their D-DAY: in these games than in most THE BEGINNING OF THE END game. Of course, BATTLESET 2: WEST adventure and role-playing PACK for HARPOON II has been out for a while, providing 15 new games which, once \"solved,\" scenarios, but what you might not know is that Novastar (916 become permanent shelfware.) 624-7113) has released four scenario disks for WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET II: TANKS! When combined with the new, PASS ON THAT (continued on page 140) My frugality aside, what inspired this reflection on gamby Alan Emrich APRIL 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 157 "


"ing values was a comment I read onsales, you probably have a friend or you give them to are anything like us, line. One veteran wargamer had finally family member who has recently acthey'll become regular strategy sucked the marrow out of the bones of quired a new computer. Sure, you may gamers, and our modem and e-mail SSI's PANZER GENERAL and announced have recommended a game or two, but opponents of tomorrow. that he was putting it up on the shell. they'll stick to playing the solitaire I believe that would be a good He had mastered the game and was game that came with Windows unless thing, and the value of a good thing ready for his next wargaming chalyou become a more pro-active recruiter. is to have done it. Having a common lenge, whatever it may be. What I suggest is that you give them interest in war and strategy gaming What concerns me is that games with some of these high-value games. You has helped me make a lot of great the high caliber play value of PANZER own them; they're yours to give. friends. Ours is a satisfying, lifelong, GENERAL (or SimCity, or CIVILIZATION, Rather than letting them collect dust educational hobby. The least we can or EMPIRE DELUXE, or you-name-it) are awaiting your urge to reinstall them, do is pass along some of the toys that piling up on our shelves. I feel that rel. pass them on to a new computer user we're no longer playing so that others egating these retired champions of who would probably never pick up a can discover the fun we're having. gaming value to the status of shelfware war or strategy game and could stand You never know, that buddy or cousin is not the smartest thing we can do. the great gaming experience these exof yours could be the next digital With the boom in personal computer ceptional products offer. If the people Desert Fox. G2 (continued from page 139) sion of TIGERS, entitled PANTHERS IN Old Guard can imagine. THE SHADOWS. Australia's SSG hasn't forgotten unofficial upgrade for TANKS! that is out The Rose is off the bloom at Avaltheir classic REACH FOR THE STARS. They on the networks (see below), we're talkon Hill, Jim Rose, that is. He's been still plan to do \"a bigger, better space ing about a game highly worthy of a their computer game guru, assembling game sooner or later,» according to fresh look. the line-up of quality computer games SSG's Gregor Whiley. In the meantime, < Speaking of that TANKS! unofficial that The Hill has been releasing of late. SSG will release THE LAST BLITZKRIEG upgrade, it was released by designer Jim will be starting his own computer in the second quarter of this year. Norm Koger and dubbed version 1.25. game company and hopes to release a Those awaiting U-BOAT 2 from It adds unit retreat and panic fire, hidwargame on the Battle of Kharkov at Deadly Games will have to keep waitden AT guns, variable weather during the Platoon/Company level later this ing. While the software is coming play, reduced effectiveness of air and year. Good luck, Jim! along, it's coming along in fits and artillery under certain circumstances, Although we're all still awaiting starts. This Macintosh wargame/simulaand more morale checks. The \"feel\" of COMPUTER THIRD REICH from Avalon tion will cover Operation Drumbeat, tactical combat has been greatly imHill, we've got some information on its the German campaign against the US proved, allowing things to occasionally boardgame sequel, RISING Sun. This East Coast after American entry into get out of your control and better simPacific THIRD REICH board game should W.W.II. ulate some of the chaos on a battlebe out in the summer of this year. If Our ace spy, The Body Bag Guy, field. We salute you, Norm, for the and when it will be converted to comhas been going through the waste basgreat product support and loyalty to puter play, no one is saying kets at Norm Koger's office. Koger's your fans. < While many are tired of hearing scribbled notes suggest that his next Not to be outdone, the version 1.2 about the wildly successful collectable offering may well be WARGAME CONof HPS Simulations' TIGERS ON THE card game Magic: THE GATHERING, STRUCTION KIT III: RIFLES, a tactical Prowl is also looking good. It includes now historical gamers have something Napoleonic game featuring swords an all-in-one unit orders menu, has into crow about. A collectable American and musketry instead of tanks and aircreased the range for units' combat Civil War trading card game called Dixplanes. moves, added a misfire/dud rate and a le has proven to be very popular. The The Bag Guy has also jacked into training rate for each force, and tons of first set covers the battle of First ManasJim Dunnigan's memory chip. Dunniother stuff (such as driving tanks in resas, and we've been having fun with it gan's latest multi-player on-line game verse!). Like Norm Koger and Gary here at the CGW offices after hours. For on the Roman Republic is being Grigsby, Scott Hamilton just loves to more information, contact Columbia shopped around the many on-line sertinker and improve his games. Games, Inc. at (800) 636-3631 from vices. Interestingly, the new Microsoft * In addition to TIGERS ON THE the US or Canada. \"Marvel\" network is singing the sweetest PROWL version 1.2, HPS Simulations Even as the 2.0 version of the song among them. (408-241-6886) is working on a sellROAD FROM SUNTER TO APPOMATTOX is Finally, the Body Bag Guy took a published strategy guide written by the finding its way to wargamers' hard much needed vacation to Tahiti. He unsame Greg Smith who did our TOP drives, designer Frank Hunter is workcovered the fact that the 3W boardgames strategy article in the November 1994 ing on both THE ROAD FROM MARENGO Tahiti and BARBARIANS are being offered issue. It will probably include a disk TO WATERLOO and BETWEEN WIND AND for conversion into an electronic format. with either more scenarios or a new SEA: THE AGE OF SAIL. Frank is hoping the interested parties include some campaign. This should be released to link these two Napoleonic titles into computer game companies that are not concurrently with their West Front veras grand a gaming experience as we known for wargames. 158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Cast a spell on your PC. Glvish Archers 10 * Summon Elves MAGIC The Gathering Illus.  Anson Maddocks 2/1 Coming soon. MICROPROSE 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. MicroProse Software is the official licensee of Magic: The Gathering!M Magic: The Gathering is a trademark of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 1995 MicroProse. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #349 "


"REVIEW All's Quiet On Tomorrow's Front Impressions' FRONT LINES Delivers Futuristic WarfareNot With A Bang, But A Whimper by Patrick C. Miller N THE OPENING ANIMATION OF IMPRESIn fairness, the game does include a The SVGA graphics are outstanding, SIONS' FRONT LINES, A SQUAT TANK \"one shot, one kill\" option that makes giving the game a very crisp, clean look. SQUARES OFF AGAINST AN AGILE HOVER combat considerably quicker and more Windows users should be comfortable with tank on a battlefield 50 years into the deadly, or you can use the game's scethe mouse-driven interface's hot buttons, future. The vehicles blaze away at nario builder to create battles more to pull-down menus and icons. The interface each other from point-blank range using your liking. However, while playing with is generally straightforward, easy to undervarious wonder weapons of the 21st cenmore lethal weaponry provides faster stand and intuitive—a good thing because tury, most of which appear to rival the paced action, it also serves to highlight the three manuals that come with the World War II bazooka for effectiveness. the lackluster performance of FRONT game leave out some important details. Finally, as the scene drags to a conclusion, LINES' artificial intelligence (AI). The The individual armor, infantry and arthe hover tank fires a laser-like red beam computer player generally makes feeble, tillery units resemble the finely sculpted, that does to the tank what you you'd expiecemeal attacks that can be crushed highly detailed mini tanks used in miniapect a microwave oven set on high would with massed firepower or easily countures wargaming. Some units contain anido to a pumpkin after a few minutes. tered with competent maneuvering. mation, such as the spinning fan blades in Veteran gamers know that any resemthe Ferret hover tank. The terrain is also blance between a game's obligatory aniLET THEM EAT PRETZELS exceptionally well done, and a hard fought mated sequence and its gameplay is Impressions set out to create a turn-based, battle yields a landscape littered with brousually coincidental, but FRONT LINES is \"beer and pretzels,\" tactical-level hex ken bodies, charred vehicle hulks, craters, nearly the exception. Unfortunately, no wargame with a miniatures game look and burning trees and shelled out buildings. vehicle in the feel that would apHow did a game that appears to offer game sports a FRONT LINES peal to a broad auso much sizzle manage to fizzle? Imdeath ray capable Price: $59.95, dience, as well as pressions based its design on a future of barbecuing CD or Floppy hard-core strateworld where warring factions use the tanks-a regret System gists. FRONT LINES is same armored fighting vehicles and table oversight, Requirements: clearly an attempt to weapons. In this world, advancements because this IBM compatible go beyond QQP's in mobility, armor protection and other 386 or better, means you and THE PERFECT GENdefensive measures have significantly 4 MB RAM, your enemies are SVGA graphics, ERAL by offering degraded the effectiveness of offensive stuck with the hard drive, such features as weapons. Is this vision of future arhigh-tech equiva mouse, CD256-color SVGA mored combat wrong? Who knows. Impressions lent of bazookas ROM; supports graphics, animated Does it make for exciting and interestto fight each othAdlib, Gravis Ultrasound, Roland, and units and combat, ing game play? Definitely not. er's futuristic Sound Blaster compatible sound cards digitized sounds. Further complicating this picture, Im# of Players: 1-2 (same computer; modem tanks. As a result, user-selectable realpressions' combat model contains so many with patch) with maximum Protection: None ism options and a variables and factors, including unit enrealism in effect, Designer: Chris Foster scenario editor. Imdurance, morale and quality ratings, a the action in Publisher: Impressions Software pressions devoted a \"combat odds\" setting and randomly inFRONT LINES Cambridge, MA great deal of time flicted damage, that trying to predict tends toward (800) 545-7677 and effort to make whether a target can be hit or hurt someclose-range FRONT LINES a game times provides the game's greatest chalslugfests that are about as lethal and as that advances this genre to another level; lenge. This complexity certainly runs interesting as the days when cavemen in some respects it succeeds, but in others counter to the company's intent for FRONT threw rocks at each other. it falls behind the current standard. LINES to be a \"beer and pretzels\" game. 160 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"He ruled the auto industry. MODEM OF THE OPERA Modem play is a feature of THE PERFECT GENERAL responsible for its longevity on many gamers' hard drives, but, because of technical difficulties, this feature wasn't available in the initial release of FRONT LINES. The game was billed as being modem playable, and references to it exist on the game's box and in the manuals. Once the modem play problems are resolved, the company says a patch will be mailed on request to registered owners and that it will also be available from the Impressions BBS and other on-line services. The decision to ship the game without the modem play was an unfortunate decision, because with the game's inadequate AI, modem play is a feature it desperately needs. It can be played as a two-player \"hot seat\" game by those willing to forego hidden movement and tolerate an interface that doesn't lend itself to this type of play. The CD-ROM version of FRONT LINES comes with 33 prebuilt scenarios (13 more than the disk version) which are ranked as easy, medium and hard. The CD also contains digitized voice and longer, more detailed animated sequences. Loading a scenario brings up a summary screen providing a brief overview of your mission, including each side's objectives and suggested strategies. You can also take a close look at the map on which the Next Unit OUDERS MOVEMENT PHALZ Dots dass Unit Meme Movedent Points LETY DRUG WAR 2000 FRONT LINES offers many hypothetical scenarios like this one, where you lead a coastal invasion with fast Ferret hover tanks into an island of druglords armed to the teeth. battle will be fought. Once you accept the scenario, you have the option of either going with the default units and their assigned deployment, or tailoring your force by using points to buy from a pool of units, which you can then deploy behind your side's lines. Combat takes place on the tactical map screen where the hex scale is 150 meters, and each turn represents one minute of real time. Here, movement and fire commands are issued to your units, and you can call up reports providing information on unit status, terrain effects and objectives. There are several options that can be used to increase the level of realism and speed of play, giving you some flexibility in customizing the game to suit your tastes. Game play proceeds with first one side, then the other, conducting movement. If the opportunity fire option is enabled, units can fire during the movement phase. Following movement, fire combat takes place, which can either be conducted in the traditional manner of having first one side then the other fire, or by using simultaneous combat resolution. The simultaHenry Ford Photo: UPI/Bettman Circle Reader Service #350 "


"ntroducing Grandmaster Championship Chess ... the next generation of interactive chess for your PC. An all-new, incredibly powerful chess engine will challenge chess masters and beginners alike. There's some serious horsepower in this chess engine. GRANDMASTER \"Grandma CHAMPIONSHIP CHESS \"Grandmaster Championship Chess is the chess software event of 1995!\" -Steve Mayer, National Master  Play against anyone, anywhere on a network or with a modem.  A wide selection of MIDI-mapped music, to perfectly set the stage for the game of your life: Grandmaster Championship Chess. . Thousands of historic games you can replay-and download thousands more from the Internet!  Interactive lessons by grandmasters, with full animation and voice. This program has even beaten top-ranked international players! Highest scoring PC program in the 1994 International ACM Tournament-beating a CRAY supercomputer!  Multiple skill levels, and an intuitive interface. With universal modem-to-modem support and network play! WINDOWS CD-ROM \"This is a game designed by champions... to help you become one!\" ---Patrick Wolff, 1992 U.S. Chess Champion F EE To order call: (800) 468-7226 . (305) 373-7700 BBS (305) 374-6872 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Program and art 1995 IntraCorp, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Grandmaster Chess. The Next Move Series and Capstone are trademarks of Intracorp, Inc. All other trademarks and copyrights acknowledged. Capstone The Next Move Series tricts Circle Reader Service #204 "


"He ruled the shipping lanes. neous feature provides greater realism because, instead of firing units in the most advantageous sequence, both sides must designate all targets, then sit back and watch as the computer determines the results. DON'T HOVER ON ME The 14 units available for combat are grouped into four types: tanks, armored personnel carriers (APCs), infantry and artillery. The three types of traditional tracked tanks include a light tank, a heavy tank and the all-powerful Mega Tank. The Ferret is a lightly armed and armored, but very fast, hover tank. The SCAB (Surface Combat Airborne Battletank) is another hover tank, more heavily armed and somewhat better armored than the Ferret. There are two types of APCs; an amphibious hover-type shuttle, capable of carrying infantry, artillery and tanks, and a more conventional wheeled APC that can haul infantry and artillery. Slashing Ariault Units of the int Recon Division dosh oron the Rio Grande intorer echelon units from the private army of the South American Conglorurate of Heavy Industry OANE DURATION TURRES ILUS TEAM (RUE Recen) ATTACKER 1200 POINTS Take advantage of your position and seise your first obxetive the land bridge from this paint you can organison offensive on the NO Trylo mintain a high kill-relia . 1 Dist OBJECTIVES Objetivo Hold Build Bridge MIDE Total Total RED TEAM (Conglorrat) DEYERDER 15 POINTS Tako sortir to form an organised defetive perimeter and move forward cautiously It done properly. your artillery oan decimate the Recon division. Deny your opponent the land bridge, and protect your Deniroy Maintain Bridge Min. II. Land Preteet Destroy to BATTLE BRIEFS Before each battle, a short but effective briefing clearly indicates mission objectives as well as providing background and tactical advice. Infantry is one area in which FRONT LINES has improved significantly over THE PERFECT GENERAL. Engineers are truly useful because they can quickly build bridges, lay mines and destroy things. Regular infantry is your basic grunt unit, good for garrisoning objective hexes and fighting other infantry. Tech infantry, described as \"little walking tanks,\" is a real menace. It moves nearly as fast as some vehicles and maneuvers easily through woods and built-up areas. Infantry can perform close assault attacks against armored units, so tech infantry presents a real threat when it gets in among your vehicles in a wooded or built-up area. In FRONT LINES, artillery in no way lives up to its vaunted \"god of war\" image. Unlike THE PERFECT GENERAL, where artillery can attack multiple hexes (providing great incentive for dispersing your units), artillery in FRONT LINES can only attack one hex at a time. It either hits or misses, and it seems to miss a lot, never scattering to adjacent hexes and sometimes inflicting only minor damage. There are four types of artillery units: light, heavy, the GSM missile launcher and the Blast Wagon, a wheeled self-propelled artillery vehicle. The other three units are motorized carriage-mounted weapons, capable of moving short distances on their own, though more effective when paired with an APC or shuttle. Aristoteles Onassis Photo: UPI/Bettman Circle Reader Service #350 APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 163 "


"WE REGRET THE APPEARANCE OF THIS AD, BUT THE MILITARY INFORMATION IN THIS NEW GAME HAS ONLY RECENTLY BEEN DECLASSIFIED. ESTETIT bebD:D LETLENIE Otherwise, we'd have to ask you to eat the evidence for security reasons For la real taste of military action try leading a navy fleet through heavy Expcet inissile attacks in the Halkland War. Or defending against torpedo strikes in the Persian Gulf. Coman and an Adgis class cruiser, and all the ships, aircraft and submaringes in the fleet. Destroy the enemy in high-tech naval warfare. Rely on stateof-the-art weapons, electronic sensors, artificial intelligence and instinct for survival. And if you're lucky, you will live to do it again! Introducing Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet. Now on CD-ROM. klubith Over 100 missions based on det cl issified information and actual battles. Live action video, 3-D cinematic graphics and ISL-quality .. GUARDIAN OPENETLUIT sound effects CD-ROM put you in the heat of battle, as dlose to reality as national security Will allow! Visit your local retail outlet or call 800-482-3766 to order. This is not a drill. Repeat. This is not a drill. TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE GROUP 2210 W.Olive Avenue Burbank, CA 91506 AEGIS AEGIS: #1 Naval Simulation CD-Rom PC Data, May 1994 Software Goreezy Where Macvic is state-of-the-Art! Software Sorcery\"Where Magic is state-of-the-Art!\" is a trademark of Software Sorgery. DAS 08PO "


"72 View Sereen Mapa Report options Tr oy Turn He ruled motion pictures. O RIOUSamba CLERCE HOVEHENT PABE Dors Heavy Tonk class Heavy Tank Unit Name Movement Points ONTA RY MAN VS. MACHINE Given the relative weakness of the computer opponent, veteran wargamers will have no problem laying traps for enemy units, while avoiding Al ambushes like this one. FRONT LINES' sighting rules can be confusing, especially when operating along the edges of cities, hills and forests. The game could use a feature that lets players see what hexes their units are capable of spotting. Opportunity fire is difficult to use and even more difficult to execute until you figure out how it's done. What the manual doesn't tell you is that after you halt an enemy unit during movement, you must first right click on the unit you want to fire, left click on the unit you want to fire at, and then left click on your firing unit. Also, because you can't control what portion of the tactical map you're viewing while the computer is moving, enemy units are often out of sight or out of range before you realize they've moved. IF YOU CAN'T BEAT 'EM, BUILD 'EM The scenario builder is an excellent addition to FRONT LINES, giving players the power to lay out their own maps, edit terrain feature characteristics and change unit values to create entirely new scenarios. The scenario builder in the CD-ROM version has a fatal bug that renders the editor nearly useless. However, to their credit, within days after the game's release, Impressions developed and widely distributed a patch to fix the problem. Impressions says that FRONT LINES is the first in a series of hypothetical and historical games that will use the game engine created for it. The company is working on an American Civil War game THE EDITORS SPEAK that it expects to release sometime FRONT LINES next year. We can only hope that Impressions' experi PROS Superb graphics and sound, ence with FRONT a good interface and nice terrain creLINES, a game with ate the look and feel of a miniatures much promise and game. The scenario editor is an potential, trans added bonus that increases replay lates into future value. products that look CONS Dull game play and poor AI and sound as good, force a retreat. Lack of modem play that play better in the initial release is unfortunate. and suffer from fewer problems. RATING   Louis B. Mayer Photo: UPI/Bettman Circle Reader Service #350 "


"REVIEW Road To Nowhere Road JE Koei Leaves Asia Behind For OPERATION EUROPE by Terry Lee Coleman THE FOLKS AT KOEI HAVE BEEN INhopes were roundly dashed. deserve better. The game attempts to STRUMENTAL IN BRINGING THE Graphically, the game is a great step cover the entire scope of the war in EuGREAT MILITARY CAMPAIGNS OF THE backwards for Koei. The majority of the rope, but lacks the depth to do it justice. Eastern world to wargamers in map is in lime green or dingy brown, and The entire European Theatre is covered North America. BANDIT KINGS OF the tactical map is so pixelated that the orby a mere half-dozen battles, and these ANCIENT CHINA, NOBUNAGA'S AMBITION, ange-dots-on-green-background effect battles aren't even the most representaROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS et al, makes the battlefield tive of their reOPERATION EUROPE: were a consistent string of solid, enterlook as though it sufspective periods PATH TO VICTORY taining games from a unique perspective. fers from a severe atof the war. Just as it seemed that the magic formula tack of measles. Price: $59.95 The Invasion of was wearing off, Koei discovered VGA Frankly, I own Com CD and Floppy France is a good graphics and revamped their game enmodore-64 games System enough start, but Requirements: gine. The result was GENGHIS KHAN II, that look better. centers around IBM compatible which featured a strong computer oppoInstead of the 386 or better, Sedan. The victonent, great campaigns, and a lot of nicely-sized sprites 4 MB RAM, ry conditions are panache-enough, in fact, to earn it a of Mongol horse 3MB hard drive more appropriate slot as a CGW Premier Award Finalist for men from GENGHIS space, VGA to a WWI game best wargame of 1994. KHAN II, you are graphics; than WWII, supports AdLib and Sound Blaster sound As you might expect, then, I was looksubjected to minuswhich misses the cards. ing forward to Koei breaking out of its cule stick figures of Protection: None entire point. The Asian mold with OPERATION EUROPE: infantry and card# of Players: 1-2 (same computer) French expected PATH TO VICTORY, 1939-45. I was interestboard-cutout tanks. Publisher: Koei Corporation to refight WWI, ed to see Koei's unique wargaming apThere are familiar Burlingame, CA and the Germans proach applied to a new milieu, especially faces, such as your (415) 348-0500 quickly showed with the enhanced graphics and game enadvisors, who pop them the error of gine of GENGHIS KHAN II. No sooner had up in the corner of the screen with infortheir ways. That this erroneous mindset is 1 booted the game, though, than my mation on your objectives, supply, or batperpetuated by OPERATION EUROPE is intle situation; but unlike the rosy-checked excusable, especially as this is obviously and tanned characters of GENGHIS KHAN positioned as a beginner's game. Why 2, these leaders look pale and wan. To bother to introduce people to wargames make the action even less inspiring, every if you ignore the most basic historical time you give an order to re-supply, for facts in your game design? instance, you see a static screen of sol The Battle For North Africa centers approdiers loading trucks, carrying sacks of priately around Tobruk, but there is no food, and so on. The problem is, they are sense of fluidity, the essence of desert warall drawn in a bad son-of-anime style that fare. Part of the problem is the poor intereven the Japanese would be ashamed of. face, another step back from recent Koei designs. Sometimes it's best to use the FIND THE HIDDEN T34/85 This close-up look at A PORT OF POOR VINTAGE mouse, for other tasks you need the keythe tactical battle board is supposedly a tank The truth of OPERATION EUROPE is that it board, and it is not obvious which is best at battle, but it looks more like chartered accountants fighting from their tax shelters. is simply a bad conversion of a Japanese what time. This kind of confusion is bad cartridge game, and computer gamers news for any game, but especially a light 166 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Now it's your turn. TRANSPO 20004 game like OPERATION EUROPE, since there isn't enough depth to make you want to struggle past the interface and onward. The Armored Battle At Kursk tries to be more historical than this simple system can handle. Essentially, what the designers have done is to take the ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS system and retrofit it to WWII. This uneasy marriage reduces the huge tank battles of the Eastern Front to aimless unit-pushing. There is no broad sense of armored thrusts, as in PANZER GENERAL, not even the rudimentary sense of combined arms that you get from playing WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET II: TANKS! As the scenarios progress, the insult to history and to any gamer playing OPERATION EUROPE increases. D-Day at Normandy evokes no leeling of the tense landings and the ensuing desperate struggle on the beaches. As you try to capture St. Lo, Bayeux, or Caen, you might as well be fighting in Italy, or at Gettysburg for that matter, so vanilla are the lands in which you campaign. The Battle of The Bulge is confined to Bastogne, which is at least some attempt at focus, but the traffic jams so crucial to the battle are simulated only so much as in the amount of fighting you do with the interface, not by any intention in the design. Finally, you get to raze Berlin to the ground in 1945. Now, I'm all for getting to shoot the bad guy at the end of the gunfighter flick, but there should be some sense that he might be Caster on the draw than the guy wearing the white hat. There is no such luck here, as the Germans will roll over and die even for a novice, and where's the fun in that? Instead of a sense of closure gained from beating a worthy opponent, the feeling here is relief, as you put the lid back on the box. MICROPROSE PIZZA UOOZ MICROPROSE WHAT IS IT GOOD FOR? Which brings up the question: for whom is this game designed? There are small attempts at serious simulation tossed about here and there. The most ridiculous of these is the Army structure, which goes from field army down to battalion. No begin0:53.3.2.3.2.2.333.20123.9.9.9. 2WY RAILROND YCON ALLE .DELUXE MICROPROSE BATTLEFIELD WITH A VIEW Note the field view (above) and aerial view (below) of the action. Don't see much difference? That's because there really isn't. Introducing the Tycoon Series from MicroProse. PC games that let you buy, build and control your own empire, MICROPROSE Anything is possible. 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles.  1994 MicroProse All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #350 APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 167 "


"colit AL Behring Temp Hoth GLAR a umalized with IV Cup need to load cargo onto a Kesselring, you cross your fingers as the planes is a prime examprogram rolls the dice and creates a charple of unnecessary logisacter, a la DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. tical emphasis; it's both There are so many other deficiencies baffling to the beginner the poor soundtrack, the throwaway tactiand a complete waste of cal module, the useless sub-systems that a veteran player's time. I could go on ad nauseam. The few nice Several concepts reaptouches, such as the rules for special forces THELLU pear from other Koei and engineers, form a minuscule part of games-morale, train the overall design. The final irony is the ing, efficiency of arms, subtitle of OPERATION EUROPE—\"Path to but while these were Victory.\" Koei should take that path back integrated into an eleto Asia, where they have won over many gant whole in previous wargaming warriors, oz else hire a real de DESERT FOX, WHERE HAVE YOU GONE? When Generals Hoth, Kempf games, here they only sign team, before they next assault the difand Peiper are rated higher for leadership, tank ability and bravery muddle and confuse. In ficult shores of 20th century combat. than Erwin Rommel, you must be in gaming's never-never land. OPERATION EUROPE, it's THE EDITORS SPEAK never obvious why things ner is going to care about such detail, work as they do. The development of new OPERATION EUROPE: PATH TO VICTORY and veterans will find it a joke, especially weaponry makes the system in Axis & ALwhen the game system evolves around LIES look refined by comparison, as new the command structure. unit types pop up in OPERATION EUROPE The logistics are way out of whack as almost without warning. Leaders in other PROS It's nice to see Koei take a well. The strategic display lists amounts Koei games have a wide range of abilities, break from Asian topics. of food, ammo and fuel, much like and the best, such as Genghis Khan and CONS This clumsy conversion of a GENGHIS KHAN 2, but it goes to extremes. Cao Cao, take on a certain personality Japanese cartridge game shows a Why are there supply differences between during play. Yet all leaders in OPERATION complete lack of understanding of armor and mechanized forces when they EUROPE are generated randomly, so that No. American wargamers. really don't affect play very much? The instead of looking forward to a Patton or RATING  SIDELINE SOFTWARE DI ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY R & G GAMES S2GO YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Arcade Pool Sports Simulation Cannon Fodder 2 Arcade Simulation Chaos Engine Action Arcade Heimdall 2 Role Playing Game Iron Assault Strategy Jungle Strike Arcade Action KA-50 Hokum Flight Simulator Klik und Play Game Creator Little Big Red Adventure Graphic Adventure Pura Tycoon Strategy Power Driver Racing Simulation Project Arcade Radio Active Trivia Game Retribution CD ROM Strategy Superski Pro Sports Simulation Universe Adventure Virtuoso Like DOOM World Cup Golf Sports Simulation Zepelin Strategy PC MAGAZINES Get the latest news on the best PCtitles from the U.S. & Europe! These high glass, full color maparines also feature doma packed PLAYABLE CD ROMS with each issue! Titles include: PC Formal. PC Review, PC Zone, PC Plus, PC Power, PC Home, Multimedia Now, CD ROM Urar, and PC Gamar! Your choicel Only $10 each! SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment Mastercard & Visa $5.00 C.O.O. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping, Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges Oefective products exchanged with some item Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (3051491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 NW. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdalo, FL 33309 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! A-320 Airbus 24.95 Dracula 14.95 4-0 Sports Boxing 18.95 Dune 18.95 A-Train 25.95 Dynamic Football Pro 24.95 Aces Over Europe 24.95 Epic 14.95 Ancient Art of War in Skies 18.95 Elenam (Drakhan 2) 1895 Armour Geddon 14.95 Evasive Action 18.95 Aretie fast 21.95 Falcon 30/Thrustmaster Joystick 49.95 ATAC (Microprose) 18.95 Flashback 18.95 8-17 Bamber Microprose) 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 BAT2 14.95 Four Crystals of Trazar 14 95 Battle Tech 2 18.95 Genesis 18.95 Bloode! 21.95 Global Conquest (Micropose) 21.95 Brutal Sports Football 16.95 Great Naval Bitles 2 CD-ROM'S 21.95 Carriers at War 2 26.95 Hardball 3 21.95 Campaign 2 21.95 Harpoon & Battle Ser2 1895 Castles 9.95 Hero Ques! 14.95 Cantonian Defender at Rame 1895 Ishar, Legend of the Fortress 9.95 Command HD 9.95 Itse From the Desert 1495 Contraptions 9.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 13 9.95 Creepers (Psypnosis) 9.95 Jet Fighter 2 Bundle Pack 16.95 Dave Ledbetter Golf (Greens) 18.95 Joe and Mac Caveman Ninja 9.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95 King's Quest 6 21.95 Legend of Kyrandia 2 14.95 Legacy (Microprose) 14.95 Legend of Kyrandia 21.95 Lemmings 2 18.95 LTD 18.95 Mantis 18.95 Mike Dita Football 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 9.95 Out of This World 21.95 Pacific Islands 14.95 Pacific Star 29.95 Patriot 24.95 Pirate's Gold 24.95 Populous & Da Disk 2495 Power Manger 19.95 Premier Manager 2 21.95 Pushover 9.95 Quarterpale Horse Racing 16.95 Rex Nedebar 24.95 Sabre Team CD-ROM 21.95 Sargon 5 9.95 SEAL Team 24.95 Secret Weapons of the Luftwarte 2495 Seven Cities of Gold New Ed 24.95 Shadowter 26 95 Shadowlands 18,95 Sim Ant 21.95 Sim Earth 21.95 Sim Life 18.95 Simon the Sorcerer CD-ROM 21.95 Sleepwalker 9.95 Space Crusade 1895 Special Forces 14.95 Saails of War (RAW) 18.95 Star Legions 21.95 Strat-O-Matic Baseball 21.95 Super Tetris 14.95 Task Force 1942 (Microprose) 24.95 Team Yankee 21.95 Terminator 2 Chess 18.95 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Admiral 14.95 Tornado w Desert Storm CD ROM 26.95 TV Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V Sports Basketball CD-ROM 18.95 TV Sports Boxing 21.95 Twilight 2000 16.95 Uzima 6 21.95 Uma 7 24.95 Usima 8 27.95 Utopia 18.95 V For Victory Vehiye CD-ROM 24.95 V For Victory Utah Beach CD-ROM 24.95 V For Vietary Market Garden CD-ROM 24.95 L V For Victory Gold Sword CD-ROM nu 2495 WW.F. 2 Wrestling 18.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Wing Commander Academy 24.95 Winter Olympic 94 Lihammer 21.95 Wizkid 15.95 WW 2 Sim Tool K 1895 Wiath of the Demon 16.95 Zool 21.95 THREE GAME COMBO PACKS ALL FOR Test Drive 3, Star Control Hoverforce $21.95 Corporation, F-14 Tomical Supremacy $21.95! Dune, Shuttle Lure of the Temptress COP $16.95 P.O. Box 5008 Glendale Heights, IL 60139 We Buy & Sell New and Used Game Software.Call for a quote on your used games. Call 1-800-525-GAME Get CASH for your games or get an additional 10% in credit, good for future game purchases at great used prices like these... $30 $36 $39 $30 $32 King's Quest 7 Under a Killing Moon X-Com Metaltech Earth Siege System Shock Dark Sun II Doom II Tie Fighter Wing Commander III Cyberia Ultimate Football Creature Shock $38 $36 $35 I $36 $33 $36 $30 and many more games... All games must bo virus froo,gamos will be checked. All games must be in original box with all Instructional materials and original disks. NO COPIES accepted. All games must be sent with account number in order for your check or credit to be processed. Any unacceptable games will be sent back at your expense. Any defective games will be replaced with same title. Most game orders can be filled in 2 wooks Duo to high demand of certain games some orders may take longer Circle Reader Service #107 Circle Reader Service #307 "


"ADVANCED SIMULATOR SERIES || VOL.IIOL FURY IN THE PACIFIC, 1941-44 Available on CD-ROM for IBM & Compatibles. OWN THE PACIFIC. 088 SSI's immensely successful ADVANCED SIMULATOR SERIES continues! GNB III: FURY IN THE PACIFIC is a huge simulation encompassing the entire Pacific War. You get all major American and Japanese ships and aircraft of the Pacific Theater. A Random Battle Generator lets you create unlimited conflict from small surface engagements to full-blown carrier task force battles! Use the powerful scenario editor to create your own battles or modity existing ones in areas like Midway, the Solomons or the Phillipines. A sophisticated customizer lets you alter various aspects of the game routines for unprecedented control. A new interface and menu options, laser-sharp Super-VGA graphics and an astounding sound track make this simulation the hottest thing afloat. GREAT NAVAL BATTLES III. The Pacific is yours, if you can stand the heat! To order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAY with VISA/MC (North America only). SPEL QUE IBM 256-COLOR SVGA DISPLAYS.  Strategic Simulations, Inc., A Mindscape Company. All rights reserved. "


"REVIEW Adventures In The Alien Skin Trade Spectrum HoloByte Wheels And Deals With GAZILLIONAIRE by Arinn Dembo INTERIOR: (Steadicam walks through an VOLUME, VOLUME, VOLUME! take the prize is by running your single intergalactic cantina, complete with Bugeye When you load up Spectrum HoloByte's ship around the Empire, ferrying passenGoodman jazz combo and pastel-skinned latest offering, GAZILLIONAIRE, it may apgers and speculating on cargo. Before beauties serving fizzy drinks which look pear that you've stepped into a wild, colthe game is through, I can guarantee that something like lava lamps.) orful galaxy full of opportunity for the paying back Mr. Zinn will be the least of MEDIUM SHOT: (Over the shoulder of energetic and resourceful space trader. your worries. I wouldn't want to spoil leather-clad, longhaired captain, camera foIndeed, for your first several runs anything, because learning to play this cuses on earnest young wannabe space through the space lanes, this game of hygame is one of the keenest pleasures it afIruder's face.) per-capitalism offers surprises at every fords, so let me put it this way: you're goCLOSE-UP: (Female captain smiles a beturn, riches at every port, and new threats ing to want traveler's insurance. mused smile and begins to speak.) in every dark corner of the galaxy. But The game system forces you to stay Captain: You think it sounds great, wheelstick around a while, kid, and we'll see light on your toes, hopping from planet ing and dealing in how long the to planet, because until you make a jourstrange new sectors of GAZILLIONAIRE shine stays on ney, your turn doesn't end. To make a the galaxy? You think Price: $32.95 your coin. profit, you purchase as many tons of meryou've got what it CD-ROM GAZILLIONAIRE You start the chandise as you can at rock bottom takes to sell lava System game in debt be prices, and you advertise for passengers Requirements: lamps and whip cause Mr. Zinn, and commodities at the next planet you IBM 386cream to weird creathe richest man intend to visit. When you touch down, 33MHz or tures that look like better, 4 MB in the sector, has you hit the market, unload what you can, everything from giant RAM. loaned you and load up whatever is cheap. Your insects to living tapio VGA/SVGA 100,000 kubars competitors are trying to do the same, ca? Think it's easy to graphics, 3 MB (the local curand whoever gets to a planet first has first buy low and sell high hard drive rency) to help crack at the marketplace, which can be space, mouse: supports Sound Blaster and in every port in the you set up your the difference between making a profit or comaptible sound cards. system, constantly # of Players: 1-6 (same computer) new shipping taking a loss for the journey. The supply dodging clouds of cor Protection: None company. As the and demand of the 20 basic commodities rosive gas, space hurDeveloper: LavaMind game begins, varies from planet to planet, and raking ricanes and herds of Publisher: Spectrum HoloByte you have nothin the full profit margin on any given Alameda, CA gigantic star-faring ing to your load-say, 100 tons of cantaloupes—is (800) 695-GAME whales? Ready to nename but a pretty satisfying. gotiate with pirates, freighter, seven when you make a big score, you can smugglers, gamblers and starving artists? warehouses, a line of credit, and a big co important things like giving your crew Think you're good enough to keep your unloan to repay, at 4% interest. If you did their wages, paying your taxes, or making ruly crew happy, coax a full load of passennothing, the game would be over in less inroads on your debt. Filling the hold of gers aboard, and stay a half-step ahead of than 20 turns, since Mr. Zinn repossesses a two-hundred ton freighter with \"moonthe tax man and the loan sharks? Yeah, your ship and holdings when you owe ferns\" or \"kryptoons\" is fun, and you loan sharks! The kind who compound your him over 200,000 kubars. have supply screens available to let you interest weekly and stand ready to re-possess Of course, sitting there letting the inknow which planet is likely to give you everything you own. You think it's gonna' terest mount up wouldn't be very sportthe best price on the load. The mechanibe exciting, the beginning of a brand new ing of you. The point of the game is to be cal aspect of the game has the potential adventure, but kid, I'll tell ya', somethe first entrepreneur to make 1,000,000 to be endlessly diverting, except for one times...it's just monotony. kubars free and clear, and the only way to thing: there are only seven planets. 170 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"NATIONAL VISA 1-800-CDROM-13 CCW0495 CGW0495 Fax orders: 214-488-2109 BBS: 214-241-4754 VISA Mastercard DUCOVER astrone Bucover Mon-Sat 10am-7pm CST We offer the only NO RISK return policy. If you are not completely satisfied with your purchase, return it for full credit! CD-ROM Download a copy of our Electronic Catalog complete with our entire selection and their descriptions from our BBS 214-241-4754. VILI NASCAR SPECIAL  SPECIAL SPECIAL SPECIAL  (SPECIAL $19 $12 $19 OU PONS NIJE Nano le PAPYRUS 7th Guest Myst Sim City Enhanced Nascar Racing Get ONE of the above specials with the purchase of 2 additional titles at our regular low prices. Not valid with other specials. 519 X-Wing BM-CD NEW RELEASES TBM-CD CHILDREN Absolute Zero $ 37 Alladin/Disney $ 29 Bio Forge 5.39 Arthur Birthday Suprise S 36 Bloodbow! $35 Arthurs Teacher Trouble $ 19 Celebrity Poker 526 Barney Bear Goes to School S12 nd nd Cruct $45 Berenstein Bears S15 Cyclones 549 Carmen San Diego Jr $39 Eleventh Hour S 59 CDROM Coloring Book SIS Harvester $ 49 Harrys Haunted House $ 16 Jagged Alliance $40 Just Grandma and Me. $ 19 Lords of Midnight $45 Kids Zoo/Undersea/American $ 25 MechWarrior II $ 49 Leam to Read in Wordland $ 12 l'owerllouse $35 Leaming Fun for Kids SIS Rise of the Triad $44 Lion King $ 35 Next Generation $62 Little Monster S 36 Superllers of Heboken S 37 MacMillan Dictionary 519 Tank Commander $45 Mario is Missing Deluxe $ 19 X.COM: Temur from the Edge S 37 Math Blaster $39 Mathematics Library $15 78M-CD ADULT Mighty Morph Power Rangers S 19 Please call and will send or FAX MS Magic Schoolbus Solar $45 a list of our ADULT titles My First Dictionary $39 FREE! Oregon Trail $ 39 IBM-CD BUSINESS Putt Putt Joins the Parade, $18 Reader Rabbit I Deluxe Business Master + $19 Rich Scary How things Work 532 Business Phone Directory 94 521 Super Family Learning S 18 FreePhone S 25 Thinking Games 512 Home & Office Legal Guide S10 Three Foot Six Pack $ 29 Phone Disc Residential 8/94 S55 Tortoise and the Hare S 36 Phone Disk Business 1994 S 39 Tuncland $ 32 PhoneDisc Business Winter95 555 Select Phone 1994 $ 79 /BM-CD LANGUAGE | 8-cp HEALTH Dictionaries and Language $10 Triple Play French $19 ADAM Inside Story $ 49 Triple Play Spanish $ 19 Better Homes Cookbook Cookbook Heaven IBM-CD TRAVEL Cookbook USA $13 Global Explorer S69 Family Doctor ver 3 $ 19 London Multimedia Tour S 19 Home Medical Adviser Pro $ 45 Map N Go S 49 Home Remedies S 29 Street Atlas USA V2.0 589 Mayo Clinic Family Health S 18 Tripmaker and 95 Road Atlas 549 Ultimate Human Body $ 47 US Atlas 4.0 $ 19 World Atlas 5.0 S 19 /BM-CD SCIENCE World Traveler S 10 Beyond Planet Earth $ 35 Beyond Planet Earth W/VHS S 3918M-CD MULTIMEDIA Body Works Voyager Anatomy 38 Audio Collection S22 Deep Voyage $13 Beethovens Fifth $ 19 Dictionary of Living World S 25 Encyclopedia of Sound II $ 10 Encyclopedia of Science $.17 Jazz Multimedia History S 19 Grutiers Prehistoria S 19 Learn to Play Guitar $ 29 In the Company of Whales S 39 Midi Master Collection $10 Jurassic Dinosaurs $ 19 MPC Wizard 3.0 $12 Our Solar System S 10 Multimedia 4 Pak $36 Redshift $ 49 Multimedia Manis $10 Shark Alert $15 Multimedia Mega Bundle $19 Small Hlue Planet $ 49 Multimedia Platinum Space Missions S 19 Sound Mod Vol. S 25 Voyage Solar System S35 Sound Sensations S 10 TBM-CD GAMES 78M-CD GAMES 10 Pack Series S 19 Ravenant $19 Aces of the Deep $19 Police Quest 525 Acgis Guardian of Fleet S25 Retsel Assault S35 Alien Logic S35 Relentless 540 Blackthome S 34 Retum To Park 522 Blown Away $ 39 Rise of the Robots S25 Camen Sandiego World S19 Secret Weapons of Luftwarte $ 15 Casino Master Multimedia S39 Secrets of Monkey Island Chessmaster 1000 Turbo S 19 Seventh Guest Civilization $25 Sim City 2000), Create Your Own Game 29 Sim City Enhanced $ 49 Cyberia $49 Star Trek 25th Anniversary. S 25 Cyber War $ 49 Star Trek Technical Manual S 39 Cyclemania $39 Star Wars Chess S 19 Dagger of Amon Ra. $19 Subwar 2050, S 25 Dark Legions. $ 21 System Shock S 49 Dark Sun Wake of Ravager. $21 TEX Flight Simulator. S 31 Day of the Tentacle $ 25 \"Theme Park Death Gate 539 Trivial Pursuit $ 39 Doom II S439 UFO/X.COM $ 25 Dracula Unleashed 525 Ultimate Domain S 19 Dragons Lair, Under A Killing Moon S 39 Ecstatica S 39 War Craft S 39 Entombed $36 Wheel of Fortune F117A Nigluthawk Stealth $19 Wing Commander 3 S59 FIS Strike Eagle III $19 Wolf S 19 Front Page Football $ 49 Word Games SIS Gabriel Knight $25 Wyan larps Old Wes! S 35 Hardball 4 $39 5.49 Hell. $19 Zerk Anthology $19 Inca 11. Incredible Machine Il 539 18M-CD GRAPHICS Indiana Jones $25 3D Home Architecture 559 Iron Helis. Sus Beavis/Butthead Screensaver $25 Jokers Wild S19 Clipart llcaven II 522 Journeyman Project Tuth ClipArt Warehouse $10 Kings Quest 6 Complete House $24 Kings Quest 7 555 Desktop Pub Dream Disc Klick and May 5:41 Dxtor Clipart $15 Knights of Zentar $ 39 Flying Colors $ 19 Lands of Lore. S25 Font Elegance $12 Leisure Suit Larry, 522 Fonts Platinum $12 Lode Runner 545 GIF Galaxy $ 24 Loom 518 GIF Galore $19 Land of the Rings 527 Icons Wallpaper More $ 25 Mad Dog Macree 2 $ 25 Kodak Photo CD S15 Mad Dog Macree. S 19 Labels SIS Magic Carpet $45 Mother of ClipArt S 12 Master of Orion $ 45 MS Art Gallery SS Mega Race. S25 Print Shop Ensemble S7S Metaltech Earthsiepe Publishers Platinum $12 Monty Python $50 Seinfeld Screen Saver S 18 Myst $49 Nascar Racing IBM-CD REFERANCE NHL Hockey 95 $45 Amer Heritage Talking Dict S25 Noctropolis $ 49 Animals of San Diego Zoo S18 Outpost $ 29 Animals of the World S12 Panzer General $ 19 Audubon Birds SIS Pinball Arcade $32Colossal Cookbook S 10 Protostar $ 19 Computer Tutor $ 19 18M-CD REFERENCE 78M-CD SHAREWARE Audubon Mammals S15 101 of the Hest Game S 19 D-Day Encyclopedia S15 01 of the Best Games 2 S 19 Deluxe Pack 4 525 Source Code Walnut Creek S 19 Family Tree Maker $55CUser Group Forhidden Subjects S 33 C Jamsa Multimedia Forbidden Subjects 3 $ 29 CICA 3 Disk Set 1294 Gardening S10 CICA Walnut Creek 99.4 $16 Government Giveaways S 29 Circle of Kowledge Ency $16 Groliers 1995 5 39 Current Shareware 94 vol 2 S 23 Hacker Chronicles 2 $35 Dom Accessory Pack Vol. 3 $ 19 Haldeman Diaries. 519 Doom Fever ? $15 How the World Works $ 28 Doom Mania $19 How things Work Doom Mania 11 $19 Infopedia. Education Master 4 SIS Instant Internet Access $ 35 Encyclopedia of Games $13 Leonardo the Inventor S 37 Five Foot Ten Pack vi $33 Mavis Beacon Kids Typing S16 Five Foot Ten Pack v2 S33 S25 Mayo Clinic Total Heart $25 Games Platinum $12 Microsoft Money $ 12 Ham Radio S10 MS Bookshelf 1994 $39 Hobbes OS/2 November 94 519 MS Cinnentnia 1994. $39 Home and Business Platinum S12 MS Dangerous Creatures $ 29 Internet Access $21 MS Encarta 1995. $39 Internet Info $25 MS Works 3.0 /Money $ 29 Internet Tools S 19 Multimedia for Dummies 24 Just for Kids National Geographic Mammals S 19 Linux 3 CD Set QRZ Ham Radio 08/94 SIS Linux Developer Kit 2 Quicken 4 Deluxe S6S Linux Plug n Play/Fall 94 $25 SAT Personal Trainer 36 Linux Quarterly Stowaway S 39 Linux Toolkit 2.0 Toolworks Reference Library S17 Mega CDROMS USA State Fact Book $ 29 Mega Games $15 US Air Power Night Ow! 14 US Aircraft Camers 512 Night Owl Pack US Fighter Jet S12 OS/2 Professional $19 US History S25 Overload Trio 3 Dis net S 19 US Navy & Marine Aircraft S12 PC-SIG 14 $ 29 US Navy Ships Simtel.20 Walnut Creek $15 US Wars: Civil War So Much Modem Madness S19 World Almanac 1994 So Much Shareware 4 $17 YES Active Talk Software Vault Emerald S19 Software Vault Games 2 $ 19 18M-CD LITERATURE Software Vault Ruby 20 Years of People Magazine S25 Super Programmer SIS Complete Bookshop S12 Take Ten Desktop Bookshop S 15 Techno Tools Great Lit Pers Lib Series SIS Utilities Platinum Library of the Future 2. S 19 Way Cool Windows Games Monarch Notes $ 29 Win Platinum Playboy Interviews $39 Windows 1994 Shareware $ 29 Project Guttenberg S 19 Windows Powergames S18 Windows Toolbox S18 18M-CD RELIGEON World of Shareware $ 27 Angels: Mysterious Messner S35 Bible Complete Multimedia S 35 18M-CD FILM Bible Library S25 Bugs Bunny Cartoon $10 Bibles and Religion S11 Classic Cartoons S10 Logos Bible Software Coll. S35 Three Stooges S 10 Multimedia Family Bible $19 TV Commercials 1950/19605 S12 55 $25 S12 Price and avalability are subject to change. We accept Visa, MC, AMEX, Discover Monoy Orders, Cashier's Chocks and pre-paid Personal Checks only $5 Shipping for entire order, $10 UPS 2-day, $15 UPS overnight. SORRY WE CAN'T LIST ALL OF OUR 800+ TITLES! WE WILL MEET OR BEAT ANY PRICE IN THIS PUBLICATION! USED CD PROGRAM, WE PAY UP TO 50% ON TRADE-INS National CD-ROM. 800-237-6613  11005 Indian Trail Suite 101-A Dallas, Texas 75229 Circle Reader Service #17 "


"Marketplace Supply W arehouse Pickup l' er: 11 Alves for Muxt Planet blank Loan: 1172166 into 54,911 Help Passenger Capaciy B SEVEN GOING ONCE longer enough to distract CGW Trading, Inc. SEVEN GOING TWICE... you, and plugging away Each planet has a number of gorgeous at it is annoying, rather paintings and humorous cartoons associthan fun. A person simated with it, as well as a \"theme\" song, a ply can't play this game few pages of planetary history, and a solidly for more than a special task that can be performed only week or two, and once on that world—i.e., religious pilgrimyou win at Intermediate ww Wages Owed: ages, ship leave, or swapping out your level, trying to win again gey 61422 cash old star-drive for a new one-as well as Taxes Owud: 12.10 at Expert or Master level access to the interplanetary news and is not an attractive france Cost Won/19000 weather reports. Exploring the planet prospect-unlike games and taking advantage of its unique opExplore Planet which have less sophistiportunities is an important aspect of the cated graphics and much game-you have to keep doing it to Felles higher replay value. win—but once the novelty wears off, doOf course, when I say FLATSCREEN ECONOMICS Although the main screen is fairly static, ing the same-old same-old at the same that GAZILLIONAIRE is difit immediately provides a wealth of useful data within an easily old planets is pretty tedious. ficult to win, I don't mean learned interface. Seven planets aren't enough to susthat you have to be outtain a player's interest or satisfy the apstandingly clever, or that petite for variety and discovery. To be game. It started as shareware, a simple the game is full of fiendish puzzles. The honest, I'd prefer to forego the exquisite scenario with simple mechanics, until it fact of the matter is that if you're doing paintings of each planet from orbit, or was picked up by Spectrum HoloByte. too well, the computer will butcher you the funky theme music, and have more Unfortunately, Spectrum did very little with random events over which you have worlds instead. This game would be a lot to expand the game in scope; instead, little or no control. The program is demore interesting if signed to keep a player surfing at zero there were 50 worlds, for as long as possible. If you start doing randomly distributed Passengers on Ship: 8 well, the computer will quickly arrange a over the map with host of financial disasters; if you're hurteach game, all posing, just as many sudden windfalls can sessing random attribTicket Price this Week: 1,000 come along utes. A larger, more varied field of play CLOSING THE DEAL would give GAZILLIONAll in all, this game is light, funny, AIRE a richness and flashy and easy to get the hang of. All sense of adventure it Passengers Waiting: 6 the jokes are delightful the first time sorely needs. around, and learning to play is a pleaThe fact that the sure. Also, the operation of the game is game can support up exquisitely smooth-in dozens of hours to six human players Help Passongers of play, there wasn't a single crash or should have made for hiccup on my machine. But like I've some good, clean fun. said, it gets old fast. If you're playing by EIGHT PASSENGER PICK UP Ferrying paying passengers from one GAZILLIONAIRE is a yourself, I can't imagine keeping GAZILdestination to the next is a sure-fire way to earn some consistent Windows application, LIONAIRE on your drive for more than a dough, but don't expect it to make you rich in a hurry. but strangely enough month. Of course, at the low asking it doesn't have net. price, it might not be such a bad deal work capability. So, although the action they slapped some fancy chrome on it especially if you could re-sell it for a is turn-based, and despite the fact that it and transferred the whole package onto profit to a gullible alien when you were is much more fun to play the game soa CD-ROM. through. cially, you have to hot-seat the play Of course, the bells and whistles, every turn, which slows things down along with a humorous, light-hearted THE EDITORS SPEAK quite a bit. By the time six people sit sense of fun, are more than enough to GAZILLIONAIRE down, go through the necessary screens, distract the player for the first few bouts. and make all their decisions, a single But in single-player mode, GAZILLIONturn can take an hour...which is pretty AIRE is not only extremely easy to play, PROS Simple gameplay and humorexcruciating but also very hard to win, which means ous motif make for a good time for a The game's heart is in the right place, that the average player will have to play few hours. but the replay value really should have it several times in order to beat the comCONS Too simple and restrictive to been better. It's a shame, really, because puter. By the time you've learned the keep you coming back for the longthe designers of GAZILLIONAIRE put a lot drill and gone through your first few haul. of attention and creativity into this games, those bells and whistles are no Profit this Week: 0,000 Pick Up Exit Set TICKET PRICE for next planet at 2.200  RATING 172 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"You've left a comfortable home and a loving wife for 40 tough, smelly sailors who eat careless captains for breakfast. In a creaky wooden ship you plan to sail the uncharted, hostile waters of a world many are certain is flat. FXPLORATION But hey, there's a little downside to everything. of a lifetime! discovery of a li for the disco set sail for Out there somewhere await fame and Fortune and adventure. Can you establish and nurture a colonial empire against constant competition from history's greatest explorers 'Exploration. Embark on a journey you'll never forget! -Play as any of five famous explorers, including Columbus and Vasco de Gama, or create your own EXPLORATION STRATEGY -Form expeditions, explore and colonize a new land, build an empire -Gain fame and fortune through commerce and conquest Adventure Fame and Fortune Fun and Strategy A G -Compete against up to four players INTERACTIVE MAGICO PC CD-ROM INTERACTIVE MAGIC INTERACTIVE MAGIC P.O.Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 for more information call: 919 461-0722 Circle Reader Service #47 "


"REVIEW 121 2022 Movin' On Up 1 . TREND M RDPREUZA maar XORA Shooting For The 100-Floor Megaplex In Maxis' SIMTOWER 312 S AS: ALLEEN by Paul C. Schuytema SIM TOWER IKE MANY A GOOD INVENTION, MAXalso where they sleep, eat, exercise, and which doesn't sound like much given your IS' SIMTOWER: THE VERTICAL EMplay-living out the drama of their lives lofty aspirations, but it's a start. PIRE FOUND ITS GENESIS IN several hundred feet from the ground. The mandatory foundation element in discontent. Yoot Saito, a Japanese SIM TOWER is the lobby. You select your businessman with background in SIMILARITIES plot, select the lobby tool, click and drag architecture, was frustrated by the inabiliFirst, let's tackle some obvious compar your mouse, and hey, you're hiring ty of Tokyo's elevators to effectively move isons. Yes, SimTower is very similar to teamsters! A lobby goes up fast, but you the massive amounts of people in the SimCITY (more to the original than the don't want to make it as large as the base city's skyscrapers. He wondered how elenew SimCrny 2000). It is a management of your envisioned \"ultra-tower.\" You'll vators were scheduled and if, perhaps, simulation based, chiefly, on cash flow, go broke doing that, so only create the scheduling could be done better. Not construction and traffic management. enough lobby for a mid to small sized ofbeing one for idle curiosity, Saito set out Because of what SIMTOWER simulates—a fice building to create a simulation that would allow single building as opposed to entire urYour $2 million should be enough to him to study elevator ban areas-it is let you build a 3-4 story office building performance and SIM TOWER a simpler simuwith a single elevator, offices and one or traffic patterns in a Price: $44.95 lation to get two fast food courts. Essentially, that's all modern-era sky Mac Floppy & your teeth into you really can build when you are a \"one scraper. CD-ROM, This is not to star\" building. For those who prefer to Then the Sim-ulat(Windows say that SIMhave their workers live on the premises, version ed designers at Maxis Tower is overly you can also build condos, but you probaavailable April got wind of Saito's 95) simplistic. Far bly won't yet have enough resources to project. The people System from it. There is keep your residents happy. responsible for en Requirements: a nice balance of grossing system sim Macintosh challenge in WHITE COLLAR MECCA ulations (SIMCITY, 68030 or SIM TOWER, even After you've dragged and placed your ofSIMEARTH, SIMLIFE, higher (68040 recommended), 4 MB RAM, more than in fices, fast-food joints, stairs and elevator, System 7 or higher, 8-bit color, 4 MB RAM sim-anything) Protection: None the original Sinyou can sit back and watch your virtual thought the SimEleDesigner: Yoot Saito CITY. Having white collars come and go. As the simulavator concept was an Publisher: Maxis lewer variables tion is running, a clock spins through the interesting one, and Orinda, CA to content with hours of day and night and weekends. that with a little more (800) 52-MAXIS means that you Outside, the sun sets, turning the sky a development, the can see each lover's purple before the rattle of mornconcept could become a neat game. Thus components' effects more directly, and ing rush hour. Wait long enough, and was SIMTOWER born. you really feel as if you can focus on speyou're sure to experience a torrid rain SIM TOWER is a building simulator, but it cific problem solving rather than large storm and even Santa on Christmas night. does not simulate today's typical downscale SIMCIty bandages (such as more Like SIMCITY, you rely on income to town high-rise. SIMTOWER looks forward roads or more police, which may or may feed your cash hungry tower-building to the day when the suburbs of major urnot stop the flow of blood.\" enterprises, Restaurants, stores and hotel ban centers become completely develBefore you can reach for the stars, rooms will provide you with a steady oped, and the demands of our exploding you've got to have solid ground underfoot. stream of income. When rent comes due, population force humanity to build up. You start with a prime plot of real estate, all of your office occupants will shell out rather than out. The high-rise of tomornothing but red, gritty dirt really, with the their bucks, and then you'll have the row, according to SIM TOWER, will not only urban skyline in the distance. You are also cash to pick up the jackhammer once be the place where urbanites work, but provided with a cash kitty of $2 million, again and build. 174 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"\"... A prince must act like a beast ... a fox to recognize traps, and a lion to frighten off wolves.\" Machiavelli the Prince\" It's 15th century Europe resources are bountiful and deception is king. It's the perfect time to execute your plan for world domination. Manipulate military, political and religious powers using bribery, piracy and assassination. Acquire wealth by trading with over 40 cities. But plan your strategy carefully, young prince. Because every move can mean the difference between exaltation and excommunication. Machiavelli the rince 1995 MicroProse. All rights reserved. Image courtesy of Archive Photos Circle Reader Service #13 MICROPROSE MICROPROSE 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. "


"file teit Options indows G apricing Hote s w/5/6th Year 02171100 TAA 2 SHOOT FOR THE STARS requirement, tall is The construction options available to not only good, it is you are based upon your building's curFRA GALEGA a requirement of rent star rating. You begin at the bottom lisa NDERRI 13 \"winning\" at this (of course), with only the most basic opgame. The best tions available to you. Hit a population strategy, then, is to of 300 and you're bumped up another ELIBALULL 10.LULUI \"go up young star rating. At two stars, you can add sinN 169 BERLIN man.\" Set yourself gle hotel rooms, maid facilities, security L I 8 VERHUS a limited foundacenters and service elevators. Climbing KARPEES tion and start up from two stars (population 300) to SESAMBURSER climbing. You'll three stars (population 1,000 and more have to do some KUVALU YA 4 than one security center) is the first real bulldozing of past XHESURI test in the game. You need to do some construction along serious building to cram 1,000 people the way, but just into your tower, but you still have only reassure your tenlimited options to work with. This is ants that they'll where your organizational skills really BUILDING IN THE BLACK Our mega-tower is humming along nicely during have better, spifficome into play. mid-day. Not too many people waiting for anything, and we've got over $2 er facilities several Hit three stars, and your building opmillion in the bank. Time for a two-martini lunch! floors up. tions become quite grand: express eleAnother reason vators, doubleand suite-size hotel tion option until you hit 100 floors of for building floors up rather than out has rooms, restaurants, stores, theaters, urban chaos. to do with the genesis idea of this sim. ballrooms, medical centers, escalators, Remember, it began its life as an elevator underground parking and recycling BUILD IT AND THEY WILL COME simulator, and elevators are your keys to centers. The climb from three to four So just how do you craft a killer tower in an efficient building. If you build wide, stars is a long one indeed. You must SIM TOWER? There are basically two apthen you will run into either one of two have 5,000 building residents and meet proaches: build up or build out. Building problems: you will have too few elevators several other requirements, the most out, that is, extending your lobby foundato move your residents effectively, or you important of will run into the \"stupid commuter\" phewhich is a favor ST U S. 12/01 Voermond 700.00 nomenon. If you have a large tower with able VIP rating. A five or six elevator shafts, the ones on the VIP will show up outside walls of the building will see the sometime when K ONSTRUL least use. Interior shafts will get clogged you reach a three very quickly, and for some reason, your star rating and KELER little virtual folk would rather stand in an rent at least one 12. — 19 . 1 . 1 3294 4 . elevator line and get stressed out than hotel suite. If take a flight of stairs up to their first or K0429.12. your tower isn't 2009 Ral second floor office. Fewer elevator shalts up to snuff-if on a Noor allow you much more control So in the VIP must wait over traffic flow. EMTA ETT GOT TALEN for an elevator or One of the best features of SIM TOWER the room isn't is the ability to see the stress levels of cleaned promptyour workers. They will cycle from dark ly-then you can't gray to pink to \"approaching aneurysm\" reach 4 stars no red. When you see a beet-red line of matter how many FIVE O'CLOCK CRUSH It's quitt FIVE O'CLOCK CRUSH It's quittin' time, and our sims are lining up to go workers waiting for an elevator, you theaters and fast home. Even though there are a lot of people waiting for the elevators, they need to do something fast. You can also food courts you don't have to wait very long, as indicated by their neutral color. \"tag\" a worker, assigning a name, and have to please then you can later track that worker to \"the masses.\" tion and building up from there, is an evaluate stress level and location. As you climb up the star rating, you easier strategy in the early game, because Since elevator management is the key have to keep building. The population it gives you the sense that you have a to keeping tower traffic moving (and goal for a five star building is 10,000 «master plan\" for the building, i.e. offices keeping resident stress low), you are given (yes, that's right, 10,000) happy resion lower floors, then hotel rooms and the most control over elevators in this dents. After reaching that august rankcondos on top, etc. This seems very logigame. Clicking with the \"examine» tool ing, all that's left is for you to reach the cal, but in truth, logic must sometimes be over an elevator shaft will bring up the noble rating of \"tower.\" All you need to thrown out the window. You will probaplanning window for that shaft. The windo is place a cathedral on the top floor bly have to build a tower that is a mishdow provides you with a way to program of your building, the catch being that mash of facilities as you begin to expand. elevator movements during certain times, you don't get the cathedral construcAlso, as you can see from the cathedral such as telling elevators to \"express to DOLO 000 Slavulalal 176 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"1 /1/4th Year fund Cynthia orice, Hoers Going to Stress 07 wan bottom\" during the intentati dari 5 p.m. rush to get home (though if you have a lot of condos on the upper floor, you will need to have at least one elevator Bename OK express to top\" to get those people OOK home and into a dry martini before 5:15 p.m.). You can also WANAW control such things as how many floors below or above an elevator may be called SIMCYNTHIA Cynthia, who seems to be working through lunch, is in away from its cur unusually good spirits. The colors of the Sim tower let us know just how rent floor. Since we're doing in different zones. SIM TOWER is a 2D simulation of a 3D building, you can the SimCities and fewer variables for the also do the unexpected, such as placing player to juggle, making it a little more several elevators in the same shaft. accessible. On the other hand, it certainly isn't a deep game, and while it might THE FINAL FLOOR take some time to get a tower up to \"lowSo how does SIM TOWER stands up to its er\" level, once you accomplish that lolty other Sim-brethren? As I've said, it has a peak, I'm not convinced that you'd want much more clearly defined \"goal\" than to play the game again. In addition, the \"flat» nature of the building and the chaotic \"build as you go\" approach serve to throw reality out the window. You really don't ever get the sense that the virtual building you are creating is a \"real\" building. Whereas you could learn some real world lessons from every other SimGame, there not much hope of that here. But if the other SimGames were a little too chaotic for you, then I'm sure you'd like SIM TOWER. If you're obsessed with elevators, then you'll love it. Hard-core SimGame fans should just beware that while Sim Tower reaches for the sky, it doesn't run very deep. THE EDITORS SPEAK SIMTOWER RATING ** PROS Quick to learn, fun to play, and with more concrete game goals and success levels than in the SimCities. CONS Has an artificiality about it, and the elevator management aspect can be a chore. Limited replay value once you \"kiss the apex.\" The Serious Wargamer Knows His True Allies Tigers On The Prowl Aide De Camp Point Of Attack SHULATIONS HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055 (408)554-8381 The WARGAMER'S Computer Company APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 177 "


"REVIEW Welcome Back To The Machine Sierra's The INCREDIBLE MACHINE 2 Will Put Your Brain Back On The Wrack by Jason Kapalka JOR THOSE WHO FEEL THERE CAN drop a weight with a rope attached to a bellums out there in the computer gamNEVER BE TOO MANY GADGETS, TOO matchbook, which would ignite and starting world. MANY CONTRAPTIONS, TOO MANY a rocket's fuse, which would...you get the There are differences in TIM2, of wonky gizmos and hypercompliidea. THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE then becourse, but they are, as they say, more cated widgets in the world, the argat THE EVEN MORE INCREDIBLE evolutionary than revolutionary. Cerrival of the latest installment in Sierra's MACHINE, which in turn begat SID AND lain aspects have been streamlined or THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE saga is cause AL'S INCREDIBLE TOONS, which has since even eliminated. While the original for jubilation. Even those who have returned to the family with the new TIM kept a running point total based nightmare flashbacks of high-school moniker of THE INCREDIBLE TOON MAon the difficulty of puzzles solved and physics class at the mention of the word CHINE, and gone on to spawn THE INthe time involved, TIM2 dispenses en\"pulley\" may find themselves drawn in by CREDIBLE MACHINE 2 (TIM2). tirely with the scoring system, and wiseTHE INCREDIBLE MAIn some ways, ly too: just solving the cursed things is CHINF. 2's gorgeous, THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE 2 very little has more than satisfying enough, and after whimsical graphics, changed since three hours of sweaty mental struggle, Price: $44.95 only to find themINCREDIBLE the original TIM who wants to be penalized for not being Floppy, $49.95 selves puzzling over CD-ROM MACHINE was published a fast enough? Not I. a ghastly web of System few years ago. As But the single biggest change is in the ropes, rubber bands, Requirements: Led Zeppelin graphics and animation, which are now engines and gears, IBM compatible said, the interface extremely tasty eye-candy rather than toasters and can386SX or better remains the functional Puzzle Solving Units. Rockets 2 MB RAM, VGA nons at four in the same-an intubulge and hose fire as they launch, firegraphics, 5 MB morning, knowing hard drive space itive click-'n' works explode in multicolored sprays, the springboard is (floppy), mouse; drag mouse blenders grind and shiver, toasters eject in the right place to supports PAS and Sound Blasteroperation. The their cargo with an animated hiccup, catapult the rubber compatible sound cards goal in all the zeppelins crumple into flaming wreckball into the hoop, # of Players: 1-2 (same computer) «Machine\" games age when punctured. Make no mistake, but wondering how Protection: None is also identical: you're still engaged in pure and intense Developer: Jeff Tunnell Productions in tarnation to get Publisher: Sierra On-Line starting with an cerebral work here, but it is nice to have that unspeakable Bellevue, WA incomplete or a more attractive playfield. The addition firecracker lit with (800) 757-7707 non-functional of background graphics like clouds, the laser beam... machine, you stars, mountains and forests is likewise First, a quick history lesson for those plunk down gadgets and devices until eiengaging, though it changes gameplay coming late to the \"Machine\" story. In ther the thing does what it's supposed to not a whit. the beginning there was THE INCREDIBLE do launch a missile off the screen, feed a \"That gameplay, by the way, is enMACHINE, an addictive puzzle game in chunk of cheese to a cartoon mouse, hanced with a parcel of new parts for the which players were challenged to build whatever) or your brain implodes under Machine, leaving the player over a hunweird, Mousetrap-style devices which acthe weight of the logistical demands. Like dred pieces with which to tinker: lasers complished their goals in monstrously its predecessors, TIM2 includes a large and phazers, balloons and blimps, lava circuitous fashion: a falling ball might flip number of easy puzzles to acclimate the lamps and flashlights, nitroglycerine, dythe switch on an engine, which would newcomer; however, I suspect the harder namite, remote-control bombs, vacuums, turn gears via an elastic band, which of the 150 puzzles (say, the latter hall) fans, coffee pots and antigrav pads, all would activate a treadmill, which would will leave more than a few collapsed cereare at your disposal, along with a wealth 178 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. PO BOX 234 Dept 10246 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 par order Mall to Canada, PR HI, AK, APO, FPO $4por order Worldwide airmail S6 per ilem. Handling $2 per shipment Hardware urders may require additional shipping charges. Call for details Visa, MC and Discover accepted Checks held 4 weeks Money Orders uncer $200 same as cash COD SB. Doleclives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3083 Source 10246 GEN HARDWARE GEN STRATEGY SNES HARDWARE SNES SIMULATIONS JAGUAR 6 Btn Arcad Pwr Stk 839 Batter Up Competition Joystck $59 Genesis CD Sys 2 S229 Gon Sys/Lion King $139 Gen Team Player 2 $34 Mega Mouse $34 Remote Arcade Sys $36 Batter Up S64 Lethal Enforcrs Gn 2$18 Over Drive $94 Power Plug $34 Pro Action Roplay $54 Pro Pad Program $14 Super Link $29 Super Multitap $32 Spor Nintendo Sys $149 $49 $36 GENESISI Aero Biz $56 Aero Biz Supersonc $59 BrainDead 13 CD $49 Caosars Palace $49 Columns 3 $46 Dark Ride CD $54 Dune CD Gonorations Lost $49 HUMANS Lemmings 2: Tribes $50 Liberty or Death $56 Moga Bomberman $44 NFL Trivin CD $49 Pac Man 2 Powermonger CD $43 Rise of the Phoenix S58 Risk $46 Amnce 3 Kingdm 3 $59 Theme Park CD $44 Wheel Fortune CD $52 GEN ADVENTURE \"NBA JAM: TOURNAMENT EDITION' Slam home all the excitment of the arcade sensation. Over 100 stars, 9 all new rim-rattling monster dunks, post season action, power up icons, hot spots, injuries, subs and new secret characters! 32X $59 SNES ADVENTURE $52 $59 Aaro Fighters $52 Air Cavalry $49 Air Strike Patrol $56 Al Unsor Jr Racing $52 Carrior Acos $52 Choplifter 3 $44 Comanche $59 Dirt Trax FX $59 Freeway Fly Boys $52 Full Throttlo Racing $58 Kyle Petty Rcg $54 Micro Machines $56 N.Mansell Indy Car $59 Pacific Theatr Ops $59 Rally $58 Speed Racer $49 Star Fox $49 Star Fox 2 $62 Star Trek:Starfleet $52 Street Racer $56 Super Bike Chaing $54 Top Gear 3000 $56 Turn & Burn:No Fly $52 Un Racers $48 Urban Strike Wild Trax $52 Wing Commander 2 $62 World Champ Rally $52 Akami $59 GEN KICK & PUNCH 02 Jaguar CD Sys $149 Jaguar System $249 Air Car Wars $52 Alien Vs Predator $56 Arona Football $54 Baldy CD $52 Barkley Bsktball CD $52 Batman Forever $59 Battlo Morph CD $52 BrainDead 13 CD $52 Brett Hull Hockey $59 Cannon Fodder $54 Castle Woll 3D $39 Chaos Agenmda $52 Club Drive $49 Creature Shock CD $52 Demolition Man CD $52 Doom Double Dragon 5 Dragon's Lair CD Dragon Dune Flight for Life Flashback Gunship 2000 Hardball 3 Hammer Head Horrorscope Hover Strike Iron Soldier Kasumi Ninja Phear $54 Pinball Dreams $54 Primal Rage $58 Ray Man Rise of the Robots $59 Str Raider 2000 CD $52 Syndicate $58 Tempest 2000 $52 Tiny Toon Advs $52 Addams Family $56 Advs Batman & Robin $46 Akira CD S 54 Batman & Robin $52 Batman:Revng Jokr $34 Boogerman $49 Corpse Killor CD $52 Dark Seed CDS52 Death of Superman $52 Dracula CD $49 Dragon Lair $54 Ecco Dolphin $52 EarthWorm Jim CD $52 Flinstones Movie $56 Flink CD $52 Flashback CD $46 Incredible Hulk 2 $58 Indy Jnes Last Crsde $39 Iron Helix CD $49 Jungle Book $56 Jurassic Park Ramp $49 Lion King $62 Loadstar 2 CD $54 Lrds of Thunder CD $44 Mansn Hiddn Souls $49 Mickey Mania & CD 558 Myst CD Out of this Wild CD $49 Phantom 2040 $54 Pitfall $61 Power Rangers CD $46 Return of the Apes $56 Revolution X $59 Rise of the Dragon $46 RobooCup Tinnatr $66 Scooby Do $52 Shadow of Beast 2 $52 Shinobi 3 $42 Snatcher CD $14 Sonic Pinball $43 Sonic Hedgehog 4 $59 Space Ace CD $52 S&V:Max Carnag $54 StarGate $54 Sylvester & Tweety $54 The Punisher $56 Thunder in Paradise $52 Time Cop CD $48 Vikings 2 $46 Virtual Springfield $56 Warrior of Rome 2 $54 Who Shot John Rck $49 X MEN 2 $52 Act Raiser 2 $48 Adams Family Vals $56 Adv Batman & Robin $59 Akira Beavis & Butt-Head $54 BlackThome $52 Bubsy 2 $54 Death of Superman $59 Donkey Kong Cntry $64 Earthworm Jim $59 Incredible Hulk 2 $58 Indiana Jones Great $62 Jurassic Park 2 $56 Knight of Round Tol $44 Lion King $64 Mickey Mania $58 Ogro Battle 558 Pitfall S61 Power Rangers $59 SeaQuest DSV $59 Spoody Gonzalos $52 S&V:Max Carnago $62 Star Trk Dp Spac 9 $56 Steven Seagal $54 Super Godzilla Spr Return of Jodi S63 Tarzan $52 Virtual Bart $49 X MEN $59 Art of Fighting $49 Baltz $49 Claylighter $52 Cybernaughts 554 Double Dragon 5 $52 Eternal Champs CD $46 Fatul Furry CD $49 Justice League S58 King of Monsters 2 $49 Kng Fu:Legnd Con. $58 Rise of Robots CD $49 Samurai Shwn CD 549 Spr Street Fighter 2 $59 Spreme Warrior CD $52 Virtua Fighters $79 9885883893838 SNES STRATEGY $58 \"DRAGON: THE BRUCE LEE STORY' The spirit of martial arts master Bruce Lee lives on in Dragon, a dangerously lifelike combat simulation based on his biographical film. Apply discipline and age old fighting techniques to subdue opponents Jaguar $39 $46 GEN SPORTS ACME Animation $64 Aoro Biz Sporsonio $56 Animaniacs $54 Break Thru $44 Bust-A-Move $42 Civilization Genghis Khan 2 $56 Kirby's Avalanche $52 Lemmings 2: Tribes $56 Metal Mariens $59 Oporation Europe S62 Also of the Phoenix S58 Risk Sper Bomberman 2 $52 Supor Pinball $49 Supor Tetris $49 Wild Snake $46 FLNEO GEO SNES ROLE PLAYING JAGUAR Bass Mastrs Classic $56 BII Walsh Clg Fb'95 $54 ESPN Hockey $58 ESPN NBA Hangtrn $58 FIFA Intrnini Scr'95 $54 NBA Jam Tourn.Ed $62 NBA Live '95 $50 NFL Football' 95 $54 NHL Hockey '95 $54 Rugby Wrld Cup'95 $52 Slam City CD 352 Slam Masters $54 TNN Bass Tourn. $49 Tecmo Supr Bowl 2 S58 WWF:Raw $59 SNES SHOOTERS Brain Lord $56 Breath of Fire 2 $64 Dragon Warrior 5 $66 DragonView $62 Final Fantasy 3 S66 First Queen $50 Golden Empire $62 Illusion of Gala S64 Lord of the Rings $54 Lufia 2 $59 Might & Magic 3 $59 New Horizons $62 Obitus Robo Trak S58 Ultima 7:Black Gate $59 Warrior of Rome 3 $52 Neo Geo CD Sys $569 Aero Fighters 2 CD $69 Agresor Drk Kmbt $169 Art of Fighting 2 CD $69 Fatal Fury Spec CD $69 Kng of Fighter 94 CD 569 Kng of Monstr 2 CD $69 Riding Hero CD $69 Samurai Shwdn 2 $229 Soccer Brawl CD $69 Spr Sidekicks 2 CD $69 Windjammers CD $69 Zed Blade CD $69 Operatn Thunderhit $54 Super R-Type 3 $56 Spr Sonic Blastmn 2$56 Super Turrican 2 $56 Tin Star Vortex Wild Guns $54 $58 $49 SEGA MARS 32X 3DO SNES SPORTS SNES KICK & PUNCH GEN ROLE PLAYING $58 $56 $52 Battletech $54 Eye of Beholder CD $42 Lunar 2 Now Horizons S62 Phantasy Star 4 SB2 Popful Mad CD $49 Revngr of Veng CD 544 Shining Force 2 $66 $58 Ballz Best of the Best $46 Clayfighter 2 Double Dragon 5 S56 Fatal Fury Special $59 Fighters History $56 Justice League $64 King of Dragons $46 Kung Fu $59 Mortal Kombat 3 $69 Ranma 1/22 $59 Rise of the Robots $62 Samurai Showdown $59 Super St Fighter 2 $66 Wolverine $62 World Heroos 2 556 $52 $56 $36 $52 'GENESIS 32X SYSTEM' Genesis 32X will turn your existing Genesis & Sega CD into state-of-theart machines! Features crisper & smoother video footage never before seen at home. $99 GEN SIMULATIONS Bass Masters Clas $59 Bassin's Black Bass $62 Brett Hull Hcky '95 $49 Cannondalo Cup $52 Championship Pool $49 ESPN Football $58 ESPN Hockey $58 FIFA Internatnal Scr $52 F. Thomas Big Hurt $66 Kirby's Dream Crso S54 Looney Tunes BBall $59 Madden Football 95 $56 NBA Jam Session $54 NBA Jam Tourn $66 NBA Live 95 959 NCAA Baktbl Finnl 4$56 NFL Quarterbck Clb $66 NHL Hockey 95 954 PGA Tour III $59 RBI 94 $49 Slam Masters $56 Sporting Nows Bsbl $59 Spr Bases Loaded 3562 Super Punch Out $56 TNN Bass Tourn $56 Tocmo Baseball $56 Tecmo Hockey $58 Tocmo Sper Bowl 3 $59 Troy Aikman Fiball $59 WWF:Raw S66 300 Gun $44 3DO Sys Pansonc $399 11th Hour $59 Alone in the Dark $46 BrainDead 13 $52 Claylighter 2 $46 Creature Shock Doom Dragons Lair 2 FIFA Internatni Scr $52 Flight Stick Pro $99 GEX Grandest Fleet Hell Horde Ishar 3 Kingdom:Far Rchs $46 Mad Dog McCree 2 $54 Magic Carpet $54 Need for Speed $52 Night Trap Of Wrid Interceptor $52 PGA Tour $54 Pitfall $54 Quarantino $34 Roal Pinball $52 Robel Assault Rise of the Robots $52 Robinson Requiem $52 Samurai Showdown $52 Shadow Caster S52 Star Control 2 $52 Spr St Fight 2 Trba $59 Way of the Warrior $52 $52 SNES STRATEGY Genesis 32X Syst $139 After Burner $46 Alien Trilogy $62 Alone in the Dark $52 BlackThorne $52 Bump & Run Driving$54 Cadillacs & Dino's $56 Collage Basketball S62 Collage Football $59 Chaotix S58 Clayfighter 2 $52 CyberBrawl $59 Dark Ride CD Doom $59 Dragons Lair 2 $52 Fahrenheit CD $52 Flying Aces CD $52 Farenheit CD Golf Mag 36 Git His $62 Incredible Hulk 2 S54 Izzy Olympic Quest S52 Kingdom:Far Rches $59 Loadstar 2 CD $58 Motal Hoad $59 Midnight Rider CD $56 Mortal Kombat 2 $62 Mother Base $52 Motocross Champ $52 NBA Jam Toum S62 NFL Instant Replay S56 NFL Quarterbck Clb $56 Over Drive $94 Pitfall $59 Power Rangers CD $52 Primal Rago S58 Ray Man $54 RBI 95 $57 Revolution X $59 Slam City $59 Star Wars Arcado $52 Stellar Assault $59 Supremo Warrior S59 Totally Brutal $52 Virtua Racing Dixe $59 Voyager Star 2 $54 WWF:Raw $59 Zorro $54 Battle Corps CD 544 Combat Cars Daytona USA 579 ESPN Spdworld CD $56 Flying Nghtmars CD $44 Megarace CD $42 Midnight Raider CD $52 Outrunners Rally CD $54 Road Rash 3 $52 Rock & Roll Racing $49 SeaQuest DSV $56 Super Bike Chlinge $49 NTASY $52 GENESIS PHANTASY STAR TV Horrifying biomonsters have once again cursed the Motavian landscapes. Discover the dreaded Dark Forces behind them. Offers dramatic battle sequences with fully animated characters and backgrounds. $82 Clue $46 Genghis Khan 2 $56 Jeopardy 2 (Dix) $52 Lommings 2:Tribos $56 Liberty or Donth $59 Lord of Darkness $56 Mario Paint $54 Motal Marinos $59 Mighty Max $54 Oporation Europe S62 Pinball Fantasies $52 Rise of the Phoenix $58 GEN SHOOTERS GAME GEAR CDI Contra Hard Corps $49 Crime Patrol CD $49 Drug Wars CD $49 Exo Squad $52 Fire Team Rogue $49 Lethl Enforcr 2 $44 Mad Dog McCree 2 $49 Rabel Assault CD 539 Surgical Strike CD $52 Urban Stnke $52 View Piont $56 Zero Tolerance $52 Romnco 3 Kingdm 3559 Sper Battleship $44 Sper Bomberman 2 $52 Sper Caesars Palce $49 Super Conflict $49 Super Pinball $49 Totris & Dr. Mario $56 The Brainies $54 Theme Park $56 Wario's Woods $48 Wheel of Fortune 2 $48 Syst W/Lion Kng $129 Boavis & Butt-Head $34 Dynamito Headdy $34 Itchy & Scratchy $34 Lion King $38 Mortal Kombat 2 $39 NFL '95 J.Montana $38 NHL All Star Hckey S38 SoaQuest DSV 538 Shining Force 2 $42 Sonic Triple Trouble $38 X Men 2 $38 450 Magnavox Plyr$289 550-Magnavox Plyr$479 7th Guest $52 Axis & Allies $44 Burn Cycle Kingdom Naked Gun 33 1/3 $24 Space Ace $52 Star Trek 6 $22 Voyer CGW 495 v $46 $44 $44 Circle Reader Service #36 "


"of less glamorous gadgets like gears, cluded, but unlike earlier entries, TIM2's take turns trying to solve a puzzle. A ropes, cables, belts and the ever-popular editor allows you to define the conditions time limit is set for each turn, during pulley. Figuring out what all these widunder which a puzzle is considered which the player is allowed to add one gets do could have been a nightmare, but new piece from the there is extensive on-line help available, parts bin to the and even better, a set of simple tutorial puzzle, and to puzzles that introduce the player gradualmove or remove ly to all the pieces. one old piece. If it There is a final class of parts I've left looks like your rifor last, because sadly they represent, if val is close to fignot exactly a step backwards, a certain uring it out, you staidness of design. These are the living can move things to creatures available to you in the game: obstruct him, or Mel Schlemming, a little humanoid otherwise place munchkin; the reptilian Edison Alligator; pieces so that in and Curie Cat and Newton Mouse, who theory) the puzzle are about what you'd expect. The critters cannot be finished Pop the balloon in the top right corner of the screen. are placed and used exactly like machine until it's your turn parts, except that they exhibit more moonce again. The bility and personality\" than your average TOO POOPED TO POP Nothing is ever easy in TIM2. The simple act of two-player game cog: Curie Cat will pursue Newton Mouse popping a balloon requires a laser, a vacuum, a cannon, a lava lamp, and isn't going to woo or cans of cat food, Newton Mouse scurseveral million of your over-worked neurons. anyone from ries for cheese or his mouse hole, Edison DOOM Deathchomps whatever comes near and belts \"solved»-no more \"honor system.» The match or on-line 'mech battles, but it objects with his tail. Mel generally just user is thereby empowered to create puzdoes offer another twist. waltzes back and forth and looks stupid. zles every bit the equal of the ones includ Cooperative play is also possible, in What's wrong the same way it's always been available, with these guys? i.e., get some pals to make suggestions Nothing's wrong over your shoulder. For the harder puzwith them--they zles, you'll need all the help you can add humor and get-the things may well have been dedepth to the signed by Satan himself, though His Inma game—it's just that fernal Majesty is missing from the they could have credits. been done so The low violence level, charming much better, as evgraphics, and-eep!—\"educational\" idenced by Sid AND content of TIM2 make it a good choice AL'S INCREDIBLE for parents looking for games that don't TOONS/INCREDIBLE involve homicide, xenocide, genocide TOON MACHINE. or xenogenocide, but remember that Sid and Al, the catlater puzzles are fully capable of bringwithin. Chariots of the Gods? Launch the Rocket into space! and-mouse pair in ing NASA engineers weeping to their the earlier game, THE KAPALKAN CONTRAPTION Using TIM2's puzzle building tools, the author knees, never mind little Johnny. Mature were beautifully andesigned this scheme to send an ancient race into space. gamers looking for a stern test of their imated cartoons in intellectual prowess will also be delightthe best ultraviolent Warner Bros. style, ed with the game. If TIM2 takes off, you ed. Now if only Sid and Al had made it who were continually exhibiting new becan expect to see lots of home-made puzin...well, there's always TIM3. haviors as you subjected them to danger zles archived on BBSes and various onand opportunity. Sid chortled as a bomb line services. The ability to add THE EDITORS SPEAK blew Al to a blackened cinder, Al yowled background scenery to your puzzles is anTHE INCREDIBLE MACHINE 2 in pain and flew straight up if he landed other plus, although it would have been on a pin, and so forth. Curie and Newton nice to import your own graphics. in TIM2, amusing as they are, just don't Also new is an on-line hint system that have the charisma of these two; I kept gives much-needed advice for many of PROS Great graphics, more parts, hoping Sid and Al would make a surprise the puzzles, although the hardest seem to more puzzles, a better editor, clever comeback to blow these colorless have left this option out. User-made puzand absorbing gameplay. usurpers off the screen. zles can include hints as well. CONS None, really, though it might These matters aside, TIM2 does have Finally, TIM2 includes a two-player not be to some folks' taste. The two some new features that Sid and Al would game. Sorry kids, no modem or network player competitive mode could have have killed for. As in earlier \"Machine\" play—this is strictly a head-to-head onebeen better. And where the heck are games, an easy-to-use puzzle editor is incomputer match. In this mode, players Sid and AI? Ancient Aztec ruins are discovered, with strango devices RATING ** 180 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"PC GAME PRICES SLASHED PC CD-ROM PC 3.5 (FLOPPY) SALE SALE TITLE SRP PRICE TITLE SRP PRICE 10 Year Anthology $59.99 $14.88 Ultimate Football $59.99 $29.88 Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet $69.99 $29.88 Under a Killing Moon $99.99 $39.88 Air Havoc $49.99 $19.88 Vortex: Quantum Gate 2 $59.99 $29.88 Alien Logic $64.99 $29.88 Wing Commander 3 $69.99 $39.88 Alone in the Dark $59.99 $19.88 Wolfpack $39.99 $19.88 Armored Fist $64.99 $29.88 Wrath of Gods $49.99 $19.88 Carmen San Diego Jr. Ed. $44.99 $19.88 Zephyr $59.99 $14.88 Colonization $59.99 $29.88 And More! Cyclemania $49.99 $24.88 Dark Sun $59.99 $19.88 Dawn Patrol $54.99 $24.88 Day of the Tentacle $49.99 $24.88 1942 Pacific Air War $59.99 $29.88 Dinosaur Adventure 3D $64.99 $14.88 Aces of the Pacific $39.99 $19.88 Dream Web $39.99 $19.88 Art of the Kill $29.99 $ 9.88 Dune $64.99 $19.88 Carriers at War 2 $49.99 $14.88 Ecstatica $44.99 $24.88 Chess Master 4000 Windows $44.99 $24.88 Fortress Dr. Radiaki $44.99 $19.88 Colonization $59.99 $29.88 Gabriel Knight $59.99 $19.88 Dark Sun $59.99 $14.88 Hell F14 Fleet Defender $29.88 $59.99 $59.99 $29.88 Inferno $59.99 $29.88 High Command $59.99 $24.88 Journeyman Project Turbo $49.99 $54.99 Hong Kong Mahjong $24.88 $19.88 Labyrinth of Time $59.99 $29.99 Mario Teaches Typing $14.88 $ 9.88 Lawnmower Man $44.99 $49.99 $14.88 Monopoly Deluxe $14.88 $59.99 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $39.99 $24.88 Populous 11 $14.88 $49.99 $59.99 Naval Pack $24.88 Privateer $24.88 $49.99 Novastorm $19.88 $24.99 Raptor (Full Version) $14.88 Peter & the Wolf Star Trek: 25th Anniversary $24.88 $44.99 $19.88 $59.99 $49.99 Quarantine $49.99 $14.88 Star Wars Chess $19.88 $39.99 Ravenloft $14.88 $59.99 Strategy Game $19.88 $44.99 Rebel Assault $59.99 Subwar 2050 $29.88 $29.88 Red Shift $59.99 $49.99 Syndicate $29.88 $24.88 Return to Zork $54.99 $24.88 X-Wing $49.99 $29.88 And More! Rise of the Robots $59.99 $29.88 Seinfield Screen Saver $49.99 $19.88 Shadowcaster $59.99 $14.88 Sim City Enhanced $59.99 $19.88 7th Guest $64.99 Saturday Night Live $39.99 $29.88 $14.88 $64.99 $49.99 Hell Cab $24.88 Space Pirates $19.88 $49.99 Star Crusader Legend of Kyrandia $49.99 $14.88 $14.88 Star Trek MM Collection $39.99 $ 9.88 Star Trek 25th Anniversary $69.99 $24.88 Strike Commander Dlx. $69.99 $39.88 Trivial Pursuit $39.99 $24.88 Power Poker $44.99 $14.88 Trump Castle 3 $39.99 | $14.88 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat $54.99 $19.88 Call Now To Order Available By Mail Order Only. Add CAPTRON $5 for Shipping & Handling. Offer expires 4/30/95. Credit Card 1-800-262-7462 expires 4/30/95: Credit Card... Purchases only. Limited to Stock On Hand. All Sales Are Final. No Or Request a Catalog Returns on Sale Merchandise. Circle Reader Service #15 MAC 3.5 (FLOPPY)) MAC CD-ROM Hurry! Supplies "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Windows On The Shareware World by Chuck Miller or a variety of reasons, a large Perhaps best described as «Asteroids \"ship\" can be represented by a wide varinumber of gamers are making for the '90s,\" INNER SPACE has a classic ety of animated icons including numerous the transition to Windows. Al look and feel. You maneuver your comspace ships and animal shapes. Some of the same time, companies like puter \"self» (a tiny ship) around the my favorites are the Duck, Fruit Bat and Activision, Sierra On-Line and screen applying thrust, turning right, Beaver, but, unfortunately, there are no Cyberdreams are now developturning left or applying breaking \"Pigs\" in INNER SPACE. ing most of their new games thrusters while firing away at enemy vesIf you aren't happy with the available for Microsoft's operating system. Approsels and asteroid-like particles of floating ships and their abilities, you have the oppriately, greater numbers tion of heading to the Ship of shareware games are Factory. This is an editing being designed for Winand creation tool that can dows, too. And, while modify existing ships' apthey're not in the same pearance and behavior, or it weight class as games becan be used to create entirely (413 ing developed by the \"big new craft. Another nice boys,\" these low-budget altouch: the game greets you ternatives are still worth each play session by name downloading and playing, and day, as in «Hi, Chuck! if only for a free test-run. It's Saturday afternoon....\" These are just a partial indiI'VE GOT DEMONS cation of the extra effort that IN MY PC! has gone into the developThough it doesn't feature ment of this game. Martin Short or Dennis INNER SPACE even furnishes 0:27 SIRENS SIEM Quaid, OPERATION: INNER SCORE an instructional tutorial in Ergre 29-REAN CCTLOVE ME SPACE nevertheless delivwhich the computer pilot exers a healthy dollop of KUKOODREFARS COMPLETE plains what he's doing and good humor and enterDUCK!? In OPERATION: INNER SPACE players can choose their own ship shape, in this why, providing an easy way to tainment. Darkly parodyParody case a duck, and shoot space targets Asteroids-style. learn the game. (This enables ing a computer-user's you to avoid that most worst fear, the game unhideous of last resorts-readleashes a horde of demons who have supdebris. What makes INNER SPACE unique is ing the instructions.) Each time the tutoriposedly loosed all your programs to feed a gameworld that is dynamically generatal runs, it continues from where it on your system's resources. Your only cd from the contents of your hard drive previously left off, providing more adhope of restoring order is to enter the as you play. The «zones\" you must purge vanced instruction as it goes. Though computer yoursell, capture or destroy all are primarily the contents of the directogameplay is not difficult, this is still a aberrant icons and face the final chalries on your hard drive, each chock full of handy feature. lenge awaiting you—all from the belly of icons and adversaries to capture and/or Of course, there is a \"vacuum\" in INthe digital beast. But fear not! Although destroy. NER SPACE: the ship control is by keyhazards, competitors and the Inner DeINNER SPACE comes equipped with a full board only. While it works okay, I mon await you, there are also some welcomplement of user-friendly features and definitely prefer a joystick for this type of come allies at your disposal. customization options. Your computer game. Also, the interface, which resemMISSLOE vice Gun Thrust 182 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Premiere CD-ROM New Media Entertainment CD-ROM for MAC & Windows Volume 1, No.1 Issue! $ ONLY $14.95 DIGITAL Interactive Magazine Check Out Eleallitaliing Christine She' lake lov Glad I You OLACI-ROM DIAVE! Music And The 'Net Yould This Mean The ENE Of Recere Street Triatlzy Leary Interactive Interview With AN ACCIdenttal lean Tanl G Multimedia Superstars Erlia Elie Scenes / , CELL E LIEV LucasArts Gee Wiere Cinema anze COLTELLE GEES MEEL CD 18 More Audiences HYBRID COMPONRA Order Now 1.800.228.7449 Econoce Visit Computer Express Online At http://cexpress.com:2700/ And Go Digital Online At http://www.Goligital.com 1188 QuickTime TEELLILUS @ 1995 e Mechia Circle Reader Service 357 "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE F 14 Wind of the Round OS UNEET WEST Bernie NORTH Elaine EAST ENG SOUTH Gaby 1000 1000 1000 1000 AXA HONOTTE S bles a windowed circuit board with a JONGG is played in hands, with a miniother details that come into play such as status panel, lacks the design sophisticamum of four hands making up a round replacement tiles and Special Hands. tion that characterizes the rest of the and four rounds comprising a game. The game also requires a familiarity game. Since all of the gameplay occurs Each of the four \"Winds\" must have with the 144 tiles in the set. within its confines, more attention their turn as Wind of the Round, and I must admit, my first reaction to should have been paid to its design. each player must have four turns playlearning yet another computer card Another problem with INNER SPACE is ing the East Wind. Though the minigame was not all that positive. Howevits own built-in advertising. Without mum number of hands in a game is 16, er, MAH JONGG offers such a unique consulting the gamer, it Mah Jongg for Windows twist, combining eleautomatically replaces Game Hand Options Help ments of cards and the the user's screen saver ancient Chinese game, with its own. The first that I quickly became time the screen saver enthralled. There are, kicked in after installing however, a few downthe game I almost had a sides. The shareware coronary, thinking that version has limited play the game was actually a options. You can't save cleverly disguised virus, RE or open any files, you and that all my crucial can't employ any numbusiness data had been ber of special features, wiped out. I'm not opand you aren't allowed posed to advertising, but to cheat. In addition, a program that changes registration is a bit inany user settings should convenient as the develdo so only with the user's oper is based in France. full permission and So, you will need to get knowledge. In addition, 43 Tiles left Elaine gett a tilo. Eleine ditcardt 2 Circia an international money the installation creates order, send it overseas, LOOK WHAT THEY DONE TO MAHJONGG, MOM MAH JONGG for Windows takes the traditional about a half-cozen direcand wait for your registile game and shuffles it into a card game for a challenging new twist. Lories scattered all over tered copy to arrive. your hard drive that Still, for a unique and should have been confined within the there may be more if the East Wind enjoyable change of pace, MAH JONGG INNER SPACE directory itself. player continues to win. \"Going Mah (MAHJBB.ZIP) is tres magnifique! If you Still, apart from an unattractive interJongg,\" the object of the game, is acneed a greater mental challenge than face and the questionable alteration of complished by completing a hand of 14 many Windows games can offer, MAH the user's default screen saver, OPERAtiles. Scores are then calculated based JONGG is worth the registration fee. TION: INNER SPACE offers a creative and upon the tiles in each player's hand beSend an International Money Order for entertaining twist to a classic game idea. fore the next hand is played. $29.95 (US) to: Bloem, 69 Allée des And the inclusion of the Ship Factory is While a knowledge of traditional Mah Plaqueminiers, le Verte, 06560 Valfrosting on the cake. Jongg is helpful, a careful reading of the bonne, France. If your system can run The shareware version of OPERATION: game rules is all that's really necessary Windows 3.1, you'll have no problem inINNER SPACE can be yours for the down to play. Watching the computer play all stalling and playing MAH JONGG. load (INSPAC.ZIP). When you're ready four Winds also helps you in under Chuck Miller, CGW columnist and editor to send for the registered version, shoot standing the rules of the game. of InterActive Gaming, is available on Coma payment of $29.95 (US) to: Software During each hand, the goal is to compuServe at 74774,1476, America Online at Dynamics Inc., 84 Coach Gate Way SW, plete tile groups, combinations of three TGAMING and through the Internet at inCalgary, AB Canada or call (800) or four tiles, called Chow, Pung and teructive.gaming@swcbbs.com. 30SPACE with a credit card in hand. Kong (which are, oddly enough, also the The registered version includes the daily specials at my local Chinese restauTo locate these games ZA NET complete working game, plus full printrant). A Chow is created by picking up a on-line, tune in to the ed documentation tile discarded by the player on your left, CGW headquarters on a Pung is fashioned by picking up a tile ZillNet. Games featured here can be JUST ME AND MAH JONGG discarded by any player that matches downloaded from ZiflNet both on ComWhen I downloaded MAH JONGG I extwo identical tiles already on your stake puServe and on Prodigy. On Compected the traditional tile game. To my (kind of like the wooden tile rack in puServe, go to Computer Gaming World's surprise, I discovered a rendition of the SCRABBLE), and a Kong is completed own forum (GO GAMEWORLD), Library classic Oriental game played as a fourwhen you pick up a tile discarded by any 7, Shareware Sizzle. On Prodigy, jump handed game of cards, only with Mah player and combine it with three identiZiffNet and Search by Title for the games Jongg tiles. cal tiles on your stake. This forms the listed here. Or, Search by Category to A beautifully rendered game, MaH basis of MAH JONGG, though there are browse the entire Games Library. 184 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"MISSION MAKE US YOUR FIRST CHOICE OVERNIGHT SHIPPING VIA AIRBORNE $7.00 ould you like to receive our 32 page ADULT CD Catalogue? Circle Reader Service #96 or send $5 PRE KE  B-I--I-5 BARB THE MOST POPULAR STOP MS ON THE INFORMATION SUPER INTERACTIVE Touch The Future! SPACE SIRENS IBM Disks Fortress Dr Radiaki 38 5th Fleet 44 Front Page Baseball AD&D Menzoberranzan 50 Iron Cross Arkanla 2 Star Trall 44 Jorune Allen Logic Armored Fist 25 Knights of Xentar Battle Bugs 44 Lords of the Realm BloForge 50 Metal Marines Call Blackthorne 38 MetalTech: Bat Drome 44 Blak Stone: Plan Strike 27 My Favorite Monsters 33 Breach 3 42 Nascar Racing Breakthru 38 Quarantine Cannon Fodder 27 Rise of the Robots colonization 49 Rise of the Triad Cyclones 45 slmTower Dark Forces 49 Space Simulator Dark Sun Ravager 49 Star Crusader Dawn Patrol 44 Star Reach Deep Space 9: Hunt 44 Startrek Next Gen Dominus 38 Theatre of Death Doom II: Hell On Earth 46 Warcraft Orcs/Humans 44 Dungeon Master 2 39 Wing Commander Fighter Wing 38 Armada Flight Commander 2 44 Zephyr SOUNDCARDS Navigate a 3D world where Audio Rock-It 16 69 your ultimate fantasies Sound Blaster 16 Valu 119 come alive. The only on Sound Blast 16 MCD 149 Ultrasound 129 that adapts to Wave Blaster 189 your choices. The Dream Machine 329 VIRTUAL VEGAS You are lured by the irresistible song of the Space Sirens emanating from a mysterious space station. You venture into the domain of the alluring and beautiful Space Sirens only to realize that you've been entrapped in VR chamber to fulfill their every desire. Engage in a search and fulfill mission in an exotic interactive odyssey. $59 CD $16 MACHINE Ultrasound 16 MCD 140 w p -322 VIRTUAL VIXENS VIRTUAL VIXENS $44 CD ROM HEADQUARTERS NEURODANCER BBBBBS 50 50 Flash 38 NEURODANCER $39 47 7th Guest 11th Hour 69 Dominus Magic Carpet 47 Space Pirates AD&D Menzo... 50 Doom II Hell Earth 46 Nascar Racing 53 Spectre Air Havoc Controller 44 Dragon Lore 44 NHL Hockey 95 39 Star Crusader Arkanla 2 Star Trall 44 Falcon Gold 59 Noctropolls Star Reach Armored Fist Flash Traffic 44 Op. Body Count 33 Star Trek Tech Man. Battle Isle 2200 Flight Commander 244 Panzer General 44 Stonekeep Blind Date 44 Full Throttle PGA Tour Golf 486 50 System Shock Bureau 13 44 Gadget Phantasmagoria Total Distortion Creature Shock Hammer of Gods Picture Perfect Golf 48 Under a Killing Moon58 Cyber Judas Harvester 59 Python's Waste Time56 US Navy Fighters Cyberia 50 Heretic call Quantum 2 Vortex 44 Voyeur CyberWar 50 Jorune Alien Logic 44 Quarantine 44 Warcraft CycleMania King's Quest VII 49 Quest for Glory IV 49 Wild Blue Yonder 45 Cyclones 46 Knights of Xentar 43 Ralden 39 Wing Commander III 56 Daedalus Encounter 50 Legend of Kyrandia 344 Relentless Twinsen's 50 Wings of Glory Dark Forces 49 Litil Dlvil 33 Renegade 39 Wolf Hunt DarkSun Ravage 52 LodeRunner Returns42 Rise of the Robots 50 Wolfpack Dawn Patrol 44 Lunicus 42 Rise of the Triad 44 X-Wing Collector's Death Gate 37 Madness of Roland 33 Secrets of StarGate 44 Zephyr Deep Space 9 Hunt 43 WOW UST SCISSORS N STONES 38 INSTONES Journey into a realm where beautiful women are available to challenge you in a game of chance. A high tech adaptation of the ancient game of scissors-rockpaper. Featuring live action video combined with 3D animation and graphics. EL F-16 Flight Control Weapons Control II Rudder Pedals Flight Control MK 1 T-1 Driving Pedals $109 $89 $99 $59 Gorg. tr Cyberlesque Go Digital CD $34 Magazine $14.95 $119 Wanderlust $39 $29 Phone (201) 783-3600  Fax (201) 783-3686  FAXBACK (201)783-3374 300-999-7995 Send Orders To: Mission Control  7 Oak Place  CGW0495 Montclair, NJ 07042. MC, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Checks held 14 days. Please include Phone # /Shipping $7 OVERNIGHT (most areas) International Shipping $25. Add $5 for Ultra Discreet Packaging! E-Mail 70007.1324@Compuserve.com Circle Reader Service #100 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Building Brains Bit By Bit How Game Designers Program Computer Pilots To Eat Your Lunch by Paul C. Schuytema case 0101000110011000101010 HE TERM \"ARTIFICIAL INTELLIity to an ape. More than once GENCE\" (OR AI) IS THROWN in 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR AROUND A LOT IN THE PAGES OF have I been startled by a CGW. Flip thorough the reviews milk-white Zero screaming in this issue, and you'll see refout of the sun and turning erences to the tough Al, the tight on my tail, peppering weak, the challenging and the my Corsair with lead. push-overs. What the reviewers are referWhat's behind this increase ring to is the collection of programming in the intelligence of these arroutines that control the computer oppotificial pilots? And how exactnents and make a game interesting to ly does one go about creating play. Al routines can control anything artificial brains? To find out, from the movements of huge armies and I went to the source-the fleets in wargames, all the way down to inprogrammers responsible for dividual pilots and drivers in simulations. all of my virtual deaths and It is these artificial pilots and race dricrashes in the three menvers that have caught my attention lately. tioned games. In the earliest simulations, AI wasn't a very good term to use for pilot intelliLEARNING TO DRIVE gence. Basically, computer-controlled piAll of these games are in lots \"flew the script,\" performing certain some way simulations that almaneuvers during certain situations. Ventempt to process their world erable games like Origin's Wing Comdata\" on the fly. Each second, MANDER and MicroProse's KNIGHTS OF the game is making calculaTHE SKY, while indeed possessing Al routions to change its world. In tines, were quite limited. In certain situathe package of program routions, you could always count on a Kilrathi tines executed in each game breaking left, or a Fokker simply cycle, some of the CPU enercorkscrewing around your Camel, but usgy is spent on calculating just ing no rudder at all. Alter logging a good what the computer oppohandful of hours, you could almost always nents are going to do. Conpredict the moves of your opponent and sider NASCAR RACING. At take them out every time. the beginning of the Al deIn recent games, I've noticed that the velopment process, Randy Al opponents have upped the ante a bit, Cassidy of Papyrus was told and in rare cases, are even downright that he would have roughly challenging to play against. I've been 3% of the computer processing time for amazed to find how skillfully computer driver decision making. That worked out drivers have nudged my car into a wall in to approximately 1,000 processor cycles NASCAR RACING. I've been surprised in per car per game tick (in NASCAR, a tick WING COMMANDER III at the wiliness of is 1/15 of a second). certain Kilrathi pilots, who can bank tight A computer driver, then, does some as they let loose some slam on my similarcalculations every tick, depending on the situation. Each and every tick, a driver will \"look around\" his car to get the \"lay of the track\" and determine the next move-a break, a swerve, or a decision to pass a slower moving car on the outside of a turn. Once each second, the computer driver considers the tire wear on the car 186 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"MIT STRIKE STRIKE RETURN TO THE GULF THE SEQUEL TO DESERT STRIKE One way, or another, you'll go... ARE Whatever the landscape, it's all death of General Kilbaba. His deadly ground when you take son, Kilbaba the Younger, has on the maniacs of Desert Strike joined forces with the world's and its nerve-racking most powerful drug lord sequel, Jungle Strike. in a quest for vengeance In Desert Strike , Middle against the United States. East madman General You'll operate a Comanche Kilbaba has put the whole Attack Helicopter, F-117A world on the brink of war. Stealth Fighter, MX9 You must fly a series of Attack Hover craft and a missions in your Apache Special Forces Assault Attack Helicopter and stop him Motorcycle in nine complex using canons, Hydras, and campaigns in a variety of exotic Hellfire missiles. Choose your locations. co-pilot and With both these killer games in patrol a real-time one package, it's double the death world in this and twice the Distributed By action-packed turmoil. One way thriller right out of the headlines. or another you'll go ballistic. Gremlin Jungle Strike takes place after the Available for PC CD-ROM. Home 1993, 1994, 1995, Electronic Arts and Granite Bay Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Desert Strike and Jungle Strike are trademarks of Electronic Arts. All rights reserved. Front Street Publishing is a trademark of U.S. Gold, Inc. Circle Reader Carun W21 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK'N ROLL THE ULTIMATE CHEATING EXPERIENCE GAME WIZABA (far more often than us human drivers, move the plane through the maneuver; that's for sure!). Then, once each lap, the rather, the AI spits out a cache of data driver evaluates the car's performance which represents the stick position, throtand makes a decision whether or not to tle position and the rudder position at pit (of course, just like real NASCAR driany given instant. The computer-convers, the Papyrus computer analogs will trolled pilots are, in a way, really flying tend to pit when the race leader heads in those birds over the Pacific. for some fresh rubber). The game loop in 1942 asks the AI The driver Al in NASCAR is essential for feedback approximately 20 times a ly a generic set of routines, meaning that second, but a maneuver might certainly each driver would drive exactly the same take longer than that to execute. So, like \"I want my AI to kick everyone's ass,\" says Frank Roan, the creator of the Kilrathi \"brains\" in Wing Commander III. THE MOST ADVANCED GAME CHEATING SOFTWARE EVER CREATED FOR IBM AND COMPATIBLE COMPUTERS > The only software capable of cheating in almost any program, including full support for popular DOS extender based games Become INVULNERABLE, INVINCIBLE or UNBEATABLE! Finish games that you have not been able to complete previously > Never run out of LIVES, MONEY, HEALTH or AMMO again! Enhanced search engine that is capable of finding almost anything imaginable Speed-up or slow-down game for optimal playability > Supports SUPER VGA and most popular sound cards >Create personal cheat files >View hints or solutions within games > Save & load most games at any point during play Shell to DOS within any game >Built-in screen saver and much more! CHEAT DEATH FOR ONLY given an identical car. However, there is in NASCAR RACING, some queries are one factor that gives drivers unique perdone once every couple of cycles. As an sonalities-aggressiveness. Each driver is example, consider a plane performing a given an aggressiveness rating which strafing run on a bomber in flight. The controls the probability that a driver will first maneuver the pilot will attempt will cut another car off or dive for the inside be to line up for the pass (either high, of the curve, among other neat tricks. ahead or to the side). Then, the plane \"It's a good thing we didn't have Dale will execute an \"attack run\" maneuver to Earnhart in this game; we couldn't tweak get into offensive position. These last the aggressiveness up that high,» comtwo maneuvers take a few seconds to acmented Cassidy. complish, so the AI will perform them without doing major checks, except for TO THE AIR, THEN! the obvious checks for enemy gunfire. While NASCAR deals with a world that is Once in position, the pilot will then peressentially a ribbon of oily concrete, Mic form a series of line-up-and-shoot macroProse's 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR is a simneuvers. These are small incremental ulation that lives in three dimensions, maneuvers, often just slight rudder adseveral thousand feet above sea level. justments, which line the bomber up in \"I had to try to think like a pilot,\" said the plane's sights. When lined up, the Ed Fletcher, producer of MicroProse's plane will fire a burst. After the plane 1942 PACIFIC AIR WAR, as he described flies past the bomber, the situation has the pilot-Al he crafted for the simulachanged and the AI routine will know tion. Not being a pilot himself, Ed that the line-up maneuver is no longer Fletcher spoke with real pilots to get a valid and will move to another, longer handle on the nuances of combat tactics. maneuver to set up for another attack Using their input, he worked to develop run (unless the bomber is already a package of Al pilot routines which gave corkscrewing down into the Pacific). the impression that there was a real perIn 1942, the pilot AI is essentially a son behind the stick of each and every \"cookie cutter\" Al, in that all American piplane in the game. lots in the same type of plane will fly with While NASCAR's Al drivers have an the same AI routines. The AI routines are \"organic\" flow to their actions, 1942's pidifferent for the Japanese, who will try to lots are continually attempting to perturn into your plane, as opposed to the form precision maneuvers. Basically, a Americans who will try to extend and then pilot chooses a suitable maneuver and get away. To add some unpredictability, executes it until it is completed or the sitsome random decision making was facuation is no longer valid. When the Altored in when the AI routines attempt to calls for a maneuver, it does not directly select an appropriate maneuver. $399.5. GAMEWIZARD Please include $10.00 for shipping & handling To order please make cheque or money order payable to: Enhanced Software Design Inc. P.O. Box 92241 2900 Warden Ave., Scarborough, ON Canada MIW 3Y9 Allow 4-6 weeks for delivery. Distributor inquiries welcome Limited Shareware version thru BBS: (416) 497-8337 Game Wizard is currently used worldwide to cheat in almost any game in existance! Circle Reader Service #265 "


"19 WE HAVE OV 2,000 MILES NEN 22 32 34 USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE, WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX, DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 13 24 DRACULA. BRAM STOKER 12 DRAKKHEN DUNGEON HACK EARTH INVASION.WIN EARTHRISE EIGHT BALL DELUXE EL FISH ELITE PLUS ELVIRA 2 EMPIRE DELUXE EMPIRE DELUXE SCENARIO EMPIRE SOCCER 94 EVASIVE ACTION EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 3 F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F-15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 FALCON 3.0 FALCON 30 SCEN 2 FALCON 3 0 SCEN 3 HORNET FALCON 3.0 SCEN 1 FIGHT TIG FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRES FIELDS OF GLORY FIFA INTERNAT'L SOCCER FIFTH FLEET FLASHBACK FLEET DEFENDER FLEET DEFENDER GOLD FLIGHT SIM 485: REAL WEATH 14 FLIGHT SIM 40 FLIGHT SIM 4 AIRCRAFT & SCEN 8 FLIGHT SIM 4: SOUND & GRAPH 10 FLIGHT SIM 5: SAN FRANCISCO 15 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 27 FREDDY PHARKAS FRONTIER 15 CD MICROCOSM CD MILLENNIUM AUCTION CD MYST CD NOCTROPOLIS CD OUTPOST CD-QUANTUM GATE.WIN CO QUARENTINE CO QUEST FOR GLORY 4 CD RAVENLOFT CD REBEL ASSAULT CD-RETURN OF PHANTOM CD RETURN TO ZORK CD-RISE OF THE ROBOTS CO SHADOW OF THE COMET CD-SPACE SHUTTLE CO-SPEAR OF DESTINY CD-SPEED CD STAR CRUSADER CD STAR TRAIL CD STAR TREK NEXT GEN CD STELLAR 7 CO-STRIKE COMMANDER CD-TONY LARUSSA BB 2 JORDAN VS BIRD JUMP JET KASPAROV S GAMBIT KGB KING'S QUESTS KING S QUEST 6 KINGMAKER KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY LAKERS VS CELTICS LANDS OF LORE LEGACY, REALM OF TERROR LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEISURE SUIT LARRY 2 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 3 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 LETHAL TENDER LEXICROSS LIGHTSPEED LINKS DISK FIRESTONE LINKS DISK HYATT LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS 1 LORDS OF THE REALM LOST ADMIRAL LOST FILES SHERLOCK HOLM LOST IN LA LOST IN TIME LOST VIKINGS LUCAS ARTS AIR COMBAT MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGNETIC SCROLLS BUNDLE PATRIOT PERFECT GENERAL PERFECT GENERAL SCENAR PGA TOUR GOLF PGA TOUR GOLF WIN PIRATES PIRATES GOLD PLANETS EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 3 POLICE QUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS MOVIES POWERMONGER PRIVATEER PRIVATEER SPEECH PACK PRIVATEER: RIGHTEOUS PRO TENNIS TOUR PROPHECY OF THE SHADOW QUEST FOR GLORY 1 VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1 EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 3 QUEST FOR GLORY 4 SHADOW QUESTRON 2 RAGS TO RICHES RAVENLOFT REALMS RED CRYSTAL RED LIGHTNING RENEGADE LEGION INTERCE RETURN OF THE PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REUNION SPEAR OF DESTINY SPEAR OF DESTINY, MISS 2 SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLJAMMER. PIRATES STAR CRUSADER STAR FLEET 2 STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT STAR TREK:JUDGE MOVIE & STARFLIGHT 1 STARSHIP, COMMAND ADV STELLAR 7 STORM ACROSS EUROPE STREET FIGHTER 2 STRIKE COMMANDER STRONGHOLD STUNT ISLAND SUBWAR 2050 SUPER SLOTS SUPERHERO LEAGUE HOBE SYNDICATE SYNDICATE AMERICAN REVOL 8 SYSTEM SHOCK TAKE-A-BREAK PINDALL TANKS. CONST SET 2 TASK FORCE 1942 TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2: CHESS TERMINATOR 2029 TERMINATOR 2029.OPERATION TERMINATOR: RAMPAGE TEST DRIVE 3 33 27 23 9 32 25 15 28 29 29 a 25 9 CON a33 WE'RE BUYING! GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES AS & IBM GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Call, fox, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quales lo 605 334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 AVAILABLE $4 and UP WE SELL USED GAMES & 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment Gomes will not be occupled without an authorization no Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pock games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S GOLD. Save your authorization no. We can't answer questions about your shipment without your number! 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a wish list of litles you are interested in. PP2 &&& & All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility AERIAL WE ACCEPT ONLY VISA/MasterCard/Discovers Money Orders/Cashiers Check 2 \"Call for file colbity before sending MO. Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S9 2nd Day Air roll for information on Canadian shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games. Some \"wish list\" game credits may take slightly longer to fill. Game Tille Price 942 PACIFIC AIR WAR A-TRAIN A320 AIR BUS AMERICAN ABC BOXING ACES OF THE DEEP ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACES OVER EUROPE ADED COLL: HEROES DRAG AIR BUCKS ALGE BLASTER 3 ALIEN LEGACY ALONE IN THE DARK ALONE IN THE DARK 2 ALTERED DESTINY AMBUSH AT SORINOR APBA BASEBALL APBA BASEBALL-WIN ARACHNOPHOBIA ARCHON ULTRA ARENA: ELDER SCROLLS ARMADA 2525 ASHES OF EMPIRE ATAC ATP FLIGHT SIMULATOR BARD'S TALE 1 BATTLE BUGS BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BIG BUSINESS BLOODSTONE BLUE AND GRAY BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN BUZZ ALDRIN RACE TO SPACE CAESAR CAMPAIGN 2 CAR AND DRIVER CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CARRIERS AT WAR 2 CASTLES CASTLES 2 CD 7TH GUEST CD-ACES OF THE DEEP CD-ACES OF THE PACIFIC CD-ACES OVER EUROPE CD AEGIS GUARDIAN FLEET CD AL QUADIM GENIE'S CURS CD ALIEN LOGIC CD-ARMOURED FIST CO-B17/SILENT SERVICE 2 CO BENEATH A STEEL SKY CO BETRAYAL AT KRONDOA COCHOAS. CONTINUUM CD COMPANION OF XANTH CD. CORRIDOR 7 CD.CREATURE SHOCK CO. CRITICAL PATH CD.CYBERRACE CD-DAEMONSGATE CD DAGGER OF AMON RA CD DARK LEGIONS CD DARK SUN CD DARK SUN 2 WAKE RAV. CD-DAY OF THE TENTACLE CD DEATH GATE CD DELTAV CD-DOOM 2 CD-DRAGON LORE CD-DRAGONSHPERE CD-DUNGEON HACK CD ERIC THE UNREADY CD EUROPEAN RACERS CD-FALCON GOLD CD FANTASY EMPIRES CD FANTASY PAK CD-FORTRESS OF DR RADIAK 24 CD FRONT PAGE BB '9! CD GABRIEL KNIGHT CD GEEKWAD CD GOBLINS QUEST 3 CD GRANDEST FLEET CD GREAT NAVAL BATTLES CD-MAMMER OF THE GODS CD HELL CAB. WIN CD INCA 2 CD. INHERIT THE EARTH CD IRON HELIX CD-JONES IN THE FAST LANE 12 CD-JOURNEYMAN PROJECT 19 CU. JUMP RAVEN CD JURASSIC PARK CD JUTLAND CO KINGS QUEST 5 CD KING'S QUESTO CD KING'S QUEST 7 CD KLIK & PLAY CD LABYRINTH OF TIME CD LAWNMOWER MAN CD LOST IN TIME CD LUNICUS 28 CD MAD DOG 2 CD MAN ENOUGH CD MEGA RACE CD MENZOBERRANZAN CD METAL & LACE THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF DEATH THEIR FINEST HOUR THEME PARK THEXDER 1 THEXDER 2 THUNDER HAWK TIE FIGHTER TIME QUEST TONY LARUSSA 2 NUAL TONY LARUSSA BASEBALL TONY LARUUSA 2 '92 PLAYERS 5 TORNADO TREASURES SAVAGE FRONT ULTIMAS. WARRIORS OF DES 11 ULTIMA 5 FALSE PROPHET ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7. FORGE VIRTUE ULTIMA 75.SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA PAGAN ULTIMA 8: SPEECH PACK ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTIMATE DOMAIN ULTRABOTS UNINVITED WIN UNIVERSAL MILITARY SIM 2 UNNATURAL SELECTION UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBUR VIKINGS 2 WALLS OF ROME WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WAYNE GRETZKY HOCKEY 2 WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WELLTAIS WESTERN FRONT WHERE IN SPACE CARMEN SD WING COMM 2 SPEC OP WING COMM 2 SPEECH PACK WING COMM SECRET MISSION 7 WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WIZARDRY 4 WIZARDRY 6 COSMIC FORGE 12 WIZARDRY 7 CRUSADERS WIZARDRY TRILOGY 1 WIZARDRY TRILOGY 2 WORLD CIRCUIT WORLD CLASS SOCCER WORLD WAR 2 BATTLES WW2 AIR FORCE COMMAND X-COM X-WING X-WING B-WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURSUIT YEAGER'S AFT ZAX MCKPACKEN && &883 Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Gomes must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. 29 12 12 22 FRONT PAGE BASEBALL 94 FRONT PAGE FB PRO 95 FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL PRO FRONTIER ELITE 2 FULL METAL PLANET GABRIEL KNIGHT GAMES WINTER CHALLENGE GATEWAY GATEWAY 2 HOMEWORLD GATEWAY SAVAGE FRONTIER GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBAL DOMINATION GOBLINS 2 GRANDEST FLEET GRANDSLAM BRIDGE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NAVAL RATTLES 2 GREENS HAND OF FATE MANHUNTER 1 NY MANTIS EXP FIGHTER MANTIS EXP SPEECH PACK VARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM MASTER OF MAGIC MASTER OF ORION MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAXIMUM OVERKILL: MISSION 12 METAL TECH: EARTH SEIGE METALTECH: BATTLEDROME 28 MICROSOFT GOLF. WIN MIG 29 (SPECTRUM HOL) ML FOOTBALL 2 ML FOOTBALL DELUXE 8 24 25 29 CDU.S. NAVY FIGHTERS CD ULTIMA 8 PAGAN CD ULTIMATE FOOTBALL CDUNDER A KILLING MOON CD VOYEUR CD WHO SHOT JOHNNY ROCK 14 CD WING COM ARMADA CD WING COMMANDER 2 CD WING COMMANDER 3 CD WOLF 31 CD WOLFPACK CD X-COM UFO DEFENSE CD ZEPHR CENTURION DEFENDER ROME CHALLENGE OF 5 REALMS CHESS MANIAC 5 BILLION 1 CHESSMASTER 4000 CIRCUITS EDGE CIVILIZATION COHORT 2 COLONIZATION COMMAND HO COMPANION OF XANTH CONQUEST OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF LONGBOW CORRIDOR 7 COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION CYBER EMPIRES D-DAY BEGINNING OF END DAEMONSGATE DAGGER OF AMON RA DARK LEGIONS DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN DARK SUN 2 DARKLANDS DARKSEED DAUGHTER OF SERPENTS DAVID WOLP: SECRET AGENT DAY OF THE TENTACLE DELTAV DETROIT DISCOVERY STEPS COLUMBS DISNEY ANIMATION STUDIO DOOM DOOM 2 FREE GAME OFFER On orders over $75 Choose from list below  Rex Nebular  Power Monger  Jordan Vs. Bird  When Two Worlds War  Realms  Dogger of Amon Ra 25 REX NEBULAR COSMIC GEN RISE OF THE DRAGON-VGA RISE OF THE ROBOTS RISK WIN ROAD & TRACK GRAND PRIX ROBINSON'S REQUIEM RECEIER ROME: PATHWAY TO POWER RULES OF ENGAGEMENT RULES OF ENGAGEMENT 2 SAM & MAX: HIT THE ROAD SANDS OF FIRE SAVAGE EMPIRE SCRABBLE SCRABBLE OLX EDITION SEA WOLF SEARCH FOR THE KING SECOND FRONT SECRET WEAPONS EXP SECRET WEAPONS LUFTWAFFE SERF CITY SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT SHADOW SORCERER SHUTTLE SID MEIER TRIPLE PACK SIEGE SIEGE & SWORD SIERRA ADV STARTER KIT SILENT SERVICE 2 SILVERBALL SIM CITY SIM CITY TERRAIN EDITOR SIM CITY 2000 SIM EARTH SIM FARM SIMON THE SORCERER SORCERIAN SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4 VGA SPACE QUEST 5 VGA SPACE QUEST TRILOGY SPACE SIMULATOR SPACEWARD HO! SPACEWRECKED 15 10 19 HARDBALL 3 HARPOON HARPOON 2 HARPOON BATTLE SETS EA HARRIER SUPER VGA HEART OF CHINA VGA HEIRS TO THE THRONE MEXX HIGH COMMAND (BY 360) HORDE HOVERFORCE HUMANS INCA INCA 2 INDY CAR EXP. CIRCUITS INDY CAR EXP. INDIANAPOLIS INDY CAR RACING INDY JONES LAST CRUSADE IRON CROSS ISLAND OF DR. BRAIN ISLE OF DEAD JACK NICKLAUS COURSE DISK JACK NICKLAUS GREATEST 18 JACK NICKLAUS SIGNED JAMES BOND STEALTH ADV JEOPARDY JETFIGHTER 20 Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listed-weve pot lots more! All Used Games are com-plete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. System compatibility is not guaranteed. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. 29 15 22 MOONBASE MORTAL KOMBAT NFL COACHES CLUB NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 91 NFL VIDEO FOOTBALL NHL HOCKEY 94 NO GREATER GLORY NOBUNGA'S AMBITION NOMAD OBITUS OPERATION COMBAT 2 OUT OF THIS WORLD OUTPOST OVERLORD PACFIC STRIKE SPEECH PACK PACIFIC ISLANDS PACIFIC STRIKE PACIFIC WAR 5 9 uys SELI 18 Circle Reader Service #241 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK'N ROLL TOP 30 GAMES ACTION 1. Descent 2. Magic Carpet 3. Dark Forces 4. System Shock 5. Rise of the Triad: Dark War ADVENTURE 1. Legend of Kyrandia 3 2. Ecstatica 3. Relentless: Twinsen's Adventure 4. Entombed 5. Under a Killing Moon ROLE-PLAYING 1. Menzoberranzan 2. Dragon Lore 3. Star Trail SIMULATION 1. NASCAR Racing 2. Aces of the Deep 3. Wings of Glory 4. U.S. Navy Fighters SPORTS 1. Front Page Sports Football Pro '95 2. NHL Hockey 95 3. Hardball 4 4. ESPN Baseball Tonight STRATEGY 1. X-COM 2. 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons 3. Warcraft: Orcs & Humans 4. Transport Tycoon 5. Lords of the Realm 6. Master of Magic DWAR GAMES 1. Panzer General 2. Flight Commander 2 3. Stalingrad 4. Front Lines PRE-ORDERS 1. X-COM 2: Terror From The Deep! 2. Command & Conquer 3. Dungeon Master 2 4. Stonekeep 5. Star Trek: TNG A Final Unity 6. Jagged Alliance 7. Lost Eden 8. Johnny Mnemonic 9. Ravenloft 2: The Stone Prophet FREE SHIPPING ON PRE-ORDERS: %p=%SHSHBBH%b9b9% While the physics of plane flight intropacket of data containing the \"situationduce a plethora of variables for computal\" data for a pilot-such things as locaer-controlled pilots, Fletcher kept the tion of other enemies, the angles to each approach straightforward by opting for other, distance, etc. Then each routine is the Al routines to return actual flight maevaluated, taking into account the pilot neuvers. The Al pilots are charged with profile modifiers, and is assigned a value. keeping track of their plane's perforThe maneuver with the highest value is mance (though they will still fly with the \"winner,\" or the best maneuver for 100% capability, even when injured). Any that particular situation. Of course, significant change in variables such as points out Roan, a normal pilot may not speed or altitude might cause the Al pilot always pick out the best maneuver at to scrap an uncompleted maneuver in faevery given time, so a probability is given vor of another. to the highest rated maneuvers, and one is selected. KITTIE BRAINS Each maneuver has two components: a «I want my AI to kick everyone's ass,\" \"start-action\" routine and a \"more-action\" says Origin's software engineer Frank routine. As I talked with Roan, he pulled up Roan. Roan coded the \"brains\" of the the programming for the head-on attack Kilrathi in WING COMMANDER III, and at maneuver and described it in detail. The the beginning of the project, he wanted start-action routine sets up a timer for the nothing more than to have his kitties maneuver. Then, control switches to the blast some playtester butt. \"The fact is, more-action routine, which updates the that isn't fun, and you want to make timer, checks the current state, and branchthings fun,\" says Roan. Roan had to turn es to one of the «sub maneuvers\" that is part down his AI several notches to get just of the head-on attack. For this maneuver, the right balance of play. those components are \"come in fast,\" \"slow In the case of WING COMMANDER III, down,\" \"fire weapons\" and \"peel away.\" there were no \"real world» pilot analogs \"We wanted to make it feel like you to refer to, so Frank Roan used himself as were playing against cognizant oppoa model for the AI. A confessed WING nents,\" says Roan. When I asked him COMMANDER addict, he came to Origin what steps he took to make the Al feel explicitly to craft the pilot intelligence for more \"human,\" he said \"I get a lot of stuff WCIII. His first step was to climb back for free in Al programming; it's a trick, into the cockpit of a Raptor and have a go like when you draw a square, erase some at WING COMMANDER II. Analyzing his fly of the lines and you can see a diamond. ing style, Roan determined that, even in You make the obvious [in the Al's perforhis quickest maneuvers, he held them formance) stand out, and the player's mind several seconds. will fill in the rest.\" Each pilot, whether Kilrathi or human, has a \"generic\" Al package of maneuvers A CHALLENGE and considerations, rated in four levels of FOR THE FUTURE competence from \"rookie\" up to \"bad-ass AI routines take a ton of computational ace\" (there are only seven Kilrathi BAAs). power, especially when you are calculatThese Al classes are further refined into ing the performance of many Al oppo\"personalities\" by applying pilot profiles nents cach game cycle. The trick for these to their decision-making process. Each designers is to create just enough \"hupilot profile is a cluster of byte-long flags manity\" so an opponent will seem realistic which serve as \"probability filters\" influto a player, but to keep the routines as encing how a pilot might react in a cersimple, and as fast, as possible. tain situation. Each profile contains a In all of these cases, the computer intelvalue for trigger happiness, courage, verligence has been both limited by available bosity, loyalty, flying skill, gunnery skill, computing resources and reigned in\" to aggressiveness and panache. These valimprove the playability. As computers inues can either be set to low, normal or crease in power, more \"game cycles\" will high levels. be made available for Al. I'd lay good Like 1942, WCIII pilots have a menu money that, given the opportunity, Roan, of maneuvers available to them. Unlike Cassidy and Fletcher could craft pilots 1942, though, the WCIII pilots are a and drivers that could beat the pants off touch more \"obsessive,\" continuously of us lowly humans on a regular basis. evaluating all of their available maneuLooks like we've got something to look vers. Essentially, the AI routine is given a forward to.... GEMINI GAMES In the US or Canada, call toll free 1-800-64-GEMINI 1-800-644-3646 or 1-800-746-2392 Call for additional titles and new releases! 7am-11pm Pacific Time, Mon-Sun. 24 hour FAX line: 818-284-2402 We accept Visa, Mastercard and checks. Shipping is just $3.50 on any size order in the continental U.S. or $5 for Express Shipping No handling and per shipment charges. Canada and other areas, please call Make checks payable to: Gemini Games PO Box 7130. Alhambra, CA 91802 *Free Shipping offer valid only in the continental U.S Lower shipping rates for Canada and other areas CA residents subject to 5% tax Circle Reader Service #369 190 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"THE MARKETPLACE Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (714) 283-3000 x37 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. B & GAMES || Get CA$$H for The Best PD/Shareware! All Types! Game Cheats, Editors and Walkthrus! Floppy Disk and CD-ROM for your PC! Write or call today for your free Catalog. BEST PRICES BY FAR! your GAMES! Sell them to Bare Bones Software!  Call, FAX, or mail us with a list of your software for fast quotes. (have pencil & paper ready if you call) Speedy tum around & prompt payment. No long waits!  We also sell pre-owned software. Call or write for free list. Bare Bones Software 3060 Route 60 East Hurricane, WV 25526 1-800-638-1123 Fax. 24hr: 304-562-1610 Customer Service: 304-562-1609 BBS for complete list: 304-562-1608 Reader Service #45 Lotsa Bytes Box 1756, Winton, CA 93388 (209) 358-1160 Voice & FAX Reader Service #370 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD We're Looking For The Next Sid Meier! We need 145,000 Contact us if you have what it takes: Ray Rutledge Strategy and Simulation Game Submissions VP External Development Strategy and Simulation Game Developers 11350 McCormick Road 3D Programmers Executive Plaza 111 Suite L7 Hunt Valley, MD 21030 phone (410) 785-1733 Artists fax (410) 785-1735 Interactive Magic is a startup simulation company from Major \"Wild Bill\" Stealey, co-founder and former chairman of MicroProse Software. Sid Meier and Bill Stealey began MicroProse in 1982 and together they built the company to worldwide fame. Bill wants to do it again and he's looking for a few good Sid Meiers! INTERACTIVE Game Designers MAGIC — Artists Volume Game Buyers Reader Service #46 B-24 viac Dont get dogged, call MOONDOG!! VROONDOG VULTIMEDIA 100'S OF WISCOUNT CD-ROM TITLES TO CHOOSE FROM!! SSI's Out of Print Wargames Are Back For Only $15!!! Mech Brigade Star Command Battle of Antietam Rebel Charge Stellar Crusade Battles of Napoleon Red Lightning Storm Across Europe Conflict: Middle East Second Front Wargame Construction Set Gettysburg Shiloh: Grant's Trial Warship Kampfgruppe Sons of Liberty Western Front SCING NASCAR RACING ONLY $29.99 FOR PRICES OUT OF THIS WORLD CALL FOR FREE CATALOG 1-800-7 CD-ROM4 Scenario Disks for SSI's Battles of Napoleon for $10 Scenario Disks for SSI's Wargame Construction Set II: Tanks! for $15 Our hours are 8:00 am to 5:00 pm PST M-F We accept Visa, M/C, Checks, Money Orders To order or request a free catalog contact: Novastar Game Co.POBox 1813. Rocklin, CA 95677 (916) 624-7113 Circle Reader Service #63 Reader Service #219 APRIL 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 191 "


"Company and Phone Index FREE CREE INFO. # COMPANY PHONE PAGE INFO. # COMPANY PHONE PAGE 67 99 191 149 195 111 71 83 117 69 379 Acclaim/LJN 133 33 Activision (800) 477-3650 121 34 Activision (800) 477-3650 113 Advanced Gravis (800) 663-8558 Cover 3 364 AlTech International (800) 882-8184 195 365 AITech International (800) 882-8184 42 AIVR Corporation (800) 324-AIVR 112 60 American Laser Games, Inc. (800) 880-1718 61 American Laser Games, Inc. (800) 880-1718 233 American Power Conversion (800) 800-4APC 27 Apple Computer (800) 538-9696 28 Apple Computer (800) 538-9696 293 BAO (217) 356-0188 141 45 Bare Bones Software (800) 638-1123 207 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 51 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 204 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 162 Computer Gaming World (800) 827-4450 65 36 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 179 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 64A-D 54 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 72-79 200 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 200-201 56 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 100-105 57 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 183 59 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 135 53 Creative Labs (800) 998-5227 85 344 CyTech Codehouse (800) 382-5656 59 77 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. (800) 4MULTIMEDIA 35 58 Discis Knowledge Research, Inc. (800) 567-4321 55 Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 93 334 Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 157 empire Interactive Entertainment (800) 216-9706 202 265 Enhanced Software Design, Inc. (416) 492-0157 188 Epic MegaGames, Inc. (301) 983-9771 17 141 Falcon Northwest (800) 258-6778 15 43 FormGen, Inc. (800) 263-2390 Cover 2 44 FormGen, Inc. (800) 263-2390 27 368 FormGen, Inc. (800) 263-2390 113 15 G & G Software, Inc. (800) 262-7462 181 241 Gamer's Gold (800) 377-8578 369 Gemini Games (800) 746-2392 190 30 GEnie (800) 638-9636 49 29 GEnie (800) 638-9636 49 GEnie L (800) 638-9636 49A-B GEnie (800) 638-9636 49A-B Gremlin Interactive, Ltd. (415) 693-0297 187 Gremlin Interactive, Ltd. (415) 693-0297 131 GT Software (800) 346-2300 147 HPS Simulations (408) 554-8381 I*Motion, Inc. (310) 576-1888 39 71 id Software (800) IDGAMES 109 Imagination Network (800) IMAGIN-1 176A-B Impressions Software, Inc. (617) 225-0500 1 9 14 Interactive Magic (919) 461-0722 47 Interactive Magic (919) 461-0722 46 Interactive Magic (919) 461-0722 258 Interplay Productions, Inc. (800) 969-GAME 76 Interplay Productions, Inc. (800) 969-GAME 175 Interplay Productions, Inc. (800) 969-GAME 169 Keyboard & Terminal Technology (908) 297-5399 198 145 Legend Entertainment (800) 658-8891 299 Looking Glass Technologies 300 Looking Glass Technologies 370 Lotsa Bytes LucasArts Entertainment Co. 372 Maxis 371 Maxis 86 Megatech Software 89 Microforum 38 MicroProse 298 MicroProse 349 MicroProse 13 MicroProse 351 MicroProse 350 MicroProse 350 MicroProse 350 MicroProse 350 MicroProse 73 MicroProse 100 Mission Control Software 12 Modern Microware 63 Moondog Multimedia 250 MPG-NET 94 Multimedia Specialists 17 National CD-ROM 253 Nawu Triad Institute 219 Novastar Game Company 99 Origin Systems, Inc. 153 Papyrus 18 Power Games International 150 Quadra Interactive 354 QQP, Division of ALG 355 QQP, Division of ALG 307 R & G Games 360 Ready Soft, Inc. 119 REM Software 291 S Software 363 Sanctuary Woods 107 Sideline Software 122 Sierra On-Line, Inc. 271 Sierra On-Line, Inc. 310 Sofdec, Inc. 115 Spectrum Electronics 225 StarPlay Productions, Inc. Strategic Simulations, Inc. Strategic Simulations, Inc. 184 Take 2 Interactive Software 295 The Avalon Hill Game Company 161 ThrustMaster, Inc. 185 ThunderSeat Technologies 186 Time Warner Interactive Group 117 Titan Games 41 TRIMARK Interactive 376 Vic Tokai, Inc. 378 Vic Tokai, Inc. 22 Virgin Interactive Entertainment 23 Virgin Interactive Entertainment 24 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Virgin Interactive Entertainment 359 Yamaha Corporation of America (617) 441-6333 2-3 (617) 441-6333 (209) 358-1160 (800) STARWAR 61 (800) 33-MAXIS (800) 33-MAXIS (800) 258-MEGA 207 (800) 465-CDCD 197 (800) 879-PLAY 123 (800) 879-PLAY 45 (800) 879-PLAY 159 (800) 879-PLAY 175 (800) 879-PLAY 81 (800) 879-PLAY 167 (800) 879-PLAY 163 (800) 879-PLAY 165 (800) 879-PLAY 161 (800) 879-PLAY 151 (800) 999-7995 1 85 (800) 289-1766 90 (800) 7CD-ROM4 191 (800) GET-GAME 10-11 (800) 233-0010 199 (214) 241-0724 171 (800) 784-1420 154 (916) 624-7113 191 (800) 245-4525 Cover 4 (800) 836-1829 x650 23 (800) 671-6333 156 (619) 931-4755 128-129 (908) 788-2799 55 (908) 788-2799 8-9 (800) 525-GAME 168 (905) 475-4801 86 (800) 457-1161 88 (800) 243-1515 154 (800) 943-3664 53 (800) 888-9273 168 (800) 757-7707 (800) 757-7707 (800) 631-5141 130 (800) 983-4321 (800) 203-2503 (800) 601-PLAY (800) 601-PLAY 169 143 (800) 999-3222 13 (503) 639-3200 138 (800) 8-THUNDER 146 (800) 482-3766 (800) 247-5447 140 (310) 314-3046 (310) 326-8880 (310) 326-8880 95 (800) 874-4607 119 (800) 874-4607 137 (800) 874-4607 125 (800) 874-4607 (800) 333-4442 1 189 .. .. 164 37 63 78 145 173 25 Please see advertisement for contact information. 192 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"ADVERTISER Product Index Game and Product Index FREE FREE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE 10-11 17 171 37 3 93 131 AN 130 195 4-5 99 295 1830 The Avalon Hill Game Co. 13 63 100's of Discount Moondog Multimedia 191 CD-ROM Titles 113 ACE Advanced Gravis Cover 3 368 Action Entertainment Center FormGen, Inc. 113 53 Advanced Wave Table Creative Labs 85 By Sound Blaster 186 Aegis Time Warner Interactive Group 164 30 Air Warrior GEnie 49  Air Warrior GEnie 49A-B 70 Alone In The Dark 3 I'Motion, Inc. 39 157 American Civil War empire Interactive 202 Entertainment 14 Apache Interactive Magic 145 33 Atari 2600 Action Pack Activision 121 293 BAO Line of Products BAO 141 99 Bioforge CD Origin Systems, Inc. Cover 4 200 Board Games & RPG's Chips & Bits 200-201 360 Brain Dead 13 ReadySoft, Inc. 86 184 Bureau 13 Take 2 Interactive Software 143 363 Buried in Time Sanctuary Woods 53 17 CD-ROM Software National CD-ROM 298 CIVNET MicroProse 45 38 Colonization Gold MicroProse 123 41 Coming Soon! TRIMARK Interactive 25 Command & Conquer Virgin Interactive Entertainment 51 89 Create Your Own Games/ Microforum 197 Solution CD 225 Crystal Caliburn Pinball StarPlay Productions, Inc. 76 Descent Interplay Productions, Inc. 31 Desert Jungle Strike Gremlin Interactive, Ltd. 344 DoomWare Developers CyTech Codehouse Network CD Occurence 1 258 Dungeon Master II Interplay Productions, Inc. 47 Exploration Interactive Magic 173 161 F16 ThrustMaster, Inc. 138 141 Falcon MACH V Falcon Northwest 15 28 Flight Simulation Apple Computer 117 299 Flight Unlimited Looking Glass Technologies 29 Free Cyberstrike GEnie 49 * Free Cyberstrike GEnie 49A-B 46 Game Developers Wanted Interactive Magic 265 Game Wizard Enhanced Software 188 Design, Inc. 117 Games For Less Titan Games 140 169 Games Master Keyboard & Terminal Technology 42 Girlfriend AIVR Corporation 112 57 Go Digital Computer Express 204 Grandmaster Capstone Software 162 Championship Chess  Great Naval Battles Strategic Simulations, Inc. Vol. 111 51 Harpoon II Capstone Software 153 71 Heretic id Software 109 22 Hodj 'n Podi Virgin Interactive Entertainment * Imagination Network ImagiNation Network 176A-B 23 Iron Assault Virgin Interactive 137 Entertainment 58 Jewel of the Oracle Discis Knowledge Research, Inc. 175 Kingdom Interplay Productions, Inc. 371 Klik & Play Maxis 86 Knights of Xentar Megatech Software 24 Lost Eden Virgin Interactive Entertainment 13 Machiavelli the Prince MicroProse 175 334 Magic Carpet Electronic Arts 107 349 Magic: The Gathering #2 MicroProse 15 Mail Order PC Games G&G Software, Inc. 181 54 Mail Order Products 'Chips & Bits 72-79 56 Mail Order Products Computer Express 100-105 241 Mail Order Products Gamer's Gold 189 369 Mail Order Products Gemini Games 190 100 Mail Order Products Mission Control Software 185 94 Mail Order Products Multimedia Specialists 199 107 Mail Order Products Sideline Software 168 115 Mail Order Products Spectrum Electronics 155 291 Mail Order Software S Software 154 27 Marathon Apple Computer 115 379 Mortal Kombat II Acclaim/LJN 133 59 Ms. Metaverse Computer Express 135 250 Multi-Player Games MPG-NET Network 153 NASCAR Racing Papyrus 23 One Must Fall 2097 Epic Mega Games, Inc. 355 Perfect General II QQP, Division of ALG 8-9 73 Pirates Gold Multimedia MicroProse 151 359 Power Speakers for the Yamaha Corp. of America 98 Power Hungry 18 Power The Game Power Games International 156 78 Power House Impressions Software, Inc. 19 45 Pre-Owned Software Bare Bones Software 77 Quad Squad Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. Ravenloft: Stone Prophet Strategic Simulations, Inc. 91 55 Relentless Electronic Arts 32 Retribution Gremlin Interactive, Ltd. 43 Rise of the Triad: Dark War FormGen, Inc. Cover 2 310 Risky Sofdec, Inc. 365 Scan Converters AlTech International  Set Our Sights Higher LucasArts Entertainment Co. 61 34 Shanghai: Great Moments Activision 44 Shareware CD's FormGen, Inc. 27 376 Silverload Vic Tokai, Inc. 63 372 SimCity 2000 CD Maxis 149 271 Space Quest 6 Sierra On-Line, Inc. 97 Spaceball Avenger Chips & Bits 64A-D Subscription Computer Gaming World 65 Super Karts GT Software 145 Superhero League Legend Entertainment of Hoboken 233 Surge Protector American Power Conversion 300 Terra Nova Looking Glass Technologies 370 The Best PD/Shareware Lotsa Bytes 12 The Complete Doom Modern Microware Accessory Pack CD's 119 The Infinity Machine REM Software 60 The Last Bounty Hunter American Laser Games, Inc. 61 The PC Game Gun American Laser Games, Inc. 378 The Scroll Vic Tokai, Inc. 185 ThunderSeat ThunderSeat Technologies 146 Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations 177 253 Triad Wargame System Nawu Triad Institute 154 350 Tycoon Series MicroProse 350 Tycoon Series MicroProse 163 350 Tycoon Series MicroProse 165 350 Tycoon Series MicroProse 161 307 Used Game Software R & G Games 168 36 Video Games Chips & Bits 179 219 Wargames Novastar Game Company 191 150 What if JFK had lived? Quadra Interactive 128-129 364 Wireless Bandit AlTech International 195 122 Woodruff Sierra On-Line, Inc. 351 X-COM Terror from the Deep MicroProse 354 Zig Zag QQP, Division of ALG 207 Zorro Capstone Software 191 183 08 169 119 167 207 127 159 . Please see advertisement for contact information. APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 193 "


"UNDER THE HOOD Installment Plan loon OKNYAK OY The 12 Step Program For The Game Install-Challenged by Mike Weksler HEN IT COMES TO VIDEO another SETUP or CONFIG command to 10) CD-ROM: Make sure your CDGAME CONSOLES, COMPUTconfigure hardware. This installation proROM drive is working. ER GAMERS OFTEN ACT LIKE cedure sometimes yields nothing but frusThe quick test is to place a CD-ROM into an elite corps who openlytration, because it encompasses all of the the drive, type the drive letter with a colon disdain the junior squaddreaded computing snafus: memory prob(example, D:), and type \"DIR.\" Make sure dies with their ram-n-play lems, hardware configuration nightmares, you don't have an audio CD in the drive; machines. But inside I storage requirements, and everyone's faI've forgotten to take mine out, leading me know that many of us are actually thinkvorite, the sound card setup. to believe that the drive had gone haywire ing, \"Wouldn't that be the Kilrathi's meow when there was really nothing wrong. if we could put a game in a machine and 12 STEPS TO A FULLER, 9) Storage: Know how much hard instantly play?\" HAPPIER INSTALLATION drive space is required and how much Unlike console games, computer games Because installation can be so troubleyou have available. must go through some form of installation some, I've created the Mike Weksler 12 WING COMMANDER III needs at least 15before they will devour your free time. It's Step Installation Program to bring out a 20MB of free disk space. Note that, while as if our computers are going: \"Uh uh, I happier, healthier configuration from installing, some games require just a bit need a little foreplay first, you big galoot.\" your machine. This is a simple checklist of more space than is listed on the box; they So we usually have some kind of INthings you should know and things you copy compressed files to the drive, uncomSTALL command for transferring files, and should do before you delve into a dunpress them, then subsequently delete the geon or take off for the skies. To put it original compressed files. Also, while some SHORT CIRCUITS through a real-world test, I enrolled my installation routines will tell you how much IBM has announced PC DOS 7. ACself in the program to get WING COMMAN space you have, others won't. Some will DER III installed on my machine. Let's see even try to install a game if you don't have cording to an IBM spokesperson, this how it works, step by step. enough space (the creators of such install latest version of the operating system 12) General: Know thy system as thyself. routines should have their RAM chips will ship with the following: built-in Before you install any game, I recompulled out with needle-nose pliers.) STACKER 4.0 data compression from Stac mend you take a tip I got from the techni8) Storage: Make sure your hard drive Electronics; \"no-worry\" memory mancal journal, Duh! \"Print out your system is unfragmented. agement with Central Point's RAMinformation and keep it near your comYour free hard drive space should be BOOST; the REXX programming puter.\" In order to get my system informacontiguous, i.e. in one complete block, language; extensive on-line help; docktion, I use PC-911 from Cybermedia (310) rather than several small chunks. Use Miing support; file synchronization; easier 843-0800. This utility has a great info feacrosoft's DEFRAG utility that comes with PCMCIA setup and configuration; an ture which detects most of the hardware in MS-DOS 6.x, or Norton's Speed Disk to improved editor; protection from more a system. Use its handy print-out feature \"optimize your hard drive. Games, espethan 2,100 viruses; an improved setup to print a detailed list of your interrupts, cially CD-ROM games that copy large files program with mouse support, and the RAM addresses, 1/0 addresses and DMAs to your hard drive, will run better if the ability to dynamically load device drivers that are in use. files aren't broken up and scattered on demand. Will there be a competing 11) CPU: Know the minimum system around the drive. MS-DOS 7.x? According to a Microsoft requirements for your game. spokesperson, \"Microsoft is currently in7) Memory: Know how much RAM a This is one you should figure out in the game requires. volved in getting Windows 95 out the software store before you blow the coin. To run WING COMMANDER III, you will door. Plans for future versions of MSWING COMMANDER III needs at least a 486need at least 8MB of RAM installed in DOS are based on customer demand. 50MHz computer to run acceptably. (I your computer. Of course, having more Microsoft will continue to support its tried it on a 486-33 with 8MB of RAM and than required is always better. With 16MB MS-DOS users.\" it ran like a chubby musk ox.) of RAM, for example, the delays between 194 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Wireless TM BANDIT 2 Dual-Player Turbo Infra-Red Wireless Game Controllers Wireless Combat at Its Best! FEATURES TRIPLE Beam Infrared Transmitter with 180° horizontal and 90° vertical field means it's next to impossible to break the connection from anywhere inside a room up to 40ff. away! Dual-player controllers support up to two. players for arcade-type games Powerful PRO mode supports 2 extra-bonus functions Independent TURBO & AUTO fires control for A and B Superior 8 directional control capability Ultra sensitive and durable fire buttons 'Ergonomic and stylish design Automatic power-off function and low power consumption design for longer battery life Uses 4 AAA batteries (2 per controller, batteries not included) 1 year limited warranty $4995 Mortal Kombat FREE Circle Reader Service #364 Mulb PTO CHE ACTUAL Add more power to your system with these fine scan converter products from AITech! And Play Your Computer Games on TV MultiPro CTV. for a top-of-the-line scan converter, capture the advanced features of MultiPro CTV-professional presentation, educational and gaming tool, IBM PC & Mac compatible. Plug & Play portable, flicker-free technology. (external unit) ProPC/TV Plus play your computer games on any TV with the complete ProPC/IV Plus scan converter from AiTech affordable presentation, demonstration and gaming solution. (external unit, IBM PC and compatibles only) game Player TV. the gamePlayer TV scan converter is the ultimate computer gaming solution. Perfect internal unit to play computer games on a larger screen TV display. Bundled with FREE S49.\" value Street Fighter II. Call your local dealer for these exciting products today! PC and compon AlTech AlTech International, World Headquarters: 47971 Fremont Blvd., Fremont, CA 94538 Tel: 510-226-8960  1-800-882-8184 Int'l Calls: 510-226-9169 Fax: 510-226-8996 Vision for Multimedia ini h awa wa t erproof waste Circle Reader Service #365 "


"UNDER THE HOOD The Turtle Beach Monterey Plays CD-Quality Digital Audio the movie portions and the game porprovide 8MB of RAM as per the WING IRQs, I/O addresses and DMAs for digitions of WCIII are greatly reduced. Other COMMANDER III install guide. tal audio, and IRQs and I/O addresses games show similar performance increas. In most cases a memory management for your MIDI device. es with more RAM. program can be helpful. It won't with WING COMMANDER III has great sound 6) Memory: Know the type of memory WCIII because, while memory managers support, so it had no problem with my Enrequired: Expanded (EMS) or Extended can optimize conventional memory, they soniq Soundscape. However, sound cards (XMS). don't optimize your expanded memory. are usually the number one difficulty when WING COMMANDER III is unique in that With QEMM, I had boat-loads of conveninstalling a game. If you're having probit can handle either type of memory. In tional memory (much more than I needlems getting a game to run, disable the other cases, you have to ascertain which is ed), but I came up 5K short of the sound and music, and try running the required and change your memory connecessary 7MB of expanded memory (5 game again. If the game runs, then you've figuration accordingly. A memory managstinking K!). got a sound problem. Most sound prober like OEMM or 386MAX is often 4) Memory: Know how much convenlems are related to the digital audio, so helpful. tional memory is required. start your trouble-shooting there. Try to 5) Memory: Know how much ExpandWING COMMANDER III is unique in that configure the music portion of the audio, ed or Extended memory is required. it only requires 360K (368,640 bytes) of with the digital sound turned off. If the WING COMMANDER III needs at least conventional memory, so the conventiongame runs, then you've either got a buggy 7MB. For this installation, I modified Mial memory was not a concern. In most digital audio driver or you have a funky crosoft's EMM386.EXE to configure the other games, it is the major concern. sound card that's not supported by the expanded memory on my machine to 3) Sound: Know your used and free game. Once you narrow it down to the digital audio, you can call the company to see THE PARTS DEPT. what the problem is. If it's a buggy driver, then you may be able to get a patch; if it's a lack of support for your sound card, perhaps it's time to go shopping. 2) Video: Know the graphic card requirements for the game. If your game supports SVGA graphics, then you may have to load a VESA driver. by Loyd Case This is becoming less of an issue since many new video cards support VESA through HAT HAPPENS WHEN YOU MIX their hardware and don't require a driver. A LITTLE RIO WITH SOME Monterey WING COMMANDER III detected my DiaTAHITI? YOU GET A MONmond STEALTH 64's built-in VESA comterey, of course. Turtle patibility. In other cases, you may have to Beach, those purveyors of actually load the VESA driver manually. sound cards with exotic names (TAHITI, See the documentation for your Super Rio, TROPEZ and MONTE CARLO, to name VGA video card for details. a few), have long held the high ground in it. But now, 1) Video: Make sure the proper playthe battle of the sound cards. And their a few games are starting to show up back CODEC (video playback software) new Monterey hasn't given up any of it. with 22-kilohertz, 16-bit stereo, and very is installed. Combining Turtle Beach's legendary soon 44.1-kilohertz (e.g., CD audio quali This wasn't applicable in this case beprowess in high-end digital audio with a ty), 16-bit stereo will be common. cause WING COMMANDER III runs under solid, if unassuming, general MIDI At present, the MONTEREY is not sup DOS and the video playback software is daughter card, the MONTEREY is really a ported by many DOS-based games, but built into the program itsell. However, if hard bundle of two existing Turtle Beach that will change because some key develop you were installing a Windows game, you products. The first is Tahiti, a high-perers have begun to support it. In addition, might need a CODEC (like QUICKTIME formance sound card that is tuned for given Turtle Beach's long-standing sup FOR WINDOWS) installed. Many games will Windows multimedia and is also WAVE port for Windows, the MONTEREY will be a detect whether or not a CODEC is runBLASTER (MPU-401) compatible. The secnatural in the era of Windows '95. With ning; if not, the program will usually ask ond is the Rio general MIDI daughter that in mind, I decided to put the card if you want the program installed. card that snaps onto the Tauti's WAVE through its paces to see what it could do. I hope this list comes in handy when BLASTER connector. Turtle Beach comEven though there aren't any games the installation blues have got you down. bines the two cards and boxes them with written for the MONTEREY yet, I was able Just remember, take it one step at a time, appropriate software to produce the to test it by playing MIDI files and record and you'll soon be taking out your frustraMONTEREY. ed digital audio. First I tested the card's tions on the Bad Guys. Why is high-performance digital audio MIDI capability. Because the MONTEREY Mike Weksler, Computer Gaming World's important? In the past, it wasn't. Until reuses the Rio daughter card, I compared Technical Editor, can be reached through cently, most games had 8-bit, 11-kiloits sound to Turtle Beach's TROPEZ and e-mail at: mweksler.notes@mail.zd.ziff.com, hertz mono sound, and all gamers the Aztech WAVERIDER 32, because they all or through USnail addressed to: Under the needed was a low-end 8-bit card to hear use ICS Wavefront MIDI samples. Howev Hood, clo Computer Gaming World. 196 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"The Best of Both Worlds for CAME LOVERS THE VIDEO GAME THE VIDEO GAME | SOLUTION SOLUTION GAMEMAKER set Woh Hotel you soon! Julienos. o onts THE SOLUTION CD CREATE YOUR OWN GAMES Design your own characters nonsters and scenes. Sreate yow OWEN mation special effects and sounds. So set up to 24 attrasures for your characters do they gain points on accumulate wealth? Wate your own tes! GameMaker puts the power in your hands! The Solution CD includes hundreds of hints and tips in an easy to use format on how to solve the most popular games on the market! Also included are special editors which provide players special tricks, such as extra lives and super powers, making each game much more exciting! MicCOTOVUM Call 1-800, 65-ODD for the nearestdealer or to order direct! DISTRIBUTOR/DEALER INQUIRIES WELCOME WOBOTU Avenue, Toronto, CANADA M6M 5AI Tel.:(416)656-6406 Fax:(416) 656-6368 Circle Reader Service #89  Microforum Inc. All Rights Reserved. The Microforum logo is a registered trademark of Microfanum Inc "


"UNDER THE HOOD er, the samples on the Rio are uncomaudio took up 59 megabytes of disk DMAs, which means there will be 32K less pressed and take up 4 MB of ROM rather space.) I then played it back and comavailable for your games. To free up this than the 2 MB of space that the TROPEZ pared it to the actual CD. The result was 32KB chunk of memory requires some and WAVERider use. We compared the nothing short of amazing. The two cuts, intricate CONFIG.SYS hacking, and possound of the MONTEREY to tapes of the the CD and the audio streaming off the sibly (depending on your motherboard) TROPEZ and WAVERIDER that were recordhard disk-sounded virtually identical tweaking the shadow RAM address seted during a sound card review back in DeNow, this is a pretty informal test, buttings of your BIOS. cember. The MONTEREY definitely sounds others who have tested the MONTEREY The MONTEREY also uses a hardware more full-bodied, although the actual more rigorously, including Ziff-Davis' PC switch to set the I/O address, which quality of the samples is pretty much the Labs, agree that the MONTEREY is the best means that the setup cannot be done ensame. It's very good general MIDI, but sounding digital audio card out there for tirely in software. So, the card sounds still not quite up to the current standard, the money today. great, but don't expect to have a troublethe Roland SOUND CANVAS. However, before you can experience its free installation. Digital audio, on the other hand, is richness, you might hear some unpleasant \"The latest sound library from Human where this card really shines. Other than things muttered by yourself while inMachine Interfaces, Inc. (HMI), used by an annoying pop that came from the stalling it. The reason is that Turtle Beach such companies as Origin, Papyrus, and speakers when I first booted Windows, has departed from the standard sound Spectrum HoloByte, should soon support the digital audio sounds clean: no hisses, card approach of using DMAs (Direct the MONTEREY. Once that happens, the pops, or artifacts of any kind. To put the Memory Access) to transfer information MONTEREY will be one of the best sound card through its paces, I dug up the first without interrupting the CPU (.e., without card setups in gaming, with one possible of Bruce Springsteen's 3 CD live collecusing IROs). The company believes that tweak. If you take the Rio module off of tion. Thunder Road is a live acoustic piano DMA, as implemented on the IBM PC arthe TAHITI and replace it with a Roland set accompanied by Springsteen's hoarse chitecture, isn't suited to high-perfordaughter card, then you'd have the best of voice. I used Turtle Beach's own QUAD mance digital audio. Instead, the both worlds: clean, crisp digital audio from four-track digital recording software to MONTEREY has a Motorola 56000-series Turtle Beach, with Roland's MIDI music record directly from the CD to a local digital signal processor to handle the digisamples-the best in the business. hard disk, in stereo, at 44.1 KHz. (It's a tal audio chores. Turtle Beach Monterey. Price: $399.00. good thing I have a big hard drive, beAs a result, the Monterey uses a 32KB For more information, contact Turtle Beach cause the five minutes of uncompressed high memory buffer to avoid using Systems at (800) 645-5640.0 NEW PRODUCT UPGRADE VERSION AVAILABLE NOW! VALUE PACKAGE Gamos Mastor consolo & choose any six matts ONLY $ 129.95 BASIC PACKAGE Includos Games Mastor Consolo & Keyboard Normal QWERT Matt Only $ 69.95 Yes, I want to take control of my games and ly Care Masters to brows Payable. Keyboard and Torminal Technology (U.S.A.) Inc. to 171 Lincoln Place, North Brunswick, NJ 08902, USA Tel: 1-908-297-5399 Fax: 1-908-297-5399 NOW SUPPORTING Name Country Address ROM CHIP Upgrado #1 Include codos for Matt No. 1-49 $14.95 Each MATTS $14.95 Each GAMES MASTER 1. FLIGHT SIM 5.0 2. HORNET 3. ACES OVER EUROPE 4. TIE FIGHTER 5. FLEET DEFENDER F14 6. 1942 PACIFIC AIR WAR 7. ACADEMY WING COMMANDER 8. PRIVATEER WING COMMANDER TOTAL CONTROL SYSTEM! City State Zip Method of Payment (Please check one) Check Money Order COD Your order will be shipped within 5 days Qty: Amount: Prices: Basic Package Basc Packag 56095 Value Package 5129.95 Value Package VAT Matts From the Upgrade Sales Tax (NJ Res 6.00%) $14.95 Shipping & Handling S&H Al orders: 4.00 COD Add $4.50 COD: $450 2 Say Helva 333.37.00 2 Day Air Delivery At $7 Canada 18.00 TOTAL For inte and order Two weeks risk free. Money back guarantee Competben moters Products Gomes Master is the finale Control System containing of the important c ondi for your game Connect to Keyboardport theperont of joystick Mug and play GAMES MASTERS a2D2EBLES Colour Coded for any ecogion Yalue Package includes: Games Master Total Control System and choose any matts Baile Package includes: Games Master Console & Keyboard Normal WEAT Matt Rom. Chip Upgrade 11 includes codes for Mart No. 1-49 Posel commande for popular 45 gormes soge One Touch vetme makes Westering Iroying the Esglés 098 02 34 664 20 O DO @010 Do more 20 Magalonas 21. Fed Baron 22. Rad Storm Rising 23. Secret weapon halutwall 24. Slund Service! 25. Special Forces 20. Stunt Island 27. Task Force 1942 28. Ulma Underworld 22. Wing Commander 30. Wow Circut 31. X-Wing 32. Air Wamo 33. A 10 Tank Killer 34. ATP 35. Hari Jump Jed BV    boraside to godetit leafure, New inesperave chip we calable about every month forure populo gone and opplication 19 Actual dimensions an 15 in Mar 1. Keyboard Normal ABCD 2. Keyboard Normal QWERT 3. Kidsboard 4. Amol the Pack 5 ATAC 6. Birds of Pray 7. Chisation 8. Chuck Yeager's Ar Control 9. Fakon 30 10 Flight of the Intruder 11. Fight Simulator 40 12. Flying Fortress.B-17 12 F117A 14. F. 1511 15 F 15 11 16 Gunship 2000 17. Jelital 18 Marts 19Comanche Maximum Overall Touchsenste undemat Home brone losy Slide in and out System for Mom No lottery or sofre required to un Games taster 37. Spectre 38 Strike Commander 39. Tornado 40 Ulm Underworld 41. Utra Bots 42. Flight Simulator 50 43. Home 44. Aces Over Europe 45. Acaderny Wrg Commander 46. Pavamer Wing Commande 47. Tio Fighter 48 Fledende F-14 49.1942 Pacific Air War System Requirements IBM AT, 286, 386, 486, PS/2, PENTIUM Tandy AT or 100% Compatible 01990 Keyboard and Terminal Technology (USA) Inc. (KATT) Games Master Total Control System is a registered trademark of Keyboard and Terminal Technology (USA) Inc., New Jersey. U.S.A Games Master Total Control System maits contents are trademark and Copy Rights of Keyboard and Terminal Technology (USA) in IOM is a registered trademark of Interational Business Machine, in All other products are registered trademark of trade names of their respective companies 198 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 Circle Reader Service #169 "


"MULTIMEDIA NADAT MITSUMI CREATIVE CREATIVE LANSIN SQUAD SPEEDS SPECIALISTS 1-800-233-0010  Quadruple Speed High Performance Operation 230 ms Access Time 256K Byte Built in Buffer Memory Long Life Brushless Motor Double Shell Dust-Sealed for increased Reliability Game Blaster CD 16 The Game Blaster 16 multimedia upgrade kit feaures: Sound Blaster 16  Double Speed CD-ROM Drive  Pair of Speakers High Performance Joystick Incredable Software including: Rebel Assult * Return to Zork Iron Helix . Civilization Sim City 2000. Railroad Tycoon  Lemmings The Simulation . Silent Service F117A Stealth Fighter New Grolier's Encyclopedia AND MANY MORE! $189 FAX: 608-836-8002 Tech/Other Info: 608-836-8001 $365 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE Yamaha YST-M10H.....................$69 TEAC SuperQuad .................... $239 Yamaha YST-MSW10H S.W.... $139 Toshiba 3501B QUAD spd. ... $289 Yamaha YST-SS1010 Syst....5209 Sony CDU-55S int.................$159 CD-ROM DRIVES SOUND CARDS Aztech CDA268-031 int....... $119 Aztech Waverider 32.............. $139 Chinon CDS 535 internal..........$205 Gravis Ultrasound .................... 5117 Chinon CDS 535 int wikit...$239 Gravis Ultrasound MAX...... $159 Chinon Quad spd. ............ Call Ensoniq Soundscape ............ $169 Creative Omni CD 3X $349 Logitech Soundman .............. $76 Creative Omni CD 4X... .......5399 Logitech Soundman Wave.......$119 Mitsumi Quad Speed int. ...... $189 MV Pro 3D korg .......$259 NEC Multispin 3Xp pon $374 MV Premium 3-D SCSI-2 $139 NEC 4Xi int. Quad spd...........$374 MV Premium 3-D MultiCD..... $139 NEC 4Xi int Quad wikit........... $459 Roland RAP-10....................... $239 NEX 4Xe ext. Quad spd......... 5464 Roland SCD-10.................. S157 NEC 4Xe ext. wikit .... $557 Roland SCD-15 $209 Plextor New Quad $319 Sound Blaster Value ... Plextor New Quad wikit ......... $379 Sound Blaster Pro Value.... Plextor QUAD Speed ... ........389 Sound Blaster 16 Value ...... .... 589 Plextor QUAD w/16-bit kit...... $449 Sound Blaster 16 MulticD...... $129 Sound Bistr 16 MultiCDIASP.$159 Sound Blaster SCSI-2............$165 Sound Blaster SCSI-IASP $189 Sound Blaster AWE-32 ...........$255 Sound Bistr AWE-32 Value .... $219 ASP upgrade chip............ ..552 Wave Blaster 2.0............ $145 VIDEO CAPTURE OUTPUT ADS Game Zapper.................. 574 Video Spigot for Windows... $199 Pro Movie Spectrum ..............$109 Sigma Desgns Real Magic... $357 RealMagic Lite......................$265 MM UPGRADE KITS Game Blaster CD 16. $365 Edutainment CD 16 ............. $395 Digital Schoolhouse............... $269 Creative Omni CD int $178 Creative Omni CD 3X ...... $349 Discovery CD 16. S264 Media Vision Rena.............$275 MV Family kit..... .......... $339 MV Super kt.... ... ... $399 MV Premium Kit... 5459 MV Pro kit $655 SPEAKERS Altec Lansing ASC1001 $105 Altec Lansing ACS3001 ...... .... $239 Creative SBS-38 S22 Labtec CS-150 $18 Labtec CS-600 $24 Labtec CS-800 $33 Labtec CS-900 $59 5399 en Soundman O PLEXTOR 4PLEX CALL FOR A FREE CATALOG! Plextor's new quad speed brings stunning performance to multimedia! 600KB/sec Transfer Rate 150ms Seek Time  220ms Access Time . 1 Megabyte Bufferl Includes a 2-year Manufacturer's Warranty $389 TITLES TO BUNDLE WITH HARDWARE 7th Guest..............$18 CHAOS Contin....... 517 F15 Strike Eagle II ...S16 Jones in Fast Lane....$16 Mad Dog Il.......... 519 Return to Zork...... $19 Aegis Guardian Fit $19 CD Deluxe 4 Pk ... $18 Family Edue. Coll...... $19 Just Grandma & Me $18 Mad Dog McCree.... $19 Star Trek 25 Anniv...... $21 Animals, San Diego ... S12 Compton's Ency '95 $28 Grolier's Enc. 1995 $28 Jutland $22 Mayo Clinic Fam Hith $18 Stellar 7... $18 Arthurs Teach. Trbl.... $17 Compton's New Cty. $17 Gunship 2000.......... $17 Kings Quest VI............S18 Megarace...............518 Theme Park ........ $25 Auduon's Birds ......$16 Day of Tentacle... $19 Hell Cab.............. $21 Links Clectr, Series $19 MS Encanta 1995 ..... $49 Ultimate Domain ...... Audubon's Mammals $16 Dracula Unleashed.... 519 Iron Helik............$18 Living Books 5 Pk $45 Oceans Below..........S16 Who Killed Brett Pen. $19 Beneath a Steel Sky $25 Dune ... $15 Indy Jns Fate Atlant 18 Lunicus.................521 Rebel Assault.......... $29 World Circut........... $23 NEC MultiSpin 4Xi The 4Xi Quad Speed Drive Features:  600KB/sec Transfer Rate 220ms Access Time  256KB Continuous Flow Cache Backlit LCD Display  Double Dust Door  Automatic Lens Cleaning \"Complete Audio Controls! $374 TOSHIBA CD-ROM TITLES 101 Only the best....... 517 Cyber Race ...........$36 Great Naval Battles IIS 39 Lost Treas Infocom 11 $25 Rebel Assault .....$42 Top 50 Gms: WIN.... $24 1942: Pacific At War 46 Cyclemania........$32 Groller's 95........... $79 Mad Dog I.......533 Relentless..... . $43 Total Distortion 551 5ft 10 Pack Vol. 1.....$27 Cyclones...................$43 Harpoon II..... $41 Mad Dog McCree. $28 Return to Zork.......... $42 Transport Tycoon ... $44 54 10 Pack Vol. 2.... $29 Dark Forces......... 545 Hamer Assit SVGA. S19 Mge Schibs Rise of the Triad... $39 U.S. Navy Fighters . $45 5th Fleet..................$38 Dark Legion .............. $35 Harvester ..... ........$46 Hum Bdy.................$41 Sabre Team ...............$34 Ulities Platinum. $16 7th Guest..................$43 Dark Seed Sam & Max Hit Road S29 Ultima I-VI............529 7th Guest 2.11th Hour S49 Darksun.... 547 Hell Cyberpunk ThrillS45 Solar Sys..................$41 Seawolf..................$43 Ultima Under 1 & 2. $29 Absolute Zero....... $38 Day of the Tentacle $28 Heroes of M&M.....$41 Magic: The Gathering$39 Shadowcaster ........S42 Uitima VIII Pagan.....$32 Aces of the Deep $44 Deathgate...............$32 Hobbes OS/2........... 516 Master of Magic...... 38 Shadows of Cairn.... $39 Ultimate Football....36 Aces of the Pacific. $38 Delta ..................... S41 Home & Bus. Plat...... $12 Master of Orion .....$38 Sim Town ................. $33 Under a Killing Moon $51 Aces over Europe... $38 Doom II............$44 Home MD Advsr ProS39 Mech Commander $43 SimCity Enhanced.... $45 Unnec Rough 95.... $32 Aegis: Grd of Fleet $46 Dragons Lair .........533 Horde, The ...........821 Mech Warrior II.....$45 Simtel.. . 15 Video Gmo Soltn 2.08 22 Air Havoc Controller $39 Dragons Lair MPEG 539 Humans. The.. ..S23 Megarace............ $32 Skyrealms of Jorune $40 Virtual Vegas........... 519 Al Qadim...... ...$38 Dragons Lair II ......... $41 Inca 2...... ....$34 Menzoborranzan..$47 Sorority House.....$34 Vortex.. .......$39 Alone in the Dark 2 $37 Dragon Lore $49 Indy J. Fate Atlant.... $37 Mitch Earth Siege $45 Space Ace........$37 War Craft $39 Armored Fist...........542 Dragonsphore.......$24 Incredible Machine Il $37 Microcosm..............$44 Space Ace MPEG. $39 Who Shot J. Rock.... $18 Babylon 5............. Call Dream Web ...... ..... $35 Incrbl Toon Machine S32 Mighty Meph P. Rngr$ 23 Space Pirates.......$37 Wild Blue Yonder..$38 Battle Isle 2200... $32 Dungeon Hack ..........$37 Iron Helix..................$54 Millenium Auction $45 Spear of Destiny.... 839 WIN Platinum..........$16 Beneath a Steel Sky $39 Empire Dix Masters $26 Jagged Alliance $46 Myst MPC.......... 545 Star Crusader........$40 Wing 1/Wing Il Dix S32 Betrayal at Kondor $23 Encarta '95..........583 Journeyman Proj....$42 Nascar Racing...... $45 Star Trek 25th Anniv $36 Wing Comm Armadas 46 Bioforge.................$45 Ency of Games ......$16 Jump Raven..............$39 New Kid on the Bick $35 Star Trek Deep Spc 9541 Wing Commander !!! $48 Blackthorne...533 Evasive Action.... 527 Jutland ... $44 NHL Hockey '95 $38 Star Trek Next Gen. 549 Wings Glry 1917-19185 46 Blake Stone: Plt Stk $26 F15 Strike Eagle 3... $46 King's Quest Comp. $53 Noctropolis......... $45 Star Trek NG WolfPack.............528 Bloodnet................. $38 Falcon Gold...............549 King's Quest VI.......39 Opr Bodycount.533 Tech. Man $39 World Circuit .....$34 Business CD, The $17 Fantasy Empires $36 King's Qst Vi Upgd. $22 OS2 Professional $18 Star Trek: World Cup 1930-94$36 CUsers Grp Lbry .S19 Flash Traffic............$35 Kings Quest VII... $48 Outpost....................$39 Str Fit Acad............$44 World of Xeen.. 38 Castles 11..... ..... $46 Fleet Defender Gold S45 Knights of Xentar...S36 Pacific Strike ........$47 Star Trek World War II..........$29 Central Intelligence. $39 Flight Sim Toolkit.... $49 Lands of Lore..........$39 Pagemaster ............. $41 Jdgmnt Rte.............33 Worldview ...........$27 CICA Windows...$15 Fortress of Dr. Rad $33 Laura Bow 2... $23 Panzer General .........539 Stonekeep .............$43 Wrath of the Gods ..S36 Cinemania '95....... 551 Front Page Baseball S45 Leg of Kyrandia Bk 1 S39 PC Sia's Wid of MM $18 Street Atlas USA 20$65 X.COM..... $38 Colonization...........$45 Front Page FB 95 $45 Leg of Kyrandia BK 11 $39 PGA Tour Goll......$45 Stronghold ........... $35 X-Wing Collectors 544 Comanche w/Mis..... $39 Frontier Elite II.......... $34 Leg of Kyrandia Bk III$39 Phantasmagoria .......$48 Siswar 2050 ..........$38 Zephyr ............ Cmpn of Xanth........ $33 Full Throttle............. $37 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $39 Phoenix Fighter....... $45 Superhero: lge Hob $32 Zillion Sounds.......... $16 Compton's '95......$54 Gabriel Knight..........$43 Lsre Suit Larry Anth. $45 Photo Gallery ...S14 Syndicate Plus..........839 Zorro ....$35 Corridor 7.............. $29 Game Master, The ... $19 Links Pro 486........... $45 Pier Shrwr #5 ..........$24 System Shock .......... $47 We only sell Cowboy Casino ....S34 Games Platinum ........ S16 Linux....................... S17 Police Quest 4.......... $39 Test Pilot.............. $42 Creature Shock......... $47 Games Shrwr w/ Bk $22 Live Action Football $32 Privtn Strike Comm $42 Tetris Gold... CD-Rom!! Crime Patrol ...........$37 Gettysburg.........$39 Lode Star..........$39 Programer CD.TheS17 TFX ........................... $29 Hundreds of titles Crime Patrol 2.......... $37 Goblins Quest lll....... 519 Lode Runner ...........38 Psychotron..............$40 Theme Park .........$39 available in-stock! Critical Path ............$42 Grandest Fleet......... $33 Lords of Midnight $43 Raidon $34 Tony LaRuss BB 2 545 HOURS: Cyberia................ $44 Great Naval Battles 1949 Lost Treas Infocom $31 Ravenlott..................546 Top 50 Gms: DOS ... $24 9 -6 CST M-F New Quad Speed Drive with features: 600 KB/sec Transfer Rate  155 ms Access Time 256 KB Buffer 125 ms Seek Time  Photo CD Multisessions Compliant $289 Wine CODBANDEN $43 BEST PRICE! Starring Mark Hamill & Malcolm Mcdowell Fly in a TRUE 3-D environment Graphics better than ones found in WING COMMANDER ARMADA! Tied for the largest game ever produced No surcharge on credit cards. CODs accepted with $5 charge. Software shipping $5 order, Canada S8/order. Hardware shipping is 5%, Canada 6%. Personal and company checks allow 14 days Returns must have RMA#, call Software sales final unless defective. Returns subject to 15% restocking feo. Pricing and availability subject to change. Hours 9-6 Central Standard Time. ONLY $48 Circle Reader Service #94 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. BOARDGAMES & RPGS SITVE JACKSON'S BZO3D 2093 GURPS \"GURPS BASIC SET the Generic Universal Roleplaying System, is the most flexible roleplaying system ever created. With just this Basic Set, you can adventure in any world you can imagine. Rules are included for all types of weapons, for wizards & magic, with more than 100 spells. 516 *TALISMAN: CITY OF ADVENCITY ADVENTURE TURE' New perils await the brave adventurers taking part in the quest to defeat the Dragon King. Amongst the crowded marELLERS 27 PUTRA RLGRAS kets and shops of the City of the Emperor can be found almost anything an adven. turer might desire, from a sturdy warhorse to a magic sword. Meanwhile, far away from the hurly burly of the city lies the forest realm of the Wraith Lord: Contains 2 new board sections. $29 THE GAME OF FANTASY FOOTBALL BLOOD BOWL' This is no ordinary boxed set! Includes 24 Citadel Miniatures, Blood Bowl playing field, handbook, team rosters, game dice and special blocking dice and more! BASIC SET TUESSATO $45 STEVE JACKSON GAMES History World GuRPS MAGIC PLANES OF CHAOS \"PLANES OF CHAOS' Take the plunge into the depths of the Abyss, the randomness of Limbo and the battle fields of Ysgard. Inside you'll find The Book of Chaos, The Travelogue, Chaos Adventures, Monstrous Supplement and five detailed maps of the realms of Chaos. $25 \"GURPS MAGIC presents a colorful, detailed magic system that is designed for easy modification, for the GM who wants to create his own background or set his own fantasy adventures. Completely compatible with magic rules in the GURPS Basic Set. More than 300 new spells! $14 'HISTORY OF THE WORLD' traces the progress of mankind from the dawn of civilization to the threshold of the modern era. Each player commands 7 empires, vies with armies and fleets, and builds monuments. S27 STEVE JACKSON GAMES FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG HORROR RPG HORROR RPG SCI-FI RPG ARS MAGICA AD&D AD&D 2nd Edition Rules GURPS Fantasy CHILL WEREWOLF STAR WARS $8 $14 Medieval Bestiary Medieval Handbook Twelfth Night Wizard's Grimoire $13 $16 $10 $15 Fantasy GM Pack Grimoire (Reprint) Magic 2nd Ed. GM Screen Werewolf (2nd Ed) Dungeon Masters Gde $15 Monster Manual $19 Players Handbook $10 $19 Star Wars (2nd Ed.) $19 Star Wars Sourcebook $18 Werewolf Adv Star Wars Adventures GURPS Times AD&D Audio Adv BLOODSHADOWS Rite of Passage Valkenburg Foundatn Ways of the Wolf $10 $10 $10 Karmeiks:Kingdm Adv $22 Night of the Vampire $13 Red Steel Camp Exp $22 Accessory Pack $12 Apparitions $12 Chill (Soft Cover) $16 Chilled to the Bone $9 Campanion $15 Horrors of N America S12 Lycanthropes $12 The Beast Within $16 Things $14 Undead & Buried $9 Vampires $12 Veil of Flesh S9 Voodoo Sourcebook $12 GURPS HORROR Bloodshadows $25 Galitia Citybook Mean Street $13 The Unnaturals World of Bloodshdows $16 $15 Aztecs Imperial Rome Robin Hood Scarlet Pimpernel Vikings $14 $14 $14 $11 $14 WRAITH $13 AD&D Dark Sun Source Bk $10 INDIANA JONES Character's Kit Storyteller's Screen Wraith Battle for Golden Sun $10 Crisis on Cloud City $10 Death in the Undercity $10 Domain of Evil $10 Gm Chambr of Questal $10 Isis Coordinates $10 Jedi's Honor $12 Mission to Lianna $10 Riders of the Maclstrm $10 Scavenger Hunt $10 Scoundrel's Luck $12 Strike Force:Shintipole $10 Supernova $13 Twin Stars of Kira $13 CASTLE FALKNSTEIN $19 Wraith Ady City by the Silt Sea $19 Citystate of Tyr $10 Dragon Kings Hardbnd S16 Elves of Athas $10 Ivory Triangi Cmp Exp $16 WII & Wy: Psion. $12 Castle Falkenstein Hardbound Comme ll Faut $25 Indiana Jones $25 Indiana Jones, Wrld of $16 Raiders of the Lost Ark $19 Vrtual Adept Tradtn Bk $10 $12 Haunts Midnight Express $13 $13 GURPS Creatures of the Night $14 CthulhuPunk S16 Mage:The Ascension $16 Vampire Companion $16 Vampire: Masquerade $16 Werewolf: Apocalypse $16 GURPS Horror $14 AD&D Planescape Adv HORROR RPG Wraith Sourcebk Star Wars Sourcebooks $9 CALL OF CTHULHU Dova Spark Eternal Boundary In the Abyss Well of Worlds VAMPIRE Face of Death Necropolis Atlanta Player's Guide The Reich Stult $11 $15 S10 S12 $9 S13 AD&D Planescape Bestiary $14 Bunnies & Burrows $14 China $14 Cliffhangers S11 Deathwish S7 Espionage $14 Fantasy 2nd Ed. $15 GURPS Rulebk $16 Hig-Tech 2nd Ed. $14 Magic Items 2 $14 Martial Arts Adventure $14 Martial Arts $13 Operation Endgame $14 Timeline $14 Ultra-Tech 2nd Ed $14 Vehicles $16 Adventures in Arkham $14 Blood Brothers $15 Cairo Guidebook $10 Investigator's Camp $10 Keeper's Compendium $11 Keeper Screen: 5th Ed. $12 London Guidebook $10 Miskatonic University $10 Strange Eons $11 Dark Empires $19 Dark Force Rising $15 Heir to the Empires $15 Imperial $18 Last Command $18 Miniatures Companion $13 Miniatures Rules $15 Movie Trilogy Sourcbk $19 Rebel Alliance Srcbk $18 Storyteller's Handbook $15 Storyteller's Screen $10 Vampire (2nd Ed) $19 Vampire Players Guide (Hardback 2nd Ed) $18 Campaign Setting $25 Planes of Chaos Boxd $25 GURPS SCI-FI AD&D Sourcebooks Vampire Adventures Star Wars Supplements S14 Call of Cthulhu Adv City of Lankhmar $15 Gd to Dragonince Wild $15 Players Guide to The Forgotten Realms $13 Blood Nativity Drty Secret of Blk Hnd $13 Elysium: Elder War $13 Hunters Hunted $10 Undra Blood Rd Moon $10 Aliens $14 Atomic Horror Callahan's Xtime Saln S14 Cyberpunk Adventures $14 Cyberpunk $14 Cyberworld (Reprint) $14 Lensmen $14 Robots $14 Time Travel (Reprint) $14 Time Travel Adventure $14 War Against the Chtorr S14 Deatstar Companion $13 Planets of the Galaxy $13 TRAVELLER: TNE GURPS Fantasy Cthulhu Casebk '20's $15 Curse of Cthulhu'20's $15 Dreamlands (1920's) $13 Fatal Experiments '20's $14 Retrn to Dunwich '20's $14 Tls of Miskatonic Vly $14 Thing at Threshold $13 ARS MAGICA WEREWOLF Ars Magica 3rd Edition $19 Black Death Camalot Conan Fantasy Adventures $14 $14 Battle Ride Brilliant Lances $25 Deluxe Traveller: TNE $34 Striker 2 (Boxed) GM Screen $10 $25 can be "


"Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10249 PO Box 234 Dept 10249 Rochester, VT 05767 OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US S4 per order. Masl 10 Canada, PR HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 per order Worldwide almal $6 per item. Handling $2 por shipment, Hardware orders may require additional ship cing charges. Call for details. Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD 58. Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day Shipping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final WARHAMMER  CALL Of CTHULHU  g ta eda ek tusi \"CALL OF CTHULHU' is a roleplaying game in which ordinary people are confronted by the terrifying beings and forces of the Cthulhu Mythos. Players portray Investigators of things unknown and unspeakable. Except for dice. everything needed for play in included in this book. S16 \"BATTLETECH A Dark age has befallen mankind. The United Star League once reigned, five suc cessor states now battle for control. The Succession Wars are fought over water. ancient machines, and spare parts factories. Control of these elements will lead to final victory S19 vonioW THE CRIM DARENESS OF THE FAR TUTURE THERE IS ONLY WAA \"WARHAMMER 40,000' It's more than just the game in the box, it's an entire hobby sup ported with a huge range of supplements, boxed sets and blister packs of miniatures, Includes hundreds of different models. 547 Wewe People WOOVU CUTE MEN OBERRANAN EXPRESS Dinash MENZOBERRANZAN' the famed city of the drow of the Underdark, is a place of great nobility & great treachery. Set includes 3 books detailing the ways of the city, 4 poster size maps, map of House Baenre compound, a House Do Urden retrospective and much more. $22 'HORROR ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS' con tains a massive adventure for the Call of Cthulhu roleplaying game. Beginning in 1920s London, the investigators journey to Paris and thence to the ancient city of Constantinople. Four books, handouts, maps, luggage stickers, and more. $29 \"WE THE PEOPLE' American Minutemen have just fired the shot heard 'round the world. Join in the war for independence with this exciting historical game that lets you lead the forces of the Continental Amy. $29 BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES NAPOLEONIC ANCIENT CIVIL WAR LEISURE/FAMILY SPORTS WORLD WAR II $25 $18 $12 D-Day Guns of Cedar Creek $32 Hallowed Ground $42 Here Come the Rebels $23 Lee Takes Command $22 Mississipi Fortress $22 Roads to Gettysburg $24 Stonewall Jackson Wy $27 Thunder at Crossroads $27 Shark Spices of the World T.V. Wars Tycoon Tyranno Ex Word Power Napoln/ Watrloo Cpgn $30 War & Peace $23 War to the Death $21 Wood Shps & Iron Mn $19 Campgn to Stalingrad $29 $16 France 1944 $12 G.D. 40:Batt for Stonne $30 $15 $23 $19 Bowl Bound $15 Pay Dirt $19 Regatta $19 Speed Circuit Statis Pro Basketball $24 Statis Pro Tms Bsball $19 World Cup FB (Scr) $38 Wrasslin' (Card Based) $15 $15 RAIL ROAD MEDIEVAL ECONOMIC STRATEGY 4 Btles of Ancient Wrld $21 Alexander at Tyre $18 Alexander's Generals $33 Ancient Empires $29 Anct Emp Sp/Alexandr $10 Anct Emp Sp/Caesar $10 Anct Emp Sp/ Succssr $10 Anc Emp Sp/Trojan Wr $10 Ancients $25 Barbarians Battles of Alexander $33 Caesar. The Civil War $38 Hannibal $35 Imperator $21 Imperium Romanumn Il $29 Peloponnesian War $29 SPOR Mod/Africanus $13 SPOR Mod./Consi Rm $13 SPOR Md./Pyrric Vctry $13 SPOR Grt Btl Romn $33 Siege of Jerusalem $27 VI Against Rome Age of Chivalry 10r2 ea$27 Black Prince Henry V Ironsides $28 The Crusades II $28 $25 $28 Global Survival Stock Market Stocks & Bonds $19 Naval War (Card Bsd) $12 Operation Crusader $29 Run Silent, Run Deep $28 Salvo 2 $23 Sink the Bismarck $23 Squad Leader SL Module each $19-$28 Third Reich $19 Tokyo Express $27 Turning Point Stalingrd S19 Up Front (Card Game) $19 Victory in Normandy $13 WestFront: War in Euro$49 1830:Rlrds & Rbr Barn $20 1870 $38 Australian Rails $21 British Rails $21 Empire Builder $25 Eurorails $25 Express (Card Game) S11 Nippon Rails $21 North American Rails $21 Rail Baron $19 SCIENCE FICTION $19 W FANTASY MODERN VIETNAM/KOREA $27 Advanced Heroquest $42 Battle Masters $42 Dragon Lords $29 Dragon Strike $33 Hero Quest $29 HO Pk 1/Kellar's Keep $10 HO Pk 2/Rtrn Witch Lrd$10 Iron Dragon $25 Sindbad $33 Talisman $44 Titan $23 Xanth $21 AMERICAN REVOL. Advanced Civilization $23 Blackbeard $27 Civilization $29 C Mod./Western Exp. Kt S8 Deluxe Diplomacy $42 Diplomacy $19 Enemy in Sight $12 Feudal $18 Guerilla (Card Based) $19 History of the World $27 Kingmaker $19 Maharaja $23 Republic of Rome $29 Supremacy Mega-Map S25 Supr Resource Deck 2 $13 Supr Revisd Ruls (5/92) $4 Suprmcy Sppimt ea $17-25 Supremacy, 3rd Ed. $42 Viceroys $25 We the People $29 2nd-7th Fleet ea $23-$27 Attack Sub (Card Bsd) $19 Back to Iraq $18 Central America $23 Flashpoint: Golan $29 Flight Leader $21 Gulf Strike S29 Harpoon $25 Harpoon, Naval Review $14 IDF (Israeli Defnce Fre) $29 Modern Nav Bll 2or3ea $19 Nato $15 Tac Air $19 Team Yankee $20 Frozen Chosin Platoon Silver Bayonette Tet Offensive The Korean War Vietnam $25 $15 $17 S33 $18 $18 1776 $22 Give Me Liberty $25 Rebols & Red Coats 1 $25 Rebols & Red Coats 2 $25 War of 1812 WORLD WARI LEISURE/FAMILY $24 CIVIL WAR Alpha Omega $19 BattleTech Blueprints $10 Bile Tech Compendium $13 Bile Tch Map St 2-4 ea $13 BattTch 4th War Scen 1 $8 BilTch Scn Bick Thorns $10 BattTch Scn Luthien $12 BattTch Son Tukayyid $12 BilTch Son Jade Falcn $13 Battletech/ Battlespace $19 Batlle Tech City Tech $19 Blood Berets S29 Blood Bowl Death Zne S29 Federaln & Empire Dix $38 Man O' War $42 Merchant of Venice $25 Space Marine $49 Str Fleet Bils Adv Msn $25 Star Fleet Battles S25 StrFit Btis Cptn's Ed 838 SFB Cptn Log 8-15 ea $9 Wrhamr 40K/Drk Minm $28 Warhammer Fantasy $48 NAPOLEONIC WORLD WAR II Aces High Aces High Amer Aces $24 Knights of the Air $19 Landships $27 Lawrence Arabia. 2 Ed $20 Richtofen's War $19 Acquire $19 Assassin $15 By Hook or Crook $19 Candidate $19 Class Struggle $19 Dinosaurs of Lost Wrld S15 Gangsters $23 Greed Box $7 Moonstar $12 Powre Lunch $13 Quest for Ideal Mate $15 1862: Civil Wr Qud Gm $23 1863:Americn Civil Wr $28 A House Divided $20 Across Five Aprils $23 Bobby Lee: Civil War $37 Brother Against Brothr $33 Campaigns of Civil Wr $21 Civil War Classics $23 Embrac the Angry Wnd $24 Guns of Cedar Creek $32 WAR GENERAL Austerlitz Empires in Arms $27 La Bataille d'aurstaedt $30 LB de Mont St.Jean Dx $62 La Bataille de Wavre $25 Napoleon at Austerlitz $20 Napoleon on Danube $19 Napoleon's Battles $23 Napoleon Leipzig Cpgn $25 1944: Second Front $32 Advncd Squad Leader $38 Afrika $21 Air Force S23 Ambush (Card Based) $27 Axis & Allies $29 A & A Plastic Minies $25 A & A WW 2 Exp. 2 $21 Breakout: Normandy $23 Battle of Alma S28 Cpgns Frederick Great S24 Kolin:Frederick Frst Dft $34 Sands of War $29 Circle Reader Service #200 CGW495 RG2 "


"The Civil War THE FIRST MODERN WAR 1861-1864 From the first shots fired at Fort Sumter to the elections of 1864, empire interactive's The Civil War is the first PC-based full scale depiction of the terrible conflict that tore apart a nation. ani in Illustration by Dale Gallon Pelatia EW uuro viande B This innovative game will redefine units. During the battle action the genre and provide for the first situations, zoom in from a dazzling time a stunning backdrop for full panoramic view to minutely detailed action battles. A 3D texture mapped combat level action! Watch each battlefield with Gouraud shaded individual soldier react to rifle and terrain lets you control your forces cannon fire! The strategic game is suitably vast, in spectacular combat sequences. In but well organised and very playable Tutorial battles and a massive onThe Civil War, you plan the campaigns line database coupled with historical and fight the key battles that will references throughout the manual give determine the fate of the nation. you fascinating insight into the trials and glories of The Civil War. Review information regarding famous generals and weapons! Enjoy songs from the period and read accounts written by the newspaper or soldiers themselves! The Civil War is a superb strategy game that accurately recreates the Could you destroy \"Stonewall\" Jackson difficulties of this the first modern Battlefields can be rotated 360P giving at Manassas and end the war? Would you powers of observation that real civil Grants Army of The Tennessee stand war. War commanders could only dream about. against you at Shiloh? The campaign section allows you as a Union or Confederate commander Two Player mode available with play CIVIL WAR IS THE STATE OF THE ART to control the resources and the REALTIME SIMULATION OF THE CONFLICT over serial link or modem. movement of armies over a THAT SHAPED THE NATION detailed map of the USA. Recruit and train new armies and fleets, build fortifications and railways. A strong economic base is essential for victory. Using Empire Interactive's Intuitive Combat Control Interface (ICCI), strategic orders can be given to the overall forces or just to specific IBM PC CD-ROM Circle Reader Service #157 VAGGER empire interactive, 13220 Wisteria Drive, Bay N-2, Germantown, The Civil War 13220 wisteria Drive, Bay 4-2, cementom, em p ire "


"ESCORE Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. INDUCTION CEREMONY! ultima  ULTIMA UNDERWORLD: WOLFENSTEIN 3-D THE STYGIAN ABYSS ID SOFTWARE, 1992 ORIGIN SYSTEMS, 1992 WOLFENSTEIN 3-D was based on the conPrior to Origin's ULTIMA UNDERWORLD: THE cept of an early Apple II game, CASTLE STYGIAN ABYSS, smooth-scrolling first-person WOLFENSTEIN, where the gamer had to es3-D was the province of driving, flying and cape from an old castle guarded by Nazi space combat games. There were first-person jailers. WOLFENSTEIN 3-D transformed the game with a freerole-playing games before ULTIMA UNDERWORLD and dungeons scrolling, texture-mapped environment that roughly correthat looked like 3-D environments, but the magicians at Looksponded to the simple line-and-fill graphic mazes of the ing Glass Technologies (then Blue Sky Productions) were the earlier game. To be certain, the walls of the Nazi-controlled first to give us that feeling of exploring and fighting within a castle were not as detailed as those in ULTIMA UNDERWORLD, real 3-D world. It was the first time that the mouse could be used but the game screen was larger and the scrolling much faster. to direct movement that was not frame-by-firame, but smoothly Though spartan, the graphics created a wonderful atmosrecalculated and redrawn according to the gamer's input. The phere, with Nazi banners hanging on the walls, stained glass texture-mapped dungeon walls were detailed and convincing windows starring Hitler himself, and lots of nice touches like enough. ULTIMA UNDERWORLD: THE STYGIAN Abyss also presentchandeliers and coats of armor. WOLFENSTEIN 3-D's use of ed a very satisfying form of two-step combat wherein weapons perspective and sound also assisted gamers in suspending are pulled back and released, with the power of the blow detheir disbelief. At the time of release, WOLFENSTEIN 3-D was pending upon the interval between the strokes. Add powerful the most thrilling, adrenaline-pumping game around, and auto-maps upon which players could make their own notes and since then, it has spawned (for better or worse) an entire you have a game which broke plenty of new ground in game degenre of action games. sign, a worthy inductee to these halls. CIVILIZATION (MicroProse, 1991) FALCON 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) GUNSHIP (MicroProse, 1989) HARPOON (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) KING'S QUEST V (Sierra On-Line, 1990) LEMMINGS (Psygnosis, 1991) LINKS 386 PRO (Access Software, 1992) M-1 TANK PLATOON (MicroProse, 1989) RAILROAD TYCOON (MicroProse, 1990) RED BARON (Dynamix, 1990) THEIR FINEST HOUR (LucasArts, 1989) THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (LucasArts, 1990) ULTIMA VI (Origin Systems, 1990) WING COMMANDER I & II (Origin Systems, 1990-91) INDUCTEES PRIOR TO 1989 BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL Software, 1987) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) PIRATES (MicroProse, 1987) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) APRIL 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 203 "


"SCORE TOP 100 GAMES READER POLL #127 T 1 2 3 H E COMPANY IOTA Star Controll! SSI TOP ADVENTURE GAMES GAME COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom Gabriel Knight Sierra Star Control II Accolade Sam & Max Hit The Road LucasArts The Seventh Guest Virgin King's Quest VII Sierra Quest for Glory 1 (VGA) Sierra Under A Killing Moon Access Eric the Unready Legend ccc 5 6 1 8 9 10 000 SCORE 9.87 9.55 9.42 9.33 9.30 9.25 9.12 9.05 9.04 9.04 *1 *2 *3 4 5 6 7 *8 9 SCORE 10.53 10.50 10.36 10.33 10.24 10.21 10.18 10.06 9.95 9.95 9.87 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ROLE PLAYING GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.44 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 9.42 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing Lands of Lore Virgin 9.25 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.11 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 8.97 Wolf Sanctuary Woods 8.95 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.81 Veil of Darkness SSI 8.74 * 11 12 13 14 *15 16 17 Origin MicroProse LucasArts id Software MicroProse Electronic Arts Papyrus SSG Electronic Arts LucasArts id Software Virgin MicroProse Dynamix LucasArts Maxis Three-Sixty Pacific Viacom Blizzard QQP Dynamix Three-Sixty Pacific Electronic Arts Dynamix SSI Papyrus Origin Sierra New World Computing MicroProse 95225 to 2255552 eye! Komdor 19 20 21 GAME Panzer General Wing Commander 3 X-COM TIE Fighter DOOM Master of Orion Magic Carpet NASCAR Racing Warlords II US Navy Fighters Day of the Tentacle DOOM II Dune II Master of Magic Front Page Sports Football Pro X-Wing Sim City 2000 V for Victory: Market Garden Sherlock Holmes CDI Warcraft Conquered Kingdoms Aces of the Deep V for Victory: Velikiye Luki NHL Hockey Betrayal at Krondor War in Russia Indy Car Racing Ultima Underworld II Gabriel Knight Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen World Circuit Carriers at War Construction Kit Pacific War Star Control II Operation Crusader Sam & Max Hit The Road System Shock Comanche: Maximum Overkill Lands of Lore The Seventh Guest Fleet Defender V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Privateer King's Quest VII Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen The Grandest Fleet Merchant Prince Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Syndicate Front Page Sports Baseball 9.85 9.82 9.73 9.64 9.60 9.58 9.58 9.55 9.54 9.53 9.53 9.52 9.49 9.44 9.44 9.43 9.42 9.42 9.37 9.36 9.35 9.34 23 24 *25 CANE 27 28 TOP SIMULATION GAMES COMPANY NASCAR Racing Papyrus US Navy Fighters Electronic Arts Aces of the Deep Dynamix Indy Car Racing Papyrus World Circuit MicroProse Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Fleet Defender MicroProse Stunt Island Disney Hornet Spectrum HoloByte Aces over Europe Dynamix 1 WUNASCAR 2 3 4 5 SCORE 10.05 9.95 9.53 9.43 9.36 9.27 9.25 9.00 8.96 8.66 SI WG a SSG 1 8 9 10 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 ADAC 9.33 PATYRUS 38 39 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME COMPANT X-COM MicroProse Master of Orion MicroProse Warlords 11 SSG Dune Il Virgin Master of Magic MicroProse Sim City 2000 Maxis Warcraft Blizzard Conquered Kingdoms QQP Merchant Prince QQP The Grandest Fleet QQP 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 SCORE 10.36 10.21 9.95 9.82 9.73 9.58 9.54 9.53 9.08 9.08 42 43 44 45 46 SSI Accolade Avalon Hill LucasArts Origin Novalogic Virgin Virgin MicroProse Three-Sixty Pacific Origin Sierra New World Computing QQP QQP Origin Electronic Arts Dynamix AD 9.31 9.30 9.30 9.27 9.25 9.25 9.25 9.18 9.16 9.12 9.11 9.08 9.08 9.08 9.07 9.06 ST ST RP MICROPROSE STAC 49 50 "


"9.52 SS emasses mgm SSI 4 Mapier 10.18 8.78 TOP WARGAMES 51 Quest for Glory I (VGA) Sierra AD,RP 9.05 52 Eric the Unready Legend 9.04 GAME COMPANY SCORE Under A Killing Moon Access 9.04 SSI 1 Panzer General 10.53 2 Legend of Kyrandia 3 V for Victory: Market Garden 54 9.03 Three-Sixty Pacific 9.58 Virgin 3 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 55 Stunt Island Disney 9.00 4 Battles of Destiny QOP 9.00 War in Russia SSI 9.44 Tanks SSI 9.00 5 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG . 9.35 VGA Planets Tim Wisseman 9.00 6 Pacific War SSI 9.34 59 Clash of Steel 8.98 7 Avalon Hill Operation Crusader 9.31 8 60 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant 8.97 Sir-Tech V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 9.18 Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations 9 Tanks SSI 8.97 9.00 62 Clash of Steel Hornet Spectrum HoloByte 10 8.95 8.98 Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Sierra 8.96 64 Alone in the Dark I-Motion 8.95 Wolf TOP ACTION GAMES Sanctuary Woods 8.95 66 Relentless Electronic Arts 8.93 CANE COMPANY SCORE 67 The Incredible Machine Dynamix 8.92 1 Wing Commander 3 Origin 10.50 WING CORDANDA 68 The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra 8.91 2 TIE Fighter LucasArts 10.33 69 Incredible Toons Dynamix 8.86 3 DOOM id Software 10.24 70 Empire Deluxe New World Computing 8.82 Magic Carpet Electronic Arts PGA Tour Golf 486 Electronic Arts 8.82 5 DOOM II id Software 9.85 Carriers at War II SSG 8.82 6 X-Wing LucasArts 9.60 73 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.81 7 System Shock Origin 9.30 74 Rex Nebular MicroProse 8.80 8 Privateer Origin 9.16 Serf City SSI 8.80 9 Lemmings Chronicles Psygnosis 8.50 76 Myst Broderbund 8.79 10 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 8.50 77 Harpoon 11 Three-Sixty Pacific 8.78 Tony La Russa Baseball II SSI 79 Genghis Khan II Koei 8.74 TOP SPORTS GAMES Veil of Darkness SSI 8.74 COMPANY SCORE Dracula Unleashed Viacom 8.74 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 9.64 82 Aces over Europe Dynamix 8.66 NHL Hockey Electronic Arts 9.49 83 F-15 Strike Eagle !!! MicroProse 8.65 3 Front Page Sports Baseball Dynamix 9.06 84 MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte 8.64 PGA Tour Golf 486 Electronic Arts 8.82 85 Superheroes of Hoboken Legend 8.61 Tony La Russa Baseball II 8.78 86 Space Quest V: Mutation Sierra 8.60 6 Wayne Gretzky Hockey III Bethesda 8.30 Lords of the Realm Impressions 8.60 MicroLeague Baseball 4 MicroLeague 8.23 88 Hand Of Fate Westwood Studios 8.56 IRU 8 Jordan In Flight Electronic Arts 7.85 89 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts 8.54 9 Microsoft Golf 2.0 Microsoft 7.43 90 Rules of Engagement 2 Impressions 10 Ultimate Football MicroProse 7.26 91 Hammer of the Gods New World Computing 8.51 92 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 8.50 Lemmings Chronicles Psygnosis AC,ST 8.50 94 Star Trek: Judgment Rites Interplay 8.49 Prince of Persia 2 Broderbund 8.49 You've read our take on the latest games, now here's a chance to see what your fellow 96 The Lost Vikings Interplay 8.46 97 gamers think. The CGW Top 100 is a monthly tally of game ratings provided by our Sid n' Al's Incredible Toons 8.45 Dynamix Challenge of the Five Realms MicroPlay 8.45 readers via the CGW Poll ballot found in each issue. Approximately 50 games are rat99 Dark Legions 8.43 ed each month, and the results are added to the aggregate results from past months. 100 Sim City CD-ROM Interplay 8.40 This historical database serves as a terrific reference for what you, the gamers, feel are Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. * = Top game of type. Dark Teal = New Game, AD = the best plays in gaming. Adventure, RP = Role Playing, SI = Simulation, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A MONTHLY SURVEY OF THE READERS OF COMPUTER GAMING WORLD + d a ST 8.52 AC,ST Vote! AD SSI AC "


"THE -5SORE PATCHES hidden maps on Power Macintoshes. 2/1/95 1942: Pacific Air War Update: Adds digital sounds, 6 new airplanes and new flight models to the original game. 1/19/95 Armored Fist V1A14 Update: CD-ROM/floppy updates address a number of compatibility issues, including: mouse, video, memory and missing/no sound effects. 1/5/95 Computer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for bugey programs have become a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. Ziff NET These patches can usually be downloaded from the major on-line networks (CompuServe, Genie, ZiffNet), but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. Red indicates new files. Wing Commander III Joystick Patch: Fixes reported joystick lockups when starting up WC3. 1/2/95 Wing Commander Armada Proving Grounds Add-on: Adds 6 player network support to Armada. 1/2/95 Wing Commander Armada v1.0 Patch: Fixes reported problems. 1/2/95 Computer Gaming World Version 126.02 Update: Fixes reported 5 1/2 star ratings bugs in reviews of Rise of the Robots and Battle Isle 2200. 1/15/95 1.5 or better, fixing some missile targeting bugs. 2/3/95 Publisher BBS Numbers Dark Sun II: Wake of the Ravager V1.1 Update: Fixes reported problems. Separate floppy and CD-ROM versions available. 1/5/95 Harpoon Classic for Windows V1.53b: Works with version 1.5 or better, fixes several reported GPF errors. Also fully implements all version 1.32 missile changes including bearing-only attacks. 2/2/95 NASCAR V1.1 Upgrade Patch: Fixes in this version include: pole bug, interrupt 10 or higher for sound card settings and some problems with SET CONTROLS function when using Thrust Master TI and other pedal units. 12/19/94 DOOM V1.9: Official Id upgrade; works only with version 1.666. 2/8/95 Panzer General V1.1 Update: Separate CD-ROM and floppy patches fix some reported problems. 1/6/95 5th Fleet Version 1.2 update: Fixes some reported bugs. 2/2/95 Flash Traffic Installation Update: New INSTALL.EXE expands sound card support, includes drivers for MS Sound System and cards with the Ensoniq chip. 1/27/95 Sim Tower V1.1 Update: Macintosh-only patch fixes problems with metro station, random lock ups and some graphics glitches. 1/20/95 Harpoon Classic V1.56d: CDROM update corrects some bugs with setting aircraft speeds, air-to-air refeuling, and some other long standing bugs, as well as using less memory. Missiles launch against bases correctly. Works with all previous versions. 12/28/94 King's Quest VII Update: Corrects all known problems, but is not compatible with V1.1. 1/11/95 Knights of Xentar V1.08a Patch: Fixes some graphics bugs as well as some hardware compatibility problems. 1/4/95 Flight Commander 2 V1.02: Patch fixes PBEM feature and reported problems with some video drivers. Also makes the game compatible with the CD-ROM version. IBM compatibles only. 1/8/95 Tanks V1.25: Unofficial patch by Norm Koger adds panic fire and retreats, hidden AT guns, variable weather, horse-drawn artillery, reduced air and artiller effectiveness, and much more. 1/25/95 Many of these patches are available direct from the publishers' bulletin board systems. Call with your modem parity settings at N-8-1. Accolade CA (408) 296-8800 Activision CA (310) 820-1276 Apogee MA (508) 368-7036 Bethesda Software MD (301) 990-7552 Broderhund CA (415) 883-5889 Capstone FL (305) 374-6872 Creative Labs OK (405) 7426660 Id Software TX (508) 3684137 Impressions Software MA (617) 225-2042. InterPlay Productions CA (714) 252-2822 LucasArts CA (415) 257-3070 Maxis CA (510) 254-3869 MicroProse MD (410) 7851841 Microsoft WA (206) 936-6735 NovaLogic CA (818) 774-9528 Origin TX (512) 328-8402 Papyrus MA (617) 576-7472 Sierra Online CA (209) 6834463 Spectrum HoloByte CA (510) 522-8909 SSI CA (408) 739-6137 or (408) 739 6623 Virgin Interactive CA (714) 833-3305 Front Page Sports: Baseball '94 V1.02: Upgrade fixes many reported problems, including crash bugs, General Manager AI, and roster handling bugs. 2/3/95 Menzoberranzan V1.01 Update: CD-ROM/floppy update fixes numerous bugs, including: NPC Vonar can scribe the Light spell, Malice will now appear in the endgame for everyone, and Jump potions will not disappear when saving the game. 1/9/95 Tigers on the Prowl V1.15h: Latest patch fixes problem accessing multiple units and adds some new features. 11/23/94 Transport Tycoon: Fixes sound card recognition bug during setup, among other minor problems. 1/10/95 Front Page Sports: Football Pro 95 V1.02: Adds fans to the stands and enables the CD-ROM version of the game to access extra plays from the CD, plus many other enhancements. 1/26/95 Warcraft: Orcs and Humans Disk/CD-ROM Update: Works with both the disk and CD-ROM versions, contains unit editor and cheat codes. 1/27/95 Master of Magic V1.2: Latest upgrade to MicroProse's strategy game with numerous fixes, new features, and major AI enhancements. 12/1/94 Harpoon Classic (Mac Version) V1.57: Works with version Warlords II Power Mac V1.04: Speeds up redraw of 206 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"NR 1 3 WARNING! NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13 For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Two young knights, separated at birth and raised by mortals, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. Never knowing their true relation -or their own dark destiny they are fated to meet and duel each other to the death. As Desmond, the Knight of Xentar, you will be striving with many a winsome enchantress to overcome menacing foes and perhaps in victory, become the ruler of all. MEGA TECH System requirements: IBM-PC 386-SX compatible 486 recommended), VGA graphics, no extended memory required, Sorind Blaster TM and ProsAudio Spectrum compatible. CD-ROM or diskette version available So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, humorous script and thrilling plots. But be warned -with its romance and intense action, Knights of Xentar is not for kids nor the faint hearted. Available at finer software dealers everywhere or call 1 800_258 MEGA. Visa/Mastercard accepted. Download the FREE demo by calling our 24 hour BBS 310 539 7739 (8 data bits, no parity, 1 stop bit, filename kxdemo.exe) or send $5 for the demo on diskette to Megatech, PO Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. ENTER THE WORLD OF DEMONS ECSTASY OR EXTINCTION AWAITS Based on the Japanese hit che Roy movie and h the best #1 game, ing Game Dragon e that will th il thrill you wir in Japanese Anime Knight III 2e Art KNIGHTS of XENTAR Circle Reader Service #86 "


"The Rumor Bag The Winter Of Our Disk Contents by William Oxford Bacon t seemed like a natural, staging a I didn't feel very regal, however, when new optional rules. It will be the first of a performance of Richard III at Mida little blond boy jumped out of one of series of games featuring NIPPON RAILS, dleham Castle with yours truly playthe corridor's shadowy recesses, waving a BRITISH RAILS, EURORAILS, and more. ing the lead role using a serviceable stick sword and shouting, \"Die, villain!\" I I caught my breath and began the Richard Nixon impression. \"I'm a instinctively stepped back and into the monologue, only to be interrupted by an king, not a crook!\" Why not? The rather comely shape of the boy's mother, English Heritage volunteer who sternly voice of an unpopular president to causing her to drop the book she was but politely asked me to leave—somesuggest the voice of an unpopular king ofreading and release an involuntary cry. I thing about defacing historical monufers a certain something muttered an apology, picked up her ments. As I followed the volunteer down In fact, it seemed as natural as Sierra's copy of SWORD OF SHANNARA, and sudthe twisting staircase, the little boy's Roberta Williams deciding to design denly realized that the young lovely was mother handed me a hastily scribbled KING'S QUEST VIII as a solo act. Both a woman I'd met at Legend. Hmm, I note. It said that Byron Preiss was going King's QUEST VI and King's QUEST VII knew that Terry Brooks, the author of to publish a MARTIAN CHRONICLES game. were written with co-authors, but Roberta the best-selling Shannara series, was The Bradbury game will take place after has interesting plans for the next installpublished by Random House, and I also the short stories from which the game rement which do not require collaboration. knew that Random House has a major ceived its name and will be a MYST-like In addition to her plans to up the ante on investment in Legend. Ergo, I reasoned, game where the player must stop a potenthe animation and integrate it with multiLegend must be publishing a SWORD OF tial nuclear disaster. plane scrolling, she unfortunately swore SHANNARA game. She confirmed my susI gave her a thank you kiss on the me to secrecy about the intriguing idea picion and indicated that the game cheek, but suddenly felt a thwack on the she has for one arcade sequence in the would be set in the time frame between side of the head. Her son was waving his game. SWORD OF SHANNARA and ELFSTONES OF stick sword like a baseball bat and was actTo perform the opening monologue SHANNARA with the player taking on the ing a lot like a big league batter in Stormfrom the highest point in the keep, I role of Shea Ohlmsford's son, Will's fafront Studio's TONY LA RUSSA BASEBALL climbed the narrow, twisting stairway, ther. She also said the game was being II. The new version will feature digitized practicing my Nixon voice with visions of designed by Corey and Lori Cole of professional players and both a near-flat glory and critical acclaim in my brain. ViQUEST FOR GLORY fame. statistical model (affected some by weathSIONS OF GLORY, of course, reminded me I was so excited by that news and myer and physics) for baseball stat-bulls and of QQP's expected late '95 release of a mind was racing so fast that I reached the a pure physics-based game for action planetary conquest game with both stratesummit hulling and pulling like an early gamers. \"I'm gonna' tell daddy,\" threatgic and tactical combat. The game is suplocomotive in QQP's upcoming EMPIRE ened the protective youngster and, knowposed to feature 20 different planetary BUILDER. This conversion of the classicing the father's great propensity for terrains and accommodate up to 40 playMayfair boardgame of railroad building jealousy, found mysell' capering nimbly ers. There are even supposed to be near will feature the standard board game, from the lady's presence to the lascivious 40 alien races within the game. plus a version of the game with lots of playing of a lute. Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $28.00 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage, Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, PO, Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Second-class postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. 208 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. APRIL 1995 "


"Introducing the UltraSound ACE\" from Gravis. ne 32-voice wavetable add-in card for your PC that's guaranteed (as in money back) to make your games sound better. No. it's not some lame daughtercard that needs Wave Blaster connectors, whatever they are. HIGH END SOUND Yes, it works with any sound card. So you're able to say hello to sounds created by wavetable synthesis without saying goodbye FOR PEOPLE WHO to the ones created by older Sound Blaster FM technology Advanced GRAVIS DON'T HAVE MONEY COMING OUT OF THEIR REAR END. WAVETABLE TECHNOLOGY. 16-BIT CD QUALITY SOUND. 99 BUCKS. HEARD ENOUGH? Circle Reader Service #113 Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. 1790 Midway Lane, Bellingham, WA 98226. For more information call 800.663.8558, 604 431.5020 or fax 604 431.5155 Ultrasound and Ultrasound ACE are trademarks of Advanced Gravis, 1995 Advanced Gravis. All rights reserved. All other brands or product names are trademarks owned by their respective companies "


"13.1 OF DRG E. YOU ARE WHAT THEY MADE YOU... Make them regret it! Stripped of memory and enhanced with both human and alien technology, you were to be the perfect warrior. Make your break for freedom as the star of ORIGIN's latest Interactive Movie. Lifelike animation of your character whose every move you control — intriguing puzzles and truly interactive environments create a ground-breaking adventure. See for yourself. 1995 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Biofore and Origin lateractive Movie are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Int. Origin is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Syarikat Actual stress may vary. ORIGIN Interactive Movie Circle Reader Service #99 "

