/

/

Vol. 5 No. 1

February 1985
Features
ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT

9

Enter Our 4th Annual RW Tourney

WAR IN RUSSIA

14

Replay of Case Blue (Part I)

COME CAST A SPELL WITH ME
A New Adventure Game Column

A SOFTWARE AGENT LOOKS AT THE INDUSTRY
BREAKTHROUGH IN THE ARDENNES
Designer's Notes

GULF STRIKE
A Review

COSMIC BALANCE

17
Roe Adams
18
Bob Jacobs
20
Chuck Kroegel
27
Mark Bausman
29

Contest Results

Departments
TAKING A PEEK

10

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

EDITORIAL

13

The Editor Muses

STRATEGICALLY SPEAKING

23

Strategy Game Tips

TELEGAMING
Delphi Gaming

SCORPION'S TALE
Hitchhiker's Guide Tips

LEARNING GAME
1984 Review

ATARI PLAYFIELD
Spelunker & Realm of Impossibility

MICRO-REVIEWS

26
Patricia Fitzgibbons
30
Scorpia
32
Bob Proctor
33
Dave Stone
35

Competition Karate
Clear For Action
3 in 1 Football
Relax!
How About a Nice Game of Chess?

READER INPUT DEVICE

40

GAME RATINGS

45

1984 INDEX

47

4th ANNUAL
ROBOTWAR
TOURNAMENT
The long awaited 4th Annual CGW
Robotwar Tournament is here! If last
year's incredible contest is any indication, this could be the computer
gaming event of the year!

Looking for better competition for
your ROBOTWAR® robot? Here is
the perfect place to try him (her?) out.
Put up your contender. Does he have
what it takes to be a champion? If you
don't enter him, he will always haunt
you with the comment "I could'da
been a contendah!"

Let us forward your request for further information you'd like to receive on any
number of products or services mentioned or advertised in this issue of Computer Gaming World.

1

Clearly print/type your name/company address on one of the attached
reply cards.
Circle the number(s) on that card
correspond to the number(s) you'll
find at the bottom of the ad(s)/articles(s)
about which you'd like to learn more.
(You'll also find these key numbers on
advertised products in this issue's Advertiser's Index.)

2

Stamp and mail the card. The
sooner it's sent, the quicker you'll
get the literature you're after.

3

Why not take this opportunity to subscribe to Computer Gaming World? A
subscription card can be found facing
page 40.

The ranks of CGW Robotwar
Champions include such immortal
greats as NORDEN + , DRAGON,
MUSTANG, and DRAGON4A. Your
robot could join this illustrious
lineup. A wall trophy will go to the
winner. All entrants will receive a
50% discount coupon towards the
purchase of ROBOTWAR DATA
DISK #3 which will contain all the entrants (available this summer).

CONTEST RULES
1. Send your Robotwar program
(source and object code) on a
diskette to:
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT
P.O. BOX 4566
ANAHEIM, CA 92803-4566
2. Include a brief description of
your robot. What is it designed to
do?
3. Only one submission per
contestant.
4. Include your name, address and
phone number with your submission. If you wish your diskette
returned, also include return
postage.
5. CGW reserves the right to
reproduce entries in disk form (with
credits) in ROBOTWAR DATA
DISK #3.
6. Entries must be received by April
5, 1985. The winner will be announced in the June 1985 issue of
CGW. A round robin style tournament will be used to determine the
winner.

Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
RAM!:A real time simulation of Ship-to-ship
combat during the Peloponnesian War. RAM!
utilizes such factors as strength of attack and
fatigue level of rowers to determine the outcome
of a ramming. You can have up to 10 ships per
side. The campaign game allows you to play each
of four historical battles, with the results of each
battle affecting the next one. One player. IBM.
$30.00.

Circle 7 on Reader Service Card
Baen Software
8 West 36th St.
New York, NY 10018
BERSERKER RAIDS: Working closely with programmers, Fred Saberhagen has brought the
world of the Berserkers to the computer. Not an
interactive fiction game like other book-based
games, BR is a strategy game in which you and
your human opponent must join forces against
the Berserker, while attempting to consolidate
your own position. Then, if you defeat the
Berserker, you may turn on your human opponent. Attack too soon and the Berserker will get
both of you, too late and you will suffer defeat
at the hands of a mere human! There are also

single-player scenarios. The game comes in a
hardbound book format. BR is a nice blend of
Saberhagen's universe with a good gaming
system. Apple, Atari, C-64, IBM $34.95.

Circle 8 on Reader Service Card
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW: A "computer saga
by Fred Saberhagen" which puts you in the middle of a story, opening with scene setting text by
Saberhagen. It's up to you to save the survivors
of a Berserker raid on your home planet, through
strategic allocation of fighter pilots and
resources, and judicious movement through
space. Apple now, IBM later. $34.95. Both games
are distributed by Simon & Shuster.

Circle 9 on Reader Service Card
Brainworks Inc.
24009 Ventura Blvd.
Calabasas, CA 91302
TELECHESS:A telecommunication Chess program for the Apple II. Everything is included for
two people to play chess over the phone lines using two Apple computers. Animated color
graphics (you see the pieces move on the board).
A "chat" mode lets you communicate with your
opponent. You can print out the screen as well
as save a game in progress.

Blue Chip Software
6744 Eton Ave.
Canoga Park, CA 91303
SQUIRE: Squire is the fourth game in the highly
acclaimed line of economic simulations from
Blue Chip. It is a financial planning simulation
that allows you to experiment with a full range
of investment options—stocks, bonds, real estate,
commodities. It has a "reality mode" that enables
you to "play" with real life goals and devise a plan
to get you there. Apple and MS-DOS. $59.95 to
$69.95.

Circle 11 on Reader Service Card
Broderbund Software
17 Paul Dr.
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
THE ANCIENT ART OF WAR: A beautifully
packaged exciting looking program, TAAW is a
ancient wargame generator and player with 11
built-in war campaigns from the pages of history.
Each campaign is fought by barbarians, archers,
and swordsmen. A game generator allows you
to create your own campaigns (designing both
terrain and army composition). In our initial peek
we only noticed one shortcoming: it is a one
player game. We would like to have seen a two
player option. IBM garners will want to own this
one. Review coming. IBM PC/XT/jr. $44.95.

KARATEKA: An action/strategy game that is
"designed to make you feel like the hero in your
own action-packed movie". The storyline concerns a young karate master who must fight an
evil warlord to rescue his bride-to-be. To defeat
the warlord he has to kill a succession of warriors, using his karate skills. Apple and C-64.
$34.95.

that your absent-minded brother/professor accompanies you. He tends to wander off. As you
negotiate the perils before you, you must keep
him close and out of trouble. Whistling to him
tends to get him to follow you, but not always.
Atari, C-64. $29.95.

Circle 16 on Reader Service Card

Circle 13 on Reader Service Card
THE SERPENT'S STAR: Broderbund is now
marketing Ultrasoft's The Serpent's Star. TSS is
a sequel to The Mask of the Sun (also available
from Broderbund). According to Broderbund
"People who like MASK will really enjoy The Serpent's Star...It's a continuation of the same kind
of exotic storyline and challenging mind puzzles
that really make you think". Apple, Atari, C-64.
$39.95.

Circle 14 on Reader Service Card
WELCOME ABOARD: "A Muppet Cruise to
Computer Literacy" is the subtitle of this computer literacy program for Apple IIe and IIc computers. On the bridge Captain Kermit helps you
program the ship's course. Elsewhere other Muppet characters involve you in tasks that teach
computer-aided design, word processing and electronic mail, as well as database management. Apple now. C-64 in Spring. $39.95.

Circle 15 on Reader Service Card
WHISTLER'S BROTHER: Arcade - strategy
game with a twist. You are in control (more or
less) of two characters. As the whistler, you'll
negotiate numerous hazards in a search for your
brother's misplaced tools and research
documents. What makes this game different is

Computer Adversary Publishing
225 Ridge Court
Marion, IA 52302
VIDEO STOCK MARKET: A stock market game
with a real time format. As ticker tapes of six
companies scroll past, players take action when
they wish (a more realistic concept than the traditional turn-by-turn mode in most stock market
games). This is apparently the first release of a
small one man company in Iowa. The
documentaisprygod,buhaltfcrnyies
in it. Well, the company IS from Iowa after all.
Seriously, this looks to be a nice first effort. Check
it out. Apple. $29.95.

Circle 17 on Reader Service Card
Creative Computing Press
One Park Ave.
New York, NY 10016
SORCERERS AND SOLDIERS: Here is an excellent looking book for the computer wargamer.
The author, Brian Murphy, has provided us with
a timely book covering the computer wargame
and adventure game fields. A well of strategy and
tactical advise is to be found in S&S. A sampling
of the chapter titles include: Wargames Through
the Computer Era; Using Terrain; Generalship;
Small-Unit Tactics; Naval Wargaming; War in

the Air; Fantasy/Roleplaying games; Elementary
Adventuring. $9.95 in paperback.

Circle 18 on Reader Service Card
dilithium Press
P.O. Box 606
Beaverton, OR 97075 - 0606
GOLDEN FLUTES & GREAT ESCAPES: A
combination book/disk that teaches you how to
write traditional verb-noun (i.e. go west) adventure games. The book includes "basic design
rules; special programming tricks in basic; and
the process of how to create your own adventure
programs." Apple and C - 64. Book and software,
$29.95.

Circle 19 on Reader Service Card
Five Star Software
P.O. Box 631
Elk Grove Village, IL 60007
TIMESHIP: Most boardgamers recognize Yaquinto Publications as the publisher of some nice
boardgames in the last few years. Yaquinto has
finally made it into computer games. Timeship
is a Yaquinto copyright that is licensed by Five
Star Software.
Designed as the first in a series, TIMESHIP is
a hi-res role-playing game of time travel.
Atracivelypkgd,hmincluesa2pg
rulebook, colorful Time Travellers Guild
Membership Card, Scenario card, and two sided
disk. The master disk side contains the various
environments in time. This first release also contains a scenario called "Murder at the End of
Time" on the other side of the disk. Other Time
Capsule adventures (using the master disk) are
planned. The game system is detailed. For example there are 35 different weapons available
(covering the entire history of man). Five Star
plans a fall release for their second scenario,
"Assassinate the Fuhrer". Review coming. Apple. $44.95.

Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94403
ADVENTURE CONSTRUCTION SET: A hi-res
adventure game generator that will appeal to the
game designer inside all of us. Eight adventures
are included with the construction set including
"Rivers of Light" by ACS author, Stuart Smith.
You can construct up to 240 different "rooms"
or "locations" in a variety of genres such as fantasy, science fiction, or a detective mystery. The
game includes information about an Adventure
Game Writing Contest in which $1,000.00 will
be given away to the designer of the best Fantasy,
Spy/Mystery, and Science Fiction games using
ACS. C-64.

Circle 22 on Reader Service Card
Quest Learning Systems Inc.
1103 Homer St.
St. Paul MN 55116
LA TRIVIATA: A computerized trivia and
strategy game for the Apple II family of computers. LT features questions of varying difficulty
levels and a point-based game board that requires
players to use both trivia knowledge and strategy
skills to win. $34.95. A survey of trivia games is
in the works for a future issue of CGW.

Circle 23 on Reader Service Card
Sir-tech Software
6 Main St.
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
RESCUE RAIDERS: An arcade/strategy game.
The player controls a "command helicopter" that
is used for air-to-air attacks against enemy
helicopters and air-to-ground attacks used in support of his own ground forces. The player must

create ground forces (tanks, soldiers, engineers,
etc.) that fight their way across the battlefield.
Review coming. Apple.

Circle 24 on Reader Service Card
Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd.
Mountain View, CA 94043-9986
FIELD OF FIRE:As in the movie Big Red One
and the book Company Commander, this game
follows the fortunes of a particular Infantry Company throughout WWII. In Company Commander it was companies I and G of the 23rd Infantry. In the movie and this game it is Easy Company of the 1st Infantry Division.
Designed by Roger Damon (Operation Whirlwind), FOF is a detailed simulation of small unit
tactics in WWII. Field of Fire is similar to
Damon's first wargame in that it is a one player
game. However FOF is much more detailed than
the former game. Atari, C-64. $39.95.

Circle 25 on Reader Service Card
GEMSTONE WARRIOR: A hi-res adventure/
arcade game in which you must find and return
the five shattered pieces of The Gemstone. Apple, C-64.

Circle 26 on Reader Service Card
Strategic Studies Group
336 Pitt St.
Sydney, Australia
CARRIERS AT WAR: Sell your IBM stock; sell
your car; sell whatever it takes—but find the
money to buy this game. We have rarely been as
impressed with our initial look at a wargame. A
review is coming, but we can tell you now... this
is an excellent game.
CAW covers fleet carrier operations in the

Pacific. In addition to six scenarios (Pearl Harbor, Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz, and the battle of Philippine Sea) you can
design your own. In addition to the 16 page
Player's Manual, there is a 24 page 8.5" by 11"
small print Design Manual. Here is just a sampling of what is in the Design Manual: Squadron
Creation, Base Creation, Ship and Plane Class
Creation, Carrier Creation, Map and Weather
Creation, etc. Apple II family (64K) and C-64.
$50.00.

Circle 27 on Reader Service Card
Synapse Software and
Broderbund Software
MINDWHEEL: The first in an exciting looking
new series of Interactive fiction games from
Synapse/Broderbund. Finally there is interactive
fiction that is in the same league as Infocom.
Written by professional writer and poet, Robert
Pinsky, Mindwheel is a journey into the minds
of four deceased people of extraordinary power:
Bobby Clemon (assassinated rock star and voice
of a generation); Generalissimo (ingenious dictator and war criminal); The Poet (composer of
the glorious epics that are society's supreme
literary achievement); and Dr. Eva Fein (the
female Einstein of the Late Technological Age).
The full sentence parser and the dynamic flow
of the game make for interactive fiction that is
truly interactive. Infocom is no longer alone.
Game is accompanied by a hardback book that
serves as the introductory chapters of the novel.
Apple, Atari, C-64, IBM and compatibles. $39.95
to $44.95.

Circle 28 on Reader Service Card
Zinta Micro-Systems
P.O. Box 946
El Toro, CA 92630-0946
CAVEMAN: Here is a new theme for and adventure game. Caveman is a two-disk adventure in
which the player assumes the role of a Neanderthal man of 40,000 years ago. The graphics are
striking, having been done by computer art professionals. Some animation as well. This the the
first title from a new company. C-64. $39.95.

Circle 29 on Reader Service Card

AIGIS CIRCLE
Aigis Circle Inc. has been a recent
advertiser in Computer Gaming
World. It has come to our attention
that several of our readers ordered
games from Aigis Circle and have not
received their games. In an effort to
help resolve any problems, CGW contacted the company.
We have been informed that the
company has had several production
problems that have delayed the
release of their games. ACI has informed us that they are returning
orders and uncashed checks to their
customers. We are told that, as an act
of good will, they will provide free
copies of the game to those who have
patiently waited for the product. Empire of Vennolandua should be out
about the tithe you read this.
ACI fully intends to be producing
games in the near future we are told.
We certainly hope so. In the meantime advertising space is being
reserved for the time when product
is actually available.

THE PAST

THE FUTURE

With this issue CGW begins it's fifth year of publication. When CGW started in November of 1981 there were
something like 70 computer magazines available to the
public. As of the beginning of 1984 there were over 700
computer magazine titles! This ten fold increase in three
years was typical of the computer industry. And, also
typical to the industry, 1984 was the year of shakeout for
computer magazines.

We are excited about the future. You readers continue
to tell us that we are doing a good job. We think that CGW
is and has always been the best computer game magazine
around and we are committed to keeping it that way. Our
new Strategically Speaking column has been well received
and I believe will prove to be second only to R.I.D. and
possibly Taking a Peek in reader popularity.
This issue we add a new staff member: Roe Adams. Roe
was an editor for Softtalk magazine, holds 32 "first
solved" titles for adventure games, will be on the college
lecture circuit (speaking on the history of adventure
games), and is a heck of a nice and knowledgeable fellow.
We are pleased that he is joining us as our Adventure
Games Editor. Look for exciting things in the future from
Roe.

The problem began in the summer of 1983, known in
the industry as Black Summer. With the explosion in computer magazine titles, newsstands and bookstores had to
make room for them. Obviously they could not carry all
or even most of the titles available. They had to pick and
choose. This alone spelled doom for some titles. However,
even if your title was included on a retailers rack you were
not safe. In some ways you were worse off.
Most retailers were not knowledgeable about the titles
that they were receiving. When a new issue of a magazine
arrived, they would often, to make space available, pull
another magazine that may have only been on the stands
two or three weeks. The bottom line was that the unsold
magazines were returned for credit. The distributor in
turn destroyed the magazines sending an affidavit to the
magazine that so-and-so number of issues had been
destroyed and that a credit should be issued. In summer
of 1983 the return rates sky-rocketed on computer
magazines. Magazines that were accustomed to only 40%
newsstand returns were experiencing 60%-70% and
even higher returns. This was disastrous in an industry
where profit margins are slim to begin with.
However, magazine returns were only part of the picture. With so many magazines it was becoming difficult
to sell advertising. In 1983 the manufacturer had many
avenues to get the word out about his product. The advertising dollars could only be spread so thin. On top of this,
the general shakeout in the microcomputer industry in
1984 dealt another blow. Some companies stopped advertising. Others advertised and did not pay. The final result
of all this is was the death of a number of magazines.
I am pleased to report that CGW was not one of them.
We saw the storm coming on the horizon. At a time when
many magazine companies were putting on more sail to
gain that slight advantage over a competitor, we continued to steer a conservative course, swinging wide of
the shoals and remaining in deep water. By the time the
storm of '83-84 hit we were well to sea, and although we
experienced the buffeting along with others, we were not
caught in the intense expansion race in the shallows. We
were in a position to trim the sails and weather the storm.
Some magazines were not.

You may also have noticed that we have begun to do
game replays. This issue contains the first part of a War
In Russia replay. We plan to have a replay article in each
issue.
Our contests continue to grow in popularity. The report
on our 2nd Annual Cosmic Balance Tournament is in this
issue. We are having to delay the report on the Lode Runner contest. There were many very challenging entries
that, frankly, we cannot adequately play and judge before
press time. Look for the results in the April issue. This
issue also announces our much anticipated 4th Annual
Robotwar tournament. It will prove to be exciting,
although I doubt if any tournament can reproduce the incredible "dead heat" finish we had in the 3rd Annual
Robotwar Tournament (see Issue 4.2). We are open to suggestions for contests based on other games. Electronic
Arts' new Adventure Game Construction Set would be an
ideal choice except for the fact that they are running their
own contest through 1985.
YOU READ IT HERE FIRST!
Here is a fictional interview that I recently re-read:
WALTER:"So at 10:42 PM here on election night,
Nov. 5, 1984, Ronald Reagan has won his second term
of office in the most remarkable landslide since Nixon beat McGovern in 1972. From our computer projections, we anticipate that Ronald Reagan will carry
every state except Minnesota and the District of Columbia. He will thus gather 525 electoral votes to 13
for Walter Mondale. The popular vote is projected
to be 55% for Reagan, 44% for Mondale, and 1% for
Libertarian candidate Ed Clark. Dan, we've seen the
landslide developing all evening, beginning with the
stunning victory of Reagan in Massachusetts, what
do you think this election tells us?"
Dan:"Well, Walter, this election with very few exceptions has given us little to be surprised about. The

WAR IN RUSSIA: Case Blue Replay

This is the first of a two part replay of the Case Blue
Scenario in SSI's WAR IN RUSSIA. Jay Selover is
a contributing editor to CGW and also reviews board
wargames in such magazines as Fire and Movement.
Kirk Robinson is the assistant editor of CGW and a
veteran of numerous wargame campaigns.

THE RUSSIAN — KIRK ROBINSON
The night is dark and the prospects bleak as I sit before our office's Apple II in order to reenact the valiant defense of Mother
Russia against the fascist Axis forces threatening her during the Great
Patriotic War. Poised to make sweeping advances into critical areas,
the Germans must be stopped or I may face internal exile to Burbank.
In approaching this task, I face one great problem which my
historic counterpart did not—the absence of Adolf Hitler. The Soviet
position must also be examined closely and reorganized so as to
redress some rather poor initial placements in this scenario. To aid
me in this quest, I have discovered a trick which is crucial for the
flexibility and depth needed by the beleaguered Soviets. This is the
fact that units which have developed well entrenched positions
(which would normally be lost were the units moved) can literally
swap identities with new token units. The token units can continue
to improve the position while the major unit it replaces is freed for
use in much needed reserves or in the battle front. Conversely,
should the front ever move the these positions, major units may once
again take these positions, by this time at maximum entrenchment.
Beyond these considerations, the Soviets must recognize one fact
at the beginning of this scenario. This is that the Germans are very
strong. Their actions must therefore be to use strategies which try
to eliminate this German power as quickly as possible and to keep
the Germans unsure of the situation by feints or even major attacks
designed to draw his attention away from those areas critical to long
term defense. One benefit of this is that if the German chooses to
ignore these, a rather nasty situation can develop which he can find
himself ill prepared to counter.
It is in this first part, causing the Germans to wear themselves
out, that the Soviets must gamble. By selecting those hexes most
likely to be attacked and giving them maximum support, you do so
at the expense of others. This policy will test your soothsayers and
astrologers to the limit as you attempt to provide the Wermacht with
a stone wall against which to slam their fist. A more difficult version of this is to provide selected weakened areas which the Germans may penetrate directly into prepared "killing zones." Success in these will quickly wear down the German juggernaut, while
failure will lead to easing the task of the Germans that much more.

THE GERMAN — JAY SELOVER
Well, here we are, about to start the Case Blue scenario from War
In Russia. I am going to play the Germans against a very capable
Russian opponent. The scenario starts in June of 1942, just as the
Germans opened the offensive which carried them deep into the
Caucasus, to the gates of Stalingrad, and to ultimate grief as the tide
turned in December.
I can not lay out here the exact strategy which I planned to follow,
since we have not finished the game as I write this, and my opponent is the Assistant Editor of Computer Gaming World. I will say
that I had played two practice games against the computer, and had
decided not to blindly follow the historical course of the initial German attack. There are two reasons not to break through near Kharkov
and clear the Ukraine, then pour armored units down into the
Caucasus. First, most of the units will lose effectiveness as they move
beyond the range of my supply system. Second, the historical attack did not work for the Germans anyway.
There are a few guidelines which I plan to follow. In any combat
situation, the idea is to maximize the effectiveness of your units
whether they are attacking or defending. That means the Russians
will be in woods, swamps, and behind rivers. It also means that I
will avoid attacking those positions whenever possible. Another key
element of effective utilization of my forces will involve keeping
my units in supply, even if that means slowing the course of the
overall advance. Nothing will wear down a unit faster that letting
it get out of supply and then trying to do anything other than just
putting it back into supply.
RUSSIAN TURN ONE
This turn is occupied with reorganizing the chaotic distribution
of the Soviet units. There are three probable and two less probable
hexes for major German attack which must be prepared. To these
are sent reinforcements in the form of raw recruits and fully tested
units from the reserves.
In the combat phase it becomes obvious that the Germans agree
as to which hexes are best attacked. All three of the prepared hexes
have met major assaults. The combination of reinforcements and
the level of entrenchment has given very low odds on these attacks.
The entire line is at least probed by the Germans and fortunately,
none of my shifting has overly weakened these areas. This does,

certain units; a fact which I must correct or use to my benefit.
In the south, the Germans make a breakthrough near Rostov. While
of some danger, this area has the greatest ability to absorb Germans
and is therefore less vulnerable. If only the Germans could be
counted on to proceed historically, this could prove interesting.

GERMAN TURN TWO

though, provide me with a better grasp of the truly massive scale
of the German forces.

It becomes very apparent that this is a live opponent instead of
the computer! Kirk takes a very long time with his move, and explains to our referee that the Russians are set up all wrong by the
computer, and that he has had to restructure the entire front! This
means that my excellent intelligence reports on the Soviet force locations are not worth much anymore.
In the north, the Russians retire from a bulge before I can attack,
so I occupy the three vacated hexes. Kirk is consolidating his line
and moving to better defensive terrain, but he has sacrificed his entrenchment there. Hopefully, I will make some progress next turn.
In the center, my attack out of Kursk runs into a buzz saw. Well,
maybe that is too strong, but there is a determined defensive stance
before Voronezh. The Russians probably give this town as much
importance as I do. In the south, an attack northwest of Rostov
breaks cleanly through the Russians. A tank corps advances two
hexes and is behind their lines. Unfortunately, none of my infantry
units advanced, so there is a one hex gap in the Russian line which
is not occupied by either side, and my Panzers will be out of supply
next turn!
Kirk obviously sees the center and north as more important than
the south. In fact, he seems to be trying to funnel my strength towards
Rostov to follow up my initial success. I will have no part of that
though. I have my sights set elsewhere.

GERMAN TURN ONE

RUSSIAN TURN THREE

Things go pretty much as planned this turn, in that it looks like
nothing happens for me. The Russians initial set-up (which the computer executes and which matches well the historical dispositions)
includes entrenchments along the entire front. Regardless of how
weak the unit or how strong the attack, the entrenchment levels along
the front allows the Russians to avoid retreats in all attacks. What
I do accomplish (I hope) is a reduction in the entrenchment levels
to something that I can break through next turn.
I execute a broad attack along the front from in front of Moscow
to the Black Sea. I encounter strong resistance between Stalino and
Kharkov (thanks to a defensive line behind a river). There is also
a lot of Russian strength before Moscow (this is no surprise). It looks
like Kirk has sent most of his initial reinforcements to the center
of his line. The initial German set-up involves an exposed salient
near Rzhev, and I withdraw from it. I also make a probing attack
further north with the 20th Panzer Division and the 36th Motorized Division.
Two unsettling statements are made in passing by my worthy opponent during the course of Turn One. First, he mentions that there
are three obvious points for the Germans to attack (I wonder if he
sees the same three that I do). Later, he comments that the Germans
always try to take Moscow, which makes me rethink my
geographical objectives.Ed. Note: How does that saying go? "Loose
lips sink ships"?

It is obvious now that an attempt on Hitler's life has been successful. The German's armor unit which broke through last turn
has withdrawn back into supply before it could be attacked. I now
doubt that they will be drawn into that obvious error. Any trap will

RUSSIAN TURN TWO
While Stalin is sleeping, I order the units in the difficult to supply area north of Smolensk to withdraw into superior positions to
their northeast which are also within my supply radius. In the north,
reinforced units prepare to oust the Axis unit near Petrozavod which
threatens my Murmansk to Archangel rail line. Out of supply, this
unit should not be too great an obstacle.
In the north/central region, I begin to expand my rail net. Continuing supply to this region is crucial if the area is to be held. I move
several units into the vacated hex south of Rzhev in preparation
for future pressure on the adjacent German positions. The continuing German assaults along this front have seriously weakened

however, is far from the worst piece of news. Several units intended
to take part in a two prong attack, cutting off the northern German
advance, were attacked themselves and forced to surrender before
they could do the same to their German counterparts. The only thing
which saved the situation, was that part of the counter attack did
succeed in forcing the surrender of a comparable German unit.
This turn has seen the beginning of a concerted effort to cause
trouble for the Germans near Leningrad. Out of supply, these positions could potentially expose the northern flank of the German's
drive on Rzhev. This is one area in which I can not fail to succeed.
If the Germans make no response, then the area falls. If they do respond, then needed units will be diverted into useless hexes.
In the central/southern areas, another penetration has been made.
No further change is expected in this area as for as the makeup of
the units except to replace the losses from German attack. The important actions should not occur until turns six or seven. Until then,
my actions will be dictated by what my opponent proceeds to do.
The area between Rostov and Voronezh may be in doubt, but they
will not just fall into the Germans hands as easily as he might like.

have to be baited with much more interesting bait to succeed.
In the north, the Axis unit withdraws into the marshes before my
ordered attack can catch it. I also execute an attack against the German line south of Rzhev. With luck, reserves much needed elsewhere
may be committed in response.
The Germans strike the weakest of my newly withdrawn units
northwest of Rzhev, causing a breakthrough in an area which is
useless to him unless he can expand the southern base. This,
however, must not be allowed. The opportunity presented by this
penetration is too great to let escape as if these units can be attacked soon, they may be eliminated. If not, they will be able to reinforce and entrench enough to prevent any successful action on my
part.
GERMAN TURN THREE
In the south, my exposed and out-of-supply armor unit is quickly
surrounded by five Russian units, so I pull it back one hex into supply
rather than go headlong into an unknown force. Just to the south,
an infantry attack pushes the Russians back into Rostov and advances adjacent to the city. In the center, I had planned to attack
from near Bryansk, but call it off to reinforce the troops there for
one week before starting forward. Two attacks take place; east out
of Kursk I get good odds but do not dent the line. Attacking northeast out of Kharkov, we get a breakthrough and and armor unit
moves two hexes toward Voronezh. But again, no infantry units
advance to maintain contact. I have the same lousy situation that
I had with last turn's breakthrough to the south.
In the north, the battle of Rzhev swings into high gear. An attack
from northeast of Smolensk is successful and I penetrate two hexes
through the woods northwest of Rzhev. A Soviet attack south of
Rzhev fails, but weakens my units. Kirk certainly seems to be strong
around Moscow! I am surprised, though, that he has tried any attacks at all this early in the game. Maybe Kirk will begin to experience
some of the frustration which I have found when an attack at good
odds does nothing to dislodge the defenders.
RUSSIAN TURN FOUR
This turn is one many events—mostly bad. A sacrificial unit
ordered to move behind a German advance ran headlong into the
withdrawing spearhead, turning it into a useless bit of debris. This,

The next installment should provide a better idea as to the style
of my opponent and the probable outcome of the scenario. Following the current course, the Germans will have either suffered some
rather unexpected reversals, or the Russians will have expended
much men and materiel in pointless actions. Neither of these outcomes may occur, however, if my opponent is as cautious as I am
beginning to believe. If he is, we may be looking at a very long game
indeed.

GERMAN TURN FOUR
In the north, I attack the hex southwest of Rzhev from four directions. We do not get very good odds, but force a retreat which triggers a Russian surrender as the units are cut off from a valid path
of retreat. One other attack south of Rzhev fails to take any ground.
In a big surprise, the Russians launch a major counterattack! They
attack the hex near Lake Lagoda which keeps Leningrad isolated.
They fail to break through, but weaken my unsupplied unit there.
An attack south out of a nearby swamp fails badly as my earlier successful attack had eliminated units which Kirk had ordered to participate in this attack of his. Finally, bad news arrives as my armored
spearhead northwest of Rzhev is lost for failure to retreat in the face
of a big Russian attack. There were only two divisions in the unit
(20th Panzer and 36th Motorized), but this is our first serious loss
and they will be sorely missed.
In the center, we attack out of Bryansk at about 2.5-1 odds but
do not take any ground. A second turn of attacking out of Kursk
succeeds, and we advance two hexes with the infantry following
this time. This spearhead is now adjacent to Voronezh on the northwest of the city. Hopefully I will be able to develop this situation.
A little bit further south, the isolated spearhead which broke through
last turn is surrounded by Russians and pulls back before the Russian forces attack. One Russian unit had been ordered by Kirk to
slip in behind my armor to cut off any retreat when he attacked.
Unfortunately for it, I had just pulled back into that hex, and they
found themselves attacking my armor at 1-9 odds. I am surprised
that there is still a Russian unit there!
In the south, Rostov will be attacked, but not this turn (maybe not
for several turns). This turn, we attack the hex just to the north of
the city and capture it. We now have two hexes adjacent to the city
from which we can attack.
To Be Continued. . . As I mentioned before, my opponent will
see this before we have finished the game. Thus, I am not at liberty
to say exactly how I have faired over four turns compared to what
I expected. I promise, though, that all will be revealed in our next
installment. Stay tuned.

COME CAST A
SPELL WITH ME
HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE
TO THE GALAXY

abysmal. There really is no adequate
substitution for original thinking, clear concepts, and masterful writing. Putting the
name Maserati on a K-car fools only the
advertising people.
The two authors who really delved deep
into this new and somewhat mysterious
realm of computer adventure games have
succeeded with excellent results: Michael
Crichton's AMAZON, published by
Tellurium (a.k.a. Trillium, a.k.a. Spinnaker
Software), and Douglas Adams' HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY, published by Infocom (a.k.a. Grues Unlimited
Industrious).
Crichton is famous for writing THE ANDROMEDA STRAIN, and THE TERMINAL MAN. The entire hi-res adventure game
construct is Crichton's from start to finish.
He worked closely with the programmer
and the graphics illustrator to ensure that
none of the story nuances were sacrificed.
The cohesive manner in which the game's
storyline unfolds reflects Crichton's skill as
a writer.
AMAZON is also notable for its use, if
sparingly, of beautiful scrolling animation.
The fantastic opening, which scans a

Leads an Invasion of the Pros

Roe Adams

We welcome our new Adventure Game Editor,
Roe Adams, to the pages of CGW. "Come
Cast a Spell With Me" is just one of the contributions Roe will be bringing to our readers.
In 1984 companies and machines fell by
the wayside with incredible regularity.
Some to thunderous applause, others with
silent tears. In retrospect, however, one of
the most significant trends to enter the
microcomputer field in 1984 was the debut
of top fiction writers into adventure game
designing. In the past, even the best adventure games have been written by ordinary
people (well, not counting Michael Berlyn,
who is, after all, hardly ordinary).
The craft of adventure game designing apparently has matured sufficiently to entice
some of the finest science fiction and fantasy writers to take a fling with a computer.
Alas, for most of these authors, who shall
mercifully remain anonymous, the results
can only be described as flops. In some
cases, the big-name author contributed only
their illustrious name or perhaps a cursory
wave of their hand over the scenario design
in benediction. Other authors were totally
mesmerized by computer jargon and surrendered their talent to the whims of third
rate programmers. The resultant quality of
these type of efforts has been mediocre to

massacred jungle campsite, completely
rivets the player. It is so good, that when the
game proceeds to the regular static screens,
it is quite a wrench and a lingering feeling
of loss. Similar rare animation treats await
the player at strategic spots in the scenario.
The game also represents a new break
through in the genre: A book will be published based upon the scenario, instead of
the other way around. AMAZON proves
what Crichton has been quoted as saying,
"This is the future of fiction, and it is fun."
Douglas Adams, who emphatically
denies being solely responsible for all of
British humor, has approached his undertaking in an entirely different manner. He
sought out the industry's premier adventure
game house, Infocom, and suggested a collaboration to bring forth the computerized
version of his international bestseller,
HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY. This book has been a gigantic hit in
book format, television and radio shows,
and a not-so-soon to-be-released motion
picture.
Infocom's illustrious grandmasters of
game design, Marc Blank and Dave Lebling,
were however busy with other pursuits.

Blank was last seen doing death defying
loop the loops in the Grand Canyon, and
Lebling was hanging around the Hart Mansion looking SUSPECT. So, Infocom's
hottest second generation game designer,
Steve Meretzky (Planetfall and Sorcerer) got
the awesome privilege of working with the
hyperfamous Douglas Adams.
Actually, Meretzky was partly chosen
because he is so unflappable and stoic and
not prone to awe or hyperness. He can handle highly volatile humor for long periods
of time without self-destructing. Who else
within Infocom's vast corporate (or is it now
Empire-wide) headquarters could have
countered Douglas Adams' infamous
multicolored bright ties so effectively and
casually? Meretzky's use of differently patterned 1950's Ugly American Hawaiian
Dress Shirts was rumored to be responsible
for Adams inventing the peril-sensitive
sunglasses (a sample is enclosed with the
game). Watching them work together is inspiring, as they thrust and parry
understatements. Brilliant non sequiturs
follow jabs of incongruities. In half an hour
Meretzky and Adams have generated an entire year's worth of outlines for Gallagher.
The game unfolds with all the majestic
splendor of Douglas Adams' irreverent
humor, lovingly expounded in great detail.
In other words, at first, it is VERY slow going for the veteran adventure game player.
That unfortunate aspect is balanced by the
fact that for any novice wouldbe Douglas
Adams fan who has miraculously missed
touching any of the four books, seeing the
BBC television series, hearing the radio
show, or tasting the unreleased movie, the
beginning of the scenario is highly odorous.
A fast perusal of the first hundred or so
pages of the HITCHHIKER book will be
decidedly helpful in grasping the full
significance of the mud, the pub, and the
babel fish.
Rumors are circulating that several important people within the industry cannot
(snicker, snicker!!!) even get out of HITCHHIKER'S first room! Seems to be a game
whose players rise to their own level of incompetency. Now that is quite a break
through in design!
The segment that has the babel fish puzzle also marks a significant shift in game
play. Over a breakfast of poached Bugblatter
on toast, Douglas Adams confided that the
scenario design was pear shaped: "Just as
the player gets comfortable in the narrow
neck, the bottom drops out!" From there on,
the adventurer is in for a non-stop roller
coaster of laughs and delicious puzzles.
The range of puzzles is from novice to expert with mast of them falling into the
standard-advanced category. Unlike other
authors, Douglas got far into the core of the
game design and worked on the puzzle constructs. So great was the depth of collaboration between Adams and Meretzky, that it
is impossible even for them to decide who
Continued on page 38

An Agent Looks at
the Software Industry

by Bob Jacobs

We are entering a new era in recreational
computing. The games now being offered
by a cross section of publishers offer outstanding depth, challenge and playability.
The games are so good, in fact, that if they
don't sell, this industry will be in deep trouble. Herein lies the paradox. On the one
hand games have never been better. On the
other hand the publishers are very shaky.

Apple II and IBM PC.

Let Synapse and Imagic, two companies
primarily known for their shoot 'em ups,
serve as illustrations. Synapse has just
released Mindwheel, the first of series of five
all text adventures. Synapse VP Brian Lee
says, "Our parser is 2 1/2 times larger than
Infocom's and allows complete context sensitive questioning of all characters. Plus, the
game is played in real time and characters
move independently of the gamer."

I've seen these games and think they're
terrific, but the question remains... will they
sell? Retail distribution of computer games
is chaotic. Publishers who can guarantee
developers that their products will be seen
at retail are in short supply.

Brian went on to add that Mindwheel is
not copy protected in the conventional
sense. "But the game will not be winnable
without the documentation." Each entry in
the new series contains a sixty page introduction to the story that was penned by a
professional writer. In addition, Synapse
has developed "browseable" packaging that
allows a prospective buyer to get into the
story before purchase. Mindwheel is currently available on the Apple, IBM, and
C-64.

Imagic's corporate hopes are riding on a
new series of simulations and adventures.
They've joined forces with paperback giant
Bantam Books in a joint venture called Living Literature. Sherlock Holmes stars in
Another Bow, the first entry in the series.
This mystery-adventure places you in the
role of the famous sleuth aboard a luxurious
ocean liner. The passenger list reads like a
who's who of the early 20th century and includes Edison, Louis Armstrong, Henry
Ford, etc. The game features high-res,
digitized graphics and is available on the

Rob Fulop, best known as the creator of

Demon Attack, thinks that large corporaImagic has also released a legal simulation called Crime and Punishment which
places the player in the role of presiding
judge in a criminal trial. They are currently working on Macbeth. You guessed it, an
interactive version of the Bard's masterpiece of murder, greed and intrigue.

tions might be willing to fund software
development for use as promotions. He uses
McDonald's as an example. "Wouldn't they
be interested in using Ronald McDonald to
teach kids how to do math on a C64 disk?"
Rob speculated. "They could give it away
or charge a buck for it." He said that he was
currently negotiating with a major firm on
a similar proposal.

Some developers have found it difficult
to adjust to the new economic realities.
They're now discovering that the days of
making a quick killing on the publisher's advance are over. Development money is still
available, of course, but in order to make any
real money the programming team better
hope that their brainchild sells.

TODAY'S HELPFUL HINT: Hang on to
those derivative rights. They may come in
handy in your old age.

Unfortunately, there is a tremendous
bottleneck at the store level, particularly in
C64 software. Today's successful publishers
(Epyx comes to mind) jumped on the Com
modore bandwagon early and cultivated the
buyers at K-Mart, Toys 'R Us and other mass
merchandisers.
Other, less prescient, publishers may pay
the ultimate penalty for their lack of
foresight. . . bankruptcy. Still others who
had adopted a low profile are now returning to the fray. Paul Zuzelo of Creative Software has spent the last year bailing out of
the VIC20 and TI marketplace and has
assembled a line of hot, new C64 titles.
Amidst all this confusion and chaos some
developers are looking around for alternate
ways of distributing software, and bypassing the publisher entirely.

FREE ADVICE TO DEVELOPERS
DEPT.: Don't do business with conservative
publishers. This business is show business.
You cannot coast. Ever. There is a strong
tendency among publishers who have "
arrived" to bring in the beancounters. That
is a sure recipe for failure in this industry.
Be especially wary of publishers who have
adopted a "wait and see" attitude towards
the Macintosh and Amiga. There's no time
to wait for trends. You've got to create
trends and hope you're right.

Bob Jacob represents software developers
including Ultra Soft, Synergistic, Interactive Arts, etc. His address is:
1642 Eveningside Drive, Suite 110
Thousand Oaks, CA 91362
(805) 492-3597
Compuserve: 75226.2103

BREAKTHROUGH IN
THE ARDENNES:
Designer's Notes

by Chuck Kroegel
Chuck Kroegel is SSI's R&D Manager. He
designed Breakthrough in the Ardennes and
Knights of the Desert. He also developed Battle of Shiloh, Tigers in the Snow, Battle for
Normandy, and Field of Fire.

There are at least eight boardgames and
two computer wargames that simulate the
Battle of the Bulge. Why so many? The
answer lies in the imagination of wargamers
who relive those days in December of 1944
when a large number of panzers, secretly
poised opposite green and tired American
units, struck out, reaching for the Meuse
River and beyond. From the penetrating advances of Peiper to the valiant stand at
Bastogne, the Battle of the Bulge is a story
of boldness and courage on both sides.

When David Landrey and I decided to do
an advanced level game on the Bulge, we
set our goals to capture the essence of that
battle. We wanted the German player to experience the difficulty of managing armored
advances along channeling roadways and
over crucial bridge sites. We wanted him to
feel the crunch of dwindling fuel and unit
stamina as he expanded his bulge in front
of ominously building American resistance.
Our goal was to have the American player,
with only a handful of units to stem the
enemy onslaught, feel the sheer panic of seeing massive enemy forces pierce his line.
We wished to see him conduct carefully
planned delaying actions and scramble to
blow key bridges in front of the German advance. We wanted him to see the light of
new hope as the weather cleared, air support availed itself, and arriving units make
a counterattack possible. Our goals included
these and more in a computer game that
would be playable and challenging for one
or two players.

SCALE AND MAP
Our first design tasks were to choose the
scale and draw the map and order of battle. We decided on a two mile hex, as this
would set the regiment as the standard unit,
but would also accommodate a divisional
unit in one hex. A regimental scale, we felt,
would allow unit differentiation to be meaningful and provide the level of control we
desired to give to the players. Drawing up
the map and order of battle was accomplished by using two or three road maps and
several volumes written on the battle as
reference. Also helpful were the personal
observations of Joel Billings, the President
of SSI, who actually toured the battlefield
in 1984. Due to memory restrictions and the
graphics package we were to use, the size
of the map was limited to a 32 by 31 hex grid.
The scale made it necessary to trim off the
southern shoulder and the western tip of the
actual battlefield. This still left plenty of
room for maneuver where 99% of the battle took place.

supply system we instituted a hex ownership concept that graphically showed the
control of map hexes. We made use of the
supply system in giving victory points to
German units that exited the map board at
a road hex that at the end of the game was
still in combat and recovery of efficiency.
German fuel problems were also recreated.
We incorporated design features that gave
the players an array of options and decisions. Air strikes were included, allowing
players to execute ground support, air interdictions, and supply drops. We allowed
regiments to build-up into parent divisions,
giving such units combat bonuses at the cost
of road mobility. Artillery was handled
somewhat abstractly by inputting such support into units from the appropriate corps
pools. Road movement, being really the only
viable movement through the forested and
rough terrain of the Ardennes, was made
possible by a special travel mode that units
enter as regiments. Such a design created
natural traffic jams behind key bridges and
clogged limited road avenues.

GAME FUNCTIONS
Our next design considerations involved
setting up the major game functions around
which the whole game system would flow.
We decided against a simultaneous movement/combat plot system in favor of an alternating phase framework based on the expenditure of operation points. We felt that
the simultaneous plot system did not allow
for sufficient reaction time. Both Dave and
I shy away from a system whereby a player
plots moves for several units at a time, not
seeing any immediate results of his efforts.
A major game element was a comprehensive supply system based on the road network. We included special supply considerations for isolated divisional units,
reasoning that whole divisions isolated, as
exemplified by the 101st at Bastogne, stood
a better chance of survival than the more
dependent regimental units. As part of the

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
After having designed the game and
developed the two player option on the computer, we proceeded to incorporate the computer intelligence routines for the American
forces to provide a solitaire game. Artificial
intelligence is the true challenge of perfecting a good computer wargame. Dave and
I have found that each game requires an individually tailored artificial intelligence. In
this game, we used generalized routines that
search for specific conditions which in turn
trigger a reaction by the computer. We also
incorporated scripted moves and setting of
objective hexes. It took a lot of imaginative
thinking and code manipulation to construct a good computer opponent. I must
credit Dave Landrey for his dedicated efforts and ability to provide such an opponent in this game.

STRATEGY TIPS
1.First Turn: Since American movement
is severely limited on the first turn, the German should plan carefully to exploit this opportunity. He should pump maximum artillery support into units opposing
American regiments and also into the 560th
VG and 2nd PZ divisions. The two U.S.
regiments of the 106th division should be
surrounded and isolated by the 18th VG (but
not attack them until turn three when surrender is possible). The German should attack the U.S. CAV regiment in hex 22,30
with one regiment of the 18th VG and the
3rd FJ (supported by at least 20 artillery
points). The 26th VG should attack hex
16,25. The regiments of the 116th PZ should
be moved to the nearest road (14,25 and
14,26) and entered into travel mode. They
should strike across the bridge at hex 15,24
or 18,25. The 560th VG should attack
towards hex 13,23. The 2nd PZ should attack hex 10,22 and advance across the river
with the PZGR regiment. The remaining PZ
regiment should then enter travel mode,
preparing to cross the bridge when built the
next turn. The 62 VG should cross the river
and attack hex 7,22 (using the engineer in
7,24 to cut the cost of crossing the river). The
5th FJ and 352nd VG should remain in
regiments and attack towards Diekirch,
entering travel mode and sweeping the
southern flank.
2.Bastogne Gambit: If the bridge at Wiltz

is not blown on turn two Bastogne can
possibly be entered on the third turn by the
RECON unit of PZ LEHR by placing the unit
out in front and rolling across the bridges
at hexes 7,21 and 6,19.
3.Durbuy Approach: When playing
against the computer, attacking along the
Ourthe River on the road to Durbuy could
possibly result in a breakthrough across the
river at Durbuy, allowing an exit off the
north edge of the map. You will, however,
be hard pressed to keep a supply line open.
4.Sacking La Roche: Capturing La Roche
by the 21st of December is essential to expanding the bulge toward Rochefort and off
the west edge of the map. Take the bridge
site at hex 11,12 with a couple of PZGR
regiments and then attack up toward La
Roche. At the same time move PZGR
regiments from Houffalize to hex 15,10
(cross-country if necessary) and advance
across the river into La Roche after combat.
5.Historic Corridor and Southern Edge:
When using the historic option take advantage of the fact that American resistance will
be weak within the corridor. The players
should take note that the German can not
move into the zero hex column. This results
in giving the U.S. a guaranteed staging area
in the south and prevents the Germans from
entering Neufchateau, complicating deep
penetration of the south.
6.Tactical Hints: Keep an engineer in the
front of major advance to repair blown
bridges. Engineers should also be present

at river crossings and fortifying actions
since they cut the costs. Air interdiction is
a very effective way of slowing down the
German advances. Conduct ground assaults
against stacks, especially containing units
in travel mode (strafing hurts), since every
unit has a chance of being hit. Remember
that divisional units may not enter travel
mode. Attack selectively during the second
phase since attacking units lose all remaining operation points which could be used
to recover efficiency the next turn. Take
note that towns are valuable points of
resistance since units in towns are never
forced to retreat. Note also that fortification
lowers the chance of forced retreats. Combat resolution is resolved in the same order
as initiated. Use this to cut off retreat routes.
Avoid moving units with artillery support
since such movement reduces that support.
Use a quick moving unit to change ownership of hexes in front of an advancing main
column, reducing movement costs. When
using the two player option, take advantage
of the fact that engineers and TDs are at half
strength. Engineers can be destroyed in one
attack, even by a unit in travel mode.
Dave and I invite anyone interested in
knowing more about BREAKTHROUGH
IN THE ARDENNES to contact us at SSI.
Any experienced players of the ARDENNES system are welcomed to playtest its upcoming sister game, OPERATION
MARKET-GARDEN, to be released in
Spring of 1985.

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISKS

Diskette #1 contains over 20 ships that competed in the 1st Annual CGW Cosmic
Balance Ship Design Contest. Included are the tournament winner, Avenger, the
judge's ships, Blaze, Mongoose, and MKVP6, and many more!
Diskette #2 contains over 35 ships that competed in the 2nd Annual CGW Cosmic
Balance tournament. Included are tournament winner, Wisconsin, and the judge's
ships, Greenlaw's Fleet, T.A.B., Judge and many more!
These ships are ideal for the gamer who cannot find enough competition or
wants to study the ship designs of other gamers around the country. SSI'S The
Cosmic Balance game is required to use the shipyard diskettes.
PLEASE SPECIFY WHICH DISK (CB#1 or CB#2) AND WHICH MACHINE
APPLE, ATARI, C-64) WHEN ORDERING. $15.00 EACH OR $25.00 FOR BOTH.

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISKS
Diskette #1 contains the source code for the twelve entrants in CGW's Second Annual Robotwar Tournament. Diskette #2 contains the seventeen entrants in the Third Annual Robotwar Tournament. Muse Software's ROBOTWAR' required to use these diskettes. Please specify which diskette when
ordering. $15.00 each or $25.00 for both.
Send orders to COMPUTER GAMING WORLD, Disk Order Dept. P.O.Box 4566,
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566.

STRATEGICALLY
SPEAKING

without this pattern was unlikely. Keep this
in mind when planning your activities each
turn, or you will often find the game ending
quickly ending amid shattered units.
Cultivate patience and a fearful
counterpunch.
Stephen Newberg, Simulations Canada

GERMANY 1985
The following are tips for the US player
in the Advance to Contact scenario:
1. Despite what the rules say, engineer units
can reorganize. I suggest reorganizing your
headquarters, infantry, and engineer units
just as soon as they arrive (if possible) to increase their efficiency. This can pay
dividends later.
2. Attack in Normal mode. This often leaves
you with sufficient movement points to (if
necessary) attack again. Normal mode will
also leave you in a better position defensively. Attack mode, alternatively, is costly and
leaves you vulnerable to counter-attack.
3. The game is won by controlling the most
towns, villages, and airfields—not by
destroying enemy units. Decide beforehand
what objectives you need to take and hold
in order to win.
W.J. Vandenbrook, Chicago, IL

Strategically Speaking covers strategy
game tips, including tips on wargames,
sports games, economic and other "real
life" simulations, and classic style games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are
those of the authors. We try to avoid printing
tips that don't work, but we cannot playtest
all, or even most, of them. So, let the player
beware.
We encourage you to share your strategy
game tips with others. Tips can be mailed
to Strategically Speaking, c/o Computer
Gaming World, P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim,
CA 92803-4566. Try to keep tips under 250
words if possible.
SIEG IN AFRIKA
The war in the North African desert lasted
several years, but generated only half a
dozen or so major battles. This is easy to
forget when playing a game with monthly
turns, but doing so can hurt. I've noticed
that many players try to fight too soon and
too often. Units start in play (and arrive as
reinforcements) in a very weak condition.
The Rebuilding function represents bringing
these units up to full strength, acclimatizing
the troops, and training them as a unit.
Rebuild at every chance. Historically,
months at a time were devoted to shifting
unit locations, accumulating supplies,
engaging in minor skirmishes, and intelligence gathering to produce a week or
two of intense combat. Survival of units

WAR IN RUSSIA
WIR contains two programming
anomalies which may be taken advantage
of to achieve greater success in the solitaire
Barbarosa game. First is the easy seizure of
Murmansk, a vital objective for the Axis as
it eliminates wintertime Lend-Lease. The
two northern-most combat groups
strategically move to 7,2 and attack the city
from the south. Luftflotte 1 moves to 3,4 to
support with 200 air points. Two turns at
most are needed to secure Murmansk. At
levels three and four, the combat groups can
then move to help southern Finland. Even
if they can't move out of supply any more,
at levels one and two, it's good trade for a
warm water port. Luftflotte 1 then moves
to Helsinki to support the second sure thing.
.. Leningrad.
With a Finnish group in 7,12, two Axis
groups in 6,14 and the city out of supply,
Leningrad will fall in less than a month. Cutting the city off is not difficult with a strong
northern thrust. Once a breakthrough is
made, send two infantry divisions towards
Archangel to seal the supply line. After the
fall, all of the air points can be relocated to
the redeployed southern airfields.
Perhaps an updated version of the game
will take into account the difficulty of movement and combat in the northern latitudes.
Although the Leningrad assault was
historically possible, the campaign against
Murmansk was defeated by terrain as much
as anything else.
Charles Jehlen, Jr., Groves, TX

FIGHTER COMMAND:
Luftwaffe Player
It is a basic principle of warfare to avoid
giving decisive battle until the odds are in
your favor. In Fighter Command, the Luftwaffe player should wear the RAF down by
scheduling many fighter sweeps, by setting
up raids spaced out to last all day (day after
day), and by striking where and when the
RAF cannot defend. At the start, knock out
the four South Coast H-radars:Ventnor
(already out on Aldertag), Pevensey, Rye,
and Dunkirk, and then doing your best to
keep them out for the rest of the battle. When
all four are out, many raids which avoid being spotted by patrols, don't fly over the Lradars, and fly at minimum altitude will not
be spotted until they drop their
bombs...even on targets well inland. Given
little or no warning, Luftwaffe bombing Can
be much more effective, and RAF intercepts
will be fewer as well. With practice, one can
learn how to keep the South Coast radars
effectively neutralized with just the Ju-87's
and fighter EG's.
Harry D.Blaker, Mason, OH

COSMIC BALANCE
In designing ships for CB, the designer
becomes painfully aware of the limited
usefulness of many of the systems available.
The problem is that each is highly useful
against some targets or defending against
some threat; but relatively useless against
other targets or threats. An exception to this
rule are the Belts. Useful against the threats
of seekers, plasma torpedoes, and fighters,
they continue to play a significant role when
fighting an opponent who possesses none of
these offensive systems. Belts are the perfect
battery! Unlike shields which can return
half of the energy stored within them, belts
are able to store energy up to the number
of belts in the design, and will return some
or all of the energy when needed. During
a toe to toe battle, the ship which can call
upon a source of extra energy to power
shields on key turns and save excess energy
on disengaged turns will have a decided
advantage.
Stewart MacKames, Orange, CA

CARRIER FORCE
REPLAY — ERRATA
The Midway replay article in our last
issue contained a couple of omissions. Figure two on page 12 omitted
TF's 4,6, and 7 which were located
in hex 21,17. Also on page 12, New
Orleans and Vincennes joined TF 12
in hex 26,16 at 1300 hours, not 1800
hours.

games. "Mugwump:' "Nim," and "Geowar"
are examples of recent test library offerings.
Although Delphi seems to be trying to provide a wide choice of games to its subscribers,
most of its programs are unexciting.
Tele-gamers are tired of seeing public domain versions of blackjack, "Mugwump," "The Towers
of Hanoi:' and "Animals." Furthermore, if they
haven't already done so, modem owners can
download these programs from free bulletin
board systems. Six dollars per online hour
(Delphi's nonprime time connect charges) is
simply too much money to pay for these stale
and timeworn games. Delphi has announced
plans to offer multi-player games in the near
future.

TELE-GAMING
DELPHI GAMING

Patricia Fitzgibbons
One of the smaller fee-based telecommunications services —compared to
CompuServe or The Source — is the Delphi
network, a product of General Videotex Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Although Delphi has attracted only about
5,000 subscribers since it began operation two
years ago, the system has a reputation for
"user-friendliness:' Many subscribers seem to
enjoy Delphi's "homey atmosphere," while
others are disappointed in the system's lack of
sophistication. Delphi offers such typical
online services as electronic mail, bulletin
boards, an encyclopedia, news and weather,
conferences, special interest groups, and, of
course, games.
The Delphi games menu lists a variety of
single-player game categories: adventures,
board games, casino-type games, a kiddiekorner, logic games, and sports games. The
adventures include the perennial "Colossal
Cave" (an "Original Adventure" clone) and the
maze game "Dungeon." Board games such as
backgammon and checkers are available, as
are sports games such as boxing and football.
In the casino, players can challenge Delphi's
computer to a few hands of blackjack or poker,
or take their chances with the wheel-of-fortune
or craps. Logic games include the old standbys of "Towers of Hanoi:' "Lunar Landing,"
and 'Alien:' In the kiddie-korner area, younger
Delphi users may choose "Guess the Animal,"
"Bug," or "Hangman."
Several games are available for subscribers
who use VT52 or VT100 terminals. These programs (including "Star Trek" and "Empire")
require special cursor commands to print out
graphic displays. Delphi also offers a test
library which usually contains a dozen or so

Delphi's online games are not exceptional,
but its Games Special Interest Group ("Games
SIG") does have several nice features. The
Games SIG offers subscribers a chance to exchange gaming information, participate in
play-by-mail games, interact with one another,
and boast about high scores. Christopher
deOgburn and "Shadowfax," the Games SIG
managers, have established several bulletin
boards devoted to a variety of gaming topics:
D&D games, chaotic role-playing games, Infocom games, Diplomacy, and video games.
Members may read and reply to messages
posted on these boards, and are welcome to
join ongoing play-by-mail games.
Sub-board managers have the option to
make their individual bulletin board private.
For example, members who wish to exchange
hints about Infocom games must send a letter to "Chuckie" (that sub-board's manager) requesting to join. Chuckie will, in turn, reveal
the sub-board's secret password to the new
member. Any user who publicly divulges
game hints is removed from the member list.
Subscribers can, of course, post help requests
publicly. Here is an example of a recent Games
SIG message:

BBoard:
Subject:
Author:
Date:

07-INFOCOM CLUES
DEADLINE
AKEITH
11/25/84

Am sure that there must be a secret room
behind the bookshelves in the library. Can
someone gently nudge me in the right direction that will help me figure out how to get
behind the bookcase?
This desperate "Deadline" player probably
received a hint through Delphi's electronic
mail system. Rather than posting a message on
the public board, however, a hint seeker could
scan the member list for the names of Delphi
subscribers who belong to the "Infocom
Clues" sub-group. The nineteen members (at
press time) of the group answer questions
through the private board or through electronic mail.
When gamers achieve a high score in a
game, their boast may be posted on the
"Scoreboard" bulletin board. Recently,

member Chuckie reached 400 points in 335
moves while playing Infocom's "Infidel." No
one has, as yet, dared to challenge that
accomplishment.
The Games SIG also offers online newsletters of general interest to members and of
specific interest to Diplomacy and role-playing
fans. Although "The Goblin Press" newsletter
is passworded, "The Game SIG Post" and
"The Online Diplomat" are public.
Other Games SIG features include a polling
function and the "Peoplenet" listing. By entering "Poll," at the Games SIG menu, members
can choose to create a poll question, list current polls, view results of earlier polls, or vote
on a question. The polling function is potentially very valuable; unfortunately, it is used infrequently. A recent poll asked the question:
"Is the set-up (sic) of this entire SIG conducive
(sic) to confusing interested parties, especially new ones?" Only one member responded,
and the result was a "strongly agree" vote.
"Is the setup of this entire SIG conducive
to confusing interested parties, especially
new ones?" Only one member responded,
and the result was a "strongly agree" vote!
The "Peoplenet" menu allows subscribers
to search a listing of user profiles. A "browse"
through this area reveals the names and interests of participating Games SIG members,
and affords users the opportunity to learn who
their fellow subscribers are. Once again, this
area is not very active.
Other available games menu options include access to Delphi's multi-user conference
area, electronic mail, and a writer's corner.
Delphi's tele-gaming offerings may be
characterized as "having potential:' At this
point in its development, Delphi has a lot of
promise but not a lot of substance. Essentially, Delphi needs more subscribers, a few unique games (hopefully of the multi-player type),
and more active, experienced SIG managers.
This is one online system that tele-gamers can
get involved with on the ground floor... if they
wish.
Delphi's signup fee is $49.95; hourly connect
charges are $6 per hour for nonprime time
and $16 per hour for prime time. The system
is accessible through Tymnet. For more information about Delphi, call (800) 544-4005, or
(617) 491-3393 in Massachusetts. Delphi's
mailing address is: 3 Blackstone St., Cambridge, MA 02139.

You may contact me on CompuServe at
76703,657, on The Source at BCE124, on

Delphi at PFITZGIBBONS, or via U.S. Mail
to:
Patricia Fitzgibbons
195 Claremont Avenue #115
Long Beach, CA 90803
Copyright (c) 1985, Patricia Fitzgibbons. All
rights reserved.

GULF STRIKE!

by Mark Bausman

Name:
Type:
System:
# Players:

Price:
Author:
Publisher:

Gulf Strike
Wargame
Atari
1-2
$30.00
Winchell Chung
Mark Herman
Avalon Hill Game Co.
Baltimore, MD

For many years now, the Soviet Union and the United States have
been testing each other with both political and military operations.
It may only be a matter of time until they chose a battleground to
determine out whom is really the superior power. The Middle East,
with its oil and political unrest, provides both motive and opportunity for a confrontation. All we need now is a body, which the
new game from Avalon Hill, Gulf Strike (GS) will try its best to
provide.
DESCRIPTION
GS presents a scenario in which Iran or Iraq is about to win their
stalemated war and the Superpowers are stepping-in to determine
who will control Iran. The game is played on a scrolling map of
65 x 55 squares (each representing a 28 x 28 kilometer area) covering Iran, portions of its neighbors, and the Persian Gulf. The computer screen is divided into three sections with the top section showing the map and the two lower sections showing unit information
and status or message information. Military units appear on the map
section as either a black Hammer and Sickle for Iraq/Soviet Union
forces or as a Gold Star for USA/Iran/Allied forces. The units include many different types of land, sea and air forces with each being distinguished by its own symbol in the unit information area.
Individual symbols representing specific units are only seen when
the appropriate map symbol is being viewed; and these only when
a friendly unit is "adjacent". This simulates the "fog of war" and
prevents you from knowing what the enemy units are until you have
recon'ed them. The status/message area is used for entering orders
and showing other pieces of unit information.
To win the game, the Soviet/Iraq player must capture 9 of the 21
specially designated Victory Point squares (VPS). If he dose not do
this within 25 turns, the USA/Iran player is the winner. There is
also a point system in which players may receive bonus points for
the number of enemy hit points they have eliminated. The Soviet/Iraq
player also receives bonus points for how rapidly he is able to capture 9 of the VPS while the USA/Iran player gets bonus points for
the number of VPS the Soviet/Iraq player fails to capture.
MECHANICS
GS is played in three phases (ground and naval movement, air
movement and combat, and ground and naval combat). During the

first phase ground and naval units may change formation and move
based upon their movement allowance and the terrain. Changing
formations costs movement points with different formations having different effects upon both movement and combat. You can have
up to 19 ground units in a single stack, while naval units are not
permitted to stack at all.
In phase two, you control the various air forces, and engage in
both movement and combat. First the player assigns each of his aircraft squadrons to a mission which may be an air strike, a surface
strike, or interception. Each squadron is then given a target, the
mission is launched, combat occurs, and the mission returns to its
base. This activity is accomplished much like the movement phases
by using the joystick and positioning the arrow cursor over the
desired squadron.
In phase three, all ground and naval combat is resolved. Combat

is handled automatically by the computer whenever two opposing
stacks are adjacent to each other. Each unit has a ground, air, sea,
and submarine combat value which is modified by formation and
terrain. The computer will decide which units are attacking and
which are defending and compare the combat values to arrive at
a winner. Each unit also has a number of hit points which are reduced during combat until they reach zero, which signals the
destruction of the unit. The phases are repeated until the victory
conditions are met and a winner determined.
Avalon Hill has incorporated a great amount of detail into GS.
The rule book is 43 pages, with better than half of it dedicated to
orders of battle and descriptions of the various air, land and naval
forces. There are 13 types of ground units with each unit having
a choice of six different combat formations. There are also 16 different types of naval units including three types of carriers and three
types of submarines, and some 20 different types of aircraft. When
you consider the number and diversity of units and differing tactical uses for each, you can see that this game has many strategic
possibilities.
With this much detail, the game system naturally has to be
somewhat complicated, but AH has done a nice job of programming
the computer/player interaction. The combination of joystick and
trigger button usually works pretty well, although your trigger thumb
might get a little tired after a few hours of play.
In looking at the map, it is interesting to note that five of the 21
VPS are clustered together near the entrance of the Persian Gulf.
Russian Naval forces are concentrated at this point but they are not
supported by ground or air units. The Soviet Navy is superior in
sea combat capability but inferior in ground and air operations in
this area. If you can prevent Soviet ground forces in the North of
Iran or the strong forces located near the Iraq and Kuwait border
from linking up with the Naval forces, then you can save at least
5 VPS and more likely many more. The other Soviet strategy might
involve a three prong attack from the South, East, and West with
Tehran as the objective. One of your big decisions will be when to
commit the A-10 Thunderbolts based in the center of Iran. The A-10's
have a high ground combat rating and a zero rating in the other areas.
As they are a short range fighter, you will have to commit them to
the defense of a specific area close to the fighting.
COMPUTER OPPONENT
In a recent edition of Microcomputer Games, (a newsletter publication of the Avalon Hill Game Company), Winchell Chung, the
designer of GS talked about the artificial intelligence he programmed
into GS. The computer uses what Winchell calls a "field map" which
is very similar to the game map. Each square in the field map has
a negative value for Soviet forces and a positive value for USA forces.
The combination of values gives each square a combat value. By
applying the combat value to the square closest to it and then reducing the combat value of the squares further away, simply because
they are further away, the computer can determine where the most
dangerous threats lie. To determine where the unit will move, it
will look at the closest victory point square and at the closest enemy
stack. It then "flips a coin" to determine which one will become
its destination. According to Winchell, the naval units do not use
the field map. Instead, they simply divide up the sea victory point
squares and go after them.
CONCLUSION
GS is a detailed game which can be played by both intermediate
and advanced wargamers and provides the players with a wide variety of strategic options. The human-computer interface is nicely done
considering the amount of items the program must handle.
Much time in this game will be spent scrolling around the map,
looking at units and giving orders with a short period of time spent
in the normal "fast" combat resolution. For those of you more interested in strategy than tactics, this is a good feature; but the tacticians among you may find that the optional combat-by-combat
resolution provides the tactical feeling you are looking for.
Once you get to know what's under those Gold Stars, you will enjoy playing the game and have a good time securing the Middle East
from Soviet influence.
Circle 41 on Reader Service Card

With a confidence that comes from the experience of dozens of space battles, Fleet
Admiral Greenlaw eyed his latest opponent
on the viewing screen.
"Range?" he barked.
"38" came the reply.
He was somewhat concerned that David,
one of his motherships, was closest to the
enemy. Quickly he relayed messages to Maccabeus and Gideon to rush to the front.
Greenlaw's flag/mothership, Joshua was
safely in the rear. But he could not have been
more concerned even if his ship were in the
van. To Greenlaw, his ships were more important than his own life.
Calling for a computer readout on his opponent, Greenlaw discovered that his two
compatriot/judges had already been
destroyed at the hands of this ship, named
Wisconsin.
"Hmmmm. . . Wisconsin is is going to a
bear" Greenlaw mumbled to himself.
As was his standard policy, Greenlaw
ordered the two motherships to the rear,
launching fighter squadrons as rapidly as
possible. Maccabeus and Gideon streaked
toward the enemy, attempting to draw fire
away from the their larger companions.
Greenlaw winced as he watched a barrage
of siege phasers pummel David. Even as the
fighter squadrons began to engage the
enemy, damage reports began arriving.
David's number two and four shields had
been breached in the first two barrages.
Although damage was minor from this
early onslaught, Greenlaw was worried.
The enemy's rate of acceleration indicated
that he was much faster than Greenlaw's
Fleet. Wisconsin would be all over the

motherships if Maccabeus and Gideon
couldn't slow her down.
"Hmmmm... I may be looking at the winning design" Greenlaw mused.
On turn three Maccabeus bore in on
Wisconsin. The enemy dreadnought
unleashed the full power of eight siege
phasers on the tiny destroyer. Maccabeus
disintegrated in a spectacular explosion, it's
heavy seekers simultaneously being
destroyed by Wisconsin's belts. But Maccabeus bought the motherships some time.
Greenlaw checked the position of Gideon.
The tiny frigate had already launched it's
two heavy seekers and was retiring to the
rear. With an ache in his chest he sighed,
realizing that he was going to have to order
the handful of men on Gideon to reengage
Wisconsin. Perhaps, like their namesake, a
divine power would save them from their
otherwise inevitable fate.
He issued the orders to Gideon, at the
same time ordering Joshua to a new heading
in hopes of opening some distance from
Wisconsin. With great remorse he watched
Gideon turn to face the foe and certain
destruction. Even as he watched, a report
came in of new damage on David. It wasn't
looking good. His fighters were scoring
shield breaches, but they weren't coming
often enough. He began to calculate how
soon he could warp his fleet out.
While his mind was musing over strategy
he suddenly became aware that something
wasn't right. Looking at the tactical display
he realized that Joshua had turned towards
Wisconsin rather than away!
"Hard about!" Greenlaw screamed.

In what seemed like an eternity Joshua
began a slow lumbering turn away from the
enemy. But the enemy seized the opportunity. Disrupters and siege phasers slammed
into Joshua.
"Shield three is breached, Sir." Came a
comment from somewhere on the bridge.
Then. . . "Shield one is breached, Sir".
Hurriedly Greenlaw began issuing orders,
sending energy to the rear shields. Draining front shields to reinforce the rears,
Greenlaw began to calculate how long it
would take Wisconsin to reach optimum fire
range.
A sudden flash on the screen told him that
Gideon was no more. Almost simultaneously a report came to him front the Fighter
Control. . . "Our fighters have just scored
four breaches of the enemy's shields!" A
cheer went up on the bridge.
Quickly Greenlaw evaluated this new information. David seemed secure for the moment as Wisconsin was concentrating fire
on Joshua. And Joshua was three turns
beyond optimum fire range of Wisconsin's
guns. Greenlaw calculated that he could
wait until turn twelve before having to make
a decision on warping out.
He sat back in his command chair. While
the crew of the Joshua effected repairs and
prepared for a possible jump to warp speed,
Greenlaw watched the tactical display of
Wisconsin.
Turn ten: Wisconsin's shield eight is
breached.
"Not enough" thought Greenlaw.
Continued on page 38

HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE
TO THE
GALAXY

As told by Scorpia

WARNING! Scorpion's Tale contains hints
on solving computer adventure games. If you

don't want help, don't read on.

❑ ❑ ❑

The New Year is with us! So, come on in,
settle by the fire, and Fred will pour your
favorite beverage, while we celebrate what
looks to be a good year for games. Ah, isn't
it nice to relax after the holiday rush? Don't
get too comfortable, though; the chaos of of
the holidays was just a warm-up for what's
coming next. So, pack your toothbrush, grab
your towel, get your thumb in gear, and
above all: DON'T PANIC! as we go out for
a little galactic hitchhiking.
Hey Arthur, things don't look too cool for
you at the moment. Not only have you woken
with one heavy hangover, there's a big yellow
bulldozer bearing down on your happy home.
What are you gonna do about that?
Say what? You're not gonna take this lying down? Well, I hope you change your mind
about that, or you won't get too far in this
adventure. That's better; now, why don't you
read something while you wait? Aha, here
comes your buddy, Ford Prefect. Looks like

he has something on his mind, doesn't he?
Strange he should turn up right now to return
your towel. I'd be suspicious of this, if I were
you.
Ok, now he wants to buy you a drink or two
(even more suspicious!). Well, why not? Free
drinks don't come along every day (and soon
they won't be coming along at all, but you
don't know that. . . yet!). So, hop on over to
the pub and quaff a few, but don't get carried away; one hangover was enough! While
you're there, you might want to look things
over, as Ford tells you that the end of the
world is imminent (sure, Ford).
Crash! Arthur, I think that was your house.
When you go back to make sure, remember
that this is also "Be Kind to Animals On the
Last Day Of The World" Day. Hmmm, yep,
they tore down your house, no doubt about
it! But hey, no need to worry; the rest of the
world is going to follow it, 'cause here come
the Vogon constructor ships. I guess Ford
wasn't kidding, huh?
Don't panic! Ford just dropped his hitchhiking thumb; you're close enough to pick it
up, so you better do just that. When you push
the right button, you'll find yourself in the
dark. Get used to that; you'll be visiting the
dark a lot during the rest of the adventure.
It's kind of a dull place, the dark. You can't
seem to do much of anything, at least for
awhile. So, keep cool, hang out, and remember that you have five senses (I hope you
remember what they are!).
That's better. You've made your way to the
Vogon ship. And there, in the corner, sits the
Babel Fish dispenser. Innocent-looking thing,
isn't it? I'll bet you didn't know that that
dispenser has been responsible for more gray
hairs, more ulcers, more chewed disks, and
more frustration than all the puzzles in all
the Zorks combined. Getting a Babel Fish into
your ear isn't as easy as you might have
expected.
No need to panic, however. You can handle most of the task easily, I'm sure. Your real

nemesis is that unprintable
uper-halfotmcnigrbo.Rht?!S,wa
to do? Well Arthur, you need a little junk, and
you have to send it to the UHOTR robot airmail. Just make a deposit in the right place,
and let the mechanical thingies do the work
for you. Wonderful! Now you're running
around with this fish in your ear (wonder how
it manages to survive without water??).
At least now you can understand what
other people (creatures?) are saying to or
about you. Ford is still snoozing, so why not
investigate the rest of the hold? That glass
case sure looks interesting. Oops! The Vogon
captain has just discovered you're on board,
and he's about to subject you to something
almost too horrible to contemplate: genuine
Vogon poetry.
Forget it Arthur; struggling is useless.
You're stuck in that Poetry Appreciation
Chair, and you're just gonna have to listen.
And while you're listening, keep in mind that
a verse of poetry has four lines.
Hmmm, things seem to be getting worse.
You survived the poetry, and now you're
about to be kicked out the airlock, into deep
space (Arthur, this just ain't your day). Look
at the bright side: you have a chance to do
something about the case while you wait.
Whoosh! Out you go... to be picked up 29
improbable seconds later by the famous
Heart of Gold (the HOG, for short). And here
is where the fun really begins. You have to
be careful now, Arthur, 'cause at some points
along the way, the program is gonna LIE to
you! Really!
Ok, you made it out of the dark and onto
the bridge. After everyone sashays off to the
sauna, you go do some exploring. And this
above all: consult the Guide about
EVERYTHING you find (except the tools;
you don't have to ask about those, but you
can if you like). The Guide is the most
valuable item you have. Use it!
Now that you've spent a little time collecting a few items, it's time to put some of them

together. This goes here, that goes there, and
as for this thing, well, maybe it's best not to
attach that one; too many connections make
for sparks.
All right, say a prayer and throw the switch.
Uggh, you 're in the dark again. Well, you've
been here before, so you should know what
to do. The thing is, Arthur, you may come
out of this as not quite yourself. Then again,
you might. The dark is a pretty strange place!
So, I'm just going to give you a few hints
about each of the situations you'll be finding
yourself (whomever you are) in as the game
progresses.
The Bugblatter Beast. By all means, consult the Guide about this incredibly stupid
creature. Don't be shy about introducing
yourself, although, in your place, I wouldn't
hang around in the lair too long. And don't
let the memorial in the courtyard scare you;
it can come in handy!
Zaphod. First, give that boat a good
looking-over. Second, the auto-pilot isn't just
for show, but you have to make it work for
you. It's the guards that are the really tricky
part. Remember that Trillion is in this with
you; she can be helpful at the right moment.
Ford. This is really deja vu! In fact, almost
an instant replay. Remember to look in the
satchel carefully! It's also helpful to
remember everything that happened at the
start of the game.
Trillion. This one is easy. Just take a good
look at Arthur, and remember to otherwise
keep your hands full at all times.
War Room. Another easy one, if you were
a good guy way back when Earth was still
there. Hang out, and you'll soon be inside
your own brain. The thing to recall here is
that anyone with a particle of common sense
in his head will never finish the game.
Now that you've gone through all this,
maybe you should relax with a cup of real tea.
How's that sound, Arthur? Thought you'd
agree. So, head for the Nutrimat, and brew
up a storm. Hmmmm... maybe that wasn't
such a good idea after all. In fact, it looks like
the Nutrimat has just taken over the HOG's
computer system. . . just as you're being attacked by missiles from the legendary lost
planet of Magrathea.
Dare I say it? Don't panic! There is a way
out! Remember, this is an emergency situation! Now might be the time to plug in all the
way and go for it. Better hurry, Arthur, there
isn't much time left!
Whew! You made it. . . and the missiles
have turned into. . . a whale??? Yep. And
guess where you're gonna have to go now?
Hehehehehe! But first, why not check out the
Nutrimat? Sonuvagun! It finally made a cup
of real tea for you! But wait!! Don't drink it
just yet. Take a good look at that tea! Does
that give you any ideas? It better!
So, here you are, inside the whale (hey,
don't knock it, Arthur, you've been in worse
places; remember that Poetry Appreciation
Chair?). There seems to be a flowerpot here.
All you have to do is get out with it. Or, at
least, get out, and have the pot come to you
later. You know how it is, Arthur; some things
just keep turning up, no matter what you do.
Relatively speaking.

At last! Back on the HOG. The question is,
what now? Well, if you've been consulting the
Guide about everything you've found, you
have a pretty good idea of what the flowerpot is for (keep in mind that it takes four to
make one). A little patience, and a little semitropical atmosphere, and you'll have some
pretty strange fruit. Don't be afraid; take a
bite.
Ah, so! And now, Arthur, it's finally time
for you to get past that Screening Door.
Think: what happened when you picked up
the real tea? And what happened when you
dropped the real tea? Consult the Guide about
intelligence, and you ought to know what you
have to do.
Good work! The door is pretty impressed!
Still, with Marvin on the other side, you need
to do something first (such a depressing fellow
(?), that Marvin). What you need is something
that will give you a little lift. Have anything
like that handy?
Well Arthur, I think you can manage the
rest of it on your own (as long as you can
count to twelve, that is!). It's been some trip,
hasn't it? The only thing is, it seems that your
adventures are just beginning. Maybe you
should have stayed on Earth, after all.. .

That's it for this column, but before we
close the doors here at the Tale, I'd like to say
a few words about mail. U.S. Mail. The best
thing I can say about it is that it tends to be
very erratic. I've gotten letters from California in three days, while a letter from Brooklyn
took a week, and yet I've also had mail from
California that took almost as long to get here.
Two letters, both mailed on the same day
from Illinois, arrived two days apart. And so
on.
I do my best to get replies to your questions
off quickly; ninety percent of the time, I can
send a reply to you the day after I get your
letter. But, your letter has to get here first.
So, if it seems that you've been waiting awhile
for a response, remember that the mail service isn't always very swift.
One more thing: answering mail is
something I do on my own; I get nothing extra
for doing this, and my mailbox is maintained at my own expense. For that reason, I do
request that, if you live in the United States,
and want a personal reply to your questions,
you must include a self-addressed, stamped
envelope. Correspondents in foreign countries (yes, I've gotten mail from as far away
as Africa and Thailand!) do not have to include return postage (US stamps are hard to
come by!), but please do include a selfaddressed envelope.
The address for US Mail is:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
If you are on The Source, you may send
SMAIL to: ST1030. If you are on CompuServe, GO GAM310.
Happy Adventuring!
This column is copyrighted © 1985 by Scarpia, all rights reserved.

the
learning
game
EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE:
1984 IN REVIEW

11011 PROCTOR
There are more educational software titles
available today than ever before. You'd expect that, of course, as long as new titles
keep appearing faster than old ones disappear. Still, the rate at which new titles appear seems to be on the increase. By now,
it feels like a veritable explosion. There are
programs designed to teach us everything
from recognizing colors to retirement
planning.
It will be interesting to see, when we look
back a few years from now, how we will
view 1984. Will we think of it as an "age of
innocence", when the market was being
flooded with more educational titles than
could possibly succeed? Or will we see it as
the beginning of the era when the computer
took its place alongside the dictionary and
encyclopedia in the home.
At the rate things happen in the
microcomputer business, we may know the
answer before 1985 is over!
NEW COMPANIES
There is a stereotyped pattern for the lifecycle of a computer software company.
First, you announce your entrance into the
marketplace by buying lots of ad space.
Presumably, a big splash is necessary to get

the consumer's attention. If you're in
business software, one new product may be
enough, but in educational software you'll
want to have more to establish an image of
tremendous breadth and variety. Six or
eight new titles will do, but you may have
to scale down if you're a smaller company.
So, honors for the biggest splash in 1984
go unquestionably to CBS Software. Their
line of more than 30 titles runs the gamut
from pre-school to adult education, hitting
all the stops in between. I give honorable
mention to Sunburst Communication Inc. for
their excellent line of games for elementary
schoolers.
Also worth noting are the number of companies which have added educational software to their existing product lines. These
include hardware makers like Radio Shack
and IBM, strategy game companies like
Avalon Hill and Epyx, and media firms like
CBS and Random House.
GOOD NEW GAMES
I'm happy to report that the line between
"educational" games and popular, entertaining games is disappearing. The success
of titles like M.U.L.E. and Flight Simulator
II is blurring the distinction. Note that both
of these games are simulations of real-life
events. Admittedly, the setting in M.U.L.E.
is pure science fiction, but the economic
forces (which is what the game is about,
after all) are down to earth.
Simulations offer the best combination of
learning and fun because they get you really involved. Other simulations that have
done well this year — and are quite educational — include Millionaire, Geopolitique
1990, Rails West, and Seven Cities of Gold.
All of these titles have been covered in
CGW. Since space is limited, I'll move on
to fresher topics.
Unfortunately, games like these require
much time and skill to create. So most of the
titles on the educational market are more
the traditional "drill and practice" variety.
These have their place, if competently done,
but tend to be very dry. This is true of all
of the "How to Take the SAT" programs
that I've seen and most of the math practice
programs.
As an example, CBS' Success with Math
series of eight programs (Apple, Atari, C-64)
covers almost everything from one plus one

up to solving quadratic equations. They are
useful tools for the student who wants to
learn but they seem "just like school" to
someone who is turned off in the classroom.
PROGRAMS FOR PRE-SCHOOLERS
The very young are more discriminating
and require a little more entertaining value,
thank you. This means colorful graphics
and snappy music. Xerox has added to the
excellent Weekly Reader series with titles
like Stickybear Shapes and Stickybear Opposites ($39.95 for Apple, Atari, and C-64).
CBS has brought out half a dozen titles
with the Sesame Street characters. The
quality of these varies from fair to very good
— the best being Astro Grover, a math game
with great animation ($34.95 for Atari and
C-64). CBS has also developed a clever
plastic keyboard overlay which makes a
computer keyboard a simple device for
young users.
Besides the more obvious skills like
recognizing colors, matching letters and
counting, there are a number of interesting
new games which teach other skills. The
most imaginative are The Pond and The Factory from Sunburst ($49 for Apple, Atari,
C-64, and TRS CoCo). The Pond lets you program a frog to jump across a pond on lily
pads. The program must be very short so
you have to find a pattern that repeats.
There are several levels of increasing
difficulty.
The Factory uses a different sort of pattern recognition. You must create a small
square plate that matches the one shown on
the screen. To do so, you arrange a series
of machines that punch holes in, paint
stripes on, and rotate a blank plate. Again,
the different levels of difficulty make this
fun for almost anyone.
U.S. Geography has gotten help from the
computer this year! There are two good new
releases on the subject. The best is States &
Traits from DesignWare ($44.95 for Apple,
Atari, C-64 and IBM). The other is Coast to
Coast America from CBS ($49.95 for Apple,
C-64, and IBM). Both provide several fun
games to play with a map of the U.S. and
teach capitals, history and other facts. The
DesignWare product is more versatile as it
lets you make up your own questions. It also
includes Alaska, Hawaii, and natural
features like mountains and rivers, all of
which are absent in the CBS game.
INTERESTING NEW SUBJECTS
Did you ever wonder what it was like to
be a Tyrannosaurs Rex? A classic case of
"where is my next meal coming from?" This
game has excellent graphics and includes
a non-game tutorial disk as well. If you get
real good at staying alive, make the planet
ten degrees colder! Try T. Rex by CBS,
$49.95 for Apple, Atari, C-64 and IBM. If
you find yourself wanting to know more
about dinosaurs in general, then CBS also
offers Dinosaur Dig ($49.95 for Apple, C-64
and IBM). This also has two disks and excellent graphics. The game tests you on
facts. This is done in several clever ways and
Continued on page 38

superior product. Spelunker out jumps Jumpman, out bounces Bounty Bob in Miner 2049,
and in almost every way is a thoroughly enjoyable game. MicroGraphic Image and Tim
Martin, the game's authors, deserve at least
one kudo each for this one.
The game's title clearly tells what Spelunker
is all about, (if you know what a spelunker is,
that is). In Spelunker you use a joystick to
careful guide an animated character through
perilous caverns while collecting treasures
and fending off geophysical and metaphysical
foes. Leading the way in the obstacle entourage are ghosts and bats, volcanic vents,
and fire pits. Suspense for the action is set by
your energy pack which drains slowly as you
move about.

skip ahead to deeper levels (without having
earned your way there). This means no
"practicing."
If for no other reason, I rate Spelunker as a
superior game because it passes my "NO
FAIR" test. By that I mean, of all the many
times I have played Spelunker, I have never
cried out, "No fair!" when I've lost a life. I have
always felt that MY timing that was off, not
that the game was stacked against me.
The game is a class act. I highly recommend
it even if you already have a drawer full of
games in this genre.

• REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY

Atari
Playfield
SPELUNKER
AND
REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY

David Stone

On the Playfield this issue are two games
that take you deep within the bowels of
earth: Spelunker , from Broderbund, and
Realm of Impossibility, from Electronic
Arts.
Both of these games offer top quality
arcade-style action and two very different
styles of play. Spelunker requires timing and
calculation; Realm of Impossibility
demands constant movement at a relentless
pace.
• SPELUNKER
If the amount of time one invests in trying
to master a game is any indication of quality,
then Spelunker from Broderbund is clearly a

The cave itself is large — six levels deep.
Each level is made up of many screens that
scroll slowly into view as you move up or
down in the cave, or flip/scroll quickly as you
push against either the left or right side of the
screen. I have explored for many hours and
have not yet reached the bottom level.
You begin the game in an elevator at the top
level of the cave. You can move the elevator up
and down and stop it near ledges where you
can hop off to go explore, collect treasures that
boost your score, and collect keys that will
unlock doors that seal off lower levels. Along
the pathways you find ropes and ladders to
scale (left by spelunkers who went before you),
batteries to recharge your energy pack and to
power your phantom blaster (a kind of "ghost
buster"), dynamite to clear blocked pathways,
and flares that will come in handy for blinding
menacing bats.
Ghosts of spelunkers roam the cave and
liven-up the game's action. A haunting tune
announces the nearness of a ghost who then
comes slowly wiggling on screen. As soon as
it is in range, you activate your phantom
blaster (by tapping the space bar). This
disintegrates the phantom slowly and drains
your battery fast.
Bats are another deadly nuisance you will
be running into. (I call them "albino bats"
because they are white.) To avoid their guano
bombs, you shoot off a flare (by pressing "F"
on the keyboard). One other required keystroke
is "D" — to drop a dynamite stick to clear rubble that blocks your path. Dynamite can be
dangerous to your health, so after you drop a
stick you have to get out of range fast to avoid
blowing yourself to smithereens.
Normally, I would object to an arcade-style
game that requires you to use both the joystick
and the keyboard. In Spelunker, however, there
is no problem. Because you move mostly as a
result of calculation, rather than reflex reaction, there is usually plenty of time to press
the required key, and then return to joystick
control.
In addition to the game features described
above, Spelunker has many of the amenities
that you would expect, and curiously, a few
missing. Included are a demo mode to show
you what to do, a feature to save the top four
scores to disk, and a "last score" listing. Missing are a two-player feature and the ability to

Electronic Arts, publishers of such
outstanding games as M.U.L.E., SEVEN
CITIES OF GOLD, MURDER ON THE
ZINDERNEUF, and ARCHON have helped
set new standards for computer gaming. It
must be really tough for software authors
working for this company to develop new
games that can successfully compete with products already in the line! Realm of Impossibility (ROI) is up to the challenge, even though it's
not entirely a "new" game.
ROI is actually an expanded version of Zombies, written by Mike Edwards and released
by Bram Inc. in 1983. Even though it is billed
in small print on the front of the software
jacket as a "Deluxe Edition of The Classic
Game Zombies", I suspect that some people
who already own Zombies will miss the fine
print and buy a game they may not have otherwise purchased.
Among ROI's improvements are an expansion to thirteen dungeons and a total of 129
rooms. The game also adds the requirement
to retrieve keys as well as crowns. Probably
most importantly, ROI retains the principal
strength of Zombies: fast action that can be
played in either a single player or two-player,
cooperative mode.
ROI has several features going for it, not the
least of which is that it is fun to play. The action in this game gets so frenzied that it might
well have been called "Scramble" (if that name
had not been taken already) or "Mad Dash."
The premise of the game is that an evil cleric
named Wistrik has stolen seven crowns and
has hidden them somewhere deep within his
thirteen dungeons. Your task is to retrieve all
of the crowns. Unfortunately for you, some of
the dungeons are locked and can be entered
only after you have retrieved keys from other
dungeons.

Retrieving a key or a crown entails entering
the dungeon, advancing through a
half-a-dozen, or so, rooms, grabbing the booty, then
making your way back as rapidly as possible
without getting killed. You advance from room
to room by pushing against border of the
screen. This action causes the screen to
rapidlyscontkeuihxrom.In
some rooms you can pick up a magic scroll
that gives you either more hit points or a magic
spell to cast against your foes.
Four types of foes thwart your movement:
hopping spiders, rolling orbs, wandering zombies, and slithering snakes. They are all smart
(they chase you) but not too smart (sometimes,
you can elude them). When they touch you,
you rapidly lose hit points. Loose all you hit
points and you are dead. An interesting
feature of the game design is that the foes cannot be killed. A less-creative game design
might have had you deal with these kinds of
foe by shooting them. Instead, you can either
drop magic crosses or cast spells to slow them
down.
You drop the magic crosses by pressing the
stick button. Crosses act as obstacles; your foes
cannot pass through them and neither can
you. Each cross you drop only lasts about four
seconds before it disappears, so there is no
time to tarry. I have found that it is best to zigzag across the screen when dropping crosses
in order to snag the most foes.
You can cast a spell to freeze, confuse, or
protect by stopping, pressing the stick button,

and then moving the stick left, up, or right
(respectively). Or, if you are too panicked to
think about it, you can pull the stick down to
cast whatever spell you have. An alternative
you are likely to rely upon is to quickly slap the
space bar to cast the last spell you obtained.
Cast the freeze spell and the foes cannot move,
the confuse spell and they won't chase you, the
protect spell and they cannot harm you. Each
spell lasts about four seconds.
The spells are nice but somewhat difficult
to use. You typically need to cast a spell when
you are surrounded and loosing hit points fast.
Unfortunately, this is no time stop. The result
is, you often end up loosing more points by
casting a spell than you would have if you had
simply made a mad dash to the screen border.
Another minor difficulty with the spells is that
a four second duration seems to be about four
seconds too short.
The visual style of ROI is unique. This is no
clone of a game written for some other
machine. It is pure Atari home computer. The
music background uses multiple voices, the
screen scrolls smoothly left-to-right and
top-to-bottom, the screens are colorful, and the
character that you control on screen is one color, but well animated.
Some of the rooms are reminiscent of
Escher drawings (you know, the ones where
you look one way and the stairs lead up, and
look another way and the stairs lead down).
The screens developed for the ROI edition are
especially interesting.
ROI does not save high scores disk, but it

does keep track of the single player and double player high scores for the current play.
The two-player mode offers all of the
features of the single player mode, with a few
twists. First, to leave a room you both must
push on the same screen border at the same
time. This requirement is good for a few good
shouts at your fellow player, such as "Get a
move on!", and "Quick! I'm losing hit points.
Push, Turkey!" Sometimes, it's enough to make
you wonder why they call it a "cooperation"
mode.
A nice feature of the two-player mode is that
if your fellow player loses all his hit points, you
can "resurrect" him by touching him. This
"laying on of hands" usually gives him enough
hit points to make it out of the room.
The player who picks up a scroll gets any hit
points that scroll may have provided. This requires you to keep an eye on each other's score
so you can let the one who is lowest on hit
points pick up the scroll. Magic spells can be
cast by either player so, again, its a good
strategy to keep an eye on the other guy so you
can cast a spell to help him out of a jam, when
necessary.
Even though ROI has several features that
are not available in Zombies, I do not feel that
the changes are numerous enough or significant enough to justify the buying both games.
However, if you have neither, then ROI is a
good a addition to your arcade-action game
inventory.

COMPETITION KARATE

Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Competition Karate
Sports Simulation
Apple, C-64
1-2
Edward Badasov
$34.95
Motivated Software
Mill Valley, CA

COMPETITION KARATE (CK) is the
first computer treatment which I have seen
of any part of the world of Martial Arts or
combatives. It was therefore a pleasant surprise to discover that Ed Badasov, the
game's creator, had done a very fine job of
capturing the feel of competition karate. Not
only is the actual competition aspect of the
game very realistic, with its nice graphics
and sound effects, but you are also given a
world in which your CK fighter lives. Between competitions, they have the
oprtuniyaceh"doj(tJapnes
name for the workout area, meaning "place
for studying the way") under your instructor's watchful eye and increase their
abilities.
Your first step in entering the world of CK
is to create some fighters, and the first step
in creating a new fighter is to pick an instructor. CK has five different instructors
from which to select, each of whom
specializes in three particular fighting
characteristics.
Each fighter is rated in nine different
categories, including strength, agility,
quickness, stamina, feet ,arms, etc. Newly
created characters generally average between ten to 13 in each ability and are allowed one workout before their first
tournament.
During each practice session, you can
choose between a specific or a general
workout. A specific workout allows your
fighter to make major improvements in
three of your nine characteristics, but you
may suffer reductions in other abilities
while doing so. A general workout offer less
dramatic improvements, but none of your
fighters' abilities will suffer reductions as
a result. At the conclusion of each practice
session, students receive an instructor bonus
in the three areas in which their instructor
specializes. You should therefore be very
careful in selecting your instructor, as you
will be stuck with him for your entire career.

Once you have created a stable of fighters,
the real fun begins. Tournaments are run
by the computer, and consist of from two
to thirty-two competitors. At the beginning
of each match, you are given the choice of
which fighter to control, whether to play
against another human or the computer, or
whether to simply watch the computer control both fighters. The matches are three
rounds each, and are scored on a point basis
with one point being scored for each effective punch or kick. Players have the option
of attacking with three different types of
kicks and punches, defending against a
specific attack, or staying on the run.
The game system goes a step beyond
merely alternating attacks by the two
players. An arrow at the top of the screen
shows which contestant has the momentum
in the fight, and it is that fighter who gets
to select the attack. It can be that one player
may make the vast majority of the attacks
if he has strong superiority over his opponent, just as you or I probably get in very
few punches against Chuck Norris or
Muhammed Ali.
Fatigue, too, plays a part in CK. As indicated above, stamina is one of the attributes which make up each fighter. As
your fighter's stamina increases, he will be
able to attack more often without becoming
exhausted. Beware total exhaustion! The
surest way to get knocked out cold is to be
dazed and have your opponent connect
with a good backknuckle to the head.
The judges are, as they should be, a bit
sticky about non-combative attitudes. If
your fighter doesn't attack for two or three
times in a row, he will probably be warned
for stalling. If he gets warned, he had best
attack very soon or have a point deducted
form his score.
Finally, you should not become
discouraged by the clumsiness and ineffectual attacks by your white and yellow belts.
As anyone who's ever practiced and type
of sport knows, you have to do it a while
before you get to be any good. Karate is not
any different, even though on your computer. Keep at it and your fighter will eventually get the hang of it.
In conclusion, Competition Karate is well
worth seeking out. I have been involved in
the world of judo since 1959, and taekwondo (Korean style of karate) since 1975, while
my wife is a two time US champion as well
as a Pan Am gold medalist. We both found
CK to be truly reflective of the type of tactics which actually win in top level competition; specifically to move a lot, conserve
your energy, and make a few good attacks
rather than many ineffective ones. Get a few
friends hooked and soon you can have a
really enjoyable group activity going. I
understand that one of the early playtesters
was so enthused, that he started taking

karate lessons. It just goes to show that you
never know what kind of excitement you
will end up in when you turn on your computer tonight.
David Long
Circle 44 on Reader Service Card
CLEAR FOR ACTION:
THE VIEW FROM A PLAYTESTER
by Floyd Mathews

Clear for Action (CFA) is an excellent
game of sea battles in the swashbuckling era
of sailing ships. Two to eight players can
fight a multiple ship battle with up to four
ships on each side or you can play solitaire
against the computer in a two-ship duel. The
game disk includes twelve historical battles.
You can also design your own ships to
recreate historical or hypothetical
engagements.
CFA is a very detailed simulation of
fighting sailing ships. On each turn, you can
plot course changes for each ship on a map
display, then the program executes
simultaneous movement. The players then
fire broadsides and reload their guns with
different types of shot. If ships are grappled
orders can be given for boarding actions on
a shipdeck graphic display.
All orders are entered through the
joystick; play is very smooth. A typical game
will last 30 minutes to two hours, depending
on the size and number of ships.
While containing much realistic detail,
the game remains very playable. The program handles most details automatically,
and with the excellent documentation you
can plan your strategy intelligently. For example, gun sizes range from mighty
68-pounder carronades down to 3-pounder
peashooters, and you may choose from five
different types of shot. You may aim at the
enemy's hull or rigging, all with drastically
different effects.
The scale of distance points on the map
grid display varies from 20 meters to 200
meters, depending on the distance between

the ships. The largest map covers an area
of several square miles. Each game turn
represents one minute of real time, and the
speed of ships and reloading time are scaled
accordingly.
Crew morale and crew quality are key factors in this game. Historically, wooden ships
rarely sank during a battle, but the crew
might surrender if they suffered severe
losses. Morale is reduced by casualties, and
also to a lesser extend by damage to different
parts of the ship. If morale drops below 50
percent, the ship will be in danger of
surrendering. Additionally, crew quality affects the speed of reloading, sail-handling,
maneuvering ability, and also "scuffling"
ability in boarding actions.
You do not have enough men to operate
the sails and all guns simultaneously.
Hence, you must shift crew members to the
deck, the tops, or the port or starboard guns,
depending on where you think they will be
most needed. As it takes time to relocate
them, you must anticipate future developments. For example, if you have few men
on the deck, you may not be able to tack or
to repel an enemy boarding party.
This game is very easy to play, but strategy
can be complex. The computer opponent is
excellent, and I hope more designers will
strive for this quality of solitaire capability.
My only complaint with this game is that
the computer can only fight two-ship duels.
I hope Mike Stradley will develop a second
edition which can handle eight ships in
solitaire play. In a two-ship game, if you
have the weaker ship, you should probably
aim for the enemy's rigging, and try to run
away.
Multiple ship games with several players
on each side can be a lot of fun. This could
be a good party game for the right crowd.
There's something about this game which
appears to bring out a touch of the old
seadog in some of us.
In a multiple ship game, you should probably try for a raking position, or try to gang
LORDLINGS OF YORE
CONTEST
Softlore Corp. announces their
1985 Softlore Spring Nationals.
Owners of their game Lordlings of
Yore (LOR) are invited to compete.
Contestants will play LOY
against three computer opponents
in an attempt to record the highest
score in the nation. LOR's unique
score verification feature permits
accurate reporting of scores.
Prizes will be awarded. Entry fee
may be required. Entry deadline
is April 15, 1985.
For an entry blank, call or write
Softlore Corp. at 8714 Wellesley
Manor, San Antonio, TX
78240-2116; 512-691-2800. LOY
runs on the Apple II family of
computers.
Circle 45 Reader Service Card

up on a single enemy ship, although this is
easier said than done. Superior maneuvering ability is necessary in order to seize a
favorable position. Ships are much faster
sailing downwind than into the wind.
Momentum is also a factor; ships accumulate speed sailing downwind, but will
decelerate rapidly when they turn upwind,
tack, or back sails. Most guns are not very
effective at long range, but firepower increases sharply at 300 meters or less.
Therefore, it is probably better to engage the
enemy from a favorable windward position,
as last minute maneuvers at short range can
have decisive results.
Selection of shot and of the optimum
range for engaging the enemy are also very
important. If you have the stronger crew,
you may want to load grapeshot, and try to
close for a boarding action. Rifle fire from
the tops is very effective in boarding actions.
Carronades are very effective at short range,
but useless at long range. If you have more
long guns, and the enemy has more carronades, you may want to try to stay at long
range and pick him apart. If you are trying
to escape, dismantling shot is very effective
against the enemy rigging at short range.
CFA is an entertaining game, which I
recommend for both experienced and
novice wargamers. Good luck, and may
your swash never buckle!
Ed.: Floyd Mathews was a playtester for
Clear For Action.
Circle 46 on Reader Service Card

Name:
Type:
System:
Players:

3 in 1 Football
Sports Strategy
Apple
1-2

Price:

$24.99

Author:

Lance Haffner

Publisher:

Lance Haffner Games
Nashville, TN

"Shelby turns the corner, gets a key block
to spring him and they can't get him down
until he reaches the 41 yard line for a 16 yard
pick-up and a Cardinal first down!" It was
the first time I booted 3 IN 1 COLLEGE
AND PRO FOOTBALL and I wasn't really
expecting a lot. I had seen the picture of the
text screen in CGW 4.6's Taking A Peek and
was expecting to play a marginally interesting game. I noticed that the team data
disk listed both the University of Louisville
Cardinals and their Metro rivals, the

University of Cincinnati, on the 1983 supplemental college section. I had served as
a security guard during Louisville's 1981
campaign and was curious to see if I could
fare better than the real coach.
From the opening offensive play, with it's
liberal use of real names in accurate offensive roles (the defense for each team is even
more anonymous than in actual football), I
was hooked. The Cardinals lost a 7-3
bailgame that seemed tremendously
realistic from a spectator's standpoint.
Since I was so pleased with the simulation, I couldn't wait to trot out my underdog Detroit Lions of 1983 and take on
"America's Team", the 1983 Dallas
Cowboys. Cowboys fans will dispute the
26-10 victory by the Lions, but the home
field advantage coupled with excellent
coaching (modesty keeps me from naming
the obvious) sums it up. Who were the
rushing leaders? You guessed them. Billy
Sims led the Lions with 79 yards on 23
carries and Tony Dorsett led the Cowboys
with 72 yards on 16 carries.
To this point, I had tried '83 college and
'83 NFL teams, but 3 IN 1 offers a USFL options, as well. I watched the Express
manage to hang on to a 30-24 victory over
the Gunslingers. True to life, the only thing
explosive about the Express' offense was the
placekicker's toe. The game had enabled me
to participate in statistic oriented sports
simulations for three different levels of play,
but the best was yet to come. The game also
makes available great teams of past NFL and
past college seasons. Would the 1969 USC
Trojans defeat the 1969 Penn State Nittany
Lions at a neutral site? My replay said they
would, 24-7. Two touchdowns by Clarence
Davis paved the way. Would the
Namth-led1968YJsavbenltodf
the glorious Staubach-directed 1975 Dallas
Cowboys in a fictitious Super Bowl? My
final score of Jets 31 — Cowboys 27 is far
from conclusive. Yet, the game system as
a whole gives the same kind of thrill and excitement that I get from SSI's COMPUTER
BASEBALL.
Since the point of comparison for many
computer games seems to be with the SSI
line, let me suggest some comparisons between 3 IN 1 and COMPUTER QUARTERBACK. Dan Bunten shared as far back as
CGW 2.5 (p. 36) that he couldn't be satisfied
with a football simulation that focused
strictly on the interaction of offensive and
defensive play selection and its effect on the
field of play. Dan suggested that the game
ignored potentially significant factors such
as "...player salaries, recruiting, training,
creation of new plays and coaching..." (p.
36). If these factors are significant for you,
you'll want to buy CQ instead of 3 IN 1. In
3 IN 1, the statistics for familiar teams
always seem to be in the right ball park, yet
the second line quarterbacks do seem to
have a better pass completion record than
the starters in the games I played. Bunten
tells CGW readers in 3.1 (p. 36) what formulae he used to determine various player's

effect on a given pass play. It would be interesting to know Haffner's calculations.
The most detracting comparison between
CQ and 3 IN 1 is the use or non-use of
graphics. Bunten described his lack of success with a text version of CQ in CGW 3.2
(p. 4, 47) and that has furnished the incentive for the attractive graphics of the current version of CQ. Yet, CQ's presentation
seems rather sterile to me in their neglect
of the personalities involved in all levels of
football as a spectator sport. The statistical
summaries at halftime and the conclusion
of the game seem much more stimulating
as they reflect individual efforts. 3 in 1 Football is text only.
The second detracting factor has to do
with the computer as opponent. CQ uses a
system that enables the computer to learn
from you and improve its level of play. To
be sure, 3 IN 1 does learn how to thwart you
when you're blitzing on every play, but it
doesn't keep a data file on your style of play,
like CQ.
I find both games to be interesting and
well worth owning. I feel that 3 IN 1 is more
fun to sit down and play an isolated game,
but CQ is a better simulation in terms of
developing one's own distinctive team and
developing a "league." I find the statistical
data in 3 IN 1 to be superior to the statistical
summaries in CQ, but I find the ability for
the computer to improve as an opponent in
CQ to be superior to 3 IN 1. 3 IN l's 14 offenses and 6 defenses certainly pale before
CQ's 36 offenses and 24 defenses (in the pro
version), but the simple flow of 3 IN l's format speeds up play. "Jones finds Dickerson
in the end zone and it's touchdown —
U.S.C.!" With both CQ and 3 IN 1 on my
shelf, I never have to worry about the matchups on the tube.
Johnny L. Wilson

hours later feeling tense and tight? How much
stress do we build up when we can't beat the
computer when playing a wargame at beginner level? Or how often do we come home
from our jobs and just want to relax? Well, our
computer can now help us through this tension and stress with another computer
"game". But this game is played with our mind
and we always win.
There are two versions of Relax! available:
the C64/Atari version package together with a
cassette and disk for both systems and a
"Universal" release that works with the C64,
Atari, IBM PC and PC jr, and Apple. The C64
version is priced at $99.95, the universal at
$139.95.
The packaging of this product is remarkable.
It has been totally thought out to include
everything needed and done with quality. The
artwork, for example, with its blue sky and
clouds is nice (and relaxing). Next, the
monitoring unit and head band are well made.
The documentation is thorough. The startup
manual easily explains all you need to know
to get started. The follow up manual of 200
pages is comprehensive, covering all aspects
of a stress reduction system including techniques, nutrition, exercise, and daily interpersonal transactions. The manuals were written by an authority in stress reduction and it
shows.
BUT WHAT IS THIS ALL ABOUT? — A
simple headband is used to monitor your
muscle tension (EMG). With the software
provided, you are able to reduce this tension and
thus achieve a state of deep relaxation. There
are three programs available with which to accomplish this. The first program produces a
continuous graph of your level of tension. The
display can be altered in several ways. The
second program produces changing
kaleidoscope patterns and tones that change
color as you relax. The patterns generated are
remarkably detailed and very based on your
muscle feedback. The third program is a game
which requires you to use tension and relaxation constructively. You must be able to
change your level of tension to "win" the
game.
The graphing program is extremely well
done and can be used as a tool to observe
changing levels of tension. If you have a current technique it provides excellent feedback
of how well it works. The package also
includes a cassette tape to guide you through
relaxation techniques. A bibliography provides
many excellent additional readings.
Next time you've played a stressful game or
have too many hours at the joystick, before you
shot off your computer, load this program and
r-e-l-a-x-x-x-....
Roy Wagner

Name:
Type:
System:
How many times do we turn on the computer to play fifteen minutes of a fast action arcade game only to shut off the computer three

Price:
Publisher:

How About A Nice
Game of Chess?
Chess tutor and
companion
C-64 (soon for Apple,
Atari)
$39.95
Odesta

Here's a version of Odesta's Chess 7.0 program for Commodore 64 owners. It's easily the
best chess-playing program for the C64 and it
does so much more than a typical chess program that it needs a new category. I call it a
chess companion — like a good friend who is
always willing to do what appeals to you. Want
to go back a few moves and replay? No problem. Got yourself in deep trouble and want
to trade sides? Sure. Want some advise on
what to do next? This program will be as
unbiased as can be. If you'd like to play a friend
instead, the program will act as a referee and
inform you if any rules are broken.
What really sets this program apart,
however, are the features designed to help you
learn. There is the Advice command mentioned above. There is a full-blown tutorial, and
there are also many subtler things. The
tutorial, for instance, can be entered at any
point during the game for review. Then, you
have the Inward and Outward commands. INWARD shows you all of the pieces which can
move to (attack) a given square. OUTWARD
shows you all of the legal moves for a given
piece. And, the command Flip shows you
what the game looks like from the other side
of the board.
Finally, the ten levels of play are aimed at the
beginning player. The highest, level 9, is
roughly equivalent to level 4 in Sargon II—
about five to six minutes response time.
Admittedly, some will miss the higher levels that
take four to six hours to find a move, but the
average beginner has no use (or patience!) for
these. Much better to have nine different levels
with response times from less than a second
up to a couple of minutes. The longer the computer can "think" about its move, the better it
plays. All these levels give a steady progression
of opponents who play at just the right
strength.
You have no excuse not to learn the game
with this package on your shelf. There is a
complete on-screen tutorial that covers how
the pieces move and the rules of the game. It
has a whole chapter on each of the three major
phases of the game: opening, middle game,
and endgame. The tutorial is well-done.
Besides text, it uses "movies" where you
watch a demonstration and practice sessions
where you get to try what you've just learned.
There is also help in the 96-page program
manual and a short booklet by noted chess
author Fred Reinfeld. About the only thing
missing is a library of famous games to study.
If I had to find fault with this program, I'd
criticize the graphics. On my three monitors
it was difficult, but never impossible, to see a
black piece on a black square. Perhaps a little
color would help, as the screen is entirely
black and white. It is also unfortunate, but inevitable, that such a large program will take
about six minutes to load. Once loaded,
response is very good.
As a final note, POWERPLAY magazine (the
Commodore "house organ") reports in the
June/July issue that Commodore has acquired
the rights to this program and will market it
as the first of a new line of strategy games.
Bob Proctor
Circle 49 on Reader Service Card

CAST SPELL (cont.)
conjured up which puzzles. The scope is
certainly impressive. Try to cheer up Marvin, the manic-depressant robot; search
yourself for a small bit of intelligence; fillet
a babel fish; balance a platter of hor
d'oeuvres; swim up a pillar of water; take
a screening test; or play Jonah. Does all this
sound impossible? Well, no, it is only
improbable!
HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY will undoubtedly be voted as the best
adventure game of either 1984 or 1985, with
an honorable mention for its highly imaginative graphics. Douglas turned down hires graphics, animation, laser disk, and
plasma screens as being too staid to fully
convey the brilliance of the scenes in the
game. Only Infocom's famous slogan,
"Here's MUD(DLE) in your eye!" would
serve as the perfect foil for Douglas's
delicate hues and cries.
When he was asked whether he would
consider doing a sequel to this game (after
all, he has three other books lying around
collecting royalties), Douglas responded, "I
feel the need to branch out into new vistas
of creative work, and to explore new frontiers. I would really like to do another computer adventure, but on a different topic."
The interview ended when I, not so innocently, suggested, "How about Dr. Who?"
Note: Douglas Adams was the script editor
for many reincarnations of the long running
British Dr. Who television show.

COSMIC BALANCE (cont.)

LEARN GAME (cont.)

Turn eleven: four breaches. Another
cheer on the bridge.
Turn twelve: three more breaches. Encouraged, Greenlaw belayed any thoughts
of warping out. "We've got her now!" he
thought.
Turn thirteen: three more breaches.
And then turn fourteen.. .
Just when Greenlaw had her where he
wanted her; under heavy fighter attack and
no longer able to put up any effective attack
herself, he lost her.. .

you learn more names and dates, but the approach used in T. Rex is more fun.
Another fascinating and novel game from
CBS is called Weather Tamers ($39.95 for
C-64 only). This one puts you in control of
futuristic satellites that let you manipulate
air masses over the U.S.; your job is to try
to make money by providing people in
different places with the weather they want on
the day they want. Getting it to snow for a
ski party in Vermont in January is one thing,
getting it to rain on crops in Arizona in
August is another! In the process, you learn
a lot about what makes our weather.
OTHER TRENDS
There is a scramble to associate
characters from comics and TV with games
for young children. The characters from
Sesame Street, Peanuts, Dr. Seuss, and
even B.C. and Wizard of Id now appear in
programs. Now what I'd like to see is to have
Pac-Man — who's already made it to
breakfast cereal and Saturday morning TV
— return in an educational game. Now
that's irony.
While the number of new titles is impressive, it's also worth noting that a lot of
conversions were done in 1984. Many programs written originally for Apple and Atari
were made available for the Commodore 64
and, to a lesser extent, for the IBM. I wonder
if 1985 will see the same thing for the Macintosh or if new machines from Commodore
or Atari will steal the show.

Wisconsin warped out.

The final score of the battle was:
Greenlaw's Fleet-150; Wisconsin-187; for
a total of + 37 for Wisconsin. That coupled
with the fact that she had destroyed both
Kirk Robinson's Dreadnought T.A.B. (Thud
And Blunder) and Mark Bausman's Dreadnought Judge (real catchy name), meant that
Wisconsin, designed by Fred Brooks of
Newport Beach CA, was one of only two
ships that had a positive score against all
three judges. The other was Zeus, a tech-6
dreadnought designed by Richard Leach of
Cumberland, RI.
There were 37 entries in this year's contest. Most entries were tech-6 dreadnoughts,
as was Wisconsin.
There were several tech-1 four-ship entries (nearly all being two motherships with
two small escorts). The highest finishing
ship in this category was Red Squadron submitted by Roger Cooper of Westbury NY.
Red Squadron was basically four small
asteroids with fighter bays. No drives, no
shields. Just a range of one and 70 armor.
Greenlaw's six fighter squadrons breached
on every turn. I couldn't figure out how in
the world (or universe for that matter) these
ships could be surviving six shield breaches
each turn and still be around at turn 10. Post
combat analysis revealed their true nature.
How do you get a range of one with no
drives? I guess they had a hand crank warp
drive. While Red Squadron was a
formidable foe for Greenlaw's Fleet and Judge;
T.A.B.'s plasma torpedo was the perfect
weapon against all that armor. After several
turns of close-in attacks with plasma
torpedoes T.A.B. inflicted sever damage.
But she had to warp out as the fighters began
to take their toll.
Transporter ships did not fair well. All
three judges adopted a policy of opening
range early. The two dreadnought judges
would only close on turn eight or when
when they were sure they were not facing
a transporter ship. Even if boarded on turn
eight they would most likely have the range
to warp out on turn ten.
The designs, for the most part, showed improvement over last year's. Congratulations
to all participants. And remember: The key
to Cosmic Balance is balance!

EDITORIAL (cont.)
computer predictions that our network did back during the Democratic primaries showed that Walter
Mondale never stood a chance against Ronald
Reagan. . .1 think it is safe to say that the
demographics of 1984 have made it extremely difficult
for any Democratic candidate to challenge the incumbent Ronald Reagan."
Walter:"Thank you Dan, and that's the way it might
be, November 5, 1984. This is Walter saying, Good
Night."
A few facts may be a bit off (the election was actually
held on the 6th and Ed Clark played no role in it).
However, the state count and therefore electoral vote was
exactly correct! And the popular vote wasn't too far off
(59% to 41%).
So where did I read this prediction? In the very first
issue of CGW,November 1981! In an article on SSI's President Elect we simulated the 1984 election with Mondale
as the Democratic candidate. The quote above was from
the opening of that article written three years before the
election! Not bad!
For our next prediction.
OUR FAME SPREADS
At latest count, we have subscribers in twenty two countries around the world. The most interesting requests for
CGW come from overseas. Early in 1984 we received a
request for CGW from the Institute of Scientific Information of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow. We
couldn't decide which issue to send them: the issue containing the NATO Commander review, or the issue containing the North Atlantic '86 review. So we sent both.
Can't you picture it? CGW on the lobby magazine rack
in the Kremlin!
In another interesting request a gamer from Tehran Iran
sent us a letter requesting a sample copy of CGW. It seems
that he needed a copy to show to the local Revolutionary
Council. He had to get their approval to send funds outside the country. Sometimes we forget the blessings of
freedom don't we!
STAID!?
One of the hottest selling computer books of the last few
months has been the Whole Earth Software Catalog.
If you have a copy, check out the beginning of the Gaming section. There, you will witness one of the problems
of publishing a book on a volatile industry. Therein the
editors recommend three magazines on computer gaming: ST. GAME, COMPUTER GAMES, and CGW. Both
St.Game and Computer Games are referred to as slick
publications (lots of color and flash). St. Game is called
"the cheekiest magazine in computerdom" and Computer
Games is said to have "the wisdom not to take itself too
seriously".
Then they come to CGW: "For a more staid publication
try CGW." STAID! Wow, I bet you can see it now. You

come to the offices of CGW expecting to find a typical cluttered editorial office populated by people with their
lunches on one corner of the desk, a week's worth of work
on the other corner, and a computer terminal plotzed in
the middle. But then you open the door, and there we are:
stiff old fellows in tweed jackets, sitting in overstuffed
chairs. Between thoughtful puffs on our pipes we say
things like: "I say, ol' chap, why doesn't someone do a
Cricket simulation? We have American baseball and football, we even have games on boxing and karate. It would
be refreshing to have a computer version of a gentleman's
game. Eh, what?"
Actually, maybe "staid" isn't such a bad a description.
One of the definitions of staid is "steadfast". Another is
"lack of frivolity or impetuousness". I like that. The
Catalog goes on to say that CGW is "at its best at long
analyses of complex games, including detailed strategies
for doing well. For serious fans of strategy games...CGW
is an investment in getting more out of some of these
monster $40 simulation games." Uh gee fellows, better
check the prices on those "monster" games again.
Of the three magazines they recommend, only our
"staid" publication is still around. St. Game has, as one
of our readers put it "died and gone to heaven". And the
March 1985 issue of Computer Games will be their last.
The moral? If you have to be "staid" to "stay" in business,
go for it!

There were 265 RIDs turned in by press time for
this issue.
Newly rated games and updated game ratings are
listed with bold type in the table on page 46. The
breakdown buy machines was: Atari — 43%; Apple
— 36%; C-64 — 21%.
GAME RATINGS
The Game Ratings Table includes games evaluated
by our readers. For a game to be included in this
listing it must first have been offered for rating in our
regular R.I.D. rating system. Games offered for
evaluation are those covered in the magazine and/or
those having a good sales record during the time of
evaluation. Once offered for evaluation, the game
must have been evaluated by a sufficient number of
readers to be included in the results. Any game not
evaluated by at least 10% of the respondents was not
included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider
such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound,
packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?)
RID #18 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles are
listed for evaluation. Please take time to evaluate
these games and articles. Use the guidelines above
for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which
you have not played enough to have formed an
opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself,
not your opinion of the game being reviewed. Enter
a zero for any article that does not interest you.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 40 for details on the Reader Input Device

INDEX - VOL 4
The following index includes listings articles and games found in Volume Four. Each entry is accompanied by
a line of information which includes (in order) the issue number, page number, and a code as to the article type.
The article type gives you a hint as to how much material you can expect to find in the listing. FA (feature article)
means the subject is treated in a major article that is often more than one page long. MR (Micro Review) means
the subject is treated in a small review, usually 400-600 words long. TP (Taking a Peek) means the subject is mentioned in a short paragraph or two which gives a brief description of the game and a screen photograph. DP (Department) means the article is one of our regular columns.

FA — Feature Article
MR — Micro Review
TP — Taking a Peek
DP — Department
MS — Miscellaneous

