September 1990

Features
Roll Call of New Computer Games

Centurion: Defender of Rome
8

Our CES Report Continues

Three-Sixty's "Sands of Fire"

12

How to Become a "Desert Rat" / Bob Proctor

The New "Lord of the Rings"

16

Interplay Forges On / Johnny L Wilson

Mindcraft's "Keys to Maramon"

20

Books and Bashing / Alan Emrich

Mediterranean Storm Watch

22

SimCan's "Malta Storm" / Sam Punnett

Computer Game Designers Speak

24

Secrets of Computer Game Design

Time Enough For War

35

Interplay's "Future Wars" / Allen Greenberg

"Meer" Naval Action
Two Wargames from General Quarters / Wyatt Lee

Number 74

38

43

Electronic Arts Provides A New Forum / M. Evan Brooks

Origin's "Bad Blood"

52

Teen-aged Mutant Ninja Bad Guys? / Charles Ardai

Tycoon "Tooter" Two

64

Robber Baronology 2A / Alan Emrich

Game of the Year Awards

70

CGW Takes You to a Gala Celebration

Departments
Taking A Peek
Inside The Industry
Rumor Bag
Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints)
Scorpion's View (Earthrise)
Game Ratings (100 Games Rated)
Over There (European Games Report)
Advertiser Index
Reader Input Device
Conversions Received
Editorial

6
11
14
27
30
40
48
62
79
79
80

Taking a Peek

Accolade
550 South Winchester Blvd. #200
San Jose, CA 95128
STRIKE ACES: INTERNATIONAL BOMBING COMPETITION: In 1984, each of the
NATO and Warsaw Pact nations was invited to send their 'Top Gun" bombers and
crews to participate in a competitive strike
event in the Dakotas. "Strike Aces" takes
you to that competition, challenging you to
fly a variety of strike aircraft (while avoiding
a computer controlled series of "enemy"
fighters). With an emphasis on game over
simulation, even non-hardcore pilots will
enjoy "Strike Aces". The game includes a
"design your own mission" feature, as well
as mouse support. IBM ($49.95), Commodore 64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
The Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
COMBOTS: This game is an interesting,
chess-like "RobotWars" clone. Players
maneuver their combots around a hex grid
board full of terrain, taking care to insure
proper facing, while seeking out enemy
combots. Each combot must worry about
energy allocation to the various systems on
board, track with radar and beacons, make
repairs, replenish supplies at base, etc. Campaign games and custom combots can also
be designed. C-64/128 ($19.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.
Digital Wizards,Inc.
2727 Camino Del Rio South #340
San Diego, CA 92108
HEART OF THE DRAGON: This is an independently produced fantasy/arcade adventure where the player(s) choose from
two characters: psionic monk or martial
arts master. It has the look and feel of a
standard European import and, although
the game is supposed to run on all Amiga
computers, those who use 512K machines
will find that character maneuver options
are rather limited. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service # 3.
PC Globe, Inc.
4700 South McClintock
Tempe, AZ 85282
PC GLOBE 3.0 and PC NATIONS: Imagine an atlas on your PC and you're getting close to describing "PC Globe". Beautiful maps, statistical and comparative data
shown as clear, concise graphs. The
databases are both extensive and useful
with everything is exportable to popular
software programs (which will make your
reports look good). Reading the documentation is quite optional, as the entire program
is so user-friendly. IBM ($69.95). By adding

on "PC Nations", flags and national anthems supplement your "PC Globe" program. The nice colors and sounds are a
pleasant addition. ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #4.
PC USA: (not pictured) This is the USA
version of "PC Globe", with even more exacting and detailed information on this country
and Puerto Rico. Includes health statistics,
crime rates, climate trends, state histories,
employment and economic charts, educational statistics, and much more. Easy to access comparative analysis, time zones
(which adjust for daylight savings time) and
several other features greatly enhance this
program. IBM ($69.95). Note that both "PC
Globe" and "PC USA" will have annual updates available for $20-$30. Circle Reader
Service #5.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
675 Almanor Avenue, Suite 201
Sunnyvale, CA. 94086
SECRET OF THE SILVER BLADES: The
"Dungeon Masters" at SSI have stirred up
another batch of role-playing stew in this,
the third part of their quality Advanced
Dungeons 6 Dragons line. This story, set

in the world of Forgotten Realms, puts
players in a mining town beset by evil hordes unleashed by the unknowing miners.
The rich storyline is enhanced by SSI's
trademarked Journal Entries, the graphics
continue to improve, and two new spell
levels have been added to the magic-users
repertoire. (Mouse support, CGA/EGA/
Tandy). IBM($49.95), C64($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.
Spectrum HoloByte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
FACES...TRIS III: Glasnost, Schmasnost!
The Soviets are still trying to corrupt the
minds of capitalists worldwide. Their latest
scheme involves another take-off on the
mind-warping hit, Tetris. In this product,
players must create cohesive countenances
out of facial segments as they fall
downward. Stack the forehead, on the eyes,
on the nose, on the mouth, on the chin, for
a perfect face. The game includes 60 different faces, including well-known figures
like Santa and Margaret Thatcher, 10 levels
of increasing difficulty, and a two player
competition mode via a null modem link.
IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #7.

CES Report

To "Knight" The Knights
"Sir" Prizes and Excitement at the Consumer Electronics Show

lthough

the booths at
the Consumer
Electronics Show were
decked out with plaques
honoring those games
nominated for our "Game of
the Year" awards (our award
year runs from one Summer
CES to another) and a
Software Showcase depicted
products which the organizers of CES thought worthy, there was not and has
never been an award for the
journalists who cover computer games. At the June
show, however, Lord British
elected to surprise both the
Editor-in-Chief and Editor of
Computer Gaming World
with a unique honor. In
celebrating the tenth anniversary of Ultima, Lord British
inducted both Sipe and Wilson into the exclusive circle
known as the Knights of
Britannia. Only two journalists were chosen to
receive this recognition.

A

product and probably their
largest adventure yet) and
Paragon Software's MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani
Conspiracy (based on the
pen and paper game) should
have all reached your store
by the time you read this.
By the fall, however, additional titles will join these.
Dynamix has two graphic

ture interface) has teamed
with artist Mark Ferrari (and
others) to develop The
Secret of Monkey Island, a
romp through pirate lore with
a look that is similar and a
game that is bigger than
Loom. Accolade's Altered
Destiny (briefly described
last issue), NEC's Ys (a CDROM product on the Turbo-

Moving ever deeper into
mankind's spiritual past,
California Dreams and
Westwood Associates have
returned to the fertile subject
matter of mythology for Ancient Dreams. In the game,
players assume the role of
the illegitimate son of Zeus,
trying to regain his place on
Mt. Olympus. Although the
tales are based on myth and
the optimal solution is to follow the myth, the game features 18-20 locations and nonlinear possibilities for winning
the game.

Therefore, since the JulyAugust edition of CGW
talked about the trends in the
computer game industry,
let's see what these two
"lords" see happening in
each computer game genre
over the next six months.

Adventure and RolePlaying
The categories of adventure
and role-playing will be wellrepresented in the latter part
of 1990. New World is bringing Might and Magic II to
both the Amiga and the
Macintosh. For those who
have forgotten, this is an extremely large game with lots
of monster-mashing, adjustable difficulty levels and
now, even more impressive
graphics. Accolade's Search
for the King (described last
issue), SSI's Secret of the
Silver Blades (their latest
Forgotten Realms (Worlds?)

Arthurian lore, players undergo several mini-quests in
order to escalate from easy
strategy to more sophisticated RPG-style puzzles and
win the game. Noting the
"spiritual" aspects of the Arthurian quests, the game
even features a Faith attribute to measure one's
progress.

"point and click" adventures
that offer a unique new look.
Blade Hunter: Rise of the
Dragon features a film noir
look at a dark future and
Heart of China features a
larger-than-life romantic adventure on a finely painted
canvas of digitized pixels.
While "point and click" interfaces are under discussion,
UbiSoft's B.A.T. also
presents a dark futures with
a fascinating graphic feel.
Lucasfilm's Ron Gilbert
(father of their graphic adven-

Grafx 16 which features
both of the best-selling
Japanese action-adventures),
Interplay's Lord of the
Rings (see the Sneak
Preview) and Paragon's The
Punisher (based on Marvel
Comics' violent vigilante)
also feature on-screen, intuitive interfaces.
One goal of Virgin
Mastertronic's Spirit of Excalibur was to create an
easy icon-driven interface for
a combination strategy and
action game. In this game of

Those who like more traditional role-playing games will
enjoy the mini-quests involved in New World
Computing's Tunnels &
Trolls game (largely based
on the solitaire dungeons
available in the early '70s),
Electronic Arts' Fountain
of Dreams (expected to be
the foundation piece for a
new fantasy series in The
Bard's Tale tradition), and
Origin's Savage Empire
(the first in the "Worlds of Ultima" series). The latter is the
stuff of which pulp fiction (a
la A. Conan Doyle's Professor Challenger stories and
Edgar Rice Burroughs' Pellucidar series) was made, asking the entertaining question, "What if dinosaurs had
survived and technological
man discovered them?" As
noted last issue, George Alistair Sanger's soundtrack will
(Continued on page 75)

Review

Inside The Industry

Mediagenic Lands
16-bit Nintendo
Development
On July 2, 1990,
Mediagenic, Inc. (NASDAQ:
MGNC) announced that it
had become the first United
States software firm to be
selected as a developer for
Nintendo's Super Famicom
video game system. The
company's first three
products on the new platform
are expected to be: a BattleTech simulation, an air combat simulator and a sports
game. Given the expected superiority of the new
machine's screen handling
techniques and excellent scaling capability, it is significant
that, at least, two of the three
announced products use
three-dimensional polygonfilled graphics.
Sources close to Japanese
production of the Super
Famicom indicate that the
machine has considerably
more addressability than the
Sega Genesis machine and
sound capability which is
much easier to program than
the current video game formats. Bruce Davis,
Mediagenic Chairman of the
Board, was so impressed
with the Super Famicom that
he announced, "The
capabilities of this nextgeneration video game system are extraordinary. With
it, we have finally reached
the point where the depth
and quality of video games
will clearly surpass that of
computer entertainment".

The announcement of a
U.S. developer for the Super
Famicom sends an important
signal to U.S. consumers.
U.S. cartridge development insures that there will be
products for the domestic
market whenever Nintendo
decides to place the 16-bit in
the North American sales
channel. With the Super
Famicom scheduled for late
1990 release in Japan,
CGWs best bet is that Nintendo is putting production in
place for a formal unveiling
of the U.S. version at the
Summer Consumer
Electronics Show in 1991
and full product roll-out prior
to Christmas of 1991.

California Legislature Nears Endorsement of Censorship
The Senate Judiciary Committee of the State of California approved an amended
version of A. B. 3280 on
June 26, 1990. Assembly Bill
3280 is the Tanner bill that
would forbid the depiction of
any alcohol or tobacco package or container in any
video game intended primarily for use by minors. As
defined, the bill did not differentiate between video
games, coin-op entertainments or computer games. It
also did not delineate how enforcement agencies were to
determine whether a game
was intended primarily for
minors or not.
As amended, the bill
proscribes only paid advertising in video, computer or

coin-op games "intended
primarily for minors."

SubLogic Facing
Double Suits
Microsoft is currently working on future Flight
Simulator projects with
Bruce Artwick's Bruce
Artwick Organization in a
separate agreement from the
original relationship with SubLogic. Currently, SubLogic
faces lawsuits from both
Microsoft and Artwick. These
are separate and distinctive
suits. Microsoft's suit has to
do with licensing
rights/marketing rights over
technology associated with
Flight Simulator III, while
Artwick's suit has to do with
the code itself.

$20 Million Libel
Suit Filed Against
Cinemaware
Citing trade libel, unfair competition and violation of a
Federal racketeering statute,
Beyond Software, Inc. (a
small San Francisco area
firm contracted to develop
TV Sports: Baseball for
Cinemaware) filed a $20 million dollar lawsuit against
Cinemaware over a letter
sent from Phyllis Jacob, president of Cinemaware, to
prospective publishers of a
computer baseball program
developed by Beyond
Software. Originally intended to be part of the TV
Sports line as TV Sports:
Baseball, Cinemaware canceled the project on May 15,

1990. When the developer
began to try to market the
program elsewhere, they
were told that Cinemaware
was claiming that they
owned all the rights and
Beyond would not be able to
sell it. Cinemaware's letter
claimed full ownership of the
program citing one paragraph of the contract, while
Beyond claims that
Cinemaware's cancellation of
the contract brought another
paragraph into play in which
all rights reverted to Beyond.
Of course, the bottom line
for computer baseball fans is
that the future of the game
originally entitled TV Sports:
Baseball is, in the worst
case, in doubt, and in the
best case, further delayed by
legal considerations.

Television Discovers Computer
Games
Both Broderbund
Software and Lucasfilm
Games have entered into
agreements for production of
television series related to
computer game products.
Broderbund has entered into
agreement with animation
house, DIC (Inspector
Gadget and Captain Planet
and the Planeteers among
others), to produce a Carmen Sandiego cartoon
series. Lucasfilm Games is
cooperating with a production company in development of a live action comedy
based on Maniac Mansion.
Maniac Mansion will air on
the Family Network.

Review

At Sea in
the Desert
Three-Sixty's Sands of Fire
by Bob Proctor

S

Sands of Fire
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
Macintosh (IBM soon)
# PLAYERS:
1
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Digital Illusions
PUBLISHER: Three Sixty Pacific
Campbell, CA

ands of Fire (SOF)
is a World War II
tank simulation set
in North Africa. It is
designed by Digital Illusions, the same people
that designed PT-109 for
Spectrum HoloByte and
is very reminiscent of it: the terrain is as flat as an ocean, you
take part in one or more short missions, there is a strong emphasis on the view "from the turret" with targets appearing on
the horizon and growing until they can be identified. Finally, you
can play the game as either an arcade shoot 'em up or a more
serious simulation.

Set Sail in the Desert
Perhaps, the element that makes this seem most like a naval
game is the terrain. Three words describe the terrain: "flat, flat,
flat." It's even flatter than it looks. There are always low ridges or
"escarpments" on the horizon but, like mirages, they recede as
you approach. There are no high spots or low spots, no way to
get hull-down to present a smaller target. One could argue that
this simplification was "realistic enough" for the flat terrain
around Tobruk or in western Egypt but it just doesn't fit for the
rugged terrain of Kasserine Pass or the mountains of Tunisia.
The land may be as level as a billiard table but, at least, one
can't see "forever". Tanks pop into view at a range of about
3000 yards, well within accurate range for the main guns. An
enemy at this distance is always accompanied by a towering
cloud of dust so they cannot be missed as long as one is looking
in the right direction. It seems a little funny that this cloud can
never be seen before the vehicles themselves can be seen, but
that's a simplification that the designers have chosen. It really
wouldn't make much difference if it was possible to see dust
clouds at greater range, though, since SOF is not a game of
maneuver. The German units always follow a predefined path
and schedule and this can be seen on the map at lower skill
levels. That Rommel must be a hard driver; one never en-

counters a German vehicle that was standing still (and thus not
creating this tell-tale dust cloud). Unlike PT-109, however, there is
no variation in weather or lighting, no dawn, no night time.

A Room With A View
The game has two active views: driver and commander. The
player gets to be both. The driver sits below where there is a
small window. Through this opening, one can see straight ahead
and there are also controls for the speed and direction of the
tank available. The commander sits up in the turret where a person would normally have his head sticking out and be able to
see all around. In SOF, the commander is always "buttoned up",
but to provide decent visibility, the player is given a nice picture
window with a view of about 180 degrees. This view can be
pivoted by rotating the turret. The commander also serves as the
gunner in this game and it is with the weapons systems that SOF
has the most realistic feel. One chooses a round from the racks,
watches the loader reach in to put it into the breech (it must be
the loader, no one else has arms that hairy!), aim, fire and pull
the eject handle to get rid of the spent casing. With full animation and sound, it's quite a show! On a Mac Plus or SE, however,
it's slow enough that most players will probably turn some or all
of it off to speed up play after the novelty wears off. The loading
animation, in particular, slows things down. The type of ammo
loaded is shown on the breech of the gun, a nice touch.
Targets appear small and grow. As they get closer, it is possible to identify what type of vehicles they are and also guess accurately at their current course and direction. The gunsight
provides a slightly magnified view and must be used for accuracy at longer ranges. There are a variety of different targets,
including staff cars and half-tracks but most are some form of

tank. These range from leftovers from 1940 up to the huge Tiger
tanks that fought in the later stages of the battle for Tunis.
If a single battle is desired, the theater of war is selected from
six choices. A player can be the British during three different
periods of the fighting around Tobruk, from early 1941 to mid1942, or El Alamein in late 1942. Or one can be the Americans
at Kasserine Pass or Tunisia in 1943. In individual battles,
players command a platoon of one to five tanks but do not give
orders; the others will follow your example in all actions.
For those with more time, a campaign game is available where
one can take either the British or American force. It is possible to
play through all of the battles for each theater before moving on
to the next, but results from one battle don't influence the type
or numbers of tanks with which the next is started. So, what the
campaign game really amounts to is going for medals.

Aid for the Commander
Several informational screens are available. Action is
suspended while the player examines these. Most useful is the
map view which can be reached with just a click of the mouse
from either driver's or commander's position. Personal and Unit
Status screens and controls for sound and level of realism are
available from the pull-down menus.
There are four types of Allied tanks: Matilda, Crusader, Stuart,
and Sherman. Although the player is given a type of tank appropriate to the period, they all look the same on the inside. At
the arcade level, they all perform about the same too. One can

zoom around with any popgun, killing Tigers with abandon. At
more serious levels, those 37mm rounds start to bounce off (the
only way to tell a bounce from a miss is by sound)!
Gamers used to the detail of board games will find that everything in SOF is greatly simplified in favor of overall feel. SOF is a
game of tank combat. The whole battle structure is just a way to
give some background to the combat situations. Fortunately, it
works. When a player finds himself in the midst of The Cauldron
with tanks racing in all directions and he's firing as fast as he
can load, it's a thrill.
Further, by the time this review hits the stands, there should be
a new, improved version of Sands of Fire. It will have a number
of minor improvements (including a control for game speed to
slow things down on the newer, super-fast Macs). It will also fix
the worst problem to be found in the game—the strange teleportation of all tanks back to their point of departure whenever the
player's tank is shot out from under him and it is time to transfer
command to another tank.

Well Done
Frankly, Sands of Fire is a competent program that does not
break any new ground in computer gaming. Still, graphics and
sound are above average and, though it is not an overly accurate
simulation, it has enough realistic "feel" to satisfy many of us.
Further, it is very easy to play and successfully recreates some
of the feel of the frenzied tank battles around Tobruk.

Rumor Bag

The Rumor Bag
by Rhett Beauregard Jackson

ow

I know why they call it "Hotlantal I thought it might have been
because of the Cheetah-Elite bottomless/topless go-go bar across the
street from the Hilton, but it turns out
that the Southerners in the know are
referring to the humidity combined with
the heat.

N

Of course, Atlanta isn't the only item
that's "hot" this time of year. In fact,
things were so "hot" at the recent Origins
game convention that it was hard to concentrate on the rumor biz. A fellow who
looked amazingly like one of the
Cinemaware artists was asking a lovely
Polynesian woman dressed in a barbarian outfit made of animal skin if she'd
ever considered starring in a CD-ROM
product. When she protested that she
was only interested in men who respect
her mind, he replied that Cliff Johnson's
first product for Cinemaware features a
female protagonist. Entitled Three, the
heroine is an executive who, by a freak
and improbable accident, loses the number three from her spreadsheet. She
must then chase the number through the
land of letters and numbers to retrieve it,
solving the classic Cliff Johnson-style puzzles as she does so.
I didn't hear the end of the previous conversation, so I don't know if he managed
to sign her up for his companies upcoming romance title on CD-I or not. That's
because two lithe and languid lovelies
clad in little more than phasers passed
within my line of sight. I decided to leave
my artist friend behind and get closer to
these live action clones of Japanimation's "Dirty Pair", Kei and Yuri. It appears they were trying to catch up to
Lord British. The Yuri clone insisted that
she had seen a contract for a multiplayer version of Ultima in Lord British's
hands when they had gotten his
autograph the night before. "I think it's
going to be called Multima and it's
going to show up on something called
Quantum," she said. "It looks like

and roster editing in order to make a
"pure-bred" computer game out of it.
Swartz was eating the wild boar dinner
and spotted my bag-clad visage first.
Pointing at his dinner, he asked, "Sort of
reminds you of your editor, doesn't it?"

they're expecting to sell more than
100,000 shelf units of the front end in
regular stores."
I decided to head over to Jim
Dunnigan's 24-hour marathon. Who
could possibly believe that a seminar
could be well attended at three o'clock in
the morning? It was packed. Jim talked
about his Hundred Years War game to
go live on GEnie in late October. There
are to be 300+ player positions in the
game. Players play one of the three
hundred significant historical characters
during the era. Each actual day of play
time equals three months so the campaign will last 400 days.
Feeling in need of some substantive
repast, I ventured over to Pittypat's
Porch, that cornucopia of colonial cuisine
that should never be missed on a trip to
Atlanta. Who should I see but Loren
Wiseman (of FASA fame), Larry Bond
(author of Red Phoenix and Harpoon),
Bill Swartz (designer of the first two U.S.
versions of Koei games) and Evan
Brooks (our own curmudgeonly
reviewer). Evan Brooks showed me his
KGB ID card (from Titan Comics), complete with motto in Russian and Larry
Bond showed me his "Commander in the
Soviet Navy" ID card. I told them
everyone was switching sides these days.
You didn't know whether to watch the
video game or disk-based game market.
In fact, Cinemaware plans to develop
and debut their TV Sports: Hockey game
on the NEC Turbo-Grafx 16. Then, they
expect to add some statistics handling

"The bore part or the wild part?" I
asked with considerable discretion. They
declined to take the bait, figuring that
neither Wilson nor Sipe were personages
to trifle with, so (at the risk of inflating
my travel and expense report to where it
matches my waistline), I joined another
party with more loquacious potential sources. There, I discovered that GEnie has
three other games in progress. Federation ll from Great Britain is a space trading text oriented game, currently undergoing playtesting. I was intrigued by Feudal
Entry, a text-based diplomatic game
from Adventures Unlimited, Inc. and
Dragon's Gate, a text-based role-playing
game by Mark Jacobs. Both are set to
go live in the fall.
I returned to the convention and was
amusing myself by looking at the costumes when a designer friend happened
by and said this all reminded him of
Greg Johnson's (direct from his Role-Playing Game of the Year award from CGW
for Starflight 2) new Sega deal to
develop an "off the wall" (why are we not
surprised?) game called Toejam and
Earl. It's a two-player game with a
Rogue/Gauntlet perspective where two
aliens have crashlanded on an insane
planet where they are threatened by the
dreaded nerd herd, killer ice cream truck
and more.
He had no sooner spoken than a guy in
an orc costume proceeded to approach
an authentic four star general and say,
"Great costume, man!". We couldn't help
it. We immediately turned to each other
and simultaneously say, "Do you think
it's possible we're living in a Sega
game?" N-a-a-a-ah!

Sneak Preview

Interplay's

The
Lord
of
the
Rings
by Johnny L. Wilson

G

amers who not only recognize

names like Bundushathur, Muzgash and Nanduhirion, but feel
their pulses begin to race and their sense
of curiosity rising whenever such
nomenclature appears, have a fascinating treat in store for them when they discover the first adventure in Interplay's
new trilogy of role-playing games.
Volume One of the Lord of the Rings trilogy is a dream come true for Interplay
founder, Brian Fargo. Fargo's very first
copy of a Tolkien novel still has extensive notes on turning the stories into a
computer game. The design team didn't
use those notes to make this game,
though; too many years and the state of
the art have passed them by.
This game hasn't been passed by, however. In fact, the company decided not to
use any part of the name of the first
novel in the trilogy because any part of
the title, The Fellowship of the Ring,
would have sounded too much like the
earlier adventure game based on the
Tolkien trilogy. The Lord of the Rings is
intended to offer more role-playing challenges than any previous games based
on the Tolkien licenses. Paul Jakeways,
author of The Dark Tower role-playing
module for the Judges Guild, and Scott
Bennie, producer of the game, are

primarily responsible for the game's
design.
The game follows the book in a rather
linear pattern, but true to Interplay's
design philosophy, one can do plenty of
diverging from the central path. As in the
book, play begins with Frodo as an individual. Then, as Frodo, the player
recruits more and more members of the
party through exploration, puzzle-solving
and smaller quests until the full ninemember fellowship is formed at Rivendell. The object of this particular game is
to find out what has happened to Gandalf, avoid the Black Riders and form the
fellowship.

"The World Of Woven Trees"
In Tolkien's novel, The Fellowship of
the Ring, the party encounters a group
of elves just prior to leaving the Shire.
They are singing a song about Elbereth,
Queen of the Western Seas, and almost
every portion of the song is about her
glorious beauty. Beauty is also the very
first impression one gets of the graphic
presentation in the Lord of the Rings
game.
In the past, Interplay has been known
for The Bard's Tale, Wasteland and
Dragon Wars look. The screen is divided

into "windows" which present animation,
maps, inventories, character read-outs
and menus. In the Lord of the Rings
game, the viewpoint is full-screen. Not
only is the introductory "cartoon" which
sets up various sections of the story
presented via the full screen, but the
party of adventurers is seen from an over
head perspective as they travel over a
colorful environment with all locations in
constant scale. There are no windows to
impede the aesthetic of viewing the action.
Of course, there must be an interface of
some sort or the player has no way of
communicating with the game. So, Interplay designed a "pop-up" interface. At
any point in the game, a player who
wants to offer direction to the quest can
simply click on the right mouse button.
When the player does this, the entire
parchment full of active icons is displayed. From this display of icons,
players may elect to participate in combat, check up on character statistics,
pick up and/or use objects, use a skill,
perform one of the two kinds of magic,
hold four different types of conversations,
rearrange the party or select another
character's skills. The "pop-up" interface
offers a welcome solution to many

design problems and is
most probably here to stay.
The adventure is divided
into four general
geographic areas which, in
turn, feature distinctive purposes in the game design.
The first area is The Shire.
The Shire is designed as a
tutorial area and contains
a few mini-quests
designed primarily to
familiarize the player with
the game system. This initial portion of the game offers some minor combat
sequences and offers
some foreshadowing
regarding the plot.
The second area is Old
Forest/Barrow Downs.
This is a relatively straightforward section where the
main challenge is solving
a labyrinthine maze and
encountering the spirits of
the dead in Barrow
Downs. Third, the party
reaches the geographical
locale between Bree and
Weathertop. This is a section which is fairly true to
the book, but adds a few
new characters and a
couple of surprises. Scott
Bennie was extremely careful in adding
plot elements, however. Whenever he
and Paul wanted to add new elements to
the story, Scott would go back to The Silmarillion to ascertain whether the proper
names or common terms involved would
look and sound authentic or not. The
fourth area is simply called Beyond. It
refers to the events at Rivendell where
the party proper (nine adventurers) is
formed and sets up the rest of the quest.

"Runes Of Power"
Toward the end of the novel, the party
is experiencing a sense of depression in
the dark land of Moria. Gimli, the dwarf,
sings a song about his ancestor (the
great Dwarven King Durin I) that mentions runes of power upon the door.
Tolkien's magic is rare and mysterious
compared to the abundance and accessibility found in most fantasy role-playing
systems. So, to be true to the literary
background, Interplay's design team
decided to move away from some of the
gaming conventions with regard to
magic. They went so far as to suggest
that Tolkien's magic was so weak by contemporary role-playing standards that a
mediocre wizard in many fantasy games
could have wasted Gandalf.
So, they designed a magic system
which had both spells (which could be
worked by wizards and magical creatures, but not by common folk) and
words of power (which would be dis-

covered by the characters throughout the
course of the game). Words of power
also appear mysteriously in a character's
inventory, especially if the character has
been talking to knowledgeable persons
or magic creatures. So, players must
check the character inventories on a
regular basis.
Another departure from traditional roleplaying game design involves the game's
approach to treasure. The Lord of the
Rings is not a "Monty Haul" adventure.
Gold and valuable items are not the commodities necessary for success in this
game. Rather, the emphasis of the game
is on searching out information and sharing it with the right people. It is a game
where one is definitely not rewarded for
attacking first and asking questions later.
Further, in order to provide the feeling of
a "real" community, the design team
elected to utilize less "set" encounters
and allow the players to experience more
random experiences.
Other factors in the game design are
typical of Interplay's recent products. Puzzles have multiple solutions and there are
plenty of off-line paragraphs to supplement the story line. Of course, there is
some spin beyond the typical off-line
paragraphs, however. Interplay's first
Lord of the Rings game uses three types
of lore: Elven lore, Numinorean lore and
Hobbit lore. These tales, songs, and inscriptions are not only interesting and
true to the Tolkien mythos, but they also
assist the player's in diagnosing the pur-

pose of artifacts and solving puzzles.
Much of this lore can be found in the offline paragraphs.

"A Lord of Wisdom"
In front of the fountain at Lorien, Frodo
sang a dirge to Samwise Gamgee about
the long-lost Gandalf. In that song, Gandalf is referred to as a lord of wisdom. In
The Lord of the Rings, Interplay is
moving away from the roots of computer
role-playing in pure hack and slash and
migrating toward a game design where
discovery is the most important factor
and "wisdom" (both inside and outside
the boundaries of the game) is the result.
To be sure, combat is still part of the
design. It was part of the book. However,
the goal of the game design is much
more that of encouraging players to explore and discover the marvelous world
of Middle Earth rather than destroy and
pillage like many gamers did in Wasteland.
The risk of creating landscapes in computer games which are large enough to
explore is that some areas will seem
empty and purposeless. Indeed, there are
"empty" spots in The Lord of the Rings,
but the overall feeling is that there is also
plenty to experience in the game. Finally,
one thing is clear. The use of resplendent
full-screen graphics and loving attention
to the Tolkien lore means that in The
Lord of the Rings, Interplay is out to
forge one "Ring" game to rule them all.

Review

"Books" Are
The Keys To
Maramon
by Alan Emrich
Title:
System:
Price:
Designers:
Publisher:
Distribution:

The Keys to Maramon
IBM
549.95
James B. Thomas
Ali Atabek
Mindcraft
MicroProse Software
Hunt Valley, MD

the game. In fact, if
the copy protection
wasn't based on key
words in the documentation, you could almost lose the whole
rules book and still
enjoy Keys with very little handicap. About the most important
thing to be learned from reading the documentation is to talk to
the ship captain who brought the player to the island.

magine sitting g own at the game table with your buddies, and
one starts to deal out the cards. He calls the game as he
deals, "Okay, five ante, deuces, aces and one-eyed faces wild,
high-low split anaconda with a spit in the ocean, guts to open." If
your response is "Huh?", then that's how I felt when trying out
my first computer role-playing game. I wish I would have started
with The Keys to Maramon.

I

Oh, sure, I spent those hours kicking around Might and Magic
and Might and Magic II, but those stories were so vast in their
scope that it was beyond my endurance to actually finish them.
While I did complete The Bard's Tale, it was only after my roommates became a cheering section every time the game was
booted (They wanted to know how it ended, even when Yours
Truly was ready to throw in the towel.). Since then, I have been
pretty much burned out on this entire genre, especially with all of
the map-making it often entails (I know, I know, auto-mapping
was made for such as I, but I have been too fastidious in avoiding the entire genre to know what difference it has made). For
me, it seemed better to "waste" my time playing epic wargames
(at least, the maps are provided for those).
The Keys To Maramon, Mindcraft's latest release (distributed
through Microprose and the follow-up to their highly successful
Magic Candle), changed all that. It really unlocked the entire
genre of computer role-playing games for me. Thus, the nice
thing about Keys To Maramon is that it is performing a "public
service" for the computer role-playing genre by serving as a excellent recruitment tool in a market dominated by hard-core, epiclength adventure games.

Keys to the Kingdom (Features and Hints)
The first thing there is to like about The Keys To Maramon is
that the documentation is light. It is not skimpy, mind you, but
short and concise, with plenty left to be discovered by playing

Keys enjoys all of the accoutrements of the role-playing genre.
The player assumes the role of one of four heroes; the
Huntsman, the Blacksmith, the Scholar or the King's Courier (the
only female character). Each has four basic ratings for Speed
(how fast they maneuver around the playing area, and in a "real
time" game, that often makes considerable difference), Dexterity
(a percentage chance of a single "killing stroke" when attacking
a monster), Strength (how much damage is inflicted by non-killing strokes), and the usual Life Points (how long one's character
will be around).
The player's character has a quest to fulfill, namely saving the
town from the monsters who come out to sack it each evening.
Naturally, final success hinges on cleaning out the catacombs
beneath Maramon and confronting the usual "ultimate bad guy"
who's responsible for all the trouble. (Won't these UBGs ever
learn?)
Four critical elements are available to help the character in
achieving this goal: weapons, armor, herbs and keys. The
weapons available in the game provide a good selection of the
usual swords, axes and hammers. These are melee weapons,
which means the character must saunter up to monsters, look
them in the eye and pound the space bar for all it's worth (both
taking and inflicting damage in the process). The bows and arrows actually fire "ranged" missiles, so monsters can be hosed
from a safer distance. (They still close awfully fast, though, so
feel free to turn the "turbo" option on your IBM clone off when
you play Keys). The down side about arrows is that the player
can only pack 99 of them. Believe it or not, 99 shots can go pretty fast (especially after building up your space-bar-pounding
reflexes). So then, it's back to trusty steel and iron to do the job
(Even these suffer wear and tear, though, so they need to be constantly resharpened—for a fee, of course).
Also, some magic weaponry is available. Fire Globes are land
mines which are dropped around town. When a monster steps

on one, BOOM, no more monster. However, it is possible for careless adventurers to step on their own Fire Globes and lose
several Life Points in the process. The real pain is that these
globes are hard to see once placed (or else the monsters
wouldn't step on them, right?). Also ready for one's arsenal are
the Ice, Flame and Fear wands (the former two firing damage at
range, the latter holding a monster in its place for a time). These
are expensive weapons, however. While the Scholar has the best
magic skills rating of the four characters, the others seem to fare
better with cheaper, and easier to wield, steel.
The armor is the usual leather, ring mail, chainmail, and steel
plate. Upscale suits include methreal (as opposed to mithral)
and, if found while dungeon delving, pearl armor (all the snappy
dressers know that Maramon is famous for its pearls). There are
no penalties, apparently, for wearing heavier armor, so batten
down, button up and battle through.

Cooking With Magic
As in The Magic Candle, "magiks" in the game revolve around
herbs and mushrooms. Fortunately, in the heat of battle or when
preparing to turn a dangerous dungeon corner, the player can
slam the "U" key and "use" a magic mushroom. Depending on
the flavor, they will increase a player's basic statistics or up the
armor class (all with a temporary effect, so pack a big lunch).
The vital herbs and potions are the ones which, naturally, restore
Life Points. Yes, the medical mushroom and band-aid brew are
the difference between the reckless new role-player charging into
certain doom and charging into nearly fatal almost certain doom.
Another key to Keys are keys. The player starts with a key to

the strongrooms (where fitful rest is available and goodies can,
occasionally, be found). Access to the catacombs below hinges
on collecting other keys, each of ever more precious metal. The
better the key, the further the access. One will have quite an extensive key ring before confronting the Ultimate Bad Guy.
The real heart of the game is not for the player to collect the
Friday paycheck from the mayor. It is, instead, to become an
avid reader. For every 1,000 experience points, the proper book
can be "read" from the closed stacks in order to gain a statistics
point for a basic attribute. By simply shelling out some big
bucks, the rare book room can be visited for some major clues
and aids to the player. Be sure to take a few notes when spending time in the rare book room. Everything learned there will
make a lot of sense towards the end of the adventure.

Key Buy (Conclusion)
In considering whether to purchase The Keys to Maramon or
not, you should note that I am not Scorpia. Not only does this
work to my girlfriend's advantage, but it also makes me the right
market for The Keys of Maramon. Spending about 5-6 enjoyable
hours playing this game has left a pleasant taste on the old
gaming palette, and a fond memory of good, crisp role-playing
adventure. Keys is not an epic quest for the jaded adventurer
(some might consider this a cheese puff when they really wanted
steak). Some may feel that this is simply too short a game for
the price (conceivably $10 per hour of gaming pleasure). It is,
however, a manageable quest for new adventurers with a compelling "gotta-play-it-straight-through" quality to it. Which often
means that after five straight hours of The Keys to Maramon,
you'll need to find one last key, the key to the rest room!

Review

Storm In The Mediterranean
Simulations Canada's Malta

Storm

by Sam Punnett
ing to interrupt the
flow of supplies on
their way to North
Africa. The Axis is
faced with suppressing
and, perhaps, storming Malta while ferrying life blood supplies
to the Afrika Korps.
Decisions are taken
in light of the National
Malta Storm
TITLE:
Priorities menu which emuSYSTEM:
IBM, Atari ST, Amiga
late the aims of the Allied
REVIEWED:
IBM
PLAYERS:
0-2
and Axis central comPRICE:
$60.00
mands. It is the ordering
DESIGNER:
Robert Crandall
of the five National
PUBLISHER:
Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Priorities that predeterBridgewater, NS
mines the combat roles of
CANADA, B4V 2XS
the various air, sea, and
land units that make up
the player's combat groups. Combat roles determine the
actions units within groups take within a game turn.
These actions are: Reacting to enemy actions within a
groups area of influence; Striking at enemy bases;
launching Superiority missions; Transporting supply or
relocating to friendly bases; and Escorting transporting
or striking units.
The player exercises some operational control through
the expenditure of Command Span Limitation points
(CSL's) applied to individual units. It is the CSL's that
are the crux of player control in the game. They allow
the player to reorientate unit actions preset by the national priorities and, in the process, fix a level of determination of effort with which the unit will undertake the action. These actions in turn affect the levels of supply
available to a group for further actions on later turns.

alta Storm is a recent release by Simulations Canada
covering the World War II Axis effort to subdue the British
bastion on the island of Malta in the central Mediterranean. Malta boasts the finest deep water harbor in the Mediterranean and was the pre-war home of the British Mediterranean
Fleet. Its airbases and location made it the cornerstone base for
interdicting Axis supply lines to Rommel's forces in North Africa.
At the same time, tiny Malta itself was heavily reliant on convoy
delivered supply to keep it vital and was perilously situated only
30 minutes flying time from Axis air armadas in Sicily. These conditions set the stage for an epic conflict in the struggle to control
the Mediterranean theater early in the war.

M

SimCan's game treatment establishes the player's role at the
strategic decision-making level. The Allied player must keep
Malta supplied and reinforced while, at the same time, attempt-

The rulebook is little help in describing to the player
just how one is to go about reordering the national
priorities. To quote the section dealing with it, " . . . this
(changing national priorities) is the heart of the game
from the player viewpoint, so careful use of this function
is advised." I found out how to do it quite by accident and was
bemused by the exercising of the "Command Override Option"
that followed, of which there is no description in the rules at all. It
also might have been helpful to provide a written description of
the units involved in the game. While the game admittedly will appeal to a select audience to begin with, it would be helpful to
know just what MC200s and Marylands are, so that the player
could be sure of action allocations.
For those who are unaware, Simulations Canada products
make no attempt at graphic representation. The design
philosophy avoids pretty pictures and artistic on-screen maps in
favor of a number crunching menu, text, list and report format.
Players who are less interested in the command experience
(Continued on page 73)

Game Developers' Conference

Art and State-of-the-Art
Are Not Synonymous
Reflections on the 1990 Computer
Game Developers' Conference
n three years of observing the evolution of the Computer Game
Developers' Conference, it has
grown from a tiny circle of visionary
idealists into a larger pluralistic community of pragmatists, technicians,
commercially oriented craftsmen,
theoreticians and (dare we say it) artists. The agenda has expanded from
talking about games, what makes
them good and how to make them better to talking about the future, ethical
and emotional impact, socializing
potential, and transformational goals of
computer games. Where we spoke of
the blatant mercenary atmosphere of
last year's conference, this year offered
a broader perspective over the overriding money questions of the previous
year.

Pitfall II, among others). Hilary

I

To be sure, these developers are concerned about making their livings
(and/or fortunes), but they are also
concerned about their art. In fact, one
presentation discussed some of the issues of art versus commercialism.

Art Versus Commercialism
Robert Gehorsam of the PRODIGY
interactive personal service began
the presentation with an illustration
about Alice Walker's The Color
Purple. The publisher of the book was
allegedly so convinced of the importance of this book that he was willing
to lose up to $100,000 in order to get
it on the market. Instead, circa $10 million later, it is considered a "monsterselling" book and spawned a very successful film version. Gehorsam noted
that one does not always have to
choose between art and commercialism.
Robert went on to define art as a creative media that changes those who encounter it and a personal expression
that communicates. Then, he noted
that it is "history" that will ultimately

believes that the graphic artists need
to be brought into the design/development process as soon as possible. She
prefers to be part of the brainstorming
process in the early stages of the
design. This enables her to consider
the visuals necessary to the success of
a product prior to the point of executing thumbnail sketches.
determine what art actually is. Bringing
his major point home, he noted that
the question is not whether business is
good for art, but whether art is good
for business.
Then, he opened up the possibility
that art would be good for business because an older and more sophisticated
audience is now consuming leisure
products. Thus, the products must be
better in order to convert this discriminating audience.
Next, Eric Goldberg suggested that
the industry is evolving to a point
where game design will play more and
more of a role and the technical services within the industry will enhance
and support the design function. In suggesting ways that publishing computer
game software is becoming an art, he
cited firms like MicroProse, Lucasfilm and Interplay that feature limited
product lines but have made a commitment to continual innovation. In citing
ways to bring the computer game art
to the masses, he cited Nintendo as
an opportunity.

The Artist's Role in Game
Design
In order to help computer games be
perceived as art, publishers have
brought creative specialists into the
development process. One roundtable
was led by Mediagenic design artist,
Hilary Mills Lambert (Tongue of the
Fatman, Face-Off, Ghostbusters, and

For example, Lambert once needed
some ideas on how to make a "Transformer"-type mechanoid work. She
went to a standard photographic reference work on movement and
photocopied individual pictures depicting the walk of an ostrich. Then, she
used these photocopies as individual
frames for a crude animation sequence, made the frames larger, put
tissues over her copies, scanned the tissues themselves and studied the movement when making her animation.
Scanning in pictures that are different
than the exact look one is going for
and using them as a model is extremely efficient.
Next, Lambert stressed that computer artists need to be machine-format literate. They must be flexible in
approaching target machines and be
certain that they are using the right
software in order for programmers to
access data at a later date. Some examples she gave referred to the inability of NTSC monitors connected to
game machines to display colors
higher than twelve or lower than one
and the fact that on Sega machines,
every color acts differently when it is
adjacent to another color (e.g. a dark
pixel next to a white pixel gives one a
rainbow effect). To avoid problems,
she tries to figure out "laws" for each
different machine and works with three
different monitors at once (a black and

(Continued on page 36)

Game Hints

es, it's that time again. Time
to take a safari into the back
room, and hunt through the
mail sack jungle for some big
game. Well, maybe you'll have to
settle for some hints instead. The
room isn't quite big enough for
lions and gazelles, not to mention
elephants and giraffes (grin).

Y

Scorpion's Mail
by Scorpia

Mail delivery in general seems to
have improved a bit over the last
couple of months or so. Letters are
now arriving in my box in more
reasonable time, although there is
still the occasional tardy missive
that takes over a week to reach
me. Most of them, though, are getting here quickly.
Some people think I'm kidding
about the stacks of mail. Ha! You
keep seven years' worth of reader
mail around, and see how much
you have. It's all over the place,
stuffed into boxes and plastic bags,
shoved into closets and on top of
bookcases . . . and the letters keep
coming and I'm running out of
room (even Fred is beginning to
grumble a bit). Maybe it's time to
dump some of the older ones, at
that.
Anyway, that's my problem, not
yours, and it's time we got to your
problems. After all, that's why
you're here in the stacks in the first
place. So let's reach into the bag
and see what comes up.

Hero's Quest: Several readers
are concerned about the skills of
their characters. They've figured
out one way of solving a puzzle,
but the type of character they have
lacks the necessary skill. Don't
worry about it! Remember, each
class of character has different
abilities and all of them come with
what they need to solve any puzzle.
Also, many of the puzzles were designed
to have multiple solutions to begin with.
The more familiar you become with your
character's skills, the better you will be
able to use them to get you through the
game.
Dragon Wars: A number of people
are having trouble getting away from it
all, or at least from the known world.
They've been everywhere on the map,
but they know there has to be more,
especially since there are some things
they haven't been able to do or find yet.
Well, you need some transportation, and
there's only one kind that can take you
across water. Yep, you need to do some-

thing about those pirates. Speaking of
which, if you haven't been able to get in
to even talk to them, you might be overlooking a certain skill. One of the original
four party members comes with it. Check
'em out, and see if you can discern the
useful one in this circumstance. Finally,
yes, there will be a Dragon Wars II. it is
being worked on even as I write this. However, it doesn't look too likely that it will
make the Christmas market.

Knights of Legend: Some folks are
looking for the arena. You'd think that
the weapons trainers could tell you where
it is, or that at least there would be a
handy sign saying "This way to the
arena!". Nope, it's stuck out there and

you have to stumble across it on your
own. Either that, or read further on to
find out that it's located about halfway
up the road to Htron, just west off the
road.

The Magic Candle: If you're having
trouble with the final ritual to restore the
candle, maybe you overlooked (or didn't
find out about) standing in the right
places in the room. Only three people
are needed to perform the ritual, so
make sure they have all the special
items needed. Then, walk them around
and keep an eye on the floor.
Might and Magic II: For those who
may be having difficulties with completing the arena sequence to see the queen,

here is some important information: you
must do all your combats (on the black
ticket) and visit the queen, with exactly
the same party members. Don't add or
drop anyone in between. Many thanks to
Brian Smith for discovering this little item.

Ultima V: Finding the Amulet in the
Underworld can be quite a task, as some
people have discovered. The trick is to
start your journey from the right place. A
whirlpool, for instance. Be sure to bring
plenty of gems, as the underground river
system can be a bit tricky to follow. In
regard to going on quests for the various
shrines, remember that you must do
these quests one at a time. Visit a shrine,
go to the Codex, and return to that
shrine, before going on to another one
(else the game becomes confused..and
so will you!). Down in the bottom level of
dungeon Deceit, some people have been
unable to reach the ladder beyond the
wall. You have to find the hidden lever
that will open part of it (and, of course,
reveal monsters). The torches on the
walls might be worth looking at.

Ultima VI: Folks, forget about the
ghost. You can't solve the murder. You
might have a good idea of who's guilty,
but there's nothing you can do about it.
Quentin is just so much window dressing, sorry to say. Moving from ghosts to
crypts, several people have been unable
to find the catacombs of Moonglow.

Have you been to Xiao's yet? Beyond a
door in her place is the ladder to the
burial site. For those who need to get
their yew log cut, there is a sawmill just
outside Minoc where the work can be
done, at reasonable cost. Finally, Raj lyes
writes to say that there is a use for the
Reveal spell, after all. The floor traps I
mentioned in my article on Ultima VI are
actually invisible! So, if you cast Reveal
on these traps, you will then be able to
move them or Vanish them without setting them off. Thanks, Raj! (Gee, I wish
I'd known that before)
That seems to be it for this peek into
the mailbag. Remember, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (Enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's View
Interstel's Earthrise
As told by Scorpia

S

corpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to be able
to provide this forum for her distinctive
and, sometimes, controversial perspective.

have been built on the asteroid and off it
goes.
All is well, until suddenly frantic calls
for help from the asteroid personnel are
received on Earth, followed by ominous
silence. Even worse, the asteroid navigating systems are no longer making the
necessary course corrections; unless
something is done quickly, the asteroid is
going to smash right into the home
planet. That could be painful.

Clink ... slide ... roll ... clink . .
slide ... clink. Gotcha! Whew! You have
no idea how hard it is to hold a crystal
ball in your pincers. Slippery stuff, crystal. Especially when it's round. Getting a
grip on it is not easy! However, the game
I see in the ball this time is definitely
easy.
That, in a way, is a little depressing.
Preceded by Loom, Conquests of
Camelot, and Circuit's Edge, Earthrise
is the fourth entry-level adventure in a
row, this summer. Perhaps that's just
coincidence or perhaps the game companies (like the film makers) believe that
people don't want to strain their brains
during the hot months.
Either way, the adventure fare so far
this season has definitely been on the
lightweight side. Which is not to say I am
against easy games. They are great for
beginning players, the occasional player
who prefers a game that won't take
months to complete, and even for the experienced adventurer who wants a little

vacation, now and then, from the more
mind-bending products. It's just that four
in a row, with nothing meatier in between, gets to be a bit much. With that
said, we can now look deeper into the
crystal for an examination of Earthrise
from Interstel.
It is the not-too-distant future, and an
asteroid is on its way to Earth. This
chunk of rock has been carefully chosen
for its mining possibilities, and the idea is
to put it in orbit around our world to
make operations easier (not to mention
cutting down on the travel time). A mining installation and powerful engines

A troubleshooter is, therefore, sent off
to see what's happened on the asteroid.
Guess who's volunteered? Right, you
have! A shuttle is prepared and before
you can say "launch", you're in orbit
around the mining colony.
Fortunately, you don't have to worry
about any fancy space piloting. You just
push a button and the computers do all
the hard work (and they do it well, too).
All you need to worry about is the situation inside the mining complex.
In some ways, the game is reminiscent
of Stationfall: strangely empty rooms
and corridors, with not a person to be
seen. No bodies, either, except for one in
the lab, and a couple of empty space

suits (wondering how they got that way
gives rise to all sorts of unpleasant
thoughts).
Obviously, exploration and investigation
are the orders of the day. The surface
area of the asteroid is small and easily
mapped. This should not be neglected,
as there are some things you will need to
do up there, and knowing how to get to
different places quickly is helpful.
You also want to find the way in as
soon as possible, since your air supply is
limited and the trip from the shuttle rapid
ly depletes it. Once you've been down
below and recharged your tank, you can
return to the surface later to map it out
(and no, do not go walking into the sea!).
The interior of the complex is also
simple to map. It consists of two levels,
each with an eight-way junction leading
off to different rooms. You don't even
need to do a detailed map here; drawing
an octagon for each level, and labelling
the sides accordingly, is sufficient. The
corridors always lead straight on, and
there are no mazes or other devious passages to worry about.
Since the installation is a pressurized environment (asteroids are not noted for
having atmosphere), you must look at
the airlock doors carefully before you go
waltzing through. Some rooms and passageways have become depressurized
and walking into them without your helmet on leads to a quick, albeit amusing,
death.
In fact, there are many interesting ways
to die, all of them thoughtfully illustrated
for your edification. Nothing drives the
point home better than watching as: you
fry yourself with a laser, your head explodes in a vacuum, an alien porcupine
turns you into Swiss cheese, or you tear
a hole in your suit and go zipping off into
space (wheel), among others. You get
the idea: be careful.

and get away before something unpleasant happens to you.
Each of these little darlings has a special weakness, which you must exploit in
order to get rid of it. Information on this
and other important matters can be
found in the complex itself. Read everything you can get your hands on.
One creature, however, you must figure
out for yourself. That's the giant spider
lurking in the gardens. It's nothing more
than a somewhat overgrown variety of
common spider, but certainly large
enough to make your life both difficult
and short. The solution to this problem
can be found above ground.
When all the obstacles have been
removed, you can get on with your main
mission, which is repairing the damage
to the navigational systems. This is a

Graphics are unspectacular, but adequate. The best animation sequences
tend to be when you come to an untimely end (you might want to save the game
and die deliberately every so often just to
see these).
One of the nicer features is the ability
to define "macro keys" for often-used
commands. The game comes standard
with several of them (for instance, one to
wear your helmet and one to take it off),
and you can add others of your own
choice. One that you certainly want to
create is "push button", since you do a
lot of that throughout the installation.
Movement of your character (a fullsized figure, in the Sierra style) is accomplished with the number pad. Commands are entered by simply starting to
type on the keyboard (or using a macro
key); this can be done even while in motion (although it is usually better to stop,
so you don't walk into trouble
inadvertently).
The game keeps a numerical score of
how well you're doing, and it's a good
idea to check this out now and then to
gauge your progress. However, a perfect
score isn't necessary to finish (I completed it with less than the full 800
points). Some actions provide points, but
have no other function. For instance,
picking up several items from the crew
quarters gives you points, but these
items have no use in the game.

simple affair, provided you have collected all the necessary parts, pieces,
and tools. Most of those are in plain
sight, or otherwise obvious if you look
around.
Then, it's just a matter of firing up the
systems, getting back to your pod (hint:
look before you leap) and returning to
your shuttle and Earth, where you can
bask in the glow of a laudatory report on
your success before the next mission
comes along.

Speaking of alien porcupines, it won't
be long before you find out that a number of unearthly critters are the main
reason for the depopulation of the mining complex. As you might expect, they
are all over the place, getting in your
way, blocking you from important locations, and being, in general, distinctly unhelpful.

In general, Earthrise is a clean, simple
game with logically-constructed puzzles
and a humorous touch. While it has a
science orientation, you don't have to be
a scientist to figure things out; a little
basic knowledge and common sense are
really all you need.

Therefore, much of the game is focused
on removing these creatures, one way or
another. Fortunately, they don't move
around, and in most (but not all) cases,
if you happen to come across one, you
have time to execute a quick about-face

The one place where you might have
problems, however, is with the parser.
There are several instances where you
know what you want to do (and that it's
the right thing to do), but phrasing the
command so the game accepts it can
lead to some frustration. Trial and error
is your only recourse in these situations.

Saving can be done anywhere at almost any time and you have fifteen save
positions to use. These can be given
short descriptions, which is handy when
the time comes to restore; no need to
guess which anonymous letter or number
is the one you want.
Overall, then, Earthrise is more a game
for the beginning player, but it can also
provide an afternoon's diversion for the
more experienced.
That's about it for this look into the crystal. Remember, if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Grade Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

4

Review

Interplay's Future Wars
The Transportation System at the End of the Universe
by Allen L. Greenberg
TITLE: Future Wars: Adventures In Time
SYSTEMS: Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
REVIEWED: Amiga
PRICE: $49.95
PUBLISHER: Delphine Software
DISTRIBUTOR: Interplay Productions

T

he Time Traveller (for so it

will be convenient to speak
of him) was expounding
upon the matter of washing windows. He was, in fact, a windowwashing wimp; not at all what one
would describe as a hero. It was
his inquisitiveness regarding what
lay behind the windows he was
servicing, as well as his childish
(though entertaining) sense of
pranksterism, which led to his discovery of the time-travel apparatus. Shortly, he would find
himself caught up in inter-temporal intrigue, mystery and
mayhem.
Future Wars: Adventures in
Time is an animated graphic adventure in which the player
travels through several eras in
time in order to save the Earth
from a group of aliens called
"Crughons" (not to be confused
with "croutons," although they frequently are). The well-crafted
story unfolds linearly and
features, in addition to
time travel, a very touchy
gathering of monks in the
past, a perilous public
transportation system of
the future, and an enemy
fortress—somewhere, somewhen. The puzzles are essentially of the objectmanipulation type and
there are some action sequences to challenge the
player, as well.
Similar in many respects to the Sierra games (such as Space
Quest III), Future Wars features a new, mouse-driven interface
which the publishers call "Cinematique." This system requires
neither any typing nor use of anything other than the mouse to
play the game. The Time Traveller is moved about the graphic
screen by placing the cursor on a desired destination and clicking the mouse. Other commands are initiated by clicking on the

second mouse button, which
brings up a window of verbs. The
command is completed by clicking on an object on the graphic
screen. The action of a verb from
the verb-window, and its subsequent results, depends on the
particular surroundings and objects available at the time it is
used.
This form of issuing orders will
please the player who is looking
forward to throwing aside his or
her thesaurus and dictionary,
having long been intimidated by
uncomprehending and uncaring
parsers. However, the graphic
screens are filled with much detail
and important objects are frequently hidden. Thus begins a
pixel-by-pixel search for minute objects and irregularities on screen
which are vital to solving the
game. Far-sighted, color-blind or
otherwise visually impaired adventurers will definitely find themselves at a disadvantage in Future
Wars.
The graphics are generally very
imaginative and at times absolutely striking. Most scenes are constructed with bright colors
and vivid detail in addition
to some subtle shadings
and nuances. Animation,
not only of the main characters but of the background as well, is wonderful. The story unfolds in a
variety of scenes which
range from cramped,
thumbnail-sized rooms to
vast, panoramic views of a
future skyline or ancient
forest. Of course, this
tremendous amount of graphic minutiae makes even more difficult those pursuits for the seemingly insignificant flecks which
are actually features necessary to complete the game.
Some limited sequences of the program take place in real time.
Here, commands must be given at rapid-fire pace in order for the
Time Traveller to progress or merely survive. There are also
(Continued on page 59)

CGD Conference
(Continued from page 24)

white television, old color television
and regular monitor).
Finally, Lambert assessed the computer artist's contribution to the genre
as being fourfold. First, artists "flesh
out" characterization. Second, they create a mood with the backgrounds.
Third, they assist the illusion of "life"
through emulating body movement.
Fourth, they offer movement, focus
and direction through the techniques
of animation.

Existential WYSIWYG
Remember Flip Wilson's "Geraldine"
character? "What you see is what you
get," was one of "her" favorite lines.
It is also, in the acronym used in
this section's title, one of the
favorite buzzwords of the computer
industry. Brenda Laurel observed in
the paper prepared as a background for her conference on interface design that what computer
users think they see is not necessarily what they actually get.
After talking about inadequate
models for a computer interface, her
paper moved to the analogy of
theater. She observed that while traditional proscenium theaters have a
backstage area and wings where technicians work and actors wait off-stage,
audiences are only aware of what is actually happening on the stage itself.
Using this analogy, gamers would not
be aware of all that is happening "behind" the action, they would simply be
members of the audience who have a
greater influence in helping the action
unfold than a conventional audience.
Laurel noted that, in the past, she
had argued that the gamer was like a
member of the audience who marched
up onto the stage and became a member of the cast. However, she recognized that this is a confusing analogy.
As in the avant-garde theatrical events

of the sixties when audience members
did join the plays, the stage can certainly become cluttered. The result is
that the play
becomes confused and
the plot
degenerates.
It is no
longer a play
with passive
observers.
Yet, this
may be what
needs to happen. The stage and staging must disappear. The perception of the stage, i.e.
the computer or computer-generated
environment, allows the gamer to become so much one with it that the
simulated environment is all that matters. Whether that environment is
created by hardware, software or wetware is of no consequence. The important factor is breaking down the technological barriers so that the gamer's
perspective is changed. Laurel calls
this existential WYSIWYG. As in the figure with the oval, the triangular
"agents" (human or simulated) relate
to the strange-shaped objects in a representational environment.

elsewhere so that someone is willing to
underwrite the next work.
Much of the rest of the session was
focused on creating limited partnerships using the independent film
production model. Martinez suggested
that developers form a production company to produce a specific title as opposed to forming a general corporation. He noted that there are definitely
advantages to private placement of the
stock as opposed to public offerings.
As a major benefit to this approach,
he cited the fact that it limits liability.
He also encouraged designers to contract for the equivalent of what
filmmakers call an "edited work print"
(roughly equivalent to Alpha) rather
than finished work. In this way,
developers cannot get stuck with the
bill for a design that isn't what the
partner expected. Then, if the Alpha is
acceptable to all concerned, the
production can continue with funds set
aside for that purpose.
How does one accomplish this? Martinez suggested that the developers put
together an investment kit: storyboard,
comparison with other works, analysis
of how this product would be different
from other works, and potential ancillary products. He further urged the
design teams represented in the conference to "develop" their current
properties, noting that characters
are valuable properties whether they
are in a book, film or computer/video game.

Gender and Cultural Bias
in Computer Games
Financing Independent
Software Productions
Another roundtable session recognized that it is sometimes difficult to
create the type of game desired
through the traditional software publisher. Ron Martinez of TRANS Fiction
Systems (Star Trek: The Promethean
Prophecy and Hidden Agenda) followed the popular analogy which compares the entertainment software industry to the film industry. He asserted
that in software as in cinema, independent production is the key to
vitality.
Quoting J.D. Salinger, he challenged
the designers to "Write the book you
want to read." Then he noted that the
only way to really do this is to: a) do it
in one's spare time, b) be independently wealthy or c) have a "hit"

If computer games are going to be
considered as works of art, their consequences as a tool for socialization
must be considered. To that end, conferences on social responsibility and
cultural bias were held in order to help
define the computer game designer's
role as artist within the global culture.
The summary statement for those conferences would have to be, "What happens in computer games does mean
something."
Brenda Laurel
opened the
panel discussion
on bias with a
provocative
question, "What
could possibly
be the value of
any work of art
that perpetuates

the myth that
nationalism and personal prestige can be enhanced through
violence?"
Joyce Hakansson of
Berkeley Learning
Technologies (designer
of Touch and Discover
and Ready, Set, Read
for Texas Instruments) opened the discussion with the important assertion that the
message is important,
especially when the target audience is the
young. "All of you are
educators. Anyone who creates interactive experiences is a teacher." Perhaps,
the most important factor about a computer game is that it requires the
player to perform visual mapping, a
method of perceiving information that
is different from reading or writing. Indeed, that which is learned through
this visual literacy may be of longerlasting effect than that learned through

within the bounds of
their "real" lives, their
work fits the definition.

traditional means because the learner
experiences it.
In keeping with the idea of the computer game designer's role as artist,
media artist Michael Naimark stated
the goal of an artist as "creating an experience which is not possible in the
real world." Since computer game
designers are simulating experiences
that most gamers cannot participate in

Finally, Allucquere
Rosanne Stone (a fascinating academician
with a visceral understanding of consciousness) challenged the
designers to create computer games which do
not educate people into
gender distinction. In social intercourse, persons
do not come into interaction with persons of
another gender with expectations of a mutually
beneficial exchange. Rather, persons
tend to approach the other gender
with expectations of dominance and
submission based on preconceived notions. She observed that the reason
"phone sex" is boring is because it
uses existing cultural expectations as
tokens of meaning.
Then, noting the psychological
(Continued on page 54)

Review

Cruisers, Convoys and
the Cost of Command
Two World War II Naval Games

eturn

by Wyatt Lee

with me now to those thrilling days of yesteryear, when
Apple II was the machine of
choice and many computer games were
still text-based. CGW reviewed a new
Avalon Hill computer game with the
conclusion that the game had " ... a
few relatively minor problems ... but it
makes up for them in the graphic presentation." In general, the reviewer (who
eventually ended up as CGW's current
editor) felt that the game had offered
both a satisfying tactical challenge and
on-screen views that effectively conveyed the feel of looking at enemy ships
through the binoculars.

R

to make the action come to life) and
documentation that looks like it has
been offset at a small franchise printer.
Instead, this review is primarily for those
who enjoy the challenge of the "hunt" followed by a quick and relatively easy tactical resolution of the battles (usually
less than a half hour).
The "action" in Action in the North Atlantic dates from the spring of 1942. In
the game, as in history, the player has
the option of attempting to disrupt the
Murmansk-bound convoys as Grand Admiral Doenitz or defending those selfsame convoys as Fleet Admiral Pound.
The strategic game can simulate five, fifteen or thirty day campaigns in which
the German tries to locate the convoys
via submarine, air and sea searches
while the British use the same methods
to avoid them.

Now, the same basic system seen in
that earlier game (Under Southern
Skies, a naval wargame based on the
hunt for the Graf Spee) is available for
several different naval actions. The
graphics have not changed significantly
in these "new" games, even though the
state-of-the-art has surpassed them, but
the challenge and game play is still
above average. The original designer
of the Avalon Hill naval wargame
has obviously developed these new
games as a labor of love. Also, there
are some new features on the IBM
versions that make the games potentially more enjoyable than their
predecessor: the ability to restart a
tactical battle if one does not like the
initial start, ability to print out the
game results in hardcopy format
and option of forcing the computer
to change sides in a hopeless battle.
Those who are automatically
prejudiced against games with CGA
graphics or have no interest in the
"what if's of naval history need read
no farther. The game has a limited color
palette (choose your four CGA colors from a
total of 24), primitive sound effects (those whistling bomb sounds come from the IBM internal
speaker and there is no sound board support

The strategic game is based on searching a map divided into a square grid.
Two-dimensional (x,y) coordinates are
provided for each location. To conduct an air search, each player identifies which of three bases the search
will be initiated from and sets the
(x,y) coordinates for the apex of the
search pattern. As the squadron of
planes flies over each sea square,
there is a chance of spotting the
enemy which is modified by both
weather and time of day.
Once located, the German can target the convoys for air attacks and
direct his surface ships (the Scharnhorst and Tirpitz) toward them. German air attacks are not usually
decisive and simply set up the real
action, a tactical surface battle.
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Action in the North Atlantic
Apple II, IBM
IBM
1-2
535.00
Owen P. Hall, Jr.
General Quarters Software
P.O. Box 1429
Torrance, CA 90505

For the British, however, air attacks from the
carriers can be very devastating. As in actual
history, torpedo bombers will often sink even
those ships which seem invincible. As the
(Continued on page 46)

I
.

s

I

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 79

The Categories
Strategy (S7): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem soloing.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter ego
through a storyline or series
of events.
Role-Playing Adventures (RP):
Adventure games that are based
on character development
(usually involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this case,
the first listed category is
considered primary. In order to
be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of this specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

,

Review

A Funny Game Happened on
the Way to the Forum
Electronic Arts' Centurion: Defender of Rome
by M. Evan Brooks
TITLE:

Centurion: Defender of Rome

C

enturion: Defender of
Rome is a game of Empirebuilding. The player begins
as a Roman officer commanding a
single legion in 275 B.C. and attempts to conquer the known
world and become the Emperor. It
must be noted that Centurion is a
game—action sequences take
priority over any historical accuracy, and its antecedents owe
more to Cecil B. DeMille than
Tacitus.

Ex Libri ("Out of the
Book")
Documentation: The documentation states the play mechanics in a
competent and succinct fashion.
There is a semi-omission in that
debarking the legion from naval
vessels is not explicit. In order to
debark troops, the right-mouse button must be utilized.
The manual does not really cover
any details about the rise of the Roman Republic or Empire, but
since it is designed for a mass audience, such omissions are intentional.
The originally-planned manual had information relating to the
various areas and their indigenous personnel (e.g. the numerous
and savage Gauls, the effective Parthians, etc.), but such information, in the end, has been left to the player to discern during
game play.
The most critical omission in the documentation concerns the
impact of actions upon status. One must continually seek to expand the Empire and his personal status. While certain actions
impact on personal status (chariot racing, gladiatorial combats,
conquest and defeat), only actual play can determine the quantitative effects. These, in turn, depend on the difficulty level of
play (ranging from galley slave [very easy] to emperor [very
hard]).
For learning purposes, the difficulty level may be fine-tuned

among the game aspects, e.g. galley slave in chariot racing, emperor
level in gladiatorial combat.
Overall, the documentation is
professionally produced and
delineates the mechanics of the
game. However, there are few
strategic/tactical guidelines to successfully securing the Empire.

Ars Pulchra Est ("The
art is beautiful")
Graphics: The graphics and
sound support are superb. A fullVGA color palette is utilized, and
combat sequences are among the
most interesting ever done.
Elephants are rendered in a basic
elephantine gray, but their cupola
is a shade of brown, while the blanket covering them is a
separate color.
As the elephants and cavalry advance to contact, they move
gracefully on the charge. When surrounded and destroyed, they
collapse inwards to disappear. The troops are rendered in a twodeep line (representing a single legion), and individual cohorts
(representing 150-300 men) can be assigned specific orders.
Sea battles, gladiatorial combat, chariot racing and a strategic
map yield a pleasing aesthetic experience. Enemy commanders
are shown in their proper equipment and the enemies of Rome
are displayed properly (e.g. the Parthians are displayed in a cavalry formation, while the Greeks use an infantry phalanx).
Overall, the graphics are the strongest asset of Centurion.
Evan and Nicky Robinson are certainly to be congratulated on a
fine achievement.

Veni, Ludi, Vici ("I came, I played, I conquered!")
Game Play: Turns are in one-year increments. Each year, a
legion may be recruited in a province (assuming command control and personnel availability are sufficient) or an extant legion
may act (recruit, move). The one-year increments are artificial,
and are included as a reference. A five-year increment might
have been more "accurate", but developing a historical persona
is not the goal of Centurion.
Negotiation: Upon entering a new region, one will learn the
potential strengths and weaknesses of the people. Generally, a
people will refuse to negotiate with Rome until the Empire is sufficiently powerful to instill a sense of respect, and certain
nationalities virtually never concede to Rome (e.g. Parthia).
Combat (Land): Control of a region is determined by the
legion's success. One selects the initial troop formation (e.g.
balanced, strong left, strong right) and then, the initial maneuver
(e.g. frontal assault, stand fast, Scipio's defense [useful for
elephant defense, in that it hopefully opens lanes for the
elephants which can then be attacked in flank]).
However, the player may individually maneuver his cohorts.
The legion is not an overly flexible tool and maneuvers are
limited to one direction at a time. Yet, this gives sufficient control
for the player to often secure victory (and when it seems that the
enemy is about to collapse, a "General Melee" order will release
the troops). In maneuvering troops, the placement of the leader
is decisive, and his personal charisma and voice determine how
effective his command control will be.
As troops engage, casualties are suffered, and leaders may, in
fact, be killed. While dying, leaders weakly wave a white flag.
This is a historical anachronism, but interesting.
While the enemy deployments are historically correct, their tactics are not always executed historically. For example, the Parthian cavalry attacks the line, but the Parthians actually used a
horse-archer type of offensive wherein they rode to engage, fired
their bows and then fled out of range in order to rearm (similar
to the less successful Spanish carracole tactic of a thousand
years later with the early pistol). Similarly, the legion uses a twodeep line, and engages with the sword only (historically, the
javelin was used as the missile weapon before the legion brought
its infamous short sword to bear).
In fighting large and ferocious opponents, one legion will be insufficient to secure victory. One must have two or more legions
present in an adjacent province and then attack seriatim. While
the lack of a multi-legion assault is noted, again the goal of Centurion was to be a game and not a simulation.

both opponents. Entertainment value is more important than victory in this sequence. If there is considerable action, the people
will be pleased and allow the sponsor to spare the defeated
gladiator ("thumbs up"). If, however, it was a quick fight, the
people will not be as happy and one must slay the hapless victim. While the player can buck the system and spare an opponent, his decision will not please the crowd and that was the
whole purpose of the exercise. Think of gladiatorial combat as
the World Wide Wrestling Federation of antiquity.
While it may seem unfair to pay for both opponents for every
combat, it is actually a rental charge. The player is a Roman officer, and does not have the time to run a gladiator school or his
own stable. Thus, the charge for each event is to utilize the
gladiator. Interestingly enough, there is no penalty (other than
the possible crowd displeasure) for killing in the ring. Surely, a
penalty of some sort should have been imposed, since a bloodthirsty game patron would soon run short of "Rental Gladiators".
Chariot Racing: Chariot racing allows one to win funds in the
arena—necessary for future expansion and allowing a lowering of
the tax rate (which in turn will make the people more amenable
to rule by Rome). While a light chariot is easier to maneuver, the
pay-off is only at even odds, while the medium and heavy
chariots yield a better return.
One must navigate safely around the Circus Maximus three
times. Maneuver is restricted to keyboard inputs, and maximization of speed in the straight-aways must be counterbalanced with
a decreased speed in the turns.
Generally, one can achieve a faster speed on the periphery of
the track, but this also results in a longer distance to traverse.
Thus, one shifts between the interior and the outside periphery in
order to achieve a first place finish. Also, one can use the whip
against nearby rivals (shades of Ben Hur).
Losing control of the chariot in the turn will result in its destruction. The charioteer will be rescued by two litter-bearers, with the
litter clearly marked with a Red Cross. (A Red Cross in 275 B.C.?
Shouldn't that have been Asclepius' staff?) Historical
anachronism notwithstanding, it is a readily recognizable symbol.
Mechanics: Utilizing both keyboard and mouse, Centurion is
easy to use. Game saves (limited to nine) and reloads are quick
and efficient. As a press release by EA noted (with tongue in
cheek), when Caesar was asked to explain his optimism even
after losing his armies, his navies and his gladiators, he replied
that his secret was "Saved Games!" Also, one can tailor difficulty
levels in the different game aspects. When all regions of the map
are conquered, one is proclaimed Caesar, Emperor of Rome at
which time total casualties and results will be displayed (one
might also wish that such a display could be accessed at will in
order to discern his "progress").

Combat (Sea): Naval combat will determine control of the
seas and prepare the way for amphibious invasions. While the
navy is expensive to purchase, it is necessary in order to
transport the legions to Britain or Sardinia (and Carthage if the
player decides to take the assault directly as opposed to traversing the Horn of Asia).

Conclusions: Centurion of Rome is a graphic tour de force. It
is also a historical tour de farce. However, the game was intended to be an entertaining experience and not a simulation or
learning tool. As such, it succeeds admirably.

Combat is represented by a ship-against-ship battle. Firing arrows and Greek fire as ranged weapons, one will seek to secure
an early advantage and then "Ramming Speed" to secure victory. There are three ship classes, and each has its own advantage (e.g. speed, durability). A good arcade admiral can often
overcome a poor strategic position.

On its merits as a game, Centurion: Defender of Rome is enjoyable, but do not expect to gain many insights into the forging
of the Empire. It is not a polished version of, say, DataSoft's Annals of Rome. It is not even Sword of the Samurai in ancient
Rome. Nevertheless, those who liked those old gladiator movies
should be the perfect target audience for this game.

Gladiatorial Combat: When the Roman people get bored,
they call for games. As the sponsor, the player must pay for

Panem et Circenses ("Bread and Circuses")

(c) 1990 All Rights Reserved

Cruisers, Convoys
(Continued from page 38)

British bombers (which look in their wire-frame graphics incarnation on-screen more like World War I planes than World
War II planes) fly toward the silhouette of the German ship,
the German player has the opportunity to defend himself via
a simple arcade routine. The German player uses the arrow
keys on the keyboard to direct the "crosshairs" for the antiaircraft fire. If he fails to destroy all of the incoming bombers,
the torpedoes begin to take their toll.
In solitaire mode, the tactical screen takes on a different appearance, depending on whether the player is commanding
the British or German fleet. If the player is Doenitz, he sees
the distinctive silhouettes of his targets in the binocular view,
alphabetical designations for each ship on a "radarscope"
view and a silhouette of his own ship in the lower left hand
corner. If the player is Pound, however, the tactical view is
simply a large blue square representing the active battle area.
There is an alphabetical representation of the ships involved
in the battle and the silhouettes only appear when one is
firing upon a target. In the two player game, the tactical
screen is restricted to the "sea square" view and the silhouettes only appear when a ship's guns are actually firing.
At this point, players must determine if they want to utilize
"gun and run" tactics, the "Admiral Nelson" (charge in,
launch the torpedoes and flee option) or the "John Paul
Jones" (close range and duke it out). As in naval miniatures,
each ship must "acquire" its target prior to finding its range.
Then, the longer one keeps his guns trained on the same target, the more probable it is that he will successfully hit his target.
Damage is also handled similarly to miniatures rules. When
the player accesses the damage report from the tactical command menu, he is essentially checking the "damage boxes"
used on miniatures player's record sheets to determine which
guns are still in play and how many "hits" are left in each
area. This is both an efficient and familiar way of handling
damage.
Unfortunately, the tactical portion of the game is also where
the most glaring problem with play appears. When the tactical display is on the screen, players can still command ships
which are in the immediate vicinity of the active sea square.
Unfortunately, the display does not give the location of the adjacent ship in relation to the battle. Therefore, if the player
has forgotten where the ship was prior to the battle, he may
be unable to bring the ship into battle. Giving a location in
relation to the battle would have been quite helpful.
Nevertheless, the game play is fast and efficient. Those who
like to play miniatures rules like General Quarters (no relation to the software publisher) should not be disappointed
and those who want a strategy game that can be finished in
an hour to an hour and a half should be delighted.

Off To Sink The Bismarck (Battleship Bismarck)
Battleship Bismarck is definitely related to its sister game.
The game mechanics work exactly the same. The major dif(Continued on page 62)

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
CGW's Overseas Correspondent
Spies On British Developers:
Inside Facts On Flight of the Intruder
by Paul Rigby

don't know about you, but I am
chomping at the bit waiting for
Spectrum HoloByte's Flight of the
Intruder to appear. Based on the book
by Stephen Coonts, Intruder is rather unique for a Spectrum Holobyte product. It
is being wholly developed in the UK
under the auspices of Rowan Software,
who previously wrote the superior ST
and Amiga versions of Falcon (they
developed a far smoother 3D system), as
well as the first mission disk for that
product. I recently paid Rowan a visit to
check on how things were progressing.

I

Judging by the EGA version
demonstrated, Intruder will herald a new
generation of flight simulations. The
game, which begins with a superb animation sequence of an aircraft launch from
a carrier, is presented in three distinct sections in order to allow the player to learn
and master the game system.
The piece de resistance of the whole
program is the ultimate CAG (Commander Air Group) option, which asks
you to command, from the cockpit of
your Phantom or Intruder, seven other
aircraft during air strikes in Vietnam.
The number of options are rather daunting but here are a few salient highlights.
During the planning stages of an attack,
you can order your aircraft to adopt a
variety of tactics. For example, you can
mix and match Phantoms and Intruders,
assigning them as Wild Weasels (antiSAM), MiGCAP (protecting the attack

group from MiG attack), ground attack,
etc. You can have a large number of infinitely variable waypoints. At each
waypoint you can order an aircraft to
"jink" every fifteen seconds, or fly low
and cruise, etc.
After take-off (you can order each
aircraft to launch at exact intervals) you
will see each flight (consisting of a flight
leader and his wing-man) adopt their
roles and head for their assigned targets.
You can, at any time, enter the cockpit
of any of your aircraft, taking direct control, or the computer can do the work for
you. Attack maneuvers previously unseen in home computer simulations, due
to the enormous mathematical computations involved, have been introduced in
the cause of realism (as has the realistic
Vietnam topography). Finally, you will be
given a roster of experienced pilots to
command. Each will have their own personality, favorite maneuvers, skills, etc.
However, lose an experienced man and
you'll be stuck with a rookie replacement! So management of human resources and careful mission planning will be
extremely important. It looks like Flight
of the Intruder will be awesome.
Rowan is also developing the second
Falcon mission disk (Amiga, IBM & Atari
ST) which will incorporate five bogies in
the air at once. They can be a mix of
MiG-21s, MiG-27s (ground attack) and
Hind attack helicopters. New weapons
have been introduced, such as the ASRAAM, and the option of defending dual
mission targets is currently being investigated. You'll need to prioritize enemy targets in these missions, as the enemy will
be heading for two installations at once.
There will also be an option to fly your F16 as a model aircraft (using the external
3D viewpoint) with the use of a suitable
twin-stick controller.
Finally, Rowan has just begun coding a
new "Battle of Britain" game (Amiga, IBM
& Atari ST). Utilizing a similar 3D system
to that which will be seen in Intruder, Battle of Britain will give you the option of
running the British or German campaign.
Obvious comparisons will be made with
Lucasfilm's product. However, according to Rowan, the polygon system they
will use will be offer more, in a combatoriented sense, than Lucasfilm's bit-maps
because you will immediately see when
an enemy is about to make a move, for
example. That is, as soon as a wing
begins to drop, you will know he is about
to turn/maneuver. Bit-maps, say Rowan,
do not allow for such subtleties as they
are too jerky.

UK software house, Empire, is developing Team Yankee, a game of tank combat based on the book by Harold Coyle.
In the game, originally due out on the
Amiga, you will have control of a maximum of 16 tanks with the strategic
deployment of each tank taking place
via a 2D map—in a similar fashion to
Microprose/Spectrum Holobyte's offerings. The player has the option to control
the game from four quadrant views (with
3D, polygon, and bit-mapped images in
each quadrant), where each tank unit
(four tanks) is represented on-screen
simultaneously, or from full-screen views
where one particular tank is singled out
for control. Empire has no pretensions
about Team Yankee, since they are not
calling it a definitive tank simulation. In a
similar way to Lucasfilm's Battlehawks/Finest Hour flight simulations,
Empire is basically calling Team Yankee
a tank combat simulation. With five missions offered, Team Yankee should be
available, as you read this, for the Amiga
ST, Amiga and IBM.
Available on the ST, Amiga (L19.95),
C64 (L9.95), with the IBM to follow,

Goliath Games has just released World
Championship Boxing Manager. You
play a boxing promoter. Hence, it is your
job to take up to five boxers, train them
and arrange the fights they will need to
reach the world championship stage
(either the Federation of World Boxing or
the World International Boxing Council).
The majority of play is controlled via
mouse/joystick and arranging fights is
done via a screen showing your desk
complete with Filofax, phone and sultry
secretary. Training and health can be
monitored in the gym and physiotherapy
areas.
When the fights have been arranged
and your "boys" trained to peak fitness,
you can watch them in action. A very
detailed, running commentary keeps you
informed on how you fighter is doing
and, in between rounds, you'll see a head
and-shoulders graphic of your boxer.
This is were you'll be able to see what
condition he is in (cuts and bruises may
appear, etc) and offer tactical advice.
Well, space considerations have
defeated me again. Tell you what,

though, if you promise to turn up here
again next month, I'll promise to bring
another bunch of news from over yonder.
See ya soon.
NOTE: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World
318 Kensington
Liverpool, England, L7 OEY
TEL: 01144-51-263-6306
SDC
60 Boston Road
London, England, W7 3TR
TEL: 01144-1-567-7621
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd.
8 Buckwins Square
Burnt Mills
Basildon, Essex, England, SS13 1BJ
TEL: 01144-268-590-766
All of the above telephone numbers
assume you can dial direct. If you
have any trouble, contact the international operator.

Review

OF MUTES
AND MEN
Origin Systems' Bad Blood
by Charles Ardai
t has been argued from time to time
Bad Blood
TITLE:
that computer games offer players litSYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$49.95
tle more than an opportunity to revel
Chris Roberts
DESIGNER:
in violence and bloodshed; that they
PUBLISHER:
Origin Systems
Austin, D(
tease out into the open strains of aggression better left suppressed; and that they
do so in a moral vacuum, rewarding acts not because those acts are
justified or praiseworthy but solely because they have been executed
properly. Bad Blood will do little to dispel this image.

I

The game is an Ultima-style RPG divided roughly equally among
exploration, conversation, and combat. In other words, first one finds
creatures, then one extracts any and all useful information from

them, and then one kills them. Even granting that exploration is not
simply a matter of finding other sentients, and that the creatures a
player meets are divided between those one is supposed to talk to
and those one is supposed to kill, the basic structure of the game encourages the order of operations described above.
What frame story sets up this rather pedestrian action? An appropriately pedestrian one. In place of a generic fantasy quest
players are treated to generic post-nuclear sf.
A nuclear holocaust has ravaged the world; in the generations
since, a variety of mutations have turned the human gene pool into
a grotesque menagerie not unlike the ones one encounters in most
fantasy games. The devastated landscape is roamed by dragons,
snake-men, giant bugs, flying stingrays and other refugees from the
earliest FRP universes. Nine of the monsters have their own distinct
characteristics and portraits in the four-color anti-piracy device titled
"Thale's Comprehensive Guide to the Beasts and Savages of the
Plains." (Note: This Is copy protection and not full-fledged documentation.)
The world's non-savage mutes have holed up in a handful of small
walled towns, as have the remaining pure-blood humans. In the best
spaghetti Western fashion, a blood feud has arisen between the parties, the humans being unsavory bigots out to kill and/or enslave the
entire mutant population. The mutants choose a hero (the player
gets to select from among three characters: a male human, a female
mutant who can shoot "eye beams," and a huge male mutant) to
dope out the truth behind rumors that the humans are planning an
all-out war on the mutes; and if the rumors are true, to do whatever
is necessary to stop the war before it starts.
The player's job is to travel the plains, questioning the characters
he meets from a menu of relevant topics including such subjects as
the war, the rampaging giant bear people keep talking about, the
location of elusive figures, and so forth. Information so solicited gets
added to the menu for future encounters. A secondary task is simple
survival, which depends largely on one's combat abilities; a tertiary
task is the accumulation of food and weaponry, which are also crucial for survival. Simply stated, the player wanders around killing,
stealing, and interrogating.
What makes this tiresome is that it is in no way original. Too often
before we have sent a tiny figure scurrying here and there over a
vast terrain in pursuit of one noble, world-saving goal or another. In
order to make this dynamic work again, a designer has to offer something in the way of plot and character, neither of which gets adequate attention in Bad Blood.
The heroes are ordinary toughs (or "tuffs," as they are called in
mute argot) on ordinary missions. The villains are bad to the core.
(Wouldn't it be refreshing to play a game in which the snake-men
are not "wily, quick, and not to be trusted"?) The macho mutes strut
and fume and spout cliches as reliably as Old Faithful; the evil
humans play their parts as predictably as the extras in an old Flash
Gordon serial; the wise, old Oracle does unadulterated Yoda schtick.
Never mind the fact that fighting one's way back and forth across a
wasteland is enough to bore the most stalwart
hack-and-slasher--even a CRPG junkie deserves more at the end of the rainbow than
the same old hoary p[l]ot of gold.
In addition, one cannot help but feel that the game is genuinely offensive. After establishing a noble and stirring cause—valorous
freedom fighters against vile slavers (about as subtle as a poke in
the eye), Bad Blood encourages players to act in reprehensible
ways. Most of the characters the player kills are not vile racist
humans, but fellow mutants. Most of the supplies the player acquires
are lifted from the unguarded huts of his peers. One NPC remarks,
when he meets the player, that he knows the player will steal from
his town. Sure enough, the player does. There are no repercussions,
at least not negative ones.
Consider another example: on the plains, there are creatures known

as turkels. "Whipping tentacles" and "caustic blood" aside, turkels are
no threat to anybody. They move with glacial speed, usually (wisely)
away from the player. Why wisely? Because the turkel is unfortunate
enough to possess a heart which, when consumed, has extraordinary
rejuvenative powers. This means that players try to kill the poor
beast whenever it appears, most effectively by lobbing grenades at it,
just so they can carve out its heart and eat it raw (Dried hearts are
available, too, but their power is minimal.).
Now, I realize that the turkel's direct ancestor is
not so much the turtle it resembles (both in shape
and name) as the mothership that flew across the
screen in Space Invaders—the turkel is bonus
points, an extra life. However, if designer Chris
Roberts wants players to take his fiction seriously,
he has to accept a certain authoral responsibility
towards his creations; he has to treat them with
more respect than this.
One could massacre hordes of space invaders
remorselessly because they were nothing more
than video images. If Roberts wants the turkel to
be more than a video image and wants us to submerge ourselves in the world of his game, he owes it to himself not
to treat his creations in the cavalier fashion he displays in Bad Blood.
Indeed, all signs point to Roberts' not taking his creation seriously.
As a game, it is top-flight work, certainly up to par with the latest Ultima in terms of mechanics. There are few technical flaws. Therefore,
one might ask whether this is not enough. It is not, not for a game
that wants to be more than a Nintendo romp, and more than every
other similar game on the market.

As a game, Bad Blood fast becomes dull; as a narrative, it is
cliched; and as a moral entity, it is suspect. There are nice touches
scattered throughout: the opening animation showing the gradual
evolution of a pre-war farmhouse into a post-disaster stockade; the
game's graphic conceits, such as the use of an old TV screen to display the action and the water level in a soda bottle to represent one's
life force; and the rich (Anthony) Burgess-esque mutant slang
employed with commendable consistency (I wonder how many
people out there will understand why 'Arnie'
means "to sell out or change sides".).
There are also minor flaws, such as the occasionally unresponsive combat controls and the
conspicuous lack of a "quick-exit" command to
take the player straight to the door of a room he
is finished exploring, which would eliminate a lot
of laborious backtracking.
However, all of this pales to insignificance in light
of the fact that there is no compelling reason to
play Bad Blood and several reasons not to. Wasteland handles the post-nuclear milieu more effectively; Ultimas IV, V, and VI tell better adventure
stories; Infocom's Trinity tells a (much) more sophisticated and
responsible nuclear story (although the skink may be the turkels
without overkill); Nintendo-style "adventure" games offer better combat action without pretending to be something they are not. Bad
Blood is nothing if not well-intended, but it fails for want of a spark
of innovation, either in the story or the gameplay.

CGD Conference
(Continued from page 37)

studies since the U.S. Civil War which
indicate that amputees remember
themselves as physically "whole" individuals in their mental perception of
themselves, she urged creative thinking that would enable both genders to
have a healthy mental image. Observing the "Hero" motif that underlies
most role-playing, she asked where the
hero form for young women might be.
She cynically noted that most games
which purport to have female
protagonists simply reduce females to
the role of an "adolescent boy" who
happens to have a fuller figure. In
order to have games which do not subconsciously prolong gender discrimination, designers must take more effort
to break the molds and explore the
boundaries of cultural assumptions.

Virtual Reality
Warren Robinett (University of
North Carolina) chaired a discussion
on the potential of "virtual reality" for
gaming. CGW #72 (pages 26 and 78)
described the basic technology involved, so this summary will describe
some of the game design issues which
were raised. First, the technological issues were considered. The technology
of "virtual" world building needs a commitment to language. Many "reality
hackers" building these virtual reality
systems believe that we are in a postsymbolic environment. Since what you
see is what you get, there is no need
for language. The designers in this session insisted that the "reality hackers"
not give us brand new worlds and
refuse to let us speak. Second, the
problem of force-feedback and the imprecision currently involved was discussed. Third, designers suggested adding galvanic skin responses to the system, monitoring heartbeats to determine how much stimulation the player
was experiencing and implanting
about twenty sensors on the face in
order to provide a "puppet mask"
video system so that the player's facial
expressions could be projected into
another player's virtual world. Finally,
the current difficulties of interfacing
two units were briefly discussed.
The session ended with an observation that there was still a long way to
go before virtual games would become
a reality. As one wag noted, "It's not
necessary to build a Dream Park

machine until we learn how to program what's there."

Artificial Opponents
Speaking of programming what's
there. Dave Menconi offered a stimulating look at the technical side of artificial opponents. One method for getting computer opponents to make sensible moves, which Menconi cited as
prominent in computer chess
programs, is the use of a tree search.
In a tree search, the program searches
all the possible moves that could be
made and all the possible countermoves which could be made by the
human player. Then, the program examines the potential chain of consequences of each of these moves.
Naturally, the tree can get very large
very quickly and secondly, designing
code which can evaluate a complex
game in an accurate fashion may be
impossible.
Another procedure, which may be
used autonomously or interdependently with the tree-search function, is the
evaluation function approach. In these
functions, the designer has determined
the most important elements in the
game and programs a formula to let
the artificial opponent routine evaluate
these elements from most to least important. Then, the program can decide
what to do.
Menconi defined heuristics in artificial
opponents as using "rules" to fit the
situations. He noted that some use
heuristics to mean that the opponent
learns from the player, but described
his idea of heuristics as being similar
to a deck of cards with three data
fields. In his example, one of the fields
would be a number, another would be
a condition and another would be a
command. Then, the program would
look through the "deck of cards" until
it found a case where all three conditions were true.
Thus, if a tank had a combat value
of 25 and was three miles from the objective, it might be ordered to charge
the objective. If the same tank had a
combat value of 11 and was the same
three miles from the objective, it might
be ordered to retreat.
In his as yet unpublished futuristic
tank game, Menconi assigned different
types of jobs to several of the tanks:
scouts (looking around to find the
enemy command cyber), pathfinders
(advancing quickly to try to take control of the center of the board) and at-

tackers (tanks designed to destroy particular types of enemy tanks). Thus,
each tank would run through the
"deck of cards" related to its particular
job, find one where all the conditions
are true and execute the command.
This is an efficient way to write standard artificial opponents for almost any
type game.

Optical Media
The techniques of artists are often
transformed by their media. Paper and
canvas offer different textures for the
painter. Pipe organs offer a richer
sound quality than electronic organs,
yet electronic organs offer new dimensions to the musician. Greg Riker
(Director of Development for
Microsoft's Multimedia Systems
Group) asked if the designers believed
that optical media would change the
face of games.
As a true believer, he offered some
statistics that provide potential excitement. Just the amount of data that
could be possible to place on a compact disc, whether it be CD-I, CD-ROM
or DV-I offers an amazing potential.
Anywhere from 550 megabytes to 680
megabytes can be stored on such a
disk (depending on the standard utilized). The data transfer rate is about
150 kilobytes per second and the
"seek time" for particular pieces of
data (circa one second) is continually
being reduced. Further, the cost factor
is not prohibitive. It currently costs
about $1,500 to master a CD and
about $2.00 per disc to duplicate them.
Those who are skeptical of optical
storage should note what is already
being accomplished. The U.S. Navy
input 30,390,000 pages of a warship
maintenance manual which required
41.5 linear feet of storage space onto
135 compact discs which required 2.5
linear feet of storage space. Further,
all of the figures just cited refer to current encoding procedures (using pits
and lands). On the horizon is a rainbow or spectral encoding procedure
that will offer 1,000 possibilities per pit,
virtually exploding the storage potential of the optical medium. Add faster
data transfer rates and read/write
capabilities to these already potent
capacities and one has an awesome
tool at his/her disposal.
So, assuming Riker is correct and CDbased games are the future of computer games, what difference will it
make to the gamer? Riker offered
several suggestions for extending the

value of current types of games.
Simulations: Not only could vehicle
sound effects and exterior sound be enhanced by the additional storage
capacity, but "voice communications"
could be added to the interface. In addition, detailed scenery disks could be
provided as an aftermarket.
Social Games: Although parlor and
party games do not really need the
computer to work, think of the amazing storage capacity of CD-based
games. One could place 7.5 million
Trivial Pursuit questions on one disk.
In addition, visual (name the painting,
painter and period) and aural (name
the composition, composer and style)
questions could be added to the
database.
Fantasy Role-Playing: The additional
capacity for art and realism should
greatly enhance the playing experience.
Sports: Deep statistical databases and
live action footage could be interfaced
to provide the most realistic sports
simulations, ever.
Strategy: In BattleChess (the CDROM version), there are 128 different
animations of the queen's character
alone. Imagine a strategy game where
every conceivable action called up a
distinctive graphic.
Riker closed his presentation by suggesting a new genre of games that
may be an area of opportunity, information retrieval games. Noting that
the skill of finding information is the
next battleground of society (i.e. information retrieval is fast becoming a survival skill), he suggested that games
which honed one's "research" capacity
would be very valuable in the future.
Optical storage is the best medium for
such a game.

Arcade Games: Their
Promise and Failure
As the community of developers has
grown, there has been an increased interest in other art forms within the
rubric of computer entertainment. This
year, with MicroProse preparing to
enter the coin-op business with their
new F-15 Strike Eagle coin-op, it was
appropriate to examine the differences
between the two formats. Atari
Games' Ed Rotberg talked to the designers about the differences between personal computer software and coin-op
games. Rotberg readily admitted that
coin-ops do not use state-of-the-art
hardware. He observed that coin-ops
are three to five years "behind the
times," noting that most coin-ops are

still using 68000 processors when the
personal computer market has moved
on to 80386s, 80486s and 68030s.

He thinks of this environment as an "interactive machine" that the player can
be "dropped" into.

However, he contended that the difference between the two types of
products is a matter of quality. Rotberg noted that celebrity licenses and
crossover marketing from other media
will often sell a certain number of personal computer games. On the other
hand, coin-op designers who want to
make sure that they get more than
one quarter from a consumer must
make sure that the player gets a
quality experience in the first couple of
minutes. The designer must convey a
stimulating environment and theme
without an intimidating learning curve.
Without an easy learning curve, coinop games will be too intimidating for
players to even invest quarters. It is
true that they strive for a minimum of
instructions. He stated that an axiom
of the coin-op industry is that, "If you
have to read the instructions, it isn't
going to be successful."

His suggestions for developing a rich
environment include the following.
1. Start with a mood or feeling rather
than a particular story line.
2. Because computer game designers
are trying to force a very large experience through a very small hole
(the computer screen), characters
should be larger than life (even caricatures are probably okay) and their reactions should be as process-intense as
possible.
3. Use process-oriented activities (exploration, combat, etc.) as a backdrop
for the world, enriched by a number of
artifacts, discoveries and encounters
that the character doesn't have to experience to win the game.
4. Do not get too carried away with
using gates, but try to have a couple
so that players do not get too far off
the track.

Another major difference that was
noted in this session is that coin-op
designers create their games for one
platform, the specific hardware built
for that particular game. They do not
have to rely on a joystick, keyboard or
mouse controller, but can design a controller to fit the specific interface. Further, they can isolate the gamer in the
cabinet and make them feel like they
are in a particular vehicle cockpit.

World Building
Starflight designer Greg Johnson
defined three elements that go into a
role-playing universe. These are
process elements (game sequences,
strategies, activities which are performed over and over again and provide a balance of competition), gate
elements (ways to control the flow of
the plot via physical gates, not only
one to continue on until they have
done something, or conceptual gates)
and fictional elements (characterization
and plot).
There is a mistaken impression, according to Johnson, that providing a
good story is to create a story and
develop a game which forces the character down the line of that plot. Then,
in order to make a game, they add
multiple paths.
Johnson prefers to start off with a different set of assumptions. Rather than
starting off with the story, he tries to
start with a "world" or "environment."

Greg Stafford, of the pen and paper
game publisher Chaosium (Call of
Cthulhu), noted the following areas
where computer role-playing games
can improve.
1. CRPGs do not really provide the
epic scale and potential that roleplayers want to experience.
2. CRPGs do not provide the responsiveness to the player's actions that
they should. Only a few have realistic
reactions to acts of ethical irresponsibility.
3. CRPGs are not effectively presenting
the great quests which offer enough
ambiguity to allow for self-discovery.
4. Magic and mystery in CRPGs do not
offer enough of the sense of the "otherness" that should be present in a fantasy game.
5. Why are the issues of sex and death
which are such driving forces in life
not addressed in any meaningful way
in CRPGs?
6. The absence of significant (and
sometimes, ambiguous) moral conflict
is too often absent from CRPGs.
7. Too often, there is an absence of significant results and/or appropriate
rewards in CRPGs.

What's The Difference?
The difference between art and stateof-the-art must be the difference between purpose (intent and effect) and
technique. This year's Computer Game
Developers' Conference effectively
demonstrated that today's crop of
designers understand both.

Future Wars
(Continued from page 35)

some animated sequences in which no interaction is necessary
and the player simply watches the story advance.
Particularly noteworthy in Future Wars is its stereo musical
score. Rumored to be available on compact disk (at least, in
Europe), it ranges from Renaissance to futuristic, following the
story. It is a respectable soundtrack which many will consider superior to most of those composed and released for theatrical
films.
Future Wars comes on two disks which contain no disk-based
copy protection and the program is easily installed on a hard
drive. A blank disk is necessary to save games in progress and
one disk will hold multiple saves. Restoring a saved game after a
failure is admirably quick and effortless.

Complaints
The detailed graphics are truly a multi-edged weapon. Not only
do they hide objects, but they also impede movement around
the screen by the main character. The Traveller must be standing near certain objects to either examine or manipulate them.
Finding the exact position which is close enough to an object,
yet not blocking it, can be a frustrating experience. Simply strolling from one spot to another can become equally irritating when
there is excess graphic debris blocking the way.
One of the most agitating moments in Future Wars occurs
when the program is first booted. The copy protection for the program is based entirely on some color and pattern matching between the screen and the documentation. Unfortunately, the
colors are inconsistent and the patterns don't match. Many
legitimate owners of the game will be booting it more than once
in order to get started.

Hints
Although many objects are difficult to spot, probably the most
difficult is a little gas capsule. It is somewhere in the medieval
era and the Traveller must not leave that time period without this
easily-missed object in his inventory. Should he do so, his adventure will come to an abrupt halt in the future and he will not be
able to return to the past.
Another difficult sequence, which is misleading, takes place at
the rail station in the future. The Traveller has only a brief wait at
that location before his transportation arrives. In that short time,
however, there is an item which must be obtained. It takes
several actions to do this, one of which must be repeated more
than once. As above, the adventure will later come to a dead halt
if this task is not accomplished in the very short time allotted.

Conclusions
The "Cinematique" gaming system is not quite the innovation
Future War's designers claim it to be—similar features have appeared in games by Sierra as well as Lucasfilm. However, there
are still plenty of reasons to invest in the program. The story
(though not quite the work of an H.G. Wells) is a good one and
the graphics are excellent. The music score, although not integral to game-play, is outstanding. Players who enjoy animated
nranhir adventures would he well advised to check this one out

Cruisers, Convoys
(Continued from page 46)

ferences are: the orders of battle and time period simulated
(since the events in this game took place in the spring of
1941), as well as the destination points for the merchant
ships (since they must exit off the
southern end of the map rather than arriving in the port of Murmansk).
In Battleship Bismarck, the German
player takes on the role of Admiral Lutjens in attempting to raid commercial
vessels in the Atlantic and the British
player "becomes" Admiral Tovey in attempting to sink the nearly invincible
German raider. Everything else plays
and looks essentially the same. Players
who like one of these games will definitely like the other.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Battleship Bismarck
Apple II, IBM
IBM
1-2
$35.00
Owen P. Hall, Jr.
General Quarters Software
P.O. Box 1429
Torrance, CA 90505

If there is a place for "small run" computer game publishers, products like
these can fit the bill. At $35.00, these
games are not exactly "budgetware,"
but the increase over the $25.00 price point given to Under
Southern Skies may be acceptable when one considers the
increasing number of games priced at $49.00-$69.00.
These are not complex and detailed games, but they still
have plenty to offer the military gamer.

Strategy

Tycoon "Tooter" Two
Stoking The Fires In Railroad Tycoon
by Alan Emrich

ast issue, we got
trains rolling
and helped put
players on the path
to the Presidency (or
Prime Ministership)
with some helpful
techniques for commencing a game of
MicroProse's Sid

L

Meier's Railroad
Tycoon. Surveys,

Computer Gaming
World.

A "balanced attack" in financial matters is a safe, conservative route to success. A mixture of line improvements
and stock investments will take a
player up the ladder to success. However, as in Sid Meier's Pirates (another
game where ultimate success is
measured by post-retirement social
standing), conservative play can, at
best, usually only bring one near the
top, rarely ever actually to it. If, after
repeated play, a player can be satisfied
with a very successful career (and the
satisfaction of a job well done), these
penultimate place finishes are no big
deal. If, however, a player is consumed
by the quest to be President (or Prime
Minister), more radical money making

With ten blocks of stock of 10,000
shares each offered initially, a competitor must acquire six blocks (60%)
in order to successfully take over (and
if the player is taken over he is ignominiously run out of town on a
rail!). Since both the human and computer players have equivalent access
to the Stock Broker, buyouts often
turn into races to see who can borrow
the most money and buy the most
shares fastest. These "runs" on one's
company stock often become a run
for the player's life. The best way to insure one against these 19th Century
leveraged buyouts is to get a head
start. Buying 20-30,000 shares early
on is the key. Even if it seems difficult
to afford, it is necessary to make the
sacrifice.
Buying early (in the first 6-8 years),
offers a double advantage. The first advantage is that one is protected early
on (and when those new competing
railroads come on line, they often have
too much money and too much borrowing power at a time when the
player is already stretched financially
thin). The second advantage is that,
barring phenomenal early success, the
price of one's stock is relatively cheap.
It usually takes only a $500,000 bond
and the 30,000 shares needed are
ready to pocket.

"milk runs", and the
secret of laying down
(track) on the job are
all important to consider before running
that first engine. However, after "old Betsy"
leaves the station for
her maiden run, new
and much larger
problems will confront the aspiring
Tycoon. Here, then,
is some advice from
old "Engineer Bob" at

On Resisting
The Robber Barons

the robber barons can steal your hardearned company out from under you!

schemes will be useful (and are
presented in this article).
Early on in the life of one's railroad,
it will be necessary to put a plaque on
the R.R. President's desk with the immortal Latin phrase, "Novissimum Custoditer (literally, "Protect the rear!", or
in the CGW translation, "Cover your
butt!"). Anyone who has carefully picked out an initial line of track which
enables him/her to run a nice
profitable "gravy train" had better
protect it!. This is because the three
computerized competitors are tantamount to the Furies of Greek mythology, sent to personally torment the
player and rob him of all his good
works. So, buy your own stock before

Another ploy, albeit devious, is to
deliberately run one's railroad "into the
ground" early on, driving stock prices
to the floor. Then, buy up 90% (the
maximum purchasable) of the extant
stock and proceed to correct the problem. Players who might have pangs of
remorse or fits of conscience will have
to remember that the likes of inside
traders often go, at best, only lightly
punished (Ivan Boesky wound up in a
plush prison nicknamed "Club Fed").
There's nothing like a game of Railroad Tycoon to teach the distinction
between ethics and business ethics!
Stock manipulation can also be done
in more "legitimate" buying and selling
of other railroad's stock. Build a cash
reserve, then make "runs" on the stock
of weak railroads. They'll start buying
it up, as well. Often, borrowing the considerable sums required to do so will
leave them even weaker. At this point,
the price will become inflated. Then,

sell off the stock at the inflated prices,
leaving the other railroad holding the
bag.

Bleeding Red Ink
One secret to building a successful
railroad is to avoid letting one's debts
mount too high. The killer interest rate
on that big red number on the screen
(12%) can quickly read like the national debt. A short term solution can be
found in borrowing more money (at a
lower interest rate), but at some point,
it has to be paid back. No railroad
can really prosper when the "interest
payment tape worm" is eating it up.
One tip, though, is to utilize
bankruptcy creatively. A bold railroad
executive might borrow every last nickel that his/her credit allows and then
proceed to declare bankruptcy. After
all, half the debt gets relieved and, if
the other half is in one's back pocket,
complete relief is in sight! Giving credit
where credit is due tends to make one
a nice guy. Taking credit where credit
is offered makes one rich and that's
the way Railroad Tycoon is won.

Rate War / Total War
One way to tell if a player is on the
way to becoming a future President is
to watch the rate wars. If the competing railroads start using them to
muscle in at one's own stations, this is
not a good omen for the player. If,
however, the player becomes aggressive enough, the kind who walks right
up to the competition's door and kicks
it down, he or she will have become
the type of ruthless so-and-so who can
scratch and claw all the way to the
top. However, no one should ever start
a war that cannot be easily won (and
quickly).
When engaged in a rate war, one

should immediately freeze the game.
The first step is to take inventory.
Determine what the city under siege of
competition supplies and demands.
Then, reroute every train, if necessary,
to win that rate war! In Railroad
Tycoon, the price for success is negligible compared to the price for failure.
A rate war is "total war." So, reroute
everybody, double track the way into
the station and upgrade the trains that
serve it. All stops must be pulled to
win a rate war, and quickly! If won
fast enough, the bonus income
received (from all the newly scheduled
trains stopping at the station) might
more than offset the cost of the war.

Breaking All The Rules
This section is only for those players
who do not know the meaning of the
word "guilt." What we offer here are un-

quaint, cheap little railroad in a garden
spot. Borrow $2,000,000 and wait until
a new railroad comes on line. The
second it does, pounce! Buy their
stock before they can buy any shares.
While the player is calling the broker
to make stock purchases, the computer opponent is wasting its calls
trying to borrow enough money to
keep up!
Once the player hits the 60%
threshold, the remaining 40% become
public shares. Take all of the new
railroad's money and use it to bail out
one's own railroad. Next, sell 10,000
shares of the railroad taken over, and
then it's back under its own management, in debt and half owned by the
player.
The first thing the railroad's new
management will do is to borrow more
money, giving that railroad at least
$500,000. Fine. Buy 10,000 shares,
take it over again, pocket the cash,
and repeat the process. A player
should be able to rake off three to five
million dollars and the competing railroad should die off after a couple of fiscal periods. By using this method, a
player can often manage to keep control of two competing railroads, and
keep exploiting the third for easy
money.

The Ties That Bind

conscionable acts of program exploitation which just might be able to leave
one's name posted in the game's Hall
of Fame as "President of the United
States".
Taking Your Track On The Road:

Instead of finding the choicest spot to
begin a railroad, find the absolute
worst! Build a short line, with two
depots, and wait for the competition to
move in. After all three "enemies"
perch on your doorstep, just remove
track until your entire rail line disappears. Then, just start anew in the garden spot, leaving your competition
high and dry! Leave them stuck in
Turkey, Scotland, Arkansas or Utah.
Make them suffer even as one's railroad "slimes" out of town to set up
shop elsewhere (sounds just like an
NFL franchise moving, doesn't it?).
The Pursestring Pounce: Set up a

With all of these diabolical techniques
at one's disposal, it should become
easier to successfully create an "octopus" of a railroad that can entrap
even an award-winning game design
like Railroad Tycoon in the tentacles
of gamesmanship. Just remember,
they didn't call them "robber barons"
for nothing.
Thanks to Joe Halada and Gavin HeIf (PRODIGY interactive personal service users) for the 'Pursestring Pounce' and 'Track on
the Road' strategies.

Games of the Year

CGW's Game of
the Year Awards
Overall Came of the Year

Railroad Tycoon
Action Game of the Year

Their Finest Hour
Adventure Game of the Year

Hero's Quest
Role-Playing Game of the Year

Starflight 2
Simulation Came of the Year

M-1 Tank Platoon
Wargame of the Year

Harpoon
Special Artistic Achievement
Award

Loom

E

ach June, CGWs editorial staff examines the releases from one Consumer Electronics Show to another
and attempts to determine those games
which have contributed the most to each
of the five categories listed in our Top
100. The ratings given by our readers,
technological merit, product impact and
judgment of the editors all come into
play in the final decision. In addition, the
editors enjoy presenting special awards
to those games which excel in at least
one aspect of their design and/or presentation.
So, if you please, get out your tuxedos
and formals, murmur in anticipation as
the lights lower and the spotlight shines
at center stage, giggle with delight as the
entire staff and freelancers of CGW perform "This Is It!" (the opening song from
the Bugs Bunny television show) as our
opening production number, and enjoy
Computer Gaming World's Annual Game
of the Year Extravaganza.

Action Game of the Year
Nominees for Action Game of the
Year are:
Activision for DeathTrack—Darek Lukaszuk and Terry Ishida (designers) with
John A. S. Skeet and Steve Ackrich
(producers), proving once again that
Dynamix knows how to give players the
feel of motion and space in a 3-Space environment;
Accolade for Hardball II—Don Mattrick,

Chris Taylor and Rick Friesen (designers) with Pam Levins (producer), injecting state-of-the-art graphics and new elements of strategy into a classic of the
genre;
Cinemaware for TV Sports: Basketball—Larry Garner and John Cutter
(designers) with Jerry Albright
(producer), improving their successful
sports series with the substance of
strategy and statistics to match the already breathtaking graphics and sound;
Lucasfilm Games for Their Finest
Hour—Lawrence Holland (designer and
project leader) with Martin Cameron and
James McLeod (artists), establishing that
beautifully bit-mapped graphics and special effects do not impede the heat and
excitement of participating in aerial combat on the computer; and
Microprose for Sword of the Samurai—
Lawrence Schick (designer and project
leader) with Jim Synoski, John Kennedy,
David McKibbin, Dan Chang and Sid
Meier (additional design), elegantly combining elements from many different
styles of games into a coherent, challenging and enlightening game.
And the WINNER of CGWs Action
Game of the Year is:
Lucasfilm Games for Their Finest Hour—
CGW's readers immediately perceived
that Their Finest Hour surpassed even
the quality of its predecessor (Battlehawks 1942). Hence, its rating
propelled it to the top of our Top 100

faster than a rocket-propelled jet from
the next game due in the series. The
watchword of this series is action and the
word from consumers seems to be unmitigated satisfaction.

Adventure Game of the Year
Nominees for Adventure Game of the
Year are:
Cinemaware for It Came From The
Desert—Ken Melville and David Riordan
(designers), producing a product that is
as "cinematic" in story as its predecessors were in graphic presentation;
Lucas film Games for Indiana Jones
and Last Crusade: The Graphic Adventure—Noah Falstein, David Fox and
Ron Gilbert (designers), combining an existing plot with new twists and game elements while continuing to enhance an interface which was already much admired
and emulated;
Lucasfilm Games for Loom—Brian
Moriarty (designer) with Greg Hammond
(producer), creating an intense entertainment experience which has remained
true to an original philosophical vision of
its author in both story and presentation;
Sierra for Hero's Quest—Lori Ann and
Corey Cole (designers) with Guruka
Singh Khalsa (producer), using the tools,
expertise and resources of Sierra's successful formula for best-selling graphic adventures and adding a twist of role-playing and a sprinkle of humor to sweeten
the plot; and
Sierra for Leisure Suit Larry III—AI
Lowe (designer and producer) with William Skirvin and Roger Hardy (artists),
taking a creative risk in transforming the
viewpoint of the game from male to
female and continuing to refine the
graphic look of the series.
And the WINNER of CGW's Adventure Game of the Year is:
Sierra for Hero's Quest. In combining
the adventure game and role-playing genres, this introductory level game has an
interesting story, fascinating encounters
and intriguing puzzles. It is one of the few
introductory games which has received
positive feedback from both beginning
and advanced gamers.

Role-Playing Game of the
Year
Nominees for Role-Playing Game of
the Year are:
Data East for Chamber of the SciMutant Priestess—Arbeit von Spacekraft, Patrick Dublanchet and Michel Rho
(designers), creating a real-time adventure with an impressive variety of character skills and objects to encounter, fascinating combination of eerie sounds and
mysterious graphics to experience and
(Continued on page 74)

I

I

Storm in the Med
(Continued from page 22)
which requires decision making on the basis of "raw" data and
limited intelligence than in pure entertainment products will want
to give these products a wide berth. Suffice it to say that there
are no graphics. The game is totally executed by textual and
numerical descriptions of the units and action. While this worked
using maps and counters in days of yore (anyone out there
remember Avalon Hill's Dnieper River Line and Tanktics?),
Malta Storm provides laminated maps and grease pencils "to
keep track of force locations and contact reports" (from the
rulebook). As the menus readily list the forces always at their
base locations, and contacts take place "out there somewhere"
and are streamed across the screen in the form of combat resolu
Lion reports, one often finds himself plotting the initial plan of attack on the map and largely disregarding the only visual aid in
the game as time progresses.
The use of CSLs to simulate a degree of operational control
gives the player a very limited feeling of involvement. The Allied
player for instance can direct only 10 of a possible 90 units to
perform other than the general actions predetermined by the setting of National Priorities each turn. Even the program's execution of CSL allocations is erratic. One example of this is if the
player possesses unexpended CSL points he may transfer units
from his strategic pool at will at no CSL cost. On the other hand,
if he possesses no points, no transfers can take place. It is also
possible to end up ordering a strike, and through a misstroke of

the keyboard, end up with no target designated and no CSL
point expended. In short, the direction of action is too simplistic
and may be too abstract to be gripping.
The military conflict surrounding the epic defense of Malta is
the type of historical material that lends itself to great computer
games. It includes heavily guarded convoys braving enemy infested waters to relieve desperate garrisons in imminent danger
of being overrun by superior amphibious and airborne forces;
raiders in the form of fast task forces, submarines, and motor torpedo boats skirmishing with Axis convoys intent on supplying
the "Desert Fox's" push on the Suez Canal. Axis air forces struggling to pummel ground facilities into submission while their Allied counterparts struggle to beat them off. Malta Storm misses
the mark of making any of this imagery tangible.
As a pure entertainment product, many will feel the limitations
placed by Malta Storm's design and lack of chrome makes it a
less than desirable game for the casual gamer. As a command
study, however, Malta Storm has plenty to offer aficionados of
military history who are more concerned with strategy than
presentation.

Consumer Alert
According to SimCan any revs of Malta Storm other than 1.33
and the 1.2 for IBM contain errors. There are very few of these
faulty versions out there for the IBM. Owners will be contacted by
SimCan directly. A company spokesman says that they will be issuing a free update notice for owners of the Amiga version of the
game.

Games of the Year

Games of the Year
(Continued from page 70)
delightful amalgam of puzzles;
Electronic Arts for Starflight 2—Greg
Johnson and Bob Gonsalves (designers)
with Roland Kippenhan (producer), establishing a universe with so many cultures,
personalities, options and plot twists that
it is easy for players to suspend their disbelief;
Interplay for Dragon Wars—Paul Ryan
O'Connor and Brian Fargo (designers)
with Bill Heineman (programmer), involving players through extremely well-written
off-line paragraphs, a magic system with
more variety, sophistication and lore than
most computer role-playing games and
multiple solutions to every puzzle;
Mindcraft for Keys of Maramon—Ali N.
Atabek and James B. Thomas (designers), combining the quick and efficient
combat action with a nice mix of some
of the skills, encounters and discoveries
that made The Magic Candle (last year's
Adventure Game of the Year) popular;
and
Origin for Ultima VI—Richard Garriott
and Warren Spector (producers), offering
an interesting and important story,
dynamite graphics using constant scaling, and incredible detail within the world
of Britannia.
And the WINNER of CGWs Role-Playing Game of the Year is:
Electronic Arts for Starflight 2. This
game offers ample reward for exploration, utilizing curiosity, managing resources and carefully handling trade and
negotiation. It expands the notion of roleplaying beyond the traditional limits of
computer games.

Simulation Game of the
Year
Activision for MechWarrior—Damon
Slye, Mark Brenneman, and Paul Bowman (designers) with John A. S. Skeel
and Steve Ackrich (producers), using
Dynamix' 3-Space animation and careful
attention to the established BattleTech
universe to create the most amazing
simulacrum this side of actually sitting in
a cockpit at one of FASA's BattleTech
centers;
Electronic Arts for Indianapolis 500:
The Simulation—David Kaemmer (designer) with Richard Hilleman (producer),
designing an accurate and fascinating
simulation of auto racing without forgetting to put in the special effects, spectator perspective and raw sound so often
associated with motor sports;
Microprose for M-1 Tank Platoon—Arnold Hendrick and Scott Spanburg (designers), providing a command perspective
of unit action combined with the excitement of a three-dimensional first person

perspective from the command tank;
Spectrum HoloByte for Tank—R. Anton
Widjaja, Gilman Louie and Steve Perrin
(designers), combining the depth of an
authentic military simulation, hot
graphics and the capacity for modem-tomodem combat in a playable simulation;
and
Strategic Simulations, Inc. for DragonStrike—Louis Castle and Brett Sperry, introducing a unique subject matter, interesting role-playing shell, and entertaining
variety of mission types.
And the WINNER of CGWs Simulation Game of the Year Award is:
MicroProse for M-1 Tank Platoon. By successfully uniting the strategy of a tactical
wargame with the excitement of a firstperson simulation, Microprose solved
some unique design questions and
created a playable game on a concept
that many felt was not "gameable."

Strategy Game of the Year
The nominees for CGWs Strategy
Game of the Year are:
Britannica Software for Revolution
'76—Edward Bever (designer), proving
that an educational game can be attractive, stimulating, challenging and deep;
Electronic Arts for Populous—Peter
Molyneux, Glenn Corpes, Kevin Donkin
and Les Edgar (designers) with Jocelyn
Ellis (producer), offering "divine" power
and a "cosmic" challenge presented via
dynamic graphics under the constraints
of real time;
Microprose for Sid Meier's Railroad
Tycoon—Sid Meier and Bruce C. Shelley
(designers), utilizing a simple interface,
layers of strategy, near perfect mixture of
scenarios and trainload of options to provide a lifetime of gaming in one product;
New World Computing for Nuclear
War—Eric Hyman and Jon Van
Caneghem (designers), transforming a
wild and wooly card game into a
hilarious, fast-playing challenge with
graphics (by Avril Harrison) that are hotter than nuclear blasts themselves; and
Strategic Studies Group for Gold of
the Americas—Stephen Hart and Ian
Trout (designers), marrying colorful
graphics and humor with a solid strategic
concept, multi-player capabilities and
sense of history.
And the WINNER is:
Electronic Arts for Populous. This unique
approach to real-time strategy offers
more cerebral challenge than reflexive
gymnastics in a game that grows in both
complexity and appeal.

Wargame of the Year
The nominees for CGWs Wargame of
the Year are:
Conflict Analytics for Action Stations

Alan D. Zimm (designer), developing a
game in which depth, challenge and expertise shine through without the encumbrance of expensive graphics;
Simulations Canada for Kriegsmarine—
James S. Baker and Stephen M. Newberg (designers), creating a series of
games that effectively presents the "fog
of war" and command perspective in
World War II naval encounters without
losing playability;
Strategic Simulations, Inc. for Second
Front—Gary Grigsby (designer), developing a game which does not oversimplify
the complexities of the strategic situation
being simulated while enabling players to
choose their desired level of involvement;
Strategic Simulations, Inc. for Sword of
Aragon—Kurt Myers and Russell Shilling
(designers), taking the concept of a
simple fantasy campaign and combining
enough elements of role-playing, tactical
combat and resource management to create an incredibly playable game; and
Three-Sixty for Harpoon—Larry Bond,
Becky McGuire, Don Gilman, Mike
Jones, Leslie Hill, and Gordon Walton
(designers), using the computer for the
management of data, handling hidden
movement, assisting the flow of play and
presenting attractive graphics.
And the WINNER is:
Three-Sixty for Harpoon. The computer
version of the popular miniatures rules is
a marvelous example of what can happen when a successful system is translated into a new medium and takes advantage of the strengths of that new
medium.

Special Award for Artistic
Achievement
From the extended color palette
generated by the dithering techniques of
Mark Ferrari, the mesmerizing special effects of Ken Macklin, the intriguing facial
expressions generated by Gary Winnick
and Steve Purcell, through the marvelous
digitized soundtrack by George Alistair
Sanger, to the artistic way the interface
was integrated into the story, Loom deserves to be recognized as a work of art.

Overall Game of the Year
This year, CGWs Game of the Year is
recognized because of its unique subject
matter, excellent presentation, and exceptional game play.
And the WINNER is:
MicroProse Software for Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon.
And so there you have it. We congratulate all the nominees and the winners.
We invite you all to the black-tie reception immediately following this ceremony
(to be held in the throne room of Lord
British's castle).

CES Report
(Continued from page 8)
change with the pace of the
game using SOUNDTRAX.
MicroProse engages in
entertaining espionage with
Covert Action. The
protagonist, named Max,
bears little resemblance to
the character's namesake,
MicroProse graphic artist Max
Remington III, and the challenges to be found in the
game bear little resemblance
to any previous MicroProse
game. There are plenty
of puzzles to challenge
players, as well as plenty
of action to stimulate
them in this new release.
With King's Quest V
and Hero's Quest II on
the way, Sierra's "Two
Guys from Andromeda"
decided that too much
of too many sequels
would be too tempting
to resist. So, in Space
Quest IV, they send
Roger Wilco tripping
through time (and imaginary future Space Quest
adventures) in order to
avoid trouble with the
dreaded Sequel Police. In
fact, several avid Sierra
gamers were alarmed by last
issue's references to the upcoming CD-ROM products
(without mention of any pc
version of the games). There
is no reason to worry. There
will also be VGA and EGA
(on both low and high density disks) versions of the
new graphic adventures from
Sierra.
Taito is importing the
European hit, Castle Master,
to the U.S. Unlike many adventure games that, like Clint
Eastwood's early films, advanced the plot solely
through combat, Castle
Master features 3-D polygonfilled technology and plenty
of physical (spatiallyoriented) puzzles in order to
present an adventure which
is primarily solved by explora
tion. The object of the game
is to collect ten keys and ten
pentangles in order to rescue
one's spouse (there are different routes for each sex)
from the bad guys.

Three fascinating licenses
are ready to peek over the
horizon. SSI will unveil their
Buck Rogers role-playing adventure in the fall. The game
will use the same basic engine as their successful fantasy series in order to bring
the classic pulp science fiction adventures to simulated
life. Also, Miles Computing
revealed that they will unveil
their first Champions
product, a superhero roleplaying game at Winter CES
(January, 1991) in Las
Vegas. Miles anticipates two

game with enhanced
graphics).

Simulations
Perhaps, the most amazing
trend in simulations if the
profusion of World War I air
combat simulations. There
were four different titles
shown at the show and many
consumers will want all four.
Microprose's Knights of the
Sky is simple, elegant, attractive and features the capacity
for modem play. Wild Bill
Stealey shot down both
editors of CGW in modem-tomodem dogfights during the
show, but the game still gets
"thumbs up" from two guys
who absolutely hate to lose
(especially in public).
Red Baron from Dynamix
features hotter graphics, a
wider selection of planes, and
more detail than the other
World War I simulations, as
well as some fascinating campaign options. It is not expected to have modem play,
however. Three-Sixty's Ace
of Aces II features quality
graphics, split-screen two per-

full-blown Champions
products in 1991, as well as
a heroes and villains data
disk. Finally, Paragon
Software is preparing Space
1889, based on the Games
Designers' Workshop
boardgames. It is expected to
be a complex mixture of roleplaying, historical discovery
and science fiction combat.
Access plans to continue
their approach to interactive
movie making with
Countdown, a CIA versus international terrorists romp
that uses art by Emmy winner Doug Vandevere (Muppet Babies), and Cartel, an
action/adventure done in the
Crime Wave style with 3-D
axis and up/down scrolling
added (unlike the original
Crime Wave, save games
and joystick control will be
available in the original
product).
Finally, for those who have
never played Dondra, Miles
Computing is releasing
QuestMaster 1 (an MS-DOS
version of the classic Apple II

son play and modem play,
as well as a purely strategic
phased movement version of
the dogfights.
Add Cinemaware's Wings,
a typically cinematic and arcade-oriented game based on
the diary of an actual World
War I pilot, into the mix and
anyone interested in the era
will almost have to have all
four. The Cinemaware
product features 230 movie
cards (titled interludes) and
action with up to 15 planes
on a screen at any given
time.

Those who want a more upto-date simulation might want
to choose Electronic Arts'
Gorbachev's Ace, a missionoriented game with 33 different mission types where
players fly an SU-25, or
Spectrum HoloByte's
Flight of the Intruder, based
on the best-selling book by
Stephen Coonts. It is a mission-based game featuring
"actual" Vietnam encounters
and attempting to simulate
authentic rules of engagement. The former features
MCGA graphics and the latter features 16 color VGA
graphics. In addition, ThreeSixty's MegaFortress offers
a mixture of old and new as
the player flies a 'teched-up B52. The game was inspired
by Dale Brown's Flight of
the Old Dog and features
missions derived from the adventures in the book.
Also, even those readers
who do not have IBM compatibles can enjoy modern
air combat with
MicroProse's coin-op soupedup version of F-15 Strike
Eagle. The graphics are
so hot, fast and smooth
that one has to play it to
believe it.
Those who want a combination of World War II
action mixed with the
"What if?" of fascinating
simulation will be interested in Lucasfilm's
Secret Weapons of the
Luftwaffe. In the campaign game, part of the
player's decision-making
is to explore how production and deployment of
the ME-262, rocket
fighter and flying wing would
have affected the balance of
the air war in the waning
period of World War II. Unlike its predecessors, Their
Finest Hour and Battlehawks 1942, the new air
combat game will feature full
256 color VGA graphics, special effects and more detailed
flight dynamics, which will
have a degradation of performance according to where
and how much damage each
particular plane can take.
Interestingly enough, ThreeSixty is preparing a World

War II submarine simulation
with marvelous attention to
detail and fabulous VGA
graphics (tentatively titled,
Das Boot), while MicroProse is updating their
product which established
the sub simulator genre with
Silent Service II.
Another subject which is
generating more than one
simulation this year is that of
space flight/combat.
MicroProse's Lightspeed features both 3-D polygon-filled
combat sequences and roleplaying aspects (about 2/3
combat and 1/3 role-playing), while Origin's
Wingleader emphasizes
the "team" aspect of
futuristic space combat.
Both games feature incredible frame rates
during the action sequences (and Lightspeed's
"kamikaze rocket", essentially a point-of-view missile, offers a fascinating
perspective which shows
this fast framing off), but
Wingleader probably advances the genre the
most. In addition to the
use of sound that advances the state of the art (see
last issue's CES report),
Chris Roberts did a wonderful
job on the graphics by using
supercomputers 3-D ray tracing to develop the images, as
well as digitized actual rocks
to portray the asteroids in
the game. Origin is so excited about the graphics in
Wingleader that they plan to
use an actual screen shot on
the cover of the package
rather than the usual painting. Wingleader features a 60
mission campaign with a
"tree branching" story so that
the player's performance affects the entire campaign.
Finally, Spectrum HoloByte is offering Stunt
Driver, an amazing driving
simulation with both construction set and modem-tomodem capabilities. Driving
games continue to be
popular and Spectrum is attempting to push the envelope.

Strategy
Real-time strategy is becom-

ing extremely popular.
Accolade's Star Control,
Electronic Arts' Powermonger and Virgin
Mastertronic's new space
game (the working title was
Quasar), as well as some of
the wargames mentioned in
the next section, are all good
examples. In the Virgin
Mastertronic game, expected to be released initially
on the Amiga, players use a
mouse-driven icon-based interface to balance resources, intelligence and military
strategy in something like a
real-time Reach For The
Stars or Andromeda Conquest.

The game involves resource
management, strategy and arcade action with space ships
which handle similar to
Asteroids.
In spite of the popularity of
real-time strategy games, classic strategy games are still
popular. Interplay is releasing two titles in this category.
Amiga owners will want to
try CheckMate, a traditional
chess program with algorithms that match up as
equal to or superior to any
chess program on the
market and BattleChess II:
Chinese Chess, a dynamic
graphic chess variant program.
Accolade also has two classic entries in this category.
Ishido: The Way of Stones,
a fascinating puzzle, matching, strategy and philosophical game (also to be published on the Sega Genesis
machine) where players attempt to match colored
stones, symbols and patterns, and Stratego, the computer version of the Milton
Bradley boardgame.

Powermonger is a followup game from the creators of
Populous. Up to four players
may compete through serial
connection in a real-time
world with thousands of simulated people with individual
names, addresses and jobs.
The game features regionalized weather, enables players
to "invent" technological advances using natural resources, select military formations when attacking and updates the game automatically
when the player has been
away for a while (i.e. the
game continues while you
are away as in Andrew
Greeley's superb novel, God
Game). The idea of the
game is to advance the
player's civilization until it permeates the entire world.

Stratego, appearing first on
the 256 color Macintosh II,
will feature standard pregame set-ups, five different
levels of computer opponents, instant replay feature, different boards and
pieces, a five game campaign game with different
variations and on-line help.

Star Control is a one or
two player game which features a combination of
strategy/action. Unlike the
two games discussed earlier,
the strategic moves in Star
Control are not real-time, but
the arcade action in which
players fight the battles is.

In terms of classics, Broderbund is releasing a deluxe
version of Where in the
World is Carmen Sandiego?
with 256 VGA colors and lots
more chrome (higher levels
of difficulty, digitized
sound/voices and digitized
graphics from the National

Geographic Society). They
are also preparing a computer version of Pictionary.
Anyone who has ever been
frustrated by their inability to
draw anything remotely
recognizable will enjoy
Pictionary's capacity to draw
for them. For those who like
the artistic aspect of the
game, a mini-paint program
is provided (and simplifies
shading and filling for those
who draw slowly).
Two games of historical
strategy were worthy of special note. Broderbund unveiled Galleons of Glory, a
simple strategy game based
on Magellan's explorations.
The game hinges on
resource management (including human resource
management) and follows
the diary of one of
Magellan's crew members.
Also, Taito is publishing a
game with elements of both
action and strategy. Entitled
Way of the Pharaoh, the object of the game is to increase one's social status
and it includes: arcade sequences, combat, iconbased trading sequences
and resource management.
Finally, two golf games
will emphasize the
cerebral nature of the
sport. Accolade's Jack
Nicklaus Unlimited
Golf and Course
Design not only features
a new course ("Bear's
Track", designed by Nicklaus for this product)
and improved game
play (e.g. a grid over the
green to facilitate putting),
but an editor where one can
start from dirt and build a
course from the terrain up.
The product includes a full
paint program and a library
of pre-built objects.
Electronic Arts unveiled
PGA Tour Golf. The PGA is
assisting in creating course
disks for this product and
this is the first product to
force players to choose their
clubs before the round, just
like in a real PGA tournament. One to four players
can compete in this game
which features plenty of

chrome in terms of "broadcast" interruptions, instant
replays with line showing the
path of the ball and great
sound support.
In Cinemaware's Dragon
Lord, players have a magical
(alchemical?) laboratory at
their disposal. One hatches,
raises and trains up to eight
different dragons; designs potions for controlling these
dragons; and sends these
dragons out to search for artifacts, attack and conquer
enemy villages and raise the
funds to keep the "research"
and conquest going.
MicroPlay's Midwinter is a genre
buster that requires skill
at role-playing (interaction with up to 32 nonplayer characters) and
3-D action sequences
(snow buggy driving,
skiing and hang gliding), as well as strategic
insight.
Last, but not least,
Mindscape is releasing
M.U.L.E. on the Nintendo Entertainment System. Since this classic
CGW Hall of Fame game is
tough to locate on any platform, this is exciting news.

Wargames
The news for wargamers is
better than it has been for
several CES shows. Not only
were there rumors of Koei's
Napoleonic game, L'Empereur, appearing near
the end of 1990 (or early
1991), but there were new titles from several companies.
MicroProse announced
that it would publish UMS II:
Nations at War under its
MicroPlay label. The new version of the "Universal Military
Simulator" enables eras and
units to be mixed, as well as
battlefields and entire planets
to be edited for future
gameplay. Unlike the original
product, players can now utilize a more realistic mixture
of terrain over the topography of the familiar 3-D grid.
In addition, the company will
release Command HQ under
the MicroPlay label.

Designed by multi-player
guru Dan Bunten, Command
HQ allows players to compete via modem in conflicts
based on World War I, World
War II or even future conflagrations. It offers strategic
level competition either
head-to-head with the computer as
a traditional wargame or
against a human opponent in
a point-to-point connection.
As noted last issue, Data
East's Full Metal Planet allows up to four players to
compete in futuristic warfare.
Ocean will unleash Battle
Command from the designers of Carrier Command,

Action
Licensed products are the
watchword in the action
category during the latter portion of the year. Capstone's
The Cardinal of the Kremlin
builds on the best-selling
novel by allowing the player
to command multiple operatives and handle resource
management (in terms of administering research
programs) in order to lead
up to three action sequences.
Activision announced
Aliens vs. Predator for the
Nintendo system, combining
two movie licenses in an action product that might be
published on the IBM, as well
as the video game machine.
As noted last issue, Britishbased Ocean plans to
market The Untouchables
and Clive Barker's
Nightbreed on multiple formats. Capstone has collected lots of classic arcade
sequences for Bill & Ted's
Excellent Adventure on the
IBM. Meanwhile, Mindscape
is unleashing Dirty Harry

the 3-D strategy game
originally published by Rainbird and currently marketed
by the Medalist division of
MicroProse. The biggest difference between the two
games is that Battle Command involves futuristic tank
combat rather than carrier
combat.
With regard to "traditional"
wargames, SSI's Storm
Across Europe is a World
War II game using the basic
movement/strategy system
found in their Colonial Conquest of several years back.
It has already been on the
market for the C-64 for some
time, but new Amiga and
IBM versions are on their way.
Space is another fertile area
for wargames and there are
two of particular interest due
this fall. Interstel's Armada
2525 is a one to six player
game which is highly reminiscent of the classic Reach for
the Stars and SSI's Interceptor features ship-to-ship combat in the universe of
FASA's "Renegade Legion".

detail to enhance the action
on lower end computers,
power meter shooting and an
emphasis on the transition
game. Finally, Konami's upcoming Nintendo hit, Bill
Elliott's NASCAR Challenge, is now being prepared
to enter the IBM world.
Sequels and updates still
permeate the action environment. Sierra's FireHawk:
Thexder 2 is a sequel to a
previous Japanese import.
This release features more
animation and an eleven
song soundtrack. Dynamix
is updating their classic tank
shoot-'em-up Stellar 7 from
wire-frame to 3-D polygonfilled graphics. Taito's Operation Thunderbolt is a sequel
to their popular Operation
Wolf.
One of the most interesting
action games on multiple formats will be Taito's Kiwi
Kraze. It looks like a Super
Mario Brothers-style game
with better graphics. Finally,
for something completely different, Cinemaware is
preparing to release Blood
Relatives, sort of an arcade action meets Clue
game with nine different murders, a
variety of difficulty
levels and replayability.

Searching for
the Grail (Conclusion)

and Tom Cruise's latest starring vehicle, Days of
Thunder, on the Nintendo.
On the sports front, Data
East's Bo Does Baseball features VGA graphics and the
capacity for downloading
USA Today's statistics directly into the game. Data East
also plans to release a
three-on-three basketball game
based on the Dream Team
charitable events being
staged by James Worthy,
Patrick Ewing and Dominick
Wilkins. This game will feature "point and press" passing, selection of graphic

Probably more than
any other CES exhibition during the past few
years, this year's show
demonstrated a level playing
field of technology, a concern for quality product and
an awareness of the crossover mass media appeal for
both video games and computer games. The kingdom
of computer gaming seems
relatively secure, but with the
new prominence of cartridge
development and investment
in the entertainment software
industry, the stakes are
higher and the dangers
greater. For Lord British and
all the other pioneers of this
industry, may the next ten
years be both as profitable
and exciting.

Reader Input Device

Conversions
Received

Altered Beast (SEGA) IBM
Blades of Steel (Konami)

Am,C64,IBM
Blockout (California Dreams) C64
Blood Money (Psygnosis) C64
CastleVania (Konami) C64,IBM
Crime Wave (Access) IBM
Day of the Viper (Accolade) IBM
Fire King (SSG) IBM
Gold of the Americas (SSG) IBM,ST
Greg Norman's Shark Attack! ST
Hole-In-One Miniature Golf-New
Courses (DigiTek) IBM
Might & Magic II (New World) Am
Nuclear War (New World) IBM
Panzer Battles (SSG) Mac
Pirates! (Microprose) Am
Power Drift (Activision) IBM
Powerdrome (EA) IBM
Rings of Medusa (Star Games) IBM
Ski or Die (EA) C64
Storm Across Europe (SSI) Am
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles

(Ultra) IBM
Tunnels of Armageddon (California

Dreams) IBM
Vegas Gambler (California Dreams)

C64
Wizardry-New & Improved (Sir-

Tech) Mac
Weird Dreams (Microplay) IBM
Welltris (Spectrum Holobyte) Am
Where in the USA is Carmen Sandiego? IIGS

Editorial

Taking the Industry's Pulse

S

tate of the Magazine: This issue,
CGW focuses on the entertainment software industry by means
of recognizing achievement with our annual Game of the Year awards; highlighting the immediate future of the entertainment software industry with the
second half of our Summer Consumer
Electronics Show report; and summarizing some of the more interesting presentations at this year's Game Developers'
Conference. CGWs readers have always
been interested in the background,
trends and news surrounding computer
entertainment, as well as the products
which are already on the market. Therefore, we have devoted a substantial
amount of this issue to providing this
more technical coverage of the industry.

switch accomplishments from one imaginary world to another. For instance, one
might be able to use the road system
from SimCity in order to race in Vette or
one's approval rating for the former
might be enhanced by one's accomplishments in, say, Ultima VI.

CGW, the oldest computer game
magazine in the world, is expanding its
circulation almost threefold with this
issue. Thousands of you may be reading
CGW for the first time. If this is your first
exposure to CGW, we hope that you like
what you see and that you will be joining
our family of dedicated readers.

In many ways, software is produced in
a corporate environment not unlike that
of large defense contractors. Instead of
military secrets, there is proprietary code.
Instead of classified information relating
to national security, there are carefully
protected marketing demographics and
there must be a careful handling of actual sales figures. The entertainment
software industry continually urges the
hardware manufacturers to standardize,
but there is very little information sharing
taking place within the software industry.
Even such a "simple" issue as whether to
move to high density disks as the
primary medium for game disks is
fraught with contradictory rumors, closelyheld secrets and no effort to standardize.

State of the Industry: Those who are
familiar with fantasy role-playing are
aware of the magical potion described in
many systems as "universal solvent."
This most useful substance also has, of
course, some most unusual drawbacks.
Since it dissolves, literally, anything, it
can be extremely handy when it comes
to melting pesky locks or eliminating
dangerous slime creatures, but what happens when it touches a character's limbs
or is deliberately poured into a bag of
holding? It definitely leads to unexpected
problems.
Will Wright, designer of SimCity and
the upcoming SimEarth, shared an impressive vision with game designers at
last spring's Game Developers' Conference. He envisioned an IFF-style file
for games that would save data in standardized formats so that players could

Like the universal solvent of the magical realm, Wright's vision offers almost
limitless possibilities, but potentially
leaves an incredible amount of obstacles
to be overcome. His proposal
demonstrates a vision far beyond the isolated individual game designer and/or ancillary product focus of the competitive
software publisher and challenges some
of the basic assumptions underlying
entertainment software competition.

In order for Will Wright's vision to succeed, an extraordinary channel of communication would need to be opened in
the creative sector of the industry, as well
as the business sector of the industry. A
summit meeting would decide what types
of data would be important to save in the
standardized format, how much space
would be reserved for future data types,
how often this format would be reviewed
and who would participate in the review
process. Summit participants would have

to determine if there was any "real" value
to making such a Herculean effort or if
this was simply a minor piece of chrome.
Marketing representatives would have to
consider the implications for expanding
the types of and number of marketing
channels available for ancillary products
based on the potential cross-overs of
various programs. Designers would have
to determine if standardized types of data
would undermine the creativity factor in
future designs or simply give yet another
tool to work with.
Frankly, we'd like to see such an industry-wide effort, but the potential for
spilling "universal solvent" on an entire industry is certainly there. Notice, for example, how inconsistently the marketing
channel handles support products at the
present. Data disks tend to get lost in the
shuffle of the next new release for several
reasons, non-standard packaging, lower
profit margin for retailers and lack of advertising/marketing effort on behalf of
publishers. Further, conversions tend to
get less shelf space because they are
often considered to be an "older" title.
In order to make the effort work, the industry would have to decide that the
universal game file format (UGFF?) was
worth selling. It would require a solid
cooperative front of marketing wizardry
to make consumers want to pay
whatever extra it takes to add this feature
to virtually all products produced in the
U.S. It might even become the competitive edge for the U.S. software industry
until such point as a world-wide standard
could emerge.
Visionary dreams tend to revitalize and
excite one. They get the creative juices
flowing. Even if they don't come together
the way they are initially described, they
tend to make one reach further than one
has before. Let's hope Will Wright's
vision doesn't get lost in the whirlwind of
economic com petition. We need dreams.

