May 1989

Number 59

Features
War In Middle Earth

10

SimCity: The City Simulator

16
18
20

Scavengers of the Mutant World

40
44

Ancient Battles
CCS' Tactical Game of Ancient Warfare / Lt. H. E. Dille

CGW Announces The Readers' Choices for Best Ads

Double Dragon, Renegade, and Bad Dudes

39

Under The Ice

Interstel's Adventure with a Change of Genes / Scorpia

A Familiar System with a Change of Planes / Hosea Battles

Top Ad Award Winners

36

A Sub Game with a Change of Climate / M. Evan Brooks

A Simulation for a Change of Scenery / Johnny L. Wilson

First Over Germany

Deja Vu II: Lost In Las Vegas
An Adventure with a Change of Luck / Dave Arneson

A Strategy Game for a Change of Hobbit / Chris Lombardi

21

Three Street Fighting Games / David M. Wilson

Sword of Sodan

Departments

23

An Abattoir of Action and Adventure / Kevin C. Rohrer

Activision's "Prophecy"

28

Scintillating Sorcery and Swordplay / Dennis Owens

Hints for "Guardians of Infinity"

31

Scorpion's Tale Points To A Change In History / Scorpia

688 Attack Sub
A Naval Game with a Change of Depth / Lt. H. E. Dille

32

Letters
Taking a Peek
Inside the Industry
Conversions Received
Back Issues
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

4
6
15
52
54
55
55
56

Letters

ploration is not worthwhile." A party will never
be able to find even the most rudimentary of
clues, information, or events without general exploration. She also claimed that hirelings,
"Have no personalities of their own (their
names aren't even imaginative)." As to their personalities, the game player helps create them
as they adventure onward, as much as they
add flavor to their own, personally created characters. If, by personality, she means that the
hirelings do not talk to you, I must clarify that
M & M II is not a text adventure. As to their
names, I found the names to be quite
humorous, as have most who have commented on them.

Zoned for Development
We'd like to add two bits of information to
Scorpia's excellent review of adventure game
development systems ("Build Your Own Adven
ture Game," CGW, Feb. 1989).
As noted, the Adventure Game Toolkit lacks
an integrated editor or debugger. However,
AGT now includes a AGTMACRO, a memoryresident program that automatically generates
templates for nouns, rooms, and creatures with
a single keystroke, from within your word
processor. Also recently added is AGTNUM, a
numeric pre-processor written by William Martinson so that game authors can include text
references rather than numbers, in their game
definitions.
Second, as Scorpia states, AGT and other adventure-writing programs are copyrighted and
resulting games may not be sold without permission. However, to encourage development
and sale of AGT games, Softworks sells an
unlimited run-time license for a one-time flat
fee of $10. Thereafter, the game-writer can sell
his or her game together with the AGT runtime code, without any royalties—even if the
game sells more copies than Zork.
David R. Malmberg
Softworks
San Jose, CA

Scorpion Assailed
I am writing in response to Scorpia's March
review of Might and Magic II. As author of the
game, I feel I am obligated to respond to the
rather inadequate review.
Might and Magic II: Gates to Mother World
is a three-dimensional fantasy role-playing adventure game. Combat is an important part of
the game, but it is not the only part of the
game. Might and Magic ll is not a text adventure, nor is it a graphically enhanced parserstyle interactive adventure. The game incorporates many new and innovative features in
unique ways to enhance playability and speed
up game play. Many of these aspects were
misinterpreted or ignored by the reviewer.
For instance, the review stated that, "Character classes are the same as before." This infuriated me. Character classes were unquestionably altered. Starting from the ground up,
all character classes were modified and improved from M & M I to II. I even added two
new character classes to heighten playability.
Other statements similarly roused my ire. For
example, the reviewer stated that, "General ex-

I was highly disappointed when Scorpia contended that "Combat has not changed at all."
As she reviewed M & M I, as well as M & M II, I
had hoped that she would easily recognize the
many changes. Alas, my hopes were all too
easily dashed. Perhaps, the only thing not
changed in combat were the command keys in
the actual combat menu. A major complaint
about the old combat system was that after the
initial, old combat menu (Attack, Run, Bribe,
Surrender), the monster picture disappeared.
So, I added a completely animated window of
the pictured monster. In addition, the entire
combat screen, including the picture, is now a
double hi-res graphic screen. Many other changes were made, including the addition of the
Hide option and alteration of the Run command.
Perhaps the most innovative feature in the entire game was not even mentioned in the article. This truly shocked me as I know of no
other game with a similar feature. By going to
the control panel, the game player may adjust
the disposition of his/her party of adventurers
at absolutely any time. The disposition of the
party directly influences the level of difficulty of
the game. The party of adventurers may play
at one of four levels; Inconspicuous, Average,
Aggressive, or Thrill-seeker. The level helps to
determine the frequency of encounters, the
number of monsters contained in an encounter, and the strength of an encounter. Basically, the player adjusts the difficulty of the
game at a whim and it goes into effect instantaneously. When you desire more experience or
feel that you are not being challenged sufficiently, make the disposition more aggressive. I
strongly believe that use of this option opens
up new horizons of game play and eases overall playability tremendously.
Perhaps, the most dreadful blow the reviewer
struck was her assertion that, "the endgame is
remarkable for its pointlessness." Rather than
fall into the routine find-and-kill the evil wizard
scenario, I opted for something different, a puzzle. While difficult, trying to solve a real-time
cryptogram to save Cron from imminent
destruction presents an intellectual challenge to
the game player, instead of a test of whether or
not combat was mastered after countless
hours of playtime. To end the game after a successful battle seems incredibly anticlimactic.
The ending of a game should be a true test of
a player's resources, not a holocaust-sized battle. Thus, the cryptogram.
The main reason I gave a final reward of 50
million experience points after the successful
completion of M & M II is because so many
people continued to play M & M I after winning
it to hunt, search, and conquer areas which
had given them previous trouble. I figured that

if such a large number of people enjoyed doing
this, I might as well make it easy for them to
do it in the sequel.
As to the reviewer's obvious distaste of combat and her claims that it is disappointingly excessive," and an, "exercise in butchery," I must
say that approximately half of all time spent in
any current fantasy role-playing game is combat time. And for those areas the reviewer complained of when she was high level and had to
battle 200 plus monsters, there are spells
created for high level characters in just those
situations. If actually cast and used properly,
the monsters would quickly evaporate and become no problem at all.
I do not think the reviewer was looking to
play an FRP in Might and Magic II. Instead,
she was looking for an adventure game. I do
not enjoy playing a game where I have to type
in thousands of words attempting to get the
right ones. This is why I like fantasy role-playing games and why I created Might and Magic.
To me, a game should consist of all single key
commands or multiple choice menus. In the
Might and Magic series, I believe that I have accomplished this to the finest degree possible.
A final observation: maybe a different reviewer
should oversee the CRPG genre. Of the reviews
Scorpia has done of CRPGs, even those with a
favorable end have been thrashed to within an
inch of death before earning the "recommended" status. However, most were not even
recommended outright. The majority of these
have been sequels to classic games and have
gone on to become classics themselves and
favorites of game players everywhere, bereft of
Scorpia's approval.
If you wish to play a CRPG which tests all of
your abilities as a game player, I offer Might
and Magic II for your pleasure. It is an adventure which spans across the globe of a large
world. Might and Magic II is a modern streamlined version of classical FRPs. If you have any
doubts on whether or not it is a game for you,
go to your local software store and ask to see
a demo. I know you will be impressed.
Jon Van Caneghem
New World Computing, Inc.
Van Nuys, CA
Ed.: Scorpia responds:
Each review I write is done with the goal of
presenting a clear picture of the game under
consideration. This includes the bad points as
well as the good. People who are going to
buy a game are entitled to know what they
will get for their money. Whether or not someone agrees with my bottom-line assessment
is not important. What is important is that
enough information be presented in the article
itself for the reader to make his or her own
judgment to purchase the game. This is why
my reviews are so detailed and don't gloss
over the flaws. The game buyer needs to
know what the weak spots are and what, if
anything, can be done about them. In actual
fact, very few of the games I reviewed came
with a blunt "not recommended." The majority
have been either "recommended' or "recommended with reservations.". Overall, it is my
job to show a game as it is, including the
"warts", and let the readers make the ultimate
decision as to whether or not it is a game
they want to play, irrespective of the bottom
line.

Taking A Peek

The Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
POLICE BLOTTER: The player must
solve seven criminal cases in this
graphic text adventure for one to four
players. From the creators of Murder by
the Dozen, the player picks a location to
visit and is directed to a paragraph in
the "clue book" to read. This game is
also similar to the boardgame "221 B
Baker Street." Apple II ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #1

Capcom
1283-C Old Mountain View/
Alviso Road
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
GHOSTS 'N GOBLINS: Rescuing a
beautiful princess is the task at hand for
the knight in shining armor (player), in
this action game for one to two players.
Using javelins, torches, swords, axes and
crosses, the knight must fight his way
past six gates, guarded by the usual assortment of monsters. IBM (pictured)
($34.95) and C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.

Capstone
14160 S.W. 139th Court
Miami, Florida 33186

Cosmi
431 N. Figueroa St.
Wilmington, CA 90744

SEARCH FOR THE TITANIC: Hunting down the famous shipwreck, and exploring it is the player's goal in this
oceanographic, adventure simulation.
Starting out as an inexperienced
oceanographer, the player must build a
reputation by finding and exploring
other lost vessels, which will reward him
with status and funding for more ambitious projects. Each expedition needs
planning, funding, personnel, equipment, maps and finally, conquering the
elements to locate, arrive at, and dive
the wreck. Digitized photos of the actual
wreck of the Titanic await the successful
salvager. This game has tremendous
depth. [Ed. Note: Groan!] IBM (pictured)
($39.95), Apple IIE/GS ($34.95) and C64 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #3.

PRESUMED GUILTY!: An S.D.I. researcher has been killed in an auto accident, or was it an accident? You are assigned to solve the case and as you
delve into it, you find yourself as the
prime suspect! Using digitized, wire service newsphotos, DNA gene prints,
biographical data supplied by your
security databanks, and an audio cassette loaded with a variety of electronic
data, the player rushes against time to
find the real culprit and clear himself.
IBM (pictured) ($29.95) and C-64

($24.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

Data East
470 Needles Dr.
San Jose, CA 95112

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404
PROJECT FIRESTART: Shades of
the movie "Alien," as the player must investigate a dead research ship, that has
a genetic experiment loose and on the
prowl. The player must find out what is
happening to the silent ship, rescue any
survivors, find the science log and, if
necessary, blow up the ship to solve the
game successfully. One player, one joystick (one inevitable confrontation). C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #8.
KINGS OF THE BEACH: Professional beach volleyball for those who are
stuck inside on a rainy day. One or two
players compete in a five beach tournament in Rio, Australia, Hawaii, Chicago,
and San Diego. The computer opponents get progressively tougher as the
tournament goes on. The practice mode
allows you to practice bumps, sets and
spikes before actually going on to the
sand. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9.

Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
P.O. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
MIND-ROLL: Players roll an orb
through 10 planes of difficulty in this
joystick driven, action game. Each plane
has a variety of different puzzles and
obstacles to overcome to allow progression to the next level. Similar to "Marble
Madness", points are scored by rolling
over certain tiles, beating the clock, and
finishing the progressively tougher
levels. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
ROBOCOP: The arcade game comes
to the home computer in this action
game based on the movie. Robocop,
part man and part machine, must battle
the street forces of evil, and ultimately
clean up Old Detroit. Armed with a special issue Auto-9 as his main weapon,
the player can also kick, punch and jab.
Nine different missions provide the complexity in this joystick driven game. C-64
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
SUPER HANG-ON: The hit, arcade
game of motorcycle racing around the
world comes to the Mac. The player can
reach speeds of up to 160 mph on a
variety of tracks, or he can use the
course builder to custom design a track
of his own. Game points are awarded for
precision driving in distance, speed and
course completion. Mac ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.

Eagle Tree Software
P.O. Box 164
Hopewell, VA 23860
DISTANT ARMIES: Players survey the
evolution of chess over the last 1000
years with this fascinating series of
strategy games. Rules, hints and tips for
games from India, Burma, China,
Europe and the Middle East are all
provided in this package. Players can
compete against each other, the computer, or watch computer vs. computer.
Multiple difficulty levels, two and three
dimensional views, and hint modes are
all available. The game uses keyboard or
mouse. A real gem! Amiga ($44.95).
Circle Reader Service # 7.

First Row Software
3624 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
THE HONEYMOONERS: Put on
your "Raccoon" cap and grab your bowling balls, Ralph and Ed need your help
in getting to the Raccoon Convention in
Miami Beach. An assortment of four
mini-games await one to four would be
Honeymooners. Players help Norton fix
leaks in the sewers, assist Alice and
Trixie piecing together a jumbled picture
puzzle, help Ralph drive a bus around
New York City, and attempt to answer
trivia questions in the "$99,000 Answer"
TV show. IBM ($29.95) Circle Reader
Service #11.
(Continued on page 49)

Review

Unfinished Tale (Game Play)

• Mordor, They Rode!
• Dial "M" For Mordor
• From Mordor,
With Love
(We couldn't decide on a title
for this article, so please
choose the one you
like best and
let us know on
your RID card
which one
you picked.)
by Chris Lombardi

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

War In Middle Earth
Amiga, IIGS, IBM, ST
Amiga
$49.99
Alan Clark & Robert Clardy
Melbourne House
711 W. 17th St.
Unit G9
Costa Mesa, CA

t was a year since Frodo last spoke to the great wizard
Gandalf. It was during that visit to the shire that Gandalf had revealed to Frodo the nature and origin of his
precious ring. Since that time, Frodo had noticed that
things in Middle Earth were going amiss. Hobbit gossip
was filled with rumors of strange travelers in Bree and murmurings about the movements of large armies of men. Fell
beasts once again roamed the countryside in search of prey
and the wise spoke of the return of the Shadow in the land
of Mordor. Now, the hastily written letter from Gandalf instructing Frodo to leave for Rivendell at once, warning of
evil riders in black. Accompanied by his dear friend Pippin
and his faithful servant Sam, Frodo packed his provisions
and closed the door of his comfortable hole behind him,
beginning his fate-filled quest, and the War in Middle Earth.

I

J.R.R. Tolkien's epic trilogy, The Lord of the Rings", has
been brought previously to the computer in adventure
games. Now, Melbourne House has recreated the world of
the Tolkien trilogy and put new spin on the story with their
strategy/adventure game, War in Middle Earth (WIM). WIM
offers you the chance to lead the Fellowship of the Ring and
the good armies of Middle Earth in their quest to destroy the
ring of Power and defend Middle Earth from the armies of
the Dark Lord.

Game play takes place on three levels providing three different degrees of detail. The full map level gives an overview
of the whole of Middle Earth, displaying all forces as small
colored dots. The campaign level, where orders are given
and most of the game is played, gives a more detailed view
of the terrain and forces. Finally, the animation level gives
you a magnified view of a single location on the map. Characters are fully animated on this level and are set against
beautiful background scenery. It is here that small battles
and encounters with friendly characters take place.
The objectives of the game are very similar to those of the
trilogy. The Ring of Power must be unmade in the fiery
cracks of Mt. Doom and the armies of the three races (elves,
men, and dwarves) must be mustered to defend their lands
against both the traitor Saruman and the Dark Lord.
Before you can muster these forces, and thus, control their
movements, you must present the leader of each people
with a token to prove the "truth of your embassy." These artifacts are randomly scattered
across the land and clues to their
whereabouts can be obtained
from various characters encountered during the game.
Once these items are found and
presented to the respective leaders, the forces
of good can be mobilized to prepare a
defense of Middle
Earth. If the Ring should be captured and brought to Saruman
or Sauron or three of five strongholds of good are overrun by
the evil hordes, the game ends in
defeat.
The game begins with Frodo
and friends heading south out of
Hobbiton. Not much can be
done until the hobbits reach
Rivendell, so this is usually the initial objective. This can be quite difficult at first, and may require a few tries. Following the story line in the books is
usually the best bet here. Once in Rivendell the Fellowship
of the Ring is formed and the quest really begins. At some
point the 'tokens of truth' must be gathered, and the earlier
in the game the better. This can be quite time consuming,
so it may be wise to split up the Fellowship to speed things.
Once in command of the allied forces, the war begins in
earnest. The first move is usually made by Saruman. His
threat can be best handled by the horsemen of the Rohirrim.
They are a strong force, comprising a large portion of your
army, and can hold off Saruman for a long time.
The threat from Sauron is the most serious, and can be
handled a number of ways. If all your forces can be gathered
before Sauron launches his main attack, the ring may be
muscled into Mordor using a football type maneuver (student body left?). A more defensive approach is also possible.
Sauron's army is huge, but the walls of Minas Tirith are
strong and can hold them back for some time. Following the
story line by sneaking the ring into Mordor is also a possibility but is very risky. The gates of the land are well
guarded and the Valley of the Shadow is crawling with orcs
and other nasties.

The designers have taken very special care in creating a
Middle Earth which very accurately reflects that of the trilogy.
All major characters and places encountered in the books
are here. In the course of your journeys you'll meet everyone
from jolly old Tom Bombadil, and the beautiful elf queen,
Galadriel, to Sauron's right-hand man, the Lord of the Nazgul. Even the numbers of the opposing forces conform to
those in the books. Each location on the map is accompanied by a detailed, water-color style, background scene.
From the campaign level, these places can be viewed at any
time by clicking on the location with a magnifying glass icon.
Some of these scenes are extremely well-rendered interpretations of the Tolkien text.

Wisdom From The Red Book Of March
(Game Hints)
(WARNING: This section contains specific hints which
some readers may wish to avoid.)
Getting the Hobbits to Rivendell can be difficult with the
Nine Riders buzzing madly about the shire. Your best path is
the one chosen by Frodo in the books. Move quickly down
to Buckland to pick up Merry. Then, pay a visit to Tom Bombadil. If you wait long enough, the Riders will move their
search down the road toward Rivendell and eventually all
gather at the Fords of Bruinen. Once they are gone, you
can go up to Bree where Aragorn can usually be found.
When he joins the group, you can sit back and let him do
the rest.
Though emphasized by the documentation as an integral
part of your quest, the gathering of the tokens is not really
necessary to win the game. If the Fellowship joins with either
Eomer of the Rohirrim or Faramir of the men of Gondor,
you will be able to control these forces. Furthermore, once
the forces of Sauron are on the move, you will be able to
command all other forces of good, anyway.
Your first objective should be to get rid of the threat posed
by Saruman. This is quite easy using assistance from the
Ents of Fangorn Forest. To acquire their help, simply pay
them a visit at Derndingle. You won't be able to give them
orders but they will immediately march down to Isengard and
destroy Saruman's main forces. They are probably the single
most effective fighting force available to you, and once they
complete their mission at Isengard they will provide the valuable service of protecting your rear from assault for the rest
of the game.
There are a number of ways you can get the ring into Mordor, but I've found the most effective is the plan suggested
by Boromir in the story. Take the ring to Minas Tirith and
gather the forces of Godow and Rohan behind its walls. You
should be able to hold off Sauron's assault until the other forces arrive. Once you have taken care of the larger portion of
Sauron's troops, you can then sneak the ring through a gap
in the defense and destroy it in the Cracks of Doom.
If you're in need of additional forces, remember the oath
breakers of Dunharrow. Their restless spirits will be more
than happy to honor their oath and fight under the right
leadership.

Return of Tolkien (Conclusions)
As an avid Tolkien fan, I found War in Middle Earth to be
a delightful jaunt through the lore and legend that I enjoyed
so much in the books. The exquisite detail and accuracy of

the game make this the definitive Tolkien computer game.
However, I found the strategic elements in the game to be
somewhat under par. Though the documentation stresses
that no two games are exactly alike, the basic objectives and
basic strategies for success remain the same. Once a few elements of strategy are mastered, the game becomes quite
easy to win. Though some may find it engaging to repeatedly play the game and try different approaches, this reviewer
lost interest after only a few hours. The game's lack of
replayability is the largest design flaw.
In summary,
this is a
detailed recreation of
Tolkien's world,
accompanied
by some very
nice graphics
and sound. It
would make an
interesting
showpiece to
add to any
Tolkien fan's
software library.
However, be
warned that the
strategy element is, at best, beginner level and replayability is
questionable.

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
the screen) and the "Battle"
sequences follow a miniatures paradigm in a quick
and simple real-time wargame. Morale will be a significant, if not overriding, factor in the battle sequences.
Also different from the initial
game in the series, there will
be scenario options in addition to the "campaign" game.

CGW Uncovers
"Indy Quotient",
In an exclusive unveiling,
CGW was shown highlights
of (and given the plot to) the
upcoming Indiana Jones
and the Last Crusade
movie, as well as given a
detailed look at the computer game based on the
movie. More detailed
coverage will be printed in
our June issue (coinciding
with the release of the
movie). For now, we can tell
you that the game will contain both an adventure and
an action track. Those who
prefer one genre over
another can, to a degree,
make decisions that lead to
either action or adventure sequences. The game's scoring system will be based on
an Indy Quotient. Essentially, you will be given the
same choices that Indy has
in the movie and be graded
on how you respond/react
(Indy doesn't always make
the "perfect" choice in the
movie. Can you do better?
That is what the Indy
Quotient measures.) According to designer Noah
Falstein, about 80% of the
movie can be found in the
game. Note that Lucasfilm
will also be developing,
along with their European
division, a straight action
game based on the movie
for the C-64, Amstrad, etc.
The adventure/action game
under development at Lucasfilm in San Rafael will be
released first for the IBM.

That's
Not Wright!
CGW has belatedly learned
that Wright Computer, a

mail order software firm
which has been advertising
in CGW and elsewhere, may
be out of business.
Repeated attempts to contact the company have been
unsuccessful. We continue
to investigate. Any readers
who can offer additional information are invited to call
(714) 535-4435 collect.

Microprose
Reveals
Future
Games
CGW's editorial staff recently invaded the halls of
Microprose in order to get
an exclusive look at three of
their upcoming products.
Sword of the Samurai is the
next product in the Pirates
genre of action/adventure. In
a departure from the earlier
game, however, the new
one will include NPCs which
are not only rivals, but
"doing their own thing for
their own reasons" simultaneously with the player
character's machinations.
The "dueling" interface has
been redesigned since
Pirates and will be more intuitive (the joystick movement is what happens on

M-1 Tank Platoon will be
the first of the recent wave
of tank simulations to offer
realistic tank platoon battles.
The weapons systems reflect
careful modeling (including
laser targeting, and ammo
types) and the geomorphic
map system lends itself to
numerous encounters. The
graphics are fast and liquid,
offering realistic perspectives. The scenarios will
cover such classic tactical
problems as: defending a
position, cautiously advancing, and attempting a
"Schwerpunkt"-style
breakthrough. The research,
thanks to the "Freedom of Information Act," is painstakingly thorough. The CGW
staff is very excited about the
product. It's our kind of
game with intriguing tactical
options, super graphics, and
enough non-stop action to
rivet players to their seats for
hours.
F-15 Strike Eagle II is currently in early-to-mid development. If all goes as planned,
F-19 Stealth Fighter terrain
should be interchangeable
with the new F-15 game.
The VGA palette may be the
most remarkable color we've
seen in a flight simulator
and the features of the
company's latest games utilizing 3-D graphics will be included. Why is the company
revamping this flagship
product? According to
graphics wizard, Andy Hollis

(F-19 Stealth Fighter), "I was
getting embarrassed by the
fact that we were still selling
tons of F-15 and it didn't
reflect what we can do." This
thought was seconded by
Microprose co-founder and
design ace, Sid Meier, "F-15
is as well-known as
Microprose, so we want to
make sure it represents us
well."

CD-I, We Hardly
Knew You!
Although a Philips representative has stated that
more than 60 CD-I (Compact Disc Interactive) titles
and under development,
many industry insiders
believe that CD-I has lost its
window of opportunity. The
much-vaunted 68000-based
entertainment machine is behind the promised schedule
and Sony has shifted its full
support to Microsoft's
CD-Rom-XA (extended architecture). Now, lower end
machines like the PC Engine, expected to debut in
the U.S. in August and the
Fujitsu Towns Machine (386based with CD-ROM-XA) on
the high end may undo CD-I.

Cinemaware
Purchases
Mirrorsoft
Licenses
After the April, 1989 issue
of CGW went to press,
Mindscape and Mirrorsoft
backed off the reported
licensing agreement.
Cinemaware purchased the
rights to the Image Works
line and will market Speedball in the U.S., rather than
Mindscape. Mindscape's rationale for retreating from
the joint venture was to
retrench and focus on its
own products which are in
development: Gauntlet II
and Star Trek: The Final
Frontier.

Review

What Do The
"Sim"ple
Folk Do?
Maxis' "Sim City"
City Simulator
by Johnny L. Wilson

S

tanislaw Lem couldn't have known what creative forces he would unleash when he told the story of an exiled tyrant who was provided with an imaginary city in
a box. The lesson to be learned from the story was that behavior patterns hold
true from environment to environment,
since the tyrant
proceeded to oppress
the citizens in the
box, just as he had oppressed his subjects
in the past.
Will Wright, creator
of Raid On Bungling
Bay, was fascinated
by the idea of that
simulacrum, the city
in the box described
in Lem's "The
Seventh Sally," that
he started work on a
C-64 program which
would accomplish just
that. Using his program, users could
zone for commercial,
industrial, and residential development; build roads,
TITLE:
Sim City
mass transit, airports, public serSYSTEMS:
Amiga, C-64/128
vices, and seaports; and make
IBM, and Macintosh
political decisions regarding the fuREVIEWED:
Amiga
PRICE:
Mac $49.95, Amiga $44.95,
ture of simulated towns, cities,
C-64 $29.95
capitols, metropolises, and
DESIGNER:
Will Wright
Maxis Software
PUBLISHER:
megalopolises. The programming
Lafayette, CA
was completed in its basic form in
1986, but it was a product in
search of a market until Maxis developed it for the Macintosh and presented it to Broderbund for distribution.
Broderbund challenged the design team to add city
management scenarios in order to make it more of a game.
Now, players can attempt to untangle traffic snarls in Bern,
Switzerland; manage Rio De Janeiro after a major flood; lead
Tokyo while it is besieged by a 'B" movie monster; rebuild
San Francisco after a major earthquake; restore Hamburg
after the bombing; solve the crime/unemployment problem
in urban Detroit; and react to a nuclear meltdown in Boston.
As nice as the scenarios are, they are not anywhere near as
compelling as designing your own. All of us in the office

have focused on designing our own cities. Why play with
someone's used Chevy when you can build your own customized Ferrari?
Since the game uses an American Urban Architecture
model, it offers a realistic approach to city planning. So realistic, in fact, that a paper describing the use of SimCity as a
dynamic model for urban planning will be presented at a
conference of city planners in August. Dynamic is exactly the
right word for this product. There is constant strategy involved in placement of zones, road building, political
decision-making, and damage control. Add to this the
chrome of an animated city with changing demographics
and skyline coupled with an annual poll regarding how the
mayor is doing (and what the citizens ("sims") think the major
problems are) and you have an extremely addictive product.
Each member of the CGW editorial staff has their own city
and we have established our own file of hardcopy maps to
use during our sessions of kibitzing with each other about
which city is the best to live in. Each step of growth reflects a
great sense of accomplishment and each of us wants an attractive city map to point to.
The program itself is actually two programs in a multi-tasking environment. The player sees the Editor, the interface/map maker where the player clicks and drags icons in
order to set features on the map and pulls down menus to
set tax rates or view maps/graphs which measure particular
growth patterns. At the same time, the actual simulator runs
in the background calculating the effects of various
decisions and using a common message area within the program to relay important changes and events to the Editor.
Therefore, the player makes a series of moves and often,
even before he or she is finished with those moves, buildings
are erected or traffic is flowing. These updates are thrilling to
watch.
Note that there is a slight problem with the menu item
which allows players to query the property value of their
zones. They only measure as high (wealthy) or low (slum)
value property. This problem exists only in the Mac 1.0 version and will be corrected in Mac 1.1 and in the coming
ports. You can get around the problem by using the symbols
on the map and the terrain card provided with the game to
monitor this value instead of relying on the query feature.

Population Bomb
The name of the game is planned growth. In order to have
the most successful possible city, there must be a solid
balance between population, industrialization, and commercialization. Early on in the game, the emphasis will be on
creating a power plant, providing housing, and developing industry. This is the first priority. It takes both an industrial and
residential tax base to get a city going. Later, the emphasis
should shift to commercial development. Roughly speaking,
industry represents external economy (exporting to other
locations) and commerce represents internal economy (i.e.
service-based).
Population is a two-edged sword, however. Although fast
population growth benefits the tax base, high densities of
population cause a deterioration in quality of life due to such
factors as crime, traffic, and pollution. If growth is allowed to
continue unchecked, those fashionable suburbs intended to
be expensive homes may turn into high-rise apartments.
Cries of anguish have rung through the CGW office suite on
more than one occasion as one of us has cried out, "Oh,
no! My prime residential area just went condo!" There is a
way to avoid this, however. When the residential zone is improved to your satisfaction, simply bulldoze one square of
the zone and build a park. This sends a signal to the simula-

lion that no further development may take place in that
zone. Building parks accomplishes more than acting as a
"No Growth" campaign, however. Building parks near
residential areas also tends to reduce crime and increase
property value.

tendency to crash into the same bridge support or run
aground in the same bulldozed coastal square, time after
time. The terrain editor (which will be marketed separately) is
supposed to let players edit their own shipping lanes. That
should solve this problem.

Mass (Transit) Appeal

On the Mac Plus, there is a bug in version 1.0 which
causes the program to "lock up" on occasion. It has been
corrected in 1.1.
Another bug relates
to loading a "saved"
game. On the Mac,
your tax and income
rate will be set to zero
when you load the
saved city, so it is best
to save in December
so that you do not
lose income. In the
meantime, we recommend that players archive their cities at
regular intervals (e.g.
every five years of
game time or so)
under different names.

In order to get the population of your city to their work and
the city's marketplace, some provision for commuting must
be made. The design team admits a bias toward rail-based
mass transit. Not only is mass transit more efficient than a
traditional road system in terms of traffic handled, but it does
not pollute. In fact, where cities have traffic/pollution
problems, the addition of rail lines will significantly reduce
pollution.
Do not make the mistake of simply building rail lines over
the top of roads, however. This does not take the traffic burden off the road network, because the simulator still considers them as roads. Players must bulldoze the existing
roads and add rails in order to receive full benefit from the
transit lines.

Creative Bookkeeping
Some players, particularly at the higher difficulty levels, may
find that finding funding to fuel their city's growth is tough to
do. There are two quick fixes for this, "Banzai" taxation and
Embezzlement. In "Banzai" taxation, the mayor raises the tax
rate to its maximum 20% in December. The taxes are collected at this rate in January of the following year. If the rate
is left at the maximum level, people and corporations will
start to desert the city. If the mayor lowers the rate to zero
per cent, it will fool the populace enough that growth will
continue at a fast pace. Players should not forget to reset
the tax base at a positive percentage prior to the end of
December, however, or they will not collect any funds at all.
This technique could be utilized on an annual basis, but we
recommend it only as a quick fix (particularly when disasters
strike). At press time, Maxis was considering a change in the
rules that would not allow "Banzai" taxation for future versions of Sim City.
Embezzlement doesn't require much maneuvering. On the
Macintosh and Amiga, the player simply holds down the shift
key and types "Fund." Then, when he or she clicks on the
bulldozer icon, $10,000 will be added to the city's resources.
On the C-64/128, pressing the Fl key raises funds by
$4,000. We avoid this quick fix of financial trouble, but it is
there if a player gets desperate enough.

Crash, Bum & Die
One of the major elements in inter-city commerce is air
travel and/or cargo handling. SimCity allows players to build
airports and seaports to simulate this facet of economic
growth and interaction. There is a major drawback to both of
these major developments: potential for disaster. We wait
until our cities demand an airport because the plane crashes
are simply much too frequent. In version 1.1, the designers
hope to allow players to select the frequency of disasters. In
one game, the present reviewer had an airport for only four
months of game time before a plane crashed into the airport
itself and demolished it. Our editor-in-chief experienced five
crashes in six months in one of his cities. These crashes occurred in spite of the fact that we had carefully followed the
advice in the manual about placing the airport outside of
populated areas and next to large bodies of water.
Seaports also present problems. Since the shipping lanes
are established arbitrarily by the program, ships may have a

Godzilla Is
An Ecologist
Although the
monster which attacks
a city is not named,
there is something of
a resemblance between the "B" movie monster of the '50s and the monstrous
reptile in SimCity. Godzilla in the movies was rather random
in his destruction, but the monster in SimCity has a purpose. He tends to avoid parks and usually heads right for the
heavy industry. The bigger the city, the longer he stays
around. Therefore, it pays to landscape your cities if you
don't want to have to fool with damage control after the Environmental Protection Agency - Lizard Division gets through
with your city. Tornadoes tend to stay longer in larger cities,
as well, but we are unaware of any contingency related to
that disaster.

Avoidance of Entropy
One final word of warning. Entropy is a biological and
sociological phenomenon. Everything that is not growing
tends to decay. SimCity takes the laws of entropy seriously.
In time, developed zones begin to erode. A successful mayor
will embark upon urban redevelopment at an appropriate
time (usually by the 21st century). It is the responsibility of
the player/mayor to stay on top of the city and nurture it.

SimCounty, SimState
The simulation is becoming so popular and so many
groups of friends have become as avid in developing their
cities as those of us at CGW that Maxis is considering a SimCounty product. This one would allow players to put all their
cities on the same map, in the same county, and would,
presumably, allow political interaction to occur. If one city
was heavily polluting the county, the other cities might gang
up on the first and put political and/or economic pressure
on the offending city. All we can say is, "Buy this game. We
want them to make lots of money so they'll develop SimCounty, SimState, SimNation, SimPlanet, SimUniverse . . .
billions and billions of games!"

Review

The Sound and The Fury
(Game Presentation)
Sound is very important to this simulation. Would-be pilots
can hear the hum of the engines throughout the game. If an
engine is hit, the player will immediately be able to tell from
the change in the sound. Another nice touch is the sound of
the enemy fighters as they pass by the B-17s on their attack
runs.

by Hosea Battles

A

s our B-17 started the attack run on the industrial center of Lille, the fighters which had plagued us for miles
broke off the action. We soon found out why as flak
began bursting all around us. Suddenly, a B-17 on the left
of the formation began to fall earthward as its left wing blew
apart. This was the most critical and dangerous part of the
mission, the
bombing run itself. We had to
stay straight and
keep our planes
level in order to
drop our bombs
on target. Unfortunately, the
enemy antiaircraft gunners
now had our
range and altitude! Our already crippled
craft shuddered
under the impact
of another hit!
Both the number
two and four engines were
windmilling. I
finally heard the
welcome "Bombs
Away" sounded
by our bombardier. Closing the
bomb bay doors,
I could now
begin turning the
craft. Before we
could make our
, cape, however, the plane shudTITLE:
First Over Germany
dered from an impact and exSYSTEMS:
Apple II, G64/128,
plosion on our left wing. Our numand IBM
REVIEWED ON: C-64/128
ber one engine was completely
PRICE:
$49.95
destroyed. We began to lose alDESIGNER:
John Gray
titude, so I quickly gave the "Bail
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Mountain View, Ca
Out!" order before we fell too far
earthward.
Such is the action to be encountered in SSI's newest
release and sequel to B-24, First Over Germany. It is a
simulation that covers the actual missions flown by the
306th Bomb Group. It takes players through their training
up through twenty-five combat missions, each consistent
with what a pilot might have flown in the historical situation.
The player plays the part of the pilot of one of the B-17s assigned to the group.

The graphics, using routines from Polarware's The
Graphics Magician, are not cutting edge. They are viewpoint
oriented, depending on what is necessary to game play. For
example, during a fighter attack, the player will view the
fighter from the gunner's point-of-view. The angle will be different, depending on which gunner was initially chosen. The
fighters increase in size as they get closer and decrease as
they fly by. At another point in the game, players see the B17 formation and ground from an overhead view. This view
portrays a ten mile diameter and tomes complete with
clouds moving across the screen. Whenever the plane enters
a cloud, however, the view switches to the cockpit view
where players see the B-17 they are following in formation.
Another nice touch is the bursting flak over the city which
gets heavier as the bombers approach the target.
Crash landings are inevitable. This is illustrated on the overhead view by means of a dramatic explosion. Then, the
screen shifts to a display of the wrecked B-17, complete with
a message window which describes the condition of each
crew member.
Another dramatic screen occurs during the bail out sequence. The B-17 is pictured at the top of the screen and
each individual crew member is shown jumping out of the
aircraft, falling for a short time, having his parachute unfold,
and floating off the screen. A message describing the condition of each crew member soon follows to indicate if he survived the crash or not.

Cockpit
(Game Controls and Play Mechanics)
Control of the B-17 is primarily joystick-driven, but utilizes
the keyboard for special functions like: powering up the engine, raising and lowering the landing gear, opening and
closing the bomb bay doors, and bailing out. Each engine is
individually controlled in case you have to feather or windmill
one because of damage.
After the player chooses his crew, game play begins with
pilot training. The training consists of eight training missions. In the first three, you learn the basics, especially how
to compensate for wind drift. The next five involve the transition to the home base of Thurleigh England with stops at
four bases for refueling.
Once at Thurleigh, players get their first combat mission.
They are to bomb the industrial center at Lille, France. Pilots
are given the formation altitude and bombing altitudes. The
correct number and pounds of bombs are automatically
loaded on the craft, so all a player has to do is take off, form
up, and leave the English shores. That is easier said than
done and it won't be long until the enemy fighters attack in
droves. If they don't attack right away, there is some realtime deadtime in the program, but once the bomber group
nears the target, the action gets hot! Fortunately for the
average player, the B-17 can take a lot of punishment. This
(Continued on page 51)

Announcing ...

CGW's
Top Ad
Award
Winners
he

people have spoken! The winners have been
declared! Last January Computer Gaming World held
its first annual TOP AD Awards. CGW advertisers
took the opportunity to "strut their stuff" for our readers
and other advertisers.

T

The top finishers in the contest were New World Computing for their full page ad on Might and Magic II and
First Row Software for their fractional page ad covering
three of their products.
All advertisers in the January issue (#55) were eligible to
win awards which were determined by the vote of our
readership. CGW readers sent in over 500 ballots. Readers
were asked to "consider the graphics, copy, and overall impact of the ads". The reader coming closest to picking the
actual finish of the ads would be awarded $250 and a
lifetime subscription to CGW.
A weighted scoring system gave 3 points to first place
votes, 2 points to second place votes, and 1 point to third
place votes.
The New World Computing ad for Might & Magic II told
you clearly what you were getting and created a sense of
adventure at the same time. Many readers pointed out that
they want to see screen shots in advertisements. New
World's ad had FIVE screen shots. Accolade's second
place Grand Prix Circuit ad with the blonde babe had just
two screen shots, but it also generated a sense of adventure for the heavily male readership, although not of the
role-playing kind (fantasy maybe, but not the kind you find
in computer games). Third place went to Interplay for
their sinister and effective three-screen-shot Neuromancer
ad.
The winning New World Computing ad was designed by
inhouse personnel Jon Van Caneghem (designer of the
game as well), his wife, Michaela, and Nicholas Beliaeff.
The voting for fractional sized ads drives home the fact
that color ads outpull black and white ads. The only two
color fractional ads in the issue placed first and second.
First Row Software placed first with their Take 3 half
page ad. XOR Corp. placed second with their Take The
Challenge ad. The composition of the First Row ad showing large box covers against an eye pleasing background
color was effective. The use of color type also added to the
impact of the ad. Third place went to Cyborg Games for
their attractive hex-filled half page black and white ad on
The Next Empire; garners love hexes.
The winning First Row ad was designed by Joe Finisdore
of "The Corporate Identity People", Philadelphia.
Randy W. Doyle of Tinker AFB, Oklahoma came closest
to picking the correct winners by picking the first and
second place winners in both the full and fractional
categories. We congratulate Randy. He will receive a check
for $250 and a lifetime subscription to CGW!

Review

C

harles Bronson has
been doing it in the
Death Wish film series
for years. The Guardian Angels
have been both praised and
cursed for doing it. Bernard
Goetz went to jail for carrying
a gun to do it with. What is it?
Vigilantism! Taking it upon
oneself to defend the public
safety and morals without
authorization.
This is not
only a popular
theme in
movies, books,
and television,
but it has also
been carried
over to the
video arcade.
Enter any video
arcade and you
are sure to see
a high percentage of games
which allow a
player to utilize
martial arts to
fight street
gangs and
evil villains. A
trio of these
games are now
available for the
home computer: Double
Dragon,
Renegade, and .
Bad Dudes.

Street Lethal
A Trio

of Vigilante Games
by David M. Wilson

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Bad Dudes
Apple II (128K),
C-64/128, IBM
Apple, IBM
$29.95 (C)
$34.95 (Ap), $39.95 (I),
and $44.95 (Am,ST)
Data East
San Jose, CA

The big question in most
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
arcade fan's minds will be
"How good are the adaptations?" Double Dragon has
PUBLISHER:
been extremely popular in
the coin-ops because of its
great variety of
moves. Of course,
as one wag typed
eloquently on a
BBS system,
"How will they
ever get all of
those moves into
a joystick?" The
truth is, they
didn't. Oh, some
of the moves are
there, but players
cannot reproduce
all of the coin-op's action. In looking at both the Commodore
and IBM versions, the IBM was certainly more like the coin-op version and allowed more flexibility. The C-64 version was a pale
shadow of the original. The moves were not there, the character
icon didn't move as freely, and one could not stand toe-to-toe
with the bad guys and slug it out. Instead, it was necessary to

TITLE: Double Dragon
Amiga, Atari ST
SYSTEMS:
C-64/128, IBM
# PLAYERS:
1-2
C-64/128
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
$34.95
Arcadia
PUBLISHER:
Costa Mesa, CA

adopt a hit and run policy: hit
the thug, move away, return
and clobber him, back off, and
so forth. Also, the inevitable
shrinking down of the graphics
to accommodate the limited
memory on the C-64 left me
personally disappointed. I
didn't really expect the game
to be as good as the arcade
version, but a bit more
similarity
would have
helped.
Players still
fight the same
characters,
only now they
can know their
names by reading the instruction manual.
Villains still
wield baseball
bats and
whips, but the
dynamite
throwing thug
is missing. At
least, the "Big
Boss" with the
machine gun
is still present.
In the home
versions, nine
basic moves
are available to
defeat the villains, so
players are not
likely to become too tired of repetitive action.
Also, the two player option in which
partners bash the bad guys simultaneously is a feature which the personal computer version offers
and Nintendo version does not
have. The game is certainly
easier when the
two twin brothers,
Billy and Jimmy
Lee face the odds
together rather
than taking turns
at fighting like the
Nintendo program.

Renegade
deletes the twoplayer option, but
provides an even
greater variety of
villains and weapons than the arcade version. Unlike Double
Dragon, however, players do not have the option of taking the
bad guys' weapons after defeating them. Also, the assortment of
gangs is more interesting than the group assembled in Double
(Continued on Page 26)

Review

Once Upon A Time .. .
The Northern Kingdoms were once peaceful.
Then, Zoras the Necromancer, unleashed his army
of evil spirits into the land. Zoras killed King Lordan
and took over his castle, Craggamoore,—but not
before Lordan had enabled his son, Brodan, and
daughter, Shardan, to escape to a distant land.
There, their grandfather (Sodan) raised them to
avenge their father with an enchanted sword.
Discovery Software's Sword of Sodan (SOS) is
an exciting new action game where one
hacks-and-slashes across eleven levels of multi-screen excitement, faces the evil minions of Zoras, and beards
the evil magician in his den. From the Dorian Vallejo (son of Boris) cover art to Julian LeFay's eerie
soundtrack and the more than four megabytes
worth of animation, SOS quickens the blood and
stimulates the senses.

Sodan Impact
Discovery Software's
"Sword of Sodan"
by Kevin C. Rohrer

Equal Opportunity Avenger
One welcome aspect of SOS is the ability to play
either a male (Brodan) or female (Shardan) character with no penalty in choosing one over the other.
Players have five "lives" to defeat the villain. [Ed: In
the Amiga version, we found an "Easter Egg" in
which players can receive an unlimited number of
lives.]
As each game level is loaded into memory, a
map delineates the player's current location within
the adventure. Then, a scroll describes in verse the
events to be encountered in the upcoming level.
Play commences and the player fights through
several screens. Levels scroll horizontally from left
to right as the player battles his/her way past adversaries and obstacles. Characters can walk, jump, or
kneel, as well as use their sword to stab, slash, or
strike downward. Unfortunately, characters may not digress
from a straightforward linear path, even to sidestep obvious
obstacles. The game would certainly have been stronger and
the illusion of a three-dimensional world more effective if
characters could have moved sideways.
During the action sequences, players see a side-view of the
hero/heroine. Statistical displays are kept to the minimum:
(hit strength, current score, and number of lives remaining).
In addition, a bar graph denotes stamina and a smaller bar
graph beneath each adversary displays the enemy's remaining strength.
Each level presents a new and increasingly difficult series of
challenges to be mastered. First, he/she battles past the
guards and through the city's gate. Then, he/she fights
against the same type of guards, while spear points poke upward from under a balustrade. Another combat pits the character against a giant while barrels roll toward him/her.
Another battle requires passage through a cemetery replete
with dozens of zombies which must be vanquished while the
character jumps over unidentified round objects rolling right
at him/her.
Fortunately, one of four types of magic potions can be picked up on each level: extra life, increased hit strength, Magic
Zapper (kills the first monster encountered), and a Power
Shield (a magic force field lasting thirty seconds). When picked up, these potions are displayed as icons, labeled "Fl"
through "F4" respectively, and may be activated with the appropriate function key.

Sights and Sounds Galore
The biggest plus for SOS would have to be its graphics

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Sword of Sodan
Amiga, IBM, IIGS
Amiga
$49.95
Soren Gronbech
and Torben Larsen
Discovery Software
Annapolis, MD

and sound. In many action games, each level is only one
screen in size and the objects and characters to be found
within them are small. In SOS, Brodan and Shardan fill the
screen, their musculature is well-defined, and movement suffers no apparent jerkiness.
On the Amiga, all sounds are digitized and in stereo. The
background noises are different on each level. In the first
level, crickets chirp outside the city gate. In the cemetery encounter, the howling wolves sound so realistic that one of
this writer's dogs heard the howling and came to investigate.
Characters groan in pain when struck and the clank of metal
striking metal accompanies the parrying of an opponent's
weapon.

Nothing Is Perfect
SOS has some weak points, however. First, there are only
eleven levels to be conquered and a single degree of difficulty at that. It would have made the game wear longer to have
the ability to adjust the difficulty level upward. Second, the
game may be a bit too blood-thirsty for the younger crowd.
Whenever a sword strikes someone, a bloody wound appears. Also, the giant is killed by decapitation, not a pretty
sight for the squeamish. Third, it seems that in these days of
document based protection, there should be no need to
save any information to the original program disk.

Final Confrontation
SOS is a quality product from beginning to end. The excellent graphics, sound, and action will keep players of all ages
on the edge of their seats.

(Continued from page 21)

One important strategy to remember in Renegade is fighting
with one's back to the wall. After all, if the goons can't get behind
you, you will only have to worry about what is in front of you.
Also, be aware
that even though
the creeps with
the clubs can do
the most damage
to your character,
they are actually
wimps. A couple
of punches and a
jump-kick will
usually knock
them down.

Street Lethal
Dragon. For instance, Renegade
players must
face, among
others: a subway
gang, a motorcycle gang called
the "Angels of
Death" (how
original), a group
of women armed
with clubs and
whips, and a
group of thugs
armed with sharp
razors whose
leader has a gun.
The important arcade "feel" is carried over into the
personal computer versions of
Renegade. Playing Renegade
makes the player feel like he is
trained in martial arts. His
movements are smoother and
faster than in the other games.

TITLE
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Renegade
Apple II, Amiga,
C-64/128, IBM, and ST
C-64/128
$34.95 (Ap,C),
$39.95 (Am,I,ST)
Taito
Canada

Data East adds
their arcade hit,
Bad Dudes, to
the melting pot of
martial art vigilante games. The IBM version converted well from
the coin-arcade machine. The Apple II conversion suffered greatly
due to the limited graphics capability of the 128k machine. This
is one game that Apple II owners will have to live without. The
C64/128 version was unavailable for review at press time.
The premise behind Bad Dudes is that the president has been
kidnapped and the player has been asked to rescue him. It's a
delightful romp across the screen as players attempt to fight their
way through the city to where the president is being held by an
evil Dragon Ninja.
Bad Dudes, like Double Dragon, allows players a little help
along the way with regard to weapons. While Renegade forces
the player to fight only with hands and feet, the other two allow
use of liberated enemy weapons. If the player's "Bad Dude" can
defeat the red garbed ninjas, they can amass helpful items like offensive weapons and defensive aids (energy drinks and extra
time).
One of the Dragon Ninja's super warriors is placed at the end of
each level, much like the "boss" at the end of each Renegade
level. When battling it out with the bad guys in Bad Dudes,
players should remain in the center of the screen as much as possible. In this way, you avoid enemies that are off-screen, but can
still harm you should you venture too near the edge. Fortunately,
Bad Dudes does not require the constant hit and move technique necessary in the other two games. Instead, it is more advantageous to the player to force the enemy to come to him.
This reviewer found the IBM version of Bad Dudes to be the
best of the trio with regard to both graphics and action. On the C64, the graphics of Double Dragon are superior to Renegade,
but this is a trade-off since it also takes forever to load. The slow
access makes the Epyx Fastload or Cinemaware Warp Speed
cartridges almost a requirement for the game. Renegade, to its
credit, loads fast enough with the on-disk "fast loader."
Still, in spite of the graphics edge held by Double Dragon,
Renegade offers more intensity than Double Dragon. Part of this
is because of its use of a time limit. Players have a minimal
amount of time to complete each level before they lose a life. It
may be an old idea, but it works.
Showing off one's Kung Fu ability to computerized thugs may
not be some people's idea of a clever game. Sometimes, though,
we need a break from our more serious gaming pursuits. Even
the most serious readers occasionally resort to pure escape literature. That's the idea with these games. For this reviewer, they
make an excellent break from the tantalizing puzzles of more
complex strategy or adventure games.

Review

Progress is made
by moving from one
game area and its related quest to
another. Shown top
view, the whole world
beyond those dingy
dungeon walls is
blacked out. Nevertheless, there is no
mistaken movement
from one game area
to another without
completing your
quest. Each section
is so thoroughly selfcontained (at least,
until you do not
need it to be any
more) that all you
have to do is be sure
to explore the entire
section.

Prophetic Gift
Activision's
"Prophecy"
by Dennis Owens

S

imply put,
Prophecy is
the most exciting role-playing
game this reviewer
has ever played on
the home computer;.
Its combination of
fast-action, character/NPC interaction,
questing, character
development and
graphics is reminiscent of almost every
game which has ever
been written in the
genre and, at the
same time, unlike
any of them.
Prophecy is what
most of the others
should have been
like.
Although its scope
is not quite as magnificent as that of the
Ultima series,
Prophecy offers,
nonetheless, a completely unique blend
of arcade-level action, speed, and roleplaying complexity and depth. Combat occurs in real time, with the monsters and
NPCs moving independently of and simultaneously with your character. As soon as
you enter a room, they come at you,
whether slinging arrows, casting magical
fireballs, or wielding their swords and it is
up to your character's quickness and
your nimble fingers to get out of the way,
even as you move toward a more
strategic location. While this may, initially,
seem to encourage chaotic and overwhelmingly fast-paced gameplay, it is an
indication of the balance in the game
that such a revolutionary change in roleplaying battle sequences adds a seamlessness to the fiction and a sense of realism
unseen in any previous quest adventure.

Each area is also
further subdivided
into individual
screens (mentioned
earlier), which are
easily traversed (once
the monsters are
killed). Characters
simply walk from one
screen to the other.
Such parceling off of
the game might
seem, at first
thought, to impede
seriously the suspension of disbelief in
the world to be explored, but in this
writer's gaming experience, there has
never been more of
a sense of there
being a real world
just beyond the edge
of the next screen.
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Prophecy
IBM
$39.95
Richard L. Seaborne
Alan J. Murphy
Activision
Menlo Park, CA

Nermon: A Nice Place To Visit
The game is big (requiring 512K) and
fast (since it uses very little disk access).
In fact, it manages to jam so much in
(Gauntlet/Pool of Radiance style
graphics, Gauntlet paced game speed, Ultima level interactions, and an ease of
play like no game ever written) by only allowing access to small portions of the
seemingly boundless world at a time.

Everything in
Prophecy adds to that belief: the
graphics, the ease-of-movement (joystickor keyboard-driven, they are equally effective and easily toggled back and forth),
the manual (clear, precise, informative,
and necessary as copy protection), and
the storyline (wonderfully structured and
tremendously reminiscent of Star Wars).
The game is well-balanced. Magic is useful, but you cannot lean on it. Use of
weapons is also important, but, once
again, it cannot always save your hide.
The game's action is fast and lively, but
not exhausting. Game speed can be adjusted and there are also respites within
the game itself. Further, even though the
action is in real-time, there is no place
you have to be by a certain point in the

game to keep from
automatically losing
the game.
Prophecy can be
played as an arcade
game, allowing
players to go
around bashing
monsters and collecting treasure to
their heart's content, but its real
magic is that the fiction is totally believable. Consistent and
flashy, its early quests, while designed
primarily to help your character build up
strength and skills, are still related to the
plot and the fact that great evil has taken
over the land.

Revenge of the . . . Jedist?
It seems that your character is the son
of a famous knight of years long past.
Your father has hidden our hero, far from
the reaches of the evil Krellane Empire,
in a tiny, out-of-the-way village named
CrissCross. Nervously, your character and
the villagers keep a wary eye out for any
sign that the evil Empire has found you.
One day, though, when the hero's
presumed "father" ventures out with a
few companions to investigate reports
that the Empire's soldiers have been seen
nearby, he does not return.
When CrissCross is destroyed, it becomes the hero's task to seek out Jed,
the legendary leader of the resistance
(whose followers are called "Jedists") and
discover the character's real identity, his
real father, who the Gendors are, and
why they are so mean, strong, and ugly.
(Hint: Do not attack the very first Gendor
encountered.)
Magic in the game is simple and
straightforward. Ten of a possible thirty
spells can be "memorized"—that is, be
typed onto a list accessible via the function keys. All the spells are immediately
available, their names need only be included on the list. Certain magical
prefixes, also available, allow the spells to
be increased in power, but you may not
have the spell points to cast them for a
while.
Though spell points, like hit points,
regenerate as time passes, spell point replacement is very slow. As your character
increases in level, though, so, too, does
the number of maximum spell points.
Also, rumor has it that ancient books of
arcane magic could increase one's understanding of the art, but such books have,
surely, long since vanished.
To cast a spell, players simply press the
corresponding function key. Simple,

versus the
monsters' ratings
in those areas. Of
course, the hard
part is actually hitting your target,
since it will be
moving. Not only
do you see your
hit points, but the
screen also shows
how many hit
points your opponents have (a
thoughtful touch).
elegant—like the entire game. Almost
everything you could possibly hope about
how the game would operate is exactly
the way it does. If you don't want to be
chasing around at breakneck speed,
having your throat cut before you take a
step, you can slow the game down. If
you don't like the treasure you've just gotten out of a chest—well, one of this
writer's favorite tricks was to save the
game (again, simply and easily) just
before opening a chest. That way, if I
didn't like the contents, I'd just reload the
game and keep repeating the process
until I did like the goodies.
Options allow players to set the
machine speed, graphics level, joystick/keyboard control, and game speed. It
does not take long to get comfortable in
moving through the game and the game
speed toggle must get the praise for that.

Yeah, But Why Can't
I Sell It In Gobar?
Dozens of items can be found in the
game—weapons, armor, and "whatnot"—
but Prophecy's only shortcoming is that,
once you begin to pick up the treasure
and you have outfitted your character as
well as possible, there is nothing to do
with the rest of the stuff. The only armory
is the entire game will only sell you something, which is a shame because gold is
valuable. By the end of the game, my
character was a walking warehouse.

Sometimes, it's better to Baenaturlik
rather than to wade in with your sword
waving.
The graphics, of course, in EGA mode,
are excellent. Fireballs blaze, lightning
bolts flash, and weapons slash. Your icon
is brilliantly colored with armor and
weapons that change dynamically with
each different outfitting. Movement is
sharp and turns are on the money.
Interaction is accomplished by moving
next to another icon and pressing "T."
Chests open and other important events
occur simply by moving adjacent to the
proper space. Although the game includes a "Look" function (for searching),
it is basically a superfluous command.
The most important hint is to go
everywhere! There is no telling where a
clue about your world will turn up. Also,
it is significant that not every NPC is your
enemy. Of course, if you happen to attack them first, you will make them dislike you very quickly.

Assorted Thoughts

Also, the pre-set character might seem,
at first, like an annoyance with all those
pre-set skill levels. The truth is, however,
that the character builds up so quickly
and the gameplay is so smooth that you
will most likely forget about those pre-set
levels almost immediately. It won't take
long—once you see your best friend
bleeding by the side of the road and two
slobbering, smelly goblins leering over
him.

Though the Jedist philosophy seems to
want to indicate some sort of code for
your character to live by, nowhere is it
necessary to do so (as, say, in Ultima
/V).Finally, a warning is in order. I collapsed from exhaustion after my first
three nights of play (and it's been a long
time since that has happened). Then,
common sense and the work week
(along with my boss's disapproving
frowns) set in. After that, I only spent
every other single night staying up and
playing the game. My wife, who is glad
I've finished Prophecy so that our
livelihood is no longer threatened, says
the game is not to be recommended for
schoolboys or anyone who has responsibilities.

After a while, the only attributes you will
worry about are your damage (amount of
injury you can put onto a bad guy) and
defense (armor class). Combat is primarily resolved by utilizing those two numbers

For everyone else, though, for arcade
enthusiasts, RPG nuts, and questhunters
the world over, Prophecy must not be
missed. It is a terrific game, a classic, and
maybe the best around.

Game Hints

Warning: Although "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. If the gentle
reader eschews hints, let him beware!
Well, here we are, barrelling
through spring into summer,
the time when a grue's fancy
turns to...hmm...maybe it's best
not to go into that. Fred is
hyper enough these days (grin).
Anyway, have a seat, a cool
drink (psst, Fred! Wake up! Customers!) and we'll talk about history: what was, what might
have been, and what could be.
Guardians of Infinity: To
Save Kennedy is billed as an "interactive strategy text adventure," but this is not by any
means your standard adventure
game. The only one I can think of that
comes close is Infocom's old
Suspended, but the resemblance is superficial at best.
The action is handled entirely through
conversations. There is, with a couple of
exceptions, no object gathering and no
puzzle-solving in the usual sense. After
years of playing standard adventure
games, this one takes a little getting used
to.
The basic premise is that John F. Kennedy should not have been assassinated
in Dallas on November 22nd, 1963. His
death was a forced event, something
never meant to happen in the normal
flow of history. This diverting of the true
time line causes "chronal abnormalities"
to occur and the very fabric of time itself
begins to unravel.
By the year 2087, the problem has
reached epic proportions, and the existence of all reality is in danger of collapsing and vanishing. Dr. Alan Cooper, a brilliant scientist, has traced the problem to
the assassination in Dallas. With a dedicated band of five people, including his
daughter, Cooper steals a time machine.
His hope is to go back in time and
prevent the murder from taking place,
thus restoring history to its proper sequence and putting an end to the
chronal abnormalities.
The game begins with the time
machine appearing outside Fort Worth
one week before the assassination. The
player takes the role of Alan Cooper.
Cooper does not leave the time sphere at
all, except in the end game (if you're
lucky enough to reach it). His function is
essentially managerial; he tells the agents
where to go and whom to see.
This is the basic feature of Guardians:

interviews with prominent politicians and
officials of the government, all of whom
are (or were) actual people of the time.
Cooper's goal is to obtain a private interview with JFK and convince him not to
take the motorcade through Dallas. Since
it isn't, of course, possible to just saunter
into the White House and see the presi-

As Told By Scorpia

dent, Cooper must "go through channels." Hence, the interviews.
The procedure itself is a simple one, although many traps and pitfalls await the
unwary. You simply tell an agent who to
see, when to see him (or her), and where
to see the person. Typical commands
would be "Iris, see Humphrey at home in
Washington tomorrow at 9 PM" or "Carl,
see Stevenson at his New York office at 4
PM."
Your agents always want to know
whether or not to tell the interviewee that
they are from the future. This is a delicate
point. Unless the agent can provide
some sort of definitive proof, it is usually
best to say, "No." They will be getting
into enough trouble as it is.
Every so often, the agents report back
on their success or failure in carrying out
their assignments. A particular person
may have been unavailable. In that case,
your agent asks what you want him (or
her) to do next. You can give them a new
assignment, tell them to wait and call
back at a certain time, or recall them to
the time sphere.
On the other hand, your agent may
have been fortunate enough to see the
subject. At these times, the agent reports
back on how things went and will tell you
if an appointment has been made with
someone higher up in the chain of command. When this happens, the agent always asks if he or she should keep the appointment. Some appointments are better left unkept.
Those are the essentials of game play.
However, before you boot up, sit down
and go through the docs thoroughly,
especially the spiral-bound manual. The
manual, an amazing achievement in dedi-

cated research, is absolutely vital to successful completion of the game.
It contains tips on playing the game,
dossiers of your agents, a day-by-day
itinerary of Kennedy's last week,
schedules of over 100 real-life people for
that week, as well as several pages in the
back that are chock full of all
sorts of interesting (and occasionally very personal) information on some of these
people. This is the information
that your agents use to prove
they are from the future.
Once you've gone through
the manual a few times, you're
ready to plan out your strategy.
Since the really top people are
not directly accessible, you have
to decide which of the "lower
echelon" to send your agents to
visit.
This is where you need to have a lot of
patience. Not all agents work out with all
the politicians and much of the game is
played through trial and error. If you find
that, for instance, Alex, doesn't get
anywhere with a particular person, try
someone else.
Earlier, I mentioned pitfalls and there
are quite a few in the game. For one
thing, some of the people visited will be,
to say the least, highly suspicious of how
your agents came by their information on
the assassination plot. Your agent could
head to an interview and find himself (or
herself) arrested. Any time this happens,
the game is over, since none of the time
travellers can stay in 1963 beyond midnight of the 22nd.
Another danger is the Highfather (read
the novelette that comes with the game
to find out more about him). A total
maniac, it was he who arranged the assassination, knowing full well what would
happen because of it. He has agents in
this time period who are working to stop
your agents, making life more difficult all
around.
The minions of the Highfather will do
what they can to foil your efforts. They
may kill your agents or make anonymous
phone calls that get them into trouble.
The only thing you can do about these
agents is avoid them. Generally, if you
find an interview (or attempted interview)
is interfered with by a Highfather agent, it
means that that section of the game is a
dead end. Give it up and try another
route. The same is true of any interview
that leads to the arrest of any of your
agents. So, be careful out there!
There are some people you will never
get to see. For instance, anyone out of
(Continued on page 34)

Review

Silent
Running
by Lt. H. E. Dille

Y

ou lost the passive line of bearing almost three
minutes ago when you ordered the Los Angeles below
the thermal layer and increased speed. The sonarman
sits hunched over his console to your right, watching the
world around the thin pressure hull with his ears. The air
in the compartment is flat and
compressed with
palatable tension, an odor the
air scrubbers cannot erase despite
the length of the
patrol. Feeling
the time is right,
you order the engine to stop and
commence a
slight up bubble
drift to periscope
depth.
"Passing layer
depth, Captain."

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

688 Attack Sub
IBM
1-2
$49.95
John Ratcliff,
Paul Grece, and
Randall Breen
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

"Very well," you
reply, feeling suddenly naked
without the
temperature inversion which
masked your
high speed approach. The cant
of the deck begins to diminish as you
approach the ordered depth and your
gaze is fixed upon the sonarman, once
more. He sits transfixed by sound, his
eyes vacant and useless for his chosen
profession. Suddenly, his fingers begin
to fly across the signal analyzer.

"Captain, we've still got the contact . .
discrete frequencies indicate possible Slava Cruiser!"
"Up scope," you order. As the scope breaks the surface,
you do a quick 360 degree scan, lingering but an extra
second on your chosen victim.
"Down scope. Confirmed Slava. Load tubes one and two."
"Targeting point, Captain?"
"Negative! This will be a passive attack . . . call range at
6.5 nautical miles . . . fire when ready."
"Aye, Aye, Sir."
The seconds seem an eternity until the boat shudders with
a faint whoosh, the hunter loosing the arrow. Almost imme-

diately, the sonarman turns to you with widened eyes, his
ears seeing more than he wishes.
"Hydrophone effects . . . close aboard, aft!"
Before you can react, the boat rocks violently as the first
torpedo rips through the hull into the reactor compartment.
The blast knocks you from your feet, your head striking the
corner of the plot table as you fall. The hunter has become
the hunted, the cycle is complete.

Electronic Arts' latest offering, 688 Attack Sub, places
players in the role of Commanding Officer on either a Los
Angeles class or a Soviet Alfa class submarine. As an unnatural predator of the deep, your mission is to support state
policy objectives in whatever manner dictated by higher
authority. The specific tasks performed range from
peacetime training missions, through cold and hot war operations, to a long range cruise missile strike into the heart of
Mother Russia! Each mission offers players unique and challenging game play and some contain very nasty surprises
that just might leave your jaw agape. Have you ever played a
computer game that made you sweat? If you are a jaded
player who thinks such a thing impossible, be forewarned,
688 will open your pores!
Starting Patrol
The game requires a minimum of 384K and a single disk
drive. It is impossible to play from the original disks because
EA has utilized a file decompression routine to get all of their
data onto either two 5 and 1/4 inch floppies or one 3.5 inch
disk. The manual provides clear instructions on how to
produce working copies from the originals or install the
game on a hard disk. In addition to the fairly standard
hardware requirements, 688 supports several peripherals that
enhance game play. Among these are: the Ad Lib sound
board, the Covox Speech Thing, and Hayes compatible
modems with a minimum of 1200 baud (or null modem
cable). It also supports the full range of graphics from Hercules to VGA.
The game's interface is icon-driven, easy to master, and
contains on-screen help functions. The icons themselves are
the various control consoles within the submarine and they
are manipulated by moving an arrow around the screen with
either the keyboard or a mouse. Function keys also allow
you to rapidly move between menus without having to
return to the main screen each time.
The game's graphics range from above average in Hercules or CGA to spectacular in EGA and VGA. The area
where the differences are most apparent is the bottom contour imaging option provided when commanding the Los Angeles class submarine. This high frequency, short range
sonar allows players to see the ocean terrain in proximity to
their submarine in a very realistic 3-D) display. Aside from the
obvious advantage of avoiding bottoming out (a very real
danger) when operating near the ocean floor, this sonar also
allows 688 skippers to utilize the topography to their advantage. Every shelf, ridge, pocket, and chasm is portrayed
in vivid detail. This is very much a game of hide and seek.
Other fine graphics include: detailed representations of the
surface and air platforms encountered, the ability to watch
cruise missiles break the surface and lock onto their targets,
and extremely satisfying explosions (unless they happen to
occur on ships you are supposed to be protecting, of
course). When you issue orders, a digitized picture of one of
several crew members responds to your commands. What's
more, the crew members even look like you would expect
them to. Additionally, the Soviet Alfa's controls are marked

in a pseudo-cyrillic script. Details are evident throughout and
yield the impression that this game was a labor of love for
the designer.

Target Rich Environment
Each mission varies significantly from the others, both with
regard to the mission objectives and the classes of enemies
encountered. Although players may only command the two
aforementioned classes of submarines, they may encounter
numerous other types, including diesel boats (noisy when
snorkeling, very quiet when on batteries), ballistic missile submarines, cruise missile submarines (which can wreck havoc
upon surface groups), and the infamous Akula class. The latter can do it all faster, deeper, and more quietly than the Los
Angeles you command. Put that in your torpedo tube and
jettison it.
Although it is possible to start playing the game without
reading the entire manual (76 pgs.), the complexity of the
situations you encounter will force you to read it soon
enough. Once you have done so, however, and played one
or two of the multi-threat scenarios, only minimal reference
back to the manual is required.
At the completion of each mission you are rewarded with
some well-deserved shore leave, if you survived and accomplished the objectives delineated in the pre-brief. If you
escaped destruction but could not complete the mission,
your Admiral will walk away with a substantial section of your
butt in his teeth. Worse yet, if you happen to be lost at sea,
a very chilling rendition of the Navy's death notification is
shown laying on a desk.
Once you become proficient at the scenarios, it will be time
to make the challenge even more realistic. Electronic Arts
anticipated this need by allowing players the option of
head-to-head modem combat. When utilizing this option, players
may complete one of the standard scenarios or define their
own mission objectives. Also, during the course of a game,
or at the end, players may communicate with each other by
transmitting messages from their respective radio rooms.

Earning Your Dolphins
The manual contains only sparse data on successful submarine tactics and you must tailor the basics to each unique
situation you encounter. Without compromising some things
which are best learned through experience, some good
general guidance follows.
Always know how many thermal layers exist and at what
depths.
Make frequent course, speed, and depth changes to complicate enemy targeting efforts.
Utilize your towed array for gaining initial contact and establishing the intended movements of your targets. It should be
retrieved prior to making an attack approach, as it will slow
you considerably should you be fired upon with it streamed.
You will lose contacts while turning with the array streamed
because of its instability. Don't worry, they will still be there
when you steady on a new heading.
Remain aware of your baffles and periodically clear them by
turning back suddenly along your previous course.
In peacetime situations, utilize noisemakers only as a last
resort in evading your pursuers. The enemy is a nervous

crew who may interpret the sound as a torpedo attack
directed at them.
(Warning: The following section contains specific hints
on game play. Readers who prefer a more general briefing should avoid this section.)
Mission briefings will only tell you what your intelligence
knows. Every mission
has little surprises that
you won't discover
until they happen to
you. Here are a
couple of examples.
In "Torpex '89," there
is a Soviet Alfa laying
quietly on the bottom
to observe the exercise. He may be
chased off if you head
directly at him and
ping him hard a
couple of times. In
the "Goulash"
scenario, you are
guarding a group of
merchants from two
Soviet surface ships
when, suddenly and
without warning, a
flight of Backfire bombers arrives and
decimates your
group. "Dirty Pool!"
you scream, since
your submarine obviously cannot attack
aircraft. The key here is to engage the Soviet ships to the
northeast before they discover your group and radio the location to the bomber group. Clever, but nasty when you experience it the first time. Such twists as these make the
game intensely enjoyable and there are quite a few of them.

Down Doppler
688 is advertised as a simulation. In a market replete with
very accurate aircraft simulators, the use of this term for 688
is misleading. The primary rationale behind this assessment
involves the excessive amounts of damage you can sustain
and still continue to function (i.e. six hits to sink as opposed
to two for your enemies). Other considerations include the
ease of targeting (although merchants and biological targets
are added for confusion), the limitation of all torpedoes to a
range of ten nautical miles, and the significant simplification
of almost all aspects of submarine warfare. Having said that,
it is important to note that the absence of these items does
absolutely nothing to detract from exciting game play, they
only detract from the ability to call 688 a simulator. In fact,
the designers are aware of the trade offs made and their rationale was to go for greater speed and excitement in order
to make a better game.

Conclusions
688 Attack Sub represents a quantum leap in quality for
naval-oriented wargaming. Its' minor flaws are excusable in
light of the game's tactical challenge, superb graphics, and
sheer excitement. It is highly recommended and would be
this reviewer's personal candidate for "Game of the Year."

Scorpion's Tale
(Continued from page 31)

the country (such as George Ball) is not
reachable. Others are being watched by a
Highfather agent who will kill your agent
if he or she attempts an interview. Fortunately, there aren't too many of these
(do not ever send anyone to see Lem Billings).
One thing you will have to put up with
is a lot of repetitious typing, as well as occasional denseness by your agents. For
instance, you send Iris to see someone
and you want her to say she's from the future because you have information you
think will convince the person. You have
to type in exactly what you want Iris to
say, which is usually several lines' worth.
Now, Iris calls back and says she
couldn't see the person because he
wasn't at home. You tell her to try again
at a later time. She asks the future question, you say yes, and end up typing in
the same information all over again.
Neither she nor any other agent remembers this stuff. Considering how many
times you will end up restoring the game
or starting over from scratch, this can get
to be a bit much.

This is also the case with some of the
assignments you give your agents. Instead of just running right off, they may
ask you who a person is (in which case
you give their official title or relationship
to some other person in the game) and
why you think it's important the agent
should see him or her. If you don't tell
them what they want to hear, they won't
go to see the person.
You may run into trouble occasionally
with explaining why someone is important to visit. If an agent doesn't seem to
understand what you're saying, try typing
in what the manual has to say about the
interviewee. That will pretty much always
work (you don't have to enter everything,
only what is relevant, usually a meeting
with Kennedy on a certain day).
Watch out when using the notes in the
back to prove your agents are from the
future. Some of the information is public
knowledge, or facts that could easily be
obtained with a little research. These will
not help your cause. You are best off

picking out the most personal and
private information, and using that.
Do not overlook Bridgette (Cooper's
daughter). While very young (only 19),
she can be just as effective as anyone
else in some situations, sometimes more
so. You have five people to utilize and no
one is superfluous.
When to save the game can be a
vexing question, since you have, unfortunately, only one save position. If you
save at the wrong time (such as just after
sending someone on an assignment that
will lead to arrest or death), you're stuck,
because there is no way that you can call
your agents. Once they are out of the
time sphere, you must wait for them to
check in with you.
This is a major oversight, because there
is no way to stop an agent once he or
she receives an assignment. Combined
with the single save position, it causes a
lot of aggravation and re-starting. Multiple saves, or a way of contacting agents
away from the time machine, should
have been implemented in the game.
While there are many people you can
visit, it is best to stick to the Washington
environment generally. The only way you
can win the game is by obtaining an interview with Kennedy and this can be
done only by going through those who
are close to him (after you've worked
your way up to these people). Kennedy
must receive three (count 'em, three)
warnings from (different) people who are
close to him before the interview comes
about.
When you think you're about ready to
see JFK, make certain you have your information prepared. Kennedy will be skeptical and you have only fifteen minutes
real time to convince him of the truth.
This is not the time to be flipping
through the manual. Know what you
want to say, and say it fast.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock on
the wall it's just about that time again.
Remember, if you have a question about
an adventure game (please folks, adventures and role-playing only; I really can't
give help with arcades or war games) you
can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
On The Source: send SMail to ST1030.
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope to receive a reply!):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Review

G

ood morning. Welcome to Deja Vu II: Lost in Las
Vegas. You are waking up from a stupor that feels

like a chronic hangover following a wild week in
Vegas. There is a throbbing bump on the back of your
head . . . .
Well, you get the picture. In fact, you get lots of them. All
are nicely detailed and there are plenty of nice windows in
which you can carry out various actions. Now, besides that
throbbing in your head, you have one whole week of game
time to turn $12.25 into $120,000.00. Piece of cake, right?

however, when there are just too many windows that need
opening. After a couple of re-starts, though, players should
get more efficient in knowing what to take and what is really
needed.
Players can save the game at any point where no direct action is taking place. For instance, you cannot save when
being confronted by the ever present human gorilla, Stogie.
It is a good idea to make saves when getting off the beaten
track. Getting off the track is often fatal.
The characters have a tremendous carrying capacity. Beds
and sofas are out,
but you can start
your own greenhouse with all the
plants you can collect. Later choices
will have to be
made about what
is to be carried.
After all, do you
really need the two
towels from the
hotel? What the
heck, have some
fun!

Seems Like Old Times

by Dave Arneson
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Deja Vu II
Macintosh
1
$49.95
ICOM
ICOM
Wheeling, IL 60090

Well, maybe not.

Deja Vu Il is a very linear game. Each location a player
visits has a limited number of exits. It is possible to backtrack
and switch between several locations, however, so lacking
the proper information or item that some locations require is
not a simple dead end. It is possible to recover by retracing
one's steps.
The program can be copied onto your hard disk, but you
will need to insert the original game disk before play can
begin. The game runs on any Mac with enough memory, including the Macintosh II+ color system. Although Deja Vu
had two disks and Deja Vu II only has one, both games
seem to be the same size. Those who have seen the game
box can be assured that the manual is just as cute as the
packaging. In fact, the manual offers several useful hints concerning the command windows and how to use them more
effectively. The hints could have been slightly more direct
and helpful, however.

Deja Vu players will find few changes in Deja Vu II with
regard to game mechanics. In fact, there are even a few old
friends like Rudy and Gabby that can be quite helpful. In addition, many of the same old haunts will also figure in the
early screens.
For those who didn't play Deja Vu, the click and drag system used in the games are quite unique. There are times,

Also, players
should note that
dawdling will result
in simply running
out of time. This is
played out by
having a nicotine
fit with no cigarettes, being
harassed by Stogie
the human gorilla,
getting assaulted
by a bag lady, and
other un' pleasantries.
You can "talk" to people, but they rarely talk back. It is rare
to get even one useful bit of information. Should you get
said information, your sources will instantly clam up like
everyone else.
"Search" everything everywhere. Do an "Operate" and
"Open," as well. There is no telling what you will find: day old
pizza to "Consume," dull pencils, hidden keys, . . . whatever.
The sequence of commands is very important. Incorrect sequences will gain you no results. Even turning on a flashlight can be complicated in the extreme. To whit, "
Flashlight-Operate-Flashlight." So, what's wrong with "Operate Flashlight?" Oh, because you can use it as an ineffective weapon
instead. Oh, I see ... scratch an hour and a half of this
reviewer's time . . . Grumble!
For those of you who haven't passed the Deja Vu II school
of pencil sharpening, here is "How Not to Sharpen a Pencil."
"Penknife-Open-Penknife-Operate-Pencil." You are then told
what a klutz you are and the pencil is now shorter, but not
sharp. "Operate-Penknife (Open or Closed)" doesn't work
either. Another hour and half shot.
I simply must refuse to reveal how long it took me to work
out other simple commands. Let's just say that I would
(Continued on page 50)

Review
by M. Evan Brooks

INTRODUCTION
Under The Ice is a simulation of submarine warfare in
the GIUK (Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom) gap
during World War III. The player may choose either
NATO or Soviet forces in three scenarios (Ambush, in
which a Red Battle Group attacks a NATO SSN [attack
submarine] group; Wolfpack, in which a NATO SSN
task force has penetrated the Soviet Bastion; Missile
Boats, in which NATO must stop the SSBNs [Strategic
Missile Submarines] from reaching safety in the polar ice
pack). The player commands his submarines individually, plots moves and executes actions in both real and
compressed time. The name of the game is Stealth,
Search, Seek and Neutralize.

DOCUMENTATION
The documentation serves as an introduction to
Under The Ice, but it does not delineate the game play
or tactics satisfactorily. A "README" documentation file
is included on the disk and is mandatory reading because of modifications to the game system. Do not attempt play without thoroughly perusing the documentation file. Game play is mouse-driven and, although a
mouse is noted as "optional," utilization of keyboard inputs is less than satisfactory. This reviewer recommends
that a mouse be considered as a requirement for play,
as keyboard input is slow and tedious. The manual does
succinctly explain the individual scenarios, however pay
attention to the victory conditions described, especially
in playing Missile Boats. For example, NATO destruction
of SSNs is worthless in the strategic gestalt, and with
the action rising to a crescendo of destruction, the
player can often forget his initial goal and be sidetracked into "cheap" enemy kills, thereby allowing a Soviet
decisive victory when their SSBNs achieve a position of
safety where they can launch their missiles against the
American Heartland.
The documentation is only sixteen pages long, and attempts to explain both game play and the principles of
sonar. The notes on sonar principles are interesting, but
of insufficient depth to allow a proper comprehension of
what is/should be happening. Consider the fact that convergence zones play a major role in submarine warfare,
but the documentation never explains their role. In effect, convergence zones are a "skip" effect of sound
waves through the ocean. Similar to a pebble thrown
into a pond, these zones are widening circles approximately every 23-32 miles apart (depending on surface and sub-surface conditions). At the zone, one may
"see" the signature of another vessel. However, such signatures disappear as the vessel traverses the zone. In
terms of tactics, if the signature of a contact should
abruptly disappear, such vessel is on a contact course
and the proper procedure would be to reverse course
until the contact is reachieved. On the other hand, if the
signal gradually fades, this means that the vessel is heading away, and one can react accordingly.

The documentation is a starting point, but many of the
game play mechanics are left to
the user to discover. The implementation of sonar techniques appears relatively accurate, but attempting
to decipher them isn't an enjoyable experience.

NAME:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

GRAPHICS
The graphics are adequate. However, since they rely
heavily on windows, pull-down menus and mouse input,
it is apparent that Under The Ice was ported from an ST
program. The sea location is well-portrayed and zoom
features allow in-depth magnification of a factor of sixteen.
In addition, convergence zones,
grid lines and distance circles (a
known-distance measurement)
may be toggled on and off.
The submarines themselves
are represented by an icon,
which may be accessed via keyboard/mouse. Also, when a vessel is "spotted," the program allows one to mark up to sixteen
separate locations. This is very
useful for determining bearings
and contact approaches. However, judicious use should be
made of these; too much clutter
merely confuses the issue.

GAME PLAY
Under The Ice is not a "shake out the box and begin
play" type of simulation. Accessing information and
proper utilization of tactics requires both time and experience. Moves are "plotted" on screen, with time of
travel and ETA (estimated time of arrival) noted. Often,
one will suffer from information overload and a careful
analysis of contacts and bearings will be required in
order to achieve success. In addition, wolfpack tactics
must be utilized. Historically, the United States Navy has
never optimized submarine wolfpack operations and submarine commanders work as "lone wolves." However,
Soviet methodology reflects lessons learned from the
German wolfpacks of World War II and the simulation allows NATO to operate in a similar fashion. Such operations are a "guesstimate" of future capabilities and may
or may not reflect actuality. However, use of multi-boats
allows one to accurately fix and engage an enemy vessel. While a single submarine might only be able to get
a bearing on a contact, a pack of three could achieve
both range and bearing in the same amount of time by
triangulating the data received.
(Continued on page 42)

UNDER THE ICE
Atari ST, IBM
IBM
$39.95
Lyric Software
6 Beach Plum Drive
Northport, NY 11768

Review

SCAVENGERS
OF THE MUTANT WORLD
by Scorpia

S

cavengers of the Mutant World is the latest in the
wave of post-nuclear-destruction games to come on
the market. It is set in a shattered world where cities
lie in ruins, monsters roam the outdoors, radiation zones
are everywhere, and the few bands of humans left do what
they can to survive.
Overall, it's a pretty grim
picture.
One such tribe of
humans lives in the
ruins of Thu. Each year,
they select the best of
their young people and
send them to forage
among the other ruins
for anything: food,
weapons, armor, tools,
parts, etc. This scavenging gives the game its
title and is also the
major activity of play.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

Scavengers of the
Mutant World
IBM
$49.95
Bruce Beaumont,
Richard Launius, and
Chris Stassen
Interstel
Webster, TX

You begin by running
a world-creation routine
to set up the various
ruins, objects, characters, and so forth. Thus,
each game is, in one
sense, unique: towns
and the objects they contain will not be the same
from world to world, although most items can
be found somewhere. Otherwise, there
isn't much difference from one game to
another.

Once the world has been created, you
choose a team of four from a pool of
twenty characters. The character symbols themselves are fixed, but the
names and attributes of the characters
do differ from world to world. Note that you do not get to
"roll up" any characters. You're stuck with what comes with
the world.
Attributes are pretty much standard with one addition,
rad points. These rad points determine how much radiation a character can absorb before dying of radiation
poisoning. There's a lot of radiation out there, in different
forms, and a high rad point attribute is important.
The initial team members come with a supply of food
and nothing else. It is, therefore, necessary to walk around
and explore the interior of Lau to find weapons and armor
before going outdoors. Scattered around the interior are a

number of humans. These are the sixteen characters who
weren't chosen for the team. Their only importance in sitting around is to wait until you invite them into the team
to replace a dead or dropped member. Otherwise, you can
ignore them.
Expect to have some hostile encounters inside Lau.
Remember, it is a ruin, not a safe haven. Hostile creatures
roam the interior and you will have to fight them. You are
usually safe when you are (CA)mping, however.
Once you've found everything there is to find in Lau, it's
time to begin exploring the outdoors. Everything you meet
there is hostile. Aside from other Lauans, everyone and
everything is out to kill you. So, the rule to follow is: "If it
moves, kill it. If it doesn't move, kill it anyway."
There are two special dangers in the outdoors: rad zones
(also found in some ruins) and rad storms. Rad zones
show up as areas of red dots; the closer the dots, the
more intense the radiation. Since walking over one of
these zones reduces rad points, they are best avoided.
Rad storms come along every so often. Usually one of
your party members will sense the approaching storm and
give warning. Then, the only thing you can do is run for
the nearest ruin and wait for the storm to pass. Being hit
by a rad storm is the same as walking over a rad zone, except that storms vary in intensity and you never know how
bad the storm is until it hits.
The game has an auto-mapping feature for the outdoors
only. At any time, you can call up the world map to see
where you are and where you've been. It can point out unexplored areas, and is also helpful for locating ruins when
you need to duck in somewhere to avoid a storm.
Exploring ruins is simply a matter of going inside, walking all around, and picking up whatever you can find and
carry. There are weight limits defined by strength, so you
can't pick up every single thing. However, you can drop
items or trade them among party members if you need to
get weight down.
Much of the time, you will be fighting the creatures that
inhabit the ruins. Weapons vary from chains and swords to
bows and shotguns (the most potent weapon). Armor,
oddly enough, is strictly from fantasy games: leather,
chain, plate, etc., except for the addition of rad suits. All of
these items must be found. They cannot be purchased.
You can usually see an opponent coming toward you, although that is not particularly helpful. Almost all types of
opponents are faster than you are and they tend to catch
up to you sooner or later (the only exceptions are that
monsters encountered inside don't follow you out and the
ones encountered outside don't follow you in).
When combat begins, the scene is a "zoom in" of the actual area you occupy. The party is automatically set up in
a diamond shape and there is no way to change the formation before fighting begins. In a narrow corridor (only three
spaces wide), this can be disastrous if a weak party member happens to be close to the monsters. Monsters, by the
way, can come from any direction: front, rear, or side.
Those that can fly (there are plenty of them) seem to
come from the walls, but that is simply an optical illusion.
Who goes when is determined by the speed attribute.
Most of the time, this means the monsters get to go first.
On a character's turn, he or she can move, change direction, equip a new weapon (if one is available in the character's inventory), or take a swipe at a monster. For non-

ponent. For missile weapons (bows, spears, slings and the
like), distance is not a factor, but having a clear path to
the target is. If a teammate is in the way, the shot will hit
him, not the creature.
It is possible to retreat from combat, as individuals, by
moving them off the combat screen. When the last (living)
member is off, the screen changes to the normal one and
the party as a whole is moved in a random direction away
from the scene of combat. This, however, is only a temporary respite, since the monsters will continue to chase
the group until: (a) the monsters have all been killed; (b)
the whole party has been killed; or (c) the party leaves or
enters a ruin.
This means that you have to fight everything you come
across in order to thoroughly explore any ruin. Smearing
monsters provides experience, but you only know when
you've "gone up a level" by the increase in a character's
rad points and hit points. Physical attributes do not
change except by using one of the "teaching machines"
that can be found in the ruins. Using such a device will
raise one of the character's stats at random. The machines
have some dangers: on occasion they will explode, wounding whoever tried to use it. At other times, the device is
simply "used up" and no longer functions. The number of
uses for any given machine is also random.
In general, playing Scavengers is like playing pick-upsticks in a killer dungeon. There are no puzzles to solve,
no one to talk to, no real obstacles to overcome; you simply march around ruins grabbing what you can, when you
can, while fighting a never-ending stream of monsters, indoors and out. Eventually, the monsters become so powerful that you don't really have a fair chance of surviving.
Opponents are geared roughly to the level of the group;
as the characters become more powerful (relatively speaking), so do the monsters. Unfortunately, there comes a
time, at around 300+ hitpoints, where the creatures are
just too devastating to survive combat with them. This is
particularly the case with monsters that emit radiation, and
there are many, far too many, of these.
This radiation causes immediate mutations in characters.
Some mutations, such as telekinesis, are beneficial, but
the majority are harmful. This is especially the case with
the radiation reaction mutation, which reduces a character's rad points to 1. As you might expect, any further
radiation this character absorbs will kill him. Rad suits, I
found, do not protect against this type of radiation.
Imagine your party running into something like three
giant condors which are very, very fast and emit radiation.
Each condor will get about 3-4 moves before your party
can do anything, even in a non-surprise situation. At least
one member of the group will probably be dead before
you even have a chance to fight back. Unfortunately, there
are not only a plethora of condors, but there are quite a
few other monsters that are just as fast and just as deadly.
Adding to the frustration is the fact that there is no way
to avoid these creatures, since the game is sending them
out based on the level of the group. The only thing you
can do is get your team back to Lau and have them drop
everything they are carrying. Then, drop the characters
from the team (one at a time) and replace them with the
first-level characters that are sitting around. It is difficult to
think of a more inane procedure than this for getting
through a game.

Even worse, Scavengers features the same sort of "nonsave" made infamous in Alternate Reality: the death of
any character is immediately written to disk and you have
only one save position. If you want to keep your characters going and have real saves, there is only one thing you
can do about it. Save the game, exit to DOS, and copy
the save file to a backup. Then, if something unpleasant
happens, you can copy
the backup over to the
game data file and try
again.
Of course, this means
re-booting the game
after each such save. It
also means having to
go through the "enter
word X from line Y on
page Z" routine. You
may have trouble with
this if you do not have
the printed insert of the
revised page 10.
There is an endgame. The pick-up-sticks aspect is not
entirely without purpose. Somewhere in the ruins are
plans for one of two items. Locating the plans and parts
needed to construct it and then, constructing the device is
the real goal of the game. This is actually a nice idea, and
makes for a non-violent ending (at least, you don't have to
kill Foozle the evil Mutant King).

Interstel may have attempted the impossible in trying to
create a CRPG with replayability. Unfortunately, the rather
limited goal of the game and the lack of a definite plotline
works against it. In effect, players end up with a diversion
rather than an absorbing adventure. The good idea ends
up being torpedoed by everything that comes before. If
one is really looking for a CRPG, the frustration and aggravation just isn't worth it.
Bottom line: Not recommended.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

(Continued from page 39)

Under The Ice

tention to ocean
conditions. Use
of ocean layers,
weather conditions and convergence zones
have an important bearing on
detection of submarines and the intelligent commander
will place emphasis on proper utilization of these factors.
The torpedo is the weapon of choice and utilization of
proper search techniques will place one in a proper
firing position (hopefully, before the enemy reaches a
similar state). Playing the Soviet side allows one a dif-

ferent perspective. Generally outnumbering the NATO
opponent, one can attrition his way to victory. Again,
however, use of coordinated wolfpack information and
sonar techniques is the key to victory.

CONCLUSIONS
Under The Ice simulates operational submarine warfare. Not as tactically oriented as Microprose's Red
Storm Rising (soon to be released for the IBM), it puts
the user in the position of the commander and executive officer, plotting the vessel dispositions on the mapboard. However, the paucity of documentation and the
resulting slow learning curve results in a product with
appeal to the true submarine buff and not to the
general gaming public.

Review

Hoplites On
Parade
"Ancient Battles"
by Lt. H. E. Dille

y

ou feel the flanks of your mount shudder under the
barded armor as the cold north wind sweeps along
the ridge where your Huns have gathered. The Roman
legions are formed in squat, menacing squares to your
front in the valley below. The stalemate has continued for
two hours since daybreak, despite feints designed to force
the Roman leader,
Aetius, to commit to
a course of action.
You now realize that
he is far too wise to
assault uphill as you
had originally hoped.
Continued inactivity
will only result in the
demoralization of
your troops, so your
decision is clear. Lifting your standard
above your head, a
sudden hush falls
upon the ridge line,
pierced only by the
short, crisp snorts of
the horses. As your
arm sweeps
downward, the earth
explodes under the
thunder of a
thousand hoof falls.
You are filled with
sadness and joy as
your brothers go forth to death
Ancient Battles
IBM
and glory.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER
PUBLISHER:

1-2
$39.95
R.T. Smith
Case Computer Simulations
c/o Scorpion
Lake Hopatcong, NJ

As the first product in Case
Computer Simulations' Encyclopedia of War series, Ancient
Battles (AB) was a risky gambit
for the British firm because of its
subject matter. After all, it is a pretty safe assumption that
you could hold a world-wide convention of ancient history
buffs at a Holiday Inn in Skokie, Illinois and still have room
for a Shriners' banquet. Fortunately for CCS and wargamers
alike, you do not have to be an ancient history buff to enjoy
this game.
All of the major armies and weapon types of antiquity, from
Alexander's Macedonian Hypaspists to Julius Caesar's
Legions, are represented in the game. The broad range of infantry and cavalry types available provides a diversity in game
play that remains one of the major strengths of AB. Additionally, each of these unit types employed different strategies for
success against each of their opponents. Consequently,
since the game is a tactical level simulation, it is possible for
you to experiment with a multitude of approaches rather

than methodically recreating the actual events of a particular
battle.

A Cohort Is More
Than A Partner In Crime
Before addressing the finer points of the game, it should
be noted that AB is not simply fun, it has educational value
as well! (Groan! Shudder! You game purists are all alike!)
Nevertheless, AB does not set out with the purpose of
educating players on the finer points of ancient tactics, it
simply allows the players to absorb these points through experience. It is impossible to play the game without gaining
an appreciation of the problems faced by the great generals
of antiquity, as well as the tactical changes that occurred as
a result of new formations and weaponry. Barbarian skirmishers, Phalanxes, Legions, and Cohorts (a later reorganization of the original Roman Legions that consisted primarily
of Heavy Infantry) are depicted in conjunction with chariots,
archers, elephants, and conventional cavalry to round out
the diversity inherent in warfare throughout the ancient world.

Alexander's Hydaspian Band
(Scenarios and Mechanics)
AB comes with five pre-generated scenarios. The first of
these is the Battle of the River Hydaspes. This is the site
where Alexander the Great soundly defeated the Indian army
in 326 B.C. by utilizing combined arms tactics. The second
scenario is the Battle of Zama (202 B.C.), where Hannibal's
Carthaginian army was enveloped from the rear by the
Roman forces under the command of Scipio. A similar plight
befell Philip of Macedonia in the Battle of Cynocephalae (197
B.C.), the third scenario. The Battle of Pharsalus (44 B.C.) is
portrayed as illustrative of the importance of maintaining a
strategic reserve (the source of Caesar's victory over Pompey
in spite of being grossly outnumbered). Finally, one of the
largest battles of antiquity was the Battle of Chalons in A.D.
451. Although the historical battle was inconclusive, this
scenario provides the best presentation of infantry vs. cavalry
tactics among the group and should test the mettle of even
the best armchair generals.
Within each of these scenarios, the player has the option of
altering the length of the battle, the level of visibility, and
whether the forces will use normal or free deployment. The
number of players may also be altered once a game is in
progress, a very handy feature that this reviewer would like to
see included in all strategy wargames. Replayability is also enhanced by the presence of a powerful map editor and
scenario builder.
Once you have the game up and running, you will find it
to be guided by a very user friendly menu system. After you
have either selected a scenario or designed one of your own,
you must determine whether each side will be controlled by
Human, Computer, or Shared command. The option for
shared command allows a player to control only those forces
directly assigned to the commanding general of a given side
while the computer controls all of the subordinate generals
in accordance with the deployment plan decided by the
human. Use of this option precludes total control of all one's
forces, but provides a more realistic command simulation.
The sequence of play for each turn of a battle is completed
in the following manner:
• Computer checks which units are visible to each side.
(Continued on page 46)

(Continued from page 44)

Tactics, Too! (Tips on Playing Well)

• Players give orders to units.
• Computer carries out the orders of both sides.
• Computer adjudicates missile fire.
• Computer calculates effects of hand-to-hand combat.
• Computer checks morale of all units.
• Players are shown which units rout or must retreat.
• Units are given another chance to complete their orders.
A Point system
based upon the
number and
strength of units
remaining on
the battlefield is
utilized to determine the victor
and status
reports of a
battle's progress
may either be
called up on the
screen or
dumped to a
printer at the
player's discretion.

Always use the "Follow" command to preserve the integrity
of your infantry lines. This should be ordered, even though it
may be difficult over rough, uneven terrain. Further, strive to
outflank the lines of your enemy while precluding him from
doing the same. Also, do not squander your cavalry on fruitless frontal assaults on massed infantry, these units are
much more effective at harassment and flanking maneuvers.
In addition, remember that your generals are valuable assets that are best employed by using their mobility to intercede at key points of the battle, this can make the difference
between victory and defeat. Finally, if you really want to
excel, go to your public library and check out a good book
on ancient tactics. The hammer and anvil maneuver utilized
by Philip of Macedon, for instance, really works.

Parade Rest (Conclusions)
Ancient Battles is an enjoyable game that will continue to
challenge players long after other games have started to
gather dust on the shelf. The subject matter is a refreshing
change of pace for experienced wargamers, but remains
basic enough for budding enthusiasts to master. Hopefully,
CCS will continue this series with a treatment of ancient
naval warfare or a solid look at the medieval world. One
thing is certain, however, AB is capable of keeping players
busy until a sequel is released.

,

:

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 7)

Gwydir Street,
Cambridge, England CB1
2LJ
PROSPECTOR IN THE MAZES OF
XOR: The player must traverse 30
mazes and collect all the blue balloons
lying around to successfully win this action game in the tradition of Boulderdash. A construction set is also provided
to make the game eminently replayable.
Great graphics, backdrops, and smooth
scrolling make the game addictive.
Amiga ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#15.

Microdeal
576 S. Telegraph
Pontiac, MI 48053
TANGLEWOOD: This graphic adventure requires the player to control five
mining mobiles, and search the surface
of the planet Tanglewood to find a
variety of treasures, crystals and clues to
recover your uncle's missing deed. Completely mouse driven, the game runs in
real time and features attractive
graphics. Amiga (pictured), and Atari ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #16.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062

Game Tek
150 S. Pine Island Rd.
Plantation, Florida 33324

Konami
815 Mittel Drive
Wood Dale, IL 60191

CANDY LAND: Milton Bradley's board
game comes to the computer. Players
play against each other, or the computer, and try to move their Gingerbread
playing piece to the Candy Castle at the
end of the path to win. For ages 3 to 6.
IBM (pictured), Apple II, IIGS and C-64
($14.95). Circle Reader Service #12.

BOOT CAMP: "All right, listen up, you
mama's monitors and diaper disks! This
is your digitized D.I. speaking, and I'm
going to take one or two of you rawboned recruits through basic marine
training. If you can manage to move
your lazy joysticks through the assault
course, three levels of the firing range,
iron man race, chin-ups, and hand to
hand combat training, we might let you
lily-livered reflexes face a band of real terrorists. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #14.

CHUTES AND LADDERS: Another
Milton Bradley classic for the computer.
A good learning aid to the teaching of
numbers and counting, the game is
designed for ages 4 to 7. IBM (pictured),
Apple II, IIGS and C-64 ($14.95). Circle
Reader Service #13.

Logotron Ltd.
Dales Brewery,

COMBAT COURSE: Basic training
redux in this joystick driven action game.
The player must overcome five levels of
difficulty and control grenades, dynamite
and dogs, while traversing a variety of
trenches. The Amiga and ST versions
come with the digitized sound of a DI
barking orders and insults. Amiga (pictured) and ST ($39.95), C-64 ($29.95)
and IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
#17.
HOSTAGE: The player controls a sixperson strike team, assigned to rescue
embassy hostages from a terrorist band.
You can access different points of view,
shoot out windows, repel down walls,
smash through windows, observe from
helicopters, or snipe at the terrorists, just
don't accidentally kill the hostages!
Three difficulty levels, as well as a training mission, are provided. Joystick required. Amiga (pictured) and ST
($44.95), IBM ($39.95), and C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #18.
INTERNATIONAL TEAM SPORTS:
Players compete against 31 different
countries in five team sports; volleyball,
water polo, soccer, swimming and track.
One or two players can play or coach in
this joystick driven action game. As
(Continued on page 52)

(Continued from page 36)

Deja Vu II
rather have been playing the game instead. When the major
puzzles to solve involve the interface, it gets old quick. If only
the manual would have offered a little more assistance.

Deja View (Conclusion)
Linear text games with "Guess The Commands" are right
down on the
bottom of
my list of
boring ways
to waste
time.
Lengthy experimentation to figure
out how to
take a taxi
somewhere
has never
been a useful, fun, part
of any game.
Players who don't mind the mental gymnastics necessary to
accomplish this might really like Deja Vu II.

All Roads Lead To Chicago
(Warning: Hints Follow!)
The first order of business is to acquire funds. Fortunately,
you are in a casino. Unfortunately, the games here are
tough and it happens to be the only casino in this version of
Vegas. Here, the lucky quarter sometimes works. If that fails,
though, you can always look for an old friend. As it says in
the manual, don't get greedy. It also helps to have a fast
hand on the mouse in order to shovel chips quickly into
your pockets.
The next order of business is to get home. In fact, this is
really the only thing you can do. Avoid wandering in the
desert. Vegas may be small, but the desert is big. You'll find
there isn't much in the train station except trains. Check
departure times and run (don't walk) to the train. Don't cross
the tracks or you'll get crunched.
Chicago starts off pretty well. You will meet Gabby and
then, it's off to the Bar, the Morgue, or your own apartment.
There are really no other choices.
Your old bar is not what it used to be. In fact, it's closed.
There are a number of ways in and interesting things to find.
Maybe there really is a Mercedes somewhere, but I prefer
Gabby's taxi and traveling office. At this point, frustration
begins to set in. The bar presents a real opportunity. It is
going to take a lot to get past this point. I really got hung up
here. Maybe the board is the "key?" Hmm . .

(Continued from page 18)

First Over Germany
reviewer made it back to base with severely crippled aircraft
on more than one occasion.
One very nice touch to the game is the sequence after the
pilot is wounded. If the pilot should be wounded, the B-17
will respond sluggishly and the co-pilot must help fly the
plane. If the co-pilot is low in aptitude and experience, controlling the plane will be difficult. Wise players will pay close
attention to the aptitude and experience level of the co-pilot
during initial crew selection.

Review Board (Critical Observations)
There are some disappointing facets to the game. For example, when planes are over a target and heavy flak is bursting around them, the joystick response is extremely sluggish.
This is true even if the pilot is completely healthy and has
not been wounded. One must also wonder why a map of
potential target areas (such as the one on the back of the 50
Mission Crush manual) was not included. It could certainly
have been helpful.
Finally, when players are selecting gunners to shoot at the
enemy fighters, there is a major problem. Should the player
select a gunner that is wounded or out of ammunition, it is
not possible to select another gunner to fire. That enables
the enemy to get a free shot at the player's B-17, even
though another gunner might have had an equal chance to

down the bogey. This seems unrealistic, since any gunner
with any kind of shot at the enemy would be bound to have
his gun blazing in such a situation.

Recommendation
Overall, First Oyer Germany is an interesting product. It
has adequate graphics and sound, but does not press the
limits of any computer's capabilities. It offers the kinds of excitement garners have come to expect from a simulation,
but not the kind of
technical flash and
visual stimuli one associates with the first
person viewpoint. The
real value of the program is in taking on
the role of a WWII
bomber pilot and experiencing his career
in a compressed time
frame. Perhaps, the
empathy engendered
toward this leader of
men and his responsibility for the welfare of his crew is the most salient facet of
the experience. Any player that wants to know the human
factor of the air war will be interested in this game and those
who enjoyed 50 Mission Crush and B-24 will definitely want
to play this game.

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 49)

coach, you must pick the players to compete on your team, and watch them age
with each Festival. New players become
available with time, and can inject youth
into an aging team. C-64 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #19.

Psygnosis
c/o Computer Software
Service
2150 Executive Drive
Addison, IL 60101
BAAL: Baal, the supreme God of Evil
(So, who you gonna' call?) has dispatched his army to steal a War
Machine. The player takes the part of
the leader of the Time Warriors and attempts to stop this evil plot. Players fight
past 100 monsters and 400 traps to successfully retrieve the War Machine. The
game has typical, high quality Psygnosis
graphics, sound and scrolling. Amiga
(pictured) and Atari ST ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #20.

Publishing International
333 W. El Camino Real,
Suite 222
Sunnyvale, CA 94087
HOMETOWN, U.S.A.: This is a construction set for building model houses.
They can be used as models, sets for
trains, decorations, doll houses, etc. The
package comes with 15 different building styles. The designs can be loaded
into a paint program, and then completed with windows, doors and signs
that come on the disk. IBM (pictured),
Mac, Apple II, IIGS and C-64 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service # 21.

Scandinavian Systems
51 Monroe Street, Suite
1101
Rockville, MD 20850
CHESS: Unlike most chess programs,
this one plays more of a "jailhouse" or
"coffeehouse" style of attack game.
Rated with an International Chess
Federation score of 1800, the program
can be handicapped and offers the
usual features of chess programs. But it
doesn't play along classic lines. Be ready
for a variety of novel attacks on your
king! IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #22.

Software Toolworks
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
THE FIDELITY CHESSMASTER
2100: An advancement in the Fidelity

series, this program offers 2-D and 3-D
graphics, over 150,000 opening moves,
unlimited levels of play, classic games
and in-depth analysis. Rated at 2325,
this is a big package! IBM (pictured),
Apple II series, IIGS and IIC+ ($49.95),
and C-64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #23.

Springboard Software
7808 Creekridge Circle
Minneapolis, Minnesota
55435
HIDDEN AGENDA: The player assumes the role of a Central American
revolutionary leader who has just come
to power. You must appoint a cabinet,
bargain, negotiate, compromise, deal
with diplomats and journalists, show
badges (Badges? We don't hall to
show no stinking badges!) all the while
improving the economy, and guiding
your country to prosperity, or ruin. An in-

credibly detailed simulation, this looks
like a real winner. IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader service #24.

Conversions Received
For the Apple
Pool of Radiance (SSI)

For the Apple IIGS
Jigsaw (Britannica Software)

For the Atari ST
Tetris (Spectrum Holobyte

For the C-64
Guerilla War (Data East)
Battles of Napoleon (SSI)

For the IBM
Barbarian (Melbourne House)
Jigsaw (Britannica Software)
Road Runner (Mindscape)

Back Issues

Hall of Fame / R.I.D.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the above named games have been well
spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time. Therefore they have been
enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame as
games of renown and worthy of play by all

Game Ratings Chart
Conspicuously absent from 'The Top 100" are the three new inductees
into the CGW Hall of Fame. This month, we celebrate the secular
apotheosis of Interstel's "Empire," the popular strategy game which won
CGWs 1988 Game of the Year Award. The strategy game finished with
a 9.97 rating under CGWs new system (7.84 in the old). Also,
Microprose's "Pirates" (CGWs 1988 Action Game of the Year) anchors
in the safe shoals of software stardom as it enters the Hall of Fame with
a 9.71 rating in the new poll (7.57 under the previous guidelines) and
"Earl Weaver Baseball" from Electronic Arts enters the Cooperstown of
Computer Games with an 8.82 rating (7.31 on the old list and CGWs
1987 Game of the Year).
"Dungeon Master" continues to rank as the highest rated Role Playing
Adventure and "F-19 Stealth Fighter" as the number one rated Simulation. "King's Quest IV' became the number one Adventure game. Histori
cal figures loomed large in this rating period as "Genghis Khan" ended
up as top Strategy Game and "Battles of Napoleon" ranked number one

among pure Wargames. The top-rated Action game was "Battlehawks 1942".

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that emphasize strategic planning and problem
solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based on first person perspectives of real world
environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that allow you to take your alter ego through a
storyline or series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures (RP): Adventure games that are based on character development (usually involving attributes).
Wargames (WG): Simulations of historical or futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC): Computer games that emphasize hand-eye coordination and reflexes.

