July 1991

Features
Follow the Bouncing Polygon

Why Players Hate to Read the Docs
10

A Maz-ing Review of Data East's Continuum / Matt Taylor

Event Horizon's

DarkSpyre

12

Hot Stuff at Both Ends

16

Evolving from

Pong to Ping

19
26
29

Red Baron Tactics / Gary Lail and Paul Nielsen

Lexi-Cross: C-3P0 Meets Vanna White?

35

Interplay's Futuristic Game Show / Stanley Trevena

Artistic Slant

38

Abstracts from the Journal of Computer Game Design

Awesome Tips
Mastering the Psygnosis Game / Derek Godat

2?

64

Rules of Engagement Designer's Notes / Maurice Molyneaux

70

Robotic Civilizations in SimEarth / Allen Varney

Departments

Virtual Reality Becomes the Name of the Game / Paul Rigby

Air Mail Above the Trenches

56

Exposing Wing Commander's Secret Missions/ Alan Emrich

The Nuk'ed Truth

Computer Game Nuclear SubmarineTactics / Kevin Turner

Get Real!

Move Over, Bart and Raphael
50
Willy Beamish Reanimates Computer Games / J. Wilson

All This and Breach

Sneak Preview illuminates Magic Candle 11 / J. Wilson

46

Chuck Moss on a "Doc-U-Quest"

The Cat's Milieu

Don't Take This Fantasy for Granite / Todd Threadgill

Number 84

43

Taking A Peek
The Rumor Bag
Opponents Wanted
Game Ratings Chart (Top 100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Scorpion's View (Death Knights of Krynn)
Inside the Industry: CD-ROM
Reader Input Device
Over There (European Games Report)
Editorial

6
14
22
40
41
52
62
74
76
80

Taking a Peek

Access
Salt Lake City, UT
LINKS: BOUNTIFUL and FIRESTONE
COUNTRY CLUB: These add-on course
disks not only bring additional and extravagantly detailed courses for Links,
but they also offer the player more than
just a change of scenery. Both products
offer new executable files to update the
original Links program. Then, players
can head out to either one of the headline stops on the PGA Tour (Firestone)
or the programmers' favorite local course
in Utah (Bountiful). In either case, the
views and terrain are both picturesque
and challenging. IBM ($24.95 each).
Circle Reader Service #1.

Accolade
San Jose, CA
HOVERFORCE: One could either consider this game an earthbound Stellar 7
or a cyberpunk version of high speed pursuit in the next century. MetaCity is over-

run with drug trafficking and bio-engineered and "enhanced" drug lords
known as Alterants. The Red Wasp Unit
is an elite force with the sole mission of
destroying these Alterants. As a Red
Wasp recruit in Houerforce, one pilots
the HoverKill 1000 Urban Assault
Hovercraft throughout MetaCity's regions
in search and destroy missions to locate
and destroy Alterants. The 3-D, 256 color
VGA graphics and soundboard support
lend a dark, futuristic quality to this high
speed, smooth-scrolling chase game.
IBM, Amiga (49.95). Circle Reader Service #2.

Capstone
Miami, FL
TRUMP CASTLE II: With graphics as
opulent as its namesake, Trump Castle
II adds not only more games, but more
panache than its predecessor. With
digitized graphics of the Castle itself,
players move from room to room in
order to play such casino favorites as
slots, baccarat, minibaccarat, roulette,

Taking a Peek

blackjack, "Big Six" wheel, craps and
video poker. Each gambling game is
competently done (again with superb
graphics), although it will take a few
minutes to become acquainted with the
plethora of options for each one. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #3.

Disney Software
Burbank, CA
DICK TRACY CRIMESTOPPERS PRINT
KIT: In the best Print Shop traditions,
this print-kit-on-a-theme covers the hit
Touchstone movie, Dick Tracy. Chock
full of computer graphics of Warren Beatty et al, kids can make designs for police
badges, wanted posters and masks to go
along with the more standard fare of
greeting cards and invitations. IBM
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
MICKEY & MINNIE'S FUNTIME PRINT
KIT: Don't put those coloring pens away
so fast! For ages five and up, parents
might want to consider a print kit which
will translate into hours of children's
amusement (and reams of computer
paper and dozens of printer ribbons
used). Mickey and Minnie have got the
graphics for all occasions (holidays,
sports, school, etc.) with lots of clever
border designs to go with them. Posters,
place mats, invitations and greeting
cards go along with six different
typefaces to help kids "say it all." IBM
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #5.

Free Spirit Software
PO Box 128
Kutztown, PA 19530
SEX OLYMPICS: Free Spirit has
developed an entire line of satirical (or is
that satyrical) adventure games pandering to frustrated libidos. In the latest installment of Brad Stallion's adventures in
the "Big Thruster," Dr. Dildo has
penetrated the Sex Olympics. The
player, as Stallion, must mount up the enthusiasm to outscore" his evil nemesis
before the story reaches its climax
(ahem). Unfortunately for those with a
liking for the lascivious, the graphics
leave a lot to be desired. Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6.

Graphics Software Labs
7906 Moonmist Circle
Huntington Beach, CA
BACKGAMMON BY GEORGE!: Get out
your Windex because this game runs
under Microsoft Windows. Players can
adjust opponent skill levels (although the
computer opponents are not particularly
sophisticated), use the doubling cube,

vary the board set up, choose between
mouse or keyboard inputs or use manually rolled dice in lieu of computer rolled
dice. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#7.

Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL
THEME PARK MYSTERY: From Europe
to the US, the type of fortune-telling
machine which made Tom Hanks Big, is
back to haunt computer gamers. Magic
Canyon Theme Park has been deserted,
but as one's inheritance, it must be explored. The player travels through four
theme worlds (like a deadly Disneyland
or sinister Six Flags where everything
has gone terribly awry) in order to
eliminate the gremlins which haunt the
park. A blend of problem-solving and arcade action are required to succeed (and
a bizarre perspective on life wouldn't
hurt, either). IBM, Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.

Micro Revelations, Inc.
Reno, NV
XENOCIDE: Four kinds of arcade action are strung together in a first-class
package pitting the player against the
xenomorphs which occupy the moons
around the home world. The action is fantastic looking in 256-color VGA, and
things move fast! Combine this with full
sound support, and the player will be
honing razor-sharp reflexes in no time.
For all those who said that super
cartridge-level gameplay couldn't happen
on a PC, they'd better take a look at
Xenocide. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #9.

Paragon Software
Hunt Valley, MD
THE AMAZING SPIDER-MAN: An arcade game with more strategy than
shoot 'em up (Spider-Man, after all, does
not kill people), this little brainteaser is in
(Continued on page 78)

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Continuum
IBM or compatible (reviewed),
Amiga (coming soon)
# PLAYERS:
1 or 2 (alternating)
PRICE:
$49.95
COPY PROTECT: Documentation Check
DESIGNER:
Infogrames
PUBLISHER:
Data East USA, Inc.
San lose, CA

A Good Time

Continuum

by Matt Taylor
[Play eerie music from Golden Age television series:] Through
the magic of computers, you are entering a world of threedimensional space, embarking on a voyage which would normally be envisioned only in your wildest dreams.... Enter into
a world where walls are of substance, but little else is.
Bounce off the platforms... or is it the ceiling?... and find yourself bursting through the portal before time expires and you
end up perishing in the Stygian abyss reserved for those unfortunate enough to be unprepared for Continuum.

I

nfogrames' futuristic Continuum has taken a whole new approach to flight sims by mixing in labyrinth exploration with
other touches almost weird enough to merit citizenship in the
Twilight Zone. At times, Continuum plays like one would expect a Star Trek: The Next Generation "holodeck" game to
play. At other times, it could almost be said that the basic idea
behind it is: "The Player is a SuperBall in a Rat Maze." One way
or another, Continuum offers some fascinating gaming experiences.

Having a Super Ball
This maze mapper called Continuum is unlike any previous
such offering, although this may not be immediately obvious

from observing the objects on the screen. There are two different
modes to challenge: "action" and "emotion." In action, players
try to tally up a high score and survive as long as possible. Emotion, however, is a matter of simple exploration, without the
necessity of competition against either another participant or the
top-score board. Sounds like a typical rehash, not worth a closer
look, right? Wrong.
First off, toss out the laws of physics and study the governing
principles of the Continuum universe. The "Mobile" ship, which
gamers "enter" and control, is equipped with left and right steering and a thruster. Again, this is standard fare as such. However,
the way it travels through its environment is an intriguing experience for all ages. The goal in each room is to collect bonus
items, if any are present, and zip out the window into the next
area as quickly as possible. Rebounding off colored platforms is
the only method of building up altitude, and they are suspended
in progressively inconvenient locations throughout each of the
256 chambers. Some bounce the Mobile higher than others and,
since the journey from one structure to another is precarious at
best, a misjudgment means a plummet to the floor below. When
this occurs, players have to seek a "grounded" square to restart
the bouncing process.

Review

A Different Point of View
The camera positions (note the plural) are a major factor in
Continuum's distinctiveness. As the environment is completely
three-dimensional, the view can be changed to accommodate
desired rubbernecking. Pressing the up and down keys results in
the angle shifting in the appropriate direction. Also, a wealth of
options are to be found, such as a choice of third-person (the
default and "friendliest" view) or first-person perspectives. It is absolutely vital to glance every which way, since it is not immediately obvious which is the most expedient route to pursue.
Other features include a "position memorize" (temporary save
which can be recalled at a penalty of one minute of precious
time), a "permanent save" (available in "Emotion" mode only), a
choice of Mobile shapes (weird blocks strung together in all
cases, but they fit the "universe" of the polygon-filled graphics
well enough), and different effects on the display (such as altering the forms from filled to wire outlines). In both modes, the
map is "user friendly" and exhibits which rooms have been explored and how many prizes have yet to be collected.

Doc-U-Quest
The documentation is adequate, but mysteriously vague on
some subjects, most notably the penalty objects. Although they
are illustrated, their negative effects are not expounded on except for the phrases "destructive" and "energy drains." Since
there is no power meter to be concerned with, what are these
words referring to? This aviator repeatedly crashed head-on into
an impediment without suffering any noticeable ill effects.
At least the bonus items are fairly clear. One grabs them in
order to raise the score which, in turn, translates into extra time
awards. Also, the clock winds back one minute upon passing out
of a chamber.

"Playing" on One's Emotions
Of course, all mentions of time and points refer only to the "Action" mode. In "Emotion" mode, a player wanders through one
of twelve areas, including: Awaken, Develop, Energize and
Meditate — yes, all human emotions. In each region, a different
color and song "scientifically proven to stimulate that particular
area of the human psyche" predominates. Unluckily for those
who are sentenced to suffer through the internal speaker's inadequate sounds (the sound board support is excellent), only one
tune is available throughout the entire game (one that will probably begin eating your nerves to pieces within minutes). Fortunately, like much in Continuum, it can be adjusted or turned off.

Zapless Wonder
Now, for the final analysis: true action enthusiasts, this reviewer
included, will doubtless find a lack of real game substance to
complement an original and provocative concept. To be exact,
flying a weird ship in a maze is nifty, but where's the interactive
fun? How long does a flight simulator stay interesting without
combat? It sounds like some sort of demented Nintendo
syndrome but, unfortunately, it still holds true. Continuum could
conceivably have worked without battles, but the goals are so
uninspiring as to actually detract from the game and out-foxing
the mazes gets dull faster than one would expect. With a
head-to-head, modem race-through-the-maze, blast-'em-if-you-see-'em
upgrade, this software would have attracted a lot more attention.
As it is, Continuum stands as a neat new way to show off the
potential of computer-simulated space travel, but it falls short in
the most important department of lasting entertainment.

Review

arkSpyre, the cold forbidding tower of
granite erected by the Gods of the Three
Ways (Magic, Intellect and War), casts a
sinister shadow over the face of humanity. The
gods are incensed with mankind's stubborn disbelief and have left one meager chance for
mere mortals to escape the aggregate wrath of
the triumvirate of deities. Their messenger, a
diaphanous apparition, has issued a challenge to all champions: if, within a three-century period, one man or woman
could manage to enter the tower and pass the trials provided
by a dozen fiend-laden dungeon levels, mankind would be allowed to survive. Now, the three-centuries-old grace period is
drawing to a close. Many adventurers have accepted the challenge, only to meet bitter defeat. Time is running out, and
mankind's only hope of survival rests on a lone adventurer's
skill, stamina and cunning.

D

DarkSpyre

Action, Adventure and Puzzles Galore
by Todd Threadgill

Such is the predicament facing the player who starts up DarkSpyre, Event Horizon Software's action/role-playing game.
Filled with challenging mazes, real-time combat and a unique
graphic style, DarkSpyre has much to offer to gamers who appreciate a true test of their adventuring mettle.

Building Character
Players begin their quest by creating a character. In most roleplaying games this is usually accomplished by filling in a screen
full of attributes, naming the character and moving on. DarkSpyre follows this tradition by allowing the computer to create
the character automatically or giving the player full control, but it
also offers something new and different. Should the manual
process be selected, the computer will present the character's life
story (up to the point of entering the tower) in the form of a fairy
tale. During the course of the story the computer will prompt the
player to fill in the specifics about the character, including name,
gender, left/right-handedness and more. Each of these choices
has an impact on the character's abilities and, subsequently, his
or her performance in the game. This reviewer found the character creation process refreshing.
DarkSpyre's user interface is also something new. The bottom
of the screen contains a "character sheet" that features a picture
of the character, including readied weapons, spell books or other
objects. Next to the portrait are buttons that perform specific actions depending upon the objects carried by the character (for example, if the character is carrying a sword, the corresponding button will read "SWING"). At the top of this portrait/action button
area is a gray bar. By grabbing this bar with the mouse, the
player can "raise" (i.e. scroll) the character sheet so that it fills
the screen, much like a window shade. When the full character
sheet is visible, players can view their character's stats, including
armor strength, hit points, etc. The character sheet may take up
as much or as little of the screen as the player wishes, but it
should be noted that using too much of the screen for the character sheet will reduce the size of the window in which the action
takes place. Since all of the action in DarkSpyre (including the
combat) takes place in real time, it is easy for players to find
their characters taking hits from assailants while they are studying the statistics display. This reviewer found that limiting the
character sheet to the extreme bottom of the screen did wonders
for extending the on-screen character's expected lifespan.

Runestone Cowboy (Game Play)
The dungeon levels are grouped, fortunately enough, in layers
of difficulty. Most of the dungeon levels are built around fixed
layouts and encounters which will, naturally enough, appear each

TITLE:
DarkSpyre
IBM
SYSTEMS:
$49.95
PRICE:
COPY PROTECT: Document check
DESIGNER:
James Namestka
PUBLISHER:
Event Horizon
(distributed by Electronic Zoo,
Baltimore, MD)

time the player passes
through them. Others, however, are completely random
with the player having only a
Gauntlet-like motivation for wandering the maze and bashing
monsters: finding a way out.
In order to pass on to the next layer of difficulty, the player
must locate a runestone which, in turn, is located on a specific
level within a group. There are five runestones in the game, representing: Strength, Agility, Endurance, Accuracy and Talent. Alert
players will observe that it is possible to reach the runestone
level before completing the other fixed levels in a particular layer
of difficulty (since the fixed levels appear in a seemingly random
order). Nevertheless, this is not usually a good idea, since one's
character will need all the experience he or she can get before ascending to tougher challenges.

Review

Experience is, of course, gained through all sorts of actions,
such as finding objects and passing from one level to the next.
Yet the most lucrative source of experience points is still combat
with the myriad denizens of DarkSpyre. This is probably beneficial on those population-bomb levels where creatures abound,
but can be somewhat frustrating on the levels where the resident
monsters are fairly sparse. The play balance with regard to encounters seems somewhat out of whack. Similarly, combat encounters can range from blissfully brief battles in which one's
character literally brushes opponents out of the way to maddening melees in which the on-screen character hacks, chops, kicks
and swings away at his or her foe with no visible result (other
than the steady drain on one's own hit points as the enemy
strikes the player's character successfully time after time). The
latter gets extremely tedious, especially since the player usually
has very few weapons from which to choose. DarkSpyre takes
realism to new heights — weapons break or dull after they have
been used for a time — and, at least in the early stages of the
game, proficiency with magic is hard to come by. Hence, special
care should be taken to beat up on lesser opponents as much as
possible in the early stages of the game, since enemies become
both more numerous and more formidable later on.
Each of the fixed levels features special hazards, such as giant
steel balls (which can either be put to use by the player or avoided entirely — some can cause damage, Indiana Jones-style),
teleporters, movable walls, magic mouths and pressure plates.
The magic mouths usually have useful information, either in the
form of a direct hint or an obscure riddle. The teleporters, which
resemble big bubbles with a ring of fire around their edges, pop

up all over the place and often serve to make mapping extremely difficult. The dungeon levels are quite large in DarkSpyre, and
there is no "auto-mapping" feature, so drawing one's own maps
is essential. Novice adventurers be warned: DarkSpyre is a difficult game. Only experienced players need apply.

In"Spyre"ing Observations (Conclusions)
DarkSpyre is a fine game, well suited to gamers who enjoy
true challenges. The documentation is both thorough and particularly suited to players (like this reviewer) who like to "play
first and ask questions later." The first portion of the documentation contains a brief and relatively well-written novella which does
an admirable job of setting the stage for the game. Some players
will lose patience with the novella, however, since it does tend to
get bogged down with details regarding characters and situations
that have little impact on the game.
The player interface is well thought out and obviously the result
of many hours of thoughtful hard work on the part of
DarkSpyre's designers. Everything that could be needed by the
player is right at his or her fingertips, and all commands function
in a logical manner. Also, even though there is no built-in "construction set" for creating one's own challenges, the package includes a pleasant surprise: an offer for the DarkSpyre Drawing
Board, a dungeon editor that will allow players to do just that.
Clearly, DarkSpyre was designed by people who love to play adventure games. As the first release from Event Horizon, DarkSpyre is truly impressive. Players who are looking for a challenging mix of action and role-playing would be wise to "visit" this
ominous granite locale.

Industry News

The Rumor Bag
by "Chip" N. Dale
t didn't quite seem right to put on
both my suit and the bag over my
head and head out for the Magic
Kingdom in order to work, but there I
was, strolling down the new "Afternoon
Avenue" at Disneyland with families from
South Carolina and Michigan staring at
me as though your favorite gossipmonger was one of those costumed characters that roam those intricately detailed
lanes. My publisher was off at some
photo shoot with General Chuck Yeager
in anticipation of Electronic Arts'
release of Yeager Air Combat. I realized
everyone knew about that, but I
wondered how many knew that Mr. Sipe
was hard at work on a book about the
hot new title. Due out in the fall of this
year, it will be the very first book in
Prima Publications' new CGW Presents
line.

meant Ocean's new The Addams Family license.

I

A brief bit of envy caused me to pause
briefly and nearly be trampled by the
Baloo character rushing past on his way
to the press conference as I wondered
why the first book in this new line wasn't
The Best of the Rumor Bag Guy. Of
course, I quickly realized that both Sipe
and Wilson are predisposed toward
books that will sell and ingraciously
hoped that all their books were flashes in
the pan. Speaking of The Flash, I also
hoped that Bethesda Softworks would
do a really nice job in bringing the crimson crimefighter to the computer screen.
I reached the press conference where
Mickey Mouse was joining Chip and Dale

I thanked the executive and left soon
after the metallic balloons and confetti
covered the participants in the grand
opening. I briefly glanced at the painted
snow at the top of the Matterhorn and, it
being a warm spring day in Southern
California, wished that it were real. A
tourist commented that the "phony
snow" made you feel like skiing or playing hockey instead of standing in line on
a spring day. Hockey, eh? I agreed with
him and wished I were heading back to
the office to play Electronic Arts' NHL
Hockey on our SEGA Genesis machine.
If there was one thing I knew for certain,
it would contain plenty of action, since it
was being developed by Park Place
Software (developers of John Madden
Football on the SEGA) and produced by
Rich Hillemann (an amateur hockey
player and enthusiastic fan).

in opening the CapCom Videocade. I
watched the festivities and commented
to the CapCom executive standing beside me that licensing seemed to be particularly successful in the video game
market these days. I told him I had just
found out from a friend at Hanna-Barbera that Taito was getting ready to announce video games based on The
Flintstones and The Jetsons. He smiled
knowingly and told me that CapCom
was working with Disney on a number of
future products. In fact, he noted that his
company was working on two original
concept Game Boy titles (one with Mickey Mouse and the other with Roger Rabbit) and had two hot Nintendo Entertainment System titles slated for July
release (The Little Mermaid and TaleSpin).
Then, he told me to make sure I visited
"The Haunted Mansion" before I left the
park. After all, he implied, publishers of
floppy-based products believe in licensing, as well. At first, I thought he was talking about Accolade's Elvira product that
had been so successful for them, but
then he told me to "look across the
ocean." Okay, so even a rumor guy can
figure out a riddle, on occasion. He

It wasn't a very long walk from the Matterhorn to Main Street U.S.A. Walking
down Disneyland's Main Street always
gives me a nostalgic feeling and nostalgic feelings often set me to thinking
about the early days of Computer
Gaming World. I remembered all those
back covers dominated by Avalon Hill
Microcomputer Games products and
wondered what had happened to the com
puter game division. So, in honor of
those memories, I stopped at a pay
phone near the City Hall and gave
Avalon Hill a ring.
I'm glad I did, because it seems that
they are still working on a computer version of their tremendously successful
board game, Third Reich. I had thought
the project was cancelled. Then I found
out they had some new surprises for me.
In addition to Third Reich, they're working on a fantasy/strategy game for the
computer with mechanics similar to the
board game Kingmaker and a new wargame based on the Peloponnesian War.
I hung up the phone and marched triumphantly out the main gate to the musical accompaniment of Disneyland's own
marching band. At least I had some
good news to share with computer wargamers. Now that Electronic Arts Distribution doesn't plan to distribute SSI's
wargames anymore, good news for wargamers is as rare as...well...as rare as
tears at Disneyland.

4

Sneak Preview

The Magic Candle Il:
by Johnny

Sneak Previews are not designed
to be reviews. They are feature articles based on "works in progress"
which CGW's editors have deemed
worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide
the "final word" on a product, since
we expect to publish appropriate
review coverage when the game is
completely finished. Sneak Previews
are designed to inform our readers
about upcoming games and
generate excitement about the
"state of the art" of computer game
design in general.
n 1989, The Magic Candle won
honors as CGWs Fantasy Role-Playing Game of the Year. Even though
the graphics seemed like a hundred
games we'd seen before and the game itself had limited distribution, The Magic
Candle still sparkled with enough fresh
design concepts to grab plenty of critical
nods. Encounters with non-player characters had significance; characteristics were
restored via mushrooms (a renewable
resource); party members could be assigned to complete tasks while the rest
of the party went adventuring and an
elaborate (most importantly, non-automatic) ritual as its conclusion to lead players
into the most satisfying finale for a CRPG
to that point in time.

I

Now, in The Magic Candle II: The Four
and the Forty, Ali Atabek and his crew
are again out to capture the imaginations
of gamer and critic alike with an improved version of the system. If one's
idea of gaming is reduced to flashy
graphics and elaborate sound support,
he or she is not likely to be drawn to this
second flame. If one is looking for deep
and satisfying game play, however, one's
leisure time will be totally consumed by a
burning desire to play this game.

A Brighter Flame
Nearly everything possible has been
done to help players suspend their disbelief and get totally involved in the
story. There are no generic towns or villages in the game. Every inhabited locale

has a different layout and look to it. Nonplayer characters who have a potential
impact on the story have unique icons to
distinguish them from characters that are
simply there for "atmosphere."
In fact, some non-player characters
have vital information that changes,
based on what has been accomplished
during the game. They may advise the
party one way before they have completed a task in a mini-quest, but they
will treat the party differently and offer different or additional advice after the task

is completed. Also, non-player characters
who are not feeling favorably disposed to
the party can be charmed into cooperation by using magical means at the
party's disposal. In short, the conversational element of encounters has more
depth than one finds in many CRPGs.
In addition, the game contains thirtyone non-player characters who can join
the party. Some will only join as a result
of certain events, while others may join
for a little while and leave unexpectedly
(the Loyalty rating is very important with

The Four and Forty
L. Wilson

out of particular locations in order to
save the game will appreciate the fact
that they can have up to eight distinctive
(and annotated) save positions and they
can save anywhere and anytime (except
during combat).

regard to these "defections"). Even the
king will offer to join the party at one
point (because of his personal motivation). This all resonates well for "believing" in these characters.
Beyond this, players not only get to assign their party members to tasks (forging weapons, tailoring clothes, etc.) as in
The Magic Candle, but they also get to
add substitute adventurers to the party
while the original adventurers are accomplishing their tasks. This is an advancement over the first game because the
earlier product required parties to travel
across the game world in a weakened
condition (i.e. with less than a full roster)
until the members on assignment were
able to rejoin them. Now, parties can adventure with full rosters and rendezvous
with their fellows at a later time.
Since up to thirty-one adventurers can
be "on assignment" at a given time, this
feature, which allows for time management of the party, may end up serving
as a subgame for many role-players.
They may end up with a goal of enriching the party as much as possible and
get so involved with trading, training and
earning money that they let the plot line
become a side issue. This, too, smacks
of realism. There are certainly plenty of
individuals in this world who could
change social conditions who opt not to
change them.

The "Play" Within the Play
Yet, providing a credible game world is
not the sum total of the illumination
provided by The Magic Candle II. The
second impression one receives of the
game is that the designers have spared
no effort in making the game easier to
play than its predecessor. Automapping
can be accessed with no resource assessment at friendly locations. Then, to enhance the mystery of hostile and unknown locales, one must use a Blue
Maramon pearl in a map flask in order to
automap in these territories. Yet the
automapping feature is there if the
gamer wants it and it fits logically into
the game's fiction, as well.

Candle Opera
In our last episode, our heroes discovered that the four and forty guardians of The Magic Candle of Barbezza, a magical construct, had disappeared. In the course of the adventure,
the good guys managed to successfully complete the arcane ritual known
as the "Zirvanad" which, in turn, restored the wax prison of the embodiment of evil, saving the known world
in the process.

In addition to automapping, which has
become something of a standard in
CRPGs (even if they are not always as
cleverly integrated into the fiction), the
game also features a "Notepad" feature.
The players themselves decide the size
of the buffer they are willing to fill with
details about the game and determine
the detail level which will be saved. Then,
players can either save all their conversations and discoveries to disk or print
them out in order to both clear the buffer
and keep the data for safekeeping.
As if the "Notepad" feature were not
helpful enough, the game also keeps on
record up to nine pages of character
data, including skills, resources and magical spells. The data can, in turn, be accessed via one word commands like "Inventory," "Search" and "Magic."
Finally, players who like multiple save
positions and resent having to be in or

Now, in The Magic Candle II: The Four
and the Forty, our heroes have the opportunity to right the cosmic balance,
once again. Or perhaps one should say
that they get to finish the Herculean task
of righting the balance which they began
in the original. After all, the player never
quite found out what had happened to
those guardians in the last adventure.
Now, it appears that the guardians themselves are being imprisoned in four and
forty black candles (a sort of reverse
poetic justice). This provides the "conceit" for a larger and more varied adventure in which the player's party: explores
a considerably larger world (the continent of Gurtex); discovers new spells
(Courage, Summon [Beast], Betray, Acidball, Drain, etc.); and assists the Children
of Light against the Forces of Darkness
in a battle of appropriately apocalyptic
scale.

Tapering Off
In summary, The Magic Candle II: The
Four and Forty is a continuing refinement of its predecessor. The Magic
Candle. As the latter placed emphasis
on characterization and ease of play, so
does the former carry on the award-winning tradition. In what we have seen thus
far, it is even more extensive, well-written
and balanced than the original.

Strategy

SUBMARINE SCHOOL 101
Basic Nuclear Submarine Tactics

T

he essence of submarine strategy

is to stay in their baffles. ("Baffles" encompass, approximately, a 90-degree arc
directly aft of a ship). Being in another
ship's baffles allows a submariner to
refine his firing solution while remaining
undetected and also allows time to guide
friendly weapons while the target turns to
bring his tubes to bear. "Clearing baffles"
simply means turning to listen behind
oneself.

has always been stealth. From the
time that the submarine was first
developed for war, stealth has been its
single most lethal weapon. III-armed in
comparison to its floating foes, the submarine maintains an important place in
naval warfare. (In WWI the battleship
ruled the waves, in WWII it was the
aircraft carrier and today, the submarine
is the queen of the seas.)

Being Dense

Welcome to Sub School
The first essential thing any submariner
must learn is the fundamental
capabilities of the platform, or boat.
These include:
• Speed: Maximum speed, acceleration, handling (turn rates).
• Cavitation curve: Cavitation can be
compared to "spinning your wheels." It
creates noise, but doesn't get one there
any faster. The deeper the run, the faster
the speed without cavitating since the
pressure is greater. A cavitation curve is
a graphic representation of speed versus
depth showing when the boat will
cavitate.
• Test depth: The maximum recommended depth (i.e., the depth one starts
praying at).
• Crush depth: Theoretical depth of
implosion (i.e., the depth where praying
ceases to help).
• Periscope depth: The depth at
which the periscope sticks out of the
water, but the boat doesn't.

Stop, Look and Listen
Submarines use sonar to find their targets; it works best when the sub is being
quiet. Sonar works by means of reception and analysis of sound in an aqueous
medium and is based on some very
simple precepts. The first is that sound
travels more effectively in a denser
medium. Since water is denser than air, it
follows that sound travels better in water.
Also, sound travels in waves. If one were
to drop a pebble in a pool of water, he
would notice that the waves start bigger
and more tightly together at the center,

gradually diminishing in size as they expand outward. The third principle is that
soundwaves "bounce." Using the pebble
example, when waves hit the side of the
pool, they rebound off the denser object.

Baffled
An easy way to think of the submarine
is as a giant directional microphone. In
the sonar dome, which is in the nose of a
submarine, are many sensitive
microphones. Naturally, the best way to
find the target is to point the microphone
all around and to listen quietly. Being
directional by its very nature, the sonar
system does not hear well aft of itself.
Also, the major source of noise
generated by a submarine is located in
its stern (where the propulsion system is)
Therefore, it follows that the best place
to hide from the enemy, while optimizing
one's ability to get an accurate solution,

"Layers" are areas of cooler, denser
water that exist at certain depths. A layer
can be compared to an opaque window;
one can see through it, but not as well as
clear glass. Layers act as a partial sound
barrier, since sound bounces off denser
mediums. While that may hamper the
search for others, it is a useful masking
tool. A knowledge of the depths of layers
is essential.

"This Is Only A Drill..."
Since other submarines are the major
threat, apply these lessons in the following exercise: A player receives intelligence that an enemy submarine is in
his patrol area; orders are to sink it. The
player's sub is currently travelling at 8
knots, on a heading of 000 degrees,
depth 350 feet. There are no contacts on
sonar, a layer is located at 200 feet and
the charted depth of the ocean floor is
1600 feet. Tubes 1 and 2 are loaded with
Mk. 48 torpedos, the tubes are flooded
and outer doors are closed.
Now, break the engagement into parts.
The first part is called the detection
phase. Here, one must configure the
boat to listen as quietly as possible. Start
by pointing the microphone around.
Order "left five degrees rudder" and clear
the ship's baffles.
Nothing.
Returning to base course, one might
think that the enemy has found the player's submarine first. Order "five degrees
up bubble" and come to 210 feet. Now
that the player's sub is close to a layer, it
can be used to evade if necessary. Perhaps a short excursion to 180 feet might
be advisable to see if the enemy is above
the layer, and to throw off any firing solution they might be calculating.

Strategy

Order the diving officer to come to 180
feet and feel the boat respond. Clear the
baffles again.

Adrenalin Rush
The target is slow to react, but react it
does. It drops countermeasures and changes course, depth and speed. Order the
weapon steered to the target zig and wait
for the enemy snapshot that is sure to follow. The target brings his tubes to bear
and launches. It's too late for him, but he
would like some company on the ocean
floor. As the torpedo acquires the target
internally, order the guiding wire cut.

Still nothing.
Confidence increasing... Order a course
change to 090, toward the heart of the
patrol area, to run a brief leg before coming back down to 210. Change depth to
210 and clear the baffles again. The
sonarman reports a contact at 235, designated Sierra 1, no classification. Order a
course change to 235 and focus the listening on the faint contact there. The
sonar "supe" reports it is a submerged
contact of unknown class. The detection
phase has ended and the tracking
phase has begun.

Adjust the Tracking
Quietly observe the quarry as sonar
feeds information to the fire control console and wait while the solution solidifies,
with confidence in the solution rising.
The target is moving north to south, so
maneuver to intercept his track. Slowly
maneuver into his baffles, solution
steadies and watch the opponent for any
sign of aspect change. If he were to clear

baffles, a short excursion above the layer
would prevent detection at this critical
juncture. With the solution entered, the attack phase begins.
The weapons officer reports weapon
status, so the player rubs the lucky zippo
in his pocket. Order firing point procedures, matching bearings and shoot.
One's ears feel the inrush of air from the
weapon's launch as fire control reports
the weapon running, wire good.

The sonar supe reports a torpedo heading in your general direction. Drop
countermeasures, change depth to get
above the layer, change course to a perpendicular of the inbound torpedo track
and pick up speed to 12 knots. The
sonar supe reports the player's weapon's
impact; the incoming weapon searches
unsuccessfully, runs out of fuel and dies.
Secure battle stations and go to radio
to prepare a report — mission accomplished. Just seven days to go before
being relieved on station and going
home. Seven more days of coffee, stale
air, rehydrated vegetables and powdered
milk. Then into port with a broom on the
mast: "Patrol area swept clean."

Opponents Wanted

Reach Out and Crush Someone

Industry News

Virtual Reality
by Paul Rigby

arch at the UK's Wembley Conference Center saw the world
launch of W Industry's two fully
operable virtual reality (VR) systems, including the world's first VR leisure system. Dr. Jon Waldern was the host — sensibly so, because the company's first VR
system was built in Jon's garage (shades
of Apple).

M

down systems (where one is seated in a
console bath-chair). There are a number
of tools one can attach to the stand-up
system, including a VR glove and a joystick that enables one to manipulate objects in 3-D space.

The main VR system (displayed at the
launch) comes in three parts: the Expality computer (a true multiprocessor);
the Visette helmet (which not only handles visuals, but also incorporates head
tracking plus quadrophonic, CD-quality
sound) and the Animet software that
binds the Expality computer together.

There is also a pressure-sensitive forcefeedback glove under development. It will
give one the sensation of touching things
and works on compressed air. Another
tool WI have under development is an exoskeleton. It would fit to the outside of
the body and track one's position as one
moves through the room. When the system is networked, other people wearing
exoskeleta would then be seen as computer renditions in "robotic" form.

The VR system comes in two forms: the
stand-up (a portable affair which allows
one to walk around the room) or sit-

Within the Expality computer, there are
actually five processing units, a true multiprocessor system. The Commodore

A3000 operates the I/O and sound chip,
while two Texas 34020 and two 34082
RISC chips run graphics efficiently
enough to produce about 30,000
polygons per second. The chips run at
33mhz but the combined MIP (million in
structions per second) performance is
through the roof.
As much as the two systems impressed
all and sundry, this reporter did have two
criticisms. The VR graphics headset uses
LCD technology. During the launch, the
sit-down model's Visette display seemed
a little fuzzy.
According to Jon Waldern, "Included in
the lens is a special new substance that
we're still working on. That substance
was fitted to the system that was shown.
Unfortunately, they were not fitted very
well. It's like getting a lens and moving it

Industry News

out of focus. A number of them were out
of focus. Much apologies for that, but
they had moved in transit from the factory to the show."
In addition, the air combat game VTOL
was poorly designed in that this reviewer
did not need to turn his head to look at
aircraft behind him (surely the whole
thrust of VR?). Quite simply, they all flew
in front whereupon they were downed.
Waldern stated, "In the first two levels
they are in front of the player, but after
that they pull back quite sharply and behind. Then the player has to start viffing,
etc. You were only in [at] Cadet level.
Things become more difficult in Ace
level. Obviously, we have to balance that
with people coming into the system who
just want to hit something."
In coin-op arcades, the cost is expected
to be about £1.00 per play (ca. $2.00))
with three levels of difficulty to choose
from.
The other sit-down VR game on display was Battlesphere. Battlesphere is
an interactive arcade game in which
players see each other in the [virtual]
world. Each player can take the others
on and can communicate by using

microphones built into the helmet. So, a
VR arcade center is something that is
definitely expected in the future.
In use, the sit-down model made one
feel part of the movie Tron, as though
one were really trapped in a computer
game! Wherever this reporter moved his
head, he saw computer generated
graphics displaying different parts of his
aircraft, bogies and atmospheric scenery
— weird. The helmet uses a head-fit system called "Erglock" ("erg" for ergonomic, not the sound people make
when putting it on) that adjusts to
various head sizes, although one will be
aware of a front-heavy sensation due to
the LCD technology mounted in the
Visette. While this reporter felt relatively
comfortable in it, he did hear negative
comments from people who wore glasses
Dr Jon Waldern was very enthusiastic
about the possibility of multi-player VR
games (such as VTOL and Battlesphere)
because "...you can get mutual interaction and multi-play capabilities that turn
it into a type of interactive cinema."
Does Jon envisage a home entertainment model?

"We are working on one. It will be available sooner than a lot of people think."
Production of the arcade sit-down
model will soon reach 5000 units per
annum and will retail at about £20,000
each. With more health and safety research, a stand-up model could be introduced into arcades.
However, WI's purpose is not simply to
develop hardware. They are also employing their own game developers in recognition of the fact that games drive the
hardware. "WI has our own in-house
developers. It has taken a long time to
build up the necessary quality. Licenses
will be issued to software houses once
the user base increases, however. I see
games production reaching about 2 per
quarter, using new types of genre that
benefit from VR."
As an example of the games WI is
working on, Jon divulged that a Dungeon Master-type game was under
development for the stand-up model.
One can safely wager that this writer, for
one, will be first in the queue when that
game is released!

Strategy

Tactical Tips for Red Baron
by Gary Lail and Paul Nielsen

The following purports to be a transcription of a letter from a
pilot on the WWI front
lines to his brother
who had just joined
the Royal Air Force.

Strategy

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:

Lexi-Cross
IBM
1-2
modem option
PRICE:
$49.95
COPY PROTECT: Document look-up
DESIGNER:
Peter Oliphant
PUBLISHER:
Interplay
Santa Ana, CA

by Stanley R. Trevena

he

"Wheel" is dead, long live the "'Cross" — Lexi-Cross,
that is. Interplay's newest product is a strategy game that
parodies the television game show format. Unlike computer
games that have merely programmed the rules to actual TV
game shows so players can test their wits at home, Lexi-Cross is
designed to be a game show set in the future. In the game's fictional wrap, the game takes place in the 21st century; television
has been replaced with holovision; contestants are from
throughout the galaxy and Lexi-Cross is all the rage. So, move
over, Pat and Vanna — Chip and Robanna are the state of the art.

T

Lexi-Cross is a fast-paced word game that has been described
as a combination of Battleship, Concentration, Scrabble and
Wheel of Fortune. The object of the game is to reveal words hidden in a matrix of tiles, guess the relationship of those words and
solve the puzzle before one's opponent can. A fast timer and
over 600 puzzles will keep even the best word puzzle fan busy
for weeks.

Dial "M" for [Rupert] Murdoch
The documentation for Lexi-Cross is presented as the
Holovision Guide. The documentation serves as a form of copy
protection and basic instructions, padded with background fiction. Beyond the information contained therein, important information on command line options, modem play and sound board
support data may be found in a separate "README" file on the
disk which probably should have been in the manual or on a
printed technical supplement.
The game itself consists of three rounds, each increasing in
point value, and a bonus round. The game can be played in
either a practice mode or "On The Air" with either a human or
computer opponent. There are five levels of computer opponent
available. Playing a game in practice mode allows the player to
get acquainted with the interface, rules and basic gameplay with
or without a timer. There is no bonus round in a practice game,
however. "On The Air" gives the player the full game show feel,
complete with the usual inanities from the host, Chip Ramsey.

Review

The game parameters are set before the program ever executes. After installation the player sets the hardware defaults.
Puzzle difficulty levels are player-selectable; low and high values
range in difficulty from Children through Genius level. Setting the
low and high values to the same setting restricts puzzle type to
one level. One can even establish the number of days before a
puzzle may recycle or, for a real challenge, have some or all of
the words in anagram form.

A Conundrum Built for Two
The actual game takes place on a gameboard built as a 10 x
15 matrix of blank tiles. The puzzles are the same for each
player, but the words are found in different locations. Puzzles can
be one of four types: common theme, literal, puzzle word and
missing word. The majority of the puzzles (70%) are of the first
two types. Players take turns alternately exposing tiles, picking
letters, buying vowels and attempting to solve the puzzle. A
player continues his turn until stopped by a "Lose Turn" token or
failing to guess either a letter or the puzzle solution itself.

while subtracting from the opponent's. A safety token is retained
and used later to counter a bad tile/event any time in the same
round. The "Peek" token entitles a player to select a row or
column to be exposed to view for a split second. Selecting any of
these will allow a player to continue his or her turn.
The player should use caution, however, as there is a counterpart to each of the above tokens; stumbling on one of these will
end the player's turn. A "Negative Point" token subtracts from
the player's total and adds to the opponent's total. "Lose Safety"
tokens remove a safety token from the player's side and give it
to the opponent. A "Poke" token selects, at random, a row or
column from the opponent's gameboard and exposes it for a
split second.

Vowel Movement

One strategy for exposing tiles can be borrowed from the game
of Battleship. It is best to pick tiles that are not adjacent on the
board and selections should cover a wide area. Then, once a letter tile is revealed, adjacent tiles can be overturned until the entire word blank is exposed. A word of caution: tiles adjacent to
the word, especially at the ends, often hide "Negative Point" and
"Lose Turn" tiles.

One last token is the "Vowel" token which, of course, enables
the player to choose a vowel. When sufficient letter tiles are exposed, the player will want to start guessing letters. At this stage
of the game, Lexi-Cross plays like Wheel of Fortune. The player
spins for point values and guesses letters. If a letter is in the puzzle, all corresponding tiles which are currently exposed are
turned over and the points are added to the player's total. Guess
ing a letter not in the puzzle will end a player's turn. A player
should remember that both puzzles are the same and letters that
the opponent has already guessed correctly are usually a safe
bet when guessing letters.

Aside from locating letter tiles, the player will want to locate
other tiles of benefit. Point tokens add to the player's point total

Mixed in with point values on the wheel are "Bankrupt," "Lose
Turn" and "Expose Row/Column" markers. The first causes the

Review

player to lose all points accumulated in the current round, "Lose
Turn" is self-explanatory and "Expose Row/Column" will turn
over every tile in a player-selected row or column. The player
can be assured that the selection will probably have a mix of
good and bad tiles. This stage of the game can begin as soon as
the first letter tile is exposed. It is best to wait until sufficient letter
tiles are exposed before guessing letters, however, since no
points are scored for letter tiles not yet exposed.
A round ends when a player guesses the puzzle. There is a
single line hint on the solve screen that the player can view at
any time during a game. The hint is blank and only those letters
used by the player will be filled in at any given time. The player
solves the puzzle by selecting the solve puzzle option, viewing
the hint and then typing in the solution to the puzzle. If the
wrong solution is given the player loses his next turn. After three
rounds the player with the most accumulated points advances to
the bonus round.
In the bonus round the player picks a set number of letters and
vowels and then must solve the puzzle in a set time limit. The
bonus round is the most difficult part of the game, but success
can be very rewarding in total points. If the player ranks in the
top five of Lexi-Cross history he or she gets inducted to the
Hall of Fame."
"Lexi-Cros
A few options are not clearly detailed in the documentation.
Pressing the F7 key during a round will save the current game to
disk. Player points and game statistics are retained but the current puzzle is not. Starting the game again with the RESUME
command line option will start the game at the beginning of the

last round played with a new puzzle. This is true even after losing
the connection during a modem game. When resuming a
modern game the player must place the keyword RESUME
before MODEM in the command line.
Three levels of modem error correction are available to the
player, but this reviewer had problems with the modem connections even at the highest error protection level. After reconnecting an "On the Air" game, Chip Ramsey will recap the last round
played and start the new round. Other programmers should take
note of this feature, as nothing is more frustrating than losing a
connection and having to restart a game from scratch. One
known bug in the game has to do with the pause [Fl] key. If
one is in 'select a letter' mode and pauses the game, the letter
selected after unpausing will not be the letter the game selects.
Later copies of the game should solve this minor problem.

See You Next Week on... LEXI — CROSS!
Lexi-Cross is a refreshing variation on the ever popular game
show theme. Anyone who enjoys Wheel of Fortune will love
Lexi-Cross. The theme music, background music, introductions and
inane comments from the host all add to the convincingly authentic game show atmosphere. This reviewer often caught himself
chanting at the computer for misfortune to be bestowed on the
opponent and breaking out in victory cheers when a win was at
hand. Anyone tired of the same old games should give LexiCross a look. This reviewer found it to be both as habit-forming
as a couch potato's viewing preferences and challenging as a
classic strategy game.

Design Notes

Abstracts From The Journal of

Computer Game Design
nce or twice per year, CGW
prints abstracts of selected articles from The Journal of Computer Game Design in order to stimulate thought concerning the
philosophies behind and development
of computer games. This month, we
summarize salient articles from Volume
4.1, 4.2 and 4.3. The journal is published six times a year. To subscribe to the
journal, send a check or money order
for $30 to:
The Journal of Computer Game Design
5251 Sierra Road
San Jose, CA 95132

O

Some Thoughts on Network
Games
by David H. Schroeder (MasterWord
on the Quantum Computer Networks)
David's article notes that there are different personalities among the commercial telecommunications networks that
offer multi-player games. He observes
that Prodigy does not want any user to
interact in real time with any other user.
In MadMaze, for example, there may be
1,000 users exploring the maze at a
given time and 500 of them in the same
exact location, but none of them are
aware of any others. They inhabit 1,000
identical, but separate "universes." On
GEnie or Compuserve, one does not
need any network-specific terminal
software to access the network (with the
exception of special games like Air Warrior that require special software). Then
there are the services like Quantum that
offer graphic game environments with
multiple players (Quantum's latest is
NeverWinter Nights, a multi-player
AD&D adventure using the SSI gold boxstyle appearance) who interact with each
other in both real-time and
play-by-electronic mail (PBEM) environments.
David's basic point is that there are
three basic issues to be addressed in
designing network games. First, the technical issue is concerned with the relationship between the central host computer
and the individual user's PC. The questions to be asked are: "Where is what
data?" and "Where is what intelligence?"
Schroeder ties this issue back into the
network's philosophy. What the designer

does in the game design is largely dependent on the network's philosophy and
capability.
Second, the network developer must
think about the relationship between
users, asking questions like "Who is what
to whom?" The goal in asking this question is provide a largely invisible interface
that facilitates fun without getting in the
way of the participants. His article suggested the analogy of the game design/interface as being like a social director at a
summer camp.
Third, he observed that a network
game environment is open 24 hours per
day and suggests that time and consideration reflect on the question, "How
does each person encounter the time
frame of the game experience?" It is not
possible to simply announce a beginning
and ending time for these games such as
a human game master might open
his/her living room. Rather, people
"wander" in and out of the game all the
time. Time needs to be spent wrestling
with ways to be certain the needs of all
the players are met, no matter how short
or long their stay in the game "universe."

Types of Play
by Evan Robinson (programmer of Centurion: Defender of Rome and Champions)
Evan placed emphasis on a taxonomy
for computer game design. His definitions follow.
Unstructured Play: Interaction with a
system in which the primary goal of the
user(s) is examination of the system's behavior. Also called "Exploration."
Structured Play: Interaction with a system in which the primary goal of the
user(s) is to place the system in a
specific state or to specifically affect
some subset of the system's variables
(like score).
Competitive Play: Interaction with a system in which each user (including system constructs which approximate
human users) engages in Structured
Play, but where all the goal(s) of all the
user(s) are not mutually attainable. Also
called "Competition."
Building on these definitions, Robinson

suggests that a system for unstructured
play is a toy, a system for structured
play is a puzzle and a system for competitive play is a game. He goes on to
defuse a major debate among designers
by exhorting developers not to become
blinded by such labels and to remember
that customers will do with these games
whatever they please (i.e. one person's
toy is another person's puzzle).

An Approach to Plotting for
Interactive Fiction
by Scott Jarol
In a three-part article, Jarol draws from
non-game sources to delineate some
ideas for plotting interactive fiction. In the
first article, Jarol notes the difference between problems and puzzles. He states
that puzzles are encapsulated activities
with a definitive outcome. Problems are
elusive goals that protagonists seek to
reach over the course of a story structure
or game. Puzzles, therefore, are largely
game extenders, whereas problems are
motivational goals. He goes on to suggest that the basis of a story (and hence,
of course, the basis of a game) is largely
discovery and confrontation. The
protagonist quickly recognizes that
he/she has a problem to solve, but rarely
realizes how complex the problem is until
later in the story as the scope is enlarged.
In the second article, Jarol draws from
Syd Field's classic works on screenwriting to enumerate five essential steps in
any movie script. In Field's classic
paradigm, there are three major plot
points, interrupted by two pinches. The
pinches, in turn, are the complications
which serve as the turning points of the
first and second halves of the second
act. Then, Jarol admits that diagramming plots in such an artificial way is
probably only useful as an academic exercise. Yet, he observes that using such a
model can help designers better understand the mechanics of narrative and, in
turn, focus better upon story.
The third article has not yet been published, but it is expected to deal with
fashioning a "virtual personality" for the
player character of a CRPG.
(Continued on page 78)

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 74

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Game Hints

An Awesome Survival Guide
by Derek Godat (with a thousand thanks to Cormac Batstone)

W

ith its latest milestone arcade
game, rightfully named
Awesome, Psygnosis once
again explores the hostile and fantastic
fringes of outer space. Unlike many previous galactic shoot-'em-ups, Awesome
requires quite a bit of forethought and
strategic planning on the part of the
player. Lightning-quick reflexes are, of
course, mandatory, but the gamer must
now exert himself cerebrally as well.

and financially stable of the two galaxies,
determined to use their superior trading
strategies to mercilessly pillage the
wealth of Homikahn. This being so, the
militaristic empire, Homikahn, began to
counteract the Octarian advantage by
preparing to convert Octaria into so
much orbiting debris. Naturally, an encoded transmission reveals this diabolical
plan to the player character and the adventure begins.

To aid the ardent Awesome player, this
writer has plunged headfirst into the
nether reaches of the cosmos and
managed to find, within the guise of an
ordinary ship's log, some noteworthy
techniques for gameplay. It is hoped that
with this reconnaissance information in
hand, and with many, many hours of gutwrenching play under one's belt, Awesome may be triumphantly concluded.

Now, the reaction of a typical
spacecraft in an ordinary computer
game storyline would, naturally, be to
proceed with haste to the Homikahn
galaxy and exterminate all the nasty,
slithering, gibbering alien scum found
therein in order to rescue Octaria from
certain death. Here is where Awesome
differs. The player's objective, as commander of the mercenary craft Elapidae,
is to unceremoniously turn tail and escape the galaxy, leaving every last man,
woman, child and space-mold to his or
her respective death.

Out of Existence Sale
In the bleak world of the future, just as
today, economics determines the fate of
billions. The troubles began when two
neighboring galaxies, namely those listed
on the star charts as Octaria and
Homikahn, began to squabble over intergalactic trade policies. Solutions to these
disputes were quietly decided upon in the
secrecy of galactic political strongholds.
Octaria, being the more sophisticated

While the plot tosses the too-familiar
burdens of nobility, humanitarianism and
honor out the window, there's plenty of
challenge for the video blackguard. Just
surviving the trek through hundreds of
light years of backwater star systems
proves an awesome, if not lethal, gauntlet.

Excerpts From the Log of
the Elapidae
It appears that the population of this system remains ignorant of our grim secret. Apparently, our ship is the only one in the system to know of the death sentence declared
by the Homikahn. If all goes well, our
"brother" Octarians shall remain in this unenlightened state until the Homikahn
military machine removes the planetary surface from beneath their feet and keep our escape efforts unimpeded by the bedlam of a
mass exodus.
I am greatly impressed with my crew's
restraint in the matter. As I dictate this log
entry, it has taken a mere seventeen bodies
to seal the lips of any potential babblers. A
surprisingly low number, considering the
crew's usual untrustworthiness and rebellious nature. Nevertheless, I have replaced
these seventeen worthless corpses with mercenary scum and plotted a course for
Tundrars, the nearest heavenly body on the
charts and, coincidentally, the planet to
which my ship has been contracted to
deliver military equipment.
We have learned some hard lessons since
thrusting away from Aquoss. Only days
from that planet, the Elapidae happened
upon a cluster of seemingly lifeless objects
which the ship's computers obscurely identified as "organic pods." To my surprise,

Game Hints

SECOND
FRONT
9.17 R.I.D. RATING

these pods were filled with a rather vicious
variety of alien insects. Luckily, one of my
mercenary co-pilots had the common sense
to thrust backward, out of the beasties'
range, before they could launch upon the
Elapidae. Maintaining backward thrust, the
Elapidae was able to pick off the xenomorphs quite easily. I should make note of
this tactic. It may come in handy somewhere
between here and the edge of the galaxy.
Our journey forced us across a spiraling
asteroid field. It was fortunate that I, in my
infinite sagacity, had a sonic mining laser installed while the Elapidae was docked at
Aquoss. That the laser was on sale, priced
ridiculously low, was mere coincidence.

S

econd Front from SSI is big...
really big. An ambitious,
strategic-level WWII wargame
covering the entire Russian front, this is
no game for the casual strategist. Although the name is clumsy (most
Westerners think of the "Second Front"
as the allied landings in western
Europe), this hexagon-based wargame
with a weekly turn scale is a grognard's
delight.
The unit of maneuver is the corps.
Each corps can be seen on a screen
showing its component divisions and
battalions, and their current states of
readiness and experience. Units often
need to rest while the supply lines
catch up to advancing formations.
Hence, assigning generals and air
groups becomes a vital concern.
Economics play an important element
in Second Front. Players can order
their economies to concentrate on the
production of key tank and plane
designs in order to make their war effort more efficient and, hopefully, more
effective. Off-board elements such as
the campaigns in North Africa and
Western Europe are handled abstractly,
with the German player needing to
maintain garrisons which can be drawn
from should emergency reinforcements
be needed.
The documentation was a bit vague
and some key information was missing
(and even incorrect) on the Read.Me
file. Fortunately, an article in CGW #73
("Second Look") added much to the
documentation to the game. For one or
two players (either at the same computer or passing saved game files back
and forth), Second Front has set a high
standard for the translation of the board
wargaming genre into computer games.
For the IBM and Amiga.
Computer Gaming World Index:
Second Front was featured in issues 72
and 73 and had short mentions in issues number 65 and 68.

After swiftly conducting our business on
Tundrars, we launched for Follas. It had
seemed ages since we had actually experienced a peaceful planet and Follas
seemed to promise plenty. Alas, the urgency
of our need to depart was to keep us from
experiencing all the wonders of this planet
composed of the twisted limbs of a thousand
alien trees. Twice during the trek from
Tundrars, we were confronted by hostile
spacecraft. The first attack was instigated at
our own initiative, since it involved an irresistible amount of floating fuel canisters
guarded by a negligible number of police escort ships. We found it advantageous to lure
the escort away with a quick exchange of
laser fire. Then, when the fools had strayed
far enough from the convoy for us to risk a
safe shot, they stood absolutely no chance
against our superior weaponry. My
navigators were able to backtrack through
the twisted fragments of our kills and overtake the unguarded canisters before they
could recede off of the scanners.
Our next battle came in the form of an ambush, completely unexpected considering the
Elapidae's formidable reputation. A ring of
blackened globes converged on the
Elapidae, leaving no room to maneuver,
much less defend ourselves from the sleek
pirate fighters which closed in for the kill.
Luckily, the Elapidae was able to break free
of this deadly circle using mortar bolt cannons acquired from ballisticians of Tundrars.
Were it not for these wondrous armaments, I
fear that my mercenary days would have
come to an end. With this advantage, the
predators fast became the prey.
Fortunately, the warp-speed jaunt from Follas to Vulcurn was nearly as peaceful as the
reputation of Follas. Once we neared
Vulcurn, however, we experienced an intriguing
encounter with a derelict space station. It
seemed to be a rotating research station, a
titanic structure of seemingly indestructible
crimson orbs. There was a gap through
which the Elapidae entered the interior of
the station. Then, as our pilots labored

furiously to avoid the outer ring of orbs, our
gunners destroyed the spokes of the station.
Once the station had been properly
decimated, I myself fired the last thousand
rounds into the central orb. Upon its destruction, the station reluctantly released a bizarre
piece of hardware which the Elapidae neatly
plucked from the orbiting flotsam and jetsam. Once slaved to the on-board computer
systems, who knows what this exotic technology will be capable of.
After the usual turbulent planetfall, the
nose-shuttle of the Elapidae skimmed along
the surface of Vulcurn in search of a
suitable trading port. Unfortunately, the flaming cyclones and geysers characteristic to
this environment conspired to completely
obstruct an aerial view of the terrain. It was
decided that one unlucky mercenary should
earn his day's diogem disks by scouting
below for a suitable landing site — preferably one with inexpensive trading centers, extensive armories and exotic alien dancing establishments spiraling for kilometers in
every direction. A simple task, considering
that Vulcurn is only the fourth largest planet
in this solar system.
After hours of dicing, gunfights, boasting,

Game Hints

pleading, arm- and sometimes tentacle-wrestling, along with unrestrained mayhem, one
poor soul was honored with this quest and
dropped into the planetary sea of flames that
awaited the nose-shuttle.
The mercenary came through and, in a matter of hours, the Elapidae was gleaming on
the floor of subterranean catacombs, whitesuited technicians swanning over her. Then,
with his final breaths, the lump of charcoal
that had been my crewman told of a great
labyrinth of catwalks and the devastating
smart-droids that patrolled them. In a cloud
of ash, the mere coughed out that he would
be in much better condition if the shuttle
had hovered above the maze while someone
noted the proper path through it. I thanked
the talking corpse for this bit of strategy,
then wheeled him out to the flesh-merchants.
Bacillius, a vile planetoid of quivering tentacles and taut flesh, was a welcome sight
after the struggles on Vulcurn. Here, another
space station found its way into the
Elapidae's flight path. Some expert piloting
was required to avoid the deadly kiss of the
station's spinning exterior and revolving
arms. Defeated, the station sent us chasing
after precious globules of fuel.
Apparently the Elapidae is fast becoming
notorious in these hinterlands. The next assault was composed of nearly every sort of
craft we've yet faced. The only unknown
element was a flickering circular gateway
that sent the Elapidae tumbling into an alternate universe. After a precious few instants
in that sub-space, we were again hurled into
the heat of battle, with a bounty of discs and
energy capsules kept as souvenirs.
We next arrived at Grosbar, though simply
landing the Elapidae in a single, working
piece had become a considerable chore. Fortunately, we were able to fit pulse shower
cannons to the Elapidae on this planet.
Later, these cannons proved to be quite useful when the ship's computers blandly announced a 'missile alert'. This rather nasty
weapon sent glowing darts of fire in every
conceivable direction, whilst the Elapidae's
pilots worked madly to swing her in a wide

circle. It seemed there was no end to the
stream of smart missiles which homed in
upon the dauntless Elapidae. After minutes
of manic evasion, a lucky gunner discovered
the source of our problems: an odd breed of
silver-hued saucer. The saucer's demise accomplished the same for our problems.
Another hop through the stars sent the
Elapidae into the very heart of yet another
space station. Merely keeping pace with the
revolutions of the great wheel was a near-impossible task, yet that was not enough.
Using the Elapidae's growing arsenal, gunners blew a hole in one crosswise length of
the station. By repeating this action, we
were able to put the space wheel behind us
and continue breathing.
After two mixed — though uniformly
deadly — onslaughts, our troubles paid off
in the form of a crystal-rich asteroid field.
Dodging the tumbling rock monstrosities
was a cheerful break from the usual assortment of tedious fire fights.
The mortar bolt cannons proved themselves worthy once more, when, without so
much as a warning, a great flurry of asteroids and saucers converged on the Elapidae.
The Elapidae had, in turn, become trapped
inside a ring of blackened orbs. Once free of
those pesky, lethal spheres, however, a hardwon victory was ours.
Alas, however, by the time we docked at
Cryogene, two-thirds of the crew were dead
and the others were engaging in a celebration of the most desperate sort. Tomorrow,
we launch for Moth, the very last planet at
the edge of the galaxy. Long-range scanners
aboard the ship have detected a great
farewell party massing between this world
and Moth. To abate the hopelessness which
pervades this, our final battle, I have added
a radial disrupter to the weapons-stock of
the Elapidae. Rumored to accomplish
damage of the most apocalyptic proportions,
the disrupter may give the ship an added advantage in our most desperate moment. If
not, whatever mercenary dog collects and
auctions off our remains can still take advantage of the money-back guarantee.

The Armories of Awesome: Availability and Prices
Weapon
Aquoss
Peripheral Gun
250
Mining Laser
250
Merc Crewman
400
Spherical Bombs 500
Pulse Laser
940
Flame Thrower
—
Mortar Bolts
—
Wide Bm. Plas. C. —
Radial Disrupter
—
Pulse Shower
—

Tundrars
400
400
—
150
—
150
150
—
—
—

Follas Vulcurn
—
150
—
500
150 250
—
100
150 —
100 —
250 —
300 —
600
—
—

Grosbar
—
—
300
725
200
—
—
200
—
350

Bacillius
150
—
400
—
—
—
900
—
300
500

Cryogene
50
50
400

900
400

Humor

Games We'd Like to
See: Doc-U-Quest!
by Chuck Moss

he

greatest computer game of all
time lies in your hands. Millions of
hours to be pleasurably wasted, a
learning curve to scale, a host of
machine intelligences to master — there's
just one question: How do I turn it on?

T

Welcome to Doc-U-Quest, the game
that drags you through the densest thickets of computer instructions. Thrill to the
challenge of trying to install the bugger
on your hard disk! Comb through pages
of the most opaque prose! Feel the old
blood pressure rise as you earn a
Masters in Literary Deconstruction (and
that's just from reading the table of contents!).
Newly released by Kafkaware, designed

save without an obscure keyword sequence found somewhere in the
hieroglyphic circumlocutions located on
that double-sided sheet of non-repro
paper.
Perhaps the most challenging variant is
Level Two: Document Check. "What is
the fourth word on the seventh line on
the nametag of the left-handed sailor in
turret B of the Bismarck on page 42?"
(Hint: it doesn't matter! The program
contains the wrong keyword anyway!)

by Sid Meagre, with assistance from
Chris Crawfish and Joseph Heller,
Doc-U-Quest simulates the herculean challenge
all computer gamers must eventually confront: reading the blasted rulebook. Five
levels of difficulty, combined with a
devilish tutorial, bring the player into the
existential labyrinth of state-of-the-art
documentation.

Or try variant Four: "Is the little scribbly
face smiling or frowning?" Or "Try to
fight the Battle of Normandy when none
of your units will go where you tell them
to. Find the mystery command that passes orders to your units by means of trial
and error." (The designers just consider it
"fog of war," nya-ha-ha!)

Game mechanics are simple: up to four
human players attempt to play a computer game by actually following the instructions! There are five scenarios: From
One: Try to install this on your hard disk
without blowing it up! through Five: 200
hours invested in Advanced Level play —
but it's 3:47 AM and the program won't

Loaded with fun and techno-thrills,
Doc-U-Quest is available for the Macintosh
Ilex, Amiga 3000 with CD-ROM, IBM 486
compatible systems (math co-processor
required) and Nintendo 8-bit. One set of
docs covers all four. Requires 20
megabytes of memory, the patience of
Job and wisdom of Solomon.

Behind the Screens

Nothin' "Do pey" About Willy
Dynamix Strives to Improve Computer Game Animation

W

hether a person is fourteen or
forty years old, chances are that
he or she was privileged enough
to see Walt Disney's classic Snow White
and the Seven Dwarfs during one of its
many theatrical releases. Some may
even have seen one of the many Disneyland television specials that provided
a retrospective on the production of the
classic film. Not only was that groundbreaking film so important to Disney as
an entertainment company that the
present "Team Disney" building has
sculptures of the dwarfs "holding up the
roof," but "Dopey Drive" is one of the
main thoroughfares at the film studio.
Why was this "cartoon" so successful?
Disney believed that one of the major ingredients in its success was the attention
to characterization in the personalities of
the dwarfs. While some may object that
the dwarfs were stereotypes rather than
characters, almost everyone would have
to admit that the Disney tradition of
animation emphasizes character (some-

times by caricaturing the very faces and
expressions of the voice talents they are

using), life-like action (particularly in the
violent scenes from Lady and the
Tramp and The Fox and the Hound
which showed the special talent of the
late, great Wolfgang Reithermann) and
atmospheric backgrounds developed in a
style to fit the story (e.g. the New Yorker
feel to Lady and the Tramp, the watercolor innocence of The Jungle Book and
the dark, forbidding colors found in
much of Sleeping Beauty and The Rescuers).
Now, Dynamix has assembled animation talents with experience as diverse as
Walt Disney's The Little Mermaid™,
Hanna-Barbera's Jonny Quest™ and
AKOMs The Simpsons™ to tell a heartwarming story of a rather ordinary boy
who becomes involved in an extraordinary (and cute) story. The Adventures
of Willy Beamish will advance the state
of interactive fiction through its rich and
detailed 3-D backgrounds, its smooth
and carefully crafted animation and its attention to the building blocks of good
storytelling (i.e. characterization). If the
writing turns out half as good as the
preliminary character studies featured on
these pages and animation tests we've
observed (See the "Do-It-Yourself Animation Test" to cut out and staple together
on p. 74), this product should have
tremendous inter-generational appeal.

Behind the Screens

Willy Beamish is surrounded with a cast
of characters varied enough to provide
Cheers scripts for a year (a mother of exaggerated yuppie temperament, a
neurotic dad who plays with Willy's toys,
a "deceased" grandfather who makes occasional ghostly visitations, two
stereotypical sisters and a potentially
romantic complication with the little girl
down the street).
In the story, his jumping frog has just
eaten all the competition and someone is
planning to blow up the city's entire
sewer system. Sounds like a good time
for Willy to "blow out of town," but knowing computer games, Willy's going to
have to find the heroic impulses within
and superhuman resources without
before anyone says "That's All, Folks!"
for this interactive cartoon.
Sierra will be officially unveiling The
Adventures of Willy Beamish at the
Summer Consumer Electronics Show in
June, but we are reproducing a screenshot and some of the preliminary artwork

so CGW readers can see that the game
will feature more than new computer
graphics techniques and a new set of
tools for making computer games. The
Adventures of Willy Beamish may well
be the benchmark in computer game
animation that Snow White was for
cinematic animation. It is too early to
evaluate the product, but it is certainly
not too early to commend the attention
to detail, studio approach and advance-

ments in scanning and programming
technology used therein.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Strategic Simulations'
Death Knights of Krynn

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.
peering into a crystal ball in the dead
of night has its drawbacks. For instance, one might see the face of a
dead man peering back and that is not a
sight calculated to bring you pleasant
dreams! Nightmares (equine and otherwise) are the more likely result. Especially if you're scoping out the land of Krynn.

Death Knights of Krynn is the followup, naturally enough, to Champions of
Krynn. It's pretty much standard "Gold
Box" fare: you can bring your characters
over from Champions or create new
ones; the emphasis is mostly on fighting
your way through the game; the plot is
essentially "Get Foozle The Evil Wizard"
and there is the obligatory final encounter with Foozle at the end.
In this case, Foozle happens to be Lord
Soth, a man (?) with definite necrophiliac
tendencies. Soth just loves undead, practi
cally undead anything. There's nothing
that he "digs" more than animating some
hapless corpse and sending it out to
wreak grave consequences on the world.
So, in case you hadn't guessed by now,
you'll be coming across a lot of undead
in this game, including a few types
you've never seen before, such as undead beasts (extremely nasty), undead
dragons, zombie mastodons, skeletal warriors, undead rocs and, of course, the
Death Knights of the title, along with the
more familiar specters, wights, ghasts,
wraiths and other delights you've become accustomed to in previous endeavors.
For variety, there are also a few regular
dragons, Sivaks, Kuo-Toa, fire lizards,

golems, nightmares, hellhounds and
human enemies wandering around, with
no other thought than to bring about
your early demise. Krynn is no place to
be looking for welcome mats.
It is important to read the monster
descriptions in the Adventurer's Journal
carefully, since some of these undead
cannot be turned by a cleric of any level;
there are some against which weapons
may be of only limited use and some
against which particular types of
weapons may be more effective.
Your party is composed (unless Lord
Soth manages to "decompose" it) of the
usual six characters, created from among
Humans, Elves, Dwarves, Half-Elves and
Kender, with the usual professions of
Fighter, Ranger, Knight, Mage, Cleric and
Thief. There is little use for thieves in this
game, except in one particular instance,
which we'll come to in due time.
If you're bringing characters over from

Champions, remember that the good
stuff, such as the dragonlance, gauntlets
of ogre power, belt of giant strength,
mace of disruption, etc., won't come with
them. However, don't despair. As you
progress in Death Knights, all these
goodies will turn up again, and this time,
you won't have to give them back at the
end.
Having created your party, or transferred characters over from Champions,
you begin the game proper in Gargath
Outpost, the local stronghold of the
Solamnic Knights. Celebrations are in
progress over your victories in the previous game (whether you played it or
not).
These celebrations are rudely interrupted by the appearance of Sir Karl,
riding a death dragon. This causes a bit
of consternation to all, as Sir Karl died
valiantly in Champions. Rather puts a

damper on all the fun, seeing a former
comrade as a quickened corpse working
for the other side.
After casting a few taunts in your direction and leaving behind equipment taken
from fallen Solamnic Knights, Sir Karl
flies off into the unfriendly skies and the
celebrations come to an end. Your party
is now free to wander about the outpost
and take on a few duties toward its
defense. It seems Sir Karl was not alone;
Gargath is under siege by the enemy.
Several encounters (including a meeting with the Dread Wolf, who will dog
your steps for awhile) later, the siege is
broken and you are now able to begin following the trail that leads to Lord Soth.
This is pretty well laid out and, as long
as you're careful, you won't have much
trouble finding your way to him.
Outside of the main path are several
other interesting places to visit, such as
Cerberus, Quazle, Cekos, Throtl and
Turef. Each of them has its own
problems with the dark forces, which you
can clear up if you feel so inclined. Typical for the "Gold Box" series, each town
not only has its collection of wandering
nasties, but there is also that one inevitable spot where the center of the
trouble is sure to be camped out. Fortunately (or unfortunately, depending on
your perspective), finding and killing the
ringleaders nearly always clears the town.
These generalities do not apply to Cerberus, however. The cleanup is a bit
more involved in this burgeoning
necropolis. While the town is infested
with undead, the real trouble spot is the
graveyard. As most of the undead in this
area are of the level-draining type, it is
best left for a time when your party is
not only of high level, but also has some
good armor. You may also want to drop
the difficulty level way down, just to get

OPINION
through this area quickly. Watching all
those hard-earned levels "pass away" at
a touch isn't much fun.
A word about Quazle: this Gnome town
I was never able to clear. I knew where
the trouble spot was; my party just could
never get through the door. Not with a
13th level mage casting Knock, nor a
13th level fighter equipped with a belt of
Cloud Giant strength bashing at the door.
The program seemed to ignore what we
were doing, as even after choosing the
"cast Knock" option, I found the spell to
still be in the character's memory. Very
frustrating. Fortunately, cleaning out
Quazle is not necessary to finishing the
game. If this happens to you, ignore it
and go on to other things.
When you reach the big fight with Lord
Soth and friends (several Death Knights
and a crew of iron golems), you must be
suitably prepared or your party will
"depart" in a very short time. All the
Death Knights, plus Lord Soth, are
capable of casting fireball spells of high
potency. They are also highly resistant to
spells themselves.
Do not use fire shields in this instance.

Maybe the fiends are simply conjuring
the fire straight from hell, but, simply put,
fire shields just don't work against their
fireballs. I found that out the hard way.
White mages should use Globe or Minor
Globe of Invulnerability. Clerics in the
party should cast Fire Resistance on
everyone else. Globes protect absolutely
against fire and the Fire Resistance spell
will reduce damage to survivable levels.
Cleric protection spells such as Bless,
Prayer and Protection From Evil are also
handy. A few lightning bolts to slow
down the golems doesn't hurt. Further,
by all means, try your own spells against
the Death Knights. Sometimes, their
magic resistance fails and one will get
through. Expect a tough fight.
Usually, this is where a "Gold Box"
game would more or less end. However,
there is more here than meets the eye. A
couple of special areas, previously hidden, now open up to you. These have
nothing to do with the game proper, but
serve as additions to the game which
give you something to do once the big
fight is over.
Trek up, way up, to the extreme

I

northwest corner of the map, and take
on Dave's Challenge. In some ways, this
is harder than the big one with Soth. Be
prepared for a lot of severe fighting. This
is the one place where having a thief to
detrap is useful. If you don't have one,
choose the person in the party with the
most hit points, let him suffer the
damage and heal him up later.
Don't overlook the Banshee pit, either.
That's where all the good stuff is located.
How much you get depends on how long
a selected character can last in that hell
hole. Some might be able to last a long
time. A protection from evil spell might
be useful here.
On your way back from this lovely
place, you'll probably hear about another
delectable spot and a mad Dwarf. This
one is practically a vacation after the
Challenge.
Also, during the game, make sure you
wander all over the countryside. There
are several little encounters, tucked away
here and there, that are not noted on the
map. By doing some thorough exploration, however, you should be able to "dig
them up."

OPINION
Death Knights advances the basic
mechanics of the "Gold Box" games by
improving the handling of spells. Generally, you tend to use the same spells most
of the time, and it gets annoying having
to rummage through the spell lists to
pick them over and over again for rememorization. In Death Knights, the program remembers what spells you had
and will re-memorize all of them for you,
without forcing you to go through the
spell lists. This makes life much easier.
Of course, you can certainly change the
spells at any time.
Speaking of magic, for those who are
not familiar with the world of Krynn, this
is an AD&D variant. While the game follows most of the rules of AD&D first edition, the magic system is somewhat different.
Mages are divided out into Red
(neutral), White (good) and Black (evil)
robes. Not all mages have access to the
same spells. Some, such as magic missile and fireball, are common to all
spellcasters. However, only White mages
can learn the Globe of Invulnerability
spells, while only Red ones can learn

Knock and Dimension Door. So it's best
to have at least one Red and one White
mage in your party.
You also need to keep an eye on the
rising and setting of the three moons
(red, black and white, naturally), as these
affect the saving throws, spell levels and
bonus spells for the different mages. It is
particularly useful to watch for when the
moons were full, so all of your mages
can memorize those extra spells (which
can be of any level).
Documentation is the usual good job, although — yet again! — the word lookups
are done in the paragraphs of the
"Adventurer's Journal." This is extremely
annoying, as it is almost impossible not
to read the entire paragraph once you
start looking through for the words. By
this time, we had really hoped for a better approach.
In general, there is a humdrum feel to
the game. We've been this way before
and play tends to have a mechanical
quality. There are no puzzles to speak of,
little scope for true role-playing and even
the side quests begin to look depressingly similar after awhile.

So, perhaps it's just as well that SSI is
now experimenting in new directions with
their Legends (Eye Of The Beholder)
line and the rumored Citadel of the
Black Sun product. Something is certain
ly needed to freshen up the AD&D series
which, like most entertainment product
lines which depend on sequels, has fallen
into a predictable rut. Death Knights
isn't a bad game; it's merely so much
like all the others that anyone who has
played them could almost play this one
in his or her sleep.
That's it for this peek into the crystal
ball. Remember, if you need help with an
adventure or CRPG game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail: (you must enclose a self-ad
dressed, stamped envelope if you live in
the United States) Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

Kilrathi Dreadnought: The Sivar
Named after the Kilrathi warrior god, this unusual warship was commanded by Admiral Thrakra, son of the Kilrathi Emperor. This was the
flagship of the strike fleet that attacked the Goddard Colony in Secret
Missions 1.
Length:
550 meters
Mass:
25,000 tonnes
Maximum Velocity: 200 kps
Cruise Velocity:
150 kps
Maximum Yaw:
1 dps
Maximum Pitch:
1 dps
Maximum Roll:
1 dps
Ship's Weapons:
Turreted Lasers (6), Image Recognition Missiles
(quantity unknown).
Ship's Armor:
Fore Shield: 27 cm equivalent; Aft Shield: 17 cm
equivalent; Front: 28 cm; Right: 26 cm; Left: 26 cm;
Rear: 14 cm.

There's a Saga
of the
by Alan Emrich

As the World Burns
TITLE:

The Secret Missions and

The Secret Missions 2: Crusade
From any point during
SYSTEM:
IBM
operations in the Vega sysPRICE:
$29.95 each
tem, the player's character
COPY PROTECT: Document check
DESIGNERS:
Aaron
Allston, Steve Cantrell,
may be called upon to parEllen Guon and John Watson
ticipate in The Secret MisOrigin
PUBLISHER:
Austin, TX
sions. Essentially, no news
is bad news when communications ceased from the Goddard colony. The root of this little snafu with the 250,000 Terran colonists there is that the Kilrathi have developed a "Death Star"-like planet-busting weapon
and were "just testing it out" at Goddard. Stealthily following the
Kilrathi strike force back into their own space, the Tiger's Claw
must sneak up on the enemy fleet, cut through it and destroy
the new Kilrathi "ultimate weapon." This, the crew bemoans (and
the player soon discovers), is just short of a suicide mission.

Little New Under the Suns
Unfortunately, the basic Wing Commander game system was
not modified by the addition of this supplement. While still delightful, all a player really gets is MOTS (More Of The Same). Still,
the missions are considerably harder (read: the odds, in terms of

ll

good things must come to an end, but putting that end
off as long as possible is certainly the way to go. To that
end, players of Origin ' s highly popular Wing Commander (rated #1 on our Top 100 Games Chart) will want to investigate the two "Secret Mission" disks currently available.
Prolonging one's tour of duty on the intrepid Tiger's Claw in the
Wing Commander universe, players can generate new characters to face the challenges these missions pose or take their
heroes out of the original game's Vega system and have them
face these daring challenges.

A

Don't Dream It, Be It
Here lies one of the greatest virtues of Wing Commander: the
music and graphics aside (and they are both cutting-edge), this
would be just another space arcade shoot-'em-up were it not for
the engrossing cinematic storyline and strong protagonists with
whom to empathize. Whether through brilliant foresight or dumb
luck (inside sources suggest the latter), Origin has hit the lottery
with the impassioned characterizations in Wing Commander.
The likes of "by the book" Angel, "cold as freon" Iceman, "one
with karma" Spirit, "wild man" Hunter and the rest of crew add a
personal role-playing element to the game that can best be explained by the phenomenon of players so strongly identifying
with their characters that they almost "become" the role they
play.
Therefore, not only does a player get more heart-pounding, joystick-breaking arcade brushes with simulated slaughter in space in
Secret Missions, but one also finds out about the continuing ordeals of the Tiger's Claw, its vaunted and much beloved crew
and the ever shifting fate of the Terran-Kilrathi war. Whatever it is
that keeps people tuning into soap operas and walking into
video arcades, these two supplements deliver plenty of both.

Kilrathi Star Post
Designed to be used as a refueling station, fighter base or a field command post, this starbase design is found exclusively in Kilrathi space,
most recently in the Vega sector campaign and during Operation Thor's
Hammer (Secret Missions 1). Lightly armed and armored (for a starbase), these Star Posts are vulnerable to major attacks.
Length:
550 meters
Mass:
40,000 tonnes
Maximum Velocity: Stationary
Ship's Weapons:
Turreted Lasers (4), Friend or Foe Missiles
(quantity unknown).
Ship's Armor:
Fore Shield: 20 cm equivalent; Aft Shield: 20 cm
equivalent; Front: 18 cm; Right: 18 cm; Left: 18 cm
Rear: 18 cm.

Review

Born Every Minute
Commander

Secret Missions

and Mike Weksler
sheer numbers, are stacked more heavily in the Kilrathi's favor)
and, at least, one particularly innovative encounter with a Terran
"ghost ship" (and a zillion hostile Rapiers) lends an air of excitement to the mounting climax in store for a player during the final
flight into glory.
Those final missions involve disrupting Kilrathi supply lines in
order to slow the departure of the dreaded Sivar-class dreadnought (which harbors the insidious planet-busting beam stitched
within the alloyed sinews of its bulbous catgut). Naturally, the
climax requires one to cut through wave after massive wave of
Kilrathi defenders and pound relentlessly on this enemy battleship until it exclaims those famous Kilrathi words of defiance,
"My offspring will avenge me!" (Well, it beats screeching, "You
sank my Battleship!")

it might be hard to notice (since everything is relative), the
Al for player's wingmen is also improved. One must watch
carefully in the heat of battle to really see this new element, but it is there. In effect, the challenge of playing is
greater, yet the odds of winning are slightly better due to
the decreased numbers of enemy fighters at each encounter.

Kilrathi Carrier: The Snakeir
Several of these carriers were sighted in the Firekka System during the
Kilrathi "Sivar-Eshrad" during the Secret Missions 2: Crusade.
Length:
650 meters
Mass:
30,000 tonnes
Maximum Velocity: 150 kps
Cruise Velocity:
100 kps
Maximum Yaw:
1 dps
Maximum Pitch:
1 dps
Maximum Roll:
1 dps
Ship's Weapons:
Turreted Lasers (6), Image Recognition Missiles
(quantity unknown).
Ship's Armor:
Fore Shield: 37 cm equivalent; Aft Shield: 37 cm
equivalent; Front: 28 cm; Right: 36 cm; Left: 36 cm;
Rear: 24 cm.

Interestingly, in spite of playing The Secret Missions straight
through to victory, these reviewers did encounter the eight-man
Terran Confederation fighters promised on the back of the game
box, but didn't even notice that they were different from any
other Terran capital ship needing escort. Oh, there were upgunned and better protected enemy fighters to face, to be sure,
but nothing new for the Terrans.

Holy Crusades, Catman!
After completing operations in the Venice sector of Wing Commander (or the Vigrid sector of Secret Missions), the player
may transfer his heroic persona to the perils which await in the
Firekka system, Antares sector. While the Terrans have been cultivating this backwater "nowhere" region of space in order to
gain an alliance with the sentient avians (or "bird people"), the
Kilrathi have noticed and taken the ultimate offense.
Unlike the gameplay in Secret Missions, the second offering
has improved Al (with an entirely new executable program).
Thus, the Kilrathi strength no longer relies strictly upon the traditional computer game fallback of sheer numbers, but now incorporates varied and improved tactics among their pilots. The Kilrathi Imperial Guard (the "Drakhai") await at virtually every turn
to menace players with a special vengeance. Fortunately, though

Kilrathi Fighter: The Dralthi Mark II
An improved version of the Dralthi fighter, this ship was captured and
flown by human pilots in the Antares Sector in Secret Missions 2:
Crusade. (This fighter is visually identical to the Mark I Dralthi pictured in
the Joan's Fighting Spacecraft supplement of Claw Marks.)
Length:
Mass:
Maximum Velocity:
Cruise Velocity:
Maximum Yaw:
Maximum Pitch:
Maximum Roll:
Ship's Weapons:

28 meters
14 tonnes
400 kps
230 kps
10 dps
14 dps
10 dps
Mass Driver Cannon (2), Heat-Seeking Missiles (3),
Dumb-Fire Missiles (2)
Ship's Armor: Fore Shield: 6 cm equivalent; Aft Shield: 5 cm
equivalent; Front: 7.5 cm; Right: 5.5 cm; Left:
5.5 cm; Rear: 7 cm.

It is also important to note that while Secret Missions 2 was
being designed, the storyline for Wing Commander II was also
being developed. Thus, the characters were written in such a way
as to connect them between the two Wing Commander games.
Prescient players will see foreshadowing in the discovery of the
alien race known as the "double helix" in Wing Commander and
the derring-do of Maniac. Prince Thrakhath of the Kilrathi (the
Emperor's grandson) becomes an important character in the
story ahead (is he so reasonable that one could actually
negotiate with him?), as does the ever-competent Jeannette
Devereaux (Angel)... but we digress.
It is the player's march to glory in the Firekka system which
will determine the fate of these avian allies. En route, the player
will encounter two new wingman to fly with (the charming Jazz
and a character named Doomsday who is the human equivalent
of Marvin the Paranoid Android) and pilot a souped-up, captured
enemy Dralthi in "undercover" assignments. These latter fighters
are most interesting, as one gets to read a bit of Kilrathi writing
on the instrumentation and tries to get a feel for cat-ergonomics.
In the end, though, the odds are too long for the Tiger's Claw to
overcome this devastating armada comprising the entire Kilrathi
fleet (pulled into the sector to take part in a military/religious
ceremony). So, the trick is to support the guerrilla efforts of the

Review

mission in any system found in the original Wing Commander.
This is displayed as a map full of circles connected by solid lines
(for success in a given system) and dashed lines (indicating the
path of failure). Players can tell at a glance that the storyline has
a built-in tolerance for failure within the various systems, allowing
the player to get "back on track" and still win in the end.
In contrast, however, lie the paths to success in the two Secret
Missions. Completely linear, there is no getting back on track
after virtually any failed mission. This means there will be a lot of
replaying certain difficult missions as players struggle through
the inflexible plot line. Some of the more challenging missions
might take a dozen or more joystick-strangling, frustration-packed attempts before a player successfully clears all the hurdles.
Still, if one is to see the cinematic victory screens, one can never
miss a beat in terms of Nav Points and Capital Ships (the criteria
for all successful missions).

Narrowing the Odds
Here are a few useful tactics, tips and techniques for those
struggling with increased difficulties presented in the two Secret
Missions supplements. Against greater odds, straight-on shootouts are not as viable as they used to be. A bit of strategy is
needed....
Keep formation! This tactic is used to preserve a wingman's
heavy-duty firepower for later encounters when it is needed the
most. When told to attack, the first thing wingmen tend to do is
squirt off their missiles at the earliest opportunity. To preserve
those missiles for use against enemy capital ships, keep the
wingmen in formation and never let them loose. Husband their
precious missiles for the most hazardous parts of the mission.

Firekka by distracting the Kilrathi as long as possible. In any
case, while fleeing, one begins to get the idea that Maniac is
definitely slipping big time.

Born-Again Wingmen
At the commencement of either Secret Mission game, all the
available wingmen are assumed to have survived any previous
funeral ceremonies. Thus, even if the player has managed to kill
off half the crew of the Tiger's Claw, they will all be back in the
bar, relaxing in their own idiom. One crew member, however,
dies rather tragically "off-screen" in Secret Mission 2, perhaps
an important plot device for the next game in the Wing Commander series. On a slightly more frustrating note, several
players have complained that in Secret Missions 2 fellow pilots
have been dying — unannounced — "off-screen." In fact, both of
these reviewers experienced this bug when it killed off Hunter
and Angel during their respective tours of duty (Perhaps they
were "bitten by the bug?"). The result of this fatal case of "cat
scratch fever" was that both "heroes" were forced to fly solo
through several harrowing missions. (Perhaps this is why one of
their characters managed to win the Terran Medal of Honor upon
completion of the campaign!)
Players should note that they do not have to transfer veteran
characters to these Secret Missions in order to succeed at them.
Fresh-faced Second Lieutenants are just as likely to triumph as
veteran Lieutenant Colonels. Rank has its privileges, but not
when campaigning in Wing Commander's Secret Missions.

Narrowing the Plot Lines
One discovery made by players in either Secret Mission package is the "Mission Selector" which allows players to replay any

Review

Kilrathi Experimental Fighter: The Hhriss
The newest in Kilrathi spacecraft technology, the Hhriss combines strong
firepower with a heavy layer of an experimental lightweight alloy armor.
This fighter was first encountered in the Antares Sector in Secret Mis-

sions 2: Crusade.
Length:
Mass:
Maximum Velocity:
Cruise Velocity:
Maximum Yaw:
Maximum Pitch:
Maximum Roll:
Ship's Weapons:
Ship's Armor:

28 meters
22 tonnes
380 kps
300 kps
12 dps
10 dps
15 dps
Mass Driver Cannon (2), Neutron Guns (2), HeatSeeking Missile (1), Image Recognition Missile (1).
Fore Shield: 15 cm equivalent; Aft Shield: 18 cm
equivalent; Front: 18 cm; Right: 17 cm; Left: 17 cm;
Rear: 14 cm.

Attack my target! This tactic is like hurling the ultimate
"smart" weapon at a single enemy ship. If one must destroy a
large enemy vessel, acquire it on the tracking computer (locking
it up is not necessary) and order the wingman to "Attack my target." The wingman will continue to attack that target, unwaveringly, until either it is destroyed or he is forced to break off due to
damage. It is important to note that even should the player later
acquire another target, the wingman will continue to attack the
one which he was ordered to destroy and will not change targets.
Protecting one's wingman, at this point, is crucial to his survival.
Thus, it is a good idea to unleash this tactic only after enemy
fighter cover has been thinned out.

Lock on for relentless pursuit. Except when defending a capital ship, an important object is usually to destroy enemy fighters.
Thus, softening ("reddening") one up so that it can run away to
recharge its shields and come back is a bad tactic. Instead, once
a good hit is scored on an enemy fighter, lock onto it and never
let it go until it's destroyed. Pit bulls get the job done against cats
(almost) every time.
Thrust past 'er. Enemy heavy fighters with strong guns will
usually kill a pilot who attacks head on. The advice is: Don't do
that! If one is approaching head on, aim slightly to one side of
the oncoming pack, keeping them on the edge of the front
screen display and kick on the afterburners. Once past, get behind one, hit it hard, lock it up and do the "dance of death" with
him. Even the smartest enemy has problems with deflection
shots at combined speeds around 1,500 kilometers per second,
so use that to advantage.
Minefields at warp speed. The worst thing about traversing
minefields is painstakingly dodging the mines floating in them.
To relive the anguish and reduce the chances of mistakenly
flying into them in multiples, one should simply haul jets. Aim for
the Nav Point and punch the afterburners. Oh, one might hit, but
seldom more than that, and often that hit is on the back shield
with no damage to the armor. Why risk more?

Joan's Fighting Spacecraft Supplement
In the best traditions of Claw Marks, the facts and figures for
some of the new ships and fighters found in the two Secret Missions supplements are presented in this article.

Technical Notes

The Circuit Writer
The Frustrations of a New Technology
By Steve Witzel

F

or the last several months, I have

been accumulating a collection of
CD-ROM programs, always looking
forward to seeing the latest technology. It
was particularly exciting to see the entire
repository of Sherlock Holmes literature
contained on one ROM. I jumped for this
one, as a lot of my youth was spent reading (and watching) Mr. Holmes. As soon
as the ROM came in, I took it to the office to look at it (not having a player of
my own — more on this later). It was
great to have the entire text available at
my beck and call. The ability to search
for this character or that character was
great... for a while.
Unfortunately, reading chapter after
chapter from the VGA monitor gets
tedious, however. No longer could I lay
on the couch, eat an ice cream cone or
sit outside by the stream and read. I was
stuck in front of the monitor. After about
three hours of Holmes and Watson, the
CD-ROM was carefully removed from the
drive and placed into its little jewel case —
never to be opened again.
Still drawn to this new technology, a PCUser Group public domain disk was in
order. This disk contains more public
domain software than a sane person
could possibly use. There are great
utilities that I never use. After looking at

scores of this and dozens of that, playing
with this one and testing out that one,
the disk went on the shelf (in the
bedroom closet — to protect it from my
preschoolers). I decided that, since I've
never used much in the way of PD
software anyway, having a lot of it at my
fingertips was no advantage!
Now, for the frustrating part. My collection now includes two encyclopedias, the
New York Library Reference Collection, a
world atlas, IBM's wonderful Mammals encyclopedia and game collections from
several different companies. All this, and
I still don't have a CD-ROM player for
my computer! For the last seven months,
after looking for the perfect player
through catalog after catalog, I've discovered that the perfect player doesn't
exist. In my office, I have a first-generation player that was picked up at a bargain price. My favorite dealer has tried to
make it work with about a dozen different interface cards, but still no luck.
The search for a new player is still on,
but narrowing. The CDR 1000 from
Tandy should be shipping by the time
this column hits the press. Retailing for
under $400, it just might end the search.
This coming year should be a great one
for CD-ROM software. Currently, there
are several disks that contain compilations of existing programs. This has a
major benefit in that many disk-based
games take two to five megabytes of precious hard drive space. Booting the
programs from the CD-ROM means that
the valuable disk space will not be lost.
If, perchance, the hard drive should be
needed for a particular game to run
faster, it is much easier to load the
software from one CD than from eight
floppies. It can, then, be deleted when
one is finished using it because it is so
easy to install and will not be such an inconvenience should you decide to re-install it. In addition to compilations of diskbased games, the software will fully take
advantage of the vast storage capability
(680MB) of the medium. Programs with
stereo sound tracks will become the
norm, rather than the exception. VGA
graphics will become much more abundant than conventional disk-based
storage has allowed. I have hopes that

scenarios will become smoother and
games will become much more interactive since there is much more room on
the ROM to flesh out both the central
storyline and alternate branches of the
story.
In fact, the CD-ROM has more potential
to impact computer users than the hard
disk did. Can any computer game player
imagine going back to computing
without a hard drive? I can't. Somewhere
out there someone is working on a new
type of program that could not have
been done without CD-ROM's vast
storage capability. When it is finally
released, I certainly will be one of the first
in line!

What to Look For in a CDROM
First, one must decide if the drive is to
be mounted internally or not. If an internal CD-ROM drive is desired, the computer must have an empty disk drive
slot. If not, an external drive might be the
solution.
External drives come in many different
sizes, from bulky units about half the size
of your computer to small units that convert to "Walkman"-type portable CD
music players.
First-time buyers need to make sure
they purchase a "kit" that includes an interface card and CD-ROM software
drivers. Don't get caught in the trap that
this writer did.
New CD-ROM buyers should look closely at "package deals" that include
software bundles with a full kit. Some of
these packages are too good to pass up.
It is also worthwhile to make sure that
the player has a headphone or audio-output jacks. Most players do, but there are
some older ones that don't.
The world of CD-ROM not only opens
the research possibilities manufacturers
have touted sell the units, but the expanded sound and visual capabilities portend a potentially richer and more satisfying gaming experience in the long run.
Gamers who wait too long may regret
missing the revolution.

Designer's Notes

The Graphics "Are" the Interface
Design Notes on Rules of Engagement
by Maurice Molyneaux

Maurice Molyneaux is co-designer and
art director of Rules of Engagement and
has served as computer graphic artist on
Omnitrend's Breach (Amiga version),
Paladin, Universe III and Breach 2. He has
previously published in the official Star
Trek: The Next Generation magazine series.
mnitrend Software has introduced a new and intriguing element
their latest title, Rules of Engagement. Not only can the game be played as
a "stand-alone" game of starship-to-starship
combat, but players can also simulate
boarding actions by using Breach 2. This article shares the design process that led to
the graphic design and interface design
merging in Rules of Engagement.

Delegate, Delegate,
Delegate
In Rules the gamer takes on the role of
Fleet Commander of Federated Worlds starships on a mission to some remote comer
of the Local Group. Although the Commander has an entire fleet at his disposal,
only the flagship is under his direct command. To control the other ships, he must
send orders to his subordinate captains,
each of which has a distinct personality
which determines his actions. Hence, the
Commander must consider who is commanding the ships, as well as the strengths
of the ships themselves, when assigning
them to various tasks.

Interface Problems
In all of the previous Omnitrend games illuminated by this artist's work, the graphics
have been primarily of the block/tile design,
to facilitate both game design and the requirements of the graphics displays (to
work in both EGA and VGA, for instance).
Rules of Engagement took a different tack.
Rather than displaying a "cockpit" or
"bridge" screen for the player, the idea was
to fill the game screen with simulated control panels, so the player would operate the
game as if seeing the actual controls of the
ship.
This turned out to be no small feat. When
getting down to it, the on-screen interfaces
of most games are not a major part of the
display. A set of controls or readouts
around a "window" or viewer is quite common, as are "hotspots" within a screen
which serve as controls. This game will be
different in that, since the player is to be
faced with the actual starship controls, the
entire screen would serve as interface!

Obviously, then, one cannot simply draw
flashy representations of control consoles,
complete with all kinds of metallic features
and blinking lights (such as one has seen
in numerous computer games before).
Given the advances in computer interfaces
in recent years, it would seem terribly silly
for a futuristic starship to be overrun with
1950s toggle switches, copious readouts,
levers, keypads and the like. In modern jet
fighter cockpits the trend is toward multifunction displays and a simplification of instrumentation. Furthermore, discussions
about man-machine interfaces have recently centered upon devices like control panels
in which the "buttons" would actually be
graphics on touch-sensitive screens. Even
today, one can find all-in-one remote controls with an LCD touch screen in place of

buttons. Touch the button for VCR, and the
display is remapped for VCR control, touch
Stereo, and the controls for one's audio system begin to function.

A "Real" Science-Fiction
Look
This thinking eventually resulted in the
concept of presenting the player with a multifunction display/interface on the starship;
no portholes and no screw-laden consoles,
just the ship's computer interface. On the
"real" ship the crew would have touch-sensitive displays. Since Omnitrend couldn't expect players of the game to have these,
they settled for using the mouse in place of
an actual hand for touching the controls.
In devising a workable interface, this designer almost inadvertently began to formulate
the "look" of the game. The sheer number
of controls meant that much of each panel
was made up of "buttons." This presented
the entirely different problem of making
each "button" look both uniform and distinctive at the same time. Toying with the idea
of making the controls detailed, with raised
buttons and such, was one thing, but
making the controls look more like 3-D objects and less like a computer display
tended to defeat the design goal of simulating a multifunction control display. To maintain this "feel," the graphics needed to look
almost stereotypically "computerish."

If the Shoe Fits
The decision to go this route was reinforced by the fact that these graphics had
to work not only using the limited 16-color
palette of EGA, but also under the stifling
limits of 4-color CGA. Areas of flat, bold
color seemed the only way to go. VGA was
simply out of the question because the
game required eight graphics buffers, and
going from 32K 16-color screens to 64K
256-color screens would have doubled the
graphic memory consumption and chewed
up most of the RAM the game would need.

Logical. Perfectly Logical....
The biggest challenge was assembling the
graphic elements so that a player could
easily understand the grouping of related
controls and displays, thus being able to follow the "flow" of control operations. The
primary solution to this was what this designer calls the "Inverse 'L' Bracket": a thick
horizontal bar set above a set of related controls and featuring a vertical "leg" which borders and defines the "height" of the group.

Designer's Notes

In essence, it's like grouping everything in
two-sided boxes. Admittedly, these 'L' brackets were inspired by similar elements on the
"companel" computer panels seen on TV's

Star Trek: The Next Generation (and
designed by Michael Okuda), but they were
used only because they work visually and
seemed to be the best solution to the problem of grouping controls. On a crowded
screen with limited resolution, every pixel
counts and only having to draw two sides
of a box instead of four made sense.
In addition to the "L" brackets, a way was
needed to link large numbers of items to
single buttons — for instance, linking a list
of ships to a "Probe" button. The solution
to this was sort of a stylized curly bracket
like one finds on a computer keyboard
("{}") on which the stem could be "moved"
vertically to attach the group within the
bracket to a selected item on the "stem"
end.
Even with all of this grouping it would be
difficult to tell a button from a label. Forcing users to try to differentiate a control
from a readout was not a good idea. Colorcoding the displays seemed the best solution, with active controls in specific colors
and all else using other hues. This designer
decided that the primary buttons would be
magenta because that color was easily

spotted even amidst a sea of garish pigments.

Colors That Are Right on
the Button
This turned out to be ineffective because
there are essentially two types of user-selectable buttons in the game (the "action" buttons and the "selection" buttons). An action
button actually does something like fire a
missile or call up a display. Conversely, a
selection button merely specifies which
item of several is the one to be carried out
or acted on, such as selecting which ship to

use from a list. To keep these controls distinct, the action buttons were kept magenta
and the selection buttons became bright
blue. Buttons that were "pressed" would
light up even brighter.
This color-coding scheme was carried to
other items. There are mini-panels that can
pop up over a primary display which are
much like the "alert boxes" used in windowing interfaces in that when the box is
present, one cannot do anything but what
the box controls allow (it usurps all control). The trouble was that parts of panels
changing is so common in the game that a
user would be hard pressed to know, when
a new set of controls popped up, if the new
controls were part of the current panel or
another "usurper." Color-coding saved the
day again. All usurper boxes are bordered
in yellow with a top bar in green. When a
usurper pops up, the colors make very
clear what it is. The color coding is used
less noticeably in four-color CGA, but it's
still there through use of dithering and so
forth.
The decision to use color-coding appears
to have been the right one. In watching
novices take to the controls in the game,
one notices they tend to have trouble until
the moment they realize that they can only
work with the magenta and blue buttons.

Designer's Notes

Once this concept is grasped, novices have
little trouble operating the interface.

Keys to Game's Undoing?
As the above problems were being solved,
another popped up: the need to make a
keyboard interface for mouseless PC
players. This was a major headache because the finished product would feature
dozens of screen display modes and literally hundreds of buttons. It was impossible
to assign individual keys to each control,
since there were easily six times as many
buttons in the game than a PC keyboard
has keys. Even if that problem were somehow eliminated, we could not possibly expect any person to memorize so many
keystrokes, nor force them to constantly
refer to a reference card in the heat of battle. What was required was to somehow indicate the keys right on the screen without
ruining the carefully designed look of the
panels.
The solution was to use one of the letters/characters on the button labels themselves as the keyboard equivalents, and indicate the keys by placing a small dash (overscore) above those characters. This put the
keystrokes right in front of the player's eyes
at all times and made the actual controls
more obvious than ever.

The Single Exception
The one and only place where the touchscreen ideal was put aside was for the selfdestruct controls. Since this was such a critical and dangerous function, something drastically different-looking was in order. This
designer's perception was that the destruct
controls would be hidden "under" the Tactical panel of the game. When accessed, part
of the touch display would slide open and
provide access to these controls, which
were rendered as hardware, complete with
all the flashy highlights, screws and such
that had been rejected for the game itself.

When the panel opens, one sees a small
warning screen, bits of exposed circuitry,
some buttons, and a handle.
The only trouble here was trying to figure
out how the user should operate the thing!
The interface thus far had been remarkably
consistent from place to place. Now, suddenly, the user was going to be faced with
(simulated) hardware and not a touch display. Pulling down the "Destruct" handle
was simple enough to figure out, if one had
a mouse. If not, how would he pull it? This
problem was overcome by having all of the
button tops in the destruct panel magenta
with overscored numbers, matching the
other buttons in the game. Then a "Pull"
tag was hung from the handle (also in
magenta with an overscored P) which
would act as the user's switch. Mouse users
would simply click on the tag, whereas keyboard users would just type the letter.

Epilogue
In most of electronic gaming the artist is
a mere illustrator, hired to create pictures
which will accompany the code. Such was
this artist/designer's experience prior to
this project, but Rules of Engagement was
a whole new ball game; one where the
artist's input was so integral to the game
that the design of the graphics actually dictated the user interface.

Scenario

The Care and Maintenance of
SimEarth Robots
by Allen Varney

They're on the way! Bzzzt-buzz-click-whirrrr....

O

rganic life-forms who enjoy SimEarth, the "planetary
spreadsheet" from Maxis, may already suspect the truth.
The Winter 1990-91 issue of the Maxis newsletter confirmed it, although it was carefully hidden in tiny print on the last
page. However, keen carbon-based visual sensors discerned the
news: "There's a secret, undocumented life-form in SimEarth...."
Who are these newcomers? Robots! Many players have found
these cybernetic guys during the final steps on SimEarth's
(r?)evolutionary scale. As a point of amusement, don't be left out
during the coming mechanized takeover!

The Nuts and Bolts for Making Robots
Raise a SimEarth civilization to Nanotech Age or just plant a
Nanotech city. Next, bomb the city with an Atomic Test. Pulverize it! After a brief time, the Nanotech crater should spawn a
crude robot on halftrack treads. (Presumably, it's a refugee from
the irradiated city.)
Check the robot's
characteristics with
the magnifying glass.
Note that while
robots can survive in
any habitat, they
must compete for
resources with other
life forms, so players
may want to help
them along by
making the world unbearable for other life
forms. Take the
planet and heat it,
freeze it, fill the air
with dust or send
plagues across the
land. The robots
don't care. Buzzwheep-wheepwh ee p ....

Code of the "Life" Maker
Somewhat like the robotic civilization described in James P.
Hogan's Code of the LifeMaker (who actually attained philosophical pursuits and a crisis of faith), the "tin cans" in SimEarth start
out dumb, but can evolve into civilized life-forms! The early
"tread" models have IQs on the order of home appliances. However, robots can evolve through sixteen stages, just like other lifeforms. On the Biosphere Model, pump up the Split Rate and
bring down the Mutation Rate. Soon the 'bots will develop better
treads, then actual wheels. By the time they achieve legs, they
should achieve sentience akin to really smart home appliances
or even computer game players. Note, though, that even if one's
robots develop a civilization, the less-intelligent halftrack models
still inhabit the wilderness, like lower life forms.
• The 'bots are viable in all habitats, including ocean shelf and
(sometimes) deep water. If you allow it, they expand to cover
every single square on every landmass, turning your world into
metallic wallpaper.
• In a world of robots, the Food line on the History window hits
the top of the chart and stays there, even if one kills off everything alive on the planet. Why? Because robots are, themselves,
food for other robots. In other words, they dismantle one another
for parts!
• Robots won't show up on any graph or window, except as a
spreading black blotch in the Map window's Life view. However,
one can blank out the robots from the screen by turning off the
Life Data Layer button in the Edit window, although the Biosphere Model Control Panel still affects robots.
• Robots are immune to plagues and other disasters that
would cripple feeble flesh (robots are stopped by them only for a
moment). 'Bots can salvage a world that is otherwise a dead
loss. Too bad players can't place them from the menu.

Scenario

• By the same token, one may soon ask, "How do I get rid of
these guys?" Since they're not listed on the life-form menu,
players can't use the Extinct Function on robots. One can
destroy them piecemeal, like cockroaches, but the disasters inflicted on them may disturb other life forms in the process. Keep
in mind, however, that robots don't much like deep ocean. So, in
an emergency, players can flood their entire world with ice
meteors.

Cybersillies
Generally, robots are a pretty boring bunch, but here are some
ideas of what to do with them:
1. Kill the planet but keep the 'bots. Boil the oceans and let
them spread out over the ocean floor. Another idea is to freeze
the planet and watch the ice cover them. They're still there, buzz
ing along under the ice (turn off the Biome button on the Edit
window to see them).
2. Make the 'bots sentient. A robot civilization, after the briefest
interval of Stone Age culture, jumps right up to the Industrial
Age. (Which makes sense, right?). Check out the "travelling
population" icon. In the Civilization Model, one might be tempted
to cut out agriculture; what is food to a robot, after all? Unfortunately, the program treats a robotic civilization like any other;
when the agriculture is turned off, the 'bots starve like anyone
else.
3. Send the 'bots thataway. A robotic civilization achieves Exodus as easily as any other, perhaps more so. But you'll note
one difference: a robotic Exodus takes forever! While your first
fleet of robotic Nanotech cities is lifting off, more appear. The
cities keep appearing and flying upward, dozens of them. It may
take ten minutes to get rid of them all, especially on slow
machines. (When the world they leave behind becomes a nature
preserve, the preserve includes the non-sentient robots left behind.)
Why do robots Exodus in such numbers? Star Trek fans might
know, but the rest of us can only speculate about what existing
galactic civilizations must think when the nanorobots fly into
their sector of space. "Servants at last?" or perhaps, "Oh, please,
not again?"
For that matter, what are the robots themselves thinking? Let's
hope it's not "Exterminate! Exterminate!" Bzzt-crackle-beep....

Reader Input Device

Foreign Correspondence

T

Over There
"Floor 13... Going Up!"
by Paul Rigby

he

latest game from Virgin
Mastertronic (and coded by the
PSI Software that produced the
budget strategy game Conflict) is Floor
13, a strategy simulation in which the
player takes the role of Director General
of a secret police force. The purpose of
this covert organization is, like any secret
police force, to keep the government of
the day in power and it achieves this by
finding and removing any threat to it. As
the Director General, the player is allpowerful (i.e. able to tap phones, deploy
surveillance teams, search premises, infiltrate groups, smear, abduct, interrogate
and assassinate suspects), coping with
several plots at once. A plot is comprised
of a series of events which can be followed through newspaper reports, meetings, phone calls between people, passing objects between people and movement from place to place. Floor 13 will
be available in the fourth quarter of 1991
for the IBM, ST and Amiga.
Coming on two disks (a program disk
and a data disk) with a small(?) 78-page
manual is Thalion's attempt at an air
traffic control simulator. Though Thalion
promises that data disks are on the way,
no extra disks are available at present.
FRA presents a menu of name slots for
the player to complete (eight flight controllers can be entered). Difficulty level increases with wage level chosen. FRA
provides ten difficulty levels, the more difficult levels including bad weather zones,
emergency cases and even hijackings!
The player will also be required to play
longer to successfully complete each succeeding level (5 to 25 minutes).
There are four German airports on the
data disk. Play can be started at any of
four stations: the grand scale (covering
the airport and its surrounding areas),
the tower, departure or approach. The
radar screen in FRA is so large that only
a portion can be seen at one time.
Moving the mouse to the extremities of
the screen will flip the screen to the ends
of the display plus any other information
such as the control-strips illustrating what
aircraft are in the area plus their information (height, speed, etc).
Orders can be given by clicking on the
iconic representation of the aircraft on
the radar or on the control-strip. A box
pops up with all of the aircraft's information, along with options to order alterations in height, speed and so on. After
this, a click on the "OK" gadget closes
the box and a synthesized voice (the
player's, supposedly) relays these orders
to the aircraft concerned. FRA is available now on the Amiga; check for prices.

Foreign Correspondence

Everybody wants to rule the world —
fair enough, but how about controlling
everything including evolution itself?
Mirrorsoft's new game,
Mega-Lo-Maniacs lets the player do just that. The
upshot is that cavemen could end up
flying Spitfires while Roman centurions
compete using nuclear weapons!
Backing up the graphics is over 1 Meg
(on the Amiga) of digitized speech
recorded by Richard Joseph — one of the
foremost computer technicians in the
business. Mirrorsoft indicates that MLM
should be an impressive challenge as
one fights the forces of nature, plus three
computer opponents, with alliances and
treaties, etc. MLM should be available
now on Amiga and ST.
Alcatraz is Infogrames' semi-sequel to
Hostages (in the U.S., Hostage Rescue
Mission from Mindscape). It tells the
tale of a crack special forces group
going in to bust drug kingpin Miguel Tardiez. He is holed up in Alcatraz of all
places, so the boys in black have to undergo a six-stage, multi-style infiltration
mission. One innovation is Alcatraz' "interactive" sound effects (i.e. the more

noise players make during the stealth portions, the harder the game becomes).
Millennium 2.2, a space empire game
published a while back, posed the task of
avoiding mankind's extinction while working from a moonbase workstation. Now
Activision has produced a sequel. In
Deuteros, a thousand years have passed.
Was there ever a moonbase? Did man
once span the system or is it a myth?
Legend has it that Earth City was a mere
colony reinstated on the Earth after
some catastrophe killed the planet. Now,
after years of training and research,
Earth City can solve the riddle. A
monumental community effort will be
needed to organize this space quest, not
only to locate the moon base, but also to
find and mine the exotic minerals that
will fuel the conquest of the galaxy.
In Deuteros, players will need to "train"
their characters to build, research and fly
the craft from Earth (each holds a skill).
As knowledge becomes available to the
player, so does the ability to roam the
solar system at will. Ensuring that each
orbital factory has the right personnel
and is following the right instructions in

correlation with the right machines will
be the player's first challenge. Few plot
details are initially given in Deuteros,
making the game a challenging voyage
of discovery, complete with plenty of plot
twists. Available now on the Amiga with
PC and ST to follow.
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11 2DD
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80
Fax: 01144-543-466-579
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ.
Telephone: 01144-268-590-766
Fax: 01144-268-590-076
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble contact the international operator.

Taking a Peek

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 8)

a league with Lemmings. Oh, sure, there
is climbing, web-spinning and all kinds of
acrobatics like that, but with Spidey's
wife Mary Jane kidnapped by Mysterio,
it's more than a test of wills. IBM
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
TROIKA: This package contains three
of those now-famous compulsive/addictive games from the culture that brought
us Tetris. These three arcade/strategy
games (with fine graphics and sound support) are remotely linked by a science fiction storyline of galactic exploration and
conquest (yeah, sure) but retain the high
standards set by both Tetris and Welltris.
The three games include Ivan, Metal
Hearts and Rebel, each of which is as
hard to stop as Rasputin was. IBM
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #11.

Potomac Computer Systems
10406 Holbrook Drive
Potomac, MD 20854
ZZT—THE OBJECT ORIENTED GAME:
Billed as the first major computer game
to use object-oriented programming, this
pleasant piece of shareware it truly
charming. A simple to learn quest game
with a bit of arcade reflex required,
strategy and puzzle solving are the real
keys to the "keys" required for success.
Playable in four or sixteen color (or
monochrome), ZZT not only boasts an
easy, yet challenging game, but also a
construction set! IBM ($14.95, including
shipping). Circle Reader Service # 12.

Sierra
Coarsegold, CA
SPACE QUEST IV: ROGER WILCO
AND THE TIME RIPPERS: The status line
reads "Space Quest XII," but Roger Wilco
is definitely in the right time continuum
in this sequel to his award-winning space
romps. This latest epic is resplendent
with over 100 hand-painted and digitized
256 color VGA screens. The sound board
support is superb with over one
megabyte of music and sounds. With
surprising animations, unbridled humor,
and an intense introduction sequence,
Space Quest IV rivals anything that Sierra has produced thus far. After the introduction, Roger is thrown through time,
into the world of Space Quest VII, with
the Sequel Police on his heels bent on
making this the last adventure for our
hero. Will they succeed? IBM ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.

Abstracts From The Journal of
Computer Game Design
(Continued from page 38)

Synthetic Creations
by Chris Crawford (Balance of the
Planet and The Global Dilemma: Guns
& Butter)
Crawford shared an idea for creating
synthetic languages with seeming
coherence. Observing that computer
scientists had tried to create a synthetic
Shakespeare by creating frequency
tables based on how many times letters
and letter combinations occurred in the
entire Shakespearean corpus (i.e. "e" occurred x% of the time, "er occurred y%,
etc.), Crawford hired a typist to input a
huge index from a scholarly book about
Central Asia. Then, he created a similar
frequency table for Mongol and Turkish
names from that index. He wrote a Pascal program of 150 lines to spew out
names from the frequency table and
generated phony (or perhaps, we should
say "phoneme") names like: Kabinongot,
Yushin, Kamangri, Bakirksh,
Ogalymamus, Malda, etc. They may not
be actual words/names, but they are all
pronounceable and they have a coherency not always found in literature and
game universes. Chris observed that the
technique might even be protracted to include two-dimensional frequency tables
for certain types of images (maps, for example). The article was remarkable for
demonstrating an additional tool for
world-building.

Chris Crawford's First Computer Game
by Chris Crawford
In one article, Crawford reminisced
about his first computer game design. It
was a tactical armored game, written in
FORTRAN. He obviously didn't sell any
copies, since there weren't too many IBM

1130 machines in the basements of wargamers. Nevertheless, the machine had
16K of RAM and Crawford input and
received data on a Selectric
teletypewriter.
Crawford took a set of maps from the

Avalon Hill boardgame, Panzer Leader
and some lead miniatures of tanks. He
placed the maps and miniatures next to
the computer. Then, the computer would
print out coordinates of events and Crawford would move the tanks around the
map to reflect the changes dictated by
the computer referee.
The game featured a data structure in
RAM so that the program could figure its
way through a hexgrid map. The program used a primitive fog of war to figure line of sight and let players know
what they could see or not see. There
were no graphics or sounds, simply the
algorithms for determining events and
providing an artificial opponent.
Crawford readily admitted that the Al
was not very good. He compensated (as,
alas, many designers still do) by giving
the computer opponent a 2:1 numerical
superiority.
The game's programming was initiated
in May 1976 and was actually running in
September of the same year. In December of 1976, Crawford set up a wargame
convention at the community college in
Nebraska where he was teaching
physics. He unveiled the game for thirty
of the attendees during that convention
and watched delightedly as his program,
Wargy I defeated several of the experienced gamers.
Long-time garners will recognize many
of the elements in Wargy I that became
Tanktics, a computer-assisted
boardgame, from Avalon Hill Microcom-

puter Games.

Conversions Received
Gunboat (Accolade) Amiga
Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight
Trainer 2.0 (Electronic Arts) Amiga
Bill Elliott's NASCAR Challenge

(Konami) Nintendo
Awesome (Psygnosis) Atari ST

Lemmings (Psygnosis) Atari ST
King's Quest I (Sierra) Amiga
Mixed-Up Mother Goose (Sierra)

MS-DOS CD ROM
Quest for Glory II (Sierra) Amiga
Space Quest III (Sierra) Macintosh
Stellar 7

(Sierra) Amiga

Editorial

The Memo, the Movies
and Computer Games

T

he State of the Industry: Walt Dis-

ney Chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg
wrote a memo earlier this year that apparently shook the foundations of every
production office in Hollywood. The Memo,
as it was referred to by entertainment industry insiders, created an epicenter of concern that radiated outward from his own
studio into the film community at large.
The document itself was apparently 28
pages of common-sense observations on
the film-making business.
As long-time observers of "The New Hollywood," the entertainment software industry, we could not help but notice some
further parallels between the two types of
studios. Katzenberg's most important points
were rather obvious, centering on the necessity of a script. He allegedly stated in one
portion that stars, directors, writers,
hardware, special effects, etc. had to be subservient to the script. At another point, he is
reputed to have said, "Scripts are it."
One cannot help but reflect on how many
times computer games are marketed as
having "better graphics," "better sound"
and new technologically advanced features,
but lack either story or plausibility. How
many times have computer garners purchased software that was developed strictly
because the publisher managed to get this
"great license" or the developer discovered
he could do "this neat stuff?"
It may seem to belabor the obvious, but
the computer games that really make the
difference are games that are built around a
focused idea. The game play, the simulation model, the play balance and/or the
story should all pull the interface, graphics,
soundtrack, documentation and even the
packaging/marketing together. To quote
"The Memo," "Scripts are it." The ideas
and research that lead players into that
blessed state of "suspended disbelief' are
the scripts of our business. Without those
elements, computer games have no soul
and, ultimately, no appeal.
Another fascinating parallel between our
industry and "Hollyweird" can be seen in
Katzenberg's admonition not to try to
squeeze the last dollar out of every deal. He
states that it is more costly in the long run
to drive a hard bargain. Frankly, the corn
puter game industry is full of talented
people who will not work for one company
or another again because they feel like they
were cheated or abused in a business
relationship. Then those very same artists
went to another publisher or started their
own company and produced megahits immediately thereafter. Is this symptomatic of
our industry's "fear of stardom?" Are we

afraid the designers are going to take our
companies away from us?
Of course, Katzenberg also told his executives not to be afraid to put a project in
"turnaround" (that creative limbo where a
script and/or package is being optioned to
other studios or put on hold) for fear that
someone else would make a successful film
out of it. He recognized that certain projects
require certain collaborations before they
can work that box office magic. "Turnaround" does not usually occur in our industry. We are too afraid of losing our
proprietary secrets and blunting our technological edge. Interestingly enough, however, many of the most successful small
publishers of entertainment software are actively swapping technology and personnel.
Their products are looking better all the
time and the larger producers may have to
either watch out for stronger competition or
pony up the funds to acquire them. Still, it
would be interesting to see what "dead"
projects at one publisher might look like if
they were picked up by another.
Finally, Katzenberg talked about packaging creative teams together, giving them
guidelines and letting them go. Every publisher in the software industry pays lip service to the idea of a creative team, but
there is a burgeoning bureaucracy at the
larger publishers that can completely stifle
the creative impulses if it is not reined in by
executives taking the risks of listening to
and acting upon the concerns and ideas of
the creative community.
State of the Magazine: "The Memo"
points out some of the dangers to be
avoided in a creative industry. Indeed, "creative industry" is almost oxymoronic. It is difficult to be creative and stay in business.
Yet, in entertainment industries above all
others, it is necessary to be both an artist
and a businessperson.
This issue, CGW takes you "Behind The
Screens." We show you some of the artistic
quest behind Sierra's Adventures of Willy
Beamish and Omnitrend's Rules of
Engagement, as well as provide some brief
notes from the Journal of Computer
Game Design. Two views of the future of
computer entertainment are emphasized as
British correspondent Paul Rigby shows us
what is new in virtual reality and "The Circuit Writer" talks about finding the right CDROM. Two articles offer "inside" information
on popular games (SimEarth and Wing
Commander: The Secret Missions). We
don't have any of Trip Hawkins' or Ken
Williams' memos to publish, but we do
think this issue will make every reader a
computer game industry insider.

