"Humans Castles 2  Dune 2 $3.95 $4.95 Canadian Rated Number 105 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 100 Games The Premier Computer Game Magazine April 1993 Special SWMSUDI ISSUL SSI's Tony La Russa Baseball II Also in this issue: SinLife F-15 Silike Eagle lll More Games from CES Special CD-ROM Survey Special Caly Crigsby's Pacific War Section Win a trip to racing school with EA's Car & Drives *Noi! 29074 12158 "


"Surar ut Destiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure 11 II IU QUERY FLOOR 1 8 SCORE LIVES 4400 3 HEALTH  362 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH ANNO 17% 83 FLOOR 9 STORE LIVES 2800 3 a HEALTH ARMOR 80% 939 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle, between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! #spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty Especial extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is 'there' like no game I've ever played...\" \"the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279(800)263-2390 Circle Reader Service #66 "


"-W:ZarJRYT: A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation by D.W. Bradley CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT VISLOO ROCCO DRANG TIGELDOR SAAILS Welcome to the sequel to Bane of the Cosmic Forge and the only game that could possibly follow its lead. It's everything Bane was...and more. 256 Colors Outdoor Campaigns  Full Musical Score & Sound Effects  Auto Mapping True Point & Click Mouse Interface. Unprecedented depth of story SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E Ogdensburg, New York 13669 To order or for a dealer nearest you call 1-800-447-1230 Circle Reader Service #111 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 34 38 Tony La Russa pg. 8 INDIN Another At Bat for Tony La Russa Johnny L. Wilson slides into SSI and steals home with the latest sequel news Games by the Genre: CES Part II The CGW Editorial Staff Winters in Las Vegas Car & Driver Contest Electronic Arts and CGW offer a chance to learn high performance driving CD-ROM Survey Take a walk through the CD side of town Six Down, And You Are The 7th Guest Trilobyte tries their unique \"turn of the screw\" in this ghost story from Virgin Games by Chuck Miller Space Quest IV The space janitor \"takes out the trash again Episodically narrated by Charles Ardai Insanity Grows on CDs Refixion II: Museum or Hospital by Tony Reveaux Walkin' in a CD Wonderland Synergy and Cameo Interactive Present Alice by Tony Reveaux More Hot Wind from Desert Storm Wargames Editor M. Evan Brooks reviews this new Dave Arneson design with a Phase Line Smash Who Killed Sam Rupert? The P.D. Takes To The C.D. by Johnny L. Wilson The Hamster-Powered Incredible Machine A review of Sierra's remarkable cartoon puzzle game by Chris Lombardi & Mike Weksler More \"Edu,» Less \"Tainment\" Sierra's Island of Dr. Brian Il provides a new port for young minds by Charles Ardai That's What SimLife is All About.. An analytical review that takes readers back to the garden of Maxwell Eden World Circuit Redefines \"The Fast Lane\" Crash helmets are not optional as Gordon Goble heads for MicroProse's winner's circle Who are These Humans? Gametek's latest game turns our reviewer into a Neanderthal by Chuck «Game, good. Fire, bad.\" Miller Mapping Out Star Legions Design Philosophy and Player Tips by Trevor Sorenson and the Design Team Prepare to Meet Your Dune (II) House Greenberg looks for worms in the apple of Virgin's eye The 7th Guest pg. 30 PSCORE S BONUSIBO 2 HE The Incredible Machine pg. 52 84 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD 98 Evan Brooks as Patriot A Desert Storm veteran offers his damage assessment on the new Three-Sixty wargame A Structural Inspection of Castles 2 Ken Hill sees i Interplay's code passes the code 100 ATAC pg. 136 "


"ARMBUR-GERONA 2002 FURE LII Un in OCHELL IEFL 3 ciglit down U1 Valase To order Armour-Geddon and protect the people of EDEN, visit your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-GET-PSYG ARMOUR-GEDDON The Balkan War of 1997 devastated the earth... Decades later, two conflicting factions survive: The hostile and combative surface dwellers, and the subterranean society of the Earth Defense Network (EDEN). As a warrior member of EDEN's High Command, it's your swom duty to defend your civilization from the marauding surface dwellers and destroy their deadly laser beam cannon before it annihilates your people. Armour-Geddon puts you in the front line! Plan the attack and leap into combat, battling the enemy from the cockpit of six different high-tech vehicles. Striking from the air in your stealth fighter, bomber or helicopter you eradicate the enemy's power grid. Decimating enemy installations, you retrieve their advanced weapons systems in your fleet of surface attack vehicles. Assembling the captured technology, you develop the only weapon on earth powerful enough to crush the enemy's aggression: the Neutron Bomb. Armour-Geddon takes realism a step further with high speed computer graphics, heads-up cockpit displays, full soundboard support and the sophisticated head to head serial link option that permits two EDEN warriors to simultaneously coordinate their attack. Any closer to the action and you'd need body armor! Psygnosis, 29 Saint Mary's Court, Brookline, MA 02146 Tel: 617-731-3553 PATYSIS Circle Reader Service #96 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 106  Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Assistant M.I.S. Manager Mike Weksler Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg 103 That Was the Pacific War That Was Bob Proctor's review raises the curtain on our special coverage of Gary Grigsby's \"monster\" wargame A Pacific War Map 11\" x 17\" of geographic delight, courtesy of SSI 108 Getting Your Task Force's Together Expanded Pacific War Ship Class Tables and the tips for using them by Daniel H. Scheltema 112 Pacific War Game Aids Explained Putting it all together to tame this monster game by John E. Johnston III (aka \"The Hammer\") Bases Located in Pacific War Finding your way around the vast ocean by John E. Johnston III Pacific War Game Turn Checklist Getting yourself organized for strategic command by John E. Johnston III with Gary Grigsby and a host of others The Comprehensive Pacific War Rules Index by John E. Johnston Ill with thanks to SSI Where in the Rules is it? A complete, detailed Table of Contents for Gary Grigsby's Pacific War by John E. Johnston III 130 It's Experience That Counts! A guide to raising personnel quality in Pacific War by Daniel H. Scheltema 136 MicroProse Unleashes a War on Drugs Paul Rigby joins the ATAC What is Sid Meier's Next Game Project? Find out in this exclusive CGW interview by Alan \"Could you repeat thal, Sid?\" Emrich 142 A III Point Landing for MicroProse Taking it slow and easy while reviewing F-15 Strike Eagle III by Doug Fick 148 Expanding on Carrier Strike M. Evan Brooks launches a new look at SSI's expansion disk for Gary Grigsby's Carrier Strike 150 Counting The Spoils of War Jelf James reviews a real piece of RAW Entertainment on his voyage of journalistic discovery 154 Banking in on Fighter Duel Pro Jaeger Software flies right with Amiga owners as reported by Jim \"Hawkeye\" Rathgeber 160 All's Noisy on the Eastern Front Three-Sixty's V for Victory: Velikye Luki by John J. Vannore 139 Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 und additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993 Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601, Mt. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe( 76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Subscription Dept. 1(800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 DEPARTMENTS 50 72 86 88 Scorpia's Mail From the Cockpit (Aircraft Adventure Factory) CGW Stock Watch The Rumor Bag (Barfus Bagus) Over There: European Software Report CWW Editorial (Empire Deluxe Tournament Rules) 146 Advertiser Index 158 Opponents Wanted Ads 166 Taking a Peek 173 CGW Hall of Fame 174 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games 176 What's Hot! 177 The Patch File 178 Editorial Awards 96 "


"\"ULTRABOTS INCLUDES THE MOST IMPRESSIVE GRAPHICS EVER SEEN IN THIS GENRE.\" -COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SWITCHING TO MEMURL TARGET DESTROYED MRENING FRIENDLY TARGET ! TARGET RICOUIRED COLLISION NARNING! EMINE DECOY LAEN M33 HEKH ENGAGE MANUAL BMS THAT IT CAN MUSE TARGET: NE-432 RANGE: da BEARKG:041 SHELLS: 1964 ASTONISHING 3-D RAY-TRACED GRAPHICS, DIGITIZED EXPLOSIONS AND SPECIAL EFFECTS. CHOOSE FROM THREE DIFFERENT ULTRABOTS, EACH WITH ITS OWN FULLY INTERACTIVE, SIMULATION STYLE COCKPIT. VERY IMAGE YOU SEE HERE IS AN ACTUAL SCREEN GRAPHIC. AND LOOKS AREN'T EVERYTHING. THERE'S ALSO THE FEELING OF HANDS-ON CONTROL OVER A FLEET OF FIGHTING MACHINES, THE SOUND OF PLASMA CAN. NONS TAKING OUT AN ENEMY BASE, THE EXPERIENCE OF ALL-OUT BATTLE AGAINST STAGGERING ODDS. ULTRABOTS IS A SCI-FI SIMULATION SO FRIGHTENINGLY REAL, YOU WILL BELIEVE THE FATE OF THE PLANET LIES IN YOUR HANDS. REST FROM NOVALOGIC, THE CAEATORS OF COMANCHE MAXIMUM OVERKILLTM Ultrabots is a trademark of Novalogic, Inc. 1999, Comanche and Maximum Overkill are trademarks of Novalogic, Inc. ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #63 "


"çmeak preven TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE TE A DATES DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY SSI And StormFront Reveal The A's Up Their Sleeve In KRIS Muk Tony LaRussa BASEBATLI Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. by Johnny L. Wilson Now, the action is smooth, even if one is using the keyboard. Further, the game now allows players to use the mouse to direct the on-screen players in two ways: 1) to point to the position where the fielder should get under the ball and click or 2) to \"drag\" the on-screen player along with the mouse with free (as opposed to program directed) movement. abe Ruth never got to manage a major league baseball team. Walter Alston, the manager who led the Dodgers to seven National League and four World Series championships, only had one \"At Bat\" in the major league. He failed to get a hit. Billy Martin, who won divisional championships as manager of the A's, Tigers, Twins and Yankees (as well as a world championship with the Yankees), only managed to hit .300 once in his career and that was in 1955 when he played in a mere 20 games. Tommy Lasorda, the manager who led the Los Angeles Dodgers to their last world championship, had his longest \"cup of coffee\" in the majors during a stretch with the Kansas City Athletics where he appeared USES 5 Park (leading the White Sox to a divisional championship), as well as with some obscenely talented Oakland A's teams, never managed to keep his major league batting average over a .250 season average (except for a brief five game stint in 1968 when he went 1-for-3 with the Oakland A's and didn't make any other major league appearances). What these managerial stories should tell us is that one does not have to be a great player in order to become a great manager. Though there have been excellent players that did become great managers (Casey Stengel and Alvin Dark weren't particularly shabby), there are plenty of Hall of Famers who did not manage successfully. Tony La Russa Baseball II (Tony2) (developed by Storm Front Software, formerly Beyond Software, and published by Strategic Simulations, Inc.) potentially meets the needs of those who want to play a computer baseball simulation and/or those who want to manage on-screen players who perform realistically, VANIES REDON NORMAL POMER CONTACT EUM FASTBALL CURVE CHAITU SCREUUE ALL ATLANTA BOSTON BALLO STRIKE 0 OUT ININING 11 Scouting Report (Differences Between Tonyl and Tony2) Those who revere action above statistics will find the game play significantly enhanced. Players no longer have that hesitation caused by the fact that the program kept going through other calculations before it would try to read the keypress. Those who \"manage only\" will enjoy the ability to change defensive positions with a couple of quick clicks on the mouse button. Statistically, Tony2 has added balks and wild pitches, as well as \"Pickoff\" and \"Release» ratings for pitchers to the statistical model. The rosters have been expanded to 40 positions, and using rookies after a simulated September 1 should allow gamers to simulate the rookie phenomenons seen in their major league \"cups of coffee.\" This is a particularly in only 18 games. His ERA was 6.15. Tony La Russa, a manager who proved he could win in a turn-around situation in Comiskey Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"bali mreunew ation. Clemons explained that even with the extended palette available in 256 colors, one has to make compromises on color gradients because it is difficult to switch distinct colors over the same backgrounds. There are baseball card style profiles that appear on the lower area of the screen for the pitcher and batter. These are not simimportant feature for a game named after Tony La Russa, since he has always been noted as a manager who uses all of his personnel and, as a result, both builds morale and gets more out of his talent pool. Tony2 even has Morale and Leadership ratings for each player so that trades can impact teams with regard to potential inertia or bad streaks. Further, the ability to links seasons together makes the game that much more versatile for statistics buffs, as does the fact that one can change the league set-ups to have only one league with one division and any number of teams (as opposed to being locked into the actual league configuration a la Tonyl). Also, some purists didn't like the way certain old-time ballplayers were abstracted in the original game. Now, for example, Roger Bresnahan's batting average as a catcher is used, as opposed to his BA as an outfielder. way information was displayed on the screen of Tony La Russa Ultimate Baseball (the superlative has slipped out of the title, allegedly due to the design team's discomfort with a certain review that was headlined \"Not Quite The Ultimate\" — wonder what publication printed that?). Now, game information is displayed very unobtrusively, most of it popping up as one needs it. In addition, Tony2 has a tremendous emphasis on Old-Time Baseball. The classic stadiums which will be available include: Baker Bowl, Connie Mack, Ebbetts Field, Sportsman's Park, Old Comiskey and even the L.A. Coliseum (among others). The stadium dimensions and appearance were carefully researched from multiple sources and lovingly rendered by art director David Clemons. Indeed, there is even a «View Stadium» feature so that Old Time Baseball fans can \"tour\" the famous stadiums of old without having to look at the interactive part of the screen. Clemons wanted to feature the skylines behind some of these stadiums, but the rest of the design team was skeptical. The skylines, after all, don't really affect play. Yet, Clemons felt that they gave the stadiums their unique character so he drew a few and left them on the computers in the office until the design team couldn't bear to give them up. The stadiums are so real that one individual had visited Connie Mack Stadium in his youth and was able to locate the section where he sat from the Tony2 screen. The instant replay feature pops up with figures the size one would expect to see in a baseball telecast. They were captured from video by Clemons' team, rotoscoped SEASON MANAGER UTILITIES PLAY STANDARD GAMES CURRENT DATE STAFRILES PAY ALLOANE TOSI APRIL  ONE DAY ONLY TRAU ROULAR SEASON THE WORLD SERIES ply digitized versions of classic or current baseball cards, although they have been drawn in that style. This is definitely a nice touch and pushes a sentimental button for most baseball fans. In addition, I liked the radar gun feature that tells a manager how fast each pitch travelled to the plate. One concession to game appearance is actually less realistic than the same feature in Tonyl. The original game had Al routines which required every outfielder to back up every play realistically. This meant that one regularly had three fielders lined up in a row behind each other as one backed up one who was backing up another. To many fans it looked unrealistic, most likely because we are used to seeing games from a camera's view. We don't usually notice the way fielders back each other up. So, the authentic style of backing up plays looked phony to many Tonyl players. Now, the back-up routine isn't quite as realistic, but it looks more natural. SEASON MANAGER UTILITIES START NEUT SEASON SCHEDULES 162 GAMES 26_TEAMS   PUMBER OF GAMES START DATE APRIL 1 In addition, stat-oriented gamers willenjoy the capacity for designing a managerial profile for each team used in a seasonal replay. This profile will allow gamers to use sliding scales to set the artificial manager's baserunning aggressiveness, lineup and pitching rotation priorities, batting tendencies and defensive tendencies. All gamers will enjoy the fact that Tony2 does not monopolize one's hard disk in the same way as its predecessor. Now, all the data files are compressed on the hard drive and decompressed as needed and, according to Hudson Piehl (Storm Front's lead programmer), the program should have selective installs so that a gamer only has to put desired files on the hard drive. The game also has some useful defaults that help gamers who do not want to micromanage their teams. For example, the outfield will automatically play deep whenever a batter with a power rating greater than 8 comes to the plate. If one wishes to override, it is possible to do so, but Piehl states the programming team's goal with regard to defaults as allowing gamers to play realistic games with the fewest possible overall keystrokes. PLAYOFF LENGTHI 7 SERISS LENGTH I C E 20 /2549 REQUIRED LEAGUS SETUP CURRENT LEAGUE SETUP HUMBER OF LEAGUES . . WEER OF LEAGUES MRER OF LEAGUES HUMEUR OF DIVISIONS NUMBER OF DIVISIONS DIVI DIVE DIVI DN2 10-80LEAGUE LEAGUE N 100 C LEAGUE SANTOFAER and composited with new backgrounds and, often, other figures from additional footage. The team usually used a 1:2 ratio of animated frames to video frames in order to get the movement to look right. Sometimes, because of odd body angles in the videotape footage, various positions would have to be re-rendered in order to look more natural. Then, Clemons and animator Steve Perris worked with Hudson Piehl to make sure that the instant replays kept the right colors for the teams that are playing in any given on-field situThe Crack of the Bat (Program Model) In another way, the system model for Tony2 is significantly more realistic. The physics model for the game has been revved up. Tonyl did not use much air resistance modeling, but Tony2 figures in the effects of humidity, temperature and altitude as well as wind, speed of the pitch and stadium distances. I expressed skepticism about the overall impact of humidity on a 162 game season and was rewarded with the details about how a 5% rise in humidity (all other factors being equal) will shorten a 400 foot home run to approximately 392 feet. The research on the physical model also brought about a new insight to this writer. Fans often assume that higher humidity reduces the distance for a hard-hit ball because of the heavy air. In point of fact, the vector of the ball is Welcome To Connie Mack Stadium (Graphics) Many gamers didn't like the unattractive April 1993 Page 9 "


"Cmeak mreview The Man in the Dugout CGW Talks With Tony La Russa changed because the ball absorbs moisture from the air and is heavier itself. Other changes for Tony2 included more substantive AI adjustments for fielding and running. In addition to the cosmetic change in fielding mentioned earlier, Piehl had to solve plenty of special case programming issues. In Tonyl, for instance, fielders would throw to the cut-off man every time, even in situations where there were two out in the bottom of the ninth with the game tied. Worse yet, they would sometimes throw behind the lead runner to try to get unnecessary outs. Tony2 has added code to reflect these special situations. Further, the trailing baserunners in Tonyl rarely took advantage of special opportunities to advance on overthrows or attempts to throw out the runner at the plate. In Tony2, the trailing runners will take advantage of fielding lapses more often. In Tonyl, gamers complained that it was extremely rare to throw out baserunners on a team managed by the computer. The design team explained that this is because the computer manager was so conservative in the original game. (Would that have anything to do with the 1983 American League Play-Offs where La Russa had five baserunners (four in scoring position) thrown out to Baltimore's one?) Now, the managerial profile will enable some managers to be as aggressive as the real Tony was in 1983 (and we'll find out if he was wrong or unlucky), while others are as conservative as the computer manager in the original game. Pre-Season Predictions (Conclusion) Frankly, if Tony La Russa Baseball // had a modem-play option, I would suggest that SSI put the \"Ultimate\" back in the title. When I saw the original Earl Weaver Baseball (produced by Don Daglow, president of StormFront) on the Amiga, I didn't think it could possibly be improved upon. Now, it appears to have been superseded by this upcoming release. One must always be careful when looking at pre-release software. It is entirely too easy to assume that certain bugs, problems and design clumsiness will be straightened out before the product is released. Still, it seems safe to take a big lead off my generally careful editorial base with regard to this game. Barring an unforeseen pick-off move, I think this version of Tony La Russa Baseball is going to be a steal. Tony La Russa Baseball II has been selected to receive our first CGW Editors' Choice award. An explanation of this new awards series can be found in this month's editorial. Cow CGW: You played for several of the great managers of our lifetime: Hank Bauer, Dick Williams, John MacNamara and Chuck Tanner. Which one had the most influence on your managerial style? La Russa: Actually, it was a fellow you probably never heard of. His name was Loren Babe. At the time, he was a AAA manager and advance scout for the White Sox. He is the one that really got me excited about managing and taught me a lot. Paul Richard of the White Sox was also a key person in my transition from player to manager. CGW: During your days in the major leagues, do you feel like you learned a lot on the days you weren't playing? Did you absorb insights while you were on the bench? La Russa: 1 suppose there is that classic mold for a successful manager being a mediocre ballplayer who had to pay as much attention to the game as possible, just to survive. I'm not sure how much that really fits. I think the basic requirement for becoming a successful manager is just to love the game and learn as much as you can. CGW: Some say you're the best in the league at getting the most out of your players. Do you think your limited playing time has translated into the way you use your personnel? La Russa: I guess I've picked up on the ability to sense needs. Even the mediocre player very much needs to be part of the action. CGW: The computer game builds on your reputation as a morale building manager. They figure in two factors: Morale and Leadership. How do you define leadership and who were some of the great team leaders you have managed? La Russa: A leader is someone who is willing to stand up in the middle of the clubhouse and say something is wrong. Then, say \"Let's change it!\" I always try to assemble a number of team leaders. You always end up leaving somebody out with these questions, but Greg \"The Bull\" Luzinski, Jerry Koosman and Carlton Fisk were terrific leaders with the Sox. They were older players and used their experience as an asset. With the A's, they would have to be Carney Lansford, Dave Henderson, Dave Parker, Dave Stewart and, of course, Dennis Eckersley. CGW: The design team for the computer game says that there is a real suspension of disbelief when you see the simulation. They say you start making moves just like you would in real life. La Russa: I was totally foreign to the idea of simulation at the start. I was skeptical, at first, but then I was fascinated at seeing how they could implement what I tell them in discussions. CGW: The default managerial profile in the game (so far) seems to be more conservative than your reputation would warrant. Do you think you've gotten more cautious since the '83 playoffs, for example? La Russa: The key is gauging your personnel. If your ball club has limited ability to run, you obviously can't give the green light as much as you want. Milwaukee had about six guys who can steal at will, so you can use it a lot. Right now. we have about three who can steal at will and two or three (others) if everything is right. I'm not less aggressive, it's just that they don't keep stats on the Hit and Run. So, it's difficult to gauge. Frankly, the hotter the club, the less the manager has to get involved. You just let the players play. CGW: Your teams historically seem to have exceptional second half records. In 83. '86 and '88 in particular. Do you do anything special to accomplish that or is it just a result of team leadership? La Russa: It's nice of you to recognize that. We try to start fast, but it's definitely my goal to use personnel in the first half in such a way that we get as fresh a club as possible in the second half. The star should probably only play five or six games per week as opposed to seven. That way he's still fresh in August and September. I try to manage early for the whole season. CGW: What do you think is your most important contribution to the computer game s design? La Russa: Time. I don't think they expected that I would spend as much time with them as I have. I got turned on by how committed Don's team was to making this game special. So, I decided to make sure I committed myself, too. CGW Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"DUN EII The Building of A Dynasty TMENJAJTUJ WNS CreaS LL 1993 Atreides Trike. Only one house will prevail. MISSILE TATU DM6 ATTACX HOVE RETREHT GUARD Crea! 08119129 Hindir ONIN Control all aspects of combat and construction. BULLD 1315 N seCED Select and build varieties of installations. Acquire valuable information from your Mentat. Conquer Arrakis this fall on your IBM PC! For more information, pricing and orders please call 899-VRG-INSZ Visa, Mastercard, American Express and checks accepted. Westwood Distributed exclusively by SCI-FI EPIC OF ALL TIME! A SIMULATION OF THE BEST SELLING GAMES Ostsidemant of Dine r enti Corporating and licensed to M altinivetsal Merchanding Inc 01984 Dino De Laurentis Strporation. Anchts neserved. 1922 WesowodSnidos Inhaltights reserved Cline Reader Service#119 "


"ndethe mdustry What's New in 1993? More Gossip from the Consumer Electronics Show from the CGW Editorial Staff UZ TISHED FISHER nha Quantum Quality Production SPORTS BBS ny Consumer Electronics Show is a good chance to catch takes place in interior locations or in cyberspace itself. The fiction up on news, and WCES '93 was no exception. One major holds that all characters have implants and that the cyberspace I piece of good news for gamers concerned Accolade's on network is the \"final frontier\" for characters to explore for fame, going legal entanglement with Sega. The Ninth Circuit Court of fortune and adventure. The program uses a limited amount of Appeals has modified its October 20, 1992 opinion in Sega v artificial intelligence to keep the entire population of the city to Accolade and Accolade happily announced that the court had their appropriate schedules, and hardcore cyberfans will be able to decided to dismiss Sega's principal argushoot innocent bystanders as part of the ments for a rehearing on the opinion which gritty, dangerous feel. was favorable to Accolade. The modified Syndicate (EA's latest project from opinion gives further breathing room to ACBullfrog) was briefly described in CGW colade and should ensure no further prob#103. In addition to its graphic look (that lems. would give Ridley Scott a wicked grin), gamers will be challenged to manage Dark Futures (Role-Playing) NPC agents controlled by Al routines The worlds of role-playing, as portrayed in and featuring diverse strengths and both speculative future and fantasy past, are weaknesses. CyberRace is expected to likely to be a little darker in 1993. Empire's feature more of a Death Race 2000 meets CyberSpace (mentioned last issue), ElecMad Max appeal. tronic Arts' Syndicate (briefly previewed in Not only are the science fiction games CGW #103) and CyberDreams' CyberRace bordering upon \"dark\" roleplaying, but will take gamers into the dark world of cyberso are the fantasy-oriented CRPGs. Dark Sun: Shattered Lands punk. Science fiction (and sometimes, cyberDark Sun: Shattered Lands is Strategic punk) author Norman Spinrad (Little Heroes) Simulations, Inc.'s CRPG set in the may believe that cyberpunk is dead as a genre, but it is very much world of Troy Denning's as yet unfinished pentalogy, The Prism alive in computer games. Pentad: (The Verdant Passage, The Crimson Legion, The Amber As previously noted, CyberSpace is based on the Iron Crown Enchantress, The Obsidian Oracle (6/93) and The Cerulean Storm Enterprises \"people and paper\" role playing system. All action (9/93)). Two types of magic exist in this fantasy world which is word Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"Trade Up! The Game You Grew Up With Has Grown Up Too! Stos 3, :: CU CODE HAPE WINDOWS  version *-=23 IBM PC version HEFS HE 9 MONOPOLY . CO TUME DE LUXE CU CODE 15=227REE IBM PC version WINDOWS  version that keeps track of all previous moves and the ability to play by traditional or custom-designed rules. It's more mercenary than your lawyer, shrewder than your accountant, greedier than the IRS and tougher than your granny. Get ready for the most challenging game of Monopoly you've ever played with MONOPOLY DELUXE. PROFILE GAMES Combining 90's technical knowhow with plenty of good oldfashioned fun, the bestselling board game of all time is back and better than ever with completely Enjoy the thrill and excitement of wheeling and dealing as you amass, or reluctantly part with, great fortunes buying and selling railroads, utilities and properties of all types. This game's a must for the library of any TRUE gamer or future real estate tycoon! BROTHERS revamped levels of difficulty and greatly enhanced graphics for your computer! You'll get more deluxe for your bucks with dazzling animation of all ten official tokens, easyas-pie interface, a game activity log PARKER MONOPOLY DELUXE with the ultimate easy-to-use point-and-click interface will be available this fall in PC and WINDOWS versions. WINDOWS version features all of the DELUXE features listed above plus the odded bonus of easier-to-use point-and-click interface. For more information, pricing and orders, please coll 800-VRG-IN07, VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS and checks accepted. MONOPOLY and RICH UNCLE design are rogistered trodemarks of Tonka Corporation. Rich Undac 1936, 1992 Parker Brothers. All rights reserved. Monopolyo 1935, 1992 Parker Brothers, lix., division of Tonka Corporation All rights reserved. Licensed to Virgin Games, Inc. 1992 Virgin Games, Inc Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd. WINDOWS \" is a trademark of Microsoh Corporation Circle Reader Service #120 "


"Realma ot Askania Sale ARBOSHIHJALOISERENAVATALIHEETAMION YARANO almost as barren as Frank Herbert's convincing, even on a 386/33 machine. Arrakis or most of Edgar Rice Burrough's If the story has as much punch as the Barsoom. One form of magic draws its special effects, this game is likely to be strength from the soil and its plant life the true heir to The Bard's Tale series. while the other draws its strength from Origin's Ultima Underworld I will sentient creatures. Indeed, this world has build on its successful formula, but will been exploited by the ruthless expenditure offer a 30 percent larger view screen of magic. Beyond the rich universe of and two slots for spells. Gamers will this role-playing sysexperience eight tem is a brand new new worlds in the computer game engame, including the gine to drive the adice world pictured venture. on the box and, in SSI and Microa bizarre twist, the Prose also plan to world of Ultima l publish CRPGs in o from a new perspecthe horror genre. tive. THORHAL SSI's entry is called Eye of the BeVeil of Darkness. holder III: Assault Veil of Darkness is of Myth Drannor being developed by Realms of Arkania will also build on Event Horizon Softpast technology. ware and looks to Based on a story and designed by Dave be the best yet in a continually improving Lucca, an associate producer on Eye II, line of rich products. This particular story the latest entry in the successful series is not as long as that in their last is supposed to be 50 percent bigger than product, The Summoning, but features either of the previous products in the more to do i.e. interior locations are series. It will feature six fully scored much more detailed), as well as having musical pieces and several musical more music and some new \"pop-up\" segues, as well as cinematic sequences animation sequences. Legacy: Realm of and short cut scenes with limited animaTerror is the MicroProse entry into the tion. It features an extensive outdoor area field of horror. As in Horror Soft's in which gamers can bash 35 monsters Waxworks (published by Accolade in the and explore ruins, guild halls and temples. U.S.), the player's character has the job of visiting an eerie old edifice. Strange Mindcraft's Gryphon Masters of Havlar events are occurring in an abandoned (due at the end of the year) will feature house, and the prothe company's new tagonist has a set game engine, comtime limit in which plete with 3-D isoto explore the 3-D metric views, manse in order to cutaway sequences find and confound the and digitized entity controlling the voices. It will be a bizarre happenings totally new uniwithin the house. Beverse where the ing developed by the eponymous gryphon U.K. division of Mimasters are the croProse, Legacy \"knights of the features a pop-up inrealm. With the latVeil of Darkness terface with colored ter in mind, it bars indicating the status of the hero's should not be a surprise that members main attributes. of the player's party of characters can mount gryphons and fly into combat. In more traditional dungeon romps, the news can be summarized in terms of Realms of Arkania is a role-player's design and presentation, as opposed to CRPG. Sir-Tech has elected to translate subject matter. Interplay's Stonekeep fea Germany's #1 CRPG, Das Schwarze Auge tures a full-screen first person perspective (The Black Age), and present it for U.S. with pop-up interface. The rotoscoped audiences. Based on Germany's premier monsters are beautifully presented and \"people and paper\" role-playing game, the real-time combat is responsive and Blade of Destiny, Realms of Arkania not Circle Reader Service #106 Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"GET THIS GAME SPACE QUEST V only features more than 50 skills and Unlimited Adventures bears a striking 80 spells, but (as in the best RPGs) similarity to the Gold Box Series from characters actually have to work around SSI. This is because Unlimited Adventures negative attributes (avarice, bad tempers, is actually a \"Gold Box Construction various phobias, Set\" that allows etc.). CRPG purists gamers to create will also enjoy the their own dungeons ability to split, save using SSI's old and recombine the game engine. The party of characters upside is that the and the fact that product is packed combat is strictly with useful tools turn-based with no (e.g. 250 monster arcade elements. images and Gametek's scanned TSR artwork to be used Daemonsgate looks for character porlike a very big CRPG. It has plenty Strike Commander traits) and helpful of detail (characters modules, but the downside is that fellow gamers will have build up their knowledge base about the game's universe as they play) and has to own their own copy of Unlimited a graphic look similar to Ultima VII, Adventures in order to play in anyone except that the game environment is else's dungeon. displayed within a curtained frame. Sim Antics (Simulations) CRPGers who play on the Amiga will Simulations have always been a hot want to check out Hired Guns. Up to category for computer gamers, and it four players can control their characters looks like 1993 will be no exception. from the same keyboard in this Psygnosis MicroProse just launched F-15 Strike release. The screen splits to show the Eagle M and Domark released AV8B action from up to four perspectives, and Harrier Assault (see F-15SE review in the combat is heavy on the action this issue, page 142), while Novalogic elements. and SSI are ready to follow up successful Finally, there is something familiar launches with support products. Noabout the following three CRPGs. Serpent valogic's Comanche: Maximum Overkill Isle is, of course, Ultima VIIB. It con Mission Disk will include 30 new mistinues the study of sions (10 for evil introduced in heavy duty playUltima VII: The ers, 10 typical of Black Gate and uses the initial release the same basic enand 10 quick and gine. Mindcraft's dirty scenarios) Legends of Drakka and several new also uses the same types of terrain, engine as was used including arctic in previous games, and alpine topog. in this case The raphy. SSI just reMagic Candle sysleased GNBNA: tem. Instead of beSuper Ships of the inga sequel, F-15 Strike Eagle III Atlantic, which not however, this story only adds ships is essentially the pre-history to The Magic but upgrades the game itself to Version Candle universe. It is, by analogy, sort 1.1. SSI plans to upgrade the program of a Silmarillion to The Magic Candle's to 1.2 with their America in the Atlantic Lord of the Rings and is set in the data disk and should add the South dwarven culture. The game features two Pacific Theater to the system with the competing dwarven tribes and two difthird set of data disks. ferent endings depending on which tribe Four of the simulations displayed at the is chosen by the player. According to show looked very familiar. Psygnosis' ArAli Atabek, there are several moral di mour-geddon, a six vehicle combat simulemmas that will drive the plot. ASIERP FREE When you switch to the crystal clarity of Sprint. Circle Reader Service #106 April 1993 Page 15 "


"lation (helicopter, fighter, light tank, heavy tank, hovercraft and Deja «View» (Adventures) bomber) originally published on the Amiga, has made the transition to the MS-DOS world. The game allows players to team up The big news for adventure games in 1993 is likely to reflect the or go head-to-head over a serial hook-up. Naturally, Origin's emphasis on sequels, remakes and licenses. Adventure gamers Strike Commander (which features terrain detail even more imseem to enjoy returning to the same environs time after time, and pressive than that in Comanche: Maximum Overkill) and Luthis year the publishers are going to serve them well. In CGW casArts' X-Wing Fighter, both originally #103, we looked «Behind The Screens\" at Activision's Return to promised for Christmas of '92, were demonZork. This sophisticated rework of the most strated at the show, as was Novalogic's prefamous Infocom world (The Great Underviously showcased Armored Fist (originally ground Empire) not only boasts new techcalled Battlefield 2000 and featuring MIA2 nology, but it also has returned to the Abrams and Russian T-80s, among others). challenging puzzles of yesteryear and a sense of good, old-fashioned storytelling. In We were particularly impressed with Toraddition to this return, MicroProse is pullnado (Spectrum HoloByte). The shaded ing back the curtain on Return of the Phanterrain has probably pressed the limit of tom. Though the game is not a licensed traditional 3-D polygon-filled technology version of the Andrew Lloyd Webber musiby creating over 16,000 objects in a 100 by cal nor uses any of the popular score, it draws 100 mile simulated world. Gamers will be liberally from the book that inspired several able to fly both the air-to-air and air-tofilms and the magnificent stage production. ground configurations of the British plane, One still must rescue the lovely ingenue and the Al for one's fellow pilots is intriTornado from the clutches of her once well-meaning cately woven into the fabric of the missions. mentor turned jealous monster. In addition, gamers can enjoy an extremely well-designed pilot/vehicle interface, which offers extremely realistic displays and sysLucasArts celebrates yet another return. Day of the Tentacle is, tems to manage from both the front and back seat of the plane. essentially, a sequel to Maniac Mansion. Although only one of the heroes has returned from the original MMI, Dr. Fred and Dead From the U.K. comes Jump Jet, a Harrier simulation to be Cousin Ted are back. This time, the zany influence of Tim Schafer published by MicroProse. The 3-D environment looks nice, and and Dave Grossman (co-scriptors of the dialogue for Ron Gilbert's there is a role-playing element to the game (i.e. flying too many Monkey Island adventures) is unleashed in an adventure inspired missions per day will cause a pilot's performance to deteriorate), by classic cartoon humor. but the real beauty of the game for sim fans will be using that vectored thrust in combat. As if this preliminary roster of games was not nostalgic enough, Tsunami's Blue Perhaps, the most unique simulation that Force (to be distributed by Accolade) pairs we saw at the show was EA's SEAL Team. the talents of Jim Walls and Cheryl Loyd This game, being produced by Paul Grace (Jim Walls was the designer of the first three (of Chuck Yeager Air Combat fame) is a Police Quest games from Sierra and Cheryl first-person perspective on squad-level drew the original storyboard for Police combat. Players take on the role of a comQuest 3) in another law enforcement advenmando leader involved in the Vietnam Conture game. Police procedures and tough puzflict. The player attempts to survive four Tus Nurse Edit zles will still be part of the formula in Blue campaigns of 20 missions each. Said mis GEVU POKUP LA HELP Force, but driving (a major part of the Sierra sions are all based on actual combat reports WETE OphOOK OF PLEH games) is not a part of this game. Indeed, from authentic experiences during the Vietthere are no action sequences in Blue Force. nam Era. The protagonist of Blue Force is a motorcyFinally, one must mention SimFarm and Maniac Mansion 2 cle patrolman who, by a series of circumEl Fish. Although neither use a first personstances, ends up as an investigator. This perspective and the former does not require the manipulation of means that the first portion of the game requires procedural puzfilled polygons, they do follow the tradition of Maxis' other zle-solving, but the latter portion of the game becomes somewhat software toys in allowing the player to control a model of a real-life more free-form in its investigation. The design of the game has system. In the case of SimFarm, naturally, the real-life system is changed somewhat, as well, since all text information will be a family farm (not to be confused with the current state of Agri presented below the graphic area so that none of the animation is business in states where the family farm has ceased to be). Players covered up. can make choices with regard to crop selecAnother fertile ground for the familiar is tion, irrigation, crop rotation, use of insectithe realm of literature. Tsunami's Ringcide, selection of livestock, sale of crops, and world: Revenge of the Patriarch (described more. The product is almost a rural version of SimCity. in the first part of this report in CGW #104) and Legend's upcoming Xanth game In a similar manner, El-Fish allows gamers to select the \"breeding stock\" from a gene (based on the hilarious works of Piers Anthony) both ensure that science fiction and pool of electronic fish and allows them to create their own eugenics program of looks fantasy fans will be able to explore the and characteristics for future fish. Then, one worlds via the computer that they have alcan sit back and watch \"real-time\" behaviors ready visited in the popular novels. in an electronic aquarium that serves as the Naturally, television also serves as a realm \"ultimate\" executive toy. It may not be a of the familiar. Spectrum HoloByte extraditional simulation, but that seems to be pects to launch their Star Trek: The Next the best way to describe this software toy. Ringworld: Revenge of the Patriarch Generation game by the end of the year. The game's story was written by an author of Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"TM REALMS Your Troops were victorious and report very few casualties TOOTED SP    1000 WATTS COULD BE missile ski * they are verb feel strung OUT The King is dead. Long live the new King you. Endowed with the divine right to rule, your father bequeaths to you his Realm. Unfortunately, as your sphere of influence grows, so does the resentment from the rulers of neighbouring Realms. Jealousy is such an ugly thing. The fragile peace has been shattered and war rages between the Realms. Now your brief reign has become a fight for survival. The neighboring Realms are growing in strength at your expense. Do you build lines of supplies to barter with them? Or do you build armies to battle with them? Each Realm vies to GAMES be the ultimate power. Enter the world of REALMS and you could control: OVER 125,000 SQUARE MILES OF FRACTALLYGENERATED LANDSCAPE 128 ARMIES, EACH A THOUSAND STRONG WITH DEFINABLE BATTLE FORMATIONS SIX DISTINCT HUMANOID RACES COUNTLESS FOLLOWERS AND THEIR MONEY  IN INNUMERABLE CITIES Created by the award-winning Graftgold development team, REALMS combines the intuitive playability of an arcade game with the depth of strategy usually found only in the most complex simulations. LOVE THY NEIGHBOR? OR PUT HIM TO THE SWORD? THE CHOICE IS YOURS. DEVELOPED BY GRAFTGOLD Creative Software But there can only be one. Just make sure its yours. AMIGA SCREEN SHOTS Realms is a trademark of Virgin Games, Inc.  1991 Virgin Games, Inc. All rights reserved.  1991 Graftgold Ltd. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Illustration by Dermot Power SHOWN. FOR PRICING AND ORDERS, PLEASE CALL 800-VRG-INOZ, VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS, AND CHECKS ACCEPTED. Circle Reader Service #121 "


"22:03 several Star Trek novels and promises to have a few surprises in of historical-strategy games. Bram Stoker's Dracula was mengame design. Capstone plans to unveil a Wayne's World adven tioned last issue as a CD-ROM on both the Sega and MS-DOS ture game. Wayne's World finds the Mirthmobile cruising the platforms. As noted then, the game is basically a horizontal-scrollbeautiful land of Aurora and the guys facing the Decent Organi ing \"shoot-'em-up» game with actual video footage from the film zation Of Dedicated Obscenity Opponents interwoven in the segues between arcade (DOODOO) via the use of a plentiful numsequences. The MS-DOS version will be ber of digitized images. published by Psygnosis, while the Sega Another source of the familiar is history. Genesis CD-ROM will be published by Two games use, at least, a pseudo-history Sony Electronic Publishing. Flashback is to drive the adventures. Maxis' Rome: a platform-style action game, based on a Pathway to Power (see the description of popular Sega Genesis title. SSI has redone Rome AD 92 in this issue's \"Over There\" with the game with an expanded color palcolumn) is a British import that allows ette and brought it to the MS-DOS platgamers to go from street quarrels to senate form. Reversing the trend, MicroProse laurels. Merit Software's Kronolog: The will take Sid Meier's Pirates to the Sega Nazi Paradox (developed by Castle1003520 Genesis as Pirates! Gold (not to be conworks) takes the view of an alternative fused with the upcoming new version of the history. The action takes place in AD 2020 Kronolog game on the computer). in a world where, akin to Fatherland, the Two action games will come to the comNazis won World War II. The game feaputer using slightly modified versions of tures 20 MB of digitized images, a score by Dallas musical talent existing game engines. Origin's Privateer will add some ecoRandy Talman and the digitized voices of professional actors from nomic strategy and freebooting spirit to the Wing Commander a Dallas-based theater group. universe and Special Forces (MicroProse) will pick up where Tsunami's Protostar: War on the Frontier is a hybrid game Airborne Ranger left off. which draws from some of the successful formulae found in Electronic Arts' Starflight and Starflight 2 (both from Binary Worlds at War (Wargames) Systems) and Accolade's Star Control 2 (by Paul Reiche). All Wargames should offer a variety of new looks during the upcomthree games place great emphasis on exploration (there are sup ing year. MicroProse will introduce Fields of Glory: Waterloo, a posed to be hundreds of planets in Protostar), interaction with Napoleonic wargame with something of a miniatures feel. It will alien races (15 alien species wend their way through the latest use several different zoom levels and will enable gamers to play game's storyline), economic achievement (bartering, scavenging four different battles leading up to the climactic conflict at Waterand investments play a significant role in the latest space game) loo. The game is supposed to have a battle editor so that gamers and space combat (Protostar features 3-D combat). can adjust orders of battle according to \"What if?\" scenarios. Finally, the animated adventure design group at MicroProse Koei plans to release Liberty or Death, a game based on the unveiled a beautifully rendered self-running demo of Dragon American Revolutionary War which uses an engine similar to their Sphere. The company offered no details as to plot or play mechan most successful games (Nobunaga's Ambition, Romance of the ics, but should the demo's musical score and the artistic Three Kingdoms. Bandit Kings of Ancient China). Though the presentation carry through into the final product, this will be a game is slightly behind the rest of the market in graphics (it uses showpiece for the genre. EGA color), these games are usually worth ELTRIMENTSI TELUINSIERI BEST looking at looking at in terms of strategy. Also, For Every Reaction though they were not demonstrating software at the show, Simulations Canada (Action Games) 6 Springfield, I Corner in Laief plans to market a tactical naval game covOf course, many games do not stick in one llashington ering both the revolutionary era and the simple category. Tsunami's Wacky FunNapoleonic Epoch, called Man Of War. sters is just such a product. The game paroThe American Civil War is back in ******* dies computer games and video games right vogue among wargamers. Impressions and left in a vicious satire that is both adSupport Ed Grabowski is hard at work on a new venture game and action game. Most of the American Civil War game that uses his sequences require manual dexterity and Your excellency 5942 miniatures-style animation (Conquest of 4478 good reflexes, but some require quick (or, 1522 22 Japan, Cohort). Entitled The Blue and the at least sharpened) wits. Everything from Gray, players will be able to refight a camgraphic adventures through racing games paign game of the entire ACW. In addition to shooting galleries and street fighters are Liberty or Death to the campaign game, historical battles satirized in this game. We will offer a warnwill be included on subsequent data disks. ing to the sensitive, however, the humor is Meanwhile, Sid Meier plans to finish a so vicious and the violence so overblown, at times, that some campaign game which integrates political, economic and military gamers are sure to be upset over the satirical slaughter of every command elements into a strategy game which involves the camcute and cuddly species by \"Blambo\" and the splattering of inno paign from roughly Harrisburg, PA to Richmond, VA (See the cent animals in the \"Roadkill\" game sequence. It is humorous, but interview with Meier in this issue's Computer Wargaming World it's \"Wayne's World\" on PCP and synergized with steroids. section). Three specific games in the action category are expected to be The Pacific Theater of World War II is also getting plenty of straight ports from video game consoles. Inindo: Way of the Ninja attention. In addition to the acclaimed Gary Grigsby's Pacific War is Koei's SNES and Sega dungeon romp, expected to be brought from SSI, Koei plans to release their long-awaited P.T.O. (Pacific to the IBM platform prior to the end of the year. Set in feudal Japan, Theater of Operations and Three-Sixty is rumored to be at work it features 18 different dungeon mazes and builds on the historical on a concept for Pacific Command from the designers of High maps/data generated in the production of the company's mainline Command. The former emphasizes sea and air power, while the George & Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"TOP SECRET ON plzenberg To From ALL NEW KGB AGENTS Special Instructions: CENTRAL CONTROL DESTROY INFORMATION ONCE RECEIVED AND REPORT TO YOUR COMPUTER TERMINAL FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ON YOUR MISSION GP Is your first day at Department P. Moscow KGB and you can now arranged for your transter here either has a strange sense o Despite all the upheaval in the Soviet government in recent year Stote Security, is still the most feared and pervasive intelligencergy only now the KGB itself is under secret surveillance by you Questions lead to more questions but one thing is clear about as safe as a long-tailed cat in a room full of rocking ac quickly and shrewdly to uncover the conspirang I can't help but think that whoever mor or hates your guis. elur years, the KGB, or Committee for one thing is clear ergothering network in the world, e conspirators before they uncover you. the KGB reeks of corruptio Gro pomoc acestor pennoms On pemotonland p ode ou macro atpost Hampos Tocking chairs. Be advised, comrade you mus eks of corruption and you're filled with surprising twists and intrigue * Movie-like storyline FEATURES: wer means no more wading through menu dnes Intuitive Icon-based Interface VCR-style \"REWIND\" option for keeping track  (Virgin GAMES of important clues and information doing through menu after menu KGB is a trademark of Virgin Games, Inc. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Lid.  1992 Virgin Games, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #122 (-1991VOLTA call. eight "


"ca s 0 .0 no Options Starr Duties Planning Phase som latter would be expected to be a detailed command simulation of from Mindcraft's Siege moving from the castle to the countryside the entire theater. in Ambush!, and diplomacy players may want to watch for the Fall In the European theater, Three-Sixty will release their third 93 game of economics, politics, diplomacy and war Dominion game in the successful V for Victory series, V for Victory: Market from the same company. Garden and are coming along nicely on their Victory At Sea strategic naval game, designed by Jim Dunnigan and being develPlayoff Tickets (Sports) oped by a team led by Dave Menconi (watch for an upcoming Although sports is a fascinating category, Tony LaRussa Base\"Behind the Screens» article). ball Il from Strategic Simulations, Inc. (see the Sneak Preview In a more generic setting, QQP is nearing completion on its in this issue) was the only product which we actually got to view Greatest Battles of the 20 Century disk for The Perfect General. It at the show. Brett Hull Hockey (Accolade), Pele Soccer (Accocontains scenarios for both theaters of Lowon lade) and David Robinson NBA Action World War II, as well as Korean, Vietnam(Spectrum HoloByte) were announced, ese and Middle Eastern scenarios. but not demonstrated. For those who want something a little farther in the future, Impressions plans to Live and in SVGA Color release an interplanetary warfare game. (Conclusion) Entitled When Two Worlds War, the game The general impression which we rewill feature speech recognition for comceived at the show was that the entertainmands (allowing gamers to program their ment software industry is very healthy and command set via a Windows program), that companies have, in general, scaled two-player linked competition (via serial back the number of titles which they are port for certain and, possibly via modem) developing for personal computers in favor and custom world generation via player-esof a limited number of premium titles. We tablished parameters. The publisher will hope that this will accomplish several very also release a sequel to Omnitrend's important objectives: 1) help get software popular tactical space combat game, Rules V for Victory: Market Garden back on time and reduce the number of of Engagement. Rules of Engagement 2 vaporware products; 2) lessen the number will feature tree structured campaigns of programs released with crash bugs; and 3) place more attention where gamers can not only play existing campaigns, but can edit on the design and production of each individual game to raise the their own campaigns and add their own animation sequences quality level of the entire industry. This may, indeed, be happenbetween scenarios using PC Animate Plus. ing. We certainly hope so! Cow Finally, the world of fantasy wargaming will find the armies So You Think You Wanna Race? Provelt. THE ULTIMATE DRIVING GAME CARADRIVER Test Drive Ten of the Best Electronic Arts believes that Car and Driver is the ultimate driving game for your IBM PC and they want to prove it to CGW readers. Now, in cooperation with Computer Gaming World, some lucky reader will get his/her speed kicks on a real track under the direction of a master at Bob Bondurant's School of High Peformance Driving. Electronic Arts will send a winning contestant to the Firebird International Raceway Complex in Phoenix, Arizona to attend a one day high performance driving course at the Bondurant School of High Performance Driving. This course is designed to make you a more confident driver by combining both racing and advanced street driving skills. Put your hands on the wheel of a Bondurant Ford Mustang GT or Ford Probe and learn to handle a car like you never before thought possible. The winner of this contest will be chosen in a random drawing. To enter, please send the following to Computer Gaming World: Your name, age, address and phone number. To qualify for the drawing, you must also correctly list the 10 cars and 10 tracks that are featured in Electronic Arts' Car and Driver program for the IBM PC. Deadline for entries is May 1, 1993. Participants must be 36 18 or older and available for travel on June 18, 1993. Please send your entry to the following address: Car and Driver Contest c/o Computer Gaming World P.O. Box 730 Yorba Linda CA 92686-9963 Contest regulations: I. U.S. residents only may participate. 2. No employees of Golden Empire Publications, Electronic Arts, E.A. alliliates or families of said employees are eligible to participate in the contest. 3. Electronic Arts cannot assume responsibility for lost or misdirected mailings and will not accept any entries after the deadline regardless of the postmark date. 4. Major prize winner will be required to sign an affidavity of eligibility and publicity release. 5. The winner will be required to provide Electronic Arts with his/her social security number. 6. The winner will be responsible for all taxes associated with the prize. 7. The winner will be required to sign any waiver to comply with all regulations required by Bondurant School of High Performance Driving. 8. All applicants must be at least 18 years old and competent to enter into a valid, binding contract. 9. For the name of the winner, send a self-addressed, stamped envelope to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686-9963. Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game ...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.' Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware...\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World Imprisoned in a Nazi Fortress In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape-or die trying. ANDALA WALTH SUR TTEL 967 19 300 3 9 7 Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLibr, Sound Blastert, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing BLH AN 5600 36 19% 53 Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. APOGEEN P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Adlib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #43 "


"LISA Grand 202/457-8728 SEE THE SHOW OF SHOWS The excitement continues. This summer, once again, the Consumer Electronics Show will be open to the public. Top name manufacturers will return to Chicago to share the latest technological advances in consumer electronics products. And the shows within the show are as exciting as the show itself. Interact with the everchanging world of Multimedia hardware and software. Immerse yourself in the technical magic being displayed through CD-ROM. Talk-along, sing-along, playalong and even teach-along through every multimedia device ever created. It's all here and all the major players are involved. See special displays like Innovations '93 featuring, the \"Best of the Best\" in consumer electronics, Technologies of the Future, and many more. Take part in the extremely valuable seminars hosted by well-known speakers and celebrities within the consumer electronics industry. Come see an even more exciting Consumer Electronics Show in 1993. Just call 1-800-388-6901 for show information or TICKETMASTER at 312-559-1212 for advance tickets for the CES Consumer Day-Sunday June 6th. Experience the show of shows. 202/457-8700 THE 1993 INTERNATIONAL SUMMER CONSUMER ELECTRONICS SHOW McCORMICK PLACE. McCORMICK CENTER HOTEL CHICAGO HILTON AND TOWERS JUNE 6TH-TRADE/CONSUMER DAY. JUNE 3RD THROUGH 5TH-TRADE DAYS "


"Forging Ahead or Fit to be Smashed? ny perspective on the future of CD-ROM entertainment that is not somewhat ambivalent is less than honest. The imagery for this section juxtaposes new technology and an anachronistic crafts1 manship to communicate the idea that CD-ROM entertainment products either need to forge into new directions or may be passed over like yesterday's horse and buggy. In this special section, CGW tries to provide a current answer to the title question. We begin with a special editorial, then follow with a look at CD-ROM products as they fit into three major sections: Shovelware (products where the added value comes from putting several existing products on a disk), Multi-media Expansions (new releases of existing products with extra graphics, sound and, often, digitized voice) and Original CD-ROM products. Then, Chuck Miller invites readers to become The 7th Guest and Charles Ardai launches into the Space Onest W CD-ROM. Tony Reveaux is committed to Refixion II: Museum or Hospital? and finds himself within the wonderland known as Alice. Finally, M. Evan Brooks assumes Coalition Command on Compton's Desert Storm CD-ROM, while 'CGW's sleuth in editor's clothing solves the mystery of Who Killed Sam Rupert? April 1993 Page 23 "


"| Dedom curvey Forging Ahead Fit to be smashed? sound and graphics, but this, of course, is secondary. Graphics and sound can enhance the gaming experience, but the heart of any product is the game play. CD-ROM technology does nothing to enhance the core elements that, in a good game, translate into \"play-\" and \"replay-ability.\" Crawford's fears were that the increased emphasis on the secondary aspects of game design would create a general trend toward less interesting games. Our experience with the recycled Pac-man design certainly does nothing to allay such fears. ye have already admitted that the image of a blacksmith forging a V CD may provide something of a mixed message. Yet, we firmly believe that any other message is misleading. Possibly more than any medium since television, CD-ROM products are in a position to be (to paraphrase Fred Allen) called a medium because they so very rarely offer anything outstanding. To be sure, there are still blacksmiths that make a living in the U.S., but they are not exactly cutting edge. Is this the fate that awaits CD-ROM? The wonders of CD-ROM technology have been well-delineated in earlier articles. CD-ROM provides extra storage space which in turn, makes possible the lavish use of graphics and digitized speech. The use of CD-ROM technology can simultaneously reduce the cost of goods for software publishers and provide part of the solution to the piracy problem. The extra storage space can allow for ondisk, interactive documentation and tutorials, as well as new gaming features. Finally, CD products could allow a smaller, standardized packaging which could benefit both gamers and retailers by allowing space for more titles on store shelves. The technology's promise is tremendous. There is, however, a dark side. This struck the editorial staff strongly as we previewed an original CD-ROM product with its lead designer. The animated graphics were flashy, the sound incredible, but the game play seemed a bit weak. We asked the designer about the game design concept and he confidently stated that the game play was \"very much like Pac-man.\" Pac-man?! Have we come all this way to go back to '80s arcade designs? The comment took us back to an editorial written by Chris Crawford, game designer and official industry \"voice in the wilderness,\" in his Journal of Computer Game Design. He expressed strong doubts about the future of CD-ROM because, as he stated, the CD-ROM is \"a data-intensive technology, not a process-intensive one.\" The CD is data-intensive in that it can provide huge amounts of quality promise do nothing to enhance this core aspect of game design, and do everything to distract from it. Though it is still early for CD-ROM games, the current signs suggest that the publishers may be losing their focus. Why the proliferation of shovelware titles and \"enhanced\" CD-ROM version of existing games? The industry is cautious. All the major players are watching and waiting and reaching out into an unknown market with sensitive antennae. They are afraid to commit resources to new CDROM products before the market has proven itself worthy of an investment. But this creates an industry double-bind. The consumers are also waiting — waiting for the publishers to create products worth another hardware upgrade. More than 63% of CGW readers (who responded to the demographic question for the Top 100) stated that they had not yet purchased a CD-ROM and were looking for a good deal. They were also, we suspect, waiting for a compelling reason to purchase one (i.e. the breakthrough game which could only be purchased in CD-ROM format). Quality software drives the hardware market, and until someone is willing to take the risk of producing original, quality products for the platform, the consumers aren't going to buy. Still, the publishers wait, and re-publish games that the majority of their market has already played. Unless someone breaks this stand-off we'll all wait around until the whole enterprise quietly fades away. Yet, there is still hope. Many of the major publishers have CD-ROM projects on their list for '93. And, while there are many multi-media enhancements of old products on this list, there are a few original titles. Groups like ICOM and small Macintosh developers have been unequivocal in their dedication to the CDROM. And some major publishers seem to be tired of having CD-ROM projects on their tentative schedules and are finally moving on their plans, despite evidence suggesting that the market is not as strong as hoped. CGW The warning to the industry is thus, the focus must be gameplay, gameplay, gameplay. Take one look at the CGW Hall of Fame and consider the games' common element. Though widely divergent in style and subject matter, all but one game has the \"game-lock\" factor. Among CGW editors, the phrase \"I've got game-lock\" is a good sign for a game company and a bad one for their social lives. These games, by virtue of their richness, depth, \"process-intensivity,\" what have you, pull the players into their world so strongly that they become \"locked-on\" with little hope of salvation. The advantages that CD-ROM Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"CO-ROM Curvey A Walk on the CD Side of Town A Survey of CD-ROM Entertainment Repackaged Software (aka Shovelware) Access: The Collector's Edition (ACcess) This disc offers nostalgic gamers the entire \"back issue\" collection from Access's early days as a publisher of games for the MS-DOS platform. On this rather dusty menu one will find Access's brutally violent action game, Crime Wave, which features some of the very first partial-motion digitized video seen on the PC. One will also find their first interactive story, Mean Streets, and the spiritual father of Links, World Class Leader Board, along with three Famous Courses expansion modules. Finally, Echelon, their preWing Commander space flight simulator, can be dusted off and joyridden about the galaxy for a few kicks. IBM ($99.95). The five games mentioned in the entry above are included, except that Chessmaster 2000 is replaced by Chessmaster 2100, the expanded sequel. Other new additions include: Loopz, an abstract strategy/puzzle game where the player attempts to create the most complicated configuration of blocks; Backgammon and Checkers, everyone's coffee house favorites; Puzzle Gallery, a huge collection of traditional word and maze games, and finally, Robot Tank, a slightly more complicated and marginally better looking version of the Atari 2600 \"classic,\" Tank! IBM ($99.95). SECRET WEAPONS LUFTWAFFE Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe (LucasArts) Software Toolworks, the reigning king of CD repackaging efforts, presents LucasArts's excellent simulation of the air war over Germany. Along with the bizarre experimental aircraft included in the original game, the package includes the four plane add-on disks, adding the Do335 Pfeil, the P-38 Lightning, the He 162 Volksjager, and the P-80 Shooting Star jet fighter to the pilot's destructive roster. An excellent package for the fan of flight and \"What if?\" historical speculation. IBM ($99.95). Ultima I-VI Series (Origin) After defeating the foaming horde of Software Etc. salespeople, you search their bodies to discover a chest. Opening the chest you find this collection of the first two trilogies of the Ultima series. Venture back, young one, to the days when software was sold in sandwich bags and best selling games could be written by college students in their spare time. (Everyone who remembers Akalabeth, raise your hand. Please buzz the nurse if you need assistance.) The complete history of Ultima is here from the simple, single character hack-fest in Ultima I, to the graphically and philosophically sophisticated in computer game terms, at least), Ultima IV. Distributed by Software Toolworks. IBM ($99.95). CD GAME PACK II ST LOOPZ CD Game Pack (Software Toolworks) — This package offers a quick way to build up a young software library, albeit with games that were mostly mediocre even in their prime. The one excluded case is Chessmaster 2000 which held the title of \"Strongest Chess Game\" for a brief software season. One can experience again its former greatness in stunning CGA graphics. Also included is the action game, Bruce Lee, a product of the martial arts game explosion in the mid-80s, as well as Beyond the Black Hole, a collection of action games in migraine inducing 3-D, and a GinKing/Cribbage King double pack. And finally, there will be plenty near-death experiences in Life & Death, a surgery simulation where one can never earn \"extra lives.\" IBM ($79.95). CD Game Pack II (Software Toolworks) An illustration of this game box accompanies the entry for \"Shovelware\" in CGW's unofficial gaming dictionary. Cybergenic Ranger (Mainstream America) If one missed the first opportunity to beat up baddies as the world's first cybergenic man (and if one has deep regrets about it) then galactic vengeance can be had with a spin of this disc. Featuring VGA graphics and RealSound, Access's pc-speaker sound system, this grand scale action game is served up a la carte (i.e. with no enhancements. IBM ($49.95). Rotor, Airball, and Time Bandit (Mainstream America) — From the deepest, darkest recesses of the collective harddrive come these three action antiques on a bright and shiny CD. Rotor is a clone of the side-scrolling arcade game's where one had to pilot a spaceship through a severely armed cavern. Time Bandit is an action game of grand scale, spanning across several time periods. And Airball is an action strategy game where the player leads a ball through 150 levels of visual/spatial puzzles in the 3-D isometric view (a la Populous). As added incentive (as if the games weren't enough!) the CD also includes 40 MBs of space photos that can be viewed with the included slide show program. IBM ($29.95). DO Wing Commander with Ultima VI (Origin) — The two biggest hits of Origin's big hit list can be had with one fell swoop of the credit card. Wing Commander was the most highly rated game in CGW's history before being topped by Civilization, and Ultima VI is considered the best Ultima in the series by Ultima aficionados, even surpassing the glory of its successor, UVII: The Black Gate. DisApril 1993 Page 25 "


"COROM Curvey tributed by Software Toolworks. IBM ($79.95) What the Diskette Can Do, the Disc Can Do Better (Enhanced Games) The Adventures of Willy Beamish (Sierra) — Since the goal of The Adventures of Willy Beamish was to create an interactive cartoon, it should be obvious that the addition of new frames to smooth the animated sequences and digitized voices would add to the entertainment experience. There aren't any new puzzles, but the entire effect is more convincing than that of the original. IBM, SEGA CD ($69.95). player. The CD music is of decent quality but the voice-acting is often strained and injurious to the sensitive ear. IBM ($39.99). Cosmic Osmo (Cyan) — Cosmic Osmo was one of the first free-form exploration games for young children, and, despite its Tower-quality graphics, remains one of the best. In this Carolian world Mice play cheese pianos and pilot bathyspheres, potatoes speak and vegetables sing of vinaigrette in this delightful little environment where anything and everything can be a portal to a different world. Mac ($59.95). Jones in the Fast Lane (Sierra) — As if there wasn't enough stress in your life, Sierra offers gamers the chance to run a simulated rat race in this computerized family boardgame. Player's determine their own victory conditions in terms of \"life goal's\" which one must meet and surpass to win. This enhanced CD-Rom version offers animated video clips of live actors and digitized speech, though the acting falls victim to the \"Front Office Stars\" syndrome. IBM ($69.95). Loom (LucasArts) — Brian Moriarty's masterfully woven tale of Bobbin Threadgood and the Guild of Weavers has the addition of children and adult voice actors playing the inhabitants of Mother Goose Land. Each mini-quest that a child completes in this animated 3-D world accompanied by a cute sing-song nursery rhyme and a spoken thank you from the characters. It's a great way to teach kids the ol' classics. How much is that CD in the Windows? IBM ($59.95). Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts) — Guybrush Threepwood's original showdown with Le Chuck has found its way into Optical Media Land. Along with the original graphics, the highly regarded SCUMM interface, and wonderful selfdeprecating wit, players can now play the game in five languages (the text comes in English, German, Spanish, French and Italian flavors) and are treated to a CD calypso/reggae soundtrack. Que bueno, mon! IBM ($79.95). Stellar 7 (Sierra) — Dynamix's '90s version of the classic coin-op tank game BattleZone has been garnished with a new AGME GERBE NET INC CAMENT NRARANT Qua Qull L2L LA SEX 2012 ceny. CAN RAJAM 73 SAREER Arthur's Teacher Trouble BattleChess Enhanced (Interplay) If one enjoyed the twist that the twisted minds of Interplay added to the great-granddaddy of games in their original BattleChess, then one will certainly be tickled with the new level of warped humor achieved in this multimedia upgrade. Forty-five minutes of CD-quality music, 31 MBs of new animations and a 25 minute chess tutorial have beefed up this popular tongue-in-cheek chess system. MPC ($79.95). Chessmaster 3000 (Software Toolworks) — Along with Activision's Sargon chess series, the Chessmaster series is one of the oldest and most respected chess systems around, going through three revisions over the years. The fourth edition is this enhanced multimedia package which offers: a broader choice of computer opponent strength, several new chess sets to choose from, the ability to save and review old games, advice in spoken English, and enhanced music and sound. MPC($99.95). Conan the Cimmerian (Virgin) — Robert E. Howard's hulking hero of the Hyborean Age hacks apart hostiles in this role-playing game with a heavy emphasis on action oriented combat. As in the DOS version, Conan must search the cliché and confused land of Howard's creation, searching towns for the powerful goodies necessary to defeat Thoth Amon and avenge the death of his wife. New to the game is a good deal of CD audio which enables the narrator and characters to speak to the BattleChess Enhanced been dressed up in its Sunday best for its appearance on the CD. Now, along with its stunning art work by Mark Ferrari and its enchanting Swan Lake soundtrack, players are treated to the best voice-acting yet seen in this young genre. This game was meant for the CD-ROM, and, if players don't mind the brevity of the game, it is a must-have product. IBM ($99.95). the Manhole (Cyan) This was the first and most well-known children's exploration program designed by Cyan, the creators of Cosmic Osmo. Like the world of Osmo, the alternate universe through the Manhole is a cute, funny, and bizarre world of improbabilities in the spirit of Lewis Carroll that will appeal to any preschool/early grade school child. The CD-Rom version appears to have a few extra sounds and musical bits. Mac ($34.95) IBM version distributed by Activision ($79.95). Mixed-Up Mother Goose (Sierra) — An already excellent children's program from Roberta Williams only gets better wit Where in the World is Carmen San Diego? Deluxe Edition CD soundtrack and a byte-sized portion of spoken word audio for its CD-ROM release. Now, as the player views the rotaling 3-D enemy vehicles during the pre-game briefing, a sexy cyberesque female provides a spoken description of the enemy's capabilities. IBM ($59.95). Space Quest IV (Sierra) — As reviewed on page 34 & 36 of this issue. Roger Wilco's battle against the Time Rippers is now narrated by Garry Owens, the voice of Laff-In, The Gong Show, and the cartoon series, Space Ghost. Owens's contributions to the game take the twisted humor of designers Mark Crowe and Scott Murphy to a new level. IBM ($55.95) Where in the World is Carmen SanDiego? Deluxe Edition (Broderbund) — She's everywhere else, so why no CDROM? Carmen has really been dolled up for this version of the penultimate edutainment product. The cosmetics include more countries, more location graphics, more animations, more clues, spoken parts for interactions with most characters, foreign language clues and authentic recordings of ethnic music at every location. Highly recommended. IBM (No suggested price — see your dealer). Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"M Curveu Authenticated Originals (Fresh CD Products) Alice (Cameo Interactive) — As reviewed on page 40, this interactive artwork is a visually stunning interpretation of Lewis Carroll's best known literary creation. Though not really much of a game, the imaginative sight and sound discoveries in store for the Mac CD-ROM owner certainly qualify it as entertainment. Mac ($99). implementing the concept. In this product, we're in familiar literary territory — the haunted house. Yes, the old geezer has once again kicked off and left several scheming heirs to figure out who gets what of the inheritance. Spooks and murders abounds as players explores the comic book-style renderings of Steere Manor. The combination of a spoken-dialogue story, a nice sound track, and the novelty of the medium saves this one from its hackneyed story. IBM. CDTV ($49.95). Actim Mentor Leccel Windows Layout to Chess 00012 1:04 NKRD a wide though cliché variety of characters), listen to their alibis, search for physical evidence, and then guess whodunnit. A multimedia diversion for the whole family. IBM. CDTV ($49.95). Desert Storm with Coalition Command (Comptons New Media) — As reviewed on pages 42 & 44, this product is a database of facts concerning the Gulf War, along with an ill-wrought game of command. The database is comprehensive and includes excellent digitized images from the Desert Storm/Shield conflict, but the game Coalition Command appears to be a hastily designed afterthought that will please neither the casual historian or the hard core wargamer. IBM ($49.95). Just Grandma and Me (Broderbund) The first Living Book in Broderbund's acclaimed series, this product helps early readers by reading the story aloud and highlighting written text as it is spoken. However the real magic is in the dozens of cute animations that reward a child's explorations with the mouse. The quality in this series of game is unmatched and goes with the highest recommendation. Mac, IBM ($49.95) L-Zone (Synergy) This bizarre 3-D environment hails from Japan and offers its users the opportunity to roam around a deserted space station, pressing buttons and twirling dials to create all kinds of visual havoc. Though there are a few elements that a generous person could call puzzles, it is more like a museum of animated graphic effects than anything else. Mac ($99.00). TIMES Thinking ITS SECS248 Score: 0.02 Depth: Chessmaster 3000 Arthur's Teacher Trouble (Broderbund) You know a kids program is good when you can't keep the adults away from it. This is the second book in the Living Books series that began with the young children's hit Grandma & Me. This product moves the audience age up from preschoolers & kindergartners to the early grammar school kids. Indeed, Arthur is a third grader faced with a tough teacher and an inter-school spelling bee. Each \"page\" in the story is read aloud to children as they follow the highlighted text, and each screen is alive with hotspots that reward mouse clicks with amazing sounds and animation. It is a beautiful program and should be at the very top of any parents list. Comes with an illustrated book upon which the program is based. IBM, Mac ($59.95). Beyond the Wall of Stars (Creative Multimedia Corp.) — Although this product is really more of an interactive novel for juveniles than a «game» per se, it does feature some game elements. Gamers get a chance to select their crew and make command decisions that will determine the direction of the plot. The interactivity is more limited than traditional computer gamers are used to experiencing, but is more satisfying than that in a \"Choose Your Own Adventure.\" Mac ($49.99) The Case of the Cautious Condor (TigerMedia) — Though the story was manufactured in the Orient Express Murder Mystery machine, this interactive comic book is novel enough to warrant a serious look. Combining a full spoken dialogue with hundreds of cartoon frames, Condor may have the audio-visual continuity necessary to make this an engaging story. One must round up the usual suspects (which includes Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective (ICOM) — ICOM has been dedicated to the CD-ROM from day one and their games are designed to take full advantage of the CD's capabilities. IN their first multimedia production, players direct the actions of Conan Doyle's classic character. As player's interview the suspects in this game's three mystery scenarios, they will be treated to 90 minutes of full motion digital video running at approximately 15 frames per second. The game was produced more like a film than a traditional game, requiring 50 acting roles and several Victorian sets and costumes. The acting is a bit over ambitious in parts and the replayability is limited, but on the whole this one of the best \"interactive movie\" experiences available. TurboGrafx-16, IBM, Mac, CDTV ($69.95). Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective II (ICOM) — The sequel to the product above, this interactive mystery game offer three more scenarios for sleuths to solve. As in the original game, this product claims 90 minutes of 15 frame per second video. This new version adds some much needed features to the video viewing mode, namely fast-forward and rewind buttons, making fact gathering and checking much easier. It also adds an acting judge, whereas the original was played\" by a static picture. IBM. Mac ($69.95). Spaceship Warlock (Reactor) — Mac owners can butter the popcorn, curl up with their favorite mouse, and go on a wild multimedia ride with this interactive science fiction flick. Upon waking in the dark streets in a dark city in a dark future, the player must escape the violence of urban life by catching a lift on a snazzy space sheep Loom CD-ROM Museum or Hospital (Synergy) As reviewed on page 38, this production is a surrealistic exploratory experience for the Macintosh. Players wander the futuristic halls of a museum or hospital (you make the call?), clicking on items to invoke bizarre animated sequences. Game or art? Who knows? The real question is — would you pay a hundred bucks to experience it? Mac ($99) Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows (Tiger Media) — Tiger Media wasn't the first to come up with the idea for interactive comic books, but they are the first to have the technology capable of adequately April 1993 Page 27 "


"ROOT  liner, where he or she will eventually have a run in with the dreaded SS Warlock. Beautiful graphics and digitized music/speech/sounds are the players constant companion. One of the first commercial CD entertainment product on the Mac and still one of the best. Mac ($95.00). Victor Vector & Yondo (Sanctuary Woods) — From a brand new multimedia developer that boasts Shelley Duvall among its staff comes this light-weight adventure of paradoxical time-meddling. The player commands special agent Yondo, the cybernetically enhanced St. Bernard, and his human, Victor Vector, as they try to save the history (while butchering established notions of space & time) by nabbing artifacts of power from the past for safe keeping in the future. Heavy on the flash and light on the substance, this product is more of a talking comic book than a graphic adventure. The music score is nice but the digitized speech suffers from the common ailments of poor voiceacting and weak script. Mac ($59.95). through a human body with reflexes swift enough to drive their probe through an organic \"rollercoaster\" without causing any damage. Out of this World (Interplay): There will be more game play and the storyline will be extended. The intent is to make it a bigger game, not just the same game on CD. Anyone who played the floppy disk version will want to play this expanded version. Power Modeler Series (Revell-Monogram): More than a set of assembling and painting instructions on CD, each release in this series will feature a simulation of driving or flying the three vehicles covered on each CD. Early looks at the products make them seem like much more than we initially expected. Rebel Assault (LucasArts): Imagine a Star Wars action game with a 3-D perspective. The action sequences will be familiar to anyone who has seen the film trilogy, from rodent hunting in the canyons of Tattoine to the asteroid-filled obstacle course of Empire Strikes Back. Actual footage from the Francis Ford Coppola film is used to interlace action and story. Early indications are that the game will be primarily an arcade \"shooter\" that loosely follows the film's plot. In addition to the IBM CD-ROM, Sony will release a Sega CD-ROM version. Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space (Interplay): The CD-ROM version of this space race strategy game is expected to feature more animation and more digitized film segments than the floppy disk version of the game. As noted in CGW's sneak preview of the product (#101), this could be the most ideal use of multi-media yet for a computer game. Dune CD-ROM (Virgin): Not only has the design team added footage from the film, but they have rendered the entire planetary surface of Arrakis. This makes the travel required within the game much more enjoyable and less likely that gamers will opt to jump from one locale to another. The digitized speech also adds to the suspension of disbelief. The Iron Helix (Spectrum HoloByte): This upcoming action/adventure game was previewed in CGW #104. Gamers explore a huge spaceship as they try to avoid and then, expunge an evil security probe. It is Alien meets Fail Safe in terms of plot. Jutland (Software Sorcery): In many ways, World War I was the grand era of naval surface action. Jutland builds upon the eponymous battle and rich tactical engagements of this era, while also providing a cinematic look and role-playing aspect to the game. Kasparov's Gambit (Electronic Arts): The multi-media version of the upcoming chess game will feature more digitized footage of the World Chess Champion providing tutorial information than the floppy disk version, as well as more 3-D chess sets. The additional storage space may also allow the library of annotated matches to be expanded beyond the 500 in the standard MS-DOS version. Legend of Kyrandia (Virgin): The CDROM version is expected to feature the same excellent game with the addition of digitized speech Lord of the Rings (Interplay): In addition to the use of digitized speech and the inclusion of film footage from Ralph Bakshi's full-length animated film version of the Tolkien classic, Interplay has cleaned up the interface and animation such that even those who did not like the regular version of the game may enjoy the multimedia version of their Fellowship of the Ring CRPG. Microcosm (Psygnosis): Fantastic Voyage meets Inner Space in this fascinating action/simulation. Players must travel Who Killed Sam Rupert? (Creative Multimedia Corp.): As reviewed on page 46. this is yet another game in the murder mystery mold. Players investigate the murder of Sam Rupert, restaurant owner, by conducting forensic research and interviewing suspects. The voice acting is decent and the digitized photos give it a very realistic feel. It's interesting while it lasts, but, like many of the games in this style, doesn't last very long. Mac ($39.99) Up and Coming (Near Future of CD-ROM) Beyond Shadowgate (ICOM): In a CDROM sequel to Mindscape's Shadowgate (developed by ICOM), the point-and-click adventure series will continue. In its latest incarnation, the adventure will feature continuous scrolling whenever the player's character is exploring, but the capacity to freeze action whenever the protagonist is examining an object. In addition to the IBM CD-ROM, the game is expected to be available on the TurboGrafx-16 as a CD product. Bram Stoker's Dracula (Psygnosis): Shield Level 10 al 444 Score 001105 Return to Zork (Activision): The CD version of the upcoming adventure game should have a 7th Guest-style walkthrough of each location. However, once the gamer has been through a location, it will be possible to skip over animations and conversations. The design team expects to use 45,000 digital images for the animation sequences in the CD game. The 7th Guest (Virgin): Trilobyte's artistic/programming masterpiece is previewed in this issue and a sequel is rumored in this issue's Rumor Bag (see page 88). SimCity CD-ROM (Interplay): Interplay has acquired the rights to produce a multi-media version of the best-selling simulation/strategy game of urban planning. Early indications are that there will be film footage of simulated newscasts and, possibly, a new game element. Total Distortion (Pop Rocket): Total Distortion is an adventure game where gamers take saved elements of an adventure game and use them to create a bizarre music video. Ideally, this should be a game that's made loud to be played loud. Cow Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"Slow Screen Redraw Needn't Be Par For The Course... OO You know what we're talking about... those other golf simulations that seem to take forever to draw the screen. Well, Wilson ProStaff Golf puts an end to all that waiting with fast-action screen redraws! So what does this get you? Faster game play and less frustration, for one thing. Need we say more? O.K., since you asked, we should also mention the wide variety of side-game options — things like Shoot Out, Stroke Play, Match Play and Best Ball. You get eight options in individual play, a whopping 13 in team play... simply pick and choose to create your own personal playing style. Wilson ProStaff Golf is an ideal game for golfers of all levels, from beginner to expert. Making a shot is quick and easy just select a club and adjust your stance, take aim, then choose your power level and ball spin and watch it fly! An undulating grid shows every curve and contour of the 010. fairways and greens, for greater accuracy as you plan your shot. Finally, one game brings it all together to give golfers what they've been looking for a challenging course, intuitive controls and realistic game play. So don't get teed off at the competition, go with a real winner. Wilson ProStaff Golf. ProStaff Featuring Fast-Action Screen Re-Draw GOLF STORE ProStaff KONAMI NOVETA Wilson and ProStaff are registered trademarks of Wilson Sporting Goods Co. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd.  1992 Konami. All rights reserved. designed & developed by KONAMI NOVOTRADE INTERNATIONAL CHOLE 1 Circle Reader Service #79 ANCAIRALI "


"all me TIME PROD NO. SCENE TAKE DIRECIORI PRODUCED BY Mihing a Guest Appearance A Sneak Preview of Virgin's The 7th Guest by Chuck Miller D ew games have created such anticipation during the past year as has The 7th Guest (Guest), an Interactive Drama 1 on CD-ROM co-produced by Virgin Games and Trilobyte. Fortunately, the wait for this long anticipated release is almost over. In fact, many readers may already have a copy in hand by the time this preview hits print (Guest is presently scheduled for release at the end of February). a sinister secret. The story, however, began long before this less-than-saintly gent became a wealthy toymaker. Stauf, at one time, was a drifter and thief, roaming from one town to the next. His wretched lifestyle continued until one night when he had a vision, a dream about a doll. Inside the House on the Hill When he awoke the next morning. Stauf carved the doll from his dream. The dreams continued, as did the fame of this newfound toymaker. Each time he dreamt of a new toy, he would reproduce it. That is, until a series of mysterious deaths occurred among children who bought one of his toys. The plot further thickened when Stauf himself suddenly met an untimely demise. Now, the drama commences when six guests are summoned anonymously to Stauf's hilltop mansion, the player being The 7th Guest. My first exposure to Guest was at a press showing during the 1992 Summer Consumer Electronics Show at Virgin's private suite, an experience I will long remember. A section of their suite, behind black curtains, was constructed to resemble an old, abandoned Victorian house complete with fireplace, grandfather clock, tufted highback chairs and sufficient cobwebs to create the perfect environment to preview Guest. The room even had that distinctive musty smell expected of an old, dilapidated structure. In other words, the atmosphere was ideal. Calling Upon a Medium In the center of these haunting accoutrements sat two computer monitors, their screens framed with antique picture frames, and two rodents of the digital variety. While a video of the introduction to Guest was projected on a large, framed screen above the fireplace, visitors were allowed to investigate the computerized drama firsthand. I was clearly impressed, as were most attendees. To date, few developers have taken advantage of the CD-ROM medium. Most have simply used the extra storage capacity to serve as a repository for compilations of previously released works (referred to in the industry as \"shovelware\") or as the means of providing audio enhanced versions of their disk-based products. This, however, is not entirely negative. It simply fails to fully exploit the benefits of CD-ROM. The Stauf Dreams are Made Of Apart from several cutting edge titles on the Macintosh platform (Spaceship Warlock, for instance, and a few products from ICOM, Guest is one of the first games for MS-DOS compatibles that has been designed from the ground up to take full advantage of the potential that CD-ROM has to offer. In fact, not only does Guest consume an entire CD-ROM (disc one contains Old man Stauf, an evil toymaker, built a house--one holding Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"chealk preveun) he In Puzzled and Perplexed approximately 619MB of data), it actually requires TWO. Not only from the sheer volume of data, but from the first screen to appear, the player knows that Guest is a substantial offering--if just on sight and sound alone. Guest is described as an Interactive Drama, but just what does that mean in relation to game play? Well, I will clarify up front that Guest is not an animated adventure in the traditional sense, nor is it a role-playing game. It may be best described as a puzzle-based, free-form graphic adventure. If the player understands this in advance, he or she will not be disappointed. An Apparition of Beauty Few games have taken full advantage of high resolution Super VGA graphics, but Guest sets a graphic adventure precedent in offering superb, photorealistic images rendered in 256-color SuperVGA (640 x 320). The images created for this eerie adventure appear in a letterbox format centered vertically on the screen with a black \"void\" above and below the image area. Successfully completing the game revolves around solving 20 puzzles. primarily of the logic variety. One can expect to find word-based puzzles, those of the Rubic variety, spatial puzzles and at least one maze. As far as the story's development is concerned, the player is allowed pretty much free reign in following characters, exploring the mansion and in solving the numerous puzzles. This all lends a non-linear feel to the game. Skeletons in the Closet The computerized world of Guest is also three dimensional in its orientation. When the player travels through the 32 rooms of this mansion, movement is realistically represented just as it would appear in a movie from a first person perspective. So much so, that it seems difficult to believe that this house exists only within the computer. In light of all Guest has going for it, one must ask if there are any rotting corpses lying around this digital dwelling? Well, to be precise, yes and no. Those who were expecting a quest-style game along more traditional role-playing or animated adventure lines, may find less than they had hoped for in Guest. Conversely, players desiring to immerse themselves in a puzzle-based world of gothic horror will be quite elated with their discovery. In the final analysis, though, I expect most gamers with an MS-DOS compatible and a CD-ROM drive to eventually purchase a copy of Guest. It is a must buy product with, I believe, a very broad appeal. Key to the realism evident in Guest is the full motion video employed. All movement through the house, including the numerous spectral appearances, occurs at 15 frames per second (on an adequate machine. See below.). In total, more than 30 minutes of smooth-flowing video are used to illustrate the ghostly apparitions, not including the time necessary to explore the entire mansion itself. Thanks to over two years of work producing the detailed graphical renderings employed, at a cost of over a half-million dollars, Guest offers the player a true 3-D environment to explore with scenery that scrolls and rotates perfectly as the player changes his or her point of view. The only significant barrier to enjoying this groundbreaking product concerns hardware, a result in part of the diversity that exists on the PC platform and due to the requirements imposed by the game itself. Guest should not even be considered unless one owns a 386DX system, a fast 16 bit SuperVGA card and at least IMB of RAM. Though not required, the minimum I suggest is a 386/33MHz system with 2 MB of RAM, a fast SuperVGA card with IMB of video RAM and a CD-ROM drive with at least a 150K transfer rate. Anything less will be incapable of providing optimal performance. Creaking Doors and Dripping Faucets Won't You Be My Guest? As striking as Guest looks, it sounds even better. The musical soundtrack, presented in CD quality audio, is the creation of The Fat Man, well known and respected for his work on Wing Commander II. Guest is destined to become the new standard for his musical talents. If I were to single out the strongest and most distinctive contribution to the unparalleled atmosphere created in Guest, it would be the music employed. Turn off the lights, turn up the volume and prepare for that inevitable chill to run down the spine. Guest is that affectively evocative. The 7th Guest is a special treat for fans of Gothic horror, setting new standards for graphic and audio quality in computer games. It is a stunning product. Virgin certainly has high hopes for Guest, as well, since a sequel is already in the works for release later this year (encompassing Stauf's house and the surrounding town of Harley). Also key to the aural heights achieved is the superior quality of the digitized audio accompanying the ghostly video footage. Recording and reproduction of live actors' voices has been handled with meticulous attention by the game's audio engineers. No \"snap, crackle, pop\" or other audio distortion is present. At $99.99 retail, Guest will require a substantial investment. However, what the player receives in enjoyment will more than compensate. I look forward to pitting my wits against Stauf as his guest and solving the puzzles in his mysterious house. I believe many others will welcome the invitation, too. CGW April 1993 Page 31 "


"WOD Become the World's Greatest Conqueror! LEX Mar STE ELETTROTTL JUEET TIL \"TELLET 1991 OOD Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia, an untamed land of conquest & glory. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forest to your advantage as you battle across the Cascatian Realm, to become the reigning king. Just about the best strategy and tactics game you will ever play. Circle Reader Service #97 NINE BEAUTIFUL SCENARIOS. A RANDOM MAP GENERATOR. UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH.  21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI). MODEM PLAY. COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY. RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS. SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS. The \"Conquered Kingdoms\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commodore. "


"BATTLES LETINY ZOEK Conquer the world in «Battles of Destiny.\" Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state of the art global conquest simulation. It's simple to play, but only a true master will reign in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Challenging Artifical Intelligence (9 levels of difficulty) Air, ground and naval combat 22 different units to construct Modem play Over 20 beautiful worlds to conquer Complete player history Dynamic scoring system Campaign play Several dudes holistic gaming The \"Battles of Destiny\" computer game is IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  1992 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #97 "


"CO-ROM beveinn In Space, Now Everyone con Hear You Scream Sierra's CD-ROM Edition of Space Quest IV by Charles Ardai SPACE QUEST IV TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Space Quest IV IBM with CD-ROM VGA $69.95 None Mark Crowe, Scott Murphy Sierra Coarsegold, CA (800) 326-6654 ARTED ANTENITORI AND THE TIME RIPRERS finds a copy of the Space Quest IV hint book), and a taste of «Back to the Future\" (the plot has Roger traveling from one Space Quest sequel to another to rescue his yet-to-be-born son from arch-villain Sludge Vohaul), and one ends up with a Mulligan stew of satire, pratfalls, and nonsense that may not be haute cuisine but is certainly filling. Good news: the CD-ROM edition is even more filling than the original. It accentuates and improves all of the game's strong points. The gags are funnier when read aloud; the graphics are even better without paragraphs of yellow text obscuring them; and the elimination of reading as the player's main activity gives one more freedom just to watch, listen, and get drawn into the adventure. SIERRA eople love Space Quest IV not for its puzzles, which are all pretty simple, 1 nor for its storyline, which is a deliberately hokey space opera, but for its gags (the best of which rival Douglas Adams for sheer silliness) and, even more, for its lavish spectacle. The animation, the movie-quality soundtrack, the exciting settings, and the imaginative visuals make Space Quest IV one of the most attentiongrabbing games to come along in years. To begin with, most of the game takes place against gorgeous, painted backgrounds. This raises high expectations which are amply met in the foregrounds, where one finds scenes filled with the kind of two-fisted, hold-on-to-your-hat action that used to occupy Buster Crabbe's time in the old Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers serials. Our hero, the intrepid Roger Wilco, escapes from the clutches of the dreaded Sequel Police! He's carried off to the eyric of a giant pterodactyl! He goes mano-a-fisho with a giant sea slug! He's kidnapped by the luscious Latex Babes of Estros! It's enough to give a guy a heart Mutter. On the gag side, people in the industry are still talking about the in-jokes the game makes at the expense of software publishers and retailers. The game also skewers many of science fiction's sacred cows and parodies arcade games mercilessly with a simulation called \"Ms. Astro Chicken.\" Add a bit of Benny Hill (at one point Roger has to cross-dress to fool a computer), a pinch of Mel Brooks' \"Spaceballs\" (Roger The Sounds of Science (Fiction) Space Quest IV not only talks, it coos, belches, vomits, throbs, threatens, shrieks and, twice, almost curses. Every word that was displayed on the screen in the original edition is now spoken, even down to the incidental text. («It would serve no purpose,\" \"You can't use that here,\" etc.) Of course, the big question is how good the voices are, in light of the somewhat wooden line readings for which Sierra has become known as a result of the CD-ROM edition of King's Quest V. The answer is that the voices Sierra chose this time are Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"ROME WASNT BUILT IN A DAY How long will it take you... "


" BUInn CD-ROM excellent not stiff, not unpleasant and that the readers' performances are a delight. of robots, aliens, and assorted spear carriers, all with something to say. Normally, comic readings are harder to pull off than straight readings, but these voice actors manage it. Except for a few who try too hard to give their characters character (two of the robots sound like water-cooler impressions of Mae West and Inspector Clouseau) and the fact that the narrator stumbles once or twice over scientific doubletalk (he has trouble saying \"the powerful quad-quark drives rev to life\" but who wouldn't?), the game's audio track is a complete success. sisting of only two to seven puzzles. There are also too many situations which depend on good timing and hand-eye coordination. I had to die and restore 43 times before I managed to navigate Roger through a zero-gravity shootout. While this means that there are better adventure games than Space Quest IV, there are few games that are more entertaining. Fewer still are improved so much in the transition to CD-ROM. Space vuest XL TE The character from whom one hears most often is the narrator, an unattributed performance by Gary Owens of Laugh-In and The Gong Show fame (as well as the voice of Saturday morning cartoondom's Space Ghost). That's excellent since Roger, appropriately enough, sounds like the hapless, nervous, bewildered lunk he is. Sludge Vohaul, looking and sounding like a Vogon refugee from The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, puts in a couple of sinister, holographic appearances. The Latex Babes, arguably computer gaming's most sexist creations, squeal \"Our hero!\" when Roger rescues them. On top of all these there is a legion Not as clear a success is the gameplay, which still suffers from the shortcomings reviewers noted when Space Quest IV first came out. Being on a CD does nothing to make the game longer, for instance; there are still only seven sequences, each conIn some ways, Space Quest IV is the perfect multimedia game: it looks and sounds great and it offers an experience one could not get from a floppy-based game. With a few more games this good on the market, CD-ROM naysayers will have to eat their words. With this game, they can already start nibbling. CGW COMPUTER BASKETBALL THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID IBM APPLE IL C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! COURT-SIDE COLLEGE BASKETBALL Included are 286 teams from the most recent season and 70 all-time greats  Player statistical accuracy from ability to tire and foul to overall contribution factor Stats compiler . You determine style of play. whether to press or use 45 second clock, weather game played at home court or neutral site and much more! Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors, Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1. 2. 3 or 4). Drakkhen. Pool of Radiance. Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4. Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889. Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2). Keel the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7), Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire. Tunnels and Trolls. Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday. Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness. Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000. Planet's Edge. Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule . All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies. 25 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $49.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling, For more information, call or write for a free brochure. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients. Dark Heart of Uukrul. Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders), Eye of the Beholder 2 Might and Magic 3 (12.95). LANCE HAFFNER GAMES IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling, Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. A GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS MasterCard PO Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 P.O. BOX 100594 . NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #80 Circle Reader Service #68 Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"CAESAR ROME WASN'T BUILTINADAY HOW LONG WILLITTAKE YOU? UPUT \" MENTE TILL J SALAM ULIA TIITTO PALATII nary Asgovernor of a province of the Roman Empire you must A build cities for the good of your people. Fortify your cities with walls & towers but should your defences fail, you must command legions to crush the hostile barbarian tribes! Success will lead to promotion and ultimately, the very best may rise to become... Caesar! Battles may also be fought out in detailed animated combat usinga much enhanced version of Impressions Cohort (Cohort II will be available separately). A Peman MRM BEFLADE 19 AB ALEBO SEDEF 1700 Grow your city with ampheatres, forums, temples, aquaducts, roads, baths & workshops and much, much more! kopr ostile idibes with cross-country walls to match The Great Wall of China Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #71 "


" CD-ROM_Della Tales from the Hacked Museum Refixion II: Museum or Hospital — Macintosh CD Experience by Tony Reveaux TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DEVELOPER: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Refixion II: Museum or Hospital Color Macintosh II or greater, 4 MB RAM, CD-ROM drive 599 None Synergy/Toshiba EMI Minoru Kusakabe Cameo Interactive, Ltd; Tokyo U.S. distribution by East West Communications Hlustum ar Sospital efixion 11: Museum or Hospital is an exploratory CD-ROM that is an odd mixture of adventure and monotony. It is a skillfully produced demonstration of spatial investigation and three-dimensional design in motion using MacroMind Director and QuickTime. One may find it difficult to determine what the point of it all is, especially when approached in a gaming frame of mind. One would fare better looking at Refixion and its artistic kin as multi-media design for multi-media design's sakeand the design in Refixion is tantalizingly intriguing. Using a QuickTime playback utility such as Apple's MoviePlayer, one can access and play the QuickTime \"MooVs\" of Museum or Hospital through the Data folder on the CD-ROM. Hiroyasu Yaguchi's music is heard continuously in the background as one traverses the interiors, or one can hear the 14 music tracks directly from the CD-ROM by using the Play utility provided on the disk. These can be heard only through the audio output of the CD-ROM player, either with headphones or externally powered speakers. The curtain rises on a mysterious futuristic building. When the user enters through the doors, his or her point-of-view is taken up immediately as seen through the eyes of a fly as it buzzes and darts around the interior of a waiting room. When one has seen enough of this excellent QuickTime loop, one can click and explore the different paintings on the walls. They are weird, anatomically ambiguous images that look like valentines from an android factory. Some of them will animate with gray, blobby bodies trying to get out. in the void. A stairway whisks the viewer up in a dizzying ascension to a cupola where three massive pedestals support boxes that twitch around a few times when clicked hardly worth the trip. Returning to the ground floor, another staircase plunges one down into a dank, shadowy corridor. Here, the cells confine exquisitely rendered 3-D solids that slowly rotate in scintillating rainbow reflections. Yet, while all the machinery in the cells above had unique sound effects signatures, these spheres spin in silence. Another waiting room is found and another movie sequence is triggered. Here, four figures that look like rookie startups for the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles are hurled out of a door onto a bench. Each takes a turn leaping and hopping around the room to no apparent purpose. Then, they are yanked back through the door. When the viewer follows them, he or she will find a modern gray corridor where a gurney bearing a double-headed dog body (that's right, you heard me) appears, hurtling and spinning around the corridor a few times (just for the hell of it, apparently) and then disappears. Museum or Hospital is an ambitious and interesting project that is really more like an extended demo reel than a completed concept. Other exploration CD-ROMs like L-Zone and Alice (see pg. 40) may suffer from some of the same elusive ambiguity, but they succeed in the multi-layered depth, range and complexity of their constructed universes. Most important, they give one a high level of interactive discovery compared to the passive, tourguided, Twilight Zone continuity in Museum or Hospital. CGW After clicking on the plate on the iron bars of the prison gate, a key will appear. It will open a lock and the door will swing open. A series of high-ceilinged stone corridors are flanked with steel doors. As one clicks on each door, one is brought up close where they can open a viewing slot. An actor, often wearing the mask of a rabbit, monkey, frog or camel, is seen through the slot groping, staggering or dancing around like a convict gone stir crazy in solitary. In the background of each is a different device of industrial machinery of cogs, chains or pistons, rendered in a 3-D that looks almost like a moving hologram. These inmates from industrial hell begin to get old after one experiences the theme repeatedly in cell after cell. Through another prison gate, one is in a room with cabinets in the walls that contain complex 3-D animations. Three hospital beds hold collapsed gray figures. When clicked upon, each reveals the same scene where the screen blacks out and a tiny armless figure walks aimlessly around 11111 1000 Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"Anything You Want. You Got It!... Circle Reader Service #72 "


"AROMJDeunen THROUGH THE MACINTOSH GLASS A Trip Into The Odd Land of Multi-media by Tony Reveaux TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DEVELOPER: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Alice Color Macintosh Il or greater, 4 MB RAM, CD-ROM drive $99 None Synergy Toshiba EMI Haruhiko Shono Cameo Interactive, Ltd: Tokyo U.S. distribution by East/West Communications lice is based in spirit on the playfully whimsical, but deeply intelligent, fancies and visual puns of Lewis Carrol's stories, Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass. Haruhiko Shono's Alice has many of the elements of a game, with playing cards used as milestones and markers, but most of one's playing time will be occupied in finding things, trying them out and discovering where other things may be hidden. Alice is advertised as an \"interactive museum\" or \"electronic coffee table book.\" A museum, however, makes everything visible and clearly marked and a book has a table of contents and page numbers. This Alice is more like some charmingly weird and elusive scavenger hunt where one is never really quite sure where they may be going or what they are looking for. The disk package displays a map of Alice's world, where four quadrants of three rooms each are designated as under hearts, spades, diamonds and clubs. This means that the cards that one will find when one can find them -will be marked as such. When one finds a card, clicking on it will reveal a stanza of verse, such as; \"Alice as Rabbit: Beyond a door closed tight Alice in a Rabbit's skin hand in hand with a bony hand.» And that's just one of the less obscure phrases. Yet, that riddle is an eerie preview to what happens when one climbs up inside the chimney beyond the Final Room. Authored in Macro Mind Director, much of the exploration in Alice is achieved through activating different objects and entering into the many paintings which fill every room. When a painting is activated with a mouse-click, it opens a window which blanks out the rest of the screen. After exhausting all of the interactive possibilities therein, one gets out of the painting and returns to the room by clicking outside of its frame. When the white rabbit pops up at key junctures, it usually means a hop in hyperspace to another room, even if the explorer hasn't finished scoping out all the possibilities. There are some doors that will not open until the explorer has completed some series of tasks. What the map doesn't show are the surprise shortcuts to special areas, such as selecting that last bottle in the wine cellar under the kitchen that whisks one up two stories to the Atelier (studio), or the top hat that leads to the Bar. To get through the door of the Final Room at the top of the stairs, one has to remember some of the card clues to crack the bunny's combination lock. Unfortunately, as in many other exploratory \"games,\" it is impossible to save one's positions in the game. One disadvantage of searching through screen after screen for \"switches\" is that after a while one develops a case of \"clickitus\" of the fingers as one repeatedly punches that mouse button like a chicken pecking at a farmyard. This is a case where the use of a «hot spot\" interface where the cursor changes color or brightness when it passes over a switch area would be a welcome relief and make the game less tedious. The sound effects of Alice are part of the data that is read by the computer as spot events, and are heard through the computer's internal speaker. The music is digital audio and can be heard only through the audio output of the CD player, either with headphones or externally powered speakers. Unlike a CD-ROM such as Spaceship Warlock, where the music track is continuous, Kazuhiko Kato's compositions provide lively introductions to certain rooms and areas which end as soon as the user clicks on to the next step. The paintings and designs of Kuniyoshi Kaneko form the visual universe of Alice. It is a very elegant and richly rendered environment that makes it a browser's paradise and worth the thousand mouseclicks it will take to see it all. Photographic scanned images and computer graphics combine with the paintings to convey beautifully detailed images that support the fantastic realism of this house of illusions. Kaneko seems to be influenced by the surrealist paintings of Rene Magritte, where familiar objects combine in impossible situations. One opens a drawer in a cabinet it is full of water. Click again and a fish jumps out. Open a door a mountain landscape appears. Click on the faceplate of a skin diver, and a pair of elephants trumpet out of it. A plaid vest hangs on a chair. Click on it-a pocket watch falls out and enlarges. Alice should be considered an adult title because of the recurring frontal nudity of both men and women in the paintings. However, Kaneko's sense of eroticism is one which is very cool, detached, and ambiguous. Dreamy, sophisticated slackers, the wide-eyed figures could pass for pale, porcelain mannequins. Readers who are looking for game play in a CD-ROM title will have to look elsewhere. Those who are looking for a surreal electronic toy may have found just the place for their very important date.\" CGW Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"Check out the New Air Bucks! Due to overwhelming response to Air Bucks, Impressions are delighted to announce an upgraded version of the game, to give you, the player, the features you want! HAIR Bucks Routes ones can gonnances Banh Balances Better Graphics Otro Bols 256 color VGA graphics are used throughout the game HET BUCKE2 Routes Planes Cargo lanences Wank < O MO FAT >> Animated Zoom Mode Perbuch: 2m0* TAN 12 Heahinston Watch your planes fly around the world; city selection & all other commands can be made from here TICKETS ine-Dee N UD 5 Lower Route OK PREDICTED INCOME ROUTE 2 DISTANT Congo Total 1.Miami .Hashington 741 131 Better Interface TOTALT 222 Service Scheduled Income on! AB 17 Price Check Route. Rep Check Plane Income More user-friendly menu selection, better mouse & faster typing Tren Date Description Tiere Fees 21460 2007 4/6 Fuel Purchase 0090 4. Tacket Fer el 009 /10 Fuel Purchase 4270 More Reports 17270 498553 D10S 422 Fuel Purchase 0105 4/27 Nen Plane 200000 144757 Detailed data on plane demand & costs is easily accessible Among the many other enhancements made to the game are: Upgraded economic model & computer player Al, sound effects, personalisation of airlines, check register, better mouse & typing handling, city sizes now from 1 to 100 & vary thru time, print to paper options & lots more! AIR BUCKS v.1.2 available free to all registered users of Air Bucks 1.0/1.01 Impressions Committed to customer satisfaction in strategy entertainment! Circle Reader Service #73 "


"CD-ROM Deuneun SEOT TRAithout Norman Photo by M. Evan Brooks Compton NewMedia's desert Storm bij M; Evan Brooks TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: esert Storm is a multi-media presentation of the Gulf War. The primary program consists of the official report from the Pentagon to the Congress delineating the preparations, conduct and aftermath of the Gulf War. In addition, the product includes Coalition Command, a game in which the player takes over as CINCENT (Commander, Central Command). Desert Storm (w/Coalition Command) IBM with CD-ROM VGA/SVGA $49.95 None Quanta Press: Game by Dave Arneson Compton's New Media Carlsbad, CA (619) 929-2500 CD-ROM U SAWARS Documentation Documentation consists of two small manuals: one for the main report and one for the game. For those familiar with CDROM, the manuals are the usual installation instructions for those new to CD-ROM, however, the manuals may best be described as \"somewhat cryptic.\" Both DOS and Windows versions are included on the same disk, although this is not made clear in the manual. The primary emphasis of Desert Storm is the Official Report. The game has been added as a graphic assist/interface for non-wargamers to understand the mechanics of the Gulf War, and the two products should ultimately enhance one another. Vice President Quayle, Secretary of Defense Cheney, and General Powell ring out loud and clear. Although actors were used for these voices, they are akin to their historic personage; sadly the same cannot be said of President Bush. With all of the Dana Carvey-wannabes about, I simply could not understand why there was not an attempt to replicate the President's vocalisms. At least, however, it is easy to understand what is being said. Mechanics This is an \"Official Report\" from the Pentagon to the Congress, with all that implies. There has been no editorial condensation, no additional facts submitted this is the document in its entirety. Its content is variable, with certain subjects being covered well and others virtually ignored. For the person with an intense desire to learn about Desert Shield/Storm, much of the information is enlightening. However, some of the information may charitably be described as \"misleading\"; in other cases, it is wrong, and even more important, there are issues of import that are not mentioned. In Command and Control Relationships it is noted that NAVCENT (Navy Central Command) was subordinate to CMEF (Commander, Middle East Forces). This was incorrect; NAVCENT was a one-star admiral, with ostensible command authority in-theater \"when the balloon went up.\" CMEF, a two-star admiral, would not become subordinate to NAVCENT. Therefore, the NAVCENT \"flag\" went from the peacetime NAVCENT (now converted to NAVLOGSUPFOR [Navy Logistical Support Force]) to Seventh Fleet (commanded by a three-star admiral). SimiGraphics And Sound The graphics and sound of the Report are simply outstanding in their imagery. The scanned pictures, in all their SVGA glory, reflect the \"state-of-the-art.\" The sound, ranging from the speeches of President Bush, General Schwarzkopf, etc., to actual sounds of battle, are as clear and distinct as when initially heard on CNN. The only flaw in the pictures is that they are unlabeled and often their appearance in the text is ambiguous at best. Insofar as the game is concerned, the graphics and sound are much more primitive. Most of the \"game\" takes place in the Command Trailer, and one can merely switch between the computer, the maps, the television and the Hot Line. With the slow access time of CD-ROM, this can often become disheartening. Sound is better. When Washington calls, the voices of Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"ORLDS JAMAL NU NODELLO out nk Saeed Lond: TOTS 10 SCRIPT Fare Powder! F ? Rang: Torget FEEDEDODE DDDD UNCU Rodor! Transport: EUILD COST: LOD17 nens 31 pourre Command your entire planet's military resources in an effort to conquer a hostile neighbouring planet. You control a state of the art workstation from which advanced software tools enable you to design new craft, research new technologies, build new installations & craft, set up highly sophisticated missions and watch the progress of this strategic interplanetary conflict. In Production! DUILO JORTOR oore GTATE SVETEM END Design your own spacecraft (or tanks, submarines, jet,...)! Sand out units on missions to explore the unknown enemy planet. and wipe out its military capability! Battles take place in space & on surface of both planets Random planet generator for great replay value Designed as a 2 player game! Impressions Committed to customer satisfaction in strategy entertainment! Circle Reader Service #74 "


"meunew CO-ROM General Eolin Powell larly, the Saudi-American Agreement regarding EPWs (Enemy Prisoners of War) is mentioned, but there is no discussion of the ramifications of the United States acting as an \"Occupying Power\" in regard to territory in Iraq. This was an important issue; the Army military lawyers contended that the United States was not an \"Occupying Power\" in southern Iraq and therefore, it had no legal 13 29JULI 04AUG! 11:34 clearance less than «Top Secret\" was forbidden to attend. The primary assault was to be an invasion at the Kuwaiti port of Al-Shuaiba (south of Kuwait City). If this is what the military had put out in classified briefings, it is hard to understand why the option has not been reflected in the game. (Note: the above information has been cleared for public release by the Department of Defense by letter to the author dated 15 December 1992). Similarly, casualties in the \"first wave\" were estimated to be 60% or greater. Thus, for those of us who were there,\" the game assumes much that we did not know. Insofar as gameplay is concerned, one must carefully manage the media. Proper press accessibility and use of press releases are critical. Any telephone calls to Washington initiated by the player request clearance for the air war or ground war to begin. However, one is stuck with the historical deployments. Between August and November 1991, I was assigned to the EOC (Emergency Operations Center) at 18th Airborne Corps (Fort Bragg, NC). The TIPFID (Timed Phased Deployment) was not a given; the decisions as to who would go when would constitute a volume by itself. Overall, though, the lack of ability to tailor unit deployments must be regarded as a negative. Most Hot Line telephone calls by Washington before the war commences will be negative. The Secretary of Defense is \"disobligation to the Iraqis in its territory. Numerous Army officers contested this initial decision, and it was only after the media began raising questions as to the treatment of Iraqi civilians that the military establishment reversed its position. Thus, the Report is an interesting starting base. However, there is no dictionary included. If one seeks a search for \"Schwartzkopf,\" no record will be found the General spells his name without the \"\". This lack of a dictionary and the literalness of the database search routines makes it difficult to use. It is full of information, but it is difficult to access. He need to destroy those Scuds, General. NOW! wastes time. But the Hot Line cannot be ignored. While Mr. Quayle's reputation is somewhat tarnished, I have heard that he did an admirable job behind the scenes. As incongruous as it sounds, his performance was praiseworthy; the cheap shots in the game do little except provide comic relief and aggravation for the player. When the air war begins, one should check BDA (battle damage assessments) and allocate air wings to primary targets. Sadly, this cannot be done in an easy fashion; while one can easily change a single wing, it is impossible to determine coverage of all targets unless one maintains a separate written log. Designer Dave Arneson admits this shortcoming, and notes that even he has to maintain such a log. The ground war, once it commences, ends quickly with a Coalition victory. A more detailed rendition of armor engagements completes the land war. This tactical scene was to be part of a more ambitious land phase, but design specifications limited the game. After victory is achieved, one will learn how well he did, ranging from \"so-so\" to election as President of the United States (another military hero as President? What would Douglas MacArthur have said?) TRA JFCN Reserve Mechanized Unit Du SAUDI ARABIA 8888 Game Play As noted before, the game is for nonwargamers. After playing it, one quickly discovers that it falls into the \"taint\" — that is, it ain't for wargamers and it ain't for non-wargamers. For the grognard, it lacks the ability to meaningfully change the outcome; for the neophyte, it is simply too slow and cumbersome to have repeated play value. If the player takes no action, then the deployment will be \"historical.\" The game assumes that the Coalition Forces would have to win; the only variable is how major the victory would be. Forces may be deployed in four options: left, center, right or broad attack. However, the amphibious assault is not a viable option by itself. The game assumes that the amphibious assault would hit the Kuwait coastline and range into Iraq (near Basra). As a participant in the Gulf War, I found this somewhat limiting. On 2 January 1991, I attended a conference in Dhahran. Anyone with a security appointed\" in the player; only commencement of hostilities will relieve such calls. However, a premature request will simply not be acknowledged. It is hard for the player to lose; historically, the 82nd Airborne referred to itself as a \"speed bump\" pre-December 1991. If the Iraqi Army had moved south, we had little assets to stop them. Again, the messages become repetitious. The CG (Commanding General) has a role other than to move troops, but there is virtually no interaction with the HN (Host Nation). Dan Quayle is provided as the «Gabby Hayes\" of the Gulf War. Calling continuously from the \"thirteenth tee,\" he simply Conclusions Overall, Desert Storm is a curious product. The database provides more than sufficient detail for most users, while the game may provide an interlude for a nongamer. However, the game may also permanently deter such non-gamers from ever looking into historical simulation gaming again. Discussions with the designer reveal that the specifications were for the non-gamer market. Given the slow access times of the CD-ROM media, I doubt that the game will receive much play. Given the attention span of the American public, I doubt the database will be carefully perused. If Saddam continues in his policy to make Kuwait the \"Nineteenth Province\" and Desert Storm II is required, then this program will become a mega-hit; absent that, it is an also-ran. Cow Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"Games For Everybody RODEO GALLTS VECEPTABLES BBITS ARMADA ONTARGET BLACKJACK NO MINI TURN BURN CASINO CRAPS PMRUO SUS CARD STUD NEW EXCITING TITLES PUBLISHED REGULARLY The Coffee Break Series COMPUTER GAMES for IBM PC & Compatibles ONLY $1295 VIDEO SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE NOT COPY PROTECTED MADE IN U.S.A. FUN TO PLAY by yourself or with friends. Look for this special display at your favorite retailer. ORCES MINI BLACKJACK ENTERTAINING play for minutes or hours. Addictive! EASY TO USE play from diskette or hard disk. GREAT GRAPHICS supports most graphics formats. AFFORDABLE... and high quality! DUAL PACKED 5.25\" plus 3.5\" disks. ARM |ZARD SD COMBINATION COMPUTER GAMES HAY COFFEE AND DOUGHNUTS NOT INCLUDED FOR IBM PC & COMPATIBLES Coher Bukseries The Via Camion Scart Villa Crespo Software 1725 McGover Street. Highland Park, IL 60035.708-433-0500 1992, Villa Crespo Software, Inc. Circle Reader Service #124 "


" IR Slay Him Again, Sam? CMC's Who Killed Sam Rupert? by Johnny L. Wilson SANNON GINGEN KILLED SAM RUPERTO It didn't have to be Los Angeles. It could have trivial details collated in the investigation will be been any stinking town where the sewage of TITLE: Who Killed Sam Rupert? required to answer the reporters' questions during Macintosh CD-ROM SYSTEM: human greed and ambition floated to the surface the press conference. All of these interrogations are PRICE: $39.99 of respectable society like flotsam after a storm DESIGNER: hard-wired, free-running Quick-Time movies of Shannon Gilligan any town where the flashpoint of violence sparked PUBLISHER: Creative Multimedia Corporation the suspects. The acting is, in most cases, surprisinto firestorms of human passion. It was an interac514 NW 11th Ave., Suite 203 ingly good and the audiotrack is easily understood. Portland, OR 97209 tive mystery and I was a police detective, clicking This would-be detective would have enjoyed havon a Macintosh with CD-ROM as I tried to get to ing more free reign during the interrogation, but the bottom of a murder. discovered that the final interviews offer more inWho Killed Sam Rupert? is an interactive murder GANEO SAM teractivity than these preliminary \"sessions. mystery on CD-ROM. Though it has elements of a The player-detective needs to make use of mategame, it is better understood as a work of fiction. rial evidence. It is very important to take note of Indeed, its appeal would be more to the mystery blood types and other information to be found on aficionado than, for example, the dedicated adventhe Non-Testimonial Evidence screen and within ture gamer. As a product, it is well-designed enough the Autopsy Report and source book on vintage to underscore both the strengths and weaknesses of wines. Those who do not take notes will find themCD-ROM entertainment software. selves lost come press conference time. The Maltese Simulacrum The Long Hello What Who Killed Sam Rupert? does well is to The press conference brings us to the negative place the reader/viewer/gamer in the position of a aspects of this otherwise interesting program. The police detective with an impossible job. A very reporters will ask a string of detailed questions important citizen has been murdered and the police regarding the player-detective's investigation. If chief wants action within six simulated hours (easily the player selects an answer before the program is playable in an hour and half). Naturally, the time VIRTUAL MURDER done \"reading the question to him/her, the answer limit is not realistic, but it serves the function of A MULTIMEDIA MYSTERT SERIES ON CD-ROM. is counted as an incorrect answer (even if it is putting the player/viewer/detective under a political correct). This underscores the fact that CD-ROMs gun and not being able to explore clues at his/her leisure. So, cach action have slow access times and the more a disc has to be accessed, the less which is undertaken by the player-detective causes a certain amount of fun it is to play. CMC needs to work on swapping data from disc to RAM time to be assessed against the simulated clock. By the final half hour of in a more economical fashion. the six, the player-detective must be ready to hold a press conference and Further, the game features a computerized \"Notebook\" feature. The prove, by fielding quesplayer shouldn't bother with this feature, however, since it is not only tions thrown by a mob of terribly slow, but it is not accessible during the press conference when it Who Killed 6:00 reporters, that he/she Sam Rupert is most needed. Old-fashioned pen-and-paper are best for this game. knows enough about the Once the detective case to request an arrest warrant. Once the press passes the press conferIlow to Play Sam Rupert conference is held successence section, he/she has a 8 Likely Suspects 6:00 choice of performing more fully, the player-detective may interrogate from one in-depth (and more interContint l'revious Play to three witnesses in a active) interviews or going more detailed fashion than for the victory (applying for the warrant). The final in the preliminary investigation or apply for a warinterviews require selectrant. ing individual questions from an on-screen noteThe preliminary investigation requires the player-detective to visit the book and applying for an scene of the crime. There, one clicks on objects to be investigated in detail arrest warrant demands and the camera zooms in to the accompaniment of a camera's automatic one to select: suspect, alibi winder sounds. Once the camera zooms in on the appropriate object, one condition, motive, weapon can click on appropriate icons to collect fingerprints, perform serological and time. analysis, analyze blood stain patterns, examine fibers, scrutinize wound patterns or undertake a luminal analysis. Being able to order these types Farewell, My Lovely of tests provides an interesting wrinkle in helping the player-detective suspend disbelief and place onesell at the center of the investigation. If Who Killed Sam Rupert? is projected to be the initial release in the Virtual Murder Series from Creative Multimedia Corporation. It is to there were more mechanisms of this type in the game, it would be even be hoped that future titles will involve more interactivity than is in the better. present package, but Who Killed Sam Rupert? is a promising start. It is The detective must also interrogate the eight most likely suspects. It is more satisfying than a television mystery, but not quite up there with wise to take notes on particular times and any names which are mentioned. Raymond Chandler, Dick Francis and Elliott Roosevelt (three of the very The notes are not necessary in order to solve the murder, but some of the best mystery writers). Here's to more cases! Cow T| Criniesolving in 1313 Begin Investition   VE 20 OILU Puge 46 Computer Gaming World "


"Fight for the -Birth of a CHLOE Nation Liberty The first shots have nor The first shots have rung out. The American Revolution has begun! gather wartime supplies. Then approach the battlefield with bayonets in an imposing array. In these turbulent times you must watch your military closely for insurgents and deserters. Maneuver your ships along the coast to gain control to key ports of enty. Then pillage enemy ships and win over extra supplies. The battle is set: the Colonists vs. the British Empire. The outcome is in your hands! Assume General George Washington's post and prepare the colonists to fight for independence. Or, as Lord Cornwallis, you have the chance to redirect the outcome of the war. Build forts, forge weapons and * IBM PC * 640 K * EGA Color * Mouse Support * Ad-Lib Sound * 1-2 Players Command colonial regiments. Defend ports of entry. *Pre Release Version Screenshots We Supply The Past, You Make The History KOE! KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEl product you are looking for, call us at (415) 318-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). 1950 Bayshore Hwy, Suite 540, Burlingame, CA 94010 Liberty or Death is a trademark of KOEI Corporation. Circle Reader Service #78 "


"After One of the Most Tony La Russa Decided Announcing Tony La Russa BASEBALLI It's a whole new ballgame! How do you improve on the «1992 Sports Game of the Year\"? The same way that Tony La Russa improves on a pennant-winning team. You study your players, from their clutch hitting to their personalities in the clubhouse. And you check out the competition, up and down the league. We did all that. And discovered since La Russa I, a lot has happened in the world of baseball. We've used that knowledge to create a game that will continue to master the category. Because we don't know how to do it any other way. We called upon the same team to create La Russa II. Three-time American League Manager of the Year, Tony La Russa and a game designer with over 20 years of baseball experience. Together they redesigned this game from the ground up. The result is the most complete baseball experience ever, with the best action, the best graphics and the best stats. If you choose to enter the dugout and be the manager, you're totally responsible for your actions. Which roster is going to work? Is that rotation due for an overhaul? Is it time to bring your secret weapon out of the dugout yet? PITTSBURGH Ao DALLO STRIKE BET STARTAREUELATOKEO POSITIONIPIG/INPELO SHIFT AN All Screens shown are IBM 256-color VGA. "


"Successful Seasons Ever, to Start All Over Again. FPLYERS AL/NL announcer, Ron Barr. True-to-life digitized sound effects include everything from the calls of umpires to the crack of the bat. STADII FANTASY DRAFT Atom RIS mytakussa BISORAVLU Yd7/16 WHEN IT COMES TO THE GRAPHICS, WE'RE PLAYING HARDBALL AGAINST THE COMPETITION. We're talking the largest action playing field visualized with 256-color VGA graphics. You'll have no excuse for not crushing a homer every time since your batting perspective is straight from the catcher's eye. You'll play on the most detailed field of its kind, from the dirt in the base path to the mow lines on the grass. And you'll see instant replays on the largest, most detailed replay screen ever. MAKE YOUR BEST PLAYS EVER. In La Russa II, players pivot at second while turning a double play, slide head and feet first, jump, dive, even toss underhand to the first baseman all with onetouch button action. Each play is covered by Emmy award-winning, nationally-syndicated 134 CATEGORIES TO MAKE YOU A BETTER PLAYER. Only La Russa II gives you the most accurate baseball statistics in every one of them. You'll man your team, with or without Tony's advice, from over 2,000 legendary players and 54 classic teams or anyone on the current roster. To help in your draft, you can display and print out leaders in 134 stat categories. And stats are tracked throughout the season for every player in every game. Each and every pitcher is rated for four pitches including fastballs, curves, change-ups and more. LA RUSSA I EXPANSION DISKS: THINK OF THEM AS THE WORLD SERIES THAT NEVER ENDS. MLBPA PLAYERS puts the 1992 season in your hands. Over 950 PERY superstars including Barry Bonds, Dennis Eckersley, Nolan Ryan, Rickey Henderson, Tom Glavine, Cal Ripken, Jr., they're all here with big, full color portraits. AL/NL STADIUMS gives you all current 28 major league stadiums, from the winds of San Francisco to the ivy of Chicago even the new parks open for the '93 season Colorado and Florida. The detail is incredible, right down to the Green Monster at Fenway. But these aren't just pretty pictures: prevailing winds, altitude, temperature and humidity all affect the flight of the ball see how Babe Ruth hits the ball at milehigh Denver! FANTASY DRAFT is the most powerful, full-featured fantasy draft league disk ever. Now you can pool all available players and conduct a real-life draft session with 2-32 teams, and any combination of divisions and leagues. THE SEASON BEGINS NOW. Fact is, Tony La Russa won't put his name on anything less than the best. If you're looking for true baseball action, the name of the game is TONY LA RUSSA BASEBALL II. \"Most baseball Rames pretend they're in the majors. This en really puts wou there. Tony Le Russe Emmy Awardwinning announcer Ron Barr calls the action! INS Tony LaRussa BASEBALLI Available for IBM TO ORDER BY VISA/MC: call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada). Tony La Russa's name and likeness are used under license from Sports Advisors Group 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc All rights reserved. STEEL Take yourself out to the real thing from flagpole to flagpole, foul line to foul line. Circle Reader Service #112 "


"Scorpion's Mail Ultima VII Crusaders Of The Dark Savant Legend of Kyrandia Dungeon Master Indiana Jones/Atlantis Spellcasting 301 Monkey Island 11 The Summoning Might & Magic IV rust the other day (or so it seems), Fred and I cleaned out some of the old mail sacks, but the place is filling up again. Personally, I think it's time we hired a dump truck and did a thorough job. Fred's against it, though; he enjoys doing this himself, mainly because his claws are such perfect paper shredders and he likes keeping his, ah, hand in on the rending and tearing business. It brings back such fond memories for him (he'd be a sentimentalist at heart, if he had one). Anyway, the turn of the year was not a good time for prompt mail delivery. Of course, with the Christmas rush, I expected that letters in the early part of January might be a little slow in arriving, but it has taken most of the month for things to get back to near-normal. One example (of many): six days for a letter to get from Pennsylvania to New York. Sigh. So a lot of replies during January went out a bit late. While I do my best to answer promptly, there's not much I can do until the letters actually get here, and over that I have no control. Sorry about that, folks. We just have to hope that things will get better as the year progresses. And now, on to the good stuff. Ultima VII: There has been a surprising resurgence of questions about this game, especially the infamous Hydra room. A lot of people are having trouble finding the way to the darling critter. It really isn't that hard if you take the middle path; trying from the side isn't going to help a whole lot. Crusaders Of The Dark Savant: Many letters about this one, which is no surprise at all. Lots of ways to get stuck or run into dead ends here. For instance, there's the matter of the Rattkin Ruins. No front door, no welcome mat; obviously, the Rattkin are not eager to have visitors. Finding a way in requires what might be called the Japanese Maneuver, performed in the proper place. Legend Of Kyrandia: Amateur alchemists seem to be having a little difficulty in mixing up the right potions. Remember, it takes two items (of the same color) to make up a basic potion, which has to be one of the three primary colors (and you do need one or more of each color). Then you can mess around with combining them to make what you really need and get on with the game. Dungeon Master: After my article appeared, I heard from several readers who all said pretty much the same thing, namely that it was easier to trap Lord Chaos when he was next to one or more walls, instead of throwing flux cages hither and yon. Believe me, folks, I tried that, many times. It simply didn't work for me; old Chaos just wouldn't stay put long enough in any one place. Maybe my computer was too fast, or I was too slow (me? never! heh). Whatever, a blizzard of flux cages was the only way I could get the job done. Indiana Jones/Atlantis: Some folks are experiencing a few problems with triangulation in the Cretan ruins. Getting that transit lined up is a tricky matter. You'll know you're correct when you see a dotted line after you come out of the transit view. If you don't see it, go back and try again. Focus the transit on the horn and just move it slightly one way or the other. With a little trial and error, you'll find the right position. Spellcasting 301: Bullfighting is not one of Ernie's major skills (but we already knew that). The best way to handle the situation is to give Mr. Death On Hooves that old get up and go feeling...while he isn't looking. Ernie's ideas on the situation are probably a little inflated, and he may have to resort to ducking, not to mention a bit of spellcasting at the right moment. Monkey Island II: A number of people would like to get their hands on some carpentry equipment. They know what to do with it, but Woody never seems to leave the place so they can snarf the stuff. Hey, even carpenters will make emergency house calls on some occasions. Especially if the patient (err, customer) can't come to them. If only you saw what I saw, you (or someone) wouldn't have a leg to stand on. The Summoning: Some folks have asked about getting into the Jester's Vault. I never managed that myself (sorry!), but from someone who did, I heard that the treasure isn't really all that terrific (no weapons, runes, or other Neat Things) or worth the effort, and there's nothing inside that you need to finish the game. So you can skip this puzzle without any feelings of apprehension. For those who missed my article a few months back on this game, I am repeating my warning about the five white pearls needed on the third level of Citadel. Citadel has only four white ones. You must find and hang on to at least one white pearl from the Broken Seal Four level in order to have all that you need at the Citadel (there is no problem with black pearls; all five are in the Citadel). Might & Magic IV: Just a reminder to some puzzled players that there are a few areas you can't get into until Dark Side arrives. Only one Sphinx can be entered, for instance. If you haven't been able, no matter what, to find a way into a dungeon or tower, then it's a place reserved for the follow-up, and you'll just have to be patient. That includes the mysterious thingies in the four corners of the map (I'm really curious about those myself). That's about it for this look into the mailbag. In the meantime, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: \"Scorpia\" to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"NATIONAL LAMPOON'S ElESSMEISTER 5Bilji \"Whodunit Sweepstakes\" at your local retailer. Look for the You Don't Buy This Well Kill This you Dog.* A Choms The Matrat e ty National Lampoon presents the most outrageous chess program in the galaxy. Match wits with a perverted old ChessMeister who has more than a few unspeakable tricks up his sleeve and will use them all to rattle your concentration. What else has the game got? A chess set featuring unique live-action video actors-from belly dancing pawns to Grim Reaper rooks. They'll dispatch and dismember each other in ways even your demented mind has never thought of. But should you like your chess unadulterated, we've got that too. In spite of all these shenanigans it plays a darn good game of chess. Will it beat the competition? Hey, it ain't called ChessMeister 5 Billion and 1 for nothing! NATIONAL LAMPOON: GIESSMEISER 5BLiNK Not an actual VGA screen shot you wish. metodo AMEMO y days a week, Spectrum HoloByte For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only) For technical questions call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F990m-5pm PST Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 * HEY, IT WORKED ONCE! This photo was a Lampoon cover in 1973. We're happy to report the dog died of natural causes. Circle Reader Service #117 "


"meuneID Duo Ex Machina Tinkering with Sierra's The Incredible Machine by Chris Lombardi & Mike Weksler IBM VGA WS-003 uild a better mousetrap,\" popular tem seems completely superfluous rarely wisdom says, \"and the world will TITLE: The Incredible Machine did we consult it, nor once did we care. We SYSTEM: beat a path to your door.\" While we would have rather had those extra two screen GRAPHICS: can't say how many visitor's have rang at the PRICE: $49.95 inches for more area in which to build our PROTECTION: Symbol Look-Up residence of Dynamix designer Jeff Tunnell, machines. DESIGNER: Jeff Tunnell we can expect that a rush of puzzle gamers, PRODUCER: Sierra On-line Score or no score, these provided puzzles are hackers, tinkerers, and lovers of software toys Coarsegold, CA a blast and are a necessary introduction to the (800) 326-6654 will be cutting a quick path to their local Free Form Mode, where TIM really shines. purveyor of games. This is because Jeff TunPlayers will have to work through at least 25 nel has created a better Mousetrap, if we're levels or so to learn how each item works, as referring to the popular children's boardgame THE INCREDIBLE it is not always obvious and the written docuin which players construct a prodigious plastic mentation will be of no help. The docs are edifice of household junk — a machine of sparse and have no information on the funcsorts — the function of which was to capture tions of the objects. Granted, TIM is the sort of another player's mouse. The popularity of exploratory game where the best way to learn Mousetrap wasn't that it was a cleverly deis to dive in and do, but some written introducsigned game, but rather due to the fact that tion to the pieces would have eliminated some players got to build and fiddle with this crazy, initial confusion. Rube Goldberg-inspired monstrosity and However interesting the puzzles might be, watch it actually work. the Free Form mode is where it's at. Here, the Jeff Tunnel's latest creation, The Incredible curious, tinkering 10-year-old is re-awakened, Machine (TIM), captures the same mechanical given a digital toy box and set loose in the delight as Mousetrap, but it is far more than backyard of his or her mind. A blank screen, just a rodent catcher. TIM is both a puzzle an unlimited supply of objects, a very basic game and a software toybox that involves both intuitive understanding of physics and a creasolving mechanical mysteries posed in a Puztive subgenius is all one needs to have a ball zle Mode and creating one's own bizarre conwith this program. We had far too many laughs traptions in a Free Form Mode. In Puzzle ASIERRA showing each other our favorite creations. We Mode, the player is presented with a pre-gen VGA found that we both had an unnatural predilecerated configuration of items on the screen, a tion for the mouse object (it is the most aerorepository of mechanical elements, and a dynamic of the projectiles\" and just so cute), stated objective. For example, in \"Put Three Basketballs in the our two favorite machines being \"Moondawg's Syncopated Hoop,\" the firing of three revolvers must be timed to hit three Mouse,\" a simple device that propels a hapless creature between basketballs such that they fall into a reservoir. So, Puzzle Mode two out-of-phase cycling fans, and \"Dr. Ranger's Mouse Particle requires the player to figure out how to use the items in their Accelerator,\" which sent the \"mouse particle» on a convoluted repository in such a way that the goal is met. The items number journey around the screen. about 40 and include a monkey on a power generating \"exercycle,\" TIM does a nice job of modeling physics, as objects behave as balloons, jack-in-the-boxes, treadmills, revolvers, dynamite, cats, one's naive notions say they should, though it is not perfect. The mice, hampsters on treadmills, and structural components like one object in particular that would have physicists giggling is the girders, pipes, and brick walls a garage sale without equal. trampoline, which seems to be made out of \"flubber\" from The Many of these items will have to be turned, resized, connected to Absent-Minded Professor in that it generates much more force than other objects, and painstakingly positioned before one presses the is applied to them, allowing one to create perpetual motion de\"Start\" button and submits one's mechanical hypotheses to a vices. However, since such devices are our favorite design \"modreality check. ules,\" we are more than willing to forgive the inaccuracy. Eighty puzzles are included in the game and many are quite When we add up our score cards, we find TIM to be one of the devious. They are graduated in difficulty, however, and they most innovative and deceptively addicting products to pass this slowly introduce new way in quite a while. items to the scene, alAside from a few lowing one to mesticky gears (lack of thodically become familiar with each an \"undo\" function, item. Players are reinability to aim prowarded for success jectiles, unnecessarwith points that tick long level away as time passes passwords), we found and, much more im TIM to be a well-oiled portantly, by the satis imagination engine US BONUSZ . faction of a job well with a very broad ap HILSEN done. The scoring sys peal. cow ily la ASCORES Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"CACHE ROM C&T 286 IPX\" DRIVERS UMB 386MAX OUALITAS BLUEMAX 486SX BUFFERS MODEMS EGA BIOS FAX BOARD It's one thing to be shot down in the middle of a game, but without adequate memory you'll never get off the ground. MEMORY TSRS MOUSE XMS HIGH DOS PREPARE TO ABANDON SHIP C&T 286 DOS 5.0 HMA WINDOWS VGA MOUSE DPMI BIOS HIGH DOS TSRS NETWORKS XMS INITIALIZE RAM Insufficient Memory BOENING POO0007 EGA INITIALIZE HMA WINDOWS 640K NETWORKS 386SX PAGEFRAME CACHE LIM EMS DPMI CD ROMS UMB 386MAX RAM BLUEMAX 386 486SX EGA DRIVERS 486 o get today's hottest computer games up and running, Best of all, it does it more easily and reliably than your computer needs increasingly vast amounts any other way. Just type \"maximize\" and 386MAX does the of conventional memorythe first 640K of memory rest, automatically analyzing your system and configuring found on nearly every PC compatible system. The same it for maximum memory and optimum performance. memory your mouse, CD-ROM and other peripherals Which is why we call it The Intelligent Memory Manager: compete for, as well. And why BYTE Magazine said \"it's so easy to Adding memory chips won't help. And use and offers such significant benefits that it UOUMN running DOS 5 usually isn't enough. should be part of every system.\" What you need is 386MAX. It's the highly So, if you want to play today's most advanced memory management software challenging games, but you don't want to run that recovers wasted memory on your out of memory, run out and get 386MAX. Or system, so it can make more memory availcall 1-800-676-0386 to order. At just $99.95, able to games and other it's by far the best flight programs that need it. insurance money can buy. QUE The Intelligent Memory Manager RAM PAGEFRAME BIOS MEMORY VGA MOUSE TSRS HIGH DOS EGA INITIALIZE DPMI MODEMS 640K FAX BOARD 3865X BUTE KORID 1993 Qualitas. Qualitas, 7101 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 1386, Bethesda, MD 20814. All company and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. System Requirements: Any 386, 386SX, 486 or 486SX PC or PS/2, min. 256K of extended memory, DOS 3.0 or higher, and hard disk drive. (386MAX also supports 286 machines with Shadow RAM, or any PC BEST BUY with EMS 4.0 hardware with 256K memory. Feature availability and memory recovery may vary on these systems.) Circle Reader Service #99 "


"meuneund An Isla Man la No M. DOFF Sierra's The Island of Dr. Brain by Charles Ardai ne Sierra Discovery Series SCIENCE & MATHEMATICS AGES 12 AND UP TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: di tegneler . The Island of Dr. Brain IBM EGA VGA $49.95 Documentation Look Up Pat Bridgemon Sierra On-line Coarsegold, CA (800) 326-6654 DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: .bon 3419 VGA EGA SIERRA DISCOVERY SERIES MONEYBACK GUARANTEE astle of Dr. Brain, to which The Island of Dr. Brain is a sequel, was a marvelous game. More than just a collection of brain teasers, it was an educational game in the best sense of the term. It educated, but first it entertained. Designer Corey Cole never lost sight of priorities; first and foremost, to create a whimsical, eye-catching, imaginationsparking computerized busybox. Anything else, such as teaching players about astronomy or offering a primer in computer programming, came afterward. Selfconscious educational do-gooding was left out entirely, and it wasn't missed. With such a fine model to draw upon, one wonders how Sierra could have gotten everything so wrong the second time around. On first glance, Island and Castle have a great deal in common: the same style of colorful, loony graphics; the same interface and game structure (one puzzle after another, loosely linked through a negligible storyline); and a mixture, in the puzzles themselves, of the old-fashioned and the new-fangled, the classic and the exotic. However, the similarity goes little deeper than the surface. If Castle resembled an animated, computerized issue of Games magazine, Island more closely resembles, at heart, one of those software packages intended to help teenagers prepare for the S.A.T. It isn't that the new game has no sense of humor; Island is as rich in puns and gags as Castle was, and most are pretty clever (though some, such as a reference to a \"Presidential Bush,\" are likely to go stale quickly). Nor is it that the visuals and sound aren't up to snuff (though Mark Seibert's musical touch is sorely missed). The real problem is that the puzzles are more contrived and less fun than in the first game; that educating the player is stressed as an objective in a way that it wasn't the first time around, and that the game loses its right to claim the educational high ground as a result of several embarrassing, sloppy mistakes. fold in linear sequence, each one popping up after the previous one has been completed. Once the puzzles have all been solved, the player gets the battery. Even more so than in Castle, where the player could often choose which of three puzzles to tackle next, the player here has minimal freedom. The game interface resembles that of other Sierra games, complete with an inventory for the player to access and a number of different icons for point-andclick purposes. However, the more sophisticated elements of the interface aren't used very much, since each location exists only to introduce one or more puzzles. One uses the eye icon to get the computer to crack jokes about various parts of the background graphics (as well as to activate spot animations), the hand icon to activate the puzzles themselves, and that's about it. The puzzles range from the straightforward (solving ciphers, putting together a jigsaw puzzle) to the more unusual (choosing the right elements to match a given spectrographic analysis, measuring out quantities of liquids of various densities to make a counterweight balance). Some puzzles are repeats from the first game (the word search, though here it is in a foreign language; the magic square; the programming of a robot); others are new to the Dr. Brain universe, though not in Battery Not Included In Castle, the player had to pass a series of tests in order to qualify for the position of lab assistant to the mysterious Dr. Brain. Here, the player, now a full-fledged lab assistant, is sent on an errand by Dr. Brain to retrieve a special battery hidden on the old man's private island. There is no searching to be done, however, as this is not an adventure game. After one lands on the island (which is not a puzzle, just a copy protection look-up), the puzzles unPage 54 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview any other respect. (There is a four-disk rendition of the Tower of Hanoi, a search for hidden animals in a forest picture, and a make-a-rectangle-out-of-a-bunch-ofTetris-shapes puzzle, for instance.) isiand of r. Brain Expert Levei place of Castle's inspiring comment on using one's mind to unlock all doors, Island offers JFK'S \"Forgive your enemies but never forget their names\" and James Michener's \"In six pages I can't even say 'hello.\" Needless to say, these are contextual non sequitur's, in addition to which I wonder how many young players will even know who Michener is. isiand ot r. Brain Expert Levei 1199 LALALA I SONRAUGS ARAN VARDU JARA are frequently confronted with situations in which they don't know what to do, either because the rules for a specific puzzle are confusing, because a puzzle requires the regurgitation of specific factual knowledge the player has not yet memorized from the documentation, or simply because it is often unclear after finishing a puzzle what one is supposed to click on to get to the next. To get the player past at least the first two of these sticking points, the game offers two sources of assistance: a Dick Tracy-style \"hint watch,\" which offers suggestions from Dr. Brain, and a difficulty slider which alters how challenging a given puzzle is. The setting of difficulty levels works quite well; the hint watch is less of a success, if only because Dr. Brain's \"hints\" too often are simply the answer to the puzzle the player is working on. Granted, this does get one past the tougher puzzles without too much agony, but also without much satisfaction. island of r. Brain Expert Lovei .... By Day To my disappointment, quite a few of the puzzles demand specialized knowledge; that is, knowledge not only of spatial relationships, shapes, language, and the like, but also of the periodic table, weights and measures, algebra, physics, musical instruments and literature. As a result, Island gives the impression of having been intended for a slightly older player than Castle (though both games say they are for \"ages 12 and up»). There are some things young gamers just won't know and probably won't pick up from either the paragraph of instructions that precedes each puzzle or from the skimpy, crammed-together compendium of information that comes in the game package under the title, \"EncycloAlmanacTionary Ography.\" (This document contains some of the game's worst howlers, such as the memorable line. \"What are Fibonacci numbers? Fibonacci numbers are cool.\" It also repeatedly spells Jules Verne's last name \"Vern.') Island of Dr. Brain Experi Lovei Striva run tries anore best. former s ke great en tai by byly I should be to be known as a rouser president who tries to und his own business. Calvin Coolidge When you have got an elephant by the hind legs and he is Trying to run usy. It is best to let him run. Abraham Anybody can destroy history. Only a diminutive pan can erase it. Oscar Wide Doctor, Heal Thyself What else is wrong with the game? One could go on and on. The cursor calibration is much too sensitive, leading to at least one situation in which the player can try to do the right thing (specifically, put a bushel of corn on a scale) and be told that he is trying to do the wrong thing. A sizable chunk of the game is given over to word puzzles which are nearly all-text lessons in synonyms, antonyms, and homonyms — hence my SAT remark, above — or else which are centered around strangely chosen quotations. In Then, too, the game contains moments of pure carelessness of the sort that are unforgivable in any professional software but particularly so in an educational game. For example, when one finds the second-to-last word in the word search the computer says, \"You have found 9. There are 1 left to go.\" Add to all of this the fact that Sierra has chosen to market the game not in Castle's zany purple package full of stars, springs, and lightning bolts but in annoying yuppie pinstripes with a headline that says \"Sierra Discovery Series\" and a pompous proclamation that reads, in part, \"We guarantee this game will entertain your child while he or she learns...if your child does not have fun...we guarantee a full refund of your purchase price...\" Island takes itself much too seriously to have fun. Though it has its moments of brilliance, it is more a gussied up set of tutorials than what Castle set out to be, a \"roller-coaster ride for your mind.\" Chalk it up to a different design team (Corey Cole is nowhere in sight), chalk it up to sequelitis, chalk it up to bad judgment and tight production schedules — chalk it up to whatever explanation makes sense, but do chalk it up and then write The Island of Dr. Brain off. Castle of Dr. Brain is a much better game. Buy that one instead. cow Even more distressing, some puzzles turn out to be quite difficult, not because the solutions are hard to figure out but because the rules are. Having exhausted many of the obvious puzzle types in Castle, and not wanting to repeat themselves too much, the designers strove for novelty; but, in the process, they came up with some set-ups so complex that one must expend a good deal of mental energy just to make head or tail of them. Truc, one of the puzzles in Castle suffered from this syndrome (the robots-andwhirlpools maze), just as one of the puzzles there (the observatory) demanded specialized knowledge. Yet Island is many times worse in this regard. Players \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD.. Clinical Psychologist. $39.95 MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind. $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. I CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN ... a journey into another reality. Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St.. Walton, NY 13856 MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (alter 5 p.m.) IBM/Compatibles ZZZZZ Circle Reader Service #46 April 1993 Page 35 "


"e pevnet What's it all about, Algae? animals that can be altered on the genetic level. By interacting with each other and their environment, the A-life forms within the simulation approximate, on a much simplified level, real world behavior, from birth to R.I.P. By pressing one of SL's \"Make It So\" buttons, players can randomly populate a world with all manner of flora and fauna and get an immediate high rating. However, a prematurely good report card in the Evaluation Window (which also provides a pictorial view of which ecological niches are currently filled) could be a fool's paradise. Many plants and animals could quickly find themselves becoming extinct for a whole host of reasons, mainly because a resilient and diverse food web didn't develop over time. So, there's much more to SL than fabricating bizarre creatures and throwing them into a custom environment just to see what happens. Should some aspects of such a free-for-all scenario prove successful, it would be impossible to figure out why. The exciting and most rewarding aspect of the simulation is experimenting with it in a scientific manner (fun is okay, too); setting and knowing all the controls and variables within the ecosystem provides a thoughtful approach and, consequently, an edge for isolating what went wrong, or right. SL encourages players to record the outcome of their efforts. A Data Log File compiles statistics that can be used for constructing a genealogy and later, a family tree of animals in an experiment. The data can also be exported to a spreadsheet program like Microsoft Excel for charting, graphing, and analysis ideal for classroom projects, high school to college. The entertaining, thorough and well-written 200+ page SL manual contains a section for carrying out a simple, controlled, step-by-step experiment that focuses on evolution through natural selection; a handy separate lab book for filling in the results is included. Last one in the gene pool is a... by Maxwell Eden Life's brief span forbids us to enter on far-reaching hopes. ---Horace, Odes The opening screen offers players the option of selecting from six complete preset ecosystem scenarios, an experimental mode for building custom worlds and setting up new scenarios, or a tour of SL's features via an on-screen tutorial. As a game, SL challenges players to solve the problems presented in the preset scenarios that include intricate ecosystem patterns: food TITLE: Simlife: The Genetic Playground SYSTEMS: IBM, Macintosh chains, predator and PROTECTION: None prey, population control, PRICE: $69.95 and soil erosion, to name DESIGNER: Ken Karakotsios PUBLISHER: Maxis a few. Orinda, CA As an experimental (510) 254-9700 tool, SL lets players create and modify worlds, plants and animals; design environments and ecosystems; and control evolution. SL puts two powerful tools in the hands of the player: \"genetic engineering,\" which directly influences how life looks, acts, and evolves, for better or worse; and time,\" which can be drastically sped up. Experiments that might take hundreds of years in real time can be performed quickly, and thus players can see SIM LIFE nce the province of science fiction and, more recently, well-equipped biotechnology firms, genetic engineering is now available — at least on electronic varieties of life forms to anyone with a personal computer. In the real world (as opposed to life inside computers), bioengineers can identify specific genes responsible for particular characteristics and then, transfer those genes and their inherent traits into the same species, or an entirely different species. The possibilities are unlimited, the responsibility awesome. Players intrigued with biotechnology, problem-solving on a planetary scale, plus interrelated topics such as the environment, evolution, behavior, food chains and ecosystems will be enthralled with SimLife by Maxis, the Artificial Life (A-life) simulation mavens well-known for SimCity, SimEarth, and SimAnt. 18 GENETIC PLAYGROUND \"Make It So!» -Captain \"Gene\"-Luc Picard SimLife (SL) simulates ecosystems complete with plants and Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"Do You Have What It Takes To Fulfill... THE PROPHECY YOU HAVE ONLY THREE DAYS The Kingdom of the Blue Rocks is in peril. The Great Eclipse will come in 3 days and the evil wizard Kraal has plans to take over. Prophecy proclaims that Ween can save the kingdom if he can find the missing pieces of the Revuss of Time. The Prophecy pulls you into a magical, sometimes frightening adventure where you'll encounter extremely challenging puzzles, fast-paced scenarios, and a menagerie of bats, rats, gargoyles, humorous sidekicks, and wicked wizards. The no-typing interface is the only easy part of this game. It has a European style of romance, danger and old world language, combined with brilliant VGA video-like character action and an exciting soundtrack. FOR IBM PCS. HINT BOOH AVAILABLE! You will journey through strange lands, and cross oceans to fulfill the prophecy. The Kingdom of the Blue Rocks is in danger. Will you be the hero? There are fearsome monsters and awesome puzzles to battle and beat. EXCELLENCE IN INNOVATIVE GAMING ASIERRA AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE DEALER NEAR YOU OR CALL: 1 [800] 326-6654 Sierra On-Line, Inc. 1993 TM designates a trademark of Sierra On-Line, Inc. O designates a registered trademark of Sierra On-Line, Inc. Circle Reader Service #103 "


"Deen) IN Climat RL Valle FI TL Sinulation Syeedindon Disasters the results of their biological tinkering There are two main screens: the Map ERNSYNGORONG within days, hours, or even minutes. Window displays the entire world at a CILITIES Any scenario, preset or custom, can be in lasta ARC 1.6 MM2A@ glance, and the Edit Window, a close up tackled in a range of five levels of increasview of a selected part of the world, that shows details on the surface such as plants ing difficulty. The complexity can get sprouting and animals scurrying about the pretty tough and humbling, even for hot shot bioengineers. Because goals in SL are terrain, perhaps hunting, eating, or mating open-ended and subjective, there's no (ooh, la, la). conventional sense of winning. The best Two narrow menu panels filled with one can hope for is to strike an ongoing icon tiles, buttons, and tools — all actibalance between life and death. Survival vated by mouse point and click, with some is the only name of the game. keyboard commands— provide access to most of the features in the simulation: from ... all life is an experiment. modifying or creating life forms and build-Oliver Wendell Homes ing new worlds, to obtaining tracking information about life in the current scenario. An ever-present Having total responsibility over genetics, food chains, mutation cosmic clock shows the passing of seasons, days and years. rates, climate, terrain, the laws of physics, and time itself, comes at a price. The number of SL's features, options, and variable Life treads on life, and heart on heart; ... settings add up to an impressive and complex network of con-Elizabeth Barrett Browning, nected functions that can appear overwhelming. A Vision of Poets Grasping the basic concept behind the simulation makes learning Opting to run a preset scenario automatically loads a world and how it all works fall easily into place. SL has two primary compoits life forms into action. Players may always alter the design of a nents: one involves the modification or creation of worlds and life preset world as life forms can be modified or changed. How about forms; the other focuses on providing extensive, continuously pigs that fly? updated graphs and reports that track everything taking place in Suppose the preset scenario titled \"Feast & Famine\" is chosen. the present ecosystem. Watch as the world is created from the top down: mountain peaks Fortunately, SL is driven by sets of pull-down menus, pop-up to valleys, moisture and temperature zones, rivers and lakes, menus, submenus, buttons, and more than twenty different win oceans, and filter food. The predator in this scenario is the peccary dows. Given the need to access all this information, the screen is and the prey is maize, bamboo, and sagebrush. If the peccary remarkably uncluttered, plus there's always on-line help available multiplies so quickly that it kills all the plants by eating them, to navigate through the maze of options. everyone loses. How to STOP playing The 1 1. Bowling ball falls down ramps. 6. Dynamite explodes. pushing pail off ledge. Puzzle Game of the Year Computer Game Review 8. Bullet bursts balloon. 4. Light shines through the magnifying glass, lighting rocket. 12. Bowling ball tips see-saw, 5. Rocket lights fuse, exploding dynamite. pulling string o 7. Pail pulls string, shooting gun. 3. String pulls switch, turning on light bulb. 9. Bucket falls on hamster cage, making hamster run. it bulb. Offer Number 370 Expires 12/31/93 "


"Meuneud where players can edit the on-screen image of existing life forms, draw original icons for new creatures, or choose from a submenu of 32 predrawn animals or plants. Life is the game that must be played;... -Edwin Arlington Robinson, Ballade by the Fire RYCH Terra Tarde To bring the scenario into balance, possible actions could be:  Do nothing and see what happens, which is always a good starting point. Avoid interfering in the simulation too soon. Let it run. Things may look bad, but they may work themselves out without \"divine intervention.\" Do some serious genetic engineering by calling up the Biology Lab Window. A display appears featuring a threepart flash card image of the selected animal or plant; younger players (teachers and parents, too) will particularly enjoy flipping through the flash cards to produce odd-looking creature combinations with new Sie Sui behaviors. Clicking another button reveals the WIDNON Genome Window. This area displays the master switches, the entire genetic code for any species or individual organism, and allows players to change, modify, manipulate 00 00 00 or redesign the organism at the genetic level; variables include many precise and subtle changes that affect such characteristics as: gender, movement, behavior, food sources, life expectancy, health, likes and dislikes, and survival attributes. Naturally, a plant JRODA PSDGenome Window has a different set of gene settings geared toward plant survival. Players can alter either the peccary's genes, or the plant's, or both in an attempt to find a solution that will save the simple ecosystem from going down the tube. Of course, another approach could be to introduce a meat-eating predator that fancies peccaries. Then, what would keep the new carnivore species from overpopulating? Another predator that preys on the piggy-eater? Hmmm. The Biology Lab also contains a small icon drawing program Deciding to create a new world with life from scratch requires several steps. Giving some preparation and purpose to an original scenario enhances the experiment and escalates the learning value t es of the simulation. The World Design Window allows players to custom-make worlds EEMBRO that are hospitable, hostile, or somewhere in-between by choosing settings for climate, rivers and mountains, and the size of the world. Of course, larger worlds require more machine memory and lengthier load times. Other considerations include whether to add Toxins (deadly poisons), Mutagens (material that increases the odds of mutation), and Ultra-Food (unlimited amounts of food to whatever animal comes near it) an especially useful tool for getting fledgling ecosystems off the ground. SL does not overlook the ability to regulate and increase the odds for Mutation, which is nature's way of trying something new to see if it works. A peccary, for example, may mutate to fly or turn into a carnivore. Initially, such a bizarre mutation applies only to a single individual, not the entire species. If eating meat or flying, which demands more energy of the animal, cannot bring in more food (energy), then the mutation becomes a handicap, and probably won't be passed on to a succeeding generation. Incredible Machine\" (in 14 easy steps). Die Balloon turns on motor switch. 13. Motor starts fan, pushing tennis ball off ledge. tennis ball 14. Tennis ball trips see-saw, sending bowling ball crashing onto your computer. QUE INCREDIBLE 11. Scissors cut il balloon string Non-Stop Fun (because you just can't stop) Getting people to play The Incredible Machine isn't hard. Getting them to stop is! Combine ingenuity and obsession in this incredible workshop for your computer. Try solving over 85 puzzles by creating convoluted contraptions (like the one in this picture), using pulleys, bowling balls, hamsters, monkeys, candles, balloons, and a whole assortment of bizarre machine parts. The Incredible Machine features timed play, and a free form mode that lets you stretch your inventive mind to the limit. Pick it up at a software dealer near you. For A Free Demo Call: Jack-in-the-box pops up, hitting SCISSOTS. SIERRA SIERRA 1-800-326-6654 While supplies last Circle Reader Service #109 "


"DODACOCOCOCO Trac KADO After the world takes shape, it's time to breath life into it. Players Census Window menu provides extensive data on life within the can begin stocking the land and sea with selections of life forms scenario: diversity of life, food web, gene pool, graphs, history, from zoos and botanical groups provided FLOPTE Silation Specal Mindows c enters mortality and population. Checking the by SL. Once the animals and plants are in EDUCACIB,25W Neam Mortality Window, for instance, reports on the scenario, they can be modified or used why animals and plants are dying, giving as templates to create entirely new spe center FOHFS, AF24 insight on how imbalances might be corcies. rected. When designing an organism, the umAnother way to enjoy and learn what's brella rule is that everything comes at a going on is to Highlight a specific creature, price. Creating a super animal, for examselect the Variables Window, and follow it ple, that excels in everything sounds like as it lives out its life. SL tracks the animal a great idea. Unfortunately, the poor beast or plant while showing how it behaves and would require so much energy that it why. couldn't possibly eat fast enough to reIf toggled on, one naturally occurring dismain alive. Nature doesn't take credit aster or another will test the resilience and cards. stability of the ecosystem, including such A thriving ecosystem will have animals catastrophes as droughts, fires, floods, and plants occupying diverse niches; that comets, and a deadly sexually transmitted is, a broad food web where the disappearance of a single species disease. might upset the balance for a time, but would not destroy the ecosystem. Build an ecosystem gradually, get stability, then try I am so absorbed in the wonder of earth adding new life forms to shake up the natives. and the life upon it that I cannot think of Once a scenario is running, keeping tabs on how life is progressheaven and the angels. ing is critical to the success of the experiment. Using the pop-up Pearl S. Buck, I Believe 05177 201301 Life? Don't talk to me about life! Marvin the Paranoid Android Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy If complete control over worlds and life are still not enough, one of SL's advanced functions give players power to alter the Laws of Physics that affect time and energy of a given scenario, which can be used in various ways. For example, making it less costly in energy to fly than to walk could simulate conditions of a low-gravity planet, perhaps like the one featured in Larry Niven's novel, The Integral Trees. Shortening the length of days and years speeds up tracking the genetic drift and mutations over many generations. Adjusting other variables such as food value, movement and metabolism costs makes survival easier for some life forms and harder for others. It's as large as life and twice as natural. -Lewis Carroll, Through The Looking Glass Before splicing one more gene, here's some background from Maxis on what makes SimLife tick — the computer science called Artificial Life. Artificial life has the same goal in mind as Artificial Intelligence (AI). Whereas AI attempts to create a full-blown, complete thinking machine, A-life uses a bottom-up approach; start with single cells that evolve into more intelligent organisms. This is how nature works; the proof being that life strives to evolve into increasingly more complex forms, not the other way around. A-life is a way of simulating life by giving a computer simple rules and seeing what happens (emergent behaviors.) These behaviors can often be astonishingly lifelike, as players of SimCity will attest to. Another compelling aspect of A-life is evolution. Like their real world counterparts, artificial life-forms inside the computer can react to their environment, grow, reproduce, and evolve into more complex forms --all based solely upon what variables the player has set into motion. Emergent behavior is the part of the simulation that goes beyond the rules originally programmed into the software. For example, rules governing reproduction and mutation were written into SimLife's code; evolution (the adaptation of a species to its environment through mutation) was not yet creatures in SL evolve. Because evolution in SL emerges not from rules but from the interaction of hundreds of elements, emergent behavioris less predictable, giving SL an organic and lifelike feel. A-life itself is created by using genetic algorithms (an algorithm is a set of rules for solving a problem) Strings of computer data (much like DNA) that describe the appearance and behavior of an artificial life form. Such strings can be divided into two sections and combined with a segment of another divided string, to create a third data string. This new string will look and act like the offspring of the first two strings, a genetically unique artificial life form. So, for example, when players crossbreed plants and animals in SimLife, they're employing algorithms -rules never sounded so sexy. Tip: SL has many inside keyboard activated \"cheat\" commands used to improve or modify the simulation. Players game for redefining the program's genetic algorithm to mix genes in a more lifelike manner during play should try \"<SHIFT EGAD>\", an advanced feature not found in the documentation. Biotechnology ranks as one of the most promising scientific developments of the 20th century that is no less controversial, for its positive and negative potential, than the splitting of the atom. The very thought of genetic engineering still harbors fears that such work could lead to a racist 21st century world of Nazi-type eugenics where people would be branded inferior and weeded out based solely on their genes. On balance, there is the tantalizing promise that biotechnology could eliminate genetically transmitted deformities and diseases. By neatly bridging the gap between entertainment and education, SL brings the engrossing science of genetics within reach of any interested person. All the buttons, options, and variable settings add to the thrill and excitement of being in charge of a sophisticated biotechnology lab, Figuring out how the whole simulation works and taking control of it is the ultimate challenge because the simulation itself is the star. If SL has one shortcoming, it's that the simulator doesn't include the top of the food chain, Homo Sapiens, as a possible A-life form. More importantly, SL is Maxis' most ambitious simulation to date; it not only makes learning the difference between \"Evergreen\" and \"Deciduous\" fun, but reinforces the reality that diversity makes life strong, and that life cannot be taken for granted. Maybe SimLife will inspire a new generation of ecologists and bioengineers who'll pioneer the transformation of planet earth into an (dare I say it?) eden. Cow Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"An epic too big for one player... ...Introducing the first on-line, multi-player Fantasy Role-Playing game. Trial  INVENTORY ITERIS PREUTOUS MEMBERSHIP KIT HEAD COVER COSTUME SHOSEN EYE COLOR FACIAC HAIR CANCEL DONE Ou fericho Ou Terace Use these buttons to Sector sharecters eye color O aton ou see mord Sned ou see Mesa Chama ou setnina Potion BBBAT Save your stats and inventory at the end of each session. Your character grows every time you play. Create your own face and personality, modifying your skills, attributes, and character class. 4551 The gateau lord to TNC INC. You see Leather Vou Te Lou HT Choose Party Hotion rou encounter i Wietat the Recruit real people from coast-to-coast to help find the secret at the heart of an ancient volcano. Join others or set out alone but beware. Anyone you meet could be a real person... or a deadly foe! Real People. Real Time... Join real people from all over the country in your quest to find the secrets of The Shadow of Yserbious. A kingdom has been buried by an ancient curse. The bravest adventurers have been called to band together to penetrate these shadowy dungeons, challenging monsters and madmen along the way. Will you take up the cause? Quest with real people in real time, in an epic that's as real as a fantasy can get. Try it! FREE! If you have an IBM PC or compatible (286-16mhz or better with VGA and modem. Call: 1-800-SIERRA-1 for a FREE TSN Start-Up Kit and 3 FREE HOURS of game play. Circle Reader Service #104 Excellence in Multi-Player Games. The Sierra Network "


"Review UNCA Photo by Larry Maloney MicroProse's World Circuit The Grand Prix Race Simulation by Gordon Goble TITLE: World Circuit: The Grand Prix Race Simulation SYSTEM: Amiga, IBM 286 or better with one MB RAM PLAYERS: 1 26 (Head-To-Head) PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look Up DESIGNERS: Geot Crammond, Steve Perry PUBLISHER: MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD WORLDCIRCUIT The Grand Prix Race Simulation Torld Circuit poses extreme danger. The converted will find their health deteriorate rapidly as lack of sleep. improper diet, and generally sloppy grooming habits join force to wreak havoc on the body and soul. Eyes reddened from the late-night glow of the monitor, World Circuiters will emerge from their place of race track glory (or shame), only to be awash in the chastising glare of their significant other. They will utter something like, \"Go ahead to bed, Martha (or Mark?), I'm gonna have just one more race.\" But it won't be just one more race. It will be two, then three and more, until the eerie hues of early morning sunlight creep through their windowpane, but the only time that will matter will be that of their latest lap. A dangerous scenario indeed. In World Circuit (The Grand Prix Race Simulation), Microprose has attempted to create the ultimate real-time, real-feel computerized road racing experience. They have succeeded. This latest venture into auto racing sims is not without minor blemishes, but for the most part, World Circuit has done what countless other predecessors could not do — provide realism, excitement, and challenge in one neat package. Hard-core computer drivers will tell anyone who listens that it was not until the appearance of Electronic Arts' Indy complex, and most provided more bells and whistles, but nothing has clicked — until now. Like Hertz, World Circuit most definitely puts the gamer in the driver's seat. at no less than sixteen of the world's most infamous proving grounds the Formula One Circuit. From Australia's Adelaide to Eastern Europe's Hungaroring, each track is an accurate representation of its real-life self, right down to the precise placement of trackside curbing. Further, the fact that that curbing acts like curbing really does — righting direction in a perfectly carved corner, or scrubbing off speed when one wheel is placed upon it — speaks volumes on the precision of this program. In The Pits (Pre-Race Preparation) MicroProse recommends a 286 or better machine with at least 1 MB RAM for World Circuit. Having tested the game on both this minimally equipped machine and a 486/33 Mhz 4 MB unit, both are quite adequate (with the exception of some detail loss on the former). Initial decision-making involves tailoring World Circuit to one's graphical preference. Of the many options available, \"adjustable frame rates\" is both interesting and innovative, permitting from eight to twenty-five frames/second to scroll across the screen. As with most 500 The Simulation that the world of armchair racing really began to take shape. At no time prior to Indy's release had there been a racing sim that provided a true cockpit feel, and in the years since, there have been a number of pretenders to the Indy throne. Many were more Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"The Best-Selling Sensation from Europe! BEST GRAPHICS AWARD Paris Supergames Show 1992 Pilot your golden starship into amazing outer space battle simulation. Take on space-age Spanish Conquistadors with swords and phasers. Advanced video-capture makes this an interactive motion picture. One of the oldest mysteries known to mankind is now the future of computer gaming, Set out on a mystic mission across space and time in this high-powered combination of complex puzzle-solving, mythical role-playing, and outer space battle simulation. You are the champion of the lost Inca empire, rocketing across galaxies, battling space age Conquistadors, and unraveling intricate and ancient mysteries. Stunning simulation technology lets you soar through winding canyons, hostile star systems, and lost ruins. This is an epic adventure that catapults you through space and time. Inca is an interactive motion picture where cultures clash and legends live. For IBM PCs. Also available on CD-ROM. Circle Reader Service #105 Excellence in Innovative Gaming SIERRA Stunning simulation de lost ruins. hrough space and Available at a software retailer near you, or call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"hin. leading edge computer games, World Circuit will automatically adapt to each machine, but if the marginally jittery default eight frames/sec. on a 286 becomes an annoyance to some, they can simply choose to bump it up to, say, ten. Though this procedure will slow the game a tad, the compensation of better graphics may be worth it; it's purely a personal preference. (By the way, depressing the \"O\" key during play will display \"processor occupancy,\" where the closer to 100% this figure is, the closer to real time the simulation becomes. I found that running a slower machine at as much as 150% presents an almost indiscernible time lag and a smoother graphic scroll.) Once everything is running smoothly, it's time to select a driver, delete his default name, and insert one's own. If there is to be more than one human participant, two cars will be selected at this stage, and multiplayer mode is initiated. (Multiplayer mode lets two human drivers take turns behind the wheel of their respective autos throughout practice, qualifying, and racing. Player One drives a stint in his own car, then hands over the reins to his opponent. During the actual race, the computer will take over one player's car while the second tries to make up lost ground or scoot further ahead. This is but one of many World Circuit firsts -an excellent idea at that -and is soon to be followed by true modem head-to-head play). life racing technique, and the following car will travel up to ten mph faster \"in tow\" than it would alone. The closer one gets, the faster one goes, and the move is made just inches off his bumper, swinging outside at the crest of the corner. For a moment, there seems to be no track and just when the car seems destined to fly off track, pavement suddenly re-appears and the player cruises on, safely ahead. Pause the game immediately by hitting the space bar, then depress «R» for a twenty second replay and review that startling maneuver over and over again from several strategic camera positions — inside the cockpit, chase view front, or chase view rear. Unfortunately, there are no fast forward, rewind, or frame-by-frame options yet available. X1000 RPM MAH one-off basis at the armchair Ayrton's or Nigel's discretion. And speaking of Senna, Mansel, et al, none of these regular Formula One names are found in the program. Microprose does, however, include a list of actual names and teams in the World Circuit technical manual. Whether to replace the default names with these guys is up to the individual. This may be the time to consider the advantages of running just a single event or contesting an entire 16-race Grand Prix season. Selection of the latter is a massive undertaking indeed, and, unless the player has no other life whatsoever, may span several weeks. Making Tracks (The Racetracks) Sixteen of the hottest race tracks in the world now beckon, and each is very different in its structure and driving formula. From the straight-away velocity of Germany's Hockenheim to the tight and claustrophobic Monaco, each course demands precision, concentration, quick reflexes, and patience, although the specific application of these qualities varies sharply from track to track, as in real life. Furthermore, judging by the analysis of a racing colleague of mine who has had personal experience at Montreal's \"Circuit Gilles Villeneuve,\" accuracy in track design has been a prime motivator for game designers. He has but one word for the sensation of returning to Montreal (albeit this time on his computer), and that word is «eerie.\" Certainly some tracks offer a more enjoyable drive than others. Standout spots on standout tracks include Estoril's rocketing downhill Turns One and Two (yes, Virginia, there are elevation changes). If this is what a Formula One car feels like at 190 mph, steering cranked hard to the right, blindly probing its adhesion limits, no wonder these guys get paid the big bucks. Another immediate sweat inducer is Silverstone's sixth gear uphill «Bridge\" sweeper, where the only thing between an on-line vehicle and the great beyond is a tactically placed slab of curbing. Brazil, on the other hand, rewards a patient drive, gears whirring up and down as fast as George Bush's popularity. Yet, there's nothing quite like the sensation of overtaking a competitor at a corner such as San Marino's 185 mph Tamurello left-hander. As one's car moves smoothly into sixth gear, it is drawn closer and closer to the car directly ahead. He is now breaking the air turbulence for both cars and the player \"slipstreams\" behind him. World Circuit is the first simulation to offer this realPractice opens on pit lane, where a quick pull on the joystick brings up the car set-up menu. Here the complex procedure of altering the race car's characteristics takes place. All six gears can be made \"taller\" or \"shorter,\" front and rear wings increased or decreased, brake bias adjusted, and tire compounds chosen. Generally, the tighter the course, the shorter the gears, and greater the amount of wing. No formal instructions are given here, and it is up to each player to adjust according to track layout and conditions. (Wet tracks and inclement weather are entirely possible for any given race.) Initial track forays should be conducted under default settings, with adjustments made from there. A default set-up will permit good lap times and race victories at every track in all but the top level of competition. From this point forward, the rookie driver is in control of his own destiny. There are no lessons, but help is available in other forms. On or off the track, cockpit views of any other driver can be accessed at any time by using the keyboard's cursor keys. Depress the up key and move ahead to the car in front, the down key, one behind. Watch what they do, and when they do it. Additionally, extra features for the newcomer include no less than six different driving aids, each geared to assist through the learning Continuing with pre-race preparations, customization of the racing environment follows, including race length, skill level of the computerized competition, method of control (joystick, keyboard, mouse or mousewheel), automatic or manual transmission, etc. I find the ideal setup involves selecting the joystick to control everything. Pressing forward will allow for gradual acceleration, and backward, graduated braking. More advanced drivers will want and in the upper levels, must) shift gears manually, and choosing fire button #1 for upshifting and #2 for downshifting makes tremendous ergonomic sense. All settings can be saved or used on a Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITSinc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PR,AK,HI, APO & FPO S4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 pershipmont. 2 Business Day Air US S6 per order; PR, HIS121st item +$2 ea. add'l: AK $191st Itom +$2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $191st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6ea.add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE S29 'ARMORED FIST'features realistic simulations of American & Russian nextgeneration tanks including the M1A2 Abrams, M3 Bradley, Russian T80 MBT and BMP 2 Personnel Carrier. Lead 4 platoons into an variety of pre-programmed scenarios or use the battle con struction set to design your own campaigns. $38 3 Button Dexxa Mouse Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P42 $159 Acoustic Research P570 $319 Acoustic Research P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $59 Adlib Gold Sound Card $169 Advancd Gravis Ultrasound $139 Champ Joystick $24 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Game Card 3 Automatic $39 Maxx Control Yoke $59 Maxx Rudder Pedals FLT $39 PC Symphony Sound Board $37 Media Concept Sound Board $79 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $179 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus $149 Quickshot 123 Joystick $16 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sony SRS7 Speakers $15 Sony SRS9 Speakers $20 Sound Blaster Sound Card $99 Sound Blaster 16 $239 Sound Blaster PRO Basic $139 Sound Blaster PRO $169 SB CD Rom Upgrade S339 SB Multimedia Starter Kit $399 SB Multimedia Upgrade $499 Sound Machine $99 Thrustmaster Fit Ctrl Sys $69 Thrustmaster Fit Ctrl PRO $119 Thrustmaster Rudder Ctrl $119 Thrustmaster Weapons Ctrl $89 Thunder Board Sound Card $84 $37 $28 $15 Because la Comisione! $34 IBM CD ROM $28 'CONQUERED KINGDOMS'allows you to invade castles and fly over mountains as you battle for control of the world. Features nine scenarios, a random map generator, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, several full campaign conquests, and complete game scoring history. $38 $56 VA Advent Willie Beamish VGA $34 Advent Willy Beamish 2 VGA S39 All Dogs Go to Heaven $17 Alone in the Dark $36 Altered Destiny $34 Amazon $39 An American Tail $26 Attack Pack S42 B.A.T. $19 Blue Force: Next of Kin $45 Cadaver $27 Castle Wolfstein 3D $37 Chamber Sci-Mutant Prstss S25 Coaster Codename Iceman Code Name Iceman 2 VGA $39 Colonel's Bequest Conquest Robin Hood VGA $36 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy Deadlock Files $34 Countdown $37 Covert Action $24 Crime Does Not Pay $29 Crime Wave $37 Cruise for a Corpse $32 Cybercon 3 $29 Dark Half S19 Dark Heart of Uukrul $34 Dark Side $28 David Wolf Secret Agent $15 Day of the Tentacle $39 Deja Vu 182 S18 Deja Vu 1&2 WIN $28 Deja Vu 2 Lost in LV $6 Demon's Gate $32 Diehard Dog Eat Dog $32 Dominus S39 Don't Go Alone Duck Tales S15 Earthrise East vs West Berlin 1948 $9 Elt $24 Epic Eric the Unready $38 Felony S3 Floor 13 S15 Free DC $19 Future Wars $9 Galleons of Glory $24 Gama Force Gambit $38 Gateway $32 Godfather $29 Gold Rush $15 GrailQuest $27 HUMANS $21 Harley Davidson $9 Heart of China VGA $34 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hired Guns Hook Hostage $6 Hound of Shadow $17 Inca $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis Indy Jones Grfx Adv VGA $27 Inspector Gadge Jack the Ripper $38 KGB $17 King's Quest 4 $34 King's Quest 5 VGA $36 King's Quest 6 VGA King's Ransom $38 Kristal $12 L.A. Law $34 Laffer Utilities WIN S24 Laura Bow 2 VGA & EGA $36 Leather Goddesses $12 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 $36 $34 S9 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $41 Legend of Faerghail $34 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA $15 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $15 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $24 Leisure Suit Larry 5 EGA $34 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA Leisure Suit Larry Bundle 1 $39 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun $34 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $44 Lost Treasures of Infocom $42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 $32 Lost in LA Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Manhunter New York Manhunter San Francisco $15 Maniac Mansion $18 Martian Memorandum $37 Max Pac $26 Mean Streets $37 Metal Mutant $32 Moebius $28 Murder Club S28 Murder by the Dozen $15 Nebulas $27 Out of this World $36 Plan 9 from Outer Space $31 Police Quest 1 VGA $24 Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 EGA Police Quest 3 VGA $36 Power Hits:Movies $32 Prince of Persia $25 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Return to Zork $38 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Riftwar Legacy VGA $39 Ringworld Rise of the Dragon VGA Risky Woods Robocop 3 | Rocketeer Rome: Pathway to Power $38 Screen Antics WIN $24 Search for the King $24 Secret Monkey Island EGA $27 Secret Monkey Island VGA $23 Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Sex Olympics Sex Vixens from Space $12 Shadowgate WIN $34 Shogun $12 Sierra Adventure Bundle 1 $39 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA $36 Space Quest 5 VGA Space Quest Bundle $36 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk $34 Star Trek 25th Anniv $36 Star Trek 5 $12 Star Trek: Next Generation $46 Stellar 7 $21 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle $25 Terminator 2029 The Prophecy Theme Park Mystery S15 Time Quest $12 Troika Uninvited Universe 1-3 Each $34 Walker War in Middle Earth $12 Warriors of Legend Weird Dreams $9 Whales $34 Wonderland $16 Where in Time Carmen SD $32 APR CGW 1 $24 S32 S32 $21 MOOP S6 $19 Quickshot $35 SOUND MAGINE 12 Roads to Gettsyburg WIN $48 7th Guest Advent Willie Beamish $45 Battle Chess WIN & DOS Buzz Aldrin Race Space Campaign $35 Capstone Game Collection S45 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan Conquests Robin Hood WIN $42 Cyber Space $38 Don Quixote $32 Dune $35 El Grito Del Jaguar WIN $46 Fascination WIN $39 Gofer's Winkel Advet WIN Guy Spy $29 Jack and the Beanstalk $34 Jones In The Fast Lane WIN $42 King's Quest 5 WIN S42 King's Ransom Legend of Kyrandia $49 Loom $48 Lost Treasures of Infocom $46 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 $46 Mantis Experimental Fgtr $45 Omar Sharif Bridge $46 Secret Monkey Island $39 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $46 Sherlock Holmes $44 Shuttle Space Quest 4 WIN $42 Spirit of Excaliber Star Child $32 Star Trek 25 Anniversary $46 Team Yankee 2 $29 Ultima Bundle $59 Where in the World Deluxe $66 White Horse Child $32 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $45 Wing Commander / Ultima 6 $60 WC/Ultima Underworld $60 Wolf Pack $39 ACOMPLETE PC SOUND KIT $39 $38 SOUND CARD $36 $32 'SOUND MACHINE'brings to gether 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in one inexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output, full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp, volume control, a pair of 3\" magnetically sheilded speakers, and a Quickshotjoystick. $99 JOVITICK $42 $24 $36 SPEAKER STIEN $32 SOITEARE S6 $9 $32 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Dofectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #112 "


"SS SS has been known to happen, without the need for a lot of wild maneuvering, just a smooth, fast line up the side of the track. This is simply not possible, or at least not at all common, in real racing. Nor is World Circuit's \"bumper car» corners. Simply, it's just too easy to push another car out of the way (and hopefully off the track) in any given corner. Obviously, rushing in and making contact at 50 mph is going to damage equipment, but a gentle fifteen mph nudge will go a long way in ridding one of one's nemesis without scarring oneself. This dirty little technique takes a while to master, but since black flags aren't yet part of World Circuit, it is quite effective. Rare has been the racing sim that has gone beyond a uni-dimensional image of fellow on-track steeds. Although endeavors at static, perspectively correct cars have been made, the final product has been debatable at best, with jumpy, off-kilter polygons being the most common outcome. World Circuit offers crystal clarity from all angles, a much needed alternative. curve. As experience and a certain amount of skill is obtained, each can be turned off (and will become inaccessible in the pro ranks). Automatic brakes will be the first to go; races cannot be won with computer assisted braking. As time goes on, and higher levels are chosen, automatic gears will be a thing of the past, as will be self-correcting spins and indestructibility. Finally, in \"Ace\" competition, suggested gears for upcoming corners will no longer appear on the instrument panel, and the \"ideal race line,\" a dotted white guide painted on the track surface itself, will disappear. By the time that level is attained, however, these aids probably won't be required. On The Course (Game Play) Almost everything happens just the way it would if one were really out there duking it out nose-to-tail with Alain and the boys. Racers always want to finesse the perfect corner, but brake just a touch too late, and quickly feel the wrath of the slippery curbing or the helplessness of a pirouetting Honda in tractionless grass. Brake too early, and exit speed won't be worth a bent nickel. Furthermore, every time that turn is traversed, it will provide identical results, providing the driver is consistent enough. Tap a car with a little too much force and the car will likely have a damaged front wing, affecting both speed and cornering ability. Do the same damage in the rear and one's car handles like it's on ice. These are strong and realistic) traits, as are the reactions of the on-track competition. Another plus is the distinct lack of recurring patterns during repeated World Circuit sessions. For instance, the 26 car grid rarely starts the same way twice, and race developments are impossible to forecast. Computer gamers are all too aware of the multitude of programs whose patterns become just too obvious in time, and once committed to memory, render the whole exercise useless. That won't happen here. Graphically, World Circuit is certainly a pretty sight. Four levels of detail (and a \"track texture\" option, making the pavement look like pavement and not a sheet of black metal) are provided and these can be adjusted while on track. There are plentiful off-course objects to use as references for speed and braking, while the trees of Monza, the harbor of Monaco, and the hazy spray created in a wet race are particularly appealing. More importantly, other vehicle perspective of this quality has not been attained since EA's Indy. Caution Flag (Criticism) Unfortunately every rose has its thorn, and on track, World Circuit has a couple of teeny tiny prickles, that, ironically, end up assisting the human driver. This reviewer, for example, is quite aggressive on the track and often likes to start a race without qualifying (translating to a last place grid position), just for the thrill of the pass. Generally, transcending a half-pack by Corner One has not been out of the question. Actually, in the lower and slower levels, an entire pack pass and first place by the initial corner Checkered Flag (Conclusion) Finally, World Circuit is appealing to the ears, as well as the hands and eyes. The high pitched buzzsaw of an overrevved first gear is as accurate and mesmerizing as the drone of sixth. However, it would be a treat to be able to hear the singing engine notes of on-track peers as they are passed (or are passing!), and a graduated, more pronounced tire squeal under hard braking would be a positive addition. The release of World Circuit has been anticipated by digital racing fanatics for some time, and the wait has been unconditionally worthwhile. It is Indy 500 The Simulation bettered, then multiplied by sixteen. It is the current crowning jewel in computerized simulations. CGW World Circuit Tips 1 Do not ignore the \"ideal line\" painted on the race track. At first, it may seem quicker to take a different route, but until proficiency is attained, it's there for a reason. 2 Keep steering aids (such as traction control) on. It does not make one moremacho to take them off and the drive feels more real with them on. 3 Punting (the act off purposely pushing someone else off track, with the desired result being a gain in position) is O.K. Punt gently, and in corners, as most cars make excellent brakes. 4 Sometimes, sometimes, cutting across grass will get a car through a sharp bend faster. A good example of this is the first chicane at the Hungaroring where, if no additional acceleration or brakes are applied while off-track, positions can be gained. 5 Don't put absolute trust in the suggested gear signal. It is most often unmistaken, but when fourth gear is signaled in a third gear bend, and the accelerator is hard to the floor (or computer table, at least), it's black flag junction. Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BIT'Sinc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PRAKHI,APO & FPO SA per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment, 2 Business Day AirUS $6 por order; PR HI$121st Item +$2 ea, add AK $1915tItem +$2 ea, ada . Handling $1 per shipment, Europe, S. America Alr Mail $191st Item +S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Malt$25 1st item +S6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM WARGAMES $22 AREC OVER EUROPE In 'ACES OVER EUROPE' you soar into air combat over WWII Europe. Dive in and take out trains, barges, staff cars, tanks, and more with aircraft like the P51 Mustang, FockeWulf 190, and Messerschmitt 190. Features his toric flight maneuvers, ability to lock view on a single target, and modem support. $46    ! $29 $32 DO On    A Train $38 A Train Construction Set $23 Air Force Commander $32 Airbucks $36 Ancient Art War Sea $29 Ancient Art of War $29 Ancient Art of War Sky $34 Are We There Yet $17 Armada 2525 Balance of Power 1990 $35 Balance of the Planet $19 Bandit Kings Ancient China $37 Battle Isle Battle Isle Scenario Disk $22 Battles of Destiny $38 Bermuda Square $21 Big Business $12 Breach 2 $19 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space $42 Caesar $36 Carrier Command $9 Castles $18 Castles 2 $36 Castles Northern Campaigns $19 Centurion Defender Rome $17 Civilization $39 Civilization Master Edition $45 Command HQ Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Control of the Seas Crisis in the Kremlin Dark Seed Dark Star Defender of the Crown Designasaurus 2 Dino Wars Diplomacy Discovery Stp Columbus Dragon Force $19 Dragon Lord $12 Dune Dune 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Fighting for Rome Final Conflict $17 Fireteam 2200 $24 Fireteam 2200 Constrctn Kit $25 Fort Apache Gemfire Genghis Khan Global Conquest Global Effect Gold of the Americas Imperium Inindo Koshan Conspiracy L'Empereur Lemmings Lemmings Datadisk Lemmings 2 Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $24 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scenario Disk $23 Lost Patrol $12 Maelstrom $38 Medieval Lords $14 Medieval Warriors $9 Mega Lo Mania $31 Mercenaries Tegel's $38 Merchant Colony $17 Microcosm $32 Millenium $24 Monarch $38 MoonBase $24 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 In 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek out and destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challenging artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $38 Nuclear War $9 Objection $34 Objection Enhanced $79 Ogre $19 Omega $30 Operation Combat $12 Overlord $21 Pacific Theater Ops $42 Paladin 2 Perfect General $32 Perfect General Scen Disk $21 Perfect General Scen Disk 2 $23 Perfect General 2 $44 Populous Populous 2 $38 Populous Promised Lands S14 Powermonger $34 Powermonger World War 1 $21 Push Over $32 QQP Bundle $59 Railroad Tycoon $34 Rampart $27 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms S17 Red Zone $32 Renegade Legion Interceptr $12 Riders of Rohan S19 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms 1 or 2 $42 Rules of Engagement $19 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN $34 Seven Cities Gold 2 S38 Shadow President $34 Shadowgate WIN $34 Siege $38 Siege Expansion Disk $19 Sim Ant $34 Sim Ant Windows $34 Simcity $29 Simcity Graphic Set 1 $15 Simcity Graphic Set 2 $23 Simcity WIN $34 Simearth $38 Simearth 2000 Simearth WIN $38 Simfarm $41 Simlife Spaceward Ho! $38 Special Forces Spoils of War Star Control $29 Star Control 2 $36 Star Legions $38 Starfleet 1 S17 Starfleet 2 Strategic Forces $19 Sword of Aragon S28 Task Force 1942 $39 Theatre of War Theatre of War Set 1 $21 Traders $19 Unnatural Selection $32 Utopia $31 Vikings Fields of Conquest $37 Visions of Aftermath $19 Warlords $24 Warlords 2 $42 Worlds at War $24 $34 American Civil War V3 Banzai $12 Battle Stations $26 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battle of Austerlitz Battle of the Atlantic Battles of Napoleon Battleship Bismark Blitzkrieg Ardennes Blood & Iron Borodino Napoleon Invades $30 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 CW No Greater Glory $39 Campaign $39 Carrier Strike $42 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War $34 Carriers at War Exp Pak $37 Charge of the Light Brigade $34 Conflict $15 Conflict in Vietnam 59 Conflict: Middle East $24 Conflict: Korea Crusade in Europe Decision at Gettysburg Dreadnoughts Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fire Brigade Fire Bri $34 Fleet Commander $39 Fleet Med $36 Frontline $34 Gary Grigsby Pacific War $46 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg: Turning Point $36 Golan Front $36 Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon $25 Harpoon Battle Set 2 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $24 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series $32 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 High Command $45 In Harms Way $36 Kampigruppe Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 Line in the Sand $24 Long Lance $39 MacArthur's War $29 Main Battle Tank C Germany $36 Main Battle Tank MiddleEast $36 Main Battle Tank N Germany $36 Malla Storm Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $24 Midway $19 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $22 Patriot Patriot Battle Set 2 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Patton Strikes Back $16 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Lightning $12 Return To Falklands $28 Return to Falklands Rising Sun $26 APR CGW2 $36 $42 $41 $39 $34 MILLENNIUM PRESENTS $59 $32 $36 'DAUGHTER OF SERPENTS'isan epic cinematic adventure, meticulously researched in every detail with original 1920's materials from Thomas Cooks. Features full screen graphics, animated icon interface, a complex and absorbing story line which varies depending on your chosen character's profession & skills. $32 IBM WARGAMES $44 $24 MILLENNIUM Action North Atlantic Action Stations Action Stations Scenario 1 Action off River Platte Air Raid Pearl Harbour Ambush American Civil War V1 American Civil War V2 $26 $29 $14 $26 $26 $42 $22 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs 56. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEELAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #113 $28 $22 "


"Deuneun Discovering the Missing Link Gametek's Comotolin How About a Lift? TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: GRAPHICS: SOUND: fter spending some time with Gametek's prehistoric puzzler, I Lam not sure I will ever feel comfortable again using the phrase \"I'm only human.\" As one soon discovers in this game of logic skill and physical dexterity, humans are small squidgy pink creatures\" who are often confused by the volume of information that they receive. Moreover, they have a lovable habit of repeating the same mistakes, over and over again, to their own destruction. The parallel to real life is all too painfully clear. The Humans Amiga, IBM (Sega Genesis and SNES soon) $39.95 VGA Ad Lib, Roland and Sound Blaster Symbol Matching Imagitec Design, Inc. Gametek, Inc. PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Essential to solving the puzzles on each level is teamwork among the members of the player's tribe. These humans must first learn how to stack, standing on each other's shoulders, in order to reach cliffs and platforms above ground level. After succeeding in this rudimentary skill, they need to develop the ability to pole vault across chasms and \"pass\" the spear without turning each other into human pin cushions. Here is where great care must be taken as one can accidentally skewer a companion or toss the spear where no one else can reach it. In such a case, the only alternative is to restart the level from Human Nature 709 You Nevesen i Them... The Humans is a delightful new release from Gametek that follows closely in the footsteps of Psygnosis' extremely popular puzzler, Lemmings. In this game of logic and coordination, however, the humorous and pitiful little creatures in need of the player's assistance are not a bunch of cute little floppy-haired rodents, but a tribe of amusing cave dwellers of a decidedly primate persuasion. TEAU The goal in The Humans is quite simple--to guide one's tribe through the scratch as there is no ability to save one's process of \"evolution,\" enabling them to progress during play. \"Loosing\" too many make the leaps necessary (and literal) to humans will also necessitate restarting, as rise above the carnivorous animals around ... Coming Soon From GameTEK a certain number are required to solve them and survive in a hostile world. each puzzle. In addition, a time limit is Failure results in the loss of fellow tribes The first discovery necessary for imposed for the completion of each level. men and ultimate extinction. Of course, human survival is the spear. Once Progress continues as long as time is these primates will need all the assistance acquired, it can be used as a defensive available and a sufficient number of that is \"humanly possible. weapon (brandishing), offensive weapon humans remain. (throwing) or as a pole to vault across pits On the Level and other obstacles, even onto the backs Primal Beauty of flying reptiles. Next in the line of disAs with Lemmings, The Humans is covery is the torch. It too serves as a The Humans is a VGA-only product comprised of multiple levels of logicand defensive weapon (brandishing), besides for the IBM, lacking support for other coordination-based puzzles which must be being used to ignite vegetation blocking graphic formats (Tandy VGA is supportmastered in the long trek up the evolutionone's path. The three final discoveries ed). This is not a problem, only a caution, ary ladder. Three skill settings and 80 levnecessary to ultimate survival include the as VGA/MCGA has become the new minels of play are provided, each with a level rope (to raise or lower humans from imum graphics standard. While this is an code supplied upon successful complecliffs), wheel (for jumping great distances attractive game with fluid animation, tion. Thus, in essence, 240 levels of play from ramps) and the witch doctor to sumgraphics could stand some improvement. are available as one's skill increases. mon objects from the spirit world). The Humans definitely has more the look Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"Go where no cowboy has gone before. No two games are exactly alike. Full network modem-compatability. 0 Behe Hulp SPACEWARD HO! the Conquest Game of the Sun .....the Design your own ships, create your own galaxy, personalize your opponents. Enjoyable \"point and click» interface makes playing a snap. Explore, colonize and conquer in a galaxy of your own design, Up to 20 human and or computer players each game. Full Windows support with menu driven commands. Rustle up some stars and get ready for action. A minute to learn, an hour to kick butt. come with which to build Ships, explore.. Spaceward Hol is a space strategy came tor the conquest of the universe, Players start lout with a rather low level of technology and and colonize planets, and eventually take over the universe Snaceward Ho! is an adventure lasting many hours and days, and is never the same game twice. Due to the multiplayer compatability you and your friends can go head to head, against the computer, or BOTH. 2in1 Sco arion Round em up and head em out. It's time for a showdown M sto (2/2) Coury SME NEW WORLD COMPUTING AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1.800.325.8898 (OR 1.818.999,0607 OUTSIDE U.S.) P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302 1992 KEW WORLD COMRTING INC * SPACEWARD HOLISA TRADEAARK OF DELTA TAO UNDER LICENSE TO NEW WORLD COMPUTING NEW WORLD COMPUTING IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OP HEW WORLD.COMPUTING INC IBU SCREENS SHOWN ARAL SCREENS MAY VARY. Circle Reader Service #90 "


"Deview al the player will want to read through!). Copy protection takes the form of symbols and numbers on a non-reproductive card stock; which is not as bad as some forms of copy protection, but less desirable than others. of a console title rather than that of a comdesperately to toggle it off as is so often puter product (indeed, GameTek unveiled the case in this genre of product. the Sega Genesis and SNES versions of The Humans during the Winter Consumer Ugh, Ugh! Electronics Show in January). The color palette is a bit limited and the characters, Qualms with The Humans are few in especially in transition animations number. Though music, as mentioned between levels, are somewhat crude in above, is above average for this type of appearance and not nearly as comical as game, the lack of sound effects are noticethose that appear on the cover of the box able by their absence. No \"Ugh!\" accomor in the manual. However, the presentapanies being smitten by a spear, nor is tion is acceptable to good overall, and the there a single \"Thud!\" when some hapless player quickly becomes involved enough human plummets to his death. Dinosaurs in the action to not be too critical of visual die without so much as a whimper. At the shortcomings. least, simple sound effects should have been provided. poporo on Boonop The Pictographs are on the Wall The only other \"missing ingredient\" that really comes to mind by its absence is a quick reference card. While not needed in the long run, it would be handy to have available during the initial stages of play, especially since both keyboard and joystick controls are employed (though a joystick is not required). Leopard Skins and Arrow Heads Though not quite the calibre of Lemmings, The Humans is still a capable entry into the genre of puzzle-oriented games. The level of difficulty does build a little too quickly for my tastes, but it is not overly frustrating. In all, much pleasure is to be had directing the antics of this comical clan of cave dwellers. There are certainly enough challenges to keep one's tribe evolving for quite some time. Cow Background music, on the other hand, is perfectly suited to the game. It is so effectively written and performed that it does not draw attention to itself. Rather, one soon finds himself or herself playing in rhythm to the music instead of trying The game manual is an excellent example of providing the player with necessary information in a humorous and entertaining fashion. It is attractively illustrated and is enjoyable to read this is one manuTHE ROAD FROM SUMTER  APPMATTOX June 25, 1861... \"The first shots of the Civil War have been fired... Fort Sumter has fallen. Volunteers on both sides rush to their colors. Across the Union the cry mounts . . . ON TO RICHMOND.\" New York Daily Tribune Union forces under General Mclella seis Harper's Ferry. The Road From Sumter to Appomattox covers the entire Civil War from the opening guns of Bull run to the final surrender. All the military and economic might of the Union or Confederacy is at your command. FEATURES: Human or computer opponents.  Naval system includes ocean and river going vessels, Over 100 individually named and rated generals.  Economic system includes foreign trade and blockade runners. Control the promotions and dismissals of those generals.  Beautiful 256 color VGA map that stretches from New Orleans Continuous-play, daily pulses, send orders-whenever to Philadelphia, from Kansas City to Bermuda you like. Fully integrated tactical combat system emphasizing command Different unit types combine to form divisions and corps. control and quick resolution of even the largest battles. Full control over the national production system. Scenario editor allows players to construct their own battles or A detailed supply system using railroads, wagons and ships. play those already included. Send cheque or money order to: $54.95 ADANAC COMMAND SYSTEMS CORP. IBM OR AMIGA -1021345 West 4th Avenue plus $5.00 S&H  Must have Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H BY8 1 MB H.D. Mouse, Telephone: (604) 739-1162 TOTAL $59.95 US Keyboard, 286 or more Page 70 Circle Reader Service #41 Computer Gaming World "


"magic Candle I overgas T3X155 T: 024. A Gate Lukas 51 84 | kark 51 89 OK Baltic 439 OK Dar Recan Lukas SI Notes Pass Magic Camp Formatny hisperi Sheathe Cont ep11:30 61 Cisar 13 XOCY TK:0ii Herrington Lukas 51 15 OK dort. pk Reca Magie For matn Whisper Shoathel Sep 3 TH220 L Overcast 1991 XEOGT LYH037 Library Jeu 51 40 OR karko 1 48 OR WOW rr ian sas . What is your subject of interest. Subject ( he ancient Solian lands have new arrivals: weapons and magic—and, most of all, their wits-to Monsters of the Blight! survive and defeat the Blight! Delightful 256-color graphics, glorious music and The Blight is consuming the ancestral homes of the elves and humans, halflings, goblins and orcs. digitized sound effects, and a compelling story with It's up to you and your chosen heroes to slay the fascinating characters make The Magic Candle III your key to many hours of enjoyment. Blight's monsters and solve its mysteries! With The Magic Candle Ill, Mindcraft continues its tradition of excellence in fantasy role-playing. MINDCRAFT Your party will have characters handcrafted by you, marching side by side with the friends old and 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 new your hero meets along the way. They will need (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #87 "


"from the pocket KIT PLANES PLUS Aircraft and Adventure Factory Timothy L. Trimble u pan s tom Lear 25 Foxtrot Sicha, Ch right leading 16 to join the cu Flight Level leaving SI. Siem . T Teresting a IT I 2 Tontrol 137 Hotel ntor weather Believe it or not, this type of multimedia functionality is actually now available for Flight Simulator with the new release of Aircraft and Adventure Factory (AAF) from Mallard Software, Inc. AAF is described as multimedia creation software for Microsoft Flight Simulator. It is basically two products in one package; an aircraft design and assembly program, and an adventure creator with a special programming language designed for interfacing with Flight Simulator. which allows the builder to take a group of parts and combine them into a single component, thereby making the assembly of an aircraft easier. This leads to the last step of the process and that is the Assembly Line. The components, parts, and structures can all be assembled, painted, and have special effects/conditions assigned. The special effects/conditions allows various parts or components of the aircraft to change their appearance under various conditions, such as making the landing gear visible \"only when gear down.\" upprovas ADVENTURE | lie advised Matka Stalog 337 MOVIETOS pilot's disconto 16 thousand fly heading 10 Speeding slower than 20 knots, traffic to follow Voulin F18 out of Dover Air For Bu of F1:270 l thousand at our best spol u 875 014 Horumer 28. trallie tuning T est twelve milits : a 767 flying direct Retut pu knots. Arerall Factory Melodtralles Duilding Planning a Elle Go to Setup Help n Malland Structure PM Aircraft Factory T i th your copy of Microsoft Flight Simulator, imagine sitting on the runway at Migs Field at Chicago in your Beechcraft B100 Kingair awaiting instructions from the tower. The spot view window shows the Kingair, with its custom colors and tail number, sitting on the \"numbers\" at the end of the runway. \"Beech 87 Tango, you are cleared for takeoff,\" the tower calls in a digitized voice through your sound card. Going to full throttle, you hear the twin turbo-prop engines torque up to their high pitch whine. After lifting off the runway, you press a key on the keyboard and display the digitized sectional chart for the Chicago area on the screen. Flipping back to the cockpit you hear the tower again, \"Beech 87 Tango, contact departure control at 119.9 and have a good day.\" Pressing another key on the keyboard reveals the digitized approach chart for Chicago O'Hare airport. After checking the approach frequency you flip back to the cockpit again. The Aircraft Factory The Aircraft Factory portion of the prodlict is a Microsoft Windows program that simulates the process of designing and building an aircraft. The Aircraft Factory is presented graphically in MS Windows) as various hangers and buildings next to a runway. Each building has a button showing the function that can be performed within: Parts, Structures, Components, and the Assembly Line. The design process begins with the drawing of \"parts\" in the Parts Shop. Each part can be an externally visible component of the aircraft, such as a rudder, spinner, wheel, etc. The Parts Shop also includes the ability to build structure template parts for use in building the structure of the aircraft. Each part can be created and edited by tracing or drawing the part on the screen, or by the entering of the part's coordinates. Once the parts have been created, the next step of aircraft construction is the building of Structures. One can create complex 3-D objects such as fuselages, engines, and fuel tanks by using previously built part templates and pre-defined bulkhead shapes. The assembly process of the structures is presented in a 3-D CAD/CAM display. The next stop is the Components Shop Once all of the components and parts are assembled into a complete aircraft, the necessary parameters for making the aircraft flyable can be added: weight, thrust, center of rotation, wing span, etc. Then it is time to play test pilot. Assembly Line allows you to load Flight Simulator and test out the aircraft that was just designed. If something needs to be changed, control is given back to Assembly Line after exiting Flight Simulator. The Adventure Factory The Adventure Factory allows the creation of custom adventures or situations for Flight Simulator. Unlike the point, click, and draw of Aircraft Factory, the Adventure Factory requires some knowledge of programming. The language used is not Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"Oaklands YCOON ALF-13 FITA NAZAR SCORT TRASA TASKISCHE GUNSHIP TASSORS ATAC F-7A Una CONQUEST Dahldands FIS Who else could give you gut-wrenching dogfights, colossal empires, and timeless adventures? Darklands CONQUIST TYCOON FITA ATAC  Savings GUNSHIP $25.000 in Savings & Prizes TRACES Prizes . Rebates SHANTI Win The Ultimate Game Machine ENS F-IS Tycoo SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE "


"   ouch: print \"uh-oh...is your aircraft insurance paid up?\" wait (10), wait 10 seconds reset , start over done: EOF: End Of File marker complex and is very similar to the BASIC programming language. Using this language, the adventure itself is defined as a customized set of conditions and consequences. As an example, a digitized voice from the control tower can be programmed to speak to the pilot when the aircraft has met the condition of reaching an altitude of 1000 feet. Any text type editor can be used for entering the adventure program. Once the program has been written then it is compiled with the AAF Compiler which converts the text of the program into something that Flight Simulator can understand. Here is a simple example (from the manual) of what an adventure program can look like: With other commands such as $PLAY and VIEW, digitized sounds (.VOC files) and graphics (.PCX files) can be added to the adventure, allowing the type of situation demonstrated at the beginning of this article. For those that are familiar with programming this is actually quite easy, but it could take a little getting used to for anyone that is not comfortable with writing a program. AAF is a great product that brings a lot of new technology to a product that was designed before multimedia was the buzzword that it is today. Primarily designed for those that are Flight Simulator diehards, the rest of the armchair pilots can still benefit from the great aircraft and adventures that are showing up as a result of this product. Already, on Compuscerve in the FSForum (Flight Simulation Forum) there is a section devoted to AAF, and the associated library contains a tremendous amount of adventures and aircraft. Mallard has also released some prepackaged, professionally designed adventures and has plans for a lot more to come. The AAF manual does a fairly good job of covering the Aircraft Factory and even contains a small tutorial on the steps for building an aircraft. However, the section covering the Adventure Factory is very weak and makes the assumption that the reader is already very adept at programming and the use of commands with parameters. Overall, I am quite pleased with this product and would recommend it to anyone that is interested in customizing Flight Simulator and creating some great \"white knuckle\" adventures. Once again, this is Timothy \"The Timinator\" Trimble from the cockpit, saying so long for now, and remember—the wheels go on the bottom. Aircrafi and Adventure Factory requires Microsoft Flight Simulator and the Microsoft Aircrafi & Scenery Designer. Mallard, Inc. can be contacted at: P.O. Box 292606 Lewisville, TX 75029 1-800-WEB-FEET Timothy \"The Timinator\" Trimble can be contacted via Compuserve at 76306,1115. CGW (Comments in italic) if pilot stalls, do stall onstall stall if pilot crashes, do ouch oncrash ouch iquit if pilot presses \"d\" if key(\"d\") goto done endif stall: print \"nose down!» wait(5) return2 What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? FCSM (Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTASTM And... ThrustMaster Controls= WCS(Throttle) Used in conjunction with your joystick 10150 S.W.Nimbus Ave. STE. EZ Tigard, OR 97223 Phone (503)639-3200 Fax (503)620-8094 RCS (Rudder Pedals) Circle Reader Service #175 Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"YCOON JEG FIS G S Darkslands F-H7A GUNSHIP ATAC ACTIS F-H7A ZAZAAR Or an anniversary blowout with an incredible $10 rebate? COXO TEST F-19 GEBENS F-19 CONQUIST And $25,000 in savings and prizes? UMD F-117A ATAC Win The Ultimate Game Machine $25.000 in Savings & Prices Savings. Prizes. Rebates GEFENS F-19 SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE "


"O pevnew \"Oh. When the Krells Come Marching in... A Review of Mindcraft's Star Legions TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Star Legions IBM $59.95 None Trevor Sorenson Mindcraft Torrance, CA (800) 525-4933 STAR LEGIONS by Sa Comard Met Betudo by Martin E. Cirulis Tith the scream of torpedoes and the whine of phasers, the KrelV lans return to wreak blazing revenge against the annoying United Galactic Alliance. So begins the long awaited third installment of the Star Fleet series began many years ago by Interstel Corporation and now continued by Mindcraft. Star Legions is, in reality, Star Fleet III, but if one doesn't recall its predecessors, one needn't worry, this game stands completely on its own. Any series continuity is completely in the chrome of the game. Of course for those of us with fond memories of the first two games, there is enough familiarity, especially in the layout of the manual, to trigger a pleasant sense of déjà vu. As one might guess from the title, Star Legions(SL) deals with the ground war aspect of the Star Fleet universe from the Krellan point of view. For newcomers, Krellans make Klingons seem like diplomats and, from the various visuals one gets of commanders and underlings, they look like green rejects from the evil Federation episode of Star Trek. The Krellan military may be effective, but they certainly have no dress code. The player's job, as a newly commissioned officer of the Planetary Assault branch, is to reduce and capture a never ending string of UGA worlds that are ripe for the plucking. The game is completely restricted to planetary assault, the defending fleet is already driven off or destroyed by the time the player arrives on the scene, and the only threat to his or her troop and bombardment ships is the Planetary Defense Phasers (PDPs) based on the higher tech UGA worlds. This threat can be dealt with by capturing the cities with the PDPS first, or, as a last resort, blasting the entire offending city into rubble with the command ship. Other than these limited ship activities, the game involves using troops to subdue enough cities to force a planetary government to see the philosophical advantages of tyranny. losses are taken in the number of men the cohort contains. When the total is reduced to zero, the cohort is destroyed. Cohorts also have an efficiency rating which affects their combat totals. This efficiency ratting is reduced for every battle that the cohort engages in and is only recovered by spending time not attacking or being attacked. Shock Troops are the primary assault troops because, initially, they are the only units capable of reaching the target cities through the use of a teleporter. It is their job to hold off the defenders long enough to build a landing pad for the dropships that will bring down the tougher Warrior Cohorts from the orbiting troopships. It is explained that current teleporter technology is only capable of sending down a man and his basic equipment while heavy armor and artillery has to be flown down the hard way. This creates a situation analogous to using paratroopers to secure an airfield so that transports can land in order to disembark the heavy units capable of winning the battle. Now the rub is that the player has only a limited number of Star Legions allocated to him at the beginning of each new planetary invasion. Each troopship holds only four Legions and their corresponding dropships, and the player is rarely allocated more than a half-dozen troopships by the stingy Krellan Fleet HQ. In the initial briefing one is given an estimate of the number of defending troops, and the troop-ship allotment is based on this number. Players should get used to calling for reinforcements, because it seems the Krellans are employing the descendants of Iraqi Military Intelligence. Defender troop totals are usually off by a factor of eight to ten! A city is captured when all of the defenders are dead or each city square has been run over. An entire planet surrenders when its morale is reduced to the breaking point. A planet loses morale through the loss or destruction of cities, or, in theory, the bombardment of the planet by the orbiting warships. One's percentage rating for the invasion is based on cities captured versus + MINDCRAFT somewhat dry tutorial (so dry, in fact, that the manual is very correct in warning not to judge the rest of the game poorly because of it), I had a firm grip of the completely mouse-driven interface and was free to refine my world bludgeoning tactics. There are only six control screens to get the hang of, and most of them have redundant controls allowing one to manage different aspects of an invasion without flipping too many screens a very helpful idea in a \"no turns\" wargame where every second of real-time equals one minute. The two weapons capable of capturing a city are Shock Troops and Warriors. Each Star Legion is composed of six cohorts of Warriors and four cohorts of Shock Troops. A cohort consists of a thousand men and it is the only moveable surface unit used in the game. UGA cohorts are shown in red, the valiant Krellans in white. Each time a cohort goes into battle, (by attacking an adjacent enemy cohort) Horde for the Holidays The game mechanics are relatively userfriendly and, after running through the Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"FISK Datklands Red SORS Waldensoftwarc FEINA ELEK-TEK.inc. lecce MIGOGNE HIP ATAC Presenting the MicroProse 10th Anniversary celebration! MONTIS F-H7A (Everything you'd want in an anniversary blowout!) CONQUIST F-13 The MicroProse PRIZES Jump Jet , Task 10th Anniversary Force 1942 , F-15 celebration gives you Strike Eagle III , and plenty of more. what you And you'll even really find your chance to want.....cool win any prizes and lots of 1. A Strategy Plus Ultimate of the ways to save. Game Machine. incredible prizes Over the next 2. An NEC Ultimate Game Machine. shown in this ad. several months, 3. A Trip For Two To Monaco Courtesy of Compute! Magazine. So look for the you'll find a valuable 4. The Complete MicroProse 10th Anniversary coupon book inside Game Library sticker on MicroMicroProse 5. A Media Vision Upgrade VIRTUAL PILOT CD/PC Kit. Prose games at games. A 6. A Thrustmaster Joystick & Weapons participating coupon Control System. retailers. book that's 7. A CH Products Flight Yoke And And party with good for big savings Game Card. 8. A Suncom Flight Yoke FX2000 and Micro Prose as we on software upGame Pads. celebrate grades. Magazine 9. A Roland Sound Card. 10 years subscriptions from 10. And A Gravis Ultra Sound Card of seriOmni, Compute and With Joysticks. ously un software. Strategy Plus. Car rentals. Or computer hardware. You'll receive a $10 rebate on blockbuster MicroProse titles like Sid Meier's Civilization SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE INDICIS CIRK UMINE** F-13 Datllands NANTIS F://7A Na purchase nerexury Far entry farm and rules writte Micralruse mith Anniversary Contest Entry Request, /80 Lakefront Dr. Font Valley, MD 21030. Open to U.S. residents and older except employees of MicroProse.urticipating companies and their families Poid where prohibited. All entrict must be received by Sep 30 1993 MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE  Savingt 1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Atklands VBA 325 000 Ing rid box ELEK-TEK.inc. Pries. Rebates MIGO CENTER A Waldensoftware SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #86 "


"MeuneIn losses, cities destroyed, and whether or not one had to call for help. The player must maintain a minimum average of 72% for at least five missions in order to be promoted to the next rank. One starts as a Commander and works his way up through Prefect, General, Field Marshal and finally Imperial Tribune. Each ranking earned corresponds with increasingly difficult invasions, from subduing the natives in fine Mussolini style at the Commander level, to actual, almost fair fights at the Field Marshal and Tribune levels. As you can see from the rank and unit designations, these alien Krellans are huge 1, Claudius fans. distressing that the ultimate refinement of future military tactics will be the shield wall. Basically, the combat system of SL and the very limited types of units involved, (only four moving ones composed of abstracted troop/armor units that behave exactly like large infantry units) creates a situation where one is left with only two strategies on the ground; when defending, form an infantry square, and when attacking, envelope the enemy in a solid line of attackers allowing for maximum attacks from adjacent squares. Once the Warrior Cohorts arrive, this situation almost always devolves into a WWI battle of attrition until one side is exhausted and destroyed. And since one can usually bring down more troops from the skies, (at least for the first ten or so city battles) the Krellans are almost always victorious. Occasionally, if the player's attention is elsewhere, a defending unit will blast through one's line and take out an unlucky dropship, but this only makes the eventual victory more expensive. In three dozen invasions, I never felt as if I was in serious trouble. The lack of any kind of air units or the ability of the defender to shift units to a beleaguered city will probably make this game a disappointment for any wargamer looking for a tactical brew-up. Many years ago there was a GDW wargame called Invasion: Earth! which dealt with this very same concept along similar lines (but with the inclusion of hidden aerospace units). It seems that the SL team could have added something similar to threaten the orbiting fleet and add another high-priorily target for a harried commander to deal with. Even the addition of one or two secondary ground units with alternate attack forms, like a few square range artillery pieces of some kind, would have been enough to give this program a greater wargame feel to it. As it is, not only are the Krellans striking back, they also can't recruits will dilute the effectiveness of the legion for the next invasion. I need not have worried, no matter what one does, all legions are back at full health with no reduction of effectiveness in time for the next planet to be pummeled. Legions erased down to the last Warrior and Shock Troop spring back to full strength and retain all their experience perks. This loss of a pretty realistic option makes the game much simpler and thus, not as interesting. Legions are not the only ones feeling much better at the end of an invasion. Any ship that was destroyed by planetary defensive fire is forgotten about in the final evaluation, as well as any damage one may have done to the planet through continued planetary bombardment. All is forgotten and forgiven. In fact, the planetary bombardment counter during the mission will actually wrap around from 99 to 0% and keep on trucking and not affect planetary moral in the slightest. The only detriments the game rememTITULO: Actually, it is easy being Green... While this game does become increasingly challenging as one goes up in rank and finds him(or her-) self facing an increasing number of defensive batteries and UGA Cohorts backing up the lame planetary militias, the same tactics perfected against the low-tech slobs will serve the player well if he/she becomes increasingly more careful in the micro-management of each city battle. SL allows the player to issue individual orders to each cohort in addition to general orders to the whole battlefield. This option is extremely useful when one needs to \"volunteer\" a suicidal shock Cohort to enter a city and destroy an anti-dropship laser before there is a flash of light, a boom, and a downpour of bit's o' scorched warrior Cohort. A strategy composed of using initial shock trooper raids to pull defenders away from an area where one wants to build a landing pad, sending down overwhelming numbers of warrior cohorts in dropships, and pulling out the shocktroops as soon as their mission is complete, should allow one to conquer most worlds well within the proscribed time limit. Krellan HQ is stingy on troops, generous on time. In real terms this means that a planetary invasion will take up anywhere from 45 minutes to two hours. bers after a mission are the number of destroyed dropships and cities. Calls for additional help are also remembered but don't seem to count against the player very much. Also, though the box boasts combat on a myriad of world types, (frozen, desert, wet, etc.) and they do provide some lovely background for the communication screens, they have absolutely no affect on combat whatsoever except sometimes when there is so much water it's hard to find a place to land. One can only hope these omissions will be fixed by the next shipping of this game to create a greater challenge. lose. I've got those Version 1.0 Blues... How the Krell am I going to explain this to HQ? Making the job of our stunningly overdressed Krellans even easier is the fact that many of the bad things that can happen, as stated by the manual, seem to be ignored in my version of the software. Since the major campaign aspect of SL is the process of building up the combat experience (and thus their combat effectiveness) of one's legions, I started playing this game being very conservative with my warrior cohorts, trying to make sure that a legion wasn't destroyed to the last man and thus totally losing a hard-won record for that unit. One is also told that even massive losses will still be bad for a unit as the fresh As one might expect from a race of mean green mothers from outer space, the Krells have somewhat neglected some of the smaller technical aspects of their operations. Some of these bugs are merely annoying, some are fatal, and I suggest that any Krellan wishing a spotless battle record save his game at least once, because when the game crashes, SL remembers that the player was on a mission but when The More Things Change... As a Science Fiction writer and something of a military historian, I find it a little Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"Win $500 Worth of Computer Software!! Help us name our company! The name will change from No-name Software to...?? Here's the details: 1) Mail or FAX your entry to us, or give it to us over the phone when you place an 5) All decisions are final. order. Sorry, entries will not be accepted over the phone without an order. 6) Winner agrees to have their name and hometown printed in a future ad. 2) Deadline for entries extended to January 15, 1993 7) We retain all rights to the new name. 3) A winning entry will be selected from all entries by the management. 8) The winner has until Dec. 31, 1993 to order all free software. 4) In the event of multiple winning entries, one will be chosen at random to be the 9) We'll pay the shipping for the software. prizewinner. 10) Have fun! No-name Software  800-788-GAME (4263)  FAX: 205-980-1953 For Fax orders please include MC/Visa credit card number, expiration date, and shipping address. $20 $17 $45 $41 $35 $17 $17 $40 $40 .535 $35 $40 $29 $21 835 $35 Ultima Underworld.................$45 Wing Commander 1................$40 Secret Missions 1...... $20 Secret Missions 2...... Wing Commander 2. Special Operations 1... $25 Special Operations 2.... $25 Speech Accessory Pack $15 PARAGON Mantis Mantis Speech Pack ...........$2 Twilight 2000 VGA....... $35 PSYGNOSIS Armourgeddon................. Atomino (\"). ..... ........$30 Lemmings VGA $30 Lemmings Additional Levels (*).... $23 Oh No! More Lemmings (*) ..........$30 QQP Battles of Destiny........ Conquered Kingdoms .... Solitaire's Journey....... The Lost Admiral ... The Perfect General SIERRA ON-LINE Conquests of the Longbow VGA......$39 EcoQuest.... $35 King's Quest 5 VGA. $40 King's Quest 6.......... Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA.. Police Quest 3 VGA..... Quest for Glory 3............... Space Quest 4 VGA ............ $39 The Dagger of AMON RA.......... $40 SIR-TECH Bane of the Cosmic Forge. $35 Crusaders of the Dark Savant........$40 $47 $35 $45 $35 ACCESS Amazon ... $39 Links.........** Links 386 ............... $40 Bountiful CC Course .... Firestone CC Course $17 Bay Hill CC Course ... $17 Pinehurst CC Course.... Dorado Beach CC Course Barton Creek CC Course $17 Troon North CC Course ........ $17 ACCOLADE Elvira 2............ Hardball 3................ . Hardball 3 Data Disk ........ Mike Ditka Ultimate Football.. Spellcasting 301 ..................$35 Star Control 2 .......... Super Space Invaders ..............$25 ACTIVISION Leather Goddesses II ........... $40 Lost Treasures of Infocom (*) ...... $40 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2()..... $30 BRODERBUND Prince of Persia (*) ................$25 The Ancient Art of War (*)...........$27 The Ancient Art of War at Sea (\") .....$27 DYNAMIX A-10 Tank Killer Enhanced (*)...... Aces of the Pacific. $45 Castle of Dr. Brain .......... $30 Nova 9(*) ......... $22 Red Baron VGA......... $40 Red Baron Mission Builder ... $20 Rise of the Dragon VGA (*)... Willy Beamish ELECTRONIC ARTS Birds of Prey ........ Chuck Yeager's Air Combat..... Earl Weaver Baseball 2.......... Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...... $46 IMPRESSIONS Air Bucks $35 Conquest of Japan $35 Discovery ............ . Paladin 2........ $35 INTERPLAY Battlechess 4000..... Buzz Aldren's Race into Space..... $35 Castles 2 ... $35 Future Wars.................. $30 Lord of the Rings ........ Out of this World (*)................$35 Power Politics (Windows 3.5\" only) ...$30 $35 Eye of the Beholder 2 ..............$40 Gateway to the Savage Frontier ..... $35 Pool of Darkness ................. Prophesy of the Shadow ... Spell Jammer.......... The Summoning ................ Treasures of the Savage Frontier .... A Line in The Sand ................$25 Buck Rogers: Matrix Cubed .........$35 Carrier Strike ................. Cyber Empires................... Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic 1939-43..... $47 No Greater Glory ......... THREE-SIXTY Harpoon. Harpoon Battle Set #2... Harpoon Battle Set #3.. $21 Harpoon Battle Set #4 $24 Harpoon Challenger Pak... $47 Patriot ...... V for Victory .......... VIRGIN GAMES Dune 2 Heimdall Magnetic Scrolls Collection. Overlord...... Spirit of Excalibur .......... $20 Vengeance of Excalibur ............$20 MISC Aspects of Valor ......... $36 Cobra Mission .... ......... Demon's Gate .......... Front Page Sports Football ........ $40 Goblins .........................$25 Legend of Kyrandia...... Lure of the Temptress .......... $30 Micro League Football 2..... Plan 9 From Outer Space .... Ragnarok (\") ...... Terminator 2029 ........ Tom Landry Football .. Tristan Pinball (*)... The Dark Half .... . Utopia Star Trek: 25th Anniversary..........$35 The Two Towers (*)................$35 KOEI Gemfire ..... Nobabunaga's Ambition 2.......... Romance of the Three Kingdoms 2....$41 Uncharted Waters .... LEGEND Gateway Spellcasting 201 $35 Time Quest......... LUCASFILM Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis ......$35 Secret of Monkey Island 2.......... $35 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe .....$40 X-Wing ..........................$44 MAXIS SimAnt() ...........****** $36 SimCity () $31 SimEarth (*) $42 SimEarth for Windows (\") ......... $41 MICROPLAY Challenge of The Five Realms .......$35 Command HQ Global Conquest ......... .. $35 Megatraveller 3..... $40 Twilight 2001 ................... MICROPROSE ATAC ..... B17 Flying Fortress.............. $39 Civilization Civilization MPE ........ .$45 Darklands $39 F-15 Strike Eagle 3............... $44 Greens Jump Jet ........ $40 Rex Nebular.......... Task Force: 1942............ The Ancient Art of War in the Skies. $35 MINDCRAFT Magic Candle 2..................$35 Siege ..... ........... NEW WORLD COMPUTING Might & Magic 3....... Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen.......$38 Planet's Edge. Spaceword Ho! ...................$36 ORIGIN Strike Commander ............. $45 Ultima 6... .........$40 Ultima 7...........................$45 Forge of Virtue..................$17 Ultima 7 Part 2-Serpent Isle .........$45 $20 $40 $35 $45 $39 $35 $39 $39 $35 $30 $35 . ...$39 $39 $32 $25 $45 $25 $35 $35 $35 SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE Falcon 3.0 .................... Operation: Fighting Tiger....... Super Tetris ..... $30 Tetris Classic.... $30 Tetris for Windows............. SSG Carriers at War Reach for the Stars .... Warlords ..... SSI AD&D Collectors Edition 2 ......... AD&D Starter Kit ..................$41 Dark Queen of Krynn..............$35 Dark Sun.... $53 Eve of the Beholder................$23 $35 SOUND BOARDS Sound Blaster Pro ................$155 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus ..........$135 Pro Audio Spectrum 16............$195 $32 Both 3 and 544\" disks included. Order all other titles by specifying the proper disk size. No-Name Software  P.O. Box 381463 Birmingham, AL 35238-1463 Orders/Info: 800-788-4263 FAX (24 Hrs): 205-980-1953 Hours: 9 AM 9PM Central Time-7 Days We accept MC, Visa, Money Orders and personal checks (held 10 business days). No surcharge for MC/Visa. Orders received before 2 PM shipped the same day whenever possible. Pre-orders for new releases shipped 2nd day air for $5 Continental U.S. only. Shipping rates: UPS: UPS: $4 for the first item plus $1 for each additional item. Defectives replaced with the same title. 2nd Day Air: Add $3 to UPS shipping rate. Alabama residents add 4% tax for hardware & books. Overnight: Add $6 to UPS shipping rate. We have lots more not listed. Call our 800 number for a quote. Circle Reader Service #92 "


"Deview SuperSoft... 1-800-285-1881 Orders Outside the U.S: 206-542-1518 HOURS: 10 A.M to 5 P.M. PST M-F IBM BUNDLE PACK SPECIALS: ...$15 AMIGA: Classics Tril............ (Midwinter, StarGlider 2, Carrier Command) Combat Classics..............30 (F15-3 Team Yankee, 688 Attack Sub) Tengen's Arcade Hits........23 (Klax, Hard Drivin', Toobin) ... 10 AD&D Pool/Cursel Sec....$38 AD&D Trilogy 2............43 Allied Forces....... Altered Destiny..............10 Amazon Guardians.............42 Ancient Art of War...........36 Bar Games............................10 Battle Isle.... Battle Tech. Trilogy........34 B-17.. Crusaders Drk.Savant...... 49 Cyber Empires........ 36 Dark Sun...................M/ Dragon Strike........ Eye of Beholder 3........SPRING '93 Falcon:0p.Fight. Tiger...24 Gemfire............ Great Naval Battles......... Gunboat... Heroes of 357th....... Hook................ Humans....... KGB...................20 Kings Quest 6... Legend of Kryandia Lemmings 3... Line In Sand.................DEC Lost Files Sherlock..............49 Might & Magic 4................43 NFL Video Pro..................46 Pacific War......... Prophecy of Shadow..................38 Red Baron/Rise Dragn/KngsQ5...46 Realms.... Search for the king.........10 SpellJammer:Pirates.. Star Control 2........ Stunt Island............... Twilight 2000 VGA........ Ultra Bots.......................DEC Ultima Underworld........... Ultimate Challenge Golf.... V for Victory............ War in Middle Earth....... WaxWorks. Wayne Gretsky 3.. Wing Commander. ..34 it fails to find a save gave it assumes he fled. This results in the loss of the player's hard won record for the current promotion track, forcing him to invade at least five more planets before getting an improved rank. Save often because the game certainly crashes often, probably on the average of once every two hours of game play. The major bug seems to be in the communications interface screen. When the image of a subordinate or planetary leader appears and talks to you often the system will lock up. Most of the time only for a moment or two, sometimes for good. Also, one must be careful where you click and point on the screen, there seems to be a few non-button areas that will cause a lock up when activated. For example, never click on the headings for the Legion Status screen before a mission unless the sounds of a re-boot are pleasant to one's ears. Set Phasers on \"Upgrade»! In the most general terms, Star Legions has some positive points; it is consistent with previous Star Fleet games in that the play is fast, easy to learn and the opponent grows in strength enough to test one's endurance at every level. However, as a \"science-fiction wargame,\" I'm afraid Star Legions does injustice to both qualifiers. The backstory and chrome of this game is, at best, tongue-in-cheek. If we are going to represent an army that speaks with English and Texan accents, borrows heavily from the Romans in both military terms and tactics, and uses ship names such as «Rhino\" or \"Lynx,\" we might as well have been the morally palatable UGW humans. 00W ZgOWA NOON WANAW LOOOOOOOOOO WOOD IBM: Battle Tech Trilogy.... (BattleTech 1&2. MechWarrior) Classic Pak........... Jet Fighter 2 Bndle......... (Jet Fighter Adven.2, Mission disk, Hint Bk.) Max Pak......... McGee Series.... (McGee, Fun Fair, Katies Farm) MegaFortress Pak.... ***........30 .30 AMIGA lored 1033 BPS MAC GET VENDUR Vidovi .........$42 A Train.... Club Raquetbll.. Guy Spy... Heaven & Earth. ........... Indiana Jnes 4........... Mission Leyte......... OOOOS AD&D Tril. Pool/Curse/Secret....$38 Addams Family... Altered Beast... Black Crypt.... Bravo-Romeo-Delta..... Breach 2.............. Campaign.......... Castles Campalgn.......... Civilization......... Crusaders Drk. Savant. Cyber Empires.. Cytron......... DragonForce...... Dune 2........ Eplo....... Fighter Duel Pro.... Flames of Freedom.... 4D Sports Driving.......... Hook..... KGB.. Legend of Kryandla... Legends of Valour.... Lure of Temptress.. Mega Traveller 1..... No Greater Glory.... Pinball Dreams... Populous 2... Premiere... Pro Footbil Sim 3.1:. Projeotile.. Realms..... Road Rash... Robocop 3D... Spider Man.... Tracon 2..... UMS2. www: wwww OOOWNIONWNOONDOADOOOOO 0000 0 WUN: UNNAN Viculo Var :D We also carry Game Cartridges for: SEGA Genesis, Super Nintendo, Gameboy, Game Gear! CALL for titles and prices. Product availability/Prices Subject to change The wargaming aspect of this game fares even worse, unfortunately. Even with the aspects that seemed to have been \"forgotten\" from this initial shipping, the battle mechanics are just too simple to inspire any deep interest in the tactical aspects of this game. Mindcraft has created a very solid platform for this kind of potentially fascinating scenario, but more work and surprises have to be worked in before most wargamers will be drawn into long term play. CGW TIP: $7.00 S/H covers up to 3 Lbs.! That means you can order approx. 3 boxes for the same shipping price. Mail to: 110 N. 201 St. Seattle, WA 98133-3012 NO C.O.D. Products are waranteed through Manufacturer CALL FOR MORE TITLES, CDS,PRODUCTS! Circle Reader Service #114 Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"You stumbled back to your office after a long day of detective work. But before you can get cozy with a whiskey bottle, there's a message waiting on the phone machine. Cobra   \"This is a life and death emergency!! Young ladies have been disappearing left and right, and now, Donna is missing!! We need your help!! Please come quickly!!! Mission Donna's rescue is only the beginning of this sizzling adventure. There's dozens more tantalizing women held against their will. Free them from the evil clutches of General Kaiser, Cobra's psychotic master criminal you screaming in ecstasy. overlord, and they will thank you in ways that will leave You'll be dazzled by the quality of the full screen emotionally to them! It's AWESOME!! ANIMATION graphics and find yourself reacting physically and BOND WAS HOT STUFF. SO WAS ARNIE NOW IT'S YOUR TURN. To purchase your copy of Cobra Mission, visit your favorite software retailer. Or call 800-258-MEGA CA residents add 8.25% sales tax $79.95 (suggested retail) plus $5.00 shipping and handling and use your VISA or Mastercard. Or send check or money order to MEGATECH, P.O. BOX 11333, TORRANCE, CA 90501 regel System requirements: 286 or faster machine with 640K RAM; hard disk with min. 8 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended) Sound support: Sound Blaster Pro, Adlib Gold CALL 800258 MEGA MEGA TECH RATED R (This program a voluntarily rated due to the partially violent and adult nature of the graphic imagery) This program is intended for mature audiences only!! No sales to miner under 18 and where prohibited by law Circle Reader Service #82 "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ 'Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" TM DRAKKAR STAR CRUISER CRUISER Gimli says. \"Hey. Batar, why doni you open the door antre'll cover the rear. www2.. 100... ol 60 IPAT25 TL mpen door forth DO altar fireball Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer, IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. a Come visit a land where dragons L roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells, and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role-playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser -a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG.Net. Inc. Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG Net, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Computer network versions of Empire Builder, Star Cruiser, Operation Market Garden, and the Kingdom of Drakkar are designed and developed by Tantalus inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, Tx 'What tore you up, Merlin?\" EMPIRE OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN 0:31 PE MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think: $4.00 per hour in the continental US and $3.00 per hour in the N.Y. city area. These costs are all inclusive. There are no hidden communication fees. Dial toll free 800-GET-GAME and we'll send you your account number, password, start-up kit, and 5 free hours right away. For more information call 800-245-0317. hree elite Allied paratroop divisions drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhine the last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine the first-line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history. U SWORD Combining two great American loves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions. It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games' award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-GET-GAME 800-438-4263 Circle Reader Service #89 "


"UBIN Weapons, and Everything Vice A Review of Virgin/Westwood's Dune II by CGW's Mentat, Allen L. Greenberg 4 TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PROTECTION: PRICE: DEVELOPER: PUBLISHER: Dune II: The Building Of A Dynasty IBM VGA/MCGA Documentation Look up $59.99 Westwood Studios Virgin Software Irvine, CA (714) 833-1999 rock formation. With a limited amount of cash \"credits,\" the player must begin to construct energy facilities, a radar station, machinery for the processing and storage of spice, infantry barracks, weapon producing factories and other vital facilities. The player must quickly earn additional credits through spice production in order for the family to survive and succeed. One of the rival families will have already established their own base and will waste little time in mounting an attack against the newcomer. D UN E. II The Building of A Dynasty Credits 11385 Spice Harvester Cost: 300 potic emperor of the known universe an additional source of conflict. Dune II is a moderately difficult strategy/wargame, brought to life with what are arguably the most outstanding sounds and graphics ever to appear in a strategy game of its kind. In the game's fictional set-up, the emperor has announced that control of the planet Arrakis will be given to the family which is able to produce the greatest quantity of the spice, Melange, from its deserts. The player must choose to control one of three families to compete with and do battle against the other two, both of which are controlled by the computer. The Harkonnen family is described as savage and cruel while the Ordos (who are not an actual Herbert creation) are characterized as emotionless, though no less cunning. Finally, the Atreides battle to disprove the adage that nice guys finish last. The actions and strategies used by the three families actually differ very little, although the Atreides are distinguished by some token feelings of guilt once the carnage is over. The Atreides are generally the easiest family with which to win, followed by the Harkonnen. The player who champions the Ordos family is presented with the greatest challenge. Dune Il unfolds in a series of nine increasingly difficult scenarios which differ only slightly according to which family has been chosen. It is necessary to tackle these in order, and the increase in complexity from one scenario to the next is usually quite dramatic. Each new scenario brings with it not only a more capable enemy, but also new equipment and facilities which are placed at the player's disposal. In addition, a new variety of hazards and surprises are found buried in the desert. As each scenario opens, the player is given a single, unprotected construction yard which has been placed on a desert BUILD THIS RESUME GAME Westwood INHOS ne might conceivably argue that the leviathan sandworms which populate the planet Arrakis in Frank Herbert's classic Dune are actually more moral, and likable, than many of the book's leading characters. Virgin Games' first Dune game used imagery from the controversial David Lynch film to tell the story of its leading character, Paul Atreides — an exceptionally moral character. Dune Il is a very different kind of game, totally lacking in morals. It draws on the book's political wars, rather than its individual struggles, for its story. In this sequel, which easily outshines its predecessor in terms of game play, three very desperate families vie for possession of the planet Arrakis, oftimes known as Dune. In the background looms the desBy the eighth and ninth missions, players will find themselves faced with intimidatingly huge pre-built enemy fortresses. They will also find themselves fighting multiple armies, including a climactic attack by the emperor's Sardaukar troops, while they continue to mine for spice. For these final scenarios, the player will also have access to special weapons provided by research facilities, the nature of which will depend on the family involved. Palaces are also given to accomplished leaders. These provide their families with secret units of Fremen, Saboteurs or Death Hand Missiles, again, depending on the family in question. Despite its abundance of sand, the planet contains a variety of other features. Rock outcroppings are the only terrain on which bases may be built, and these first require concrete foundations. Spice fields are Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"a giant tank roles over an infantry unit is particularly effective. Finally, surrounding these amazing sounds is one of the most original and enjoyable music scores ever composed for a computer game. scattered throughout the area, although mining equipment may need special transport to reach them. Sand dunes and mountains are also present and these complicate travel. Certain dunes may also hide additional spice or abandoned credits and weaponry. Of course, the greatest pain in the Arrak-ass are the planet's legendary sandworms. Limitless is their appetite, and no participant in the battle is immune to sudden ingestion by them. MENTAT OPTIONS Credits | 12/2618 [Harkonnen Harvester is 100 percent full and heading back. HARVESTER HAUS EUR The refinery converts harvested spice into credits. SPICE REFINERY POWER NEE OSS FOR Players with one of the appropriate sound boards, (Sound Blaster or Adlib Gold) plus 2 MBs of available memory, will also hear the mentat's running narration of action on the battlefield. Dune Il's control interface deserves strong praise for its highly intuitive design. Clicking on a structure gives the player access to a damage report, as well as commands regarding its repair and upgrade. Buildings which are capable of production each feature a screen containing an illustrated menu of available products, including the cost and building requirements for each. During combat, clicking on a unit also produces a damage report as well as access to movement and attack commands. By using the family radar system, movement commands may be given across the entire playing area as easily as those involving only short distances. Dune II is a real-time exercise in every sense of the word. The buildings which occupy its overhead point of view show continuous motion and activity. Combat vehicles and flyers constantly cross the terrain while spice-harvesters busily plow the desert. Even more dramatic are the game's digitized sound effects. The noise of exploding tanks, the shrieks of dying infantry and the thunder of collapsing buildings are rendered to perfection. The sound of tearing flesh and crushed bone as Exit In addition to its concise instruction manual, the program contains an extensive amount of on-line help. By calling on the family psychic advisor, or \"mentat,\" the player may review the scenario's goals and receive advice on how best to achieve them. A description of each available facility, weapon and unit are also available. By stripping Arrakis not only of its spice, but also of its lead characters, along with its morality and mysticism, Westwood Studios and Virgin have produced a real gem. Surprisingly, the game is still highly evocative of Frank Herbert's original novel. Wargamers with some experience will probably feel more at home in its environment than will beginners, although the latter group may still find it a difficult exercise to resist. Be it to test one's strategic abilities, or the need to feel in control of the known universe, Dune // will prove a gratifying experience. Cow THE NEXT EMPIRE LIKE THIS EVERY TURN! ...the only game that sends you fabulously detailed maps like this one, showing your fleet's sensor views every turn ...along with clear, complete stats on each starship you design, build, and maneuver Individually using up to 21 different onboard systems...plus status reports on starbases, probes and asteroids you controll The Next Empire is a completely computer-moderated game, over 6 years In the making. Each universe is a unique, complex gaming environment populated with 21 allen players Itching to blow the hulls off anyone who gets in their way! O B FREE DA SET-UP AND RULES!  $7.50 per turn; no hidden fees or double turns Recently voted #1 PBM game in a nationwide player magazine survey!  fast game (two weeks per turn) or slow game (three weeks per turn)  clear, concise rules; our complexity comes from your gaming freedom  FREE SET-UP AND RULES! Reality Simulations, Inc. P.O. Box 22400 Tempe, AZ 85285-2400 (602) 967-7979 Circle Reader Service #100 April 1993 Page 85 "


"CGW STCCIX WATCH A monthly look at the Computer Entertainment Stock Market 8: R THE Microsoft Corporation NASDAQ Symbol MSFT One week per bar      Stock Price per Share at the io doo 1990 1991 1992 Is Microsoft Too Big? When Bill Gates wrote the first BASIC for Altair computers back in 1975, he couldn't possibly have realized he was destined to become the richest man in America. That 4K program proved to be the cornerstone for what Gates would eventually achieve, the creation of a software publisher that would outperform IBM itself. At Computer Gaming World, we are not only dependent upon MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows, but we perform all our editing in Word for Windows and use Excel for Windows for everything from scheduling and tracking expenses to planning our page layouts. Further. almost 90% of our readers are dependent upon Microsoft for some part of their systems software. Some critics believe that Microsoft's licensing practices are unfair. Just before press time, the FTC decided to delay its ruling on Microsoft's marketing practices. The concern was generated from the fact that Microsoft uses what is essentially a two-tiered licensing structure. Computer manufacturers can use their less-expensive tier if they pay the fee on every machine they manufacture, whether or not they include MS-DOS as the operating system. For a significantly higher licensing fee, they would only pay an MS-DOS fee for machines that use it. So, with the lower-priced tier, a clone manufacturer would have to pay both Microsoft and its competitor in order to place a different operating system on a given model. Hence, Microsoft's competitors in the systems software arena feel that the marketing practice is unfair. On the applications side, Microsoft's competitors in spreadsheets and word processors (notably Borland and Lotus) feel that Microsoft has such an incredible revenue stream from their systems software programs that they have an unfair advantage with regard to applications. For example, Microsoft Multiplan was not a big hit, but it served as the \"farm system\" in which Microsoft Excel was perfected. Microsoft didn't really have to worry about \"getting it right the first time\" because the systems side provided sufficient revenue to fund all of the development experiments they needed to make along the way. Competitors in the field of applications would like to see Microsoft broken into two corporations. They believe that if the systems revenue was separate from the applications revenue, they would be able to compete on a level playing field. In spite of the controversy over licensing practices, Microsoft is an extremely well-run company. With many companies, there is a built-in entropy as the company grows. Microsoft has avoided this process by making the managers of individual divisions as responsible for the profit/loss and planning as they would be if those divisions were companies themselves. This means that there is a pride of ownership and accomplishment (as well as intra-company competition) that keeps the divisions healthy and growing with a positive synergy. The good news for gamers is that the company's entertainment division is becoming more aggressive. In addition to their venerable Microsoft Flight Simulator, they have added a version of Links (Microsoft Golf) and a half-dozen entertainment packages for Windows, Further, the company now has key personnel that understand games in top positions. This could lead to systems decisions that will keep developers from having to fight the system. Cow Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"This Is The Only Hardware You Need To Shop The World's Ultimate Games Superstore. Sim SimCity & Graphics Set #1 w SimCity Strategic Guide Or Shop Us On: PRODIGY CompuServe, GEnie, Delphi, LA On-line, America On-line and many more! Rex Nebular A priceless vase is lost on a distant planet that doesn't exist! An irate colonel wants it back! And only one man is experienced enough...skilled enough...and foolish enough to retrieve it! Interstellar adventurer and bungling bachelor Rex Nebular! Join Rex as he pilots the Slippery Pig on a crash course for Terra Androgena, a planet populated entirely by bizarre alien women. Only you can help Rex Nebular com plete his mission, and escape Terra Androgena alive! (IBM) Publisher: Microprose Design and build the city of your dreams! Fight crime, unemployment and pollution Control budgets, transit and population Create industry shopping centers.Darks sta diums Seaports and airports Pre-built cities include Tokyo. San Francisco. Bern, Hamburg, Rio de Janeiro, Detroit and Boston, SunCity Graphics Set 1 includes three complete graphics Sets that load into SimCity to let you rule other turnes and places Ancient Asia Medieval Times, and Wild West (BM) Publisher: Maxis Also Available SOFTWARE Databases CAD/Graphics Communication Tax Preparation Accounting/FAX Home Productivity Desktop Publishing Languages/Utilities Operating Environments Spreadsheets/Integrated CD ROM/MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE & ACCESSORIES Printers/Monitors Modems/Scanners Mire/loysticks Storage Devices Family Fun Pack CD-7th Guest FAMILY Dragon's Lair III DRACUS LAR 10 After destroying the evil Clust \"MORDAD wizard Mordoc in his bid for marriage to your beloved Daphne in *Dragon's Lair II: Time Warp\". Mordoc's evil Sister Mordread is demanding revenge. You, as dirk the Daring, must test your skills as you are thrust into a frantic quest to save Daphne and the children But you must hurry before the evil witch Mordread traps them forever. (IBM) Publisher: ReadySoft SIERRA Three great games for one great price! In Goblilins the king has gone insane! You te next. You control three imps Hooter, Fun Pack Dwayne and Bobo in this madcan al -o-onster puzzles. In Conquests of the Longbow: The Legend of Robin Hood live the life of the Outlaw of Sherwood Forest in this full-length animated adventure that features multiple paths and endings. In Hoyle Book of Games Vol. 3. get six classic board games: Yacht. Pachisi, Backgammon, Dominoes, Checkers and Snakes and Ladders. Play against human or ani. mated opponents (IBM) Publisher: Sierra Henry Staufis an evil toymaker whose work holds a sinister secret. When a series of children die in mysterious circumstances after buying his toys, the local community begins to ask questions and the plot thickens when Stauf himself meets an untimely demise, The game begins when six guests are anonymously summoned to the late toymaker's remote hilltop mansion, now eerily vacant. (IBM) Publisher: Virgin Orders accepted on our toll free num. ber Mon-Sat 8:30 to 5:30 EST. Visa MasterCard, and Discovercard accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours Continental US shipments: UPS Ground $5. Airborne Overnight $7. Corp. Gov't. Educ. APO, FPO. International orders accepted No sales tax except for Mass add 5% Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's guarantee. Defective software replaced immediately. No COD's. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. 15% restocking fee for non-defective returns $36 $30 S60 W/ FREE Screen Saver VISA 800-228-7449 Fax: 508-443-5645 Maahant 15 51121. COMPUTER Express The World's Ultimate Games Superstore M DUCOVER Pus Sector of Dr Dan T utmed for Windows Fron B SS100 CS150 Soch S IBM PC SW satu Where Wear WA MACINTOSH 63 RECREATION SOFTWARE Atattoo AMIGA RECREATION SOFTWARE 3D Pinta Lands A&D t o W Baby Alone the O R Will Toe Pos Mon 11 dey ABCs Enfanted Outs n Delux VGA Reader Rat Rodytotes 01 SATCHES Sector Sme Soon Santa Story Todos Aretin When the USA Tapet Will League Dopo Delos Windows Tina Ratt Un large PI God Popular Ba lenta 1,600H A4) Rechtheus Robe Shadow Soros Socio StrCom Sund Theses Trump Call Tunn Udel Labuh Wachy fonte Wayne World Westfestone wa WW2 W a arotest MULTIMEDIA CO Asses 00Worts Cat cb-Commer CDs Gade CO-Shek Detect CD Shock CD Austrot CDRW CD-Spa A tt content CQuett COUP Ward concat Coats S tall Com C orto EW HARDWARE Home GM XOS AVS Mesut Estats Biss 6000 Croces Chat Pool for Windows Comanche Da Dise Cocher Contoh 275 RECREATION SOFTWARE Com Bo Sancho Internal Ovo that 56 Bote Out of the World Pinocen Rost Tycoon S elet sta CICMACHI Wolfortan Van Van Demon co-cato CD Shutte 2322RRASS COUCATION SOFTWARE Gurs HOME PRODUCTIVITY to be found Autopor Beyond B, Chen Cooking the rest 15 SE Hot Sports Fooh Green MBPS Hay La Sthat Home Alone Hoy book Is Co Sta to Soorts CU Sort COS Sur Vio 3933 EDUCATION SOFTWARE Conductors Sitt ART EDUCATION SOFTWARE Tie JUD Links L 366 Web Hoopy Here are only a few of the 3,000 products we've delivered to our satisfied customers. Just call 1-800-228-7449 to start saving time and money with Computer Express. Computer Express 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"The R  by Audie Rambo «WHO SAYS I AIN'T SENSITIVE?\" Is it my fault if those pansies at the Pentagon got a little offended at my _sense of humor? The bureaucratic brigadiers seem to think my caustic comment concerning former L.A. Police Chief Darryl Gates' and Sierra's agreement to work together on Police Quest 4 (I merely suggested that they could call it King's Arrest VII) was in bad taste and warranted TAD (Temporary Additional Duty) for sensitivity training. After all, they pointed out that the deal was already engendering significant extra publicity and that Gates has considerable expertise in police procedures. I knew that. I just have a cruel sense of humor. I mean, I'm as sensitive as the next guy. I figure I'm sort of a SNAG in military terms (Sensitive New Age Guy to civilians), so I appealed to my CO on the basis that I had simply gone for a cheap laugh and hadn't meant any harm. Unforunately, I made the mistake of suggesting that the officer who had assigned me the TAD should go easy on the coffee, maybe he could play Coffee Break Casino instead. CBC is the updated version of Coffee Break Software's classic program and is not part of Villa Crespo Software's Coffee Break Series. The new version will be upgraded to reflect changes in graphics and sound since the game's original release as a CGA product. I was as dead as Mean Time, the on-again, off-again Interplay product that was supposed to follow-up on Wasteland and has now been officially and irrevocably cancelled, just like my leave. I won't even be able to use those hockey tickets I'd purchased from a scalper (well, the barber over at the PX, actually). I was gonna' take my CO to the game and tell him about Strategic Simulations' just under development hockey game. I wouldn't be able to tell him much about it, since I'd seen it on an FYO basis. I could have told him that it was the game that Canadian-based Strategy First Software had been working on and which was first described in \"The Rumor Bag\" over two years ago. It will feature extremely smooth animation and a wide variety of built-in statistical and league administration tools. We gathered together in a quonset hut on Perris Island for our foray into compassionbuilding and tolerance training. As Dis dispensed their profane ridicule to their respective recruits, we played a game to help Ls understand the non-verbal communication of those who are different from us. The red group was trying to get the green group to give us candy corn to offer the orange group. It was like a group of mimes trying to play that old Parker Brothers game, Pit. There might be a lot going on, but it wouldn't be quite the same. I mean, if these sensitivity trainers wanted to play games, I could show them some games worth playing. SSI plans to release Clash of Steel around the start of the Origins game convention. It's an impulse-based strategic wargame based on WWII's European Theater of Operations. The system is most similar to the boardgame World in Flames in that it has an emphasis on production and politics which is not always factored into \"pure» wargames. Clash of Steel features five scenarios and a campaign game. If they didn't like wargames (then why are they in the military?), they might like Fantasy Empire, SSI's latest strategy-action game from Silicon Knights (Cyber Empires). Not only does the game feature the same type of economic strategy as the science fiction game, but the design team is working on some interesting twists in artificial personality. The game is set in a Dungeons & Dragons (as opposed to AD&D) world, and the player directs the action through a computer-controlled agent. I started to nod off when the instructor started droning on and on with a list of politically correct euphemisms. I started to suggest that an MS-DOS owner who has less than 4 MB of RAM might be considered \"recreationally challenged,\" but I was afraid I'd have to stay for individual counseling after class. Name changes must be the order of the day, since Wesson International's Moonbase (sort of a lunar SimCity with a more solid capitalistic model) is now going to be distributed by Mallard Software as Lunar Command. I dreamed that I was in this big quonset hul and the ghost of a cross-dresser was haunting me. I awoke with a start. The only ghosts I wanted to see were those in Virgin's The 7th Guest. The first game isn't even out yet and Trilobyte, the designers and developer of the game, is working on Part II. Their working title for the sequel is The 11th Hour and they expect to have it on the market by October. \"You're blocking!\" said my sensitivity instructor as he hovered over me. \"Free up your mind from those stereotypical images. Let your creative juices flow. Let the spirit of brotherhood compel you toward understanding. The most creative thing I had seen in recent days had been the god game that SSI was working on with StormFront (formerly Beyond Software). Entitled Stronghold, this real-time strategy/management game is something like an advanced version of Bullfrog's Powermonger crossed with Sid Meier's Civilization, but set in the AD&D universe. It features random maps and random problems as the player strives to reach high political rank in a given civilization by building up cities, towns and economies. One can choose from 50-60 different types of buildings in order to create different levels of economic and political development. I didn't think my instructor would like the game much, though, since \"racial\" characteristics would have a lot of bearing on the game. Elves don't like to remove trees in order to build up farming, and dwarves thrive in the mountains where they can mine. Gamers get to prioritize the type of building, fortifying, working and learning to be accomplished at each given location. The type of civilization to be built depends on maximizing these inherent tendencies. I finally managed to struggle through my last sensitivity training session, vowing that I wouldn't make any more cracks about celebrity designers no matter who a software publisher decided to sign. Unless, of course, they decide to publish Bill Clinton and Sam Nunn Go One-on-One, Rush Limbaugh's Battle Chess: Capitol Hill, Richard Simmons' Marine Workout or Michael Jackson's \"Make Your Own Portrait\" Utility. Then, of course, we might have to see the Rumor Guy's Word Imperfect. Come to think of it, you see the latter every month. Until then, Semper Fi! Cow Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"From The Creator Of Leisure Suit Larry, A Western Comedy That's Good Clean Fun For The Whole Family. N-a-a-a-a-a-t! They call him Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist. He's a gunslinger, sworn to uphold truth and justice in the Old West. And he gave it all up for his love of pharmacology. Al Lowe, the man who created the most outrageous cult hero of the computer age, brings us a traditional Western complete with cowboys, town drunks, gamblers, desperados, and naturally, the Beautiful Young Schoolmarmand turns it inside-out, upside-down and backwards... skewering every Hollywood Western ever made (and a few that weren't). For the first time in your life, you can actually be a mysterious handsome stranger. Aided by your faithful Indian sidekick, Srini Bagdnish, you'll dodge whizzing bullets, stop stampedes, rescue villagers, perform amazing trick shots... and try to remove childproof caps. Mosey on down to your software dealer and ask for Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist. And don't spend another sheepless night. ODDZ BEZREAS BRONNES PARALISTS SIERRA See your local retailer or call 1-800-326-6654. "


"CAT  . Over There The Gobliin's European Vacation by Robin Matthews berium fure ne of the most unusual graphic adventures to be released in the last year was Coktel Vision's Gobliiins. This humorous tale involving mischievous Gobliiins has recently been distributed in the US by Sierra. Coktel has now released Gobliins 2 on the IBM platform. Apparently, while fooling around in the original game, someone got their 'i' poked out, as it is now Gobliins featuring two (instead of 3 in the original) of the cheery, grimacing, chuckling little so and so's. In the game's fiction, King Angoulafre's son has been kidnapped by a huge winged creature and taken to the demon Amoniak. Fifty years earlier, Amoniak was heavily embarrassed by the King, and has now taken his revenge by making the Prince his Court Jester. The King makes an urgent call for adventurers to find and rescue his son. Obviously, the discovery and rescue of said prince becomes the object of the game. world itself is far larger than the original Gobliiins, but the graphics, controls and, particularly, the wicked sense of humor are very similar. Be warned, Goblins 2 is unusual, but those who want a change from severe harsh dungeons or who enjoyed the first release, will definitely enjoy this. Gobliins 2 is good fun and is currently available in Europe now on MS-DOS. PADOM asked and requires the player to use the honor system in giving the answer (i.e. there is no system of check). If one is playing against computer opponents, this means it is possible to cheat enough to finish the game on the first roll! If one is playing with other human players or is truthful, this is without doubt the best computerized trivia game to date. Over 3,000 questions are included, but repeats did start to turn up (in fairness, same as in the real thing). The graphics are streets ahead of the original, and the general sound effects, like the clunk of the dice, are very good. The questions are set by Russell, a cartoon-like duck, whose comments can become tiresome. Musical posers are also included, indicated by a visit to the Music Room, and reproduction is OK, if a little low in volume (no good in the crowded room situation with several people \"discussing\" whether the right answer had be given or not). Gobliins 2 Enter two talented goblins, the serious diplomat Fingus and the oddball Winkle. These two super goofs take up the challenge and are teleported into the local village. This small hamlet would keep a psychiatrist busy for a year, since the locals are full of hang ups, neuroses, phobias, etc. The hamlet is only part of the gaming environment, however, since the game world is divided into small environments, each made of four or five locations and each having a self-contained problem which can be solved by clues within said locations. Deluxe Trivial Pursuit is an accomplished update although perhaps a year or two late. It will provide good solid family entertainment, but is probably at its best for two or three players. Trivial Pursuit made a huge impact in the 1980s, and has probably at some time been played by everyone between certain ages. It received an earlier conversion to the MSDOS world by Domark, but this was back in the days when 512 K was king and CGA was good enough [Ed: Parker Brothers tried a venture into software a couple of years ago. They published an EGA version of Trivial Pursuit, but it didn't have much to offer.). That software has looked very dated for some time, but almost as the sales of the board variety start to decline, Domark has brought out a new version. Deluxe Trivial Pursuit boasts full 256 color VGA graphics, support for the major sound cards, and mouse/joystick control. Thalion is a German software house that has been around for some time. They recently released a CRPG on the IBM. Amberstar starts as a single character role playing game with an overhead view. The character is created using a simple system (male or female, please note) and then, steps into a vast playing area. The main screen is similar to that in SSI's Prophecy of the Shadow, albeit not in the same high quality graphics. Movement is via the mouse or cursor keys and, upon entering a town, the view changes As in the original product, the Goblins are both on screen at the same time and can be manipulated simultaneously. Co-operation is still the name of the game, because many of the problems can only be solved by the two goblins working as a team. The gaming The gaming system works on the same basis as the original, in that a question is Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"HARMONY FRIENDLY POPULATION:LOW TECH LEVEL :PIEDIUM GRIK ZOO zod m00 O O OO MURDER. TREASON. SABOTAGE. ESPIONAGE. INTERGALACTIC WAR. JUST ANOTHER DAY ON THE PLANET HARMONY. INTRODUCING MAELSTROM!\" The ultimate galactic strategy game. EVER-CHANGING PLOTS. On the planet Harmony, nothing is predictable. Hundreds of characters interact in an MIND-BENDING STRATEGY. As Overlord of the planet Harmony, everchanging world, all with their own you'll need all your wits to defeat the evil Syndicate whose stories and motivations. You'll never treachery knows no bounds. You'll direct battles, coordinate experience the same game twice. intelligence, manage resources and vie with galactic leaders in a world where every decision could be your last. Enter a world where only the strong survive. And see if you've got what it HEART-STOPPNG ACTION. You'll watch from your Executron 1200 takes. Order Maelstrom today! \"holo-desk\" as your warships obliterate an enemy task force, and despair as you view the videotaped kidnapping of a leading scientist. Just keep telling yourself: \"it's only a game.\" 1-800-238-4277 Merit Software DON BLUTH MULTIMEDIA, INC. 13707 Gamma Road . Dallas, Texas 75244  214-385-2353 IBM PC and Compatibles 5.25\" (1.2 MB) or 3.5\" (1.44 MB) disks enclosed. Requires: DOS 5.0.286-12 or higher, 1 MB RAM, VGA Graphics, Hard Disk, and MS.compatible Mouse. Sound Support: PC Speaker, AdLib and Sound Blaster. 1993 Merit Software. Maelstrom is a trademark owned by Don Bluth Multimedia, Inc. All characters, audio, visuals and concept  1992 Don Bluth Multimedia, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Programming 1992 PAS Systems ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. SL Score TM Circle Reader Service #83 "


"  STEREOTILETTE umn, all roads at the moment lead to 486s and to Rome. After Caesar from Impressions, Rome AD92 has now been released from the UK development team at Millennium. This is an adventure/conquest/exploration game set in Ancient Rome where gamers assume the role of one Hector, a lowly slave to his master Habeas Corpus (a lawyer). Rome AD92 is played over six huge levels, which are best described as a cross between Populous and Millennium's previous offering of Robin Hood. VSE... 2 Do... WHO2 MAP 32 FOLLOW EVN QVIT 2 Deluxe Trivial Pursuit Rome AD92 wege thing Band Of A JOUTEEL IS BEDOUING COLDER IS GETTING THLOKERS TID RIPERICS SOUND RERCHES 900 THROUGH THE FRONT HET: The interface is simple to use, albeit a bit limited. The combat techniques become more important, but Millenium stresses that Rome AD92 is not designed to be taken too seriously. The commands allow you to control military units singly or collectively, and the Eagle Standard plays an important tactical role, as well as affecting morale. to a first person perspective that is something of a cross between The Bard's Tale and Dungeon Master. Upon encountering a door, a window type graphic appears together with the various options. The whole gaming system has a feel of quality about it (or was it nostalgia?) and the mixed views work seamlessly. The graphics are generally useful, if unremarkable, and the interface is workable, but Amberstar really scores with a good old fashioned plot and some tough puzzles. A full party of characters seems likely and the sub-quests are nicely varied. The game is still in the early days of production and subject to some rough edges, but looks like it will be an interesting addition to the adventure/CRPG collection. As mentioned in the last Over There colKENZO KAZI KOUE ON Amberstar The locations are carefully drawn and are full of authentic looking Roman buildings, trees, roads and a buzzing populous. The six levels get progressively more difficult, but the main object is to improve your combat skills and at the same time \"solve\" each level. Rome AD92 is not easy to categorize; in some ways it is an adventure, in others, a wargame, in yet others, a god game. Whatever it is, Rome AD92 looks pretty and plays well. The levels are huge, and it should provide good entertainment for those who don't mind having their games a touch on the light and frothy side. Rome AD92 is available now on MS-DOS platforms and will also appear on the Amiga format. Ed: Maxis will be bringing the game to the US shortly.) CGW TWIN ENGINE GAMING PRESENTS: Out Time Days Space Combat a game of Time Travel in an alternate dimension a game of pure tactical combat... in a rather unique environment THE EXPERIENCE: OTD is a game of life on a strange world. Although populated by a variety of 12 Youll he fighting in an edgeless contest zonc abar livsemi-humanoid races, it is nothing like the Earth ing crcaturcs. Space Combat is almost all combat. with that your character left behind. Gone is the industrisome room for diplomacy. OfTcusive actions include al might of large nations. The multi-talented worker thc crcature's Psychic Scrcams to mentally clisrupt is a thing of the past. Even your famed Time Jump er others. launching Inverse Mincs that will implexic ing skills have been checked to a certain degree. incar your cncmy, frccing Sporcs to destroy interHowever, you do happen to be one of the few Time inals, using Norve Pulscs to paralyze posky scouts, Jumpers on this world, and that in itself is a major strength. and Virully Infecting your opponent in the hopes of You'll choose one of several sccts to work with, or attempt to taking over their alicn. Each tum comes with a special full-pige graphic create your own from scratch, which will help set your general methprintout of your cncing position to aid od of operation. As cach new timc opens, there are now discoveries to you in planning. makc, now lands to chart, and new people to meet. The world awaits change, and you are the catalyst. Space Combat was designed to hc crisy to Icarn, hut dillicult to master. OUT TIME DAYS is a highly interactive role-playing Play-By-Mail Every gume starts with ton players. game with tums processed weekly. It has received excellent reviews, und is cuch is climinated, the chances notably from Flagship and Paper Mayhem. Tum cost of the game ending will increase. is $5.00. The game is open ended and 99% computer Turnshiccts are custom made on a laser moderated. The rulcbook may be obtained for $5.00 printer to aid you in filling out your (refundable with startup). A special startup is next tum. The games run about 12-18 available that gives you the rulcbook, the startup lurus. Cost is $.3.50 per luni. A nilc. turn, and five turns for only $15.00. baxok (requircel hclore you can join) is $1.00 (frec il you mention this adl!). Dependable, weekly, crror-free turns since 1984 Twin Engine Gaming; Dept 631; 3254 Maple Leaf Ct.; San Jose, CA 95121 Circle Reader Service #116 Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons Dragons COMPUTER PRODUCT Dungeoise sasons FOR THOSE WHO WOULD GIVE ANYTHING FOR A THIRD EYE. THE GRAND FINALE OF THE MEANEST 3-D GRAPHIC ADVENTURE SERIES EVER! FORGOTTEN REALMS world, where you must wrest an artifact of divine power from the dread lich Acwellan. A massive monster bestiary awaits your journey through the forest, mausoleum, temple, and guilds. The never-ending complexity with more character action, plots and subplots requires you to think on your feet or perish. The streamlined interface with the new ALL ATTACK button gives you the smoother moves you'll need to survive in combat. Eye III is an assault on your senses, with three times more cinematic intermissions and five fully-scored music pieces. Plus the ability to import your favorite characters from Eye II, along with weapons, treasure and experience levels. The way the developers of Eye Il see it, if you're going to go out, you might as well go out in style. Who knows, 40-100 hours later, you might just see the light at the end of Eye III. Then again, you might not. If you thought it would be impossible to top the first two \"Eye of the Beholder\" adventures, you're in for a deadly surprise in EYE OF THE BEHOLDER II: ASSAULT ON MYTH DRANNOR. Behold Eye III, with the hottest graphics, a devilishly deep plot, and more cinematics than ever. This time you're transported to the ruined city of Myth Drannor in the SEL Acivanceci Dungeons Dragons Eru Berorder III FUEL IBM CLUE BOOK AVAILABLE! ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS FORGOTTEN REALMS and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR. Inc 1993 TSA Inc. -1993 Strategic Simulations Inc. All rights reserved TO ORDER: Visit your retailer, or call 1-800-245-4525 with Visa/MasterCard orders (USA and Canada only). Start le NUOTRE IBM 256-color VGA displays "


"1 BEST of the Mental Gymnastics & REST by Chuck Miller The world of shareware 1 very now and again an excellent game comes along that, K while simple in concept, offers an exceptional playing experience. This holds especially true with games that challenge the mind, focusing on mental skill rather than physical dexterity. In this installment of Best of the Rest, I would like to bring two such products to the attention of our loyal readers: Oxyd and Capture the Flag. Both offerings require a sharp mind and reward it with an enjoyable gaming experience. Help, My Computer Can't Breathe! My favorite new shareware title is Oxyd from Dongleware Publishing, Inc. Available in an unusually large number of formats, Oxyd can be played on MS-DOS compatible, NeXT, Amiga, Atari ST/STE/TT/Falcon or Apple Macintosh computers. To my knowledge, no other shareware product, nor commercial product for that matter, is available on so many different platforms. Well, the story goes like this. Something terrible has occurred inside your computer. The life-supporting Oxyds have closed up. Now, without the vital oxygen they emit, this unique world of bits and bytes is endangered. As such, the player must commence upon a risky mission inside the computer to re-open the Oxyds and prevent the destruction of the digital landscapes within. All in all, the story line is an intriguing one, executed with great aplomb. single-player landscapes have been provided, as well as an equal number of dual-player landscapes. While the mechanics in Oxyd are simple, the puzzles are quite intricate. As one progresses through the landscapes, the puzzles become more complex. Objects need to be moved, lasers must be reflected off mirrors and prisms, bombs must be placed and ignited, and the force of gravity must be opposed. Death-heads, flying rotors and chasms all serve to destroy one's marble on contact. Varying landscape materials also affect play. Swamps, ice, plus raised and sunken pathways all affect the marble as it is guided across the landscape. In addition, every tenth level provides a Meditation landscape where the player must place steel balls in special pits, all the time combating friction, acceleration and magnetic fields. The challenge presented is both daunting and addictive. WOOOOOO XOVE  AAAAAAAA 6 TITTOO I had the opportunity to play both the Amiga and MS-DOS versions of Oxyd and they compare very well. Graphics are especially good, with the Amiga version appearing more colorful and the higher resolution MS-DOS version more defined. Sound effects are very good and are comparable on both systems (though the PC version seems to require a great deal of EMS memory in order to load all sounds). A key feature of Oxyd is the ability to employ a dual-player mode via linked computers. Support is provided for linking through MIDI, modem, null modem and Appletalk. In this mode, an additional 100 landscapes are available through which two players, one controlling the black marble and another a white one, cooperatively work to solve each level. Oxyd is distributed as shareware and contains all 100 levels (plus the 100 dual-player levels). The first 10 may be played free of charge. From that point on, however, the player will need the While Oxyd may initially resemble the classic memory game, it goes far beyond it in creativity and challenge. Using a mouse, the player manipulates a black marble through each level of maze, touching each Oxyd to reveal its hidden color or pattern. Opening two matching colors or patterns sequentially causes them to remain open. When all Oxyds on a level are opened, the player advances to the next level and a new landscape. In all, 100 Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


" 176-page game manual, The Oxyd Book (General Edition), which contains useful information and hints for playing the game, plus the secret formulas necessary to remove the Magic Tokens which block the player's progress. As you may have surmised, I am truly impressed by Oxyd. It is an exceptional offering, guaranteed to provide numerous hours of enjoyment (including many sleepless nights). In fact, the quality surpasses that of a great many commercial offerings. Get a copy! Oxyd can be ordered from Dongleware for $4.00 (please specify the version needed when ordering-IBM-PC, NeXT, Macintosh, Amiga, Atari ST Monochrome, Atari ST Color, or Atari TT/Falcon). The Oxyd Book is $39.00, plus $3.00 shipping and handling. All orders should be directed to: Dongleware Publishing, Inc. P.O. Box 391829 Cambridge, MA 02139-0018 Phone & Fax (617) 497-1130 Orders only (800) 228-OXYD With Flags Unfurled Another very popular shareware game is Carr Software's Capture the Flag. Based on the traditional outdoor diversion by the same name, this game pits the player against an opponent (human or computer) in an effort to capture the other's flag. The goal is simple enough — capture the enemy's flag before one's own flag is taken. Unlike most wargames, Capture the Flag is primarily a non-violent offering with a brief learning curve. There is no death or destruction; no one is ever killed. Like its namesake, enemy players are captured in a cute animated, cartoon-style scuffle) and sent to \"prison,\" a waiting zone, where they remain for the duration of the game (or a set number of turns). By nature of its design, this is an excellent game for children or adults who normally bypass computer wargames due to their predominantly complex and violent nature. constructing one's own battlegrounds. Graphics are of very good quality and provide an enjoyable gaming environment (the appearance is similar to that of a Windows-based product). Character animation during movement is smooth. Sound effects enhance the playing experience. The icon-driven interface is simple and very intuitive, so much so that what little instruction is needed for play is available through a built-in help feature. Overall, it is evident that care was taken in the development of this product, its presentation being of commercial quality. As it stands, Capture the Flag is an enjoyable diversion worthy of consideration, especially for budding computer strategists. It requires a 286 or better PC compatible system, VGA graphics (640 x 480 in 16 colors) and 530K RAM. Ad Lib and Sound Blaster are supported, and a mouse is recommended. Shareware and registered versions are available directly from Carr Software at $5.00 and $29.00 respectively. Direct your orders to: Carr Software P.O. Box 3919 Merced, CA 95344-1919 (800) 487-9231 File Connands Help TURN 4 Mouse 18,149 Screen 5,137 134 26 row 16, column 143 AUL BUCI D.. EI.FI Eye N o . 12 12 1 0 19 19 Gl. Hun 26 8 End Turn Map File Connands Help TURN 4 Mouse 18,149 Screen 5,137 Next Help Preu Uision Until the Morrow Greg row 16, column 113 AL BICO D.. ESTU 1 8 19 19 12 12 Gl. Hur It is time once again to power down the systems for the day. Before I sign off, though, let me remind one and all that shareware authors need our support. Some excellent games are being released through shareware channels. However, these programmers need our help to continue their efforts. Please remember to support them by registering the software you use. We will all benefit Games reviewed in this column are available through numerous distributors of shareware and public domain software, as well as on many national and private telecommunication services (GEnie Round Table locations and file numbers appear in brackets when available). If you do not have access to these services, you can, in most cases, write or call the game developer for an evaluation copy. 268 End Turn | Mop Next Prev Help i sion Capture the Flag is very easy to play. Two small teams are deployed over an extensive battleground. Play is turn-based, each player moving his or her characters and assigning them individual commands until available movement points have been expended. The player's turn is then ended and the opponent's begins. Play continues in this fashion until one team captures the opponent's flag. The playing field itself is comprised of several well designed and varied terrain types, ranging from flat grasslands to forests, and even rocky badlands. In addition, a terrain editor is provided for Send Us Your Best If you have authored a shareware or public domain game and would like to have it considered for review in this column, please send two complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" disks) to: Best of the Rest Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. CGW April 1993 Page 95 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD «I Came, I Played, I Conquered\" The First CGW Multi-Network Modem Gaming Tournament! nnouncing a tournament for every moA dem gamer who has ever thought: M \"Wouldn't it be great to get the Command HQ players on CompuServe to play the ones on Prodigy?\" Now, under the joint auspices of New World Computing and Computer Gaming World, modem gamers can not only try their hands against the best, but they can win valuable prizes as well. Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics WARGACHING WORLD In this issue ... Three-Sixty's Patriot . . 98 SSI's Pacific War... 103 Pacific War Strategy. 126 MicroProse UK's ATAC ......... 136 Interview with Sid Meier ....... Game and Scenario The game to be played during this tournament will be Empire Deluxe. CGW's editorial staff selected this game for several reasons. First, we have noticed that gamers tend to spend more of their time playing their newest games, so we hoped that our selection of a new game would encourage more gamers to participate in the tournament. Second, though Empire Deluxe is a new game with new features, it has enough of the familiar mechanics of the classic Empire that we felt a majority of gamers would be comfortable with the game. Finally, our on-line editor was getting enough experience with early versions of the game (due to his work on a companion book for Empire Deluxe) that he could design a special tournament scenario to be included with the production version of the game. Participants will need to own a copy of the game in order to play, but there is no entry fee. The scenario which will be used has been included in the released version of the game. The file name is CGWTOURN.SCN. The special rules for playing this scenario are as follows: 1. Before beginning the game, the two human players competing should decide by advanced agreement which player number (i.e., color) each will be with the remaining (third) position being computer controlled at the Expert skill level. 2. The scenario must be played using the Advanced Game rules. 3. The person who must pay for the modem game call will be designated each month. It will randomly be either the players with the higher or lower alphabetized last name (Abrams being low and Zwick being high, for example). That seems a fair way to try to split up the phone charges which the players must bear. 4. When you reach the Player Setup screen, give the computer (Expert) player Moderate handicaps for both combat and pro140 MicroProse's F-15 Strike Eagle II........ 142 duction. Each human player must then be assigned three levels of handicaps. These can either be taken as one level of handicap (Slight) in one category and two levels (Moderate) in the other or as no handicap in one category and three levels (Average) in the other — it is up to each player individually. Again, this should be agreed beforehand and discussed prior to commencing the actual game. 5. The scenario ends immediately when one of the two human players controls all three \"capitals\" (player starting cities), with the controlling player immediately declared the winner. Alternately, if one human player remains after the other has resigned or been eliminated, the sole remaining human player wins. If neither of these victory criteria have been met by the end of turn 200, end the game at that point and determine who had the higher \"score.\" Each human player scores 1 point per point of production efficiency for every city he or she controls (i.e., a city with a production efficiency of 72% is worth 72 points). No points are scored for units on the map at the end of the game. The highest score determines the winner. Ties are awarded to the player with the lowest player number i.e., red is player 1 and would win in a tie score situation). 6. After a winner is determined, both players should e-mail us and let us know:  who won SSI's Carrier Strike Expansion Disk.... 148 Spoils of War from RAW Entertainment.... 150 Jaegar Software's Fighter Duel Pro ........ 154 Opponents Wanted .. 158 Three-Sixty's V For Victory: Velikiye Luki ..... 160 Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"how the game was decided (capital conquest, resignation or points) and on what turn prepare them for the May issue. Thus, players will have to hustle their scheduled games. We'll try to notify players by e-mail as early as possible as to who their next matches will be against and include their opponent's phone numbers. If you cannot contact your opponent to arrange a time to play, notify us. We'll adjudicate any irregularities and our decisions resolving disputes must, of necessity, be final. You'll arrive on a Wednesday and settle in. On Thursday morning you'll receive a tour of New World Computing followed by a trip to Universal Studios that afternoon. Friday morning will see you making the commute out for a tour of Golden Empire Publications (publishers of Computer Gaming World), followed by an afternoon and evening of frolic at Disneyland. Make your own plans for Saturday and then home again on Sunday. what color the winner played what color the loser played their respective chosen handicaps any dramatic stories or interludes that might be interesting to share with our readers (Optional) send a copy of the save game file (there might be a good screen shot there for the magazine). For example, an end-game e-mail might read: \"Karl Killer' Kane led the red forces to victory over the blue devils of Nancy \"The Ninja\" Neusbaum by capturing all the capitals on turn 144. Karl had only a slight combat handicap to Nancy's moderate one and, despite being initially outnumbered, conquered enough islands to gear up for his complete conquest of the mainland. Prizes All prizes (except for CGW subscriptions) have been donated by New World ComputSigning Up ing. Tournament Organization The tournament will be a 64-player, single elimination event. Each game must be completed within, roughly, two weeks from the time the issue announcing the matches hits the stands (the exact completion date will be posted on each month's schedule). What that means is that when, say, the April issue comes out in mid-March (they always roll out two weeks before the cover date), players will have until the end of March to get us results so that we will have time to All entrants will receive an Empire Deluxe souvenir of some sort (a hat, T-shirt or something else to be announced). The two 3rd Place finishers will receive a year's subscription/extension to Computer Gaming World magazine and a New World Computing game of their choice. The 2nd Place finisher will receive a compilation of New World Computing games.  The 1st Place finisher will win the Grand Prize: a trip for two to Southern California (by air within the continental United States) with hotel accommodations and attraction admissions provided. You'll have to rent your own transportation around town, but it will be worth it for this itinerary: There are no entry fees, but all players must sign up by sending an e-mail on one of five possible networks. Your e-mail must include your name, address and phone numbers for both work and home (plus any modem and/or fax numbers). Our on-line addresses are: Prodigy: EXPT40B CompuServe: 76703,622 GEnie: CGW America OnLine: CGW The Sierra Network: Box 1048 With only 64 slots to fill, we expect it to go fast. We will accept a few entries after #64 as alternates who might enter the tournament by replacing players who cannot complete either the first or second rounds. All of the usual disclaimers apply: Employees of New World Computing, White Wolf and Golden Empire Publications are prohibited from playing, void where prohibited by law, etc. CGW The WARGAMER'S NEW! FROM Computer Company HPS POINT O SIMULATIONS AIDE DE CAMP Authentic weapons capabilities with authentic combat results. Take ANY board wargame and play it on your PC. Play-by mail or modem. Unmatched detail down to individual rounds resolution. Save floor space and playing time. Over 100 weapons from 11 nations. Tantra Set in the volatile Middle East, Point of Attack operates on Create colorful maps, up to 30,000 hexes, by using the a platoon-section level. Create custom engagements, or drawing editor to design terrain and units. Multiple explore one of the five scenarios. Features night combat, user-defined zoom levels. Permanently save game set-ups adjustable weather conditions, morale and other intangible as well as turns including movement and combat for later factors, advanced artillery, and lots more. review/replay. Compatible with all game systems, theaters, scales and eras. Design your own game. The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation Imagination is your only limit. available! Requires a hard disk, VGA display, and at least 600K of RAM. Requires an EGA display and at least 512K of RAM. Mouse optional. (Board games must be purchased separately.) IBM only $54.95 IBM only $79.95 Available only by mail. Mail checks/money orders to: VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. HPS Simulations, P.O. Box 3245 CA residents add state sales tax. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Please specify disk spec when ordering. April, 1993 Circle Reader Service #69 Page 97 "


"Deyneur Rushdie tohudent A Review of Three-Sixty's Patriot by M. Evan Brooks Patriot IBM SVGA TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: # PLAYERS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: $69.95 None ARTECH Digital Entertainment Three Sixty Pacific Campbell, CA (409) 776-2187  PATRIOT QUESTION: What do Patriot and The Satanic Verses have in common? ANSWER: In both cases, the end-users want to kill the author. atriot is the most detailed Gulf War simulation yet brought to the computer market. 1 Initial consumer response has been unanimous -and bad. Criticism has ranged from mild invective to a sense of personal betrayal. As a participant in the Gulf War, I was interested in the subject matter. However, the treatment herein may best be described as \"o-Cubed\" (obtuse, opaque and obfuscatory). The \"game» is an operational simulation of various Desert Storm scenarios, both real and hypothetical, including the Battle of 73 Easting. the Breach of the Saddam Line, the Battle of Khalji, and others. Each scenario is preceded by an opord (\"operations order\") in the Army standard five-paragraph format. For anyone with experience in the Army or in Joint Operations, the opords will be very familiar; for those unfamiliar with such formats, it provides a window into military planning. Graphics and Sound The graphics are SVGA only. The maps (with a choice of single, split screen or overview) are well done. However, implementation of units is confusing. Literally overlaying one another, it is often difficult to determine who is where. Actual unit depictions may be vehicle silhouette or standard NATO display. Movement orders may be implemented by objective arrows, waypoints or unit boundaries. However, unlike Harpoon, one's preference selections are not saved in the included scenarios. Each and every time one reboots, he must again determine the preferences (a user-created scenario will allow one to retain preferences). Sound, on the other hand, is limited to opening music and sparse battle sounds in the program itself. Game Mechanics Documentation The documentation is professionally printed. That sums up its advantage; of course, the major question is why did so many trees have to be sacrificed for so little information? There are actually three manuals: (1) The \"Field Operations Manual\" is particularly useless, having a \"brief history of warfare, the principles of war and a glossary. Too cursory, too general, too bad. (2) The Training Manual\" is the main documentation. It tells how to access each command, but it fails to tell one how to move units in an easy way, how to commit to combat, how to judge success (or failure), or how to combine the different options into an experience both historical and enjoyable. (3) The Quick Start\" should be a tutorial — well, it is in a way. An eight page \"Quick Start\" sheds a dim light on what is supposed to happen. Again, too cursory, too general, too bad. There is no historical framework in the printed documentation. Nowhere are the scenarios, neither historical nor hypothetical, discussed. Further, there are no designer notes on how to best employ one's units, assuming that one can learn how to access them. The game mechanics are where Patriot both waxes and wanes. One can access units by a \"Current Unit\" window or by map or organizational tree function. The \"Org\" button is pure militarese; one can see the unit trace\" (superior and subordinate units) and move up or down the command authority. Formations may be combat-tailored to one's specifications, e.g, in the Battle of 73 Easting scenario, one may choose to abolish the artillery parent unit and assign cach artillery battalion directly to the Second Armored Cavalry Regiment. A few mouse strokes and it is done. This, coupled with the boundary lines, makes this product the first civilian wargame ever published which could be used immediately in the military for a CPX (Command Post Exercise). And this is part of the problem. Contrary to advertising lore, the line that \"it's not just a job, it's an adventure\" is simply not true. The majority of military life is repetitious, dull and boring. CPXs are like this, only more so. One plans out the corps and divisional boundaries, the brigade responsibilities, etc. In short, it quickly becomes pure work. Patriot accurately recreates this work, but the terror of Scud attacks and the thrill of rolling into a newly liberated city cannot begin to be simulated (no joie de vrie here). While units can be moved by objective arrows, waypoints or boundary lines, actual implementation of orders is exceedingly Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"Devnem GURUDNIK difficult. After playing Patriot, one will appreciate why General George Patton's turning a multi-divisional force 90 degrees in forty-eight hours to relieve American forces during the Battle of the Bulge in World War II was such a feat of arms. Simply speaking, radical course changes cannot be done. Yet, the reason for this is invisible to the user, who will simply blame it on the interface. The interface is awkward, but the documentation should have explained the problems and the realities. One problem that is more difficult to overcome is overrunning enemy units. The overrunning unit simply continues on its axis of advance; no follow-on units are left to fix and destroy the enemy forces, and attempting to turn around is futile. The best response seems to be to adopt a defensive posture once contact is achieved. Is this realistic? No, but it allows the battle to be fought to a conclusion. There is no ground scale present anywhere. While I could determine the general scale based on unit frontages and actual terrain, most users would not be able to do so. A bar scale in the map window would assist the user immensely. Also, this would allow the user to determine how far a unit could be expected to penetrate in a certain time frame. Right now, the game is like lining the horses up in the stall, yelling \"GO\" and waiting at the other end to see who arrives first. Perhaps, the most important user function is the \"Pause\" key. Be willing to use it often. Turns are 15 minutes, and a lot can happen. Be prepared to pause the game and examine what the current situation is. Anticipate what will be needed over the next few hours. Remember, generals plan the battle, colonels direct the battle, and captains and majors execute/fight the battle. In Patriot the player is the general/colonel and once the forces have been placed \"on-line,\" most of his job is over. This may account for some of Patriot's inscrutability — the user's job is almost over when, in most other wargames, it would only be just beginning. In the history of wargaming, certain games produced interesting concepts which should have been reused, but were not seen anew. Jim Dunnigan's boardgame Fulda Gap allowed the use of DLIC (detachments left in contact), so that retreating units left a small covering force. Norm Koger's computer game Red Lightning used sub-forces (allowing brigade subunits to be deployed forward or back). In all these cases, there were ideas that had not been seen in wargaming before, and yet which enhanced the \"state of the art.\" Patriot has many such concepts -the use of formation tailoring, the accessibility of units from different modes (map, org, current unit), there is much here for thought. But the basic problem comes down that while there is much that is impressive, the lack of a meaningful game dooms the remainder to oblivion. When a reviewer is this confused, action should be taken. A three hour telephone conversation with Three-Sixty ran me through some basics. However, does the average user have access to so much personal help? Even after this, I must confess that I am still confused about much of the program's mechanics. And there are the missing options: Intelligence? No matter. Logistics? Forget about it. CAS (Close Air Support)? Helicopters only. Desert Storm was a war of logistics; just ask LTG Gus Pagonis. The data base is limited to what was on the ground. However, the historical experience was not so clear. I can remember working in 18th Airborne Corps EOC (Emergency Operations Center) at Fort Bragg, NC from August through November 1990. The TPFDL (pronounced \"Tipfiddle\", i.e. Time-Phased Force Deployment Listing) was a source of endless argument — who ships over when? Actually, CENTCOM (Central Command) made it clear -send over \"shooters\" (combat elements). Support elements would have to wait until sufficient forces were on hand to deter any Iraqi aggression. But even this was not clear-cut. Which \"shooters»? The National Guard (\"Round Out Brigades\") were not ready, therefore, USAEUR (U.S. Army Europe) forces were called. But this logistical Gordian knot is never touched in Patriot. Further, the logistical build-up was the most rapid in military history. Military airlift and sealift were shown to be deficient in quantity. These types of problems are not covered by the simulation; it is more operational in nature. Certain errors are basic the Battle of Khafji is incorrectly occurring in February (it actually began on 29 January). Similarly, time zones throughout the operations order are noted as \"Sierra\" (actually, it was \"Charlie» time; «Zulu\" Time is Greenwich Mean, and \"Sierra\" is more akin to the Hawaiian time zone). Still, these are minor points and do not impact on gameplay. However, what does impact on gameplay is unit strength. The American player will discover that the Iraqis are not a \"push-over.\" Losses can be quite heavy on both sides. Three-Sixty told me that this is because accurate historical deployments were used, but only \"open source\" data was used for weapons systems. Thus, although we all know that the M1 Abrams tank is better armored than public sources admit, and we all know that the T-72 Soviet tank will not be an equal adversary, the \"open sources\" use a worst-case scenario. Thus, one cannot recreate anything near the success of Desert Storm unless he edits the scenario and increases the armor durability of the American armor. However, does the average user know what the capabilities of the M1 tank are? Should he? Or is it instead the responsibility of the designer to produce a simulation and game which portray his best \"guesstimate\" of what actually is, and not what is only open source? Game Play I have 23 years of military experience, 20 years of board wargaming experience, 10 years of computer wargaming experience and was present for both Desert Shield and Desert Storm in the Kuwait Theater of Operations. Based on the program as released, I could not begin to figure out what to do or how to do it. Clearly, something is wrong with this picture. Conclusions Patriot has some innovative concepts. However, \"You are the Beta Tester.\" Frankly, the data base is well done, but Patriot's game and entertainment value seem to have been omitted. This, coupled with the bugs and crashes that plague the program, declare Patriot to be more of a Benedict Arnold. Cow April 1993 Page 99 "


"Deview EN. Justas other montok in the Wall Photo by Susan Zurdwik Interplay's Castles II by Ken Hill TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Castles II: Siege & Conquest IBM EGANGA $59.95 Documentation look-up on installation Vince DeNardo, William Fisher, Byon Garrabrant Interplay Productions Irvine, CA (714) 553-6678 PUBLISHER: CASTIESTI SIEGE & CONQUEST. powerful enough to win the support of the resident Pope-in-exile, Innocent Benedict. The player must complete this imposing job by managing three types of resources: Administrative, Military and Political. The player controls \"tasks\" in each of these areas to perform the day-to-day operation of his realm. Each kingdom starts out with a small number of resource points in each area, and the amount assigned to a given task affects how long the task takes to complete. As tasks are successfully resolved, the number of points available in each area increases to reflect the skill and experience of the player and his subordinates. The Administrative tasks include the gathering and production of the goods necessary to maintain the local economy: food, timber, iron and gold. Food is required to feed one's army and people, timber and iron are required to outfit army units and for castle construction, and gold is required for most every action in the game from paying spies to building one's \"dream castle.\" Planning and building castles are also an administrative function. How well the player manages the game's economy is a crucial element of success. Each of the 35 territories in Bretagne has an assigned commodity which can be gathered or produced from that area. One of the nice features of the game allows the player to choose how they want the commodities to be distributed. A \"balanced\" distribution will spread them out evenly across the map, while a \"geographical\" distribution will assign them to area according to the terrain (gold and iron in the mountain, timber in forests, and food in the plains.) A completed castle of sufficient size in a territory doubles the amount of production in that territory. Players quickly learn that they must have all commodities available to them. A wide variety of tasks must be performed on a continuous basis and each of these requires a certain amount of goods to be gathered successfully. Gold is especially valuable but one can't ignore the other commodities either. In dire circumstances, the player can resort to buying goods on the \"Black Market.\" This source is unreliable and extremely expensive. Hence, it should be used only when desperate measures are required. Military tasks include: attacking, recruiting army units (infantry, archers and knights), building machines of war (catapults, siege towers and ballista) and sabotaging enemy territories. Some tasks (like building siege towers) cost a considerable number of military points and are not available until the later stages of the game. Since armies must be fed and paid once a year, players have to take care to build enough of a standing army to provide both a capable attacking force and a deterrent to enemy attacks without ruining the rest of the economy. Balancing the use of scarce resources is one of the cornerstones of the game system. Political tasks include a wide variety of activities: scouting, trading for commodities, sending diplomats, spying and meeting with one's advisors. While it is hard to point at any one area of the game as the most important, players must pay particular attention to the political tasks. This game mirrors history in that the political skill of the player is more important than A 20 Gather Food 0 21218 100 11011es les aze Police Realm astles II, the latest medieval offering from Interplay, owes much to its older cousin, the original Castles. However, Casiles II offers more to the strategy gamer than just castle design and defense. Castles Il is a first-rate strategy game that provides a challenge for anyone who has every dreamed of being King. Castles Il is set in the mythical land of Bretagne (loosely based on 14th century France). The reigning King Charles has died without an heir and a power struggle for control of the throne is inevitable. The player assumes the role of one of five potential rulers of Bretagne. Starting from a small base, the player must expand the territory under his control and become 03 Scout STOCK ARMY RELAT OPTS Relations Ollosis Dijous 0Burgundy4 Dirogoor 3. Olhe Pope: 4 Happiness Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"Deae) 229223 224 122 Gather Food 182B. Police Realm military prowess. Players who ignore the political tasks in order to concentrate on military victories will find their road to the throne very bumpy indeed! Diplomacy is especially important. There is a relationship rating for each of the other players in the game including the Pope. Rated on a scale from 1-9, a rating of 3 or lower reflects poor relations. An attack from this player is a very good possibility. A rating of 2 or lower with the Pope results in excommunication from the Church. Excommunicated players are unable to trade with other players and are prime targets for attacks. STOCK BELT OPEE Trode my (3 units) L Timber (1 uit market LOK (CAN for of the block Posts: 115 LORD DINWARDICESTES Costics 02 SHEI POATLEASE A rating of 7 or better denotes friendship, good will and the possibility of alliance. Chances of successful trading or other interaction with these players is much better. A rating of 8 or higher with the Pope will result in a blessing from His Holiness, and anyone daring to attack a blessed player will incur his wrath. The Pope is also the only one who can confirm the player's ascent to the throne, so particular care must be given to diplomatic relations with him. These ratings are constantly adjusted throughout the game. Diplomats will arrive from other players demanding payments of gold or other favors to keep them happy. Some bartering is allowed but a refusal to pay could harm relations with that player. Of course, the player may also send diplomats to the computer players demanding payments. Another important factor is the happiness rating of one's people. This rating affects many parts of the game including the morale of the army and the ability to stave off revolts. There is a political task to increase the people's happiness, but it is an expensive and time-consuming process. Military victory can increase happiness while defeat can lower it. Game play is real time but the speed of play is controlled by the player. Each task has a status window on the screen complete with a bar showing it's relative level of completion. Without interference from the player, time passes slowly. Pressing and holding the right mouse button will cause time to pass more quickly. Usually, the player can set up a series of tasks and let time fly until the first task has been completed. The interface is wonderfully intuitive. Most players won't have to spend much time learning how to work with the game. The entire game can be played effectively using the mouse. Several bits of \"chrome\" add the overall flavor of the game. First of all, there are animated film clips available for several key parts of the game. They require VGA and a considerable amount of disk space. While they add something to the overall feel of the game, they can be turned off. Installation of the film clip files is optional. Other interesting features of the game include the \"plots\" held over from the original Castles. These add spice to the game by weaving action that takes place inside or outside of the realm of Bretagne. For example, an envoy from a far-off empire may ask for the player's help in building a navy to defeat the Saracen hordes by providing a large amount of timber. If one can successfully provide this timber, the price received will be well above market value. The plots can help or hinder the player's goal of gaining control of the realm. Plots can be toggled on or off at any time during the game. Players also have the option of playing out battles with a tactical simulation. Units can be selected and positioned with the mouse. These tactical battle sequences can be quite entertaining, and a skilled player can give his or her claim to the throne a considerable boost by mastering this section of the game. These battles are optional and the player will be at a slight disadvantage if he or she chooses to have the computer resolve all the battles. Finally, castle design and construction is alive and well. Players build castles for three reasons: to improve defense for that territory, to prevent revolt in surrounding territories, and to increase production. Castle design is easy and favorite designs can be saved to disk for later reuse. Castles are expensive and slow to build but are absolutely crucial for success. A few wellplaced castles in one's territories will quickly pay for themselves. The game is designed for a single human player only. However, the computer opponents are highly skilled and very challenging. Quicksilver/Interplay spent several months tuning the artificial intelligence routines for this game, and it shows. Even on the easiest level, the computer opponents are difficult to master. At the higher levels they become even tougher. If one is tired of silicon-brained wimps as opponents, Castles ll will provide a refreshing change of pace. There are some minor problems with Castles II. The design of a castle has little effect on its ability as a defensive structure (despite claims in the manual to the contrary). Since one defends with only half of the available forces when on the defense. one can find himself outmanned and, without enough bodies to man the walls, a castle is little or no help when defending against an enemy attack. It's an odd role for the \"star of the show,\" but I don't think that it detracts from the game. Another problem is that the Al of the computer opponents might be just a little too good. The computer players are so good that some novice (and even some experienced) strategy gamers will become frustrated. The tutorial and strategy tips in the manual are inadequate and don't explain how to succeed in the game. Interplay is discussing the possibility of expanding the strategy section of the manual and/or making the easiest level of difficulty slightly easier to counteract this problem. Castles Il is a game that will appeal to many strategy gamers who like an interesting and challenging game. It's a joy to play and, despite its somewhat sedate nature, can become quite exciting during the course of the game. More than once during a crucial point in the game, I felt my pulse racing as I quickly set up the attacks and diplomatic missions necessary to stop my hated opponent from successfully claiming the throne. It offers a variety of game play that will keep it on my computer for some time to come. CGW Battle Russing.. April 1993 Page 101 "


"\"...no other game, no matter how graphically advanced, captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Compter Game Review, Oct. 1992) ...a remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Compter Gaming World, Aug. 1992) Do yo own  modem? Then live out your favorite roleplaying fantasies in the finest multiplayer interactive fiction game ever Legends of Future @NICOLE LEE '92 past Every day, the intrepid, the romantic, the imaginativo and the adventurous meet as player characters in the sea Shattered Realms, a virtual fantasy world created from shared imagination on the Digital Dreams Network! Explore the dark reaches beneath the Teeth of Shartan or enjoy a casual stroll with friends through the enchanted Grymwood Forest. Become a champion Justice, or a force for darkness. Delve into political intrigue or play the lone wolf on a personal quest. Share adventures and make friends with people calling from across the country. Skilled authors create special quests nightly that allow you to become part of an ongoing plot within a never ending tale. Call 800-937-7644 to join the adventure (1200/2400 bps, 8N1, full duplex) or 800-274-2814 for more information voice As low as $3.00 per hour all day every day Visa . MasterCard  American Express Circle Reader Service #76 Legends of Future Past is available only on the Digital Dreams Network, a service of Inner Circle Technologies, Inc. Other features include forums containing thousands of files and featuring discussions on a wide range of topics from science fiction to PC computing. Other entertainment products, teleconferencing, nationwide matchmaking and news serviceas are also available. "


"pas Bali Hai Will Call You_ (or War in the South Pacific Grows Up) by Bob Proctor Title: System: Protection: # Players: Price: Designer: Publisher: Gary Grigshy's Pacific War IBM Document look-up 1 or 2 $79.95 Gary Grigly Strategic Simulations Inc. Sunnyvale, CA 94086 rere it is, the game Grigsby fans have been waiting eight years for! The whole of World War Il in the Pacific, from Seattle to Calcutta! Awesome! Just how big is it? Owners get over 320 ground units, every combat vessel and just about every combat aircraft. But wait! They also get 242 leaders, 200 bases, cargo vessels, and factories. Grigsby's grognards can suffer through Arctic weather, read Japanese naval codes, and wage strategic warfare with submarines or long-range bombers. Pacific War is a prime example of how a computer can make a playable game out of a simulation of staggering complexity. line service (or a friend who is jacked in) for clarifications and explanations will help a lot, too. Gary Grigsby himself is on GEnie and his remarks have been repeated on CompuServe and other private bulletin boards. If all this seems reasonable, players who have enough free time to spend 30 to 200 hours per game may like Pacific War. Anyone still reading is probably wondering, \"Gee, that long to learn; is the manual that bad?» Well, no, it's packed full of information and is actually pretty good (SSI representatives on CompuServe said that they spent more time and care on this manual than for any previous game). Granted, but in my opinion it is still very incomplete. The manual weighs in at 160 pages. This seems big at first but consider the breakdown: 54 pages of rules; a 5 page tutorial; 5 pages of Designer's Notes (which includes some tips); a 28 page history of WWII in the Pacific, written by Albert Nofi, which originally appeared in Strategy & Tactics #29; and 55 pages of data tables listing all unit, base and leader data. For any normal game this would be plenty, but PW is not a normal game. A game as complex as PW really needs two manuals, one to teach the game and one to provide a quick GARY GRIGSYS I'm Gonna Wash That Game Right Outta My Hair \"Playable\", however, does not necessarily mean \"easy\". Pacific War (PW) is strictly a game for those addicted to wargames. Beginners and dilettantes should stay away --they will likely feel that the game is unplayable. Even among the die-hards there are some complainers; those who expected to jump right in and begin trying their favorite strategy. No sir! Expect to spend ten to twenty hours just learning to play. Access to an onApril 1993 Page 103 "


"Dan macnhcunda Pure reference to specific rules. The need for a tutorial is greater when the game system is unlike any game that came before (as is the case with PW). More player aids would help, too, especially a checklist of all the functions or activities that a player should do each turn (See the player aids in this issue Ed). It is real easy to forget something crucial (like assigning a leader) without a checklist, so why not help the novice out? PW also lacks a printed map. Players not up on their Pacific geography will have to learn it by scrolling around on-screen. There are 200 places of interest on the map: cities, islands, airfields, villages. All are referred to as \"bases\" and can be used by either side. Engineers can be used to expand port and airfield capacities where needed. LE DEL ANZAC Salons DRIE 149. Sydney M33rd Inf Diu ) 7th Gurka Rot (BRT) 3 therefore, to put the most aggressive commanders in charge of the most important operations. If a base does become isolated, a player must decide if it is worth the risk to form a task force to transport supplies there. One must also make d sure there are enough ships G. CLO allocated to the Routine Convoy System to carry what is available. This can be a real problem for the Japanese late in the war. Beyond routine supply, the player must also make sure that there are combat forces available. Here, players are strictly on their own. Ships are highly mobile and, thus, easy to transfer so are the long-ranged aircraft like PBYs and B-17s. Moving land units and fighters around, however, usually means organizing a task force (TF). The whole process requires foresight and planning and there never seems to be enough ships! With a HQ set to full human control, a player becomes responsible for creating all task forces and assigning targets for all air groups. On defense, this will often mean setting a reaction range so that the ships or planes will attack any enemy detected within that radius. On offense, one can have a lot of fun raiding enemy bases, but to make progress they must master the art of the amphibious assault. A major assault may require six task forces: a transport TF to carry the troops, an air combat TF to screen them from enemy air, a surface combat TF, a replenish TF to keep the carriers on station, a bombardment TF to soften up the defenders before the attack, and a cargo TF (or two) to supply them \"over the beach» while waiting for the port to surrender. It takes time and experience to get good at this invasion drill, even after becoming familiar with it. The computer makes an interesting and capable opponent. It chooses from several master strategic plans so there is a lot of variety (at least in the early stages of the war; I've not spent nearly as much time playing in '44 and '45). If the computer opponent has a failing, it is that it doesn't react strongly enough to very ahistorical attacks such as an invasion of Japan in early 1942. While it's pointless to argue about \"realism\" in this situation, it would be better for the game if such reckless adventuring were punished severely. Some Enchanted Evening PW uses weekly turns to portray the entire war from December 7, 1941 until the end, which may come earlier or later than August 15, 1945. Both sides get an Orders Phase and then orders are carried out simultaneously during the Execution Phase. In all games, the computer can play either side, both or neither. There are a variety of entry points which allow you to jump into the conflict at different points in History. These are: 12-7-41: the beginning of the DEFENDER ATTACKER: Japanese banks, 120 squads and 14 artillery There Is Nothing Like A Game PW is organized, as was the military on both sides, into a hierarchy of headquarters. Every base is attached to exactly one HQ, The number varies as commands are overrun or new ones are created. The player has no control over this process other than to protect his existing HQs. The hierarchy reflects differences between the opponents. In Japan, the schism between Army and Navy went right to the top, so the two major HQs are the Imperial GHQ and the Combined Fleet. All army HQs report, directly or indirectly, to the former Esth Inf Div (A) and all fleet HQs to the latter. The Allies favor combined-arms HQs S6th Inf Diu cu which have both army and navy HOs as subordinates. The major Allied HQs are Central Pacific (based in Hawaii at the start), Southwest Pacific in Australia), and the British Southeast Asia Command (in India). The Allies also have three HQs that control land units only and are not of much onder concern to the player. These three -Nationalist China, ANZAC (Australia and New Zealand), and the West Coast of the US representing \"home guard\" units that are present for defense. Each HQ is assigned an \"objective,\" which is always a base. If the objective is controlled by the enemy, the HQ will try to capture it. If it is controlled by the good guys (it will often be the base where the HQ is located), then the HQ will defend it. Each HQ can be under full computer control, operational computer control, or full human control. You've Got To Be Taught The simplest ones are to assign objectives and leaders to HQs. Then, if desired, one can just sit back and see how they do. This is what operational computer control is for, the player does the key tasks and lets the computer handle the rest. But Bull Halsey himself can do little without ships, planes, and supplies, so the other major responsibility is to see that adequate resources are available. This is a little more challenging (forgive my gross understatement). 1 Basic supplies are pretty easy; they are automatically distributed by a «Routine Convoy System\" to every base that hasn't been cut off by enemy air zones. This distribution is influenced by the leaders currently in command, the more aggressive leaders get a larger share of supplies. It is essential, 30 squads 1 TF Adjustments Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"war, attack on Pearl Harbor optional 5-2-42: just prior to the campaigns for Port Moresby and Midway 8-7-42: the invasion of Guadalcanal 6-12-44: the invasion of the Marianas 10-13-44: the invasion of the Philippines (Leyte) Those wanting to play a shorter game and still have the computer declare a winner, there are two scenarios available. \"Rising Sun\" begins with the 12-7-41 turn and runs for four months, the period of initial Japanese expansion. \"Coral Sea/Midway\" begins with the 5-2-42 turn and runs through the end of June, a mere two months. The length of each turn (and thus the game) is highly variable, depending on several factors. The first is how much responsibility the player cares to assume (one can direct just one HQ, take full control of every 2020EA EA 68 * 8*8B HQ, or choose some combination in between). A second factor is how much information the player wants to see on the screen during the Execution Phase. The fastest option is to select \"none\" and then use the Utility menu to review the results of the previous turn during your Orders Phase. The mention of menus brings us to the subject of the user interface. The good news is that owners of previous Grigsby titles will feel right at home with PW. The bad news is that the interface leaves a lot to be desired, especially for mouse users. I would fault four major areas: 1) More information about bases should be displayed on the map. By default, they show only a flag of control with no indication of strength or even if the base is occupied. There is an «Alt Symbol\" command on the Utility menu that shows more but given 16 colors and map symbols that are 12 pixels square, the need for multiple display modes could be eliminated. 2) There are just too many modes. Four are display modes — Task Forces, Airfields, Ports, and Armies and you have to change modes to see all of the forces at a base. Add the dozens of functional modes for finding targets, transfers, sub control and so on and it could wear down the weary. 3) Most commands for HQs and units are not available using the mouse from status displays. Once you've called up the status of a task force, for example, there is a button to change 142 aircraft approaching TF leaders but not the target or reaction Allied Force Defending range. 4) The functions assigned to the mouse buttons are poorly chosen. Some displays open with the left button, some with the right. Sometimes the right button acts as the Esc key, sometimes it doesn't. You can get used to it eventually but it adds to the initial confusion. Happy Talk Pacific War is a unique game, providing insights into the Pacific campaign that are not obtainable in any other way. If you are fascinated by the war in the Pacific and you have the time and patience required, this game will give you hundreds of hours of CARRIER STRIKE Ships 18.95 1695 DOS RPG \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do your know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 9 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 DISCOUNT TITLES SIDELINE SOFTWARE DISCOUNT TITLES 4-D Sports Boxing 18.95 Advanced Destroyer Sim 16.95 ORDFERS 1-800-888-9273 Arkanoid 2 16.95 Armor Alley 16.95 Your European PC Connection Austerlitz 16.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 BAT 14.95 TYPE NEW TITLES Battlechess $ Battletech 2 Bloodwych 16.95 Robocop 3 Arcade Adventure 38 Centurion 18.95 14.95 Alone in the Dark Arcade Adventure Colorado 45 Conan the Cimmaron 18.95 Curse of the Enchantress RPG Conllici. Europe WWF, T2, The Simpsons: all Arcade Strategy Deluxe Strip Poker 16.95 Die Hard 2 16.95 Street Fighter 2 Arcade Drakhan 18.95 Cool World Arcade Adventure Elvira 2 18.95 F16 Falcon 19.95 Harrier Assault Flight Sim. Fire Team 2200 16.95 Ishar: Legend of the Fortress Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 First Samurai Arcade Strategy Fool's Errand 16.95 Amberstar RPG Greg Norman Goll 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Ween the Prophecy RPG Hero's Quest 18.95 A320 Airbus Flight Sim. Hills Street Blues Hoverforce RPG 14.95 Daemonsgate Imperium INCA RPG Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 eatesi 18 16.95 Tornado Flight Simulator Flight Sim. Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Wizkid Arcade Strategy Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 World Wrestle Federation 2 Simulation Monty Python 16.95 Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pil Fighter 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Sands of Fire 13.95 Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also Shanghai 2 18.95 feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with Sherman M-4 14.95 each Issue! Shadowlands 18.95 Sleeping Gods Lle 16.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Spot 16.95 Star Saga Two 14.95 Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Stunt Car Racer Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on Super Oll Road special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Super Space Invaders 16.95 Price & Availability subject to change! Three Stooges 16.95 T.V. Sports Baseball No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged T.V. Sports Basketball with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. TV. Sports Boxing T.V. Sports Football 14.95 FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Trump Casino 2 16.95 Wing Commander 19.95 Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 Dealer Inquiries Invited! Winter Super Sports '92 16.95 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard Circle Reader Service #102 DE EUROMAGS VRDO 21.95 18.95 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00; 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use Intemational Money Order in US funds. 14.95 Circle Reader Service #94 April 1993 Page 105 "


"ASIA Tokyo Nagoya Sasebo Midway. Calcuita PA C Iwo Jima. Okinawa Wake Rangoon Haiphong Columbo Bangkok * Manila Saipan Ulithu Eniwetok Guam Truk Saigon Kwajalein Is. Makir Singapore Kuala Lumpur \" Tara Rabaul Teloekbeteong Bali Timor Darwin Port Moresby New Georgia Guadalcanal Ndeni Cooktown Espirtu Santo Suva Noumea AUSTRALIA Brisbane Sydney Auckland Melbourne "


"Seattle NORTH AMERICA San Francisco Los Angeles San Diego Oahu   Palmyra * Christmas Nassau Tonga GARY GRIGSBY'S MAP KEY U.S. BRITISH  JAPANESE LAND PATH STRATEGIC COMIAT ON A MASSIVE SCALE! "


"pacificupar Recipes for Pacific War Task Forces A Reference for Using the Expanded Ship Class Tables by Daniel H. Scheltema Expanded Allied Ship Class Table Ship Class Type Spd Durab Arm Cap BB Srf Torp SDur ADur A-A The assembling of task forces is a major play element in Gary Grigsby's Pacific War. However, players are left on their own to decide the proper mix of ships. The information one needs exists in the ship class and weapons tables, but this has proven tricky to use. Thus, I assembled my own for players to use. While players still won't always have the right ship in the right place when they need it, these tables should at least indicate what the right ship is! 0 CV CV 33 30 92 0 Essex illustrious Implacable Indomitable Lexington Wasp Yorktown 108 3091 288 36 92 42 33 256 290 38 60 256 29 92 38 45 256 29 126 35 90 1120 84 56 10 76 192 21 78 25 91 192 210 168 43 348 19950 352 180 46 332 180 46 352 228 58 80 9 120 26 120 CV 33 Colossus Hermes CVL 25 Independence CVL 32 521 36 44 30 37 0 12 240 33 0 3 23 6 2 120 2 18 18 164 cooooooooooo 3 Attacker CVE 18 Bogue CVE 18 Campania CVE 16 Casablanca CVE 19 Commerce Bay CVE 19 Ruler CVE 18 Sangamon CVE 18 20 19 25 18 37 23 21 1 20 1 28 1 18 1 27 1 33 1 24 1 31 32 7 48 6 32 8 24 5 48 48 10 487 wwww Sun 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 80 40 122 72 80 156 64 Explaining the Expanded Ship Class Table Columns The first five columns in these tables are reprinted from the manual and presented here for the sake of completeness. The new columns have abbreviated titles as follows: BB:The number of bombardment points a ship of this class will contribute to a surface combat or bombardment task force that performs a bombardment mission (calculated as per the manual). Srf:An extrapolated surface combat index value. Torp:An extrapolated torpedo index value. SDur:An extrapolated durability index for surface combat. A Dur:An extrapolated durability index in air-to-surface combat. A-A:The number of flak points this ship will contribute to the task force's anti-air barrage. 33 BB Alabama BB Colorado BB lowa BB King George V BB Nelson BB Nevada N. Carolina BB Pennsylvania Ramilles BB Richelieu BB S. Dakota Tennessee BB Warspite BB 116 123 09120 577 0720 108 120 0 8160 511 0 654 150 140 09120 680 01059 116 113 06112 319 0 662 113 116 09216 575 0 662 96 110 0 6080 309 0 534 116 123 0 9120 577 0 720 110 120 07200 364 0 667 97 930 6688 360 0 457 116 130 0 6632 358 0 761 116 136 09024 568 0 796 108 120 07200 4300 654 102 930 6528 352 0480 181 220 164 48 265 560 166 272 166 24 134 48 181 240 167 48 115 40 191 84 200 188 164 48 121 160 22 BB 21 25 Alaska Renown BC 107 86 70 03456 246 0 4880 269 0 397 0 381 100 376 96 60 33 32 44 27 120 29 8 85 35 What The New Categories Mean The bombardment numbers are very self-explanatory and it's easy to see from the tables why one battleship can get favorable results on entrenched troops that a whole flotilla of destroyers won't even scratch. The flak numbers are similarly easy to understand. Remember, however, that destroyers are handled in multi-ship squadrons, so their contributions must be multiplied by the total number of destroyers present in the squadron to get the numbers to jibe right. (Both of the above ratings are modified by ship damage, treating the damage points as direct percentage reductions.) The other indices are meant to offer a relative strength comparison in their respective categories and are a bit more Baltimore CA Exeter CA Indianapolis Kent CA London CA New Orleans Norfolk Northampton CA Pensacola 43 53 0 1224 1020 200 752 58 75 23 0 1128 23 0 960 70 0 23 0 960) 46 01128 85 0 23 0 960 71 88 0 1128 85 230 1232 93 31 31 31 336 8 120 1156 12 80 11 120 20 56 11 120 33 33 79 41 23 Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"pacific par Ship Class Type Spd Durab Arm Cap BB Srf Torp SDur ADur A-A 20 14 38 17 54 0 25 13 Altanta Capetown Dido Oakland CLAA 33 CLA 29 CLAA 32 CLAA 33 23 0 384 16 0 128 20 0320 23 0288 7 264 4 92 6 118 7 272 18 28 18 20 30 54 CL24 33 12 33 288 66 Adelaide Beliast Brooklyn Caledon Cleveland Danae De Ruyter Enterprise Fiji lava Leander Minotaur Omaha Perth Southampton      = 17 16 0 368 28 0 15 5 27 33 16 0 672 56 75 29 8 140 33 430 792 55 0 74 1956 16 0 248 21100 4 41 43 0768 61 0 19 236 16 0 23 151 27 13 280 22 0 0 16 25 16 0 360 29 201 226 34 26 0 608 80 22 16 0 40029 0 20 650 24 20 0384 0 384 30 88 26 29 26 0520 26 0 520 44 75 40 11 130 11 130 23 33 0464 0 464 36 36 40 40 1148 23 20 0 384 30 88 25 7 28 30 26 0 608 48 7542 130 240 3 44 29 26 0 608 48 7540 11 80 30 31 33 32 1180 Tromp 66 Uganda Tangier CS 17 40 0 12 56 8 0 3 2 68 Battle Benham Bristol Cavalier DD DD DD 35 35 35 DD  . Clemson - 35 35 36 36  5 DD DD DD DD DD DD   36 DD 36 convoluted. The Yamoto, with its 1716 surface combat durability, is not necessarily that many times harder to sink than a sub chaser with its 1, due to the nature of surface combat. Any hit will produce one damage point and the surface durability rating has no effect on that. What it does signify is the chance that more than the one point will be shrugged off. It is very hard to get penetration on the Yamoto class battleships, and even if that's achieved, it's hard to get significant damage beyond the first point due to their high surface durability. The same applies to the air combat durability, which is lower for all ships due to the larger warheads on air delivered ordinance than on a typical ship fired salvo. Torpedoes are handled separately since they are ranged differently than ship guns and deal with armor differently. This index only shows relative total throw weight» in torpedos, taking into account range, warheads and accuracy. Notice that Allied torpedos don't compare well to the Japanese (for many historically valid reasons). The surface combat index takes into account relative accuracy, range and warheads. Any ship can deal out a single point of damage with any hit in combat. It takes 99 hits, however, to sink a ship. A battleship that tosses big shells can kill ships with a few salvos (especially against armorless targets) since most of their hits will penetrate and those that do will still do a lot of damage (even if they aren't \"critical hits\"). An MTB unit with only flak will be required to score 99 hits to kill most ships, assuming it can survive that long and get that close in. Note that alhough the Lady Lex and Kaga compare favorably with heavy cruisers, they are not recommended for that role. DD DD Comet Electra Evartsen Fantastique Farragut Fletcher Greyhound Gridley Intrepid Livermore Mahan Napier Paladin Porter Quickmatch Sampson Scorpion      DD 35 36 36   6 5 3 0 80 10 100 3 1 133 6 0 96 9 108 1 36 6 0 120 11 67 1 46 30 64 7100 1 56 6 0 104 9 40 3 0 64 50 3 080 8 1002 30 112 11 66 6 0 120 12 99 6 0 120 11 54 6 0 120 1167 3 0 64 7 100 6 0 96 9 108 3 0 64 7 125 6 0 120 11 67 6 0 120 1181 1 44 3 0 96 10 125 148 3 0 64 8 100 1 52 6 0 192 18 54 2 106 3 0 64 8 100 1 52 6 0 192 18 81 2 106 3 0 64 7100 142 6 0 120 11 54 1 44 0 0 48 1 33 3 0 80 1 56 6 0 144 16 67 2 130 3 0 120 1288 3 0 128 13 50 1 60 3 0 64 7 100 2 1 42 0 0 64 9 75 156 3 0 64 7100 3 0 64 7 100 21 56  DD DD DD DD DD DD DD DD DD    Sims -WN DD vou Stronghold Stuart Sumner Sweers Tribal Ulster Vampire Wizard Zephyr DD DD 34 DD 37 DD DD DD 32 DD DD 8 4 6 6 4 6 6 -NNN V 5 DE DE 21 0 0 24 24 4 4 13 20 cos 1 1 35 11 25 1 25 1 25 DE 4 Buckley Butler Cannon Evartsen Hunt II Hunt III Hunt IV Rudderow 50   1 DE DE DE DE 1 Brewing Recipes for the Air Combat Task Force When constructing task forces, especially invasion fleets where one expects to see some serious action, it pays to play close attention to which classes of ship go into which type of task force. Air combat task forces should incorporate as much flak strength as possible, as they pave the way for all the others. Adding battleships can slow an air combat task force down unless they are chosen carefully. Furthermore, adding battleships can also cut into the total flak barrage strength since most battleships aren't very good anti-air platforms. Con4 0 0 24 0096 3 0 0 64 4 0 0 96 5 00 48 25 25 23 8 12 4 25 38 20 1 1 40 60 26 1 1 MTB PC PC 35 40 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 27 1 1 2 12 PT 1 Manley Rudderow APD 24 APD 22 4 4 0 1 15 20 24 48 4 5 1 1 1 25 36 April 1993 Page 109 "


"pacific mar Expanded Japanese Ship Class Table Type Spd Durab Arm Cap BB Sri Torp SDur ADur A-A versely, a single lowa class can put up more flak than a couple of average five-destroyer units. The difference in destroyer classes can also be extreme. A single Battle or Sumner (both late war classes) puts up more ack-ack lead than a Capetown class CLAA. When assembled carefully, 1942 US air combat task forces can put up 2000 flak points easily and, by the end of that year, the Allies should be able to build at least one with a 4000 flak point rating. A player can afford to take a few risks with that much flak covering them! The Japanese don't have this advantage and must rely on CAP, making their incursions into heavy land based air zones even riskier. Ship Class Akagi Hiryu Junyo Kaga Shinano Shokaku Soryu Taiho Unryu CV CV CV CV CV CV CV CV CV 31 34 25 28 27 34 34 33 32 108 40 72 816 62 0 222 56 76 68 2264 288 31 0 79 21 122 48 253 288 300 8 3 108 108 45 84 1424 107 0 249 63 124 240 60 47 480 56 0 733 184 454 100 30 84 384 41 0 156 40 164 64 15 63 288 30 0 52 14 116 116 35 84 192 32 0 210 53 226 70 16 64 288 39 0 61 16 238 ooo Hosho Ryuho Ryujo Zuiho CVI 25 CVL 26 CVL 29 CVL 28 25 54 32 45 | 18 128 431 192 2 37 192 1 30 192 3 230 21 19 cooooo 4 15 6 6 2 4 2 2 28 116 72 56 4 1 Kaiyo Shinyo Taiyo CVE 24 CVE 22 CVE 21 30 1 24 192 391 33 192 36 1 27 192 21 22 0 19 5 NINA 3 88 100 56 0 5 BB BB 25 30 Fuso Kongo Nagato Yamato 120 93 07472 385 105 70 05232 276 130 1030 8448 543 213 160 012288 695 0 565 0 374 0 677 01716 142 80 94 80 170 88 430 120 Aoba Mogami Myoko Tokao Tone CA CA CA CA 34 33 34 35 31 41 44 43 26 26 43 43 0 688 48 238 43 01232 87 35756 01232 87 476 98 01232 87 476 96 0 1024 74 357 51 11 15 25 25 56 56 56 3 35 18 22 19 19 84 20 16 Agano Kalori Kitikami Kuma Nagara Oyodo Sendai Tenryu Yubari 36 36 17 27 18 10 9 10 10 10 10 10 9 272 28 238 9 9 176 16 24 11 0 144 14 1190 11 9 240 21 238 9 240 21 238 10 9 368 35 0 16 9 240 21 238 11 9 36 12 357 9 200 17 1196 3 12 5 80 3 12 27 27 NNG Kamikawa Nisshin 0 12 807 0 2 1 2 020 64 703 1 24 28 DD 38 DD 35 Akatsuki Akitsuki Asashio Fubuki Hatsuharu Kagero Kamikaze Shimakaze Shiratsuyu Yugumo 20000 DD 33 DD DD DD 39 DD DD 35 7 0 9 144 13 268 38 9 0 9 128 17 119 1 1 86 9 144 14 238 1 9 144 13 268 11 38 6 0 9 120 11179 0 9 144 14 238 0 964 724 1 8 09 144 14 446 1 144 5 0 9 120 12 238 1 1 40 0 9 144 14 238 1 1 NOVO And Don't Forget the Carriers! The big question in the construction of air combat task forces, of course, is how many carriers they should incorporate. The errata comment referring to p37 of the manual gives an equation for CAP deployment when attacked of: \"If6 plus a random number from 0-8 is less than the CV points, then CAP is halved.» What this means is that 3 Allied carriers (with their 9 CV points) will fail this test 25% of the time resulting in 1.5 carrier's worth of CAP overhead. Now, compare this to the «sure thing\" of having two carriers per task force always being able to keep the full two carrier's worth of CAP overhead. Hmmm.... This formula is applied after others that also affect CAP, such as surprise, PPs, and leadership. Though probabilities say a player would be better off, on average, with three carriers contributing their full rating to CAP 75% of the time, I recommend running three task forces of two carriers each, to two task forces of three each. This allows a player to project air-power in more places at once, or at more times at once. By following this tactic of smaller carrier groupings with the Japanese, I can do better than the historical turn's Pearl Harbor raids 90+% of the time. Think about that. Surface Combat Task Forces In surface combat, it pays to have your opponent outnumbered. Be sure to flesh out surface combat task forces with destroyer squadrons that can unleash their deadly torpedos. Torpedos are their best chance to seriously hurt the big ships. The Japanese have their Long Lance torpedos which are brought into play early and enjoy a very long range. Combat resolution works by the computer forming lines with the heavies in the lead. Since they tend to bang at each other, the side with the numbers advantage will usually get Matsu DE 27 4 0 0 72 10 119 66 Sub Chaser PC Torpedo Boat PC 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 32 0 3 0 18 1 1 -12 9 e 1 Minekaze Mutsuki Wakatake APD 24 APD 33 APD 35 4 0 25 16 2 0 1 4 0 9 64 8 179 30 948 6 0 1 7 40 1 Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"Dam free shots at the tail-end crowd. Don't expect to get more than two rounds of surface combat in during a gunnery duel. It happens, but rarely. This means many Allied destroyers, especially American ones, won't get many opportunities to get in close enough to use their torpedos. Still, each hit from a 5\" gun on a battleship does 1/99th what it will take to sink something. Light cruisers can also play an effective role in a surface combat task force, particularly in the case of some Allied light cruisers as TWO YEARS AGO... THE FWS UNION DEPARTS FOR TAU CETI IL VIA THE HYPERSPACE BOOSTER Following years of instability and chaos with the Federated Worlds (FW) and the United Democratic Planets (UDP) vying for superiority in the Local Group in 2374 CE the hyperspace booster at Cetus Amicus was certified operational. The FW. eager to reestablish contact with the mysteriously silent Home Cluster, dispatched the FWS Union, under the command of Alex Seward, to use the booster to travel to Tau Ceti III the location of the Home Cluster's booster. Captain Seward completed his mission, overcoming saboteurs and xenophobic locals, and uncovered the truth about the discontinuance of Development Assistance to the Local Group. Seward's findings led to an investigation by the Federated Worlds Special Forces' Intelligence Division (FSWF-ID). It was discovered that a conspiracy had been going on during those fifty two years of non-contact, involving high-level officials in not only the Home Cluster, but also in the Local Group. With members of both the FWand UDP governments implicated, both sides grew mistrustful and hostile. Following several military incidents, the UDP declared war on the Federated Worlds their guns are decent in their own right. Look at the Clevelands: flak like a CLAA, main batteries better than Exeters or Aobas, and good armor to boot. The first Cleveland class arrives in November of 1942. On the Japanese side, the Kitikamis look good. They sacrificed main turrets for torpedo launchers. Facing one of these inside torpedo range could be real interesting, Bombardment Task Forces When putting together a bombardment task force, do not include destroyers (unless you are concerned about submarines or you have nothing else handy). You should have a feel for where the sub activity is by recent attacks and can decide based upon that whether to save them for the surface combat forces or, in the case of the Japanese, maybe for transport task forces. It is assumed that the air combat forces will deal with any air attacks and, thus, clear a path to the target. If not, at least with all big ships the chances of a seriously damaging hit is lowered. Light cruisers are usually better put in the surface combat groups than bombardment, too, as their guns usually contribute little on this mission. Anti-Submarine Warfare Duty Always choose the most \"useless» destroyers and smaller ships for ASW duties. Dispatch them to the routine convoy ports (Nagoya, Los Angeles and Calcutta) where the computer automatically assigns them to ASW duty. Alternatively, use these ships to form up \"hunter-killer\" groups and have them patrol back and forth across areas of heavy sub activity. They also can be used as tail-end Charlies in surface combat fleets, but only if nothing better is handy. Since they burn fuel and don't contribute much firepower, lame destroyers are best deployed on ASW patrol, especially an otherwise weak one. Examples of «lame\" destroyers include the Kamikazes, sub chasers, torpedo boats, Clemsons and British MTBs. To Be Continued... The War escalates this Spring Command Last, but far from least, never forget to include a task force leader with any task forces expected to (or fear will see combat. A weak leader is rarely worse than no leader in naval combat and a great leader will make a tremendous difference. CGW OMNITREND SOFTWARE OMNIENE Circle Reader Service #125 April 1993 Page 111 "


"pacificar Things Your Manual Never Told You A Guide to CGW's Supplements for Gary Grigsby's Pacific War by John E. Johnston III MANDER IN CHIEF COMMA BEL. UNITED ST TEC FLEET STATES PACIF player to locate needed material easily. The Expanded Table of Contents that accompanies this article was compiled specifically to remedy this omission of detail. acific War is, unquestionably, Gary Grigsby's finest work to date. What sets Pacific War apart from other current wargames is the level of detail it possesses. Land units are historically correct and vary in size from battalions to armies. Troop formations can also be divided into smaller units as needed. Air units include a staggering array of airplane types, organized into the historical plane squadrons that fought WWII in the Pacific. The heart of any Pacific wargame, however, has to be the ships involved. Here, Pacific War simply shines. Every ship above the destroyer level is included as an individual unit, and ships of destroyer level and below are included in multi-ship units and ship pools. Pacific War puts the player in the role of theater HQ commanders. Air, land, and sea forces are moved, transferred, created, assigned missions, given leaders, and sent on their missions with instructions. Just as in real life, though, those orders may well be ignored, misinterpreted, or even overtaken by events. As the theater HQ commander, the player has no tactical control over these results. While I plan to address the mechanics of Pacific War in a future article, it is sufficient to state here that Pacific War gives the player a very real feel for World War II high command in the Pacific theater, with its warts and all. About the Expanded Table of Contents (See p. 126) The table of contents in the Pacific War manual is best described as \"minimalist.\" While elegant, it simply does not provide the level of detail required to allow the About the New Index (See pp. 122-123) Many purchasers of Pacific War who were very disappointed by the brevity of the table of contents tried instead to locate items in the manual by using the index, only to find that feature had been left out entirely. The lack of an index for a game of this scope and complexity and in a manual of this size (156 pages) is puzzling. If ever a game manual needed an index, this one does. In order to rectify this error, the Pacific War index that accompanies this article was compiled with the help of SSI. This index should make it Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"ON GENIE THE MECHWARRIORS ARE VICIOUS CONNIVING UNPREDICTABLE, GLOATING SOBS Circle Reader Service #67 "


NA


"IN OTHER WORDS PEOPLES MUCH LIKE them YOURSELF. DET AGRO time, with other Genie players. Some of the best gamers in the world. The crowd viewing your BattleTech duel? They're real people. The guys in your mercenary unit? Real. The greedy creeps who sold you your Mech? Too real. Good thing your lancemates are real too-because your life depends on them.  So if you're tired of computer games you can solve and = PEKESMA You're in your 85-ton battle Mech. You've shelve, join the living on GEnie. We'd really just entered the arena on Solaris. Another enjoy having someone like you in Multiplayer Mech moves into position against you. BattleTech. For lunch. But something's Sign up now: different. This time, I. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) the MechWarrior at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. you're facing isn't 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon some programmed drone. It's another perconnection, enter HHH son. A real, live, devious human being obsessed 3. At the U#= prompt, enter XTX99325, with reducing you to tiny fragments of organFASA then press <RETURN> ic debris. But that's what makes it soooo good. 4. Have a major credit card or your checking When you play Multiplayer BattleTech account number ready. on GEnie-or any of our way For more information in cool online multi-player games, the U.S. or Canada, call you're in real competition, in real multi-player games 1-800-638-9636. cueca GEnie 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS Circle Reader Service #67 Multiplayer BarcleTech is a trademark of Kesmal Corporation. MechWarrior. Mech, and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech available only for IBM PCs and compatibles. Frames from Multiplayer BattleTech. "


"About the New Player Turn Checklist (See pp. 119-120) easier for users to locate specific items and references within the manual. When combined with the Expanded Table of Contents, it should make the vast amounts of information in the manual far more accessible to Pacific War players. The ANZAC Unit Release Table The following ANZAC units are scheduled to be released to Southwest Pacific HQ as listed: Unit Month 1 AUS Engr 7th AUS Infantry Diy 6th AUS Infantry Div 9th AUS Infantry Div 3rd NZ Infantry Bde 8th NZ Infantry Bde Apr 42 May 42 Sep 42 Nov 42 Jul 43 Aug 43 About the New Map (See pp. 106-107) All computer wargames with onscreen maps that exceed one screen in size need to include a hard copy of the map for planning and analysis purposes. The need for a map in a monster game, particularly in a monster game which covers over seventy-eight million squares miles of territory (and the onscreen map of which must be shown one partial screen at a time), is self-evident. As a result, while SSI certainly may (and has been) criticized for the minimalist table of contents and for not including an index in the manual, SSI's failure to include a hard copy map is without doubt the single greatest omission in Pacific War. The detailed geography of the Pacific may be well known to some, but it is certainly barely known to others, and trying to locate unknown bases with exotic names by trial and error has been the source of a great deal of frustration for more than a few players. The lack of a map also inhibits some players from developing long-term strategic plans and forces them to \"wing\" their strategies while onscreen. SSI has stated that it did not include a map in the manual due to both the size of the play area involved and for cost-related reasons. With some encouragement from the staff of this magazine, they have been persuaded to include a map for inclusion with this article. There are a considerable number of different types of reports, options, and orders that are available to the player during each open-ended Orders Phase in Pacific War. There are so many, in fact, that new players may find themselves unsure of just what things that they should do and in just what order that they should do them. To assist the new player, the Pacific War manual does feature an abbreviated \"Orders Phase-Player Checklist\" on pages 14 and 15, but this checklist leaves out many important functions. A player who follows it turn-by-turn will soon discover that not enough things have been done and that far too many things have been left undone. The expanded Orders Phase Checklist that accompanies this article (which was jointly compiled by Gary Grigsby, William Highfield, and myself) is designed to remedy this situation. It lists almost all of the options available to the player and organizes them into logical subphases within the Order Phase. It also lists the relevant keystrokes for each option. The checklist was designed to be used by having a player place its two sheets backto-back in a clear plastic page protector, which can then be marked on with a waterbased marker or grease pencil. As each option is exercised, simply fill in or check the matching box on the checklist. Not only does this allow a player to tell when every relevant option has been exercised for each subphase or for the entire Orders Phase, but the checklist can also prove invaluable if the game has to be saved in the middle of an Orders Phase for mundane matters like meals, sleep, or work, then restored later. (\"Let's see, now where was I? Ah, yes, the checklist tells me that it's time to march my LCUs overland.\") Important matters that need to be dealt with later in the Orders Phase can also be noted on the checklist near the appropriate item, and cleaning the previous Order Phase's marks off of the plastic protector can give the player something to do besides biting his nails during the often-all-too-aptly-named Execution Unfortunately, this information was not included in the manual. If version 1.0 of Pacific War is being used (see below), the Southwest Pacific HQ must be put under computer total or operational control for one turn in order for each transfer to be implemented. Bugs, Support and Fixes There are a number of known bugs in Pacific War 1.0. They include but are not limited to the Missing Raider Battalion Bug, the Bermuda Triangle Bug (don't try to load planes onto already-loaded ships!), the 65,534-Gun Bug, the ANZAC Transfer Bug (see above), and the most serious of all, the West Coast Defense Bug. The latter is fairly serious in that there is a problem with the Al routines in Pacific War 1.0 such that the Allies do not protect the West Coast of the United States well at all. All is well, though; these bugs have been addressed by Gary Grigsby in interim releases of Pacific War. Grigsby, incidentally, has been actively supporting Pacific War on the Gamers Round Table on GEnie, where he has been answering questions, resolving problems, ending confusion, and posting interim bug fix versions for Pacific War (one cannot praise Grigsby too highly for doing this; his dedication to supporting Pacific War is amazing and all done \"on his own time\"). As of this article's deadline, the current interim version of Pacific War available on Genie is 1.06, which addresses all known Pacific War bugs and which includes some new features developed since 1.0, such as a command which cycles the player through all Task Forces in their home ports and which asks if these Task Forces should be removed or not. (Version 1.06 of Pacific War has also been uploaded to the SSI software library in the GAMAPUB Forum on CompuServe.) The accompanying sidebar, «Pacific War Support via GEnie\" discusses how to sign up for GEnie and where to find the Pacific War discussion, interim releases, and related files. About the New Base Location Table (See p. 125) Phase. To assist those players with a less-thanperfect mastery of the geography of the Pacific, a Base Location Table also accompanies this article. It was designed to allow the player to locate exotic-sounding and probably unfamiliar bases like Sarmi, Ndeni, and Teloekbetoeng by a method other than the map-scrolling version of trial and error. To find a base using the table, look up the name of the base that you wish to find on the map. Next to its name are X and Y coordinates, as displayed on the map screen. The X (first) coordinate increases towards the right of the map; the Y (second) coordinate increases towards the bottom of the map. When the X and Y coordinates are known, the map display information will allow the player to find the base reasonably directly and easily on the game map. The checklist is designed purely as a learning tool, not as any kind of a straitjacket: all of the subphases are purely artificial, the sequence listed on the checklist can be varied or abandoned at will, and the entire checklist itself can be readily abandoned as soon as the player is comfortable with all of the nuances of the Pacific War Order Phase. Playtesters, however, have unanimously reported that use of the checklist makes Pacific War significantly easier to learn, play, and understand. Computer Gaming World Page 116 "


"UKIYE LUKI  MAP MARKET GARDEN 1 BEACH  VE, FOR VICTORY ADEN UTAH ET GARDEN UTA! VELIKIYF LUKI KI  MARKET FOR VICTORY FOA VICTORY CTA WIELUN FOR VICTORY WARGAMING WITHOUT COMPROMISE Strategy Plus Game of the Year V FOR VICTORY: UTAH BEACH THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC 2105 S. BASCOM AVENUE CAMPBELL, CA 95008 408-879-9144 AVAILABLE AT BABBAGES, COMPUTER CITY, COMP USA, EGGHEAD SOFTWARE, THREE-SIXTY DIRECT SALES: 800-653-1360 IN THE U.S. 800-697-2360 IN CANADA ELECTRONICS BOUTIQUE, WALDENSOFTWARE AND OTHER FINE SOFTWARE RETAILERS, Circle Reader Service #40 "


"pacnfic injar Pacific War Support on Genie In Conclusion Pacific War is a milestone in computer wargaming it's the first true computer \"monstergame.\" Despite a number of forecasts that such a game would have only a limited appeal, Pacific War has proved that there truly is a market for large, detailed, strategic wargames by exceeding all projected sales figures by a considerable margin and thereby giving SSI a very pleasant surprise. Pacific War has also convinced a number of board wargamers that it is finally time to migrate from the board world to the computer world. Pacific War is a game that suceeds well on a great many levels. If you enjoy large, detailed, complex strategy games, then this game is one that you don't want to miss. As for SSI, one hopes that Pacific War has taught them a few lessons, to wit: (1) there is indeed a strong market for welldone strategic wargames, so more need to be developed and released; (2) a detailed table of contents and an index are essential components of any computer wargame manual; and, (3) a computer wargame should always include a hard copy of the game map.c6w Gary Grigsby is, as of press time, providing support for Pacific War on the GEnie network. This support includes answering questions, resolving problems, ending confusion, and making interim bug fix versions of the main Pacific War.EXE file available for downloading. The Pacific War discussion can be found on Genie in the Pacific War topic (Category 25, Topic 49) of the Games (Scorpia) Round Table (805;1). Pacific War-related files, including the latest interim version of Pacific War, can be found in the Gamers Round Table library (805;3). How to Sign Up for GEnie To sign up for GEnie, follow these simple steps: 1. Set your communications software for half-duplex (local echo), at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369 (or in Canada, 1-800-387-8330). Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the Ult=prompt, enter XTX99381,SFRT then press ENTER>. 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may also use your checking account number. For more information in the United States or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636 or write: GEnie, c/o GE Information Services, P.O. Box 6403, Rockville, MD 20850-1785. The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 Page 118 Circle Reader Service #65 Computer Gaming World "


"pacific upar Pacific War Orders Phase Checklist Week of: REPORTS SUBPHASE Review last turn's battle reports (alt/B). Use SIGINT to review enemy Task Forces, bases, and land combat units (LCUS) that have been spotted (F5). Check losses/score (F9). Check sunken ships (F8). Check ship pools (F4). REINFORCEMENT SUBPHASE Check for reinforcements in Sydney, Calcutta, Columbo, Kweiyang, Kunming, Soerabaja, Auckland, Manila, and San Francisco if Allied; in Tokyo, Shanghai, and Port Arthur if Japanese). Check replacement pools (F7). Cycle through factory cities to see which planes are being produced and upgrade to newer models when applicable (F6). HQ SUBPHASE Examine HQs(alt/F). List HQ units (alvD). Relocate HQs (alt/E). Move HQs to TF in the same square (alt/S). Assign new leader to HQs (alt/L). Set HQ control (alt/K). Change base HQ (alt/C). Set HQ target (altG). List HQ aircraft (alt/X). Assign HQ air leader (alt/P). Reinforce bases (alt/R). April 1993 Page 119 "


"Pacific War Orders Phase Checklist (Continued) LAND SUBPHASE Examine land units in sequence (S/W). Divide units as needed (D on Unit Data Display). Activate all LCUs that will be loaded, moved, or that will attack (A on Unit Data Display). Assign leaders to land units (F1 on Unit Data Display). March LCUs over land (alt/W). Call for immediate sealift forces (alt/T). AIR SUBPHASE Check which enemy bases are exerting AZOCS (alt/Z). Check which friendly bases are exerting AZOCs (shfu/Z). Examine airfields in sequence (ZIA). Set priority target base (B). Set missions (D, N, NI, SA, OA, AB, T, D on Air Unit Display). Transfer air units (alt/A). Upgrade older plane types (C on air unit display). TASK FORCE SUBPHASE Examine ports in sequence (O/P). Examine existing TFs for damage, fuel, and threat levels (N/G). Unload TFs at destination bases (U). Disband TFs at destination ports (R). Replenish TFs if possible (Y). Transfer damaged (or undamaged) ships to new TFs (T). Scuttle badly disabled ships. Check for isolated bases that may require special convoys in order to receive adequate supplies (alt/O). Create Transport TFs (and/or Tokyo Expresses, if Japanese) to resupply bases in range of enemy air or sea zones of control (C). Create Cargo TFs to resupply bases in rear areas (C). Create Replenishment TFs (C). Create combat TFs at friendly ports (C). Assign leaders to TFs (F1 on TF display). Load TFs with troops, supplies, or fuel (L). Set TFs' destinations (D). Set TFs' functions/move options (F). Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"The Book Store CGW Presents ... NEW RELEASE CONOUEST TOTTEETTONIC Global Conquest, The Official Strategy Guide by Computer Gaming World On-Line Editor Alan Emrich is only $24.95 plus $ 1.81 tax and $3.50 shipping and handling. Special features: floppy disc with updated (2.0) game version and a new map maker; and full-color player's aid card. A complete tutorial with five programmed scenarios. Strategy tips, detailed, tables, and analyses of actual program formulae. A complete modem-gaming reference. Sid Meiers Civilization, Or Rome on 640k a Day CIVILIZATION by Johnny L. Wilson and Alan Emrich Prima $18.95 If you're serious about playing Civilization, this is the book you need. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Includes 100 charts covering technological advancements: 24 original tables and 22 specific formulae showing how the game works, as well as 17 ways to cheat and more than 20 ways to win. CHUCK TEADERS AIR COMBAT Chuck Yeagers Air Combat Handbook by Russell Sipe and Mike Weksler $18.95 U.S. $25.95 Can Winning Strategies to all the missions. Campaign games for every player-flyable aircraft (P-51. FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, Phantom II, MiG-21). Valuable performance charts for each aircraft. Extensive information from the designers of YAC. Exclusive interview with Chuck Yeager. THE SIMEARTH BIBLE The SimEarth Bible by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne-McGraw Hill $14.95 I salute Johnny Wilson for giving us a new kind of book about the earth and the terrestrial planets. James Lovelock The SimEarth Bible is a winning strategy guide to SimEarth, as well as a fact-filled guide to Earth sciences and theories of the balance of life on the planet. THE OPTICAL GUIDE TO The Official Guide To Sid Meiers Railroad Tycoon by Russell Sipe COMPUTE Books $12.95 U.S. $16.50 The best book on Railroad Tycoon. If you love Railroad Tycoon get Russell Sipe's book. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Here are just a few of the things you'll learn: get the answers to puzzling economic forces in the game: learn to defeat each of the tycoons: manupulate the stock market to your advantage and learn optimal building and survey techniques. The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne McGraw-Hill $14.95 Each time we read this book we learned something, because it explains the theory behind the game and doesn't just list one-two-three hints. Use order form bound into this magazine to order books. "


"pacific war Pacific War Manual Index 47 60 41 41 15 52 39 39 37 40 34.42 47 Accelerated ship repairs Acquiring preparation points Activation 15, 31, 32 Administrative HQs 27 Admirals 27, 33 AFVs 15, 34, 35, 48, 51 Aggressiveness rating 25, 31, 33 Air bombardment 36,41 Air bombardment strength Air combat TF 11, 20, 25, 26, 38, 44, 54, 59, 61 Air group experience gain 19 Air group reinforcements Air groups 3, 5, 11, 14, 1621, 23, 24, 26, 27, 31, 32, 36, 37, 41, 44, 4852, 56, 57, 6264 Air leader 12, 13, 20, 29, 31, 32, 38, 56, 57, 62, 63 Air missions 37 Air operations 13, 20, 29, 33, 48, 61, 62 Air rating 25, 33, 39 Air strikes 6, 9, 2022, 34, 3739, 50, 59, 62 Air target 9, 11, 12, 15, 25, 62 Air to air combat Air to sea combat Air transfer 11, 17, 57 Air unit orders 16 Air units 12, 17, 28, 36 Air Zones of Control 7,9, 21, 23, 25, 42, 43, 50 Aircraft 2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 12, 1624, 32, 34, 36,37,39 42, 44, 46, 4851, 53, 55, 56, 62, 63 Aircraft accuracy ratings Aircraft carrier Aircraft damage Aircraft factories Aircraft ranges Aircraft repairs Aircraft replacement pools Aircraft types 17,21 Airfield capacity 11, 17, 18, 45 Airfield/Aircraft damage 42 Airlift supply 48, 51 Allied HQs 28, 59 Allied objectives 4,5 Ammo points 41 Amphibious assaults 1, 2, 54 Amphibious landings Amphibious operations 2, 6, 28, 54, 62, 63 Anti-lank fire 34, 36 AO 3, 23, 24, 40, 45, 49 AP 3, 13, 14, 16, 22, 23, 29, 30, 40, 45, 49, 59 APD 3, 14, 16, 22, 23, 30, 40, 45, 49 Arctic Weather Zone Armor penetration Army 4.7, 8, 10, 14-16, 27, 28, 32, 34, 56, 63 Army combat operations Army HOS Army Movement 10,16 Artillery 51, 52 Assault value calculation Assembly port Atoll 35, 36, 61 Atomic Bomb 17-19 AZOCs 14, 26, 44, 50 Backup disks 1 Baka Bomb Balance 4,5, 37, 45, 55 Base(s) 1, 2, 4, 5, 6-17, 19-27, 29-36, 41, 42, 44, 46-64 Base capture 35, 36 Base construction 49 Base damage 41 Base disruption 41, 42 Base flak 41 Base resupply Base supply 47, 48 Battalion 32, 54 Battle reports 8, 14 BB 3, 22, 23, 40, 45, 46, 49 BC 3, 22, 23, 40, 45, 46, 49 Bombardment 23, 36, 41, 42, 55, 62, 63 Bombardment Of LCUS Bombardment Strength 36, 41, 42 Bomber Load Brigade 32 CA 3, 22, 23, 27, 28, 40, 43, 45, 46, 49 Campaign 41 4 CAP 18-20, 22, 39 Capacity 5, 11, 14, 16-18, 22, 24, 30, 41, 42, 45-49, 53,63 Cargo 3, 6, 10, 11, 15, 21, 23-25, 34, 46-48, 52, 55, 58-60 Cargo and transport TFS 47, 48 Cargo TF 55,60 Carrier air groups 17, 27, 51 Carrier air strikes 37-39 Carrier battles Carrier combat 37, 61 Carrier combat operations Carrier points Casualty points Central Pacific 28, 29, 55, 60 Change Base's HQ 30 Change HQ's Human/Computer Control Level 30 Change mission 32 Changing aircraft factories 21, 49 Changing the type of aircraft 17 Chinese production City (Cities) 34, 37, 42, 46, 47, 53, 64 City/Factory/Depot damage Civilian losses 19 CL 3, 22, 23, 40, 43, 45, 46, 49 CLAA 3, 40, 43, 45, 46, 49 Combat 2, 3, 5-7, 9-28, 30-40, 42-44, 47, 50-56, 58-64 Combat forces 3, 23, 33, 55, 58, 59, 62 Combat formations 15 Combat operations 19, 34, 37, 44, 59 Combined arms HQs Construction 8, 46, 49, 52 Consumption rate 50 Control level 12, 30, 57 Control victory points Convoy 6,9, 42, 44-47, 55, 61 Coral Sca/Midway 4,5 Counterstrike 39 Create TF 9,11, 22, 58, 59 Crippled ships 41 Critical hits CS 3, 16, 23, 40, 45, 46, 49 Current Airfield 9 Current base 12-14, 22, 29, 30 Current score CV 3, 38, 40, 45, 46, 49, 53, 57 CVE 3, 22-24, 38, 45, 46, 49, 53, 55 CVL 3, 38, 40, 45, 46, 49, 53 Damage points 41, 46 Damaged aircraft 17, 45, 62 Day Combat 18 DD 3,16, 22, 23, 40, 43, 45, 47, 49 DE 3, 16, 23, 40, 43, 45, 47, 49 Defender Retreat/Surrender 35, 36 Defending unit 36, 37 Delay 3,4,6,8,9,12, 26, 33, 44, 55, 59 Depot 11, 12, 16, 20, 25, 37, 42 Designer's notes Destination Base 9, 10, 16, 23, 24, 47, 58 Destinations 11, 15, 24, 25, 34. 59 Disband 9, 19 Display 3, 4, 6-10, 13, 15, 16, 21, 24, 30, 42, 51, 53, 55-59, 62 Display/Delay Menu Distributing preparation points to HQs 31 Dive Bomber 18, 32, 40 Dividing units Division 32, 58 Documentation check Durability 39-41, 45, 46, 52, 53 Enemy base 10, 12, 15, 20, 23, 25, 36, 62, 63 Enemy subs 37 Enemy TFS 6, 14, 18, 21-23, 37, 44, 50, 59, 62 Engineer 32, 62 Entrenchment 15, 36, 37 Entrenchment level 36, 37 Evacuation 23, 34 Execution phase 6,9-12, 14, 16, 20, 21, 24-26, 34, 37, 42, 44, 47, 51, 59, 60 Execution sequence 60 Exit game Expansion 48, 49 Experience 5, 15, 18-20, 35, 37, 40, 41, 51, 62 Factories 5, 8, 14, 15, 18, 21, 36, 41, 48, 49 Factory 3, 11, 12, 16, 19-21, 25, 41, 42, 48, 49, 53 Fighter 18, 20, 21, 32, 37, 39, 40, 50, 51, 59, 63 Fighter-Bomber 18, 32, 40, 50, 51 Find an HQ 12, 14, 30, 31 Find HQ's air groups 31 Find HQ's Land Combat Units 31 Find ships 9, 24, 57, 59, 64 Flak 18, 19, 36, 39-41 Flak strength 36, 39, 41 Friendly base 10, 12, 20, 25, 29, 48 Friendly base supply 48 Fuel 5, 10, 11, 13, 19, 22-24, 30, 34, 36, 42, 46-50,63 Full Control 13,30 Game abbreviations Game concepts Game map Game menus Game scale 2,60 General orders menu 4,7 Generals 27 Get transport 30 Group attack ranges 21 Group transport ranges Guadalcanal 4, 5, 55, 57-60 Headquarters 3, 9, 14, 27, 29-31, 51, 54-56, 60 Headquarters functions Heavy Bomber 18, 32, 39, 40, 50, 51 Hex 2, 4, 8-13, 15, 16, 20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 30, 33-36, 42, 44, 47-51, 56, 58, 59 Hit determination Home Base 6, 9, 10, 21, 24, 26, 32, 34, 41, 44 Home bases Home port 8, 10, 20, 24, 32, 63, 64 Horizontal and vertical menu selections Hot keys 14-16, 21, 29 How to play HQ and leader orders HQ menu 7, 12-14, 17, 20, 22, 29-31, 54 HQ status change HOS 12, 13, 27, 28, 30, 31, 33, 36, 59, 63 Industrial expansion Industrial expansion of factories Infantry 34-36, 46, 51, 52 NNNW 3% 27 53 29 41 35 54 19 Sow Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"27 53 32 15 . 37 36 45 21 9 Inner Defense Perimeter 18, 19 Installing the game Intensive training 19 Japanese HQs Japanese kill multiplier Japanese objectives 4,5,8 Japanese production 46,53 P eproducon Kamikazes 1,61 Keyboard 2-4, 7-9, 12, 15, 16, 21 Kill victory points 53 Land combat 2, 3, 5-7, 9-11, 14-16, 23-25, 27, 31-36, 52, 54, 56, 59, 61, 63, 64 Land combat forces 3,33 Land combat sequence of play 34, 36 Land Combat Unit activation 32 Land Combat Unit orders Land Combat Unit reinforcements Land combat units 2,5-7, 10, 11, 14-16, 24, 25, 27, 31, 32, 34, 36, 54, 56, 59, 63, 64 Land march paths 7, 15, 59 Land operations 33, 62 Land rating 25, 33, 35 Land-based air groups 3,11, 17, 27, 37, 49 Land-based air missions Land-based strike missions Landing Ships Launching carrier air strikes 38 LCU readiness loss LCUS 2, 7, 10, 13-16, 21, 22, 25, 29-31, 34-36, 46, 48, 51, 52, 54, 55, 63 Leaders 3, 13, 20, 24, 29, 33, 36, 38, 57, 63 Leadership 27, 33, 35, 53 Leyte Gulf 4,5 List of battles Load Current TF at Basc Load TF 9,11 Loading 11, 16, 23, 24 Locating air units 17 Locating an HQ's air groups 17 Locating specific aircraft types 17 Logistic operations 6,34 LST 3, 13, 14, 16, 22, 23, 29, 30, 45, 49 March mode 16 Marianas 4,5 MCS 14, 22, 23, 30, 45, 47, 49 Menu 3-14, 16, 17, 20, 22, 24, 25, 29-31, 48, 51, 54-59 Mode 7,9, 10, 12, 14-17, 21, 23, 26, 57, 59 Motor Torpedo Boat Mouse 3,4,6-13, 15-17, 21, 24, 26, 29, 30, 54, 56-60 Move HQ to a TF Move option 9,11, 15, 25 Move submarines 9,26 Movement restrictions Nationality 14, 22, 30, 37, 39 Naval bombardment 36, 41, 62 Naval HQs Naval interdiction 17,18 Naval operations 33, 63 Naval rating 25, 33 Night combat 17, 18, 43 Observation aircraft Odds 35-37, 62 Oil 5, 8, 11, 23, 24, 31, 46-48, 53, 62, 64 Oil reserve 31, 46, 48 Oilers 3, 13, 22, 30 Okha Attack 19 Operational Control 13,30 Options 3-5, 7-9, 25 Options menu 4, 5, 7 Orders phase 2, 6-8, 13, 14, 20-22, 30, 37, 59, 60 Orders phase-player checklist 14 Overland supply movement 34,47 Patrol 3, 12, 14, 16-18, 22, 25, 26, 32, 37, 39, 40, 43, 44, 47, 50, 51, 59, 64 Patrol range 26 Patrol zone 12, 26, 59 PC 3, 45, 47, 49 Performance 32, 33, 35 Player aids Player checklist Player's role Preparation points 11-13, 16, 27, 29-32, 35, 38, 39, 54-57, 62, 63 Primary guns Priority Target Base Production victory points 53 Radar 22, 38, 39, 51 Random element 26, 44 Range 3, 9, 11, 15, 17, 21, 25, 26, 37, 43, 44, 48, 50, 61-63 Reaction 6, 10, 18, 21, 24-26, 34, 43, 44, 50, 51 Reaction searches 21, 50, 51 Readiness 5, 10, 15, 16, 23, 25, 31, 32, 35, 36, 46, 48, 49, 55, 59, 62, 63 Readiness factors README file Ready aircraft 17, 18, 37, 42, 45 Refuel 11, 55 Regiment Reinforce HO 22,29 Reinforcement arrival bases Reinforcements 5, 14, 34, 52, 64 Relocate HQ 12. 29 Remove TF 9, 10, 25 Repair phase 45, 46 Repairs 45, 46, 64 Repairs at sea Repairs in port Replacements 34, 46, 51, 52 Replenish 9, 11, 17, 23, 24, 48, 49, 55 Replenishment TF 17, 46-48 Resource 8, 11, 23, 24, 46-48, 53, 62, 64 Resupply 15, 21, 47, 48, 60, 62, 63 Retreat 35-37 Return to DOS Rising Sun Routine convoys 21, 42, 44, 46, 47, 50, 55, 61, 63 Routine training 19 Saved game SBF Scenario objectives Searching for enemy Subs Searching for enemy TFs Select new HQ air leader 29, 32 Select new HQ leader 29,32 Selecting a TF leader Selecting a TF mission Set Delay/Display Levels Set TF Destination Base Set TF Home Base Setting TF Destinations Setting TF Home Bases Setting up the game 2,4 Setup 3-6, 9 Ship construction points 8, 46, 52 Ship damage 39-41 Ship evasion modifiers Ship evasion rating Ship reinforcements 5, 52 Ship repairs 45, 46 Ship target selection Ships 2, 3, 6-16, 20-25, 29-31, 34, 36, 38-49, 51-55, 57-59, 62-64 Shipyards 8, 48, 52 Show isolated friendly bases SIGINT 8, 9, 14, 51 Signal Intelligence Sinking 41,53 South Pacific 28, 29, 55-57, 60 South West Pacific 28, 29 Special Attack-Kamikaze Special carrier damage Special headquarters movement restrictions Squads 15, 36, 46, 49, 52, 62 Standoff 3,9, 11, 15, 25,63 Status Change Strategic bombing 1.53 Strategy 1, 2, 62 Strategy and tactics Strike missions 37, 50 Submarine attacks Submarine combat Submarine combat operations Submarine contact 44, 45 Submarine war Submarines 3, 5, 9, 12, 26, 44, 59, 61, 62 Summary of game menus 2 Supply 10, 11, 14, 15, 23-25, 34, 42, 46-52, 54, 55, 59, 61-63 Supply and fuel production 46, 47 Supply Points 10, 25, 46, 47, 49, 50, 52 Surface combat 9, 22, 23, 26, 33, 42-44, 50, 51, 55, 58, 59, 62 Surface combat resolution Surface TF 10, 24 Surprise 38, 39 Surprise carrier air strikes Surrender 35-37, 53 Tac-Bomber 18, 40, 50 Tactics 2,62 Target selection 11, 12, 16, 20, 25, 40 Task force 4, 11, 12, 16, 20, 21, 25, 39, 58 Task force movement Task force orders Terrain 2, 16, 36, 37, 47, 49, 56, 61 TF flak fire TF leader TF mode 7, 10, 14, 21, 23 TF move option TF preparation point increase TF reaction movement and combat TF standoff range TK 3, 23, 24, 45, 47, 49 TOE Tokyo Express 23, 34 Torpedo bomber 18, 32, 40, 50, 51 Torpedoes 39, 41, 43-45 Training 19,62 Transfer air group Transfer ships into current TF Transport 6, 12, 14-18, 21-23, 25, 30, 32, 34, 43, 46-48, 50-52, 54, 55, 58, 60, 61, 63, 64 Transport TF 6, 23, 25, 32, 43, 47, 48, 54, 55, 60, 61, 63, 64 Transports Turn sequence Tutorial 2, 55 Types of HQs Unit activation 15, 32 Unit display 15, 16, 21, 56, 58, 59 Unit experience, leadership and combat Unit locations Unit menu 4, 7, 9-11, 16, 17, 24, 25, 48 Unit resupply United States production Unload TF 9, 10, 25 Using the keyboard 2-4,8 Using the mouse Utility menu 7,8,51 Victory conditions 8, 53, 61 Victory points 42, 53 Warhead 41 West Coast 28, 31 Western Alliance oc 51 32, 49 37 23 29 saw 27 19 40 40 Do 40 3,7 8 April 1993 Page 123 "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S PC WAREHOUSE EROSALONES REMOTE HOUSE * 6472-B Windy Road, Las Vegas, NV 89118 (800)788-2193 (orders) 8-6 M-F, 9-4 Sa (702)897-1671 FAX *** (702)897-2797 Tech Support ALL IBM COMPATIBLE CREATIVE LABS ARTWORX GRAND SLAM 2 31.95 SND BLSTR CDROM KIT 369.95 CENTERFOLD SQ 19.95 GREAT NVL BTL 43.95 CL MM UPGRADE EXT 589.95 STRIP POKER 3 29.95 HEROES OF 357TH 31.95 CL MM UPGRADE INT 519.95 ADD ON'S ea 16.95 JOHN MADDEN II 31.95 CL MM STARTER KIT 439.95 LEGENDS OF VALOUR BRODERBUND 37.95 VID BLSTR MS VIDEO 349.95 MAGIC CANDLE III 37.95 A-TRAIN 41.95 SOUND BLASTER PRO 179.95 MERCENARIES 37.95 ASPECTS VALOR 35.95 SND BLSTR PRO BASIC 149.95 PATRIOT 44.95 CARMEN S DIEGO call SND BLTR 16 BIT ASP 239.95 POPULOUS II 37.95 CD:GRANDMA&ME 38.95 WAVE BLASTER SIEGE tba 36.95 KID CUTS 34.95 SOUND BLSTR PRO MCA 259.95 STAR LEGIONS 35.95 PLANET'S EDGE 36.95 MEDIA VISION THEATER OF WAR 31.95 PLAYROOM 29.95 V VICTORY 1, 2 ea 43.95 FUSION 16 MM KIT 499.95 PRINT SHOP DX 45.95 INTERMSN SCRN SVR 2 9.95 PAS PLUS MM KIT INT 769.95 SIM ANT 35.95 IMPRESSIONS PAS 16 MM INT 959.95 SIM EARTH 42.95 SIM LIFE 41.95 AIR BUCKS 35.95 OTHER CDR DRIVES 34.95 AIR FORCE COMMANDER 35.95 TREEHOUSE SPACEWARD HOI 35.95 CONQUEST OF JAPAN 35.95 PANA521A FOR SB PRO 258.95 DISCOVERY:COLUMBUS TEXEL DM3024 INT 35.95 BETHESDA 419.95 PALADIN II 35.95 TOSHIBA 3301B INT 472.95 BETHESDA SPTS 35.95 INTERPLAY TOSHIBA 3401 200ms 495.95 HOCKEY SIM II 29.95 ROAD FINAL 4 35.95 CASTLES II 35.95 CD ROM CADDY 3 FOR 17.95 TERMINTR 2029 41.95 BATTLE CHESS 4000 3 5.95 MIRACLE:PIANO TCHR 315.95 GRETZKY HRY 3 35.95 OMAR SHARIF BRIDGE 29.95 COMPTONS LORD RINGS VOL. 2 35.95 VIDEO BOARDS: MARIO TEACHES TYPING 24.95 BERENSTAIN call STAR TREK 25H 35.95 AI TECH CD:AM H. DICT 47.95 POWER POLITICS (WIN) 29.95 PRO PC/TV PLUS 323.95 CD:DESERT STRM KNOWLEDGE ADV. PRO VGA/TV PLUS 636.95 W/COALITION 29.95 VIDEO SURGE 615.95 CD:GOLF GDE: KNOWLEDGE ADVENTURE 47.95 ATI UTRA GRPHS 1MB 489.95 CAL/HI 3 2.95 SCIENCE ADVENTURE 47.95 COMPUTER EYES RT4 34.95 CD:GRAMMY 37.95 SPACE ADVENTURE 47.95 PC TELE-VISION 265.95 SPORTS ADVENTURE DAVIDSON 47.95 TELEVEYES VGA-TO-TV 229.95 KONAMI GRAMMR GRMLN 29.95 MAGNI VGA PRDCR PRO 1574.95 KID WORKS 2 34.95 AIR WARRIOR 35.95 WIN TV 439.95 LOST TRIBES 24.95 BATMAN CLIP ART 19.95 CH PRODUCTS MATH BLSTR+ 29.95 BATMAN RETURNS FLIGHT STICK 38.95 READING/OZ 35.95 LURE TEMPTRESS 29.95 NFL GAME CARD III AUTO 29.95 SPELL-IT+ 29.95 29.95 VIRTUAL PILOT 63.95 TIME TREKS 35.95 NFL VIDEO FTBL 44.95 NFL CLIP ART WORD ATTACK+ 29.95 19.95 GRAVIS ZOO KEEPER 35.95 LEARNING CO ELIMINATOR GAME CARD 29.95 TOYSTICK ANALOG 3 DISNEY ANCIENT EMPIRES 29.95 3.95 JOYSTICK ANALOG PRO 39.95 ALADDIN PRINT 14.95 METROGNOMES 29.95 MIDNIGHT RESCUE 29.95 ULTRA 16 BIT SND BD 139.95 ANIMATN STDIO 77.95 HEAVEN&EARTH OPRATN NEPTUNE THRUSTMASTER 35.75 34.95 TIME RIDERS MICKEY S 123 WEAPONS CONTROL 34.95 72.95 19.95 TRES COVE MICKEY'S ABC FLIGHT CONTROL 35.95 59.95 19.95 TRES MATH STORM FLIGHT CONTROL PRO STUNT ISLAND 35.95 99.95 33.95 TRES MOUNTAIN 34.95 ELECTRONIC RUDDER CONTROL 99.95 WRITING/PUBL. 39.95 ACM GAME CARD 26.95 ARTS LUCAS ACCOLADE ADD:SPELLJMR 36.95 CLASSIC AVNTR 35.95 J NICKLAUS SIG GOLF 41.95 BIRDS PREY 31.95 INDIANA JONES 4 35.95 ROAD&TRACK GRND PRIX 34.95 CAR & DRIVER 37.95 SECRET WEAPONS 42.95 SNOOPY'S GAME CLUB 29.95 CD:AESOP FBL 32.95 X-WING 41.95 SPELLCASTING 301 35.95 CD:DON QXTE 31.95 MALLARD STAR CNTRL II 35.95 CD:GOFERWNKL 34.95 32.95 AIRCRFT&ADVENTR SUMMER CHLNGE CD: PUTT PUTT 38.95 24.95 ACCESS CD:S. HOLMES 2 46.95 FLT ADV. #685 17.95 SOUND/GRAPHICS UPGR. 26.95 AMAZON GUARDS OF EDEN 38.95 CD:12 ROADS 19.95 GRAND CANYON LINKS 386 PRO GETTYSBURG 41.95 44.95 43.95 HAWAII 26.95 COMANCHE MAUNA KEA 19.95 SCEN. ENHANCE. 26.95 TAHITI 19.95 MICROPROSE ATAC 34.95 B-17 41.95 CDR:MANTIS 47.95 DARKLANDS 41.95 F-15 STRK EAGLE III 47.95 GLOBAL CONQUEST 35.95 GREENS 35.95 JUMP JET 38.95 REX NEBULAR 35.95 SEA ROGUE 35.95 TASK FORCE 1942 41.95 WORLD CIRCUIT 35.95 MICROSOFT CD:ENCARTA 264.95 CD:CINEMANIA 54.95 CD:MUSICAL INSTRMNT FLIGHT SIM 4.0 37.95 ENTERTAIN.PACK(WIN) 27.95 GOLF (WIN) 42.95 PUBLISHER (WIN) 129.95 SOUND BITS (WIN) 27.95 ORIGIN STRIKE CMMANDER 47.95 ULTIMA VII PT 2 47.95 ULTIMA UNDRWL 2 47.95 WING CMNDR 2 47.95 QOP BATTLES DESTINY 35.95 CONQUERD KNGDMS 35.95 SOLITAIRE JRNY 35.95 SPCTRM HOLOBYTE FALCON 3.0 44.95 TETRIS CLASSIC 29.95 SIERRA/DYNAMIX ACES OF PACIFIC 44.95 ADVENTURE STRTR 19.95 FRONT PAGE FTBL 41.95 INCRED. MACHINE 29.95 KINGS QUEST VI 44.95 CD:SPACE Q.IV 41.95 TURBO SCIENCE 29.95 CD:W. BEAMISH 41.95 SSI ADV.DUNG-DRAGON call LINE IN SAND 26.95 CARRIER STRIKE 41.95 PACIFIC WAR 47.95 SUBLOGIC ATP ENHANCED 36.95 I.P.S. E or W ea 59.95 SCENERY DISKS call VIRGIN CD:7TH GUEST 59.95 CD:DUNE tba DOUBLE DRAGON 3 14.95 DUNE II 35.95 MONOPOLY DLXE 35.95 AND TOP 100 IN CGW'S 2/93 ISSUE 41.95 VASA Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game S5; add'l games add $1 each in Cont US 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Cont.US. COD add $4. All prices are US S. MasterCard Circle Reader Service #123 "


"pacificar Gary Grigsby's Pacific War Base Location Table Coordinates Coordinates Base Name Coordinates Base Name Base Name X 40 72 31 BODO POBRAN Adak I. Adelaide Admiralty I. Aitape Amamil. Amchitka Amoy Anchorage Andaman I. Anjiang Ankang Aomori Attul. Auckland Bali Balikpapan Bangkal. Bangkok Bataan Batan I. Batavia Biak Bikini I. Bonin l. Bougainville Brisbane Broome Bukal. Buna Cagayan Calcutta Canton Canton I. Cape Gloucester Cebu Ceram Changsha Charter Towers Chengtu Chilung Christmas I. Chungking Clark Field Cloncurry Columbo Cooktown Dacca Darwin Davao Dimapur Dutch Harbor Eastern U.S. Efate Emirau l. Eniwetok I. Espirtu Santo Etorofo Jima Flores Gasmata Green I. Guadalcanal Guam Hainan Haiphong Halmahera Hankow NABASANONNO OD. = NG=8848808NN SOPURWERS ONDON JASON 280 Harbin Hawaii Hengyang Hobart Hollandia Hong Kong Hughes Imphal Iwo Jima Jaluit I. Jitra Johnston I. Juneau Kaifeng Kauai Kavieng Khota Bharu Kiriwina I. Kiska Kitakyushu Kuala Lumpur Kuantan Kunming Kwajalein l. Kweilen Kweiyang Lae Lagaspi Lanchow Lashio Leyte Lingayen Los Angeles Macassar Madang Makin I. Mandalay Manila Manokwari Marcus I. Maui Medan Melbourne Menando Midway Milne Bay Mindoro Miri Morotai Mukden Nagoya Nanchang Nanking Nanning Nassau Naurul. Ndeni Negros New Georgia Noemfoar Noumea Oahu Okinawa Osaka Owens, Stanley M. Palau Palawan Palembang Palmyra Panay Paramushiro Parepare Peking Perth Phnom Penh Ponape Port Arthur Port Moresby Pusan Rabaul Rangoon Rennell I. Rockhampton Rossell. Saigon Saipan Sakhalin I. Sakishima I. Samar San Francisco Sapporo Sarawak Sarmi Sasebo Seattle Seoul Shanghai Shimushiri Jima Shortland Singapore Singora Soembawa l. Soerabaja Sorong Suva Sydney Takamatsu Takao Tarakan Tarawa Tawi Tawi Teloekbetoeng Tenimbar I. Tientsin Timor Tinian Tjilatjap Tokyo Tonga Townsville Trincomalee Truk Tsingtao Ulithi Waigen I. Wake I. Wenchow Wewak Woleail. Wotje l. Yap Zhanjiang 8aBERS=0&Ondow owocos 88 88 89 9aNasce 890 ScoBoona SNca SOMASARSUS April 1993 Page 125 "


"A La pacinc par p erience in L LLLScheltema ne of the important factors in resolution of combat with air groups or land combat units («LCUS\") in Gary Grigsby's Pacific War is the experience of the units involved. At the start of the war ('41 campaign) the Allies have both few and (largely) inexperienced units. As a result, they tend to be steamrollered by the Japanese units that have earned their experience from years of combat in China prior to Pearl Harbor. As the war progresses, the equation gradually changes as attrition slowly wears down those tough Japanese units and the Allied units are strengthened through their survival of their \"trial by combat\" ordeal. These notes address things more from the Allied perspective as the Allies have the early problem, but the same techniques apply equally, in most cases, to the later war Japanese formations, assuming they can spare the time to implement them (which they could not historically). negative experience checks, so it's now a \"normal\" unit for combat purposes, though it may still be a bit of a pushover if met by a real force. The LCUs of less than 50 experience do gain one experience per week unless they are Indian, Dutch or Philippino. Engineer units only gain one experience point per week if they are at less than 25. This is the slow way to improve unit experience, and only good until units hit their experience by training\" ceiling, The Key to Gaining Experience A player can improve unit experience by judicious application of training, in the case of air groups, and with careful \"blooding\" of LCUs. Finally, keeping a careful eye on the replacement rules is also important in both cases of planes and troops. First, let's look at some basic rules for judging experience.LCUS often arrive at about 50 experience (except for a few of the better trained units, such as raiders, paratroops, Marines and some Aussies returning from the desert war). Land based air groups arrive at about 60. Carrier air groups are usually received at around the 70 experience level. Experience LCU Rating Air Rating 0-30 Poor Hopeless 31-50 Inexperienced Poor 51-60 Average Inexperienced 61-70 Fair Average 71-80 Good Fair 81-90 Excellent Good 91-99 Elite Excellent The above constitutes my own subjective ratings, but they're based on the program's numbers and the combat equations. An LCU at 30 experience will fail part one of its experience checks 50% of the time (pg. 35 of manual) and the leader's land combat rating test will fail seven times in eight, for about a 42% nel chance of ending up fighting the combat with an effective readiness of one. If it does slip past that set of checks, there's roughly a 45% chance it will fail the next set, resulting in it functioning at 25% its current readiness (or 25% net readiness at best). Combined, this means the LCU has roughly a 30% chance at defending as the weak unit it is, and about 70% chance that it will defend about the same as an unoccupied base (2 squads). Never count on a unit with 30 or less experience to withstand any attack by itself. Putting a base leader in charge of units of this class, without a better unit, is a good way of eliminating leaders. Let the HQ leader who is elsewhere handle these sorts of lost causes. At 51 experience, the LCU cannot fail either of the two sets of Combat is the Best Teacher The way to best increase the experience of an LCU is to get it some combat experience. If it's one of the above mentioned hopeless units, it may be more trouble than it's worth, but those with experience in the 50s are worth blooding and evolving into useful troops. It's important to remember that replacements lower the experience of a unit, so committing a unit to engagements that result in heavy losses will be counterproductive. The US and Aussies have Guadalcanal or the other jungle islands in the Solomons and New Guinea as training grounds for troops. The Brits have Burma. For the Japanese, all of the above are also useful, along with the Bataan peninsula. These areas are good because of the heavy jungle terrain cover that results in lowered casualties and stiffened enemy resistance. Atolls, conversely, are the worst place to train troops by combat. The idea is to cut off and isolate a group of enemy troops, then put one good unit as an \"example\" troop to the green ones, and stack some green units in the base to get experience hunting down those enemies in the jungle. Bring the good unit to help dodge disastrous results on the experience checks mentioned above (and, thus, avoid having the whole force surrender when everyone forgets to bring their ammo). Pack a decent leader, too, as the troops will fight better, take fewer losses and, as a result, gain experience faster. Keep them well supplied, protect them from air attacks and naval bombardments, and activate them every week. Try to arrange things so a rear echelon HQ manages the base and doesn't drain off preparations points (PPs) from precious spearhead HQS. A couple months of this sort of action can turn those average units into excellent ones, ready to hit the beaches on their own. Breaking Up Is Easy To Do (But...) Be aware that, as of my last test, dividing units off from their parent, getting them experience and then rejoining them with their parent unit does not result in an increase in the parent's experience. I was hoping I could use sub-units in battles, thus not risking the parent's whole, and make use of the experience gained in the whole when they recombined. No luck. One can, however, create overstrength formations in this fashion and get experience even faster since overstrength formations receive no replacements until they fall below TOE strength levels. Thus, experience gains from combat are not diluted with overstrength units as their losses are not made up for by green replacePage 126 Computer Gaming World "


"We're playing serious games. MESTRE VENNI TI Close the door. Plug it in. Turn on the computer. outrageous sounds when you plug it into the And brace yourself for all the outrageous 16 bit CD hottest speakers you can find. Or take it to a friends quality sound you can handle. house. It's totally portable. Whether you're behind enemy So get ready. There's nothing lines or slamming one out of the to do except buy PORTABLE park, PORTABLE Sound sends Sound and plug it in. Plug in your you on a sensory collision course. speakers. And play. But, just one The most war torn battlefields word of caution. Once you're come alive. Fantasies scream into plugged into PORT-ABLE Sound, reality. And, the grunts and groans you can kiss the day good-bye. of the gridiron are enough to bruise PLUS, FREE SOFTWARE even the toughest soul. INCLUDING: Lotus Sound\" for Whatever your pleasure, you won't WEATHER Windows 3.1 a utility employing find more real sound. PORT-ABLE Sound is based OLE (Object Linking and Embedding technology). on advanced Digital Signal Processing technology, WinReader for Windows 3.1, Digispeech's DOSTalk So you'll enjoy the greatest compression capability and DOSReader text-to-speech applications. Show with the highest quality sounds. Here's something & Tell For Kids for Windows an easy to use else that will make your pulse race. With PORT-ABLE Multimedia Authoring program. Sound you have all the right connections including PORTABLE Sound Features: Stereo or Mono an \"Audio-in for direct recording from a CD or tape playback 16 or 8 bits per channel, (sampling rates: player and a \"Line-out\" for powered external stereo 11.025KHz, 22.050KHz and 44.1 KHz). Synthesized speakers. To make things even cooler, PORT-ABLE music, 9 melodic or 7 melodic and 4 percussive Sound comes with an external speaker cable for voices. Completely integrated solution. Supports DVI audio compression and all Windows 3.1 programs incorporating the Multimedia standard sound interfaces (WAVE, MIDI). Sound Blaster/AdLib compatible.. DC powered. Smart printer parallel port pass through. An external speaker cable with a telephone type connector. MINIMUM SYSTEM REQUIREMENT:  For DOS PORTABLE Sound applications, an IBM PC or compatible with 8086 CPU, 640KB RAM running MS-DOS 3.3 or greater. For Windows 3.1 or Sound Blaster/ Adlib applications, an IBM PC or compatible with 80386 CPU and 2 MB RAM. Package includes software on 3.5\" High Density diskettes. PORT:ABL5ound Digispeech\". inc. THE SOUND SOLUTION Corporate Office: 2464 Embarcadero Way. Palo Alto, CA 94303 Sales Office: 550 Main Street, Suite J. Placerville, CA 95667 Telephone: (415) 494-8086 FAX: (415) 494-8114 Telephone: (916) 621-1787 FAX: (916) 621-2093 Circle Reader Service #128 Suing Qurtin C Minor, Opis 13 : em R eap          la ROSADIDA CUIDEA CE WAT 101112 "


"VKNG ) SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing  IBM Mac IBM Mac IBM Mac 19 19 ca . 49 . Pools of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory I (VGA) Quest for Glory II Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Realms Realms of Arkana Red Crystal Return to Zork  Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima Vil Part 2 Ultima Trilogy! Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) ei Wing Commander ! Secret Mission I & II Wing Commander I Deluxe Wing Commander II Special Operations! Special Operations 2 Speech Pack Wing Commander III 19 X-Wing Hint Books IT 12 10-12 A-Train: Official Strat. Guide AD&D Clue Books Avatar Adventures Bard's Tale Ill Chaos Strikes Back Chuck Yeager Handbook Civilization Clouds of Xeen Dager of Amon Ra Darklands Dungeon Master . WONDO Realms of Arkania Sir-Tech breaks off from the Wizardry line & brings another great role playing adventure. Utilizes excellent graphics and sound. Very hot item! IBM $37 kness . Past IBM Mac AD&D Starter Kit 31 . AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's Edit 2 43 . AD&D Unlimited Advent 375/93 Bards Tale !!! Bards Tale Constr. Set 32 . Betrayal at Krondor Black Crypt Castles 36 20 Northern Camp. 19 . Castles Il Challenge of Five Realms 34 Champions of Krynn 19 . Conquests of the Longbow 42 42 Curse of the Azure Bonds 1537 Darklands Art Disk w/HB Darklands MPE Dark Queen of Krynn 31 Darkside of Xeen Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 4193 11/93 Grey Isles Camp. 4/93 Daughter of Serpents 32 Death Knights of Krynn 19 Dragonlance Collec Ed. 43 Eric the Unready 37 Eye of the Beholder 19 Eye of the Beholder 2 37 Eye of the Beholder 3 42 Four Crystals of Trazere 34 Gateway Savage Frontier 31 Gemfire 32 Gryphon Master of Havlar 11/93 Heimdall Ina Inindo King's Quest IV King's Quest V(VGA) King's Quest M King's Ransom Legacy Legacy of Necromancer TBA Legend of Kyranda Legends of Drakla Legends of Valor Lord of the Rings Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings Lure of Temptress Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Martian Dreams Might & Magic 1&11 Might & Magic 11 39 37 Might & Magic IV M&M Clouds of Xeen Merchant Colony 32 . Pirates Gold 6/93 . Pool of Radiance Lemmings w companion disk 15 Lord of the Rings Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 10 Lucasfilm Air Combat Lucas Arts Adv. Game Book 12 Harpoon Battlebook Heaven & Earth: Strat. Guide 12 Magic Candle 2 Martian Dreams Might & Magic Official Guide Might & Magic 111 Patriou Official Strat. Guide Planet's Edre Pools of Darkness Powermonger Official Strat 12 Populous 1 & ll Off Stral Book 12 Quest for Clues: Book of Orbs 11 Quest for Clues: Man of Swords 11 Quest for Clues 3 & 4 16 ca. Railroad Tycoon 12 Ragnarok Strat. Guide 10 Rex Nebular 10 Ringworld Run 5 Magazine 1-17 Secret of Monkey Island I & II 10 ca Sherlock Holmes Sicrra Hint Books Sim Earth: Official Strat. Guide 12 Sim Life: Official Strat. Guide 12 Star Control 2 I! Starflight I & II 8 ea. Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strike Commander Guide 10 Stunt Island Guide Summoning Ultima: Official Book Ultima IT-VI Ultima VII 10 Ultima VII Part 2 10 Ultima VII & Underworld 11 Ultima Underworld I & II 10 ca V for Victory #1 Battle Book 12 Ved of Darkness Wing Commander I & II Guide 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7: Hint Book . . . . IBM Mac 90 33 Veil of Darkness This gothic nightmare is not for the faint hearted. Plunge into a maze of vampires, werewolves and zombies accompanied with chilling graphics and sound FIX IBM $37 Present Alone in the Dark 3/93 Amazon Batman Returns Blue Force: Next of Kin Spring Carmen San Diego: Past Carmen San Diego: Europe 34 Carmen San Diego: Time Carmen San Diego: USA 34 Carmen San Diego: World 34 Carmen San Diego: Deluxe 49 Carmen San Diego: Amer. Past 38 Castle of Dr. Brain Champions Classic Adv. Pak (LucasArts) Dagger of Amon Ra Deja Vu 1 & 11 Eco Quest 2 Elvira! Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jones/Last Crusade Indy Jones/Fate of Atlantis 39 Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy 53 Leisure Suit Larry! Leisure Suit Larry 5 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom II 37 The Manhole Maniac Mansion 2 Out of this World Police Questi Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Rocketeer wlSound Source Savage Empire Sea Rogue Seal Team 52HHP Spellcasting 301 Strike Commander Speech Pack Uninvited (Windows) Veil of Darkness Waxworks Willy Beamish Wolfenstein/Spear Des  42 42 Future HHHHun Hardware . 42 37 37 37 39 37 1537 25 Savage Empire Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spellcraft Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima IV Ultima V X-Wing Pilot X-wing, A-wing, or Ywing against the Imperial Empire. Includes combat training, tours of duty, promotions decorations, replay camera. Digitized music and dialogue from the movie. Must have! IBM $42 12 l 5/93 Adlib APS 2001 Cobra Joystick CH-Flightstick CH-Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke 2000 Gravis Eliminator Gamecard 29 Gravis Joystick Gravis Pro Gravis VitraSound Pilot Control Stand Pro Audio Spectrum-16 210 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus 145 SoundBlaster ASP 16 235 SoundBlaster Pro 180 SoundBlaster Pro Basic 150 SoundBlaster Microchannel 269 Thunderboard Thrust Master flight stick 69 Thrust Master Pro 114 Thrust Master Rudder Pedal 109 Thrust Master Throttle 79 Thrust Master TSR'S . March Specials LEGACY TERRORKS IBM Ami Dungeon Master Scrolls Elvira 1 & 11 10 Empire Deluxe Strat. Guide 12 Eye of the Beholder 2 F.15 Strike Eagle Ill Guide Falcon Air Combar Falcon 3 Strategic Guide Global Conquest Guide wldisk 15 Great War Planes Gunship 2000 Strategy Guide Jetfighter Il. Strat. Guide Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Valor . A.T.AC. A Line in the Sand Champions of Krynn Centurion Death Knights of Krynn Eye of the Beholder! F-16 Combat Pilot Int. Sports Challenge Links/Bountiful Course Disk MBT. Cen. Germany Overrun Secret of Monkey Island Sim City Add-ons 1 & 2 Space Quest IV Starflight I & II Stratego Test Drive II: Supercars Treasures of Savage Frontier Ultima VI Wing Commander 1 Armour Geddon Bad Blood Battletech Powerhits Buck Rogers Buck Rogers 2 Breach 2 Cyberspace Dune Dune Il Epic Elite Plus Flashback Free D.C. Gateway Hard Nova 16 Jonny Crash Fall Leather Goddesses Phobos 2 46 Legions of Krella/Star Legions 37 \"M 693 Mantis Speech Pack Martian Memorandum Mechwarrior 2 Megatraveller! Megatraveller 2 Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits: Sci-Fi Privateer Protostar: War on Frontier Rex Nebular MPE Ringworld: Revenge Patri. Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Space Hulks Space Quest ! Space Quest III Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spelljammer Star Control 2 Star Flight 1&11 16 ea. 37 ea Star Trek 25th Anniversary Star Trek Next Generation 30 Strike Commander Speech Pack Terminator 2029 Twilight: 2000 Ultrabots 09999..., ...magawa. BA%BDD.HHHHH Legacy You've just inherited a home from your evil ancestors. Explore over 400 rooms of terror in a desperate struggle to stay alive. Excellent graphics and sound FIX. IBM $34 Latest and Greatest Battles of Destiny Conquered Kingdoms Dune II F-15 II Front Page Sports: Football Mercenaries Pacific War Star Control II Ultima Underworld II V for Victory Series 16 ea. ... "


"For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax Fax 1-(404) 840-7925 SAME DAY SHIPPING on items in stock. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm EST (6am-7pm PST). UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day Air: $6.00 2-Day Air: 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD Add: 5.00 Overseas: Avail. Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Avail. Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 L 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Strategy IBM Mac 22 FBA-VICTORY IBM Mac 42 42 Red Storm Rising Classic Shadow President Shuttle Special Forces Utopia 38 SimLife SimLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Super Tetris (Windows) Tristan Utopia Virtual Reality Studio 2 Wacky Funsters Ween: The Prophecy Wordtris Sci-Fi Pre-WWII IBM Mac Ambush 4/93 Ancient Art of War Skies 37 . Blue and the Grey 5/93 . Caesar Centurion Civil War Vol. 1.2 or 3 27 32 Cohort 2 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of the Americas L'Empereur Liberty or Death Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladini Prelude to Jutland P.T.O. Rampart Red Baron (VGA) 42 42 Mission Builder Romance of 3 Kingdoms 42 . Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 42 . Siege Dogs of War Warlords Enhanced . Warlords 11 6/93 . Waterloo 19 BHBHD  18 . Sports 10/93 Empire Deluxe This is the modern version of the award-winning EMPIRE. Now with Super VGA, digitized sound F/X, network & modem capability, scenario editor, and more. A must! IBM $37 16 37 16 6/9328 38 31 . . Battlefield 2000 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Fireteam 2200 Global Effect Imperium Mantis Speech Pack Mechamander Mercenaries Mercenaries2 Reach for the Stars Robosport (Windows) Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 4 Second Conflict (Windows) Space Inc Spaceward HO! (Windows) Spaceward HO! (DOS) Spectre Star Legions Star Legions 2 Theatre of War SVGA When Two Worlds War 4-D Boxing All-Amer. College Frbll 92 Andrett's Racing Challenge ATP Tennis Bill Elliot Nascar Car and Driver 28 37 V for Victory: Market Garden The most popular WWII series in gaming software adds another proud product Simulates Allied airborne invasion of Germany in 1944. SVGA graphics required. IBM/Mac $43 IBM Mac Complete PGA Tour Golf 31 . Earl Weaver Baseball 31 Earl Weaver Baseball !! 16 . Front Pg Sports: Football 42 Front Pg Sports: Baseball 393 . Front Pg Sports: Bsktball 193 Games: Summer Challenge 35 Games: Winter Challenge 35 Grand Prix Grand Slamn Bridge 11 Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk Stadium Disk Hockey League Sim 11 Indy 500 Jack Nicklaus Sig Ed. Golf 42 Course Disk #2 John Madden Football II Jordan Flight Links Links 386 Pro Mauna Kea Crse. Disk 19 MicroLeague Baseball 4 NCAA College Football 92 37 NFL Challenge NFL Video Pro Football 47 PGA Tour Golf PGA Tourn. Crse. Dsk. 15 PGA Tour Golf (Windows) 37 PGA Tourn. Crse. Disk 15 Pool Shark Pro League Baseball Power Hits: Sports Tony La Russa Ult Baseball 19 Add-On Disks Tony LaRussa 2 92 Stats Disk ALINL Stadiums Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 Hockey League Sim. Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 37 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit /93 34 6/93 . 19 19 37 . 38 57 IBM Mac V for Victory. Mkt Garden 43 43 V for Victory. Casserine Pass 20 V for Victory: Stalingrad 30 Victory at Sea Warlords Western Front WW II: Battles of Pacific 32 World War II Slarvew 47 General . 16 Modern .. 39 A-Train Construction Set Air Bucks Are We There Yet! Battles of Destiny Battle Chess Battle Chess (Windows) BattleChess 4000 (VGA) BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) Buzz Aldrin's Race to Space 42 Caesar's Palace . Caesar's Palace (Windows) 18 Chessmaster 3000 3 4 Chessmaster 3000 (Windows) 43 Civilization 38 Civilization Master Edition Classics IQ Classic 5 (Windows) Club Racquetball Command HQ Classic Design Your Train ....... HHHHDHBDHHHHHHH . 18 . . . 38 Warlords Enhanced This classic wargame has been on top of CGW's Reader Poll for 2 years. Addictive medieval strategy game with 1-8 human/computer players. A+ rating IBM $19 35 30 Keyboard Overlays A-10 Tank Killer ATP Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress C. Yeager Air Combat F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.0.1 Flight Simulator 4,0 Jetfighter I and II Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10 2999999999 30 . . . CD-ROM CARRIERO AT WAR IBM Mac Design Your RR Design Your Landscape Dominant Specics Dominion 9/93 Eco Quest 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Eric The Unready Facetris 111 Flight Sim 4.0 Sound and Graphics Global Conquest Goblins Grandest Admiral Grand Slam Bridge II Heaven and Earth Hong Kong Mahjong Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyles/Classic Incredible Machine Ishido Lemmings More Lemmings & Game More Lemmings Lernmings 2 Lexi-Cross Life & Death 11 Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced 12/93 Monopoly Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37 Origin FIX Screen Saver Perfect General 38 WWII Scenario Disk 22 Great Bartles 20th Cen. 25 Perfect General Enhanced 8/93 Pinball: Windows Pool Shark Populous Populous 2 37 World Editor 3/93 . Powermonger WWI Scenario Disk Power Politics Power Hits: Movies R.R. Tycoon Classic Reach for the Skies Risk Risk (Windows) Sargon V Scrabble Deluxe (Windows) Sharif On Bridge Sharif On Bridge (Windows) Shuttle SimAnt SimCity SimCity (Windows) SimCity Supreme ! SimCity Supreme 11 SimCity 2000 SimEarth SimEarth (Windows) SimFarm 25 . Aces of the Pacific WWW: 1946! RAF in the Pacific IQ Aces Over Europe Campaign Disk! Action North Atlantic Action Stations v3.2 Data Disk Air Raid Pearl Harbor Air Warrior B-17 Flying Fortress Bantai Battletank Barbarossa Bismarck Campaign Carriers at War 42 Const. Kit 37 Carrier Strike Expansion Disk #11 21 Clash of Steel 17932 Fleet Commander 6/93 Fleet Med German Raiders Atlantic 26 Grand Fleet Great Naval Bardes Super Ships/Atlantic 19 Scenario Bulder America/Atlantic 19 High Command 44 High Cmd. Enhan. SVGA 5793 In Harm's Way Malta Storm Marianas Turkey Shoot 26 MBT Central Germany 39 MBT Kursk Midway New World Order 2/93 Pacific Theater Op. Pacific War Panzer Battles 26 Patton Strikes Back 17 Reach for the Skies River Plate 26 Rommel North Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 44 DO-335 plane disk HE 162 P-38 P-80 Seventh Fleet Silent Service 2 Silent Service 2 Classic 22 Task Force 1942 39 Their Finest Hour/Bulhwks. 44 Third Reich V for Victory Utah Beach 43 V for Victory. Velikiye Luki 43 IM 12 7th Fleet AT.P. 39 A 10 Warthog A Line in the Sund ATAC Air Force Commander Allied Forces Comanche: Max. Overkill Expansion Disk 1 Expansion Disk 2 Conflict Korea Conflict: Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F-15 II Classic F-15 III F-15 III Voice Commander F-19 Voice Commander Falcon 3.0 Operation: Fighting Tiger Falcon MC Flight Sim 4.0 Flight Planner Sound & Graphics Rescue 911 Scenery Design Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk 1 Halls of Montezuma Harpoon v1.3 Battleser 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Designer Senes Harpoon Scenario Editor Harpoon Challenger Pak S.E. 49 Harpoon 11 Harrier Assault Jet Fighter 2 Add on disk JF2 wladd on disk Jump Jet Jump Jer \"Ace Pack\" KGB MI Tank Platoon cArthurs War Me, Fortress N sion Disk 1 or 2 Megalon..ss Megapack Pacific Island Patriot . . 18 57 . 31 3/93 29 19 CONSTRUCTION KIT Carriers at War Construction Kit This kit allows modification of existing CAW scenarios or the creation of new scenarios. New scenarios includeWake Island, Guadalcanal, and Tarawa IBM/Mac $37 12 Roads to Gettysburg The 7th Guest Amazing Universe Battle Chess Barrie Chess Enhanced Blade Buzz Aldrin's Race Space Campaign Case of Gautious Condor Challenge of Five Realms Chessmaster 3000 Conquest of the Longbow Creepy Casde Cyberspace Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Sun Destination-Mars Dune Eco Quest Great Naval Battles Gunship/Midwinter Guy Spy Iron Helix Jones in the Fast Lane King's Ransom King's Quest Y The Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Treasures Infocom! Lost Treasures Infocom II M-1 Tank Platoon Magnetic Scrolls Maniac Mansion 2 Mantis Manhole Enhanced Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows North American Indians Pacific Islands Pacific Islands !! Prince of Persia The Secret of Monkey Island 47 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 57 Sharif on Bridge Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. I 43 Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. 1143 Shuttle Spaceship Warlock Space Quest IV Star Trek 25th Anniv. Edition Total Baseball Total Distortion Ultima l-V1 Bundle Ultima Undwid Wing Co. 47 Victor and Yondo Where World Carmen Deluxe 52 Way Beamish Wing Commander+ Secret Missions 1 & 2 47 Wing Commander II Deluxe 47 Wing Commander/Ulurra VI 57 Wolfpack 1. . . 37 43 Circle Reader Service #118 "


"  ments. Instead, the survivors improve and tough it out until unit strength (in squads, artillery and APCs) gradually falls back to its Standard TOE maximum. Overstrength units are especially nice for beachheads, though a bit more cumbersome to put ashore. That is because they don't soak up over-the-beach supply for replacements (1 supply per squad, etc.), but use it all to bring their readiness up to the 49% maximum for that situation. Be careful when creating overstrength units. Do not lower their total experience in the process, or if that happens, blood the unit again before using it. I don't actively use this as a tactic, as it's hard to manage, but I do on occasion benefit from it in the course of play when previously deployed subunits meet up with their parent again. Pushing Fledgling Air Groups Out of the Nest... Gently With land air groups the situation is similar, but air groups have better training programs. They are also far more prone to take heavy losses if committed when inexperienced. Additionally, they tend to be much easier to get to the \"front\" by island hopping. Thus, they often experience heavy losses and accomplish very little in the process. Especially early in the war, Allied air groups are severely outmatched in the state they arrive. Check San Francisco for air reinforcements each week even if the West Coast is under computer control. (The West Coast tends to forget to forward air units to the front often so it is best to manage that personally by forming up convoys, boarding the air groups, and setting the convoy destination.) Immediately set any newly arrived air groups to training\" missions. The PPs required come from the West Coast HQ, so they don't affect any front line HQs. If one opts to island-hop new air groups to the front, do so before they take on replacements. Repeatedly island hopping these units results in attrition that costs the group both experience and planes. The planes do go back into the pool, so are not actually lost, but the player must expend supplies when they are replaced. It's better to let them get up to full strength, then board them on merchant vessels (MCSs) and ship them to a base within one flight of their deployment base. Controlling Air Group Losses Personally, I don't use any air group in actual combat until they are at least average experience (60) except in emergencies (and I accept the fact they're going to get creamed in that case). Setting them directly to training when they are received usually means that, even after being brought up to strength, they are close to or above this 60 point level. Have some idea of what sort of opposition new air groups will face from the activities of the enemy air in the area. Lop-sided losses indicate a severe numerical imbalance, severe experience imbalance, or equipment quality imbalances (or a combination of these). The combat reports generally show which. This assumes the wise use of air commanders. (Use the best air commander, assuming he's better rated in air than your HO commander, as the HQ-commander's \"air attaché.\") Equipment of inferior quality in the hands of excellent pilots will devastate superior equipment in the hands of average pilots. Don't feed average or lower rated air groups into bases where they face top-notch enemy groups. They'll lose more than they'll gain. Place them against groups estimated to be of a lower skill, smaller numbers, and inferior equipment. Let the fledglings get some confidence shooting down wimps before sending them after the bruisers. The best way to accomplish this is to find a nice quiet backwater A time when the world seemed more fantastics and anything was possible! ourney back in time to the year 1957 on an expedition to the dark heart of the Amazon Basin. A desparate, crazed message sends you on a perilous search through a land where legends come to life, danger hides behind every corner, and incredible treasures wait to be discovered. AMAZON is designed in the style of the serials of the 1940's and 50's such as Flash Gordon, The Lost City, and Rocketman. These serials were made up of intriguing, fast paced episodes which placed the hero in unbelievable peril. AMAZON contains 14 exciting episodes filled with plot twists, mysterious charac. ters and heart stopping cliff-hangers. You haven't had this much fun since the drive-in days! X 20USALAA Metal monsters seek your destruction! "


"machcinar with a lightly held, small, enemy base. Get the air groups within \"normal\" range operating from a level 4 or 5 air base and have them bomb the enemy LCUs by choosing those as the base's air target. A few weeks or months of crunching coral works wonders for their willingness to tackle the tough guys, and greatly improves their skill. Keep them well supplied, make sure they have a good aggressive commander, and watch them fly two to four missions each week (or more if they can take pot-shots at enemy transport convoys). Just avoid taking loses. Bombing missions increase skill the fastest with the least losses if heavy enemy fighter coverage and heavy flak are avoided. Get these new units to at least a fair, or a good experience level, then commit them carefully. As long as they're shooting down as many as they lose, they should hold their own or improve. If they get battered by numbers or better enemy groups, pull them out for a break crushing coral again. This technique is especially important when converting groups to newer and better equipment. The conversion loses the unit some of their edge as they need to adapt to the new planes. Pull them out of the front base before converting them, preferably to a base that meets the above \"coral crunching\" criteria. Do the conversion and immediately assign them to training missions until they have all their planes readied following the switch-over. Then, put them to work crushing coral a bit to get their edge back. It's important with new planes because the replacement pool is initially shallow, and it is unwieldy to have to convert the unit back and forth from old to new to old due to heavy combat losses. With the new and (hopefully) improved aircraft, and good experience, they should be able to more than hold their own. I generally convert my best air units to new planes first for exactly this reason. (It seemed to work that way in the real war, too.) Landing the Heavy Bombers Heavy bombers tend to be a special case for several reasons. The planes are much slower in arriving as less are produced per turn. They have a useful range for night missions which, at least early on, only have flak to deal with. However, before throwing heavy bomber groups directly into the fray flying night missions, consider: (1) night missions aren't nearly as effective as day missions; (2) only one night mission is flown per turn, versus two day missions; and (3) night missions are flown at normal range, not the extended (1.5 times) range at which many day missions may be flown. These points argue for putting the heavies through the same training regime as the other types. If they're high experience, they can still fly those night missions but they will now be more effective at night, too. If they do fly in daylight, they will be far more survivable. A surpressed air base, due to accurate bombing from a couple of groups of heavies, will be spending a lot of time and supplies repairing planes damaged on the ground and less time putting up CAP, and even the CAP they do put up is apt to be less experienced that it was before the bombing losses. Both of these factors will tend to result in the heavy bomber groups gaining more experience, rather than suffering the heavy attrition they would if merely average in experience, and result in more planes active at a time. Another technique that carries over from the LBU notes is that of oversized units. Air units have maximum TOE sizes which cannot be exceeded. For most Army units, that number is 50. For most Marine and Navy units, it's 30. Tac-bombers and heavy bombers top out at 40 per group. The way to achieve the same effect (i.e., the \"over-sized\" unit) is to put a 50 plane fighter or fighter-bomber unit operating from a front-line, size 2 airfield. It A Multimedia Entertainment Extravaganza! Super VGA and VGA Modes. Rich Characterizations. A Cliff Hanger around every corner! From the designers of the Award Winning Martian Memorandum. & ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED ACCESS Software, Inc., 4910 West Amelia Earhart Drive Salt Lake City, UT 84116 (801)359-2900(800)800-4880 EXIT Z OALS Battle for your life at the Bridge of Death! Pulse pounding kanmit as ) motion video sequences and synchronized speech. They grow them big in these parts! SA EXI01E03 Gasp in disbelief at the lost tribe of Amazon women!* *Actual Amazon VGA screens. Circle Reader Service #44 They grow them big in these parts! "


"Macnfic nonar is possible to fly a maximum number of planes from a group equal to the airfield size times ten. Thus one can fly only 20, leaving 30 ready replacements grounded. When losses are taken, they aren't replaced, diluting the experience rating. Instead, the ready planes are flown in their place. The unit will pay a price later when it moves to a larger airfield and is replaced up to full size, but this is one way to bootstrap lower experience units to great quality fairly fast. Call this the \"cream skimming\" method of training. To best achieve this effect, the full-strength unit should be within one air transfer range of the deployment base. No sense shedding too many planes to attrition before they even get to their new base. Once they are blooded and at the point of absorbing replacements, rotate them to a slightly larger size 3 base, then a 4. A nice side effect of this technique is the lowered supply cost of operating the unit in a possibly isolated base. Since it's actually above full operational size, until it drops to maximum airfield capacity size, it will use no supply points in absorbing replacements. This can be very handy in invasions where a player wants some beachhead CAP but doesn't want air groups soaking up supplies the troops protecting them need even more. Of course, first the base must be captured (grin). Carrier Groups: Making the Best Better Carrier air groups are generally in better shape when newly received. However, they are also much more vulnerable to complete destruction through the loss of their floating bases if they don't quite manage the job. I prefer to commit my carrier air groups only when they are one level better than my land based groups are upon commitment, usually an absolute minimum of \"fair\" and preferred \"good,\" if I can't manage \"excellent.\" Carrier air can't be \"over-sized\" but are subject to the same effect of apparent increase in skill due to the \"cream skimming» technique. The problem is that their total number also dwindles until the carrier makes port or meets a replenishment fleet, and then the replacements result in an experience drop, often a significantly large one. The cure is the \"backwater coral-crushing cocktail.\" I choose a small atoll base, on the edge of the enemy's territory and outside the range of other LBA assets, if possible, and have my carrier stand-off the maximum range that allows the planes to still hit the LCUs or base. The base should have no more than a level 1 airfield so that fighter opposition is not present and, preferably, only a small port so that flak is light. Pick a home base within out-andback range of the carriers, make it their home \"training\" port, have them sail out, hit the target base for two turns, then return to port for supplies and PPs. Repeat until the air-groups are about to go on strike for some «realaction, then send the carrier back into harm's way. It's actually easier to get carrier groups up to spec. than LBA (Land Based Aircraft) as one can put the base where desired, rather than trying to shoehorn a training airfield into a hot zone. The Final Experience Using these training techniques, a player's divisions and air groups should become much more effective in combat and much less apt to fold-up under the pressure of intense activity. After one too many sudden surrenders by invasion forces, and watching one more green air group eliminated as an effective force as virtually every plane was damaged or destroyed every week, I began paying more attention to this aspect as a part of the total logistics of the theater. I expect other players of Pacific War will see the same difference in unit performance, Cow PORTINIUM II ENCHANTED HORIZONS ANNOUNCES: A new, low cost version of the original PORTINIUM Play-By Mail game is now available. PORTINIUM II incorporates all the features of the original game version. Players receive five standard game units on each of the primitive and medieval levels of game play. Timetravelinto the conventional and futuristic technology ages affords players the opportunity to capture additional pieces to equal or surpass levels of conquest in PORTINIUM. The struggle to become a dominant player and participate in \"The Gathering of the Four» remains a challenge for the strategy-minded player. Receive over twenty double-sided pages of high-quality Laser Graphics output per turn. Over 24,000 sectors to explore. No hidden costs. $10.00 per turn. 3-week turnaround. ALSO AVAILABLE: PORTINIUM, the original time-travel P.B.M. fantasy at a new, reduced price. The PORTINIUM Hi-Tech and Lo-Tech games offer many of the larger game features, in one age of play. PORTINIUM $15.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) PORTINIUM HI or LO-TECH $5.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) One-time, LIFETIME setup fee of $25.00 includes: 198-page Hi-Gloss Player's Guide,startup packet, free start-up turn, plus free turn and subscription to game newsletter. www........ . ... Write or call for free brochure ENCHANTED HORIZONS P.O.. Box 9897 Spokane, WA 99209-9897 (509) 325-6941 Circle Reader Service #64 Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"macnch PACIFIC WAR TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction STARTUP Backup Disks README File Installing the Game Documentation Check PLAYER AIDS How to Play Amphibious Landings Scenario Objectives List of Battles Player's Checklist Strategy and Tactics Hints Summary of Game Menus GAME CONCEPTS Game Scale Game Map Combat Forces Game Abbreviations TALKING TO THE COMPUTER Using the Keyboard Horizontal and Vertical Menu Selections Using the Mouse SETTING UP THE GAME Options Menu Display/Delay Menu TURN SEQUENCE ORDERS PHASE Utility Menu Options Unit Menu Options HQ Menu Hotkeys Orders PhasePlayer Checklist Land Combat Unit Orders Unit Display Unit Activation Dividing Units March Mode Get Transports for Land Units Air Unit Orders Locating Air Units Locating an HQ's Air Groups Locating Specific Aircraft Types Changing the Type of Aircraft Air Transfer Carrier Air Groups Landbased Air Groups (Airfield Capacity) Air Group Missions Inner Defense Perimeter (Air Group Experience Gain) (Air Leaders) Arctic Weather Zone Air Targets Aircraft Ranges Group Attack Ranges aucDonau www wwNNNNNNNN -----Group Transport Ranges Air Zones of Control Changing Aircraft Factories Task Force Orders Task Force Movement Radar Reinforce HQ Function Get Transport Function Create TF Function Selecting a TF Mission Transferring Ships into a TF Loading Task Forces Find Ships Setting TF Destinations Setting TF Home Bases Selecting a TF Leader Unloading TIS Removing Tfs TF Move Option TF Reaction Movement and Combat Submarines Q and Leader Orders Types of HQs Japanese HQs Allied HQs Headquarters Functions Relocate HQ to a New Base Move HQ to a TF Select New HQ Leader Select New HQ Air Leader Reinforce HQ Change Base's HQ Change HQ's Human/ Computer Control Level Set HQ's Target Base Get Transport Find an HO Find HQ's Land Combat Units Find HQ's Air Groups Special Headquarters Movement Restrictions Preparation Points Acquiring Preparation Points Distributing Preparation Points to HQs Land Combat Unit Activation HQ Status Change TF Preparation Point Increase Air Group's Movement or Change Mission LEADERS EXECUTION PHASE Army Combat Operations Land Combat Sequence of Play Assault Value Calculation Unit Exp., Ldrship., and Combat Performance Bombardment Of LCUS LCU Flak Strength LCU Readiness Loss Base Capture Defender Retreat/Surrender Landbased Air Missions Searching for Enemy TFs Searching for Enemy Subs Landbased Strike Missions Carrier Combat Operations Launching Carrier Air Strikes Surprise Carrier Air Strikes Air to Air Combat Air to Sea Combat TF Flak Fire Ship Target Selection Ship Evasion Rating Aircraft Accuracy Ratings Hit Determination Ship Damage Armor Penetration Damage Points Special Carrier Damage Crippled Ships Base Damage Naval Bombardment Air Bombardment Base Flak Air Bombardment Strength Base Disruption Airfield/Aircraft Damage City/Factory/Depot Damage Surface Combat Surface Combat Resolution Reaction Movement and Combat Submarine Combat Operations Submarine Contact Submarine Attacks REPAIR PHASE Aircraft Repairs Ship Repairs Repairs at Sea Repairs in Port Accelerated Ship Repairs SUPPLY 46 Supply and Fuel Production Japanese Production United States Production Chinese Production 47 Base Resupply Routine Convoys 47 Overland Supply Movement Cargo and Transport TFs Unit Resupply Friendly Base Supply Transport TF Supply Replenishment TF Supply Airlift Supply Factories Industrial Expansion of Factories Changing Aircraft Factories BASE CONSTRUCTION AND EXPANSION FUEL/SUPPLY CONSUMPTION 49 Ships   17 17 17 999 April 1993 Page 133 "


"Victory Conditions STRATEGY AND TACTICS Land Operations Air Operations Naval Operations General 2.9389 113 113 115 116 119 9 121 121 125 100 138 138 140 145 Aircraft AIR ZONES OF CONTROL SIGINT RADAR REPLACEMENTS REINFORCEMENTS Reinforcement Arrival Bases Land Combat Unit Reinforcements Air Group Reinforcements Ship Reinforcements VICTORY CONDITIONS Production Victory Points Control Victory Points Kill Victory Points Japanese Kill Multiplier AMPHIBIOUS OPERATIONS TUTORIAL DESIGNER'S NOTES The Player's Role Orders Phase The Execution Sequence Carrier Combat Kamikazes Routine Convoys Land Combat 86% 88% 8 146 LEADER TABLES Japanese Naval Leaders Japanese Army Leaders Allied Naval Leaders Allied Army Leaders SHIP TABLES Japanese Ships Allied Ships SHIP CLASS TABLES Japanese Ship Classes Allied Ship Classes Generic Ships AIRCRAFT TABLES Japanese Aircraft by Availability Date Japanese Aircraft by Type Allied Aircraft by Availability Date Allied Aircraft by Type WEAPON DATA TABLE Weapon Data BASE DATA Base Data Table Highest Oil Bases Table Highest Resources Table 100 146 101 TIMELINE WAR IN THE PACIFIC 1941-1943, by A. A. Nofi 70 MENUS & TABLES General Orders Menu 100 Utility Menu 100 Unit Menu 100 HQ Menu Game Abbreviations Flak Modifiers 101 Target Selection Values (Air to Sea) 102 Ship Evasion Modifiers 102 Aircraft Accuracy Ratings 102 Aircraft Ordnance Options 102 Description of Box Cover Pictures 102 Aircraft Carrier 102 Aircraft in Flight 102 Aircraft on Ground 102 Paratroop Soldiers LAND COMBAT UNIT TABLES 103 Japanese Land Combat Units 103 Allied Land Combat Units 108 147 148 149 29999888 151 151 152 152 155 155 102 CREDITS 157 PANZER SALIENT The Battle of the Bulge LOOKING FOR A SPORTS TITLE? CALL FOR CURRENT PRICING AND SAME DAY SHIPPING Continuing it's tradition for excellence, COMBAT ENTERPRISES INC. proudly announces their newest computer simulated play-bymail WW2 wargame--\"PANZER SALIENT\" depicting the Battle of the Bulge. SPORTS O EURO MAS Players may choose tactical (Division) or strategic (Army) commands. Whichever role you chose, you will find yourself in a highly interactive, intensely fought wargame where your gencralship skills will be tested to the max! PANZER SALIENT uses the proven game system found in our popular \"Crisis in the West\" game. Fire & Movement (#83) writes, \"The maps are beautiful...offers players the many joys of partaking in an umpired game with its good fog of war rules...give serious thought\". Initial startup costs $45 which comprises your first full turn, full color situation maps, full color manual, unit sheets, OB worksheets and a performance rating at the end of the campaign. Follow on turns are $20. We also offer a variety of books and games at discount prices. For sign up or information, write Combat Enterprises Inc., PO Box 763, Bel Air, MD 21014 or call (410) 838-7602. All inquiries are welcome. In the works: WARSHIPS Naval surface actions the heavies. THE PLAYBOOK OF SPORTS-RELATED SOFTWARE If you're a computer sports fan, you want to know what software is available, how similar titles compare, and you want the latest releases of attractive prices. That's why our complete Playbook describes dozens of strategic simulations, awesome action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We want to be your source for hi-tech sports. The Playbook is free with all phone and mail orders. T> or simply send $1.00 for your copy today! BASEBALL BASKETBALL BOWLING ACTION EDUCATION CALENDARS $1 FISHING CARD COLLECTING FLIGHT GAMES FOOTBALL HANDICAPPING GOLF TRIVIA HOCKEY SIMULATORS HORSERACING STATISTICS MOTORSPORTS OLYMPICS CEREBELF SAILING SAILING Per 800 747-0908 617 576-6700 JOSKIING A TENNIS m urban YA | 675 Moss Ave  Cambridge MA 02139 TAKE YOUR BRAIN OUT TO THE BALLGAME Circle Reader Service #55 Circle Reader Service #48 Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. 800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 5 A Train 37 B 29 & Loom 139 (Ads  28  888888888:43688884232-883893828848288&# 8&2 44 31 39 21 &85 SON 31 47 49 32 37 31 38 37 37 888 MASTERCARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESSACCEPTED WITHNOSURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: NQTPERITEM 908-396-8880 Laffer Utility 22 Phonics Plus Studyware LSAT 30 Illustrated Shakesper27 Fontmonger 16 Sound Cards Leather God Phb2 42 Pinball Studyware for SAT 30 Intl Bus & Econ Atlas 39 Legend 41 Pitfighter Stunt Island Intro to Game Fren 79 Grammatik 5 57 Ad Lib Sound Card 65 Legend of Kyrandia 35 Plan 9 Outer Space Summer Challenge 34 Intro to Games Span79 Hijaak DOS or Win 129 Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 Legion's of Krella 37 Planets Edge Summoning 139 Jones in Fast Lane 37 Info Select 87 ATI Stereo F/X Leisur Suit Lar Bndi 39 Playroom w/ Sound 31 Super Tetris Kings Quest 5 42 Language Assistant. VGA StreoFIX 1MB 369 Leisur Suit Larry 5 37 Polce Quest 3 Take a break X-Word 29 Languages of World 99 Fr. Gr. Heb.ital. Span 42 Covox Snd Mster II 145 Lemmings Pools of Darkness Pool Learn to Speak Span69 Laplink 4 Pro 99 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Oh No More Addon 22 Populous 2 Tank (new version) Library of Future 99 Lotus Works Media Vision Lemm.-Oh No More 31 Power Hits Sports 32 Task Force 1942' 39 Microsoft Ock Basic 65 Audio Port L'Empereur Sci-Fi Team Yankee M-1 Tank Platoon 62 Microsoft Quick C 65 CDPC Lexicross Battletech-Mech 32 Tengens Arcade Hit 25 MacMillian Child. Dict.49 MS DOS 5.0 47 Pro Audio Spec+ 139 Liberty or Death Powermonger Terminator Manhole 49 MS DOS 5.0 Upgrd 62 M.M. Upgrade Kit 765 Life and Death 2 Principles of Biology 25 Terminator 2 Magazine Rack 45 Norton Desktop v2. 95 Pro Audio Spec 16 198 Links Principle of Calculus 25 Tetris Classic Marketing Master 39 Norton Dsktp DOS 115 Pro 16 Multimedia Links 386 Pro Principle ofChemsty 25 Theatre of War 31 Mavis Beacon Norton Utilities 111 | Upgrade Kit Course Disk ea 16 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Thunderhawk MIG 29/MIG 29M 62 One Write Acct. 100 Thunderboard 3 or more (ea) Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Time Riders America35 Mixed Up Mother Gse37 Pacioli 2000 v2.0 31 Thunder & Lightng 229 Loney Tune Prnply 19 Print Shop. New 36 Time Treks MS DOS Archives 35 PC Animale Plus 115 Sound Blaster 115 Lord of Rings 2 37 Graphics (ea) 22 Tom Landry Football30 Presidnt:It Start Geo105 PC Anywhere 4 115 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Lost Admiral 35 Print Sp Companion 31 Tony LaRussa Base. 17 Prince Persia/Nam'6565 PC Kwik Powerpak 72 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Lost File Sherlck H 41 Privateer LaRussa addon 15 Railroad Tycoon 62 PC Paintbrush 5 + 99 SB Multimedia Kit 560 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Pro League Baseball 35 Tracon 2 Red Strm/Carr Cmd 62 PC Tools 109 SB MM Starter Kit 459 Lost Treasures 2 29 Quest for Glory 1 Tracon Windows 37 Reference Library 80 Peachtree Basic 75 SB CDROM Intrl 360 Magic Candle 2 38 Quest for Glory 3 39 Treasure Cove 35 Shakespeare 37 PFS: First Choice 75 S SBCDROM Extrni 429 Main St Creatvity Kit 17 Ragnarok 36 Treasure Math Storm35 Sherlock Holme Cnslt42 PFS: First Publisher 75 Sun Moon, Star w/ Sony Manhole 31 Railroad Tycoon Treasure Mountain 31 Sleeping Beauty 37 PFS:Prospect 75 CD, SB Pro, S/W 599 Mantis Rampart Treasure Savg Frntr 32 So Much Software 59 PFS:Publisher Wind 75 Roland SCC-1GS 375 Mario Teaches Type 25 Random Hs Encycl 62 Treehouse Sophisticat Santa Fe 45 PFS: Window Works 75 Sound Canvas 559 Martian Memordm 32 Reader Rabbit Tristan Pinball Space Quest 4 PFS:Write w/Grmtk 69 Roland MA-12Cea 105 Marvin Moose 1/2 31 Reader Rabbit 2 Trump Castle 2 Spirit of Excalibur Presention Task Frc119 SPEAKERS Shielded 28 Math Blaster Mystry 29 Read 'n Roll VGA Trump Castle 2 Delx 42 Siat Pack 83 Print Shop 36 W/3 band Equilizer 45 Math Blaster Plus 29 Red Baron Twilight 2000 Stellar 7 37 Procomm Plus 2.0 69 Altec Lansing 200 219 Math Blaster Wind 36 Mission Disk Ultima 7 Strange Bedfellows 39 Procomm/Window 82 ACS 300 W/subwof 299 Math Rabbit Realms Forge of Virtue 17 Street Atlas Pyro Screen Saver 35 MIDI Interface Math Zone Rex Nebular Ultima 7 P12 Time Maq Almanac 129 QEMM Matrix Cubed Midiator 101 Serial 95 Riders of Rohan Ultima Trilogy 1 Time Table History 69 O DOS 3 79 Mavis Beacon Type 32 Risk for Windows PC Midi Card Ultima Trilogy 2 Time Table Science 59 Quicken 6.0/Win 45 MOX-32 179 Mavis Beacon Wind 38 Risky Woods Ultima Underworld 47 Quicken Quick Book 84 Ultima 1-6 MPU-IPC 135 McGee at Fun Fair 25 Road & Track Pres Ultrabots Ultimate Basketball 35 Sitback DOS or Win 59 Mean Streets Road to Final Four 37 U.S. Atlas Cakewalk Apprentic145 U.S. or World Atlas 49 Stacker 325 Medieval Lords Robosports Wind Utopia 30 Vintage Aloha Stacker 16 Bit Card 179 The Miracle Mega Fortress Romance 3 King 2 V for Victory #1/#2 44 Wild Places Superstor MIDI Software Mission Disk 27 Rorkes Drift 34 Vegas Games Wind. 19 Wing Comm & Miss 45 Turbo Cadd v2.0 79 Ballade Mega Traveller 1/2 37 Rules Engagement 37 Vengeance Excalibur30 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Word Perfct5.1/Win249 Band in a Box Mega Man3 17 Rule Engagment 2 38 Warlords 31 Wing Comm 2 Windows 3.1 92 Cadenza Mental Math Games 35 Scrabble Deluxe Wyn Gretzky Hcky 2 35 WC 2/Ulti. Undowld 49 Winfax Pro 74 Cakewalk Merchant Colony 31 Scrabble Dlx Win Western Front World Atlas MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Roque What's My Angle 30 World View 35 Mice & Trackball Cakewalk Pro Michael Jordon Flight42 Second Front Where Carm San Diego Wrath of Demon 32 Appoint MousePen 70 Cakewalk Window Mickey ABC's, A5 Drummer Secret Monkey Is. 2 38 in America's Past 36 Microsoft Mouse Adults Only Must be 21 85 Color or 1-2-3's 25 Scrt Weapon Luftwf 42 in Europe Animation Fantasy 65 Mouseman Serial 69 Encore Mickey's Crossword 19 Piano Works Dornier 335 in Time FAO Set Trackman Serial 99 79 Play it by Ear Mickey Jigsaw Pzl 31 P-38 Mission Dsk 20 in USA PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Modems & Fax Master Tracks Pro 249 Mickey ABC Combo 37 P-80 Shoot Star in USA Deluxe Private Collection 65 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 Music Printer Plus 419 Mickey Word Advent 25 Heinkel 162 in World Deluxe 49 Priv, Pictures 1 or 2 65 Maxlite 9624PC 189 Music Time Micro Cookbook 31 Sesame St. Lrn Clas 31 Wild Wheels 32 Storm 1 or 2 Maxlite 96/96 349 Musicator Microleagu 4 BaseB 39 Sesame St. Publish 25 Wing Comm 1 Dlxe 49 Visual Fantasy Maxlite 14.4/14.4 419 Quick Score Deluxe 99 Microleague FB Dix 42 Sesame St. Vol.1 17 Wing Commander 2 49 Volcano Practical Peripherals Recording Studio 75 Microsoft Golf Sesame St Vol. 2 17 Special Oper Disk 25 Caddies 7.95ea. 3/$ 19 PM 2400 Internal 129 Rhythm Ace Midnight Rescue Seven Cities of Gold 38 Speech Disk Utilities PM 2400 External175 Songwright 5 . Might and Magic 3/4 38 Shadow Prophecy 30 Wizardry Trilogy 31 Sportster 2400 Ext. 149 Trax for Windows Millennium 2200 60 25 386 Max Shanghaill 61 Word Muncher Milliken Storyteller Sportster 2400 Int. 129 32 Shuttle Wordtris Adobe Type Mgr 59 Joysticks Mike Ditka Ultimt FB 37 Sportstr 14.4 v.42bis 309 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 World Circuit After Dark for Wind 29 67 CH Flightstick Zoom External Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Silent Service 2 All Type Writer Rabbit 31 65 CH Game Card 3 Mixed-Up Mother Gs 30 Zoom Internal Sim Ant Autodesk Explorer 119 Your Prsnl Train SAT30 CH Mach 3 Monopoly Deluxe Sim City Zoo Keeper Bannermania Scanners Eliminator Game Cd 26 Moonbase Sim City Graphic Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Calendar Creator + 55 Microtek 600G 829 Gravis Joystick Muncher Bundle Sim City Windows 37 Adv of Eco Island 22 Carbon Copy 129 Microtek 60OZ 1359 Gravis PC GamePad21 Murder Sim Earth Dinosaur World 22 Central Pt AntiVirus 84 Scanman32 160 Kraft KC3 Joystick 18 Mutanoid Math Chlg 31 Simpson Adventure 31 Race Thru Space 22 Choas 39 Scanman 256 265 Kraft Thunderstick 28 NFL Challenge Prem59 Snap Dragon Colorix Skins & Pads Maxx Flight Yoke 69 NFL Print Pro CD ROM 17 Snoopy Game Club 29 Copy || PC s Maxx Pedal. 39 NFL Pro League FB 35 Solitaires Journey 3D CnstrctCasti Mst 62 Corel Draw V3.0 Dust Covers 379 8 Mouse Yoke 32 Nigel's World Space Ace 2:Bort Aloha Hawaii Grounded Wrist Straps 9 Data Ease Personal 68 Ninja Turtle Arcade 25 Space Quest Bundl 39 Atlas Pack Quickshot Aviator 5 32 Desqview 2.4 Keyboard Skins Ninja Turtle: Adventr 31 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Desgview 386 Space Quest 4 Quickshot Game Cd 14 125 Static Pads Nobunagas Ambition 37 Space Quest 5 Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 DOS Fax 15 Quickshot Intruder 5 30 Large-System 15 Quickshot Warrior No Greater Glory 42 Speedball2 Audubon Mammals 37 Dvork on Typing 31 Wrist Pads 18 Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Speedreader Autodesk Explorer 119 8 Thrustmaster Fight 69 Express Publisher 99 Stax (Dust Repellent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro Operation Neptune 35 109 Barney Bear School 26 Spell-a-saurus Facelift Statx Complete Cleaning Weapons Control Orbits Spellbound Batik Designs 45 Far Side Calendar 49 79 System Oregon Trail 15 Thrustmaster Pedal 109 Spellcasting 301 28 Battlechess Origin FX Spell Craft Beethoven Ninth 59 Hours: M-F9AM to BPM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Spell-it Plus Once Upon Time Store Hours: M-F 9AM to 6 PM Bible Library Sat 10AM CO 3PM Out of This World SpellJammer Bookshelf Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. 07065 Outnumbered Spirit of Excalibur 30 Britanica Family Chc 75 Overlord Spoils of War Britannica Family Dr 59 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Pacific Islands Sports Adventure Business Master 39 Paladin 2 Sprout! Carmen World Dixe 65 Master Card, Visa American Express & Discover Accepted. No Paperboy 2 Star Control 2 37 Cautious Condor 45 Surcharge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box }, Carteret, N.J. Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Patriot CD Game Pack 07008. All Sales Are Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective 55 PC Globe Stickybr Math Tutor 30 CIA World Fact merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All PC USA Stickbr Pre-School 30 Compton Encydpd 409 Products are new. We do not guarentoe compatability. Shipping PC Study Bible Stickybr Read Tutor 30 Conquest Longbow 37 charges: 48 contiguous states, $4 per order. Alaska, Hawaii, Penthouse Jigsaw Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 Corel Draw Upgd 149 and Puerto Rico $10 ISL pc., $i ea. add. APO/FPO) and P.O. Boxes Perfect General Strip Poker 3 $6 1st pc. $1 c. add. Canada SB ist pc 36 Electronic Cookbook 75 $1 ea. add. Heavies Strip Poker Data (ea)17 Data Disk items extra. Foreign Orders call for shipping charges. N.J. Font Master PGA Tour Golf Strike Commander 45 Food Analyst Residents acid salos tax. Call for current price and Storybook Weaver PGA Golf Windows 38 34 Game Collection availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.'S WELCOMED...Does not 45 Course Disk Studyware for ACT 30 include closeouts, liquidations. Or limited quantities and 19 Game Master PGA Golf Complete 49 Studyware GMAT 30 Golden Immortal 28 product must be shipping for your protection, we will only Studyware GRE 30 Gunship/Midwinter 62 ship to the address the credit card company has on file. 8838788 4D Boxing 20 Dr. Quandry Dragon's Lair Construction Set Dragon's Lair 2 A320 Airbus Dragon Lr:Sing Cst 37 ABC Wide Wrld Box 30 Duck Tale:Qst Gld 15 ABPA Baseball 25 Duerk BaseB. Encyl 20 Aces of the Pacific 39 Dune Mission Disk 25 Dungeon Master Action Stations Dusk of the Gods 38 Addon Disk 22-45 14 Dynamix Bundle 39 AD&D Collect Ed 2 44 Earl Weaver 2 AD&D Starter Kit 44 Commisioner Dsk 12 Adv Willy Beamish 37 Play & Mgr. Disk 12 Air Buck's Earthquest 37 Air Force Command 36 Eco Phantoms 31 AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Eco-Quest 1 Algebra Made Easy 25 Elvira 2:Jaws Amarillo Slim DICK 32 Entr Pak Win (ea) 28 American Gladiators 25 Eye of Beholder Ancient An War Sky 35 Eye of Beholder 2 38 Animation Studio 69 EZ Cosmos Are We There Yet? 18 F-14 Tomcat 19 Armada 2525 F 15 III Armourgeddon F 15 111 Master Edit. 49 A.T.A.C F117a Stealth Fighter41 Automap Facts in Action 31 Automap Windows 48 Falcon 3.0 Automap Europe 74 Oper Fight Tiger 25 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Family Tree Maker 42 Back to Future 3 25 Far Side Calendr Backgamn By Geo 26 Farm Creativity Kit Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Femme Fatale Barbie Design 16 F.F. Data Disk Barbie Fashion 25 Fighting for Rome 29 Barbie Adventure 25 Final Conflict Bart Simpson Hous 30 Flames of Freedom Battlechess (allver) 30 Flight of Intruder Battlechess 2 Flight SimulA.T.P. 37 Battlechess 400 39 Flight Simul (M.S.) Battle Isle Arcft/Scen Dsgn 28 Battles of Napoleon 31 California Battlestorm Flight Planner 25 24 FS Pro Berensin Bear Cnt 19 Berensin Bear Color 25 Great Britian Berenst Bear Lettr 25 Hawaii Berlitz Interpreter 37 Instant Facit Loc. 26 Bicycle Poker Bill Elliott NASCAR 30 East/West U.S. 59 Birds of Prey Scenery Set A 37 Blitzkrieg Scenery Set B 37 Bloodwych Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Bo Jackson BaseB Sound & Graphic 25 Bodyworks Tahiti 19 Bridgemaster 30 Western Europe 19 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Floor 13 Buzz Aldrin 39 Fly Grand Canyon 37 Captain Comic 2 Follow the Reader 29 Carl Lewis Challng 29 Four Crystal Trazer 32 Carrier Strike Free DC Carriers at War 35 Front Page Sports 35 39 Casino Pack 1 Gateway Castles Global Conquest Northern Campgn 19 Gobblins Castle 2 Godfather Castle of Dr. Brain Gods Cathy Daily Planner 43 Gold of the Aztec 31 Ching Ancient Emp 30 Gold Sheet Pro FB 37 Challenge 5 Realms 35 Grand Slam Brdge 231 Champions Great Naval Battles 44 Champions of Krynn 20 Greens 35 Chemistry Works 38 Gunship 2000 Chessmaster 3000 32 Scenario Disk 24 Chessmstr 3000 Win38 Guy Spy Children Writ & Publ 39 Hardball 3 Chip 'n Dale 15 Data Disk Civilization Hare Raising Havoc 29 Civilization MPE 47 Harpoon 47 Classic 5 Headline Harry Coaster Heimdall 19 Comic Book Creator 17 Heros of 357th Conan: Cimmerian 30 Hole in One Golf Conflict: Middle East 32 Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Conflict Korea Hoyle Bk Game 1/2 22 Conquest Longbow 39 Hoyle Bk Game 3 30 Conquest of Japan 35 Humans 25 Crime Wave Indiana Jones 4 37 Crisis in the Kremlin 39 Island of Dr. Brain 29 Crossword Magic Jack Nicklaus Signtr 42 Cruise for a Corpse 33 33 J. Nick. Crse 3,4,5 14 Daffy Duck P.. J. Nicklaus Clip Art 17 Dagger of Amon Ra 39 Jetfighter 2 Dark Half Adv. Mission Disk 19 Dark Queen Krynn Jobhunt 30 Darklands John Madden 2 Darkseed Jump Jet Dark Sun 50 Kid Pix Death Knight Krynn 32 Kid Pix Companion 25 Dlx Paint Animation 85 Dlx Paint | Enhncd 85 Kings Quest Bundle 39 Design Yr Own Hm 39 Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Design Your Railid 35 King's Quest 5 42 Railroad Robbery 19 King's Quest 6 39 Designasaurus II 23 Knowledge Advent 47 Disney Entertain Pk 47 Konami NFL FOOIB 30 30 2368882848289889887888888889 1888666888888888988888888888888888888888888SFR&R&52-5888888888657883886886889898869888873888 088 88808 88078oolio 42 32 288 88 888 58&88 47 39 / Hard 31 79  3 Circle Reader Service #62 "


"Can Argonaut make up the lost ground? by Robin Matthews TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DEVELOPERS: PUBLISHERS: ATAC: The Secret War Against Drugs IBM EGA VGA, MCGA $59.95 Documentation Look-up Argonaut MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD rgonaut had a pretty glittering career up to its release of the multiLairplane simulator, Birds of Prey (published in the U.S. by Electronic Arts). BOP was a great concept, with its multitude of missions and the chance to fly more than 40 of the worlds greatest aircraft. Ultimately, the game had poor graphics, awful controls and was just 'old hat'. There was a rumor circulating at the time of its release that Argonaut was aware of its shortcomings and, as a result, certain features were kept back for another product. Whether that was true or not, Argonaut has released its latest flight simulator via MicroProse. ATAC, sub-titled \"The Secret War against Drugs (Note: a new flight sim without an \"F\" anywhere in its title!), is a multi-plane simulator and, bearing in mind the disappointments of BOP, was approached with a large degree of caution by this reviewer. Set in the near future, ATAC is a combined simulation/strategy game that places the gamer in control of a special task force created to fight the war against drugs. The game's fiction asserts that it is 2003. In that imagined future, the drug problem has become so far out of control and the Colombian drug barons have become so powerful that they are out of the reach of normal law enforcement. Hence, the United Nations, with the backing of the world's major nations (and a certain amount of forethought with which we have not seen demonstrated in the international body) has set up an elite force to bring down the drug barons and their cartel: The Advanced Tactical Air Command. ATAC is neither short of materials nor manpower. The player's persona is proto be either an introduction to those unfamiliar with flight sims or merely to provide a souped-up shoot-em-up. Gamers figuratively jump into the nearest F-22 or Apache, take off and buzz around Colombia looking for action. There is no campaign on this level, but Air Strike allows one to get used to the aircraft controls and \"feel\" of the two platforms. In Level Two, the Limited Campaign, the gamer participates in a crusade against one of the four drug barons. This level provides a gentle learning curve for those who wish to progress from the simple Air Strikes up to the full blown Campaign. Against one drug baron the results of one's efforts are more clearly seen and there is a lesser chance of the big drug consignments getting through. Level Three is the biggie, a full blown campaign against all four powerful drug barons. Senores Orviedo, Cesar, Sanchez and Velez are powerful and dangerous, and this Level will stretch your strategy and resources to the limits. It is unlikely that you will succeed at this level until the limited campaigns are truly mastered. THE SECRET WAR AGAINST DRUGS NOUS FLAPS caers DWF 19 ABRIKES FLARES 10 WARS MICROPROSE vided with: 250 special agents to provide intelligence, eight of the world's best pilots and a secret airbase within the borders of Colombia which has been upgraded and converted for use by eight F-22 Advanced Tactical Fighters and eight AH-64A Apache Helicopter Gunships. ATAC can be played at one of three levels: Air Strike, Limited Campaign and Full Campaign, each giving a greater challenge. Level One, Air Strike, is designed Arrear of Flying As far as the flight models are concerned, the two aircraft are very, very different. Neither aircraft flies as realistically as those simulated in Falcon 3.0 or Gunship 2000, but the controls are sensitive and flying has just the right degree of challenge. The AH-64A Apache takes some real flying, especially when things heat-up. The F-22, a combined Lockheed/Boeing Stealth development of the F-15, is a thoroughbred fighter interceptor and is very responsive. It has horizontal and almost vertical tail surfaces, thrust Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 4/93 Since 1982 to Titles at the Lowest Price **800-554-9925 ComputAbility 800-554-9925 Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! Consumer Electronics Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! HOURS: Mon-Fri 9am-9pm Sat 11am-5pm  FAX (414) 357-7814 INFO (414) 357-8181  PO Box 17882, Milwaukee, WI 53217 Carmen San Diego America..... IBM Castles Legends of Valour 37.95 Leisure Suit Larry 5 39.95 Lemmings/Lemmings Il... 29.95 34,95 Liberty or Death 34.95 Links 386 Pro 39 95 Mauna   19.95 Lord of the Rings I: Two Towers ........ .34.95 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes... 2.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Lost Vikings 29.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 Mantis / Speech Pack.....................39.95/19.95 Mario is Missing..... ....................34.95 Megatraveler llor lll....................... 34.95/39.95 Michael Jordan in Flight ............... 37.95 Might & Magic III 34.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win... 34.95 Mozart's Magical Music Machine ...... 20.95 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 Nam 1965 19/5 . 29.95 NFL Pro League Football 44.95 NFL Video Pro Football .4495 No Greater Glory..................................39.95 Omar Shariff on Bridge Windows....29.95/29.95 Pro League Baseball ... 34.95 Prophecy of the Shadow 37.95 Quarky Turbo Science 29.95 Quest for Glory 3 39.95 Realms of Atkania 34.95 Ring World ... 34.95 Robocop 3-D...... ........................ 31.95 Seal Team 37.95 Secret Weapons lufttwaffe 39.95 Expansion Disk 1.2.3 or 4 19.95 Shadow President...... 39.95 Shadowgate for Windows ....... 31.95 Shadowlands... 29.95 Sid Meier's Bundle... 29.95 Siege / Expansion Disk 37.95/20.95 Sim Ant DOS/Windows 34.95/34.95 Sim City DOS/Windows .... 29.95/34.95 Sim Earth / Windows 39.95/39.95 Sim Lite 39.95 Solitaires Journey 34.95 Sound Graphics, Aircraft 2495 Space Hulk... 39.95 Space Inc. 34.95 Space Quest 5 39.95 Traders... . Tristan Ultima VII Forge of Virture Data Disk Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Underworld Il......... Ultrahots Uncharted Waters.... Unlimited Adventures V for Victory. Utah Beach V for Victory Il Velikiye Luki Wayne Gretzke 3 Warriors of Legend....... . Wax Works ... ........... .. Ween: The Prophecy...... Where... Carmen San Diego, Each Where...Carmen Past Where...Carmen USA Deluxe Where..Carmen World Deluxe........ Wing Commander 11 Speech Accessory Pack Special Operations 1 of 2 Wing Commander Deluxe World Circuit Grand Prix 29.95 29.95 49.95 20.95 19.95 ...49.95 37.95 39.95 31.95 42.95 42.95 34,95 19.95 34.95 34.95 29.95 34.95 44.95 44.95 49.95 15.95 20.95 ...49.95 34.95 S939  585888888 SOUND CARDS CREATIVE MEDIA VISION CREATIVE LAOS 3095 PRO AUDIO COTTOM Multimedia PC $189 SOUND RI ACTED IL CALL! BLASTER.16  16-Bil Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible  16 Bit / MIDI Interface. True 16 Bit Stereo Sound Advanced 20 Voice Stereo Synthesizer Joystick, Amplifier, Software Call for List! 37.95 25.95 3495 A Line in the Sand ........ 24.95 Aces of the Pacific 39.95 WWII 1946 add on disk 19.95 Aces Over Europe 44.95 ADIBOVADIJUNIOR VOL 1.. 34.95 Adventures of Pinocchio 45.95 Alt Bucks 34.95 Air Support 29.95 Air Traffic Controller 34.95 Air Warrior 39.95 Aircraft & Adventure Factory ..... 24.95 Rescue Air 911. Flight 685 or 701.ca....... 17.95 Armagan 39.95 Ambush 37.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 ATAC 3495 ATP Tennis 31 95 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Bad Blood 31.95 Batman Returns 39.95 Battles of Destiny 34.95 BattleChess 4000 Super VGA 29.95/3495 Battlefield 2000 37.95 Beat the House 29.95 Big League ballpark disk hardball III...... 17.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Black Crypt 31.95 Body Illustrated 44.95 Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space 34.95 Campaign 34.95 Car & Drive 3795 Carrier Strike: South Pacific 39.95 Expansion Set 20.95 Carriers of War .... ... 3495 Castles I or II.... 95/3495 Challenge of the Five Realms 3495 Champions 34.95 Civilization 44.95 Classic Adventures 34.95 Clouds of Xeen 39 95 Cobra Mission 44.95 Comanche: Maximum Overkill ........ 42.95 Mission Disk 1 or 2.................25.95/25.95 Conquered Kingdoms............... 31.95 Creepers 29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 41.95 Curse of Amon Ra 39.95 Cyber Empires......... 31.95 Daemonsgate VGA. 34.95 Darklands 39.95 Dark Hall 34.95 Dark Sun... 4795 Daughter of Serpentis. 31.95 Dinosaur Adventure 29.95 Dominant Species 29.95 Dragon's Lair 3 .. 34.95 Dune Il 34.95 Ecoquest ll 29.95 Eight Ball Deluxe 39.95 Empire Deluxe 3495 Erc the Unready 34.95 Fables & Fiends. Legend of Kyrandia 3495 Falcon 3.0 4495 Disk 1 Operation Fighting Tiger 24.95 Family Entertainment Pack 29.95 Final Conflict......... 29.95 Flight Assignment: Air Force...... 39.95 Flight Simulator 4.0 39.95 Add-on Disks CALL Frederick Pohl's Gateway 34.95 Front Page Football 39.95 Gambit 37 95 Gary Gristy's Pacific War 44.95 Global Effect 31.95 Grand Slam Bridge II ..... 31.95 Great Naval Battles 42.95 Scenario Builder Expansion Disks ea25.95 20.95 Harpoon CALL Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Harrier Assult 34.95 Heroes of the 357th... 31.95 Humans 24.95 INCA 34.95 Incredible Machine 29.95 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis 34.95 Island of Dr. Brain ... ........ 29.95 J. Nicklaus Sign Tour 2......... 17.95 Jump Jet 39.95 King's Quest 6 44.95 La Russa Baseball 37 95 Laser Squad 24.95 Legacy, The 39.95 Campaign Disk Castles Il Civil War Conquest of Japan Creepers 29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant...... 39.95 Cyber Empires Cytron... Daemonsgate.......... Dark Seed Death Knights of Krynn. DeluxePaint IV (while supplies last) Demoniak Desert Strike ...... ............. Discovery Columbus..... Dragon's Lair 3... Dune Elvira ll Jaws of Cerberus Eye of the Beholder or ll Eye of the Storm F-147-18 Fables & Fiends Legend of Kyrandia Fighter Dual Pro Final Conflict Gateway to the Savage Frontier Global Effect Great Naval Battles Harpoon... Battleset 4 Harpoon Designers Series Battleset Harpoon Signature Edition Heimdall 24.99 Indy Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis International Sports Challenge Jack Nicklaus Unlimited..... 3495 Legend of Kyrandia. 34.95 Lengends of Valour... ....37.95 Lemmings 1 or 2... 28.95/34.95 Light Ouest... 31.95 Links 29.95 Firestone, Bountiful Course Disks 17.95 Lord of the Rings 2 or 3 34 95 Lords of Time 29.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Madden Footbal Mantis Mega Fortress Mission Disk 1 or 2 Mercenaries Megatraveller 2 Mig 29 30.95 Might & Magic III Napoleon Navy Seals No Greater Glory.......... Oh No! More Lemmings stand alone. On No! More Lemm, add-on Out of this World 46.96 PGA Tour Golt 31.95 Golf Tournament Course disk 17.95 Perfect General 3495 WWII Scenario Disk Pinball Dreams Pinball Fantasy Put-Fighter Plan 9 from Space Pools of Darkness Populous Il..... The Challenge scenario disk Powermonger Prehistoric Prophety of the Shadow Red Zone 29.95 Road Rash 31.95 Rules of Engagement 37.95 Secret of Monkey Island I ar II 34.95 Shadow of the Beast Il or Ill......... 34.95 Shadowlands 29.95 Sharif on Bridge.... Shuttle 29.95 Sim Ant Sim City Sim Earth Solitaires Journey Space Hulk Spoils of War Star Control II Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strip Poker 3 Tales of Magic: Prophecy Shadow Terrain . The Challenge The Light Corridor Tom Landry Football Twighlight 2000 Ultima IV or V Utopia. Viking Field of Conquest Warriors of Legends Where in the ... Carmen each 29.95 World Curcuit .. ....... 34.95 JOYSTICKS MODEMS ZOOM $75 V.32 bis Internal/External .................... $199/$205 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Int. .............. V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Ext ........ $199 $19 $30 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick .... ..... $32 Eliminator Game Card PC MouseStick ......... CH Products: Virtual Pilot NEW! Virtual Pilot Pro NEW! $89 Flight Stick $39 Hi Speed Adaptor Gamecard 3 Auto Gamecard 3-PS/2 MACH 3 Joystick Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke MAXX Pedal... .. Kraft: Kraft KC3...................... $17 Kraft Trackball w/Ft Cntir ....... Kralt Thunderstick Thrustmaster: Flight Control $75 Weapons Control $85 Thrustmaster Pro ................. $119 99888888888 $29 S65 $39 $55 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows... $199 / $199 SupraFaxModem V.32 bis, Ext. alone............ $279 with Fax Software, DOS/Win ........... $299 / $299 29.95 $27 AMIGA Ongin FX: Screen Saver ................... Out of this World ...... Pacific Theater of Operations....... Paladin 2 Patriot Perfect General Pirates of Gold Edition Pools of Darkness Populous il Power Politics Powermonger WWI PrintShop Deluxe Graphics Libraries Business Graphics Libraries Sampler Privateer 25.95 34.95 39.95 34 95 42.95 34.95 .39.95 37.95 3795 29.95 20.95 44.95 29.95 29.95 47.95 Special Forces 29.95 Spell Crall... 34.95 Spellcasting 301... 34.95 Spelljammer: Pirates of Realmspace 37.95 Star Control Il 34.95 Star Legions 37.95 Star Trek Screen Savers for Win....... 32.95 Strike Commander 49.95 Strip Poker 3/data disks.................29.95/15 95 Summoning ..37.95 Task Force 1942 39.95 Tegel's Mercenaries......... ... 37.95 Terminator 2029 39.95 Theatre of War 31.95 Tom Landry Football 29.95 AT in Agony Air Force Commander Air Support ATAC B-17 Flying Fortress Bard's Taile Construction... Birds of Prey Black Crypt Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space Campaign Carmen San Diego Each 39 95 29.95 34.95 29.95 30.95 39.95 29.95 31.95 31.95 39.95 3495 30.95 & 338889 S&&&& & ORDERING INFO: Specity system. For fast delivery send cashier's check or money order. Personal & company checks allow 14 business days to clear. P.O. 's welcome.C.O.O. charges are $5.00Jn Continental U.S.A. include $5.00 for software orders 5% shipping for hardware, minimum $5.00 MasterCard and Visa orders please include card: expiration date and signature. Wi residents please include 5% sales tax. HI, AKFPO. APO.Puerto Rico and Canadian orders, please add 6% shipping minimum $6.00. All other foreign orders add 15% shipping, min $15.00 All orders shipped outside the Continental USA are shipped first class insured U.S. mail, where available. If foreign shipping charges exceed the minimum amount, you will be charged the additional amount All goods are new and include factory warranty We do not guarantee compatability & version 15. Due to our low prices all sales are final. All Delective returns must have a return authorization number. Call (414) 357-8181 to obtain an RA. or your return will not be accepted. Prices and availability subject to change without notice. Shipping & handling are non-refundable. We ship the latest versions available to us, updates must be handled by end user directly with the manufacturer Not responsible for typographical errors. In an effort to be complete, some new products may not be available from the manufacturer at press time "


"DeuneIn helicopters and even the latest Mig's (including the Mig 29 Fulcrum). Successful intelligence is the only way to defeat these dealers in death, and the gathering of facts vectoring systems and the ability to fly at 148km/h technically stalled, pointing upwards at 60 degrees but still under full control. Maximum speed is 921 mph at sea level, Mach 1.7 at 30,000 feet. Armed with a 20mm canon, internal Sidewinders or AAM's it also features \"new design\" weapon racks for extra ordnance. The Apache has been around since 1986 and is accepted as the world's supreme helicopter gunship. The Apache is a standard model in all modern helicopter simulators, since it features advanced communication systems, navigational flight aids, Target Acquisition/Designation sight (TAD) and helmet mounted sighting system. With a maximum speed of 162 knots and 3.5 tons of armaments, including its tank busting 30mm Chain gun, it's a real mean machine. its up to the player to gather intelligence, make deductions and create his own missions. Intelligence Reports are gathered by various agencies, civilians, special agents and electronic surveillance. These reports are the key to the Campaign games, without them the drug barons will import/export uninterrupted and will take over the world. The reports will cross refer to the detailed maps and allow you to prioritize targets. Here the strategy element comes into its own. The manual contains a series of articles about drug manufacture, illustrating these with small novellas about the people involved all the way along the drug chain. This includes details of the socio-economic history of regions such as Colombia, indicating why the drug industry is so entrenched. The four drug barons do not have complete control of the country, but do occupy a sizeable part. They are dependent on the indigenous population to work the plantations, factories and production sites and the whole situation is politically volatile. If the player's missions disrupt the flow of cash this may force the workers to leave the barons. If on the other hand, one's pilots blow up several carriages of civilians when they blow up the the drug train, this is likely to drive the populous back into the protection of the barons. Each target has an element of strategic risk, and this must be weighed up before launching strikes. The country is littered with buildings, farms and factories linked with drug production, and also with homes, schools and hospitals. Intelligence is fairly reliable, as long as agents are kept supplied, but civilian casualties must be avoided at all costs. The drug barons ignore the player's character as long as they are left alone, but to \"win,\" one must destroy key installations, disrupt drug shipments, interrupt his cash flow and force his work force to desert him. I PRIMA 1 LAY IT IAC The flight controls take some mastery, but are not as complicated as those found in modern \"deep\" flight sims. Most controls are accessed be single key commands,and they are fairly standard, \"+\" and \"\" for throttle, numeric pad for movement etc. Mouse and joystick are also supported with the former being best for menu selections and the latter for flight control. ATAC also contains some sophisticated features with sensitivity toggles, advanced time at x2, x4, x8 and x16, and lots of various external views, including a floating camera perspective. In fact, at any one time it is possible to put four to eight friendly aircraft in the air and jump in and out of the cockpits of all. Bearing in mind the other aspects of ATAC, the level of difficulty/realism/playability is about right, but the scenery detail does leave a little to be desired. Perhaps, it's a question of being spoiled by the likes of Comanche: Maximum Overkill and Harrier, but it is difficult to suspend one's disbelief when the countryside is bereft of trees, lacks contours and I suspect that my F-22 actually ploughed straight through a mountain at one stage — not a bad evasive maneuver, eh? and speculation is critical. Since one must keep the agents supplied (otherwise the quality of intelligence information will deteriorate), supply missions are necessary. These can be flown either automatically or manually. General recon missions also improve intelligence reports. It is here that the multi-plane feature comes into its own, and it is possible to switch from plane to plane, and from chopper to chopper in one double key stroke. In this way one can always seek out the more interesting bits of the action, and leave the computer to carry out the more mundane tasks. In the campaign modules, the countryside is a target-rich environment, varying from buildings, trains, trucks, planes etc., containing anything from supplies, cash, the raw coca leaf harvest and also, the finished refined product. The free form of ATAC is superb, reminiscent of some of the best parts of Jetfighter II, and allows the player to form his/her own strategy. The Level Three campaign game is a real challenge, but the design of the game is such that it can be replayed over and over again, as the locations and events are randomized. If the individual components of ATAC are taken in isolation, there are better serious flight sims, there are more frantic shoot-em-ups, and there are deeper and more satisfying strategy games. The normal problem with \"combined\" products is that no matter how good the separate elements are, the whole is always less than the sum. In ATAC, this is not the case, the modules all meld together well and produce a total game that is far more than its components. ATAC is by no means a perfect product, but it will appeal to a wide audience who are looking for something a bit different, a successful mix of flight simulator, strategy and good 'ole carnage. CGW Ad Hoc Missions In ATAC there are no pre-set missions, The barons, not being short of a dollar or two, have their own defensive and offensive equipment, varying from DC 10 transports, Cessna light planes, Hughes Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"How To Order Indexes and Older Back Issues are Available Back Issues: $4 each Please add 15% for shipping In the center of this magazine there is a detachable order envelope. Simply use the blank lines on the order form to specify issue numbers. As some issue numbers are in limited supply, please list one or more alternate selections (this will expedite your order in the event one of your requested issues is sold out). CGW Indexes CGW Article Indexes for the years 1987, 1988, 1989, and 1990 are now available. Please send a large self-addressed stamped envelope and $1.00 per index (specify which years) to: Computer Gaming World, Index Dept., P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Older Back Issues For a list of older CGW back issues and their prices, please send a large self-addressed envelope to: Computer Gaming World, Archive Dept., P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Please allow four weeks for delivery. Note: to avoid unnecessary delays, do not include a request for both indexes and older back issues in the same letter. Please send separate requests. Romance of the Three Kingdoms II; Sid Meier's Civilization Strategy: and more! #80 THE SAVAGE EMPIRE; Links; CES Report (Part 1); Imperium; Command HD Replay (Part 2); Full Metal Planet; Dragon Lord; Space 1889; Spellcasting 101: King's Quest V; Magic Fly; Pharaoh's Tomb; and more! #81 MEGAFORTRESS: Power Monger Review; The Lord of the Rings: More Command HQ Designer Notes: Stealth Affair: CES Report (Part 2): Test Drive Ill; SimEarth Setup Hints; Red Baron Review: Hard Nova; Thunderstrike; Computer Game Artist Portfolio; Quest for Glory Desinger Notes; Warlords; and more! #82 MIGHT & MAGIC III; Covert Action Review; Spirit of Excalibur; More Their Finest Hour Tips; Setting up Multiple Ultima VI and Savage Empire Saved Games; PRODIGY's Baseball Manager, Das Boot; Elvira; and more! #83 TIMEQUEST:B.A.T.: Eye of the Beholder; Flight Simulator 4.0; Falcon 3.0; Battles of Napoleon Scenario; WWI Air Combat Survey, Modem-to-Modem F-16 Combat Pilot; Lemmings; Moonbase; Overlord; Galleons of Glory: Educational Games Survey: Road & Car; and more! #84 MAGIC CANDLE I: Continuum; DarkSpyre; Nuclear Submarine Tactics; Virtual Reality: Red Baron Tactics; Lexi-Cross; Awesome Tips: Willy Beamish Preview: Wing Commander Secret Missions; Robots in SimEarth; and more! #85 CHUCK YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT: Summer CES; On-Line AD&D; Star-King; Pick'N Pile; Harpoon Strategy; Medieval Lords; Centurion Strategy; Second Front Strategy; and more! #86 This issue is sold out! #87. ULTIMA VII; Heart of China; Role-Playing Game Survey; Behind the Screens at Lucasfilm; Might & Magic/Faery Tale Adventure Cartridges; UMS Il; Conflict: Middle East; Medieval Lords Strategy, Xenocide; Martian Dreams, Armada 2525; and more! #88 ROCKETEER; Tenth Anniversary Issue: Computer Games History: Wing Commander Il; Games of the Year: The Sierra Network; Toejam & Earl; Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball; Wargame Paiktography, 1900-1950; Second Conflict; Western Front; and more! #89 STAR TREK: 25TH ANNIVERSARY; Earl Weaver II: Making of Links Course Disks; Gunship 2000; Educational Software Survey: F-117A; Objection!; Amarillo Slim's Dealer's Choice; Rules of Engagement; WordTris; Holiday Buying Guide; SPA Report; and more! #90. The New CARRIERS AT WAR; Vengeance of Excalibur; Virtual Reality Conference; 4-D Boxing; ABC Wide World of Sports Boxing; Secret of Monkey Island II; Martian Memorandum; Might & Magic III; Intertainment '91; Police Quest 3; NFL Pro League Football, Dragon's Gate On-Line Game; Conflict: Middle East Replay: Patton Strikes Back; No Greater Glory; The Lost Admiral; and more! #91 WIZARDRY VII; Predator II; The Black Crupt; Conan the Cimmerian; The Games: Winter Challenge; Riders of Rohan; The Perfect General tips: Gunship 2000 tips; Megafortress scenario disk; and more! #92-ACES OF THE PACIFIC; January CES; Stanford Wong's Video Poker; Are We There Yet? SimAnt; Public Domain Role-Playing Games; Murder!; L'Empereur; and more! #93 CHAMPIONS; January ES Part II; Falcon 3.0; Bloodwych; Lost in L.A.; Nova 9; The Miracle Piano Teaching System; Millenium; MicroLeague Football: The Coach's Challenge; The Next President; Global Conquest; The #94 DARKLANDS; Computer Acquire; Free D.C.!; Shuttle; Mike Ditka Ultimate Football: Uncharted Waters; Star Trek: 25th Anniversary: Super Tetris; NFL Football; Spelunx; Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Strategy: Sid Meier's Civilization Update; and more! #95. LAURA BOW I; SPA Report: Populous II; Genus Game System; Uncharted Waters tips; CD-ROM Report, Twilight 2000; Celtic Legends; Crisis in the Kremlin Preview; Sound Card Survey; Computer Game Design Abstracts; Wild Wheels; Solitaire's Journey Preview; Action Stations! module; Multi-Player Battle Tech; Modern Warfare Paiktography, Birds of Prey; and more! #96 GRAND PRIX UNLIMITED; Sea Rogue: Planet's Edge; Ultima Underworld; Lemmings tips; Roberta Williams interview; Populous World Editor; World Circuit: Computer Game Developers Conference; Gods; Big Three; Castles tips: Fleet Commander Designer's Notes: MBT: Middle East; Fighter Duel; and more! #97 STUNT ISLAND: Summer CES Report; Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Golf; Spaceship Warlock; Chessmaster 3000; Out of This World; Computer Game Developers Conference Part II; Legends of Future Past; Virtual Reality Studio, Magic Candle II; APBA Baseball Products; Federation II; Carrier Strike Preview; Theatre of War Preview; Computer Third Reich; Global Conquest Replay; and more! #98 AMAZON: Omar Sharif On Bridge; A-Train; Summer CES Part II; L-Zone; Dune; Indiana Jones & Fate of Atlantis; Wolfenstein 3-D; Air Bucks Preview: Dusk of the Gods: Ultima VII; Darkseed; High Command; Carrier Strike Replay: Conflict: Korea; Napoleon l; and more! #99-X-WING FIGHTER;Laura Bow II; World Series of Poker; Global Effect; Gateway; Solitaire's Journey: Sea Rogue tips; The Two Towers; Waxworks Preview; Lemmings tips; Nemesis!; Aces of the Pacific tips; Galactic Frontier; Carrier Strike Replay; Fireteam 2200 Replay: Spoils of War Preview, The Lost Admiral tips; Fighter Town U.S.A.; Siege: Siege tips; Conflict: Korea Replay; and more! #100 COLLECTOR'S EDITION; 3900 Games Later; Legend of Kyrandia; Jack Niclaus Signature Course Design I: Crisis in the Kremlin; Magnetic Scrolls Collection: The Dark Half; Tetris Classic; Hong Kong Mahjong; Links 386 Pro; Grandmaster Chess; Games of the Year Awards: Science Fiction Paiktogra. phy: Computer Game Design Abstracts; Guy Spy; Napoleonic GAP Program; 100 Years War Preview; PBEM Diplomacy; Carriers At War Design Notes; and more! #101 -BUZZ ALDRIN'S RACE INTO SPACE; Holiday Buying Guide; Jack Nicklaus Course Design Il; John Madden II & NFL Football: Heaven & Earth; SPA Report; Darklands tips; Robosport; Mantis; Floor 13; Cruise for a Corpse; Shareware: Dune Il Preview: Warlords tips; Team Yankee; Air Force Com. mander: A Line in the Sand Preview; and more! #102 ULTRABOTS; King's Quest VI; The Games: Summer Challenge; Quest for Glory 3; Plan 9 From Outer Space; Realms; NHLPA Hockey for Sega; Darklands tips; Spear of Destiny: Spellcasting 301: Spring Break; Red Baron Mission Builder; B-17; Great Naval Battles in the North Atlantic; Theatre of War: Operation Fighting Tiger, and more! "


"Only The Cool Parts Of The Civil War Sid Meier Shares Some Thoughts About His Next Project pixic working the controls in his programmer brain. If one could but reverse-engineer Sid Meier's personal definitions of \"cool\" and \"fun,\" his design secrets would be exposed.  Red TYCOON YCOO TEISINE F-18 Covert Action The five days I spend in Las Vegas at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show are always a mixed bag of good times and exhausting work. One of the experiences that fell under the good times\" heading this year was an opportunity to spend some time hanging out with MicroProse's Ultimate Game Wizard, Sid Meier. While watching him noodle around with their World Circuit game during a lull in the show was entertaining (we nearly busted a gut when he drove over the man with the checkered flag at 200mph), his \"next project\" stories were better! While I was interviewing him for details about what goes on behind the closed doors of his MPS office (relax, it's game development), their Grand Vizier of Public Relations, the gracious and talented Kathy Gilmore, checked in occasionally to make sure that not too many beans were being spilled. Fortunately, she was kept busy enough with software buyers that I was able to get some privy info. . One important preface is that this game project, which will be a game on the American Civil War (1861-1865), is not locked into a schedule. If the game does not develop smoothly, the project may be scrubbed entirely. However, it is pretty far along and appears very likely to be published. by Alan Emrich ability. The computer opponent cannot be perceived as artificially cheating or a weak player. As with Civilization, no special effort is likely to be made to tie the game in for classroom use. Larger, mundane matters of the Civil War, such as logistics, are likely to be minimized (if they are presented at all). These are simply not \"fun.\" However, smaller tactical battlefield operations, will be included. Mr. Meier envisions a complete system for fighting out battles tactically (presumably at the brigade/regiment level which, technically, is more grand tactical than tactical). When asked about a miniatures tie-in for lead pushers (i.e.. the ability to print out orders of battles to be fought out on a table top and then input the results). Mr. Meier responded favorably. Tactical battles will be optional. In an effort to keep the war moving, they can be skipped and left to the computer to resolve in seconds. In order to keep things manageable, the Civil War game envisioned by Sid Meier will only be playable in the Eastern Theater (From North Carolina to Pennsylvania). The Mississippi campaigns and the war at sea will both be handled abstractly by a player-defined priority system. \"If it's fun, it works,\" says Mr. Meier, who added that having two campaigns (east and west) raging at the same time would detract from the player's total enjoyment. MICROTONE Sid's hits and misses. Why The Civil War? When he was a boy. Sid Meier used to flip through pictorial history books. One in particular stands out in his memory, The American Heritage History of the Civil War. In his Civil War game design, Mr. Mcier is attempting to capture the essence of that book and its presentation of the complexities of the Civil War in a manner which is visually (as well as viscerally) entertaining. Mr. Meier wants to recreate the toy soldiers (which grown-ups now call \"miniatures\") feel of playing in the sandbox so that players will have fun like they were kids again. Sid Meier's Civil War game (that's NOT the official title, by the way) has the player assuming the role of no individual person. Because the game telescopes during play between strategic, operational and tactical levels, the player will have to fill many roles. One moment, he might be an American President and the next, a general in the field. Sid Meier opted for this variance in command perspective because \"no one person did all the really cool and fun stuff.\" Mr. Meier went on to describe the player's role as sort of the Pug Henry (from War and Remembrance) of the Civil War i.c., at every major event when it occurs. What About Play Balance? When asked how such a one-sided affair as the American Civil War could ever be play balanced. Mr. Meier indicated that he had given that a lot of thought. Apparently, the focal point of the game will be the Union election of 1864. If Lincoln loses, so does the Union, as the South will get a negotiated peace. Foreign intervention is also possible. \"I thought it might be cool to have Napoleon III at Gettysburg,\" intimated Mr. Meier. Other events such as the draft riots and copperheads will have their effects on the game as well. Sid Meier in the throes of an \"inspirational flash.\" Note caffeinated game designer fuel in the background. Sid Meier: A Personality Profile Before getting into the details of the game, I must give readers an idea of what it is like to talk to Sid Meier (I'm told that I do a pretty respectable impression of the famous game designer). Sid Meier is very laid back. Closing on 40, the two most used adjectives in his gaming vocabulary are \"cool\" and \"fun.\" With thoughtful pauses and inflections in his low key manner of speech, it's clear that there is a playful Time Is Still Everything The game is currently set to play in real-time, as opposed to being turn based (as in Civilization). When asked if a real-time turn structure would finally beget modem or multiple human options in a Sid Meier game, the reply was \"W-C-I-I... We'll see.\" Mr. Meier then went on to underscore his deeply held belief that strong Al was critical to a game's success and enjoyRemember Civilization? Finally, I asked if Sid Meier would ever go back and do a bit more for his wildly successful Civilization game. \"There's too much demand for Civilization stuff to ignore it,\" he said. Among the many ideas he's kicking around for that game are a \"what happens next\" on earth kit and a \"Civ in Space\" expansion module. CGW Puge 140 Computer Gaming World "


"S.C.OUT It's a nasty job.... but someone NEW has to do it. To re-activate the abandoned moonbase, S.C.OUT must first seek and destroy the alien infestation. The base's entire arsenal is at your disposal: bombs, SAMS, force mirrors, cannons and even atomics. But first you have to find them using all the ingenuity and strategic powers at your disposal. Then attack! ni But be careful...the enemy has some nasty surprises of its own: mazes infested with worms, viruses, explosives and the sinister \"Slime\". Dazzling graphics and driving soundtrack add to the fun of your mission. TERTUTUSTE But remember, we warned you! DO088 8888 88 un munt Check out our other hot new games Cogito and The Tinies! A Kalisto game by INLINE DESIGN To order, visit your local retailer or call: 308 Main Street Lakeville, CT 06039 1-800-453-7671 S.C.OUT is available for IBM compatible (VGA) and Macintosh systems. \"Circle Reader Service #75 "


"Deview The Eagle Has Landed...Slowly MicroProse's F-15 Strike Eagle III by Doug Fick Doug Fick is an F-16 Instructor Pilot and Flight Examiner with the Vermont Air National Guard. He has logged over 1500 hour's of flight time in both F-16As and F-16Cs. TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: F-15 Strike Eagle III IBM $79.95 None Andy Holus, Jim Day, George Wargo, Chris Clark MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD PUBLISHER: ern combat aircraft and associated ordnance and threat systems that are presented in the simulation. After reading the manual, I still had a lot of unanswered questions about some of the more complex bombing modes and felt the air-to-air section could have been more detailed. The Strike Eagle is the most sophisticated strike bomber in existence, using some of the most advanced and complex avionics systems to achieve remarkable accuracy. Overall, the manual covers most of the material needed but, unlike the aircraft, misses the mark. The manual definitely doesn't do the gamer or the program justice. Ah well, there's only one solution for the die hard sim-fanatic jump in and take a spin. s the name suggests, F-75 Strike Eagle III (SE3) is Microprose's third installation of their F-15 Strike Eagle series. In an attempt to keep up with the competition. MicroProse pushes computer capabilities to the limit with advanced graphics and realism. From the moment the box is opened, it's easy to tell SE3 is a simulation of a modern fighter. Just one glance at the list of commands reveals the more than 80 keyboard combinations needed to run this high-tech bird. This can be either very intimidating or enticing, depending on the player's personality. I'll have to admit, I was a little of both when I saw this. Obviously, SE3 is not a program that can be jumped into without at least some familiarity with the manual. TRIKE EAGLE Eric'premiere Net Fighter Returns in Revolutionary Now Air Combat Action ACROPROSE Mission Briefing The manual is written in four sections, with aircraft controls covered first. This is the \"nuts and bolts\" section that discusses all of the cockpit and radar displays, along with basic explanations of all 80+ control keys. The following section deals with the standard mode (i.e. less realistic mode) of operation. Air-to-air and air-to-ground employment and landing are all discussed. The next section covers the authentic mode of operation and is nearly a repeat of the standard mode discussion but points out the differences between the two. Lastly, air combat, scenarios and weapons are explained. The air-to-air section is a mediocre treatise on air combat, while the scenario discussion does a credible job of setting the stage for the one historical (Iraq) and two hypothetical (Korea and Central America) theaters of operation. The weapons section consists of short descriptions on the modPreflight The Strike Eagle (alias \"Mudhen') was designed primarily as a single ship, night interdiction aircraft. In keeping with this mind set, MicroProse designed the program around single aircraft operations. Thus, SE3 is a \"me against the world\" game -once across the front line, the player is all alone and everything out there is hostile. All game options are selected from an open hangar. From here, a quick start single mission can be selected as well as one of three theaters of operation. Jumping into quick start puts the player right into the cockpit with a standard load of MK-82 freefall bombs. Careers can be either single mission or campaign. Once one of the three scenarios are selected, the next step Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"Our Keys To The Future. The Computer Learning Foundation We're helping you put kids on computers. Write to us today. We're here to help you ... Help kids key into computers ... Kids are the key to America's future. And computers are the tools of their times. By the year 2010, virtually every job in America will require some use of technology. That means we must prepare all of our youth today to take on technology tomorrow. You Won't Believe What you'll Aliever The Computer Learning Foundation helps parents and educators The Computer Learning Foundation is an international non-profit foundation taking the lead in computer literacy efforts. We are here to help parents and educators with the information and resources they need to help our children. We have involved millions in discovering the benefits of technology. Our Computer Learning Month in October is a focus for thousands of community and school programs. In addition, our lesson plan books, resource guides and information books help thousands of parents and educators each year use technology with children. Computers benefit children today. Computers can enhance children's learning and unlock their creativity. They can help children be more productive and develop better communication skills. Plus, children love using computers, so children maintain a positive attitude toward learning. For more information, write to: COMPUTER LEATH Computer Learning Foundation Dept. CGW P.O. Box 60007 Palo Alto, CA 94306-0007 The Computer Learning Foundation is a non-profit educational foundation funded by corporations. Corporate Partner: Sega Youth Education & Health Foundation Corporate Associate: IBM Corporation-EduQuest Principal Sponsors: Apple Computer, Inc. Computer Gaming World Curriculum Product News Egghead Software Electronic Learning Media & Methods Microsoft Corporation PC Home Journal Scholastic Software, Inc. T.H.E. Journal Teaching K-8 Technology & Learning "


"Deview graphics all turned down to the minimum level, it's barely fast enough to be usable. Turning the graphics up on this system leaves the program so choppy that I wouldn't want to play it. On a 486/50 and the highest level of detail the program shows some choppiness but normally can sustain at least six frames per second and usually runs over ten per second. I find anything less than five or so to be unusable but not everyone feels the same way I do. LLLL is to receive a mission briefing. This includes target, weather and munitions data. The munitions data is a recommended load and can be changed as desired. For the most part, all the menu screens are intuitive and well laid out. After just a few minutes in the program, I had a good feel for where everything was and how it worked. The weapons screen does take some getting used to. Instead of listing the weapons by name, ordnance is displayed graphically in front of the Strike Eagle. It takes a while to learn to recognize each munition. radar (both air-to-air and air-to-ground), tactical situation display (TSD; a moving map showing the Strike Eagle in the center), horizontal situation indicator (HSI; a navigational instrument also used for the ILS landing system), attitude director indicator (ADI: an artificial horizon used for flying in instrument conditions), armament page (showing either air-to-air or air-to-ground ordnance selection), headsup display repeater (nearly identical to the ADI), a master caution page showing which systems are inoperative due to combat damage and lastly, the tactical electronic warfare system (TEWS; showing threats either by icon in the standard mode or numeric system in the authentic mode). With so much flexibility can come conIn The Cockpits SE3 provides seven different multipurpose displays to keep track of aircraft systems, targeting and weapons status. There are three in the front cockpit and four in the back. Each display is user programmable as to what is shown. The options are QQP's Strategies of the Month Vol. 19 A monthly column to improve the quality of play Takeoff My first impression was \"Wow, this is one really good looking program,\" quickly followed by \"Wow, this is one really slow program!\" Graphically, the game is a delight. I spent the first ten minutes just looking at the Eagle from the external views. Gear, speed brake and ordnance load are all faithfully reproduced. When a missile or bomb is released the graphics change to reflect accordingly. The sky deserves a mention. It's the best I've seen in any program to date. I still haven't decided if I like the way that ground detail is displayed. At first it annoyed me. It seemed to flicker by looking more like a brown or green ocean with the sun rippling off it, but after playing the program for awhile this sensation went away. Targets are well detailed and consist of an immense array varying from Scud launchers to bridges to anything else that can be imagined. If a target is in the middle of a city, sure enough, there will be a city faithfully reproduced right down to the minarets. The anti-aircraft fire from within the city looked like it came from a CNN highlight film of Baghdad with tracers arcing everywhere. Normally, on the first pass over the target all the gunners are asleep, but try to come in a second time and Mr. GsH-23 just might have a 23 millimeter surprise waiting. The detailed graphics come at a very heavy cost. I've seen the program run on everything from a 386/33Mhz system to a 486/50Mhz system. On a 386/33 with the CONQUERED KINGDOMS: . Instead of always taking 60% of the counties in Cascatia, switch to taking thrones as your objective. Having to take all the thrones in a given Cascatia campaign makes for a whole new style of strategy. Something very few people know is that you can double teleport in the same turn with two wizards. If both wizards start with 7 mana or better, one can teleport, bring other units plus the second wizard with him. Even though that second wizard has turned gray it can also teleport and bring all the original units with him. Try it, it's fun. An obvious strategy is to take as many castles as possible quickly. But, many a game has been lost when a player puts most of his efforts into taking castles and almost forgetting the large point towns.. Remember, if you decide on a large force of dragon strategy, you should intermingle them with gargoyles or your opponents archers could devastate you. A super and fun challenge: Play any scenario against the computer (advanced mode) and only use human characters. You'll be surprised at the difference in play style. SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY Go to the back of the manual and try all the strategy type games. They will challenge your mind. BATTLES OF DESTINY Play a game with no air transports. Quantum Quality Productions 1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 Circle Reader Service #98 Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview fusion. The player new to the game might very well get frustrated at first trying to sort out all this information. Cockpit management should be the first priority on any mission. One needs to decide what is necessary to employ ordnance and survive, then set up each cockpit accordingly. The possible set-ups are endless and experimentation is highly encouraged. Jumping between the front and back seats is accomplished via a single keystroke, so access to all seven displays is quick and easy during the mission. One recommendation: turn the autopilot on prior to getting into the pit since it's hard to fly from the back seat, even with the HUD repeater called up. effects of thin air at altitude is shown. When first coming off a tanker and carrying a full load of high explosives, it's nearly impossible to stay above 25,000 feet without tapping the afterburner. Conversely, drop the ordnance, burn down some fuel, and the plane reacts far differently. MicroProse deserves a solid A for accurate aircraft performance. Spectrum HoloByte and the Falcon 3.0 team could learn something about realistic flight characteristics from this program. Gen. Hortos WAKE VIND SONOROG 42013 Rian infrared 3.04 bany infracarep-pdictestonint Grock 2000 Fendi effect on tey.co m MOUNT GRU-15 RT WITH A-GP CLEAR STATION NEXT STATION MORENA cally, by the time two aircraft are within gun range, one of the planes is exiting the merge in a fireball after having been popped with a missile. Gun combat does occasionally occur and the program doesn't do too bad in this environment. Graphically, other aircraft are fairly detailed and displayed larger than scale to give aspect and closure cues to the player. Hitting with the gun is very easy, far easier than in an actual dogfight. Not only is the enemy aircraft displayed larger than life, but the area to hit is also larger. It's like fighting a maneuverable 747 once it's out front it becomes rich acreage in which to plant bullets. A \"C+\" sounds about right for the grade in gun fighting. If the task load gets too great, just call up a friend and run the mission over the modem with one player in front and another running systems from the pit. Other modem options are cooperative wingmen with two Strike Eagles sent on an interdiction sortie acting as a team and lastly, head to head competition. Since the program speed is dependent upon the slowest of the two computers, modem play requires a pair of fairly quick machines to run at an acceptable frame rate. Weapons Employment (Air To Air) Winning in the air-to-air arena usually boils down to one phrase \"he who shoots first wins.\" With the huge APG-70 radar throwing out enough energy to light up a small city, that normally means the Eagle. Additionally, a sharp lookout at the TEWS will show any interceptor trying to flank radar coverage. Lastly, the external tactical view is used to visually pick up threats that are using ground controlled radar (GCI) to intercept the Mudhen. Since aircraft using GCI often have their own radar in standby, they won't trigger the TEWS, and if they approach from the side or rear and not picked up visually, the first indication of their presence may very well be expanding rods of metal traveling at mach five ripping through the Eagle. Missile combat is very well done. The radar display is integrated with the use of the mouse to designate targets and provides the most accurate portrayal of modern fighter radar operation yet seen. The HUD symbology is right on and missile ranges and launch parameters are very good. SE3 is the first simulation since Flight of the Intruder, to portray the AIM7 Sparrow missile. For the first time, players can't merely \"fire and forget.\" The AIM-7 requires the aircraft's radar to illuminate the target until impact, forcing new tactics to be practiced. What if my Eagle and that Fulcrum on the nose launch at the same time? Should I hang around and hope my missile hits first, thus destroying his radar and the guidance to his AA-10 Alamo, or should I drag, dumping my missile guidance but also putting the Fulcrum's missile into an out of range tail chase? It's a shame the manual didn't go into greater depth on how and why these systems operate the way they do. Players would be fascinated and, much more importantly, would more easily understand what needs to be accomplished and why, in order to employ missiles. The program gets a solid \"A\" in my gradebook for missile combat, but the manual pulls down only a \"C-\". The Strike Eagle is not, and was not intended to be, a dogfighter. Air-to-air gun combat is and should be a last resort. TypiRODE Dolce Aircraft Performance Model The performance model in the standard mode is grossly overpowered. Much like Falcon 3.0, it seems that someone grafted an extra Pratt and Whitney engine to the airframe. However, once authentic mode is called up and a few stores are loaded, players get a good feel for how fast energy bleeds off when pulling G's. Even the Weapons Employment (Air-to-Ground) The meat of the Strike Eagles mission is delivering air to ground ordnance with devastating accuracy. The aircraft uses multiple systems to put weapons on target. The inertial navigation system (INS) ties into the global positioning system (GPS) to provide navigation accuracy in the tens of feet. The synthetic aperture APG-70 radar utilizes Doppler beam sharpening to *paint a near picture-like image from ground returns, and the forward looking infrared (FLIR) pod allows the pilot and weapons system operator to both see and target in the dark. Finally, the laser designator is used to guide laser bombs with pinpoint accuracy. Each one of these systems is simulated in the game, and learning which to use and when to use it can be a challenge. It takes ora 190 a 1999 ARE April 1993 Page 145 "


"Deview Advertisers List time to understand and employ the various modes of weapons employment. There are three types of ordnance the F-15 utilizes. The first and easiest to understand is freefall gravity munitions such as Mk-82s, Mk-84s and cluster bombs like Rockeye, CBU-87s and CBU-89s. These come off the aircraft with no subsequent guidance and let Sir Isaac Newton's laws of gravity do the work. There are two 171 167 Se IEEE.FR 127 or very short impact. A good example of this is the film of the miss from the mid January strike on the SAM sites south of Iraq's 32nd parallel. The way that the system is simulated in SE3 is very true to life, but I found employing GBUs in the program difficult. Since there are no support aircraft to help suppress enemy surface-to-air systems, flying at high altitude in the authentic mode is perilous at best. While it's possible to fly low and loft the GBUs at the target, it's not easy to do. The last category of munitions are powered systems like the Harpoon, Maverick, HARM and SLAM missiles. Lock the weapon onto the target and guided\" will appear in the HUD when in range. All these systems are fire and forget, so once launched, other tasks can be performed. SE3 does a very good job handling a multitude of delivery systems in a realistic fashion. As with the air-to-air radar, air-toground targeting is handled with the mouse (or keyboard) and provides a highly accurate simulation. The hardest part of getting into and enjoying the program is learning how to implement the many systems and devise tactics to take advantage of each type's strengths. In this area, SE3 gets an outstanding \"A+\". The only question is, do most game buyers have the patience and perseverance to learn how to use them. I know several people who gave up on the program early and quit playing it altogether. It's a shame because SE3 provides a lot of insight into, and is an accurate portrayal of, strike fighter operations. 1 Access Software 130-131 Adanac Command Amtex Software Apogee Software Aztech Systems 169 Blue Valley Software Cape Cod Connection Cerebel Info. Arts 134 Chips & Bits 65, 67, 151, 153, 155. 157, 159, 161 Combat Entertainment 134 Computer Express 147 Computer Learning Foundation 143 Compsult 156 Computability Computer Learning Foundation Consumer Electronics Show Creative Labs Creative Software Systems Digispeech Disk-Count Software 135 Electronic Arts Enchanted Horizons 132 Flagship Magazine 118 Formgen GEnie 113. 114, 115 Gosselin Computer HPS Simulations Impressions 35, 37, 39, 41.43.111. 164 In-Line Design 141 Inner Circle Software 102 Keyboard Commander 156 Kids & Computers 127 Koei Konami Lance Haffner Games Legend Entertainment Liberty International Merit Software MicroProse Software 73, 75, 77 Mindcraft Software Mission Control MPG Net 82-83 New World Computing 69 No Name Software Origin Systems 180 Paper Mayhem Point of View 121 Psygnosis 5, 149 QQP 32-33, 144 Qualitas Reality Simulations SDJ Entrprises 152 Sideline Software 105 Sierra On-Line 14, 15, 57. 58-59, 61, 63, 89 Sir-Tech Strategic Simulations 48-49, 93 Spectrum HoloByte Supersoft Three-Sixty Pacific 117 Thrustmaster Twin Engine Gaming 92 Viking Software 128-129 Villa Crespo 45 Virgin Games 11, 13, 17, 19 Zeros & Ones 124 -1 47 163 79 methods to find the proper moment of release. First is the continuously displayed impact line (death dot). Merely fly the pipper over the target and hit the pickle button. The second way is to let the aircraft decide when to release the weapons by using the auto mode. After designating the target by use of the radar or having it pre-planned in the INS, just fly over the target with the pickle button down and the plane will calculate the release point. This is a great mode for dropping bombs with minimal risk to the Strike Eagle. It lets the jet stay right on the deck since the target doesn't have to be acquired visually. Of course, if I really dropped a non-retarded bomb from 300 feet it probably wouldn't arm and if it did, would blow me out of the sky. The program doesn't seem to take into account the fragmentation envelope from one's own weapons, which can often extend out to 3000 feet. The second set of munitions are laser guided bombs. Most of the highlight film from Desert Storm showed this type of bomb hitting with devastating accuracy. In Desert Storm, the typical delivery was from high altitude. The target is located by using the radar and INS, and then the laser designator is slaved to it. The laser is turned on and reflected energy bouncing from the target is picked up by a receiver in the nose of the glide bomb unit (GBU). Once in range, the bomb is released and falls ballistically toward the target. The laser receiver steers the bomb to zero in on the reflected energy from the target. If everything works right, the bomb will strike the target within tens of inches from the exact spot where the laser is pointed. Every once in a while the receiver loses the reflected energy and the bomb goes ballistic, usually resulting in either a very long 105 RE Post Mission Analysis When I first started playing SE3, I really didn't like the program. I definitely wasn't awed by the manual and had to force myself to put time into the game. A funny thing happened along the way. The more I played and learned about it, the more impressed I became. The systems and aircraft are very faithfully reproduced and provide an excellent feel for what it's like to run a modern, complex strike aircraft. It is definitely a worthy simulation. Cow Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"FIND OUT WHAT HACKING JO REALLY MEANS.. ...It means that we've hacked our way through hundreds of titles to find the best, then we slashed our prices. So you spend less time trying, and more time flying! Here are some of the games we're playing this month... orld... DUNGEON B-17 Flying Fortress.......$39 Yeager's Air Combat.......$38 Links 386 Pro ................$42 Global Conquest.......... Out of This World ..........$36 Indiana Jones 4............ Ultima Underworld ........$47 Gunship 2000............. THE SOURCE FOR SOFTWARE, THE GUIDE TO GAMES 1-800-624-8228 Internat'l Fax/Phone: 1-718-624-8228 HOURS: 12PM 12AM EST, M-F ADDRESS: Digital Dungeon 45 Duffield St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 TERMS: We accept money orders, personal checks, wire transfers. Credit Card and CASH/CERT C.O.D.'s from established customers. SHIPPING: We charge by shipping weight/class + 15%. We use U.S. Mail, UPS, Federal Express & Airborne Express. APO's are no problem, charged 1st class mail rate. Foreign shipping by weight & courier + 25%. N.Y.S. residents add 8.25% sales tax. All products are new and guaranteed. Call for exchange/return policy. NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR TPOS! Circle Reader Service #61 SE RESPONSIBLE'Pong by weighing weightclass. "


"o pevneun Strikingly Handsome SSI's Carrier Strike Expansion Disk the player which can only be overcome by proper tactics and even better luck. TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: # PLAYERS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Carrier Strike Expansion Disk IBM VGA 0.2 $29.95 Documentation Look-Up Gary Grigsby Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 yarrier Strike has previously received extensive coverage, with both review (CGW #97) and replay formats (CGW #98, 99). In this expansion disk, designer Gary Grigsby has added four scenarios and a new campaign. Most of the game mechanics haven't changed (see below for exceptions) and the graphics treatment is the same. The sound support has been extended somewhat, but the major benefit for those who purchase this expansion module is to get the new scenar10S. by M. Evan Brooks (akin to the \"Cone of Silence?\"), the player will have to husband his night fighters carefully. Night CAP can drastically reduce incoming threats. Massed strikes cannot be accomplished at night (technology was not sufficiently advanced), but even a minor bomb hit (and with bombers now carrying up to 2-ton bombs, a minor hit may not be so \"minor») can render a flight deck inoperable. Also, night searches find the enemy, minor damage may render him hors de combat, and the breaking of a new dawn may well see a massed strike bringing it all home. Even more interesting, the first-generation of \"stand-off\" weapons is available. While the bombers will have to break through enemy CAP, they will not have to endure flak. While it is difficult to tell how statistically accurate the new weapons are, it appears that their use engenders some major damage to enemy carriers. Overall, the 1947 Campaign is an interesting facet of carrier warfare. However, do not be lulled into a false sense of security. An easy first victory by the Americans may be followed by a major Japanese effort (and success). As noted in earlier replay articles, \"you've got to know when to hold them, and when to fold 'em!» README (Documentation) The documentation may generously be described as sparse; realistically it may be described as virtually non-existent on paper. A data card (5.5\" square) tells how to install the program. That's it! Luckily, there is a text file of three pages, which should be printed out. It explains the changes in Version 1.1 and gives a short paragraph about the new scenarios. Overall, the documentation is chintzily sufficient. Fresh Waters (New Scenarios) There are five new scenarios, and each may be used as a new starting point for a Pacific Campaign: (1) WAKE ISLAND (Dec., 941): Two American carriers attempt to support Wake Island following the «Debacle at Pearl.\" While the number of carriers per side is generally even, one of the American carriers is using Brewster Buffaloes as its primary fighter. An exercise in futility, the historic scenario begins with the American carriers placed too far eastward to be of any help; the typical scenario will generally see the Japanese sink the carriers with little risk. This scenario is best used as a start for a long campaign and the American may well consider declining battle. (2) PLAN ORANGE (Jan., .42): Assume the Japanese did not attack pearl Harbor. This scenario envisions the battlewagons rushing to engage as each side uses around three carriers to scout ahead of the \"Main Battle Fleets.\" (3) ROSSEL ISLAND (March, '42): The worst case scenario, assuming that the Pearl Harbor Raid also hit the carriers. Luckily, the British lend a hand, and a huge battle develops off Port Moresby (five Allied vs. six Japanese carriers). (4) GUADALCANAL (August, '42): Midway never occurred, and now the crux of the Pacific War will be fought off Guadalcanal — eight Japanese carriers against five American. Losses will be high in this one! (5) OPERATION KE (February, '43): The Japanese try to retake Henderson Field — four Japanese vs. two American carriers. Ironbottom Sound fills with more than destroyers and cruisers... Finally, and most importantly, the 1947 Campaign. Postulating a world in which war was delayed for five years, this campaign allows for a year of battles with new ships, planes and weapons systems. Generally, I find the Fascist Hypotheticals somewhat \"bombastic.\" However, the 1947 Campaign simply allows for a different look at carrier employment. With night fighters and bombers capable of penetrating the \"Shield of Darkness\" Keep 'Em Flying? (Game Mechanics) Certain game mechanics have been modified. The longer an aircraft is operational, the higher the attrition rate. Thus, the \"three strikes per day» rate may still be maintained, but non-combat losses will render such tactics self-defeating. Additionally, aircraft may be repaired at night (roughly six planes per carrier per night), the computer uses more discretion in sailing \"in harm's way,\" and finally, one may divert aircraft to another carrier due to flight deck damage. While these changes are incremental, the operational attrition radically changes the complexion of the game. Historically more accurate, it presents an obstacle to Sunset (Conclusions) What can be said of the Expansion Disk? It is interesting and makes Carrier Strike even more challenging to play. However, there is a major caution with the expansion disk — marketing and pricing. Normally, I never address pricing in product lines. Discounting is so prevalent and heavy that retail prices are a ceiling which is rarely touched. However, the Expansion Disk is only sold by mail from SSI. Its price of $29.95 when compared with the full program's retail cost of $59.95 may only be described as excessive. Although an interested user may well derive full value from the Expansion Disk in terms of cost per hour of use, it should also be noted that the full program can be purchased at discount for about $37. Similar expansion disks have heretofore sold for $19.95; at such a price, I would feel no hesitation in recommending this product (especially when one could again purchase it at discount for $15), but at full list price, I would defer a purchase of this sort. C6W Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"TM THEY'RE BACK!!! with new skills, for a new world... ZSYNOSIS ** * 12 BRAND NEW TRIBES OF LEMMINGS, EACH WITH THEIR OWN SKILLS * SKIERS, SURFERS, BONGO PLAYERS, SNAKE-CHARMERS & MORE * PUZZLING PROBLEMS WITH HILARIOUS ANIMATION * SAVE THE TRIBES & WIN THE TALISMAN 8-WAY SCROLLING * ENHANCED SOUND SUPPORT WITH DIGITISED LEMMING VOICES production designed by DMA DESIGN * RIVETING GAME PLAY IN THE LEMMINGS TRADITION Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 Tel: (617) 731-3553 Fax: (617) 731-8379 Circle Reader Service #127 "


"DUInn Spoils of War RAW Entertainment's Game of Conquest and Exploitation by Jeff James 2-4 TITLE: Spoils of War ack when 8-bit maSYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM chines such as the REVIEWED ON: Amiga #PLAYERS: Commodore 64 and PRICE: $49.95 the Apple II reigned supreme PROTECTION: Documentation look-up DESIGNER: German Design Group in the world of computer PUBLISHER: RAW Entertainment gaming, a small software League City, TX company released a program which cast the player as an ocean-going explorer searching for the New World. With a well-crafted interface and an engaging storyline, this game of European Colonialism emerged as one of the most memorable games of the 8-bit era. The game (as many of CGW's veteran readers may have already surmised) was Dan Bunten's Seven Cities of Gold, and the company was the brand new Electronic Arts. However, good game ideas never really die; they simply bide their time until a suitable sales gimmick comes along to warrant their re-birth. Such is the case with RAW Entertainment's Spoils of War (Spoils), released to roughly coincide with the 500th anniversary of Columbus' journey to America. Impression's Discovery: In the Steps of Columbus and Koei's Uncharted Waters also were released in 1992, attempting to capitalize on the hype, history and hoopla of the famous explorer's exploits. Ironically, EA's update of Seven Cities of Gold was originally supposed to appear in this time frame, but was delayed. With Spoils, RAW Entertainment and the German Design Group have attempted to craft an engaging tale of colonialism and conquest, giving gamers a chance to sail the bounded main in search of fame, fortune and unclaimed real estate. simultaneously, increase the power and influence of their own empires. An additional play option introduces the element of the «Cayas,\", a tribe of neutral Indian natives strongly patterned after the ancient Aztecs — that may interfere with human and computer players alike. After names have been chosen for all participants and the \"look up the word\" copy protection has been successfully dealt with, the game begins. First on the list of things to accomplish is the hiring of explorers, non-player characters who act as \"middle-management.\" These four types of explorers admirals, generals, commanders and governors — each have a particular area of expertise. Admirals command fleets, transfer supplies, gold, soldiers and other explorers across the oceans; generals command land-based armies; while commanders and governors primarily deal with management of cities and harbors. The manual states that up to 600 explorers can be present in the game, divided between all four players. Skilled use of each of these explorer types is essential to doing well in the game. The bulk of the game's play takes place on two map levels: strategic and tactical. The strategic level allows nearly all of the non-military decisions to be made and provides the view to direct forces on the world map. This map is a surprisingly limited one, with each of the up to four players beginning the game crowded together on a tiny island in the center of the game map. The map is only 64 X 64 squares in dimension at the strategic level, although greater detail can and does exist at the tactical level. About half of this map consists of ocean, while the edges of the map along all compass directions consist of unexplored land mass. While this geographical layout serves well for the abstract gaming style that Spoils uses, gamers looking for a fairly accurate recreation of the historical European expansion to the New World will be disappointed to use this system, abstract in both the political and geographical sense. The tactical level is where combat takes place, with two disPrelude To A Big Land Grab Spoils allows from two to four players (human or computer-controlled) to compete in a quest to colonize distant lands and, Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Call 800—753—4263 Shipping to US PRAK,HI, APO & FPO SA perorder. Air Mail to Canada $6 perorder. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $121st Item+$2 ea, add'l AK $191st item + $2 ea. add. Handling S1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mall $19 1st item +$6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall S251st Item +S6 ea. add I. Handling S1 per shipment, IBM WARGAMES IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS MASQUE VIDEO POKER for Windows     Rommel Battles For N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein Rommel at Gazala Rorke's Drift Second Front Seventh Fleet Stalingrad Campaign Storm Across Europe Third Reich To The Rhine Typhoon of Steel UMS 2 UMS 2 Civil War $24 UMS 2 Desert Storm Scen $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $28 Under Fire $12 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikiye Luki $44 V for Victory: Market Garden $44 Victory at Sea $37 Vulcan $34 War in the Falklands $26 Warship that changed Histry $26 Waterloo $16 Western Front $36 White Death $24 \"VIDEO POKER gives you complete game strategies for Las Vegas and Atlantic City video poker. Expert strategy tables, availablein pop-up windows, show which of your current play options yield the best payoff average. Features double down option, practice drills, exciting tournament mode, & rapid computer simulation. $19 WINEXMS Learn to play Video Poker like an Expert! $43 $31  IBM SPORTS       $17 $32 'MAXX COBRA FLIGHTSTICK brings together the thrill of a joystick and the versatility of the keyboard. Features molded casing for left or right handers, 7 button pistol grip joy. stick, 25 programmable functions, exact auto-centering, and true circular directional control. Game port not necessary. $ 54 4D Boxing 4th & Inches $4 4th & Inches Team Const $10 ABC Monday Night FB $37 ABC Wide World Boxing APBA Baseball $24 APBA Base TD 1908-89 Ea $21 APBA Base Team Disk 1990 S19 APBA Base Team Disk 1991 $19 APBA Baseball General Man $29 APBA Baseball Statmstr 2.0 $29 APBA Baseball Wizard 2.0 $29 APBA Basketball $34 APBA Bowling $14 APBA College Basketball $32 APBA Football $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 ATP Tennis $34 Action Sports Soccer $25 All American College Ftbll $36 All Star Sports Pak S15 American Gladiators $21 Basketball Challenge $28 Bball Challenge 1987 Teams $13 Bball Challenge 1988 Teams $13 Bball Challenge 1989 Teams S17 Bball Challenge 1990 Teams $17 Bo Jackson Baseball $32 Carl Lewis Challenge $32 Cycles Grand Prix $28 Daily Double Horse Racing $19 Days of Thunder $24 Dirk's Baseball Encyc $19 Face Off Fast Break $6 Front Page Football $39 Future Sports $28 Games Winter Challenge $34 Grand Prix Circuit Greens HardBall HardBall 2 Hardball 3 Hardball 3 Players Disk Hardball 3 Stadium Disk Harlem Globetrotters $15 Hat Trick $9 Hole In One Mini Golf S12 Hole In One Mini Golf Crs Disk $7 Hole In One Mini Golf Dix S12 Indianapolis 500 $17 International Sports Chall $29 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 927 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $27 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $12 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 1 $15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 2 $15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 3 $15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 4 $15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 5 $15 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed $40 Jack Nicklaus SE Course 1 $19 Jack Nicklaus SE Clip Art $24 Joe Montana Football $31 Lakers vs Celtics $17 LH Base 70's Series $16 LH Base 80's Series $16 LH Baseball 1989 Team Disk $16 LH Baseball 1990 Team Disk $16 LH Baseball League Leaders $16 LH Boxing Contenders $16 LH Col Bball 87-88 Teams S16 LH Col Bball 88-89 Teams $16 LH Col Bball 89-90 Teams $16 LH Col Bball L Leaders LH Col Bball Utilities $16 LH Coll Basketball 91 TD S16 LH Football 1989 Teams $16 LH Football 1990 Teams $16 LH Football 70's Teams $16 LH Football 80's Series $16 LH Football L Leaders $16 LH Football Utilities $16 LH Pro BBall 91 Team Disk $16 LH Pro Baskeball Utilities S16 LH Pro Basketball $36 LH Pro Basketball L Leaders $16 LH Pro Basketball Utilities $16 Lance Haffner Baseball Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Lance Haffner College BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football $36 Lance Hafner Hockey $36 Links $29 Links Course 1 Bountiful $17 Links Course 2 Firestone $17 Links Course 3 Bay Hill S17 Links Course 4 Pinehurst S17 Links Course 5 Dorado $17 Links Course 6 Barton Creek $17 Links Course 7 Troon North $17 Links Pro 386 Golf S32 Links Pro Course 1 Mauna $20 Links Pro Course 2 Pineh $20 Links Pro Course Disk 3 $20 Low Blow $12 MUDS S12 ML Baseball $28 ML Baseball 4 USAT $31 ML Baseball Genrl Mngr $24 ML 1970s World Series $17 ML 1980s World Series S17 ML Basebll Season 83.90 Ea S17 ML Baseball All Stars $17 ML Baseball Franchise Disks $20 ML Baseball Manager's Ch $19 ML Baseball 4 USAT F Mgr $25 ML Baseball 4 USAT G Mgr $19 ML Basketball $28 ML Basketball All Stars $34 ML Football 2 $39 ML Football Deluxe $39 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 ML Wrestling 1990 $28 Madden Football $17 Madden Football 2 $32 Madden Player Stats 87-88 $18 Madden Player Stats 90 S18 Magic Johnson Fast Break Magic Johnson MVP S15 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Michael Jordan Flight Sim $38 Microsoft Golf for Windows $39 Mike Ditka Power Football $32 NFL Challenge $60 NFL Chall Col Alumni Teams $22 NFL Chall Game Situation Ed $20 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 $22 NFL Challenge 1984 Teams $15 NFL Challenge 1985 Teams $15 NFL Challenge 1986 Teams $15 NFL Challenge 1987 Teams $15 NFL Challenge 1988 Teams $22 NFL Challenge 1989 Teams $22 NFL Challenge 1990 Teams $22 NFL Challenge 1991 Teams $22 NFL Chalinge All Star Team $22 NFL Challnge Dream Teams $20 NFL Chling Greatest Teams $22 NFL Challenge Premium Ed $59 NFL Football $31 NFL Proleague Football $19 NFL Proleague Football 92 S24 NFL Video Football Nascar Challenge Orel Hershiser's Strike Zone $28 Over the Net $9 PGA Tour Golf PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed PGA Tour Golf WIN Playmaker Football Power Hits: Sports Pro League Baseball Pro Tennis Tour 2 ProFootball Analyst 92 Ed RBI 2 Reel Fish'n Road to the Final Four Serve & Volley Shufflemania Skate or Die Sport of Kings Sporting Triangle Summer Challenge Super Car Pak TKO Team Suzuki Tennis Cup Tie Break Tennis Tom Landry Football Tony LaRussa Baseball Tony La R Fantasy Manager $15 Tony La R Classic Stadiums S15 Tony LaRussa AL Stadiums $15 Tony LaRussa NL Stadiums $15 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $15 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $15 Tony LaRussa TD 1901-68 $15 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 $36 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 $34 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Wayne Gretzky League $26 Weaver 2.0 Comm Edition S41 Weaver Baseball 1.5 S19 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Weaver Commissner Disk 2 $16 Weaver Team & Player 90 $12 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Circuit World Class Soccer $28 $24 'ARMADA 2525 is an epic struggle of galactic conquest. Carefully balance military spending and industrial growth. Invest in research and development to gain technological superiority. Seek out and colonize the best star systems as you move your armadas to defend your planets or launch an attack on eninterstel emy fleets. S29 $34 $17 IBM ROLE PLAYING $45 2400 AD $24 ADD Collector's Edition 2 ADD Starter Kit $35 Autoduel $26 Bad Blood $31 Bard's Tale 2 $19 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Bard's Tale Construction $19 Battletech $12 APR CGW3 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #49 "


"pevnew tinctly different screen types: naval combat and land combat. Naval combat involves maneuvering ships into and out of attack positions by way of an overhead map. Commands exist for firing cannon, changing course, boarding enemy ships and other tactical options. If the player can make it through hostile seas, a land battle may be in the player's future upon landfall. During land combat, Spoils offers a close-up view of the battlefield and any engaged units. In addition to being able to move a wide variety of explorers around the game map to do the players' bidding, Spoils offers a wealth of secondary and tertiary play options. Gold can be spent on research and development in the hope of increasing the effectiveness of ships and weapons) or can be allocated for building settlements, harbors and mines. A variety of military units are available for use in battle, including artillery, cavalry, marines, engineers and lowly foot COMPUTER WARGAMES soldiers. More soldiers Historically Accurate...Easy To Use can be recruited, and opFor IBMT PC and Compatibles tions are available for training existing soldiers BIG THREE la GRANDE to a more advanced state (V 2.01) ARMEE of combat capability. FiWWII Strategy Game Napoleon's Campaigns nally, players can view Seven Scenarios, Map Seven Scenarios, Map World-renown, New Release the Spoils gameworld by Hard Drive Required Challenging Intense way of a quartet of map European Theatre Austerlitz to Waterloo functions, ranging from $25 Each. Send check or money order to: political and economic SDJ Enterprises, Inc. views to detailed geoDepartment C 314) 966-5602 graphical maps. 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. Evenings Only St. Louis, MO 63131 Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk PLAYER FOSITIONS PROFITIOS GOLOTH FHASE EVERAL \"SUMER 150 GINOPAL Circle Reader Service #101 Hard-Drive Heroics Amiga owners tired of shuffling floppy disks will be pleased to hear that the Amiga version of Spoils fully supports hard-drive installation, thanks to an AmigaDOS 2.0-style hard drive installation routine. Although the graphics used in Spoils are rather plain, the sounds are well-done. When at sea, players will hear the splashing of waves, the creaking of wood and the calls of sea birds. Although the sound is generally of high quality, a good deal of the effects which are used may quickly begin to grate on a gamers' nerves (especially the exultant cry soldiers give after each victory in land combat). Rough Seas Ahead As annoying as a few of the sounds used in Spoils might become, the biggest obstacle facing gamers will be dealing with the Spoils interface. Although the game does support a mouse, looking at the structure of most of the game screens indicates that very little thought was put into making mouse and game mesh well together. Mouse \"hot spots\" are often hard to discern from the rest of the screen, making the use of a keyboard a more attractive play option. When the player finally learns how to best instruct the program what to do, playing the game itself is made more difficult by a large number of screens which look remarkably alike. Controlling dozens of explorers — of different (618) occupations — by way of 9 8 Bn l similarly colored and structured screens can be a tedious endeavour. BETHEL e ato Spoils has a great deal of detail buried under this recalcitrant control sysCCTPUTERVE tem. It is unfortunate that it requires so much effort to effectively appreciate that detail. Another niggling quirk concerns the time period used for the game: gameplay begins in AD 1800, a time period in which a good deal of the historical \"New World» had already been explored. The game graphics and the illustrations used on the manual/box-cover strongly resemble images commonly associated with the early to mid-16th Century, with plate-clad conquistadors brandishing muskets and other weaponry common to that period. While RAW Entertainment might not have specifically intended Spoils to be an accurate representation of history, this reviewer would have liked a little more history and a bit less abstraction. Spoils is an unarguably ambitious attempt at giving gamers a glimpse into the military, political and logistical problems that explorers faced when they sought out the PROFIT ON GOLD New World. UnfortuCOVERNOR OUFUS (015) nately, it drowns itself with this very same deSal 198 tail, forcing players to wallow through poorly designed menus and play options. With imKEY/CLICK HOUSE proved graphics, a less cumbersome interface and a greater dose of historical accuracy, Spoils of War could emerge as an excellent choice for wargamers looking for a break from more conventional gaming tableaus. Without those improvements, Spoils of War is an ocean-going adventure which only the most tenacious of gamers will enjoy. CGW COMPUTER BASKETBAL IBM  APPLE IL C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! COURT-SIDE COLLEGE BASKETBALL Included are 286 teams from the most recent season and 70 all-time greats  Player statistical accuracy from ability to tire and foul to overall contribution factor Stats compiler . You determine style of play. whether to press or use 45 second clock, weather game played at home court or neutral site and much more! PLAYER POSITION PHASE GOVERNOR SPRING E S BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose lineups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler  Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule . All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies 25 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $19.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. LANGE HAFENER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #60 Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITHYOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'1802—767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PR,AK,HI.APO & FPO S4perorder. Air Mall to Canada $6 perorder. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US SG por order;PR, HI $121stItem +$2 ea, ada AK$191st Item +$2 ea. add'l. Handling $i per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mail $191st item+$6 ea. add'l Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1stitom +$6ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING CHARACTER EDITORS in $21 $49 S16 $37 $39 'GEMINI JOYSTICK'features a full size handle, 6 large tactile buttons, dual axis trim adjustors for precision control, turbo fire, 4 stabilizing suction cups, & testing disk. Fully compatible with high speed PC's (PC, XT, AT, 386, 486, & compatibles). S19 Eye of the Beholder 2 Fountain of Dreams Hard N Hard Nova Keef the Thief Keys to Maramon Knights of Legend Lord of the Rings V1 $16 Lord of the Rings V2 $16 Magic Candle 1 $16 Magic Candle 2 $16 Martian Dreams $16 Mega Traveller:Zhodani Mega Traveller 2 Might & Magic 1 Might & Magic 2 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 Might and Magic 1 $16 Might and Magic 2 Planet's Edge Pool of Radiance Savage Empire $16 Secret of Silver Blades S16 Sentinel Worlds S16 Space 1889 $16 Space Rogue S16 Tales Magic Prophcy Shadw $16 Treasure Savage Frontier $15 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4 $16 Ultima 5 $16 Ultima 6 $16 Ultima 7 $16 Ultima Uworld Stygian Abyss $15 Wasteland $16 Wizardry (1-3) $16 Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 $16 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $16 Wizadry 7 Crusaders S16 $16 $15 S16 $38 $9 Battletech 2 Black Crypt Bloodwych $15 Buck Rogers Countdown $12 Captain Blood $9 Captive $30 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn Cobra Mission Conan $16 Corporation $19 Curse of the Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Empire $32 Cyber Space $38 Cybergenic Ranger $9 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Sun Darklands Darklands Master Ed/book $51 Darkspyre $32 Daughter of Serpents $32 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Dragon Strike $15 Dragon Wars $12 Dragons of Flame Drakkhen $37 Dungeon Master $34 Dusk of the Gods $24 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus VGA $27 Elvira Mistress Dark $29 Escape From Hell $17 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Eye of the Beholder 3 $39 Eye of the Horus $28 Fire King $19 Flames of Freedom MWIL $28 Fountain of Dreams $15 Four Crystals of Trazere $26 Gateway Savage Frontier $32 Gods $26 Hard Nova $17 Heaven and Earth $32 Hero's Quest Heroes of the Lance Heros Quest 1 VGA Heros Quest 2 Heros Quest 3 Hillstar $15 Immortal $17 Joan of Arc $12 Keys to Marimon King's Bounty $15 Legacy of the Necromancer $17 Legend $31 Legend of Valor $39 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Loremaster $39 Lure of the Temptress $37 M $45 Magic Candle 1 $12 Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Martian Dreams Matrix Cubed Mechwarrior MegaTraveller:Zhodani $12 Mega Traveller 2 Mega Traveller 3 $39 Midwinter $12 Might & Magic 1 $12 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $34 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen $34 Might & Magic 5 D Side Xeen $42 Mines of Titan $12 Mission Impossible $19 Murder $29 'CARRIERS AT WAR'brings to life six crucial carrier battles of WWII; Pearl Harbor, Coral Sea, Midway. Eastern Shores, Santa Cruz, and Great Marianas Turkey Shoot. Seek out and destroy enemy carriers, fleets, air forces. Features hundreds of individually modeled ships and aircraft from that period. $37 S16 Paladin:Scrolls Talmouth Dsk $16 Pirates $9 Pirates Gold $39 Planet's Edge $34 Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness $38 Prophecy 1 Protostar $45 Questron 2 $12 Ragnarok Rings of Medusa $24 Savage Empire $34 Sea Rogue $29 Secret Silver Blades Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Sorcerer Shadowlands $29 Shadows of Mordor $28 Sleeping Gods Lie $28 Sorcerian $15 Space 1889 $12 Space Hulk Space Inc $34 Space Rogue $30 Spacewrecked $19 Spellcraft: Aspect of Valor $38 Spelljammr Pirates Rim Spc $38 Spellbound $39 Spirit of Excalibur $16 Star Saga 2 $19 Starflight 1 $17 Starflight 2 $17 Summoning $38 Sword of the Samurai Tales Magic: Prophecy Shad $32 Tangled Tales $21 Terran Envoy $12 Third Courier S6 Times of Lore $28 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Trilogy $15 Tunnels & Trolls Twilight 2000 VGA $34 Twilight 2001 $39 Ultima 4 $35 Ultima 5 $35 Ultima 6 False Prophet $21 Ultima 7 Black Gate $52 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle S52 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima Trilogy 2 $52 Ultima Uworld Stygian Abyss $52 Ultima Uworld 2 Labyrinth $52 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $32 Veil of Darkness $42 Vengeance of Excalibur $16 War of the Lance $9 Waxworks Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 5 $26 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $34 Wizardry Trilogy $32 $9 CARRIER IBM ARCADE 38% S21 00 $12 CARRIERS AT WAR $32 $34 Delta 'THE CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT provides an infinitely flexible tool for creating a particular battle or an original scenario. Build ships and planes, organize squadrons, draft maps, position air bases and adjust the artificial intelligence used by the computer. 3 new scenanosincluded: Wake Island, Guadalcanal, & Tarawa. $37 Airborne Ranger Aliens Ate My Babysitter Amazing Spiderman Arachnaphobia Armor Alley Artura Atomino Back to the Future 2 Back to the Future 3 Bar Games $20 Bargon Attack VGA $24 Bart Simpson's House Weird $31 Batman Caped Crusader $28 Batman the Movie $24 Battle Storm Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv Blockbuster Blockout Brain Blaster Budokan Cadaver Cogito Windows Colorado Combat Classics Continuum Cool Croc Twins Crackdown Crazy Cars D-Generation Dark Century Day of the Viper $19 Dick Tracy Dig Dug Double Dragon 2 Double Dragon 3 $12 Dr Doom's Revenge 59 Dragon's Lair $21 APROGWA CHARACTER EDITORS $19 CONSTRUGTION KIT Bard's Tale 1 Bard's Tale 2 Bard's Tale 3 Champions Krynn Curse Azure Bonds Dark Heart Uukrul Dark Queen Krynn Death Knights Krynn Dragon Wars Drakkhen Escape From Hell Eye of the Beholder $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $27 59 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treatodas Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #50 $16 $16 $16 $16 "


"IM PUN Photo courtesy of McDonnell Douglas The Magic of a 1590 hp Merlin A Review of Jaeger Software's Fighter Duel Pro by Jim \"Hawkeye\" Rathgeber TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Fighter Duel Pro Amiga $59.95 Documentation Look-Up Bill Manders, Matt Shaw Jaeger Software Rockville, MD (301) 948-6862 basic thrust of the program is to get gamers into head-to-head, realistic dogfights. For anyone who enjoys WWII vintage fighter planes and loves speculating upon their strengths and weaknesses or determining which was the fastest, the deadliest, the best in a one-on-one dogfight, etc., FDPro is a would-be pilot's dream. It allows armchair pilots the chance to fly any of 16 different fighter aircraft against either multiple computer bogeys or against a modem opponent. Jaeger has added sensitivity levels for the joystick which range from low impossible to stall) to high (expert). I recommend beginners to start at the low setting and gradually move up. The rudder can now be controlled either with the mouse or with rudder pedals and will slowly roll the aircraft to either side. Another nice feature, if one happens to have a spare computer and a parallel port connector (which Jaeger sells), is a rear view that allows a pilot to see where he or she has been, imitating the rearview mirrors fighter pilots used during WWII. FIGHTER DUEL Corsair vs. Zero PRO PC Il 9 Jaeger Software Learning to Fly FDPro is different from most flight simulations in that one cannot immediately pick up the joystick and soar into the sky. The realistic flight model in FDPro forces one to, amazingly enough, learn how to fly before learning how to fight. This involves understanding the basics of flight and getting used to the mouse/joystick interface. It took hours of practice before I could maneuver my plane reasonably well. I found flying with the mouse a bit awkward at first, but with practice I discovered that I could set the flaps, pan the view in any direction, and control the throttle, all without taking my eyes off the screen a must in a dogfight. Once in the air I began to understand the fighter pilot aphorism, \"Speed is life.\" The faster I flew, the easier it was to control the plane. Loops and rolls are simple when traveling over 300mph. (Tip: Try not to dive straight down for too long as the controls may lock up and make for, let's just say, a very quick landing!) I was also impressed with the ultra smooth frame rate (24+ per second) which gave me the feeling of floating on air. Although there are only eight gauges, they all function smoothly and are worth keeping an eye on. The Fighters \"There are only two kinds of aircrafi, fighters and targets. Major Doyle \"Wahoo\" Nicolson USMC, Fighter Pilot oth visually and viscerally, Nicolson's statement is the motto for Fighter Duel Pro (FDPro), the vastly improved successor to Jaeger Software's original Fighter Duel. Visually, the graphics are spartan with a philosophy of keeping the peripheral vision from cluttering up the action; and viscerally, the My first impression when I climbed into the P-51 cockpit was, quite frankly, disappointment. There is no canopy, fuselage, tail or wings. The only items visible were a row of gauges across the bottom of the screen and a set of crosshairs in the middle. However, once I increased the throttle, heard the roar of the 1590 hp Merlin engine, and began rolling down the runway, I forgot about the lack of wings and started concentrating on staying on the blacktop. As I lifted off, it seemed as if I were encased in a glass bubble that flew and Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PR,AK,HI,APO & FPOS4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada S6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US S6 per order; PR, HIS121stItem+$2 ea, add\"I; AK $1918titem + $2 ea.add'l. Handling S1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mall s191st Item +$6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australla, Africa, Air Mall S251st Item+S60a, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM TRADITIONAL $25 S9 \"CO MANCHE MAXIMUM OVERKILL' is a glimpse into the future of military avionics and exactingly accurate simulator of the Beoing-Sikorski 66 Comanche Helicopter. Features actual terrain rendered in real time 3D, fly mutiple missions in 1999, complete Thrustmaster support & 256 color VGA graphics. S46 $26 $27 $6 Speedball 2 Star Blade $24 Stellar 7 $21 Stormlord $6 Street Fighting Man S15 Street Football $15 Super Off Road $12 Super Off Road S15 Super PacMan $9 Super Space Invaders $25 Superman Swamp Gas Windows $38 Take-A-Break Crosswrd WIN S29 Take-A-Break Pinball WIN $29 Take-A-Break Pool WIN $29 Taking of Beverly Hills $24 Teenage MNT Manh Missn $31 Teenage MNT Arcade $24 Tengen's Arcade Hits $25 Terminator $34 Terrorpods $24 Tetris Classic WIN $27 The Light Corridor $29 The Tinies $29 Thexder 1 $15 Thexder 2 Treasure Trap $10 Tristan Pinball $34 Troika $6 Turbo Outrun $17 Vaxine $24 Viking Child $24 Volfied $24 Wild Streets $31 Wild Wheels $32 Wrath of the Demon $29 X-Men $9 X-Men 2 $25 Xenocide S6 Zoom PIRET   317 $37 $15 ST BATLA GREATEST ICENTURY S21 'GREATBATTLES OF THE 20TH CENTURY' brings 20 new scenarios for the Perfect Generalgame. Includes 1967 & 1973 Suez conflicts, Kursk, The Moscow Push, Stalingrad, Malla, Long Binh Inferno Crete, Falklands, Inchon, Operation Sea Lion, Pusan Per, Saigon, Bataan, Fulda, Dnepr Br., Guderian Forward & more. $23 $22 Dragon's Lair 2 Time Warp $34 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Dragon's L Esc Singe's Castl $34 Dragons Breath $27 E-Motion $15 Eagle's Rider $29 Fast Track $25 Finale Fire & Forget $19 Flintstones $19 Freakin Funk Fuzzballs $19 Galactic Conqueror $31 Galactic Empire Galaxian Gauntlet Gauntlet 2 Ghost & Goblins $21 Gobliiins VGA $24 Gold of the Aztecs $29 Grave Yardage $12 Gremlins 2 $9 Guy Spy $29 Hacker 2 $12 Hard Drivin' 2 $38 Hare Raising Havoc $32 Harmony Heavy Metal Highway Patrol 2 Home Alone Hyperspeed Indy Jones Act Game Infestation $31 Jetsons $15 Killing Cloud $19 King Graham Board Games S9 Knight Force S29 Laffer Utilities Larry's Casino $9 Laser Squad $32 Laura Bow Parlor Games $9 Loopz Monty Python Ms PacMan Mystical Never Ending Story 2 Never Mind Night Breed Ninja Gaiden 2 Ninja Rabbits Nova 9 VGA $21 Obliterator $6 Off Shore Warrior $25 Oil's Well S12 Out Run $28 Pac Man Paper Boy 2 Pick'n Pile Pipe Dream Pit Fighter Power Drome Power Hits: Battletech Power Hits: Sci Fi Predator 2 Prehistorik Psychic War Punisher Quix Rampage Robocop $28 Roger Wilco Space Games Rollerbabes Rotox S.C. Out Savage Sierra Arcade Bundle 1 Silpheed $21 Simpsons Arcade Game $31 Sliders $27 Space Ace $34 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Wars $17 Dealer's Choice $29 Demon Blue $10 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $10 Dr Wong Jacks & Video Pokr $10 Dr. Floyd Desktop Toys S26 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack $9 Electric Crayon S12 Electric Jigsaw $12 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Family Crossword Puzzles $28 Femme Fatale Femme Fatale Data Disk 1 S18 Femme Fatale Data Disk 2 $18 Femme Fatale Data Disk 3 $18 Floor 13 $15 GO Master Ver 5 WIN $39 Gambit (chess) $38 Game-Maker S68 Games People Play $21 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $99 Go Master Dix Ver 5 WIN $109 Go Master Junior Ver 5 S19 Go Master Junior Ver 5 WIN $19 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Go Master Tool Kit WIN 53 S79 Grand Slam Bridge Grand Slam Bridge 2 Grandmaster Chess Hollywood Hollywood Squares Home Alone 2 S26 Home Casino Spectacular $15 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro $32 House of Cards S12 Hoyle's Book Games V1 $21 Hoyle's Book Games V2 $19 Hoyle's Book Games V3 S29 Hoyle's Book Games V4 $29 Ishido Jeopardy Jeopardy 2 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary $15 Jeopardy Sports Edition Jeopardy, Super Talking Jigsaw Pinups Joseki Genius Laffer Utilities WIN Lexicross Living Jigsaws Lotto Gold Lotto leverage Manhole Mental Blocks Monopoly Deluxe Monopoly Deluxe WIN Oligopoly Omar Sharif on Bridge $37 Omar Sharif on Bridge WIN On Target $10 Peanuts $31 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $24 Pictionary $19 Planet of Lust Pool Shark Price is Right Prime Time Hits Prime Time Hits 2 Punisher Puzzle Gallery 1 $19 Puzznic $25 Rack'em Risk Risk WIN $26 Rodeo Games $10 Sargon 5 $34 Scrabble Scrabble Deluxe Scrabble Deluxe WIN $26 Scruples Sesame Street $12 $9 IBM TRADITIONAL $9 $10 $12 $12 $12 $10 $10 $9 $10 $19 $29 $32 $36 $12       Dreadn-ughts The most EXCITING SEA BATTLES ever fougit $12 RIR $32 2 DREADNOUGHTS accurately models the looks, specifications and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as: Coronel (1914). Falklands (1914), Jutland (1916) and Dogger Bank (1915). Features a menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view, & hidden movement. $42 3D Pinball 3 in 1 Players's Pack Acquire Amarillo Slim's Poker Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud Armada Villa Crespo CB Backgammon WIN Baseball Facts Battle Chess VGA Battle Chess WIN Battle Chess 4000 VGA Battle Chess 4000 SVGA Blackjack Blackjack WIN Bridge 7 Bridgemaster Caesars Palace Caesars Palace WIN Casino Craps Casino Game Pak WIN Casinos of the World Ceasars Palace Centerfold Squares Checkmate Checkmate WIN Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus Chessmaster 2000 Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 WIN Classic 5 Classic 5 WIN Clue Clue Master Detective Combination Lock Cribage Gin King Crossword Magic $29 $15 $15 $10 S32 $29 $15 $21 $36 S36 Sementara $12 $9 $25 $12 $21 $24 $9 $27 $29 $38 $32 $32 $12 $15 $10 $19 $29 $24 $26 Visn & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Oller, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Rearier Service #51 $28 $37 "


"DURIN sounded like a plane. The old adage, «If it walks like a duck and talks like a duck\" came to mind. In talking to one of the designers, Matt Shaw, I was told that they could have added wings without any problem, but it was their experience that the less there is to clutter the view in a dogfight the better. frames per second doing barrel rolls without a hint of jerkiness is a pure joy to behold! Hearing the opponents guns get louder as he gets closer, seeing the screen shudder as one's plane takes hits, hearing the engine cough as it loses oil, seeing the fuel gauge drop to zero (self-sealing fuel tanks tend to leak when hit by cannon) or getting dizzy when the controls seize up and the screen goes into a \"death spin\" are all great effects put in by Jaeger. both if using an analog joystick (highly recommended) Each plane has its good and bad points. The Spitfire IX, while the all around best dogfighter, has a nasty habit of spinning unexpectedly. The German planes (BF109-E&G plus the FW190-A8) while being among the fastest aircraft in a dive simply cannot stay with the more maneuverable Spitfires, Mustangs and Zeroes. The futuristic looking Japanese J7W Shinden, which flew in the last days of WWII, is the fastest fighter in the game, but it can't climb or spin with the Spitfire IX. Some good match-ups are the P-47 against the FW-190, the P-51 versus the P-38, the Zero opposite the Spitfire I, or the venerable Corsair against the heavy firepower of the British Tempest. There can also be historical duels such as the BF109-E1 taking on the Spitfire I and the sturdy Hurricane in a reenactment of the Battle of Britain — right down to the carburetors that tend to cut out on the Spit and the Hurricane as they nose into a dive! Tournaments Even though each aircraft basically looks the same from the cockpit, I found every plane to have a feel all its own. The German fighters are fast and deadly, the British and Japanese craft are light and maneuverable, while the American planes (with the exception of the P-38 and the P-51D) tend to fly rather like a bundle of bricks with a feather attached. An added feature, depending on the plane, is the ability to fire cannons, machine guns or There is a national FDPro league that has been active ever since the first months of Fighter Duel. Tournaments are coordinated by the tourney chairman, Drew \"Ghost Rider\" Dorman. The tournaments are run under a league format wherein the best flyers can be found in Division I while beginners start out in Division V. Anyone who wants to participate can give Drew a call for more information. He can be reached at 5560 Pershing, Apt. #505, St. Louis, MO, 63112 (314-367-3916) or by e-mail at A.Dorman2 on the GEnie network. I've had many a heart pumping, finger twitching, sweat inducing duel flying this fantastic sim! Fighter Duel Pro has taken modem gaming to new heights and in my flight log gets both flaps up!!! CGW The Duel FDPro was built first and foremost for modem play. When hooked up head-tohead, both planes start out at 6000ft (tourney mode) making a head-on pass after which anything goes. Seeing the enemy in hi-res, interlaced, bit-mapped detail at 28 SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS NMBOARD COMMANDE PREMIUM TEMPLATES Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another. M 1 Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remembership $16.50 Question $ 950 Hestar AAA w $16.50 AT z B-17 Availablell IBM AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM ARCADE GAMES: IBM SPORTS SIMULATIONS: SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 Arkanoid 11 $14.50TV Sports Football $14.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 Bubble Bobble $14.50TV Sports Basketball $14.50 Includes: Demolition Mission, Operation Wolf $14.50 Super Sunday $ 9.50 $14.50 NBA Basketball $ 24 Army Moves, Bad Street Brawler, 9.50 Rambo 111 $14.50 Blades of Steel $16.50 Tal-Pan, Fist, Tai-Ceti, Mutants. Renegade $14.50 Double Dribble $16.50 Cyrus Chess, Doc the Destroyer, Sky Shark $14.50 Monday Night Football $29.50 & Uridium. Less than $1.50 each! Harmony $16.50John Elways Football $ 950 Cycles $16.50 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19.50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR AMIGA Pick 'n Pile $16.50 Pro Tennis Tour 1 $16.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 The Ball Game $ 5.00 Microleague Football $14.50 Vampire Empire, Sky Blaster, Triple X Savage $14.50 Microleague Baseball $14.50 Crystal Hammer, Final Mission, Little Cybergenic Ranger $14.50 Tennis Cup $16.50 $14.50 Grave Final Orbit Dragon, Eskimo Games, Powerstyx, Spin $14.50 Yardage Batman Caped Crusader $14.50 Subuteo Table Soccer $ 9.50 World & Clever and Smart Treasure Trap $16.50 Downhill Challenge Skiing HIBM ADVENTURE GAMES: IBM_STRATEGY GAMES: Superbike $14.50 Challenge $19.50 Championship Waterloo Football $14.50 Buck Rogers 1 $19.50 First Over Germany $19 50 $19.50 Championship $14.50 Heroes of Lance Baseball $19.50 Championship Sons of Liberty Golf $14.50 Dragons of Flame $19.50 Red Lightning $19.50 Pro-Beach Volleyball $16.50 $12.50 Superstar Indoor Sports Under Fire $19.50 $ 950 War of the Lance $19.50 Gulf Strike $14.50 Superstar Hockey Roadwar Europa $14.50 $16.50 IBM FLIGHT SIMULATORS: Phantasie III $19.50 F-15 Strike Eagle Mid-Winter $16.50 Time & Magk $1450 $16.50 Firezone $14.50 Solo Flight $14.50 Gunship S.D.I. $16.50 Star Saga $19.50 $ 9.50 Berlin 1948 $14.50 Dragonlord $16.50 Tomahawk Fireteam $1450 2200 $16.50 Super Huey !! $ 9.50 Delender of the Crown $ Dambusters $ 1650 9.50 Star Glider II Navcom $ 9.50 Xiphos 6 $14.50 $14.50 Leather Godesses of Phobos Das Boot U-Boat Simulator $19.50 Carrier Command $14.50 Mhes of Titan $ 1450 Sands of Fire $16.50 Sky Chase $14.50 IBM SOFTWARE: CD-ROM $19.50 IBM TRADITIONAL GAMES: $14.50 Barney Bear goes to School David Wolf Secret Agent Amarillo Stim's Real Poker $14.50 Blue Angels $14.50 CD Grab Bag $ 1500 Friday Night Poker $14.50 Rocket Ranger $39.00 $14.50 CD Game Collection Blackjack $44.00 Academy $ $14.50 Chessmaster 3000 9.50 Air Strike U.S.A. Jigsaw $29.00 $19.50 CD-ROM Collection WCIA $16.50 Blue Max $ 39.00 BattleChess 11 $19.50 IBM EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS: Golden Immortal Super Password $49.00 $950 Great Ctes of the World $ 950 President Elect WILD & COOL GAMES: $49.00 S World Geography 9.50 Hound of the Baskervilles Continuum $39.00 $ $16.50 U.S. Geography 950 Jones in the Fast Lane $ 29.00 $19.50 Bainey Bear goes to School $14.50 Kings Quest 5 Drakkhen 3D Gamemaker $ 49.00 $ 500 Discover Numbers $ 5,00 LOOM $39.00 Weird Dreams $14,50 Discover $ 5.00 Madu Mother Goose Alphabet $16.50 Discover Math Sex Olympics $ 500 Phoenix Shareware 20 $24.00 $49.00 Sex Vixens from Space $14.50 Grade A Math 1-2-3 $16.50 Secret of Monkey Island Holmes Consulting Detective $49.00 1000's more items for all So Much Shareware $39.00 VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE $ 49.00 different computers... Apple. Utima 1.6 Bunde 1800 676 6616 VGA Spectrum $39.00 Atarl, Amiga, C64/128, MAC, Wing Commander Bundle Credit Card Orders Only !!!! ($25 minimum & lots more IBMMS-DOS !! Wing Commander Ultima 6 Bunde $49.00 COMPSULT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 for U.S.A., S8 for Canada $16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales tax P.O. BOX 5160 To receiveour complete catalog of over 2,000 items for all computer types, send SAN LUIS OBISPO $2 in cash or stamps to the above address. The catalog is FREE with any order. CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call(805) 544-6616. $14.50 Prates! XT LAYOUTS COMING SOON.. NODODD OOOOOO Falcon 3.0 A-10 Tank Killer Acos of the Pacific F-15 Strike Eagle 11 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe F-117A Nighthawk Joftfighter I & II Megafortress B-17 Flying Fortress ATP CY Air Combat Flight Simulator 4.0 GAMES 4.50 Bucket Hanseat * High-quality , 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout *Affixes to keyboard * Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards * Sturdy, laminated stock Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed Any 2 $21.50 /l87er sehen Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 ench IN a me Country S & Madd $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL Address city KCC. Inc., Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 4839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 Toms (Discounts per order only: Allow 2-4 Weeks) DEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-6066 Circle Reader Service #57 Circle Reader Service #77 Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PRAK HIAPO & FPOS4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling s1 pershipmont. 2 Business Day Air US6 per order; PR, HIS121st Item +$2 ea. add\";AK $191st item+$2 ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mail S191st Item S6 ea.add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $251st item +$6 ca.add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM TRADITIONAL IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION THE LEGACY WALL $34 $33 REALM OF TERROR  $44 \"LEGACYREALM OF TERROR'isa 3D animated horror adventure game. You must find & destroy the entity which has taken control of your house. Features auto-mapping, ten levels with up to 40 rooms per level, detailed yet easy to use magic and combat systems, pointand-click interface, and amazing audio effects. $41 $10 $12 $19 S15 $27 $34 Shanghaii 2 $29 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Shogi Master Sierra Family Fun Pak Solitaire Royale Solitaire WIN Solitaires Journey Sorry Space Vegetables Spot Stratego $31 Strip Poker 3 $31 Strip Poker 3 Data Disk 1 $19 Strip Poker 3 Data Disk 2 $19 Strip Poker 3 Data Disk 3 $19 Strip Poker 3 Data Disk 4 Strip Poker 3 Data Disk 5 $19 Strip Poker 3 Data Disk 6 $19 Super Jeopardy Super Tetris $29 Swap $29 Tactical Wizard Terminator Chess Tetris Tetris Classic Trump Castle 1 Trump Castle 2 $19 Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 S6 Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 2 $6 Trump Castle 3 $34 Turn-n-Burn $10 Vegas Entrtnmnt Pak WIN $20 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Video Poker AlaCarte $34 Video Poker Villa Crespo $19 Video Poker WIN $12 Video Poker by Masque $12 Virtual Reality Studio 2 Wayne's World Welltris Wheel of Fortune Wheel of Fortune 2 Wheel of Fortune 3 Wheel of Fortune Gold Word Tris $27 World Champion Backgamn S24 World Champion Cribbage $24 S27 $17 In'POPULOUS 2 you're locked in cataclysmic combat with the titanic forces of the Olympian Pantheon. Set the oceans to boil, rip the skies withlightning, & hurl downpours of fire to crush Poseidon, Appollo, or Zeus himself. Features 35 animated new powers, 1000 different worlds, a deity creation system, and modem support. $38 Scenery Enhancement Editor S21 Scenery: Hawaii $16 Scenery: Tahiti $16 Seal Team $42 Search for the Titanic $27 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $44 Scrt Weapons Exp 2 P80 $21 Scrt Weapons Exp 3 He 162 $21 Scrt Weapons Exp DO335 Shuttle $26 Silent Service 2 S34 Sky Chase S25 Snd, Grphcs & Arcrft Upgrad $27 Stormovik $15 Strike Aces $19 Strike Commander S45 Strike Commandr Speech Pk $18 Stunt Driver Stunt Island $36 Stunts $15 Syndicate $48 Tank Task Force 1942 $39 Team Yankee $32 Team Yankee 2 $29 Test Drive 1 Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2 Muscle Cars Test Drive 2: The Collection $29 Test Drive 2:CA Challenge S15 Test Drive 2:Euro Challenge $15 Test Drive 2:Supercars $15 Test Drive 3 S29 Test Drive 3: Road & Car $17 Their FH/Battlehawks Bundle $44 Thunderhawk $21 Thunderstrike $27 Top Gun Danger Zone $31 Tracon $34 Tracon WIN Tracon 2 $29 Tracon 2 WIN $34 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $37 Vette $15 Voice Commander $18 Voice Commander F153 $18 Wing Commander $39 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $52 WC Secret Mission $21 WC Secret Mission 2 Wing Commander 2 $52 WC 2 Speech Pack $15 WC 2 Operation 1 S24 WC2 Operation 2 $24 Wolfpack $15 X-Wing $46 Yeager's Air Combat $38 $22 Dynamics Bundle 1 Elite Plus $19 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117A Stealth Fighter VGA $42 F14 Tomcat $19 F15 Strike Eagle 2 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Scen $17 F15 Strike Eagle 3 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces Pak $49 F19 Stealth Fighter F22 Advanced Tactical Fghtr $39 F29 Retaliator $32 F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 Falcon 3 Scen1 Fighting Tor $24 Falcon 3.0 $48 Falcon AT $19 Fire & Forget 2 $30 Flight Planner $24 Flight Simulator 4.0 $42 Flight of the Intruder $15 Fly the Grand Canyon $45 Grand Canyon Scenery $16 Great Naval Battles $45 Great Naval Battles Exp Pak S21 Great Naval Batt Scen Buildr $28 Gun Boat $33 Gunship $12 Gunship 2000 VGA $39 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk $24 Harrier Assault $38 Harrier Combat Simulator $6 Hawaiian Odyssey $22 Heatwave $25 Heroes of the 357th $32 HoverForce $31 Hunt for Red October $19 Infiltrator 2 $28 Instrument Pilot Scenry East S59 Instrument Pilot Scenry West $59 Japan Scenery Disk Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Jet Fighter 2 Mission Disk $19 Jump Jet S39 Knights of the Sky $29 LHX Attack Chopper Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Land Sea Air Trilogy 2 $39 Life and Death $19 Life and Death 2 $24 Lightspeed $9 Mantis Experimental Ft VGA $39 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Maximum Overkill $46 Max Overkill Missn Disk 1 S28 Max Overkill Missn Disk 2 $28 MegaFortress $12 Megafortress Mega-Pak Megafortress Miss Disk $26 Megafortress Miss Disk 2 $26 Miami Enforcer $39 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32 New Facilities Locator $18 Orbits $37 Power Politics WIN $34 Pacific Islands 2 $30 Power Boat Simulator $39 Privateer $52 Rapcon $29 Reach for the Skies Red Baron VGA $36 Red Baron Mission Builder S24 Red Storm Rising $14 Road & Track Grand Prix U S37 Sailing Simulator VGA Sailing Sim East Coast Voyg $39 Sailing Sim West Coast Voyg $39 Sailing Instrctr Pack VGA $239 Scenery Collection Set A $37 Scenery Collection Set B $37 Scenery Colltn California $37 Scenery Colltn Great Britain $37 $34 49 $15 TRIALS OF THE OLYMPIAN GODS $17 POWER HV Bera PARIT IBM SIMULATION S21 $38 IBM EDUCATIONAL 688 Attack Sub $19 ATP Flight Simulator $29 A.T.A.C $34 A10 Tank Killer 1.5 Enh $34 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Over Europe $46 Aces Europe Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Europe Mission Disk 2 $27 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Aircraft Scenery Design $35 Airport Facilities Directory $12 Allied Forces $12 Armour Geddon $29 Armoured Fist $38 Assignment Miami $37 B17 Flying Fortress $39 Battle Command $19 Birds of Prey $32 Blue Angels $15 Blue Max Aces Great War S9 Car and Driver $38 Cardinal of the Kremlin $16 Carrier Command $12 Combat Classics $29 Conqueror Multi Tank $16 Crash Course $6 Das Boot Submarine $12 Design Your Own Railroad $29 POWERED PARTNERS 622 by Acoustic Research do the job of both a speaker and amp. Plug them into any sound source with line level or headphone output: computers, TV's, or keyboards. Features magnetic shielding, a 30 Watt subwoofer, frequency range of 50Hz 20kHz, & volume control. $239 S31 Auto Map $64 AutoWorks $49 BodyWorks $49 Boom Box $29 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $29 Chemistry Works $45 Cuckoo Zoo $32 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest $32 EcoQuest 2 $34 Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise S32 Incredible Machine VGA $29 Island Of Dr Brain VGA S29 Jones Fast Lane $24 Mario Teaches Typing Mavis Beacon Teach Typing $26 MBeacon Teach Typing WIN $29 Mixed Up Faery Tale VGA $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Mozart Magical Music Machn $18 $24 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs S6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash Most items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Delectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Senica #52 "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own (free) ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX [714-283-3444] or E-Mail (Prodigy [EXPT40B), CompuServe [76703,622], The Sierra Network at Box 1048, GEnie and America On-Line (CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each time if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However, . Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing. Games being played other than direct by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers. . Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. We reserve the right to edit all Opponents Wanted ads to our standards of taste (such as they are). ion Avenue), Portalnd, OR. Contact: Adventure Games Northwest, Inc., 6517 NE Alberta, Portland OR 97218; 503-282-6856 or 206-574-GAME. The Computer Game Developers Conference is where the insiders meet to discuss the technical aspects of creating computer games. The 1993 Conference will be held Saturday, April 17th through Tuesday, April 20th at the Westing Hotel in Santa Clara, California. For more information, call or write: Dev Con, 5339 Prospect Road, Suite #289, San Jose, CA 95129: (408) 374-4340. The Gen Con Game Fair will be held August 19-22, 1993 at the MECCA Center in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Meet some of your favorite editors from Computer Gaming World magazine, live and in person at their exhibitor booth! For more information, write to Gen Con Game Fair, PO Box 756, Lake Geneva, WI 53147 or call (414) 248-3625. Origins '93 will be held July 1-4, 1993 at the Tarrant County Convention Center in Fort Worth, Texas. For more information, write or call: Gemco, PO Box 609, Randallstown, MD 21133; (410) 2983135. Bulletin Board Systems Intracorp/ Capstone has survived hurricane Andrew and is proud to announce that their BBS is back up and operational. Demos, sneak previews of upcoming products, tech support and on-line doors which feature many popular games are available. Configure your modem for 2400, N-8-1 and call (305) 471-8962. Thunderbolt! BBS in Chicago, IL now offers online entertainment with Poker, Blackjack, Bingo, Galactic Empire, Zorgon, Quest for Magic, The Arena and Flash Games (\"The Next Generation\" of online gaming). Play RPGs with online multi-sided dice! Eric Spanitz, SYSOP. Modem settings 8-N-I, 300/1200/2400. Phone (312) 248-4822. Hack and slash your way through the real-time, multi-user game Legends, featured on The Batboard TBBS in Columbia, MO! True AD&D action awaits, as well as over 30 other on-line gaming challenges including ANSI Pro Football, role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for top scores, full access on your first call (and it's FREE!). Over 1 gig of free downloads, FidoNet echoes (including GAMING) and the superb adult role-playing game The Wild Side. Call (314) 446-0475, 24 hours a day. Opponents wanted for XSHIP, a space conquest strategy game. The game is played via BBS with two to ten players per game. Game turns update as fast as the players take their turns. For more information, call the Battlefield BBS in North Babylon, NY at (516) 669-0522 300/1200/2400 8-N-1. Call the Missile Silo BBS. Contestants wanted for and HQ, F-29 Retaliator and many others. Tournaments to be held soon. Files, message base and (soon to come) on-line games, Bunning on Telegard 2.5 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Located in Skokie, IL outside of Chicago. Call (708) 581-1735. Mention this ad in CGW for no-hassle access validation. HARPOON USERS UNITE! The Harpoon Users Group (HUG) invites you to join the ranks of its members. HUG publishes the quarterly newsletter C31 which features articles on design tips, game Strategy and tactics, weapons platform information, Harpoon product development and much more. HUG also operates the Harpoon Scenario Warehouse BBS where members have access to hundreds of user-created Harpoon scenarios. Our BBS can be reached at (718) 746-7466. Information on joining HUG is available on the BBS or by sending a stamped, self-addressed envelope to our new address at: HUG, PO Box 5138, Bryan, TX 77805-5138. The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (AD&D. GURPS), play-by-email games (Diplomacy. ASL), Empires at War (a Napoleonic online game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted, Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 (2400 8-N1] Free access. The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky Command HQ, The Perfect General and Global Conquest (just to name a few!). We have online games, message bas and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton, NJ at either: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342; 9600 v.32 (908) 7060305; HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The World of Windows is looking for some great game players like you! Try you skill and compete for monthly prizes. Sports: Drag racing excitement al The Motor City Raceway, a fishing tournament at The Freshwater Fishery, play in the Tournament Golf game or even pick your favorite NFL team and play some Pro-Bowl Football. In RPGs there is the post-apocalyptic horrors in The Land of Devastation, warriors collide in The Pit, explore Sin Baud's Dungeon or conquer the galaxy during Trade Wars 2002. For Strategy games, try our Chess Magic chess tournament, deluxe versions of Scrabble and Blackjack or solve a murder at the Who-Dun-It Hotel. Modem settings are 8-N-1, 300-38400! There is free access and thousands of Windows games to download for off-linc enjoyment. Call today at (305) 7513117. Mindcraft Software, Inc., publisher of the Magic Candle series, Rules of Engagement, Siege and Breach 2 is proud to announce that it now has a BBS running 24-hours a day. The BBS offers on-line help. upgrades, demos, scenarios, technical support and more. Set your modem to 2400, 8-N-1 and call (310) 320-5196. The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn, IL invites you to join their Tradewar 2002 game. Fly your spaceship, battle the Ferrengi and other traders. Download TWRULES.ZIP before starting. Once you start, you may not restart for 4 months. Only 150 players maximum per game. Call (708) 424-6136. Space Station Aragon welcomes all adventure gamers to call (206)277-5489 in Bellevue, WA. This unique board features free downloads of the latest demos from many major software companies and text files on subjects like Star Trek and Star Wars. Take part in our forums to discuss and get hints on the latest games. Take a break and play one of our adventure doors. Sysops llibard and Tiern. Dune BBS is seeking modem gamers like you! Modem warrior message area and on-line games. Running on remote access 1.14. Operates 24 hours/day, 7 days/week. Located in the Milwaukee, WI area: (414) 571-0584 at 2400 14.4k; 8,N,1. By Area Code New York City gamer seeks opponents for The Perfect General. Please call Sean at H-(212) 6612330. Join the no-cost Axis & Allies boardgame tournament playing nationwide via the Prodigy network. All games require 2nd edition rules and are organized by a \"game manager.\" Contact Rick Jamison in Weirton, WV at H-(304) 797-1750 or send Prodigy email to CBXH77A. Seeking local opponents in the Pittsburgh area to play The Perfect General, Command HQ or Conquered Kingdoms. Please call Jim K. at H-(412) 884-7197 Tucson gamer seek opponents for any Amiga games, especially wargamers. Will play by modem. email or face-to-face. Call Bob in Tucson, AZ at H-(602) 883-4825. Seeking opponents (preferably local) for F-15 Strike Eagle III, Falcon 3.0 and The Perfect General. I'm also interested in upcoming Strategy/Flight Sim games that support modem play. Contact Robb Harris of Oxford, WI at H-(608) 586-5039 or W-(608) 586-5096 or Fax/Modem (608) 586-4593. I'm experiencing \"no joy\" in the \"clean, clear and sober\" skies of Columbus, OH. Local area F-15 III and Falcon 3.01 pilots can contact Sid \"Shakespeare\" Maurer for co-op or duel flights at 1-(614) 294-1861. New York City modem opponents wanted for Command HQ, Global Conquest, The Perfect General or Conquered Kingdoms. Call Bob at H-(718) 539-2002 after 7:30pm EST. Wanted: opponents (especially local ones) for Command HIQ, The Perfect General and Battlechess. Am I the only person in my area who plays these games anymore? Surely not! My limited phone budget will allow me to only call local opponents, but I'm always up to a challenge (particularly for CHQ) if you're willing to call. Contact Charles Mosteller at P.O. Box 181, Greer, SC or by telephone at H-(803) 895-1058. Leave a message if I'm not home. Nearly 50 active players are competing in a continuing struggle to determine the top \"Ace\" amongst CompuServe members. The MTM-Lobby often resembles a fighter jock hangout with a large number of Falcon pilots looking for friendly matches to keep their competitive edge finely honed. If you are interested in joining the competition ladder, contact Victor \"Duke\" Zaveduk on CompuServe at 176711.27] in the MODEMGAMES Forum. CGW Conventions Adventure GameFest '93 will be held May 21-23 in the Portland, Oregon area. Board, computer and miniature gaming of all genres, both tournament and open gaming, will be featured. There will be door and event prizes, a games auction and a miniatures painting contest. Pre-registration is $15 for 3 days, $12 for 2 days or S7 for 1 day. To be held at the Oregon Convention Center, 777 MLK Jr. Blvd. (UnPage 158 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'1802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PR.AK,HI,APO & FPO SA per order. Air Mall to Canada S6 perorder. Handling S1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR,HIS121stItem + $2 ea. add'l; AK $191st Item +$2 ea. add'l. Handling 81 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $191st Item +S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $251st Item +S6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS $10 Never Ending Story 2 Orbits: Voyage Solar System $39 Oregon Trail $24 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Print Shop Dlx Busins Graph $29 Putt Putts Fun Pak $22 Quarky Quaysoo's Turbo Sci $29 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Twisty History VGA $29 Wacky Funster $18 Where in USA Carmen Dlx $45 Where World Carmen Dlx $52 Where in America's Past $37 Where in Europe is Carmen $29 Where in USA is Carmen $29 Where in USA is Carmen Dix $49 Where in World Carmen $32 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game, pre-recorded games from worthy opponents, and many game modes. $39 Time Quest $10 Treasures Savage Frontier $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Twisty History $10 Ultima 4 $10 Ultima 5 $10 Ultima 6 $10 Ultima 7 $10 Ultima 7 and Underworld $16 Ultima Avatar Adventures S16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $10 V for Victory $16 Wasteland $10 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $12 Wizardry 7 $12 Yeager Air Combat Handbk $16 Zak McKracken $10 ** LINKS 386 LINK IBM BUDGET IBM HINT BOOKS $10 8 $10 DO Entertainment Pack Vol #1 DR FLOYDS DESKTOP TOYS DIV COWER 'DR FLOYD'S DESKTOP TOYS'is a collection of short, fun diversions for the computer. Features cryptograms the time honored code breaking game, Web Spinners build the largest spider web, Pentominoes a puzzle game to exactly fit a number of blocks into a particular shape, Wallop, Snark Hunt, & Kye. S26 $10 King's Quest 4 King's Quest 5 $10 King's Quest 6 Knights of Legend $10 Laura Bow 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $10 Lemmings w/disk $21 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $10 Lost in LA $10 LucasArts Adventure Book $16 LucasArts Air Combat Guide $16 Magic Candle 1 $10 Magic Candle 2 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhunter San Francisco $10 Maniac Mansion $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed $10 Mean Streets $10 Might & Magic 1 $10 Might & Magic 1&2 $16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Off Book of Leisure Suit Lrry $12 Off Book of Ultima 2nd Editn $15 Off Gde Roger Wilco's Adv S12 Off Gde King's Quest 2nd Ed $10 Off Book of Police Quest $12 Patriot S16 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness S12 Populous 1 & 2 Official Strat S16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger Quest For Clues 2 or 3 Quest for Clues 4 $21 Quest for Glory Strategy Gd $19 RUNS Issue #1 19 Each $6 Railroad Tycoon $10 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Search for the King $10 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Sorcerer Simcity/Simearth Book $20 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Sonic Strategy Guide $16 Space Quest 1 $10 Space Quest 2 $10 Space Quest 3 $10 Space Quest 4 $10 Spellcasting 101 $10 Spellcasting 201 $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $10 Starflight 1 $10 Starflight 2 $10 Strategy Plus Issue 4 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 10 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 11 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 12-27 S5 Strike Commander Stunt Island Summoning $16 Tales Magic: Prophecy Shad $12 838 $8 688 Attack Sub $10 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Altered Destiny $10 Bard's Tale 1 Bard's Tale 2 $10 Bard's Tale 3 Bargon Attack Black Cauldron $10 Blue Force Next of Kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Castlevania Official $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization $16 Codename Iceman $10 Colonel's Bequest $10 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot $10 Countdown $10 Curse of the Azure Bonds Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands S14 Darkspyre $10 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dragon Wars $10 Dragons of Flame Drakkhen S10 Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Great War Planes $16 EcoQuest Search For Cetus $10 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 S10 Fascination $10 Free DC $10 Gateway Savage Frontier $10 Global Conquest Strat w/disk $21 Gobliiins S10 Gold Rush $10 Gunship 2000 Hard Nova Harpoon $16 Heart of China $10 Hero's Quest $10 Heros Quest 2 Trial by Fire S10 Heros Quest 3 $10 Hillsfar S8 Immortal $10 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $10 Indy Jones Grix Adv $10 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 $16 Keef the Thief $10 King's Quest 1 $10 King's Quest 2 $10 King's Quest 3 $10 S9 $9 4th & Inches Airborne Ranger Amazing Spiderman Armada Villa Crespo CB $10 Artura Backgammon WIN Bar Games Baseball Facts Battle of Austerlitz Blockbuster Blue Max Aces Great War Captain Blood Carrier Command Chess X Colossus Colorado Combination Lock Conflict in Vietnam Crash Course Cybergenic Ranger Deja Vu 2 Lost in LV Demon Blue Dig Dug Don't Go Alone Dr Doom's Revenge Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack S10 Dr Wong's Jacks & Video Pkr $10 Dragons of Flame Earthrise East vs West Berlin 1948 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack S9 Face Off Fast Break Felony Finale Future Wars Gama Force Gauntlet Gauntlet 2 Gremlins 2 Harley Davidson Harrier Combat Simulator Hostage Jeopardy Jeopardy 2 John Elway Quarterback Lane Mastadon Lightspeed Living Jigsaws Lotto leverage Magic Johnson Fast Break $6 Mini Putt Ms Pacman $6 Never Ending Story 2 $9 Ninja Rabbits Nuclear War Obliterator On Target Pac Man Pirates Punisher ARRCGW7   Second The Galactic Conflict Continues... SECOND CONFLICT is a game of interstellar strategy & conquest for windows. Control all aspects of the economy, military, and civilian population. Allocate resources to produce battleships, planetary defenses, stealth ships, transports and missiles. Features multiple human & computer players, & a scenario editor. $34 S16  $9 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Samo Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Checkcompatibility before you buy. Detectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEELAST PAGE FOR DETAILS "


"DBIBIN VB vietom: Veliki ve Luki by John Vanore TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: V For Victory: Velikiye Luki IBM, Mac $69.95 None Ed Rains, Keith Zabalaoui, Larry Merkel Three-Sixty Pacific Campbell, CA (409) 776-2187 FRONY rust about a year ago (as I write this), the Three-Sixty/Atomic Software team burst onto the computer wargaming scene with V for Victory Battleset 1: Utah Beach. Initially only available for the Macintosh family, an IBM/DOS version was released late in 1992. Also released late in 1992 was V for Victory: Velikiye Luki. Velikiye Luki, the site of a fearsome siege in 1942-43, has been referred to as the Stalingrad of the North, with the Red Army struggling to keep a large German force encircled within the city and its environs until it collapsed. This is only the second computer game released on the subject. The first, White Death by RAW Entertainment, was a direct digital translation of a Game Designers Workshop boardgame of the same name. Whatever its merits as a game/simulation, the computerized White Death suffered considerably due to its agonizingly unfriendly interface. FOR VICTOAY turn, the system works extremely well at simulating the smaller engagements, although it does push the envelope of manageability on larger scenarios featuring hundreds of units. VL is played in a number of sequential, quasi-simultaneous-move turns, with the computer capable of playing either the Soviet or German side. For the human player turn, there are three distinct phases: Planning, Execution, and After Action. During Planning, obviously enough, all units to be moved and all attacks (which, for other than artillery, take place between adjacent forces) are designated. Planning also encompasses calls for artillery and air strikes. After Planning comes Execution. Simply put, all the plans made during the previous phase are now simultaneously implemented, for both the human and computer players. In the After Action Phase, one can use the mouse to click through all the highlighted hexes and get a brief or detailed report of whatever combat transpired there. VYE LUKA The System The Features As one might expect, Velikiye Luki repreKA... sents an evolutionary enhancement over Utah Beach, rather than a revolutionary leap. There is a great deal of similarity between the two, and the differences are largely a function of subtle improvements to the system. Like its predecessor, Velikiye Luki (hereafter VL) features a battalion-level simulation overlaid on a spectacular graphic presentation. The crisp, vivid graphics (on both a color Mac and SVGA for the IBM and clones) are not only superb, but so well done that the gamer has all but the actual tactile sense of pushing counters across a card-stock map. So much for the sequence of play. The simple, three-step process provides a very smooth interface into a sophisticated simulation program. The player can choose from a variety of offensive and defensive options for all his forces. Attacks can be either All-Out Assaults, Assaults (the basic default), Assaults with No Advance or Probes. Each type of offensive action has its own list of inherent potential risks and gains. Conversely, defenders can assume the Retreat If Attacked, Defend If Attacked or Defend At All Costs postures. All are fairly self-explanatory and all have logical times and places of logical application. At a scale of one square kilometer per hex and four hours per Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800—753—4263 Shipping to US,PR,AK,HI,APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling 51 per shipment, APR HIS121st Item + $200 addAAK $191st Item + $2 ea, add. Handling S1 per shipment Europe, S. America Air Mall $191st item + $6ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item +56 ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM BUDGET MAC WARGAMES MAC SIMULATION $10 $46 $29 $42 $29 $34 w ER $27 American Civil War V1 CW No Greater Glory Halls of Montezuma Harpoon Scenario Editor Panzer Battles Patton Strikes Back Rommel North Africa UMS 2 UMS 2 Planet Editor V Victory SA 'ROME' follows your journey as Hector, a lowly slave at the foot of Mount Vesuvius, who becomes a Citizen, then Centurion, and finally Emperor of Rome. Features an easy point & click interface, 6 levels with different plots & schemes, isometric 3D graphics in 256 colors, with Adlib, Roland & Sound Blaster support. $38 Rodeo Games SDI Sentinel Worlds 1 Space Vegetables Stormlord Super PacMan TKO The Train Third Courier Troika Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 2 Tunnels & Trolls Turn-n-Burn Uninvited War of the Lance Weird Dreams Wheel of Fortune Wheel of Fortune 2 Wheel of Fortune 3 Xenocide $29 $37 $29 $34 $29 $38 Falcon Color Falcon Grand Prix Circuit Hunt for Red October Life and Death Megafortress Red Baron Color Sands of Fire Sim Ant Sim City Supreme Specter Test Drive 2 Tracon 2 Vette Yeager's AFT $24 $21 $32 $38 $39 $32 $35 $46 $37 $6 $6 MAC SPORTS $27 $29 $32         *FREE GAME OFFER 4th & Inches $12 4th & Inches Team Const Fast Break S30 Hardball 2 $31 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 1 $15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 2 S15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 3 $15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 4 $15 Jack Nicklaus Course Disk 5 $15 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Mean 18 Golf Nascar Challenge $31 PGA Tour Golf Course 1 PGA Tour Golf $38 Playmaker Football $32 Tom Landry Football $29 Wayne Gretzky Hockey $36 Weaver Baseball $32 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid only while supplies last. MAC ADVENTURE S30 TEGEL'S $17 SPEND $75 $32 $39 MAC TRADITIONAL Advent Willie Beamish Color $39 Conquests Robin Hood Color $39 Heart of China $34 Indy Jones Grfx Adv King's Quest 5 $39 Leisure Suit Larry 1 Color $34 Leisure Suit Larry 5 Loom $29 Lost Treasures of Infocom $46 Mutant Beach $43 Out of This World $36 Police Quest 3 Color $34 Rise of the Dragon $34 Secret Monkey Island Color $38 Sky Shadow $28 Space Quest 3 $34 Space Quest 4 $34 Where In Europe is Carmen $30 Where Time is Carmen SD $30 Where World is Carmen SD $27 Where USA is Carmen SD $30 'TEGEL'S MERCENARIES' is a futuristic strategy game with roleplaying character General Tegel doesn't care who you hire as long as you get the job done. Features a multitude of exotic locales and sticky situations, a scenario builder to challenge the most advanced warriors, 256 color VGA, and digitized sound. $38 Artura Blockbusters Colorado Felony Gunship Mean 18 Famous Courses 2 Obliterator Third Courier TKO Trump Castle DD1 Trump Castle DD2 $29 $31 SPEND $100 MAC STRATEGY  MINICRAFT Battle Chess 2 Chinese $29 Battle Chess Bridge 7 Checkmate $36 Chessmaster 2100 $32 Classic 5 $32 Cribbage King Gin King $27 Crossword Magic $32 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Hoyle's Book Games V1 or 2 $21 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Ishido $34 Lexicross Monopoly Omar Sharif Bridge Risk $29 Sargon 5 $32 Scrabble Deluxe $29 Shanghaii 2 $32 Solitaire Royale $15 Stratego $31 Super Tetris $32 Tetris $24 Wordtris $29 $32 S29 $36 Airborne Ranger Backgammon by George Big Business Blue Max Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack Future Wars Harrier Combat Simulator Magic Johnson Fast Break Operation Combat Pirates Punisher SC Out SDI Sound Star Tie Break Tennis The Tinies Troika Under Fire DINS ON GUARD MAC ROLE PLAYING Ancient Art War Sea S29 Ancient Art of War $29 Castles $36 Citadel $26 Command HQ $39 Cyber Empire $32 Darwin's Dilemma $32 Genghis Khan $37 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $109 Go Master Ver 5 $109 Gold of the Americas $29 Harpoon Battle Set 2 or 3 Ea $22 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $27 Harpoon Chalenger Pack SE $49 Harpoon $39 Lemmings $29 Mission Starlight MoonBase Operation Combat Railroad Tycoon Reach for the Stars Robo Sport $35 Romance 3 Kingdoms S42 Simcity Graphic Set 10r2 Ea $23 Simcity $29 Simcity Terrain Editor $15 Simearth S41 Spaceward Ho $37 Strategic Conquest $37 Uncharted Waters $42 Warlords $29 AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies, Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks, zooms, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & soundeffects. $39 SPEND $200 S38 $38 S15 S32 S29 Curse of the Azure Bonds Dark Queen Of Krynn King's Bounty Might & Magic 1 & 2 Might & Magic 3 Pirates Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness Secret Silver Blades Spirit of Excalibur COLOR Starflight 1 Starflight 2 Vengeance of Excalibur Windwalker Wizardry 1 Wizardry 2 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $38 $34 $32 $38 $38 $29 $38 $38 $29 $28 $28 $33 $37 Bridge 7.0 Cardinal of the Kremlin Chess Net Covert Action Dark Hall Dusk of the Gods Free DC Megafortress Megatraveller 1: Zodani Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon Sentinel Worlds Shadow Sorcerer Storm Across Europe Trump Castle 2 ADD CCIO Visa & MC Accepted.CODs $6.Checks Held 4 Weeks.Money Orders Trea Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final s "


"Deview File Options Staff Duties Planning Phase Alert Cikon e tretexto se bare report. To vyves Select Fine A . odk * thus will not be able to conduct attacks across a broad front. The Schwerpunkt principle is most important here. Choose your battles carefully, then mass all your strength in those sectors. Scroll through the sidebars, and you'll find one for Operations. Click on the Aircraft Button and ready air assets will be made available for dedication to ground strike missions. (Air Superiority is abstracted out of game play and is, in fact, another component which can be modified at start-up to adjust play balance.) Allocating ground attack missions is as easy as designating artillery fire missions: select the attacking unit, then (while depressing another key for artillery), click on the target hex, and it's done! BROEK 0 000 velkiye Luki KLE MEN In addition to all the basics of wargaming presented in Utah Beach, VL presents much of the chrome to which wargaming grognards have become accustomed. For instance, artillery can now execute a \"shoot and scoot\" maneuver, allowing the unit to reposition immediately after firing to negate enemy counterbattery fire. A nice touch. Also, infantry units are now capable of riding on lanks, a great way of getting around the perennial shortage of dedicated transportation assets on the Eastern Front. (One small gripe here. I would have preferred that Three-Sixty have annotated the changes from Utah Beach for the benefit of those who've played that game. It would have been much easier than poring through all the documentation again.) On top of all that, VL features a number of optional functions and historical variants to be used in adjusting play balance and difficulty levels. Whereas most other computer wargames merely fudge combat rations or otherwise let the computer \"cheat,\" VL lets you toggle on and off such elements as Fog of War and Limited Intelligence. You can also vary the weather conditions, modify the degree of air superiority, or take advantage of additional forces which were historically available but did not actually become involved in the fighting. Winning too handily as the Soviet? Give the Germans the elite Ist Fallschirmjager Division and see what happens. To manipulate this wealth of data, the VL screen contains several windows and sidebars. In fact, the VL map only occupies about 70-80% of the screen. A Unit Window, situated at the bottom of the screen, presents as much or as little information as you want on friendly, enemy, or all units. If the Fog of War or Limited Intelligence options are toggled off, you can view a full data set for any unit you click on, including combat strengths, fatigue level, etc. This is particularly useful in checking out artillery units, to see which ones are in supply and haven't moved recently, and are thus ready for fire missions. If one desires to fight the whole war oneself and not hand off logistical functions to the (computerized) staff, the HQ Sidebar, running down the right side of the screen, is invaluable. From this position, the player can, at the beginning of each game day, allocate supplies among all major headquarters elements. By choosing among None, Minimal, Defensive, General, and Attack, you will basically set the tempo for the remainder of that day's operations, as a corps which has only received Minimal Supply will not be able to carry out sustained assaults. Choose wisely! The consensus among VL players is that supply management is critical to winning any scenario. As either the German or Soviet player, you will face supply constraints and The Scenarios VL comes with eight scenarios, including the mandatory and ubiquitous all-inclusive Campaign Scenario. To ease the learning curve, the scenarios come in graduated levels of difficulty from Beginner to Expert. \"Into the City,\" for example, is a cluttered but relatively uncomplicated situation. The Soviets have invested the city of Velikije Luki and seek to clear it of German forces. The German player, in contrast, tries to keep his forces from being annihilated in the encirclement. \"Eight More Kilometers,\" on the other hand, features the German relief effort attempting to break the siege of Velikiye Luki. The Soviet must contain German forces in the city while beating back the relief column. Then there's the Campaign Game. Estimated to take 90 hours of play time, it pulls everything else together in one mammoth slug-fest. For the expert only, this one requires much attention to detail and ample help from the computerized staff. The Issues There are a few ongoing concerns over VL which, despite my enthusiasm for the game, I would be remiss in not raising here. Modem play: This issue has been raised repeatedly in the 360 Topic on GEnie, and is one of the few shortcomings of the V for Victory series. Currently, there is no provision for modem play between two humans, although the V for Victory main menu hints at its future incorporation into the series. Just when this will happen is as yet undetermined. Artificial Intelligence: The computer opponent's Al has also come under some fire. The Soviet computer opponent has been File Options Starr Duties Planning Phase OBD NOV Gork 22 November 19.12 B y Manday Today, Wednesday Thunday NORDIS day Sunday SE SI Le Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"SOFTWARE HEADQUARTERS Specialists in International Sales Competitive Pricing. Same Day shipping International Order Line (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 CONTROL IT GAMES AirBucks.. Amaron. Lute of the Temptress...........32 Magic Candle 3........ Mantis:Experimental Fighter......43 Megatraveller 3 Mercenaries Might/Magic Clouds of Xeen.....43 Silent Service 2 Classic...... Spectre 3..... Task Force 1942 V for Victory Math Blaster Plus Windows.......37 Number Munchers.............. Oregon Trail Deluxe ....... Read & Roll VGA... Reader Rabbit 2...... Reading Adventures in O2..........37 Basics Electronic Cookbook......49 BattleChess Beauty & the Beast................. Conan the Cimmerian...... Golf Guide ....... .... Grammy Awards....... A Train... A Train Construction Set...... 25 Strike Back. Strike back and surprise your opponent with the APS 2001 Cobra, the only fully programmable, microprocessor controlled, optical joystick that works through the keyboard port. Experience the ultimate in performance without paying for costly gamecards or separate control devices. APS 2001 Cobra by Maxximum...$69. Where in Time is Carmen..........32 Where in USA is Carmen ...........32 Where in USA Carmen Deluxe....47 Where in World is Carmen VGA 47 Wing 2 Special Operations 1..27 Wing 2 Special Operations 2 .....27 Wing Commander 2.................52 Wing Commander 2 Speech Pak 21 Wing Commander Deluxe ..........52 WARGAMES 688 Attack Sub Combo....... Air Force Commander Ancient Art of War in Skies........37 ATAC...... ..... ATP Flight Commander Aces of the Pacific Ancient Art of War.. B-17 Flying Fortress.... Campaign... Carrier Strike... Carriers at War.....................34 Carriers War Constuction Set..37 Command HQ Classic..............22 SPORTS 4D Boxing............ Action Sports Soccer . .. All American College Football....37 Andretti's Racing Challenge....22 A.P.B.A Baseball... Bill Elliot's Nascar Challenge.... 32 Car & Driver Front Page: Sports Football......43 GREENS: Ultimate Golf...... Hardball 3 Hardball 3: Park Disk Jack Nicklaus:Signature Ed.......43 Jack Nicklaus Tour Disk for 2...20 Jordan In Flight... John Madden Football 2.... 33 Links 386 PRO......... Links: Mauna Kea Course Disk..20 YOU MUST BE 21+ TO ORDERI Ecstasy contains over 560 megs, over 330 Adult Animations, 2600+ Hi-Res SVGA pictures, 470 erotle stories. Animation Fantasies: Vol. 1, Vol. 2 or Vol. 3 contain over 100 Adult Animations each. Busty Babes includes over 4, 200+ files featuring over 800 film stars! Order All 3 and Save. One for $89.Two for $140. or 3 for $199. SEXTASY 39 os........69 40 SOUSD Mill Barbie's Glamorous Quest.......27 Bard's Tale Construction Set....34 Bard's Tale Ill... Bart Simpson Arcade Game......32 Bart Simpson: House Weirdness 32 Batman Returns..... Battle Chess 4000 SVGA... 37 Beat the House....... Black Crypt........ . Bridge 7.0... Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space..43 Caesar......... Car & Drive....... ...... Castles 2: Siege & Conquest... 37 Challenge of the 5 Realms........37 Civilization.............. Cobra Mission......... Creepers................ Crisis in the Kremlin... Crusaders of the Dark Savant...42 Cyber Empires..................... 33 Monopoly Deluxe... Oh No! More Lemmings! Add)...22 Out of this world... Paladin II Populous 2... Powerhits: Battletech Putt Putt Join the Parade Quest for Glory 3 Railroad Tycoon Classic RoboSport for Windows Rules of Engagement 2...... Scrabble Deluxe......... Shadow of the Sorcerer... Shadowlands Shadow President...... .....43 Shanghai 2 Dragon's Eye Sharif on Bridge Sharif on Bridge for Windows....32 Sim Ant..... .. Sim Life... Sim City... Genuine SoundBlaster Chipset An Ergonomically Designed Joystick High Performance Speakers Bundled Software Includes: VOXKIT Voice Utilities, Talking Parrot, FM Intelligent Organ, Juke Box for Windows 3.1 & Castle Wolfenstein. By Bondwell........ Reading & Me..........................32 Storybook Weaver ... Spellit Plus Talking Super Munchers.. Tree House.. What's My Angle........... Word Munches... .... Zookeeper... PRODUCTIVITY Animation Studio...................79 AutoMap.. .. AutoWorks...... ... Body Works .... Chemistry Works ........... Expert Office Des on... Expert Pet Car........................14 Expert Dos Tutor.. .......19 Floor Plan Plus... ..........47 Mavis Beacon 2 Windows ..........37 PrintShop Deluxe for Windows...47 Guinness Disc of Records ....... Grolier's Encylcopedia............239 KGB/CIA Factbook Legend of Kyrandia............ Loom Lost Treasures of Infocom.. Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 Mantis Experimental Fighter ....49 Mayo Family Health Book.......CALL Omar Shariff on Bridge.............46 Secret of Monkey Island Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe....57 Sherlock Holmes Detective 2. Software Jukebox Space Shuttle Simulator..........27 Star Trek......... U.S.A. Wars: Civil War...............39 U.S. Presidents......................39 Wing Commander/Ultima 6......59 Wing Commander 2 Deluxe....CALL Wc2/Ultima Underworld........CALL .....$99. Links: Course Disks................ 18 MicroLeague Baseball 4...........42 NCAA: Road to Final Four 2.....CALL NFL Pro League Football ...........47 Virtual Pilot Virtual Pilot puts firepower right under your thumbs, gives you advanced aileron and elevator trim controls and extra throttle control for high-powered games. It's as close to reality as you can get without leaving your computer. by CH Products ...$69. Combat Classics......... 37 Commanche: Maximum Overkill 47 Commanche: Mission Disk 1....28 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Classic........22 F15 Strike Eagle 3.................47 Falcon 3.0........... Great Naval Battles:1939 43...47 Global Conquest............... Gunstuip 2000 VGA...... Gunship 2000 Scenano Disk.....27 Harpoon...... ........ Harpoon Battle Set #2 of 3.......21 Harpoon BattleSet # 4.. Harpoon Challenger Pak....... Harpoon Scenario Editor ........28 Jump Jet Line in the Sand.. Lost Admiral ......... .. ..... 37 Patriot... Pirates Gold ..... . ........43 P.T.O. Romance of Three Kingdoms 2..43 Computer Cleaning/Vacuum Kit Includes a Vacuum and attachments, 3.5 & 5.25 Disk Drive cleaning kit, Monitor & Keyboard Cleaning Tool, and a complete Mouse cleaning system.Packaged neatly in an attractive carrying case. NEL Full Motion Video.. PGA Tour Golf... 32 World Circuit Racing.............37 Tom Landry Football........... 32 World Tour Tennis.................30 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3...........37 Hockey League Simulator 2...CALL EDUCATIONAL Algeblaster Plus Grammar Gremlins Headline Harry VGA Kid Px.. Mid Px Companion Mid Works 2........ Mano Teaches Typing....... Math Blaster Plus.......... 25 43 A MUST HAVE! by Suncom........$27. The Dagger of Amon Ra..... Daemonsgate........... Darklands Dark Sun:The Shattered Lands ..47 Daughter of Serpents Design Your Own Railroad Discovery. Steps of Columbus...37 Dragon's Lair 3..... Dune 2..... Eco Quest 2..... .... Empire Deluxe.. ....37 Eric the Unready ..... .........37 Eye of the Beholder III.............43 Global Effect........ ..33 Grand Slam Bridge 2............ SOUNDCARDS Ad Lib Gold 1000...................179 Ad Lib Music Card .......... ...47 Pro Audio Spectrum 16..........CALL Sound Blaster Pro.................199 Sound Blaster Pro Basic........CALL Sound Blaster 16 .249 UltraSound Card..... JOYSTICKS ..32 139 Sim City for Windows Sim City Graphic Ancient Cities..24 Sim City Graphic Futute Cities...24 Sim Earth Sim Earth for Windows Solitaire for Windows Space Ace 2: Bort's Revenge Space Quest 4 Spaceward Ho! Speedball 2..... Spellcasting 301 Spellcraft:Aspects of Valor Star Control 2....... Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strike Commander......... 52 Strike Command Speech Pak...22 Strip Poker 3........ Stunt Island... . Super Jeopardy ................ Super Space Invaders... Super Tetris.......... ....32 Terminator 2029.... ...13 Tracon for Windows ..... ....47 Tracon 2:Air Traffic Controller ....43 Turtles:Arcade Game..... .....32 Turtles: Manhattan Missions....... 32 Ultima 7: The Black Gate ........52 Ultima 7's Forge of Virtue.. ...22 Ultima 7: Serpent Isle...........52 Ultima Underworld.... ........52 Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven Independent controls including radar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter mea sures............$89. Flight Control-The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as 2 button Joystick......... .....................................$69. Flight Control Pro ............................ $116. Rudder Pedals..... ACM Expansion Game Card. . . $35. ADULT CD ROM Animation Fantasies 1.2 or 3.89 Busty Babes Esctacy Hot Pix Island Girls Local Girls. Lovely Ladies Private Pictures ..... So Much Stareware. Storm 1. Il or Ill. Triple X Exteme. Visual Fantasies... Volcano. Women of Venus....... Virtual Valerie 49 APS 2001 ... ....... Analog Sabre Analog Plus... Flight Stick by CH Products ....42 G FORCE Yoke..... Gravis PRO Joystick for PC .........39 Gameport Auto CH Products......34 Gameport (MicroChannl) by CH .48 Gamecard (80 mhz)...............27 FX 2000................. .... Mach Ill by CH Products........... 33 Guy Soy .. Heaven and Earth ...............32 Home Alone 2................30 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro .............33 Hoyles Book of Games 3.... ..32 The Humans... Indiana Jones 4:Fate of Atlantis 40 Inspector Gadget....... Island of Dr. Brain.... KGB... King's Quest 5... King's Quest 6...... Leather Goddesses Phobos 2.43 Legend of Kyrandia. ....37 SPECIAL OFFERS Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover Genghis Khan..... ............25 Romance 3 Kingdoms II.......35 L'Empereur.... ........ .30 Uncharted Waters ... ..35 800-999-7995 Maxx Yoke gives you the precision you always wanted. It's a full sized multi-functional aircraft Joystick for your PC. Maxx Pedals are floor style modular attachments which are fully assembled and ready to plug in and play. Flight Yoke $59. Pedals $39. International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School. State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) / UPS Blue ($7 minimum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders Send money orders or checks to: The Ultimate Casino Gambling Simulation Just Got Better! WTRUM P Super VGA graphics and super sound CASTLE. Includes: Blackjack, Roulette, carefully capture every detail. SE3 Baccarat, 36 Slot machines, 4 types of poker, Keno, Craps & Video PokerlPacked with features & Fun. By Capstone..............$37 Maxx Yoke & Pedal Bundle....$89. Leisure Larry 5...... ....... Lemmings 2. ...... Life & Death II: The Brain........27 Lord of the Rings ll. Two Towers 37 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...47 Lost Treasures of Infocom........43 Lost Treasures of Intocom 2... 37 The Lost Tribe..... . ....27 Ultima Underworld 2..... ...52 Ultima Tropy 2 Ultrabots... Virtual Reality Studio 2.0........57 Viel of Darkness............. Waxworks.......... . ....37 Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna........27 Where America's Past Carmen .37 MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW493, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! Mouse Wheel.... Mouse Yoke. PC Gamepad by Gravis....... Quickshot Aviator 5.... ........32 Quickshot Intruder 5. Quickshot Warrior 5. Virtual Pilot................ CD-ROMS 7th Guest.....................CALL American Heritage Dictionary.....64 The Animals............................69 Super Munchers... .......... Dr. Quandary....... Oregon Trail Deluxe.... Seige Obitus by Psygnosis..... Conquored Kingdoms...... Action Stations Perfect General Battles of Destiny...............30 Crusaders of the Dark Savant...35 Darkseed................................ James Bond Stealth Affair........20 35 Circle Reader Service #129 "


" File Options Staff Duties Planning Phase NOW... THE NEED FOR LEADERSHIP HAS NEVER BEEN GREATER JUMS DED A . 602M HO HOHOHO+++ erky J + 23 Ece HUU OOOOO NEZ KIE ICE Turn Prore PExecuting Order Applying hardichen Checking Suplies Updating p r oudy Betting Yictory Alled Savind Gal Axis Eight months ago, at the peak of the FW/UDP war, the Cetus Amicus hyperspace booster was used to propel a research vessel of the duBois Autoengineering Corporation to a starsystem outside the boundaries of the Local Group. The vessel returned almost immediately, having been attacked by alien spacecraft of unknown origin. The Federated Worlds dispatched a battle group to investigate, but they were likewise attacked, and, being heavily outnumbered, were forced to retreat back to FW space. Following these incidents, alien spacecraft of many types began to appear in the Local Group, some ambivalent to humanity, others openly hostile. Two months ago, all contact with outposts in the Ce Ente Calad system was lost. A Federated Worlds Armed Forces (FWAF) task force was sent to investigate, but they did not return. A second, larger task force was then dispatched, and they found the outposts ransacked, and the task force which preceded them utterly destroyed. There were no survivors. Recently, contact was also lost with outposts in the Deimos system. Again, a FWAF task force was dispatched to investigate, and, again, they failed to report back. They are feared destroyed. With the war with the UDP continuing, the discovery of the new apparently hostile alien factions of unknown intent on our borders, and a mysterious force marauding within the Local Group itself, the Federated Worlds has reached a critical point in its history, one that threatens not only the FW government, but, perhaps, the very existence of humanity in the Local Group. harshly criticized (again, on GEnie) for a distinct lack of aggressiveness. The comments generally cover inadequate use of artillery barrages, a hesitancy to attack, and uncoordinated, piecemeal attacks when they do occur. My playing has been predominantly as the Soviets, attacking a very stubborn German computer foe, and have noticed very little of this non-aggressive behavior from my digital adversary. (This, by the way, was also the case in my experiences with Utah Beach.) As the Soviet, however, I often find my attacks, particularly artillery barrages, hamstrung by a lack of supply. Lining up all the Soviet artillery hubcap-to-hubcap does not a whit of good if the quartermaster corps can't deliver adequate numbers of shells, and I suspect this general crisis of supply may be driving the supposed Al problems encountered by some others. RULES OF ENGAGEZAENT Battleset Concept: The initial production version of VL contained a basic application that was not compatible with the scenarios from Utah Beach. That is, Utah Beach scenarios would not run under the enhanced V for Victory engine released with VL. In a November 1992 posting on GEnie, Carl Norman of Three-Sixty bluntly stated they had made a mistake in thinking they could apply a Harpoon-like Battleset structure to V for Victory, referring to the two systems as \"apples and oranges.\" More recently, however, Three-Sixty has been testing a common software engine that will be compatible with the two existing games plus the upcoming Market Garden. Where this will lead when games four and beyond in the V for Victory series are released, I don't know. The Conclusion For my money, and despite the few dissatisfied voices, V for Victory remains the best computer wargame available, and Velikiye Luki is an excellent extension of the series. The AI may not be flawless and some folks (a very small percentage, by my count) may have no trouble whatsoever in trashing the computer opponent. However, the vast majority of computer wargamers will find Velikiye Luki a thought-provoking, challenging simulation of combat on the Eastern Front, one with a superior combination of wargaming \"steak» and graphic sizzle. I wholeheartedly recommend it to any Mac or DOS computer gamer. CGW The War escalates this Spring OMNITR EN SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #126 Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"Blow It Out Your Ear. Pump up the volume with Sound Blaster ! The sound card from Creative Labs. Experience the full power of 1l-voice synthesized music and 8-bit sampled sound effects. Don't just hear it... let it blow you away! The scream of your F-15's engine as you elude enemy fire... the crisp crack of your bat when you hit a homerun off the screen... the echoing ring of sword against sword during your next fantasy adventure. No wonder Sound Blaster is the world's #1 seller. And why it's the sound card that more gaming software developers write for under DOS or Windows 3.1. 2 SB To find out more about Sound Blaster, the only sound card that's 100% Sound Blaster compatible, visit your local computer retailer or call Creative Labs at 1-800-998-LABS. Get the full blown sound capability you've always wanted for your PC-for only $149. With Sound Blaster from Creative Labs. Because... SOUND if you don't have BLASTER Sound Blaster, you're really blowing it! SOUND BLASTER IKI BLAST WYWW W EMO RIRRIER CREATIVE MKPIL Sound Blaster is a trademark of Creative Labs, Inc Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 1992 Creative Labs Inc All rights reserved International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd, Singapore Tel 657730233 Fax 657730353 CREATIVE LABS. INC. Circle Reader Service #59 "


"   $3556353588 tries with serendipitously timed aid packages and order military options without risking counterattack. Designed by serious students of international affairs, Shadow President is Balance of Power with significantly more options/solutions and information at the player's fingertips. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #3. Capstone 7200 Corporate Center Dr. Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 Bridge Master --While these two men were racha MA Bennett's car Was sideswipaa tybear dawen by the datendant, Tim Murdock. Bennettia ear went out of controls wents over the cliff and he was filled. Tim Murdock was drectly responsible for the death of Edward Bennett CONTINUE Deadly Games 312 E. 23-5D NY, NY 10010 (212) 475-2377 M4 TANK SIMULATOR: From the designer of Bomber, Rene Vidmer, comes the WWII version of Mr. Toud's Wild Ride. Reminiscent of the Avalon Hill boardgame Patton's Best, one commands the crew of an M4 Sherman tank as the members of a tank battalion campaign their way across France, Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany in 1944 and 1945. The gritty \"You Are There\" perspective is played out as much more of a strategy game and less of a simulation, with a feel for capturing the era and topic that may well be unsurpassed. M4 Tank Simulator has all of the best elements of a tactical military campaign game with the looks and sounds to sell it. Color Macintosh ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #4. L.A. Law 1 BRIDGE MASTER: The scope of Bridge Master is larger than any other bridge game on the market. It allows gamers to edit the computer players (for gender, bidding aggressiveness and playing aggressiveness), play on-line, create custom pictures for the backs of card decks, select background music, play modem-to-modem or compete over a Novell network. Eight different bidding conventions can be selected, but the computer opponents do not always pick up on them (particularly at lower difficulty levels). In general, the computer opponents play a very weak game, but the beauty of this program is its capacity for connectivity. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1. LA LAW: Here's a chance to shine in the law offices of McKenzie Brackman as one of the bright lights of the suit set. Players choose one of three junior lawyers from the TV show, then takea case and begin racking up those billable hours. The only hitch is that the player is racing against time; the trial begins in only nine hours, and there isn't much time for conspiratorial lunches. There's the case file to read, private eyes to call, witnesses to interview, groveling for advice from the show's partners, plea bargaining to do with the opposing counsel, legal research to avoid, etc. When one's case is ready, or even if it's not, it's time to fool the losers, er, persuade the fine jurists that one's lily-white client never inhaled or called Michael Milken back. The mousedriven game disabuses users of the theory that being a successful lawyer requires no more than a rodent's brain. IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #2. 01.525 HEZITEREZI General Investment Corp. 231 Nob Hill Way Los Gatos, CA 95031 (408) 356-7208 DUDDDDD der EMPAT IR stadig COL WIEN Shadow President INTERACTIVE COMPUTER CROSSWORDS: Here's a good game for conundrum aficionados with a robust lexicon. While the name Crossword is probably a misnomer, both of the major game variations appear on a crossword/Scrabble-like game board. However, players are not limited by the words they use, or even where they are placed on the board. The trick is to add a word to the board that forms other, incidental words by placing letters adjacent to previously played words. Unfortunately, those who are strictly word game tycos will be fighting an uphill battle. Only people like William F. Buckley, Jr. have a vocabulary larger than the computer's, and it uses every one of them to beat its human competition. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #5. Batur 375103440 090210 DECEMBER M4 Tank Simulator CIRE COMPUTER HIRE MINING A htnico S10 D.C. True 1840 Oak Avenue, Evanston, IL 60201 (708) 866-1864 SHADOW PRESIDENT: Take the CIA World Factbook and a cabinet of computer-controlled artificial personalities. Stir in a mixture of pseudo-imperial presidential power and a host of international crises. That's the recipe for a successful game of power politics on an international scale. Gamers will need to learn how to mold public opinion, placate offended allies, neutralize hostile powers, creatively bribe neutral counTHE MAIN WORD TIELD SHIFT ITAL Humongous Entertainment 13110 NE 177th Place #180 Woodinville, WA 98072 (206) 485-1212 PUTT PUTT JOINS THE PARADE: Except perhaps for Broderbund's Grandma & Me, this has to be the best piece of software for youngsters that we've seen. Filled with delightful aniERRETTI Vui Lng Sn C, VI KIM Inv, fi Interactive Computer Crosswords Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"CAPE COD CONNECTION'S SCROLL TO ADVENTURE STRATEGY. SIMULATION Rex Nebular.............. $37.07 Seven Cities of Goldil Seven Citiesll............... tba Sim Life Spellcraft................. $31.77 Star Control2 Shadowlands........... $26.47 Suike Commander Spaceward Ho!............ tba Tank 2.0(Spec. Holo) Summoning............... $35.37 Third Reich Two Towers................ $31.77 Ultrabots Sanction Earth MS-DOS Simulation MS-DOS Strategy Software Software VForV Russian .......... $41.27 MS-DOS Role > VFor Victory .............. $41.27 Membership Prices listodonly. Alinein/Sand........... $21.17 W Please Callfor Non-Member Playing & S Action Sta. Util 1112 Western Front ............ $31.77 Pricing!! Action Stations.......... $26.47 Adventure Games A-Train.................. $37.07 Battlechess 4000....... 531.77 MS-DOS Sports AD&D Coll. II............... 541.27 Software AD&D Starter Kit....... $41.27 APBA Baseball ........... $21.17 Ashes of Empire....... $42.37 Carl Lewis Challen ..... $26.47 Cobra Mission............ $42.37 Duerk's BBall Encyl.... $21.17 Crus. Dark Savant...... $37.07 Fant. Football92 ........ $21.17 Daggar Amon Ra....... $37.07 Front Page FBall......... $31.77 Darklands................. $37.07 ROME ALONE Groens.................. $31.77 Daemonsgate............ $37.07 Gretz Hockey III......... $31.77 Dragon's Lair 3.......... $31.77 MAXIS Hardball lll .............. $31.77 Dunall $31.77 Hardball Teams....... $13.22 Dungeon Master ....... Point and click your way through ancient Romo. Start as $26.47 a poor innocent slave with many opportunities and possibilities. HBI Ballparks........... $13.22 Erik the Unready ....... $31.77 Blend strategy and adventure in six levels of difficulty on a J. Nick Sign Golf ..... $37.07 Forgoof Virtue............ .$13.22 T.LaRussa BBall2......... tba Gemlire....... journey to become Emperor of Rome. ............$26.47 CCC Member Price $26.47 .......... ........... $31.77 ** Aircraft & Adven. F...... $26.47 Battle Isle .................. S29.47 Acesinthe Pacific....... $42.37 Battle Isle Scen's....... $20.62 ZODIAC SIGNS Airbucks .......... ... $31.77 Battles of Destiny...... $31.77 SOFTWARE MARKETING Air Traffic Control....... $31.77 Bridge 7.0. ............... 526.47 A personal Astrology Planner. Air Force Comman..... $31.77 Buzz Aldrin's Rac ...... $37.07 Colorful, easy to use program EL FISH MAXIS Air Warrior ............... $31.77 Campaign. $31.77 that lets you create a personalizAnc. Art War/Sky ....... $31.77 Carrier Strike............. $37.07 El Fish is a new type of creativity software. A ed astrological plan. Find out A.T.A.C. ............. $31.77 Carriers at War ......... $37.07 kind of toy that can only exist in the age of what's in the stars for you. B-17 Flying Fort.......... $37.07 Castles. computer. Animated fish combined with art, CCC Member Price $37.07 F-15111....................... $42.37 Castles North.Ca...... $15.87 science, technology and life provide endless F-117A.. .......... .... $42.37 Castles Il................... $31.77 possibility for creating your computer aquarium Falcon 3.0............. $42.37 Chessmaste 3000..... $29.47 CCC Member Price $31.77 Falcon 3 Missions....... $21.17 Chess 3for Wind........ $35,37 Links 386 Pro.... ...... $37.07 I. Jones Fate Atl........ $31.77 Fit Adventure 685...... $13.22 Civilization.............. $37.07 Microsoft Goll............. $51.00 Kings Quest VI......... $42.37 Ult. Underworld..........542.37 CDROM Titles FS Pro (Mallard)........ $21.17 Civ. Collectors .......... $42.37 NFL Chall.3.0............ $26.47 Koshan Conspir... .. $26.49 Ultima VII................... $42.37 Multi-Media Upgrade Grand Canvon Sce..... $15.87 Command HQ........... 515.87 NFL VideoProFB... $42 37 Leather Goddossll..... $37.07 Ultima VIII...................... tba Pro 16. ................... $924 Great Naval Bat's...... $41.27 Conflict: Korea.......... $31.77 CDPC. .................... $995 Gr. NavBat Expan...... $22.39 Conflit: M-East .......... $31.77 MS-DOS Games Yet Multi-Media Upgrade Kit Gunship 2000 ............ $37.07 Cong. Kungdoms....... $31.77 ALONE IN THE DARK To Be Released INTERPLAY A chilling 3-D .... Gunship 2 Scen.......... $21.17 Conq of Japan.......... $31.779 .......$560 Hyperspood.............. $31.77 foray into the macabre mansion Lost Treas. Infocom.......$50 Crises Kremlin.......... $37.07 Look For Them Sec. Monkey Isll............ $50 Mantis, Exp Fight........ $37.07 Cyber Empires.......... $29.47 of Dercelo were you'll need to Soon?? Sec. Weap Luft.............$65 Mantis SpchAcc......... $15.87 Grigsby Pac. War....... $42.37 and deal with hideous, hidden AH-64(Spec. Holobyte) Ult. Underg/W Com2.....$55 Oper Lightning Stm.... 515.87 Global Conquets....... $31.77 monsters and puzzles. Real Air Force Pilot Trainer W.Comm. llwall Data...55 Railroad Tycoon ........ $15.87 Great Bat.20th C...... $21.17 time action, electrifying music Avenger A10(Spec Holo) Red Baron. ................ $37.07 Harpoon ................ S35.37 and sound effects, 256 vivid Celtic Legends Cape Cod gives Red Baron Miss. D.......$15.87 Harp. Designer......... $29.47 colors, and over 50 hours of Dark Sun(SSI) Rescue Air 911 .......... $13.22 High Command ........ S45.00 careful game play combine to make Dragons Lair III........... $31.77 Scen. Enhancer Ed.... $21.17 LA Law ................... $31.77 this a superb game design. Fleet Commander (RAW) consideration to the Sec Weap.Luff...........$37.07 Monopoly Delux........ 531.77 Harpoon Gold Sec. W. Miss. 1............$15.87 Power Politics Win .... $26.47 games its lists. ProLeague BBall........$31.77 Leg Kyrandia............ $31.77 Harpoon Patriot Sec. W. Miss. 2............ $15.87 Railroad Tycoon ....... 515.87 Summer Chall......... $29.12 Lost Files S.Holme..... $41.27 Games listed in this Jump Jet (Microprose) Sec. W.Miss. 3............. $15.87 Shadow President..... $37.07 Strato-Mat-BBall........ $21.17 Lost Treas. II..............$26.47 Liberty or Death (Koei) ad are the newest Sec. W.Miss. 4......... $15.87 Siege........ ..... 535.37 Tom Landry FBall....... $26.47 Lure of Temptress...... $26.47 Magic Candle III .......... $35.37 Sil. Service Class........ $15.87 Siege Expansion....... $17.67 and best titles in our Pacific War (SSI) ....... $42.37 Magic Candle lll ......... $35.37 Sim Ant...................... $31.77 Spaceward Ho......... $31.77 You've worked Pirates Gold Sim Antior Window .... $31.77 opinion. Other M&M Clouds Xeen ..... $37.07 Solitaire Journey...... $31.77 Pirates of Realm Space $37.07 Special Forces B. ...... $26.47 Pirates Gold............... $37.07 Hard All Week titles can be Tabii Scen Upgr. ....... $21.17 Star TrekAnniv.......... $31.77 Pirates Roalm Spac.... $35.37 PTO: Pacific Theater of War Treat Yourself to a Quest for Glory III......... $37.07 reat Yourself to a Questfor Glory III...... $37.07 Rules of Engagement it obtained!! Team Yankee 2.......... $26.47 The Perf. General ...... $31.77 Game. Realms..................... Traconfor Window..... $31.77 Per. Gen Scen's ......... $18.52 $15.37 Ultima Underw 2 ........ $47.17 The Lost Admiral ....... $31.77 The Cape Cod Connection Membership Club CCC's Answer To The Recession, Recessionary Pricing!!! CAPE COD CONNECTION has essentially evolved into a Membership Club. Simply the finest club in the industry today. Club members receive the Best Price, the Best Service, and the Best Information. For that reason the product prices listed above are for MEMBERS ONLY. Join the club with your first order. It's only $20 for a FULL YEAR. You do not have to become a CCC Member to order from us. Please call for Non-Member Pricing. CCC offers every electronic means known to mankind for ordering. We are open Monday Friday 10 AM 8 PM and Saturday 10 AM 5 PM. CCC now has a store location at 630 Main St., Falmouth, MA 02540, drop in and browse. All phone numbers are the same. Overseas Dealer Inquiries welcome. (Prices and availability may vary.) CCC policy is to replace defective software with the same. MAIL TO: 630 MAIN STREET FALMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS 02540 NEW BBS 1-508-540-8732. Voice Orders 1-800-729-6733 . 1-508-457-0738. Fax 1-508-457-4558 Circle Reader Service #47 "


"1   mation and digitized speech, it has been lovingly designed by a team including Ron Gilbert (formerly of LucasArts and their SCUMM adventures). This pre-adventure will have the kids glued to the chair and clicking with glee. Young gamers will guide young Putt Putt the Car as he runs errands in preparation for the big town parade. He'll have to earn money by delivering groceries so that he can get a car wash, buy a balloon and find a puppy. Be warned, though; once Junior is into this one there'll be little time for the grown-up's games. IBM DOS ($49.95) IBM CD-ROM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6. There are plenty of solitaire games with glitzy graphics which are linked together by a \"campaign game\" element. This time, Interplay is throwing their hat in the parlor-games-done-on-Windows ring with a rather classy bunch of solitaire games. Presented with spiffy graphics and sound, this package only offers a dozen games, but the other features and options raise this package above some of the other \"instant Windows\" game products that have come out of late. Hooks have been left for possible expansions including more game varicties. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #9. Putt Pult joins the Parade Inline Design 308 Main Street, Lakeville, CT 06039 (203) 435-4995 Lawrence Productions 1800 S. 35th Street Galesburg, MI 49053-9687 (616) 665-7075 The Tinies THE TINIES: The Tinies of the title of this game aren't as cute as their names and their furry bodies might suggest. These little fur-balls have attitudes, and they flaunt them with impunity, making faces at the player and rudely gesturing as the player tries to put them down for a nap. The object of this simple game is to put each colored Tiny in their respective \"sleeper pods.\" This involves maneuvering the Tinies around their simple, object-cluttered environment, which of course isn't as simple as inserting tab 'A' into slot 'B. While the Tinies' antics are cute, the nature of the puzzles and the level of interest inspired is no real \"biggie.\" Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #7. HOJEN THE LOST TRIBE: The Computer Age returns to the Stone Age in this wonderful educational game of tribal leadership. Chased from their homeland by an angry earth god (a volcanic eruption), the tribe has to find its way back to the mythic homeland, and the player is elected the leader. Anyone who thinks that running today's businesses might be difficult ought to try their hand at managing a group of hungry, whimsical, superstitious, and none-too-forgiving Neolithic hunter-gatherers. Players must decide when and what to hunt, when to practice hunting, when to move on, when to carve hunting pictographs or Venus figurines, and how to handle the dozens of random events that crop up in life B.C. This is quality software, with digitized photos of humans acting out the scenarios, animated wall paintings that illustrate the tribe's activities, a well designed interface, an on-line prehistoric database, and a challenging game. The box recommends the game for ages 8 and up, though the lower limit seems a bit optimistic. IBM ($39.95), Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. Swamp Gas Visits Europe Salita Wiedes Kunde SWAMP GAS VISITS EUROPE: This educational game takes Swamp Gas, a lovable, antennaed ET, on a holiday across the European continent. One to four young gamers will be assigned a series of missions which involve piloting Mr. Gas to different European locales. Depending on the difficulty level, they will be asked to identify either a country, capital, major city or historic landmark. If players complete the mission within the allotted time, they are treated to the Alien Arcade where they can choose to play one of three simple action games. In this way, the education is alternated with entertainment to provide incentive, though the extraterrestrially cute digitized voice of Swamp Gas might be incentive enough. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #8. Legend Entertainment 14200 Park Meadow Drive Chantilly, VA 22021 (800) 658-8891 Solitaire for Windows EXIS ERIC THE UNREADY: As previewed in the last issue of CGW (#105), this adventure game is a lampoon that leaves few icons of pop culture unscathed. TV, film, science fiction, and other computer games all suffer abuse at the hand of Bob Bates (Time Quest) and his pen-turned-shillelagh. Legend's interface hybrid, which combines the textual interaction of an earlier adventure system with beautiful graphics and graphic puzzle asides, only seems to get better. It seems to have found a balance between the depth of textual interaction and the sizzle of beautiful graphics and graphic interaction. In 18:55 Select a highlighted hex if you wish to move or erscout. Roy heces bordered in bloehwe scouting report. Or choose one of the action buttons. Interplay 17922 Fitch Avenue, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 SOLITAIRE FOR WINDOWS: Stop me if you've heard this one before. The Lost Tribe Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"SOUND GALAXY IT WAS AS YOU WERE THERE! Forget about a primitive game session where gunning down a jet fighter or running away from a fire breathing dragon creates a dumb effect. And you reacted because you see it coming. If not, it's a game over for you. CD-Quality Sound Sound Galaxy change all that See and Do by giving you a whole new generation of sound technology that promises you superb CD-quality sound that match the best amplifiers and full stereo capability. Ease Of Installation All configuration settings are via software for ease of installation to users without the hassle of setting jumpers connection. Support More Sound Standards Let yourself go ga-ga over the full sound support for AdLib, Sound Blaster Pro, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. And you find yourself hacking away the jungle of games and entertainment software available under both DOS and Windows environment. Value For Money And topping it all are the bundled software such as Windat, Jukebox and Galaxy Master, just to name a few, so that you can edit audio, animate and create stunning graphics on screen. And not forgetting the free speakers that allows you to blast yourself to glory as you see your scores chalking up. More CD-ROM Interface Now, with built in AT-Bus Mitsumi, Panasonic and Sony interface, Sound Galaxy provides even more options for CD-ROM drives. It can be further upgraded to more powerful SCSI CD-ROM Drive. So when you want to be there without being there with malevolent creatures, be a politician to set new world order, get into a 18-hole during lunch or play bridge with Omar Sharif, it has to be Sound Galaxy because we can make it as if you were there. Call us : 1-800-886 8859 Want U.S.A. Oflice: AZTECH LABS, INC. 46707 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 Manufactured by: AZTECH SYSTEMS PTE LTD 31 Ubi Road 1, AVS Building, Singapore 1440. Tel: (65) 741-7211 Fax: (65) 741-8678/9 Tlx: RS 36560 AZTECH AVS All trade numes & murks are registered trademarks of respective company. Circle Reader Service #45 "


"Taking a peek Eric, players take the persona of the title character as he tries to prove himself worthy of a seat at the Rhomboid Table. Lovers of good camp and good puzzles should find this product worth a few sleepless knights. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #11. Battle of min captain's chir drapan's tati million FrPHONE Treasure Island, ont rart Tho is Treasure Island, None of the r ! Columbia colof Piracy Tlus Con consists of several tits that Puddle behind a miles.Mitt lence. Jolly Roger files fron stop or of the fildir, the place has a call Illicit took about it. You osim lere Zack. He has to work with a sophisticated and temperamental machine, the manual to which is techno gobbledygook. What's more, he has got co-workers that are working against him by hiding his tools and a boss who screams first and thinks later (if at all). Zack's task is to work his way through six levels of spatio/logic puzzles which are all set in a world seen from the 3-D \"isometric\" viewpoint. Trial and error experimentation, forethought, and a dose of spatial logic skills will help the puzzle-loving gamer in completing this well-wrought brain-drainer. Amiga, IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #14. Ord som Mindcraft 2291 205th Street, Suite 201 Torrance, CA 90501 (310) 320-5215 wheel. a l . and the words. \"Columbia School Yuneen of Piracy Eric the Unready BO110 03 01 Ti Garz 05 00 Orvice other THE MAGIC CANDLE III: An evil blight has swept across the lands within the Solian Sea and, once again, fantasy role-players are faced with the task of extirpating the threat to Good. The world of the Magic Candle has changed a bit in this third incarnation, with improved VGA graphics, better mouse support, improved note keeping, and new spells, but fans of the series can still expect the very detailed role-playing found in its predecessors. Players will still have the ability to divide their party and give each character an occupation, one will still have to tend to their characters fatigue and hunger needs, and the character system still includes a nice variety of useful skills. Magic Candle III will certainly not surprise anyone, but fans of the system may think that this is just as well. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #12. Strongholds B0110 says: We Should always stay dioshotel shelters and stronghoids. The Magic Candle III AND HIS Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 EPIC: This game so desperately wants to be Wing Commander. It has a grand and complex space theme that, stripped of its complexity, reduces to a Battlestar Glactica-esque space ark storyline. It has some lovely 3-D animated cut screens for the in-depth briefing and launch sequences. It has a branching storyline that reflects the success or failure of the player's missions. Unfortunately, the flight model is a bit silly. The player's space fighter orients itself along a plane, behaving somewhat like it were in atmosphere, the fighter responds much too readily and rapidly to feel realistic, and the player can repeatedly ram into the surface of a planet at high speeds several times before this Herculean ship is destroyed (meanwhile the enemy is generally destroyed with a single shot). While it is evident that much love went into the production of the graphic splash and animated sizzle, it is also evident that the fundamental mechanics are a bit under-cooked. Amiga, IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #15. Tegel's Mercenaries TEGEL'S MERCENARIES: Those who enjoyed the hard-edged, cyber-marine feel of the victims in the film Aliens (\"Vasquez, anybody ever mistake you for a man?\" \"No. You?) might find a world tuned to their tastes in this real-time, squadlevel wargame with a role-playing edge. Players will lead a rough band of mercenaries through a series of scenarios, all generally involving the violent deaths of members of the K'kistik race. Aller handpicking a squad of mercs from a portfolio file of 20, players will direct the actions of the mercs from a top-down view. Mercenaries is much like Omnitrend's Breach, but with a personality. The world in which the mercs' activities take place is graphically rich and alive with non-player characters that wander about and comment on the fire-lights that crupt around them. Yet, though it outpaces Breach in character, it doesn't have anything near the interface elegance that the comparable program had. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #13. Origin Systems PO Box 161750 Austin, TX 78716 (512) 328-0282 Contraption Zack ORIGIN FX SCREEN SAVER: Is there a trend here? First Dynamix with Johnny Castaway and now Origin with Origin FX? Maybe... but there's little doubt that many Windows-using gamers will have their computer's idle time occupied with an assortment of goofy animated effects (oops, FX). Among the more interesting of the 24 screen salvation options are: Claw and Scratch, where analogs of Tom and Jerry chase each other about the screen using traditional cat and mouse cartoon tactics; Silhouette, where creatures from Ultima Mindscape 60 Leveroni Court Novato, CA 94949 (415) 883-3000 GOODOOD CONTRAPTION ZACK: Most computer users should be able to relate to Epic Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"New! TRISTAN Available for IBM PC and Macintosh color, \"Best Simulation\" Finalist 1991 computers. -Software Publishers Association \"(TRISTAN) should be a big winner.\" John Sculley \"You can easily forget you are playing on a computer -Miami Herald 1000 \"TRISTAN puts a new tilt on old fashion pinball.\" -MacWEEK \"Superbly lives up to its billing as solid state pinball.\" -MACWORLD Enjoy the Excitement of Real Pinball!  Authentic Ball Action Wild Pinball Devices  Fabulous Sound  TILT and much more... Solid Stait PINBALL TRISTAN To Order: Contact your favorite retailer or call (613) 967-7900. * A488 1000 SPIN MICHAEL Compatible with Windows 3.x, Sound BlasterTM, Adlib SoundTM, and 256 color VGA. SOFTWARE CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #42 Amtex Software Corporation  206 George Street  Belleville, Ontario Canada K8N 3H4  voice (613) 967-7900  fax (613) 967-7902 "


"_   neering introduction into the world of trusses, beams and stringers, tension. compression and load. Apple II ($59.95), IBM ($99.95). Circle Reader Service #18. VII suddenly materialize in your application, taking a part of your desk top with them as they run across the screen; Window Washer, where Vinnie the work-a-day schlub will use his squeegee to good effect washing your nasty word processing application off the screen. There are less interesting one's as well, like the Guardian which merely runs the intro Origin logo animation from Ultima VII over and over. Another nice feature is the ability to use custom .BMP images to create a personalized slide-show. Computer screens will never again rest in peace. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Origin FX Screen Saver File Edit Game Offcatty Misi Subern Sition plat The political situation has deteriorated. The reuell has started. Comience your mission. Intelligence reports have 40 ships in your ares. Good hunting. Captain Nemo! score u The Ono Srps 40 Psygnosis 29 St. Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 731-3553 BILL'S TOMATO GAME: Not since Attack of the Killer Tomatoes have so many red, ripe fruits been victimized for our entertainment. In this puzzle game from the publishers of Lemmings, comes a tragic tale of two young tomatoes who decide to escape their fate as stewed specimens, leap from the Produce Truck of Doom, and lead the life of renegades. Alas, just as their home garden is in sight, an evil squirrel snatches away Tracy, the female half of this pair. Terry's (and the player's) quest is, then, to rescue Tracy by progressing through many fiendishly devised tests of problem-solving and timing. By correctly positioning fans, trampolines, jack-inthe-boxes, and blocking boxes, and by timing the sequence so that Terry avoids moving obstacles, Terry can progress through the screens and on to a juicy reunion with his ripe little lover. The game is as conceptually cute as Lemmings, but contains more frustration per bushel, as most of the puzzles are more timingthan strategy-oriented. Amiga ($49.99). Circle Reader Service #19. Auntiary Controls Subversion Point of View Computing, Inc. 5050 Edison Avenue, Suite 221 Colorado Springs, CO 80915 (800) 397-7055 SUBVERSION 1.0: Part Battleship, part Cat & Mouse, this game pits the player in a super-sub against an armada of hostiles. Confined to a boxing-ring sized map, the action is fairly tense for the player as he/she decides what single action to take each turn in order to combat the enemy above. Reaching the supply ships on the board before they are sunk by the enemy is another important goal, as is knowing how to deal with the hazards of the deep. Sadly, the copy protection is extremely intrusive on game play, occasionally dropping depth charges on any rising enthusiasm for the game. Amiga, Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #17. Truck roll 19. Y . AUT FILSTAG RowWeat 9.00 Bridge Builder \" 380 300000 175 Pre-Engineering Software 1266 Kimbro Drive Baton Rouge, LA 70808 (504) 769-3728 BRIDGE BUILDER: Software is still available for the Apple II -and if you believe that one then I've got a bridge I want to sell ya. Actually, this piece of educational software is available for both the Apple and the IBM, and gives one the ability to create as many bridges as one's imagination can compose. Players build their bridges by selecting among bridge \"members» of differing strengths. When the bridge is completed, an 80,000 lb. truck is run across the structure to test its viability. More often than not, the truck and its unfortunate test driver plunge into the icy waters below in a mass of tumbling girders. An analysis function will then allow the user to pin-point the weaknesses in the design. Though crude in terms of graphics and interface, this seems an excellent intuition-building tool and pre-engiTanager Software Productions 1933 Davis Street, Suite 208 San Leandro, CA 94577 (510) 430-0900 OPERATION U.S. PRESIDENTS: Presidential trivia may not matter to most of us, but it matters to school teachers and it matters to the secret agents of C.Y.P.H.E.R. The player's role as secret agent is to crack a code which can only be done by learning about the Presidents. The agent is not alone, however. There is a vast network of C.Y.P.H.E.R. agents ready to provide clues and a powerful Microscan Watch which remembers the clues and has an encyclopedic function. After meeting fellow C.Y.P.H.E.R. agents and gathering clues, the player then visits the Gallery of Presidents to make a selection. The graphically simple, 256 color program offers four levels of difficulty and over 1,000 clues about the Presidents. It is ideal \"for ages 8 108,\"according to the box, but seems mostly suited for children under 16. IBM ($49.95) Circle Reader Service #20. cow Bill's Tomato Game TUTTUOPIO STUTTE In the Observatory neighborhood, all the streets and tod for states Operation U.S. Presidents Page 172 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME Gellysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM GED SPORG SASA The tactical combat system used in Gettysburg: The Turning Point spawned its own series of American Civil War games. Many players felt that it was the first \"realistic\" wargame in terms of the way it handled \"What if?\" orders of battle with computer-moderated random set-up. The artificial opponent was reasonably competent for most gamers, and the randomality added to the game's challenge and replayability. The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Each month, we will highlight at least two of these games as part of this listing. Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atart ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (Micro Prose, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1988) Many formats Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM GUNSHIP THE SCORRELATNO ACROPROSE From its inception, Gunship offered a playable helicopter simulation combined with action-oriented realism. Though its debut was on the 8-bit Commodore 64, its polygon-filled graphics were fast enough and the controls (handled easily with the keyboard overlay) were realistic enough to satisfy almost every military simulation buff. Gunship was not the first helicopter simulation, but it was the first mission-oriented combat helicopter simulation and the first to allow characters to have continuity from mission to mission. It was successful enough to spawn an entire generation of imitators. March 1993 Page 173 "


"Kinga Svt VI Reader Poll #103 The Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 2 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Quest for Glory III Sierra Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck LucasArts Star Control II Accolade The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts Sheriock Holmes CD ICOM Amazon Access 10 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend O NOUAWNCOMPUTER GAMING WORLD SCORE 10.40 10.08 10.02 9.99 9.95 9.72 9.71 9.55 9.50 Top 100 Games semiet Compus Ganu Haguziar Type SP WG,ST ST SP RP AD Underwald Top Role Playing Games AC QQP ST AD AD.RP AD NOUAWN GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.45 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.64 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.57 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.48 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.45 Ultima VII Origin 9.39 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.10 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 Ultima V Origin 9.00 Elvira Accolade 8.82 AD,ST WG ST SI AC 9 10 WG AD AD RP WG S core 10.73 10.72 10.72 10.50 10.45 10.40 10.34 10.26 10.08 10.02 9.99 9.95 9.88 9.85 9.84 9.82 9.74 9.72 9.71 9.64 9.63 9.62 9.61 9.57 9.55 9.55 9.54 9.51 9.50 9.50 9.48 9.47 9.47 9.45 9.39 9.38 9.33 9.29 9.27 9.25 9.25 9.21 9.19 9.18 SI -ac00cm Game Company 1 Links 386 Pro Access 2 Conquered Kingdoms QQP Civilization MicroProse Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 5 Ultima Underworld Origin 6 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 7 Wing Commander II Origin 8 Solitaire's Journey 9 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 10 Quest for Glory III Sierra 11 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 12 Star Control II Accolade 13 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty 14 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 15 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 16 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 17 The Perfect General QQP 18 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 19 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 20 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 21 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 22 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 23 Stunt Island Disney 24 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 25 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM Hardball III Accolade 27 Great Naval Battles SSI 28 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 29 Battles of Destiny QQP Amazon Access 31 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 32 Links Access Warlords SSG Might & Magic III New World Computing 35 Ultima VII Origin 36 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 38 High Command Colorado Comp. 39 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 40 Terminator 2029 Bethesda Lemmings Psygnosis 42 Conflict: Korea SSI 43 Carriers At War 44 Second Front SSI 45 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend Tetris Classic Spectrum Holo Byte 47 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 48 Eye of the Beholder Gunship 2000 Microprose 50 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra RP AD SP WG,ST Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY Red Baron Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 4 Stunt Island Disney Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Gunship 2000 Microprose Silent Service II MicroProse Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse SI 10 SCORE 9.85 9.84 9.62 9.61 9.51 9.33 9.10 9.08 9.06 9.04 34 WGST AD RP SP WG,ST RP RP ST SI WG 37 Top Strategy Games SP SCORE 10.72 10.26 9.85 9.38 SSG + GAME Civilization Solitaire's Journey Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Chessmaster 3000 The Lost Admiral Mech Warrior Populous II Castles 2: Siege and Conquest 9 Hoyle Book of Games. Vol. 3 10 Siege COMPANY MicroProse QOP Electonic Arts Software Toolworks QOP Activision Electronic Arts Interplay Sierra Mindcraft AC AC WG WG WG AD ST AD RP SI 9.05 8.95 8.92 8.82 9.16 N 8.78 SSI 9.14 9.11 9.10 9.10 9.09 8.77 AD "


"MicroProse Electronic Arts Sir-Tech WOO QQP com OUAW Top Wargames GAME Conquered Kingdoms 2 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach 5 Great Naval Battles G Battles of Destiny Warlords 8 High Command 9 Canflict Korea 10 Camers At War COMPANY QQP Three-Sixty QQP Three-Sixty Pacific SSI QQP SSG Colorado Comp. SSI SSG SCORE 10.72 9.88 9.74 9.63 9.54 9.50 9.47 9.29 9.21 9.19 SI AD AD,RP AD RP AD WG AD ST.SI 9.08 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.02 9.01 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.96 8.95 8.92 8.92 8.92 8.89 8.89 8.88 8.83 8.82 8.82 ST AC AD AD WG SP como IDER Top Action Games ST RP 1 2 3 8.81 GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Terminator 2029 Tetris Classic Oh. No More Lemmings Super Tetris Out of this World Conan the Cimmerian COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Bethesda Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Interplay Virgin TON MicroProse Sierra Sierra Sierra Origin Sierra SSI Dynamix Activision MicroProse Electronic Arts Psygnosis Dynamix Access SSI Electronic Arts Interplay Accolade MicroPlay MicroProse SSI Sierra Mindcraft Spectrum HoloByte SSI Dynamix SSI Interplay Legend Electronic Arts MicroProse RAW Entertainment SSI SSI Interstel SSI SSI SCORE 10.34 9.82 9.25 9.25 9.14 8.92 8.77 8.51 8.31 51 Silent Service II 52 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 53 Bane of the Cosmic Forge The Lost Admiral 55 Red Storm Rising Conquests of the Longbow 57 Quest for Glory II 58 Palice Quest 3 59 Ultima V 60 Space Quest IV Western Front 62 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 63 Mech Warrior 64 F-117A Populous II Oh, No! More Lemmings 67 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 69 Pacific War 70 Indianapolis 500 71 Castles 2: Siege and Conquest Elvira 73 Command HQ 74 Rex Nebular Gateway to the Savage Frontier 76 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 77 Siege Super Tetris 79 The Summoning 80 Heart of China 81 Battles of Napoleon Battlechess Gateway 84 Starflight 11 85 F-15 Strike Eagle II 86 Action Stations Pools of Darkness 88 Typhoon of Steel 89 Armada 2525 90 Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball 91 Buck Rogers Carrier Strike 93 Legend of Kyrandia 4-D Boxing 95 Megafortress 96 PGA Tour Golf NFL Pro League Football 98 Out of this World 99 The Games: Winter Challenge Martian Dreams WG,ST AD RP ST ST ACS RP AD WG ST AD 34994839493834334387899733899383894638 288304328 8.79 8.79 8.78 8.77 8.77 8.76 8.75 8.72 8.72 8.72 RP 8.71 8.69 Top Sports Games SI WG RP WG ST SP NKS GAME COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access Front Page Sports Football Dynamix Hardball lll Accolade Links Access Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Indianapolis 500 Electronic Arts Tony La Russa's Ultimate BaseballSSI 4-D Boxing Electronic Arts NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports PGA Tour Golf Electronic Arts SCORE 10.73 10.50 9.55 9.47 9.27 8.83 8.60 8.56 8.54 8.54 10. VOAWN 8.68 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.60 8.57 8.57 8.56 8.56 RP WG SSI AD 8 SP SIST SP 8.55 9 10 Virgin Electronic Arts Three-Sixty Pacific Electronic Arts Micro Sports Interplay Accolade Origin SP AC 8.54 8.54 8.51 8.50 8.50 SP RP Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP-Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"What's not What You've Been Playing Lately PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software December, 1992 PC Games (MS-DOS) The Feedback Forum of Reader Response Rank -icicroonOn9 Title and Source Kings Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) Front Page Sports: Football (Sierra On-Line) Comanche: Maximum Overkill (Nova Logic) Wing Commander (Origin) Sim City (Maxis) F-15 Strike Eagle IT (MicroProse) Monopoly (Virgin Games) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Aces of the Pacific (Sierra On-Line) Links 386 Pro (Access) Civilization (MicroProse) The Humans (Gametek) WWII 1946: Aces Mission Disk (Sierra On-Line) Risk (Virgin Games) Star Trek 25th Anniversary (Interplay) Police Quest (Sierra On-Line) Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum Holobyte) SimLife (Maxis) Hardball III (Accolade) Quest for Glory Ill (Sierra On-Line) Edotverzea Every month our mailbox fills to capacity with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our many loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of the release of our latest issue we can expect to see dozens of cards begin pouring in with comments, suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 game poll. Through your efforts, we know which articles were hits, which flopped, how many tyypos an grammatical errors we've let slip through--in addition to the many wellarticulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is set aside to give our readers a voice, and to display the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" field on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out--and keep 'em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #103, February 1993: Conquered Kingdoms (QQP) Civilization (MicroProse) Front Page Sports Football (Dynamix) Wizardry VII: Crusaders of the Dark Savant (Sir-Tech) Ultima Underworld II (Origin) Wolfenstein 3-D (id Software) F-15 Strike Eagle III (MicroProse) V For Victory: Velikiye Luki (Three-Sixty) Dune II (Virgin) Comanche Maximum Overkill (NovaLogic) Who are you? Just who are you people? And what do you do with your time? Each month we ask all sorts of prying questions in search of the answers. After immediately turning all data over to the CIA, we then tabulate it for our own amusement. Here are some of our more recent findings. -cini+ Rank ora cim* en to win Rank Amiga Cannes Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Civilization (MicroProse) AD&D Eye of the Beholder (Strategic Simulations) Operation Combat (Merit) AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations) Vacintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Lemmings (Psygnosis) Sim City Supreme (Maxis) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Award Winners: KO V & Red Baron (Sierra On-Line) CD-ROM Products Title and Source Battle Chess (Interplay) Wing Commander/Secret Missions I & II (Origin) Cinemania (Microsoft) CD Game Pack (Software Toolworks) Sherlock Holmes Detective (Ieom) Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego (Broderbund) Sherlock Holmes II (icom) Kings Quest V (Sierra On-Line) World View (Aris Entertainment) Wing Commander & Ultima VI (Origin) What is your sex? Female: Male: 93% \"You mean during the day or the night?\". 4% What is your favorite gaming genre? Wargames: 20% Flight Sims: 13% Adventure games: 6% Role-playing games: 19% Strategy games: 16% Action games: 5% Don't label me! 20% Rank Which is your primary gaming computer? IBM & Compatibles: 91% Macintosh Family: 3% Amiga Family: 6% Atari ST: -cim #vis nobis cimtvis mooie 6% Which network do you primarily patronize? CompuServe: 8% GEnie: Prodigy: Sierra Network: America On-line: Internet/Usenet: Unconnected: 61% 8% 6% 18% How old are you in earth years? Under 14: 2% 14-17: 8% 18-23: 24-29: 19% 30-35: 21% 36-40 15% 41-50: 15% 51 and over: 290 6% 5% This list is based on units sold by Software Etc. Babbages, Waldersoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025. Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"Mailches The Patch File Yomputer game programs have grown so massive and the OS/2 and other DPMI operating systems and software. 11/14/92 number of possible configurations has become so huge *NFL Pro League Football '92 V1.1: Contains many upgrades, that incompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at fixes, and additional schedules. 1/26/93 an exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrat*Pacific War V1.06: Fixes the bombardment bug, the West ed at the need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but Coast defense bug, the missing unit bug, etc. An \"unofficial\" they seem to be an interim solution that is going to be with the upgrade from Gary Grigsby not supported by SSI. 1/24/93 hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform configPower Politics Update: Fixes all known bugs. 12/11/92 uration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. Computer Gaming World will Quest For Glory III \"B\" Patch: Corrects all known game play publish a regular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. errors. 12/03792 These patches can usually be downloaded from either Railroad Tycoon Version 1.01 Update (Mac): The latest verCompuserve or GEnie, but can also be obtained from individual sion for the Mac. 09/25/92 software publisher's own BBSs and direct from the publisher Rex Nebular Update 8.49 (IBM/VGA): Corrects the chicken(with proof of purchase). We continue to urge publishers to keep bomb and poly-cement problems. 11/13/92 us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. SimLife Upgrade V1.02c: Fixes minor problems. 12/16/92 (*** indicates new files.) Spelljammer Update V1.1: Latest version of the game. Air Force Commander Slowdown Patch: Makes the game 11/21/92 playable on high-powered machines. 11/24/92 Star Control 2 V1.1: Fixes several small problems. 12/11/92 Amazon Raft Bug Fix: Fixes the problem getting the raft out of *Star Legions Update: Fixes some machine-specific lock-ups, the box in the airplane. 12/12/92 problems with phasers firing out of the FOV, changes to mission B-17 Flying Fortress Version 2 Update: Adds many new fearatings, fixes to award sequence. 1/15/93 tures and tweaks some of the existing ones. 11/17/92 Stunt Island Update: Fixes a minor bug in the Install program *Batman Returns Update: Latest version of Konami's Batthat was causing some system lockups after the hardware autodeventure. 1/24/93 tect sequence. 11/27/92 Civilization Update (Amiga): Latest version for the Amiga. Tom Landry Football V. 1.02 Update: Corrects problems with 09/12/92 modem play, excessive penalties, Sound Blaster problems, and Crisis in the Kremlin Version 1.01: Fixes problems reported by improved animation choreography. 12/03/92 users since its original release. 09/26/92 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Version 1.10: Fixes many bugs, Crusaders of the Dark Savant Patch #2: Fixes the «Don including the Canadien. VoC file, the computer scoring problem, Barlone\" bug. 11/16/92 CH FlightStick problem, penalties, referees, coach's clipboard Darkseed Version 1.5 Update: Latest version of CyberDreams' and others. 11/24/92 adventure. 1/20/93 F-15 Strike Eagle III Install Update: For those having trouble with the install program. 12/23/92 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten *F-15 Strike Eagle Help Info Text: Text file containing known problems and suggestions for those having problems with the The Game Center section of the PRODIGY network offers sim. 1/08/93 its users the chance to rate their favorite games on a weekly Falcon: Operation Fighting Tiger V3.01.1 Update: Contains basis. CGW provides this data as yet another indicator of new installer, a fix for blank screen lockup, escort mission fail what's hot in gaming as determined by the player's votes. ures, Reg Flag buildings, PC Speaker sounds, ROE conflicts, BPlease note that a PRODIGY rating is not a cumulative rat52 crashes, ships in allied comm mode in Kurile Theatre, and ing, as in the CGW Top 100 Poll, and is based upon a others. 10/13/92 straight 1-10 scale. Full Count Baseball V5.1 Upgrade: Expands play-by-play and offers a new screen layout. For owners of V5.0 only. 12/06/92 Greens Version 02 Update: Addresses the problems reported with scoring, Sound Blasters, etc. 11/22/92 Gunship 2000 Islands and Ice Version .08: Latest version of TOP TEN RANKED GAMES Week of Jan 22 Jan 28 the I&I scenario disk. 10/10/92 *Great Naval Battles Update: Latest version of SSI's BB simu RANK STORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE lator. 1/08/93 Harpoon Version 1.32 Upgrade: Latest IBM version of the 2997 Wolfenstein3 6 1782 Star Trek 251h 2450 Civilization 7 1683 lima 7 game. 11/14/92 2188 Ding Commander 2 8 1625 Aces of Pacific Island of Dr. Brain Update: Fixes \"Ooops 10\" error, music 1818 Links 9 1572 Falcon 3.0 room puzzle, and several other problems. 12/23/92 1718 ultima Underworld 18 1464 Monkey Island 2 Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Rev 1.5: Fixes the Mini-Moss effect caused by several objects being placed after a hill crest. 13 free games and more 12/16/92 Look Lightspeed Version 02 Update: Fixes the trade problem that some players have experienced. 11/17/92 Menu X-ref Jump Path Tools Help Exit Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.08: Allows game to run under GANEPOEL In EN GAMECELER April 1993 Page 177 "


"The Envelope Please by Johnny L. Wilson tate of the Industry: A film can get extra marketing spin from the Academy Awards. Studio chiefs and directors of non-commercial films can sometimes be vindicated by a well-timed award. Science fiction authors can get build their reputations (and find grounds for negotiating a new contract on their subsequent books) just from having one of their books nominated for a Hugo or Nebula award. Nobel prize winners attain extra funds to continue their research. Product awards in nearly every category have the potential to influence our purchasing decisions. Yet, almost every award format gives way to controversy. Hollywood insiders complain that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences is too politicized. Members of the Science Fiction Writers Association complain that too many amateurs have infiltrated their august membership. It seems that, no matter what group gives the awards, there are always critics who complain that a given winner was awarded their prize due to (Select one): a) a previous body of work; b) sentimentality; c) incompetent voters; d) a lobbying effort or e) all of the above. The Software Publishers Association presents the Excellence in Software awards at their Spring Symposium each year. Indeed, they will have been presented by the time most of you read this editorial. Every year, we hear talk of how \"political\" the awards are and new initiatives to reform them. For example, we (along with others) criticized the selection of a data disk as the sports game of the year during last year's awards. Others complain of a backlash against some of the member companies in the SPA. Does this mean that the SPA awards are bad? Of course, not. At worst, it probably signifies that they are like industry-presented awards in any given field and subject to the same pressures. At best, they have value for promotion, occasionally offer extra spin (and shelf life) to a product and, best of all, provide some attention to computer software in general (and, hopefully, entertainment software in specific) that may deserve a second look. What they do not usually accomplish is the task of bringing unknown or lesserknown products to the attention of the public. At their best, an award should call one's attention to a demonstration of expertise, a display of innovation or a dash of risk that turns into something elegant in aesthetic or utility. Further, awards carry more weight when those who know something of the difficulty in accomplishing a task can acknowledge an exceptional job. Since the SPA tends to be oriented toward the administrative and marketing aspects of software publishing, the awards seem to favor those products which are better marketed as opposed to better designed. Naturally, the Computer Game Developers Conference would be an ideal venue for awards which reflect design over marketing. Yet, the CGDC has abdicated their potential for adjudicating product awards because of a philosophical devaluation of awards in general (largely for reasons mentioned carlier). The members recognize the failings of awards without realizing their positive potential for enlightening gamers on those products which designers feel are most noteworthy. Frankly, we wish they would change their minds. State of the Magazine: Magazines which cover a given field usually offer awards as part of their critical task. The awards allow readers to gain a sense of perspective with regard to games which have remained significant and stood above the rest after a passage of time. In CGW, for example, we have two sets of awards for two operative periods of time: the Game of the Year awards and the Hall of Fame games. The former awards represent the \"selling season» from one Summer Consumer Electronics Show to another and the latter awards signify games that have shown themselves to be exceptional over the long haul. The former awards are genre specific, with the exception of the overall Game of the Year award and the Special Awards for Artistic Achievement. The latter awards are all-inclusive. The awards provide a ready-reference for the readers regarding which titles are deemed most worthy of their attention by the editorial staff of the magazine. At CGW, the process begins with the editors listing the games which they consider to be the best in each genre. This list is crossreferenced with the readers' ratings in the Top 100. The editors express their opinions concerning the artistic merit of each game and why they believe a given game is better than another. These arguments are weighed carefully against the readers' ratings and a decision is made. Hence, the winners are not always the top-rated games in their genre (since the artistic and design merits might outweigh a popular, but conventional game), but they are usually well-rated. The overall Game of the Year must offer something very special. It will usually feature some new technology or cross-over into some new boundary of game design. It will often appeal to more than one type of gamer. Some years, it is tougher than others to make this selection, but it is never done hastily. A great deal of thought is placed into every selection and a considerable amount more goes into this one. The biggest drawback to CGW's two sets of awards is the fact that we conservatively wait until a game has developed a \"history\"before we acknowledge it. Some readers have complained that this offers no assistance in terms of purchasing outstanding games at an early juncture. So, this month, we unveil a third set of awards. The CGW Editors' Choice designation will accompany feature coverage in the magazine. These awards are designed to give timely recognition to those products which, from our critical vantage point, seem to go beyond the rest of their genre. Since they will, of necessity, be early choices, this will necessitate our staff going out on the occasional limb. Yet, we think that readers who know our approach and tastes will benefit from this additional recognition. Watch for the unveiling of our new awards logo in future issues. We recognize, however, that every reader is not going to agree with all our selections, whether based on early experiences or a well-known track record. Yet, we still think it is worthwhile to make a stab at honoring those games which we deem critical successes. To paraphrase a cliche', \"If there were no awards, (Select one: critics, marketers, egotists, reporters, gamers or competitors) would find it necessary to invent them. CGW Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"«Catch a dragon? No sweat!» ERICANBEKON The Torus Inquirer ERIC ABDUCTED BY UFO! THE UNREADY. Osn busyt You 12 NICE Here's what the experts are saying about Eric the Unready. \"A comedy adventure full of whimsy and wonder\" --Computer Gaming World «Eric is flat-out funny. There's comedy for everyone and a good quest to boot.\" --Computer Game Review \"A wonderfully hilarious adventure -Game Bytes Magazine Eric the Unready established his reputation by impaling his instructor during jousting class. Then, when Princess Lorealle the Worthy is kidnapped, Eric begins a madcap quest through this hilarious fantasy world packed with dragons and dwarves, wizards, unicorns, and the most fearsome beasts of all, the dreaded Attack Turtles. Every player will find at least one favorite movie, TV show or adventure game that has been struck by Bob Bates pen! From the award-winning author of TIMEQUEST. 256-COLOR VGA LEGEND CREATAINMENT COMPANY \"I laughed till my pants fell down!\" Larry Laffner Breathtaking fantasy art! 256-color VGA Awesome soundtrack New menu-driven system for conversing with characters Intriguing mix of interfaces creates a constantly changing graphical scene \"More fun than a barrel of monkeys!\" Guywood Threepbrush W LEGEND 2920 PWY Owaring SERIES BOSNI ET og en D. You dont S ie w atched and ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY 14200 Park Meadow Drive Chantilly, VA 22021 Distributed by Accolade, Inc. To order, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-245-7744  1993 Legend Entertainment Company. ERIC THE UNREADY is a trademark of Legend Entertainment Company. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Actual VGA graphics shown. way warm 2112 Circle Reader Service #81 "


"Ultima Underwona 4 he Thrilling Sequel to Computer Gaming World's Role-Playing Game of the Year! It's not just a dungeon game anymore! Labyrinth of Worlds ou see a pack YOU see a hostile reaper. You see a hostile di reaper You s&ahong dart UNDERWORLD The Stygian Abyss\" was hailed as the first in a new generation of fantasy adventures. UNDERWORLD II Labyrinth of Worlds delivers a new, sharply realistic look. With smoother animation, more detailed creatures and a spacious view window, it's the most realistic gaming environment on a PC. The world of Underworld II is more varied and engaging than ever before. We've added new terrain features (like shifting floors, water currents and thin ice), new spells (like Shockwave and Portal), new and nastier traps and puzzles, and new creatures (we'll let you discover these for yourself...) Underworld Il takes you beyond the traditional dungeon environment. Deep in the earth, the Guardian's magic has cracked the walls of reality, opening the way to eight new worlds beyond Britannia: a city buried in ice, a floating castle, an ancient tomb and more... From the halls of Lord British's castle, it's time to carry the battle forward and into the LABYRINTH OF WORLDS... vou ses a nearly fun lantern You see red potion Actual screens may vary. ORIGIN We create worlds. Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. A Looking Glass Technologies Design An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750  AUSTIN, TX 78716 Origin, Ultimo and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Underworld, The Stygion Abyss and Labyrinth of Worlds are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. A Looking Glass Technologies is a trademark of A Looking Glass Technologies Design, Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #93 "

