Number 27

April 1986
FEATURES
Under Fire! Replay
With Commentary by Ralph Bosson

Side By Side
Europe Ablaze and U.S.A.A.F Reviewed

Map Design for Computer Games
Creating the Universe

Seventh Fleet
A Review

Game Manufacturer Survey
What Machines Are They Going To Support?

Battle of Antietam
A Review

10
William H. Harrington
16
Jay Selover
26
Steve Estvanik
30
Ed Curtis
32
Bill Oxner
34
William H. Harrington

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

6

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Scorpion's Tale
Ballyhoo Tips

Atari Playfield
Atari 1040 ST, Fooblitzky

Overthere!
Computer Game News From England

Commodore Key
Accolade, Whitefield Chess

Amiga Preferences
Information for the Amiga Gamer

Sports Scoreboard
Boxing and Karate Games

Strategically Speaking

24
Scorpia
36
Gregg Williams
38
Leslie B. Builder
39
Roy Wagner
39
Roy Wagner
40
Rick Teverbaugh
42

Game Playing Tips

Reader Input Device

45

Game Ratings

48

100 Games Rated

Activision
2350 Bayshore Frontage Road
Mountain View, CA 94043
415-960-0410
ALTER EGO: This one is different! A
role playing game that allows you to
experience life (from birth to death) in
a realistic environment. As the player
responds to specific questions, AE
develops a "profile" on which his life
experiences will be based. The player
may begin at any one of seven stages
of life and is presented with situations
to which he must react. The situations
are extremely varied, such as deciding
to take drugs, ask your girlfriend to
move in or counsel a friend in distress.
The current release is a "male" version,
the female disk will come later. The
setting is contemporary America, no
orcs or magic. The game was developed
by a practicing psychologist. An
interesting item. C64, Apple, IBM,
Mac.
Circle Reader Service #3
Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
415-479-1170

THE MUSIC SHOP: Allows you to
create original musical compositions by
placing musical symbols onto the staff
on your screen. You can change tempo
and sound, key and time signatures.
You don't have to know how to read
music to utilize the program. Includes
a wide selection of traditional songs on
the disk. C64. Circle Reader Service #4
Brown-Wagh Publishing
800 Charcot Avenue, #110
San Jose, CA 95133
FORTUNE TELLER: Exactly what
the title would seem to indicate. This
is a horoscope program. The user types
in the date, time and place of birth.
You can then ask questions in nine
categories of life experiences. C64,
Apple, IBM. ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #5
Cygnus
PO Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598
713-486-4163
STINGER!: A space arcade game, lots
of shoot-em-up. As Humans in the far

future you are faced with defeating
mutant insects (bees, wasps and
hornets) that are now the size of
spaceships. They are beginning to
migrate (killer bees!) and must be
halted. C64. Circle #6
SOLARSIM: Designed to perform
several astronomical functions:
simulate the motion of the planets
around the sun; simulate the motion of
comets; display the motion graphically
in a 3-D view; display the positions of
over 800 stars and allow the user to
identify each one; etc. NOT a game,
this is a simulation that will appeal to
serious astronomy buffs. IBM.
Circle Reader Service #7
Micro Prose
120 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
301-667-1151
ACROJET: Simulates the BD5-J, a
one-man, 200 mph jet aircraft that is
fully acrobatic. Three dimensional
graphics, sophisticated instrumentation and quick response
maneuverability. One to four players

can compete in the Decathlon of Sport
Aviation events. Excellent graphics
and attention to simulation details.
C64.
Circle Reader Service #8
Mind Systems Corporation
PO Box 506
Northampton, MA 01061
413-586-6463
PYLON RACER: Fly a racing plane
around a triangular course, racing
against a competitor visible in
perspective in color on the screen. You
can save your flight-path data on a
data diskette and use this data to race
against a friend. You can also compete
against other racers via modem, in
real-time. IBM. ($44.95). Circle #9
Peterson Computer Company
PO Box 40067
Bellevue, WA 98004
KEYS OF THE KINGDOM: A Bible
adventure game, intended for ages 12
and up. The player participates in
Bible stories and puzzles. The game
involves collecting the armor of God
(Ephesians 6) and using it to get the
keys to the Kingdom of God. Game
procedure is familiar to adventurers:
getting objects, going north, walk,
pray, etc. The parser seems fairly sophisticated. IBM. ($25.00). Circle #10

Polarware/Penguin Software
830 Fourth Avenue
PO Box 311
Geneva, IL 60134
312-232-1984
TRANSYLVANIA: Enhanced version
of a classic text/graphics adventure
game. Search Transylvania to find and
rescue Princess Sabrina. Creatures,
forests and a castle. This is the second
in a series of interactive fiction that
incorporates hi-res graphics and indepth parsing. Full and multiple
sentence commands, 1000+ word
vocabulary. All major computers.
( $34.95 ) . Circle Reader Service #11
Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Road, Bldg A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983
800-227-1617 ext 335
Circle #12
BATTLEGROUP: Sequel to
Kampfgruppe. A tactical level combat
game from WWII, allowing the player
to recreate tactical combat from North
Africa '43 to the bunker in Berlin.
Four historical scenarios are included,
but options are available to create
your own terrain and objectives.
American, British and German forces
are provided. The computer will take
either side in solitaire play, or the

computer will play itself in historical
mode. Each unit represents a platoon
of tanks, infantry or guns. C64, Apple.
($59.95).
RINGS OF ZILFIN: Animated window
graphics and economic considerations
represent a new approach to role-playing fantasy adventure games. Screen
insets, zooms into room interiors,
scrolling landscapes keyed to a
strategic map and flashing character
locator. You search for the two missing
Rings of Zilfin and fight the evil forces
of Lord Dragos. Recommended for
beginning and intermediate strategy
players, estimated 40-80 hours of play.
C64, Apple. ($39.95)
WIZARD'S CROWN: Hi-res graphics
adventure game. You are the leader of
a band of eight adventurers hired to
wrest the magical Wizard's Crown
from behind spell-woven walls in the
city of Arghan. Combines detailed
war-game type tactical battles with
the magic of a fantasy quest. One
feature of the game allows you to skip
ahead in the story and resolve combats
quicker. A multitude of combat
options occur, with up to five levels of
play. One player. C64, Apple. ($39.95).

PHANTASIE II: You are to gather a
group of adventurers to sail to the
island of Ferronrah, use your spells
and weapons to invade difficult
terrain, destroy the demons and rid
the land forever of Nikademus' evil
spell. Eight races, six classes of characters, 80 monster types, various
weapons and spells. One player, 30-60
hours of play, joystick. C64, Apple.

In CGW #25 Bill Harrigton reviewed Avalon
Hill's exciting new tactical combat game, Under
Fire! In this issue he teams up the the game's designer, Ralph Bosson to bring us an exciting replay.
Bill's comments are in normal text, while Ralph's
thoughts are italicized.

Ralph and I have chosen a scenario similar to
the action described on the back cover of the
Under Fire! (UF!) game box -- a Russian assault on a
German occupied dacha. We'll use the Shadow
Valley map, the Strong Hold scenario and a time
limit of ten game turns. It might be, say, late summer 1943 in the Kuban Pocket on the shores of the
Black Sea. My objective as the Soviet Major in
command of the mission will be one particular
building in the complex. We'll say our partisans in
the area have confirmed it's the German Regimental Command Post. Our company, is a combined
arms force of armor, infantry and tubed weapons,
mortars and lend-lease bazookas from our capitalist
friends in America. We have been "volunteered" for
this important target to support a larger, general
advance by the division. What an honor!
Ralph: One aspect of conventional board gaming
I've always liked is the setting of individual goals
for each of the players. In Under Fire I wanted
players to be able to set their own very personal
goals apart from the game's own victory conditions.
Just to make life interesting I've chosen the
Leader Control option. Rather then Player or Computer Control. From now on I'll only be in command of those units within 100 meters of my position. The computer will control everybody else on
the board and hopefully will make the "right" decisions in combat. This option neatly simulates the
command and control problems that result in coordinating combat with several squads under independent leadership. As an added bonus though my
"Leader" will be able to call in "off board "artillery.
Ralph: The Leader Option requires the controlling player to order his units into positions that will
allow them to work together with the rest of the

"team". Coordinating the movement and timing of
your units under this demanding game option is
critical and not an easy task. The program's AI will
generate combat orders for the units not under Bill's
control as he orders them toward the objective area.
But they'll be under their own command and might,
for instance, decide to "dig in" rather then provide
covering fire if they don't think an attack would be
worth the ammunition used.
The nine squads under my command, being one
leader, two T34 tanks, one mortar crew, and five
infantry squads were initially chosen by the computer during set-up. I elected to trade in three almost useless SU76's for the two T34's and some
extra machine guns, grenades and some lend lease
bazookas. (If I'm going to be volunteered to kick in
the front door of that dacha that's the least Regiment can do!) My initial deployment is in three
groups, North Group composed of two infantry
squads, Center Group with a T-34 and two supporting infantry squads and South Group under my
immediate command with another T34, a half
mortar squad and two infantry squads. No 3-to-1
attacker's advantage here! My forces instead will
have initiative and surprise alone going for them
and I hope a little luck!
Ralph: This is a risky decision for Bill, trading
in those three SU's for two T34's. The computer in
UF! will set up roughly comparable opposing forces,
if his company runs into German PZ-IV's or
PANTHER's he'll win the Order of Lenin. But if his
resistance is largely infantry he just might need
that 3rd "useless" SU-76! Bill has one other
advantage though, the larger size of Russian
Infantry squads enables them to take a lot more
punishment before they break.

My initial strategy for the South Group will be
to advance cautiously through the heavy woods in
"scouting" mode, my units will automatically go to
ground if they sight an enemy. (I don't know
what's lurking in the forest there and I'm not about
to find out the hard way if I can help it.) Center
group will make a dash for the tree line opposite
their jump off point while North group provides
support if they come under fire. At least I hope
they do. Even Ralph isn't absolutely sure what
might happen under Leader Control.

Ralph: Bill's immediate problem is the disposition of the defending German forces. The
solitaire player in UF! may randomly chose between
three defensive options, The program may chose to
concentrate the defending forces in the objective
area, or disperse it's units in a defensive belt outside
the objective or chose to use the bulk of it's forces
to defend the objective while maintaining a light
screen outside the objective area.

Turn 1

mode sight an enemy unit it will immediately halt
and risk exposing itself to enemy fire. This options
works well in wooded terrain but I wouldn't
recommend it in the open.

The South squad begins to advance through the
forest toward it's objective. I've sent the infantry
scouting ahead of the T-34. If they get into trouble
I can call up the tank or lob a few mortar rounds.
So far, so good. The center squad is holding their

positions in the tree line, waiting for Northern
group to dig in and prepare covering fire. The
woods are almost eerily quiet. Too quiet!

Ralph: Bill's use of "scouting" does have one
drawback. Should any of Bill's units in "scouting"

The sound of a German heavy machine gun
shatters the morning quiet. As our center group began it's dash for the tree line a German squad
opened up from the woods. Five men are hit in 2nd
squad (infantry) and the T-34 has come under indirect artillery fire! The tank is undamaged and our

UNDER FIRE!
tankers return the fire and score two hits on the
German machine gun. No supporting fire from the
Northern Group yet! Are they asleep up there or
just deaf! In the South still no activity as we proceed through dark green forest.

went to ground with no injuries. Our Center Group
has at last gotten to the tree line. They move north
to take up their final positions before storming the
dacha. As they advance they will provide cover for
the Northern Group as it begins to move toward

Ralph: That's the Leader Control option alright.
My guess is the squads in the North Group have
weighed the risk of revealing their own position
against the poor odds of directing small arms fire
over such a long range. And they can see that
German artillery falling in their front as well. The
solitaire player in UF has a strong sense of self
preservation!

the tree line and it's rendezvous with Center
Group. I don't like this one bit.
7th squad (infantry) reports that the German
unit that ambushed them has disappeared! That's all
I need, to play hide and seek with German machine
gun squads!

The center group continues their brave dash toward the tree line. Six more of our men are cut
down! Wait till we close with the fascist swine! Our
T-34 attacks and scores only one hit on the German
machine gun squad! That's luck for you! I've called
in an artillery strike on the reported German position. I can't see them of course but it's imperative
to suppress that German machine gun that's cutting
them to pieces.

Ralph: I don't want to rain on Bill's parade but
the odds of scoring a direct hit with indirect fire
(His leader is not in sight of the target) are pretty
long.

Ralph: The German squad could be doing one of
two things. The UF! tactical routines could be
directing it to retreat toward the Objective Area
ahead of the attacking force OR they could be
maneuvering for another assault on Bill's advancing
forces.
Turn 5
Our Northern Group continues it's crossing of
the open field. But the heavy machine guns I so
thoughtfully equipped them with in the beginning
are slowing them down. They may be late. Our
Center Group has nearly arrived at the rendezvous
point! In the South though we've got our hands full.
The missing German machine gun squad turns up
on our flank! Our 7th squad (mortar) makes contact

Center group's T-34 fires again, with No Effect!
The last remaining member of 2nd squad falls.
Now only the tank and a single infantry squad remain in Center Group. Our artillery rumbles overhead, a photo flash of light and the seven man
German squad vanishes in a boiling geyser of dirty
gray smoke and debris! Well done Comrades! That's
shooting for you.

Ralph: All right, so I'm only the author, what do
I know?!
Turn 4
At last, contact. Our 7th squad (mortar) in South
Group had gone on ahead and was out of my control. Another German heavy machine gun in our
path. Luckily our comrades where "Scouting" and

and attacks. Before they're done their shells and
medium machine gun take care of six more of the
enemy. Meanwhile 4th Squad (infantry) trades fire
with a new German infantry squad suddenly in our
path. Despite a hail of rifle and heavy machine gun
fire, bazookas and even rife grenades only one
German is hit! What are they wearing, steel underwear! In turn our men suffer five more hits. Our
T-34 opens up on the new German squad and
claims two more of the enemy. A hissing panzer-

faust strikes the T-34!!! The crew bail out just in
time but the tank will be sorely missed.
Ralph: Bill got caught at close range by a dugin German squad w/ a heavy machine gun. Looking
at the situation, it appears that the German got a
surprise modifier on the attack. The modifier not
only adds hitting power but Bill elected to order his
men to "fire" and increased their exposure. I don't
want to second guess, But... Bill might have done
better to order his men to "Hit The Dirt". And Bill's
running out of time as well as men! The Northern
Group is off schedule and the South Group is
bogged down in the forest. Worse the more time he
takes the greater danger that the solitaire player is
reinforcing the Objective Area.

Turn 6
At the rate they are going the Northern Group
will never arrive at the rendezvous point in time.
I've ordered them to drop their heavy machine guns
to make better time. Center Group shielded in the
forest waits patiently for them to arrive. In the
south the battle rages against the dug-in enemy
units. I've called in an artillery strike on the German infantry squad with no results! And I am sorry
to report that our mortar squad has been wiped out.
Our 4th Squad (infantry) and the surviving tank
crew have claimed only one member of the German

Unit in response.
Will this turn never end? Our 4th Squad is in
turn wiped out. The brave tank crew are next
struck by indirect enemy artillery fire and are lost
to us.
I am fatally hit while attempting to come to the
aid of my men. It's up to our comrades now in the
remaining North and Center groups to carry on
without us.
Ralph: With the loss of his "Leader" Bill now
has no direct fire control of any of the Soviet forces
on the map. And now when they'll need it the most
there's no one to call in artillery support.
Turn 7
Lieutenant Kalashnikov reporting: Center Group
leads the assault into the dacha. Our T-34 crashes

UNDER FIRE!
through the hedge and advances on the dacha. A
German squad opens fire from the second floor of
the building. At first they exchange fire with no
effect but our men won't be put off so easily! Another 76 MM shell and a burst of machine gun fire
claim two more Germans. A loud bang, a panzerfaust strikes the front armor of the T-34. The crew
bail out!
Ralph: The big question now is how many
Germans are in the dacha. Without the tank Bill will
have to mount an unsupported infantry assault.
These last few yards will be the toughest!

As the tank crew ran, broken, for their lives and
the cover of the northern hedge they where cut
down by the German machine gun nest on the second floor. While the Germans were concentrating
on the hapless T-34 crew our infantry squads from
the Northern Group have arrived and are prepared
to leap the hedge and make a dash for the inside of
the command post and avenge their fallen comrades
with rifle and grenade.
Turn 9

Turn 8

A German machine gun nest hidden behind the
building has opened up on first on 5th Squad , one
man falls. Our 3rd Squad (infantry) attacks in turn
Continued on pg. 47

SIDE BY SIDE
EUROPE ABLAZE AND USAAF
by Jay Selover
If you were a boxing promoter, you could wait
your whole life for this match-up. A real heavyweight contest! A "Thrilla In Manila"! What am I
talking about? The comparison of Europe Ablaze
and USAAF, of course. Never before have two true
"heavyweight" companies released games on very
similar subject within a few months of each other.
Here you have undisputed champ SSI and veteran
designer Gary Grigsby putting their title on the
line with USAAF. The challengers, Roger Keating
and the Australian company SSG, bring in Europe
Ablaze with only one previous outing. But that one
prior release, Carriers At War, was a stunning first
round knockout which catapulted the Aussies to the
top of the contenders.
Alright, enough of the boxing metaphors. Let's
look at the two games. Both games cover strategic
bombing in Europe during World War II. Both show
the course of the air war on a day-to- day basis
with missions and interceptions tracked through the
day in five to ten minute increments. Both can be
played solitaire (computer playing either side) or as
two player games. Beyond these simple observations, we will need to look at each game to understand how deeply the similarities run and where the
differences are.

which to choose; each one covering several months
from a critical period. Thus, one can replay the
Battle of Britain in the first scenario, as Germany
endeavors to best the RAF and subdue England.
The second scenario marks the beginnings of the
Allied campaign, with RAF night bombing raids
and the USAAF testing its wings against a
formidable Luftwaffe. Finally, the third scenario
covers the heart of the most devastating Allied
bombing of the Reich. This is one key difference
between Europe Ablaze and USAAF; while the latter covers only daylight bombing of Germany by
American plane in 1943-45, the former presents
several strategic situations and can allow either the
Allies or Germans to play the strategic offensive.
Europe Ablaze builds on Carriers At War with
some critical changes. Some of these were made due

Europe Ablaze

Europe Ablaze was released in October, 1985 for
Apple systems (only). The design/development team
of Roger Keating and Ian Trout have taken the
basic system from Carriers At War and moved it
half way around the world. Europe Ablaze covers
strategic bombing in Europe during World War II
on a daily basis with each day broken into five
minute increments. The game description claims
that the time frame is 1939-1945 but that is not
quite accurate, in that one does not play a six year
campaign. Instead, there are three scenarios from

to the differences in the two types of campaigns
covered and others were made because of advances
in Roger Keating's programming techniques. As in
Carriers At War, the program keeps track of virtu-

ally every plane in the respective air forces on a
minute-to-minute basis during action. The unit of
maneuver is the air group (5-40 planes). Each
group roster is kept up to date with losses, damaged
planes, and also those out of service for repairs or
maintenance. The computer also keeps track of everything on the ground; status of airbases, status of
all sorts of target types, all flak units, and also the
reconnaissance level on each target. This program is
a "number cruncher" par excellence!
Many of the new items relate to the unique aspects of combat with heavy bombers in Europe.
Specifically, we now have mission planning and
important subroutines for fighter interception. Before each day's combat, an air force with bombers
must make plans for upcoming operations (daylight
bombers plan at midnight and night bombers plan
at noon). One decides on the targets of the day's
missions, the altitude and arrival time over the target, the course to be flown (up to two midflight
course changes are allowed), which groups will
participate, and which fighter groups will fly escort
(at least as far as they can).
Beyond the major missions (from zero to four or
five each day), one can assign individual groups to
other tasks. Recon missions must be flown to keep
intelligence reports updated. Also, individual
bomber groups can execute raids or harassment
missions. Finally, fighters not escorting missions
can be assigned to offensive sweeps, patrols, or be
held in reserve for interceptions. The assignments
other than missions do not often hurt the enemy
badly, but they can do a very good job of cluttering up his radar screens making it hard to pick out
your big missions.
Planning is all well and good, but if your force
is on the strategic defensive (Britain in 1940 or
Germany in 1944), what you really want is interception capability. Here is another major addition
beyond Carriers At War. In Europe Ablaze, an entire set of menus is available to assign interception
missions "on the fly" as a day's fighting progresses.
As one receives radar alerts and updated reports on
enemy forces, one must decide which incoming

"blips" to intercept, which fighters to scramble, and
when.
USAAF
Much of what you use to describe USAAF
sounds like "same as Europe Ablaze". In a "broad
brush" description, both sound very similar. In the
individual situation of American daylight bombing
of Germany, the players make basically the same
kind of decisions in USAAF as in Europe Ablaze.
Before each day, the American player decides on
targets for his missions, the altitude and route to
fly, take-off time, and the groups assigned to each
mission. Defensively, the Luftwaffe player may assign some standing patrols, but most of his activity
will occur (as in Europe Ablaze) during the course
of the day as he decides which enemy "blips" to
intercept, with what, when, and where. The two
programs are both very similar also in that they
keep track of all air groups (serviceable and
out-of-service aircraft), replacements, morale and experience, target status, flak positions and strengths,
weather, and many other factors. Both programs
also give the results of air-to-air combat in terms
of individual planes lost (with some intentional
uncertainty and exaggeration in pilot "kill" reports).
While USAAF may seem "smaller" than Europe
Ablaze in that it covers only one phase of World
War II strategic bombing and it lacks the "design
your own scenario" feature of Europe Ablaze, it
compensates in the treatment it gives to target selection for the American player.
USAAF is more a "study" on the crippling of
specific German industries than a view of the entire air war. When the American player begins to
bomb Germany, in Europe Ablaze he selects his
type of target from a list that includes "population
center", "airbase", "radar station", "industrial center",
and a few others. In USAAF, that "industrial center" is broken down into about fifteen different
categories. You do not just bomb Essen, you bomb
the munitions plants, or the aircraft factories, or
the ballbearing factories, or the chemical works, or,

or, or. The American in USAAF must decide which
industries will provide the best pay-off in victory
points (considering the likely Luftwaffe defensive
commitment), and then go after a few industries in
force. Things become still more interesting in USAAF when you look at the industrial interrelationships which have been built in to it. Thus, knocking out one industry below a particular "critical
level" may begin to reduce the output of other
"dependant" industries. Thus, destroying the chemical industry gives you a certain number of victory
points, but you will also benefit from a reduction
in the rubber industry (rubber is dependant on
chemicals). An even more tempting target is the
aircraft industry, since the level of this industry is
directly connected to the number of Luftwaffe replacement planes which appear for the German
player to use.
USAAF also has a few other items not found in
Europe Ablaze. The map extends further south into
Italy, and the Americans must also direct the operations of bombers based in Libya, Tunisia, or (in
1944) southern Italy. There is also a more detailed
treatment of fighter doctrine and American assignment of fighters to "deep escort" of bombers is
handled very nicely.
Side by Side
In the final analysis, Europe Ablaze and USAAF
are complimentary designs. Because of the slightly
different focal points and features covered, they

could both be owned and played without feeling
that you have just bought "two of a kind". If this
was that heavyweight fight that I mentioned earlier,
it would go fifteen tough rounds and come out a
draw.
Europe Ablaze is a bit more generous in its
coverage of strategic bombing and also has a
"design your own scenario" feature which allows the
truly dedicated to vary virtually every parameter or
even design entirely new situations. It is also well
suited to multi-player games, as individual air
fleets can be assigned to different players and there
is even a slot available for a "commander in chief"
on each side who sets priority targets for each air
command.
USAAF is a bit more confined in its treatment,
but it covers well what it sets out to do. As a study
of the collapse of Germany's industrial capacity
under the weight of American bombs, it is unsurpassed.
I hate to end this all on something of a downer,
but let me add one note of caution. A strategic
bombing campaign is a long grueling affair. Each
day alone looks very much like each other day.
Bombing missions go out, take fighter and flak
losses, bomb the target with more or less success,
and return to base. There is no sudden knock-out
punch available within this course of a day or even
a week. To get the most out of either of these
games, you will need to be patient and play for
quite a while. The battle reports that come in during a day can be quite exciting to see at first, but
after days and days of the "same" reports, one can
begin to wonder if anything is really happening to
the enemy. If there is one fly in the ointment with
these two games, it is the danger of succumbing to
an ennui over the day to day "sameness". This is a
function of the combat being simulated, and it is
present equally in both games.
It is easy to enjoy both games; just learn to look
past the tactical results and analyze the trends
which become evident from week to week. Your
operational plans and execution really do make a
difference (both offensively and defensively), and
once you begin to feel how you are changing history, these games can both become very rewarding
gaming experiences.

As told by Scorpia
Back again, eh? My, you're looking a bit
peaked. It must have been all that running around
in the cubes you did last time! No matter, we have
just the thing to make you feel better and provide
you with a little relaxation: a trip to the circus!
Well, maybe this wasn't quite the best circus to
choose. "The Travelling Circus That Time Forgot,
Inc." is, perhaps, a trifle on the sleazy side. Certainly the performances were nothing to write home
about. Nor the over-priced goodies, which weren't
all that good. At least it's over, and now you're
loitering in the wings of the big top, feeling
slightly depressed.
Ah, but you may yet have the chance to bask in
the limelight, incredible as that might seem. There's
more going on around here than is first apparent!
All it takes is a little snooping around (ok, a lot of
snooping around), some death-defying acts, and a
bit of help from your friends (and this column!) to
bring you fame (if not fortune).
The first order of business, naturally, is to find
out just what is happening below the surface. Stepping out of the wings, you find yourself at the
Connection. A small group of people is making its
way through a turnstile nearby, but you don't seem
able to follow them just yet. No need to worry;
you'll manage that later.
In the meantime, look at little Comrade Thumb,
the midget. Poor guy, he's having a hard time getting a drink of water. Too bad he isn't quite tall
enough to reach the button on the fountain.
Moving along south, you come to the White
Wagon, where Mr. Munrab (read that backwards)
resides. He probably wouldn't take kindly to being
interrupted, but what's that sticking out from under
the trailer? Hmmm, it's a long fiberglass pole.
Funny, no one did any pole-vaulting during the
performances, so it must have some other use (or
even uses). You might as well hang on to it.
Drifting west, you reach the Back Yard. Here
comes Chuckles, who brushes past you, speaks to
the guard in the cage, and disappears through the
turnstile southwards. And right on his heels is none
other than Comrade Thumb. The little guy is ap-

BALLYHOO
parently willing to give a performance for you
gratis, so go ahead and enjoy it. And by all means,
do not overlook Harry the guard. He is a very
knowledgeable person; talk to him often.
Say, look at that tent over there... let's take a
peek inside. Ah, this is where the props are stored.
Uh-oh, sounds like someone is coming... better do
something fast! You don't want to be seen (there
won't be much of a game, otherwise).
But, at least you know now what the problem is:
Munrab's daughter has been kidnapped! And the
detective he's hired is just slightly less than competent. With him on the job, you shudder to think
of what might happen. There's only one thing to
do: rescue her yourself. Of course, that's easier said
than done. Especially since any or all of the performers could be involved.
Things seem to have reached an impasse. You
can't get through the south turnstile, and you can't
get through the east one. But, have you been everywhere else yet? Wander around for awhile, and
see what turns up. Bet you'll find one or two useful
items! A word of advice: when visiting high places,
less is better.
Ok, now you can get through the east turnstile,
which leads to the Midway. First stop is the
Menagerie, which houses an irritable elephant and a
bored gorilla (separately, of course). A little further
on you come to an empty cage. Peering in, you can
just make out a key hanging on the wall. Naturally,
the cage door is locked, so you'll have to swipe the
key some other way. It's a shame your arms aren't
longer.
Further along the Midway is Rimshaw and the
bizarre Andrew Jenny. Checking your ticket, you
see you are entitled to Rimshaw's services, so take
advantage of them. Andrew Jenny, however, isn't
(aren't?) going to be very helpful right now, so you
might want to move on to the end of the Midway,
and Tina the Fat Lady.
She doesn't seem very talkative; indeed, she apparently doesn't even know you're there at all.
Now, how are you going to get her attention?
Shouting won't do it, and you can't go climbing
around on her, either. While you think about this
one, I'll just sneak out for a quick snack. Oh, and
make sure you take in the complete exhibit!
Looks like you're about done here for now, and
there's still that other turnstile to get through.
That's a tough one. Harry won't buzz you in, because he knows you're not one of the performers. If

you could figure out a way of tricking him, you
might be able to get by. However, you do have to
know a little bit more about Harry first... and don't
forget about the balloon.
So, here you are in the performer's camp at last.
Not a very large place; only two trailers in all: one
for Katzenjammer the Lion Tamer and one for the
clowns. It doesn't appear that anyone's home at
Katz's place, still that key you borrowed might be
useful here. Clown Alley is occupied, but you'd
have a hard time getting in as yourself. Pretty hairy
stuff.
Care for a little excitement? Ready to take your
life in your hands? No? Gee, then you won't ever
finish this adventure! Ok, that's better (I'm glad
you changed your mind). Pay a visit to the lion's
den. My, that stand looks interesting. Unfortunately, shaggy-mane won't let you near it. But
that's no problem for you, right? You know all
about these beasts, right? (If you don't, you haven't
been talking to the right person!). So, don't just
stand there, get those cats out of the way! Grate
work!
Whew! Actually, this lion-taming business is really easier than it looks, huh? (We will overlook the
fact that your face is white and your knees are
shaking). Perhaps a little music will help you to
calm down. Unfortunately, reception around here
isn't too good; all you get is static. It probably has
something to do with being at sea-level.
Now that you've gotten yourself together again,
you might want to check out that gift. You still
have some money
with you, and that's what it's for;
don't be afraid
to do a little gambling. Ooops, it
looks like you're broke (or maybe you did too well
and got tossed out). No matter, there wasn't anything else to spend the money on, anyway.
Let's do a little inventory check here. Ah yes,
that cigarette case. I'll bet there's someone who
would be interested in seeing it. That is, if you
know to whom it belongs. And leave us not forget
those poor animals cooped up in the menagerie!
So, what about Mahler (the gorilla, not the composer) and Hannibal of the jungle? Ya know,
there's a lot of truth to that old saying about elephants and mice; now where would you find a

mouse? As for the gorilla, you should be able to
handle him in record time; it's all in your head.
There seems to be a hole in the wall here suddenly; take a step through and see what's on the
other side. Aha, the White Wagon! And now, you
can get to the ladder-in back of it. But wait... here
comes Comrade Thumb, and he appears to be
rather upset. Remember what he shows you (it can
wait a little while), then check out the top of the
trailer.
It wouldn't be surprising if you found something
interesting in that trailer; however, there's Munrab
to deal with first. Actually, getting him out is really pretty easy. Hello? Anyone home?
Still, you don't want to waste time here, so get
in and out fast. Then you can check out what
Thumb was trying to show you before. Ahhh,
you're getting close now, but you aren't quite finished. The bird, so to speak, has flown again. Give
chase, but don't just stand around.
Darn! Looks like he got away after all. Say,
who's that lying on the ground there by the Midway entrance? By golly, it's the detective, and he's
out like a light. Possibly there is some way you can
wake him up. After all, you're just dying to get a
look at that ransom note, aren't you?
The action is beginning to wind up now; you

Continued on pg. 44

Map Design for Computer Games
Creating the Universe
by Steve Estvanik
he universe may be measured in parsecs or
footsteps, but its appearance to the user is
all important in computer games. Computer
game designers have many considerations to balance.
Among the variables are resolution, color palettes,
information to be displayed, terrain features,
scrolling and grid systems. In addition, choices
made in map design can have dramatic effects on
programming and the dynamics of play.
What follows is an overview of some of the decisions and problems a designer faces when determining the type of graphics displays to use in a
game. I'll be concentrating on the 'strategic' areas
of game design. The more tactical areas of actual
color choices, terrain representation and symbols
used will be discussed in a future article.
A map is arguably the most important part of a
game. Games require the assimilation of many
kinds of information and the manipulation of a variety of kinds of units. From all the options available, helpful as the computer might be, the human
commander must still develop a plan of action and
somehow convey those orders to the program. The
map should help, not hinder, the player in sorting
available information. It should organize and channel the player's energies, not disperse them with
excessive distractions. Good map design can't cover
for a bad game design, while bad map design can
easily ruin an excellent design.

T

MAP TYPES
The first step in designing a new game's graphic
system is deciding what type of map to use. The
simplest maps are static, like the world maps used
in Epidemic to show the progress of the disease.
Individual countries may change color, but the map
itself is a single screen. These maps can be produced separately with a 'paintbrush' program and
loaded into memory when needed. The next step up
from this are the maps used in Diplomacy, The
Ancient Art of War or Incunabula -- an unalterable
background in graphics mode, upon which units are
displayed. These maps introduce the first problem,
since they are larger than what can be shown on
the screen at one time. In the early days of computer games, some games, best left unnamed,
`solved' this problem by displaying each portion
separately. A map that was 6 times the size of the
screen would thus be displayed only as 6 separate
maps. This worked fine while action was confined
to the middle of the map. But if your units were
trying to cross a map, or coordinate with troops on
the next map, it was at awkward to use these programs. The solution, of course, is a scrolling map,
but scrolling is not a graphics feature on all sys-

tems. And on most systems, the entire graphics
image must be stored somewhere. This means the
map itself (apart from the units displayed upon it)
cannot change. Some games, like Eastern Front,
provide for a changing background color, but as
this is still an essentially static map, since all of a
given terrain becomes white in winter.
In contrast, dynamic maps use the computer in a
way that no boardgame can. Boardgames sometimes
try to accomplish similar effects by using various
counters and markers, but these systems are limited
in effectiveness and burdensome to use. Computer
versions are transparent to the player. In my current project, The Civil War, the computer takes on
the tedious bookkeeping of supply and railroad integrity and shows you graphically who controls
what territory. As Union and Confederate troops
move on the map, they change the background
color of that terrain. Thus you see the dynamic aspects at a glance and can plan your attacks accordingly. Similar effects were used in By Fire and

Sword to give a historical feel to the map. Here,
each vassal unit claims land for its feudal lord. The
result is a patchwork of colors reminiscent of medieval maps. These effects cannot be achieved economically in graphics modes. On the current generation of machines, (perhaps even including the ST
and the Amiga) graphics modes considerations restrict the programmer to predrawn maps. Redrawing complicated maps cannot be done dynamically
in graphics mode. This leads the designer to look at
alternate means of producing maps, eventually
coming to character graphics modes.
Character (or text) graphics was actually the first
kind of mapping used in early minicomputer interactive games. Minicomputers were limited to the
ascii character set and could only draw crude maps,
often with no cursor control at all. The first games
for early microcomputers were conversions of earlier works that didn't take advantage of the new
machine's capabilities. These recycled games fared
poorly in comparison to arcade games which
showed the new machines' powers to better advantage.
Recent micros have much improved text graphics abilities. The IBM for example offers a 256
character ascii set. 16 colors can be displayed simultaneously, until recently, far outstripping the
abilities of most other machines in so-called hi-res
mode. (Apple's hi-res discrimination of 280 by 172
is actually not as fine as IBM medium res of 320
by 200!) On newer machines like the Atari or
Amiga, you can define your own terrain-building
characters to develop a custom set. Thus a game
like Gulf Strike can have the look of a graphics
map while using character graphics.
The main advantage of character graphics is the
ability to change very small areas, modify colors
and even change terrain features. Thus in By Fire
& Sword, the barons can choose to cut down forest
areas to create their castles. Other barons can then
send troops to siege and set fire to these buildings.
These operations would have been prohibitively
slow to display in graphics mode.
MOVEMENT SYSTEM
The next problem is the choice of a movement
system. The simplest method is area movement such
as that used in Diplomacy or Call to Arms. With
area movement, units move from one section of the
map to another. There is no need for accurate
measurements as the time scale allows movement
through large areas.
For most tactical games, and many strategic
games, a more constrained movement system is required. In boardgames this is usually solved by the
use of a grid system. The two main grids used are
square and hexagonal. The square grid is easy to
draw and regulate, but distorts diagonal movement.
Also, it generates problems for zones of control
(ZOC) in diagonal directions. Some games which
appear to be graphic maps are in reality disguised
square grids, for example, Legionnaire, Gulf Strike
and Rome & the Barbarians. Units are unnaturally

constrained in the directions they can move and
attack. In Legionnaire, for example, to move diagonally, the unit moves up one, then over one for a
cost of 2 rather than the true cost of 1.4. A careful
programmer can overcome these difficulties and
produce a square grid design that still plays well
and has the proper feel. In such cases, the square
grid is a perfectly acceptable solution to the problem.
A related problem of square grid systems is the
blocky look that results. Rivers either take right
angle bends or they have to run through the middle
of squares. Which, in turn, causes problems in deciding which side of the river troops are on. Very
few maps, computer or boardgame, allow rivers to
run through squares or hexes. The boardgame War
& Peace does, for example, and therefore requires
special rules for following a river's course versus
crossing it. Instead rivers are usually borders. Similar effects occur with mountain passes. These effects rapidly complicate the movement and combat
sections of the game. Their implications when it
comes time to write the artificial intelligence routines grow proportionately. An easier method needs
to be found.
The hexagonal grid seems to cure most of the
square's problems. All directions are more equal
and ZOC is simpler to calculate. There are several
subtle distortions, though. Any hex grid has a grain
-- lines of units can form a straight line in either
the horizontal or vertical direction, but not both.
The other direction will be a jagged line. Thus a
unit moving in a row of hexes will cover less dis-

tance than a unit forced to move in a zig-zag pattern. (The distortion is about 20%.) Road networks
are also distorted. In Napoleonic and Civil War era
games, in which regimental lines occupy multiple
hexes, the grain of the map can make a big difference in tactic. In general you can bring more
units to bear against the grain, so attackers will
want to move against the grain, while defenders
will want to be facing with the grain. (This is most
easily seen by playing with some counters on any
grid map.) The designer's choice of grain direction
thus directly and artificially influences the play of
the game. (POP QUIZ: Examine the maps from
some of your favorite boardgames or computer
games. Can you spot the grain? Would it be easier
to attack or defend if the grain went in the opposite direction?)
The ultimate system, then would be one in
which all distance costs are geometrically accurate,
in which ZOC's are reasonable and in which there
is no grain effect. Such systems exist and have been
used for years by miniatures aficionados. They use
various rulers and templates to decide movement
distances and firing ranges. Some means of coding
terrain features is required. Otherwise, how would
the program handle a unit which was 1/3 on a
road, 1/3 in trees and 1/2 in rough terrain? To
date, most of the computer games to use this have
been naval games, as the technique is most easily
applied when the need to represent terrain is minimal. In summary, the choice of mapping systems is
more than an aesthetic decision. It will also affect
later programming difficulty and will influence
both the feel and the play of the game.
There are more solutions to these problems than
there are games designers. Finding an appropriate
solution still requires more art than science, but an
understanding of the problems involved will help
point you in a reasonable direction.

Steve Estvanik is an independent microcomputer
consultant and freelance games designer. His games
include Incunabula, By Fire & Sword, Circus Maximus and the IBM version of Gulf Strike for Avalon
Hill. His Air Traffic Controller game will be offered by CompuServe later this spring.

SEVENTH FLEET
Ed Curtis

China, for what ever reason, has invaded Vietnam. Despite warnings from its neighbor to the
north, the Soviet Union, Chinese forces continue
pressing forward and are even now approaching the
area of Hanoi. It is at this point that Simulations
Canada's new game, Seventh Fleet (SF), begins.
As might be suggested by the this game's title,
SF is primarily an operational level simulation of
the confrontation between the US Seventh Fleet
and the now growing Soviet Pacific Fleet set in the
not too distant future (1995). The cordiality between China and the United States has apparently
continued to grow, as the premise of this game is
that the Seventh Fleet is preparing to counter the
threatened intervention by both air and naval elements from the Soviet Pacific Fleet.
The mechanics of SF are very like those of its
Mediterranean counterpart, Fifth Eskadra. A given
turn begins with a status update which includes
such items as the current and projected weather,
your current number of victory points, the level of
conflict from last turn, and a request for your recommendation for the level of conflict this turn. As
operational commander, you are given the choice of
escalating the conflict from the beginning level of
rising tensions to conventional warfare and from
there to tactical nuclear warfare and (if things are
particularly bleak) to operational nuclear warfare.
Your decision may, however, be overruled by your
superiors sitting back in Washington or Moscow.
This can be extremely frustrating when you have
carefully set your forces for a quick attack while
your opponent is out of position, only to have those
*ss#%!@s back in their safe offices tell you that
conditions do not warrant escalation to what ever
level you requested.
From this point, the game proceeds to the familiar screen which gives you the options of
checking the status of your task forces, manipulating their makeups and investigate the ETA for your
reinforcements. This menu also gives you the opportunity to check a very important set of ratings
for your task force commanders, their reliability
and initiative. A force commander which has low
reliability is not very competent and must be constantly watched or merged into another task group
with a commander of greater seniority
(commanding a higher ranked ship). A commander
of high initiative should also be watched, as he will
use information you may not have to change his
destination or ordered mission type. Having to
constantly monitor a task force is quite hazardous,
as SF introduces a new factor into their game system: an EMCON rating. Every time you contact
your task force for information you reduce its
EMCON rating by 10%. When this reaches zero,

your task force becomes very easy for enemy forces
to electronically detect.
After the forces are organized and movement
orders are transmitted, the game then enters a period of radio reports from your units. These reports
might include non-ordered spontaneous attacks by a
ship or sub, a reported spotting of an enemy ship
or task group, or the reported detection of a submarine. It is during this phase that attacks by independent units, such as submarines, are most likely
to occur.
This phase is, in turn, followed by a phase of
intelligence reports. The first of these reports is
from your respective national command centers.
Moscow or Washington will give the approximate
location not long ago occupied by what was probably a hostile force. As might be guessed, these
satellite reports tend to be neither timely nor overly
accurate. They will at best provide possible information when weather obstructs your own searches.
This is also the time when you will learn the estimated time of either the CVN KREMLIN's departure from Vladivostock or the arrival of the CVN
ENTERPRISE. The next two reports give information as to the locations of ships and submarines
detected by your own ships, submarines, and air
elements. Unlike the previous reports, these can be
accepted with some confidence and may, unlike the
others, be used in planning air or missile attacks in
the next phase. The final report gives the number
of aircraft available this turn and the number delayed for one, two or three turns.
The last phase gives you the opportunity to
launch air and missile attacks against targets identified in the previous phase. Besides these planned
attacks, spontaneous missile and ASW attacks may
also take place at this time. At the end of this
phase, shore bombardment occurs, the loss of any
Soviet ballistic missile submarines (SSBN's) is reported, and political changes (such as Japan giving
the use of its forces to the US or withdrawing them
and declaring its neutrality) are announced.
SF contains an interesting collection of strengths
and weaknesses; most stemming from the same
factor. There is an admitted effort on the part of
the designers, Nichols and Newberg, to create a
simulation as opposed to creating a game. When

designing a simulation, the space you have and the
time you have available are concentrated towards
the goal of creating a final product which, to the
best of your ability, knowledge, and limited programming space, provides a valid simulation of
what could actually occur. Designing a game on the
same subject, the designers would concentrate on
play balance, ease of play, scenarios, varying difficulty levels and as much accuracy as possible in
the limited space and time available. This is the old
classic debate of realism vs. playability (what is the
proper balance between the two). Within the limits
available (especially when designing for a 48K Apple), something has to be sacrificed from the pure
design as simulation in order to give the final
product some hope for longevity. The more accurate
the simulation and the more consistent the initial
setup, the less time will be required to master or
recognize as hopeless a given side when playing the
computer as your opponent. And, four out of five
of the people who play it will be playing it solitaire.
In SF, the designers have succeeded in creating a
very convincing simulation with only one or two
possible arguments about the projected abilities of
various weapon systems nine years from now. The
limited intelligence and the performance of the
many ships, submarines, and aircraft are two factors which the designer's painstaking efforts have
succeeded in duplicating in a very convincing way.
In all, SF is a very good simulation. In terms of

game design its only strong point is its ease of play.
The only variability from one game to the next is
the beginning positions of the forces involved.
There is no way to handicap it besides playing the
Soviets when the US becomes too easy a victory (a
problem which might have been solved by a factor
which would alter the reliability and initiative of a
particular side's commanders up or down).
In short, the final product will be enjoyed by
those dedicated to realism for an extended period
but to those less interested in an accurate simulation, SF may not have the staying power of more
variable computer war games.
In order to be able to have the memory necessary to design their simulation, any vestige of
graphics have been sacrificed to the need to use a
map and counters. While this works quite well, it
can be cumbersome.
SF is the best simulation of operational level
naval warfare currently available. My only doubt
concerns its longevity. The third in Simulations
Canada's line of operational level naval simulation/games is projected to cover the North Atlantic,
and it will be of interest to see if they bend from
their strict dedication to accuracy of simulation at
the expense of improving it as a game or, as is
more probable, try to achieve both by expanding
from a 48K Apple design to 64K. Which ever their
choice, it can only be hoped that they continue to
develop and market titles on the much neglected
area of naval warfare.

-CGW SURVEYSurvey of Game Manufacturers
There is intense interest in the ongoing debate concerning the
merits of the two new 32-bit computers, the Amiga and the Atari
ST. We feel, as computer game consumers, that the acid test for
any machine has little to do with its technical merits. The real
question is, how many games will I be able to play on my
computer.

Strategic Simulations continues to be the most prolific
purveyor of computer games. Adventure games will represent a
larger portion of the SSI line in 1986, confirming the increased
popularity of role-playing games.
Electronic Arts is strongly committed to the Amiga. They will
support the ST if mass merchants begin to carry it.
Sierra On-Line is "head over heels in love with the ST". Also a
strong PC emphasis, largely due to relationship with Radio Shack
and the Tandy 1000 machine.
Microprose would like to get into fantasy but hasn't had any
designs presented to it. They are actively recruiting game
designers and welcomes game submissions.
Avalon Hill Game Co. Although Avalon Hill is cutting back
on the number of titles to be released (compared to past years),
the titles they do release will run on several machines with the
Apple and C-64 claiming the largest piece of the pie.
SubLogic will release only two titles this year, Jet and Flight
Simulator.
Broderbund is undecided on ST and Amiga, although is
carrying Mindwalker (by Synapse) for the Amiga.
Avant-Garde will release primarily sports related titles in '86.
Simulations Canada will have only two new titles this year Operation Overload and Stalingrad.
Strategic Studies Group will release one title - Road to
Appomattox. SSG is a rarity in today's environment, it is still a

one-man programming band; Roger Keating. SSG reports that
they keep Roger chained to his computer and can expect one new
game every nine months.
There is many a slip twixt press release and actual shipping of
a new game but 1986 would appear to be a good year for garners.
The numbers for the ST and Amiga have to be viewed with
skepticism as most manufacturers are reluctant to commit
resources until the market smoke has cleared. However, it must be
reported that more positive comments were made regarding the
ST. The relative price of the Amiga (for a game machine) and the
financial condition of Commodore were noted by a number of
manufacturers as the reasons they were hesitating on the Amiga.

Because of this, and because this is also a turbulent time for
the older machines as well, we decided to poll some of the major
computer game manufacturers and ask them the following
question: "How many games do you plan to release in 1986 on the
following machines?". Note that the answers in the chart below
represent more than just titles (ie. SSI is not releasing 46 titles in
1986) the numbers represent all products on all machines (ie. A
single title which will be released on three machines equals three
products in the "totals" column. Here are their answers:

There does not appear to be the same feeling regarding the IBMPC, despite the cost of a system. The Macintosh library of games
is growing but not at any great speed, perhaps the new Mac+ will
spur interest. For the obsessive garner, Apple and the C64 are still
the machines of choice. There aren't many titles you're going to
miss with either of these.

BATTLE
OF
ANTIETAM
by William H. Harrington
It began with a thoughtless mistake, when Lee's
campaign orders, lost by some forever nameless
Southern officer, fell into Union hands. It would
end with a Confederate defeat that saved the Union
but condemned the nation to nearly three more
years of bitter war. Robert E. Lee and his legendary Army of Northern Virginia sought to invade
Maryland and end the War for Southern Independence, on northern soil, with the final defeat of the
Union Army. The result was what most consider to
be the bloodiest battle of the war.
In the North, Abraham Lincoln and the hard
pressed Union Army, reeling from incompetent
leadership and a stinging defeat at the hands of
Lee's incomparable veterans turned once again to
the star crossed man who had single handedly created the Army of the Potomac and who, until the
end of their days, was perhaps the only commander
these men in blue genuinely loved, George B. McClellan. Always brilliant but often indecisive, he
never it seemed able to strike the final blow against
the South. He would have one last chance to grasp
the promise that had always eluded him and save
the Union. By a meandering steam that gave the
battle it's name Lee and McClellan fought the great
Battle of Antietam.
SSI's Battle of Antietam (BOA) by David Landry
& Chuck Kroegel recreates this desperate battle on
your favorite Apple II, Atari or Commodore 64 and
marks a long awaited return by the folks at Mountain View to the Civil War. Let's just say it was
worth the wait. BOA's packaging is the now standard SSI game box, the cover depicting Union
troops of General Hooker's valiant I Corp and
Stonewall Jackson's Confederate veterans battling
for the infamous "Corn Field". Inside you'll find a
double-sided game disk, a multi-colored laminated
map of the battlefield, and one of the most complete manuals to be found in computer gaming.
And we do mean complete! From a special introductory section labeled "Quick Start Rules" for beginners to an extensive explanation of rules and
game options for the veteran the manual goes on to

provide complete combat resolution tables, Order of
Battle, maps of the development of the "historical"
battle and even a compelling narrative by Robert
Billings of the actual struggle. The manual's gray
text and blue subject headings contributes the final
touch!
BOA is a "Grand-Tactical" simulation. The scale
is brigade level with each demi-brigade under it's
historic leader faithfully recreated according to unit
strength, weaponry, moral and experience. Game
play may be either two-player or solitaire with the
computer able to play the role of either Union or
Confederate commander. Be warned however, the
solitaire player is a challenging opponent and capable of fairly sophisticated play. As the Confederate
player it will play a sound, conservative, game
challenging the Union forces when necessary. As
the Union player it tends to be aggressive, giving
priority to "objectives" rather then enemy units.
Games can of course be saved in progress. You will
not finish BOA in one evening.
BOA is also a game for everyone, from tenderfoot to veteran. It includes a basic, introductory
game with simplified rules and game play, an intermediate game with more sophisticated options
and for the dedicated gamer an advanced game that
allows for detailed command and control capabilities such as unit integrity, brigade and divisional
command control tracing, leader replacement and a
not a few late nights.
The gaming system created by Landry and
Kroegel however goes far beyond simulating only
the battle and its participants. From fog of war to
McClellan's indecision, gamers may elect a series of
options designed to recreate the "feel" of Civil War
command and the unique problems of 19th Century
combat. The "Unit Activation" option for example
simulates all too realistically McClellan's piecemeal
assaults on the numerically inferior Confederate
forces. In addition players may chose to exercise
hidden movement and have opposing units appear
on the map board only when sighted by friendly
forces. Garners may even elect a time limit during
game turns to issue orders. This last option may
simulate the pressures of command amid the con-

fusion of battle but it is definitely not recommended for the high blood pressure crowd!
The graphic system employed in BOA is both
detailed and clearly designed to support the gaming
system. The on-screen battlefield is a scrolling
window on a larger invisible 42 by 36 square grid,
each square representing 200 yards on a side. That's
right, there isn't a "hexagon" to be had for love or
money. Landry and Kroegel have elected to abandon the memory hungry hex movement system
borrowed from board games and substituted a computer algorithm to control movement. That extra
memory in BOA's case has led to a richly detailed
game and display system. The terrain includes the
town of Sharpsburg, streams, fords, woods, cornfields, roads and bridges, each in detailed, hires
color.
Combat Units in BOA are depicted, in the basic
game, as either standard icons, or figures representing the three major unit types, Infantry, Cavalry and Artillery. In the Intermediate and Advanced Games traditional military symbols (i.e. bars
for infantry, circles for unlimbered artillery etc.)
can be used. Using the traditional symbols, players
can determine unit facing and deployment at a
glance! And if you've ever poured over those richly
detailed pen & ink battlefield maps that have embellished Bruce Cotton's superb histories of the
Civil War then BOA's symbols will be history come
to life.
The Game System in BOA is based on distinct
phases including Unit Activation, Command Control, Recovery/Rally, Reinforcement and Operations. But just maybe the most revolutionary feature Landry & Kroegel have incorporated in BOA
is on-line Help Menus! Imagine, no more fumbling
through the manual hunting up obscure commands
or coffee stained, dog eared command cards! After
all your word processor is probably simpler to learn
then most strategy games you've played! Makes you
wonder why someone didn't think of it a long time
ago!
Game play in BOA begins at dawn, 6 AM, on
the battlefield of Antietam. Each game turn in
BOA represents a single hour of real time. The

sense of realism is further heightened by current
statistics at the beginning of each hourly turn of
killed, wounded and even "missing in action". During game turns each player's units may be activated, deployed, change facing and travel mode and
of course perform both offensive and defensive
fire. At the beginning of the turn players simply
select a unit, its direction, movement mode, column
or normal for infantry say, and begin to trace a
particular unit's movement orders. Terrain, the
proximity of enemy units, movement modes etc.
will determine how far they can actually move. The
movement of masses of often green, raw recruits
was a major problem for Civil War Commanders.
BOA captures the tactical flavor of Civil War combat with a variety of movement and deployment
options. Infantry Units may have improved mobility on the battlefield by selecting movement in
`column', rather then 'Normal' mode but suffer
heavy casualties if under fire and caught 'in column' on ,say, a road or bridge. You will need to
learn to maneuver your brigades to insure their
combat effectiveness.
Close Order Drill, that bane of every soldier in
boot camp was more then a parade ground pastime
in the Civil War. In BOA the gamer is allowed to
select any one of eight 'facing' positions, critical to
directing Unit fire and determining line of sight. In
addition units may melee, or close assault opposing
units. After all units have been deployed and fire
and melee plotted the computer resolves combat.
Fatigue takes it toll as surely as the enemy miniballs and shells, units may break under fire if they
fail and even rally if conditions warrant. It is fair
to point out that this extensive combat resolution
takes some time and an accelerator card would be a
welcome addition to game play. That aside the result is a game system that is both easy to use and
learn while making possible a wide range of sophisticated game options without sacrificing playability.
SSI and the authors have created more then a
first rate grand tactical simulation of one of the
most critical battles of the Civil War with BOA.
They have captured some of the look and "feel" of
Civil War combat, and it shows.

yet but is (by the time you read
this) at the tail end of a sixmonth test promotion to regular
Infocom customers.

Atari Mayfield

GREGG WILLIAMS

The Atari 1040 ST
The big news in January was
the introduction of the Atari
1040 ST. Tramiel, for all his
faults, has created a computer
that breaks an important price
barrier--the first computer with
a megabyte of memory (1024 K)
for under $1000! The Atari 1040
ST sells for $999 with a
monochrome monitor and $1199
with a color monitor. It includes
an internal power supply and
internal double-sided 720 K disk
drive, a full 1 megabyte of usable memory (the TOS operating
system that ate up much of the
520 ST's memory is in ROM on
the 1040 ST), an RF modulator
(so you can hook it up to a color
TV set), and Atari BASIC and
Logo.
At the moment, the only advantages to having a 1040 ST are
that you have more space for
BASIC and Logo programs and
that the unit boots up much
faster (in about 5 seconds). The
real advantage will come when
someone writes some software

that really takes advantage of all
that memory.
Atari will continue to sell the
520 ST, but they're unbundling
the $800 package to $300 for the
computer, $200 for the disk
drive, $200 for the monochrome
monitor, and $400 for the color
monitor. You can now use the
520 ST with a color TV, too,
which means that you can buy a
working 520 ST system for $500.
All this is hard to imagine for
someone whose first computer
cost $700 and had cassette storage and 16 K of memory, but
it's sure a lot of fun!
At Long Last, Fooblitzky
Now I finally have the room
to talk about Fooblitzky, a game
that I first saw a prototype of in
(I think) 1983 during a visit to
Infocom. This game is noteworthy in two ways. First, it's a
multiplayer game with some
graphics (from a company best
known for its solitaire puzzleoriented text adventures). Second, it's not out on the market

I shelled out $39.95 for the
game, sight unseen, largely because I'm very involved in
multiplayer games--but also because, if the game is never (God
forbid) officially released, I'll
have a real collector's item.
I love multiplayer games.
Solitaire games are wonderful to
have around, but nothing beats a
well-designed game that immerses (and brings together)
several people in the cozy soup
of human interaction. My favorite multiplayer games are
M.U.L.E. (an Atari game from
Electronic Arts--one of the best
games ever designed) and Cosmic
Encounter (a multiplayer board
game). Fooblitzky isn't as interactive as these two games, but
it's still a fun way to spend time
with a few friends. Like many of
my favorite games, it has a
whimsical premise, a definite
element of luck, and delightfully
unexpected turns of fortune.
Fooblitzky requires two to
four players (no solitaire option,
unfortunately) and includes four
folding workslates and erasable
markers. Each workslate contains
a replica of the on-screen playing board and an area for keeping notes. You play using your
Atari and either one joystick or
the keyboard. The software (not
copy-protected, by the way) is
the electronic equivalent of paper maps, dice, and plastic tokens--the Atari shows you the
board, sets up the hidden portions of the game, and tells you
what you're entitled to know.
As advertised, Fooblitzky is
very much like a cross between
Mastermind and Clue. At the beginning of the game, each player
secretly chooses one item from a
list of 18 (the computer chooses
for any absent player positions).
The object of the game is to
discover what the four secret
items are and get them to a
checkpoint. Checkpoints are
maddening because they tell you
how many correct and incorrect
items you have, but not which
items are which (this is where
the game resembles Mastermind).
Deductions you make from observations about where certain
items are and aren't provide the
resemblance to Clue.

Playing Fooblitzky
Several things influence your
actions during the game. You
may get sent to the hospital if
you cross a dangerous street intersection, you can buy or sell
items at the pawn shop, and, if
you're on the street at the end of
your turn, you may get "flashed"
by the Chance Man, who may do
you a favor or really mess you
up. If you're sufficiently sneaky,
you can also "bump" an opponent
and grab some of his or her
items. If you run out of money
(called "foobles"), you can earn
some more by washing dishes in
a restaurant.

Fooblitzky uses a highly stylized "doggy" motif throughout
the game (for example, their one
ad promises that "this is one
game that's really going to bow
wow you"). The game board
represents the town of
Fooblitzky, with its shops, sidewalk squares, and crosswalks
(some of which, from move to
move, become dangerous to
cross). The city is divided into
four quadrants, each of which
has six stores (drug, grocery,
hardware, pet, sport, and toy
stores). Each store sells three
items--for example, the pet store
sells fish, snakes, and pigs. Each
item costs either 4, 8, or 16
foobles, and there is one item of
each price in each store. (At the
beginning, the computer tells you
the prices of the four secret
items. If the items cost, say, 4, 4,
16, and 16 foobles, you can automatically ignore the six items
that cost 8 foobles each.) You
can carry only four items, so you
must sometimes discard an item
to be able to pick up another
one--and woe is you if you discard the wrong item!
The Importance of Being
Watchful
It gets complicated: at the beginning of the game, each store
in each quadrant has one of each
item--except that one of the
four copies of an item is removed if it is chosen as a secret
item. (This means that, if you
walk into a store that nobody's
been in and the item is missing,
it's one of the four secret items.)
Items stolen by the Chance Man

or given away to Charity Central
appear randomly in pawn shops
(this makes things difficult in a
four-player game, when there
are four players and only four
copies of a given item). If you
get tired of running around
town, you can either take the
UGH (Underground Highway) or
you can call a distant store from
a phone booth.
I don't have the room to explain some of the finer details
(like what happens when two
players choose the same item),
but you get the idea. The game
goes to the player who takes
good notes, has some good luck,
and is careful enough make absolutely no wrong inferences-one wrong inference can severely
damage your chances of winning.
Fooblitzky was designed by
Michael Berlyn, Brian Cody, Poh
Lim, and Paula Maxwell. It was
originally started by Berlyn
(who's no longer with Infocom)
as an exercise to see if it was
possible to write games with
graphics that can easily be
moved to different computers
(which is Infocom's trademark
with its text adventures). The
answer is a qualified yes.
Fooblitzky currently runs on
Apple, Atari, and IBM computers. The game makes occasional
sounds and uses graphic images
(nicely designed by Maxwell),
but the moving graphic images
are jerky and slow; fortunately,
both sound and graphics are ornamental and can be tolerated.
Mike Berlyn says that Infocom
has removed some of the satirical
aspects of the game as he designed it; given his sense of humor and sharp wit (as seen in his
adventure Planetfall), that's our
loss.
Fooblitzky is an interesting
game that is a moderate but not
overly taxing workout of brain
cells--it's not Pac Man, but
(fortunately) it's not chess, either. It has numerous game options, and the mechanics of play
are well engineered. I like it,
especially when you have three
or four players. I don't know the
eventual status of the game, but
you can order it from Infocom's
mail-order service at 800-2626868. If all goes well, perhaps
Infocom will eventually design
more multiplayer games.
That's all for now. Until then,
remember--he who laughs, lasts.

STOP PRESS...
LATE NEWS. ..
GOSSIP.. .

OVER
THERE!
Leslie B. Bunder

In England and Europe, the game Star
Rank Boxing has been renamed Barry
McGuigin World Championship Boxing
after the boxer of the same name.
The Official Game of the Super Bowl
has been released by Ocean for the Commodore 64.
Zoids is a computer game based on the
toys from Martech and speaking of toys,
Transformers is now a computer game
from Ocean.
At last, Fred Flintstone has been
turned into a computer game called Yabba
Daba Do from Quicksilver which runs on
the Commodore 64.
After the Hunchback arcade games,
comes the Hunchback adventure from
Ocean.
Finally, be on the look out for any
games from Firebird especially the Hot and
Gold games. They are well worth a look.
Software Houses

Hello and welcome to Over There!, the
column that gives you all the latest views
and news going on in England.
First of all, thanks to all of you who
have written to me with your opinions and
views on the state of software being released. As I said before, the more comments I receive from you the readers the
more I can make this column interesting,
so get out your pens or word processors
and send all letters to me, Leslie B. Bunder at the following address , 50 Riverside
Close, Cuckoo Ave., Hanwell, London W7
1BY England. Don't forget to send the
letters airmail. If you don't, it will take
months for your letter to reach me. If you
wish a personal reply enclose two international reply coupons and you'll hear from
me. If I think your letter is good and you
mention what computer you own, I'll even
send you an English game for your computer, can't be fairer than that, can I?
The last time I wrote, I mentioned that
Commando games were the big craze, this
time I was hoping to tell you about another big craze in computer games but I
couldn't find one!! So what I'll do is mention some of the better computer games
around and if you want further information the address of the software house will
appear at the end of the column. Don't
forget the international reply coupons if
you want the information.
The Game of the Month has got to be
Back to the Future from Electric Dreams.
'Back To The Future' is very closely based
on the film of the same name in which you,
as Marty McFly, must get your future
mom, Lorraine to fall in love with your
future dad, George. If you don't, poor of
Marty won't be around. The game features
the hit song of 'The Power Of Love' which
comes across quite well. Colors and backdrops are very well used and are based on
some of those shown on the film such as

the school and Doc's house. 'Back To The
Future' runs on the Commodore 64/128,
All Amstrad and Sinclair Spectrum
48/128.
From Melbourne House, the company
who brought out the excellent Karate
game 'Way To The Exploding Fist' comes
Rock'n Wrestle which, as the title suggests, is a wrestling game. The object of
the game is quite simple, just play against
a friend or the computer and pin your opponent to the ground till he submits. This
is a great game, the graphics are large,
colorful and smooth, while the sound effects are really atmospheric, you can
nearly feel the pain of losing. Did I say
losing, well it's more than likely you will
against the computer when you've got
players like... well check out the game and
you'll find out. `Rock'n Wrestle' runs on
the Commodore 64/128, All Amstrads and
Sinclair Spectrum 48/128.
If you like Trivial Pursuit, you'll be
glad that a company called Anirog have
brought out a game called Trivia which
has 1400 questions on 6 different topics.
`Trivia' runs on the Commodore 64/128,
Commodore C16, Commodore Plus 4, All
Ataris, All Amstrad and Sinclair spectrum
48/128.
From Elite Systems, comes two more
arcade conversions following on from the
successful Commando games: Bomb Jack
and Ghost 'n' Goblins. The games are very
closely based on the arcade versions and
run on the Commodore 64/128, all Amstrads, and Sinclair Spectrum 48/128.
'V' the TV series has now been turned
into a computer game from Ocean. You
play the role of Michael Donovan who
must seek and destroy the enemy alien
Mothership. The game features cartoon
like graphics and is quite fun to play. 'V'
runs on Commodore 64/128, All Amstrads
and Sinclair 48/128.

Elite Systems Ltd., Anchor House,
Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall,West
Midlands, U.K.
Ocean, 6 Central Street, Manchester
M2 5NS, U.K.
Quicksilver, Liberty House, 222 Regent
Street, London W1R 7DB, U.K.
Anirog Software, Unit 10, Victoria Industrial Park, Victoria Road, Dartford,
Kent, U.K.
Martech, Martech House, Bay Terrace,
Pevensey Bay, East Sussex BN24 6EE,
U.K.
Electric Dreams, 31 Carlton Crescent,
Southampton, Hampshire SO1 2EW,U.K.
Melbourne House, Castle Yard House,
Castle Yard, Richmond TW1O 6TF, U.K.

plan. You can play a new game or one of
the tutorial boards. You can even setup
your own boards with your favorite chess
problems. It has nine levels of play. You
can play human against human, human
against computer, or even computer
against computer. You can replay or
printout the moves, exchange sides, force
the computer to move or take back a
move. A play help screen is always available if you forget a command.
There were some minor elements of the
programming that I found objectionable,
but overall the program is an excellent
way to learn about the game of chess. The
tone of the tutorial is very understandable.
This program is highly recommended.
Roy Wagner
AMIGA PREFERENCES

AMIGA PREFERENCES
AND
COMMODORE KEY

COMMODORE KEY

NEW KID ON THE BLOCK
Accolade is a new software company,
but the people there are not new to computer games. Alan Miller and Bob Whitehead worked at Atari and later went on to
form Activision with two others. The new
company carries on the tradition of quality
computer graphics. One look at the new
releases and one is awed with the images
they are able to produce. They are
"movie-like" in appearance and play.
Movement from one screen to another is
quick. The games are fun and impressive.
Law of the West is interactive western
with you playing the sheriff. You must interact with various people around town.
Try not to be too quick to use your gun;
most interaction is peaceful. But every so
often a bank gets robbed or someone insists on testing your reputation. This game
is not very challenging, but a whole lot of
fun.
Hardball is the best graphic game of
baseball yet. It contains all the elements of
real ball with full joystick control. You
make ALL the strategic decisions of the
manager and ALL the moves for each
player. Sounds complicated, but it is really
easy. For a fun game of baseball at home,
this one is what all the others tried to be.
The Dam Busters is a simulation of a
British Lancaster bomber mission to destroy three German power dams. You play
the roles of all aboard the plane (pilot,
navigator, bombardier, and gunner). The

graphics are again, excellent. Game play is
relatively easy. The game is one of reflexes
and shoot 'em out of the sky.
Some of the other new games from
Accolade to look for are PSI 5 Trading
Company, a space freighter management
game, and Fight Night, a boxing construction set with emphasis on fun.
PLAY IT AGAIN PAUL
Paul Whitehead was a chess master at
15, a U.S. Junior Champion at 17, and
then an American Open and Class Champion. Now in his twenties he enjoys
teaching chess. He has joined with a very
skilled programmer to produce Paul
Whitehead Teaches Chess from Enlighten
Inc. The program is designed to teach even
an absolute beginner how to play chess
skillfully. The concepts taught are useful
to even the middle level player.
The tutorial program is very nicely
charted and numbered so that you can
easily cover the elements of chess that you
are interested in learning. The program
covers all aspects of chess from the basic
beginning elements on through tactics and
strategy of openings, middlegame, and
endgame. You can easily review what you
have learned or jump to another area entirely. The graphic display is very colorful
with the chess pieces very nicely defined.
A tutorial help screen is always available
at the press of a key.
Also included with the tutorial program (two disks) is a disk with "The Coffee House Monster", a chess opponent program by International Master Julio Ka-

The initial wave of games for the
Amiga has recently turned to a ripple. The
early flood from Infocom, now includes all
titles. Even their largest game, A Mind
Forever Voyaging, loads entirely into the
Amiga's memory. With the release of Ballyhoo, a circus mystery, Infocom has introduced a new concept to computer game
marketing. They have made available a
limited quantity of signed and numbered
copies of the game that can be purchased
directly from Infocom. This offering was
made to subscribers of the New Zork
Times.
Brataccus from Psygnosis Limited in
England was released by Mindscape.
(Versions also for the Fat Mac and Atari
520ST). This game truly represents the
"lowest common denominator" software
syndrome, in that it takes little advantage
of the Amiga's features. Use of sound and
color are minimal. Brataccus is a graphic
adventure in which you seek evidence to
clear yourself of crimes you are thought to
have committed. In the course of your efforts you must defend yourself from hostile
guards and villains. The game takes place
on a colonized asteroid. Movement using
the mouse or keyboard takes some practice. The game is well documented.
AmigaBasic from Microsoft, the BASIC that comes with the Amiga, is very
powerful. To fully illustrate this, Jenday
has released Conversation With A Computer by Gil Dodgen. Aside from using
computer speech (standard on the Amiga),
there are three activities; memory test,
number puzzle, and a "pegboard" game.
The program contains over 2000 lines of
BASIC code. The excellent manual explains what the code is doing. It gives
coded examples of nearly all of the powerful features of Amiga BASIC. This
"game" is more of a learning tool than a
true game.
Software Golden Oldies from Software
Country (and distributed by EA) has been
enhanced and released for the Amiga. It
offers conversational versions of the original Adventure game and Eliza. Pong
comes in the original black and white or
with special variations in any of 4096 colors. The game of Life is very nicely enhanced with menus and use of mouse.
These versions of four true classic games
are like having a classic '57 Chevy with a
digital dashboard and CD player.

SPORTS SCOREBOARD

Rick Teverbaugh
Put up your dukes and prepare to defend
yourself. If you thought you had to fight your way
through this column every issue in the past, you
ain't seen nothing yet.
Over the next several paragraphs, I'm going to
try and cover six boxing games and five karate
contests which should more than release any
hostilities you might be harboring from the roughand-tumble outside world. So let's tie on the gloves
and come out fighting.
Title Bout (Avalon Hill; Atari, Commodore)
Certainly the grandpa of the historical simulation
games of pugilism. Before we get to the game and
its many qualities, the first stunning fact that sets it
apart from all the others are the number of boxers
included. Over 500 come on the disk and you have
the ability to increase that number to well over 600
with fighters you rate yourself.
The rating process isn't that difficult, especially
if you have any familiarity with the board game of
the same name. In fact, purchasing boxing card
updates for AH is the best way to always keep this
game current.
James and Thomas Trunzo created the game
with a steady and loving respect for the sport. But
in truth, neither was extremely thrilled with the
original Atari version of the game. Probably the
most universally hated aspect of that version was
the 'conversation' between the fighters in the ring
during the match. Thankfully that has been
removed from the Commodore version.
What remains is a solid, if sometimes hard to
follow, boxing game that can provide hours of
enjoyment and realistic results. Of course, not
every match will be one by the favorite, but that's
realistic too. The reason that I call the game often
confusing is that at the end of each round and
before the fight, you are given a large array of
facts and figures about your fighter. These can be
very handy when selecting what strategy best suits
him for a particular round. But all the figures are

coded with abbreviations that aren't easily
remembered. A well-written set of instructions will
become dogeared by the time the memorization is
complete.
You control how many rounds and whether the
game will have two humans in control or whether
the computer will fight one side. The computer is a
fine, if often predictable, manager. It will still be a
tough chore to take a patsy like Alfredo Evangelista
and beat Muhammad Ali.
Graphically, the game won't astonish you but it
will impart enough information and action to let
you imagination fill in the gaps. Overall, this is the
boxing game that gets the most play in my ring.
Ringside Seat (SSI; Apple, Commodore) Many of
the things that can be said good about this entry
are echoes of positives mentioned above. Ringside
Seat is very similar to Title Bout.
However, it is superior in two ways. One, you
can create as many boxers as you'd like because all
you need is a blank formatted disk, where Title
Bout must use the disk that comes with the game.
Secondly, Ringside Seat tells you in common fight
terms the condition of your fighter and doesn't
hide it in complex codes.
But there also are some strong disadvantages.
Graphically, the game is a bit harder to follow
because the figures are more stick-like and much
smaller than in Title Bout. Part of the reason for
that is the large amount of information passed
along in running commentary during the bout.
Another disadvantage is the limited number of
boxers (50 to be exact) rated for the game. There
are also no supplemental disks with additional
boxers available from SSI, an unusual occurrence
for an SSI sports game.
Overall, the game has just as believable results
as anyone, but getting there just isn't quite as much
fun..
Championship Boxing (Sierra; IBM, MacIntosh,
Commodore) If options were the only things needed
to make a great game, this one would be the best
game in the world of any genre. If great graphics
were the most important consideration, then this
game would be heavyweight champ!
But if feeling like real boxing is a consideration,
this game should throw in the towel. I know some
of your might think I'm being too hard on this
relative newcomer but let me give you some facts.
I've played 42 bouts using almost every
historical combination you can muster with the
boxers included in the game. Of those 42, none (as
in zero) ever went past eight rounds. Even the
lightest punchers against the best defensive fighters,
still produced knockdown after knockdown,
followed by TKOs and KOs.
I'm sorry, but I just don't believe that if
Muhammad Ali, in his prime, and Larry Holmes
would have met, that Ali would have knocked
Holmes down three times and Holmes knocked Ali
down once - in the first round.
The game does have some whimsical moments,
like when you can create a kangaroo as the graphic
image for one of your fighters. But if you expect
realistic results from this game, at least the
Commodore version I tested, the joke's on you.
Star Rank Boxing (Gamestar; Commodore) My
belief in sports games is that if they feel like the

sport, they must be pretty good. But if they get
your personally involved in the game as well, they
must be great. Star Rank does both and I have no
qualms about calling this a great game.
First of all, the game doesn't recreate any real
boxers. You create your own boxing persona and
then take him from the lowest ranking to perhaps,
a shot at the title. Nearly 20 ring veterans stand in
the way, so you'll need plenty of patience and lots
of training to move up the ladder.
After you've made all the decisions, about his
personality, trunk color, hair color and skin color,
you pick an opponent either one or two steps up
the ladder from your position and then pick what
areas you need the most work in the number of
weeks prior to the bout.
Once fight day rolls around, you'll need quick
reflexes, stamina and a watchful eye on your
boxer's condition to come out a winner. The
joystick is used to control the movement of the
fighters. You'll find the graphics quite a bit above
average and the animation second only to
Championship Boxing. After three of four matches
with your fighter, if you're not totally involved
with his progress and don't look forward anxiously
to each and every fight, then boxing games are
obviously not your bag.
Pro Boxing (Artworx; Commodore) There aren't
as many options in this game, either in creating an
individual boxer or in possibilities once you've
entered the ring, but as a new entry, the game
packs a solid punch.
Basically it's just you against the computer or
another human, with each having fighters of
identical capabilities. The game has a bit more ring
movement possible than Star Rank, but the variety
of punches is much more limited. Artworx is
putting this out under its budget PX line. For those
of you who aren't really sure whether boxing on a
computer is for you, this is an inexpensive way to
find out. I think you'll like it.
Fight Night (Accolade; Commodore) I wish I
could say the same thing about Fight Night as I
said about Pro Boxing. But if you're a real boxing
fan, I think you'll be offended by this game. As
good as Accolade's Hardball is, I was expecting
much more out of this entry.
But as you might expect with boxers like Dip
Stick, Kid Kastro and Hu Him in the stable of
challengers, the entire game is merely for laughs.
Dip Stick, for example, is most famous for his low
blow, which almost always lands, does damage and
goes unnoticed by the referee (if there is one).
The game could have been much better. The
graphics are good and it is possible to create your
own characters and save them to disk for future
use. My only question is why would you want to?
Competition Karate (Motivated Software; Apple,
Commodore) This is my favorite game of any of
the 11 hand-to-hand combat games covered here.
The game is a little like Star Rank Boxing in that it
gets you involved with the characters you create.
Those characters are saved and nurtured and
trained into lean, mean, fighting machines.
But where the game goes beyond Star Rank is in
the play of the game and the tournament concept.
The game moves at a steady, yet slow enough pace
to allow for strategy. Know you opponent, his
strengths and weaknesses and you'll go far. How

far? Well, you'll be able to tell because the program
keeps track of every students progress and ranks
the top 10 after each tournament.
Each character is assigned an instructor, which
will affect what strengths and weaknesses he
exhibits, but you also control part of the time he
spends in the dojo and how he spends it. Game
play can be controlled through the keyboard or
paddle controls. Truly one of computer gaming's
classic creations.
Black Belt (Earthware Computer Services;
Commodore, Apple) If it weren't for Competition
Karate, this would be the game all other karate
games would be measured against. But, as it is, this
is a fine game. For Black Belt you are identified by
name, but only your record is kept.
As your record improves and you gain greater
experience, your rank moves and you gain more
possible moves within a match. You can spar
against another human foe or take on the computer.
There are six different levels of computer foe.
Control during the match is by keyboard or
joystick. The graphics are fluid and well-drawn. It
is quite easy to see what you're doing and its effect
on the other combatant.
Karate Champ (Data East; Commodore, Apple)
The last of the karate games that plays like a sport,
also plays like an arcade game, which can be good
or bad depending on what your looking for in the
game.
In either a one-player or two-player mode, the
game is fast-paced and requires almost immediate
memorization of the joystick controls. There are 16
different movements possible during a match. Eight
are selected with the joystick depressed and eight
without.
You can choose the number of matches you
want. Each match consists of a 30-second time
limit or until one player scores to points against the
other. A referee gives either a full point or a halfpoint to any player scoring a fall over the other. As
with all Data East products, the graphics are very
good. My only complaint is that some of the inmatch options are counters for a move of your
opponent, but there often isn't any time for those
reactions.
Kung-Fu Master (Data East; Apple, Commodore)
Much more a karate game with adventure elements
thrown in. It looks much better on the Commodore
than on the Apple.
This time these guys mean business. There are
knives and bad guys ganging up on you from both
sides. You are supposed to travel through the
wizard's temple and rescue the fair maiden held
captive there. Besides other kung-fu experts, there
are dragons, snakes and killer bees. Good luck.
Karateka (Broderbund; Apple, Commodore)
More like an adventure game with karate thrown
in. Actually resembles a Chuck Norris movie in
flavor.
There's another fair maiden to be rescued and
some puzzles to solve along the way. Controls aren't
as complex as with Kung-Fu Master and graphics
are a cut better also, both on the Apple and
Commodore versions.
That's it for now. See you next time. Be a good
sport.

a period that you can deal with it at your leisure.
The sum total of soviet strategy in Seventh Fleet
reduces to keeping as large a force in the Sea of
Okhotsk as possible while dealing with the American carriers one at a time.
Stewart McKames
Orange, CA

SEVENTH FLEET
(Simulations Canada)

Strategically Speaking

Strategically Speaking covers strategy game tips,
including tips on wargames, sports games, economic
and other "real life" simulations, and classic style
games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are those
of the authors. We try to avoid printing tips that
don't work, but we cannot playtest all, or even
most of them. So, let the player beware.
We pay $5.00 for each Strategically Speaking tip
used. Presently the bulk of tips submitted to CGW
are on wargames. We also need tips on other types
of strategy games as well. Tips can be mailed to
Strategically Speaking c/o Computer Gaming World,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. Try to
keep tips under 250 words if possible.

SEVENTH FLEET
(Simulations Canada)
As the commander of the Soviet Pacific Fleet,
send all Victor and Charlie class submarines (other
than the one shadowing the Carl Vinson) to Yokosuka with orders to Shadow Enemy Task Force on
turn one or as soon as possible. This should give
you at least four subs in Yokosuka to challenge the
Midway when it becomes available. With this number of subs shadowing the Midway, you should be
able to cripple the CV before its ASW elements are
able to eliminate your subs. If the Carl Vinson begins in the far south and Japan enters the war before the Midway becomes available, hit Yokosuka
with every aircraft available. By doing this, you
will gain the victory points for hitting Yokosuka
and delay the arrival of the Midway and many
Japanese reinforcements. The net results will be
that the Carl Vinson will be on its own for so long

As the commander of the U.S. Seventh Fleet,
only two rules need be remembered. First, always
keep several submarines as escorts for your CV
Task Groups. The second is to never initiate hostilities until the Midway and Carl Vinson are in two
Task Groups in adjacent hexes. While it is expensive, the Soviets can maul any group which has
only one CV's cap to protect it. If you keep two
adjacent, you keep both under a two CV cap while
using the Soviet limitation to ordering a strike on
only one location. The cap should minimize the
damage done by the heaviest Soviet strike while the
splitting of the two CV's will limit any possible
damage to only one of the two. With this formation
and the possible addition of several Japanese Task
Forces as decoys/screens, you should have no trouble sailing into the Sea of Okhotsk. Possible uses of
your battle ship should also be considered. Armored
as only WWII battle ships were, the Missouri is
VERY hard to sink. Taking advantage of this, sent
it towards Vladivostock on turn one. With luck it
will be in bombardment range before the Kremlin
becomes available. At worst it will gain points for
bombarding Vladivostock, delay the arrival of some
ships, and disrupt the availability of Soviet air elements.
Stewart McKames
Orange, CA

CARRIER FORCE
(Strategic Simulations)
The documentation in Carrier Force recommends
7-8 search missions maximum. I've found that for
the last three scenarios 10-12 can be used depending on the location of one's own carriers. During
the launch phase send about 1/3 more than necessary and on the following air move phase land every third mission. The computer presents missions
to be moved based on the mission number and assigns unused numbers as they are available.
Mix the mission numbers so as to be able to
shift extra missions to a new area if the enemy is
found. If necessary missions can be lost deliberately
to enemy air cover (they would be destroyed on the
ground anyway).
Attack missions should be launched in an order
that will assure all searches in the area will have
had a chance to look before they arrive. It can be
very frustrating to locate the enemy after turning
the attack mission the wrong way or run out of gas.
David B. Carlson
Creve Coeur, MO

BALLYHOO
should know where to go next. The difficulty is
that person standing in front of the trailer. He's
there as a guard, and you won't get past him; you
will just have to make him go away. Yet that
shouldn't be too hard; look through your inventory
and think about it. I'm sure you can get him very
nervous very quickly.
Search the trailer carefully and take nothing for
granted. You'll need a little (hehe) help, but that's
easy. Unfortunately, just when you think that the
game is over, you find out that it isn't. Munrab has
the wrong idea about you, and the girl is gone
again! Oh, the trials and tribulations of the amateur
detective!
When you finally track everyone down, you begin to wonder if this is a replay of King Kong.
Well, it isn't, but it's close enough. Of course, you
know how to handle Mahler. However, it helps to
be on the safe side. The roustabout can be useful,
if you recall what he was doing when you first saw
him. And let's not forget Jimi Hendrix, either.
After that, everything is pretty clear sailing,
except that you will have to make one quick sidetrip. It's a bit of a drag, but I give you my pledge
it's necessary.

don't blame you a bit!). Before we turn the lights
out here, I'd like to give you an update on the
Kobayashi Alternative. Articles for CGW usually
have to be in about 2 months before publication.
After my Kobayashi review was subbed, Simon and
Schuster announced they were replacing the disks
that had bugs in them. This information came too
late to be included with the article. Therefore, anyone who has Kobayashi, and has discovered bugs in
it, should send the original disk, plus a list of the
bugs found, to: Prentice Hall, Route 9W, Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632 Attention: Technical Support. You will get an updated, bug-free (we hope)
version in return. Make sure you specify which
computer you have.
And so it's that time again. Remember, if you
have a problem with an adventure game, you can
reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (listed under
Groups and Clubs). On GEnie: come to the Games
RoundTable (type: Scorpia to get there). U.S. Mail:
Send your questions, with a SELF-ADDRESSED,
STAMPED envelope (not required for correspondents outside the USA) to:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028

Whew! After all that, it's probably going to be a
long time before you visit the circus again (and I

Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Continued

RID #27 (use card at pg. 5)
On this page a number of games are
listed for evaluation. When evaluating a
game consider such things as
PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?).
For each game you rate, place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number. Leave blank any
game which you have not played enough
to have formed an opinion.

UNDERFIRE (con)
and another German falls. It is our 6th Squad
(infantry) that next pays a heavy price for these
last few yards, eight more of our men fall. 3rd
Squad attacks and three more Germans are hit. A
final burst of machine gun fire and the 6th squad
is wiped out.

Ralph: The Germans are in the Objective Area in
force! The strategy the program finally selected was
to station small picket units around the dacha to
slow the advance while the main force was dug in at
the Objective Area.
Turn 10
Next a Hummel, a German self propelled gun
emerges from behind the building! 5th squad hits
the front of the monster with a bazooka round but
suffers seven killed from its heavy machine gun.
Meanwhile squads 3 and 5 continue firing on this
new threat. Seven more men from the 3rd squad
are hit. But a final bazooka round claims the
Hummel and the four lone survivors of the 80 So-

BULL SESSION
Since the beginning of wargaming garners have
always indulged in the traditional "after game"
second guessing and a cold beverage or two. So
without further ado...

Ralph: Bill, your overall strategy was excellent.
Moving your three groups in a pincer fashion has
more then a few merits. But there's just a few decisions I would have made differently!
Bill: I was waiting for that "But".
Ralph: I'd wouldn't have chosen the COMMAND OPTION. I prefer PLAYER CONTROL
and the ability to give direct combat order to "all"
the units on the board.
Bill: I know Ralph but "Real Men" sometimes
prefer to simulate command and control problems
as well as tactical combat.

Ralph: Well you'll agree then that trading in
those (3) useless SU76's for (2) T-34's didn't
achieve the desired result? That third tank would
have come in real handy, especially since their
didn't seem to be a German tank threat.
Bill: Yeah, I admit I wish I could have taken
that one back.

Ralph: I don't think delaying the Northern
Group's movement at the beginning of the game
helped. There was only one German unit in the way
of the Northern Group and it was tied up with the
Center Group! By moving the Northern Group on
turn 1, there would have been no need to shed the
weight of their Heavy Machine Guns. And those
Machine Guns would have been very, very useful
when the final push on the Dacha came! Or you
could have reversed the rolls of the Northern and
Center groups, by moving the Northern Group and
using the Center Group for cover fire. The Northern Group would have been fired on at a longer
range by the German unit and the Center Group
would have provided cover fire from the protection
of the woods at closer range.

viet soldiers who began this battle break into the
German command post.

Epilogue
Did they succeed? After the game it was revealed that three German squads where left in the
building. Did the Soviet troops have time to throw
their grenades and wreak the CP? Or did they fail,
and fall under a hail or German bullets, needlessly.
In UF! the game goes on long after you turn off
the computer.
Bill: I agree to a point. I was really concerned
that I didn't have any real advantage in numbers
or firepower. That open field seemed like a long
way to go and I felt that I needed someone to
provide cover fire to support the initial units
making the crossing if they got into trouble. As
for substituting the Northern Group to make the
initial dash, well, I felt the field of fire that the
Northern Group had was superior and I knew that
Center Group would have a shorter distance to
cover. I didn't think it was going to be easy and I
wasn't!

Ralph: Well I must admit that the Southern
Group couldn't have had worse luck! It as the most
powerful group and it's loss denied the team most
of it's support weapons.
Bill: I Know! I was counting on either the
mortar team or the T-34 making it to the Dacha.
How do you think it might have gone if we had it
to do over again Ralph?

THE ROAD NOT TAKEN
Lt. Kalishnikov reporting - I have positioned
my two remaining SU-76's in the woods to the
west of the Dacha. Three full infantry squads
with heavy machine guns are ready to support the
final attack. With a shout our infantry leap over
the hedge and rush the west side of the Dacha. A
German Machine Gun opens up on one squad.
Half our brave men fall. Both our SU-76's return
the fire and destroy the gun emplacement. Next a
Hummel appears to the South. It fires on one of
our 76's and misses! (I'm in the woods and he's
firing on the move) Both SU-76's return the fire,
one misses but not the other! There are no German survivors. With a rush we burst into the
Dacha. Our superior fire power, three heavy machine guns, grenades and two supporting tanks is
more then a match for the Germans. The Dacha is
ours!!!

Now that Computer Gaming World is published
nine times per year there will be a delay of one
issue in reporting R.I.D. results (i.e. the results of
R.I.D. questions in CGW #26 will be reported in
CGW #28). Because of this change we have no new
ratings for this issue. The following game rating list
is the same list that appeared in issue #26.
After some five years as the highest rated

computer adventure game, Wizardry has finally had
to surrender its top spot (and second spot too, for
that matter). Origin Systems' Ultima IV is the new
adventure game champion followed by Electronic
Arts' Bard's Tale.
SSI's Kampfgruppe continues to dominate the
strategy game list although it is being closely
challenged by Microprose's Silent Service. Look for
the updated ratings in our next issue.

