Number 32

Nov. 1986
FEATURES
Designer Profile
An Interview with Alan Miller of Accolade

Designer Profile
An Interview with Brian Moriarty of Infocom

Lords of Conquest
Review and Strategy Tips

Alternate Reality
A Review

Battlefront
SSG's WWII Game Reviewed

A Mind Forever Voyaging
Playing Tips

Chessmaster 2000
A Review

Rommel: Battles For Tobruk
GDW's Desert Warfare Game Reviewed

Bronze Dragon
Adventure Game Review

6
Frank Boosman
16
Scorpia
20
A. Locsin & J. Kittridge
22
Scorpia
28
Jay Selover
40
Scorpia
44
Bill Oxner
46
Evan Brooks
49
Johnny Wilson

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

4

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Commodore Key
Information for the C-64/128 Gamer

Macintosh Window
Surgeon, Dark Castle

Atari Playfield
Super Boulder Dash, Rogue, The Pawn

12
Roy Wagner
15
Frank Boosman
32
Gregg Williams

Over There !33
British Computer Games

Amiga Preferences
Archon II, Marble Madness, Mind Walker

Leslie B. Bunder
38
Roy Wagner

Reader Input Device

55

Game Ratings

56

100 Games Rated

Activision
2350 Bayshore Frontage Rd.
Mountain View, CA 94043
GAMEMAKER DESIGNER'S LIBRARIES: The first two releases in
this new product line that support
Garry Kitchen's GameMaker cover
SPORTS and SCIENCE FICTION.
The libraries each contain pre-programmed features based on either
sports or science fiction themes, including background scenes, objects,
animation routines and sound effects.
Available for C-64 ($19.95) and Apple
($24.95). Circle Reader #1.
LABYRINTH--THE COMPUTER
GAME: Developed by Lucasfilm
Games, Labyrinth: The Computer
Game is based on the film directed by
Jim Henson. You use a joystick to
control your animated character,
which can be either male or female. In
your travels through the Labyrinth
you will encounter many of the popular Jim Henson characters, including
the Fireys, Ludo, Hoggle and Sir
Didymus. C-64 ($34.95) and Apple
IIe/c ($39.95). Circle Reader #2.

PAPER MODELS--THE CHRISTMAS KIT: This is the first in what is
to be a series of paper modeling programs from Activision. Create your
own three-dimensional Christmas ornaments and decorations. With the
Christmas Kit you can create such
holiday items as cubed and triangular
gift boxes, toy trains, sleighs and complete Dickens-style Christmas villages.
The items can be decorated with customized graphics using a built-in paint
program or the ready-made clip-art
library. Completed decorations are
then printed ready to be assembled
and displayed on a Christmas tree or
given away as gifts. Mac, IBM, Apple
($29.95); C-64 ($24.95).Circle Reader
#3.
Accolade
20833 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
ACE OF ACES: An aerial warfare
game in which you fly an R.A.F.
'Mosquito' fighter-bomber on four
different air battles. These include an
air to air battle with German fighters
and bombers; an attempt to eliminate

V1 rockets in mid-flight; a confrontation with U-boats; and a rate against
enemy trains. Four graphically excellent views are available from within
the cockpit: straight ahead, over the
tail, and over each of the wings. C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader #4.
BitCards Inc.
P.O. Box 1289
Champlain, NY 12919
A CHRISTMAS ADVENTURE: Here
is something a bit different. 'A Christmas Adventure' is a text/graphic adventure set in and around Santa Claus'
ice-castle at the North Pole. The program enables the purchaser to produce
a personalized software
gift-and-greeting-card all-in-one. By using the
customizing utility you can include
personal references to the recipient in
the story. Apple II (64K) and C-64
($24.95). Circle Reader #5.
Broderbund
17 Paul Dr.
San Rafael, CA 94903
THE TOY SHOP: It looks like this is
the Christmas of paper modeling soft-

ware. Prior to the release of 'Paper
Models' mentioned above, Broderbund
released their new mechanical model
program. The Toy Shop contains all
the necessary materials to construct
such toys as a balloon-powered steam
engine, balancing jet, carousel with
horses that move up and down, equatorial sundial, pennypower scale, The
Spirit of St. Louis and a clockwork
mechanical bank. The Toy Shop comes
with a starter supply of adhesive
cardstock, wooden dowels, rubber
stripping, wire, balloons and cotton
cord. Replacement construction materials are available in 'The Toy Shop
Refill Pack', sold separately. The Toy
Shop runs on the Apple II and C64/128 ($59.95); IBM and Mac
($64.95). Circle Reader #6.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404
AMNESIA: This is the first EA text
adventure. In Amnesia, written by
award-winning author Thomas Disch,
the story begins with the main character waking in a strange hotel room in
Manhattan. He cannot remember
anything. You take it from there. The
game includes a 1700-word vocabulary, 4000 separate locations in Manhattan including 650 streets and the
entire subway system. Apple, IBM

($44.95); C-64 ($39.95). Circle Reader
#7.
STARFLIGHT: According to EA
President Trip Hawkins Starflight "is
the most ambitious outer space fantasy
game ever designed. It took 15 manyears of energy and all-out commitment to create a product of this calibre." The game is set in a galaxy of
270 star systems and 800 planets. The
mission: find colonizable worlds, gather
minerals and ancient artifacts, and
learn the secrets of alien races. A
built-in fractal generator makes
Starflight graphically stunning. IBM
($49.95). Reader Service #8.
WORLD TOUR GOLF: What? Another golf game!? IBM gamers now
have three new excellent golf programs
from which to choose: Mean 18 from
Accolade, Championship Golf from
Gamestar, and, now, World Tour Golf.
World Tour Golf is similar to the other
two products but goes beyond. There
are an incredible 24 historical courses
available as well as a championship
course made up of the world's toughest
holes. A detailed construction set allows you to design your own courses
(place tee, green, trees, bunkers, water
hazards, hills, par and yardage markers, dragons and cows (?), etc.) Up to
50 objects can be placed on each hole.
Continued on pg. 52

DESIGNER PROFILES

ALAN MILLER
With this issue CGW begins a series of DESIGNER PROFILES. Contributing Editor Frank Boosman has been conducting a series of interviews with top name computer game designers. In this issue you
will read his interview with Alan Miller of Accolade. In future
issues you will be treated to interviews with Chris Crawford
(Balance of Power), Doug Crockford (Lucas Films); Dan Gorlin
(Broderbund); Jon Freeman & Ann Westfall (Archon/Adept); Dan Bunten (M.U.L.E. and Robot Rascals); Gary Grigsby (SSI); and Bruce
Webster (Sundog and Star Rush). A second Designer Profile appears
in this issue -- Scorpia's interview with Brian Moriarty
(Trinity) of Infocom.

Alan Miller is one of the veterans of the computer gaming industry. He joined Atari in 1977,
where he wrote such titles as Surround, Hangman,
Concentration, and others for the Atari 2600 (also
known as the VCS). In 1979, he left Atari with two
other designers to form Activision, where he wrote
more 2600 titles: Checkers, Ice Hockey, Robot Tank
and others. In 1984 he left once again to form a
new company, this time creating Accolade with Bob
Whitehead. Since founding Accolade, Alan has
written Law of the West, a unique action/adventure
game with a Western setting. By the time you read
this, Alan's new game, a football simulation for the
Commodore 64, should be on the market.
I met Alan at Accolade headquarters in Cupertino, only a stone's throw away from industry giant
Apple Computer. The Accolade offices were sleek
and well-furnished, and bespoke of success. We began the interview by talking about some of his
personal history in the gaming industry.

CGW: How did you get your start in the computer gaming field?
Alan: I joined Atari in 1977; I started out doing
some initial games for the 2600 before it was introduced.
CGW: What was it like programming on the 2600?
Alan: The 2600 was a very strange machine to
program for; the machine was highly configurable
through software; all the parameters pertaining to
display output were specifically under software
control. It was nice because it left a lot of what the
program could do up to the programmer, and the
machine was not limited so much by what the
hardware designers had originally designed the
machine to do. So it was a vastly more configurable
machine than anyone thought it would be.
CGW: So what happened then? You were at
Atari?
Alan: I was at Atari doing 2600 work, and I had
started doing a basketball game on their personal

computer that was under development, and that
project was delayed for a bit because they had
trouble putting the operating system on the
400/800, as it was to be called. So four of us game
designer types were called in to do the operating
system, which we did in 12 weeks on the machine.
So I co-authored the operating system for the
400/800, and completed the basketball game.
Things were changing over at Atari, changing in
ways that I did not like, and about that time (the
end of 1979), I left to form Activision with a couple of other game designers.
CGW: I assume when you say "things happened"
it got more corporate and more structured, or am I
wrong?
Alan: I don't think those were the reasons that I
left; that hadn't occurred to much of a degree when
I left. But they had lost their striving for technical
excellence in the design of products, and they had
lost their understanding of the marketplace from a
marketing standpoint, after Nolan had been removed from the company.
CGW: So you got to Activision and started doing
VCS titles again?
Alan: That's right; I did more VCS titles. The
VCS was a very popular machine to program on
because there were so many units. It eventually got
up to probably close to 15 million units worldwide.
I did titles such as Checkers, Tennis, Ice Hockey...
CGW: My favorite!
Alan: That's my favorite, too, actually.
CGW: So you did those games; then what happened?
Alan: Then Bob Whitehead and I left Activision
in November of 1984 and we got together and
formed Accolade, which was incorporated in December of 1984.
CGW: Did you and Bob already have designs in
mind when you left, or did you just say, "Let's
form a company and do some games"?

Alan: We started the company first and then we
thought of game ideas for quite a while before actually starting. So we didn't leave Activision with
any game concepts in mind. That's something you
can't do, or you're in trouble. But we started doing
games here for personal computers, whereas at
Activision we had not done any games--either Bob
or myself--for computers.

CGW: Have you had an idea for a game come to
you in a flash?
Alan: I rather doubt that it's happened that way.
I think they tend to evolve more in the background
of my mind. I've been doing this for about 10 years
now, and there are a lot of subject areas where I've
thought about doing games. There's usually not a
flash of inspiration.

CGW: And at Accolade you've done Law of the
West?
Alan: Yes, and now I'm working on an untitled
football game.

CGW: How much of a game do you have visualized before you start to work on it?
Alan: I work differently from a lot of people in
that I try to visualize the entire game before I begin it, and that process usually goes something like
this: usually I'm free after the end of a project, and
I take a couple of months to sort through a bunch
of ideas. After I decide which one I want to pursue, another couple-of-month-process begins where
I think about the technical feasibility of it and the
viewpoints that I want to have in the game--basically the screens. So at that point, for me, I will sit
down and write a five- or ten-page description of
what I want the game to be, just to straighten out
in my mind aspects of the game.

CGW: There are some interesting football games
in the works at different companies.
Alan: Well, I hope so, because l'm not terribly
impressed with the bunch that are out there now. I
hope that in the next generation, we can provide
customers with some real entertaining software,
which is my job! I love to make games!

CGW: Let's get away from history and talk
about your philosophy of game design. Where do
you get your ideas from?
Alan: We're inundated with ideas from everything; if you're talking about just going out and
getting a subject for a game, what we create for
people are interactive experiences in which they'll
enjoy participating. So v e get those ideas from
sports, movies, books, TV shows... all aspects of
life.

CGW: One person said they thought game design
consisted of three stages: the first third being the
design and programming of the game; the second
third being the debugging and the playtesting; and
the final third putting the finishing touches on it-cleaning and polishing it. Do you agree with that?
Alan: I don't disagree, but I'd have to think
about exactly how I lay it out. I'm about two-thirds
through this football game, and the game is just at
this point coming together to the point where people can start to play it. So the remaining third of
the game is going to be playtesting, and that's going
to be about ten weeks. That's playtesting, adding
features, removing features that people find objectionable. So that's it, but I put a lot of thought up
front before I actually sit down and write any code.
I started thinking about this concept in December
of last year, and I didn't write any code until the
end of February. That's about a three-month period
without actually doing any programming. I've been
doing the programming now for about five months
with one other co-designer.

CGW: How does an idea come to you?
Alan: I usually have a whole bunch of ideas, and
I don't know exactly where they come from. I have
three other ideas on the back burner that I want to
get to right now, but there's a weeding-out process
that I go through once I get an idea: can I implement it? I'm also very practical-oriented: will people buy it, will they want it? These are the two
main reasons for eliminating ideas.

CGW: On which machine?
Alan: We're working on the Commodore 64. So
those first three months can sort of be counted on
the project, because I was certainly doing background processing on the ideas, even though I was
doing other tasks. So there's three months of
thought, five months of implementation, and now
we're to the point where we can begin tuning the
game and actually start to play it. We're doing some

pretty ambitious things, so those five months of
programming were pretty difficult.
CGW: Do you do games first on the Commodore
64 because one, you're familiar with it, two, games
sell well on the 64, or three, because it's the lowest
common denominator, and makes an easy port to
other versions?
Alan: The reason we do it is because it will sell
the most on that system. I don't think that because
you do it on the Commodore, it's an easy port to
other systems. I would say that this game could
probably only be ported onto the Amiga. It makes
use of special hardware processes inside the Commodore that are really closely emulated only on the
Amiga, not on the Apple or the IBM. The Atari,
even though it has player objects [sprites], it
doesn't have enough to really do this game justice.
CGW: It's said that one of the ten rules of television production is that all hits are flukes. Do you
agree with that?
Alan: I think that hits are unpredictable. I think
one should always strive to turn out high-quality
work; high-quality work has the greatest chance of
producing a hit. I don't think a hit can be predicted
or created; it just occurs. So I generally agree with
that.
CGW: Which game of yours are you proudest of?
Alan: I think the Ice Hockey game. It has a degree of involvement that somehow is better than a
lot of the other things I've done. It expresses more
to people the idea of fighting for the puck and
skating on the ice and just seems to draw people
more into the game than any other stuff I've done.
CGW: Chris Crawford once said that when he
works on a game, he works on it, playtests it, and
then fine-tunes it until he's sick of it, until he
can't stand to look at it. When he can't stand the
thought of it anymore, then he knows it's done. But
a month later, he wishes he could get the game
back and change just one or two things. Are you
that way?
Alan: Well, I guess I force myself to work on it
that extra couple of months, because I am physically ill during the last couple of months of working on my games. I have nightmares.
CGW: Really? So if you do a game a year, then
that's one or two months out of every year that
you've got nightmares.
Alan: Yeah.
CGW: And people said game design was easy!
Alan: Game design is not easy! But it's very rewarding in a lot of ways; it allows me to have my

work interact with humans in a way that no other
programming can.
CGW: Someone once made a comment that they
thought that people like computers because computers let them play God. They let you have total
control of a little universe. Do you think that's
true?
Alan: As a game designer, that's true, and that's
one of the things I like about designing games for
computers. But what I primarily like about computers is seeing people react to my work. I very
much understand what you're talking about, about
playing God, because you're creating a universe.
But there's another level of creating an emotional
reaction in people that's more satisfying to me.
CGW: Does it give you a thrill to watch somebody playing your game?
Alan: Yes, as long as they're enjoying it! I really
feel bad when they're not enjoying it. Seeing people enjoy my games is my primary reward. Finan-

cially, I could probably make as much money doing
straight programming, and probably work less, but
as I said, there are other rewards to the job. I have
a lot more independence and there are emotional
rewards that I could never get with traditional
engineering projects, because on a traditional, large
engineering project, it will last for two to five
years, and you're only one of 10 or 15 people
working on the project. It's really hard to isolate it
and see what you did. I guess I need to see that
people recognize my work. I get some good feelings
just out of the recognition.

CGW: What games have you played a lot of in
the past?
Alan: I probably put hundreds of dollars into
Missile Command as an arcade game. I play a lot of
pinball, but I'm not really addicted to any one pinball machine. They all seem sort of generic to me,
unfortunately. Choplifter in the arcades is real
good. It's a good home game, but the arcade version has super graphics. Ancient Art of War by
Broderbund holds long-term interest for me. I also
played a lot of the original Adventure game, the
one that Zork was based on.

CGW: Which computer games do you really like?
Alan: Which games do I really like?

CGW: Have you ever seen a game and said to
yourself, "I'm glad my name isn't on that"?
Alan: I unfortunately see that all too often. I see
the problems in games--in fact, that's my specialty,
reviewing games for people here and at all the
other companies I've been in. I'm very happy to see
games that are implemented extraordinarily well.
Unfortunately, I see that very rarely. Most of the
games I see could be implemented much better. It's
mostly just a matter of time, and of experience on
the designer's part, to get the games done right.

CGW: Yeah. If you could go to a desert island...
Alan: [laughs]
CGW: ... with just a computer, electricity, and
five games, which ones would you take?
Alan: Well, I'd prefer to say which games I like.
We have to consider the arcade arena, too. I like
Karateka a lot. I like Marble Madness a lot in the
arcades--I hear EA has a real hot version coming
out on the Amiga, but I haven't seen it. What other
games do I like? Hmmm... I need a list of games!

CGW: Do you see this poor quality in published
games, or in submissions you get at Accolade?

Alan: Submissions aren't so bad, because they're
usually submitted as an incomplete work. But I do
see a lot in published works, and that disappoints
me. I'm talking about implementation here. The
graphics are usually pretty good, but the human
interface can be bad--games can be awkward to
play. One of our competitors has a golf game where
you have to hit the keyboard about 20 times before
you can take a single shot. That's ludicrous to me,
because no human being has that the patience to do
that, or maybe one out of 10,000. Games should be
worn by the user without feeling like they're
wearing them. They should be intuitively obvious
to use, and as transparent as possible to the user.
The user should feel that they're in an experience.
That's something about some of my earlier sports
games: you weren't aware that you were tweaking a
joystick and pushing a button so much; they sort of
pulled you into the screen. I miss that in a lot of
the games today.
CGW: Are there any designers whose body of
work you really like?
Alan: Sure. Bill Budge did a lot of things early
on that I thought were great. Some people that I
worked with at Activision, Dave Crane and Steve
Cartwright, are first-rate designers. Over at Epyx,

Steve Landrum, who currently has a motorcycle
racing game out. He has also done Commie Mutants
from Outer Space. Then there's Dan Gorlin; I only
know his work from Choplifter, actually. As I said,
Rex Bradford, the author of Mean 18. I really like
his work. Eugene Jarvis, the designer the designer
of Defender and Robotron 2084.
CGW: If you couldn't design computer games,
what would you do?
Alan: Well, my training was as an electrical engineer, and I have a lot of experience in that, so
most logically it would seem that I would go back
to traditional engineering. Unfortunately, I don't
find that terribly rewarding, and after my experience in this business, which is a creative business, I
think next I would try writing books or television
and movie scripts.
CGW: How do you see computer games evolving
in the next 5 or 10 years?
Alan: From a hardware standpoint, the visual
resolution is going to continue to improve as well as
the audio reproduction capabilities of the machine.
On the software end, I think we're going to see
evolution towards better development of the characters inside the games. I think we will continue to
broaden the scope of the themes we explore. I think
visually we'll see the work develop more cinemagraphic techniques where you can see cuts and
dissolves and fades and shots from different perspectives, which currently are very difficult to
generate on the systems. But they will appear much
more like movies and television.
CGW: What about 10, 20 or 50 years from now?
Alan: I think in the next 10 or 20 years we'll an
expansion of interactive entertainment similar to
that which television has undergone since its inception. I think it will become the dominant form of
entertainment in this country. I think it will surpass
television and make it passe in the next 20 or 30
years. Interaction is so much more interesting than
passivity, having a control over your own destiny.

Commodore Key

by Roy Wagner
It's A Small World
For a long time it has been a very
large world. The only software that we
seem to see available was written in the
good old US of A. And still there was a lot
of talk about the "good stuff that was
available over-there and it never seem to
come over-here. Granted, a lot of the good
stuff over-there were clones of the goodstuff over-here, or stuff that really was not
that good. But still we never got a chance
to see it.
One of the major reasons was tied to
legal licensing rights and royalties and all
that mumbo-jumbo. Bottom line was that
WE were missing out on a lot of good, low
priced software games.
This started to change in 1985 with
the introduction of MasterTronic software
from Great Britain with prices of about
$10 per game. The graphics and sound
were good and the games pretty much
matched the price. Good short term disposable fun. This year we saw the introduction of more United Kingdom titles
from Firebird Licensees. And generally
speaking these were of higher quality with
a higher price. The pricing however was
much lower than a similar games from a
USA producer.
Well, now as we are about to enter
1987, we have word that two major US
game producers, Activision and Broderbund, are bringing in some of the best titles from all around the world for OUR
consumption.
Activision will be releasing their
"foreign" games under the name of ELECTRIC DREAMS. So finally, we will be
seeing many more of these great, top-sellers from all over the rest of the world.
Some of the titles that we can expect to
see in the near future are: THE ROCKY
HORROR PICTURE SHOW, ZOIDS, and
SPINDIZZY.
Meanwhile Broderbund, another major
US producer of games, is negotiating to
distribute its software titles all over the
world. It's LODE RUNNER game is an
extremely big hit in Japan already. The
key products that they are releasing
abroad are: THE PRINT SHOP (a
tremendously BIG seller here already),
FANTAVISION, DAZZLE DRAW, THE
TOY SHOP, and THE ANCIENT ART of
WAR. They have brought into this country such imports as: SNOGGLE, APPLE
PANIC and ALIEN RAIN.
Name Your Pleasure
FRANKIE GOES TO HOLLYWOOD
from Firebird comes to this country from
the the UK. This topped the British best
seller list and is out to do the same here. It
was voted the Best Adventure Game of
1985 by the "Commodore Computing International" magazine.
This title is based on the name of a
popular British rock group. The game be-

gins with you as Frankie, a person devoid
of any personality, in an in an environment of suburban boredom. You are out
on the streets of Mundanville with all
house looking the same from the outside,
but each holding different "adventures"
inside (much like here in the states).
There are well over sixty tasks that
can be completed in a journey to seek the
completion of your personality, and to
reach the Pleasure Dome which holds the
"ultimate experience". Your travels will
involve you in a murder mystery, a
labyrinth of options, a bombing raid on
Merseyside, Cupid's arrows, talking heads
(British), a shooting gallery and a war
room. Many other surprises await you.
There is a distinct British flavor to much
of what you encounter, but much of it is
easily understood by anyone fluent in the
language of the arcade game, with an accent on the modern as versus the classic
fantasy adventure so popular here.
A joystick is recommend, but the keyboard can be used. The manual explains
enough to get you started, but not nearly
enough to understand what is going on.
I'm sure you'll figure it out. I greatly
missed the game NOT having a SAVE
GAME option. The graphics and game
play are well done. I think you will find it
an interesting game.

It's Up In The Air
Both FLIGHT SIMULATOR II and
JET from subLOGIC are one of the best
simulations of reality that are available for
the home computer. However, not everyone wants to experience the complexities
or joy of flying, even if scenery disks are
available to all major population areas in
the United States and Japan. Some of us
enjoy sitting in our favorite chair at home
looking out at the screen showing us the
latest top football game. From there we
send each ball on its flight to score another
one for our favorite team. If only we were
managing the game, our team would win
every time.
Well, from the producers of great flying simulators come a new sport simulation. FOOTBALL gives us a comprehen-

sive coaches play book that provides a full
complement of offensive and defensive
plays. We are limited to two all star teams
with very detailed, though fictitious, individual player details.
The player characteristics can be altered before starting a game, but unfortunately cannot be saved for use at another
time. The length of the quarter can be set

from 1 to 99 minutes. You may play
against the computer or another person.
When two are playing both make there
play selections at the same time each using
a joystick. Once a play has begun both the
offensive or defensive player may use the
joystick to control the actions of key
players, or just let the computer play out
both sides. For a pass play, you must initiate the pass using the joystick.
This game is quite distinctive from
other football games on the C64 because
the action of each individual player is
represented and animated. The game is
somewhat limited in options and player
data. The attempt to depict all the players
was a good idea, but I don't think that it
really looks that good. It is hard to identify the different players and when there is
movement down field, it looks more like
the players are ice skating than running
down field. I was disappointed in seeing
this game turn out to be not as good a
simulation as I expected. Perhaps it was
because after such great flying simulations,
I expected too much when my feet were
back on the ground.
Recommendations
With the gift giving season nearly
here, I offer the following to be worthwhile
presents:
Action Arcade:
LODERUNNER'S RESCUE (Broderbund)
Best Implementation:
Any LUCASFILM Game from EPYX
Interactive Fiction:
Any Electronic Novel (Broderbund)
Sports Simulation:
LEADERBOARD Golf (Access)
Children's game:
Any DISNEY/SIERRA Educational Game
Home Utility: NEWSROOM (Springboard)

MACINTOSH WINDOWS

by Frank Boosman
Pushing The Envelope
In test pilot terminology, "pushing the
envelope" means making a plane go faster
or higher than ever before, or performing
maneuvers more complex than any before
them. To push the envelope is to be the
best, if only until the next hotshot comes
along and outdoes you.
Computer games can push the envelope: a particular game might have better
sound than any before it, or more realistic
graphics, or a radical new design. It's fun
to see a game that pushes the envelope;
you feel as if you're watching a little tiny
bit of history in the making.
It's my pleasure this month to review
two games that push the envelope of computer game design, but in very different
ways.
Surgery In Only Ten Easy Lessons?
Well, not quite. But Surgeon, a new
game from Interactive Simulations for
Medicine (ISM), is easily the most realistic

scalpels, forceps, sutures, hypodermic needles full of drugs, and more. Above the
palette of tools is a graphic electrocardiogram (EKG) indicator. (This will be familiar to anyone who watched the television show Emergency; remember "Set up
to transmit an EKG and start a Ringer's
Lactate"?)
Surgeon simulates one and only one
abnormal condition: an aortal aneurysm.
This is a blood clot in the aorta, and can
be fatal if not treated promptly. The idea
is to cut through the layers of tissue until
the aorta is exposed, then remove the
aneurysm and a section of the aorta along
with it. An artificial graft must replace the
removed section of the aorta, and the patient must be closed up. If you can do this
without letting your patient die, then the
operation is a success. If not, well... don't
blame me when your malpractice insurance
rates go up.
Like most great games, Surgeon challenges our perception of what a game
should be. Is this a hand-eye coordination
game? Yes, to a degree, since that's how
real surgery is. Is this a medical knowledge

lengths to make Surgeon medically accurate; surgery works just like the real thing.
The patient is prepped as in real life, blood
vessels bleed the way they're supposed to,
the layers of tissue appear the way a surgeon would see them... In short, this is a
very technically accurate game. About the
only thing I can think of that the people at
ISM left out was anesthesia; in Surgeon,
it's considered to be automatic. I can think
of two good reasons for this, though: first,
anesthesia is a separate specialty from
surgery, and second, it would be asking a
lot of a player to keep track of both the
EKG and the anesthesia, and operate on
the patient at the same time. Not even real
doctors do that.
Surgeon has its faults, of course, but
they're relatively minor. The manual needs
improvement; hiring a professional technical writer would be a good step. Also, I
felt as if Surgeon needed an "autopsy"
feature that would give clues as to where
the player went wrong when a patient dies.
And I think I've elaborated on my dislike
of copy protection before. But even without these changes, Surgeon is still a very
solid, complete, and playable game.
Arcade Gaming And The Macintosh

depiction of surgery ever available for a
microcomputer. I found myself amazed at
the detail of design that went into this
game as I played it. Before I wax any further, though, let me briefly describe it.
Surgeon begins by showing a digitized
x-ray or sonogram of a patient complaining of pain in the abdomen. You must first
determine whether or not the patient requires surgery; unnecessary surgery is a
serious matter. If surgery is required, the
display will change to one of the patient's
abdomen as it would appear before you.
To the left is an array of surgeon's tools:

game? Yes, since you'll have to learn what
certain tools and medicines are used for,
and how to recognize abnormal heartbeats.
Is this a tool for learning about surgery?
Yes; as a friend of mine has pointed out,
Surgeon would excel in applications such
as giving medical students their first taste
of surgery, or perhaps showing a patient
and his or her family exactly what would
be done during an operation. The list goes
on.
Ultra Realism
The folks at ISM have gone to great

A friend of mine who has developed
some productivity software for the Macintosh was recently contemplating the idea
of doing an arcade game for the Mac.
Why? Because he felt that there hadn't
been an arcade game yet for the Macintosh
with really good animation. I know a few
people who would disagree with him, but
it's certainly true that the quality of animation has been lacking in many games
I've seen. But he changed his tune when I
showed him Dark Castle, the latest game
from Silicon Beach, makers of Airborne
and Enchanted Scepters.
Dark Castle is, in a nutshell, the best
arcade game I've seen for the Macintosh,
and perhaps the best I've seen on any microcomputer ever. Why? Well, for starters,
I'll talk about the artwork. Done by Mark
Pierce (of Video Works fame), it's simply
astounding. Every facet of the 14-room
dungeon is beautifully crafted, all the way
from the dragon to the pits of lava to the
one-eyed mutants who love to dance.
Mark has surpassed himself with his work
on Dark Castle.
Hand-in-hand with the artwork is the
animation, which is flawlessly smooth and
natural in appearance. As your on-screen
character runs, jumps, and does battle
with medieval creatures, you'll find yourself commenting on how realistic he and
the rest of the inhabitants of the castle
look. Particularly impressive is the shimmering water effect on the title screen. To
be honest, I didn't realize the Macintosh
Continued on pg. 42

DESIGNER PROFILES
BRIAN MORIARTY
In mid-July, our Adventure Game Editor, Scorpia had the opportunity to interview Brian Moriarty, author of "Wishbringer" and "Trinity". Here is
her report.
Brian and I met for lunch and had a really fascinating conversation. Mostly the talk was about
"Trinity", but we also talked a little about
"Wishbringer" and some of Infocom's plans for the
future.

CGW: Did you enjoy doing "Wishbringer"?
Brian: Oh yes, very much. It was nice, and it
sold really well. It was '85's biggest seller for Infocom, by far.
CGW: Will Infocom do a follow-up to
"Wishbringer"?
Brian: Yes. Not right away, but it's on the list.

CGW: Let's start with a little background. How
did you come to be a game designer with Infocom?
Brian: Originally, I worked as technical writer
for Analog Computing. Then in the spring of '84, I
went to Infocom as a microcomputer engineer, to
work on the interpreters for various micros. I got to
be friends with Mike Berlyn, Dave Lebling, Stu
Galley and all those people, and I convinced them
that I was going to hold my breath until they made
me a designer. I also had two adventure games that
had been published in Analog, and they were pretty
well received, so that helped, too.
CGW: Ok, now for the usual question: where did
you get the idea for "Wishbringer"?
Brian: Actually, the first game I did was
"Trinity". When I became a games designer, Infocom asked me for a synopsis of a game I wanted to
do, so I wrote the synopsis for "Trinity". They
looked at it and they all liked it, but they said it
was too ambitious. Of course, at the time we didn't
have the Plus system yet, and it would have been
very difficult to do that on a normal system. Then
the marketing people came over and said "Hey,
what we really want is an introductory game". So I
said "Ok, I'll do an introductory game. Let's try to
think of something neat to put in the box".
CGW: So "Wishbringer" was actually developed
from the packaging?
Brian: Right. I said: "We'll put a magic ring in
the box, and we'll do a story about a magic ring".
But then I said, "Magic rings have already been
done, and the ring would probably be a plastic one.
Why don't we put rocks in the box? We could get a
carload of rocks, they'd be cheap, and we'd just
put one in every box." Then a marketing person
asked, "Why don't we make the rocks glow in the
dark, since the rock in the game glows?". I said
"Ok, we'll paint the rocks with glow-in-the-dark
paint". But the marketing person said "No, the kids
will come along and suck the paint off". So someone suggested we make rocks. Meanwhile, I started
to write a game around a glow-in-the-dark rock.
And that's where "Wishbringer" came from; it came
from the plastic rock.

CGW: Ok, let's move on to "Trinity". Where did
that idea come from?
Brian: Actually, I had the idea in '83, when I
was working at Analog and writing adventures
there. It's an idea that I'd had in my head for a
long time. When the chance came to do it, I took
the plunge.
CGW: Was there anything that set of the specific
train of thought that brought you to "Trinity" and
what would happen in the game?
Brian: I've read a lot about that in the past, and
I've always been interested in that subject. When I
started working on the game, I amassed a pretty
substantial library on the history atomic bomb and
nuclear weaponry in general. In the course of
writing the game, I also did some original research.
I went to the Trinity site myself, visited Los
Alamos and a lot of museums, and I talked to a
couple of people who were actually there. So a lot
of the stuff that happens in "Trinity" is pretty accurate. I think it's the first interactive fiction that
attempts to re-create a real place and not just simulate a made-up place.
CGW: And that's all in the New Mexico section
of the game?
Brian: The Kensington Gardens are relatively
accurate, too, except for the location called "The
Wabe". Every other location there is correct and in
the right place. I hadn't seen it before I wrote
about it, but I have seen it since. That part was
written based on maps and photographs.

CGW: How long did it take you to do "Trinity"?
Brian: It was started in May of last year ('85)
and finished in June of this year. A little over a
year.
CGW: How much of that time went into the design, and how much went into the programming of
it?
Brian: As usual, most of it was programming.
That's usually the case. I'd say that 90% of the time
is programming, and the other 10% is creative. Our
development system is still very programming intensive. It doesn't do a lot for you. It does some
things, but there's still a lot you have to do for
yourself. It's Quite a bit of drudgery.
CGW: What was the most difficult part of the
game to write?
Brian: The hardest part was in the fantasy world:
the giant sundial, and the shadow moving across.
There's all sorts of factors involved there in moving
that shadow and having it in different rooms, and
the doors opening and closing, and then having you
be able to control it. That was very tricky do.
CGW: Did you map everything out before you
started the coding?
Brian: I usually do, although not all the designers do. When you're making it all up, it's easier to
do that. The first thing I did was sit down and
make a map of Trinity site. It was changed about
50 times trying to simplify it and get it down from
over 100 rooms to the 40 or so rooms that now
comprise it. It was a lot more accurate and very
detailed, but a lot of that detail was totally useless.
So I tried to boil it down to what was absolutely
needed. That map that comes in the package is
made from geologic surveys and blueprints and is
completely accurate.
CGW: Why did you want to write a game as depressing as "Trinity"?
Brian: Well, it wasn't a pleasant experience, I
can tell you that. It's not easy to sit down and write
that stuff. As I said, I've talked to some people
who were there, and I've read a lot of books by
people who were there, and the one thing they all
say about it, the one common theme, is that it was
inevitable. That if we hadn't done it, someone else
might have. And they also say that that's not the
only thing that's inevitable. History has a lot to
teach us. And that's the point of the game. Because
when you're the Wabewalker, and going through
the game, you're very literally creating the Book of
Hours, you're writing your own history.
CGW: So what statements are you making with
"Trinity"? Do you have a personal statement to
make?

Brian: I wanted people, when playing the game,
to feel their helplessness. Because that's what I felt
when I was reading and talking to these people and
seeing these places. You could just feel the weight
of history on you. Going to Trinity site and being
there and realizing what this place means. I just
wanted people to feel that weight on them when
playing the game. Have it crush them in the end,
because that's what I got out of my studies and research.
CGW: There are a couple of spots in the game
where you have to do some unpleasant things. Why
did you put that in?
Brian: That was deliberate. I was amazed to see
how many people were really bothered by the scene
with the lizard, because it was them doing it. It's
nice to know interactive fiction could do that,
make you uncomfortable about killing things. In no
other media could I make you feel bad about
killing something. Because there's only one medium
where I can make YOU do it, and make you feel
empathy for a thing that doesn't exist. It's only
with interactive fiction that you can explore those
emotions.
CGW: When the game was finished, how did you
feel about it?
Brian: Relieved. As usual. We usually feel that
way when a game is finished, but I felt especially
relieved. It was hard to live with that game for a
year. But I don't want people to be scared away
from this game. A lot of people look at the cover
and say "Oh God, a gloomy game". It isn't a gloomy
game, but it does have a dark undertone to it. It's
not like it's the end of the world. But I'm glad I
did "Trinity". It's nice to know that interactive fic-

tion can do things besides give you puzzles and
make you laugh. It can also make you think. And it
can deal with big issues.
CGW: Moving on to perhaps a lighter subject,
can you tell us what you're working on now?
Brian: I can't say very much, it's too early yet,
but my next game will be something light. I don't
need to do another one like "Trinity", that was a
hard game to work on. It's a collaboration, with
someone from outside Infocom. The new one will
be a fantasy, and should be out in February.
CGW: (Excitement!) Is this the follow-up to
Hitchhiker (hope hope)?
Brian: No.
CGW: Awwwwwww. Will Infocom be doing one
eventually?
Brian: We hope to. Douglas Adams would like
to, but he's very busy right now.
CGW: How long have you been working on your
current project?
Brian: I just started it less than a month ago. It's
a quickie, it has to be done very quickly. It's
something that had already been developed, but was
put on the back burner for awhile.

CGW: So this will be a beginner or standard
level game?
We're trying to get away from genres and levels,
I think we're going to try to make the games two
levels, Introductory and Other. It's very difficult to
assign a level to a game. Who can say what is standard or what is advanced? Hitchhiker's was labelled
"Standard", but a lot of people thought it was
"Expert" level. We haven't abandoned levels yet, but
I think we're going to.
CGW: And the same for genres?
Brian: We have thrown out the genres. How do
you classify "Trinity"? is it a fantasy? Is it sciencefiction? We had trouble classifying that. The game
I'm working on now is completely unclassifiable.
And a couple of other games we have in the works
just don't fit in. We didn't like calling "Ballyhoo" a
mystery because it's not like our other mysteries.
People saw "mystery" on the box and thought "Oh,
it's another of those games where you have to talk
to characters". But it's not, it's a puzzle-oriented
game. So we're getting away from trying to pin it
down. We're just saying, "this is the game, read the
description on the back to get an idea of what it's
about".
CGW: Brian, it's been a pleasure talking with
you. Before you go, do you have any closing remarks?
Brian: No, except to say what I've been saying
to everyone about "Trinity". That it's not a funeral,
and not to be afraid of it. It's kind of a dark game,
but it's also, I like to think, kind of a fun game,
too. I don't want people to be put off by the subject. But I do want people to think about what they
see. And to write lots of letters if they're mad at
the ending and think it should be something else. I
love to hear from people. I hope I do.

If wily enough, and if blessed with luck, you
can attain any of these goals with Lords of Conquest (from Electronic Arts), a new computer game
based on the boardgame Borderlands (from Eon
Products).
On maps depicting real and imaginary continents, you raise armies and conquer territories to
control resources.
Since you enter moves are entered via joystick
and are menu controlled, the simplest way of
learning is simply by playing.
Twenty different one-screen maps cover parts of
the real and imagined world.
The list of built-in maps of Lords of Conquest
include:

LORDS OF CONQUEST

by Aurelio Locsin III

Name:
Type:
System:

Lords of Conquest
Introductory Wargame
C-64 (Apple & Atari
coming)
#Players:
1-4
Author:
Ted Schmeckpepper
Publisher: Electronic Arts
1920 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404

Have you ever wanted to conquer the world?
No? Well, how about Europe or South America?
Perhaps you have fantasized about extending the
borders of Imperial Rome, or winning the Civil
War for the South.

Some Thoughts on the Variety of Strategic Considerations in LORDS OF CONQUEST

by Jack Kittredge

Lords of Conquest is, as many grizzled gamers
know, based on the board game Borderlands, published by Eon Products. When thinking about the
conversion we tried to make the most of the new
medium. Besides taking care of all the picky details
like managing pieces, counting forces, and limiting
moves, we knew that computers excel in at least

North America 1 & 2
Shenandoah 1 & 2
Caribbean
World
3 Continents (Europe, Asia, Africa)
Africa
South America
Polar Ice
Down Under
European Wars
Prussia
Early Italia
Mediterranean
Middle East
China
Riverland Sea of Japan
Borderlands

If the built-in maps do not appeal to you, you
can create and save a map or have the program
create one at random.
Play is conducted in yearly phases: 1) Production
for building units and collecting resources; 2)
Trade, available only in multi-player games; 3)
Shipment for moving forces; and 4) Combat for
taking territories by force.

two other areas: data processing and working with
variable parameters. The quality of the solo game
attests to the work which went into programming
LORDS to process large amounts of data and reach
far down the decision tree for optimum "intelligent"
computer play. The large number of optional parameters is our stab at keeping the game fresh and
strategically challenging.
THE OPTIONS
There are a number of ways to play Lords of
Conquest, each of which gives you an entirely different experience.

During the Production phase you can build the
basic combat unit, the weapon, which moves one
territory at a time. You also collect resources,
among which the horse is the most useful. Horses
attack, defend and carry weapons up to two territories away. Horses and weapons can be ferried
across water by boats, which can also attack and
defend. The most expensive units to build are cities
which increase production and are useful on defense.
The artificial intelligence routines play a pretty
good game. The computer player will attack territories unexpectedly and sometimes holds back on
unit building until it can build more powerful
units. However the computer does not use its boats
efficiently, preferring to attack with land units.
When you close in on a victory against a computer opponent it has an annoying habit of conceding the game with a cute message like "Uh oh, I
have to run." However, the computer does not offer
you the same concession when you want to surrender. Instead, it crushes you totally. The winner of
the game sees the map colored in his image while
listening to a short musical tribute.
Solitaire games last about 30 minutes. Multiplayer games can last much longer. Games can be
saved in progress.
The manual does a thorough job of explaining
the rules. However it would have been nice to have
the quick reference guide (printed on the back
cover) as a separate card. This would have saved
much page flipping.
Veteran wargamers may find Lords of Conquest
too simple. However, the game offers a quick and
pleasant break from complex simulations. Its simplicity also allows new players to concentrate less
on mechanics and more on strategy. General gamers
will find Lords of Conquest to be an enjoyable introduction to strategy/diplomacy games.

Number of Players. The maximum game, with
four players, is wide-open and free-wheeling. Alliances shift constantly and you have to be a master
of diplomacy to gain and hold a real winning position. With three players, each player lives in fear of
an alliance of the other two against him. The canny
player will strive to monopolize some vital resource
and use trade to reward his friends and punish his
enemies. The 2-player game ignores trade and
diplomacy in favor of straight strategy. Ruthless
pressure and careful attention to details and timing
are the order of the day. One unexpected move
may bring about a complete reversal of fortunes.
Playing solitaire against the relentlessly logical

computer is how most people play LORDS. We
spent a good deal of effort getting a vigorous opponent into the cpu, and I think most humans will
lose their first few games. But AI is still a pretty
fledgling subject, and the brain has had a good
head start (so to speak). Humans have the ability to
learn and to recognize important patterns of development, which the computer does not. After a
while you will find yourself getting better and
better. That's why we threw in the nine stages of
difficulty - when you're winning more than you're
losing, rachet up to the next stage and eat dust
again for a while!
Game Level. LORDS has four strategy levels.
The introductory game, with only gold and horses,
is in some ways the most elegant. The lack of variety of resources focuses play directly upon the key
military elements: mobility and power. The basic
game introduces the complexity of administering
wealth in the form of Iron, Coal, and Timber, and
maintaining balanced holdings. The advanced game
allows sudden behind-the-lines attacks via the new
element of naval power thus enhancing mobile tactics. Expert play expands the strategic requirements
via introducing pre-attack shipments, which require
increased planning and foresight.
Chance Level. LORDS has three "chance vs. determinism" options. If your strategic tastes are deliberate and calculating, with low chance you can
be certain whether or not you will win an attack. If
you like a little spice, but nothing too unreasonable,
you can choose medium chance which flips a coin
on ties. But if you like staking everything on a
come-from-behind surprise move that just might
win, then pick the high chance option and hang on!
Map Variety. The configuration of the map on
which you play will be central to the game. You
can play with the prepared maps, generate random
ones, or make your own fashioned after whatever
strategic tests you can dream up. Is water important, touching a lot of territories and separating
them? Then boats will be crucial. Are water areas
small and isolated from each other? Then the main
game will be on land. Are territories strung out like
a necklace? Then horses will be vital to an advance.
CHOOSING TERRITORIES
This is the "beginning game" where your basic
strategy direction is established. It is of course important to occupy territories where resources will
be produced but horses are especially important
early on as they will tip the balance your way in
the first attacks.
I try to pick territories where I can build a city
which would bear upon and increase the production
of several kinds of resources. Of course I also want
Continued on pg 26

Name:

Alternate Reality:
The City
System:
Atari, C-64
Price:
$50.00
Designer:
Kathi Tremblay
Publisher: Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311

by Scorpia
There you are, minding your own
business, going about your usual activities,
without a care (or hardly a care, anyway)
in the world. And just like that, everything changes. Without warning, without
explanation, you are kidnapped by mysterious aliens. When you recover from this
outrage, you find yourself in a small room
with only one exit. Beyond the doorway
lies a city unlike any you have seen before.
Above the doorway is a panel displaying
an ever-changing series of numbers. There
is no other way out. You step across the
threshold....
So begins Alternate Reality, the most
ambitious computer game since Time
Zone. Planned to cover at least five games,
all of them full scenarios in themselves, yet
linked together to form one complete
whole, this could be a series to reckon
with. Maybe. The first in the group, Alternate Reality: The City, has good parts and
some not-so-good parts.
You start in that little room, with the
city of Xebec's Demise in front of you. The
numbers sliding by overhead represent the
attributes your character will have the
moment you step through the doorway.
There is little in the way of choice or control here. You could end up with a very
good set of attributes, a mediocre set, or a
very bad set, indeed. Once through the
door, there is no going back, and you are
stuck with what you have.
Your character's stats are composed of
Strength, Stamina, Intelligence, Wisdom,
Charm, and Skill. You also have Money
(you get a little to start with) and Hit
Points. Each is determined randomly when
you step through the door. Look them over
carefully as soon as you're out. If your
character comes through with rotten stats
overall, re-boot the game and create another one. If you get a decent one, save the
game right there and make a couple of
back-up disks.
The best way to handle this is to go for
high strength and intelligence, and hope
for the best with the other attributes. All
attributes are important, but at the very
beginning, you are extremely vulnerable,
and you need at least a couple of good
scores if you want to survive. On the Apple version, the numbers (over the door)
for strength and intelligence are
side-by-side, so keep your finger on the key, and
hit it as soon as you see good numbers
show up for these two. This does take
some precise timing, and you may have to
try more than once, but it's worth the ef-

fort in the long run.
Once in the city, you will find survival
difficult. Thieves and muggers will attack
you. Other citizens will steal your money
and possessions. Monsters (usually found
only at night) will be after your blood.
You will need food and water to survive
(you get some at the beginning), and a
place to sleep when you're tired.
Against this, you have only yourself, a
little money, a meager supply of rations,
no weapons, no armor. Overall, the
prospects are not heartening. The first
thing to do is get a weapon; you cannot
survive fighting bare-handed, and you
WILL have to fight sooner or later, probably sooner. So, the moment you're out the
door (and you've backed-up your character), head for the Smithy in the City
Square, which is fortunately nearby. You
should have enough to buy a stiletto, at
least.
Naturally, you want more money. The
only way to get it is to kill someone or
something. You can't beg and you can't
steal (even though everyone else can steal
from you). Money and other items become
available only after a successful combat.
So you are going to have to get into the
thick of things practically from the start,
whether you like it or not.
There are three ways of killing someone (or thing): in a regular fight, by
tricking it, or by charming it. Tricking is
dependent on your intelligence. The higher
your score in that attribute, the better
your chances are, although you also need
to take into account what you're up
against.
Charming, as you might expect, requires a high Charm rating. As with
Tricking, you must consider your opponent. Unintelligent creatures, like Black
Slimes, can't be charmed. Tricking, I've
found, usually works better overall than
Charming. In both cases, though, there is
no explanation of WHY a Trick or Charm
kills what you're up against. A trick might
kill someone, but I haven't figured out yet
how you can Charm someone to death.
If your Trick or Charm doesn't work,
you're in trouble. You immediately become
engaged with your opponent, who gets a
free shot at you (ouch!). At this point, you
have a number of options, which generally
boil down to two: fight back, or try to
disengage. If you think you can win, by all
means fight, but keep an eye on your hit
points. You could end up dead very fast.
Disengaging has its own drawbacks.
For instance, it might not work (in which
case, another free hit by your opponent).
If it does work, many times whoever you're
fighting will steal some or all of your possessions (except weapons and armor). Intelligent creatures will take money, gems,
jewelry, potions, and compasses. Unintelligent ones grab your food and water. At
least you're still alive. For awhile.
Low-level characters should not be
running around at night or in the rain.
There are too many dangerous monsters
out there at those times. If it's night, sleep

at an Inn. If it's raining, sit in a Tavern
(one you know is open 24 hours) or stand
around in one of those empty rooms until
the rain stops.
There are many citizens of Xebec's
Demise you'll want to avoid fighting at the
start. Warriors, Fighters, Gladiators, and
Knights, for instance. Knights are especially deadly; they have potent swords,
take a lot of damage, and are very hard to
hit. They, however, will have no trouble
hitting YOU, and after two or three shots
from them, you can kiss your character
goodbye.
Noblemen should also be avoided; they
have magic swords which can do pretty
stiff damage, as well. Thieves can also be
tough customers. It's best to stick to
Commoners and Couriers until you've gone
up a bit in the game.
Ok, so here you are, fighting, tricking,
charming, trying as best you can to stay
alive. What for? Good question. The whole
game is designed around two points: (a)
completely mapping the city and (b) getting your character up to at least tenth
level so it can survive in the next scenario,
The Dungeon. That's what The City is all
about. There are no other goals, just map
and survive.
And mapping is a pain. A REAL pain.
Although a map comes with the game, it is
very incomplete. You have to fill in the
rest, and believe me, it's hard work. For
one thing, one step in the game does NOT
equal one square on the map. In the Apple
version, one map square is equal to about
six steps (this may vary among different
versions). Just imagine going along, carefully counting your steps, and halfway
through you run into an encounter.
ARGG!!!
What's even worse, is that after an
encounter your position isn't the same as
it was before. The program arbitrarily
moves you a ahead or behind from where
you were before the encounter. So, many
times you are forced to re-trace your
steps. This is definitely a game for the
dedicated cartographer.
But wait...there's MORE! Many of the
guilds and other places of interest in the
game are behind hidden doors or secret
passages. These, of course, are not obvious.
Therefore, you must also test each wall as
you come to it, by trying to walk through
it. Fun, huh?
Speaking of Guilds, there are twelve of
them (the docs may say 14, but that's an
error, there are only 12). In The City, if
you have an Apple, Atari, or C-64, you
will NOT be able to join any of them. It's
not built into the 8-bit computer versions
(whatever the docs may say). Guilds are
worthwhile for two reasons only: 1) the
very first time you visit one, one of your
attributes will be increased (absolutely
free!) and 2) you can have cursed items
uncursed (for a stiff price). Make sure you
check the uncursing prices when you visit
a Guild; should you pick up cursed
weapons or armor, you want to know
where the cheapest place is and get there

as fast as you can.
To help you out a little, here is what
you can expect to find in the four city
quadrants (so you'll know where to look,
and when to stop looking in a particular
area). NW: 2 Guilds, 5 taverns, 2 Inns, 1
Smithy, 1 Bank, 1 Healer, and 3 Shops.
NE: 4 Guilds, 5 Taverns, 1 Smithy, 4
Shops, and 1 Dungeon Entrance. SE: 2
Guilds, 2 Taverns, 1 Inn, 1 Smithy, 5
Shops, 1 Dungeon Entrance. SW: 4 Guilds,
3 Taverns, 4 Inns, 1 Bank, 1 Healer, and 4
Shops. City Square: 1 Smithy, 1 Bank, 2
Shops.
The Taverns add up to one more than
noted in the docs; that is because there are
two Mom's Bars (back-to-back but separated by a wall). The Shops also add up to
more, because some are duplicates. For
instance, there is a cluster of shops, all
called Merchant's Grotto. I've counted
each entrance as a separate Shop.
All these places have different prices
for their services or merchandise, so it does
pay to shop around. At the start, the best
place to sleep for the night is the Lazy
Griffin Inn; just head north along the
Main Street, keeping to the west side of
the avenue, and you'll find it. Later, when
you've done some more exploring, you'll
find others that are even less expensive.
The cheapest tavern is called "The
Tavern", and can be found (eventually) in
the north wall, although locating the way
in is not easy. However, they have the
lowest prices on food packets and water
flasks, so this is a good place to stock up
when you have some money. Remember
that the bill of fare in the taverns changes
hourly, so if they don't have what you
want, wait around awhile and try again
(wait around OUTSIDE...see below!)
One thing you MUST be careful of is
staying until closing time. While some
taverns are open 24 hours a day, others
are open for business only during certain
hours. Should you happen to be in a tavern at closing time, not only will you be
unceremoniously kicked out, you will NOT
be allowed in that tavern, or any other,
ever again. Ridiculous, but that's how it is.
And don't buy too many rounds for the
house, either, or you'll be kicked out for
spending too much money (you figure it
out, I can't).
Banks are good places to store your
spare cash, when you finally have some.
Rates and risks vary from bank to bank.
It's best to start with a low-risk account;
the interest isn't terrific, but your money
is safer that way. Remember that banks
aren't open 24 hours a day, so keep some
money with you at all times.
Healers are not easy to find, there are
only two, their prices are high, and they
aren't always in when you call. Also note
that paying for any service automatically
raises the rates. Thus, if you happen to be
both poisoned and low on hit points, the
cost for healing will go up after you've
been unpoisoned. Unless you have a fair
amount of money, Healers aren't too
helpful. This is a big drawback when

you're just starting out, as you can't afford a Healer's services. If you've been
badly hurt in a fight or two, the only way
to heal up is to stay at an Inn for the
night.
I haven't yet found any difference
among rooms in regard to regaining hit
points. A night on the common room floor
appears to work as well as a private room
with bath. What does seem to make a difference is time of day. You heal faster
sleeping at night than in the daytime.
One thing you'll certainly want is a
compass, which shows you in which direction you're facing. This is invaluable when
moving around at night (or in the rain) or
walking through inside passageways. Buy
one as soon as you can afford it.
Eventually, you will begin to find potions. There are at least 52 of them in the
game. Some are helpful (healing damage,
raising attributes), some are neutral
(water, milk, fruit juice), and others are
bad news (poisons, lowering attributes).
You don't know what you have until you
drink it. Potions come in a variety of colors and flavors, but different potions could
have the same color. A white potion could
be milk, or it could be poison. The actual
contents of the flask are randomly determined when you open it.
One of the worst potions to drink is
the potion of inebriation. This makes you
very, very, drunk. You can't see straight
or walk straight, and you will be subject to
momentary blackouts. No tavern will let
you in, and you can't sleep it off at an Inn.
The only way to get back to normal is to
visit a Healer and have him clean you out.
Potions are not something low-level characters should mess with, unless you have
the character backed-up.
In time, the game becomes boring.
You've mapped the city, you know where
everything is, you've visited all the Guilds:
there is nothing left but killing monsters.
So you stand at night in front of a Healer's
shop (precautionary measure) blowing
away anything and everything that shows
up, and guzzling potions in between. This
is not much fun. In fact, it's downright
monotonous.
This is probably the blackest mark

against The City: it has no sub-goals,
there isn't anything else for you to do once
the place is mapped out except fight. Of
course, you ARE preparing for the scenarios to come, yet you would expect a
little more from this game, which has some
very nice touches of its own. Certainly
more than just hack and slash, which is
what it all comes down to.
Graphics, on the Apple, are not very
good. All the exterior walls are white with
red splotches, and not pleasant to look at.
Many of the pictures of people and monsters you encounter have a good deal of
red in them, which makes it hard to see
them or distinguish them from the walls.
Perspective (3-D, you-are-there) however,
is quite well done, and does give you the
feeling that you're walking around in a
real place.
The City supports one or two drives,
and is very smart about that. It checks for
a second drive on boot-up, and whenever
you are prompted to insert a disk, it will
also check both drives for it. Further, the
program can distinguish among the boot
disk, the city disk, and your character
disk, so there is no danger that the wrong
one will be written on.
Saving can be done at almost any
point, except combat, but this ends the
game. Restoring is automatic upon bootup, and your character is removed from
the character disk at this time. Therefore,
if your character dies, or if you boot without first saving, your character will be lost.
Always have at least one back-up of the
character disk handy, just in case. By the
way, you can have up to four separate
characters on one disk.
Overall, I have mixed feelings about
Alternate Reality: The City. On the one
hand, they've made it very hard to get off
to a good start in the game unless you're
lucky (or have played before), the mapping is unnecessarily difficult and tedious,
the sound on Apple versions can't be
turned off (I know one person who finally
disconnected his speaker, he couldn't
stand it any longer), and in the later
stages, the game becomes a dull succession
of combats whose only purpose is to raise
your character's level.
On the other hand, there IS much to
explore and find, and many places that
seem to have no purpose may become important later on as more scenarios are
added. The turning of day to night and
back again (with a sun that actually rises
and sets), the passage of time in hours,
days, months and years, clear skies and
rain, are all good touches, giving a feeling
of reality (no puns intended) to the game.
And there are many factors beneath the
surface that affect your character in subtle
ways, which you may or may not discover
as you go along.
Bottom line: Recommended, with
reservations; a good game for people who
enjoy mapping or have a lot of patience...it's not for everyone.
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

CONQUEST

Continued from pg. 21

to pick territories so that they help me defend my
other holdings. Because territories bear on one another, a compact position is much easier to defend
than one spread out all over the map.
Finally, I consider my position in the first play
sequence. Am I Lead Player and thus have the first
attack? Or am I at the end of the line where I will
have to survive several attacks before getting aggressive? If I attack early, I can afford to be spread
out more, figuring I can consolidate my position by

I almost always attack if I can. By doing so I
expand my holdings, bolster defenses, and possibly
acquire new resources. Since the attack possibilities
are visible to all, there should be no surprise element. However, the maps are varied enough and
the shipping-into-an-attack moves are complex
enough so that many people will not see a weak
spot in their defenses until it is too late.
Since
the support of others is often necessary for a successful attack, diplomacy is vital in LORDS. Seeing
what other players need, and what they fear, and
offering ways to help them in return for their help
It is also wise not to
is the name of the game.
bring too much strength into a position that you
can't defend. After an attack in which I had to
bring a lot of force to bear, I often use my second
attack to consolidate instead of penetrating further
into opposition territory.
DEVELOPMENT

taking over territories from opponents. If I attack
late I need to pay special attention to picking, so
that I can defend my territories and stockpile by
controlling adjacent territories.
TRADING
Trading is one of the most important parts of
the game. Generally it is advantageous to you because it quickly enhances your position. But you do
not want to provide an immediate opponent with
the weapon, horse or boat which will soon be
rammed down your throat. I try to analyze my
trading partner's needs carefully, and offer him a
deal which will subtly work to my advantage. If
I'm clever I don't make it so obvious as to kill the
exchange. I figure that trade benefits both sides,
and those who don't trade will inevitably fall behind.
SHIPMENT
A key shipping move can often tip the power
balance of the game. Bringing fighting forces to
central spots for defense and possible attacks is
usually smart. Horses and boats are very powerful
in shipping because they give you mobility. I like
to make sure mine are kept in flexible positions,
especially when armed with a weapon.

Boats are highly useful, especially if accompanied by a weapon and/or horse. If your territories
lie along water and if a weaker player's territories
do too, a boat may well be your best early goal.
With it you can make sudden, brilliant raids deep
into his territory, often even seizing the crucial
stockpile.
Unless you develop your resources you will be
left far behind your opponents. The usual question
is "guns or butter?"; i.e. whether to immediately
make a weapon, or whether to make a city instead.
A weapon is more powerful in a fight and is mobile. Also, since production does not always happen
you may have to wait awhile for your city to benefit you. Nevertheless, I figure it is usually advisable to build a city if I can double several useful
items. For one thing, there is some moral odor attached to the player who makes the first weapon,
unless sorely besieged. In addition, the city's ability
to increase production is of continuing value year
after year. Most importantly, cities are the path to
the win -- so I'm that much closer to the ultimate
goal!
Jack Kittredge is the designer and co-programmer of the C64 version of Lords of Conquest.

Battlefront
Name:
Battlefront
System:
Apple, C-64
# Players: 1-2
Price:
$40.00
Designers: Roger Keating
Ian Trout
Publisher: Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598

Well, the boys at SSG sure fooled me. After
their very successful releases, Carriers At War and
Europe Ablaze, the word was that their next release
would be an American Civil War game titled The
Road To Appomatox. When I saw the cover of Battlefront, I knew right away that this was not your
ordinary Civil War game; not with an American
Sherman tank rolling through the ruins of some
European town straight towards a band of waiting
Germans! No, that's right; Ian Trout and Roger
Keating managed to finish their World War II
Corps-Level game before the Civil War title and
Battlefront made its debut at Origins '86 in Los
Angeles.
Battlefront, as I mentioned is a Corps level game
covering ground combat during World War II. Not
exactly a small topic! The way it is able to cover
such a vast array of combat situations is that it is a
true game kit as well as a game. In the now expected style of SSG, the "design your own" scenario
aspects are at least as important as the pre-built
scenarios. Battlefront gives you the framework
within which to build almost any combat situation
that occurred in World War II at the level of one
Corps per side.
The game package includes one disk (with the
game on one side and scenario data on the other); a
48-page book which includes the rules, examples of
play, and scenario design data; and two sets of
six-by-eight laminated cards with scenario information
and details of the various menus in the game. The
components are very well done; my only complaint
is with the cover art on the package. All I can say
about that is "Yuck!"
Well, let's put the album-style package away
(please!) and take a look at the game. Roger and
Ian have taken a great stride towards demolishing
two of the long cherished gripes about computer
wargames; that they lacked a realistic "point of
view" and that computer wargames could not hope
to compete with boardgames since the player could
not make changes to the basic system in a computer
game where he thought it appropriate.
More on the scenario design later, the "point of
view" question is really at the heart of this game.
You play a Corps commander about to face a com-

by Jay Selover

bat situation. Your Corps consists of up to three divisions, each of which contains up to four regiments. You also have several independent battalions
which you can attach to any of your divisions and
you have the word of your air force buddies that
they will be there when you need them. The units
which move and fight on the screen are actually the
component battalions of the regiments in your
Corps, but you can not actually touch them directly. You will be telling each division commander
what you want each of his regiments to accomplish
during a turn, but then you must sit back and
watch how your subordinate units decide to carry
out your orders. This game really has the proper
perspective of the role that you play in your army,
as frustrating as that can be when you watch one
key battalion move somewhere you didn't really
want them at all.
The System

Battlefront uses a scale of about one kilometer
per hex (this can vary with the scenarios), and each
turn is six hours (there are three daylight turns and
one night turn per day). And, of course the unit of
maneuver is the battalion. The battlefield can vary
with the scenario up to 39-by-28 hexes, scenarios
can be up to sixteen days long (seven is average for
the provided scenarios), and up to fourteen different unit types. All of this may seem a bit fuzzy,
but that is because the system can be adjusted to
alter so many of the basic parameters.
The four scenarios provided with the game give
an excellent indication of the diversity of the program. The first one covers the German airborne invasion of Crete. The second covers part of the action at Stalingrad. Actually, it covers the attempt
by two German Panzer divisions to drive through
the Russians and relieve the besieged Von Paulus in

the city. The third scenario takes you half way
around the world, to the small island of Saipan
where the Americans must land and take the island
stronghold from some pretty determined Japanese.
Finally, the last scenario is Bastogne; you guessed
it, General "Nuts" McCauliffe keeps the Germans
(hopefully) from capturing this critical road juncture during the Battle Of The Bulge. These scenarios appear to be selected as much as anything to
demonstrate the flexibility of the system to cover
everything from the frozen steppes of central Russia to the steamy tropical jungles of the Pacific.
The game itself is completely menu driven, and
the menu layouts do bear some striking similarities
to SSG's previous offerings. When you get down to
the play, though, one big difference becomes apparent. This is not a pseudo-real time game where
the action just goes along until you request an interrupt. This a game with real turns. Before each
turn, the players are given an opportunity to check
the situation, look at the current status of their
forces, and issue new orders for the upcoming turn.
After each player is finished, the computer takes
over and completes the turn, moving and executing
combat for all of the units.
The point of view of the player as Corps commander is rigidly adhered to in the limitations
placed on the types of orders that the player can
issue. Basically, you have the ability to assign objectives but not to get in and meddle with the tactical execution of the battle. During the "Orders
Phase", you can call up each of your divisions separately and assign a few items at the divisional
level. You can order a move by the divisional
headquarters, assign a portion of your limited air
support to that division, and you can assign any of
your independent battalions to that division for the
upcoming turn. Then, you can go in and look at the
status of each regiment in the division. The display

will show the condition and location of each battalion in the regiment, but you can not talk directly
to the battalions. Instead, you give a general order
to the regiment, and each of the battalions will
carry it out to the best of their abilities. Even the
allowable orders are very much in character. You
have four options but what the four options are
will depend on the contact status of the regiment.
A regiment which is not near any enemy units get
a very different set of choices from those that are
heavily engaged. The movement orders give a good
example of the perspective of the game. A regiment
which is given a movement order is then given an
objective. Objective hexes are pre-designated in the
scenario design and represent important landmarks
or goals of the historical combatants. Thus, you order a regiment to move to Bastogne, and then it is
up to the individual battalions to each select the
most efficient way to get there. Another example is
the "support" order; when you give this order to a
regiment, any battalions which are within two
hexes of an enemy will dig in and any uncontacted
battalions will move up to support their buddies.
But again, you have no direct control over how any
one of the battalions will move.
The Play
So, how does it feel to sit there, one step removed from the actual fighting and watch your
computerized minions try to execute your plans?
Pretty good, actually! The game can be extremely
frustrating, but it is the accurate portrayal of your
role as Corps commander that causes the frustration, not the game mechanics.
The game itself does take quite a while to get
used to. The documentation does not help much.
It's better than a lot of what we have seen in computer games, but it does not contain any of the
specifics that I like to see. The first seven pages of
the rulebook contain a "walk through" of the first
turn of the Saipan scenario, and the rest of the
rules pretty much explain the functions and capabilities of the various menus. After that, you are
pretty much on your own. Expect to lose a few
battles before you begin to figure out how to really
use your forces effectively. One big lesson to learn
real quick is that your units represent men, not
machines. Leaving a regiment on the line once it
gets really tired is the quickest way I've found to
get it ground into dust! Another good lesson is that
you don't just go and order assaults by every unit
that happens to be close to the enemy! There are
some real good orders like "probe", "prepare", and
"support", that can make all the difference between
a well orchestrated attack and a banzai charge. Oh,
and how about one more good lesson; learn the caContinued on pg. 50

The Atari Playfield

by Gregg Williams
As Monty Python's Mary, Queen of
Scots said, "I'm not dead yet." That's also
the status of the venerable Atari 800,
though I fear the end is near. It's been two
months since I wrote my last column, so
I've got a veritable deluge of games to talk
about. Here goes.
Super Boulder Dash
In 1984, Peter Liepa and Chris Gray of
First Star Software created (to my
knowledge) the first home computer video
game good enough to make it--unchanged--into a coin-operated video
game. The game play and graphic pyrotechnics of Boulder Dash (the Atari 800
version, of course) were so good that First
Star licensed it to some company for coinop use. I actually saw the coin-op version
once and the graphics were identical.
Boulder Dash was an instant classic on
the scale of Lode Runner; but, designed for
a machine with more horsepower (an Atari
vs. an Apple II), it was far more exciting:
fast scrolling playfield, scintillating diamonds, good sound effects, and a personable little character called Rockford, who
tapped his foot impatiently when he got
tired of waiting for you to make a move.
Boulder Dash had 16 caves and four
bonus caves, each of which could be played
at five skill levels. In each cave, Rockford
had to get a certain number of diamonds,
then get to an exit door before time ran
out. Easy? Are you kidding? There were
things that got in the way: boulders, fireflies, butterflies, enchanted walls, and
amoebas, each of which represented both a
danger and, sometimes, an opportunity.
Some caves were straight reflex games,
others were puzzles. For example, some
caves had no diamonds in them at all; the
solution is to drop a boulder on a butterfly, which caused it to explode and change
into diamonds. The caves were cleverly
designed, and they changed somewhat
from level to level, often necessitating different strategies. Unfortunately, the game
did not include a construction set, which
would have been easy to do and a lot of
fun.
In early 1986, Electronic Arts released
Super Boulder Dash, and I said, "Oboy, a
construction set!" Unfortunately, no--but
it's still a great buy. You get a two-sided
disk that contains the original Boulder
Dash on one side and 20 new screens on
the other. The graphics are still impressive, and the design is one of the best I've
ever seen. One suggestion: EA gives hints

on how td solve each screen; use them if
you need them, but try to do without
them first--one of the joys of this game is
discovering what works.
Atari 800 Buys
To make things even more exciting,
EA has reduced the list price of most of its
Atari 800 games, including Super Boulder
Dash, Archon, M.U.L.E., Pinball and Music Construction Sets, and Seven Cities of
Gold--all of these are classics and great

bargains. One place, Tevex (800-5541162), is selling them for $12 each. Software Discounters of America (800-2257638) usually has good prices as well).
Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800-4430100, x335) is closing out two fine games
at good prices. Cytron Masters, by Dan
Bunten (of M.U.L.E. and Seven Cities
fame), is a capture-the-flag combat game
that gives you simultaneous play in its
two-player mode. No turns on this game-you play as fast as you can move your
joystick, and it's a lot of fun! It's selling
for $19.98. Fortress, though written in
BASIC, is still worth it. It's a simple game,
distantly related to Go and Othello, but
it's hard to master. One very interesting
point is that true AI (artificial intelligence) algorithms in the computer opponents make them get better the more they
play--this is very spooky to watch, but it
does happen. It's selling for $17.48, and
SSI claims a 14-day money-back guarantee--so you should give these games a try.
Short ST Reviews
I apologize for the lack of space for ST
reviews. Pretty soon, this column will be

nothing but ST reviews, though, so please
be patient. Here are some of the games I've
been looking at.
Rogue, from Epyx, is a randomized 26level dungeon game, essentially a soupedup version of the game that's been on
minicomputers for years. The graphics are
gorgeous (love that ST color monitor!),
and the gameplay is okay but repetitious
after a while; also, the GEM window interface gets in the way from time to time.
Be prepared to get killed dozens of times
before you figure out how to stay alive.
The Pawn, from Rainbird, is an fantasy adventure game with highly detailed
pictures attached to some (but not all)
locations. It had occasional grammatical
errors. The parser got confused several
times in some rather inexcusable ways.
Different locations have the same name,
and the program does a lengthy access for
the graphic image, even if you are playing
the game in text-only mode (this makes
moving across the map slow and tedious).
I also found the scenario indistinguishable
from those of countless other fantasy adventures.
The Activision Little Computer People Discovery Kit is an odd entertainment-mostly for children. When you boot the
disk, the program shows you a 3-story
house that is inhabited by a little video
man and his dog. He writes you letters,
plays simple games, watches TV, builds a
fire, even (discretely) goes to the bathroom. You have to feed your LCP (as he's
called) occasionally, or he turns green (no,
he never dies--I tried). It's cute and well
done, but the genre really has more potential than is used here, and I hope someone "fleshes out" the idea someday.
For those of you who like golf, Accolade's Mean 18 is really well done. It's a
golf game that simulates three famous
courses, St. Andrews, Augusta, and Pebble
Beach, and even lets you design your own.
It has tons of options and simulates both
the hitting and the trajectory of the ball
well.
Next Month
Unfortunately, I've had to save the
best ST game for next month: Activision's
Hacker II, by Steve Cartwright. It's stunning visually, and the plot is even better
than the original: you remotely control
three robots smuggled into an enemy office
building, and you have to find and escape
with a secret document. It looks very good,
but I'll have more details next month.
Until then, remember--things always take
longer than they take.

I OVER THERE

by Leslie B. Bunder
Hello and welcome to another edition
of 'Over There'. As is usual, I've got a
good selection of the latest news, views
and gossip coming out of England, as well
as competitions which you can enter.
Competition
Here we go again, it's competition
time!! Up for grabs this issue is the chance
to win a copy of the latest game from CRL
called Cyborg. This game is good looking

plays real mean which makes it a real
challenge. I have five copies of the cassette
version for the C-64/128 to give away. All
you have to do it think up something that
is very funny about what the letters CRL
stand for, the funniest suggestions win a
copy of the game.
Address your entries to 'CRL Competition' at the address given at the end of
this article. Good luck.
News... Views... Gossip
To celebrate the fact that 'Star Trek'
is 20 years old, Beyond Software of England are all set t release a computer
strategy game based on the TV series. This
project is one of the largest ever undertaken by an English software house. Beyond Software is well known for its excellent strategy games such as 'Lords of Midnight' and 'Shadowfire'. Star Trek is being
designed by Mike Singleton (who wrote
'Lords of Midnight') and is being programmed by some ex-members of Denton
Designs who wrote 'Shadowfire'. The game
will incorporate speech synthesis. It will be
released initially for the C-64/128, Atari
ST, Spectrum, and Amstrad. Versions for
other micros such as the Amiga and Apple
are being considered.
The mystery surrounding the computer
game version of The Hunt For Red October has been solved. Argus Press Software
will be bringing out a computer version
around Christmas time. The game will be a
submarine simulation/strategy game.
Commented Peter Holme of Argus: "We
are very pleased to have the computer
rights and we plan something very special
for its release."
Also set for release from Argus, though
not yet confirmed, is the home computer

version of the arcade game Pac Land.
Talking of arcade games, Gauntlet is set for
release from U.S. Gold for the C-64, Amstrad and Spectrum.
An official computer version of Trivial
Pursuit is all set for release from Domark.
Versions for the C-64, 8 bit Atari, Amstrad and Spectrum will be released.
Dragon's Lair, the hit arcade game of a
couple years ago, has now been converted
to run on home computers by Software
Projects. It will run on the C-64, Amstrad
and Spectrum.
Remember the excellent Way To The
Exploding First from Melbourne House?
Well, the sequel, entitled Fist 2, is set for
release shortly and would appear to be
quite stunning. There will be over 100
screens of continuous scrolling and you can
control your warrior with over 20 joystick
generated moves (C-64, Amstrad, Spectrum).
Mastertronic, the budget software
house, is bringing out a computer version
of Flash Gordon for the C64/128. It
sounds quite interesting. Be on the lookout
for some of the newer budget titles from
Mastertronic; they are quite stunning (e.g.
Kik Street 128 and Finders Keepers).
Keep Those Letters Coming
It's really nice to receive letters from
you folks out there in the States. If you
wish to write me about any aspect of the
English Gaming World, please feel free.
Write to: Leslie B. Bunder, 50 Riverside
Close, Cuckoo Ave., Hanwell, London W7
1BY, England. If you wish to receive a
personal reply be sure to enclose two international reply coupons. I look forward
to hearing from you.

-

-

-

_

AMIGA PREFERENCES

by Roy Wagner
More Of The Same, But Better
Archon II: Adept from EA is a worthy
sequel to it's excellent predecessor Archon.
Where Archon was a strategic and tactical
struggle between Light and Darkness,
Adept is a conflict between Order and
Chaos. The powers of battle are conducted
by four Adepts. Each Adept has available
a full range of spells (Summon, Heal,
Weaken, Imprison, Release, Banish, and
Apocalypse).
As the game begins, it is four against
four in a "world" with five distinct elements (Earth, Water, Air, Fire and Void).
Each element affects the conditions of
combat. Each Adept is able to summon
four different Elementals or four different
Demons to face its enemy in the field of
battle. The Adepts themselves may also
enter battle. Combat is always one-onone. The object of the game is for one side
to occupy six power points, four of which
change location from turn to turn.
Archon and Adept are similar in some
respects to chess, but go beyond it with
each pieces capture resulting in an
"arcade" like battle on a separate screen.
For those not much into this latter aspect
of the game, you can select a "cyborg" op-

tion in which the computer resolves the
individual battle and you can just concentrate on strategic moves. (If you feel
like a little arcade action, you can briefly
override and take control of an individual
battle.)
Both games are controlled with a joystick in Port #2 for one player against the
computer. With two players, a joystick
must be used in Port #1. There is no option to use a mouse. There are three levels
of player handicapping which make this
game much easier to play against the computer or with an adult playing a child.
Both of these games look very complex
when one first looks at them, due in most
part to the number of various different
player pieces involved. After a few games,
these come to be better understood and
one can concentrate more strategy, which
is the major element of each game. These
games on the Amiga are well done and enhanced somewhat from earlier versions for
other machines. They don't take advantage of using menus or mouse control. If
you are interested in a challenging strategy game, I recommended both Archon
and Adept.

is a disappointing omission. Unless you
remember or write down previous scores,
each new game is just that, a NEW game.
The challenge of trying to BEAT a previous score is missing without the vanity
board. It would have been better to leave
out the two player option in lieu of the
scoreboard.
Also since you can "ONLY" play this
game and not run anything else on your
Amiga, the startup sequence is rather
awkward. Rather than going directly into
the game, you must click on two icons before things get started. Once a game has
been started there is no way to restart the
the game.

Go Ahead - Lose Your Marbles!!!
Marble Madness from EA gives you an
extremely popular arcade game for your
Amiga. This game hit the arcades in the
Spring of 1985 and became a favorite of
many of the software artists at Electronic
Arts. Not content to see their quarters disappear so quickly and knowing the capabilities of the home computer, especially
the Amiga, the challenge was there to
equal it. The contract was signed for the
rights to do the official version of the arcade game. The challenge was met and it
resulted in a game the equal in thrills and
action to the original.
The game takes place in a three dimensional tiled world of sloping surfaces
with uphills, obstructions and other moving things to block your movement of a
marble through a GOAL at each level.
Each of the six levels become more challenging. Each has its own musical theme in
stereo and distinct "personality".
The graphics and action are outstanding. The game play is great. One or
two players can "run" the course at the
same time. A mouse, joystick, or two types
of trackballs can be used by either player.
The game action is somewhat slower with
two players, but not that bad. There are
eight levels of difficulty, though these seem
to only vary the amount of time that one
has to complete the six levels. The marble
can even be given an extra burst of speed
by pressing the button on the controlling
device.
This games nearly fills the 880K Amiga
disk. Probably due to there being no remaining space, the game does not save the
"top" scores. For a game of this type, that

After several months playing various
games on the Amiga, I went into a commercial game arcade. What surprised me
the most was that the same "great" games
of a year ago did not look anywhere near
as impressive. I went in particular to take
a look at Marble Madness and that too
was a lesser match for the version on the
Amiga. The graphics were nearly identical
in resolution and quality, but the
"physical" action of the marbles and various other elements of the game appeared
more realistic on the the Amiga version.
For arcade action, Marble Madness is
highly recommended.
Another Form Of Madness
Mind Walker from Commodore (but
done by Synapse), is true madness of the
ultimate form. This is game is the most
challenging game currently available. It
more fully uses the features of the Amiga
than any other game. In many respects it
is a bizarre cross between Adept and Marble Madness. It is strategy, it is arcade and
it is MADNESS.
You are a physics professor that has
gone mad from years of detailed work. You
are lost in your own internal world of your
mind. Your personality is a four way split
of a Human, Wizard, Spriggan, and Water
Nymph. In these four forms you must
wander in the Mind, the Brain and the

Subconscious in order to find and piece together your Sanity.
You begin in the Mind. Your goal is to
trace a path of coherent thought from one
crystalized thought to a flashing square.
This path can only be traced using a single
being of your personality over each type of
terrain particular to that body form. When
you change terrain, you must change body
form. This is done by finding a "Pyramid"
under which you cycle through each body
form. Once you have completed a path you
must find a square with a "Tube" on it, to
get you to the next level. But this is not at
all easy to complete. There are several obstacles to interfere with your success.
Throughout the area of the mind are "bad
thoughts" that attack you, if you do not
escape their domain or destroy them with
your "Fractal Ray". Also there are certain
screens that are "Booby-Trapped" and
only good thoughts can help you escape
their hold on you.
The mind is a vast three dimensional
area of multiple levels and terrains. Assisting your movement is a large map of
your current and surrounding area. Even
more mind can be displayed, if necessary.
This "map" screen will show you the locations of thought crystals, pyramids, tubes,
and your path. It also displays the domains of each body form.
Once you have a path of coherent
thought, an area of complete thought is
created. This "unlocks" the tubes and the
passage to your Brain. Once in a tube, you
fall down a long passageway with transparent green doorways to the physical
brain floating towards you. You must
catch one of these doors between your two
hands which are visible on the screen using
your joystick. Strangely, the joystick
movements seem physically opposite your
logical expectations. Beyond the green
door is your brain, a maze of static neurons emitting sparks of synaptic impulses
and "vicious viruses" that attack your
body form and drain your strength.
Your goal in the brain is to find the
container of your "Shards of Sanity".
There is no visible map here, but rather
the sound of pounding and an increase in
temperature as you near your goal. Once
you have the container of shards you must
return to the entry tube so that you may
escape to the Subconscious, the final level.
You may defend yourself against virus attacks with a thought reflector that rotates
around your body form. The neurons are
also dangerous when firing, but often you
may be forced to go through them as they
often grow around the escape tube.
In your Subconscious, the seven most
recent shards of sanity are displayed. You
must place these correctly into an area
that contains forty-two locations. You use
the mouse to place the shards. Once all are
correctly placed you return to the Mind
once again to continue your quest to complete your sanity.

You may only return to the mind when
you have correctly places ALL seven
shards. This is rather difficult at first,
when there are forty-two possible locations
for each shard. But assistance is available
as Uncle Sigmund is present in the subconscious. He will show you where a shard
goes, at a cost of game points.
If not apparent from the discussion of
this game so far, This game is very complex, but it's presentation is outstanding.
The "music" and sounds of the game are
excellent. You are missing a lot if you do
not hook this game up to an external
stereo system. The graphics are very good.
I only wish that the mind map were displayed quicker since I found that I needed
to switch screens between the mind and
map quite frequently. The manual for this
game is extremely well written and colorfully illustrated.
The games has all the "necessary" options that I like to see in a game. It has
three preset games wherein the terrain of
the mind and the brain are always the
same. And there is also the option to randomly generate a new game. You may vary
the difficulty of any game. You may save
eight games (an absolute necessary in this

game). Games are saved only by a letter id
(A-H). I much prefer the option to "name"
or identify my saves. Also a FAME screen
displays the top twenty scores with a three
initial identifier. You may select not to put
your score on the list also. This game is
highly recommended as an very sophisticated arcade type game.
Recommendations
With the gift giving season nearly
here, I offer the following to be worthwhile
presents:
Action Arcade:
MARBLE MADNESS (EA)
Best Implementation:
MIND WALKER (COMMODORE/SYNAPSE)
Interactive Fiction:
Any Interactive Fiction from INFOCOM
Sports Simulation:
MEAN 18 (ACCOLADE)
Combat Simulation:
ARCTIC FOX (EA)
Best Simulation:
FLIGHT SIMULATOR/JET (subLOGIC)
Home Utility:
DELUXE PRINT (EA)

SCORPION'S TALE

A Mind Forever Voyaging
As Told By Scorpia
Ah, November! My favorite month!
Bare trees, cold winds, long dark nights;
the perfect time of year to get cozy with a
warm computer and some good adventure
games. But don't let me keep you here by
the door...step in, settle down by the fireplace, and Fred will pour you something to
take the chill off. Hmmm. That vacation
trip to London didn't seem to do you
much good. Had you going round in circles, eh? Well, it doesn't matter. I mean,
you didn't really think you were an actual
person, did you? Surprise!
A surprise indeed, to find that you are,
in fact, a computer simulation and not a
real person. Your entire life has been lived
out, not in the physical world, but within
the circuitry of a computer system. PRISM
- Perry Sim - the first truly successful experiment in artificial intelligence.
And successful not a moment too soon.
The world is in bad shape, and getting
worse by the minute. To deal with this sad
state of affairs, a Plan has been proposed,

a Plan that calls for bold and decisive actions. It sounds good but: will it work? No
one knows. Those who back the Plan are
sure it's the solution, still there are some
who aren't quite sure.
So, Perry Sim gets a job. A computer
simulation of the world ten years hence
will be created, based on putting the Plan
in action. Perry's task is to enter that simulation, and report on the results. Very
simple.
Of course, it isn't going to be quite so
simple as all that. Yet, A Mind Forever
Voyaging (AMFV) is unlike any other Infocom adventure. There are hardly any
puzzles to solve until almost the very end
of the game. No treasures to gather, no
bottomless chasms to cross, no locked

doors to open. More than anything else,
AMFV is an electronic novel, in which
you, as Perry Sim, observe the Plan's results as they unfold through the years.
However, don't get the idea that you
just sit there and watch, although you'll
be doing a lot of that. Perry DOES have
an assignment, after all, and there are
certain things he must record. Finding a
few of the places on the list may take
awhile, even with the cute map that comes
with the game. It doesn't show you everything, so some exploring is necessary.
Fortunately, there are no mazes in the
game (yay!), so mapping is quite straightforward.
And there are some other things Perry
must be familiar with: the various connections he has, called Modes. Communications Mode, for instance, allows him to
view various areas of the PRISM Project
installation, such as the rooftop, the
maintenance core, and Dr. Perelman's office, among others, as well as giving him
access to the World News Network.
Interface Mode lets Perry interact with
some of the minor computers that control
things such as the life support systems of
the installation, the traffic in the real
world, and the computer that runs the
simulations he will enter.
In Library Mode, Perry has access to a
number of interesting files including data
on the Plan. There is also a Sleep Mode
(yes, even computers, it seems, need rest
from time to time!). To get through the
game successfully, it is necessary for Perry
to know about all of these things and how
to work with them. There is plenty of time
between simulations, so use it wisely.
Keep in mind also that Perry lives in
this world. It's the world he grew up in,
back when he thought he was a human
being. He has a family here, as well as a
job (fortunately, his job is being a writer,
so he has all this free time to run around
the city making recordings). Rockvil is a
perfect simulation of reality. What happens inside the computer can also happen
outside, where Rockvil actually exists.
This is what makes the simulations of the
future so shattering.
Part 1 is pretty simple and straightforward. Perry enters the 10 year simulation, records everything on his list, and
then "returns" with his buffer full of data.
Keep in mind that the buffer has a limit,
so don't run around with the recorder going all the time. Just use it where you have
to and turn it off in between. If you don't
get everything the first visit, you'll be sent
back to record anything you missed.
Well, the world ten years up the line
looks pretty good, huh? Dr. Perelman and
his associates are certainly excited over the

results. However, this also leaves you with
nothing much to do at the moment. Boredom strikes. What's a sentient computer
to do? Snoop around, of course. Take a
peek at the Simulation Controller. Oho!
It's been quietly chugging away on its
own, and now has a 20 year simulation
ready.
This is Part 2, covering simulations for
20-50 years ahead. It is much like Part 1,
in that you are still walking around observing the changes through the years and
making recordings of what you see and experience. However, you will quickly notice
that the further ahead in time you go, the
nastier the world becomes. There are many
changes, none for the better, and several
items on the old list aren't available any
longer. The Plan is turning out to be a lot
worse than anyone expected.
Which brings up the major problem of
the game. The people backing the Plan,
especially Senator Ryder, claim that
Perry's recordings are fakes. They aren't
going to let anything stop them now. Especially not "simulated data" from a
make-believe person.
And so we come to Part 3. At last,
Perry gets a chance to show he can do
more than just watch, although again,
that too is important. Things get off to an
unpleasant start when the PRISM installation is taken over by the National Guard
(one guess who's behind that). Then Ryder
storms into Perelman's office, delivers a
vitriolic diatribe (charming fellow), and
stomps out again, with Perelman dragged
along by the soldiers. Hooboy!
If I were you, I'd be feeling real nervous right about now. Ryder is certainly
up to something, and whatever it is, it's
nothing good. If you wait too long, Perry
Sim will just be history. Better keep an
eye out around the installation. You never
know who you might see! And don't forget
about Interface Mode..there ARE some
things you can fiddle with yourself.

Ok, you've managed to overcome this
threat, but you can't keep this up forever.
Somehow, you must put an end to Ryder
and his schemes once and for all. Now, if
you could prove to everyone what Ryder is
really like, show his true colors to the
world, that would do the job. Better
hurry, though, because time is running
out.
Whew! So much for Ryder and his
grubby Plan. The world will be a much
better place without it. And now comes
the reward. Oh yes, it isn't over yet! So
many times, a game ends with a brief
"Congratulations, you saved the universe.
Rah rah" message, sort of taking the edge
off your achievements. After all the hard
work you put into finishing an adventure,
you want something a little snazzier, some
real recognition for your efforts.
Well, while there may not have been
too many puzzles to solve here, you really
have saved the world from a nightmarish
future. And that accomplishment merits
something very special. Computers, after
all, are people, too. You've just proved
that.
So, what is this terrific endgame? Ah,
you'll just have to play the adventure
through to find out! But, believe me, it's
well worth it! Perry Sim, ever and always,
a mind forever voyaging.....
I see by the invisible clock on the wall
it's that time again. Before we close the
doors, tho, a special hint for all you Bard's
Tale players out there. From my mail, it
seems that a lot of folks are having some
problems getting into Mangar's Tower.
They get the Onyx Key from Kylearan, go
dashing madly off to Mangar's gate....and
they STILL can't get in! Well friends, that
Onyx Key is only for Mangar's front door,
it's NOT the key to the gates! The only
way past that gate (for now, you may find
another later) is to pay a visit to the sewers, level 3. And remember, there are no
big neon signs that say "Mangar lives
here".
That about does it for this issue. As
always, if you or any of your IMF force
are....err...oops!...AHEM...as always, if you
need help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways: On
Delphi: visit the GameSIG (found under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
stop in at the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On the
Source: send SMAIL to ST1030. By U.S.
mail (remember to enclose a self-addressed
stamped envelope if you live in the United
States!):
Scorpia P.O. Box 338 Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Macintosh Window (cont.)

Continued from pg. 15
was capable of animation this good.
Next comes the sound, which is Silicon
Beach's best effort yet--and that's saying
a lot. Eric Zocher, VP of Silicon Beach and
their sound specialist, may know more
about Macintosh sound than anyone else
alive--including the Macintosh designers-and he's gone all-out to make this his
best work yet. The sound effects for Dark
Castle were actually recorded in a studio
using the talents of the person who was
the voice behind Fred Flintstone, and
they're marvelous.
And finally, Dark Castle is filled with
lots of little touches that show it's one of
the first steps toward what Silicon Beach
likes to call "interactive cartoons." When
your on-screen character falls a little too
far, he will spin around in a circle (with
stars above him), then shake his head as if
he's groggy. When he walks off the edge of
a cliff, he doesn't immediately fall; first, he
looks down and sees that there's no ground
below him, then falls, a la Wile E. Coyote.
Perfect!
And as icing on the cake, Silicon Beach
has decided not to copy-protect Dark
Castle. Marketing an 800K game presented
a problem: should they distribute it on one
800K disk (convenient for Mac Plus own-

but making it impossible for old Macintosh owners to use), or distribute it on
two 400K disks (making life great for old
Macintosh owners, but requiring disk
swaps for Mac Plus owners with no external drive)? In the end, they just decided to
trust people and let them make their own
working copy of the game onto whatever
size of disk they like. Hurrah for common
sense!
ers,

Corrections And Acknowledgements
In my August review of Flight Simulator, I implied that the only possible reason for Sublogic to replace the Mac's standard menu-handling software was to ease
the translation of FS between different
computers. Although that is certainly a
valid possibility, it has been pointed out to
me that another reason they might have
written their own menu software is that
the Mac's takes control of the machine:
virtually nothing else can take place while
a menu is being held down. As you may
know, flying continues in FS even while a
menu is in use. I stand corrected--but I
still don't know why they did it. Do you?
If so, send your answer to: Why Did They
Do It?, 10 Downing Street, London, England.

My other correction is to my September/October review of Race Car Simulator.
In it, I listed four pre-designed tracks that
I said came on the disk with RCS. As Dom
DeLuise said in Blazing Saddles, "Wrong!"
The tracks I listed actually come in the
form of screen dumps in the manual. The
tracks on disk are completely different.
And for acknowledgements, I'd like to
thank Ezra Shapiro, columnist for Byte
magazine, for his insights into how Surgeon might be used in the medical field.
I'd like to especially thank David Whiteman, a senior-year medical student at the
University of California at San Diego, for
his excellent and extensive critique of Surgeon's accuracy.
Keeping In Touch

I encourage your comments--and
thank those readers who have already
written for their suggestions. You can help
me make this column as good as it can be
by writing to me at: 4568 Georgia St. #2,
San Diego CA 92116. Or you can reach me
at the following electronic addresses:
MCI Mail: fboosman
BIX: frankb
Until next month, keep playing those
games!

by Bill Oxner

Name:
Chessmaster 2000
System:
Most
Price:
$39.95
Publisher: Software Country
9713 Santa Monica Blvd. #204
Beverly Hills, CA 90210

The King is dead. Long live the King! The
crown has been passed in the world of personal
computer chess programs. It happened in Mobile,
Alabama, in July of this year. Chessmaster 2000
(C2000) won the Personal Computer class of the
United States Open Computer Chess Championship.
The competition, sponsored by the United States
Chess Federation, pitted 18 programs in a threeday, round-robin style tournament. C2000 emerged
the winner, defeating programs running on super
computers, dedicated chess-playing machines and
PC programs from the US, Europe and Asia. It
became the only off-the-shelf program to ever win
this event.
Chess addicts may be satisfied knowing only the
raw power of the program, yet C2000 has much
more to offer. It begins with a slick, professional
package. Included is an excellent booklet containing
a brief introduction to chess rules, a history of the
game, a library of 100 classic games and a selection
of chess problems. The 100 games are a nice touch.
The games are stored on the program disk and can
be replayed (move by move) and analyzed. The
quality of the documentation is first-class.
C2000 is a menu-driven program. There are almost too many options to list in a short review. In
the Playing the Game Menu you can select as your
opponent C2000, another human or autoplay. Next
is the level of play. There are 12 levels, ranging
from 60 moves in 5 minutes to 40 moves in 6000
minutes. The latter is recommended only for
play-by-mail games unless your boredom threshold is
extremely high. The more time that C2000 is permitted, the more moves ahead (plys) it will plan.
There is a further option allowed (Easy Mode)
where C2000 will "think" while it waits for you to
move. This option alone sets it apart from most
computer chess programs. The next option allows
you to set the style of C2000's play. It can be set to

play Normal (mixes best and random moves), Coffeehouse (more random) or Best (always best
moves). If you find you are losing too often you
can "brain-damage" the program by setting it for
Coffeehouse.
C2000 has perhaps the largest "opening book" of
any PC chess program, a claimed 71,000 moves.
Most classic openings, such as the Ruy Lopez, seem
to go about seven moves deep before the book is
exhausted. The book can be set On or Off.
You may choose to play the white or black
pieces and can switch back and forth during play.
If you are bored you can force C2000 to move instantly rather than wait for it to complete its
thinking. If you make a mistake or want to analyze
a line of play you can delete as many moves (both
sides) as you wish. Moves deleted can also be recalled.
Screen options are equally good. The board can
be displayed in 2 or 3 dimensional representation.
Screen colors may be changed. The time clock and
move display are optional. You can rotate the board
(90 or 180 degrees) for a different perspective. You
can display captured pieces, list all moves made so
far, or have C2000 display what moves and countermoves it is thinking about. You can "ask" C2000
for a hint and it will suggest what it considers your
strongest move. Teaching mode will display all
possible moves for a chosen piece. Sound is optional. This feature allows you to leave the computer and still be alerted when C2000 has made its
move, yet another example of the excellent quality
built into the program. Finally, you can ask C2000
to display the line of play that it is predicting
(when it made its last move), whether it thinks it is
ahead or behind and how many plys it searched
before making that move. These are all features
that add an extra dimension to playing the game
and cannot be found in such numbers in any other
PC chess program.
The game can be used to solve chess problems or

analyze lines of play. You can set up the board
piece by piece, make moves and then instantly return to the original situation. You can save a current game to disk at any time and any number of
games can be stored. Classic games can also be
loaded and replayed. Moves can also be sent to a
printer.
The analysis options are very detailed. You can
play a game, store it to disk and then ask C2000 to
analyze every move for one or both sides. It will
show what it feels was the strongest move and give
a "score". The score represents C2000's analysis of
the overall game situation at that time using piece
counts and positions. Analysis can be displayed on
the screen, sent to a printer or stored in a disk file
that can be read by any word processing program.
It should be obvious by now but C2000 also
handles the more mundane requirements of a good
chess program. Castling, capturing pawns en passant
and pawn promotion.
In addition to technical details and options,
computer games also have a subjective "feel". C2000
has a professional quality from boot-up to mate.
The pre-game menus are clearly labeled and easy to
utilize. The graphics are superior. During many
hours of play (IBM version) not a single bug was

detected. The developers claim three years of effort
went into creating C2000 and the final product
demonstrates that attention to detail.
Your reviewer is a good chess player. I found
that I could hold my own and defeat the program
up to about level four. In all honesty I feel the
program would probably beat me consistently at
higher levels. The program is very "solid" in its
play, it simply doesn't make errors. In contrast to
other chess programs it is also very alert on defense. Victories, even at level two, were hardfought contests that went 50 or 60 moves. It seems
to have a bit more "imagination" than other programs, although the day is still far off when a
computer program will sacrifice a queen (as Bobby
Fischer did) in order to mate in ten moves. One
great feature of the program is that it will resign
when it sees a hopeless position, it does not force
you to grind out an inevitable win.
I wish I could find something negative to include in this review but I can't. Even the price
($39.95 for IBM) represents a good value. Chessmaster 2000 is the finest chess program I have ever
encountered. It is powerful, flexible and fun to
play. I feel it will be a standard for years to come.
It gets my absolutely highest recommendation.

ROMMEL
BATTLES FOR TOBRUK
Title:
Rommel: Battles For Tobruk
System:
Atari, Apple, C-64
Price:
$40.00
Designer:
Frank Chadwick
Publisher: Game Designer's Workshop
P.O. Box 1646
Bloomington, IL 61702

by M. Evan Brooks (c) 1986
Rommel is GDW's latest release in the computer
wargaming market. The simulation covers the four
major battles for Tobruk (Brevity, Battleaxe,
Crusader and Gazala). The computer permits one to
play either British or Axis or utilize a two-player
option. Unfortunately, the computer does not
normally play itself (this can be a valuable learning
lesson); however, by timely saves of the game and
resetting the options, the computer can be forced to
play itself, although the mechanics thereof are
somewhat clumsy.
The designer, Frank Chadwick, is a boardgame
designer of repute. His previous design efforts are
among the best in the boardgame field, e.g. A
House Divided, Operation Crusader, Fall Of
Tobruk, 8th Army.
Rommel is extremely detailed, with options
available of fatigue, supply, limited visibility and
air strikes. One may choose how many of these
options to utilize; each adds realism to the
simulation, but at a cost of playability. The basic
problem is that a game may be very detailed and
still playable; however, Rommel is rarely playable,
and with the multitude of wargame designs
available, this reviewer does not think that Rommel
will receive a favorable reception.
The graphics are primitive, and not state-ofthe-art. The game was first shown in an early
design stage at Origins '85 (the National Wargaming
Convention). Even then, this reviewer had
reservations about the graphic representation. Four

strategic maps are available (German positions,
British positions, both positions and terrain). The
tactical map shows only a portion of the playing
area, and it is here that orders are inputted. The
tactical map may be scrolled by joystick or
keyboard; however, an unpleasant "flicker" effect is
created and scrolling is limited to vertical and
diagonal, not horizontal. GDW claims that this is
because Rommel is one of the few computer
simulations to use a true hexgrid, but the overall
effect can be tedious. Turn resolution is
accomplished on the strategic map; both movement
and combat occur by amorphous pixels moving and
having combat. This review may be saved, with a
full game's saves becoming a virtual docu-drama.
While this is a nice touch, the basic primitiveness
of such resolution is questionable.
Even more important is the computer artificial
intelligence. Depending upon the degree of
complexity and options chosen, the computer may
take anywhere from 3-15 minutes in order to
decide how to act. This does NOT include
resolution, but merely the computer deciding upon
its strategy. As the programmer points out, in a
two-player version, this is not a handicap. But, the
vast majority of wargame simulations are played
solitaire. Given that, the computer response time is
totally inadequate.
Most of the time is spent with the artificial
intelligence determining the front line. The
programmer, Mark Miller, stated that Rommel takes
a fresh look at the situation each turn. The program

does not use a decision-tree branching analysis.
This reviewer is not really certain of the advantages
in Rommel's approach; suffice it to say that the
time delay outweighs any increase in realism.
The programmer noted that Rommel was
composed of 38,000 source lines and 13,000 data
lines. This is an extremely long program, using
virtually both sides of the Atari disk version (for
comparison, Microprose's Kennedy Approach is c.
17,000 lines in its entirety). Thus, there is a lot of
information contained in Rommel; the flaw is that
most gamers will not have the patience to dig it
out.
The documentation is voluminous. However,
there are two omissions: (1) player hints are brief,
at best and (2) a bibliography is lacking. Mr.
Chadwick has stated that the sources mainly used in
developing the game were the official German and
Australian histories as well as information he had
gleaned from many prior design efforts in the
boardgaming field. The map insert is extremely
detailed and reminiscent of board wargames.
Although GDW denies it, Rommel has the
appearance of a board wargame adapted for the
computer as an afterthought, and this appears to be
Rommel's primary failure.

Fatigue and visibility options add increased
realism. The supply option is among the most
detailed ever in a computer simulation, as are the
air strikes. Supply can be traced from each corps
HQ to its subordinate units; in the longer scenarios,
this will drive one's strategy. This is correct -- the
Desert War was a conflict of logistics; long periods
of relative inactivity except for logistics acquisition
were followed by short intensive combat which
ended as the logistics chain became overextended.
Rommel does an excellent job of recreating this
aspect of the war.
Just as important are the Corps Tables. These
portray enemy/friendly status. The most interesting
facet of Rommel's limited visibility is that the
enemy Corps Table is, by necessity, incomplete; in
effect, it becomes the player's G2 (intelligence and
enemy order of battle). Only those enemy units
adjacent to or previously in contact with one's
forces will be revealed, and much of the
information shown may be dangerously out of date.
But such is the life of the commander!
Air strikes simulate tactical bombing raids. One
must determine sorties and target prioritization,
while keeping range data and changing battlefield
conditions in mind. Bombing raids mistimed are

worse than useless; they can cause friendly
casualties or even support an enemy counterattack.
However, their proper use may well retrieve an
otherwise doomed position.
Victory conditions are similar for each scenario.
Generally, control of key terrain (especially
Tobruk) coupled with a favorable combat kill ratio
determine the victor. The German player must
realize that Tobruk may often be unattainable; in
that case, his tactics will be limited to forcing large
British casualties. Similarly, the British player must
examine the victory conditions and avoid the
historical mistake of reacting piece-meal. Coherent
strategic plans coupled with tactical expertise are
the keys to victory.
Rommel permits multi-stacking in hexes. This
will allow a proper `schwerpunkt deployment as
well as maximum defensive positions. However, the
player must carefully examine the hex to insure
that he is aware of all units therein. Also, unless
one is careful, horrendous traffic jams may be
created that delay tactical implementation.
Overall, Rommel is an extremely detailed
simulation. But the detail clutters playability to an
unconscionable degree so that Rommel becomes an
exercise in frustration. The designer and
programmer were very helpful and cooperative in
answering any questions this reviewer had. Their
assistance is deeply appreciated, and this reviewer
wishes that this review would be able to repay
them in kind. But Rommel's flaws will doom it to
the back of most gamer's shelves.
GDW's previous computer simulation,
Chickamauga, was favorably reviewed by Computer
Gaming World (Jun-Jul 85). That review noted
Chickamauga's success as being two-fold: physical
implementation coupled with the design modelling
the battle. Not all reviewers concur, and this
reviewer feels that Rommel fails for the same
reasons as Chickamauga, only more so. Physical
implementation and user friendliness are
inadequate; these failures are of a sufficient
magnitude to deter all but the most hardy from
delving into the game.
This is a shame; it is apparent that much design
time and effort went into Rommel. More was
attempted than in most simulations. But the lack of
response time by the artificial intelligence coupled
with the graphics cannot save Rommel from itself.
Undocumented feature: Rommel has a feature
not mentioned in the documentation, which may
prove educational for the user. At any point one is
in the option screen, pressing the "Shift-R" keys
will allow the player to review the computer's move
and modify it as one wishes (the programmer calls
it the "ultimate cheat" key). Once this option is
selected, it may not be turned off..

BRONZE
DRAGON

Name:
Bronze Dragon
System:
Apple II family
1-5
#Players:
Designers: Dan Schnake
Adam West
Publisher: Commonwealth Software
821 S. State Avenue
Indianapolis, IN 46227

by Johnny Wilson

Sir Plene Bonum swaggered into the dark tavern.
His practiced eye recognized eight potential enemies and his tactical intuition moved him to a position where his back was to no man. He hoped,
anyway, that the giggling waitress who was gathering two tankards of ale for Captain Brawney of the
local guard wouldn't try any stealthy maneuvers
with daggers. He cast a wary eye toward the very
old wizard who seemed to stagger, almost reel with
fatigue down the stairway and hoped that the old
geezer wouldn't zap him with a "Shatterglass" spell
once he got up the nerve to approach him for information. A mesmerizing bosom hypnotized him
for a moment as a voluptuous blonde waitress
stepped up to the bar beside him. "Excuse me," he
tried an uninspiring conversational gambit, "I'm
new in town and I was wondering if you could tell
me about the Parchment of Power."
The goddess in waitress garb turned sad eyes
toward Sir Bonum and whispered, "Don't fight the
zombies unless you must." The waitress of wonder
glided away in order to serve the town blacksmith.
The blacksmith had obviously overheard the knight
errant's query because he offered the unsolicited
information that those zombies were tough. Yet, the
most interesting news came in a loud, authoritative
voice from Captain Brawney, "The stupid paper
won't even hold together. It ain't worth it, nohow!"
Such are the clues, red herrings and encounters
that one is able to gain in the Dragon Village Pub,
even before a party gets ready to embark upon an
adventure in Bronze Dragon (BD). BD is a new release in the fantasy genre which looks visually like
an offspring of the ubiquitous Eamon adventures
(it's a text game); plays swiftly by means of a menu
similar to the commands in Phantasie (no parser
problems); entails character generation evolved
from a Wizardry type system; and offers more plot
lines than any other game in its genre. The raison
d'etre for BD rests in the detailed background of
the campaign (with 13 plots to choose from), the
ability to personalize characters by means of acquiring artifacts which really affect events rather
than simply adding to booty, and the awareness that
each character's actions have significance (it's possible for one's alignment to change for better or

worse). BD has enough opportunities for "hack and
slay" gaming without being totally dependent upon
such a strategy. Indeed, there are "good" monsters
like lions and unicorns which are costly to attack.
The mechanics of BD are straightforward. It
comes with two disks and the player must make a
third using the BD utility (a character disk). After
creating and saving a roster of characters, the
player outfits each character and gathers a party.
The potential races and character classes offer no
real surprises. Humans, elves, dwarves and halflings
make up the genetic pool for heroes and heroines.
Knights, assassins, ninjas, elders and wizards make
up the placement categories for those who want to
graduate from the mundane to the heroic.
Once the party arrives at the site of the adventure, the game progresses by means of a numbered
menu. These options are: 1) Rest, 2) Fight, 3)
Search, 4) Look, 5) Diversion, 6) Advance, 7) Retreat, 8) Use Object, 9) Inventory or 0) Leave. The
`Search' command brings about a Search sub-menu
which allows the character to search for objects,
search creature, search for secret doors, or search
for traps. The 'Diversion' option is unusual, but
effective. This option gives everyone else in the
party a +1 to hit on the next turn and allows assassins to assassinate, but draws the monster's attention
to the character doing the diverting. 'Use Object'
allows the character to attempt to unlock an item,
use an item on a creature (how else would you eat
or drink?), examine an object, use on one's possessions (connect two items, poison a blade, etc.), or
use in the room (catch all command). The
`Inventory' command enables one to put the proper
object in hand, determine character status, get rid
of an object (erasing it from the module forever),
give an object to another character or monster, or
give money.
In addition to this menu and its sub-menus, each
character class has its own special command menu.
Pressing the space bar toggles these menus into
place. Knights may choose the "Swordplay" option
which adds +1 to the "To Hit" roll for every two
skill levels of the knight and also maximizes sword
Continued on pg. 55

BATTLEFRONT
Continued from pg. 29
pabilities of your units and exploit their strengths.
This one can be a bit tough, since the scenario descriptions tell you things like the identity of your
units (mechanized infantry, assault guns, tank destroyers, etc.) but do not give you any specifics on
the movement and combat capabilities of the individual battalions. Still, it is not a good idea to send
your regiment of foot infantry in against a solid

line of armor battalions in the open! If all of these
lessons sound pretty familiar, well they should.
Battlefront does a pretty good job of rewarding
proper strategies and blasting away poor ones. The
problem to be overcome is the common feeling
among gamers that "If I've got a unit, then by gosh,
it's gonna do some fighting!" The sooner you learn
to look beyond the simple symbols on the screen to
take in the full picture of the battle with consideration to fatigue, supply, available air support, and
your overall objectives; the sooner you will be a
successful Corps commander.
The above mentioned were obviously recognized
by the designers, and were obviously incorporated
into the computerized opponent. The computer can

play either side (or both) in any scenario, and provides a very credible opponent. Don't be ashamed
to play your first few scenarios with a considerable
handicap for your side.
Designing Your Own

Here we come to one of the key features of
Battlefront, and also to one of the hallmarks of
SSG's games. The game contains a "scenario creation" utility that allows you to create a scenario to
cover virtually any ground combat that took place
in World War II. Pretty big order? Well, yes, but
when you can modify almost every parameter that
defines a scenario, there is really very little limitation to what you can do. Undoubtedly, the biggest
problem with designing particular scenarios will be
that you will need accurate data for your scenarios.
This part of Battlefront is really more a "game
design kit" than simply a way to modify scenarios.
Let's start with terrain. You can specify the size of
the map; from 13-by-7 to 39-by-28 hexes. The
terrain in each hex can be defined individually.
The number of possible terrain types is unlimited,
because you define the effects of all terrain. There
are fourteen different terrain icons, so this is the
maximum number of different types of terrain you
can put in a scenario, but each of those fourteen
types can be anything you want. Take that light
green icon. Label it "light woods" and give it minimal cover for direct fire and make the "movement
points to enter" fairly low for both foot and motorized units. Or, call it "Amazonian jungle" and
have it cost ten movement points for foot infantry
and impassable to vehicles! Each terrain icon can be
given a name and different movement parameters
for foot vs. motorized units and different combat
modifying parameters individually for small arms,
heavier caliber direct fire weapons, and artillery.
The treatment of terrain should give you an idea
about the open ended capabilities in designing your
own scenarios. In addition to creating a custom
map, you can generate the combat units in all
shapes and sizes. Each battalion in the game can be
given different movement and combat capabilities,
range, weapons effectiveness, fatigue, and experience. Also, the headquarters units of the divisions
can each be rated for leadership, administrative
effectiveness, and supply capabilities. Finally, the
scenario itself can be designed with a host of special features. You can designate the terrain objectives for each side, the length of the scenario, the
victory points to be earned for each enemy strength
point destroyed, and many other factors which can
make each scenario unique.
One of the biggest headaches that people complained about with Carriers At War and Europe
Ablaze was the amount of time that it took to ac-

tually input all the parameters needed to do your
own scenarios. Although it may look like things
will be just as time consuming with Battlefront,
that is really not the case at all. The main reason is
that even the very biggest scenario that you can
design will have no more than sixty battalions on
each side. This really made a big difference when I
went to input my own scenarios; what had taken
several evenings can now be done in a few hours.
Actually, the toughest part of designing your own
scenarios will be obtaining the required accurate
background information on the battle that you plan
to simulate. But then, that has been a major problem for all game designers since the hobby started.
And, I am sure that we can look for help in this
area to Run 5, the SSG magazine which has been
published to support their games.
Final Thoughts
So far, I have not mentioned the execution of
the combat routines in Battlefront. Unfortunately,
it is a little tough to judge the appropriateness of
the combat execution, since the documentation with
the game tells us very little about how combat is
actually resolved. For instance, the fatigue of the
units in combat obviously affects their performance, but we can not tell whether the program

might overstate or understate the importance of fatigue in the overall combat equation since we never
see that equation. And judging the importance of
any one component in combat by watching the
outcome of combats in the game is pretty tough
since each combat situation has so many independent variables which impact the outcome. In defense of the designers, I must say that the combat
results do look pretty believable, and there is no
doubting that Roger and Ian have tried to factor in
as many parameters as possible. As one last example
of the amount of detail in this program, it keeps
track of the ownership of each hex on the board;
whose units were the last to pass through it. Then,
in the movement routines, the computer adjusts a
unit's movement rate depending on whether it is
traversing friendly or enemy hexes.
Battlefront is a very good game which does an
excellent job of putting the player into an authentic
combat role: that of a Corps commander. The four
scenarios provided are a good showcase of the
game's capabilities, but the real value of the game
is in its ability to be tailored by the player. If you
are willing to do a little research, Battlefront can be
used to recreate just about any Corps level action
from World War II. That's a lot of game to get for
the money!

PEEK (cont.)
Split-screen animated graphics give
both an overhead view and a golfer's
eye view of each hole. IBM ($49.95).
Reader Service #9.
Ellicott Creek Software
30 Chestnut Ridge Lane
Tonawanda, NY 14150
THE ADVENTURE OF THE VATICAN CAMEOS: A text-based interactive novella based upon a story mentioned by Dr. J. Watson. The program
utilizes a menu entry system to ease
input. There program has a 13,000
word vocabulary and over 60 locations.
YOU CAN WIN A $1000 IF YOU ARE
THE FIRST PERSON TO SOLVE
THE ADVENTURE (details will be
made to registered owners). The game
is NOT copy protected. Apple, IBM,
C-64 ($32.95). Reader Service #10.
Hi Tech Expressions Inc.
2699 South Bayshore Dr.
Suite 1000A
Coconut Grove, FL 33133
1-800-848-9273
CARD WARE, HEARTWARE, PARTYWARE, JINGLEDISK: Four programs that allow you to design and
print your own greeting cards. CardWare is a birthday greeting card and
all occasion card maker. HeartWare
allows you to make romantic love
notes and greeting cards. Party Ware is
a design kit for party paraphernalia
such as party notes, hats, banners,
placemats, games, etc. JingleDisk is a
holiday card maker. All four products
also allow you to make a disk greeting
card, complete with music, that can be
played on a friend's computer. PartyWare costs $14.95, the others are
$9.95. Apple, C-64, Atari 8 bit, IBM.
Reader Service #11.
Overt Strategic Simulations
P.O. Box 66424 Dept. 112
Los Angeles, CA 90066
WORDFUN!: Wordfun combines trivia
with three word games to provide an
educational game for any age group.
The game includes thousands of words
in phrases to be deciphered. IBM.
Reader Service #12.
Performing Arts Software Inc.
320 N. Brazil Ave.
Indianapolis, IN 46219
BASEBALL FANATIC: Here is a stat
baseball with a few of new twists. Five
play levels allow you to select the degree of "action". Selecting the 'Super
Slugfest' option will result in a game
with something like 30-40 hits.
'Slugfest'= 24-30 hits. 'Pitcher's
Duel'= 8-15 hits.' Average Big
League'= 16-23 hits. Pot Luck= the
computer secretly selects a level. Unlike most stat games, in BF you play
the game one pitch at a time. Mix up
your pitches, fool the batter, outguess
the pitcher. Finally, there is a Scoreboard Watcher feature that allows you

to replay games very rapidly. After
selecting the teams and number of
games to be played, just sit back and
watch. IBM (Protected $39.95; Unprotected $49.95). Reader Service #13.
Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada B4V 2X6
OPERATION OVERLORD: A simulation of the 1944 summer battle for
France. Computer can play either side.
Players have the viewpoint of the Theatre Army commanders for the invasion, breakout, and defense of Fortress
Europa. Under direct control of the
players are such responsibilities as determining strategic goals, planning of
operations, supply situations, operational orders to combat units, and the
assignment of air power. The computer
handles such considerations as individual tactical actions, movements, and
engagements of land and air units.
Apple, IBM ($60.00). Reader Service
#15.
Strategic Simulations
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
ROAD WAR 2000: A 'strategic adventure game' reminiscent of the 'Road
Warrior/Mad Max' movies. The game

follows a futuristic scenario of a postnuclear attack age where survival depends on a good set of wheels, and the
ability to anticipate which human
skills, tools and supplies are the most
valuable in a world where civilization's
normal infrastructure has broken
down. As a gang leader in this world,
you will be given the task of finding
eight scientists who are crucial to the
survival of the world. Apple, C-64
($39.95). Reader Service #16.
Tee-Kay Software
P.O. Box 23771
Columbus, OH 43223
GENRAL: A two player modem game
that simulates a campaign in an
imaginary 19th-century war (infantry,
artillery, and cavalry). Players fill the
role of division commanders. This realtime game requires two CP/M-80 or
IBMpc computers communicating via
modem or cable at 300 baud. Each
player controls an army of 26 units.
There can be action in several places
at once, and the decision which to attend first can be critical. $50.00.
Reader Service #14.

RID #32 (Use Card at pg. 5)
On this page a number of
games are listed for evaluation.
When evaluating a game consider
such things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?);
LIFE (does the game wear
well?).
For each game you rate, place
a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate
number. Leave blank any game
which you have not played
enough to have formed an opinion.

Continued from pg. 49
damage. They may also choose to go into a 'Rage'
which will allow them to attack at twice their normal speed, but will gradually reduce endurance to
zero. Assassins may invoke their special menu in
order to either 'Assassinate' (assuming that they
have a dagger in hand and the area is either dark
or the victim 'diverted') or "Sneak" about a room
with a base 35% chance of not being detected.
Ninjas get a 'Martial Arts' option with its own
sub-menu. After choosing this option, the ninja
may either attack, strike or defend under a certain
discipline. Attack will do 1-10 damage on a monster covered under that discipline and Strike will
automatically cripple a monster covered under that
discipline. For example, a ninja trained under the
Bear Discipline would be able to cripple a monster
that used an encircling (bear hug type) attack using
Bear Strike. Defend increases one's armor ranking

and also makes one invulnerable under the right
discipline (Yeti Defense would make one invulnerable to Freeze spells). In addition, the ninja can
`Leap' within range without losing his combat turn
or if necessary, 'Imitate Dead' (cures of poison, illusion and berserking).
Elders (the clerics of the game) and Wizards can
toggle special sub-menus which list the spells they
know by choosing the 'Sorcery' options. In addition,
Wizards can 'Cast Energy' with the damage equal to
10 times the Wizard's skill level, but it reduces endurance to zero. Elders can 'Destroy' any 'undead'
creature less powerful than the Elder. Further, the
Elder has the very important option of 'Innate
Heal' which will heal characters who have lost hit
points beyond 50% of maximum.
For all of its similarity to other systems, BD is
an imaginative game with its own character. The
variety of attack options, artifacts, monster attacks,
and plot twists makes it a distinctive, enjoyable and
satisfying game. Nevertheless, many will not be interested because of the lack of even simple graphics
in this age where numerous graphics adventures
with relatively high sophistication exist. Here, one
must make a choice between detailed data and an
impressive array of options or sophisticated graphics and less options.

There were not many changes in position as a result of RID #30 (there is no RID #31).
But there was one BIG occurrence. Although the numbers are small, Chessmaster 2000
came in with an impressive 8.10 in the strategy category. It will be interesting to see
how this program from Software Toolworks (distributed by EA) does on RID #32. On
the adventure/action side Ultima IV continues to be the top rated game.

