"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Star Trek The #1 Computer Game Magazine April 1994 / Number 117 ZD GAMES RATED The Next Generation Feature Reviews TEX Subwar 2050 Quest For Glory Merchant Prince Sneak Preview's Perfect General 2 Warlords Il Construction Kit Winning Strategies For SimCity 2000 $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian CD-ROM Product Reviews 171486\"011439 "


"FONI GEN INCORPORATED Oisciples OF STEEL The disappearance of your father has left Lanthor without a leader. Factional infighting in the resulting power vacuum has left the realm in chaos! In your heart, you've always known that you were the chosen one — now it's time to act! You've got to save your once-rich land by re-establishing the supremacy of the guilds. Choose your disciples and your strategies, build vast armies to conquer or defend, heed the counsel of the lords or assassinate them everything is under your control! Disciples of Steel is the ultimate role playing game, with stunning graphics and hundreds of challenging quests. Heart pounding sound effects and original soundtrack make Disciples incredibly realistic It'll amaze you with its fine attention to detail, powerful weapons, and huge array of magic spells! el pooled chbec DOO NAME SHEENA CAM Feelpool STEEL UCPA STLEIL Fuchs STEEL. VOUR PARTVIS SHEENA STEOOTH INTELLIGENCE HISOOM ACCURACY INTUITION CONSTITUTION CHARM IMG SPL INTERRUPTED BY A GROUP OF POSSIBLE FOES. YOU HAVE ENCOUNTERED A LIZAR CUAN, SEVERAL GIANTGATS Onion 1 ATT FOS WATER ESSENCE 47 POLERO HTH PLATINUM HATER OPTIONS ALTER DISCIPLE WE OUT OF Hone your skills and build your strengths danger lurks around every turn! Fight or flight! Choose wisely, as things are rarely what they seem! SEXUS Time for talk is pusi! Only the origlyty na the cunning will survive! Game by Megasoft Entertainment. Published by FormGen Inc. (800) 263-2390 Circle Reader Service #57 "


"A GREAT GREAT WAR PLANES YOUR BELLY TANK IS ON FIRE. YOUR RADIO IS GONE. YOUR AIR FIELD IS 135 MILES AWAY. GODSPEED. FREE Limited Collector's Edition Discovery Channel \"WINGS OF THE LUFTWAFFE: FIGHTER ATTACK\"> Video Offer FREE with Aces Over Europe purchase after March 1, 1994 while supplies last WINGS AVIATION MILITARY COLLEGTION OAR THROUGH FLAK-FILLED SKIES IN THE COCKPIT OF YOUR SUPERMARINE SPITFIRE. P-51 MUSTANG. FOCKE WULFE 190. OR ONE OF 13 OTHER AIRCRAFT FROM THE INFAMOUS SECOND WORLD WAR. FLY ALL NEW AIR-TOGROUND MISSIONS, TAKE OUT ENEMY BRIDGES, AND STRAFE ARMORED VEHICLES. FACE OFF AGAINST THE MOST FAMOUS ACES IN THE EUROPEAN THEATER ACES EUROPE GOVER WINGS VIDEO OFFER. FOR A LIMITED TIME, YOU'LL RECEIVE FREE THE DISCOVERY CHANNEL'S \"WINGS OF THE LUFTWAFFE: FIGHTER ATTACK\" ON VHS TAPE WITH YOUR PURCHASE OF ACES OVER EUROPE. THIS SPECIAL OFFER BRINGS ALIVE GERMANY'S DEADLIEST W.W.IL FIGHTERS IN GRIPPING HISTORICAL FOOTAGE. SEE THEM BUILT. SEE THEM FIGHT. THEN FLY THEM YOURSELF IN ACES OVER EUROPE\"! OWOD SEE YOUR RETAILER, OR CALL NOW AND MENTION OFFER D818. 1-800-757-7707 ACES OVER EUROPE THE LATEST IN THE GREAT WAR PLANES SERIES. Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY TM AND ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSED TO. DYNAMIX, INC. 1994 DYNAMIX, INC Circle Reader Service #95 "


"SOMEONE OUT THERE WANTS TO DESTROY YOU. "


"BET ON IT. METALTECH ACHILLES RRETH no MARAUDER Lonely at the top? Don't believe it. You're the top rated fighter in the Battledrome, and there's a crowd of cyberpunks just waiting to take you down. SLAYER STITYDER SESTEESEE UNICATOR LUERLTHER PODIDO VIPER With real time modem play, you can be challenged by anyone, anywhere, anytime. Nice touch-reach out and blast someone. Of course they've challenged you before. And they've lost. So far. CONER SEPARE But you're up for the challenge. You knew it when you first stepped into the Battledrome and viewed your stable of 10 Herculans. Pure fighting machines in riveting 3Space graphics=articulated perfectly to prowl the drome—to seek and destroy-or tough it out toe-to-toe-to battle with cunning, power and skill. No, getting on top wasn't easy. But you're smart and you set the perfect battle conditions, you chose the weaponry, the right Herc, the right tempo-even the right music. And you bet smart. Building a stash to buy new weapons, new Hercs and enough cold cash to back up your boasts. Yeah, someone out there wants to destroy you. So let 'em come, let 'em place their bet. Then let's see if they've got the ballistics to go up against number one. Battledrome-blast into the MetalTech era. BATTLEDROMENI TOREBIT CTELE METALTECH ATTLEDRIN TBREETSEL DESTIS KISELE TURUN BATTLEDROMES NICI SLANES ROBOTIC COWBA OMOROMADY HIGIL-STAKES ROBOTIC COMBAT MODEM READY Available at retail for IBM compatibles or call 1-800-757-7707 1994 Dynamix, Inc. or IM Indicato frademarks ol, or licensed to, Dynamix, Inc. All rights reserved. namix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY Circle Reader Service #96 "


"COMPUTER FEATURES GAMING WORLD 14 Sneak Preview: Star Trek-The Next Generation Spectrum HoloByte Lets You \"Make It So\" by Terry Lee Coleman They're Here! Comprehensive Coverage of the CD-ROM Invasion Tasting The Wrath of the Gods Emrich & Miller Discover How The Luminaria Live 50 When Paramount Says \"Jump Raven\" Chris Breen Asks \"How High?\" 20 Daemonsgate Unlatched! EID's Epic Emerges From Vaporland by Bernie Yee 100 UN Star Trek-The Next Generation pg. 14 66 Gaze Not Too Deeply How The Light Reflects Upon QQP's Red Crystal by Alan Emrich and Petra Schlunk 80 Captain Nemo, Where Have You Gone? The Virtual Depths Of MicroProse's Subwar 2050 by Ed Dille Rally 'Round The U.K. Off-Road With Accolade's All-Weather Sim by Gordon Goble 80 Jump Raven pg. 50 Game Over, Man! Martin Cirulis Reviews MicroLeague's Alien Breed Do-It-Yourself Flight Sims Flight Sim Blueprint For Domark's Flight Sim Toolkit DONDE Quest For Glory pg. 54 The FX of TEX A Eurofighter's-Eye View From Paul Rigby Spectrum HoloByte Hits The Deck! \"Endo\" Estaphanian Does A Wing-Over in Hornet: Naval Strike Fighter 102 104 Bird On The Wire Safe Carrier Landings in Hornet: Naval Strike Fighter by Tom \"KC\" Basham 1999 108 COUNTER SALE SimCity 2000 Strategy Guide Making The Maxis Of Your Mayorship by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. THAT FLAT OF THE ROOM Hornet pg. 102 "


"\"if you want to go all out for games, the Falcon is the best bet for your money.\" -Computer Gaming World MACH V LHE FASTES COT FASTERSEVGA MING MAHIGHER A SECONANSFERS THE FASTEST GAMING MACHINE JUST GOT FASTER! NOW WITH EVEN HIGHER FRAMERATES 45+ VGA FRAMES PER SECOND!! & FASTER HARD DRIVE TRANSFERSOVER 4 MEGABYTES PER SECOND!! THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE If you need the fastest computer performance for your gaming, personal, or business software, you need to fly a Falcon! The MACH V Is Complete For Only $2,495 To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available On Approved Credit. Standard features: IntelTM 486 DX/2-66 Processor, P241 Pentium Upgradable 100% Compatible with All IBMT PC Software Falcon VESA Local Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache, AMI BIOS VESA Local Bus Graphics Board with 1 Megabyte 16.8 Million Colors! Falcon VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card 4 Megabytes of RAM expandable to 32 1.2 & 1.44 Floppy Drives 250 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive with 128K Cache MPC Level 2 Compliant 250 ms Double-Speed CD-ROM Drive NEW! SoundBlaster PRO with Multimedia Encyclopedia on CD-ROM NEW! Shielded Multimedia Speakers CH Products FlightStick PROTM 4 Button Joystick with Viewing Control CH Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport Mini-Tower Case with 250 Watt Power Supply Two Cooling Fans with Temperature Sensing 14\" NonInterlaced Super VGA Monitor, .28dp, Edge-to-Edge Display NEW! 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover MS-DOS 6TM 3 Button Mouse with Mousepad One Year Parts & Labor Warranty One Year On-Site Service Policy NEW! Upgrades for Memory. Hard Drives, Monitors and many other components are available each MACH V is custom tailored to fit your game! FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Trademarks are the property of their respective owners "


"116 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Music For The Masses The Future of Sound In Computer Games You Could Be In Pictures Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul Can Make Anyone A Star 128 Rebounding With Authority! Strat-O-Matic Basketball Boxes Out The Competition 138 Accolade Kicks Off! Bernie Dy Gets In The Trenches With Unnecessary Roughness 150 QQP Corners The Renaissance Market A Machiavellian View Of Merchant Prince by Tim Carter Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Chuck Miller Terry Coleman Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks 158 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD Sneak Preview: Perfect General 2 Can QQP Improve Upon Perfection? by Alan Emrich 160 Sneak Preview: Warlords Il Construction Kit SSG Proves War Is What You Make It by Alan Emrich 164 Romance A Trois Koei's Three Kingdoms Unveil Dragons Of Destiny by Terry Lee Coleman Land LU Bu's Messenger Hould you invade 7.Ye? Terns-Tood 333 11.Ruler: Advisor: Xin Yu! That tern is not acceptable. Sep. 194 Autumn Dragons of Destiny pg. 164 Contents are copyrighted by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co.. 1994. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add 11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa. MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-4450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 447-9330 or fax to (303) 443-5080 (intemational subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: P.O. Box 57167. Boulder, CO 80322-7167 Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability), $6.00 per issue ($7.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703.622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke (714) 283-3000 x41 Printed in the U.S.A. DEPARTMENTS 19 168 169 170 54 174 Editorial (Gamer's Lib) READ.ME (All The News That Fit) Scorpia's View (Quest For Glory / Scorpia's Mail Over There (Euro-Sequels) Letters To The Editor CWW Editorial (Putting Power In The Gamer's Hands) 60 Opponents Wanted Marketplace Advertisers' Index Taking A Peek Hall of Fame Top 100 Games What's Hot? Patch File The Rumor Bag (Guinness Recordus) 181 182 184 185 186 124 142 156 "


"\"EPIC PINBALL RINGS UP A HIGH SCORE\" COMPUTER GAMING WORLD \"UP THERE WITH THE BEST OF THE COMMERCIAL RELEASES\", RATED 91% PC FORMAT \"PERFECTED TO THE PEAK OF PLAYABILITY... EPIC PINBALL IS VITAL TO HAVE. BUY, BUY, BUY!\", RATED 5/5 PC POWER Epic Pinball is shareware from Epic MegaGames. REWARE IT TODAY! What Do We Mean by the Term \"Shareware\"? Epic Pinball, Our Latest Masterpiece for Your PC It means you can try it before you buy it and it means you won't pay an arm and a leg for a quality PC game. The shareware version contains the Android table. The \"registered\" versions are the Epic Pinball Packs shown here which contain four pinball tables each Epic MegaGames redefines the art of PC Pinball with Epic Pinball by James Schmalz. It offers realistically fluid ball movement, a high-quality sound track and ultra-smooth scrolling graphics. It's all here: ramps, sink holes, kickbacks, drop targets, multiple-ball play, jackpots, skill shots and scoring rules just like real pinball tables. Epic Pinball packs offer a variety of pinball styles from the nostalgic Excalibur to the futuristic Enigma with targets and other surprises emerging from an oozing plasma field. Epic Pinball is shareware which PC Zone says is \"easily as good as commercial offerings\". See the sidebar to find out how to try it today. Where Can You Find the Shareware Version to Try? If you have a modem try one of these two great places (or your local BBS); Just GO EPIC on CompuServe. You can download a specially priced Game of the Month and visit our forum where you'll find more Epic shareware games, hints, tips and support. For a free CompuServe signup kit call (800) 524-3388 and ask for representative 536. EXEC-PC is the world's largest BBS with over 280 lines. On your very first call you can download Epic shareware games hassle-free. Just call (414) 789-4360 (V.32bis) or (414) 789-4210 (2,400 baud) If you don't have access to a modem but you have a VISA or MasterCard you can order the shareware version through our toll-free line for only $5. Android Excalibur Pot Of Gold C rash and Burn EPIC PINBALL PACK RUN You can buy Epic Pinball pack 1 or 2 for $29.00 PLUS $4 SHIPPING AND HANDLING Jungle Pinball Deep Sea Magic Enigma EPIC PINBALL PACK 23 Where Can You Get the Registered Versions? To order call 1-800-972-7434. Have your credit card ready. Or, on CompuServe you can purchase our games for direct download to your PC. You pay only for the game, there are no connect charges for the download. This way you can be playing in minutes. We'll mall you the written documentation and your free bonus disk. GO EPIC for details. Or get both Epic Pinball packs for only $45.00 Ox0404 Ob PLUS $4 SHIPPING AND HANDLING TO ORDER CALL EPIC MEGAGAMES 1-800-972-7434 VISA, MasterCard and Checks accepted. MD residents please add 5% sales tax. Each order includes a bonus shareware game. In the U.K. or Europe please call Epic MegaGames UK at 0767 260903. EPIC PINBALL REQUIRES A 386 OR BETTER, 640 KB OF RAM AND VGA. "


"EDOOORDAL PERATION TOWARD MOVEMENT A GAMER'S MO by Johnny L. Wilson as this ever happened to you? (Soundsence a variety of perspectives. Ralph Ross, that the nervous system produces more elecmore like a late night commercial than former Chairman of the Humanities Departtrical energy, which actually changes the Lan editorial, doesn't it? Just humor ment at the University of Minnesota, wrote brain's physical structure and chemical comme. Answer the question.) You're sitting on in Symbols Civilization that \"Art even offers position.\" Essentially, game play creates enan airplane, paging through the latest copy of syntheses of types of experience, ... yielding dorphins which, in turn, \"stimulate thought, CGW, and the person next to you glances at possible frameworks in which we can organ interest and attention.\" a screenshot and remarks, \"My nephews and ize the fragmentary bits and pieces of our Of course, the potential for opening new nicces love those Nintendo games. You must ordinary lives so that they are related and have children, too.\" Ever have guests notice significant.\" He goes on to conclude, \"The horizons and providing new insights, stimuyour desktop computer and, as a result, find value of a particular artistic perspective, then, lating new ideas and creating new interest, yourself claiming that you only use it for work lies chiefly in its originality, depth, and incidoes not guarantee the realization of such and maybe a couple of flight simulators? Ever siveness—perhaps, too, in its pertinence to possibilities. I've known people who fixated possibilit hear your spouse apologizing on your behalf our lives.\" on the language and feelings described in The for how much time you «waste\" playing Given that definition, gaming is within itCatcher in the Rye without learning to empagames? self a particularly vital form of art. Gaming is thize with the difficult passages faced by adoIt just seems too strange. Just as some golf a structured play that allows the gamer to lescents that they knew. We have heard of ers have to justify \"wasting\" time on a golf assume the perspective of a member of anhigh school students who viewed Schindler's course by explaining how much «business\" other class or race, a personage from history, other class or race, a rom history List and laughed at the death scenes rather they conduct on the course, many computer a command persona, another sex, another than being sensitized to the horrors of racism gamers are ashamed of their hobby. Model profession, and another belief system. Roleallowed to run rampant. Potential does not railroaders will nearly ostracize forever any playing and adventure allow us to examine guarantee fruition. person who comments about their \"cute little other lifestyles, strategy allows us to expend Yet, I cannot help but think that we, as trains,\" but computer gamers seem to apoloand amass other resources, and action/simu gamers, are wrong when we are embarrassed getically duck their heads whenever someone lation allow us to draw upon and develop by our hobby and pretend that we only play asks, «But aren't those games just for kids.\" other skills than those we use in our primary primary a few games or concede that games are \"for Isn't it ironic, though? Many of those very lives. kids.\" Games are for anyone who is still learnpeople who feel like we are wasting our time In short, play, and gaming as structured ing and becoming Games are exploratory in front of a computer monitor working out play in particular, has the capacity to broaden learning experiences for all of us who still solutions to game problems, be they spatially, our knowledge and insight without the exwant to grow. Games are for those who want logically or resource based problems, spend a pense which would be required in time, cduinvolved stimulation from their entertainsignificant amount of time passively consum cation, economic risk and physical risk) to ment rather than passive viewing. ing whatever comes out of the television gain an equivalent of the same knowledge in screen. They just don't get it. actual experience. Since it has this capacity Maybe we need to rethink some of the Our society seems to have a fundamental (although this capacity is not always used, conventions in game design—the prepondermisconception regarding play. The majority particularly in poor game design), gaming game design), gaming ance of violent solutions as opposed to creaof adults seem to regard play as having the actually matches the purpose of art espoused tive exploration and experimentation, the same relation to reality that fiction does to by Kant in The Critique of Aesthetic Judgment. increasingly narrow scope of subject matter truth: they perceive both as lies. That is a very He said that art \"is a mode of representation perceived as marketable, the limited nature of naive oversimplification. Like the great Jewwhich ... although devoid of an end, has the non-player characters and our assumptions ish novelist, Elie Wiesel, I happen to believe effect of advancing the culture of the mental about game players—but we sure don't need that \"Some stories are true that never happowers in the interests of social communicato be ashamed of the fact that we play. Maybe pened.\" Just as fiction can suspend our disbetion.\" we don't need to have Gamer Pride parades Tief enough to let truth penetrate our normal But, don't just take this cditor's philosophy. or have an official Gamer Liberation Movedefense mechanisms, so can play penetrate to According to Dr. Gini Graham Scott, author ment, but it's time we realized that gaming is that inner core of personality where we ingest of The Empowered Mind, even a video game more than okay. It's beneficial. If the hobby ideas through simulated experience. as simple as those offered on Nintendo's matures, it may someday even be understood Like art, play allows the gamer to experiGame Boy \"stimulates the brain in such a way as art by more than idealistic old editors. CGW Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"SKIM THE CLOUDS, BUST A FEW BALLOONS AND DOGFIGHT YOUR WAY THROUGH THE GREAT WAR. GLORY 1 limb into the cockpit of a Sopwith Camel and I test your skills as a daring aviator in the War to End All Wars. Fly or the British and Americans, ilscovering the strengths and weaknesses of your different planes as well as those of the enemy. Earn the respect of both sides as you secure your place in the company of Actual screens may vary. aces!  4-channel digital sound gives you the roar of dogfighting the way WWI pilots heard it.  Instant mission generator lets you fly against any combination of enemies you choose.  Refined game engine generates realistic clouds, trees and increased plane detail. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, WE RECOMMEND AN INTEL486\" DX2 OR PENTIUM\" PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 GRIGIN We aicde Rodas. F1 Copyright  1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Wings of Glory is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Intel, Intel486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Circle Reader Service #85 "


"READ.ME SSI Advances Beyond AD&D With Divorce From TSR THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD of Valour,\" said Souza. «We've been getting into this category more on our own with games like Jorune: Alien Logic,\" a computer game version of a 13-year-old paper RPG which SSI will release on CD with digitized audio and video. Souza added that SSI was unhappy with the rules and restrictions imposed with the license that limited their creativity. SSI still has games under development using chartrategic Simulations and TSR have followed by the Gold Box Line, Eye of the acters from the TSR universe, including decided to adventure off on separate Beholder series, and most recently Dark Advanced D&D Slayer for the 3DO. quests. TSR, owners of the Advanced Sun: Shattered Lands. Both companies say TSR has not yet announced a new Dungeons & Dragons world of fantasy and they are separating on good terms. SSI exclusive relationship with another comrole-playing characters, will not be renewspokesperson April Souza said the compaputer game developer or publisher, ing its exclusive license with SSI next year. ny chose not to renew so that its newer However, spokesman Tom McLaughlin The TSR license on SSI's games has RPGs wouldn't compete with SSI's TSRsaid TSR will have a «major announcebeen fruitful for both companies, resulting licensed games. ment at CES in June.» He added that TSR in sales of over two million games. The \"We've had a few fantasy games withis moving toward the development of softunion began in '88 with Pool of Radiance, out TSR like Veil of Darkness and Legends ware on its own. MicroProse Adventure Development System Purchased Tools Find Sanctuary In The Woods The Secrets of Doom s hinted in the March issue of ucts that you might not recognize as CGW (#116, p. 26), MicroProse graphic adventures will also use that will no longer develop graphic toolset,\" said Markley. adventures using the tools created for Rex Sanctuary Woods may be an unfamiliar Nebular and the Cosmic Gender Benders name to computer gamers. The company and Return of the Phantom. Sanctuary was named after a kennel (which bred Woods, the Vancouver-based multimedia champion St. Bernard dogs) and the kenpublisher, has purchased the MADS nel was, in turn, named after the famous (MicroProse Adventure Development World War I battle. The company basicalSystem) tool kit to produce originally put educational content on CDs for a graphic adventures. time, but branched our into edutainment Spectrum, Inc. Chairman Gilman with the Victor Vector and Yondo advenLouie explained to CGW that the MADS tures (Yondo is a St. Bernard). Now, the tools would no longer be useful for their company is ready to move from light mulcompany, because they did not allow timedia to actual games. adventure games to be linked with simulaThe first graphic adventure to use the tion products. toolset will be based on Robert Ripley's Since Ted Markley and Matt Gruson, Believe It or Not. The game allows players designers of the engine, were moving to to become '30s era explorers, the time Sanctuary Woods, it was natural that they frame when Ripley found most of his would want to obtain their old toolset. amazing discoveries. «We have a whole They will integrate the existing technology strategy to continue a product line with with Woodscript, the company's cross-platthe adventures of Robert Ripley,\" said form development system, to use on Markley with the optimism any producalmost all of their products. \"Even proder/designer has for a new product concept. intrepid explorers of id Software's DOOM have unearthed mysteries buried deep within its program depths. It has been reported that secret incantations, when typed into your keyboard while playing the game, will grant you untold powers and explosive riches. At any time in the game, type: IDDQD to render yourself indestructible. IDSPISPOPD to walk through walls. IDKFA for a resupply of ammo. IDBEHOLD plus \"A\" to display the entire level map, \"I\" for invisibility, «L» for light amplification, «R» for a radiation suit, «S» for berserker rage, and «V» for indestructibility Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"Game Companies Shuffle The Cards \"I'll Have A Pentium Lite» Intel Announces New 486-DX4 Chip ebruary, 1994 was an eventful month marks a merger between two pioneers in the al years and targeted Brian Fargo and in the entertainment software busiinteractive entertainment industry. The Interplay as an ideal creative partner. ness. Virgin announced its intention merger may offer a signal that both compaNeither Fargo nor Sheinberg would comto extend an initial public stock offering nies felt pressure to align against the possiment on the exact amount which the enterElectronic Arts and Broderbund Software bility of hostile takeovers from traditional tainment conglomerate invested in effected a merger; MCA took a significant entertainment or communications indusInterplay, but the terminology \"significant stake in Interplay Productions; Activision, tries, but official statements from minority stake» was used. One observer Inc. garnered $42.5 million from placing 5 Broderbund CEO Doug Carlston and suggested that this might mean just under million shares of common stock (slightly Electronic Arts CEO Larry Probst stressed the legal limit of 20% ownership because of over 30% of the outstanding shares); and the synergy expected between EA's broaderobscure financial reporting rules, but this an acquisition of Sierra by Acclaim based distribution and Broderbund's was not confirmed by company spokesperEntertainment was rumored. At press time, strength in marketing educational and prosons. Whatever the percentage, MCA was the Sierra/Acclaim rumor had been officialductivity titles. also granted additional options for increasly denied by Sierra On-Line's Jerry Interplay Productions and MCA jointlying its minority position ing its minority position in Interplay, and Bowerman, but the other four stories sent announced their new relationship on Interplay was granted ac reverberations throughout the industry. February 10, 1994. Sid Sheinberg, MCA record and theme park properties for interActivision, Inc. announced on January CEO, stated that the company had studied active purposes, as well as new technologies 31, 1994 that it had sold 5 million shares of the interactive software industry over severfrom MCA parent company, Matsushita. stock for $42.5 million. In addition, the company is repurchasing $2.1 million worth of preferred stock. The new funds will enable the company to continue publishing high profile interactive movie-style adventures such as the successful Return to Zork, the upcoming Planetfall sequel, a spy adventure currently in production called ntel has just released information on tems. The down-side of this lower voltage William Colby's Covert Action, and an unan their latest CPU in the 486 family, the requirement is that the chips cannot be nounced, potential project for a certain -IntelDX4 processor, Using processor used to upgrade existing machines. On the high-profile action star that has yet to begin clock tripling technology, Intel has been other hand, the chips will be a great boon production. able to achieve speeds up to 100 megato the notebook computing market. So far, Virgin Interactive Entertainment will hertz, almost doubling the speed of current notebook and portable computers have offer 1.85 million American Depository high-end 486-based machines. Intel hopes been the recipients of hand-me-down Shares. ADSs are instruments by which the a new family of DX4 chips will fill the processors from their big brother desktop shares of foreign companies are traded on emerging price gap between entry level, machine. Now, with a low voltage, hotU.S. exchanges. 486SX systems and Intel's Pentium-based rod CPU, notebook users will be able to machines. Electronic Arts announced on February run their games and applications just as 9, 1994 that they had reached an agreement The IntelDX4 chip to merge with Broderbund Software. will be available in four Under the structure, each Broderbund flavors: 100/33, shareholder would receive 1.6 common 100/50, 83/33 and shares of EA stock for each Broderbund 75/25, where the first share. The approximate value of the entire number indicates the deal was reported to be $400 million. The internal clock speed, agreement seems like a natural in that it while the second indicates the bus speed in megahertz. Since the Errata IntelDX4 is already compatible with bus In the March issue of CGW, the READ.ME column erroneously referred speeds of 25, 33, and 50MHz, we'll most to Time Warner Interactive's purchase of likely see the 75/25 Software Sorcery. Time Warner and the 100/33 combiInteractive has not purchased Software Sorcery. Rather, Time Warner is publishnations in desktop computers. Intel has also announced that there will be a future fast as on their desktops. In a demonstraing three of Software Sorcery's games: Pentium OverDrive processor chip that tion of the chip, CGW saw Origin's Strike AEGIS: Guardian of the Fleet, Escape from will be compatible with the DX4 systems. Commander running on an active matrix the Dead Zone, and Fantasy Fiefdom. We The Intel DX4 is a 3-volt chip, rather color notebook with the 75/25 DX4 CPU deeply regret any inconvenience caused by and, to quote a CGW Editor, \"It cooked!\" the error. than 5-volt as in most current DX2 sys040 intele Intel DX4 INTEL \"89 '93 April 1994 Page 13 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW SNEAK FREVIEW Game Still La Development $727 TER THE NEXT GENERATION... Engage! With Spectrum HoloByte's Role-Playing Event by Terry Lee Coleman gone before.\" The Star Trek games from Interplay have been undeniably successful, reportedly selling over 300,000 copies, but even as good as the Interplay games are, they are in many ways very typical adventure Hime flies. On a galactic scale, it seems to go by at warp speed. Can it be that 1 Star Trek: The Next Generation is in its seventh season? It seems only yesterday that Trek fans were full of trepidation, wondering how any show could come close to the magic (if nor ratings) of the first Star Trek. To be sure, the new series got off to a rocky start. An overly-long 2-hour pilot episode, the fact that the show was syndicated, and an untimely writer's strike did little to get the show off on the right alien appendage. As the series progressed, it was apparent that the cast had developed into a fine ensemble group, in some ways even more endearing to fans than the crew of the original Enterprise. Now, as the show's run appears at an end, big-budget films beckoning on the horizon, what better time for a Next Generation role-playing game? Cerrainly Spectrum HoloByte thinks the time is ripe to go where «No game has games. Spectrum HoloByte wanted a game of greater scope, with more of a role-playing feel. To achieve this noble end, they have amassed enough information for the game to fill up an entire CD-over 600 MB of data. In fact, there was much discussion about whether 2 CDs would be needed, as in 7th Guest, but Spectrum decided to avoid the extra inconvenience to gamers and tighten the game to fit on one compact disc. What could possibly take up that much room, you may ask? Digitized pictures and animation devour lots of bytes—at least with 20th Century technology. For those skeptics who harbor doubts about the worth of megabytes of graphics, they will fall by the wayside soon after beginning the game. The beginning screens are so much like the actual opening credits for the show, you may wonder if you're watching a videotape. Painstakingly hand-rendered art combined with digitized footage is almost seamless, quite simrati The crew of the Enterprise stand ready to respond to your every mouse click. Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2 Edition COMPUTER GAME Strahd's Possession Inmask and defeat Strahd, one of the Umost nefarious of all gothic horror characters, or you'll never escape the terror of the AD&D RAVENLOFT\"game world! Presented in High Resolution 320 x 400 256-color VGA, STRAHD's POSSESSION delivers twice the quality of VGA without the cost of a Super-VGA card! So you experience gothic horror role-playing at its best in this visually stunning game. Bask in the glow of an exceptionally large 3-D gaming window. Explore bonechilling dungeons. Challenge 30 authentic RAVENLOFT game world creatures. Cast over 60 mage and priest spells. Let automapping keep track of your travels with maps that print complete with any notes you made on them along the way. All this plus a haunting musical score and digitized sound effects will keep you on edge for hours and hours! Just be careful, things get pretty eerie when the sun sets! Available for IBM & Compatibles on 3.5\" disks and Enhanced CD-ROM. o ut orange compatibles IBM HI-RES 256-color VGA Displays 2011 ATSTOORNITORAL a ODBE , Es TO ORDER: Visit your local retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa/MC (U.S. & Canada only). SEL GINEERAUILLACE OR SMALLTENINGEYJNOMIETACEREA CU CAN WADIFANANA BALL. WE ON SOVET GAROLD DILLING BY CONTINUIOC WC LGION UKRAINISSALLONGATAFLANNUT A REVILLE CLIL KNOWN ASTABA YAO NA HISHAMC TWY DO YOU VENTURC INTO THIS DARK TERENTS ORD en Mercat apa DPE Technology developed by DreamForge Intertainment, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS AD&D, RAVENLOFT. the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof, are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc. 1994 TSR, Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"opens, the Enterprise is pasector of space and will target a particular trolling near the Romulan planer if you have selected it specifically. The Neutral Zone. Picard is length of time it takes to travel to a particular reading a letter from a system varies. For instance, going to Epsilon friend, who like Jean-Luc, is Alpha at Warp 3 will take over two years, interested in archaeology. while at Warp 7 it would be only a few days. While the Captain ponders Travel to the particular planet is then simply the difficulties of archaea matter of deciding on a speed and giving the ological exploration so close order to \"Engage,\" in the usual Picardian to the Romulan Empire, he fashion. A nice touch is chat Chief Engineer BEERS i is abruptly called to the Geordi LaForge will tell you if you lack the bridge. Immediately, the antimatter for a particular speed. Enterprise is placed in a crisis OPEN ALL FREQUENCIES situation involving the Follow My Orders SARL HAILI Romulans, political refuHESUME gees, strange artifacts and At various times in the game, your vessel the usual variety of alien may be called upon to help out in some The view from the \"windshield\" of the Enterprise. races. emergency elsewhere in the quadrant. This ply some of the best animation seen in a brings up an interesting dilemma: If you rush Having been hooked, you are then immersed in the depths of the story. off to the cmergency, will the current situcomputer game to date. The sweeping granRather than the normal string of barely-reRather than the normal string of barelv-re ation be different when you return? Can you deur of the Enterprise gives way to close-ups of dark moons and ringed planets, finally afford to ignore the plight of suffering Fedlated puzzles to be solved, the Next Generation plotline is a web cration beings, regardless of your overall misof inter-related broadening to include the vastness of the stars conundrums. The depth of both the writing sion? Moral decisions for the player are the surrounding the ship. Such an impressive and the gaming world itself is staggering it heart of good role-playing games, and Next opening is not merely a pretty picture, but is fair to say that the vast majority of gamers Generation could be the best in this respect offers the first brush strokes on the canvas for will spend between 30 and 100 hours of play since Ultima 6. what may well be Spectrum's masterpiece. in the Next Generation universe. Not every The main storyline involves a mysterious, With many games, the opening sequences world you travel to has an alien race, of ancient alien race who has evidently disapoffer so much promise that the player is incourse, but consistent with the series, the peared without a trace. Without giving away evitably disappointed by the graphics in the galaxy is a big place, with plenty of things to the plot twists, suffice it to say that the legacy remainder of the game-such is not the case do and places to go, keeping you and the of this near-forgotten race proves most interof this near-forgotten race proves m here. The characters are obviously digitized, Enterprise crew busy for quite a while. esting to the Romulans and the Ferengi, as then fleshed out with hand-drawn art and well as the Federation. As you move around shading so that they really do look like their To Seek Out New Life the quadrant, clues to the overall mystery are humanoid counterparts. Data is appropriTo maneuver through the section of galaxy found, both by stellar exploration and by ately pale, Worf is hard-edged Klingon and which the Enterprise is patrolling, you merely away-team missions. You have the ability to Riker has on his famous poker face. Deanna go to Astrogation, where the patrol area is trolarens choose who beams down to the different Troi and Dr. Beverly Crusher are as beautiful depicted as a vast three-dimensional cube. worlds, and this choice can make a huge as the actresses who portray them. Captain Dozens of star systems and hundreds of planfolan difference in the success of the missions. Sig. Jean-Luc Picard stands out from the rest: ers, nebulas and the like are open for exploranificantly, the designers avoid using Data as Regal, self assured, he occupies the forefront tion, adding immeasurably to the illusion the \"Swiss Army Knife\" for every occasion, of the main screen of play, the bridge. His that you truly are \"exploring strange new and each character has different skills to be prominence is appropriate, as the player takes worlds.\" The Astrogation utilized, just as they would in the TV series. on the role of Picard for most of the game. interface is quite intuitive. SECTOR: PER ASTROGATION With most role-playing games and advenallowing the erstwhile exSEE INFO. COURSE DISPLAY ture games you must select one character to plorer to examine each cube play throughout the game. While this apof space in detail. Cross-secproach has its uses, all of the dramatic impact tion views show each star of the storyline is tied up into what circumsystem, complete with constances befall your single character. In Next venient descriptions of each Generation, you assume the guises of various crew members. In this respect, the game is planet and celestial body more like a good novel, allowing you access from the ship's computer. to different points of view during play, and it Star Trek fans and lovers of also fits with the ensemble history of the Star astronomy could spend Trek series. hours with this feature Unlike more recent Trek games, which alone, as the different plancrs all sport their own have resembled hour-long television epiGIMPUTER sodes, Next Generation is much more openunique look. ended. Make no mistake, there is a plot, but the computer automatit won't drag you by a leash. As the game ically sets a course for any Finding a destination with the three-dimensional Astrogation cube. -Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons COMPUTER GAME THE GENIE'S CURSE Explore a new game world in the style of the Arabian Nights! High magic and dark deeds reign as you face the evil Genie Lords in a quest to restore your family honor! A complex, pregenerated character grants you quick entrance into the all-new AD&D AL-QADIM» game world. Encounter genies, sinister sorcerers, wise hermits, and many more mysterious beings, each with their own secrets and challenges. Use magical items to face the challenge of real-time combat and puzzle solving. And savor a tightly woven story line that's enhanced by grand cinematic musical themes — all in the exotic new AL-QADIM game world! 500 Leod ur E  18M 256-color VGA Displays TOISID NAALASSAN ASKAN IBM 8 SANCYRANNASISIWAUWAW COMPUBLES Available on 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM. TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only) SE L Lexxx ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS ADED ALOADIM the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereol are trademarks owned by and used ainder license from TSR Inc. 1994 ASB, Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. WANALY S IS "


"rant which is unknown to the Fedwhich is probably why they are always eration, you will map the sector, equipped with phasers. The Federation crew making the data available in the may be non-aggressive, but they rarely run library computer for later perusal. from a fight. More than once in Next GeneraWhile auto-map features have tion, you will have to decide whether to enFederation vessel. assist us please.lt been a fixture of role-playing gage in a phaser firefight or beam back to the games for some time, this feature ship without completing your mission. As you might expect, it is difficult for the charare in fact on a galactic mission of acters to die. Normally, injured crew memexploration. bers are beamed directly up to sickbay, just as BER 2 they would be in the series. Still, this doesn't My First Duty give free rein to the overly aggressive. If you OPEN ALL FREQUENCIES Is To The Ship provoke a fight with a host of Romulan vesHAILES RESUME Despite the freedom with which sels, expect to lose the Enterprise with all you have been endowed, you are hands. The Good Samaritans of the galaxy give road-side assistance still expected to represent yourself In addition to the problems faced by interto another alien in distress. as would a Federation officer, acting with a multitude of different starfaring Each member can be equipped with specific Therefore, while the game will let species, nature often conspires to throw probequipment, but they always carry phasers and you fire on another starship, tricorders. If Dr. Crusher is along, she always doing so without reason will SECTOR ASTROCATION carries a medical tricorder, and so forth. bring inquiries from StarSEE INFO. COURSE DISPLAY fleet and could cost you Away-team planetary missions take place in your command. Also, the traditional adventure game fashion, being beings whom you meet will laid out across several screens to be explored. remember how you treated Non-player characters met during a mission them on previous occasions, are much more than the usual cardboard which has obvious connotaurs found in many role-playing products. tions on the outcome of the Some are charming, others irritating; all have are charming, others irritating all have overall plot. The combat their own hidden agenda for you to discover, system itself is still under deand each of them must be treated as individuvelopment at this time, but als for you to ultimately succeed in the game. is expected to emulate more Certain decisions made on these missions can the combat sequences from have catastrophic consequences, as you might the series, rather than the expect. Even so, such is the depth of the game Wing Commander-style of that the designers have left open different simulator prevalent in prepaths for the player to get the crucial inforvious Trek games. GenerCut-away view of planetary system, with the mation to reach the endgame. If, for instance, ally, combat is a last resort destination planet highlighted. the evidence on a particular world is demeasure, but space conflict stroyed, you may be able to gather that same lems in your way. On one mission, radiation is a necessary evil at various points in the information in an asteroid belt, examining prevents normal transporter use, and you game. similar phenomena. Thus, the game universe must come up with a solution. The use of Away-teams, on the other hand, are accuscan be explored without resorting to a numsuch standard Next Generation plor devices tomed to beaming into dangerous situations, ber of save games, playing makes any gamer familiar with the mythos the same frustrating sefeel more at home, yet the designers have also quences over and over as in taken care to put unexpected twists on familmany games. iar ideas to keep the player guessing. The In fact, it is possible to surprise ending will no doubt delight many reach the endgame along Next Generation fans, as it is entirely in keepdifferent paths. Of the dozing with the philosophy of the television seens of worlds that can be explored by away-teams, the Its ability to weave new elements into the story is constructed so that storyline, yet retain the classic feel of both the the major worlds can be visStar Trek universe and remain true to the ited in any order, without MEDICAL TRIC TRON characterizations, is the strongest selling MED KIT WOAF compromising the player's SPHERE CRUSHER point of the Next Generation game. That chance to win. Crew memSANI-BEAM CARLSTROM Spectrum HoloByte was able to include a rich BUTLER YUCI ROOT bers will make suggestions gaming world full of depth and surprises, is from time to time, but you almost too much to believe. Not only Trek are free to take action as you fans, but anyone who enjoys cutting-edge see fit. Should you decide to gaming, should look forward to the final Geordi and Riker prepare to go planetside for a little R&R. visit a section of the quadproduct. Spectrum HoloByte, make it so! Cow ries. Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"DARK LEGIONS A Masterful Blend of Subtle Strategy and Wickedly Ruthless Action! IBM 256-color VGA Displays 723 A Templar faces three deadly opponents on the main strategy screen. KILLER GRAPHICS. For 1 or 2 OUTRAGEOUS ANIMATION. players, DARK SIZZLING SOUNDS. LEGIONS boasts That's DARK LEGIONS from SSI. It's got modem play. Sophisticated Demon the maneuvering, artificial intelligence. trickery, and Pre-set scenarios with variable deception difficulty settings. And a wide of the best strategy games. range of set-up choices to make Plus blazing every game different and playing time limitless! combat so Troll Troll Think you can cut it? You'll realistic it rivals the need brains and brawn to hottest arcade mega-hits! survive Create an army of up to in this 50 beings from the realm of alternate dark fantasy. Choose from. dimension, 16 different characters, such Wraith where hidden traps and 'as the six we took right from the game to show you here! Each lurking creatures make every move character comes unpredictable and with unique hazardous! powers and Wizard abilities. DARK LEGIONS. Then, let A Savage Battle for the mayhem Ultimate Power! begin! Your goal: TO ORDER: Visit your seek out and retailer or call: destroy 1-800-245-4525 de Ore the opposing with Visa or MasterCard legion's master and wrest (U.S. & Canada ultimate power for yourself! only, please). Conjurer HIPE Scratch one Troll it's about to be roasted by a Fire Elemental! Stay away from a Troll's huge club! This Wizard's learning the hard way. Available for IBM & Compatibles on 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM. = 3L $1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Developed by Silicon Krights. "


"MISION OF THE DATA VD-ROM Drives—They attach themselves like parasites to our computer systems, similar to the way the alien mind-controllers of Robert A. Heinlein's The Puppet Masters attached to their hosts. New machines with internal CD-ROM drives dominate store shelves as if they were the conquering tripodal Martians of H.G. Wells' War of the Worlds. Meanwhile, multimedia upgrade kits sit on the shelf looking as benign as the pods from Invasion of the Body Snatchers, but frightening consumers almost as much as the original movie scared kids in the '50s. Evidently, however, the masses are running out with more sound, more video and, all too toward CD-ROMs, instead of running away many times, less game play. Too often, they from The Amazing Colossal Man or The Blob suggest, the \"more\" syndrome adds as little to in those old technophobic thrillers. Dataquest game quality as 3-D did to Creature from the estimates an installed base of multimedia Black Lagoon and It Came from Outer Space. machines featuring an internal CD-ROM They mockingly refer to Apple's QuickTime drive at 2.46 million worldwide an almost as «Lag Time\" and lament the fact that multi2,000% increase) by the end of 1993. Yet, the media technology hasn't quite come to technophobia remains. While the results may in terms of presentation. There are still time be as beneficial in the long run as the intent lags, lip-synching problems, anti-aliasing of the alien robot in The Day The Earth Stood problems in integrating digital video with Still, the presence of these new machines or rendered art, sound effect/music trade-off peripherals is significantly daunting to the considerations and SCSI compatibility issues. average computer owner. It's a threatening new world for many The consumer looks with justifiable skeptigamers. Some software publishers are plancism at the idea that CD-ROM products will ning to publish strictly in CD format after lower the prices of software purchases. this Christmas. Many believe that it will be Though some companies are selling products hard to find floppy disk products on store that use the CD as a delivery-only mechanism shelves by the second quarter of 1995. The at less expensive rate than the same product fact is that CD is here, now. So, in the tradion floppy disk, consumers are reserving judgtion of those \"Coming Attraction» trailers at ment upon the claim that «We come in '50s era drive-ins, we present our perspective peace.» Savvy consumers see yet another piece on the world of CD-ROM entertainment of hardware that will be outdated in a short software. With capsule reviews and a few time and worry whether the investment is quick comments, we will attempt to telegraph worth it or not. some of both the disappointment and excitement with regard to the fact that—They're Though CD delivery means shorter install Here! times and an end to the ritual of disk-juggling, gamers find themselves particularly wary. They see the new CD products coming Illustration by Brian Clarke Computer Gaming World HOL. Page 20 "


"SASHERS RANT TEYRE HERE! "


"SENSATIONAL SOUNDS Now Showing At A CD-ROM Drive Near You Battle Chess Enhanced: The game that brought animation and humor to chess has been released in several different forms. One of the first CD games on the market, the Enhanced version is still a popular variation on the ancient game. Queens cast deadly spells, Kings blast away with hidden revolvers, and lowly Pawns give arrogant Knights their comeuppance in ways the old chess masters never imagined. Better artwork, smoother animations, and a much The 7th Guest: Consistently ranking high in our polls and a stronger chess algorithm than its disk predecessors make the CD proven bestseller, The 7th Guest is a CD-ROM showpiece and a version a good buy for both the casual and the serious chess enthutitle that has remained unchallenged in its 3D-rendered beauty siast. Interplay Productions Inc., DOS/MPC & 3DO, $54.99. until the recent release of Myst on the Macintosh. Though classified Capitol Hill: Perhaps providing real evidence that politics is a as an adventure game, 7th Guest is really an interactive puzzle-based game, this product walks the would-be Congressional drama, a game whose traditional brain-teazers are woven together Representative from junior politico to Majority Leader. Hundreds by the haunting story of the mysterious Henry Srauf. If you have a of actual Capitol Hill photos and 45 minutes of video clips put you penchant for puzzles and want to see right in the middle of legislative and hear some of the most exceptional debates. There are lots of decisions to computer graphics and music created be made as you support or attempt to to date, scare yourself up a copy of this kill various bills—you may even get game. Virgin Interactive calls from that guy in the big white Entertainment Inc., DOS, *, $99.99. house. The big filibuster, though, is The Adventures of Willy Beamish: that this game, for all its promise, lacks Almost every adult has, at one time or a real endgame to make it come to life. another, secretly harbored a desire to The Software Toolworks, DOS, relive childhood years. You can take $49.95. this wish to the vicarious extreme CD-ROMIX! Prime, Freex and here. As Willy Beamish, you play Hardcase: It was inevitable that multitricks on your little sister, irritate your media would eventually invade every teachers, and generally annoy the aspect of our lives. One of the last of adult world in ways Beaver Cleaver the artistic holdouts was comics, but never dreamed of. Of course, there is a now they get the full treatment in this plot woven through Willy's shenanigans with his faithful frog sidekick, The 7th Guest, Virgin's graphic and sound showcase title. Malibu Comics' best-selling Ultraverse line is showcased here, Horny: if Willy is able to get out of including some real collector's items. Prime # 1, Hardcase # 1 and detention and ditch his baby-sitter, he may be able to uncover a Freex # 1 have never looked better with high-resolution graphics toxic waste dumping scam. This wonderfully zany world, created and visual effects, and the sound effects and rich musical score add by Jeff Tunnell, is every bit as carefully rendered as his more serious a new dimension to the traditional comic. The addition of interRise of the Dragon, despite the fact that it is a cartoon. The CD verviews with the artists is another nice feature, but the tactile feel and sion should by rights be even more of a riot, with digitized and lipsmell of a newly-printed comic hasn't quite been captured by the synched voices, but the acting adds little to the game, and it is fair electronic medium as yet. CD-ROMIX!, DOS, $24.95. to say that some of the voices are miscast. Dynamix, DOS & Sega CD, $59.45. Conspiracy: This cloak and dagger adventure game set in the crumbling USSR of 1990 was originally released as KGB. The Alone in the Dark: Games for the computer often lack suspense, mediocre game has been resurrected and embellished with the qualbut clever use of camera angles add a startlingly cinematic touch to ity acting of Donald Sutherland and a new intro sequence. this Lovecraft-inspired tale. You have the choice of playing either a Sutherland plays the part of the main character's dead father, intromale or female investigator searching for clues to the apparent suiducing the story and dolling out cide of Jeremy Hartwood. Inside the 3-D haunted house you'll find advice in full motion video ghosts, ghouls, pentagrams, demon-raising incantations, and all segments. Since the origkinds of occultic hocus pocus. The floppy-based version was simply inal game was not the best horror game for the computer in years, filled with creaky written with the stairs, haunted pianos and more monsters than you can shake a cruSutherland characcifix at. Enhanced on CD, the game offers better animation and ter in mind, his more cerie sounds, making the house of Dercero even more menacaddition comes off a ing. As an added bonus, the disc includes an adventure game bit strained: he is a vignette. Jack in the Dark, that introduces the sequel to Alone in the bit like a ghost that the Dark. Make sure to play with the lights off. I-Morion, DOS, main character y with the lights off. I-Motion, DOS, main character can con$69.95. jure when he \"just thinks about * 2MB or more HD space required Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"LUNICUS They Stole Your Planet. They're Trashing Your Country. They're Going To * Kill Your Family. Is There's Only One Thing A Civilized Person Can Do... HAL GAM MACWORLD Ebol WASTE EM \"FASTEST GAME ON CD-ROM.\" -NEW MEDIA MAGAZINE -MacHOME JOURNAL \"THE KING OF CD-ROM ADVENTURE GAMES.\" titt1/2 -MacUSER MAGAZINE Vou're one of the last free Earthlings left: your team on Moonbase Lunicus will have to save the world. Grab your cybersuit. Strap on the ol' plasma cannon. Jump in your shuttle and scream into the fire-fight of your dreams. AVAILABLE FOR MACINTOSH AND WINDOWS ON CD-ROM This lightspeed arcade movie brings you the best of both universes: butt-kicking action with CD-ROM intensity, and all of it with killer attitude! Hyper-real environments. Skull-crushing music-tracks. Kick droid-butt against tough odds that keep rising to match your skill. There's no waiting for anything, not even if you need to breathe. CYBERFLIX It's a dirty job but somebody's got to do it. Paramount Interactive Circle Reader Service #90 "


"him.» Sutherland's acting is first-rate, nonetheless, and the video is comprise a game, the only available source of cyberplasm is in the played nearly full-screen, but pays a very heavy price in image resohands of a menacing mob of marauding machines. An interactive lution to do so. The novelty of seeing a Big Screen actor in an comic book for gamers eight years old and up, and fans of alliteraadventure game is about the only thing going for it. Virgin tion everywhere, The Cyberplasm Formula provides for some enterInteractive Entertainment Inc., DOS, $74.99. taining, tongue-in-cheek, exploration and puzzle-solving. Sanctuary The Cyberplasm Formula: Victor Vector and Yondo, the timeWoods Multimedia, MPC/MAC, $39.95. traveling field agents of The Museum of Fantastic Phenomena, are CyberRace: Sid Mead brings his name, if not his considerable at it again. Their mission: journey to the late 21st Century and procinematic design talents, to bear on the software industry. cure a supply of cyberplasm. It seems that the museum's curator, However, even the man who helped make Blade Runner a sciencehalf-mechanical and half-humanoid, needs the cyberplasm to stay fiction noir success can't quite pull off the same here. The game is a alive. Since there must be a problem in order for this journey to space race simulator that uses Voxel technology to render the alien Tintaplats Enhanced character animation process that creates excellent lip-synching and facial expressions. SimAnta will walk you through the basics of the game and allow you to play while she comments on your progress. interplay Productions has always been ing history; and a fully narrated tutorial SimCity: Maxis' classic city simulator at the forefront of CD-ROM gaming. that allows the player to jump into a game comes to life with the help of Interplay's come When they introduced Battle Chess on in progress at several points. The package multimedia team. Using the original the CD-ROM in 1990, they were the first also includes a source book of 10 historical SimCity game engine, Interplay adds a company to enhance one of their games for castles, with photos, film and voice-over beautiful computer-rendered introduction the new technology, and Battle Chess was, narration, and castle floor plans that you sequence, full motion video segments of for a few years, one of the only real CD can actually use in the game. professional actors, and real footage of natproducts amidst a lot of talk. Interplay Lord of the Rings CD: With 25 minutes ural disasters to heighten the drama of continues to heavily support CD gaming, of footage from the SimCity life. and has, in fact, built such a reputation Ralph Bakshi film, Newscasters will that Maxis has come to them for enhanced and 40 minutes of bring out the versions of their games. high quality CD lighter side of Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space CD: audio and digitized ACTION nuclear meltNEWS Interplay has added multimedia booster speech, Interplay's downs and tornarockets to their strategy game covering the Lord of the Rings does, while the U.S./Soviet race into space. The low captures the flavor working class sims frame-rate video footage of the original of Tolkien's epic will tell you about release has been enhanced and extended tale berrer than any the problems they with full motion footage, including some other computer face in your city. never-before-seen video from the Soviet game adaptation. SVGA video suparchives. The game has been significantly You assume the port has been tweaked as well, with the addition of E role of hobbit added, as well as a mail and modem play, a fully orchestrated Frodo Baggins, leader of the Fellowship on spoken on-line help system. Even in a lifesound track. a new quickstart level, and a quest to destroy the Ring. An 8-minute threatening crisis, Sim City has never several new mission types, including a tutorial has also been added to help acclilooked better. manned trip to Mars. Only the astronauts mate new players to the interface and game Star Trek 25th Anniversary CD: The themselves had a clearer picture of this hisplay features. voices of the original Star Trek cast have toric period. SimAnt: Maxis digital ant farm has been beamed down to the CD-ROM verCastles II: You're unlikely to see a better undergone a complete overhaul for this sion of Interplay's best-selling adventure example of what CD-ROM can do for enhanced multimedia version. VGA graph game. Now, the actual voices of William gaming than in this enhanced version of ics, a new sound track and sound effects, a new sound track and sound effects, Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and dozens of the original Castles II. Around the fortress an incredible computer-rendered introducother actors will speak the lines of a half of a solid strategy game, Interplay has built teov game. Interplay has built thon, 30 minutes of full motion, full s tion, 30 minutes of full motion, full screen dozen original adventure episodes. The several multimedia battlements: fully spo animation, and 20 minutes of film footage game has been changed a bit to incorporate ken, professionally acted game plots totalshot in the Arizona desert paint a pretty a new ending, but the core game engine and ing 4-5 hours of speech; enhanced black & picture of ant life. A full tutorial has also its strong writing remain the came Gamere white movie footage; 30 minutes of BBC been added, hosted by SimAnta, a digital who haven't yet explored this familiar unidocumentary film footage on castle buildpuppet created with Vactor-technology, a verse will definitely want to do so. Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"The kingmaker. Orest TM for the Crohun Actual screens may vary. Step back in history to the time of the War of the Roses. In England, racked by civil war, the crown hangs by a thread and the throne is there for the taking. Take command of your own faction and begin the quest for the crown. Will you fall to face the executioners blade? Or can you outwit your opponents and win, for your Roval Heir, the throne of all England? Based on the best selling strategy board game, Kingmaker brings the intrigue and anarchy of the 15th Century warring England to life. No matter how many times you play, \"highly-sophisticated artificial intelligence guarantees a challenge for novice and master strategist alike. Available at Leading Resellers, including:  Babbages Comp USA Computer City Electronics Boutique Egghead Radio Shack  Software Etc. Walden's Software. Coming Soon ... 3rd Reich PC and Operation: Crusader-Part 1 of the World at War Series! The Opposition finds toice through Pichard of York, both Rival claimant finds voice Shakespeare's great drama Henry VI recounts the War of the Roses throughout Kingmaker. \"Come, let us four to dinner. I dure say this quarrel will drink blood another dny.\". B ench BANNED in the UK! Can you place your candidate upon the throne? Or will you end, us so many did, bent beneath the headman's axe ... AL The Abalon Hill Game Company ook memory. Fligh Density Salou GAMES OF STRATEGY Available on: IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 286 or better. me Min. 640K memory. High Density DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC Hard Drive. VGA graphic support AdLib, Roland, SoundBlaster 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 Sound support for digitized speech. If Kingmaker cannot be found locally, please call TOLL FREE 1-800-999-3222 UTALNPBH 1. 000.2222. Also available: Commodore Amiga. 1 MB reqd. HD recommended. Circle Reader Service #38 "


"APTAR STORES landscapes of its race course. While the racing can be mildly interamount of repetition involved, and retracing one's steps does get a esting once you get beyond some awkward game mechanics, an bit old after a while. Nonetheless, the experience is worthwhile for uninteresting plot and characters fail to keep interest, despite some anyone with more than a passing interest in the horror genre. pretty neat artwork. CyberDreams, DOS, $69.95. Viacom New Media, DOS, $69.95. Day of the Tentacle: The disk version of this game was a fabuDragon Tales: Rage of the Dark Alliance: Role-players are in for lous sequel to Maniac Mansion in which the world had to be saved a treat with this new 3-D adventure scheduled for a first quarter from a mutated tentacle in classic cartoon chaos. The CD version release. Unlike The 7th Guest, which offered limited path moveadds not only full digitized speech for all of the characters, but the ment in each room, Dragon Tales features extensive movement acting abilities of Richard Sanders (WKRP's Les Nessman) as our throughout, some rooms having over 200 pre-defined paths. hero Bernard, along with many other inspired performances. More Created with 3D Studio 3.0, the game world offers a more realistic than the sum of its parts, the enhanced game involves you in the environment for interaction. As the player moves about in the CD characters' plight, even as you're splitting at the sides from the version of this game (a floppy version will also be available), conmadcap humor. Chuck Jones would have been proud. LucasArts tinuous movement and panning result in life-like first-person Entertainment Company, DOS, $69.95. movements. Though action similar to that of Shadowcaster is incorDracula Unleashed: Those who sink their teeth into Dracula porated, the primary focus is on puzzle-based play, where puzzles Unleashed can count on many hours of haunting play in this often have more than one possible solution—but keep your sword unholy whodunit from the creators of Sherlock Holmes, Consulting handy. The Software Toolworks, DOS, *, * .?). Detective. Live actors and sets add a strong cinematic realism to the Dune: When released in the 60s, Frank Herbert's epic novel was atmosphere of this interactive horror. Acting is excellent, with more than a sci-fi hit, becoming one of the first of that genre to memorably creepy performances throughout. There is a fair gain acclaim—and big sales—in more mainstream venues. The Playing Outside The Lines S ven as much as we enjoy gaming, we but the picture quality still has a way to go must admit, however reluctantly, before it reaches television standards, much that there are other reasons to go less those of a good movie theatre. The multimedia.» With this in mind, here is a sound is hardly earthor ear-shattering, handful of other cool stuff available on CD but in fairness, this approach would probafor your PC, all unique and stimulating in bly work better with a newer film. The their own right: La performances, especially that of star Jimmy Dennis Miller: That's News To Me: Stewart in the prime of his rich career, may yet be savored here. A noble effort, this Described by the sardonic wit himself as a title will please fans of the film, at least series of monologues from a comic in a until the technology improves enough to padded cell designed by Steve Jobs, this leave it behind. Micro Prose Software Inc., CD allows you to do what no producer was ever able to do-control Dennis MPC, $79.95. Miller. Building off Miller's strength as the HBO Comedy Central: It's \"newscaster» on Saturday Night Live and All Relative: The his very topical stand-up routines, the pro Simpsons were gram allows you to select jokes based on to select jokes based on neither the first the months of 1993 and four different top nor necessarily the ical segments (World News, Sports, Show funniest of America's Biz and Politics). You pick a month, a carBiz and Politice) You pick a month. a car dysfunctional famiegory and a specific news story; Dennis Ties, and this product, takes care of the rest. $29.95. Macintosh the first release in Time and IBM with Windows. Warner Interactive's It's a Wonderful Life: It's certainly a Short Attention Span wonderful idea, transferring classic films to Theater shows why. It premultimedia. This somewhat uneven prodsents 51 short video clips of ucr showcases both the strengths and weakstand-up comedians talking nesses of the genre. The ability to read the about the dysfunctional nature of their families. The script while watching the film makes this more than just a film on your computer, short video segments are indexed by several subject areas and types of comedians (Italian, Jewish, etc.), as well as alphabetically by name. The product also has a screen-saver feature that plays video clips randomly when your computer isn't busy gaming. IBM with Windows, $39.95. MEGA Rock Rap'n Roll: Clever use of pre-composed music bits allow you to produce your own pro-quality jam sessions at home. Dissonance, distortion, wah-wah and several other sound effects constructed through «tape loops\" can be used to emulate that big studio effect. Your recording genius can be saved to hard disk, or even cassette tape, as the program offers instant mixing and neareffortless editing. After just a few minutes with the interface, you'll be grooving to the Bop O-Rama, a music mixing program for the musically-challenged. Paramount Interactive, MPC & MAC, *, $59.95. Desktop comedy routines on the family routine ons COME Noreet SHORT ATTENTION STAN THEATER It's All Relative Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"IN CYBERSTRIKE, ALL BEGINNERS WILL BE TREATED FAIRLY. GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine WINNER 1993 COMPUTER ON-LINE GAME OF THE YEAR 0) E AND THEN DESTROYED Beaten all the boxed games? Done the arcades to death? Try CyberStrike,\" the wild new multi-player game on GEnie where you hop into a two-legged CyberPod and battle it out against other real live humans for control of a virtual reality city. The action's fast and furious. But even if you're new in town, you won't get blown to Kingdom Come. Well, not right away at least. In fact, CyberStrike is so easy to learn, you might actually live long enough to waste someone else first. And best of all, it only costs three bucks an hour. So strap yourself inside a Pod and come out shooting. You've got nothing to lose. Except your life. GEnie multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS SIGN UP NOW: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter JOINGENIE then press RETURN 4. At the key code prompt enter AJC423 5. Have a major credit card or your checking account number ready. For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. LE TE 13 mm \"Here's the fine print. Genie multi-player games and support services are $3.00 an hour in non-prime time: 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. local time Mon.-Fri., all day Sat. and Sun. and selected holidays. There's also an $8.95 monthly subscription fee. Each month, you'll get credit for up to four hours of nonprime time usage. Any surcharges incurred apply to all hourly usage, including your first four hours. SIMUTRONICS Circle Reader Service #59 "


"VESMERZINE MEGABYTES film should have been bigger than Star Wars, because it had all the Overall, a good buy for either the novice or veteran sim enthusiast. elements of a hit: strong characters, dastardly villains, politics, MicroProse Software Inc., DOS, *, $79.95. intrigue, and an action-packed plor. Somehow, the best elements of Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers: Gabriel Knight is as differthe book failed to translate to the big screen, and when the game ent from other adventure games as a fine wine is from the local was released, it suffered much the same fate. Of course, the most drug-store brand. Certainly the game is well-plorred. and the obvious solution was to take elements from the film and game to design is sound throughout. In Gabriel Knight, though, there are form a new product. Strange as it sounds, this cult marriage is faire is fairno emptily pretty scenes, no gratuitous bits of sound. Everything in ly successful. Many of the actors come off better on the PC screen the game contributes to an atmosphere possessed by no other comthan they fared in the real cinema, and the addition of digitized purer product before or since. In the CD version—the only one to speech spices up many of the dull parts of the game. If you have own-voices of major actors (Tim Curry, Mark Hamill) call like more than a passing interest, hop on an ornithopter and grab this sirens to the gamer, who is gladly seduced farther and deeper into game-just watch out for the worms! Virgin Interactive this impeccably crafred and terrifying world Challenging and Entertainment Inc., DOS, $99.99. thought-provoking, an experience not to be missed, for those F-15 Strike Eagle III: As this classic flight sim has progressed mature enough to handle it. Sierra On-Line, DOS/MPC, , through its three versions it has steadily improved its graphic look $69.95. while keeping its hard-edged simulation core intact. Although the Gobliiins Multimedia CD: The King of the Goblins has lost his game is not on the cutting graphical edge, the carefully rendered wits, and it's up to three of his goofy subiects to find them. This artwork still has a definitely pleasing photo-realistic style which French puzzle game with an adventure style interface is ever so cute adds immensely to gameplay. The CD adds some !) minutes of and challenging, and the physical, Three Stooges-inspired comedy gorgeous intro footage, a couple of new scenarios, and a very useful and a very useful is perfect for the younger computer gaming ser. You control the is perfect for th tutorial on the plethora of armament for this versatile fighter. Movie Select: In a quandary about product. A reference work in the wines, Personal Wines (user-customized, of which video to rent for the night? This Compton's tradition, this CD features stacourse) and Port. You can search by variprogram has guides to some 40,000 video tistics on all NFL players since 1980, video etal, producer, vintage, rating, price or titles, each with capsule summaries. Films highlight clips from the 1992 season, Hall value, with space provided to enter your of Fame stories and video clips for some personal tasting notes. Multicom fan's desires can be satisfied. Look for parplayers, and a trivia game. The trivia game Publishing Inc., MPC/MAC, *, $59.95. ticular directors, stars or genres, while features an on-screen football Xplora 1: Peter Gabriel's Secret World: Movie Select gives recommendations based field across which players Peter Gabriel's pioneering musical and on your desires. You can even print lists of advance by answering multechnological spirit are captured your favorites to take with you to the video tiple choice questions corvividly on this CD. store. As a bonus, the CD version includes rectly. Unfortunately, it Nearly two movie-theatre style previews of justfeatures no artificial hours of released videos. Not yet the interactive opponent to test one's stunning Siskel and Ebert, but still a useful tool for gridiron trivia prowess. video footage the film fan. Paramount Interactive, MPC, Nonetheless, this elecand 30 min*, $59.95. tronic equivalent of an utes of audio NFL encyclopedia combine with Personal Daily Planlt--Adrenaline, offers plenty of Earth and Paradise: These programs offer more than 100 information to be still images to different versions of daily planners for the explored. allow you to search computer age. Earth has a real nature-film Compton's New through the makauthenticity to its look, while Paradise Media, IBM with ing of the Us looks as though you've been dropped into Windows, *, album, view the the middle of a sports swimsuit issue. Tons $39.95. filming of the Kiss of quotes, trivia from Isaac Asimov and Wines of the That Frog video, or access to spreadsheets and word processors World: More than a coffee sample music of 40 are but a few of the conveniences offered table book on the computer, Wines of the cclectic artists from by this useful product. The addition of World not only offers color photos, literate around the world. While voice recognition software makes you text and understandable flow charts on viewing artwork, videos or backstage shots almost feel as if you have a secretary close Wine Appreciation, Wine Regions and at the Grammy's might be interesting, at hand. Media Vision, MPC, *, $59.95. Wine Quality, but it also features a useful explorers will have the most fun remixing The Sporting News Multimedia Pro tool called the Wine Browser. The Wine their own Peter Gabriel music videos and Football Guide: You can host your own Browser is a database that contains notes joining in on jam sessions. Interplay NFL highlight show with this multimedia on U.S.-produced varietals, Bordeaux Productions Inc., MAC, *, $44.99. CGW XPLORA 1 Peter Gabriel's Secret World Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"Real Ordinary ReelMagic 256 VS. 32,768 COLORS Why settle for a mere 256 colors, offered by current PC games, when ReelMagic gives you theater-quality graphics with over 32,000? There's more to games than a mouth that sort of moves or tinny sound. Now there's a new way to play PC games that's just like sitting in a theater controlling the action with your joystick. It's ReelMagic, the new MPEG playback adapter. Available only from Sigma Designs. This incredible add-in board brings the next generation of CD-ROM games to your PC GRUNTS VS. CD-QUALITY AUDIO Get 16-bit CD-quality sound that plays Sound Blaster and Windows\" compatible software. The 8-bit audio you're used to just doesn't compare. POUICE QUEST4  5 FPS VS. 30 FPS ReelMagic-compatible games run at 30 frames-per-second, TRUE full-motion, so you avoid jerky, blocky images. Reel Magic bigger than life. ReelMagie 1/4 VS. FULL SCREEN Now you Say adios to wimpy can get theater-quality video in a graphics. Herky-jerky full-screen image for a realistic, movie-like experience. movement. Bogus sound. And phony scenarios. ReelMagic pumps up the reality meter so you can crank up the fantasy. We've also included Activision's Return to Zork so you can experience the excitement of full motion video now. It's not real unless it's ReelMagic. Call 1-800-845-8086 ext. 324 for a dealer demo near you. Or you can stick with real ordinary. Oh joy! Discover the new generation of Red Magic games from these manufacturers, and look for more exciting titles coming soon. Reel Magic Adapter PC Computing SIERRA ACTIVISION COMITON'S NEWMEDIA Maase divas as I OG MVP Cris MVPI READYSOFT trilobyts ACCESS GAMES entertainment FINALIST Only ReelMagic Makes It Real DASMAS 1993 Styna D , the T Sona Dist a nta runkard s a trudnork of Sga Dagine chord names and products are trademarks or registremerafterpart s . Circle Reader Service #98 "


"ASTOUNDING AMMATON ENERGY P LUS UNNI Stricato U, WP Estimated ETUD:21 um three gobliins with the mouse, using each character's unique skills against a wizard Al in this quick-playing game. It is quick-playing to solve the \"now, where do I use this object?\" puzzles. In its for two reasons: there are only three stones per side, and the Al is \"enhanced» form, it has a much improved sound track along with fast. The game's graphics aren't anything special and there isn't a new spoken word vignettes sprinkled between the puzzle levels. soundtrack, but since the game doesn't require much disk access, Sierra On-Line, DOS, *, $39.95. you don't even need to put the game on your hard drive. It plays Gobliins II: The sequel to Gobliiins is no less entertaining than very nicely when it comes straight off the CD, even with a singlethe original, though it does star one less animated goblin. In this speed drive. ROM TIME, DOS, $39.00. trip through animated adventure/puzzle land, two imps, Fingus Inca Multimedia CD: Offering the same blend of arcade action and Winkle, must work as a team to rescue the Goblin King's kidand puzzle-solving play of the diskette version, Inca Multimedia napped heir. The game play is similar to the original, though the CD adds to the playing experience and atmosphere by incorporatinterface has been simplified, and there is much more sound and ing a New Age CD quality stereo soundtrack (employing authentic digitized voice acting than in the enhanced version of the first Incan instruments) and crisp, digitized voices. Otherwise, play has game. Sierra On-Line, DOS, *, $39.95. changed little from the original Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic release, sporting puzzles of mod1939-43: In some respects, this game is a est difficulty and joystick bustin' cross between disk space-intensive games on action sequences. So, if you don't CD such as Jutland, and more traditional mind a good dash of action fare. The game requires 8MB but has hunmixed in with your puzzle-solvin' dreds of authentic WWII images accessed fun, Inca can offer it in plenty. directly from CD. The game features addiSierra On-Line, DOS, *, tional menu options, including hidden $49.95. movement of other task forces. All the Indiana Jones and the Fate of expansion disks and editors are included on Atlantis: Indy! Come quickly! the CD version, making it a good buy for They've taken the words off the aspiring captains of the Bismarck, or other screen and replaced them with great ships of the era. It would be hard speech! Playing the disk version of indeed to find a more comprehensive simulaAtlantis is fun, but in many ways, tion of ship-to-ship naval warfare in WWII. it's just another adventure game. Gamers once again play space-time seamstress Strategic Simulations Inc., DOS, *, $70.00 in Presto Studios' The Journeyman Project. What the CD version does is use Hell Cab: Aesthetically resplendent, but full speech throughout to transrather simplistic in terms of game play, Hell Cab is a case of new form the game into a fine approximation of an Indiana Jones film, technology meeting old game design. In much the same way as the with you as the main character. The acting is excellent, the action old Cinemaware games, we were enamored with the graphics but more gripping than ever, simply because it can be heard rather than less than enchanted with some of the game play. In this adventure read. It's like going from silent films to talkies. If you want a good game with timing-sensitive action sequences, the gamer takes on reason to purchase a CD-ROM, look no further. LucasArts the role of a modern New York tourist who ends up in a taxi desEntertainment Company, DOS, $69.95. tined for the land of eternal punishment. If you have trouble playIron Helix: The 3-D rendered interior of a starship with a mind ing games \"to save your life,\" imagine what it's like trying to win a of its own is the setting for this game of hi-tech cat & mouse. You game in order to save your soul.» Time Warner Interactive, MPC control a defenseless probe as it tries to wrest control of a starship & MAC, $99.99. from a renegade Al while avoiding the pursuit of a probe-eating The Horde: Kirk Cameron, teen star of TV's Growing Pains, defender robot. The pace of the action is not as break-neck as the plays the role of Chauncey, a clumsy young oaf charged with turngame's billing likes to pretend, but the game promises several hours ing a tepid swamp, an arid desert, and an arctic wasteland (among of intense, strategic duck n' jive against an aggressive and efficient other undesirable plots) into productive farmland. As if this AL. Be warned, though: when those several hours are up, there is weren't difficult enough, Chauncey must defend his farms from very little replay value. Spectrum the Horde: a species of ravenous mouths-with-legs. Developed by HoloByte, MPC & MAC, Games For Bob (Paul Reiche, Fred Ford), The Horde is a wild and $99.9). wooley action/strategy game that combines resource management The Journeyman with scrolling hack-n-slash action. Interspersed berween game levProject: For whatevels are full motion video clips that chronicle Chauncey's success er reason, a large and his developing relationship with the King and his Evil Advisor. number of CD Excellent acting and game play combined with twisted humor games share a com(centered upon a disturbing preoccupation with cows) should mon science fictional make this one a winner. Crystal Dynamics, DOS & 3DO, $59.99. motif, probably because Hyper Backgammon: You can sharpen your backgammon skills of the high-tech flair associet for TRRFYING INCOMPATBILITY Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"STAR TREK JUDGMENT RITES MOVIE & SOUND PACK AN EXPLOSIVE NEW ADDITION TO THE JUDGMENT RITES EXPERIENCE. STAR TREK JUDGMENT RITES MoviE & SOUND PACK UTILINES JURGIT SAL Star Trek: Judgment Rites\" goes to warp speed with the addition of the new Movie and Sound Pack. 1. A cinematic explosion of sight and sound, the Judgment Rites Movie & Sound Pack plugs into your original Judgment Rites program, expanding the experience with fantastic new cinematic sequences and digitized sound effects from the original television series. It's the ultimate expansion disk for the ultimate adventure. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 The Judgment Rites Movie and Sound Pack requires the original Star Trek: Judgment Rites program. Software 1993, 94 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. & 1994 Paramount Pictures. All Rights Reserved. STAR TREK is a Registered Trademark of Paramount Pictures. Interplay is an authorized user. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"SATILANNE SCRIPTING ated with the genre. While Journeyman possesses some of the traptle, and they certainly didn't look as crisp and ocean blue as pings, it avoids many of the pitfalls of its competitors. Gamers Jutland but then they didn't take up 20 MB of hard drive space, familiar with Poul Anderson's novels about the Time Patrol will either. Software Sorcery, DOS, *, $89.95. feel very much at home here, as they attempt to repair rips in the King's Quest V: Sierra's first King's Quest title to make its way to fabric of time. The guardians of the True History must be ever vigCD-ROM. King's Ouest V: Absence Makes the Heart Go Yonder! is ilant as they travel through wonderfully-rendered 3D worlds, fola product that leaves its players with mixed emotions. Though it lowing the intricate plotline. Solid acting by real pros blends with employs over 50 voice actors and offers a rich stereo soundtrack, the evocative soundtrack to provide a refreshing experience for the quality of the voice acting covers the gamut from excellent to most any gamer. Definitely a game with which to wow the neighmediocre and, in some cases, can grate on the nerves. Nonetheless. bors. Presto Studios Inc., MPC & MAC, CD Only, $99.95. if you have not yet played this title, it is an excellent animated Jutland: Jutland is one of the few naval engagements that rival adventure with a solid story continuing the exploits of King Trafalgar in scope and grandeur. This CD-only game is appropriGraham, a game the whole family can enjoy. In spite of the hetately grandiose, although it attempts a bit more than it can actually erogeny of the voice talent, the CD version is preferable over the pull off. Real-time combat fits in well with the tactical feel, some floppy edition as the other enhancements are excellent, and the what resembling tabletop miniatures in style and function. game can be played directly from the CD. Sierra On-Line, Gunnery tables showcase the effective penetration power of shells DOS/MPC, $44.95. versus various types of armor thicknesses, fitting well into the comKing's Quest VI: King's Quest VI: Heir Today, Gone Tomorrow plicated ballistics model. Wargamers will likely be disappointed features quality vocal talent throughout and audibly displays that from a historical standpoint, as the torpedo boats which caused Sierra learned from their previous error, employing professional Jellicoe to turn his fleet away are given short shrift in the game. In game. In actors rather than using existing staff members for voice-overs. fairness, most boardgames have also ignored this aspect of the batThe AB s of CDs Multimedia For Kids Busytown: Based upon The Busy World of the dino-craze. Included with this silvery A Story Painting Adventure offers a unique of Richard Scarry, Busytown introduces disk of dino delights is a copy of the Dino and entertaining way to do so. An adaptachildren ages 3 to 7 to lovable characters Times, the official tion of the classic children's story, this title like Huckle Cat and Mr. Frumble as they newsletter of The allows kids to «paint their way out of puzlearn addition and subtraction, pattern Dinosaur Society, and zling situations using wellmatching, counting, problem solving and several classy dinosaur known computer reading. Whether building a house or decals. The real meat painting tools like a becoming a firefighter, Busytown is playful of this package, of sprayer, eraser, paint learning at its best. Paramount Interactive, course, is the brush and pencil. MPC, *, $59.95. Dinosaurs program Afraid of the sharp Forever Growing Garden: Watering itself, a multimedia edge on Captain Hook's sword? Grab the your computer is probably not a good idea, encyclopedia that but watering the plants in your garden is a chronicles the hispaintbrush and turn it daily affair, even if your garden is a digital tory of these into a banana! Over 30 one. Young gardeners can sprout vegetaancient lizards. scenes are featured with bles, flowers and decorative hedges in one Graphics, videos hundreds of possible soluof three garden sites: home, castle or farm. and audio effects tions. Electronic Arts, A Garden Growth Speed-O-Meter allows are superb, and DOS, *, $49.95. growth time to be adjusted so that one day the interface is a model of the interface is Putt-Putt Goes to the equals one day, one day equals one second, design and user-friendliness. If you want Moon: Following the success or anywhere in-between. Whether you the best resource available on those wonof their exceptional edutainment title for have a green thumb or not this garden simderful and terrifying animals, then young children, Fatty Bear's Birthday ulator will provide much soil-spading fun. Microsoft Dinosaurs is your best bet. Surprise, Humongous has once again Media Vision, MPC/MAC, $49.95 Microsoft Corporation, MPC, *, $79.95. attained orbit with Putt-Putt Goes to the Microsoft Dinosaurs: Kids' obsession Peter Pan: A Story Painting Adventure: Moon. Directed by Ron Gilbert (of Monkey with dinosaurs long preceded lurassic Park. If you want to reinforce your children's Island fame), Putt-Putt Goes to the Moon but the hit film has only fanned the Cames (ages five to nine) learning skills, Peter Pan provides a fun learning adventure for chile Peter Pan EA Kid Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"Although the game can be played directly from the CD if so its depressingly empty world and staid adventure game mechanics desired, installation of additional data will speed up play. Overall, create a game that is less than timeless. Electronic Arts, DOS & the game features a nice, fairy-tale plot, fair but difficult puzzles, CD32, $59.95. and Sierra's traditional excellence in sound and graphics. It is a Laura Bow in the Dagger of Amon Ra: Mystery fans will relish much improved product over carlier multimedia efforts and a worthe intrigue, secret liaisons and hidden agendas of The Dagger of thy heir to the King's Quest lineage. Sierra On-Line, DOS/MPC Amon Ra, not to mention the swelling ride of murders occurring $49.95. throughout this adventure. The sequel to The Colonel's Bequest Klotski: This admittedly budget offering is hardly Tetris, but it finds our heroine, Laura Bow, in a much more believable 1920s is addictive enough to stay on the hard drive for some time. A pure setting, with Art Deco very much in evidence, and hard-boiled puzzle game, it requires moving blocks around so a particular block characters in nearly every scene. Audibly enhanced from the origican \"escape.» Some of the puzzles require non-linear thinking, nal floppy release and featuring a competent cast of voice actors, while others are fairly straightforward. Something to enjoy with the this second Laura Bow adventure calls on the player's attention to evening tea, for those who want more of a mainstream brain-draindetail and deductive reasoning skills to solve the theft of the infaer than, say, The Incredible Machine. Quanta Press Inc., DOS, mous dagger and expose the murderer before becoming the next $19.95. victim. Hand-painted art, emotive stereo soundtrack, deep puzzles, The Labyrinth of Time: Essentially a traditional adventure game and a convoluted storyline all combine to and a convoluted storyline all combine to make this multimedia cast from the raw material of multimedia, The Labyrinth of Time game a winner. Sierra On-Line, DOS/MPC, $49.95. features a relentless maze in both space and concept. King Minos is The Legend of Kyrandia: Westwood's first Fables Fiends title back in the labyrinth-building business and, if successful, he will is an excellent, if somewhar short, adventure. Stunning graphics use the mystical powers associated with the \"labyrinth of time to and sound initially brought the fantasy world of Kyrandia to life. control all space and time. The player has been plucked from Now, with the release of the CD-ROM version, digitized voices his/her own work-a-day life to face the immortal tyrant, and the have been added to further immerse the player in the richness of rest is revisionist mythology. The graphics are impressive, from the the gaming world. The Legend of Kyrandia is a quality product film noir introduction to the lavish sets of lonic columns, and the throughout. If Westwood would just release the CD version of soundtrack offers the gravity to be expected from a Classical Greek their titles first, they would have few detractors. Westwood theme. Though mythology and time travel interbreed seamlessly, Studios, DOS, CD Enhanced, $74.99. GOES dren 3 to 8 years old. The goal: learn how MAC, *, $59.95 many hours of learning fun with this interto cooperate while helping Putt-Putt and Sound It Out Land. This is one of the active picture book. Broderbund Software his friend Rover (a moon rover) accomfew educational programs that uses phonics Inc., MPC & MAC, $39.95. plish a few good deeds for the moon peoto teach reading skills. In the guise of a TuneLand: Starring Howie Mandel as ple and repair a rocket to return to earth. musical theme park, this Little Howie, TuneLand is the first title in Putt-Putt offers a classic adventure program uses songs and a new, and aptly named, Desktop experience for children objects to teach reading Playground series. Children (ages 3 to 103) (and adults). and recognition skills. can anticipate endless hours of giggles and Humongous From Sing Along Sam to play as they learn basic computer skills and Entertainment, Vowel Owl, Sound It interact with the comical on-screen antics DOS, $49.95. Out Land offers youngof Little Howie. Countless animations and Sitting on the sters eye and ear candy a bevy of favorite children's songs and Farm: It doesn't of the most nutritious rhymes contribute to each scene in this take very long for kind. The six original interactive musical cartoon, making it a a picnic lunch to songs included can wholly captivating experience for both turn messy when a also be played on children and their parents. 7th Level, little girl is joined audio CD players. MPC, $49.95. by a menagerie of Conexus, MPC, Where in the World is Carmen delightful animals. $49.95 Sandiego Deluxe: This educational The first I-Learn The Tortoise sleuthing game needs little, if any, introtitle for kids ages 7 to and the Hare: An duction. From Nickelodeon to Saturday 11 offers four modes age-old tale from morning cartoons, Carmen Sandiego is a of interactivity: the fables of Aesop, well known figure. The CD-ROM version Listen-Along, for listhis story-one that extols the of this best-selling game adds substantial tening to the story virtue of steady work as opposed to hurvalue to an already excellent game. being read; Read-Along, ried, sporadic efforts—springs to life in the Enhancements include digitized photos allowing a child to record her own voice; hands of Broderbund's Living Books from the National Geographic Society, Sing-Along, for listening to and recording group. Children ages 3 to 8 can either lismusic from the Smithsonian/Folkways with the music; and Write-Along, for creten while the story is read aloud or interact Recordings, and The World Almanac & ating new stories. Designed primarily to with the story by exploring screens thatBook of Facts. Go ahead, enlist as an ace develop reading and writing skills, and hide dozens of silly animations. In either develop reading and writing skills, and hide devens of detective with the ACME Detective encourage creativity, Sitting on the farm case, there is certainly no shortage to the Agency and track Carmen down in this stands up well as a fun educational tool. entertainment value or hilarious antics in educational adventure. Broderbund Sanctuary Woods Multimedia Corp., The Tortoise and the Hare. Prepare for Software Inc., MPC & MAC, *, $60.00. April 1994 Page 33 "


"COLOSSAL COMPRESSION Loom: Brian Moriarty's beautifully spun tale of Bobbin of the paladin Roland, a knight in service to Charlemagne who Threadbare and his quest to mend the fabric of time receives addiwon the magic sword Durendal from the Saracens. More a book tional embellishments in its CD-ROM form. The game package than an adventure game, Roland incorporates Hypertext, actually includes two CDs: Loom the Audio Drama, a 30 minute QuickTime video, and full spoken dialogue to tell the tale of story that sets up the game's characters and setting, and the Loom Roland's decent into madness from the perspective of several charthe Game, which feaures full spoken dialogue and an enhanced acters. With textual commentary from the likes of Carlos soundtrack. Though a few years old, Loom's unique music-oriented Casteneda, Carl Jung, and Anais Nin, its use of art and acting to interface, strong story-telling, and incredible graphics still stand up add another dimension to the text, and its «mature» treatment of to more current adventure games. Unfortunately, the CD-ROM the story make it a decidedly adult, and decidedly interesting, tale. version does nothing to address the only criticism ever leveled A significant step in interactive fiction's quest to define itself. against the game—it's too short. Still, it is an excellent game for Compton's New Media, MAC, CD Only, $59.95. the new computer gamer. The Magic Death: Virtual LucasArts Entertainment Murder 2: A beautiful, NobelCompany, DOS, CD Enhanced, prize winning anthropology stu$99.95. dent has been murdered in a Lost in Time: Combining a Voodoo ritualistic killing, and 3D game world with digitized you have six virtual hours to figvideo to achieve a look similar to ure out whodunit. The play is that of Inca, Coktel Vision transvery similar to ICOM's Sherlock ports you back to the year 1840, Holmes series of games. After where you must prevent a murfinding clues at the scene, orderderous fiend from killing your ing toxicological exams, and ancestors in classic time-travel reviewing QuickTime animafashion. The game begins with tions of videotaped interviews your attempt to escape from a with suspects, you'll be able to prison cell in the hold of a solve this attractive, engaging, Spanish Galleon. Though game Broderbund's Myst has established the current high-water well-scripted mystery. Creative play is interesting and movement mark in gaming graphics. Multimedia, MPC, $49.99. through the 3D world is fluid, Man Enough: If you've ever the digitized video does not seem as crisp, nor does the music offer wondered what an interactive dating service would be like. Man the emotive force of that employed in Inca. Additionally, some Enough should give you a clue. The object of the game is to win puzzles border on the obtuse, but there's still enough going on to and not to score. You win by getting to know five lovely NPC entice those gamers who missed catching reruns of Time Tunnel. ladies through menu-based conversations accented with boudoir Sierra On-Line, DOS, *, $39.95. photos. If you can successfully captivate their minds while followLunicus: In this arcadish action shooter, the player is part of a ing the conversation trees through five different dates, you get to team charged with zapping alien droids who have overrun Earth in go on a dream date with the lovely woman pictured on the pack2023. As with most games of this ilk, the background info is superage. Well...you get to go on a date via the magic of photography. fluous. The game cleverly incorporates programming enhanceLearning to match potential coversational gambits with each artifiments to speed up CD-ROM access times and enable \"high speed, cial woman's personality is the primary activity in the game, but fluid motion\" action. Firefights through mazes in three cities are the designer did experiment a bit with interactive video during the challenging, but graphics quality is mixed and begs more realistic Paintball segment. The denouement seemed kind of cute, but detail. Cyberflix, MAC, *, $79.95. knowing this male-oriented hobby, we know that some gamers are Mad Doe McCree: From the arcades to the desktop, American going to be more annoyed than amused. Tsunami Media, DOS, Laser's Mad Dog McCree sets its sights on the gamer with the er with the $79.95. fastest mouse, as gun-slinging action comes home. Based on the Microsoft Golf: Sporting a familarcade hit, this real-motion interactive shoot-em-up game brings iar look, this could easily be exciting action to PC compatibles, complete with ambushes, bank called \"Son of Links robberies and scalawags galore. The CD version is not as fast on comes to your favorite the draw as its heritage would lead you to believe. Even so, there's golf course.\" While plenty for the sheriff to do. Rescue the mayor and his daughter and the resolution canrid the town of Mad Dog and his pack of outlaws, but make sure not equal Links to practice shootin' some bottles first. If your aim is off and you 386—and what take three bullers, you'll be pushin' up daisies. American Laser could?-it does use Games, DOS, CD-I & 3DO, $59.95. Windows' 256 colors The Madness of Roland: Set in Medieval France, this is the story to good advantage. el cultieWhile WASTERJIL Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"DON'T BUY A SOUND BOARD UNTIL YOU'VE HEARD US TOOT OUR HORN. FM SYNTHESIS OF SOUND BLASTER 16 WAVE TABLE TECHNOLOGY OF SOUNDMAN WAVE HELE SOUNDMAN WAVE: GENUINELY BETTER SOUND, FULLY LOADED. Maybe you've read* how wavetable synthesis uses actual recordings of instruments to create synthesized sounds. SoundMan Wave And how fantastic it sounds versus regular FM synthesis. Well it's true. SoundMan Wave lets gamers rock and roll with the real thing for an affordable price. And it comes loaded with great software like Recording Session and MCS MusicRack\" compatibility guarantee, and to back that up we'll give $500 to the first person that comes across a game with which SoundMan Wave isn't fully Sound Blaster compatible. Right now, hot games like Xwing, 7th Guest, Doom and Space Quest 5 already take full advantage of our wave technology. Dozens more are expected to hit the market each month. SOUND ADVICE DON'T BELIEVE US? CALL NOW FOR OUR FREE SOUND ADVICE AUDIO CD AND GET A $10 REBATE. Listen to expert advice about adding COMPLETE COMPATIBILITY GUARANTEE. GUARANTEED (100% sound to PCs, and hear for yourself the incredible difference between SoundMan Wave and run-of-the-mill 16-bit boards. Call for our Sound Advice Audio CD before supplies run out, ABLIS/SOUND BLASTER COMPATIBLE SoundMan Wave's Yamaha OPL4 chip is completely compatible with the Adlib/Sound Blaster and we'll enclose a $10 rebate coupon: standard so it is backed by a 100% money back 1-800-889-0051, OFFER #5E \"See PC Magazine, 12/21/93, p 95. We-properties of registered owners. LOCITECH The Senseware Company Circle Reader Service #70 "


"over Keep them Busy... time. Dynamic Dimensions Development Inc., MPC, $49.95. Myst: There's no question that Myst is an artistic masterwork: the incredible, rendered artwork, the sound, QuickTime video clips, and their composition are superb. As for game play, it's very much standard adventure game fare. A lone righter of wrongs, you must unravel the mysteries of Myst Island and find out who is destroying a library of books with the power to transport readers to other worlds. Puzzles abound, and there are many interesting toys to noodle with, but the sights, the sounds! These are what Myst will be remembered for, and what plants it firmly on the top of the Mac multimedia heap. Broderbund Software Inc., MAC, $59.95. Power Modeler: Backroad Racers and Power Modeler: European Racers: A true hybrid product, the folks at Revell have thoughtfully included a real model car in the game for those of us who like the smell of new plastic and modeling glue. The CD allows the prospective racer to paint and design his own car right down to a personalized license plate. What keeps this from being merely a cute software toy is the option to drag-race your model car masterpiece on four different tracks. In some respects, the designers go a bit too far you can be arrested by the model police on the way to the virtual race track—but for the most part it's a good ride. Just don't expect this to be Hot Wheels meets Indy Car. Revell-Monogram Inc., DOS, CD Only, $69.95. Quantum Gate: The line between genres continues to blur with this VirtualCinema product not exactly an adventure game, but hardly cinema either. Despite the too-politically correct theme of saving a dying Earth 60 years in the future, this nonetheless packs a good entertainment punch. The Windows interface encompasses both 3D movement and arcade sequences, with the player even being able to access on-line computer terminals in classic sci-fi Ralud. Buss bornxx Neighbory ver Richard Scarry has a gift for mesmerizing children. And now this renowned artist, author and educator brings his skill-building lessons to life on two award-winning CD-ROM: ACTIVISION FOR CD-ROM! Only on See your local retailer or call 1-800.477.3650 to order. Available in Macintosh and IBM formats CD-ROMI Ben DOP oxx ... in the Best possible way! Circle Reader Service #33 Despite a staggering amount of detail, screen re-draw speed is not bad, provided the game is played on a fast 386 or better. Lots of informational screens and different views showcase a very userfriendly product. Torrey Pines, included with the game, is a fairly easy course, yer still offers a variety of challenges for the beginner or veteran computer golfer. Video tips from pros have full voice and are thus more like a real golf lesson. Certainly cheaper than most actual golf courses, with the comfort of putting in your own living room (or office). Microsoft Corporation, MPC, * $64.95. Might & Magic: World of Xeen: New World's popular World of Xeen has been available since the release of Dark Side of Xeen simply by installing Clouds of Xeen and Darkside on the same system. Now, with the release of World of Xeen CD (on two CD-ROMs), several enhancements make it the preferable choice for playing this expansive role-playing combination. Over 200 talking characters are interspersed throughout the game world (though some just offer greetings), featuring over two hours of digitized speech. Music of 16-bit CD audio quality is also provided. Xeen is playable directly from your CD-ROM drive, requiring only minimal hard drive installation. New World Computing, DOS, $69.95. Morphman: This first release from Dynamic Dimensions combines 3D animations with Microsoft's Video for Windows to provide an interesting game concept, though it's decidedly lacking in interaction. Our superhero, Morphman, on a quest to rescue a kidnapped scientist, has the ability to transform into any creature he has \"sampled\" with his molecular sampler. Unfortunately, the transformations are automatic: you have no say in when or what Morphman morphs into. It often feels like there is little you can really do, with play reminiscent of Readysoft's Dragon's Lair and Space Ace. You simply perform the right mouse click at the right Let dozens of familiar characters from the \"Best\" and \"Busiest\" neighborhoods teach and entertain your kids--three and up for hours on end! And you'll be glad to know that, while they play, they're also developing problem-solving, memory and language skills. It's the best way to keep them busy! ACTIVISION F O FL See your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 to onder Available in Macintosh and IBM formats Circle Reader Service #34 Computer Gaming World Page 36 "


"IMAGINE A GAMING DEVICE SO INTUITIVE IT'S LIKE NOT HAVING ONE AT ALL. CYBERMAN THE MOST ADVANCED WAY TO MASTER 3-0 GAMES. Now moving in a game is as easy as thinking about it. Only CyberMan moves in three directions (x, y, and z) and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll), which correlate directly to your moves inside a 3-D game; your BY intuitive movements translate literally to the screen. LOGITECH It's also the only controller with tactile feedback that The Senseware Company makes you a physical part of the game. CyberMan is avail able now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928 * Tiademarks belong to their regstered ones. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"CLEARLY, SOMETHING HAS STARTLED MR. Cow, AND It Ain't A PAIR OF COLD HANDS. You GOT A VILLAGE. FARMS. HUTS. KUIGHTS. PEOPLE TO BOSS AROUND. AIDA COW. LIFE is GOOD. BUT THEN YOU GET THESE VISITORS. THEY'RE FAT. THEY DROOL, BURP, AND SMELL LIKE AM OUTHOUSE. THEY COME in HORDES, EATING YOUR 3D TEXTURE MAPPED HUTS, TREES, WOMEN, CHILDREN, AID WORST OF ALL, YOUR COW. YOU TRY TO TRASH THEM WITH YOUR SWORD, BUT IT AIN'T EASY AND THER GUTS GET ALL OVER YOU LIFE STARTS TO SUCK. You'VE MET \"THE HORDE\", MY FRIEND. AN ORIGINAL GAME WITH CD-QUALITY LIVE ACTION VIDEO, DIGITIZED MUSIC AND DISGUSTING EATING soundS. AND A CAST OF ACTORS WHO CAN ACTUALLY ACT: LIKE KIRK CAMEROH AND MICHAEL GREGORY. You BULD WALLS, MOATS, AND DEATH PITS. AND YOU HRE AL ARCHER TO HELP FEND THEM OFF. AGAN THE 3 DO HORDE ATTACKS. YOU SAVE THE COW, BUT THEY EAT YOUR HUT, YOUR "


"THE HORDEM 1994 Crystal Dynamics Inc. All rights reserved IBM PC game screen shown. Crystal Dynamics and The Horde are trademarks of Crystal Dynamics 3DO, the 3DO logos and Interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of The 3X Company IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp CORN CROP, AND THAT GIRL NEXT DOOR YOU HAD YOUR EYE 01. now LFE REALLY SUCKS. AND IT AIN'T ABOUT IBM PC PC-CD & 3DO TO GET ANY EASIER. THE EVIL HORDLINGS GROW BIGGER, FASTER, EVEN SMARTER. (AND YOU HAVEN'T EVEN IET THE Evil CHAICELLOR YET.) DEAR READER, WE PRAY YOU'RE THE SORT WHO LEARIS Quickly. 'CAUSE THIS STUFF'S. CRYSTAL DYNAMICS HAPPENING ON 32 BITS. Enjoy, MY FRIEND. AND GOOD LUCK. Circle Reader Service #51 "


"The Medium Is The Messenger Many companies have begun to offer their games on CD without \"multimedia enhancements,\" offering gamers the advantages of this new medium of delivery easier installation and storage, and in some cases, lower prices. Almost all of these games must be installed to your hard drive before play. style. Video segments offer the option to look at close-up windows of people you speak with, enhancing the feeling that you are a character in a movie. Still, the interface often intrudes into the action in ways that games of simpler plotlines, such as Doom, do not. The acting is fine, the game interesting, but it's still a game-not the great leap beyond the marketing folks would have you believe. Media Vision, MPC, $79.95. Rebel Assault: LucasArts' interactive telling of the Star Wars tale seems to have split gamers into two camps—those that absolutely love it, and those that absolutely don't. All agree that the combination of video footage from the movie and marvelously rendered graphics is incredible, giving gamers the feeling of actually taking part in the movie. This experience is enough for some, but others find fault with the game play, which is very limited and very reperitive. As a young Rebel recruit, you must blast your way through wave after wave of TIE Fighters, Star Destroyers, Stormtroopers, Imperial Walkers and whatever else is worth blasting in the Star Wars universe. Come to this one expecting a good show, but be sure your trigger finger knows what your eyes and ears are getting it into. LucasArts Entertainment Company, DOS, $79.95. Return of the Phantom: The legendary Phantom of the Opera has returned; this time, however, he talks. Not well enough to send chills up your spine, mind you, and not in every instance, but he does reel off a few lines. A quick enhancement of the floppy version, this \"talkie\" CD needed more rehearsals prior to release. With no heir to Lon Chaney in evidence, the vocal talent leaves much to be desired in this otherwise enjoyable animated adventure. The text boxes are still intact, and no animation for lip movement is employed for the close-up character portraits, giving the whole thing the feel of a poorly subtitled foreign film. Still, if the price is right, the CD version is preferable as it requires very little hard drive space to install. Fortunately, speech can be toggled off. MicroProse Software Inc., DOS, $59.95. Return to Zork: Updating and expanding a classic is similar to reinventing the wheel, but Activision manages a pretty good ride. A bizarre amalgamation of fantasy, modern and mythical worlds is somehow blended by a marvelous visual and sound presentation into an unusual whole which adds to the Zork universe. The acting on the full-voice CD is quite good with but a few notable exceptions. Veteran Zork travelers will be disturbed by the changes wrought in their beloved land, and they may have a little trouble with the new interface. Still, the many plot twists and engaging characters will keep most players engrossed and might even give younger gamers a hint of what all the excitement was about back in the old 8-bit days. Activision, DOS, *, $79.95. The Secret of Monkey Island: An award winning adventure classic by Ron Gilbert, Monkey Island offers up LucasArt's famous humor at its best. From the hilarious sword-fighting banter to its jammin' reggae soundtrack and 300-pound voodoo priestess, this tale of scurvy sea-dogs and ghostly pirates aims to please and hits the entertainment mark dead-center. Though game play has not been augmented, CD quality audio is provided, as is the full game text in five languages (English, French, German, Italian and Spanish). For an adventure you'll long remember, raise your cup of grog, Matey, and sign on for the voyage to Monkey Island. LucasArts Entertainment Company, DOS, $59.95. Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective I, II & III: With cach volume in the series, Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective has steadily evolved and improved, most noticeably with regard to B-17 Flying Fortress, MicroProse Software Inc., DOS, $69.95 Bicycle CD-ROM Collection, Swfte International, MPC, $49.95 Blue Force, Tsunami Media, DOS, CD Enhanced, $69.95. Capstone CD Game Casino Collection, Capstone, DOS, $19.95 Capstone CD Game Kids Collection, Capstone, DOS, $19.95 Chess Maniac One Billion and One, Spectrum HoloByte, DOS, $59.95 The Coffee Break Collection, Villa Crespo Software, DOS, $59.95 Comanche CD, NovaLogic Inc., DOS, $74.95 Curse of Enchantia, Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc., DOS, $42.99 Daemonsgate, Imagitec Designs Inc., DOS, $39.95. Dark Sun: Shattered Lands, Strategic Simulations Inc., DOS, $80.00 Dungeon Hack, Strategic Simulations Inc., DOS, $60.00 Eric the Unready, Legend Entertainment Company, DOS, $59.95 Eye of the Beholder III, Strategic Simulations Inc., DOS, $69.95 Eye of the Beholder Trilogy, Strategic Simulations Inc., DOS, $80.00 Fantasy Empires, Strategic Simulations Inc., DOS, $50.00 Flight Sim Toolkit: Domark, Windows, $89.95. Gunship 2000, MicroProse Software Inc., DOS, $59.95 Humans, GameTec, DOS, $39.99 Interplay's 10 Year Anthology, Interplay Productions Inc., DOS, $79.95 Jurassic Park, Ocean of America Inc., DOS, $79.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 1, Activision, DOS & MAC, $59.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom II, Activision, DOS, $39.95 Mantis: Experimental Fighter, MicroProse Software Inc., DOS, $59.95 Protostar: War on the Frontier, Tsunami Media, DOS, $69.95 Ringworld, Tsunami Media, DOS, $59.95 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe, LucasArts Entertainment Company, DOS, $99.95 Shuttle, Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc., DOS, $49.95 The Software Toolworks CD Game Pack, The Software Toolworks, DOS, $39.95 The Software Toolworks CD Game Pack II, The Software Toolworks, DOS, $49.95 The Software Toolworks CD-ROM Challenge Pack, The Software Toolworks, DOS, $49.95 The Software Toolworks CD-ROM Discovery Pack, The Software Toolworks, DOS, $49.95 The Software Toolworks CD-ROM Fun Pack, The Software Toolworks, DOS, $49.95 Spellcasting Party Pack, Legend Entertainment Company, DOS, $49.95 Terminator 2: Judgment Day Chess Wars, Capstone, DOS, $49.95 Tetris Gold, Spectrum HoloByte, DOS/MPC/MAC, $49.95 Tony LaRussa Baseball II, Strategic Simulations Inc., DOS, $60.00 Trump Castle 3, Capstone, DOS, $59.95 Ultima I-VI, Origin Systems Inc., DOS, $99.95 Ultima Underworld I & II, Origin Systems Inc., DOS, $99.95 Wacky Funsters, Tsunami Media, DOS, $29.95 Wing Commander Deluxe, Origin Systems Inc., DOS, $79.95 Wing Commander II Ultima Underworld, Origin Systems Inc., DOS, $79.95 Wing Commander II Deluxe, Origin Systems Inc., DOS, $79.95 Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"You're tense! You're stressed! You need a release! You need.. You need to blow something up! In FLAK ATTACK you're the last hope for mankind as you try to blow parachuting robotic storm troopers out of the Enemy robot soldiers...POW! Sub-space vorskies while in BOT it's up to you to infiltrate tices...BAM! BLOOSH! Look out for that mutant a killer robot factory and stop rock monster! Hover Bot...lookout...KABAAM! the 'Mother' computer from producNow, don't you feel better? ing any more. Introducing the Fast Action Paq: The First So if you're looking for a break in Challenge, a new collection of arcade games for your everyday action or just someWindows\" by Quackers from Mallard Software. thing to blast into a million tiny bits, get These four games are filled with action, adventure Fast Action Paq: The First Challenge and suspense, just the thing for taking out your anxifrom Quackers. You'll feel better for it. eries at home or at the office. Easy to install and easy to play, these games are compatible with just about any PC running Windows. So you don't need monster power or elaborate do-dads hooked up to the whatchamacallit in the back of your computer. Just click open BUBBLE TROUBLE and begin blasting a clear path through space for your starship or MOLE'S QUEST to jump and scurry from Mallard Software to a new home by following a series of For more information or to order call: tunnels and mine shafts while avoiding 1-800-WEB-FEET vicious miners, radioactive walls and  1994 The Dreamers Guild, Inc. Quackers is a trademark of Mallard Software, Inc. mutant subterranean creatures. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation Circle Reader Service #72 VTM STAR "


"10 STUPAVDOUS STORAGE TIMES ace gains in video quality—both clarity and color. While lacking the more realistic flight model for the F-16. Various instrument spirited pyrotechnics of more recent portrayals of Holmes (such as options are included, with an invisible cockpit the most avantthose featuring Jeremy Brett on PBS' Mystery! garde change. New levels of series), the casting is good and the acting solid difficulty and the Tactical and professional. The chief strengths of these Operations missions are games, though, are the challenging cases the included, making the CD player is asked to unravel. Whether solving a the best option for most murder most foul, or following the trail of a gamers—especially as it dastardly thief, your skills of deductive reasonsaves you 35MB on your ing will be sorely tried. Would-be Watsons hard drive. Origin Systems should pack their trusty revolvers, as the game's Inc., DOS, *, $79.95. afoot! Viacom New Media, DOS & MAC, Video Cube Space: $69.95. Clever packaging—the The Software Toolworks' Star Wars Chess: game box is itself a cubic With the plethora of chess games on the marpuzzle-encloses an insidiket, Star Wars Chess resorted to using a wellously addictive game. known license in an attempt to distinguish Host your own murder mystery party with Screen redraw is better than Sherlock Holmes, CD itself. The disk-based version is largely forgeta lot of Windows products, table, but the CD adds enough bells and whistles to amuse even and the puzzles themselves are visually pleasing, even considering the most jaded gamer, and plays a better game to boot. Choice of the high standards of many similar products. Sort of the SVGA chessboards is limited, but Darth Vader's infamous breathing, answer to Tetris, the excellent sound and ease of use make this a growling wookies and C3PO's British-butler antics are only a few good gift to ease newer computer owners into enjoying their of the items that make this a very entertaining and accessible prodmachine. Proof that good things do come in small, even weird, uct for the casual chess packages. Aris Multimedia, MPC, $49.95. player. Wookie to Jedi Wolfpack: This sub sim is powered by an Knight 3, anyone? The emphasis on modifying and constructing new misSoftware Toolworks, MPC, sions. Opening animations for the CD version $69.95. aren't bad, but once the game starts, the prospecSpace Quest IV: Thanks DDDDED DEL tive sub captain will feel as if the graphics are nearto the distinctive narration ly as far back in time as the technology of the of Gary Owens of Laugh-In undersea vessel itself. Poor graphic resolution, fame, playing the CD verdappled with pixellations, do nothing to add to sion of the futuristic Space the feel of a game sadly looking for more than the Quest IV will bring back facelift it received here. Additional scenarios are memories of the late 60s to available for those determined to torpedo somemany seasoned gamers. thing, but the venerable Secret Service II is much Providing a more-thanpreferable to this depth-charged offering. competent comedic perforElectronic Arts, DOS, $39.95. mance, Owens and the rest Wrath of the Gods from Maxis is a myth in the making. Wrath of the Gods: An adventure game ser in of the vocal talent ancient Greece, this CD-only product first employed in this CD impresses with its size. Some 450-plus MB are used to send you on enhancement bring Roger Wilco's campy world to life. Though the s campy world to life. Though the a journey through a variety of mythical quests. Fans of specialjourney through a variety of mythical quests. E plot remains unchanged and no new game play has been added, effects guru Ray Harryhausen will enjoy the ride, as it resembles those who have not yet ventured forth with the intrepid janitor will the old Jason and the Argonauts movie. Fight the many-headed want to do so on the silvery platter, as this is one of his finest and hydra, grab the golden fleece, it's all funniest adventures. Sierra On-Line, DOS/MPC, $39.95. here for hours and hours of Strike Commander: Upon release, it was readily apparent that enjoyment. Keep in this game suffered from an identity crisis. Viewed as more of an mind that the more action game than a serious simulation, it compares favorably with classically educated titles such as F-117 Stealth Fighter. The detail in the game is may fare a bit better masked by a hazy horizon which seems to exist in all types of than the mythically weather and climate. Like most Origin action games, the plot elechallenged, but ments make up for deficiencies in perceived realism, and are quite hints are included. entertaining in full digitized speech. The admittedly exciting comMaxis, MPC/MAC, bat sequences are enhanced in the CD version, particularly with a $79.95. Cow Duo, ACING Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"TO GRAB THE LATEST IN IBM GAMES CALL: 1-800-247-5447 APRIL'S TOP 50 GAMES $36 $56 Ultimam Aces Over Europe $42 AD&D Genies Curse(Apr.) $48 Archon Ultra $38 Carriers at War 2 $41 Command Adv. Starship $42 Companions of Xanth Daemonsgate $36 Dark Sun $46 Dominion (April) $45 Dungeon Hack $38 Dungeon Master 2 $38 Eye of Beholder Tril. CD Fantasy Empires $36 Gabriel Knight $42 Great Naval Battles V2 $46 Hand of Fate $35 Harpoon 2 (Apr) $48 Heirs To The Throne $36 Interplay 10th Anniv. CD $52 Iron Helix CD $59 Kasparovs Gambit $37 Kings Quest 6 $46 Master of Orion $40 Maximum Overkill $42 M&M 5: Dark Side/Xeen $42 M&M: World of Xeen CD $45 Pacific Strike $52 Police Quest 4 Privateer Quest for Glory 4 $42 Rebel Assault CD $50 Red Crystal Sam & Max Hit the Road $39 Seal Team $41 Shadow Caster Sim City 2000 Star Reach Strike Commander $36 Syndicate $37 Third Reich (Apr) $38 Ultima 8: Pagan $48 Ultima Underworld 2 $47 Unnatural Selection V for Victory: G,J, S $42 Victory at Sea (May) $45 Warlords 2 $42 Wing Comm. Academy $32 Wizardy 7 $36 WW2: Battle So. Pacific $37 $41 $42 pioner: $47 CITY 2000 $37 $39 $42 $39 $35 OPEN 9AM-9PM MON-SAT (EST)  FED-EX SHIPPING $7/ORDER . ALL RETURNS MUST HAVE RMA# NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ERRORS OR OMISSIONS X Wing TITAN GAMES 1 WEST SEMINARY ST. BRANDON, VT 05733 VISA Lederler APRIL BODE Circle Reader Service #108 "


"THERE GOES THE LU E E "


"NEIGHBORHOOD. D oom. Earth is destroyed by a D catastrophic event, and you're responsible for rebuilding civilization on another planet. Lucky you. Where you go and if you survive is up to you there's a galaxy of possibilities. the robominers and monorail systems you'll use on the planet surface, Outpost's photorealism and 3-D rendered animation are unprecedented. Based on NASA research in planetary science, robotics, terraforming, and interstellar spacecraft design, Outpost places you in control of the most comprehensive strategy simulation ever developed for the PC. No kidding. From the colonization starship to Develop agriculture, mining and manufacturing to suryive, and then invest in research and recreation facilities to make life more comfortable for your colonists hopefully they'll be around long enough to enjoy it. Because, in the end, the decisions you make will determine the destiny of mankind. OUTPOST BUILD MANKIND'S FUTURE IN SPACE A SIERRA See your local retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 Circle Reader Service #97 "


"LESS Lumindrid's wrath of the Gods by Alain Zeus on the Loose\" Enrich dild Cuck Otudents of Greck Immythology, as well as fans of the classic Ray Harrylhausen-animated films such as so del te donciety, will find Watly fle Gods from Luminaria and Maxis an enjoyable and connelling photo-relistic graphic adventure. Unlike digital video and live-action characters rather niinitions, Wint of the Col, a veenough to playli still retains a cinematic feel. Additionally. What Connecting for a «Homer\" cre are three levels of hints available for those «myrI t the Greek legends referenced in Wat. The first is a straight Imatic ion screen that tells the stories behind tacli location and encountered. Sayyydventurers will manage to figure out objects w will be required to get them through most of the buzzles rea reco hip, modern style. of the anci ated in relevant ) today's computer er. While historical might prefer the clasnown Greek nlyths, supported by technology nances the whol rather tha tion to itself. Though Wit), as the Greek gods s, is not perfect, it does exhibit a inspiration in its overall execution. asantly breezy, were told Corrshersed through vich touch lost conundruilms make sense and can be solved after moments thought I by Steve Reeves You're Not Our hero is a young lad of less than god-like stuture. In fact, he looks more geck than Greek (one wouldn't be surprised to find a pocket protector toga). Nonetheless, he is of noble birth, tlhough tilly unaware of it. In classic Inythical fashion, he 1ndoned on ountain side as an infant, and opted by a centatir, unaware of this truelineage, until now. tale begins as you set out to reclaiin your kingdom and free people from the terrible tribute demanded of young men and women by the cvi KinMinos. Fail, and you will join them in their Tata victim of lie Minotuur in the Labyrinth of Crt. Succeed. and become a hero worthy of your godly lineage. Making your nallic as a hero isn't quite what it used to c. Pcrscus, eticles, Hercules--they made their careers with one or two lheroic cats. I Wicity, you have to tackle do-gooders did, combined. Needle sy, there are encounters 1ple t), perhaps following design losoplny where a myth is as mile Tortunately, you herOcs | allowing of recklessness not allorded lose heroes of old, in prehensive and accessible hint: cal information provided. excessively essively challenging puzzles my required visit | the it System that never fails to provide the solution to the a vague hint for free, but more omes at the price of five points dedicted from your final reasonab y competen It adventurers will seldom need ice the tales carefully and devote a little power to the talk nearly dventurers Please Apply hile \\Xiat) will challenge even the most seasoned turer, clinovice player will find thegimccljoyble and managcable as well. Mel filly, glln: 11cchhanics are streamlined and easier to use than tlOSc found in situilar games, Luminaria should be foresight the neoplayt, as actions and inventory are both kept to In aditionally, just or to a Page 1 "


"18TH Whether you're facing a horrible fire-breathing dragon, a heavily armed MiG 29, or that really nasty dogleg on the 18th hole, there is one place you can turn to for help. CompuServe. The very best place to go for any kind of them for test drives. Before you spend your hardcomputer and video-gaming support. earned money. Because on CompuServe you can get advice, So whether it's beasts, bogeys, or birdies and opinions, and more than a few special secrets by you're tangling with, don't go out there alone. Get talking to the members in our Gaming Forum, people CompuServe on your side. who share your passions for everything from whacking Sign up now and receive a free introductory enemy fighters to getting an eagle on the 18th. And CompuServe membership with a $15 usage credit and some of the biggest game publishers and distributors a free month of basic services. Call 1 800 524-3388 are here for you to talk to, as well. and ask for Representative 534 for more information. As a CompuServe member, you can download O CompuServe demo versions of the best new games, too, and take The information service you won't outgrow. Circle Reader Service #47 "


"MERE try to select an incorrect inventory item to solve the current puzzle, a sound cue like \"Nope,\" or \"Try something else\" helpfully directs you away from the item that doesn't apply in that scene. In order to meet the needs of a wide range of player abilities and knowledge of the Greek myths, the beautiful map of the game's locations and the on-line Oracle can be toggled off for veteran adventurers, or left on for the more casual gamer. Another nice feature is that you never really die in Wrath, even when you die. Rather than having to restore a previous save, you automatically appear somewhere in Hades. While underground, you can speak to one of the many damned souls and pick up a clue to help solve the particular puzzle that resulted in your demise. After these encounters with the likes of Sisyphus (that rock n roller), Prometheus (who is glued to his seat) or Tantalus (whose reach does not exceed his grasp), it is generally a simple hike back to the surface. A Game Of Mythic Proportions Wrath features little in the way of atmospheric music, providing only occasional fanfares. Still, there are ample digitized audio effects to sufficiently accent play. Waves lap up on the shore, birds chirp, and dragons roar off in the distance. The sounds of battle include the grunts of warriors and the ringing of bronze swords. The digitized photorealistic backgrounds are quite plentiful, featuring over 100 beautiful scenes created from original photographs of Greece—which probably accounts for the general state of disrepair represented in all the temples, castles and other ancient Greek landmarks. Though a few characters are computerrendered, such as the dragon, chimera and Stygian witches, most denizens encountered are played by digitized actors. E lilalam Many performances come off quite well, particularly the portrayal of Hera, the Hillary Clinton of the gods. Others seem to be done more for comic relief, such as the hot-handed, hydra-hacking helper, who aids you midway through the quest. While the animation was not always smooth, due to the CDROM access time re20 quired, it remained very realistic. BECOME THE ULTIMATE GAMER The Furies Apart from the sometimes slow access times associated with CDROM media, there are few shortcomings to quibble about. In particular, though, two improvements would have made the game even more user-friendly: an intelligent pointer and quick movement through the game world by means of the map. It became tedious determining which directions could be traveled from each location without using the \"eye\" cursor to examine each possibility. Employing an intelligent cursor that changed to indicate available \"exits» would have alleviated this headache. The other less-than-godlike annoyance was the frequent need to trudge long distances one screen at a time. Quicker passage could be booked through the strategically-placed chariot stations, where a dragon ride, complete with jet plane sound effects, whisks you across long distances; but the hassle of doing so often consumed as much time as simply hoofing it. We would have preferred to jump to previously visited locations through use of the on-screen overview map. From REM Software With the Infinity Machine\", you can make virtually any game bow to your every whim! With our easy to use real-time editing technology, you can add lives, edit character specs, and change weapons & abilities all without ever leaving your game. With our Infinity Code system, you can generate your own codes for easier access to game features! And when you're in a tough situation, Infinity Machine's slow motion feature gets the action back under your control. Reaching Mount Olympus Wrath of the Gods is a fun and educational adventure for both the seasoned and novice player. Luminaria has blended a fine mix of hip history, challenging game play, and quality presentation in this title. The incorporated Reader's Digest-style version of the Greek myths, plus the beautiful pictures of related Greek art and architecture, combine to breathe new life into these ancient tales. Hopefully, interested players will be inclined to knock the dust off their old mythology texts and re-acquaint themselves with these legends of yore. At the very least, you might concede that all those history and classical literature classes were worth something after all. CGW $34 MasterCard VISA . U.S. TO ORDER, CALL 313-457-1161 Circle Reader Service #121 Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"The Elder Scrolls \"I've played role-playing games since they first appeared on mainframes a decade ago. The Elder Scrolls: Arena is quite simply the most captivating, well-designed, realistic world available on home computers. Russ Ceccala, Associate Editor, Electronio Games \"The most impressive showing by any company...Bethesda's Fall line-up is one of the best going.\" --Computer Game Review Circle Reader service #41 BETHESDA SOFTWORKS Cooee . SIMONE, Ali Teserveotsa Softworks and the EO "


"REVIEW Puppet. Punks And Cyber-Skinheads The Dark Future of Paramount's Jump Raven by Christopher Breen emember the ad campaign for that lo-cal, hops-based bevera number of obvious ways, the program demands at least six megaage where one pack of bloated idiots chants \"Tastes great!\" bytes of free RAM, and parents concerned that the seedier side of the while another, equally rotund crowd chirps «Less filling!\"? English language might someday creep into their child's vocabulary Naturally, one is supposed to come away with the impression that this will almost certainly find many of the CyberPuppers' snappy rejoinswill is not only mighty yummy but also won't cause the imbiber to ders objectionable. erupt in barking flatulence. The truth is that it usually is an either/or proposition: Either it tastes Panic in The Year Zero like beer and, because beer JUMP RAVEN In the world of Jump Raven-a bankrupt America of is full of carbon dioxide, the not-so-distant future life is anything but good. puffs you up like a dirigiGangs of heavily armed Skinheads, Da Kuan (Chinese ble, or it's flat and bland for \"fat cats\"), and Cyberpunks rule the boroughs of a and leaves you wondering decaying New York City. Due to the effects of global why, if you're so interested warming, Earth's ecosystem is in a shambles: floods, in staying trim, you didn't famine, disease, burning rain forests, mass extinction. drink a bottle of overThe few remaining nonhuman planetary life forms have priced bubble-water inbeen preserved as genetic samples, locked in a frozen stead. state within beer-keg-like pods. This kind of division also A group of Skinheads RADAR exists among developers of who apparently object CD-ROM games. The to all forms of nonWe-Know-It's-Slow-But jackbooted life have hiThat's-Technology-For-You camp produces games that jacked the pods and are rich in graphics, animation, and sound but makes few dealt them out to memattempts to coax arcade-like action out of its products. DIRECTIONS bers of the various Conversely, the We're-Clever-Enough-To-Work-Aroundgangs who, in their These-Limitations bunch spends an inordinate amount of thuggish wisdom, carry time devising caching and compression schemes that althe pods aboard their low the action to spool smoothly from its disks. You can screaming engines of almost hear these disparate groups' antiphony: «Looks death. The player takes great! Runs fast! Looks great! Runs fast!\" Paramount on the role of Jump RaInteractive's Jump Raven falls squarely into the second ven, a male, mercenary category. warrior who pilots a Jump Raven is the follow-up release to Bill Appleton's premiere heavily-armed hovercraft named, confusingly enough, Jump Raven. effort, Lunicus. Lunicus showcased Appleton's proprietary DreamFacRaven's mission is to roam the streets of the Bronx, Brooklyn, and tory technology that left many players gaping in astonishment at its Manhattan, blast the baddies and their mobile machines of destrucquick, CD-ROM-based arcade action. DreamFactory was so imprestion to Kingdom Come, recover the pods, and deliver them to a sive, in fact, that few reviewers bothered to note that the plot predetermined drop point. Commanding the mission from the relasurrounding the action was a trifle hackneyed and that the other tively safe confines of Grand Central Station is Lou Battaglia, the \"breakthrough» technology, the Clutch Cargo-like CyberPuppets, fighting zookeeper. smelled distinctly of ripe Camembert. Battaglia acts as the Master of Ceremonies, providing a bit of The good news is that Jump Raven feabackground on the plug-uglies Raven is fared to meet and introducing tures the same sprightly (spritely?) action aven him to Arms Mart's Weapons Lady, found in Lunicus, as well as a new and a proper English gentlewoman with somewhat improved cast of CyberPuppets. a predilection for high-tech deathJump Raven The plot, although exhibiting some of the SYSTEM: Macintosh ware, Raven is initially supplied with REQUIREMENTS: Color Mac with 8MB RAM, same weaknesses as Lunicus, is less intrusive CD-ROM drive $1,000 (additional cash is earned for this time around, while the dialog and back$69.95 cach cnemy vehicle destroyed) to Bill Appleton and Cyberflix story can occasionally be quite clever. The Paramount Interactive purchase weapons from five categogame is also enhanced by a wonderfully ries: lasers, shells, rockets, missiles driving soundtrack. The bad news is that and defensive weapons. Naturally, the interface could have been enhanced in the G note is not enough to buy the NAVITATIINTA JITVET CONTITUL ARMS CONTROL SAVE GREYS TALES SUNDS SYSTEM NOS JOUET 11111111 TATICA258 TITLE: PRICE: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER Palo Alto, CA (415) 812-8200 Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"Stare The officially Licensed 1:02:87: PYOTAKZ INDYCAR ICT NG 136 2328 9M 1835 9 no ** hiles 0:00:52.0: COURSE on E TVI TOYOTA How fast can you go I' NDYCAR Racing ? Take the default car and hit the road running. 0:0 1:S3.08 Practice all eight tracks. When you're good enough, go for more. INDYCAR * More real set-ups, game play and graphics than any racing simulation ever had before. ALUMAX W PAVY 0:05:82.82 Vergi PAPYRUS I) IBM PC screens shown. Actual screens may vary. 1 800 8 7 4 4 6 0 7 Distributed exclusively worldwide by Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc.  18061 Fitch Avenue  Irvine, CA 92714. USA IndyCar and the helmet logo are trademarks of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation, under exclusive license to Championship Auto Racing Teams, Inc. Indianapolis 5000: The Simulation is a trademark of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation. Indianapolis 500 is a registered trademark of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation. Papyrus is a trademark of Papyrus Design Group, Inc.. Virgin is a trademark of Virgin Enterprises, LTD. Circle Reader Service #88 "


"rcally powerful \"smart\" weapons, so you must be selective and keep in mind that any spare cash will be needed for repairs at the local Jiffy Wrench or for gas from the roving fuel truck. Once Jump Raven is armed, Battaglia presents the cast of copilots. Pull My String These six CyberPuppet copilots are the key to the game. Although you need worry about only three of the craft's controls-navigation, hover and weapons—any competent hovercraft pilot will tell you that without a reasonable set of keyboard commands and a reliable targeting system, that's one or two tasks too many for a single person to handle. Enter the copilot. Each copilot is rated on the ability to handle the hover and weapons controls and can be assigned any or all of the controls. The theory is that the copilot's skills and a pilot's fighting style will determine which copilot is best for the job. After a couple of battles, the seasoned Jump Raven player realizes that: (a) the copilots have generally good instincts in regard to navigation, although when the fighting gets too hot it's best to take over the controls and make a run for it; (b) the copilots aren't particularly adept with the hover controls; (c) manual targeting of moving enemies is next to impossible for nonCyberPuppets; and (d) some of the copilots are incredibly annoying. Along with all the gages and controls in the Jump Raven cockpit, ORECTW 5139 $399 there is a video screen that displays the nattering image of our puppery copilot. These one-dimensional CyberPuppets—whose personalities range from the whining valley-girl, Chablis, to the gruff, foul-mouthed cyborg, Dogstar-simply will not clam up. The unending chirruping is irritating enough, but due to memory constraints, the Pups have a limited phrase book. Imagine a hellish Chatty Cathy repeating an unimaginative obscenity over and over. After a short time, one is relieved when the video screen takes a direct hit and silences these obnoxious magpies. Unfortunately, this solution isn't permanent. The program determines the intervals at which Jump Raven requires repair, refueling and rearmament. When the game has decided that enough damage has been inflicted on the vehicle, a call comes in from Leonard \"Lenny\" Fiskowitz, the Jilly Wrench guy, indicating that it's time for another round of expensive repairs. If the copilot has control over navigation, we immediately depart the battle scene-even when we're about to pick up one of the precious pods that we've blasted loose from an enemy ship—and zip off to the shop. The problem is, there's no way to tell Lenny that we don't find our copilot's inane dialogue particularly useful and prefer a broken video screen. Sure, we can decline the repair and save ourselves the much needed $75, but it's now on Lenny's list and, as far as he's concerned, Jump Raven is one step closer to that next call. The inelegant response to this problem is to wrest the navigation controls from the copilot when Lenny beckons and hold on to them until he gives up. These not-completely-minor annoyances make it tough to fully embrace all that is Jump Raven. Yes, the battle sequences are tons o fun, the screen writing and non-repetitive dialog is often very amusing, the background music is terrific, and the game is darned fast for a CD-ROM. Still, it seems as if the game's potential wasn't fully realized. How hard could it have been, for instance, to include a few keyboard commands that select the different weapons? Why is manual targeting so difficult? Would processing power really be so taxed by an option that instructs the copilot to shut the hell up unless something very important is going on? Finally, where do those unretrieved pods go once the player has left the area of conflict? Adequately addressing these issues might have made Jump Raven a great strategy/action adventure rather than just a good arcade game. CGW Sound Cards Cantinal DSP 16 SIXO SoundBlaster 16 MCD. $179 Advance Gravis UlaSound................... Turtle Beach Monterey... Orchid Sound Wave 32 S2.19 Direct Way Top 30 CD-Titles Titles D1 ric 7th Guest... Animal San Diego Zoo... Authur's Teacher Trouble......... Business and Espinnic Atlas CD Deluxe Bundle Titles in ICD CD Duo Mario's Missing. World Atlas Chessmaster 3x3 Compton's Encyclopedia Compton Family Charice Comptons's Interactive Encyc. V.2.01. Dinosaur's Adventure.... Dracula Unleashed Grolier'. Encyclodian Ver...... King Quest VI... Kodak Photo CD...... Macmillan Dictionary for Children... Mavis Teaches Typing................. Mayo Clinic-Ilealth box Mortal Kombat Playing language, Japanese Maying Language, Spanish Pihlishit 2.0.. $26 Rehel Assault Reference Library Return To Za Secret of Monkey Island Space Quest IV Star Wars Chess Stellar 7........ Terminator 2. The Arcade Game...... US Atlas with Autumn US Atlas 10.. US & World Atlas Where in the World Is Carmen Sandic World Al. Terms and Condition 1. 1 day amy gaande 1. No responsible for misprint 1. All Products comes with manufacturers Warranty No me humli axepte lex cu wilRMA. Price and availability are subject to change with utice Shipping and handling charges are tra and flokk M-F 8:30am-5:30pm PST DSP Dual 16 Multimedia Kit \"Tre 16 bits, DSP Based Sound Card Wavetable Upgradable) \"Dual SCD-ROM Drive *Shield Speakers Microphone 4 Titles ChessMaster XXO Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing L'S Atlas World Atlas CD-Rom Drive Free CD) Title with selected CD ROM Drive Purchase AI CD Drives are Dual Speed unless otherwise noted Mitvanmi FX1ID. ...$187 Panasonic CR 562/563.....................................$187/519) NEC Triple Speed 1951.. ..S419 Sony CDU 3A SI Teac intemal Di-CD.SOS SCSIL... S289 Plextor 3028 int 240ms SCSI IL........ ...$276 Toshiba 110L SCSI (Caddylessi..... 5209 Toshiba 3401B 2 S CSI IL...... $345 $ 30-DAY LOWEST PRICE GUARANTEE $79 $49 Children's Pack Animal Sant business Pack iness and cook Atlas Credicro clopedia-Verb Kral Pita Hun Assistant kle Library for Children CDN Maria's Missing World Atlas 25986688 $79 $69 Education Pack n on's Encyclopedia Maya (limic lealth Ilaying Language, Spanish Fun Pack Return To Zork Helst Serr e s Poland Mantis, The Experimental fighter II ESPECT 1-800-882-8108 VISA Second 91761 3210 Las Brickell, Ontaris, 4029thrin Dept. 2595 Circle Reader Service #52 Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"\"This game is brilliant. Daemonsgate captures the essence of good role-playing like no other game.\" \"Daemonsgate will grip you and it won't let go.\" Kevind Perry Computer Once mavielu CD ROM (92% Golden Triad Award & Of Year 1993. \"Daemonsgate is a role-player's dream. It is a complex and masterfully done game which must be experienced to be appreciated.\" Mark Camron Rotronia ames (94%) A Roleplaying Game of Epic Proportions.... IMAGITEC DESIGN INC. COMPUTER GAME REVIEW Journey through a hostile land, to liberate your people from a malevolent foe of unparalleled savagery, Circle Reader Service #64 Daemonsgate: Available from selected retailers NOW! IBM PC Disk & CD ROM IMAGITEC Product available in North America & Canada through BAKER & TAYLOR AFFILIATED LABELS 3850 Royal Avenue Simi Valley CA 93063 Tel. 805 526 8700 Tel. 800 775 4200 Fax. 805 526 9300 "


"bion ou View aer Scarpia, So You Want To Be A Hero? Then Follow Scorpia Into The Shadows of Darkness HADOWS OF DARKNES keeper and his wife, three peasant farmers (well, one used to be an elephant trainer), the shopkeeper, a doddering old man, a mad scientist, and a gravedigger (yes, his name is Igor) are the only permanent residents. There is the Gnome jester, but he is only residing at the inn temporarily. Outside the town, there are the castle gatekeeper, the gypsies, a mysterious woman with a crush on your Hero, and, in a special return appearance, Baba Yaga. Baba, by the way, isn't the only one making a return visit, but that's something you get to worry about later on. hadows of Darkness is the fourth install Fighters, of course, are the premier muscle ment in Sierra On-line's Quest for men. They are skilled in combat and will also Glory series. This time around, our learn to do some climbing. Otherwise, they hero adventures in the land of Mordavia, have no special abilities and won't pick up any which means \"Dark Valley,\" and a more apt new ones as the game progresses. This is name would be hard to find. The town in probably the best choice for someone with no which our adventure begins is cut off from prior experience with the series. the rest of the world by a deadly swamp across Once the character is created (or imported), Once the character is created (or import the only road. Nasty monsters roam the surthe game begins immediately with your the game begins immediately with your Hero rounding woods, and vampires are rumored inside the Dark Cave, which is not a great to inhabit the decrepit castle nearby. Even place to be. Since the Cave is also the end worse, there is an ultimate evil, said to be in game, you won't see much of it at this time, the mysterious Dark Cave, about which the so getting out is the first priority. Then it's a villagers refuse to talk. All in all, Mordavia is matter of finding your way definitely a place in need of a Hero. through the woods to the town of For this excursion into the realms of horror, Mordavia. you can import a character from any of the There is no auto-mapping feaprevious Quest For Glory games (provided cure, so its time to dust off the you finished the game), or create a new one. graph paper and sharpen those As in the previous games, you have your No. 2 pencils. Many of the forest choice of Fighter, Mage or Thief, and each graphics are «recycled,\" such that character type has different skills and so will a number of screens resemble each follow a slightly different path through the story. If you want a Paladin, you must import one, as there is no opportunity to work up a Fighter to that class here. Paladins are a good choice for this game. They are expert fighters and learn a few handy spells, too. They also gain the ability to heal themselves—a skill no other profession has. Mages are an acceptable second choice if you don't have a Paladin. They start with a wide variety of other closely, so without a map it's easy to spells in their repertoire, which makes some become confused and lost. With nasty critters parts of the game easier for them. wandering around, you don't want to spend too much time out here at the start. Thieves don't come off so well in this game. In general, there is little scope for their proWhen you do get to town, don't expect a fession. The town of Mordavia is small, with welcome with open arms. The villagers are few inhabitants and fewer opportunities to fearful and suspicious of strangers. Given perform as a Thief. On the other hand, armed their circumstances, perhaps that isn't surwith a generous supply of daggers and some prising. In any case, you'll have to prove proficiency in acrobatics, Thieves can do yourself a Hero to them before their attitude quite well in combat. For all that, anyone changes. looking to indulge in a little light-fingered As mentioned earlier, there are few inhabilarceny will be disappointed. tants left here. The Burgomeister, the innBREDDED. Part of the game is devoted to helping out what's left of the inhabitants by reuniting two married couples and rescuing the innkeeper's daughter from an extremely nasty situation. In between, you save the lives of Igor and a gypsy, as well as restore the jester's sense of humor. While doing all thar, your Hero is also collecting several rituals that will release the Dark One into the world. This Dark One brings definite Lovecraftian overtones to the game, providing an odd juxtaposition with the more traditional fare of vampires, werewolves and ghosts. A monTITLE: Quest For Glory: Shadows of Darkness PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 1MB RAM, VGA graphics, 10MB hard drive space PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Lori and Corey Cole PUBLISHER: Sierra On-line Coarsegold, CA (800) 326-6654 Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"DISCOVER THE BIG PICTURE GAMER US PLAY COMPUTER GAMES ON YOUR FREE BONUS GAME WITH PURCHASE SEE PACKAGE FOR DETAILS YOU Just Plug It In AND THE ULTIMATE COMPUTER GAMING EX. PERIENCE IS YOURS! GET READY FOR YOUR MOST AMAZING GAMING ADVENTURE EVER WITH TV GAMER PLUS PLAY COMPUTER GAMES LIKE THEY WERE MEANT TO BE SEEN: BIGGER AND BETTER ON YOUR TV! EXPERIENCE COOLER COLORS, BIGGER BOSSES, MEGA MAPS AND SUPER-SIZE SWORDFIGHTS 9 TV Gamer Plus Features 5 YEAR WARRANTY WINDOWS SUPPORT (BM VERSION) IBM & MAC VERSIONS AVAILABLE EXTRA-LONG RCA CABLE TO TV ALL CABLES INCLUDED SIIG, Inc. 6078 Stewart Ave., Fremont, CA 94538 510/ 657-8688  1994 by SIIG, Inc. TV Gamer Plus is a trademark of SIIG, Inc. Inc. TV Gamer PlusTM Is Available Al The Following Locations Fry's American BrandsMartUSA. MICRO CENTER COMPUTER Circle Reader Service #99 "


"strosity that can best be described as somethe game more than once can become a little ness, magic use, and special attacks of your thing along the lines of Cthulhu's big tiresome. For instance, there are a lot of concharacter, so you can tailor fighting style to brother, it seems a bit out of place among the versations, some of which act as triggers for your taste. If you want to switch to arcade usual denizens of horror folklore. Nonethe events. So you have to endure them, even mode, click the right mouse button. It is less, it does give an air of creepiness to the though you have played before. simply amazing that this information was left game that a mere walking undead could never In terms of puzzles, Shadows of Darkness out of the docs. manage. ranges from weak to obscure, and some situThe real problem with this one, however, is The game sports the standard Sierra icon ations can't really be called puzzles at all. For technical. Shadows of Darkness may well be interface. You can cycle through the various example, bringing together Olga the shopthe sloppiest product ever released by Sierra. activity icons with the right mouse button or keeper and Boris the gatekeeper is really nothMy difficulties began after the game was ining more than busy-work. Your stalled and it simply refused to run, period. A Hero simply runs back and forth call to the Sierra tech line revealed that Shadbetween the two as a sort of gloriows of Darkness, as released, was not compatfied messenger boy. Bringing toible with AMI BIOS (not exactly an obscure gether Anna and Nikolai is much one). This was related to the special 32-bit the same, only you don't have to protected mode under which the software do quite so much running around operates. Fortunately, a patch was available (although finding Anna in the first and I quickly got it on-line. place can take awhile). After the patch was applied, the game finally came up. Unfortunately, it came up silent. The 32-bit protected mode grabs all of upper bring the cursor up to the hidden memory for itself, so nothmenu bar at the top of the screen. ing can be loaded high, There you can switch icons, access and a bare-bones DOS inventory, check the time of day, boot disk is necessary. This rest, cast spells, save and restore the made it impossible to load game. It is a simple system, and easy to use—Sierra is getting the interface thing down to a science. In the past, Quest For Glory combat has been a bane to those like myself who The end game, with your characdespise arcade action in adventure games. In ter face-to-face with the villain, is a this iteration, there is a strategy mode that letdown. Having worked so hard to takes this burden off your fingers completely. reach this point, done all the rituIn strategy mode, the computer runs both als, and with the arrival of the Dark your character and the monster in combat, One imminent, you find that this one and how well your Hero does is based solely dramatic moment is hardly more on his skills and stats. than a joke, literally. Only one physical action by your character is Given the generally low competence of AI needed, and then it's over. Ho in most games, some might look upon autohum. And the banishment of the in the Gravis Ultrasound Roland emulator, combat with a certain skepticism. However, Dark One is glossed over with a little text and I found that with the Sound Blaster I have played through more than once in this you don't even get to see a graphic of it! Did emulator loaded low, the game again mode and have no complaints. My Heroes wouldn't run. So, I had to play with no sound did quite nicely, and of course better as time project? or music, which explains why there is no passed and their skills improved. You can The manual is missing a little something, commentary on either. break out of strategy mode and back to arcade too. Actually, three booklets come with the I ran from a boot disk without sound, and at any time, or even run away if your Hero is game: the generic Sierra interface manual, a for a while everything was fine. However, the in bad shape. Without doubt, strategy mode manual for special controls in the game, and further into the game, the slower it was in is one of the brighter spots in this game. a manual that describes spells, gives some saving and restoring. Actual disk access was Typical for a Quest For Glory, some puzzles playing tips, etc. Nowhere in these manuals quite speedy, but waiting for the software to have different solutions, and certain events or is there any mention at all about strategic make up its mind to go to disk took a long situacions occur based on character type. For combat mode. Not a word. Something this time, often a minute or more; some on-line instance, only a Paladin can put to rest the important does deserve at least a few words. folk complained of waiting three minutes or Rusalka in the lake or meet Piotyr's spirit, You could, of course, turn on strategy mode longer to restore a saved game. It was usually while only a Thief can get into the Thieves to see what it does, but without instructions faster to quit the game, rerun it, and then Guild (there is no Mages' or Fighters' Guild you're likely to miss the second control panel. restore a position. For saving, of course, you in Mordavia). Once the combat screen comes up, clicking just had to wait it out. For all that, play will be much the same the left mouse button displays four extra levRegardless of the frustrations, I got through regardless of profession, and so going through ers that control the aggressiveness, defensivethe game with a Paladin and a Mage, and then Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"THE LOCALS WOULD LIKE TO HAVE YOU FOR LUNCH ne good news is you survived. the plane crash. The bad news is, you're on the Isle of the Dead. Now, as you search for survival Sitems and a way off the island, you face a horrifying assortment of flesheating zombies, hideous bats, bloodthirsty wolves and other unsavory locais. Can we help it if the press is calling it \"gory,\" \"gruesome, \"graphic\" and \"sickening? You'll traverse dense jungles, treacherous caves and explore the local village to unlock riddles that could aid your escape. And if you're lucky, you may even rehabilitate a beautiful zombie babes 'But don't forget to keep an eye out behind you. Because on the Isle of the Dead, you're on the menu! See your dealer or call today! WARNING: This game depicts scenes of graphic violence. «Big, bright, oli-so-gruesome graphics ... enough blood and gore to make even George Romero blanch. A real tongue-in-cheek, teeth-in-flesh kind of adventure.\" PC Entertainment, October; '93 USE IN DIC ISLE OF THE DEAD Definitely not for the faim-hearted. Sampled realistic sounds add to the sickening, bloody almosphere. Video Games September '93 Brings new meaning to the term \"graphic saduenture. PC Entertainment October '93 1-800-238-4277 IN USARL CHIL OOIWAIS YTTARE 13707 Gamma Road  Dallas, Texas 75244  214-385-2353 st IBM 3.5\" HD disks: Minimum requirements: 386 PC 5600 compatible, 4MB RAM; DOS 5.0 or greater, hard drive and VGA gaphics, Sound support SoundBlaster and compatibles. 1994 Metit Software. Available at: Babbage's  Best Buy COMP USA  computer City  Nobody Beats The Whiz  Software Etc. Circle Reader Service "


"moved to the Thief. Three quarters of the way Finally, there is also a problem with importalong, the game crashed in the swamp whening some characters from earlier Quest For The Thief's Workaround ever I tried to open the Mad Monk's tomb. Glory games. Sierra has a patch for this one, After the main article was written, a way This turned out to be a \"random error,\" that too. I heartily suggest that if you intend to around the thief's dead-end problem was right or might not show up. It hadn't done play Shadows of Darkness, you get the version worked out by Sierra. The key is spending so with the other two Heroes, but this time it but this time it number of vour game and call Sierra fir number of your game and call Sierra first ro enough nights in your room at the inn to reared its ugly head. have several \"voice dreams,\" and most imfind out if you will need any patches to fix any portantly, hearing the weeping from the Well, Sierra had a patch that fixed both this problems. That will, at the very least, save you innkeeper's room one midnight (you are problem and the interminable waits for saves some frustrating experiences. awakened by this; don't stay up waiting for and restores (this patch, by the way, came out Up to now, Sierra has had a reputation for some time after the first one I had gotten). it). These events must happen before you releasing solid product—software that might There was only one drawback: because of the rescue Tanya extensive changes made to the files, my saved require at most a minor upgrade for sound Once those situations have occurred, it games were no good and I had to start over should be safe to rescue the girl. I tried this drivers or a small section of the game. With again from the beginning. Shadows of Darkness they have rainted their in my Thief game, and after spending two near sterling reputation by releasing a game extra nights in my room, the problem was So I started my Thief over. By day 11 in the they knew to be in bad shape, releasing it cleared up and I finished the game with the game, all the quests had been finished, the five prematurely for «financial reasons.\" While Thief. So, if you have been waiting around rituals collected, and it was just a matter of they have been quick in getting out the for that note, and it hasn't shown, follow waiting for a certain note to appear in my the above procedure and you should be patches, that does not absolve Sierra of their room one morning (this note initiates the end able to continue on with the game. game). On day 26, I was still waiting for it. lack of thorough testing that this game reNothing could make it appear, even replaying quired, especially given that it is working Overall, then, Shadows of Darkness was a from some earlier positions. Either the trigger under third-party software (the DOS Extendisappointment. I wanted to like this one, but for this event was not set, or somehow it was der). der). We will hope that this is a one-time the technical problems overwhelmed game turned off. I had no way of knowing, and with event and that Sierra is not going to join the play, and the numerous replays deadened any that in mind. I had no inclination to start ranks of other companies--too numerous to pleasure left in it. Had the game run without from scratch again. This also happened to mention—who release shoddy product difficulties I'd probably have enjoyed it more. other players who were running characters knowing they can get by with patches and As it is, I can only suggest you approach this other than Thieves, and we all eventually upgrades, and who make a pay-testers» of their one with extreme caution, and be sure of what abandoned those games. customers. you're getting. CGW SIDELINE SOFTWARE DI ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY Watch me come alive in your computer! len BABA A Girlfriend Teri Shown Here TOON YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Alien Breed Arcade Alone in the Dark 2 Adventure Battle Isle '93 War Simulation Brutal Sports Football Arcade Simulation Daemonsgate Role Playing Game Elite 2 Space Strategy Fields of Glory Strategy Simulation Ishar 2 Role Playing Game Jurrassic Park Arcade Strategy King Maker Strategy Lil' Devil Arcade Adventure Simon the Sorcerer Graphic Adventure Star Lord Strategy Sub War 2050 (Microprose) Simulation T.F.X Simulation T-2 The Coin-Op Arcade Winter Olympic '94 Sports Simulation PC MAGAZINES Get the latest news on the best PC titles from the U.S. & Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo packed PLAYABLE cover DISKS with each issuel Titles include: PC Format. PC Review. PC Zone PC Player. PC Plus, PC Power, PC Action, and PC Games! Your choice! Only $10 each! SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment Mastercard & Visa $5.00.c.0.. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day ait available! Call for prices on special shipping Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Detective products exchanged with some item Products warrantied through Sideline, FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info Call (305) 491.9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman! S2GO Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Heart of Chirua 18.95 Hero Ouest 18.95 Hook 16.95 It Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Joe and Mac Caveman Ninja 18.95 Killing Cloud 14.95 King of Chicago 14.95 King's Quesi 6 21.95 lnd et Kyrang 21 95 Lemmings 2 28.95 Links 386 (Access) 29.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Mike Ditka football 18.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Obitus (Psypnosis) 18.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Populous & Data Disk 24.95 Power Manger 19.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 Road & Track GP Unlimited 21.95 RoboCop 3 18.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sargon 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sim Anf 21.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sim Life 18.95 Sleepwalker 18.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 14.95 Space wrecked 16.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spous of War (RAW) 18.95 Spot 16.95 Strike Fleel 19.95 Super Off Road Racing 16.95 Super Space Invaders 18.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 The Immortal 79.95 The Lost Admiral 21.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 21.95 TV Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Twilight 2000 16.95 Lima 6 21.95 Vente 14.95 W.W.F. 2 Wrestling 24.95 Waxworks 24.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Winter Super Sports 92 16.95 Wizkid 18.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 World of Legends Son of 2495 Wrath of the Demon 16.95 Zool 21.95 Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. for $69.95 Plus $4 shipping. Add $4 if C.O.D. Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles Artificial intelligence, Interactive Conversation 3000+ word vocabulary, synonmys, idioms She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen VGA video of a REAL woman no cartoons! Runs on any 286, 386, 486 (12MHz min.) Requires 640K RAM and 10Mb hard disk No nudity, possible mature situations Also available Girlfriend Lisa now only $59.95 \"If your dealer dosen carry Girlfriend show them this ad and they can order it from us!\" AldeaLabs 709 Lingco, Suite #106 Dept. #CGW Richardson, TX 75081 (214) 235-4999 FAX 235-4992 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Castles 16.95 4-0 Sports Boxing 18.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 A-Train 26.95 Collossus Bridge 4 16.95 Action Stations 18.95 Colorado 14.95 Ancient Art of War in Skes 24.95 Command HO 18.95 ATAC (Microprose) 24.95 Conan the Cimerron 18.95 B-17 Bomber Meroprose) 24.95 Greepers (Psypnosis) 18.95 Rackarnmon 14.95 Dave Ledbetter Golf (Greens) 26.95 BAT 14.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 BAT2 21.95 Dune 18.95 Battlechess 18.95 El Fish 21.95 Battlechess 4000 21.95 Elvira 2 18.95 Battle Isle 18.95 F16 Falcon 14.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Bloodwych 14.95 First Samurai 18.95 Carrier Command 14.95 Floor 13 18.95 Carriers at War 21.95 Global Conquest (Micropose) 21.95 Circle Reader Service #93 Circle Reader Service #35 "


"DRAGON KNIGHT For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Twin brothers, born to mortals, are separated at birth, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. They later meet, never knowing their true relation — or their own dark destiny. Fated to duel your twin to the death, you must fight to stay alive and rescue lovely, innocent maidens from the clutches of menacing foes. And perhaps, become the ruler of all. 1000000 Enter a World of Demons and Damsels. If You Dare. So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, numerous scripts and a thrilling plot. But be warned — with its voluptuous women and intense action, Dragon Knight III is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard checks accepted. Syte toquirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386ecommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, mouse recommended. Operating Sys: MS DOS 3.3 D ove, W 1.Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound suppos, Jound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thu, ve Boos, Pradio Spectrum, Adlib Gold ed Speed Wester. > This game is not ior the faint-hearted. Contains violence For a free demo, call our 24. BBS at 310-539-7739. (SNT), and some material inappropriate for minors under 18. Circle Reade: Service #73 Al companies and product nomes mentioned ore trademark or registered trademarks of the respective owners. "


"MAIL Mirry 29 Scorpia's suurvuruar Adapture Garming's Answer-Woman Has Got The Clues For You Darkside of Xeen Ultima Underworld Stygian Abyss Lands of Lore Return To Zork Simon The Sorcerer Hand of Fate Sam & Max Dark Sun Serpent Isle h my, it's spring already (though problem. This is why you need the whole though, this one is simpler than it appears, there's snow on the ground as I Truth, and why you have to rescue King provided of course you happen to have the write this!!), and the mail room is Richard first to get the shard (hint: shard, a right item in your inventory. Don't be a still full to bursting. Even that little addition small piece of something larger). When that vegetable, use your head! (Or, use Mr. B's hasn't helped very much. Looks like Fred and idea merges into your head, you'll be able to head, that works better.) I will have to do some work in here, if we ever deal with Scotia. Just make sure you use it Dark Sun: Some readers have been asking get the time (hah! Dream on Scorp). soon, like before she gets to that third form. about that underground temple and how Before we get to the good stuff, I'd just like Return To Zork: Entering the locked grothey can get around in it. There are entry to remind everyone that my machine is cery store is one of the more obscure puzzles points in each town (if you look carefully MSDOS. For that reason, I really can't help in the game. Forget about a key--there isn't enough), but those don't lead you very far. you with a game if it only comes out on one. You're going to have to make like a thief Sorry to say, you won't be able to do the grand another computer, like the Amiga or Mac. to get in. Of course, it helps if you had the tour until after you've helped Tynan and Darkside of Xeen: There's been a fair proper tool, and that's the obscure part. Very Tristram get back together. And, alas, there amount of mail lately about the levers in the likely, it wouldn't occur to most people that isn't all that much down there in the way of Dungeon of Lost Souls. These lerrers have giving a certain item from Pugney's a hot time goodies, although you should be able to find been from readers who bought the hint book, would do any good, but there are a lot of a nice ring for your mage. followed the instructions, and got nowhere. I strange things in this game, and that's one of Serpent Isle: Some gamers have been conSa talked to New World about this, and it turns them. fused at the end of this one by Xenka's inout that you guessed it—the hint book is Simon The Sorcerer: This one can be frusstruction to \"go to Sunrise Isle.\" They either wrong (oops). The correct instructions are: trating because there are so many things mistake the ice dragon island for it and spend walk to the top of the room on the left-hand tucked away in corners that are easy to miss. a lot of time wandering around and getting side. Go down the line, pulling all the levers For instance, the man fishing at the bottom nowhere, or they set out in the ice raft looking you can. If one doesn't move, just go on to of the cliff. How to get down there? Good for it. None of that is necessary. What Xenka the next. When you're finished, walk over to question. Luckily, the answer is a simple one: really means (and what she should have said) the right-hand side of the room and pull the find the vines on the left, and in no time at is to go to the Temple of Balance, via the lever you find there. The door should open. all you'll be down there, too. You really have serpent gate. Ultima Underworld Stygian Abyss: Looks to move that cursor all over the screen when And that's it for this look into the mail bag. like a resurgence of interest in this game. It you play this game. Remember, if you need help with an advenseems the Cup of Wonder has a number of Hand of Fate: Somewhat surprisingly, folks ture game, I can be reached in the following players wondering these days. Ir's certainly a are having a little trouble with that Skeptic ways: tricky item to find, even when you've tracked potion. They can brew it up all right, but down the right location on level 3. What you somehow, it just doesn't seem to have the need to do is put a little music in your soul necessary oomph to wake people up. That's the Groups and Clubs m here. A little fine tuning, and the cup will be because some players just don't read instrucOn GEnie: Visit the Games Round Table yours. tions carefully enough. Like the one that (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). Lands of Lore: Thar bio showdown with mentions the Altar of Doubr. Omitting that By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, Scoria seems to be a big headache for some little step makes all the difference. stamped envelope if you live in the US): people. The old girl changes to one form-no Sam & Max: What's that you say? You need problem. She switches to the second one-n0 to get your hot little hands on Mr. B's toupee, Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New problem. Then she gets to the third form, and but the alarm keeps going off? Well well, you York, NY 10028. suddenly she can't be killed. Uh oh. BIG shouldn't be so clumsy (heh). Actually Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"NEWS & WEATHER . Commerce Business Daily Execugrid Headline News Newsgrid Headline News Newspaper Library Newstand. People in the News  U.S. Government Center Weather Reports  SPORTS ARENA. Fantasy and Simulation Sports Forum  Fishing Forum  Great Outdoors Forum  NVN's Baseball Pool NVN's Basketball Pool NVN's Football Pool  NVN's Hockey Pool NVN's Colle Forthal Pool NV Colla Baskathallal Alert Sports Garden SportForum Sports Headline News  BUSINESS & ANOC Aka St etusi es Libra Bull o r ni es la o Census Library Commerce Business Dany Computer Library Corporate Affiliates Corporate Directories D&B Company Profiles :D & B U.S. Business Locator  Employee Benefits  E-Span Job. c/ Ecug Id cacine Na S. Financial Markets  Franchise Handbook  Help Wanted-USA  Insider Trading Monitor Investor od leg rum a n et Close  Mergers & Acquisitions Filings  Patent Library. People in the News. Small Business & Entrepreneurs  Tax/Accounung Forum  Tax Library. Technology & Quality Management Chomas New Industrial Products . Thomas Register  Traumark broery TRW Business Tredit Profiles  REFERENCE CHER AOS Rea CSL nput ty por el premio esm eeel . General Medicine Medical-Livrare paper Liblau Nuwstanu. NV Doknelfraiche Lurary none Le Reference Library. U.S. Government enten  COMMUNICATIONS. Chat Club Form Electronic M 1. Fox-A Letter Internet Mail. NYN Member Profiles  FORUNU NE TIO tu amor 1 al T Rum AMIGA A war vrum  Around America Forum Astro.bg. Holisi.c Solenoura Asrorum ... Am m orum via. ForChalu Forum BBS Forum . Computer Games Forum Computer Graphics Forum Computer Networking Forum Computer Programming Comedy Forum . Diabetes/Hypoglycemia Forum  Disabilities Fo A lumn um. Family & Home Forum  Fantasy Sports Forum Fishing Forum . Food & Wine Forum  GameRoom 1 baleni brum. GEMS Senior Forum Genealogy Forum General Exchange Forum General Games Forum Gifted Education Forum Great Outdoors Forum  Ham Shack Forum  Hobby Forum  IBM PC & Compatibles Forum  Internet Forum investora u For Kids Form1 : Forum  Macintosh Forum Maintenance & Home Repairs . Mental Health Forum M ier com um diarum Music Fo im Native American Forum Needlecraft Forum Numismatic Collectors Forum  Nursing Network  NVN Help Forw NVN Member Profiles . Offline Reader Forum PC Life Column  Pets & Animals Forum  Philat For Dhilosomh Forum Phi bowqphy Forum  Poet's Forum  Politics Forum Quilting Forum  Real Estate Forum  Religio Satu l Cum Ect inics Science Forum Science Fiction Forum  Small Business & Entrepreneurs  Soap Opera Forum Society For Creative Anachronisms. Sports Forum  Star Trek Gaming Forum Substance Abuse Forum  Sysop's Picks Sandy Edlum Tax/Accounting sum. Technology & Quality Management. Teen Forum Television Forum  The First Precinct vel om 20 UDST U excuJUNIX Forum  Windows Forum Write Stuff Forum  TRAVEL SERVICES. Around America Forum EASY Sabre  Mileage & Routing Official Airline Guide Travel Forum . ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES U scones by Jovce lilson Magill's Survey of Cinema. Movies Forum  People in the News  Soap Opera Forum  Soap Opera Sur mures Te EDUCATIONAL SERVICES. Academic American Encyclopedia. American History Computer Library Dissertation abstracts Eucation Forum  Education Library. Historical Forum  Gifted Education Forum  NVN Bowl. World History WORLD OF CAMES. Adventure Casino  Galaxy Captain  Galaxy II  Games Forums Hundred Years' W a a rdom of DKT MODThe Quest For Immortality . ONLINE SHOPPING. Autovantage Cataludnoduk Commu Store Lopan Jousen el Wanted-USA. PC Catalog . FOR ADULTS ONLY  About Adul Services  CLI Adult Entertainment  Midnight Rendezvous. MÉMBER INFORMATION & ASSISTANCE  Account Manage lent. Cumhura m e Sery winem id I rec bror Berices. Member Guidelines NVN Help Forum Offline Anand coloring Blingeement Llicyhole Access relatou ricing Information Sysops Picks  Online Terms and Conditions  Upgrade Your Subscription Online Customer Service Support Private Forums . Variable lowpriced subscription plans. Over 1,000 dial-in access points  NVN Classroom  Toll-free Customer Support  NVN Help Forum If this isn't enough, how about the lowest online rates going? NVN Subscribe today by calling 1-800-336-9096. Or register online using any comm software set at N-8-1 and full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When connected enter BW94LS and press <return>. A SERVICE OF U.S. Videotel\" * A few select services carry additional charges. National Videotex is a service mark of National Videotex Network, Corp. All others are for identification purposes only and belong to their respective companies or organizations. Circle Reader Service #80 "


"REVIEW Too Much, Two Late Imagitec's Daemonsgate by Bernie Yee BabhLEDELLUEBEL WERAMAN NAMELESS SRVS I HAVE HERRE THAT YOU WILL BE LEAVING THE CITY SOON, IF YOU NEED A GOOD SHORD PRM THEN I AM V Then Daemonsgate was shown to like interface with which you can gather inThere are many, many places to visit, and the press two years ago, it made a teresting keywords to bring up in other conmany things to do. Like the Ultima series, V bit of a stir. It was an extremely versations. The NPCs also have their own time passes in a realistic way, and people will ambitious fantasy role-playing game in the keywords in highlighted text that can be sebe found in bed at 2 a.m. or tending their style of Origin's Ultima series. It used the lected to follow up conversational leads. All shop at 3p.m. However, there are major gaps now familiar 3/4 overhead view, had tons of of the information gleaned through converin the «realism\" department. Your hero can characters and conversational interaction, sation is gathered into a knowledge base that walk into the medical facility and \"borrow\" a and offered an exciting real-time comfirst aid kit, a mortar and pestle, and other bat system. That was two years ago. SI CONTROLLI POORSTED OBJECTSUE SYSTEME items throughout the town. Again, like Sadly, Daemonsgate suffered a very comRICER Ultima, the roofs of buildings disappear plicated birth, enduring development when you enter, allowing you to see inside delays and being shuffled around to sevthe various structures you are exploring. eral different publishers. Meanwhile, While using the standard VGA palette, the RPG genre has moved on to Ultima Daemonsgate graphics border on the carVII, with its easy, full-screen, drag and roonish, especially in the separate combat drop interface, and Ultima Underworld, display. with its true first-person 3D engine and  nearly perfect automapping system. Might and Magic Daemonsgate is stuck, technologically, While your party walks around, they are somewhere around Ultima VI, and it Hit SELECT BUTTON TO CONTINUE >> displayed as a single character icon. Enfeels like an old game. serves as an auto-notetaking device. Similarly, emy parties are similarly displayed as a Being an \"old game\" isn't necessarily a you can page through the inventory and charsingle character. However, when combat problem. Having had the recent pleasure of acter statistics pages, and set game options takes place you find yourself in another disreplaying Wasteland from Interplay's 10th through the omnipresent menu bar. play, suddenly facing off against a group of Anniversary CD-ROM, it's obvious that The lack of an overhead map or automapautomatons. The combat system is actually older, less sophisticated engines can still play ping system is a very conspicuous omission, reminiscent of MicroProse's Darklands, one host to a great game. But Daemonsgate is not especially in a game that prides itself on its of the best real-time combat systems I've seen. great—it's composed of good elements, but immense size. The starting city of Tormis is The overhead view allows combat to take on in their overly ambitious attempt to create a a big city, and although a map comes with the a tactical complexity that first person games huge and complex world, the designers failed game, there's no way to find out like Eye of the Beholder lack. Combat unfolds to integrate the good parts into a great whole. where you are until you locate a in real time as you issue orders Daeno landmark like a tavern or an Under Siege inn. A physical map of the enTITLE: Daemonsgate The hero of this adventure is Gustavus, a tire world is provided as well, $39.95 SYSTEM: young character with world-saving potential but it only deals in geographical REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, VGA graphics; who begins his adventure inside the besieged generalities. Even Interplay's supports Adlib, Roland and Sound Blaster sound cards; city of Tormis. Hoards of daemons sit outside ancient Dragon Wars, written package contains both floppy the city gates, and your job as Gustavus is to for an Apple II, had a rudimendisks and CD-ROM PROTECTION: None get out and discover who is behind this attack. tary automap. It is inexcusable DESIGNER: Nigel Kershaw The best starr is to talk to anything that looks that a game running off a CDPUBLISHER: Imagitec Design, Inc. remotely humanoid. The conversation sysROM drive on my 486/33 is (615) 824-1960 tem is cleverly implemented with a hypertextlacking such a basic amenity. PRICE: IBM ILMOSAE Goodletsville, TN Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"GET REAL BLASTIR Upgrade up to a Sound Blaster« 16, and you've got PC audio as real as it gets. Real CD-quality, 16-bit stereophonic sound. Real built-in upgradability. And best of all, real 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. All of which may just be why we're the 16-bit PC audio standard. And why those other manufacturers spend so much time comparing themselves to Sound Blaster. But like the man says, Get Real. Because there's only one card that's \"as good as a Sound Blaster 16\" And that's a Sound Blaster 16. For information, call 1-800-998-5227 uno Sound Sound Sound BLASTER THE 16-BIT SOUND STANDARD. CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. 2.PC2 PC usilpauile.com U.S. Inquiries: Creative Labs, Inc., Tel: 1-800-88-5227 or 1-408-428-6600. International Inquiries Creative Technology Ltd, Singapore, Tel: 65-773-0233, Fax: 65-773-0353. Sound Blaster, and the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Lid. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #50 "


"SINGHALLACES ESTE LEG&FRGS SEOSENTINE SWORD EFBMALS COULD TEMPT YOU WITH THTENUS COME ON I'VE GOT THE HIND KOSTOS THINK ABOUT. COLD 19 11 ICOZZE gods. to each character, but you can interrupt the elementals to weapons, your party CONTROLEER SYSTEME combat and issue new orders to attack, defend will be able to stomp just about GUSTAVUS NEUE another character, retreat and so on. Noneanything it comes across. Of theless, the strength of the combat system is course, you will be diverted by nusapped by the graphics, which are so munmerous \"shmutz-quests\" where dane, so uninvolving, they look like they've you need to run around looking for come right out of an old Atari 2600 cartridge various \"reagents\" for magic spells game. The character portraits, on the other (sound familiar?), but once you've hand, are nicely done and quite expressive. gathered the goods, you've got imGo figure. mense power. Daemonsgate, like many of its RPG breth ADAMANTINE SHORD FOR 1207GOLD RIOCESO LA CONTROL MODE OERENCE DEPENGELOLOLEVSTEMELOR ren, becomes a game where well-developed characters resemble not heroes, but or a story that flows easily, like a good read in a well-written page-turner. It seems over-enthusiasm got the The designers had excellent game design best of the designers in the realm concepts when they started out on this venof interface and game mechanics as ture, but for some reason—perhaps the awkwell. It took me a great deal of ward circumstances surrounding its effort to get used to the interface development—they were unable to pull it and feel comfortable in the game GUSTAVUS HAS KILLED together. Daemonsgate isn't a bad game. If world. The complexity of the inyou are an Ultima fan from way back, or if terface and engine is, no doubt, the you haven't been keeping up with the latest Daemonsgate's magic system also has a numresult of the designers' attempt to RPG advances due to hardware restraints, ber of interesting and original features. There encompass the massive quest and richly-deDaemonsgate is as good a choice as many other are different types of magic, like Hedge Wiztailed world that they envisioned. Unfortuolder games. Still, Daemonsgate is no Arena, ardry or Elementalism, each with their own nately, size isn't everything when it comes to no Betrayal at Krondor, no Ultima VII, and powers. You can create potions, summon FRPGs. Story pacing, balance and structure these are the games it will be sharing shelf are even more important, and Daemonsgate's daemons or enchant objects, and once your space with, and with which it will be comcreators have not managed to create a game magicians have managed to bind powerful pared. cow EDDIESEL EGETETETT BEDE FEDERER DET FRANCISCA. O FRANCISCA. PIJERAMAH HAS KILLED SIEGFRIED. Introducing... THE UNIVERSAL COCKPITTM STRAP IN. AND TAKE OFF!!! The UNIVERSAL COCKPIT Allows you to Take Command of Your System Three Ways (stick, yoke or steering). Now You can have Complete Control whether on the Track or in the Air. FEATURES:  Tough Aluminum Construction  Free-Standing System. No Clumsy Desk Mounting FLIGHT SIMS AUTO RACING SIMS Clamps or Suction Cups! Stick/Rudder/Throttle Steering/Brake/Throttle (not shown , yoke configuration) Push Button Shifting  3-in-1 Modular System, Easily Converted Coming Soon: The UNIVERSAL JOYSTICKTM-\"Complete\" Control of Auto Racing and Flight Sims in an Economical Desktop Package. ASK FOR DETAILS! SIMULATION SYSTEMS 1-800-647-7623 SIMULATION SYSTEMS 791 E. Brokaw Rd. San Jose, CA 95112  1-800-647-7623  Fax (408)441-0650 Circle Reader Service #100 Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"Carey DeVuonos Hollywood Mogul RUN YOUR OWN HOLLYWOOD MOVIE STUDIO Past the studio gate with your name on it lies your personal dream factory. Go for it: Buy original scripts and blockbuster bestsellers or steal ideas for yourself. Set vastly padded production budgets. Choose cnough special effects to hide the lack of plot. Play God with producers and directors. Make and break superstars careers, or enslave stars of tomorrow. Shoot on Sound Stage 10, in London, or on the slopes of the Himalayas. Have marketing and distribution grovel at your feet.  Attend your world premieres. Grab it all: Sit back and watch the grosses roll in. Snag that Beverly Hills mansion, Malibu beach house, 40,000 acres in Montana or your own Greek island. * Collect the most overpriced art on earth. Find you can't live without that 4th studio jet. Keep the biggest names in Hollywood waiting outside your studio gate. Or Gamble it all! Sell your shirt just to stay alive. If you've got what it takes to make it in Hollywood... Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul is gonna take everything you've got. Circle Reader Service #44 DeVuono De Vuono To purchase, visit your local software retailer, or call 1-800-350-5550. Available for IBM And Compatibles. MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows versions available. 600k required, mouse suggested, 3 meg hard disk space required, EGA screens. GAMES huollolle telefo "


"REVIEW The Red Crystal Shattered: Koperasi No More Imprismed No More By QQP's Quartz lan Emrich and Petra Schlunk In a fantasy land where crystals and mysning the minimally detailed strategic map of town might yield several dozens of these tical insights are the norm, it's amazing Blackmoore, the large and small squares de pointless encounters of The Red Crystal kind. that we could not read the signs. The noting castles and towns offer prime locations Sure, these denizens disappear after you put foreshadowing was there, if we had bur noto visit. Fortunately, new characters are up with their prattle, but more are continuriced. After installing QQP's fantasy epic, placed near towns and castles that are geared ally generated, so you must quickly learn the The Red Crystal, the future was spelled out to toward their lesser prowess. art of avoiding these dregs lest madness result. us in DOS-CD/REDCRY—and how proYou maneuver through Blackmoore via There might be one beneficial encounter phetic it turned out to be. Similarly, the sword icons, pointing in one of the eight shuffled in there somewhere, but who wants per-game look-up copy protection took Alan directions found on a numeric keypad (alto put up with a hundred pointless interrupto Page 8, Line 1, Word 1: \"bored.\" Ignoring though a mouse may also be used for movetions to find it? these telling bits, we pressed keys and pressed ment). Upon entering a rown, the familiar Having endured character generation and on. sword icon seems to multiply as swarms of the monotonous, moron-filled streets of a non-player characters (NPCs), cleverly disnearby village, it is your task to go adventurCharacter Generation-Roll Again guised as your sword icon, meander abouting and clean out cach of the castles in the land of Blackmoore. The Ultimate Each player controls a single hero of the Bad Guy has darkened the land, familiar fantasy ilk. During creation, the and only a hero who discovers the character's primary goal should be to start seven secrets of life can finally stop with the highest possible statistics. We him. The seven secrets of life are learned quickly that an average schlep chardecent pieces of sage advice, told by acter can not just venture forth and hope to one of life's truly great adventurers, survive the massive castle cleaning endeavors co-designer Bruce Williams (founin store. No, players must patiently re-roll ad der of QQP). Why these pearls nauseam (emphasis on the nauseam) until the were cast before this swine of a numbers for the character's strength, intelligame, however, is something we gence, armor, etc., are at least demi-godlike. cannot answer (perhaps that's the To add more challenge to this task, the eighth secret). If there is any reward manual reveals nothing about average values seeking only to interrupt your game. These in playing Red Crystal, discovering these seor ranges for these attributes, and starting nomadic NPCs, in their maniacal determinacrets would be it, but with all of the tedium tion to reach the character's sword icon, can required to learn even one, much less seven, will only buy a player more frustration once even traverse obstacles which you cannot. we feel confident that these will remain sethe game begins. Trust us, it is better to be An encounter occurs when swords touch; crets, even among purchasers of the game. frustrated early on, generating optimal statisthe other sword disappears and tics for new characters and only marginally is replaced by a screen almost inconvenienced, rather than playing for a bit, always filled with an NPC's bawatching them die, and then starting all overnal chatter about you nal chatter about your ugly looks or telling you to get out of The Red Crystal the way. Curiously, the screen is INED CRYSTAL Politicians Don't Shake occasionally blank and conveys REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 1MB RAM This Many Hands the message \"Empty house. No VGA graphics, 8MB hard There you stand, a new hero in the land of one home.» Just how these PROTECTION: Documentation look up Blackmoore (gain five experience points if empty houses manage to wan# PLAYERS: 1-2 (modem play) der across the landscape strikes Charles Griffith, Steve recognize \"Blackmoor\" as the name of Cohen, Bruce Williams PUBLISHER: us as a poorly chosen plor device QQP, Inc. one of Dave Arneson's campaign which (908) 788-2799 formed the basis for the earliest Dungeons & stolen from The Wizard of Oz. Dragons game). Whither now? While scanSimply walking across a single Red Crystal again. TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: $59.95 IBM cirive space; supports Adlib and Sound Blaster sound cards DESIGNERS: Flemington, NJ Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"WHEN YOU'RE REALLY SERIOUS ABOUT PLAYING GAMES Subscribe to America's #1 computer game magazine... and score up to 47% savings! Get ready for some serious action with Computer Gaming World the spectacular monthly magazine that helps you pump-up your computer gaming expertise. Brought to you by the publishers of PC Magazine, PC/Computing, MacUser and Windows Sources, every monthly issue of Computer Gaming World  Reveals special \"winning secrets\" for your favorite games  Provides \"first looks\" and in-depth reviews of new computer games  Explores the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive game environments  Helps you make the leap into cyberspace with on-line gaming  Explains how to turbocharge your system for faster action...and much more! Whether you're into fantasy, action, sports or strategy. Whether you use DOS, Windows or a Mac...it's time to start racking up the points with Computer Gaming World. Subscribe now and save! One year/12 issues $27.94 You save 41% Two years/24 issues $49.97 — You save 47% Savings based on annunt cover price of $47.40. Please mention this 4-digit key code to operator when placing your order: 4294 CALL NOW TOLL FREE Special Sports Games Section COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine 100 GAMES RATED SCONFIG FILES TO SOLVE GAMERS MEMORY PROBLEMS MIG takes EMPIRE DELUXE WarnGINAW-Medias XXX 13666 1-800-827-4450 "


"Gym put SCENCE CREME om Barbarian Needs Hit Points Badly! more times to clean out a level, and more ter generation. Also useful would have been Upon entering a castle, you are told if your times still to clean out a castle—and then basic game information such as how healing character feels at ease there (meaning the there are multiple castles! How much of this occurs and how to don armor. cowardly hit-and-run \"heroics\" one can stand castle isn't too tough for your characrer to is a matter of taste, but a good stand-up fight Modem Bones take on at that time). However, a torturous amount of trial-and-error was required before with a satisfying screen showing a monster's Red Crystal is one of the first few RPGs to defeat would have been more to our preferwe learned the disappointing secret of sucoffer modem play. Sadly, we're not pikers cessfully conducting combat in the dungeons ence. here, and even with the patient help of QQP's of these castles. When a monster is encoun Withdrawal Symptoms tech support, a modem connection was not tered, the play switches to a tiny area from possible. From trawling the on-line networks, which only you or the monster will survive. Trying to find your way through multiple we discovered that we were not alone in our levels of several castles while fightdifficulties and, in fact, were fortunate to even ing scores of regenerating monget the game running without needing to sters is bad enough. Worse, Red reconfigure our memory too much. Crystal appears to offer the tantaAmong those who did manage a modem lizing prospect of actually being hook up, players discovered that there were able to map dungeon levels. The even more frustrations ahead. For instance, maps, which auto-generate slowly there isn't a chat mode. How do you fight a as a character walks around dodgmonster cooperatively with two players coning battles or looking for loot, disnected by modem? Well, it seems you can't. appear completely whenever you Instead, you take turns-I'll fight this monjourney to another level or retreat ster, you fight that one if you can find each from monsters too difficult to other and manage to stay together, but that's fight. \"Fleeing\" sends the character a different problem. Modem play has been randomly to another part of the In order to hit a monster with a hand the saving grace of many a computer game dungeon and, in the process, weapon, you must maneuver your figure next eliminates all the mapping that to the monster and swing your weapon. Then, in order to have any hopes of hitting had been done up until that point. the monsters at all, you have to choose an But that's not all. Dungeons attack height before swinging. Otherwise bave secret doors, and Red Crystal you may find yourself swinging your weapon takes the word \"secret\" to preat the air space above a maggot or whacking viously unexplored depths. If SFEES 2: away at the hooves of a minotaur. This is a you ve accidentally fled into a convention tried by several games in the early room with a secret door, for indays of CRPGs, but one that falls flat in Red stance, you may never find your Crystal, as height differences are not shown to way out again (unless you fee the player graphically. In any case, monsters once more and are, again, placed are tough. Chipping them down a couple of randomly clsewhere in the dunhit points at a time, versus the plethora regeon). How can this be? Because finding geon). How can this bc? Because findir that was not in the forefront of its genre. In quired to slay them, lets players know that secret doors depends on one's Ability statistic the case of Red Crystal, unfortunately, its poor this is going to be a long game. and, if it is too low, you're entombed, period. implementation has become yet another That, however, is the good part of combat. At some point, every gamer will appeal to blood-pressure raising exercise. the manual to help them out of their frustraThe bad part is that, if you stand next to a tions. In the case of Red Crystal, this may monster for more than about two seconds, Sticks and Stones (er, Crystals) they swing back (and always at the right make a bad situation worse. Now, QQP has Like many of those who enjoy good comheight, of course). And when monsters atlong been known for their below average puter games, we've found QQP to be a very tack, they can deal some serious damage, documentation. Previously, though, their satisfying wellspring of entertainment, and especially to new characters. Furthermore, if fine games have more than compensated for their staff has always been exemplary in their your character has the misfortune of dying at their printed weaknesses, but leaving gamers helpfulness. Frankly, however, we can't bethe hands of one of these monsters, coming naked in the desert of despair with Red Crystal lieve that it says QQP on this game's box. Of back to the last saved game position will and naught but a bad manual for relief can course, every company has their dogs, and no reveal that all of the previously killed monlead to wailing and gnashing of teeth that one can hit the mark everytime. Perhaps it is sters have returned to their posts, and the reaches biblical proportions. the \"home run hitters syndrome\" that makes gauntlet must be run anew from the begin\"The usual poor (and unintentionally comithis miss stand out. Like Babe Ruth, when ning. cal) editing aside, much of the manual's deQQP steps up to the plate and connects with To survive and fight another day, the ideal scriptive information is useless. The narrative a game, they hit home runs and the fans come tactic in combat is to close in, swing, and then describing the various evil generals and monback anticipating the next one. When they run like heck to another corner of the area and sters, in particular, offers fiction where facts miss, however, a strike out seems all the more face the monster for the next swing when it would have been more appreciated. What the disappointing. We fear that this foul ball has again closes. Repeat several zillion times until rules really need are early game survival tips hit them in the face, leaving a black eye that the monster is finally defeated. Repeat even and more information for intelligent characmay take some time to completely heal. Cow LEFER 96 100 ZETOS BIRINT Ohh Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"Microforum Experience the adventure of a lifetime and venture into the dark threatening planets of the G.O.8,G galaxy. Experience the latest in computer animation, graphics and sounds with this CD-ROM game! It is the future, Your name is Buzz Klondike, You are explor ing a new galaxy in search of uncharted mineral rich planets. On each new planet you explore you will face new terrifying challenges. Meet the most intriguing and dangerous creatures in the Universe. Face the ultimate challenge-THE GAME GRID, Experience the adventure of a lifetime and venture into the dard threatening planels of the c. . . JalaxU. This out of this World CD-ROM game with keep you playing for hours. Includes an extensive collection of sound effects, animation, incredible SOLD AT BETTER COMPUTER STORES! TO ORDER DIRECT CALL 4800.465.CDCD (1-800-465-2323) Circle Reader Service #75 ALER IN URIES ARE ALWAYS WELCOME PLEASE CALL 1.800.466 "


"CHIPS & BITS PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10042 FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Details Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10042 Visa/MQ Accepted Checks held 4 weeks Morty Orders same as mish COD 58. Delectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price/availability may change. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per orden Mall to Canada, PA, HI AK APO, FPO $4 por order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping So por itom Handling 52 per shipment CD ROM note: JC signifies ewolonno only NOTEBOOK GAMEPORT Transforms highperformance portables into serious simulation machines by providing connectivity for any IBMcompatible joystick or yoke and rudder pedals. Completely self-contained ex. ternal gamecard connects to the se. rial port and provides pass-through mouse 'FLIGHT STICK PRO' is the ultimate battle stick for computer pilots. It can activate radar, arm and disarm weapons and view your aircraft without ever removing your hand from the stick. The trigger and 3 fire buttons gives you full range of combat while the viewer gives you total com mand of the aircraft. $57 port. $39 HLONE THE DARK FIELDS OF THE ROAD TO WATURLOO \"PACIFIC STRIKE is a World War 11 flight simulation that allows you to change the course of the war in the Pacific Theater. Fly a wide variety of expertly modeled aircraft in all the major theatres, including Pearl Harbor and Midway. Plan your own missions and earn promotions. Features VGA Graphics. $49 'ALONE IN THE DARK 2 Descend into the terrifying depths of the ultimate 3D virtual mystery. Become the detective, Ed. ward Carnby, embarking on a sleuthing quest to rescue a kidnapped child. Features frightfully eerie soundtrack, 70 characters, 15 levels and hun. dreds of detailed 3D objects. $36 \"FIELDS OF GLORY' An intrigu. ing action game with a miniature feel. Command the French, British or Prussian in the roles of Napoleon, Wellington, or Blucher. Choose from 4 historical or 2 fictional battles. Use a modem for head to head competition. Fight a single battle or an entire campaign. $34 Fru Titel bestiaren ondore RIGIN CROPROSE IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $18 $2 $1 $54 $24 $48 $52 $39 Acoustic Resrch P22 $66 Reel Magic CD Upgrde $699 Acoustic Resrch P42 $159 Reel Magic Vid Upgrd S389 Acoustic Resrch P570 $319 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Acoustic Resrch P622 $239 Sony MDR E414 Hdphn $9 AdLib Sound Card $34 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Adlib Gold Sound Card $99 Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 Adlib Programmer's Man $6 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $214 Advncd Gravis Ultrsnd $129 Altec ACS 100 Spkrs $109 Sound Blaster 16 MCD $169 Altec ACS 150 Subwfr $109 Sound Blaster Deluxe S79 Altec ACS 200 Spkrs $209 SBlastr Omni CD Drv $220 Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $169 SBlaster Powrd Spkers S24 Altec ACS 300 Sp Sub $229 Sound Blaster Pro Dix S124 Altec ACS 50 Speakers $79 Snd Blaster Voice Assist $49 CH Weapns Contrl Sys $44 Snd Galaxy BX2 $59 Cyberman Snd Galaxy NX2 $79 Fighter Stick $79 Snd Galaxy NXPRO $109 Flight Control Stand $18 SGalxy NXPRO16 MM $449 Flight Stick $36 SGlxy NXPRO16 SCSI $139 Flight Stick Pro SGalxy NXPRO MM Kit $349 Game Card 3 Automatic $28 Sound Machine Gravis Analog Joystick $29 Sound Machine Pro 16 S139 Gravs Anolog Pro Joystk $32 Sound Star Snd Enhncr $9 Gravis PC Game Pad S19 SoundMan 16 $99 Labtec CS-1000 Spkrs $75 Thrustmastr Drivg Sys $124 Labtec CS-1200 Spkrs $84 Thrustmastr FCS Pro $99 Labtec CS-1400 Spkrs $89 Thrustmastr Flight Sys $59 Labtec CS-150 Spkrs $17 Thrustmastr Game Card $27 Labtec CS-550 Spkrs S24 Thrustmastr Ruddr Sys $99 Labtec CS-700 Spkrs S32 Thrustmaster WCS 2 $94 Labtec CS-800 Spkrs S30 Video Blaster $349 Labtec CS-900 Spkrs S63 Virtual Pilot $61 Mach 2 Joystick $21 Voice Blaster $52 Mach 3 Joystick $27 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Maxx Control Yoke $54 IBM ADVENTURE Maxx Ruddr Pedals FLT $38 Media Concept $39 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD $65 Notebook Gameport $397th Guest CD $48 Pilot Control Stand S19 7th Guest CD JC $35 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 S139 Advent Will Beam EGA $19 Pro Audio Spct 16 Bas S115 Advent Will Beam VGA $24 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus589 Advent Will Beam CD $24 Pro Audio Studio 16 $169 Advent Will Beam CD JC$19 Alone in the Dark $33 Alone in the Dark CD $48 Alone in the Dark 2 $36 Alone in the Dark 3 CD $48 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon Trail $29 An American Tail $21 Animation Classics Award Bundle $46 Awful Thngs frm Outrspc $36 Beneath a Steel Sky CD $39 Beverly Hillbillies $19 Bioforge $52 Bioforge CD Bloodnet $39 Bloodnet CD $43 Blue Force: Next of Kin $42 Blue Force: Next Kin CD $39 Blues Brothers Buccaneers CD $48 Castle Wolfenstein CD $48 Cast Wolfstn-Spr Dest $32 Chaos Continuum CD 542 City 2000 CD Colonel's Bequest S15 Companions of Xanth S34 Compans of Xanth CD $39 Conan CD $26 Conan CD JC $18 Conqust Robin Hd VGA $24 Conqu Robn Hd WIN CD $42 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy CD $44 Critical Path WIN CD $48 Cruise for a Corpse $19 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 Daemonsgate $32 Daemonsgate CD $32 Dark Seed $28 Dark Seed CD $39 Day of the Tentacle $35 Day of the Tentacle CD $42 Deja Vu 182 WIN $34 Dracula $34 Dracula CD $35 Dracula Unleashed CD $47 Dragon Knight 3 $46 Dragonsphere $42 Dreamweb $36 Dune CD Dune CD JC $34 Earth Invasion WIN $24 East Front WIN $32 El Grito Del Jaguar CD $46 Elf Epic $32 Eric The Unready CD $36 Eric the Unready S21 Escape Dead Zone CD 548 Evolution $39 Evolution CD Fascination CD $39 Firelancer 2120 $45 Firelancer 2120 CD $45 Flashback $32 Floor 13 S15 Fourplay WIN $19 Fred Pharks Front Phrm $24 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight Gabriel Knight CD $45 Gateway $13 Gateway 2 CD $34 Gateway 2:Homeworld $32 Goblilins 1-3 CD ea $19 Guy Spy CD Guy Spy CD JC $19 Hand of Fate Hard Day's Night CD $29 Harvester CD $52 Heart of China EGA $34 Heart of China VGA $19 Heart of China VGA $34 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hell Cab CD $52 Hired Guns Homey D. Clown $27 Hook $32 Loom CD $38 Inca DOS or CD $19 Lost Files Sherlock Hims S26 Inca 2 DOS or CD $19 Lost in Time $18 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atints $36 Lost in Time CD Indy Jnes Fate Atints CD$42 Magic Death CD Inherit the Earth $45 Magic Pockets Innocent Until Caught $34 Man Enough CD $45 Inspector Gadget $34 Manhole Iron Helix CD $56 Maniac Mansion $18 Island of Dr Quandry $26 Mario is Missing CD $44 Isle of the Dead $38 Martian Memorandum $2 Jack the Ripper $39 Metal Mutant $3: Jagged Alliance Microcosm CD $49 Jonny Quest $26 Mixd Up Faery Tale EGA $14 Journeyman Project CD $48 Mixd Up Faery Tale VGA $29 Journeyman Proj 2 CD $52 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $28 Jurassic Park $39 Morph Man CD $32 KGB $17 Myst CD $64 Kid's Collection CD $14 Nebulas King's Quest 4 Out of this World King's Quest 5 VGA $32 Out of this World 2 CD 34! King's Quest 5 CD JC $19 Peppr's Advt in Tm VGA S29 King's Quest 5 WIN CD $41 Phantasmagoria CD $5! King's Quest 6 VGA $45Police Quest 1 VGA $1! King's Quest 6 CD JC $29 Police Quest 3 VGA $2. King's Quest 6 CD S42 Polce Quest 4 DOS/WIN $4 King's Quest 6 Upgrd CD$24 Polce Quest 4: CD King's Ransom $36 Prince of Persia King's Ransom CD $38 Prince of Persia 2 Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $36 Quantum Gate WIN CD Labyrinth of Time CD $48 Quest for Glory 1 Lands of Lore CD $44 Quest Glory 1 VGA CD Laura Bow 2 Quest for Glory 3 Laura Bow 2 CD $24 Quest for Glory 4 Leather Goddesses 2 $39 Return To Zork CD Legend of Kyrandia $32 Return of Phantom Legend Kyrandia CD JC $24 Return of Phantom CD $3 Legend of Kyrandia CD $39 Return to Zork Leisure Suit Larry 1 EGA$16 Return to Zork CD JC Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA$19 Rex Nebular Master Edit $3 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA$24 Riftwar Legacy VGA $3 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $42 Ringworld Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD 546 Ringworld CD Loom $19 Robinson's Requiem S4 $29 $31 $4 $32 "


"LIL Quest for the \"INHERIT THE EARTH' A fantasy adventure that will Introduce players to a new world of breath taking scenery and excitement... Earth. Accompany Rif the fox as he attempts to uncover the mystery surrounding an ancient hu. man artifact. Features intuitive interface, puzzles and overhead perspective. $45 'GREAT NAVAL BATTLES 2' takes you to the South Pacific for 5 tactical battles, 3 carrier battles, one full campaign and limitless hours of cutting-edge naval combat simulation Features play screens with digitized WW2 photo backgrounds and fully animated realtime damage control screens. $45 'MYST', The surrealistic adventure that will become your world. Journey to an island world tinged with surrealistic mystery, where only your wits and imagination will unlock an ancient betrayal of the past. Features 3D photorealistic graphics, original soundtrack and non-linear gameplay. CD 548 The Surrealistic Adventure That Will Become Your World W .Xdventure THULA ON SHADOW CO Ultima mi 'SHADOW OF THE COMET' This Call of Cthulhu adventure is a labyrinth of mystery and gripping full screen animation. Set in 1910 in the sea-side village of Illsmouth, players become John T. Carter a young astronomer. Features bone chilling 3D animation, stunning sound effects and an action packed sus. pense story. CD 548 *ARMORED FIST plunges you into the modern battlefield in command of a company of armored units. Features complete driver's station simulation of the American built M1A2 Abrams, M3 Bradley IFV, and the Soviet built T-80 and BMP. Remote artillery and air support night vision optics and amazing Voxel Space terrain. $52 'ULTIMA VIII: PA. GAN' You are imprisoned on a distant world where the forces of the Guardian hold absolute command Without allies or even a familiar frame of reference you must learn to defeat the ruling Elemental Titans on their own terms in your quest to bring the battle to the Guardian $52 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS Terrorpods $24 Tetris Gold CD $32 The Light Corridor S29 Titan S29 Titus Fox S25 Tristan Pinball $19 S29 Volfied S19 Who shot Johnny Rock $39 Winball WIN $28 Zool $34 $27 Walker $32 Warriors of Legend $18 Where in Amerc's Past $37 Where in Euro is Carmn $29 Where in Spce Crmn Dix $44 Where in Time Carmen $32 Where in USA Carmen $29 Where in USA Crmn Dlx $45 Where in World Carmen $29 Where in Wrld Crmn Dix $52 Where in Wrld Dix CD $59 Who Killd Sam Ruprt CD $21 Wing Comm Ultima 6 CD$24 Wing Comm UltmUW CD$55 Wrath of the Gods CD $39 Yserbius $28 Zombie Dino CD Trog $19 IBM HINT BOOKS S44 $48 $33 IBM ARCADE Robinson's Requiem CD $42 Robocop 3 $32 Sam &Max Hit the Road S36 Sam &Max Hit Road CD 545 Screen Antics WIN $19 Secret Monkey Isl VGA S25 Secret Monky Is CD JC $19 Secret Monkey Isl CD $39 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 secret of 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster Shadow of Comet CD $48 Shadowgate WIN $34 Simon the Sorcerer $32 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA S28 pace Quest 4 CD JC 916 Space Quest 4 CD $37 pace Quest 5 VGA $36 Spellcasting 101 $19 pellcasting 201 $36 pirit of Excalibur CD $22 tar Reach $36 tar Trek 25 Anniversary $32 tar Trek 25 Anniver CD $55 tar Trek: Judgment Rits $33 tar Trek StarFit Acad $36 tar Trek StarFit Acd CD $52 tarship $39 tellar 7 $21 tellar 7 CD $24 urf Ninjas $37 ystem Shock $54 ystem Shock CD S54 erminator 2029 S37 erminator 2029 Opr Scr $19 erminator Rampage S42 error of the Deep S 36 error of the Deep CD $36 he Dig $42 he Prophecy S19 reasure Huntrs, Inc CD $48 uneland CD $36 nder a Killing Moon CD $55 Galactic Empire $27 Geekwad Games Galxy $19 Geekwd Gms Galxy CD $21 Gobliiins 3 $19 Gobliiins VGA $16 Guy Spy $24 Highway Patrol 2 Incredble Machine VGA $27 Incredible Machine 2 $27 Incredble Machne 2 WIN $29 Incredible Toons $29 Infestation Innocent $38 Jurassic Park CD Knight Force S29 Krusty's Super Fun Hse $29 Kye Deluxe WIN Mad Dog Mcree CD $32 Mad Dog Macree 2 CD $39 Metal & Lace $29 Metal & Lace Upgrade $5 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Mirage Thunder $39 Monty Python Mortal Kombat $39 Mystical $29 Night Breed $26 Nova 9 $21 Off Shore Warrior $24 Paper Boy 2 $19 Prehistorik $29 Raiden S32 Rebel Assault CD $44 Rise of the Robots $39 Silverball Sliders $29 Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Street Fighter 2 $34 Super Cauldron $25 Swamp Gas WIN $38 T2:Arcade Game $29 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $19 Teenage MN Turtles Adv $14 GEN Secrets of Game $10 Gabriel Knight $10 Gateway Savage Front $10 Global Conqust Strt w/dk$21 Goblins $10 Gold Rush $10 Gunship 2000 $16 Hand of Fate $10 Harpoon $16 Harpoon 2 Stratgy Guide $16 Heart of China $10 Hillsfar $8 Immortal $10 Indi Jones 4 Fate Atintis $10 Indy Jones Grix Adv $10 Inherit the Earth $16 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 S16 King's Quest 1-6 ea $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1-3ea $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $9 Lemmings w/disk $18 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 S10 Lord of the Rings V2 S6 Lost Files Sherlock Hims $10 LucasArts Advent Book $16 LcsArts Air Combt Strt $16 Magic Candle 2 S10 Magic Candle 3 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhunter San Francsc $10 Martian Dreams $13 Master of Orion OffStrGdS16 Matrix Cubed $10 Might & Magic 1 & 2 $10 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3-5 ea $16 Might & Magic Compnd $16 Off Bk Leis Suit Larry 2 $14 Off BK Ultima 2 Edition $16 Off Gd RWilco's Spc Adv$14 Off Gd Kng's Qust 3 Ed $16 500 CC Race Bike $29 Alien Breed $19 Aliens Ate My Babysitter S19 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $27 Back to the Future 2 Battle Storm S29 Cogito WIN $34 Cool Croc Twins Crazy Cars Creepers $29 Creepers Dragon's Lair Dragon's Lair CD Dragon's Lair 2 Tm Warp $34 Dragon's Lair 3 Dragn's Lr Esc Sgs Cst $34 Dragon's Lair CD JC S28 Dragons Breath $27 Eagle's Rider S29 Eight Ball Dix $38 Fast Action Paq $24 Fire & Forget $24 Galactic Conqueror $31 $15 Off book of Police Quest $12 Patriot $16 Pepper's Adventure Time $8 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1-3 ea $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 182 Off Str Bk $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger Privateer Playtest's Gd Protostar Quest For Clues 2-4 ea $21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 or 4 $10 Quest for Glory Strt Gd $19 Questbustrs: Bk of Clues$18 Railroad Tycoon $12 Realms of Arkania $14 Return to Zork Return to Zork Advt Gde $16 Rex Nebulr CosGenBen S14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Sea Wolf Strategy Guide $16 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Caster Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simcity/Simearth Book S20 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy S16 Sonic Strategy Guide S16 Space Quest 1 HintBook $10 Space Quest 2-4 ea $10 Spellcasting 101: Off Bk $14 Spellcasting 201 BK $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $9 Starflight 1 or 2 Strike Commndr Off Bk $14 Stunt Island $16 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Altered Destiny S10 Bard's Tale 1-3 ea $10 Bargon Attack S10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Castle Wolfenstein 3D S10 Castle of Dr Brain S10 Champions of Krynn S10 Civilization S16 Codename Iceman $10 Colonel's Bequest $10 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot $10 Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands $14 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dragons of Flame S8 Dungeon Master S10 Dynamix Grt War Planes S16 EcoQuest Search Cetus S10 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus S10 Elvira Mistress Dark S10 Eye of Beholder 1 or 3 $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Fascination $10 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm $8 $25 $18 $34 $22 $39 $29 $10 "


"CHIPS & BITS MITTETULUI Pebble Beach PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10042 FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Details Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10042 Visa MC Accepted Checks held 4 weeks Money Orders same as cash COD $8. Defectives replaced with same product Most items shipped into day Shipping limas may vary. Price availability may Change. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US 54 par order. Mail to Canada, PR HAK APO, FPO $4 por order. 4-8 day Worldwide shipping S8 per Tom Handling $2 per shipment CB ROM nolo. JC signifies jewel case only, \"UNDER A KILLING MOON' Trans. ports you to the virtual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy. New feature allows you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices & sound effects and an amazing level of detail & free. dom of movement make this game visually & aurally stunning. CD $55 \"PEBBLE BEACH GOLF LINKS' is the first in a series of LINKS CLASSIC EDITION courses made for the LINKS 386 PRO with VGA graphics. Designers and programmers spent more than a year repro ducing every nuance of Pebble Beach. Users will feel like they've ac tually played the course! $24 UNDER Chamriinsun COURSE 294 ACCESS STARNING BRIAN FET HARSOTRDIER, BRUSSELL MEANS THE WAR IN EUROPE 1939-45 DARK LEGIONS STORM ACROSS EUROPE' covers every part of the blitzkrieg that Hitler unleashed in 1939 You control every facet ol the war including amphibious landings, u-boat campaigns and strategic bombing strikes. While the battle rages,you must juggle limited resources between production and research. $12 DETROIT' is the ultimate automobile simulation that lets you design and build the car of your dreams! Create a powerful Empire and amass for. tunes! But first you'll have to face strikes, wars, new laws and competition from up to 3 opponents. Features 9 types of vehicles. Research engines, brakes, saftey & more. S34 \"DARK LEGIONS Command Stygian forces in a savage battle for ultimate power! Your goal: seek out and destroy the opposing legion's master. Create an army of up to 50 beings from the realm of dark fantasy. Choose from 16 different characters each with unique powers. Features modem and network play. S42 Can You Change Automotiva History? SEL iz STRATEGIC MILLATIONS.IN IBM HINT BOOKS IBM BUNDLES IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $18 $37 Summoning S16 Super Mario Wrid Secrts $9 Tales Magic:Prphc Shdw $12 Time Quest $10 Treasures Savge Frontr $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 TurboGrafx 16 Vol 2 S10 Ultima 4-6 ea $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 & Uworld Book $16 Ultima 7.5 Balncng Scls $16 Ultima Avatar Advent Bk $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima UW Wild Lab Bk S12 V Victory S16 Wizardry 6 Cosmo Frge $12 S16 Yeager Air Combat Habk S16 Yserbius S12 Zelda 3 S9 Perfect General Trilogy $36 Power Hits: Battletech $32 Power Hits: Movies $17 Power Hits: Sci Fi $19 Power Hits: Sports $19 Quarterdeck Game Bndl $62 Secret Weap Luftwff CD $39 Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle S34 Spellcasting Bundle CD $32 Task Force 1942 CD S35 The Victory Pack $25 Turning Point $29 Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $59 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Wing Commander 1 Dlx $48 Wing Commdr 1 Dlx CD $29 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Wizardry Trilogy 2 $15 $33 IBM BUNDLES IBM EDUCATIONAL EcoQuest 2 VGA $28 Fatty Bear's Bday Surp $32 Fatty Bear's Funpack CD$34 Fatty Br's Wrld Gms CD $44 Fatty Br's Bday Surp CD $38 Hypnotic Harp CD $34 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Jack and Beanstalk CD $34 Japanese Alive CD $118 Jungle Book WIN CD $19 Last Chnce See WIN CD$38 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Mario Teaches Typg CD $48 Mavs Bcn Teaches Typg $29 Mavs Ben Tch Typg WIN $34 MS Art Gallery Londn CDS45 Microsoft Dinosaurs CD $42 Mmedia: Vivaldi WIN CD $24 Orbits: Voyage Solar Sys$29 Oregon Trail WIN $34 Oregon Trail WIND CD $39 Peter Pan Story Paint Ad$34 Play Room $35 Print Shop Dix Print Shop Dix Bus Grph S29 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $42 Putt Putt Gs to Moon CDS44 Putt Putt Joins Parade S32 Putt Putt Joins Pard CD $48 Putt Putt's Funpack CD $34 Putt Putts Fun Pak $19 Quarky Quaysoo's VGA $29 Reader Rabbit 1 $32 Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Reader Rabbit 2 WIN $29 Reader Rabbit 3 $32 Reader Rabbt RdyLtrs35S37 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Rodney's Funscreen CD $46 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secret Isl Dr. Quandry $29 Slatr & Charlie Go Camp S29 Slater & Charlie CD $42 Softwre Toolwks Ref CD S79 Speedreader WIN $30 Darklands Mstr Ed wbk S51 Stickybear Prts of Spch $32 Darksun CD Stickybear Reading $24 Daughter of Serpents $19 Stickybear Spellgrabber S29 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Stickybear Spelling TutorS32 Demon Hunter $42 Student Writg Cent WIN $32 Disciples of Steel $29 Super Munchers $29 Dragon Tales CD $38 Supr Solvrs: Midnt Rsc $26 Dragonsphere CD $39 SS: Gizmos & Gadgets $26 Dungeon Hack $42 Talking Jungle Safari CD S60 Dungeon Hack CD $34 Treasure Cove S 29 Dungeon Master $29 Treasure Math Strm WINS32 Dungeon Master 2 Treasure Mountain $39 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $19 TreeHouse Eternam $19 WWCrmn Sdg Dix CD JC$24 Eye of the Beholder 1 $14 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 IBM ROLE PLAYING Eye of Beholdr 3 CD JC $24 Eye of Beholder 3 CD $48 All Character Editors S16 Fire King S24 Access Super Bundle S40 Flams of Freedm MWII S24 Al-Qadim S45 Forgotten Castle Al-Qadim CD $42 Forgotten Castle CD $55 Amberstar $19 Four Crystals of Trazere $16 Arborea Journ In Sanct $34 Gateway Savge Frontier $32 Arena: Elder Scrolls $44 Gods S16 Bard's Tale Construction $29 Gryphon Mstrs of Havlar S38 Black Crypt $32 Heroes Might & Magic S45 Blackmoore CD $46 Hero's Might & Magic CDS45 Bloodstone $27 Hunters of Ralk CD $54 Bloodwych $15 Interactive Movie 1 $52 Celtic Legends $32 Interplay's 10 Yr Anth CD$48 Challenge of 5 Realms 539 Jorune $45 Champions $37 Jorune CD $48 Cobra Mission $34 Lands of Lore Conan $16 Legacy of Necromancer $17 Curse of Azure Bonds $15L egacy: Realm of Terror $39 Cyber Empire $16 Legend $22 Cyber Space $39 Loom CD JC $19 Cyber Space CD $38 Lord of the Rings CD $45 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Dark Sun $47 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Dark Sun Grey Isle ExPk$34 Lord of the Rings V1 & 2 $35 Darklands $29 Lords of Midnight $48 Lords of Midnight CD $55 Loremaster $29 Lost Tribe $26 Lure of the Temptress $16 Magic Candle 1 $19 Martian Dreams $37 Megatraveller Might & Magic 3 $19 Might & Magic 4 Might & Magic 5 $39 Pirates Gold $39 Planet's Edge $22 Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness $38 Protostar $39 Ravenloft $48 Ravenloft CD $52 Realms of Atkania $36 Red Crystal $29 Savage Empire $34 Secret Silver Blades $15 Shadow Caster CD $48 Sherlock Holmes 1 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD S51 Spacewrecked SpellJammer:Pirtes Rim $1 Spellcraft:Aspct of Valor $19 Star Saga 2 Star Trek Next Gen CD $4 Stonekeep $52 Stonekeep CD $48 Stronghold $3 Summoning $1 Sword of China S42 Syndicate CD S4E Tales Magic:Prphc Shdw S1E Twilight 2000 VGA S24 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar $35 Ultima 5 Warrrs of Desty $39 Ultima 6 False Prophet Sis Ultima 7 Black Gate $47 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $1 Ultima 7.5 P2 Silvr Seed $2C S39 SIS ADD Collector's Edit 2 $46 ADD Starter Kit $35 Air Combat Classics S42 Capstone CD Gm Collin $45 Combat Classics $19 Dynamix Bundle 1 $24 Eye of Beholder Collct $52 Eye of Beholder Tril CD $51 Falcon 3.0 wThrstm FCS $99 Gateway Collection 1&2 832 Land Sea Air 2 S19 Lost Treasures Infocom $39 Lost Treasrs Infocm CD $39 Lost Treasres Infocom 2 $29 Lost Treasrs Infcm 2 CD $29 Lucas Classic Advent $36 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Max Pac $16 Maximum Overkill wDisk $45 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Aesop's Mmdia Fbls CD $30 Ancient Empire $25 Annabl's Drm Anc EgCD S52 Auto Map AutoWorks $49 Barney Br Gs to Schi CDS23 Barney Br Gs to Spc CD $23 Big Bug Alphbt BK CD $32 Castle of Dr Brain EGA $25 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Children's Writg & Publ $42 Civil War $57 Clock Works Dinopark Tycoon $34 Dinosaurs CD $48 Discovers of Deep or CD$37 Don Quixote CD S24 Dyno-Quest S29 EcoQuest VGA S32 EcoQuest CD $29 $34 "


"Dreadnaughts The more EXCITANO SEA BATTLES IN DREADNOUGHTS models the looks and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as; Falklands (1914).Jutland (1916) and Bank (1915). Features menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view and hidden movement. 1 or 2 players. $34 'SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD' Sam \"You know Max, ever since we've been CD-ROMed, 1 feel an urge to say everything out loud!\" Max: \"Me too! Technology is a beautiful thing, Sam\" Now hear their wacky banter as they search for a bigfoot on the lam. Now in CDROM Talkie Ver. sion. CD 545 'THRUSTMASTER'S FORMULA T1' is the most realistic control for all of today's driving simulators. Features fully functional steering wheel, brake and gas pedals and turbo boost gauge used in supporting games. $124 GRANDEST 'STAR WARS: REBEL ASSAULT Take control of a Star Wars vehicle in challenging piloting and combat scenarios. Hone flight and combat skills to defend Tatooine against Imperial attack. Challenge the menacing walkers of planet of Hoth and combat the Empire in intense deep space battles. CD $44 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the course disks for extra fun. $32 'THE GRANDEST FLEET' Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat & the exhilaration of victory! Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and superships. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis. Modem play and random maps. $36 LINKS (386 IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS $45 $34 $52 $37 Jltima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Ultima 8: Pagan $52 Jltima 8 Speech Pack $17 Jltima 9: Ascension $52 Jltima 9: Ascension CD $54 Jltima 10 CD $54 Jltima UWorld 1 & 2 CD $59 Jltima UW 1 & 2 CD JC $34 Jltima UW 2 Labyrinth $48 Jltima UW Stygn Abyss $21 Incharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $33 leil of Darkness $37 Vaxworks $19 Ving Comm 2 UUW CD $34 Vizardry 4 $19 Vizardry 6 Cosmc Frge $22 Vizardry 7 Crusaders $29 Vorld of Xeen CD $42 542 $37 $35 IBM SIMULATIONS Attack Pack S42 B17 Flying Fort Classic S19 B17 FFort WSS 2 CD JC $26 B17 FFort WSS2 CD $37 Backroad Racers CD $43 Battle of Britain $34 Battlecruiser 3000 $45 Car and Driver $26 Chopper Pack CD Coaster $32 Combat Classics 2 $29 Cyber Race $29 Cyber Race CD $39 Delta V $48 Design Your Own Railrd $19 Earthquake Simulatr CD $42 Elite Plus $19 European Racers CD $41 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117 + F15 CD JC F117A Stealth Ftr VGA $29 F15 Strike Eagle 2 $15 F15 Strk Eagle 2 Scen $17 F15 Strk Eagle 3 Acs Pk $52 F15 Strike Eagle III $42 F15 Strk Eagle 3 CD JC $26 F15 Strk Eagle 3 CD $46 F19 Stealth Fighter $18 F40 Pursuit Simulator $29 FA 18 Hornet or CD $54 Falcon 3.0 $46 Falcon 3 S1 Fightng Tgr $24 Falcon 3 S 2 MiG 29 $32 Falcon 3 S3 FA 18 Hrnt S32 Falcon 4.0 Falcon AT $16 Falcon Gold CD $55 Fast attack CD $48 Fire & Forget 2 $29 Flat Top $48 Fleet Defender F14 Tmct $48 Flight Adventures 825 $39 Flight Planner $24 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Flight Sim Toolkit CD $54 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on $19 Flight of the Intruder $16 Mechwarrior 2 CD $46 Fly the Grand Canyon $32 Megafortress Miss Dk 2 $26 Flying Circus $39 Megarace $36 Frontier Elite 2 $38 Metal Tech: Battledrome $29 Grand Canyon Scenery $18 MiG 29 (Stand Alone) $44 Great NB Supr Ships All $19 MS Fight Sim4 Japan hd $19 Great Nav Batt Son Bld $24 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $46 Great Naval Batt CD JC $28 MS Fight Sim5 LsVegas $29 Great Naval Battles CD $55M S Fight Sim5 New York $29 Great Naval Battles 2 $45 MS Fight Sim5 Paris $29 Great Naval Batt 2 CD $42 MS Fight Sim5 SnFresc$29 Gunship 2000 VGA $37 MS Fight Sim5 Portland $32 Gunship 2000 Scen Dsk S24 MS Fight Sim5 DC $29 Gunship 2000 CD JC $26 MS Fight Sim Fight Shop$32 H.A.W.C. $34 Microsoft Space Sim 1.0 $44 Harrier Assault Mig 29 Gold CD $52 Harrier Assault SVGA $48 Nomad CD $39 Harrier Assit SVGA CD $44 Operation Airstorm CD $42 Heroes of the 357th $15 Pacific Strike $49 Hyperspeed $16 Pacific Strike Spch Pak $17 Indy Car Racing $39 Power Boat Simulator $39 Inferno DOS or CD S39 Praxim $32 Iron Angel DOS or CD $39 Privateer $48 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Privateer Special Opert $22 Jet Fighter 2.0 Miss Disk$19 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Jet Pack CD $46 Rally $29 Jump Jet $39 Reach for the Skies $19 Jump Jet Aces Pack $50 Real Weather Pilot S29 Jutland CD $44 Red Baron MD Builder $18 Knights of the Sky $19 Red Baron VGA $36 Lawn Mower Man CD $42 Road & Track GP Unlim $24 Life and Death $19 Sailing Instrctr Pk VGA $239 Life and Death 2 $24 Sailing Sim3 Est or Wst $32 Lunar Command $24 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 M1 Tank Platoon Classic S19 Scenery Enhancmnt Editr $21 M4: Sherman Tank Sim S34 Scenery: Hawaii $16 Mantis Experim Ftr VGA S28 Scenery: Tahiti $16 Mantis Exper Spch Pak $19 Sea Wolf S48 Mantis Exper Ft CD JC S19 Sea Wolf CD $52 Mantis Experim Fghtr CD$46 Seal Team $37 Maxim Overkil Bndl CD $59 Secret Wp Luftwff CD JCS19 Maximum Overkill MD 2 $32 Secret of Dinosaurs CD $44 Mechwarrior 2 $46 Shuttle $26 Shuttle CD $29 Wing Armada $54 Silent Service 2 $19 Wing Commander $19 Space Racers CD S44 Wing Commander 2 S26 Spectre VR CD Wing Commander 2 Bdl S29 Spectre Virtual Reality $38 Wing Commdr 2 Dix S29 Speed Racer Wing Commar 2 Dlx CD S29 Star Fleet Acadamy CD 545 Wing Commander 3 Storm Troop DOS or CD $54 Wing Commander 3 CD $54 Strike Commander $34 Wing Commndr Acady S26 Strike Commander CD $55 Wings of Glory $52 Strike Comm Spec Op1 $22 Wolf Pack CD Strike Comm Speech Pk S19Wolfpack Stunt Island World Circuit Sub War 2050 $36 World Circuit CD $34 Syndicate $39 X-Wing $42 Syndicate S1 Amer Rvit $22 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 919 TFX: Tactical Fightr Exp S39 X-Wing MDK 2 B-Wing S19 TFX CD $45 Yeager's Air Combat S21 Tank $16 Zephyr S45 Task Force Admirls Pack $45 Team Yankee 2 $19 Team Yankee 2 CD $29 IBM STRATEGY Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2:Collection $19 18th Air Squadron $36 Test Drive 3 $29 $34 Test Drive 3: Passion $19 A Train Construction Set $19 Theme Park $42 A Train wConstructn Set $42 Tie Fighter $48 Advanced Civilization $35 Top Gun Danger Zone S24 Aide de Camp Tornado $48 Airbucks 1.2 $24 Tornado CD S42 Ambush at Sorinor $42 Tower S42 Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Tracon WIN S28 Archon Ultra Ultrabots Sanction Earth S36 Arctic Baron Vette $15 Arctic Baron CD Voice Commndr F117A $18 Armada Voice Commndr F15SE3 $18 Armada 2525 WC 2 Operation 1 $19 Ashes of Empire $29 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 Bandit Kings Anct China $34 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 Battle Group Commndr $45 WC Secret Mission $20 Battle Isle $32 WC Secret Mis 1&2 Bdi S20 Battle Isle Scenario Disk $22 WC Secret Mis 2 HD S20 Battle of Chickamagua 338 Wild Blue Yonder CD S49 Batt of Chickamagua CD $42 A Train $42 ITP 2.0 $29 .T.A.C $30 110 Avenger $46 110 Tank Killer 1.5 Enh $19 320 Airbus $32 H-64 B Longbow S54 H-64 Helicopter S46 ces Over Europe S39 ces Europe Miss Dk 1 $27 ces Europe Miss Dk 2 $27 ces Pacific Miss Dk $19 ces of the Deep $42 ces of the Pacific $39 cross the Rhine ir Combat Pacific 1942 $48 ir Duel $33 ir Warrior SVGA $34 Armour Geddon $32 rmoured Fist S52 rt of the Kill S24 ssignment Miami S19 $34 S29    "


"CHIPS & BITS The VideoGame PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10042 GOLUTION FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Detalls Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10042 Visa MC Accepted. Chocks hold 4 weeks Money Orders same as cash COD 58 Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price availability may change. All solos linal OVERNIGHT SHIPPING In US $4 per order Mail to Canada PR. HLAK APO, FPO S4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment CD ROM note. IG Signalies jewel case any 'SOLUTION CD Have you ever played a game, got as far as you could, but just weren't able to finish? Would you like to be invincible, have unlimited lives or grand scores, discover hints that aren't in the manual or help-line or see the graphics and concepts of a game before purchasing it? NOW YOU CAN! CD 529 'RAVENLOFT' Un veil and destroy Straud, one of the most nefarious of all gothic horror characters, or you'll never escape the terror of the AD&D Ravenloft game world. Features in ventory manage ment for the whole party on one screen, extra large 3D gaming window and digitized sound effects. CD $52 WORLDS DRAGO.N. TORCIE WAR 'D.R.A.G.O.N. FORCE' They're armed, dangerous and ready for action. They're the Drastic Response Assault Group Operations Network Force an elite international strike force against terrorism. Lead your team of top-secret trouble-shooters on special operations to the hottest hot spots worldwide. S12 \"WORLDS AT WAR' is a game of planetary con quest. A space naval warfare based on the Solomon Campaign of 1942 43 naval combat on a galactic scale! Play for hours like a chess game or for a weekend with a full campaign. Features a 72 page manual on \"How to Attack Neutral Planets $19 NAW 'ACROSS THE RHINE' Control history's most famous tanks or entire companies & experience the fierce combat & tough decisions that gripped WWII tank commanders. Blast your way through enemy units across war-torn Europe. $48 nterstel IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM SPORTS $29 The Complete UMS $44 Theatre of War $16 Theatre of War Set 1 $21 Tigers on the Prowl $42 Unnatural Selection $29 Utopia $29 Viking Conquest $36 Vikings Fields Conquest $19 Vikings Fids Conqust En $34 Walls of Rome $39 War in the Gulf $19 Warlords 2 $42 Warlords 2 Scen Editor $29 Warlords $16 When Two Worlds War $34 Worlds at War $34 $42 $42 $36 $19 $34 $39 IBM SPORTS Battles in Time $36 Battles of Destiny $34 Beyond Squad Leader $38 Black Beard Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Breach 3 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $38 Buzz Aldrn Rce Spce CD$54 Caesar $29 Campaign 2 $36 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Carriers at War $24 Carriers at War 2 $39 Castle Conquest $42 Castles $18 Castles 2 $36 Castles 2 CD $49 Celtic Tales: Balor of Evil$42 Chessmst 4000 Trb WIN $36 Civilization $44 Civilization WIN $42 Clash of Steel $39 Cohort 2 Colonization $45 Colonization CD $45 Command HQ Classic $18 Command and Conquer $42 Conquer for Windows $19 Conquered Kingdoms $34 Conqurd Kingdms Scn 1 $24 Conquered Kingdoms 2 $36 Conquest $36 Conquest of Japan $36 Crisis in the Kremlin $32 Cybergo $39 D-Day: Beginning of End $42 Dark Star Darklegions $42 Darklegions CD $42 Detroit $34 Discovry Stp Columbus $34 Dominion: One Kng's LI $41 Dominus $39 Dune 2 $34 El Fish $34 Empire Builder $36 Empire Deluxe $34 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Empire Dlx Mastr Ed CD $45 Fantasy Empires $39 Fantasy Empires CD $45 Fantasy Fieldom CD $48 Fields of Glory Fifth Fleet Fort Apache $19 Gemfire $37 Genghis Khan 2 Gettysburg $29 Gettysbg Interact Battle $32 Global Domination $34 Gobliiins 2 $16 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet $36 Great NBatt Admirls Pak $49 HUMANS $24 Humans CD $28 Humans: Insult to Injury $14 Harpoon 2 $48 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Heirs to the Throne $36 Kingdoms of France $34 Kingdoms of Germany $36 Kingmaker $39 Koshan Conspiracy Koshan Conspiracy CD S48 L'Empereur $37 Lemmings 2: Tribes $29 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings wDtdk CD $45 Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scen Disk $23 Lost Vikings $24 Maelstrom S36 Master of Orion $39 Mechamander S42 Mechamander CD $42 Mega Lo Mania $19 Merchant Colony $17 Merchant Prince $39 Nano Tank WIN $28 Napoleonics S34 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $29 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Objection $19 Objection Enhanced $19 Operation Crusader $34 Operation Europe Outpost CD $48 Overlord $21 Paladin 2 $34 Patrician Patrician CD $36 Pax Imperia Perfect General $34 Perfect General 2 S44 Perfect General S2 20th S23 Perfect Generl SD WW2 $21 Populous $17 Populous 2 S26 Populous Promisd Lands$14 Powermonger Protostar CD $39 Purest Wargame $36 Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 $40 Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Rampart Reach for the Stars $24 Realms S16 Red Ghost $39 Red Zone $32 Riders of Rohan $19 Robo Sport WIN Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $39 Rules of Engagement 2 $34 Rules Engagem 2 CDk $19 Second Conflict WIN $34 Seven Cities Gold 2 $19 Shadow President $39 ShadowGate WIN S32 Sid Meir's Civil War S58 Siege With Exp Disk S19 Sim Ant Sim Ant WIN $34 Sim Ant CD $48 Sim City $27 Sim City WIN $34 Sim City CD $48 Sim City Classic $26 Sim City Classic WIN $26 Sim City 2000 $42 Sim City 2000 WIN S42 Sim City 2000 CD $45 Sim City 2000:Grt Distrs $18 Sim City Graphic Set 1 $23 Sim City Graphic Set 2 $23 Sim Earth $29 Sim Earth WIN $29 Sim Earth CD $48 Sim Farm $29 Sim Health $29 Sim Life $29 Sim Life WIN Smokin' Gun WIN $28 Space Hulk $19 Space Miner $36 Space Raiders CD $42 Spaceward Ho! $36 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Special Forces $39 Star Control Star Control 2: $34 Strike Squad $39 Stronghold CD Sub Version Tac Ops $42 Tank $36 Task Force 1942 $36 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 S44 T 2 Chesswars CD S27 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 LH Boxing Contenders $1 LH Pro Baskeball Utilits $16 LH Pro Basketball $3E LH Pro Bball 89-90 Tms $18 LH Pro Bball L Leaders S1 LH Pro Bball Utilities S1 Lance Hafiner Baseball $3 Lance Haffner Boxing $3 Lance Haffner Coll BBall $3E Lance Haffner Football $3 Lance Haffner Hockey $3 Links Crs 2 Firestone $12 Links Crs 3 Bay Hill S17 Links Crs 4 Pinehurst $1 Links Crs 5 Dorado $11 Links Crs 7 Troon North $1: Links Pro 386 Golf $33 Links Pro 486 CD $40 Links Pro Crs1 Mna Kea $1! Links Pro Crs2 Pinehrst $16 Links Pro Crs3 Bnff Spr $1! Links Pro Crs4 Belfry $1! Links Pro Crs5 Innsbrk $1! Links Pro Crs6 Firestne $21 Links Pro Crs7 Pbbl Bch $2. ML 1950s World Series $1\" ML 1960s World Series $1\" ML 1970s World Series $1\" ML 1980s World Series $1 ML BB 4 USAT Fan Mng $2 ML BB 4 USAT Gen Mng $1 ML BB Pro Teams ea S2 ML Personal Pro Golf S2 MicroL 82-88 BB Seasn $1 MicroL 89 FB Season $1 MicroL BB 4 USA Today $2 Microleague Basketball $2 Microsoft Golf CD $4 Microsoft Golf for WIN $4 Mike Ditka Power Ftball $3 NFL Challenge $6 NFL Chall 1985 Teams $1 NFL Chall Premium Ed 55 $18 $14 $29 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Bsball Innovator $34 APBA Bsball Statmstr 2 $29 APBA Bowling APBA Football $34 APBA Hockey $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 Action Sports Soccer $19 All American Coll FB '94 $42 American Gladiators $21 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball for WIN $46 Basketball Challenge $28 Blood Bowl Brett Hull Hockey $42 Dave Robnsn NBA Actn $44 Dirk's Baseball Encyc S19 Front Page Football Pro $45 Greens $34 Hardball 3 S 34 Hardball 3 Collection S39 Hardball 3 Plyrs or Stad S16 Jack Nicklaus Signtr Ed $27 Joe Montana Football $31 $36 $17 $39 $29 $36 $36 $36 $34 "


"Advanced tidury or rolitk on 'SOUND MAN WAVE' provides the highest 16-bit 44kHz recording quality and highend wave table synthesizer that significantly improves the playback quality of prerecorded games and multimedia music. Includes software for recording, editing, mixing, and extra value 'FLEET DEFENDER F14 Whether on routine Fleet defense duties, air to air combat engagements or special intercept missions, the F-14 Tomcat leads the field. Features state of the art 3D visuals, accurate flight modeling of all planes, authentic radar and weapons system, & campaigns. $48 *7th GUEST: 11th HOUR' Sequel to 7th Guest except the stakes are higher, the puzzles more clever and the return visit even more unsettling. Solve puzzles and investigate clues that take you through Staut's haunted house with movie-like plot twists, special effects and music soundtrack. CD$49 SoundMan Wave software. $99 DUSK SEGODS     UN OMTI131 COMPUTER lomacu The Exciting Games of International Intrigue DUSK OF THE GODS' Become an Einherjor, one of Odin's champions, & travel throughout the lands of Norse Mythology. Battling hostile creatures will be one of many challenges you must lace on your journey. Alter events so the gods may defeat the minions of Loke at the Battle of Ragnorak. $24 'CYBERMAN 3D CONTROLLER This revolutionary input device allows you to move freely in 3D. High resolution and absolute mapping provide maximum precision. Tactile feedback that lets you feel all the action from a bump against a wall to the full impact of being shot or attacked from behind. S74 90 min mattomato come DIVISION All Ye Ayalin M o Campus DIPLOMATIE 'DIPLOMACY' is the computer version of the board game of persuasion, compromise & betrayal. Try to arrange deals that will lead you to ultimate victory. The result is diplomacy, a balance between the trust needed to deal & the profitable stab in the back that leaves you friendless. $12 interstel IBM SPORTS IBM ADULT IBM ADULT IBM ADULT IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES S29 $32 Strip Poker 3 DD1-6 ea $16 Strip Poker Professional $34 Strip Poker Pro DD1-6ea516 Super Smutware CD 519 Tracy I Love You CD $32 Tropical Girls CD $26 Wickd Q-Time Movie CD $42 Womn Who Lov Men CD $26 Women of Venus CD $22 X-Rated Bloopers CD $27 Third Reich To The Rhine $36 UMS 2 $19 UMS 2 Civil War $24 UMS 2 Desert Storm $24 V Victry: Gld, Jno, Swrd $39 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikye Luki S44 Victory at Sea $46 War in the Falklands $26 Warship Changd History $26 Waterloo $19 White Death $19 WW2 Batt South Pacific $34 $32 IBM WAR GAMES IBM TRADITIONAL $32 NFL Coaches Club $34 NFL Coaches Club Expn $19 NFL Cches Club FB CD $34 NFL Football $19 NFL Football '94 $29 NFL Video Football $19 NHL Hockey $44 Nascar Challenge $29 PGA Tour Golf $21 PGA Tour Golf Crs 1 S17 PGA Tour Goll Lid Ed PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Pga Tour Crs 1 WIN $17 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $19 Proleague Football '94 $34 Quarter Pole $26 Road to the Final Four $37 Road to the Final Four 2 $41 Strat-O-Matic Cmpt BB S29 Summer Challenge $19 The Games Winter Chall $29 Time Out Sports Bsball $39 Time Out Sports Bsktball$39 Tom Landry Football Dix $29 Tony LRussa Baseball 2 $35 Tony La Russa BB 2 CD $46 Tony La Russa BB 2 92 $14 Tony LAss BB2 Fan Mng $14 Tony Less 2 BB Stadm $18 Tony LRss BB 2 1992 $16 Tony LAss BB 2 1993 $16 Tony LRussa NL Stadms $15 Tony LRss Tms 1901-68 $15 Unnecessary Roughnss $34 Wayne Gretzky Hocky 3 $36 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Weaver Commsnr Dk 2 $16 Wilson Pro Staff Golf S23 94-95 CDX Calender CD $29 Adult Movie Almanac CD $52 Adult Palate CD $22 Adult Palate 2 CD $29 Adult Pictr Library V1 CD$19 Adult Reference CD $24 Advt of Brad Stallion CD S39 After Dark Trilogy CD S34 Amateur Models CD $19 American Girls CD $29 Animatd Fantasies CD $34 Animatd Fantasies 2 CD $34 Best of Inferno CD $39 Best of Vivid CD $32 Best of Barlow Affairs CD$39 Busting Out CD $38 Busty Babes CD $32 CD Brothel CD $36 Cafe Flesh CD $32 Calfornia Daydreamr CD $29 Camp Double D CD $29 Cat and Mouse CD $42 Centerfold Squares Condo Cuties CD $34 Creme de la Creme CD $29 Debby Does Dallas CD $38 Deep Throat CD $36 Devil in Miss Jones CD $34 Digital Dancing CD $38 Doors of Passion CD JC $29 Double Play Vol 1 CD $36 Double Play Vol 2 CD Dream Girl CD $32 Dream Machine CD $39 Ecstacy CD $29 ErotiCafe CD $48 Exotic Girls 3 in 1 CD $19 Extreme Delight CD S22 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD1-6 ea $18 Femme Fatale WIN S29 Flame CD Gifty Gold CD $28 Gifts That Keep Givg CD $25 Girlfriend Suzie $36 Girlfriend Teri $36 Girls Steven J Hicks Girls of Risque CD Glamour Girls 1943 CD S36 Heavenly Bodies 2 CD 545 Hidden Obsessions CD $32 High Volume Nudes CD S26 Hooter Heavens CD $36 House of Dreams CD S24 Hs of Sleepg Beauts CD S29 Insatiable CD Intract Adv Symr Bts CD $39 Jigsaw Pinups $19 Kama Sutra CD $44 L.A. Strippers CD $32 Legends of Porn 2 CD S29 Loads of Fun CD Lovely Ladies II CD S39 Mark of Zara CD S38 Massive Mellons CD $29 My First Time CD $29 Mystique of Orient CD $29 New Wave Hookrs 1 CD $32 New Wave Hookrs 2 CD $32 Nightwatch Interactv CD S36 Nova Collection V. 1 CD $26 Nova Collection V. 2 CD $29 Overexposed CD $39 Pandor...AAAH'S CD $27 Paradise Club CD $46 Penthouse Jigsaw PG $21 Phone Sex CD $15 Physical Therapy CD $19 Playboy Electronc Dtbk $34 Rimfire Pacifc Vid CD JC$32 Roquelle Released CD $34 Scissors N' Stones CD $44 Secrets CD $34 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Sexiest Women on CD $24 Sinfully Yours CD $29 Southern Beauties CD $26 Strip Poker 3 $19 $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Pacitc War $45 Gary Grgsby's War Russ$45 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg:Turning Pnt $36 Golan Front Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Designer Srs 2 $25 High Command $45 In Harms Way $36 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 Long Lance $39 Main Batt Tank C Grmny $36 Main Batt Tank MidEast $36 Main Batt Tank N Grmny $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War Mare Nostrum $26 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pacifc Strm Midwy Cpgn $36 Pacifc Strm Solmn Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $19 Patriot $14 Patton Strikes Back $14 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands S28 Rising Sun $26 Road Sumter to Appmix $45 Rommel Bait for N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Squad Leader $48 Stalingrad Campaign $36 The Great War Action North Atlantic $26 Action off River Platte S26 Aegis: Guardn Fleet CD $54 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 Amer Civil War V1-3 ea $24 Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $36 Battle of Austerlitz $26 Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic $36 Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark $26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blood & Iron $48 Blue and the Grey $36 Borodino Napoleon Invds$29 Bravo Romeo Delta $24 Campaign $32 Campaign CD $35 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Civil War No Greatr Glry $21 Dreadnoughts $29 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb $36 Americans in Space CD $41 Animation w/Hanna Barb $45 Batt Chess 4000 VGA $24 Batt Chess 4000 SVGA $36 Battle Chess EGAVGA $18 Battle Chess CD JC $24 Battle Chess WIN $18 Batt Chess Win/Dos CD $45 Beat the House $29 Bridge 2: W/Omar Sharif S28 Brdg2: W/Omar Shrt CD $52 Bridge 7 $24 Bridge Olympiad Bridgemaster S29 Bridgemaster WIN S29 CD-Romix 1 Hardcase $18 CD-Romix 2 Prime $18 CD-Romix 3 Free X CD $18 Caesars Palace WIN $17 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Casino Master Gld WIN $43 Checkmate $36 Checkmate WIN $36 ChessManiac 5 Bill & 1 $39 Chessmniac 5 Bill& 1 CD $34 Chessmaster 2000 $24 S36 IBM ADULT $25 101 Sex Positions CD $44 101 Sex Positions 2 CD $34 $39 Ch "


"CHIPS & BITS FIGHTER Candle lo PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10042 FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Detalls Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10042 Visu/MC Accepted. Checks held 4 wooks Money Orders samens cash. COD $8. Dolectives roplaced with same product. Most items tihipped same day Shipping times may vary. Pricajavailability may change. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING In US 54 par gider. Molt to Canada, PA HI AKAPO, FPO 94 per order 1-3 day Worldwide shipping $6 per Hem Handling $2 per shipmont CD ROM note: o signifies jowolnego only \"TIE FIGHTER', Sequel to the acclaimed X-Wing. players fly under the direction of the Dark Lord himself, Darth Vader. Defy the Rebel Alliance in training, combat missions & tours of duty that strengthen the Emperor's hold on the galaxy. Six Imperial starfighters to fly under the strategies of the Empire. $48 \"MAGIC CANDLE III' The ancient lands around the Solian Sea have been stricken by a mysterious blight! Crops are failing, illness is spreading. and strange beasts lurk in the hills. Can you find the source? Explore the southem homelands, unearth valuable treasure and stop the blight before it consumes the world! $12 Charge of the LIGHT BRIGADE *THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE\" During the Crimean War, was one of the bravest, & saddest incidents in British Military History. OI the 673 men who began the charge only 195 were fit for action at its end. Features a large game area, 2 player mode, animated graphics, & tactical maps. $12 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun & excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles,flashbacks, pans & fades. Fully digitized voices & sound effects. $12 \"WINGS OF GLORY 1917-18 Learn to fly & master different planes & discover the strengths and weaknesses of each, as well as those of the enemy. Features 5 different planes, 4 channel digital sound and instant mission generator. $52 RORKE'S DRIFT IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET $12 $12 $3 $9 $12 $12 $34 $9 $6 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $35 Chessmaster 3000 CD $46 Classic 5 $32 Classic 5 WIN $30 Classic Solitaire WIN $18 Clue Master Detective $16 Cribbage Master $29 Doodlemation Windows $19 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Gambit $39 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $49 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Go Mastr Dix V5 WIN 53 $79 Go Master Junior Ver 4 $19 Go Master Jr V5 WIN 53 $19 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Go Mastr TI Kit WIN 53 $79 Go Master Ver 4 WIN $39 Go Master Vr 5 WIN 53 $39 Grand Mastr Chess Dlx $37 Home Alone 2 $26 Hong Kong MJ Pro $32 Hoyle's Book Games V2 $19 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Bk Games Cissc $29 It's a Wonderful Life CD $39 Jeopardy 25 Aniversary $14 Jeopardy, Super Talking $16 Jersey Devil CD $34 Joseki Genius $39 King's Table $24 Laffer Utilities WIN $21 Lawn Mower Man SS CD$36 Lexicross $24 Lucky's Casino Advent $39 Monopoly Deluxe S29 Monopoly Deluxe WIN S29 Mosaic Magic CD Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 Omar Sharif on Bridge $32 Omar Shrf Bridge Dix CD$46 Origamo $39 World Series Poker $24 Oshkosh '92 CD $39 Wrath of the Demon CD $29 Pinball Dreams $29 Zig-Zag $34 Pool Shark $15 Positronic Bridge $30 Positronic Bridge Cp SE $60 IBM BUDGET Risk WIN $26 Russian Six Pack $26 007 James Bond Stlh Aff $12 Russian Six Pack WIN $19 3 D Pinball $12 Sargon 5 $13 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 Scrabble Deluxe $26 ATP Flight Simulator $12 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $26 Acquire S9 Scrabble Deluxe CD $25 Action Stations Scn1 $3 Scribler Airborne Ranger $9 Shanghaii 2 $29 Air Force Commander $9 Solitaire Royale $19 Air Force Comm 2: WW2 $12 Solitaire WIN $26 AirportFacilities Dir $12 Solitaires Journey $34 All Star Sports Pak $9 Solitaire's Journey WIN $38 Allied Forces Solitaires Journey 2 $36 Amarillo Slims7Crd Stud $12 Sinfrd Wongs Vid Pokr $19 Amazon $9 Star Wars Chess $38 Amazing Spiderman $12 Star Wars Chess CD $44 Aracnaphobia w/Snd St $12 Super Jeopardy $19 Armada Villa Crespo $9 Super Tetris Artura $4 Swap $29 B.A.T. $6 Tactical Wizard $39 Back to the Future 3 $12 Take-A-Brk Crswrd WIN $19 Backgamn By Grge WIN $9 Terminator 2 Chess Wars$37 Banzai $9 Terminator Chess $34 Bar Games $9 Tesserae WIN $16 Baseball Card Collector $12 Tetris $15 Baseball Facts $9 Tetris Classic $26 Battle Command $6 Tetris Classic WIN $26 Bermuda Square $9 Trump Castle 3 $29 Big Business $9 Trump Castle 3 CD $29 Blackjack Vegas Entrtnmt Pak WIN$21 Blackjack WIN $12 Vegas Games Pak WIN $21 Blue Max Aces Great War $9 Video Cube CD $45 Breach 2 $12 Videogame Solution CD $29Bsball Chall 87-89Tms ea S9 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $49 Bo Jackson Baseball $12 Wayne's World $19 Bodycello CD $12 Welltris $15 Boom Box $12 Word Tris $27 Canyon Capers $12 Captain Blood $9 Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 Carrier Command $9 Carriers at War Const Kit $9 Casino Craps $12 Casino Lte 7 Crd Stud $12 Casino Lte Texas Hold'm $12 Castles Northern Cpgns $9 Champions of Krynn $12 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Chess X Colossus $9 Chess Net WIN $9 Combination Lock Conflict $12 Conflict: Korea $12 Conflict: Middle East $12 Conquerer Multi Tank $6 Corporation $9 Covert Action Crash Course $9 Crime City $12 Crime Does Not Pay $12 Curse of the Catacombs $9 Dark Half $9 Das Boot Submarine $12 Dealer's Choice $9 Decision at Gettysburg $12 Demon Blue $9 Diplomacy $12 Dognapped $9 $6 Doom Episode 1 $7 Double Dragon 3 $12 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dr Thorp's Mini Blackjck $9 Dr Wong's Jcks/Vd Pkr 5 $9 DrWngs Jck/Vd Pkr WIN $12 Dragons of Flame $9 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $9 Dragon Strike $12 Dune $12 Dusk of the Gods $12 E-Motion $6 Earthrise $9 East v West Berlin 1948 $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 Face Off $9 Fast Break $6 Fighting for Rome $12 Final Conflict Finale Flinstones Free DC $9 Future Classics Collect $9 Gamma Force Grandmaster Chess $12 Gofer Winkl Adv CD WIN$12 Harmony $5 Hare Raisg Havoc Snd Sr $9 Hearts $12 Heatwave Hole In One Mini Goll $6 Hole In One MGif Crs Dk $3 Hole in One M Golf Dix $12 Interact Adult WIN CD $12 Internatnl Ninja Rabbits $12 International Sports Chall $9 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $3 Jack Nicklaus Crs 1-3 ea $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 5 S6 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs1 $6 Japan Scenery Disk $12 Jeopardy 1 or 2 $9 Jeopardy Sports Edition $7 Joan of Arc Killing Cloud $6 L.A. Law $9 Laser Squad $12 Leather Goddesses $12 Lightspeed $9 Links Crs 6 Barton Creek $9 Line in the Sand $12 MUDS $9 ML Baseball All Stars S12 ML Football 2 $12 Madden Football $12 MacArthur's War $9 Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 $12 Magic Johnson Fast Brk $6 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed Medieval Lords $9 MegaFortress MegaTraveller 2 $12 MegaTraveller:Zhodani $6 MicroL Bsball Seatle 13 $12 Midway Midwinter Millenium Mines of Titan NFL Chall 1988 Teams $9 NFL Chall 91 Pre Seasn $9 NFL Chall Coll Almni Tms $9 NFL Chall Dream Tms $9 NFL Chall Dream Tms $9 NFL Chall Pre Seasn 90 $9 NFL Proleague Football $12 New Facilities Locator $9 Never Mind $9 Ninja Gaiden2 Ninja Rabbits Nuclear War Obliterator Oil's Well Oligopoly On Target Operation Combat Pac Man Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Pick'n Pile $6 Pictionary $12 Pirates $12 Playmaker Football $12 Power Drome $6 Power Hits: Kids $9 Power Politics WIN S12 Predator 2 Pro FB Analyst 92 Edit S9 Punisher Puzzle Gallery 1 $12 $29 $12 S12 $12 $9 son "


"THE GENE'S CURSE TIES 18 'AL-QADIM: THE GENIE'S CURSE' a pre-generated character, allows the player to enter the action right away. Simple point-andclick interface provides hours of fast real-time action, arcade style combat, exploration, puzzlesolving and role. playing. Multiple difficulty levels challenge both novice & expert players. S45 'MECHWARRIOR 2' Climb into one of 16 Battle Mechs and prepare to set your imagination on fire. You're strapped into a 100-ton machine that can annihilate a squadron of F-15s in a heartbeat. And you're about to battle your way across the planetary terrain. From ice to desert to urban land. $46 CONCUSSIDH 240 93 HOB 'SYSTEM SHOCK' You receive a neural jack implant that allows you to enter cyberspace. Upon awakening, you discover that a super-intelligent computer has seized control of the station and is planning to release a deadly virus. $54 www AdLib Bodetel Federated Worlds OPERATION CRUSADER' is set in the expansive reaches of the Libyan & Egyptian deserts during WWII. Six historical scenarios will show you first hand what open field tactics and desert combat are really like. Experience the cursed Hellfire Pass, & see for yourself if you can earn the title of 'Desert Fox. $34 'BREACH 3' As Squad Leader of an elite corps of marines waging war against the UDP you must direct your men in missions from rescue and-support to seek-and-destroy. Combines the best of turn-based and real-time gaming. Features tree-structured campaigns & individual marine personalities. $36 'AD LIB'The music synthesizercard that made the PC game industry standupand listen, is here to make your favorite action, adventure, role playing, arcade and simulation games come alive with sound. Features 11 different FM synthesized voices and the greatest level of software supportin the industry. S34 he bu ! IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET MACINTOSH 3DO TURBO GRAFX TURBO GRAFX S6 $9 Twisted $51 Who Shot Johnny Rock $49 Wing Commander S49 WorldBuilders, Inc S49 Wizardry 1 & 2 CD World Heroes CD Xak 1 & 2 CD S9 S19 Turbo Duo $289 TurboGrafx 16 CD Play$149 Air Zonk $42 Battle Lode Runner $43 Beyond Shadowgate CD $45 Black Hole Assault CD $47 Blood Gear CD $47 Bonk's Big Adventure CD$44 Camp California CD $44 Cosmic Phantasy 3 CD $46 JAGUAR NEO GEO $46 Puzzle Master Tony LaRussa Baseball $ 9 Jack Nicklaus CrDk 1-3ea $6 RBI 2 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $12 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 5 S6 Regengade Legion Intrpt $12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Lexi Cross S19 Rings of Medusa Tony LR Classic Stadims $12 Omar Sharif Bridge Dix S19 Rodeo Games $9 Treasures Savage Frontr$12 Out of this World Rotox $9 Trump Cst 2 Casino Rsrt S6 Robo Sport S24 Ruckus Pokr or Roulette $12 Trump Cst 2 DD1 Lis Sits S4 Shadowgate S19 Rules of Engagement S9Trump Cst 2 DD2 Poker 2 S4Sherlock Holmes CnDt 2 S19 Savage S6 Turn-n-Bum S9 Sim Ant S19 S.C. Out $12 Typhoon of Steel S12 Spirit of Excalibur S14 Scenery Collection Set A $9 UMS 2 Planet Editor $12 Test Drive 2: CA Chaling S6 Scenery Collection Set B $9 Under Fire $12 Test Drive 2: Super Cars S6 Scenery Collin California $9 Uninvited $6 Word Tris $19 Scenry Coll Great Britain $9 Vaxine $12 SDI $6 Vengeance of Excalibur S12 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 3DO Shadow Sorcerer Video Poker WIN $12 Siege $12 Video Poker by Masque $9 3D0 System S699 Sleeping Gods Lie $12 Visions of Aftermath $12 3D0 Gun S39 Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 Wacky Funster $9 Aces over Europe S49 Sorry $12 War of the Lance $9 Battle Chess $46 Space Vegetables $9 Weaver Tm & Ply Stts 89 83 Demolition Man $49 Sporting Triangle $3 Wheel of Fortune 1 or 2 S6 Dragon Tales Spot S6 Wheel of Fortune 3 59 Dragon's Lair $49 Star Legions S9 Wild Wheels $12 Dragons Lair 2 S52 Strategic Forces S9 Wrath of the Demon S12 Escape Monster Manor S49 Street Ball S9 Xiphos S9 Horde $49 Storm Across Europe S12 Jurassic Park $49 Taking of Beverly Hills S6 Lemmings $49 Team Yankee AMIGA Mad Dog McCree $49 Teenage Mut Nnja Turtl $12 Madden Football $49 Teenage MNT Man Miss $12 Breach 1 Scenario Disk $3 Megarace $44 Teenage MNTurtls Arcd $12 Fast Break Microcosm $49 Teenage Mutnt Nnja Turtl$12 Heatwave Night Trap $52 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Jack Nicklaus Course 1 $6 Oceans Below Terran Envoy Test Drive2:Muscle Cars $3 Out of this World Test Drive 2: Euro Chall $6 PGA Tour $49 Test Drive 2: Supercars S9 Road Rash S49 Test Drive 3:Road & Car S9 MACINTOSH Shock Wave S49 The Tinies S12 Space Ace 549 Think Cross S12 Bridge 7 S19 Star Control 2 $49 Thunderhawk S6 Dragon's Lair 2 S19 Star Trek Next Genert $49 Tie Break Tennis S9 Go Master Deluxe S49 Stellar 7 $49 Time Quest $12 Harpoon Scenario Editor $14 Total Eclipse $52. Neo Geo Gold System S569 Neo Geo Control Pad S46 Neo Geo Demo Vidtape S3 2020 Super Baseball $119 3 Count Bout $189 Alpha Mission 2 $129 Andros Dunos $199 Art of Fighting 1 or 2 $199 Baseball Stars Pro 10128149 Burning Fight $149 Crossed Swords S129 Fatal Fury $149 Fatal Fury 2 $199 Fatal Fury Special $199 King of the Monsters $149 King of the Monsters 2 $179 Magician Lord $149 Mutation Nation $149 Nam 1975 $129 Ninja Combat $149 Riding Hero $129 Robo Army $149 Samurai Shodown $199 Sengoku $129 Sengoku 2 $199 Soccer Brawl $129 Super 8 Man $129 Super Sideks Soccer 2 $199 Super Sidekcks Soccer $179 Super Spy $129 Survivor $199 Thrash Rally $129 Top Hunter $199 Top Players Golf $129 View Point $199 World Heroes 2 $199 $49 Jaguar System $249 Jaguar CD System Jaguar Controller $24 Alien Vs Predator $54 Barkley Basketball Baseball $54 Basketball $54 Battle Wheels Battle Zone 2000 Brett Hull Hockey Brutal Sports Football Bubsy $46 Checkered Flag 2 $54 Club Drive S44 Crescent Galaxy $44 European Soccer Chall $56 Hardball 3 $46 Jack Nicklaus Golf $46 Jaguar Formula 1 Racg $54 Kasumi Ninja S54 NFL Football Raiden $44 Tempest 2000 $44 Tiny Toon Adventures $44 Ultimate Brain Games $56 Ultra Vortex $54 Dungeon Explorer 2 CD $44 Dungeon Master CD $44 Dynastic Hero CD $44 Exile 2 CD $46 Fantasy Star Soldier CD $44 Fighting Street CD $34 Gao CD $45 Godzilla CD $46 JB Harold CD $37 Jackie C. Actn Kung Fu $39 King of Monsters 2 CD $46 Loom CD $39 Lords of Thunder CD $44 Lords of Rising Sun CD $39 Madden Football CD $44 Magical Chase $39 Might & Magic 3 CD S47 Military Madness $27 Mystic Formula CD $45 Nexzar CD $47 Populous CD S48 Prince of Persia CD $39 Rayxanber 3 CD $48 Riot Zone CD $44 RoboTech 2036 CD $44 RoboTech Lov Song CD 547 Simearth CD S42 Soldier Blade $39 Splash Lake CD Street Fighter 2 $79 Terraforming CD $44 Turrican $14 Vasteel CD $46 $54 S12 $44 S49 LYNX $28 Lynx System Alien Vs Predator Battle Zone 2000 Castle Wolfenstein 3D Checkered Flag Dracula Eye of the Beholder 539 $36 "


"CHIPS & BITS PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10042 OVER FREE GAME OFFER EUROPE See Last Pago for Detalls Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10042 VILMC Anchpted. Checks held 4 weeks Money Orders same as cash. COD 58 Dotectives replaced with samo prodal. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Pricelavallability may chance. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 por order. Mail to Canada. PR. HAK APO, ERO $4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item Handling $2 per shipment CD AOM note: u signifies jewel case only ACES OVER EUROPE' Experience the intensity of aerial combat in the European Theater of WWII. Fly with pilots from the U.S. Air Force, R.A.F. & German Luftwaffe. Patrol the front lines, target supply depots & come face to face with ground targets and artillery bunkers. Fly a single mission or a tour of duty. $39 'BIOFORGE' After breaking free of your security cell, you enter the ruins of an ancient alien civilization. There is a hostile alien on the prowl & an emergency situation to bring under control. 3-D synthetic actors & rendered backgrounds.$52 FORT APACIT THAD REICH 'METAL & LACE The gorgeous Robo Babes are expecting you and you'll get a welcome you won't soon forget. Strapped in Robo armor & loaded with special weapons, the talking Robo Babes will have you gripping your joy. stick & wiggling the gimbal all night long! Contains violent fighting scenes & sexy graphics. $29 'FORT APACHE' Take charge of a detachment of cavalry troopers in this exciting Wild West strategy game. Pa. trol the area around Devilbush Hills and train your rooky men into hardened troopers. Features wide variety of missions, choice of weapons, detailed troop statistics and fighting on foot or horseback. $19 \"THIRD REICH' On September 1, 1939, this man unleashed a war machine so horrific, when it was finally defeated, 40 million people lay dead. Features 4 challenging scenarios, 1 or 2 player mode, full play capabilities on both Operational and Strategic Maps, intuitive interface and Neural Net Technology $34 METALA TAN VIDEO LANDETLITIR THE BATTLE OF THE RORO BARES GENESIS GEN ADVENTURE GEN ADVENTURE GEN KICK & PUNCH GEN SIMULATIONS GENESIS SPORTS $47 X MEN S46 Young Indy Jones Chron $43 Zombies Ate Neighbors S44 Zool $49 S39 Rise of the Robots $49 Rise of the Robots CD $46 Street Fightr 2 Chmp Ed $62 Streets of Rage 3 $59 TMNT:Tournmnt Fighters $56 $49 GEN ROLE PLAYING hall 4 Way Play Adaptor $29 6 Button Arcd Powr Stick$44 6 Button Control Pad S19 Cable for Genesis 2 $19 F-16 Wireless Contri Pad$42 Game Gun CD $22 Genesis Activator $89 Genesis CD System 2 $229 Genesis CDX System $399 Genesis Sys Sonic 2 $119 Genesis Team Player S28 Mega Mouse Remote Arcade Pad $19 Remote Arcade System $36 SG Program Pad 2 $32 Saturn System 32 Bit $499 Sega Steering Wheel $39 Pele Soccer $54 Prize Fight Vid Boxg CD$49 RBI Baseball 4 CD $49 Side Pocket $39 Tecmo Super Bowl $52 Tony LaRussa Ultim BB $38 Vitale Basketball $52 WWFSW:Rage in Cg CD $46 WWFSW2 Royal Rumble$49 Winter Olympics $54 World Chmpshp Socer 2 546 World Cup USA $54 GEN SHOOTERS MIG 29 Monster Truck Wars $49 Nigel Mansell WCR $49 Pow Mod:Euro Cars CD $42 Race Drivin' $45 Racing Aces CD $36 Road Avenger CD $39 Road Rash 1 or 2 $42 Skitchin' $44 Speed Racer $56 Super Battletank 2 CD $44 Super Monaco GP2 $39 Tomcat Alley CD $49 Virtua Racing $79 Wing Commander 2 $56 $56 GEN STRATEGY $59 Battletech $52 Battletech CD $42 Dark Wizard CD $43 Dungeon Master CD $42 Eye of the Beholder CD S54 Gemfire $49 Genghis Khan 2 Lunar CD $46 Lunar 2 CD $49 Might & Magic 3 $59 Phantasy Star 2 or 3 $59 Pirates! Gold $49 Powermonger CD S43 Rings of Power S56 Shadow Run S49 Shining Force $48 Star Quest $49 Uncharted Wtrs NwHoriz $59 Vay CD $46 GENESIS SPORTS GEN ADVENTURE Hook CD $42 Incredible Hulk $54 Indiana Jones CD Indy Jones 4 CD $44 Intrplanetary Lizards Jungle Book $54 Jurassic Park CD $49 Mad Dog McCree CD $49 Mansn Hidden Souls CD $49 Mickey & Don Wrld Illsn $32 Out of this World or CD $49 Pink Panther $47 Pirates of Dark Water $54 Popeye S46 Prince of Persia S49 Puggsy or CD S49 Rebel Assit CD $46 Ren & Stimpy Show $46 Rise of the Dragon CD $46 Robocop Vs Terminator $56 Rolling Thunder 3 S49 Secret Monky Island CD $42 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD 543 Shinobi 3 $46 Sonic Hedgehog CD $46 Sonic the Hedgehog 3 $56 Space Ace CD $49 Spiderman & Venom $54 Spidrman vs Kingpin CD $36 Splatterhouse 3 $52 Star Trek Next Gener $49 Star Trek Next Genr CD $64 Star Trek:Deep Space 9 $54 Sunset Riders $29 Switch CD $49 T2:Judgement Day S42 Terminator CD $49 Time Killers $56 TimeGal CD Toe Jam & Earl 2 $46 Vikings $39 Virtual Bart $49 Who Shot Jonny Rck CD$49 Wolf Child or CD S42 Battle Fantasy CD 542 Black Hole Assault CD S42 Cobra Command CD $39 Crime Patrol CD $49 Drug Wars CD $49 Exo Squad Gauntlet 4 $46 Grindstormers $49 Gunstar Heroes S44 Lethal Enforcers w/gun $69 Lethal Enfrcrs w/gun CD $64 Mega Turrican $46 Robo Aleste CD $41 Silpheed CD $43 Skeleton Krew $46 Soul Star CD $44 Stellar Fire CD $46 Subterrania $49 T2:Arcade Game CD $49 Third World War CD $42 Total Carnage or CD $49 In Aero Biz Supersonic $59 Caesars Palace $49 Columns 3 $46 Dune CD $49 Family Feud $49 General Chaos S36 Jeopardy or CD $49 Jeopardy 2 Deluxe $49 Liberty or Death $59 Microcosm CD S49 Nobunaga's Ambition S49 Risk CD S52 Romance 3 kgdms 2or3 $59 Shanghaii 2 $44 Sonic Spinball $43 Super Battleship $43 Virtual Pinball $43 Warrior of Rome 3 CD $52 Wheel of Fortune 2 949 GEN KICK & PUNCH Addams Family $44 Advent Will Beamish CD $42 Aladdin $49 Alien Trilogy CD Alien Vs Predator $49 Asterix & Great Rescue $49 Beavis & Butt-Head $49 Bubba & Stix CD $44 $46 Castlevania $44 Chester Cheetah 2 S46 Chuck Rock 2 CD Cliffhanger CD $49 Cool SPOT $45 Demolition Man Dolphin CD $39 Dracula or CD $49 Dracula Unleashed CD $43 Dragons Lair 1 or 2 CD $49 Dune:Battle for Arrakis S49 Fire Team Rogue $59 Golden Axe 3 S49 Heimdall CD S44 Bubsy Barkley Basketball Bill Walsh Coll FB or CD $49 Bowling $42 Brett Hull Hockey $54 Brutal Football $49 Double Dribble $52 ESPN Baseball or FBall S54 ESPN Baseball CD S49 ESPN Football CD $49 FIFA International Socer $52 Greatest Heavyweights $49 Hardball 3 $52 King Salmon Legends of the Ring $49 MLBPA Baseball $52 Madden Football 94 $54 Mutant League Football $36 Mutant League Hockey $49 NBA Basketball or CD $49 NBA Showdown $58 NFL Greatest Teams CD 549 NFL Sports Talk FB 94 $49 NHL Hockey 94 $49 NHL Hockey 94 CD $52 PGA Tour 3:Europe $52 $42 $49 GEN SIMULATIONS Battle Toads/Dble Dragon$49 Best of the Best $49 Clayfighter $52 Dragon $56 Eternal Champions $56 Fatal Fury 2 $54 Final Fight CD $39 King of the Monsters 2 $54 Mazin Saga $44 Mortal Kombat CD $46 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Ninja Warriors CD $49 Power Instinct $52 $56 GAME GEAR $39 AH-3 Firehawk CD $44 Al Unser Jr Racing $46 Battle Corps CD $44 Desert Strike $42 F117 Night Storm F15 Strike Eagle 2 $48 Ground Zero Texas CD $54 Harrier Assault CD $49 Jaguar Racing CD $39 Jungle Strike $49 Game Gear System S129 NBA Basketball NBA Jam Session S38 NFL Football Joe Montn S36 Sonic the Hedgehog 3 $32 "


"CITY 2000 Die Air Luar SIMCITY 2000 is the long awaited follow up to SimCity that takes urban planning into the next century. SimCity 2000 adds a new level of realism & sophisticated gameplay. New features include underground water and trans. portation systems, 3D views & SVGA graphics. $42 STAR REACH' You are on a quest to conquer & colonize a galaxy of alien worlds in a mind-bending, real-time universe. First you must overcome hostile climate conditions, ward off enemies, calculate risks & make tactical decisions. $36 \"1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR' Dodge the relentless gunfire of Japanese Zeros. Execute gravity twisting dive-bomb attacks. Attack enemy bombers in a desperate fight to save your carrier. Virtual Cockpit allows viewing in all directions. 548 1045 Every day you survive Is a victory... UTPOST TASSID 'OUTPOST' You only get one chance to destroy civilization. Players explore new worlds. research new technologies and strive to colonize distant planets. Based on NASA research. Outpost is a realistic simulation of the complexities involved in building a self-contained colony on a hostile planetary surface. CD $48 ACES OF THE DEEP' Between September 1939 and May 1945, Germany launched over 1,000 U-boats into combat against the Allies. Dive deep to avoid at tacks and measure your succes in tonage as you take command in the most realistic and advanced WWII German U-boat simulation created. $42 \"WARLORDS 2 brings the fun and excitement of the first Warlords with 640 x 480 graphics, a hidden map option, and totally new Al system. Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports for amphibious warfare, & a diplomacy option that provides the framework for backstabbing. $37 ACES or the DEEP bu SNES HARDWARE SNES ADVENTURE SNES KICK & PUNCH SNES ROLE PLAYING SNES SIMULATIONS SNES STRATEGY $64 S34 $79 Championship Joystick Power Plug Pro Action Replay Super Advantage Super Multitap Super Nintendo Sys Super Scope Wireless Control Pad Metal Combat Pink Panther Pirates of Dark Water Popeye Radical Rex $48 $44 $52 $49 $49 Seventh Saga $56 Spellcaster:Aspct Valor $49 Super Dragone Crom $54 Ultima 6 or 7 $59 Uncharted Waters or 2 $59 Warrior of Rome 3 $52 $39 $32 $139 $54 $12 Super F1 2 $58 Super Mario Kart $46 Super Off Road:Baja $52 Super Strike Eagle Top Gear 2 $49 Transformers 2 $56 Turn & Burn:No Fly Zne $52 Wild Trax $56 Wing Comm Scrt Miss $49 $54 SNES SHOOTERS SNES ADVENTURE Dragon $56 Fatal Fury 2 S59 Final Fight 2 $52 King of Dragons $59 King of Monsters 2 $54 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Ninja Warriors $56 Peace Keepers $54 Power Instinct $54 Ranma 1/2:Hard Battle $54 Rise of the Robots $54 Samurai Showdown $59 Sengoku Shadow of the Ninja 2 S54 Streetfighter 2 Trbo Ed $59 Super Street Fighter 2 $69 Survival Arts TMNT:Tournt Fighters $56 Tuff Enuff $42 Ultimate Fighter $56 WCW Super Brawl $49 World Heroes 2 $58 Aero Biz Supersonic $59 Family Feud $46 Jeopardy 1 or 2 $52 Jeopardy Sports Edition $52 Liberty or Death $59 Loopz $46 Mario's Fun w/Numbers $49 Mario's Time Machine Metal Marines $59 Nobunaga's Ambition $49 Operation Europe $59 Pinball Dreams $49 Railroad Tycoon Romance 3 Kingdms 3 $59 Sim Ant $42 Sim Earth $56 Super Battleship Super Caesars Palace $46 Utopia $49 Wheel of Fortune 2 Dlx $49 SNES SPORTS $54 $39 $54 $54 $46 $49 Robocop Vs Terminator $56 Rocko's Modern Life S49 Run Saber $39 S.O.S. $52 Space Ace $52 Speedy Gonzales S52 Spiderman & Venom S59 Star Trek Next Gen $59 Star Trek:Deep Spce 9 S56 Steven Seagal S54 Super Advent Island 2 $52 Super Empire Strk Bck $55 Super Mario All Stars $54 Super Return of Jedi $59 Super Star Wars $36 T2:Arcade Game $49 Tales of Spike McFang $56 Tazmania $48 Terminator $44 The Shadow $52 Time Killers $56 Time Slip $39 Ultraman Untouchables $52 Virtual Bart $57 Wizard of Oz X-Kaliber Young Merlin $56 Zero Kamikaze Squirrel $54 Zombies Ate Neighbor $49 Zool $49 Bio Metal $47 Citadel $52 Contra 3 $46 Cybernator $49 Exo Squad Fire Striker $52 Galactic Defenders $52 In the Hunt $54 Lethal Enforcrs w/gun $69 Operation Logic Bomb $39 Parodius $54 Soldier of Fortune Super Metroid $56 Super R-Type 3 $54 Super Sonic Blastmn 2 $54 Super Turrican 2 $49 Total Carnage $52 View Point $54 $54 FREE GAME OFFER $54 ActRaiser 2 S49 Addams Family Values S54 Aero the Acrobat Aladdin S54 Alien vs Predator $44 Aliens 3 Amer Tail:Feival West $49 Arcus Odyssey $54 Asterix the Gaul $54 Beauty & the Beast $56 Beavis & Butt-Head $49 Bubsy $54 Bugs Bunny Rab Ramp $56 Capt America & Aveng $42 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Crazy Chase $49 Daffy Duck/Marvn Mrtn $49 Death of Superman $59 Dracula $49 Fire Team Rogue $59 Flintstones $49 Generation 2 $54 Hurricanes $49 Incredible Hulk $54 Jetsons $49 Joe & Mac 2 $49 Jurassic Park $56 Knights of Round Table $56 Lawnmower Man $42 Legend $49 Magic Boy $46 Mario & Wario $54 SNES ROLE PLAYING Spend $60 on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Mar 1st through Apr 31st or while supplies last. $46 Barkley Basketball $56 Baseball Stars 2 Bill Walsh Coll Football $52 Brett Hull Hockey $54 Brutal Football $52 Diamond Challenge $52 ESPN Bsball or Fball Hardball 3 $56 Jamm It $56 Ken Griffey Baseball $52 Kick Off 3 Kirby's Tee Shot $52 Legends of the Ring $49 MLBPA Baseball $52 MLBPA Grand Slm BB $59 NFL Football $39 NHL Hockey 94 $49 Pele Soccer $54 Pro Sport Hockey $54 RappBall $49 Slam Masters $54 Soccer Shootout $54 Sports Illustrated Kids $56 Super Bases Loaded 2 $59 Super Goal! 2 $54 Tecmo Baseball $56 Tecmo Super Bowl $59 Tecmo Super NBA Bull Tecmo S. S56 Winter Extreme $54 Winter Olympics $54 World Cup USA S54 SNES SIMULATIONS First $54 Brain Lord $59 Breath of Fire $59 Equinox $52 Eye of the Beholder $59 Final Fantasy 3 S64 First Queen Gaia Fantasy $56 Gemfire $56 Genghis Khan 2 $59 Journey Home $49 King Arthur/Knghts Jstc $59 Lord of the Rings $54 Lufia $54 Might & Magic 2 $52 Obitus $58 Paladin's Quest $52 Runes of Virtue $59 Secret of Mana $59 $36 $49 Air Strike Patrol Al Unser Jr Racing Choplifter 3 F-1 Pole Position Freeway Fly Boys Monster Truck Wars Rock & Roll Racing Spectre VR Speed Racer Star Trek:Starflt Acad Super Battle Tank 2 Super Chase HO $52 $52 $44 $54 $49 $58 $49 $52 $56 $56 $54 $49 Artura. Sound Source, Grndmstr Chess, Rings of Medusa, Airborne Ranger. Gunship, Free DC, Big Business 5.25, SDI, Jeopardy, Wheel of Fortune 1 or 2 5.25, Backgammon by George, Earth Rise, Vid Poker, Obliterator, 3 in 1 Players Pack, Video Poker Villa Crespo, Magic Johnson Fast Break, Dusk of the Gods. Punisher 5.25 SNES KICK & PUNCH $59 Art of Fighting Battle Blaze Claylighter $46 $56 "


"REVIEW Wing Commander Under Water? que 7523 Exploring The Depths With Subwar 2050 by H.E. Dille > 111 CONTACT OF DE SILT HINEE .  TEHETIC 999 CUBE 345 ERP 0 TORPEDO READY 2 TIHEI 4.50 SOXARIFASSIVE 280 CONF 299 pace may be the final frontier, but it and Sea of Japan), each of which is certainly isn't next in line for exploiracomprised of nine to eleven mis-Altopilot Offtion. Before Mars is marred by stripsions. mining, the world's oceans will be harvested for their riches. Subwar 2050 explores a fucampaign, you create a character on ture where the concerns of environmentalists the sub roster and familiarize yourhave been shoved aside by a desperate need self with the operations center of for more resources. Naturally, the oceans the \"submarine carrier\" they are hold the last, largely untapped, solution to embarked upon. From this central economic stagnation. The governments of screen, it is possible to fly in a simuthe world lack the financial strength to ex lator, select a campaign, attend S EN ploit this environment, so the ball is grabbed mission briefings and so on. Are the by MegaCorporations-entities with the resimilarities adding up? You betcha, a straight mission-to-mission arcade game sources to compete on a global without characters or story. Fly the mission, scale with complete disregard for collect the cash and move on. As such, it will everything except the profit maronly appeal to players on the base level, leavgin. Moratoriums on mining and ing it far behind its spacefaring cousin. drilling in international waters are The training campaign is designed to famila thing of the past. The major iarize new mercenaries with the operation of corporations embark on a \"land their craft and prepare them for the rigors of rush» unlike any ever seen, staking combat. Climbing into the \"cockpit\" after their claims to the vital undersea the mission briefing, you launch from the regions. The promise of riches Tiger's Claw...oops, I mean the sub carbrings claim jumpers in its wake, rier...and proceed to a number of navigaand the climate of industrial estional waypoints, each of which may lead to pionage and sabotage gives way to an enemy encounter. The early missions are open warfare. During play, you become one and I couldn't help but keep looking around easy and fairly safe, mostly involving the deof many mercenaries willing to ply their trade for Maniac to pop up with some struction of numerous robot 4000 feet down, provided the price is right. arrogant young punk commenSubwar 2050 drones and the evasion of a few tary. Unfortunately, in this reTaking the Plunge! spect, Subwar 2050 loses its similarity to Wing Commander. TITLE: Subwar 2050 PRICE: $59.95 Subwar 2050 is not, by any stretch of the The latter drew you deeper into SYSTEM: imagination, an actual military simulation of the story through dramatic cut REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better IMB RAM, VGA graphics, 12MB hard drive undersea warfare; its design philosophy holds sequences, the development of space; supports Adlib, Roland a far greater kinship to Wing Commander empathy for other crew memand Sound Blaster sound cards PROTECTION: Documentation look-up than it does to Seawolf. Players pilot various bers, and a well-thought out ficPUBLISHER: types of deep submergence vehicles and subtional background. Subwar Hunt Valley, MD marines in five different campaigns (Train(410) 771-0440 MICROPROSE 2050 enjoys none of these cincing, North Pole, Antarctica, South China Sea matic plot or pacing devices. It's copie PE NE SPEEDT 12 FONER : 40 COMMALARION IBM MicroProse Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"TYRE TORMADO TIN  THI FURCTTIR 100% TORTACENTRE LORD HEIGHT: San proximity mines. Once you're certified to accept more strenuous and profitable missions, deadly combat begins in earnest. Take Her Down, Scotty Aside from a background that almost appears to be a field of stars at times, the undersea visuals are fairly good. Visibility is limited by depth, though chearing is allowed by way of vehicle \"headlights.\" Nearer the surface, the top of the viewing screen becomes progressively lighter to simulate the penetration of the sun's rays. Once at the surface, things TOTO HEADINGI DEPTH: 4400 CLRNC: 122 costringere pense don't hold up as well visually, perhaps to serve as a reminder that the real action is down below. One of the most interesting aspects of Subwar 2050's simulation model is the way it handles thermal layers. Understanding how these layers occur and their tactical significance is important to judging Subwar 2050' s combat model, so allow me to give a 30-second lesson. The ocean is a dynamic environment, continually mixed by wind, waves, currents and tidal action. These forces have the greatest effect near the surface, but are present throughout the body of water. During the day, the sun warms the surface layer, exciting individual water molecules as energy is transferred. The individual particles spread out, making the entire layer of warm water less dense than its cooler counterparts. The depth to which this warming occurs varies with the length of the day and other factors, but all water within that depth is raised to a constant temperature. As such, it is referred to as the surface isothermal layer. When the water is deep enough INFORMATION . to permit several thermal layers to coexist, the conditions are right for the formation of a sound channel. This is a situation where a layer of warm water is bounded top and bottom by colder water, such that any sound emitted within that layer tends to be trapped between the two boundaSAARE ries. The sound channel acts as a conduit for any noise, allowing day's submariners have an awesome array of day greater propagation within the weaponry at their disposal, from 10 mile wirechannel, but also precluding detecguided MK48 ADCAPs that can be fired at tion of noise sources outside the an opponent with near pinpoint accuracy, to channel. sophisticated wake homing seeker heads that can follow the pressure differential created by Subwar 2050 attempts to model a ship passing through the water for 30 miles, the complexities of ocean thermal rudely slamming home in the ship's screws conditions, paying particular atwith no advance warning. What weapon optention to how sound moves tions do you have in this multi-threat envithrough different thermal layers. ronment some 60 years in the future? How Through the use of different-colabout very short range torpedoes that must ored grids, Subwar 2050 handles lock onto their target within seconds of this tactical aspect well but, unfortunately, things take a turn for the worse from that point on. Cavitation Noise Real submarines are blind and must navigate and find their targers like a blind person does, by listening to his surroundings. Subwar 2050 wants to adhere to this fundamental precept of undersea warfare, but cannot help including the visual aspect as well. Thus, all of the programming effort that went into the elaborate thermal layer model, launch or they begin a circular search pattern as well as speed, detection curves and other that may prove hazardous to you and your factors, tends to be largely irrelevant. \"wingman's\" health. Not sexy enough? OK, A standard underwater engagement should then use even shorter range straight-running incorporate a slow, methodical approach, intorpedoes that are annoyingly referred to as cluding passive use of sonar, where you listen \"rockets.\" to your enemy's radiated noise as opposed to actively \"pinging\" him. A carefully executed Down Doppler surprise attack would follow as soon as the target's location is reasonably certain. Subwar Clearly, Sub War 2050 is a product with an 2050 wants to be an intense actionidentity crisis. It wants to incorporate sophisoriented game, so the design enticated physical models of the type you'd courages players to dash in-damn expect from a true simulation, and yet it the torpedoes and hope for the wants to have an action game's visuals and best. Since you shoot your enemy pace. It wants to tap into the Wing Compace. It wants by linc-of-sight, all of the normal mander market and at the same time set itself suspense of this type of game is in a truly novel environment, but it has neither the research nor the creativity behind it lacking. The cat-and-mouse chase, to establish itself as a unique product in its so enticing in the best of submarine own right. It feels like a game unclear of its games, is totally absent. own concept, lost in the depths of its unclear Weapons selection and performgoals, unable to return to the surface to enjoy ance is equally uninspiring. Tothe light of day. CGW Mission Briefing April 1994 Page 87 "


"REVIEW SU Mobilu Around The UK In Four Days RALLY Accolade's Rally Tears Up The English Countryside by Gordon Goble 2 Start, a s an irrepressible fan of racing simulaSlowed temporarily while choosing the right was behind me, a glove-clasped steering tions, I was very much looking forcode word from the Rally manual, I soon wheel framed a digital speedometer and ta1 Lward to Accolade's Rally. The premier found myself in one of the simplest interfaces chometer, and across the dashboard to the levels of formula auto racing have been wonone could hope to find. Pointing and clicking passenger side were various readouts of splitderfully portrayed as of late in superb simulamy way through, I quickly had my car of times, course information, maps and gametions such as World Circuit and play options. All the necessary data, including IndyCar Racing, but the realm of NETWORK ON material that was unrealistic but welcome, rallying, where the multi-day drivDay Map 1 were certainly present. Without further hesiing events test both endurance and RALY tation, my talkative co-driver (more of a navidriving skill, has never been thorgator, really) was informing me in his best oughly explored. British accent that we'd be off to the races in Developed by England's Euro\"3...2...1...Go!\" press Software, and focused on that country's Network Q RAC So Much For Fahrvergngen Rally, a 35-leg 4-day racing event, Rally seemed full of promise. Scan2 Well, four-wheel drift me off the Tower of ning the game manual before loadContinue London! No sooner were we out of the blocks ing the software (some people do Halt Birmingham than I had radically eliminated at least a half do that, you know), expectations dozen spectators. While it's true that spectawere further heightened upon discovering the ing the cho choice, renamed the default driver \"Gordo tors do scand awfully close to the action in real various forms of expert consultation that bad The Magnificent,\" and was ready to run. First life, rarely has such carnage been wrought in gone into the making of the program. Events stage: Sutton Park, a forest-enclosed three the first five seconds of a run. Yet in the course mile sprint where all four wheels would, with organizers, participants, and even repreof taking our the race fans, I realized that our a little luck and a dash of skill, sentatives from Ford, Subaru, Lancia, Toyota find themselves on tarmac for Ford Escort had also warped right through and Mitsubishi had apparently had their inseveral trees, stumps and large rocks. Seeing put, and suddenly visions of an off-road Inthe duration. An easy starting dyCar didn't seem terribly exaggerated. point. Rally: The Final Round Of The After quickly calibrating my World Rally Championship Upon loading Rally's 5 megabytes onto my PRICE: $59.95 CH Flightstick, I found myself SYSTEM: hard drive, a cool European beat filled my REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGA graphics, cars, and while titles and credits cascaded behind the wheel of my desig5MB hard drive space; supports Adlib and Sound across the screen, so did short movies of these nated machine. Ourside the car, Blaster Pro sound cards screaming little four-wheeled buzz saws, cutthe view was pleasant enough, Documentation look up DESIGNER: Europress Software ting swaths through narrow trails, hurtling and inside, ergonomics were Accolade San Jose, CA over hill crests, plowing through mud bogs, suitable. A centrally positioned (800) 245-7744 and shining beacons into the dark night air. rear view mirror displayed what TITLE: IBM PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"ARE YOU READY TO EXPERIENCE THE ULTIMATE IN SQUAD-LEVEL SPACE COMBAT? The sequel to the immensely popular Breach 2, Breach 3 puts you in command as Squad Leader of the Federated Worlds. Do you have what it takes to command your marines in 120drzw(x dangerous missions against destructive enemy forces? All new features in Breach 3 include a unique combination of turn-based and real-time play; individual personalities for each marine; stunning 256-color VGA graphics; tree-structured campaigns containing up to 511 scenarios; support for all major sound cards; and modular terrain, objects and opponents. Uzmaz LOUFUK The fate of the Federated Worlds is in your hands... LOILOLDE A== COU a ULUTUSTEE lus Choose from exciting missions or use the scenario builder to create your own! Watch marines carry out your orders according to their own unique personalities! Stop the graphically stunning combat at any time to change your orders! OMNITREND Impressions The latest module In Omaltrand's Interlocking Game System Breach 3 allows you to interconnect with Breach 2 and Impressions INTERLOCKINO GAME SYSTEM Rules of Engagement 2! Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment  1993 Impressions Software Inc. Screenshots may vary Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"no evidence of blood nor bark nor gravel on the car, and certainly feeling no mechanical or personal damage, I had my hopes for a realistic sim dashed as surely as those spectators would have were I piloting a real Ford. By the end of Sutton Park, I had removed over a hundred trees, stumps and posts, generally reshaped the landscape, taken a terrible human toll (we're talking 20 fatalities, 30 or so life-threatening injuries, and at least a dozen nasty wounds), and had finished a commendable fifth of 30 entrants, with nary a slap on the wrist for my rather reckless driving. Needless to say, Rally just doesn't cut the mustard in the realism department. Although deserving of some accolades in appearance (graphics are built on a 3-D texture-mapping technology-sort of a poor cousin to IndyCar Racing), game mechanics suffer in two important areas. First of all, car control is erratic. Although climbing a grade will slow you down as effectively as descending will increase it, and the effects of \"drifting\" through corners seems somewhat accurate, the steering controls are both sloppy and oversensitive. Imagine driving World Circuit with both steering assistance and traction control off. Then imagine a joystick with two degrees of movement on both axes and acceleration controls with two modes: completely on and completely off. This is the experience of driving a Rally car. Loading auto-gearshifts and autobraking will assist handling, yet will detract substantially from much needed speed. Obviously, going from a pavement-hugging state-of-the-art formula car to a diri-caring sedan is quite a jump, but Rally is not merely a matter of adaptation. In an attempt to simulate the spinning rubber experienced in a real car, it's almost as if the Rally designers have gone a little too far. The slightest over-acceleration from a standing start or even at low speed will often result in horrific spin-o-ramas, while moving from joystick to keyboard control provides even less joy. As mentioned earlier, taking out a large number of obstacles as a result may not significantly affect your placing in a given leg, but damage will accumulate, and repairs down the road will take a bite out of overall time. beaten path, a roadside attraction? It just doesn't matter. Rally will automatically right you and plunk you back on track and pointed the right way. In all fairness, some legs are run on race tracks, and here Rally is adequate, bearing a striking likeness to the late, lamented racing game named after Mario Andretti. But such opportunities to escape the mechanical foibles of 31862 on 0983 the game are few and far between. MPHIROB010. is the avoidance of any and all obstacles. In Every dark cloud has a silver linRally, not only is this procedure next to im** ing, and Rally is certainly not all bad. As a possible (due to curious handling characmatter of fact, Rally seems like a good idea teristics), but unnecessary. In a real rally, and a decent presentation awaiting proper competitors are released one at a time and game mechanics. If it all worked properly, race against the clock. Given the narrow and piloting this type of vehicle through this type proting\" haphazard make-up of much of the route, this of terrain would be a great way to spend some is a good idea, and it is mimicked in the game. gaming time. A speaking co-driver, barking In a real rally, a fast car might make up so out navigational instructions is a novel and interesting twist, as is the challenge of 35 separate and distinct courses. Also commendable is the ease of movement through the various interfaces and phases of Ralla quick point and click is all it takes. Several visual effects are excellent too, including that of changing environmental conditions; races may be held in rain, snow or complere darkness, and all are effectively portrayed, right down to working windshield wipers. But one of the biggest knocks against Rally MPHADO, comes from its use (or misuse) of computer much ground on his predecessor that he may memory. In the course of this review, being well catch and perform a neat little pass. In unceremoniously heaved from the program Rally, passing is passé. Instead, blowing was not at all uncommon. Using DOS 6.2 straight through your foe is the best course of MEMMAKER as instructed didn't help the action. You may slow slightly as you merge situation, nor did recommended alterations to the CONFIG.SYS file. A Rally-specific through his car, but suddenly he will appear boot disk (or the ability to create one) was not in the mirrors. Or not...perhaps he may vapart of the package, and totally clean boots porize for a bit, then magically re-appear in (freeing up 615K of conventional memory), front, or to the side. although decreasing the number of dumps, If you feel the need to win a specific leg, no did not completely remedy the situation. matter what the cost, the strategy is simpleUnfortunately (and perhaps unfairly) for don't steer! Blasting through cars, people, their creators, today's driving simulations trees and other nuisances is no problem. Find must be compared to what else is out there, yourself off course, in the weeds, off the and right now that includes IndyCar and World Circuit. To that end, Rally does not offer replays, drafting of other vehicles, exterior camera angles, or anything in terms of car set-up (apart from tires). Add this to the aforementioned problems, and die-hard racers will want to look elsewhere before considering Rally, a pretty L a package and exciting concept with little realism, stability or substance. 0308 V HEHHODOM cow 45.00 Driver Side Airbags Not Necessary The lack of collisions is the truly damning quality of Rally. A trick to racing at any level Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"It's not a game. It's war. New York, Monday. Stat ABS SPECIAL | Bleen LEY'S NO. 13.041 TUESDAY JUNE 6 TUESDAY JUN Gh 1941 1941 .. NDITION POWERS Ame It's D-DAY. M NIE. It's The Beginning of the End. DOAR of gun mingled with barrage and vals as the great dome loomed up thank the two released my shutter. Here is his picture, one that es pilots. e fire 4: It's coming. mely! \"A great number of fires wer April, 1994 Parachutes open in the Norman lork, rewella Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software. Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234. Cambridge MA 02142 "


"AEGIS CD COMPUTER Express DETROIT You design and build the exact car of your dreams! From 1908 through 2008, you are the president of your own car company and must make all the key decisions on marketing, production, research and development. You'll even have the chance to design new cars -from sports cars to wagans and trucks-using advanced technologies that become available over time. Then, test your creations to see if they'll succeed in the market. place. Face inevitable strikes, wars, new laws and fierce competition from up to three human or computer opponents. Incredibly fun and easy to play, Detroit is the game car fans have been waiting for! Since 1985 Guardian of the Fleet naval simulation. Pushes you to the limit of real-time strategic and toclicol combat simulation. Puts the latest in military Technology and the ultimate high-tech warship at your fingertips Features historically accurate banle sequences. Based on newly declassified military information and historical accounts of actual battles. Challenges you to use the arts of deception, intelligence and warfare in this hightech, highthrill military simulation Time Wament DOS-CD 7 800-228-7449 EXT TOU, FREE ORDER LINE 330 $53 Impression DOS, MAC $39 MICROCOSM CD A cinematic adventure of exploration and deadly hide and seek. It's a fight for control of the free will of Tiron Korsby During a routine operation, an implanted miniaturized MICROCOS brain-manipulotion droid is threatening to roke control over Korsby's mind. A countering operation must be performed, and thus your mission begins. Features over SOOMB of graphics and sound for a rich, varied and life-like inner body experience. Multiple frame rates of up to 30 frames/second for smooth gameplay and nonstop action. Psygnosts: DOS-CD ISLE OF THE DEAD A South Pacific Island hopping adventure takes a strange twist as you're forced to crash land on a jungle island The good news is you survived the plane crash. The bod news is you're on the Isle of the Dead which is inhobited with ghoulish zombies and a host of terrifying creatures. Traverse dense jungles and treacherous caves, while exploring the local village to unlock riddles that could oid your escape. If you're lucky, you may even rehabilitate a beautiful zombie bobel LAWNMOWER MAN CD Truly an impressive blend of 3D and block busting action. There are 10 different varieties of gameplay, from puzzles through cinematic style platforms 10 fly through scenarios which are true to the feel and quality of the film. Jobe, a simpleton who spends his hours cutting neighborhood lawns, is used as a guinea pig by De Angelo, and attains super. human powers with the help of a unique Virtual Reality system. Entered into a Virtual Reality world within the Earth's computer network, he seeks revenge against Dr. Angelo for the injustice carried out against him. Sony Imagesoft DOS/MAC OD THE LAWNMOWER MAN POLICE QUEST IV CD The highly anticipated theunder A diens fourth chapter in the best selling Police Quest series is now available on CD! The nation's most experienced cop brings you the most realistic police simulation everl Features all now ultro realistic digital photography, video captured actors, and digitized crime scenes State of the art sound effects and music, including rock, rap, and hip-hop. You can't get any closer to the crime scene without a bodge. Windows compatible for fast, point-ondclick gameplay QUEST Marit DOS $34 $39 Serrat WIN-CD $45 S an JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS Flight Stand. Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro.. GForce Flight Yoke........ GameCard Autosel............. GameCard III Automatic......... GameCard III MCA Automatic ... Gameport 2000 Up to BOMHE Genovation Parallel Game Port ..... Notebook Gameport... Thrustmaster ACM Gome Cord Thrustmaster Flight Control...... Thrustmaster Formula 1 Thrustmaster Pro Flight Control.... Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals...... Thunderstick............ Virtual Pilot..... Virtual Pilot Pro... Y-Cable for 2 Jaysticks..... IBM D-ROM BMCD-ROM Complete House ................... Compton's Contemporary Ency. .. Compton's Int. Encyclopedio Conspiracy Cookbook Heaven Shareware..... Coral Reet Critical Path Curse of Enchantia..... CyberRace... D&D Fantasy Empires... D&D Stronghold Daemonsgate Dare to Fly Dark Seed Day of the Td Deathstar A Dictionary ig World ure 3D clopedia BMCD-ROM & o 10-Ye Anthology CD.................. 11th Hout 20th Century Video Almanac.. 7th Guest AD&D Eye Beholder Trilogy ..... AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands AD&D Dungeon Hack Adventures... Adventures of Willy Beamish..... Aegis Guardian of the Fleet.... Air Warrior... AirWorks.. Aladdin and His lamp.. Alone in the Dark Amazon The Guardians of Eden..... Animals MPC...... Art Gallery Windows....... Arthur's Teacher Trouble. B17 & Silent Service Battle Chess... Beethoven Microy Baneath a Steel Berlitz Japan AMERICA Berlitz Think Sinn e Better Homd PUIE Bibles & Re Biologo Blood No Blue Ford Budget Request Your Free Buzz A CNNT America Online Capital Membership (includes Challer Cica G 10 Hours Online) Battles.. Pack rshed CALL SPEAKERS AC5300 Spuskur Palt/Sytwoofer... AR Partner 570 Speaker System Altec ACS100 Speakers ............. Altec ACS200 Speakers............ Koss HD.1 Speakers........ Kass HD-4 Speakers..... Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers.... Labtec CS-1000 Speakers..... lobtec CS-180 Shielded Speaker Labtec CS 550 Speakers. Labtec CS-800 Speakers Labtec CS-900 Speakers... Labtec SS 700 Speakers..... pedia '94 gla II ur MPC 'East & West CD clasy tight explorer Gobliiins I... Gobliiins II Gobliiins III Great Naval Baltles ll............ Great Naval Battles Pack.... Greens Golf CD.... Gunship 2000 w/Scenario.... HAM Radio Shareware ........... Harvester CD Hell Cab... Home Medical Advisor Pra Humans INCA... INCA 2 ... Indiana Fate of Atlantis.... Iron Helix... J.F.K Assassination.... Jopan Business Travel CD... Journeyman Project ... Just Grandma & Me.... Jutland.......... Key Home Designer........... King James Elect. Bible..... King's Quest VI...... King's Quest VI Upgrade. Labyrinth of Time.......... Londs of Lore................ Laura Bow II....... Lawnmower Man Legend of Kryandia Leisure Suit Lorry VI Lightning............. Loom.. Lord of the Rings Lost in Time.... Lyric language French MPC... Lyric language Spanish MPC... MPC Wizard Diagnostic...... Mad Dog McCree.. Man Enough Mantis Expertimental........ Mayo Clinic Family Health 1.2 Mayo Clinic Total Heart..... Mochomander CD MegaRace....... . Microcom. u  Microsoft Baseball WIN Microsoft Golf Windows MPC.... Might & Mogic World of Xeen Monopoly Deluxa.... Multimedia Dinosaurs.... Multimedia Mozart... Multimedia Stravinsky..... Musical Instruments .... Must...... Naval Pack.... Newsweek Interactive #1 Newsweek Interactive #2 Nomad... Oceans Below.. . Our Solar System Shareware ..... Oxford English Reference... Penthouse Interactive, PhoneDisc USA: Business. Photo CD Access DOS..... Photo CD Access WIN PhotoEdge Color WIN Pill Book Police Quest IV... Publisher 2.0....... With Any Purchase Ace Board ......... Audio Magician Plus lo AudioMan... Gravis Ultrasound ........ Port Able Sound Plus.... Pro Audio 16 Basic Pro Audio Studio 16 Pro Audio Studio 16XL Pro AudioSpectrum 16... Reelmogic Multimedia Playbock Sound Blaster 16 Basic Sound Blaster 16 MCD...... Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2.. Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 ASP Sound on 10............ SoundMan Wave ..... SOUND CARDS 20 OZ .459 Coffee Bra Comanche Command Stoh Companions of a Compleal Beatles........ Arthur's Teacher Trouble B17 & Silent Service II...... Battle Chess Beethoven Microsoft Beneath a Steel Sky Berlitz Japan Alive... .. Berlitz Think & Tolk French ....... Better Homes Healthy Cooking .. Biblos & Religion Sharowaro... Bioforgo Interactive Movie Blood Net............... Blue Force........... Budget Guide USA 1993 Buzz Aldrin's Space.. CNN Time Capsule 1993 Campaign ............. Capitol Hill ........ Challenge CD Pack..... ..... Cica Games Windows Shoreware..... Cinemania Movie Guide 94 Clipart Goliath Shareware. Coffee Break CD Collection Comanche w/Mission 1&2..... Command Starship ... Companions of Xanth Compleat Beatles..... Complete Bookshop Shareware................ 15 sins II llins lll... . Naval Battles Il . Naval Batles Pack Yolf CD. 00 w/Scenario. Jo Shareware.............. Dare to Fly Dark Seed.... Day of the Tentacle......... Deathstar Arcade Battles... Dictionary of Living World Dinosaur Adventure 3.D... Dinosaursl Encyclopedia DireciPhone Discovery CD Pack Drucula Unleashed Dragon's Lair Dragon's Lair for Reclmagic DragonSphere CD..... Eco Quest Search for Cetus. Encarta Encyclopedia '94.. F-15 Strike Eagle ... Family Doctor MPC. Flight ATP w/East & West CD Fractal Ecstasy FreePhone Fun CD Pack Gobiel Knight Gateway II........ ... Global Explorer..... ..639 599 439 .519 409 Dune... CDU31 ALL/L2X CD Complete Kit........ CDU31 ALL/N2X CD Starter Kit....... DigitalEdge CD Mult. Kit........... Discovery Int. Dbl. 16 bil Kit.......... Edutainment Kit External Edutainment Kit Internal...................... Fusion Double CD Internal Kit....... Memphis Multimedia Upgrada Kit. MultiSpin 3XE E 195 ms MultiSpin 3XI Int. 195ms................ MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms...... OmniCD Upgrade Kit PAS 16 11 Multimedia Kit Rena CD-ROM Portable Player ........ Texel DM3028 Int. 240ms..... Texel DM5028 Ext. 240ms CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM 699 BM CD-ROM 499 469 299 599 CALL 349 469 RSS "


"VICTORY AT SEA JOHNNY ROCK UNDER A KILLING MOON CD CONSPIRACY CD A complete and accurate World War II naval simulation. December 7 1941 may live in infamy, but what happens after that is up to you! Step into the Admiral's chair and command the entire United States or Japanese forces at such infamous battles as Midway, Coral Sea, Leyte Gull, Guadalconal and more. Authentic World Wer Il footage and sound effects integrated into gameplay. Advanced artificial intelligence will challenge the most hardcore armchait Admiral Da Interactive movie tokes you to the streets of post World War 111 San Francisco, into a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed you'll feel like you're actually there, Hollywood stars add credibility and the necessary tolent. Create a personalized Tex Murphy movie which can be replayed at any time. Rich, original music, high quality digitized voices and sound effects make this interactive movie as exciting as it is visually stunning. Follow the trail of corruption into the most powerful conspiracy the KGB has ever known. Your first murder investigation for Dept. Pof the KGB leads you straight into the disintegrating holls of power Features Donald Sutherland as your father and only ally. As a former KGB agent, he will shrowdly guide you through the game with stateof-the-art digitized speech and video. Actual TV footage of the Soviet crisis also heightens the very real peril of your assignation. But even Sutherland can go only so far into the KGB Uncover the conspiracy while you still con Who shot Johnny Rock? Interactive live motion picture action! It's the Rollicking '30's and Someone has killed popular singer Johnny Rock in this action-packed gangster whodunit. Navigate the back streets, gaming halls, funeral parlars and the dirty sections of this city to get at the clues held by a number of shady characters and solve this murder mystery Bad guys with machine guns provide a high level of challenge An Loser One DOS-CD Three Staty DOS, MAC $41 $ Call Acco DOS-CO $56 Virgin Genoa DOS-CD $42 VIRTUS VR CAMPAIGN II 50 years of global conflict a new gener AMPAIGN FANCARD II Designed to dissipate heat in today's personal computers packed with add-ins. Eliminates overheating programs. lowers internal temperatures by 65 degrees by circulating 27 cubic feet of air per minute over the hottest components. Keeps your hard disk or hard disk card cool Equipped with 2 fans, and a large LED to show that the power is on Features 12 volts and fits into any 8. 16, or 32 bit slot. Draws only a tiny amount of power 1-year replacement warranty Imagine the world of virtual reality on your desktop computer Remodel your home, office or just create fantasy worlds! Walk around in your model immediately Design your space using hundreds of included Gallery pieces. FREE Putorial video Included Simple drog anddrop drawing. Comes with its own set of 3D worlds: swim through an underwater sea odyssey, ar live the drama of JFK's motorcade passing through the streets of Dallas. You control The action, like a flight simulator or a movie that you direct MEGARACE CD A wild, VIRTUAL driving experience through the landscape of o futuristic Megalopolis! Radical head to head compe tition combing speed, cunning, aggression, and allout combat, make MegaRace a one of a kind gaming challenge. Play against one of five computer generated drivers as they navigate through 3D obstacles to take the lead, using any means Winning is all that counts use weapons, tricks and skill to cross the finish line and win! simulations Over 130 templates of the not if, icont military LARS OF KHAI FOARTE forces of the lost 50 years have been included to empire help you gain on insight into real conflicts such as Korea, Vietnam und Operation Desert Storm. Fly helicopters in air to ground or air air attacks Deplay the animated infantry during fierce battle field action in a new 3D environment. Features all the modern weapons systemsguided missiles, rockets, homing missiles, laser rangefinders, gun stabilizers and night sights. T.S.Microtech DOS Virtual WIN, MAC $61 Software Toolworst DOS-CO $33 Enple DOS $33 Batea WORD WS EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 330 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 **** -*-* 1 *15C FAX:0011-508-443-5645. XI. CompuServeID:70007. 15342 BlavattTV. kumtib NATURL. FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS CALL CALL Ab NOUVED Quantam Gate.......... ROMIX Comics Freex #1.... ROMIX Comics Hardcase #1 ROMIX Comics Prime #1... Rebel Assault... Redshift. Return of the Phantom Return to Zork............. Rich & Famous CookBook.... SVGA Harrier.... Sam & Max Hit the Road... Scrabble Deluxe ........ Secret Weapons Luftwaffe Secret of Monkey Island... SelectPhone .... .... .... Shadow Caster CD.............. Shadow of the Comel............. Short Attention Span Theatre Shuttle .... . . SimAnt Enhanced SimCity Enhanced...... Space Quest IV... Space Shuttle MPC Spellcasting Party Pak ..... Spirit of Excalibur .......... Sporting News Pro Football.. Star Trek 25th Enhanced.. Street Atlas 2.0 USA. Strike Commander/lactical.... TechnoTools Shareware Teri Gold Compilation The Patrician. Time Almonac of 20th Century Tony LaRussa Baseball il Too Many Typofonts! Shareware ... Total Distortion U.S. Arlas 4.0 UFO Close Guide ........ USA Today. The 90's Vol. 1... Ultima I. VI Ultima Underworld I & II. Under a Killing Moon CD Where in World Deluxe Wines of the World Wing 11/Ultima Under World Wolf Pack Works 3.0....... World Atlas 4.0... World Circuit Grand Prix Wrath of the Gods. After Dark After Dark 2.0 WIN. AutoMap 3.0 WIN AutoMap Ski Resorts WIN AutoMap Upgrade 3.0 WIN. Betty Crocker Cookbook WIN Click & Drag WIN Corel Draw 4.0 WIN Delta Companion WIN......... Delta WIN.... Disney Collection Screen Saver .. Forever Growing Garden CD. Gifs Golore Shareware CD....... Holy Bible King James Version..... Home Survival Toolkit........ Key CAD Complete Libris Britannia Shareware CD. Lotus 123 Ral 4 Upg WIN lotus 123 Release X WIN MS-DOS Upgrade 6.2...... Notion Desktop 3.0 WIN. Norton Utilities 7.0 Office Professional 40... Office Standard 4.0. Organize Your Way WIN Parodox 4.5 WIN Personal Golf Analyzer.... Photo CD Alaska....... Photo CD Animals Photo CD Auto Racing Photo CD Butterflios... Photo CD Fireworks.. Photo CD Japan... Photo CD Porsche Racing Photo CD Sailboals........ Photo CD Underwater Photo CD WWII Aircraft.... Plan it Paradise WIN .... Print Shop Deluxe. Print Shop Deluxe CD Ensemble.... Print Shop Doluxe WIN Ashes of Empire...... Procomm Plus WIN .. Axis the Gamecheater ...... Publisher 2.0 WIN B-17 Flying Fortress Publisher Special Occasions WIN.. 47 Q&A 4.0 WIN... Barkley Basketball........... Baseball Card Collector WIN QEMM 386 7x.. Battle Chess 4000 SVGA Quattro Pro 5.0.. Battle Chess 4000 WIN Quattro Pro 5.0 WIN..... Banle Chess WIN Scenes Impressionists Collect... Battle Cruiser 3000AD.. Scenes Outer Space Collection Battles of Destiny...... Scenes Sierra Club Collection... Beethoven II..... Simtel DOS Shareware CD.. Space & Astronomy Shareware CD Betrayal at Krondor.. Bicycle Bridge WIN.... Stomp Keeper ............... Bicycle Poker WIN....... Winfux Pro 3.0 WIN. Blake Stone....... Windows 3.1 Blood Net.... Windows NT 3.1.... Blue & the Gray Windows Upgrade 3.1... Blue Force: The Next of Kin Word 6.0 WIN... Word for Word 6.0 WIN Bram Stoker's Dracula.. Breach 3..... WordPerfect 6.0 DOS Brett Hull Hockey WordPerfect 6.0 WIN Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space A320 Airbus: US Edition.... Caesar.. . Caesars Palace WIN AD&D. Dark Sun Hint Book......, Campaign il........... AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered Lands Card Shop Plus... AD&D: Dungeon Hack .........................39 Carrier Striko...... AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy.. ....49 Carriers at War II.......... APBA Baseball WIN Castle Conquest... Aces of Pacific 1946 WWII Miss.. Castles II: Siege & Conquest Aces of the Deep CALL Challenge of ihe 5 Realms... Aces of the Pacific Chessmaster 4 WIN............. Aces over Europe.... ...... Civilization Aces over Europe Mission #1..... CALL Civilization Hint Book Aces over Europe: Mission #2 CALL Civilization WIN..... Across the Rhine....... Clash of Steel: WWII 1939-45 Adven, of Willy Beamish ... Classic 5 WIN....... Adventure Pack... Classics Fun Pack WIN..... Air Combat Classics.... . Cooster ........ Air Combat Pacific 1942.. Cobra Mission..... .... Air Strike Pacific 1942 Cognilo WIN Air Warrior.. Comanche & Mission Disk #1 Alone in the Dark.... Comanche: Mission Disk I.. Alone in the Dark il... Comanche: Mission Disk II.... Arborea 2 Combat Classics II. Archon Ultra Command HQ Classic....... Arctic Baron Command Starship ... Armored Fist... Companions of Xanth.. Art of the Kill. Conquered Kingdoms. Circle Reader Service #49 Conquered Kingdoms Scenario.... Crosswords Deluxe WIN ......... Cyber GO ....... .. Cyber Race CyberSpace.................. D Day: Operation Overland D&D Fantasy Empires...... D&D: Stronghold D Day: The Beginning of End... Daemonsgate. Darklands Hint Book. Day of the Tentacle Hint Book Day of the Tentacle: Maniac II. Della V Detroit..... Doom Doom Episode 1 Dragon Knight III Dream Web..... GROW .50 299 Dune.. . 299 46 40 Dune II Dungeon Master........ Earth Invasion Arcade WIN... Eco Quest ll: Rainforest Eight Ball Deluxe........... El Fish Elder Scrolls: Voll Arena Empire Deluxe.............. Empire Deluxe Scenario..... Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide Empire Deluxe WIN Eternam... Evasive Action........ Even More Incredible Machines. F-15 Strike Eagle Il Classic........ F.15 Strike Eagle Ill... F. 19 Stealth Fighter Classic....... Falcon 3.0............ ... Falcon: FA-18 Hornet Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary. Falcon: Operation Fight Tiger... Fast Action Pag: 1st WIN FlashBack ........ ............. Fleet Defender Flight Adventure 825 Flight Light .... ..... Flight Screen Sovet Flight Simulas Vegas.......... Flight Sim: New York Scenery RECREATION NO BE "


"THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS MARK 1 STAR TREK COMPUTER Express User program mable throttle and weapons functions. Compatible with 5 pin keyboard connectors. Program your joystick for any current or future game. Your gaming peripherals ljoystick and WCS) will be instantly compatible with current or future games. Features: LED lighting system indicates when certain functions are activoled: Screw down connector: Handle moves fore and oft for throttle control; Sturdy seven fool callos: Allows joystick programmability through joystick interface Digital/Analog mode toggle switch; Usor program mable functions: One year warranty. STAR TREK COLLECTIBLES GUIDE CD Designed for all GREENBERG'S Types of Star Trek collectors and enthu siasts! Encyclopedia-style format combined COLLECTIOLES, with a sophisticated imoge text database for easier reading and quick reference Browse from over 400 color and black & white photos of collectibles from the original Star Trek TV series, six Star Trek movies and the Current Star Trek: The Next Generation TV Serios. Detailed listings for over 3000 collectibles, including the issue and current market prices. Need to learn about a Tricorder made by Mego? lustelick and browsel Since 1985 800-228-7449 530 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE Thrustmaster IBM $92 MCS DOS-CD $32 HACKER CHRONICLES CD Over 12 years in the making! Contains stories of how they did it, actual break. ins, arrests and prosecutions Most articles were written by the actual people who committed these acts Access articles CRON and software 2 with an easy-touse menu system. Areas of information include Phone Phreaking Computer Hackers, Satellite Communications and \"Underground\" General Information. Many subjects all very technical in nature and explained in detail, such as ATM's, credit cards, voice mail, etc. MORPHMAN CD You are the super hero Morphmon and it's your job to rescue the kidnapped Professor. destroy scien tific experi ments, and blow up a research fortress. The world is depending on you and your Morph technology to accomplish this task before the experiments reach civilization. Your only weapons are your wit and the molecular sampler on your slouve that allows you to alter your own molecular structure and that of objects around you. Features realistic 3D animation with Microsoft Video for Windows. Realistic 3D explosions, disintegrations, glowing and other special effects seen only in movies KABOOMI Make no bones about it! Kaboom is the most fun you can have with sound on your PCI With all the wacky sounds and cool music, you'll never have to senle for a simpla \"Beepogain. The Wild and Wacky Sound Brings your Software for Windows computer to life with incredibly vivid sound, from roosters crowing to tires screeching to music made famous by Elton John, Phil Collins and many others. Attach sounds to any Windows event. Easily create, edit, and personalize sounds with the sound editor Rock out with a boom box you won't have to carry on your shoulder! All this in one box! Sounds like one heck of a lot of fun for so little money, don't you think? Nove: WIN, MAC, WIN/MAC-CD S 29 GAMEMAKER 2.0   Uses a graphical interiace to let you create adventure and arcado-Style games in 256 color VGA graphics without programming. The games you create are only limited by your imagination Comes with a large selection of ready made basic clements such as hero characters, monsters, weapons, landscapes and more Create full screen scrolling scenes completo with background animation. Import graphic images into games, and include Sound Blaster compatible music and digitized sounds. Plus you'll enjoy the sample games included. SAS Publishing: DOS-CD $24 Dynamie Dimensione DOS-CD Recreational Software Designet DOS $48 3 RECREATION RECREATION King's Quest VI... King's Quest VI Hint Book King's Ransom Kingdom of Germany... Kings Tablo............... Kronolog...... Xye Deluxe Lands of Lore... Lands of lore Hint Book.... Laura Bow II VGA....... Leather Goddesses of Phobos II. Leanev Realm of Terror RECREATION Metal & loce Upgrade Disk NR18....... Michoel Jordan Flight..... .... Microleague Baseball/Football... Microsoft Arcade WIN Microsali Space Simulator Mig 29 Stand Alone Version......... Might & Magic Clouds of Xeon Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeon ..... Mike Ditka Football Miracle Piano Teaching System... Monopoly Deluxe ........... More Irisle Machines Mor Games WIN bol......... OSOBNO RECREATION andia \"Hint book lege Leisure Leisure Leisure Su leisure Suit IN Lem. COCO BONGO Links 34 Links Boni Links: Belfrey Links: Fireston Available Soon Sam & Max Hit The Road CD-ROM Version Pre-Order NOW! CALL $3900 26 900k Flight Sim: Oregon... . Flight Sim: Paris Scenery... Flight Sim: San Francisco... Flight Sim: Washington D.C. Flight Simulator 5.0.... Flight Simulator Flight Shop.. Flight Simulator Strategy..... Flight Simulator Toolki..... Forgotten Costle Four Play ....................... Freddy Pharkas.... Freddy Pharkas Hint Book Front Page Sports: Football Pro Frontier Elite II............... Gabriel Knight Hint Book... Game Moker 2.0 ...... Gary Grigsby's War in Russia.... Gateway II.......... . Geekwod Games of the Galaxy Genghis Khon 11 Gettysburg WIN... Giga Games Shareware CD Global Dominations Goblins............... Goblilins Ill......... .... Goblins II: The Prince Buffoon Grand Slam Bridge II WIN Grandest Fleet.... .. Great Naval Battles II........ Great Navol Battles Pack Great War...... Hand of Fate Kyrandia Il... Hand of fate Hint Book... HardBall lll. HardBall II Big League Parks HardBall ll Diamond Collect. HardBoll lll Player Disk HardBall V Harpoon II...... Head Couch Football WIN Heirs to the Throne. High Command...... Hoyles Book of Game I Classic........ Human's Like You've Never Seen.. Human's: Insult to Injury INCA... INCA 2... INCA Hint Book Incredible Toons Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis ........... Indy Cor Racing Innocent Until Caught..... Isle of the Dead......... Jack Nicklaus Contest lour. Jack Nicklaus Signature Goll.... Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2. Jagged Alliance Jeopardy Deluxe WIN....... Jeopardy Sports Ed, WIN..... Jeopardy Sports Edition Jeopardy with Alex.... . Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck WIN Jer Pack......... Joe Montana Football......... Jump Jel.. Jurassic Park Kasparov's Gambil.... Kid Pix . King's Quest V VGA.. Links Lord Of The los! Treasu Lost Treg\" Lost Vil lost Llassic Lucky's Casino A. Lure of the Temptre M4 Sherman Tank Master of Orion....................... Leather Goddesses of Phobos II ... Legacy Realm of Terror Legend of Kyrandia....... Legend of Kyrandia Hint book..... Leisure Suit Larry. Leisure Suit Larry V............ Leisure Suit Lorry V Hint Book Leisure Suit Larry VI............. Leisure Suit Larry VI HBook.... lemmings... Lemmings Links 386 Pro... ... Unks: Banll Springs SVGA... Links: Beliray Course SVGA Links: Firestone Course SVGA Links: Innsbrook Course SVGA Links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA.. Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA Lord Of The Rings/Two Towers... Lost Treasures of Infocom I....... Lost Treasures of Infocom II...... lost Vikings... Lost in Time Lucas Arts Classic Collection Lucky's Casino Adventure Lure of the Temptress M4 Sherman Tank....... Master of Orion......... MechWarrior Mechamander...... Merchant Prince.. Metal & lace....... 29 Point Pool Shork... Populous l.. . Power Game ll ............ Monopoly Doluxo ....... More Incredible Machines More Vegas Games WIN Mortal Combat...... NFL '94............ . NFL '94 WIN.... NFL Coaches Football NFL Pro League Football NHL Hockey '94........ Nano Tank.......... Nomad Open Dialogue WIN Operation Combat 2 Outpost Oxyd PGA Tour Golf WIN ........ Pacific Strike Pacific Strike Speech Disk Pacific War Perfect General II Perfect General Trilogy..... Pirates! Gold Police Quest III Police Quest IV........... Police Ques: IV Hint Book Pool Shark Populous Il... Power Game il... Powermanger. Prince of Persia Il... Privateer... Privateer Operations 1 Priveleer Speech Pack..... Prophecy Quarter Pole.... Quust for Glory ............... Quest for Glory Il Quest for Glory IV........ Quest for Glory IV Hint Book Railroad Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Deluxe... Rally: The Final Round..... Reach for the Skies..... Real Weather Pilot Realms of Arkania....... Realms of Arkania Hint Book Red Baron Red Baron Mission Builder Red Crystal .. . Red Storm Rising Classic Remind Me Return of the Phantom... Return to Zork... Return to Zork Hint Book Rise of the Robots....... Road & Track Grand Prix... Road to the Final Four 2 Romance Three Kingdoms III Rome: Pathway to Power... Royal Flush. Rules of Engagement il.. Russian Six Pack... Russian Six Pack WIN SSN:21: Sea Wolf SVGA Harriet..... ... Sam & Max Hint Book.... Sam & Max Hit the Road Soal Team... Secret of Monkey Island Il Seven Cities of Gold... Shadow Coster.... Shadow Caster Hint Book Silent Service Il Classic ....... SimAnt WIN.. SimCity 2000 SimCity 2000 Scenario 1 SimCity Classic... SimCity Classic WIN SimEarth WIN SimFarm SimLife WIN... Simon the Sorcerer..... Simon the Sorcerer Hint Book Smokin' Guns Solitaire WIN... Solitaire's Journey WIN Space Hulk...... Spoco Quest IV Space Quest V... Space Quest V Hint Book, Spear of Destiny ....... Spear of Destiny Hint Book Spectre VR Speed Racer Challenge Racer X Spelleasting Party Pak SportsWorks ...... . Star Reach Star Trek: 25th Anniv. Hin: Bk... Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Star Trek: Judgment Rites. Star Trek: The Next Generation Star Wars Choss......... NOUVERD RECREATION RECREATION RECREATION 888888 28 CALL CALL 35 40 .49 CALL "


"HIRED GUNS AXIS THE GAMECHEATER Allows you to cheat almost all of the CITY 2000 popular computer gomes. Supported games include: Prince of Persia, Lemmings, Hellcats, PGA Tour Golf, Spectre SimCity, Street Fighter Il and many more. Overrides predefined game functions and parameters to give you more of what you need for each specific game. Add more time, money, ummo, shields, lives, or whatever else your favorite game requires. You could almost be immortall Moc version $33. Any mission, anywhere... for price. Bottle your way through over 20 theaters of engagement, encountering a variety of adversaries and dispatching them with efficiency Collect weapons, scanners, manipulators and food. Over 1.7 million cubic meters of battle area. Choose from a selection of 12 different mercenary characters. Will your team survive? Can you liberate the hostages? Enlist with the Hired Guns and test your skills. SIMCITY 2000 The ultimate City Simulator This morning you approved new solar power plant designed an underground transportation system, and jumped five points in the polls. Then you raised foxes, read two local newspapers, built a zoo, and pushed your education bill through the city council. It's time for lunchunless, of course, there's a fire, tornado, earthquake or alien Invasion. SimCity 2000 really brings your city and its resident sims to life. If this game were any more realistic, it would be illegal to turn it off. Scenario Disks also available, UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS Suit up and go heodio head against real NFLPA prosina ferocious bamle of outrageous tackles, impos sible one handed colches, bruto headbutts, and flying helmets, in a graphically intense PC WAO football game Design your own plays, rosters and logos. Take the field os TV sportscaster Al Michaels and call every play. Filled with intense graphics, realistic animation and high-impact gameplay Impott and export teams from all 28 NFL cities Features 12 player competition, or 2 player cooperative game play. Supports all major sound boards. Baseline Publishing DOS $36 Paygnosia DOS $32 Mode DOSMAC $39 Accolados DOS $33 KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES High quality, full calor keyboard overlays for flight simulators will turn any AT101 keyboard into a 3D looking control panel Includes all key commands in a logical layout, and legend boxes for cockpit displays Available for MS FS 5.0, FALCON 3.0, MG 29, STRIKE COMMANDER ATP, XWING, COMANCHE, F-15 , ACES OF PACIFIC JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS, B-17. GUNSHIP ACES OVER EUROPE, TORNADO and morel Ask about Folcon 3.0's Keyboard & Utility bundles! Quantity Pricing 2 $21.50:39 $3000, any 4 or more only $9.25 each! CARRIER5 AT WAR II CARRIERS AT WAR II TUTI STUDIE WEGO Fleet carrier CARRIERS operation in AT WAR Southeast Asia 1936-1946. This sequel to the hugely successful CARRIERS AT WAR uses a much improved version of the original mechanics Spans a decade that changed the world. Offers more tension, more excitement, tougher opponents and more dramatic Carrier bamles. The uncer tainty of war is vividly recreated. Eight scenarios included, some hypothetical, others controversial Explore all aspects of tactical and strategie combat between Japan and the United Stotes and Great Britain LANWORDS FOR WINDOWS Fast paced, challenging. entertainment value that's fun for all ages. Seven word game variations, or create your own version Change the look of your games with a choice of colorful life patterns. Offers 20 different computer opponents with increasingly sophisti cated vocabulary and skill, ranging from beginner to expert levels, containing 160,000 words. Online help, best plays, anagram finders, and word linders are also included. If you've got network support, you can receive and send messages to your opponents via a chat windows screen BEAT THE HOUSE WINDOWS NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS! Prepare yourself for a casino gaming experience! Includes the 160 page study guide \"Beat the House Companion.\" Fecturing slot machines, blockck. roulette, video poker and Crops Beginners will learn the rules and terminology of casino play. Seasoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting rachniques as well as profitable betting shotgies. One to four people can play ogainst each other, or computer players will fill the empty seats. Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to \"Beat The House!\" Kung Ho Kaynard Commander Carp $ 13 $50: DOS $39 Saber Softwares WIN $23 Splell of Discovery DOS, WIN $27 RECREATION SCL HSOUNDYW 1893999 CALI 283 .48 Stonekeep....... Street Fighter II ....... Strike Commander. Slike Commander Players Guide Strike Commander Speech Pack Strike Commander Tactical #1..... Strike Squad ........... Subwar 2050 ... Super Hero League of Hoboken Syndicate.......... Syndicale: American Revolution......... System Shock T2 The Arcade Game................ TXF: Tactical Fighter Exper... The Dig The Patrician ....... Third Reich... Tie Fighter Space Combat Tony LaRussa Baseball it Tony LaRussa I: AL&NL Stadiums.... Tony lakussa II: Fantasy Draft....... Tornado... Tower.. Ultima Underworld..... .. Ultimo Underworld Il Hint Book... Ultima Underworld II: Labyrinth Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle Ultima VII Port 2: Silver Seed........ Ultima Vil: Forge Virtue........ Ultima VII: The Black Gate Ultima Vill: Pagan... Ultimo Vill: Pegen Speech Pak Ultrabots.... Unnatural Selection Unnecessary Roughness.... V for Victory Pok Vegas Games WIN Victory at Sea........... Vikings: Fields of Conquest Vittus VR WIN........ WW2 Air Force Commander WWII Pack Walls of Rome........ Warlords ..... ... Warriors of Legend... Washington D.C. Scenery.. Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WIN When Iwo Worlds War.. Wing Commander Academy... Wing Commander II w/Speech Wings of Glory 1917-1918... Wizardry Trilogy (IV/V/VI) World Circuit Grand Prix....... World War II: Battle S Pacific ...... X-Wing... X-Wing Official Guide............ X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty.... X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit Yserbius... MACINTOSH MES Caesar ... Caesars Palace....... Carriers At War ........ EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 Castles II.... OUU\"220\"/447330 FAX:508-443-5645 Chuck Yeager Air Combat Civilization 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 Dare to Fly CD Dark Seed...... .. Detroit ERORIDO+--**31*15C FAX:0011-508-443-5645. Dracula Unleashed CD Empire Deluxe.... XIX.CompuServeID: 70007.1534 A m Tn. F17A Stealth Fighter.... Flight Commander  Flight Sim: Japan Scenery Flight Simulator 4.0... ... FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING Hell Cob CD............. Indiana Fate of Atlantis CD Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis ... 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS Iron Helix CD............ Jeopardy Sports Edition..... Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck Journeyman Project CD Airborne Ranger SNES..... 52 Metal Marines SNES.. Jump Raven CD Aladdin SEGA Micro Machines SEGA.. King's Quest VI.... Art of Fighting SNES....... Mortal Combat SNES Lawnmower Man CD Barney SEGA Mortal Kombat SEGA Legend of Kyrandia.. Battle Chess 3DO... Mutant League Football SEGA Leisure Suit Larry VI.. .... Blades of Vengeance SEGA.... CALL Mutant League Hockey SEGA Lunicus CD.............. NBA Showdown 94 SEGA M4 Sherman Tank ...... Bubsy in Claws SEGA Bubsy in Claws SNES NHL'94 SEGA Moc Arack. CPU Bach 3DO... NHL '94 SNES Mac Full O'Humans..... Mario is Missing... Cliffhanger SEGA Normy's Beach SEGA More Incredible Machines. Dungeon Master SNES Oceans Below 3DO Escape from Monster Manor 3DO Pelel Soccer SNES Myst CD Eternal Champions SEGA... Pirates! Gold SEGA.... Oceans Below CD.. F. 15 Strike Eogle II SEGA Railroad Tycoon SNES, d Magnur. F-19 Stealth Fighter SEGA RoboCop vs. Terminator PGA Tour Golt il CALL Final Fight 2 SNES........... Pathway into Darkness... Shining Force SEGA........ Hardball I SNES Populous... Sonic the Hedgehog 3 SEGA Impossible Mission SEGA Space Shuttle 3DO... Powermonger CALL CALL John Modden NFL '94 3DO. Street Fighter !! SEGA Print Shop Deluxe ........ John Madden NFL 94 SEGA Street Fighter IISNES Pro Audio Studio 1oC.. John Madden NFL '94 SNES.... Quicken 4.0. Super NBA Basketball SEGA Jungle Striko SEGA Railroad Tycoon ...... Super Off Road Baja SNES.............. Jurassic Park SEGA... Super Wing Commander 3DO .........CALL Redshift Co Lawnmower Man SNES TMNT Tournament Fighters SNES Royal Flush..... Lemmings 3DO. Virtual Pinball SEGA Short Attention Theatre CD MIBPA Baseball SNES WWF Royal Rumble SNES..... Sim Ant. Mad Dog McCree 3DO Walsh College Football SNES......... SimCity 2000 Maria's Time Machine XMen SEGA. SimCity 2000 Scenario I. SimCity Classic Simtite ........... . 800 228-7449 Orders Only. 508 443-6125 all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday 8AM till BPM. Spectre VR CD. Star Trek 25th Anniversary...... Saturday 9AM till SPM. All other Business Monday Friday9AM till SPM. Most orders ship within 24 hours Street Allas USA CD. Temporary shortages ate normally filled within 10 days Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not Strip Poker Pro #1 Data Disk..... returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses. International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges Strip Poker Pro #6 Data Disk.. $7 por order up to 6 lbs. 51 per ib. above 6 lbs. UPS ground handling charge-$3 por order. Actual freight charges apply Strip Poker Professional for computers, hard disks, Bernoulli's, tape back-ups, printers, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawaii, outside cont Sword of Sodan ........... nental U.S. APO FPO call for information Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not avalable The 11th Hour CD outside the US. Please mil for more information. Not responsible for errors or omissions. Mastercard, Visa Thrustmaster Flight Cont. MKI Discover, American Express, prepaid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals... Thrustmaster Weapon Markll. Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not Thunderstick ADB................ charged until the merchandise is shipped. Wo check for stolen credit cards. Al returns for credit, repair, or exchange Tristan MAC LC/MACII....... must have a return authorization number. Roturned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking V for Victory Pok. too. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers. Victory at Sea Send your Fax today! Al quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manufacturer's warranty Detective tems replaced immediately. All om numbers represent 3.5 floppy, except where noted. Educational government Wheel of Fortuno w/Vanna White Wrath of the Gods CD and corporate purchase orders welcome Circle Reader Service #49 SEGAVSNES/300 SEGA SNES/300 55 36 MACINTOSH MES 7th Guest CD A Hard Days Night: Beatles CD Alone in the Dark American Civil War III Art Gallery CD... AutoMap. Axis the Gamecheater Batle of Britain 2.... Body Works 3.0 Bomber 2 Virtus VR... "


"REVIEW Yet Another Bug Hunt Alien Breed Runs The Sci-Fi Gauntlet by Martin E. Cirulis CCT Tour Mission: Kick some mean, games-basically a big monster that you must mulated from previous levels comes with you. green Alien butt! Overcome 18 shoot many, many times instead of the usual Also, there is no way to stop the action in the levels of the most ferocious creaonce or twice. middle of a level and come back another day. tures ever to terrorize the Cosmos. Then set To its credit. Alien Breed has introduced a I've never quite understood why this method the Intex Space Station for self-destruct and small twist with the idea that the player rumof saving is so popular in European software, face the biggest challenge of all: Get out quick mages through each of the 18 levels and but perhaps part of the conversion to North or die!\" performs a specific mission on each one. American markets should include the standSound familiar? It should. We've all seen Somerimes it's the destruction of various ard save-game options we Colonials have this movie and its progeny countless times power facilities; on other floors you must come to expect from our computer games. and, more importantly, we've seen this game close the fire doors to prevent the destruction It is also obvious that this game was born in motif before. Well, MicroLeague has decided you've caused from spreading too soon. an environment where shoot-em-ups still that, once again, it's time for a lone combatWhen you have completed your floor misdominate the game marketplace. Unfortuant to wander hi-tech halls of a space station sion, usually you have less than two minutes nately, in the North American market, possito make your way back to the elebly because of the endless hordes of simple vator shaft before the level is concartridge games, computer gamers seem to sumed by fire, ruining your whole want a little more \"meat\" in their bytes. Withday. This «beat the clock» premise out some more intensive detailing of gameis sometimes very weakly tied into play, most action games imported straight the plot, but it does add a different from Europe will continue to be pretty, but kind of tension to the game and leave the considerable resources of most comforces you to think about where puters untapped. By now, most of us will you're going instead of just firing have played id Software's DOOM, and alblindly. though it's based on an almost identical Also included is a two-player (somewhat tired) premise to that of Alien mode that puts both players on the Breed, the execution makes all the difference. | atibli LAENSE screen at once. This is useful for a For what it does, Alien Breed does it well. in search of gleaming, long-headed monsters more social situation, but both players must Graphics are nice, sounds effects are good, with serious overbite problems. Now, origistay relatively close together in order for the and the action is fast-paced. Even the price is nality of storyline isn't exactly the make or screen to scroll along with them, much like nice, being noticeably lower than the standbreak point of either movies or software, but the classic arcader Gauntlet. A modem orard going rate for a box with a disk in it. originality of execution usually is. Unfortunetwork link that would allow players to Though probably not suitable for the average nately, Alien Breed has fallen behind in the roam the halls in different directions and computer gamer on this continent, this game tech race. approach problems from both sides would can make for a pleasant arcade break for the have significantly boosted the game's value. less demanding player. Even better, Alien A Case of Cartridge Envy Breed would be the perfect gift for a friend Two Cultures Separated by who is regretting the decision to buy a comAlien Breed would be right at home at the Common Hardware purer instead of a Nintendo. CGW local arcade or on any cartridge game maAlien Breec Alien Breed is a European imchine. It has an overhead, two-dimensional viewpoint, colorful backgrounds, smooth port and so embodies all the curious differences in game descrolling, and quick-moving figures closely Alien Breed resembling Sigourney Weaver's playmates. sign theory that distinguish the EN ONDE move through various locations, shootmarkets separated by the Big REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, VGA graphics, 2.2MB hard drive space; ing everything that moves, while picking up Pond. The game has no savesupports Adlib and SoundBlaster sound cards scattered ammo and credits. Between blasts, game slots, only mission codes PROTECTION: Code Table look up that allow you to skip levels Team 17 Ltd. you can buy various items from convenience PUBLISHER: MicroLeague Interactive Software store terminals placed around the complex. that you've already completed Newark, DE Every three levels or so there is the traditional in a previous session, and none (800) 334-6572 \"Boss\" figure that is so popular in arcade of the equipment you've accuTITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: $29.95 IBM DESIGNERS: Pase 90 Computer Gaming World "


"Tnheritoneet The for the arth 06 Quest for the Orb * Exciting Story * Intriguing Puzzles * Huge 3-D Maps Unforgettable Characters Breathtaking Scenery * Beautiful Original Soundtrack ome to a place of unbridled wonder and unspoiled beauty: Earthl To the Morph, Humans live only in legends, but their legacy remains. Accompany Rit, a heroic fox who must journey far from home to uncover the mystery of an ancient, yet powerful human artifact. With thrilling graphics, sounds, story, and an easy-to-use Interface, Inherit the Earth will provide hours of challenge and enjoyment for the whole famil VEW Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898. (818-889-5650 outside the US), or by mail PO BOX 4302 Hollywood, GA 90078-4302, Dreamers Guild creation evod 1994 New Wodd Computing, Inc. Iohabit the Earth is a trademark of Now World Computing New World Computing din altinctivo logo are mattered trademarks of New World Computing, Inc. All rights r   ans shown. Avol  , Circle Reader Service #81 "


"GAME DESIGN Unleashing the Power of light Sim Toolkit Part One of a Three-Part Series by Matt Miller of Domark through the design of a complete Toolkit scenario, stepping through each of the program's Windows editors and providing special tips and trawlers and destroy them, using his HARM (High-speed Anti-Radiation Missiles) ordnance. U.S. satellites have also detected Sovier cruisers and an aircraft carrier moving into U.S. waters. Enemy aircraft will most definitely be in the area. The F/A-18 will be armed with 4 HARM missiles, 4 AIM-9M Sidewinders, and 2000 cannon rounds. If need be, the Hornet pilot could risk rearming at the Aleutian Island Airbase should he use up his payload before completing the misdesign casier. By the conclusion of this series, you will have built your very own super-charged flight sim. So if you'll now open your Toolkit, we'll get started. sion. Heating Up the Cold War The Sim Scenario The February issue of CGW saw the saw the unveiling of the latest simulation project from Domark entitled Flight Sim Toolkit (Toolkit). Domark released the product after two years of intensive development by Domark's flight sim partners, Simis. Toolkit was created so that the sim player no longer had to hope that his ideal flight scenario would be published, but so that he could use simple tools to create his own dream simulator. Much of the later development time was spent perfecting the Windows interface to increase ease of use and flexibility while maintaining the inherent power of the Simis polygon engine. The resulting product is a powerful and flexible tool that enables a person without programming experience to design anything from an F-111 Aardvark to the Wright Brothers' Flyer. In this series of articles, we'll take you The year is 1980. A Soviet spy has stolen a top-secret American U2 spy plane. The spy is nearly into Soviet Airspace when SAC notices the outbound U2. A lone F/A-18 Hornet pilot is warming up his engines in preparation for a training flight, when he is ordered to take-off immediately to engage and destroy the stolen aircraft. Meanwhile, an increasing number of fishing trawlers have entered the Aleutian Island chain. U.S. Intelligence suspects them to be Soviet spy and missile boats. The pilot's mission is to engage the missile To create our scenario, we will use a variety of Toolkit options: 1) a color palette to get the right terrain colors for the Aleutian Islands; 2) a shape for a U2 spy plane; 3) a cockpit for the Hornet and flight models for both the Hornet and U2; 4) sounds to enhance our sim; and 5) the terrain in which the combat scenario will take place. In this installment, you will first be introduced to the Color Editor, where you have access to nearly every color your sim world can produce. Secondly, we will take an in-depth look at the Shape Editor and build the U2 aircraft. After following the steps necessary to build the U2, you will have the skills needed to create virtually any Toolkit object. To begin, click on the Project menu item Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"and select New Project. The computer will water. The box above it will be the ask you in a browser box what you want the next highest band above the horiFST-D:IFSTICOLDWARI new project to be called. Type \"Coldwar.\" zon, and this color will blend File Project World Help This will create a new sub-directory and will smoothly into the color of sky you copy the files in the TEMPLATE sub-direchave chosen. There are five pre-de FST Tools tory into your new project. termined shades, which are the World Editor Dipping into Toolkit's clip-art library, we shades used to blend the top horiwill choose the following objects: A-18.FSD zon box into the sky color box. Shape Editor (your Horner), Most sims you create will have Color Editor AIRHANG.FSD, TOWER.FSD, identical colors for the two HoriTRAWLER.FSD, NIMITZ.FSD, zon boxes, but some interesting ef Cockpit Editor KIDD.FSD, RAPIER.FSD, ZSU-53.FSD, fects can be generated by varying SU-27.FSD and TUG.FSD. We will also use the degree of the two colors located Model Editor the included AV8B.PCX cockpit for our in the horizon. unis Lid Hornet cockpit. Copy these files using the The ground colors are deter LOO WOO S = 0 Km, Z= 0 Km Windows File Manager (or Copy Item from mined by height. The highest point Domark's FST features five tools with which to build your sim the Project Manager) from the LIBRARY of your terrain will have the color world. This article explores the Shape and Color editors. sub-directory, into the COLDWAR sub-diin the lower right box of the two rectory. You may also want to copy the.WAV columns, while the lowest point (next to sea like the other palerre colors when you change files (for sound) from LIBRARY into COLDlevel) will have the color in the upper left box. the Time of Day in the World Editor to WAR (we will be changing some of these The Spread function will look ar borh of these evening or night. This allows you to create later). colors and evenly spread colors between runway lights, aircraft lights and sophistithem, creating perspective and horizon cfcared afterburner effects. A Sim Of Many Colors fects. Since our islands are to be frozen over You can create a convincing camouflage We begin building our sim in the Color with snow, we want our colors to enhance the effect on an aircraft by setting its colors to the Editor. Open the default color file Arctic effect. Choose a darker shade of white same value as the sky color. While you can (COLS.FCD), where you will see a standstill see the definition of the aircraft (due ard color palette from Toolkit. The sky is to light-sourcing and shading), the effect a common shade of blue, and the horizon created is a realistic blending into the sky. and sca blend in a realistic fashion. The Similar effects can be generated with ground colors are all shades of green, and ground and sea vehicles; just set aside a few cight colors determine the appearance of colors in Object Colors for camouflaging objects. When observing the sky/horithe enemy forces. zon/sca colors, you will see four boxes. For our scenario, we will change the The top box is what the majority of the color of the light blue shade (fourth from sky will look like, the bottom box depicts the left) to match the sky colors exactly. the sea, and the middle two boxes repreSpecifically, the color should have the valsent the variants. ues: 56, 120, 156. Now that we have crefor the lowest ground, and then choose a pureated a color scheme we will examine one of The bottom box in the Horizon section is white (255,255,255) for the highest. Then the most powerful editors in Toolkit, the a color band that will be painted above the click on Spread, and the tool will smooth out Shape Editor. the levels to give you a clear indication of FST Color-cols.fcd height. Polygon Creation: File Help As you can see, the color editor is very As Easy As X-Y-Z versatile. If we wanted desert terrain, we Sky would choose shades of brownish-yellow. If Toolkit uses shapes to define the appearance Horizon Change >> we wanted to have snow-capped peaks, we of an object. These objects are created in the could use the normal green shading and Shape Editor, which consists of a CAD packSpread change the top two or three levels to increasage designed specifically for Toolkit users. lowest pt ing shades of white. This would put patches Although it doesn't take very long to gain of snow at mid-levels and bright white tops at proficiency with the Shape Editor, you may peak levels. choose to select objects from the clip-art liTerrain The object colors presented here are pribrary to save time. The Shape Editor interface mary. Each color has six shades associated consists of a 3/4 perspective grid, which ocwith it, each of which are utilized by the cupies the center window, and three vert light-source shading feature of Toolkit. You windows to the right labeled XY, XZ, and YZ, highest pt may notice in the Shape Editor that there are which show multiple perspectives of the obsix more colors with which you can customize ject. On the far left is a menu of point-andObject the color of an object. The first four colors click icons familiar to Windows or Macintosh here are primary colors—true red, blue, green users. The Color editor features a bountiful palette with variable color scales. Your sim can and yellow. Along with white, these colors are The Edit Grid is your frame of reference as contain up to 256 colors. unique in Toolkit because they do not dim you edit your objects in two dimensions. The Sea April 1994 Page 93 "


"NBAN three vertical-view windows will indicate the gons should my objects have for maximum (remember to click your polygon points in a third dimension, which is the plane the Edit speed efficiency?\" This will depend on what clockwise direction). Since your grid size is set Grid is currently on. The plus and minus object you are trying to create. Here is a good at 1 meter, the box will be 1 meter in height. buttons in the lower left on the toolbar can range for the number of polygons a shape Switch to the YX view and select the top be used to move the Edit Grid. With some should have: polygon. Lift the top polygon 1 meter more practice, you can edit in all three dimensions Cultural (Aesthetic value only):20-60p off of the box. Now you have a basic shape at once, moving the Edit Grid during an Target:50-90p 18m x 2m x 2m. We want to curve out the operation. Enemy Aircraft:80-140p sides of the fusclage, so we'll use the Enter There are two important rules to follow Player Aircraft:90-200p Tetra tool. Select the YZ view of the fuselage when using the Shape Editor. The first is to On the other hand, the player's aircraft can and then change your Grid Size to 5 meters always select each point of a polygon in a be made with more polygons should you using the Other Size in the Grid Menu item. clockwise direction. Failure to do so will rewish; since the outside view doesn't require Draw the short side of the shape first to ensure sult in an unbalanced object. The second rule the processor to clip around the cockpit or the processor to clip around the cockp that the center line is going from front-tois: If You Can't See It, Don't Draw It! A generate the data for the instrument displays, back as opposed to bottom, and follow common mistake is drawing polygons on an there is more processing power available for there is more processing power av through on the points to complete the shape. object that will never be seen in the sim. As more polygons. Select the ZX view and use the Copy and the computer must draw each polygon to the In our scenario we will be creating the U2 Paste commands to copy the Tetra you just screen, unnecessary polygons will cause your spy plane. Before starting, you should know created on the other side. sim to slow down. At the bottom of the Shape about a handy time-saving trick: in the Shape Two other handy functions are the Lock to Editor screen is a line which indicates the Editor, you can select various editing views Grid and Mirror functions located in the number of polygons your computer has to just by clicking on the three vertical windows Group menu, The Lock to Grid function draw. The fewer the polygons, the faster the to the right of the main edit window. This takes a shape that doesn't currently rest on the object will move on the screen. bypasses the Switch View icons on the roolbar grid lines, such as whenever you paste an and makes the program even casier to use object, and locks the points of the polygon to the closest grid points. Sometimes this may rule. There is no need to waste processing Our first step in creating the U2 will be to result in distortion of the object, but that can power on drawing the bottom of the boat, as creare the fuselage. We can use the Create easily be fixed by Selecting the Points that are it would naturally be submersed in water. You Cuboid tool to create a long rectangular box in the wrong place and moving them to the might benefit from asking, «How many poly18 meters in length, and 2 meters in width correct coordinates. TEST Spennamed 151 S onundred The other key function Elle Edit Porygon Group Shape Grid Help Elle Edit Polygon Group Shape Orle halp 20 is Mirror. Mirror flips an object 180 degrees along one axis of the three dimensional work area and is great for creating perfectly matched wings and rails. In this case, we'll use it to copy the other side of the fuselage. Next, place Tetras on the sides of the aircraft, looking at all three views on the right to Basic fuselage Adding detail to the fuselage. make sure they are all placed correctly. We can now move on to the wings and tail. Since we want our wings to have some thickness, we'll set our grid to .25 meters. Now use the Enter Cuboid tool and (in the ZX view) create the right wing of the aircraft. Since the U2 wings are long and thin, make sure to draw the wing accordingly. Afterwards, use the Copy, Paste, Lock to Grid, Wings Tail and Mirror functions to Relax ENE1 SISICOEL XIST US 1.00MSelect Polygon-4.00 1.00 2.00 14:30 LevelO000M Raven count: 0.00MSelect Croup-11.00 0.00 21.00 Level 15000M Polvoon count 16 sa IST Shape u Shape Grid Help Eile Edit Polygon Group 151 Shapes Group Shape Grid Help Elle Edit Polygon Ndoa %3ENNENT GESTALOS 1.00MSelect Group-13.00 1,00 70,00 LevelO/K000MPalveon count: 212 1.00MSelect Group 4.00 1.00-19.00 Level 1500ML Pomon count 10 Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"Elle Edit Polygon Group Shape Grid Help Shtetit Group Shape Brld Help Elle Edit Polygon 20N13:00 SEMENTS 0.00M Select Group 0.00 8.00 -3.00 Devolo 15.000M Polmaon.count 26. 050 . LOMIO SOLO Polvon.count? Tail detail Engine nozzle 14 UDHISTORISTA 1ST Elle Edit Polygon Group Shape Srld 131 GOLD Shape Srld Help Help D: 8: 1 Elle Edil Polygon Le diamond shape with longer sides towards the front. Now select the YZ view and center the Zoom on this piece if needed. Move the furthest back point so that it runs along the same Z plane as the middle two. Then bring the tip of the pyramid a bit further forward. Take the entire shape and move it so that the back of the cockpit rests against the fuselage. Grasp the forward point and bring it down to rest on the nose of the aircraft. Using what you have learned thus far, you can add little details to the aircraft such as external fuel tanks. Since your aircraft is mainly one color, you can quickly color multiple polygons. Simply click on the Select Group burron in the toolbar, then Select All in the Edit menu. Now in the Group menu, select Group, which will place all of your polygons together. You can Scale, Rotate, or Mirror in this mode to affect the shape of the entire plane. Also, you can color the entire object at once by selecting the group, then a color, and finally selecting the group again. While still in the Group menu, select Ungroup and choose the Penta used for the cockpit. Color the Penta a shade of blue, then use the Select Polygon tool to select the surface of the back of the engine shape. Finally, for a little flair, color this polygon red to create engine exhaust. In the next installment of this series, we will discuss the Cockpit and Flight Model Editors, and in the final installment we'll put the finishing touches on our simulation using the Terrain Editor. By the conclusion of the series, you will have gained newfound insight into the behind-the-scenes world of modern day flight sim creation and will be invited to test your skills in a major Flight Sim Toolkit contest sponsored by Domark and CGW. Oh, and don't forget to save your work! 0.50MSelect Point 10.00 0.50 0.00 Love.COOL Polvoon.count 57 2.00MEnter Triangle Level Oso Polmaon.count.82 Nose piece Cockpit canopy function and enter the points counterclockwise. You shouldn't make this shape as tallas the engine nozzle, as it will interfere with the cockpit view. The cockpit itself involves not only creating the shape, but placing the instruments as well. Start with a basic Penta shape in the ZX view, with a .25 meter grid. Center your view around the nose of the planc, and draw a FST Viewer File create the left wing and the tail, always making sure that the polygons line up with the fuselage in all three dimensions. Again, check the three view windows on the right. Change the grid back to 1 meter to create the engine nozzle and nose piece. Select the YX view of the aircraft and move the Edit Grid, using the buttons on the toolbar, so that the Edit Grid rests on the back of the U2. The next task is to make a box the same width and height as the original fuselage block. From the ZX and YZ views, the block should extend 1 merer from the back of the fuselage, since the Grid Size was also set to 1 meter. The nozzle should be cone-shaped, so move your Grid Size down to .25 meters and then move the end points of the nozzle one step (onc quarter meter) toward the center, making sure to do this in both the ZX and YZ views. To create the nose piece of the cockpit, we need to select the XX view and move the Edit Grid to the front of the aircraft. Now use the Enter Penta tool and draw the four points for the base of the pyramid. The point for the pyramid will appear in the center of the base. If the center looks like it's going into the aircraft instead of going out, just Undo the OOOXXL The finished U2 CGW April 1994 Page 95 "


"Crazy Nick is crazier than ever for dreamin' up this Spring CRAZY NICK'S THE PROPHECY The King Has Turned into a Ravin Drooling Lunatic \"a cincinatic tour-de-force.. Blog REBRO INC Multimedia CD Storite ist GOBLINS CD-ROM $19.95 $39.95 WINDOWS $14.95 $29.95 Dp THESE TITLES JUST $19.95 SRP Sale Jones in the Fast Lane 69.95 19.95 Stellar 7 34.95 19.95 THESE ENTERTAINMENT TITLES JUST $24.95 Gobliiins 49.95 24.95 Gobliins 2 49.95 24.95 Gobliins 3 49.95 24.95 Inca 1 49.95 24.95 Lost in Time 59.95 24.95 THESE TITLES JUST $29.95 Dagger of Amon Ra 69.95 29.95 Inca 2 69.95 29.95 THESE ENTERTAINMENT TITLES JUST $34.95 King's Quest V 69.95 34.95 King's Quest VI-Upgrade 39.95 34.95 THESE ENTERTAINMENT TITLES JUST $39.95 Ecoquest: Search for Cetus 69.95 39.95 Mixed Up Mother Goose 69.95 39.95 Space Quest 4 69.95 39.95 Willy Beamish 69.95 39.95 THIS TITLE JUST $14.95 SRP Sale Screen Antics 34.95 14.95 THESE CHILDREN'S TITLES JUST $19.95 Sierra Discovery Series Alphabet Blocks 49.95 19.95 Sierra Discovery Series Yobi's Magic Spelling Tricks 49.9519.95 Sierra Discovery Series Ready, Set, Read 49.95 19.95 THESE ENTERTAINMENT TITLES JUST $29.95 Freddy Pharkas 69.95 29.95 Hoyles Classic 49.95 29.95 Lost Secret of the Rainforest 49.95 29.95 Pepper's Adventures in Time 49.95 29.95 Slater & Charlie Go Camping 49.95 29.95 Take-A-Break Crosswords Vol 1 & 2 49.95 29.95 Take-A-Break Even More Incredible Machine 49.95 29.95 Take-A-Break Pinball 49.95 29.95 All of the above require Windows 3.1, 386SX or better, Soundboard with DAC, either 2 or 4 mg. SRP Original Suggested Retail Price MS-DOS $14.95 $29.95 THESE TITLES JUST $14.95 Jones in the Fast Lane Nova 9 Red Baron Mission Builder Rise of the Dragon Stellar 7 SRP 19.95 19.95 29.95 19.95 19.95 Sale 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 14.95 THESE TITLES JUST $24.95 Hoyles 3 Lost in Time SRP 49.95 39.95 Sale 24.95 24.95 Inca* THESE ENTERTAINMENT TITLES JUST $19.95 A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 29.95 19.95 Gobliiins 29.95 19.95 Gobliins 2 39.95 19.95 Leisure Suit Larry 1 29.95 19.95 Mixed Up Fairy Tales 29.95 19.95 Police Quest 1 29.95 19.95 Prophecy 39.95 19.95 Quest for Glory 1 29.95 19.95 Robin Hood: Longbow 39.95 19.95 Space Quest 1 29.95 19.95 Space Quest 4 39.95 19.95 Willy Beamish 39.95 19.95 THESE ENTERTAINMENT TITLES JUST $29.95 Dagger of Amon Ra 69.95 29.95 Even More Incredible Machine* 49.95 29.95 Freddy Pharkas 69.95 29.95 Hoyles Classic 49.95 29.95 59.95 29.95 Island of Dr. Brain 49.95 29.95 King's Quest V 69.95 29.95 Leisure Suit Larry 5 39.95 29.95 Lost Secret of the Rainforest 49.95 29.95 Pepper's Adventures in Time 49.95 29.95 Police Quest 3 69.95 29.95 Quest for Glory 3 69.95 29.95 Red Baron 49.95 29.95 Shadow of Yserbius* 59.95 29.95 Slater and Charlie Go Camping 49.95 29.95 Space Quest 5 69.95 29.95 Turbo Science 49.95 29.95 All MS-DOS are 3.5 VGA. Requires: 286 or better (\"386 or better), 640k, hard drive, mouse. SRP Original Suggested Retail Price "


"sale... but what he says goes, so enjoy these great savings while they last! SPRING SALE! SPACE QUEST IV Sierra Discovery Series o ttv  Acs Sierra Discovery Series  UNDEA TURBO SCIENCE J ou Were UNI Sierra On-Line  Sneak Peeks HINT BOOKS ALL ORIGINALLY '995, NOW JUST 495 WITH PURCHASE OF SOFTWARE ON THESE PAGES! FREE! Pay only CD-ROM WAS $0.96 Pay only $2.00 S&H ... with the purchase of any software in this sale! THIS CD OFFERS DEMOS, INTERACTIVE GAME SEGMENTS, AND SNEAK PREVIEWS. Here are just a few of the titles you'll find on this CD:  King's Quest VI. Leisure Suit Larry 6. Outpost  The Shadow of Yserbius . Aces over Europe  Lost In Time. Betrayal at Krondor  Ready, Set, Read with Bananas and Jack  The Even More Incredible Machine. Inca 2 Castle of Dr. Brain King's Quest 1 Codename: Iceman King's Quest 11 Colonel's Bequest King's Quest III Conquests of Camelot King's Quest IV Conquests of the Longbow King's Quest V Dagger of Amon Ra King's Quest VI Ecoquest: The Search for Cetus Leisure Suit Larry 2 Even More Incredible Machine Leisure Suit Larry 5 Freddy Pharkas Lost Secret of the Rainforest Gobliiins Police Quest 1(Icon) Gobliins 2 Police Quest 2 Inca Police Quest 3 Prophecy Quest for Glory I (SCI)(Icon) Quest for Glory II Quest for Glory III Rise of the Dragon Space Quest I (Icon) Space Quest II Space Quest III Space Quest IV Space Quest V Willy Beamish WORLOOT DIECOVERY CALL NOW TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THESE CRAZY SAVINGS! A.J.'s World of Discovery MS-DOS Disk & Doco Only WAS $19.95 FREE! Pay only Pay only (Must have A.J.'s to run lessons below) Math, Ages 4-5 ....................$19.95 Language, Ages 4-5 ...............$19.95 a Math, Ages 6-7 ................$19.95 Language, Ages 6-7 .............$19.95 11-800-757-7707 $7.00 S&H FAX 1-(209) 683-4297 Monday Friday, 7AM-7PM (Pacific Time) Outside the US call 209-683-4468. Mention Offer #1404 when ordering. METHOD OF PAYMENT: All prices are in U.S. dollars. No C.O.D. orders accepted. Applicable sales tax and shipping and handling charges apply as noted below. VISA MasterCard The Three OUCOVER/M DORES SALE RULES AND CONDITIONS SALES TAX & SHIPPING & HANDLING FEES FREE! $2.00 s&H Take Three Game Pack WINDOWS WAS $0.96 Pay only $2.00 S&H ... with the purchase of any software in this sale! Includes:  Pinball (1 game)  Crosswords (6 puzzles)  The Even More Incredible Machine (10 puzzles) This offer not valid with any other Sierra/Dynamix/Bright Star/Coktel Vision offer, coupon, discount, etc. @ Offer good only on direct purchases from Sierra On-Line, Inc. * Offer good in USA and Canada. This offer may be withdrawn at any time. No back orders or rain checks will be issued. Good only while supplies last. We will not substitute any out of stock item. Your order will be shipped as complete as possible. CA 7.75%; IL, TX 6.25%; MN, PA 6%; MA 5%; WA 6.5% Single game add $4.00 U.S. or $5.00 Canada. Add $2.00 for each additional game ordered. No S&H on bint book(s) when ordered with game order. Add $1.50 for hint book(s) if ordered separately. (Canadian customers are responsible for GST tax and any special Poste fees. Please do not include the special tax and fees with your payment to Sierra.) SIERRA ON-LINE NO RISK GUARANTEE: If you are not completely satisfied with your product for any reason, return it within 30 days and we will promptly refund your purchase price. A software product is only as good as the company behind it. We stand behind our software with product warranties and customer support services which exceed normal industry standards to maximize your utility and enjoyment of your microcomputer. Expires 5/31/94. Offer number 1404. Cirrle Reader Service #94 "


"REVIEW TFX Ocean's Experimental Flight Sim Design by Paul Rigby SP 112 cean's TFX is a multifacered, multiThe Arcade section removes the realism display to help with gun kills. Most damning layered, enigma of a game that from the game and sends you against the foc of all, there's no rudder, which knocks simulates the new American ATF, with five levels of increasing difficulty to ground strafing down to minimal levels of the Lockheed F-22, the Lockheed F-117 tackle. realism, makes landing the aircraft rather hazStealth Fighter, and the upcoming In Simulation mode you can pilot a craft ardous (especially on a carrier), and reduces Eurofighter 2000. without restrictions or specific mission conthe effectiveness of many aerial dogfighting siderations. Choose the elements of the flight maneuvers. TFX is divided into six portions: sim-such as aircraft type, weather, time of The manual is lacking in certain areas, as raining is a structured set of 10 missions day and you're off. that introduces the new pilot to all of the well. There is little information on the weapaircraft missions, weather types and other UN Commander is a simple mission ons and no indication of how they rate in builder with an easy-to-use menu interface. target effectiveness. The text is content to variables in the game. Progress to the interCompleted missions can be saved and throw around terms such as \"weapon drag swapped with friends. factor,\" which have no apparent meaning in Once in the cockpit, the the game and seem more like pure hype. The flight models are quite good. manual also lacks structure; for instance, the The inertia effects are quite instructions for launching mavericks and credible, yielding loss of alfree-fall bombs appear on page 31, with lasertitude during steady turns targeting weapons included almost as an afand realistic rolls and stalls. terthought on page 46! Flaps are controlled autoAt first glance, the enemy artificial intellimatically and can be viewed gence appears to be well-implemented. Enin cross-section within the multi-function displays. Gemy aircraft take advantage of three forces are handled well, with dimensions in their maneuvers, but quickly some excellent digitized pibecome predictable. When the player is faced lot grunting during blackwith two aircraft, the bogies always split: one rides low, the other high on a curve, seemesting parts of TFX is barred until the 10 out sequences. ingly with no variation at all. Combar is fairly training missions have been successfully comstraightforward, and avoiding SAMs appears pleted. Overly strict, this may lead to frustraSpecial FX to be much too easy. No need for fancy-pants tion for some players unaccustomed to the TEX's excellent FX include atmospheric avoidance maneuvers-a few bits of chaffand flight sim experience. missile viewpoints that offer an up-close the odd flare do the trick. Tour of Duty allows you to enroll in one viewpoint of the detailed obLanding is not easy in any of the aircraft, of three squadrons and tackle missions jects and terrain, plus laser-tar TEX despite the inclusion of an ILS system. Cararound the world. Usually, this consists of the geting weapons. While in genprimary/secondary mission approach, with a eral the effects are well exebit of mission text to fatten the scenario. cuted, there are noticeable TFX PRICE: $49.95 SYSTEM: Flashpoints feature five individual mission restrictions as far as realism is REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 2MB RAM, VGA storylines. Imagine five Strike Commander concerned. The AGM-65 Mavgraphics, 16MB hard drive space; supports Thrustmaster, storylines which cover such diverse areas as erick, a fire-and-forget missile, Flightstick Pro, and most major The Falklands, Bosnia and South America. is a waste of space in TFX, being sound cards PROTECTION: None The actual storylines are split into missions, treated as a dumb, point-andDESIGNER: Digital Image Design PUBLISHER: Ocean Software or parts, as in a TV serial, with character text fire rocket. In addition, there is Manchester, England and newspaper headlines providing filler mano ranging or directional infor(408) 954-0201 [U.S. office) terial to move the plot onto the next stage. mation at all on the heads-up 0000 13 ESC 200 FUE 3937 EMG 533 3951 065 TITLE: TEX IBM Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"DON'T WASTE YOUR SOUND CARD ON INFERIOR SPEAKERS. LI COLL INCOTIASIG PERCEOT ORAG FACI 10.36 Himus Am 9L  AMBAHN ARAM The Powered Partner 622 rier landings are notably difficult. In one inOddly, this was the first time that I managed stance, I found myself hitting the carrier deck to hear any engine noise from my Sound at the wrong angle and bounced violently up Blaster. into the air again, luckily to try again. There Another bone of contention is the flight is an auto-landing option, handy if you want computer's tendency to provide unneeded to ignore manual landings and just get on aid, automatically leveling out the aircraft with the action, but this option leads to imwhen the computer thinks the pilot is about to buy the farm. Unfortunately, , ha when attempting ground strafes, low altitude strikes, or creative treetop flying, the computer takes control and returns the aircraft to level flight just as the enemy is about to be blown to the four winds. Exasperating, to say the least, especially since there is no obvious way to turn this \"flight aid\" off. RREREM EXTERNAL LEICHTE BOG NG MAX: 650DKG Blasted Blanket Bingo! CLEAR ALL CLER PYLON DEFAULT CURRENT SELECTION OR When low on fuel, an enormous plausible situations. Your craft can be out of BINGO sign is spread across the HUD, imfuel, miles from anywhere, then suddenly pairing vision. Flving the Eurofighter, which come in for a landing, simply by toggling the carries little fuel in any case, this warning is auto-landing switch. triggered shortly after take-off. Why the low During a mission you are treated to a very fuel warning couldn't have been reduced to nice cockpit-scan view, initiated with the cooan MFD or cockpit light warning remains a lie-hat on the joystick. The scan view is a mystery. Even without the BINGO game, minor variation on the padlock view, and it finding the target can be difficult, as there are is far less disorienting than the Falcon system no carat-HUD markers to aid the pilot. in many ways. In TFX, flicking the coolie AWACS information for alternative direcleft/right smoothly moves the view left/right in one smooth scan. The downside is that tions are haphazard at best; waypoints on the there is no upwards view or target-lock view, moving map would have been useful in this which is the main positive aspect of Falcons respect, but none are supplied. To make these padlock view. matters worse, the briefings are too brief and lacking in necessary information. Voices In My HUD In many ways, TFX feels old fashioned. Digitized voices from other aircraft, There is no campaign option in which you AWACS, or cockpit computers will keep you can plan missions or make significant tactical company throughout a mission. These are decisions, and although the digitized voices well produced, clear and effective Other nice provide an illusion of wing-men, the feeling effects are the weather conditions, probably is more akin to flying an old \"you versus the the best in any sim so far. Thunderstorms, world» simulation. rainfall and snow all add atmosphere to the Clearly, TEX offers a mixed bag. Despite simulation, as does the pitching of a carrier as rrier as some innovative ideas and features, some it rides the sea swells. Oddly, this pitching parts of the design feel a bit hackneyed or effect occurs on terra firma as well (a case of unfinished. I would not recommend the Force 10 gales, or an over-active suspension?). This oversight is perhaps offset by the excelgame to Falcon or Tornado players, who will lent implementation of air-to-air refuelings. dislike TEXs simplifications, lack of realism, These take a good bit of jockeying for posicraving for post and lack of depth. However, if you are one tion, but produce satisfaction when comfor simpler simulations (like Jetfighter II), pleted. A separate HUD screen, which TFX will definitely be worth a test flight. For indicate the oncoming tanker's height and the casual pilot, TEX will offer plenty of speed, is provided for these mid-air rendezlong-term gameplay, and its structured layout vous. will not lose inexperienced players as did the Irritations? The music is very irksome and, open-ended format of Falcon. The excellent if disabled in the configuration menu, has the graphics and digitized sound may even proannoying habit of coming back on again at vide enough glitz-appeal to tear one or two will. It was only when I disabled my Roland youngsters away from their Mario-clones. card that the music finally disappeared. Cow Powered Partners are the perfect complement to your multimedia computer system. They are the only speakers to be named a 1992 Windows Winner by Windows magazine. They were also nominated for a Readers' Choice award by Multimedia Magazine. But the best reason to use Powered Partners is the sound. Listen to the experts: \"They (Powered Partner 622) set the standard for all the other speakers\" (David Ranada-\"Windows\" recommended) and \"If you want the best, look no further... the (Powered Partner) 570s are the WS Rolls Royce of sound\" (Rich Heimlich). With such high praise, why buy anything else. ENDED Powered Partner 622 Features  Sophisticated 3-piece system with separate powered sub-woofer  Fully shielded, even the sub-woofer  Perfect for all computer and video applications  Electronic crossover and 3 power amplifiers For a dealer near you, call 1-800-969-AR4U. In Canada, call Precor at 1-800-268-1172. Superior Sound Simplified  1993 Acoustic Research, a division of IJI Circle Reader Service #32 April 1994 Page 90 "


"SSN-21 SeaWolf and 688 Attack Subare trademarks of Electronic Arts.  Electronic Arts, Ever wonder what it's like to have your life llash before your ears? You'll lind out when you play SSN-21 SeaWollm the sequel to 688 Attack Subm And the most realistic PC  submarine simulation this side of Annapolis. As you skipper the world's newest, most heavily arned nuclear attack subitro less than 100 different sound effects assault your setises via our revolutionary 16-bilfull digital stereo sound. NOBODY KNOWS WHAT HET GIVE YOU A PRETTY GOO You'll hear ihe eerie high-pitched whine of Torpedes us they home MANTE ses PEGCHECAYA id on their targets. The menacing drone of a Idestroyer passing overhend. "


"And damage reports from the mouths of crewmen pruying they'll live to enjoy another liberty call. or couvse, it pays to COETECTED ANSSE keep your eyes open, too. SSN-21 SeaWollm features color motion video, 3-D underwater mapping, and vivid digitized images old more than 50 Peal-world ships and aircraft. Now, take a linal breath of fresh air and dive into a world where good hearing is your greatest asset. L LOOKS LIKE. BUT WE'LL DIDEA HOW IT SOUNDS.. Sure, it'll test your nerves. But whal were you Jexpecting, the Love Boat? SEAWOLF ELECPROMC ARTS Circle Reader Service "


"REVIEW Hit The Deck! Photography by Rate Tomsett Spectrum HoloByte's Carrier-Based Hornet by Mark «Endo» Estephanian good carrier-based flight sim has quickly converting to either a ground attack missiles and air-to-ground Mavs, I rap the always been hard to find. In ten or air-to-air fighter. Its carrier deployment \"+\" key to throttle my two turbines up to years of combat sims, there have capability makes it even more flexible. full military power. It is now obvious that only been a few worth mentioning. Once Spectrum's Hornet has been the Hornet cockpit is decidedly different Velocity's Jetfighter sims were breakthrough loaded onto a hard drive with either Falcon from Falcon. I now have two Digital products in their day, simulating carrier or the stand-alone version of MiG-29 Display Indicators which display a variety operations with smooth flight models and already installed, you can take to the skies of data. I pull up the engine DDI and mongraphics. Spectrum HoloByte's Flight of the over the world's current hot-spot: Bosnia. itor my engine thrust, fuel flow and exhaust Intruder also included carrier scenarios and To illustrate Hornet's new features and temp, all displayed as digital readouts. I was probably the best of the older proflight model, I'd be pleased to have you as a then slam the afterburners open to stage 5 grams, offering innovative features that ele copilot on one of my first missions. and give the Alt-C launch command. vated gameplay to new levels of richness. Of The launch off the carrier was pretty course, all of these sims are several years old, Tour de Bosnia straightforward, except for the fact that my which in our hobby means ancient, and the The interfaces of Hornet are essentially joystick did not respond to small movetime is right for a \"contemporary\" carrierthe same as in Falcon 3, and within minutes ments. I increased my stick movements and based sim. of the install I had formed a new squadron found my aircraft snap rolling at 500 feet. Whoooaaa!! OK, so maybe my «Thrusty\" To fulfill this need, Spectrum HoloByte with the new Bosnian theater, hit the comjoystick needs to be reconfigured. I give it has released Hornet: Naval Strike Fighter, mit button, and was waiting for the familiar yet another high-tech toy in the company's satellite downlink message. Command another shot and find no improvement. After consulting an on-line flight sim Electronic Battlefield Series. Hornet joins sends a message describing the Operation Flighting Tigers and MiG-29 scenario: my mission, to take out Hornet. Naval Strike Fighter Fulcrum in the growing list of add-on disks an enemy tank column north of that interface with Falcon 3. Valejevo. After setting up each flight's waypoint action and TITLE: Homet: Naval Strike Fighter flight path, I perform a recon of Ol' McDonnell Had A Jet PRICE: HORNET SYSTEM: my flight path and use the trace REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 1 MB RAM, 6MB The McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 option to find possible enemy hard drive space, Falcon 3.0 or Hornet incorporates twin afterburning MIG-29 Stand-alone threats. PUBLISHER: Spectrum HoloByte engines and is packed with the latest avion With pilots assigned to their Alameda, CA (800) 695-4263 ics and weapon systems. The Hornet can flights and armed with air-to-air function as a true multi-role aircraft by $59.95 IBM Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"ROOM 09 forum, I notice many players are experiencinformation as to heading, altiing the same problem. A suggested fix is to tude, range and aspect are discalibrate backwards or to hold the joystick played next to the targer icon. calibration icon in the corners for a long Aspect is displayed by a small period of time. I try this and it corrects the directional tail attached to the problem, though the aircraft still exhibits an icon and is displayed 180 degrees extremely fast roll rate. opposite of the Falcon program, Once airborne with some degree of conso it does take some getting used trol, I configure my left DDI to show the to. Radar Warning Receiver and my right DDI Scanning for enemy contacts, to air-to-air radar. In the lower middle of I select the Track While Scan the instrument panel is the Horizontal mode. This allows me to target THIERDIRS 000 SPEEC 0213OTS ALTITUDE = 00576 FEET Situation Indicator. This display shows one aircraft while continuing to your aircraft's current heading along with a display other threats. Picking up a contact hose off an AIM-9M. The missile tracks waypoint and radial heading. The radial at 40 miles, I hit the \"T\" key to acquire the i and flies up the MiG's pipe, exploding in a heading is a specific flight path that has target and tap the \"Z\" key to lock 'em up. I massive bit-mapped fireball. I didn't see a been preset to the waypoint. Ideally, you hit the IFF (Identify, Friend or Foe) kev chute, poor bastard. should line up the heading cue with the and determine that the contact is hostile. waypoint cue along with the radial indicaMy Radar Warning Receiver lights up, so I Are We Having Fun Yet? tor. know my target has me locked as well. At Air-to-air action is typical of Falcon 3. While heading to a waypoint, I take 10 miles, I activate my jamming system Bandits will perform maneuvers in both the time to feel out the flight model. The F/Aand, since no other targets are within my horizontal and vertical. Excellent enemy Al 18 feels responsive, yet it can get scan, my radar shifts to the Single Target makes the F/A-18 a very difficult aircraft to heavy and slow. Hornet can fly and fight. The blistering roll rate makes model four different flight modcontrol stability a major issue and a player els from Easy to High Fidelity as must be very conscious of every move he in Falcon 3. Airspeed does bleed makes. New padlock and radar information off as Gs are applied to the airalong with a new heading indicator increase craft, and the turning radius will the pilot's situational awareness and add tighten with reduced airspeed new layers of challenge and strategy, and higher Gs. The aircraft is As I move into the mountainous region heavier with more momentum ENGINE MONITOR of Bosnia I admire the improved terrain than the F-16 and becomes lum 19520 RPM 19520 graphics. Switching my radar to air-tobering at 125KIAS. It does roll ground, I notice a new feature which FLE 20 CHF 30 extremely fast and takes a very enables a player to zoom in on a selected steady hand to fly. Close atten631 area of the topological display as opposed to tion to energy management is a must, lest zooming into the whole screen. Targers can you want to present a fat, slow target. Track mode which will keep the targer now be identified even if they should be Ar Angels 5, I instruct my wingman to locked and will not display any other airoffset to the nose of the aircraft, so I can use close it up, and he quips back with a \"Copy t while automatically adjusting range. Mavericks along with maintaining a ground LAUNCH WARNING!!! I break hard to will do.\" Time to activate the APG-65 Airradar image of the target. Switching down to-Air radar. This radar is simulated in port and pump chaff and flares while I to my HSI, I line up the waypoint and radimany degrees in Hornet as in Falcon 3. I switch to padlock to get a visual on the AA al have configured my aircraft with the High missile. the COMED map which is superimposed Fidelity flight model so I can check out any The padlock view remains the same as over the HSI information. I am now at the new features. The F/A-18 radar incorpoFalcon, but now includes an afterburner initial point for my attack run. rates Scan, Track While Scan, Single Target and brake cue in the mini-HUD. I pull M y air-ground radar picks up the tank Track and Air Combat modes and a range max Gs, which is limited to /.) by the F/Acolumn. They are expecting me, and my of 80nms. When a contact is targeted, s targeted 18 avionics system, and jink violently. I can 18 avionics system, and Jink violenty. I can RWR lights up wit RWR lights up with AAA radar scans. toggle off the G-limiter, but Approaching the column head-on I targer there's a chance I'll overstress the and release six Mavericks. The sky lights up wings. Luckily the Atoll missile with AAA and I get a launch warning. impacts one of my chaff packets Jumping back into padlock view, I pick up and I'm still alive. Still in padlock an SA-6 missile cracking my six. Dumping I keep toggling the view until it flares, I break hard, but the missile nails my targets a MiG-29 which is now in aircraft Warning indicators are flashing visual range at 2 miles. I pull verand the incessant voice of Bitchin' Betty is tical while banking and rescreaming \"Check Cockpit!\" as I check out acquire the target with the radar my warning sys and see that the missile h in Air Combat Mode which locks knocked out my weapons. Time to get out up anything within 10 miles of of Dodge. Endo exit stage right! BERDIREGE203 SPEEDI0450 RROTS ATITUDE 209935FEET my aircraft. I get a good tone and Air-to-ground action is intense. The SAMOM ABGASS 178 E FLOW 178 LBS REM 09375 GR WT 99718 2001103 DEO = TRAOK April 1994 Page 103 "


"US Navy F-14 pilot once said to me, \"The thing I hate most about I the Navy is living onboard the carrier; the thing I love most about the Navy is flying from and landing on the carrier.\" Putting 30,000 pounds of airplane moving over 100 mph down onto a 160-foot stretch of pitching and rolling runway has been likened to \"landing an elephant on a postage stamp.\" No PC-based flight simulation as yet does justice to the rigors and dangers carrier aircrews face daily, but landing onboard the USS Theodore Roosevelt in Spectrum HoloByte's Hornet Naval Strike Fighter is as close to that intensity as it comes. Because of the difficulties of a carrier landing, many simulation fans choose to skip it, either by ending the mission or by handing the task to the autopilot. Realworld pilots have no Escape key to lean on, and few things will give you more satisfaction than mastering simulated carrier traps. Carrier landings in Hornet will never be easy, but with practice you can execute \"controlled crashes\" successfully every time. RUNEBYRELUUMULULUHUSU ENGINE MONITOR well-implemented enemy AAA and 50mm pilot adjusting his view, so be prepared! cannon fire leaves no question that you are Also, if you are carrying any stores, these getting shot at. Shoulder launched missiles will be jerrisoned when the carrier waypoint will kill you very quickly should you not is selected, so shoot 'em or loose 'em! (See evade them or get outside of their range. the following Carrier Landing strategy article Unfortunately FLIR pods are not support for some very useful tips.-Ed.) ed, and targeting smart weapons remains Hornet has a modem option which will virtually the same as Falcon 3. The ground connect with Falcon 3.03 and MiG-29 map zoom feature does give you some players. Hornet will automatically update added flexibility in picking up ground caryour Falcon 3 and MiG-29 programs to gets. Hornet does not support any low level make them compatible with an updated terrain avoidance systems, so I'll have to communications system, which looks the keep my hands on the road and my eyes on same but permits a faster connect time. A the wheel while I make my egress through network option is also included so that the mountainous terrain. Falcon, Hornet and MiG 29 owners should be able to mix it up. Snagging The Three Wire Heading home, I steer toward the wayBug 'Em Up point cue in the HUD to get on course for Hornet does have some irritating bugs, the carrier-time to get in the groove. After the most problematic being the joystick calpassing the carrier on one side, I activate ibration routine. The joystick is just too the ILS, and the LSO calls to tell me that sensitive, making flight more difficult than it's time to enter the pattern. I begin to it has to be. The carrier will also disappear turn on final and line up with the deck, under certain circumstances, and a random adjusting my airspeed with throttle and airview change will occasionally occur, shiftbrake to 135KIAS. I pick up the \"ball\" (the ing the perspective to the left side of the optical landing system located on the carricockpit. er deck) which provides me with flight cues me with light cues Allied wingmen and flights also exhibit as to my angle some funky of attack, HENRIAM behavior. I've while my 19520 BPM 49520 BPG-66 seen wingmen angle of attack MILHOS POS HIL TLR 30 CHF 30  fly around the indexer procarrier until they vides an addirun out of fuel. tion reference. Other allied airThe LSO is 060HGA craft will also also giving me run into moun verbal cues to tains for no aid my 056926 apparent reason. approach Wezx 121 MiGs will get in while an AOA behind your bracket flights and will appears in the HUD. According to the manual, I should keep the velocity vector attack you when you are landing on the carrier, which is a real problem since your centered within this bracket to get a good weapons have been automatically dumped. approach. I'm lined up ready to catch the [At press time, Spectrum was working on a three wire. 200 feet...good speed....SLAM!! software patch to address most of these probI smack the carrier lip and get the all too familiar \"your dead» animation sequence. lems.--Ed. Oh well, maybe next time. When the Smoke Clears After playing for many hours, the landing section is still one of the most challengWhen these minor problems are ing aspects of the sim. This is exacerbared addressed, Hornet will make a very welcome by the high roll rate, which makes more addition to the hard-core pilot's collection. than minor flight corrections a hazardous It doesn't break any new ground, as it is choice during your approach. The LSO basically Falcon 3 with new scenarios and a dialogue is a nice touch, and the AOA different flight model, but the carrier operindexer and AOA HUD bracket aid your ations add an enjoyable twist. Players can approach and generally give you the \"feel\" expect the same degree of intense enemy AI of maintaining a high AOA on carrier and the involved mission planning requireapproach. A view shift will be activated ments ments that made Falcon 3 a touchstone for when you hit the ILS, meant to simulate a serious simulations. CGW 180 F FLOW 180 556 EGT SE LES REM 09831 GR WT 40202 146.30 040 TOTALIS Procedure or Wildcard? Hornet's Landing Systems Officer (LSO) is designed to talk you onto the deck. If you fly the appropriate course, as defined in the HNSF manual, the LSO should guide you in safely. Unfortunately, following this procedure can have other severe consequences. First, you must fly to the last waypoint to enter the landing pattern. When you fly over this waypoint, all ordnance, except wingtip stores, is automatically jettisoned. An urban legend persists that US Navy pilots jettison all ordnance before landing back on the carrier in order to reduce risk. Carrier-based pilots, however, have told me nothing could be further from the truth. Fuel would routinely be jerrisoned to meet landing weight requirements, but ordnance was always brought back onboard except in emergencies. If you fly the standard Hornet approach pattern, you will invariably be forced to jettison any remaining stores, regardless of whether you may need them later in the campaign. Additionally, the Hornet radio calls seem to suffer a few bugs. Sometimes, the carrier never gives you the appropriate calls for landing. To save ordnance and avoid the bugs, I've developed my own landing procedure. First and foremost, I avoid the last waypoint like the plague. Instead, I fly within a few miles of it, then activate the ILS. By Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"Catching The 3-Wire Every Time How To Survive Carrier Landings In Hornet Naval Strike Fighter by Tom «KC» Basham approaching the last waypoint, I've been positioned astern of the carrier, and by using the ILS I can pinpoint its location. Coming back from a mission, though, I'm rarely flying standard approach parameters, so I still use the suggested race-track pattern. Photography by Rafe Tomsett FROM LSO IME VECK I CLEAR OIKESIR Entering the Pattern Descend to 1,000 feet, slow to 300 knots, and fly directly toward the carrier. Don't worry about what the ILS lines are doing, you're not going to land just yet. The carrier becomes visible at seven miles. clearly passed across the carrier's path. My and downwind legs. When you close to approximately two procedure mirrors that found on page 72 of Once you have been cleared, verify your miles, turn slightly to the right and fly past the manual, but allows a little extra altitude speed is 200-250 knots and lower your the carrier, maintaining 1,000 feet and 300 for mistakes during the crosswind leg. gear. If you've forgotten to lower your gear knots. Watch the carrier pass down the left You are now ready for the downwind or your hook, the LSO will remind you. side of your aircraft using the padlock view. leg. Turn another 90° to the left, holding Still, you have enough other things to This is the upwind leg. altitude and speed. Don't wait too long on worry about the closer you get to the ship, the crosswind leg before entering so it's best to have these simple things out ise koha the downwind leg, as you want to of the way early. Be careful not to exceed stay close to the carrier. Your 300 knots with the gear lowered, as the gear heading should now be 1800 will be damaged. Your screen should now opposite of the carrier. Although resemble Figure 1. the manual suggests descending You are about to turn left another 90° to 600 feet, maintain 1,000 feet onto the base leg. Correctly timing the base altitude--you're going to need leg is critical. The base leg is a gentle leftthose 400 additional feet very hand turn back toward the carrier. When ENGINE MONITOR soon. Using the padlock and outyou complete the base leg, you should be side views, monitor the position reasonably aligned with the runway and on FCK 20 30 of the carrier. When it is exactly the final leg. As you can see in Figure 1, the off your left wing, the ILS HUD carrier is 1.4 miles away. Although the carFigure 1 should show you approximately rier is visible from 7 miles away, the runway Use the ILS-HUD to maneuver near the carrier. eight miles away from the ship. can only be seen from 1.7 miles, and the LSO only guides you under 1.2 miles. To Timing the Base Leg maximize the time available for lineup on Once your aircraft is clearly past the carFrom here, things are going to get busy. the final leg without extending beyond the rier's bow, note your heading. In Hornet, First, notify the LSO of your intention to 1.7 mile visual range of the runway, begin the carrier usually cruises along square the base leg approximately 1.4 miles from headings of 90°, 180° or 270°. This makes land by pressing Alt-H, keeping in mind that you may have to press it twice before the carrier, as shown in Figure 1. your approach much easier. Drop your he responds. If the LSO calls, \"deck clear,\" Bank about 450 left and execute a genhook and turn 90° to the left. Maintain 1,000 feet, but slow to 250 knots. Using you're all set and can continue. If he orders tle, 2-G turn. Don't rush the turn. You the padlock view, monitor the carrier's you to go around, you must extend past the want to complete 180° of turn and be position. Fly this heading until you have carrier and repeat the upwind, crosswind aligned with the runway. If you turn too 15409 RPM 1848 103 F FLOU 103 MIL NOS POS MIL. 1969 EGT 369 LES KEM 10533 GR WT 35189 April 1994 Page 105 "


"TACTS REPLAY FRONT COUNTER LORD PLAY INDEX NO. TOTAL quickly, you will fly toward the carrier but appear beside the velocity vector, but the down speed should be around 140 knots. be improperly aligned. You'll only be about entire assembly should float around the However, in Hornet you'll sink like a simu1.4 miles from the carrier and there won't HUD in ordinary velocity vector fashion. lated rock to the bottom of the simulated be enough time to correct a grossly misIn Hornet, though, the velocity vector ceassea at 140 knots. Remember also that the timed base leg. Remember, when you begin es to move around the HUD when the engines take time to spool up. If you're the turn your speed will decrease. Apply AOA indexer appears. The velocity vector is sinking too fast, you must apply power power to keep your speed between 190 and probably the single most important instruquickly. If you wait too long, you'll crash 210 knots. ment during landings. If you're within 1.7 while the engines are revving up to the new Watch your altitude closely. To commiles of the ship, you can already see the power setting. runway, and the ILS bars are Maintain a speed of 160 to 170 knots more clutter than anything else. and move the nose until the velocity vector Deactivate the ILS HUD and rely lays over the trap wires. Above all else duron your eyes for lineup and the ing the final leg, keep the velocity vector on working velocity vector for the trap wires! You should keep the nose descent information. As the manroughly level and maintain an angle of ual states, the runway is canted attack of around 5-6. As you close, listen 100 from the deck. When you're to the LSO and watch the meatball for vital perfectly lined up, your heading clues, but pay extremely close attention to should be 100 left of the carrier's the velocity vector. Keep it where you want MEDIA E heading. to land, and you'll land there. SCORE 123 C Why is the velocity vector so important? Because it shows The Final Drill Figure 2 where your aircraft is going, It takes about 12 seconds from the time Beginning the lineup 1.7 miles from the carrier. regardless of the nose position. If that you call the ball at 1.2 miles until the velocity vector is below the touchdown. During that time you must carrier in the waves, that's where plete the base leg, you'll want about 500 you're going to wind up. If the keep the velocity vector on the trap wires, feet of altitude for each mile away from the velocity vector is aligned on the carrier. Idcally, you should be at 750 feet carrier properly, you're going to when 1.5 miles from the carrier. Learning and exactly right. Figure 2 shows to adjust altitude, airspeed, throttle and what you should see, captured turn rate simultaneously is no easy task and from a replay tape. requires practice. On the final leg, always remember: use pitch to control Turning on Final: Getting Busy your airspeed and power to conNow things really start to cook trol your altitude. If you are too Immediately hit the \"\\\" key to deactivate low, don't pull the nose up. In 9252 SCORE 123 the ILS. That's right, shut the ILS off. the more realistic flight models, 2993 00.029 INDEX NO. TOTAL 100 PLAY STOP FRAME ! Why? Because it's not very useful at this pulling the nose up will cause you COUNTER 0000S 00088 point. The ILS bars themselves have no to slow down, decreasing lift, center points marked, so there's no way to causing you to descend even A replay of final approach, just before touchdown. really tell if they're centered or not. Second more. If you re too low, apply power. If you're too FROMLSDE YOU'RE CON GLIDESLOPE fast, pull the nose up slightly to your speed between 160-170 knots a bleed speed. This is very imporyour angle of attack around 59. The runway ONE 00190R tant! During the final leg, you will appear to drift to the right slighly must establish your sink rate, or because of the movement of the ship, but at vertical velocity, such that you these short ranges you'll be on the deck DISC use up all altitude and touch before you notice much. Figure 4 shows the down exactly over the carrier. final instant before touchdown. You may be Don't let your sink rate get pitched slightly down as shown in the picENGHIE MONITOR A 12 AIM412:0 too high, either. Although you ture. If so, you must remember to flare can monitor your vertical speed (pull back on the stick) so that you land on SFR 30 CHF on the HUD, you control your the main gear. Although the Navy would 6 ! sink rate by speed and the velociprefer softer landings, anything with a vertity vector. In short, when you fly Figure 3 cal velocity of less than 200 feet per minute, slower you sink faster. When you Seconds before touchdown, cockpit view. as indicated on the HUD, will suffice. fly faster, you sink slower. If your Carrier landings take practice. The keys: speed is too high, you'll shoot 1) properly time the base turn, 2) maintain the velocity vector does not operate properright past the deck. If your speed is too low, appropriate sink rate on the final leg, and 3) ly on the ILS HUD. When ILS is activated, you'll splash short of the deck and swim above all else keep the velocity vector on the the angle of attack (AOA) indexer should home. According to the manual, touchtrap wires. CGW COCKPIT CHTERNAL Tom. REPLAY IVS FRONT COUNTER LOAD TIMER TLPS GEAR HOOK 13752 RP 18752 140 F FLOW 140 MIL NOS POS MIL. 130 EGT 190 LES REM 03836 Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"HOLY CHEATS THE WORLD'S FIRST GAME UTILITY WEBrenTEAMECHEATER You're not playing by their rules anymore... Baselling Axis the Gamecheater gives you a few new tricks in your favorite games special powers, enhanced weapons, and extra lives. So now you can get on with the adventure, past that nasty spiked pit, without burning your last life in a bad Super Dave imitation. Or you can loose your vengeance with that outlaw turbo laser cannon you've always wanted. With Axis the Gamecheater, you get the little boost you need to keep the game fun! Superpowers are yours on demand — with just the press of a key! Axis the Gamecheater provides custom cheats for dozens of the most popular games, on PCs or Macs, and we're adding new games all the time. Ask for it at your favorite software source! For more information, call 800-926-9677 or 901-682-9676, Fax: 901-682-9691 Baseline PUBLISHING Circle Reader Service #40 Copyright 1993, Baseline Publishing, Inc. All rights foreign and domestic reserved. Axis the Gamecheater and the Baseline logo are trademarks of Basalinda Pulilishing, Inc. All other names are trademarks of their respective holders. Help! I'm being held captive in the fine-print disclaimer! "


"STRATEGY Machine Politics In The 21st Century possibilities. In order to explore these new possibilities, Maxis has made significant technological advances over SimCity Classic and added a tremendous amount of detail. Naturally, this increased detail has increased the complexity of the simulation and the number of new game options. Combine these factors with a somewhat cursory manual, and many gamers may find that they would settle for the NYC sewer scenario that plagued the dreams of modern mayors rather than concend with this plethora of new details. This article is intended to keep that frustration from occurring. Who To Listen To One of the most essential qualities of a Sim Mayor is a thick skin. You will be continually criticized by the media, and there is no end to the vociferous complaining, begging, and whining of your citizens, who will constantly bombard your office with plaintive pleas for assistance: \"We need more police,\" or \"We need a stadium.\" Many new, eager-to-please mayors, working on the notunreasonable assumption that the SimCitizens know what they need, often build the requested facilities at once, then wonder why their cities go into premature bankruptcy. The important thing to remember is that your citizens are a bunch of pathetic whiners too lazy even to submit their own zoning requests, instead requiring you to make all of their decisions for them. Ignore the litde beggars at first, and build your city your own way, in your own time. When you have steady cash surpluses cach year and can afford the upkeep on the items your citizens want, then consider their requests. The only exceptions are requests for airports, scaports, and connections to other cities-these are very important. Your advisers, on the other hand, will generally give you good counsel on what your city requires, with the exception of your fire marshal, who chronically wants more fire protection than your city probably needs. Your property tax manager often will tell you to jack up property taxes, but be careful about doing so, as too high a tax rate can actually Understanding The Inner Workings of SimCity 2000, Part One by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. f the worst nightmares of 20th Century New York City mayors were recurring visions of the sewer system disintegrating, what will the dreams and nightmares be for mayors in the 21st Century? Obviously, SimCity 2000, Maxis' new version of their classic city building simulator, won't provide all the answers, but it's sure to offer some fascinating Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"reduce revenues by killing development and driving your populace to greener pastures. -WNThe People Mover velopment is as critical as a well-planned transportation network. Without transportation, your citizens will be unable to reach shopping malls and their places of work, telecommuting and home shopping nerworks nor being an option in the SimUniverse. Citizens go about their daily business via one of three ways: private cars (via roads and freeways), city buses (via roads and freeways), and trains (via tracks and subways). All have advantages and disadvantages, but to weigh those considerations it is necessary to first understand the heart of the SimCity 2K transit simulation: the trip generator. Each and every building or undeveloped zone in SimCity 2K generates \"trips» based upon its population. A \"trip» represents a hypothetical attempt by a single SimCitizen to find a suitable destination, whether a place of employment or a place to shop. Zoned but undeveloped acres may generate one trip cvery ten cycles (a cycle is one iteration of the trip-generating subroutine, which operates continuously), while a high-rise apartment complex may generate a trip every cycle. The SimCitizen starts with 100 travel points, which it expends on movement through the transit network of your city. Each square traversed on the map costs a varying number of points (see Table 1); if no destination can be found before these points run out, the trip is considered a failure and no traffic is generated (the SimCitizen stays at home rather than venture out). If the citizen finds a valid destination, then the route is noted and appropriate traffic generated along that route. AAN-NW NW NW of origin before it gives up, therefore no trips TABLE 1 Travel Point Costs will be generated from any zone more than three squares from Roadway by car or bus, no traffic some form of transit. Roadway by car or bus, light traffic Once the SimCitizen hits a road, it follows Roadway by car or bus, heavy traffic that road (in a random Highway by car or bus, no trafic direction), looking Highway by car or bus, light traffic along both sides of the Highway by car or bus, heavy traffic road for a valid destination square. When it On ramp by car or bus comes to an intersec Tunnel square via car tion, it takes a random Tunnel square via bus turn. If a dead end is Bridge square via car reached, it retraces its steps back along the Bridge square via bus dead-end road (travel Train track or subway square points expended on Change modes from car to bus such wasted travel do Change modes from bus to car count against the trip's 100-point allotment) Change modes from car/bus to rail and continues. When Change modes from rail to car/bus the SimCitizen encounters a mass transit Figure A to observe the way the system works. access point (a bus depot, railway terminal, or Assume a trip is generated by a house in the subway station) it has a 50% chance of trans residential area (green block), and that the ferring to the new mode of travel and again entire roadway is clear of traffic. The comsetting off in a random direction. These mode muter, a drone of the corporate state, wishes changes also cost travel points (see Table 1). for some reason to visit her McJob in the For trains, the SimCitizen proceeds along industrial zone (yellow block). She enters the train or subway routes from station to station. roadway (1 point) and travels to the left (since Ar each station the SimCitizen has a 50% the road deadends on the right). Traveling chance of disembarking (again paying the one space (1 more point, total of 2), she looks mode change cost) and continuing on foot or to her left and sees nothing. To her right are by car. If the SimCitizen does not disembark more residences. Another space (1 more at a given station, it chooses a new direction along the tracks and proceeds until finding point, total of 3), again she is frustrated in her nother crarion For buises, each time the Sim search. Traveling three more spaces (3 points, Citizen encounters a bus station it has a 50% total of 6), she is still frustrated, for to her right is nothing but fast-food restaurants and shoe Examining the travel point costs outlined stores (blue commercial zone). Traveling one in Table 1. it becomes clear that each method more space (1 point, 7 total), she finds her of transportation has advanreward at last; to her right is an industrial tages and disadvantages. Zone, and she parks her car and enters a d Cities with no mass transit of thankless drudgery. Had traffic been light, whatsoever do not impede her trip would have taken 14 points; heavy trip efficiency when there is traffic would have made the cost 21 points. As no traffic; indeed, the mode you can see from this small example, condichange costs incurred by tions of minimal traffic can make long automass transit (which your mobile trips possible (at least along roads sims will take even when without trouble-making intersections), but there is no need to) can reheavy traffic will quickly limit the radii of your sult in trips being aborted sim's perambulations. Had there been a subthat could have been sucway station in the heart of the residential and cessfully complered. How industrial zones of this miniature city, then ever, when road traffic half the trips from one zone to the other becomes heavier, the mass would take the subway, at a cost of only 6 transit systems prove their travel points; the main benefit of such a short merit. For example, let us roure would be that it would alleviate much use our sample mini-city in of the traffic generated along the roads, makroad or public conveyance located within the same block as the origin point. The SimCitizen can only walk three squares from its point Figure A April 1994 Page 109 "


"ing everybody's life easier (and your mayoral is a fine art. Bus depots must be placed along it blocks the road, causing a dead end (and popularity higher). a roadway or they will not conduct any passome possible aborted trips for long-distance Note that in game terms, there is only one sengers at all; within that limitation, any drivers). Used sparingly, however, you can get difference between a successful trip that takes high-traffic area makes a fine place for a bus a high proportion of your populace riding the only two travel points and one that takes 99: station. You must be careful not to build toorails in this fashion. For maximum rail coverthe shorter trip will generate traffic along a many stations, because huge numbers of staage, lay your stations and track or subway so much smaller portion of that every block has at least one rail access roadway, while the long trip point; the difficulty here is that an excessive will be generating traffic number of stations can cause passenger conalong its entire length. For fusion as your sims enter and exit the rail purposes of access to zones, system many times in one trip, wasting travel however, either trip will sufpoints on mode change charges. Experiment fice and the sims do not care to find the right balance for each area of your how long their drive is, as city. long as they can make the The Water Works And Electric Co. drive at all. (Note also that subways and trains have an There are only two utilities that you must infinite capacity. There is no be concerned with as your city develops: traffic modifier for such water and electricity. Of the two, water is the travel, so it does not matter simplest, as it has only two sources, pumps how long a rail trip is, as long and desalinization plants. Each water pump as it reaches a valid destinawill generate an amount of water which varies tion). according to the weather and the pump's The mayor who builds a Figure B proximity to fresh water. A pump will genercity with nothing but roads ate enough water to service 24 to 36 squares tions will result in many aborted trips due to and highways will notice severe traffic probof development (depending on the weather), your citizens' propensity for getting on and lems clogging the arteries of his or her fair with an additional 12 squares of service for off the bus whenever they see a station. One city. In early stages of your city's developeach water or waterfall square the pump is station for every 70-100 acres of developed ment, this is not a problem: you don't have adjacent to. One handy technique for maxiland (two 6x6 blocks) is about right. enough citizens to clog a drain, much less a mizing the coverage of your pumps is to build decently-designed road system. However, Rail and subway stations can be placed a long, thin (one square wide) strip of land once heavier population densities are anywhere. When placed on a road, they do through the middle of a long lake. Build a reached, the far-seeing mayor will need to not attract as many passengers from the intepump on each land square on your isthmus institute some form of mass transit to keep rior of their block, but get passengers coming (see Figure C). Each of your pumps will the roads clear. off the street. When placed inside a block, generate enough water for 96 or more squares There are advantages and disadvantages to they get a larger proportion of their local of developed land, saving you considerable Gither business but do nothing for passersby. Either each of the three forms of mass transit at your money (though, regrettably, nor any space, since the water spaces aren't of much use). If disposal. Bus depots are inexpensive and reapproach is fine; in general, let your track layour dictate where your stations are placed. duce traffic considerably, but they don't reyou don't have a natural lake available, then make one. Simply use the Lower Terrain duce pollution very much (though there is One additional option is to lay a rail station tools to lay water in two long strips with one some reduction) and they take up four acres across a street (see Figure B); this allows passquare of land between them. Creating water per depot, space more profitably used for sengers from as many as four blocks to use the terrain costs $100, just as much as pumps, so development. Rails are moderately expensive, facility while still allowing for passersby to use the terraforming is not costing you any net ice traffic and pollution, and boost indusit. The disadvantage of this technique is that funds; additionally, you trial development throughout your city, but File Speed Options Disasters Windows Newspaper a gain the power savings of take up even more room than buses. The train Quiry Tool s not having to power all stations are four acres in size, and the tracks those extra pumps, and the take up an inordinate amount of space. Sub2 land-value enhancement of ways reduce traffic and pollution and take up E. all that artificial coastline. only tiny amounts of space, but they are very DES Desalinization plants are expensive to build and maintain. When de SE generally not worth the veloping a well-balanced city, I build a modBE trouble. It's easy enough to est railway first (perhaps three or four stations change your land-water separated by six to ten squares of track configuration that there's apiece), then add buses to newly developed no point in bothering with areas with potential to develop heavy traffic. the ocean for water; just creI save subways for last, using them only for ate some lakes inland (at high-value areas where bus or train depots $100 a square, admittedly) would take up too much high-priced real and save your citizens the estate. pollution. The placement of your mass transit stations Figure C Water towers are entirely Jul 1915 <Simpleton) 33.199 Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"Paranoid population, Psychotic criminals. Power hungry corporations. Big Brother' government Haves and have nots. America? Close. BENEATHAN SKY m a cityzanly The Watchmen's Dave Gibbons could create. In a future only, Virtual Theatre could make real. In a world only you can save. Developed By Available on PC CD-ROM BENEATH A STES. SKYsnc 1994 Revolution Starle, et contacto Entertainmen t . The nderruct Revolution SORATU. L. Vor a tossered de Vinception Circle Reader Service #109 "


"useless, except for water-strapped cities with severe cash problems. One tower costs $250, takes four squares, and stores 40,000 gallons of water, whereas four pumps take the same amount of space, cost $400, and produce (rather than simply store) a minimum of 48,000 gallons of water. The $150 savings isn't worth it; go with the pumps every time. Waste water treatment plants, on the other hand, are a boon to the ecologically conscientious mayor. They are inexpensive and will cut your city's pollution levels by as much as a third, and you only need one. Your citizens hate having them around, however, so make sure yours is far away from population centers (but still connected to the main water grid). Don't go crazy with pipe laying to establish your water grid. Your citizens will take care of the plumbing within each block, so simply connect the blocks together with one length of pipe. It may take a little longer before water flows through the entire block, but you will save yourself trouble in the long run because pipes can interfere with your subway construction. Electrical power is more complex, as there are many types of power plant and each has drawbacks. Table 2 summarizes the differences between power plant types. As this Table demonstrates, some forms of power are far more efficient than other types, Ironically, the clear winner in the cost-benefit analysis is hydro power, the power source which is available at even the earliest historical periods of the game. While not quite as inexpensive as coal, microwave, or fusion plants, and while not as efficient in terms of megawatts per acre used as microwave and fusion plants, hydro power has the overwhelming advantage of not needing to be replaced every 50 years, and the strong advantage of being added to your city in small, affordable increments as the city grows, rather than as one enormous lump of mostly unneeded power. For a mayor wishing to run a more realistic city, then the choice is more difficult. In carly historical periods, there really is no choice other than coal plants. Wealthy cities may flirt with oil power for the pollution reduction, but, in my opinion, it is not really worth the 50% price premium. Gas is massively expensive, at the top of the price list per megawatt, and shares with solar power the dubious distinction of being the largest waster of space (a measly 3.125 MW per acre of plant, worse even than wind power). In more modern eras, nuclear power begins to look attractive, but be advised that SimCity 2K nuclear plants suffer a remarkably high accident rate; that, coupled with the plants' high cost per megawatt and high capital cost make nuclear a poor choice. The ecologicallyfriendly plants of choice, solar and wind, are workable but incredibly wasteful of space. However, if you have room to burn, they make a better choice for the modern era than hordes of smoke-belching coal plants, and wind power, like hydro, does not need to be rebuilt every 50 years. Microwave and fusion power, of course, are the best of the futuristic plants. Since even an enormous city will need only two or three of these monsters, the MW/acre advantage of fusion plants is irrelevant, and you should build whichever plants meets your power needs. In next month's article, we will deal with city services, the layout of your city, zone development, land value, and general tips and tricks for enhancing your city's performance in every way. Robert Hayes welcomes questions and comments on CompuServe at 70314,2302. CGW TABLE 2 Power Plant Statistics 20 25 Oil Plant MW Cost Pollution Accident S/MW MW/Acre Coal 200 4000 Heavy None 20 12.50 Hydro* 503 None None 17.77 220 6600 Medium None 13.75 Gas 2000 Light None 3.125 Nuclear 500 15000 None Severe 31.25 Wind** 100 None None Solar*** 50 1300 None None 3.125 Microwave 1600 28000 None Modest 17.50 Fusion 2500 40000 None Slight 16 156.25 NOTES: * Hydro power figures reflect the fact that it is generally necessary to construct the hill and waterfall needed to build the plants. The most efficient hydro dam configuration is a one-square hilltop with waterfalls on the eight descending slopes. ** Wind power generation can be less than shown in the table due to unfavorable weather conditions. *** Solar power generation can be anywhere from no power generated in rain or heavy cloud) up to the figures shown. When nuclear plants have accidents, they explode and spread fire and radiation over large areas of the map. When microwave plants experience a mishap, an area around the plant may be incinerated, but no permanent damage is done. Il a fusion plant sulfers an accident, the plant is destroyed, but no other damage is done. 100 Page 112 Computer Gamine World "


"Doit on the big screen...with gamePlayerTV full-motion video/audio capture, compression, and professional audio/video output to TV and video. S o, don't settle for small-time pleasure when you can achieve the ultimate in game-playing excitement with gamePlayerTV. For more information on this and our other products, contact your local dealer or call us at 1-800-882-8184 or 1-510-226-8960, or fax 1-510-226-8996. Play PC games on TV! The new AlTech gamePlayer TV lets you do this. Instead of playing games on your PC monitor, you can maximize your game-playing excitement by playing them on a larger TV screen. Imagine sitting in front of your 20\" TV playing your favorite computer game and for the first time, seeing and hearing the power of 24-bit computer graphics. WOW! Sit down Sega: this is real power! GamePlayerTV is well-suited for game, business presentation, video recording, and all home and business audio applications. It includes high-quality digital audio record Audio/VideoBlender VideoSurge and playback capabilities for all your Windows Sound System, SoundBlaster and AdLib games and educational and business software. And, whether your TV accepts NTSC or PAL signals, gamePlayerTV provides 24-bit, 16.7 million color resolution and S-Video output for enhanced TV viewing and video tape recording An easy and user-friendly on-line TV adjustment screen puts all the controls for TV output right at your fingertips. The sound editing software included with gamePlayerTV makes recording and playback of digital sound fun and exciting. AlTech's enhanced Windows-installed software makes the set up of gamePlayerTV easy and effortless. AlTech can assist with your other desktop video and multimedia needs too. We offer a complete line of fully compatible DTV and multimedia products, including integrated WaveWatcherTV audioSHOW AlTech International 47971 Fremont Blvd., Fremont, CA 94538 AlTech gamePlayerTV ProPC/TV Plus TV Vision Mu 1 time d i a AlTech International, 1993. Audio/VideoBlender, VideoBlandar, VideoSurge, Wave WatcherTV, audioSHOW, gamePlayerTV and ProPC/TV Plus are trademarks of AlTech International Star XWING Wars is a product of Lucas Arts All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Specifications are subject to change without notice. Circle Reader Service #36 "


"Microforum Presents the Latest in CD-ROM Dream Girls Do you have what it takes to be with two of the most beautiful models around? Now you can find out thanks to the latest in computer technology ! This advanced multimedia game features incredible live video, hit songs, sound effects and amazing graphics! 3995 Hier kerana cilierofoun G.O.R.G. Experience the adventure of a lifetime and venture into the dark threatening planets of the G.O.R.G. galaxy. This \"Out of this World\" CD-ROM game will keep you playing for hours. Includes an extensive collection of sound effects, animation, incredible graphics and over 35 planets to explore. Super Arcade Games The ultimate CD for video games. INCREDIBLE GRAPHICS, SUPER SOUND EFFECTS & FAST ACTION! Have hours of fun. Hundreds of the very best games such as: Doom. Blake Stone Gotcha-Helius Stellar Defense Ken's Labyrinth.Megatron SeaQuest Captain Keen and MANY MORE! 2995 NEWONI NEW VERSION: SUPER ARCADE GAMES 4995 The Programmer CD The \"PROGRAMMER CD\" is a great way to learn, develop or upgrade your programming skills! Learn how to program your own computer or extend your current knowledge POWER UTILMES 2995 The World of Computer Software Explore the latest software from all over the world! Comes in 4 volumes. Each volume contains the following catagories Business, CAD, Clip Art, Games, Desktop Publishing, OS/2, Languages and Many More! Over 1GB of software for each volume. Vol. I. Vol. II. Vol. III, and Vol. IV are AVAILABLE! coforum the Programmer Power Power Utilities One of the most useful collections of utilities on the market. All utilities are carefully selected, tested and organized in an easy to use menu system. Included on this CD are a wide variety of powerful and useful computer utilities: Copy, Virus, DOS, Disk and many more. 2095 The EACH TIC COMIE 2995 WINDOWS SET Complete Windows Set \"The Complete Windows Set\" is for the Windows lover ! The set contains hundreds of the very best windows Programs carefully selected and fully organized in a menu driven system for easy access. HE WORLD OA THE COMPLETE WINDOWS SET A COLATE B A RTRAR FOR 2995 The World of Mac Software \"The World of Mac Software\" contains over 200 of the best programs exclusively for the MAC. This is an incredible collection of software for the MACINTOSH. This CD includes: Word Processing, Graphics Programs Utilities, Educational Programs, Business Programs, Games and SO MUCH MORE! NEW VERSION! THE WORLD OF SOFTWARE 2095 ATTENTION PROGRAMMERS : DO YOU HAVE A SOFTWARE PROGRAM SUITABLE FOR CD-ROM? MICROFORUM IS LOOKING Microforum Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax: (416)656-6368 1 Woodborough Ave. Toronto, Canada Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax: (416)656-6368 "


"Xeber CD NEW! The Ultimate Trivia CD N Take the Ultimate Trivia Challenge and test your knowledge. The Ultimate Trivia is the most advanced, challenging and exciting trivia game you'll ever play. This advanced multimedia trivia game includes live Video questions, incredible sound effects, breathtaking photography and Over 500 Trivia Questions! EACH MICROFORUM CD INCLUDES COMPLETE TECHNICAL SUPPORT ACROSS NORTH AMERICA AND EVERY PURCHASE OF A MICROFORUM TITLE ENTITLES YOU TO PARTICIPATE IN A FREE DRAW TO WIN OUR COMPLETE COLLECTION! THE ULTIMATE 4995 ITV MI N IM Sounds of MultiMedia A complete collection of exotic sounds, pictures, animation and video clips for your MultiMedia programs, presentations, desktop publishing, word-processing programs, or just for pure entertainment ! You can finally bring your computer to new levels of entertainment ! NEW! Sounds of Multimedia rem wen The Video Game Solution CD This CD-ROM includes easy to follow instructions to use hints and tips on how to solve the most popular games on the market! Also included are special editors which allows a player to have an unlimited number of lives and makes each game more exciting. Sounds of Multimedia?! 2995 The Video Game 3095 NEW! ele Businesson Designer Fonts NE Explore the latest fonts designed by top graphic designers! This CD package contains an impressive variety of new typefaces for both TRUETYPE and POSTSCRIPT FONTS. Improve you presentations with this incredible font collection. A great way to create a lasting impression ! \"Designer Fonts\"contains over 400 customized designed fonts by top Designers. Simple and easy to use. RONIS The Business CD Tired of wasting money on expensive business software? Then maybe it's time to try our \"Business CD\"! Over 50 of the very best business programs, carefully selected and tested, including accounting programs, spreadsheets, word processors, desk-top publishing and one complete communication package all under an easy to follow menu. DESIGNER I FOR WINDOWS hero Niby for OVER 400 FONTS Business 3995 CD 2995 ATTENTION DEALERS! Get into the Microforum Educational Multimedia Program! With over 20 fabulous Educational Disk The Educational Disk is a fun way for children to become familiar with the computer. This disk contains over 50 programs math, alphabet word processing, geography computers, etc... Includes great graphics, sounds and actual human voices. This CD includes a user friendly menu and all programs are easy to use ! Disk MsMasonra titles to choose from, this carousel will prove Educational Disk 2995 to be a hot new item among your customers. TO ADD TO ITS INTERNATIONALLY DISTRIBUTED CD-ROM COLLECTION. FOR MORE INFO. PLEASE CALL 416-656-6406 Circle Reader Service #76 TO ORDER CALL 1-800-465-2323 DEALER INQUIRIES ARE WELCOME! BETTER COMPUTER STORES EVERYWHERE! "


"Illustrations by Jorge Galindo Play That Funky Music, Byte Boy! The advent of the Adlib sound card in 1988 added a new dimension to the computer game experience. Unfortunately, the advances in sound technology since then have also added a new dimension of confusion. In this first article of a two part series, computer game composer Donald Griffin will wade through the sea of terms—DSP, PCM, MIDI, OPL—to help you better understand your sound card and its future. by Donald S. Griffin In a perfect world there would be a dozen could make full use of their sonic potential could have its own sonic style. And, yes, they sound cards...and they would all be essenwithout headaches. They would be flexible would be inexpensive. Are we anywhere near tially the same. They would all have every enough so that any new and inventive techthis perfect state of affairs? If you've been synthesis technology in abundance. They nique would be easy to implement. They keeping up with the developments in sound would all be compatible with every piece of would be similar enough that one piece of cards, you're probably enjoying a good belly software. They would all talk to the software music would sound equally good on all of laugh right now, and I can't blame you. But in the same way so that software developers them, yet different enough that cach brand we are closer than the disheveled pile of sound Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"cards on my studio floor would suggest. everything works with everything else, but it than the original, but in some cases this causes Sound cards do seem to be moving in the just ain't so. As a result, developers are forced the sound to be very different from the sound general direction of the ideal world of my to make tough decisions as to which cards to intended. This could make a cymbal, for hardware fantasies. support. In the words of technical director example, sound more like a bird, or make a Dave Walker at Electronic Arts, «The congunshot sound like a buzz. The only solution What's Old sumer wants to buy a board supported by all seems to be a straight forward OPL-2 emulathe developers, and the developers want to tion, which tends to sound a bit raspy comIn the beginning Big Blue said, \"Let There support a board owned by all the consumers.\" pared to the original. This approach is Be Noise,\" and behold unto us was born the marker Carch-22. To solve the problem. unfortunate, because it's like asking a race car PC speaker: Beep beep beep. Boop boop more communication is needed between to drive like a bus: it's hard to accomplish and boop. That got old really fast. Then came sound card manufacturers and software deis a complete waste of a race car. The reason speaker modulation: Buzz, pop, click. This velopers. Things are slowly starting to get we are reduced to this is twofold: we have tons wasn't much better. Then came the AdLib Music Card, and the waves parted and we better, as we'll discuss later, but the industry of games written for OPL-2, and our race cars has a ways to go. are all so different from each other we can't were all lead into the sonic promised land. find a single race they can all run in. Well...not exactly. It was a big improveWhat's New ment on the state of the art, but the AdLib's A Solution With Its Own Problems OPL-2 chip was a very basic implementation Today, the latest thing is synthesis based on Along comes General MIDI (Musical Inof a relatively old technology called FrePCM recordings. There are many apstruments Digital Interface.) A long time ago quency Modulation (FM), which is not ideal proaches, but the PC world has latched onto in a music studio far, far away, some poor sap for musical instruments and even worse for the term \"Wave Table to cover any type of was trying to connect two synthesizers of sound effects. Enter Sound Blaster stage left. synthesis that involves digitally recording and different brands so he could play the keyThe Sound Blaster was essentially the same as playing back samples of instrument sounds. board of one while triggering the sounds in the AdLib card, but it added the important For example recordings might be made of the other, and it just wasn't going to happen. ability to record and play back low resolution every third note on the piano. By playing back A bunch of manufacturers of synthesizers de digital audio. The low resolution part wasn't the recording faster or slower you can fill in cided that if this was possible they would all so great, but the digital audio was a real the notes in between. Bend a note up or down benefit since it would allow one musician to godsend. Even low resolution digital audio too far and it doesn't sound like a piano play many synthesizers at once, thereby insound effects were a great improvement over anymore, so real skill is involved in knowing creasing the demand for their products. They FM, and since the OPL-2 chip was no longer how many recordings you need to cover the formed the MIDI Manufacturers Association being used for effects, the music could have whole piano. Too many and you run out of (MMA) and it formed the MIDI specificathe OPL-2 chip all to itself. The type of digital memory for other instruments; too few and tion. audio the Sound Blaster used was called Pulse your piano doesn't sound real enough. Code Modulation, or PCM for short. The MIDI is what led to this business of using ode Modulation, or PCM for short. The The current crop of Wave Table-based maximum resolution of the original Sound cards all sound much better than OPLcomputers like word processors for managing Blaster's PCM was 8-bit, 22KHz, and it was musical notes and other musical stuff. As time even OPL-3 based sound cards, but they have only capable of mono, not stereo. went on, the keyboard makers began to realtheir own problems. Since their sound is ize that each synthesizer had different collecNot long after, MediaVision introduced based on digital recordings permanently tions of sounds arranged in a different order, the ProAudio Spectrum card with two OPLstored in ROM (permanent memory on a and they were using those standard MIDI nd th 2s and PCM at the full resolution of a CD: chip) they are relatively inflexible. If you want controller messages in some very non-stand16-bit, 44KHz and stereo to boot. This a new instrument sound, you can't have it. If ard ways. This meant that even though their touched off a flurry of one-upmanship that you don't like the hardware designer's choice synthesizers could all communicate with each would not only lead to some real improve for a trumpet sound, you have two choices: other, a piece of music written for one of them ments, but would open up the market to lots take it or leave it. This makes the role of the would not make sense when played on anof clones, each with their own definition of sound designer a very important one since the other. Their solution was the General MIDI the word \"compatibility.\" Companies like quality of the instruments determines standard. The MMA reached a consensus on Roland, with their MT-32 and later SCC-1 whether the hardware is allowed to reach its a set of instrument sounds and locations as Sound Canvas, and Turtle Beach with their full potential. Important lesson number one: well as a standard drum ser and standard uses E-MU-based Multisound card would atdon't buy a Wave Table card based solely on of certain MIDI control messages. This was tempt to bring much improved quality to the its technical specifications; listen to the Wave supposed to allow a tune in the form of a PC, but at the cost of high prices and even Table portion of the card thoroughly. MIDI data file composed on one General more diversity-otherwise known as confuThe OPL-4 is a new chip from Yamaha MIDI (GM) synthesizer to play properly on sion. which is essentially a Wave Table synthesizer a GM synthesizer of another brand. The The prices may have dropped significantly, and an OPL-3 and OPL-2 all rolled up into problem with General MIDI is just that it's but confusion still reigns. If you can't figure one. This allows it to keep true FM compatigeneral. GM does not get very specific about out what sound card will work best for you, bility and add Wave Table synthesis while things like duration and volume of the instruit's no fault of your own. The hardware and only requiring one chip. This should keep the ments it defines. This is good because it allows software manufacturers are still confused cost down. Many of the boards I just menfor individuality and creativity on the part of themselves. There are a lot of brilliant, welltioned have the ability to emulate or imitate the manufacturers. It is also bad because GM meaning developers out there who can't agree an OPL-2 or OPL-3, but the results are inexsynths are not enough alike in some cases, on what makes a good hardware-software act. The problem seems to be that they can resulting in weird music. There are some in combination. We would like to tell you that make the OPL-2 emulation sound better the industry who suggest further restricting April 1994 Page 117 "


"1 9 4 2 AFE ? 11942 1942, The Pacific Air War from MicroProse. Who says you can't fight for both sides? KICK BUTT. The battles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sea! Capture territory for the glory of the Emperor! THE PACIFIC AIR WARM In 1942, The Pacific Air War, you can command Japanese forces, too. The sky's the limit as you perform gravity-twisting air combat maneuvers in your Zero. Drop 800 kg bombs on heavily defended U.S. carriers. And take on the same death-defying challenges that World War II Japanese fighter pilots faced. PILOT any of 3 historically-accurate Japanese planes, each with its own cockpit and flight characteristics! SWEAT over the comprehensive strategy for all naval forces! GO HEAD-TO-HEAD against a friend via modem! Your tour of duty includes some of the most heroic battles ever fought. Battles that will push your skills to the limit as you master WW II air combat in an innovative Virtual Cockpit. MICROPROSE  1994 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles & CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. "


"It's 1942 In The South Pacific. Whose Side Are You On? 119425 Defend the U.S. honor! In 1942, The Pacific Air THE PACIFIC AIR WAR\". War take full command of U.S. forces. The sky's the limit as you pilot Corsairs and Wildcats in gravity-twisting air-to-air combat. Drop 1000 lb bombs on heavily defended Japanese carriers. And take on the same death-defying challenges that World War II American fighter pilots faced. 1942, The Pacific Air War from MicroProse. Who says you can't fight for both sides? KICK BUTT. The battles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sea! PILOT any of 7 historically-accurate U.S. planes, each with its own cockpit and flight characteristics! SWEAT over the comprehensive strategy for all naval forces! GO HEAD-TO-HEAD against a friend via modem! Your tour of duty includes some of the most heroic battles ever fought. Battles that will push your skills to the limit as you master WW Il air combat in an innovative Virtual Cockpit. Circle Reader Service #119 MICROPROSE  1994 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles & CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. "


"OOOO the GM specification. This makes many comSample RAM could also be used for sound Reverb and chorus are called \"effects\" by posers I know nervous. Who will get to imeffects, saving that much memory in your PC musicians. Professional synthesists usually pose their tastes on the rest of us? If we have for better graphics or more complex code. An have effects in separate units which they can to further standardize General MIDI (maybe added bonus is that sound effects in sample mix in as desired. This is why E-MU's excelwe can call it Not-So-General MIDI) it RAM can also be manipulated like any instrulent line of Proteus synthesizers have no efshould be done by an impartial committee ment sounds. They can be pitched up or fects processing. In fact the Proteus line is under the MMA. down, panned left and right, and bent up like admired for how dry» their samples are. But a slide trombone. But modern sound hardthis article is about sound cards which are Why Not Roll Your Own? ware can bring even more life to the party. meant to be everything you need in one place. Effects are often left out of sound cards beFortunately, there may be ways around the A Room For Improvement cause they increase the cost. But before you standardization problem. Creative Labs will say you can do without reverb and chorus I soon be introducing a new sound card based Digital recordings for use in synthesizers, suggest you listen to the Roland Sound Canon the new E-MU 8000 chip, a PCM playoften called \"samples,\" are usually made in vas in comparison to a Wave Table sound back synthesizer using a method they are special acoustically dead rooms, with the micard with no effects processing. The differcurrently calling Advanced WavEffects Syncrophone up close so all you hear is the inence is dramatic. The good news is that sevthesis. The new Creative Labs sound card will strument. When played back with no further eral new cards have connectors which can have one megabyte of sample ROM where processing, your music sounds like the band receive plug in daughter cards to add effects permanent GM instrument sounds will be is with you in a closet. You could record your in the future, and both Creative Labs' new stored, but it will also have 512k of sample samples in large rooms to give them that sound card and MediaVision's new RAM (expandable to 32 megabytes!) which, concert hall sound, but when you shifted the Waveguide sound card (available this year) unlike ROM, can be changed by your softpitch up or down you would also shift the will have onboard effects processing. ware to suit the occasion. This sample RAM sounds of the echoes off the walls. This can What is Waveguide .nny van. choudel could be used for special custom instruments start to sound really weird, and so it limits designed by the composer. To facilitate this, your instruments to only one environment. Organ Schwarzenegger E-MU is touring their new Sound Font techBesides, you can always run the sounds nology which combines both the digital inthrough a reverb unit later to make them My ideal synthesizer has always been one strument recording and instructions for its sound like they are in any size room you want. where you say something like \"I want a mause into a single file. Using Sound Font, a What? You don't have a reverb unit? Well at hogany clariner 12 feet long\" and the synthecomposer could fill in the sample RAM with least you can thicken the sound a bit with sizer figures out what that instrument would his own custom instruments, and thereby chorus right? No chorus? Looks like we have sound like. It would be even better if I could make different sound cards appear identical. a problem. make up instruments that were not practical Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"comMAIDES SION In 2011, you command Stern's Wildcats, an elite squadron of mercenaries trying to fly straight in a world of deceit and violence. Pilot the F-16 Fighting Falcon and the F 22 Lightning as you engage rival squadrons, third-world dictators and the armies of the dreaded IRS. This CD-enhanced version includes: in real life. What would an organ the size of To Synth, Or Not To Synth? an aircraft carrier sound like? Well guess what? That's what Waveguide is all about! This may soon be the question. Digital Waveguide Filter, developed at Stanford and recordings of sound and music may make reco licensed to Media Vision, is just one of several synthesis unnecessary. According to Michael approaches generically referred to as \"modelLand, sound programmer and composer at ing synthesis.\" A clarinet model would deLucasArts, \"It is going all digital sooner than scribe all the important aspects of a clarinet we realize.\" Land, along with Dave Walker of that effect the sound. The modeling equaElectronic Arts, Doug Cody of Media Vision, and John Miles of Miles Design, sees the tions, called algorithms, are designed with adoption of a new VESA audio standard as a hooks which allow access to some of the chance to bring more and better digital audio values from a MIDI device like a keyboard. to our computers than ever before. Although Naturally, the quantity and nature of these Land cautions that good sound card design is hooks would be totally different for different critical to good digital audio handling, he also kinds of instruments. This means that playing points out that a straightforward method of each algorithm or instrument from a MIDI making a digital recording and playing it back keyboard would be a new leaming experithrough your sound card would guarantee ence, sort of like learning to play the real that every sound would come out the way it instrument, and with Waveguide you can was intended. The new VESA standard proplay it badly just like in real life. You can make vides faster, casier transmission of audio and a trumpet sound sour and you can make a video dara from your disk drive to your sound clarinet squeak. Waveguide requires more card while requiring less from your CPU, musicianship from the user, but allows much leaving it free to calculate and construct to its more flexibility. I've heard a short flute solo heart's content. coming out of a Waveguide that behaved much more like a real flute than any syntheSo why do we need synthesizers on our sound cards in the first place? The answer is sizer I have ever heard. I have spent many years in bands and orchestras as well as trying fairly simple: digitial audio isn't quite there to recreate them with synthesizers, and I yer. The size of a good quality digital audio would have been fooled. Each note had enfile can be thousands of times the size of a MIDI file of the same tune and requires much tirely different characteristics from the last, just like real sounds. Peter Cook, MediaVimore effort from your CPU which may already be overburdened by your favorite flight sion's master of the Waveguide, says that sim or driving game. The digital audio hanWaveguide Filter can not only provide cffects dling abilities of most of today's sound cards like reverb to Waveguide instruments, but to PCM sound effects as well! are pretty much of the «record it or play it back\" varicty. New cards with sound processAnother modeling technique involves reing computers called DSPs (Digital Signal constructing what happens to a sound after it Processors) will eventually allow lots of fancy is created. This is often called Resonance interactive things to be done with your Modeling, Rob Faulkner at E-MU Systems sounds instantly as they are needed, like says that E-MU's new Morpheus synthesizer rpheus synthesizer changing the sound of the room with adjustuses this technique. The Morpheus gets its able reverb or changing where a sound seems name from the fact that you can morph one to be coming from in 3D-space using a surresonance into another as the nore sounds, round technology like Q-Sound. A flight similar to the way your voice changes as you simulator is not simply a few predetermined walk out of a tunnel. movies, so why should sound be treated that The sound of an acoustic guitar comes from way? The possibilities of interactive sound the vibration of its strings, but the sound is effects and music are staggering, but until further refined when that sound bounces recently the lackluster quality of sound cards around inside the guitar body. In a sense, has not made it worth the trouble to do Media Vision is modeling the string and Eanything fancy. This year may see a dramatic MU is modeling the body. At this point I am change. Stay tuned.... only speculating that Creative Labs, who Donald S. Griffin is the owner of Computer owns E-MU, may include E-MU's Morpheus Music Consulting in San Francisco. He has been a musician for over 20 years and has been technology in a future Sound Blaster card, involved in MIDI and computer music for 10 but if Media Vision is successful with their years. He has composed music for over 20 recently announced sound chip involving games, including Aladdin for the SEGA Genesis, and Mario's Time Machine and Rules Of Enmultiple synthesis technologies including gagement 2 for the PC. Don will be back next Waveguide, then Creative Labs may feel the month with a chip-by-chip analysis of 94's need to up the ante. sound card lineup. CGW Over 60 missions, including the expansion module Tactical Operations. Easy installation that takes less than 12 megs (as little as 1.5 megs!) of hard drive space. Complete digitized speech and sound effects, plus General MIDI (MPU-401 interface) music support. Every line of dialogue is spoken.\" Improved frame rate (up to twice as fast as the original), reduced diskaccess time, uninterrupted flight during missions, smarter enemy intelligence (AI) and less base memory required. All-new flight options Rudder Pedal support, Realistic Dynamics mode, and Invisible Cockpit and NoHaze options. Gauntlet mode wave after wave of enemies, with final score telling you how well you did. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, USE AN INTEL486' DX2 OR PENTIUM PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 \"Sound Blaster or 100% compatible sound card required for digitated speech and sound effects Sand Blaster Pro Audio Spectrum General MIDI with MPU 401 interface, or 100% compatible sound card required for music NIO180 AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE RETAILER NEAR YOU OR CALL 1-800-245-4525 FOR MC/VISA/DISCOVER ORDERS. AFIN An Entronic Arts Company 1994 ORIGIN System, lec. Tactical Operations is a trade mark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc Origin and Strike Commander ate testered trademarks of GRIGIN Systems Iee Electronic Arts is a registated trademark et Electronic Asti Circle Reader Service #86 April 1994 Page 121 "


"Holy Sphin SVELD ARMOUR SCORE 8003200 HEALTH Hang on. Tight. You're about to enter the dark and foreboding world of Microcosm. Super-realistic, computer generated graphics inject you into the body of Cybertech's presi dent, Tiron Korsby. Your mission: to find and eliminate a deadly and elusive brain manipulation droid. Experience a whole new realm of adventure gaming as CD ROM-based interactive cinema effects transport you inside the heart-stopping action. GCONSO "


"ICROCOSI cter! SEGA CD NCROCOSM O Over 500 megabytes of brilliant SGI graphics and an original sound track by Rick Wakeman, formerly of YES, crank up the intensity to levels you've never before encountered. Step into the latest high-tech micro-submersibles and pilot your way to the edge of your imagination. But don't forget to pack an extra pair of shorts. Available for Sega CD, PC CD ROM, and 3DO at your local Yetailer. ZAYIS Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Circle Reader Service #91 "


"R. C hatte A . Over There Seguel Syndrome Strikes Again Robin Matthews Marlbericum F sont t seems that European designers have Vision with the imminent release of Inca II: thing that is good and fresh about software caught that distinctly American disease— Wiracocha. Most players of Inca I are still design-innovative, stylish and slightly risky. sequelitis-as a rash of \"part-twos\" have trying to work out all its subtleties and hidden Kalisto's Fury is unoriginal, bland and safe. It broken out across the continent. Perhaps we symbolism, but Inca Il continues its unique will sell fairly well, but PC gamers must rely should more carefully quarantine U.S. game and bizarre mixture of science fiction, ancient on other sources to push the envelope and imports and check for viruses. Incan mythology and arcade action. The encourage true game evolution. In fairness, if graphics passed muster in Inca I, Kalisto eventually follows in their countrybut the plot and, to a lesser degree, men's direction then c'est la vie! the interface left much to be deBack across the English Channel, Virgin sired. Coktel has apparently adhas released Goal! (yet another footie game, dressed this, and Inca II should be are there now more football or golf sims a more \"commercial\" release. The about?) and Krusty's Super Funhouse. Goal is game will be released first as a CD from the hard disk of one Dini Dini, the with full digitized speech and an brains behind the soccer simulations that enhanced soundtrack, with a disk started it all off, Kick Offand Kick Off 2. This release padding rapidly behind builds on the same type of interface, but now Another French outfit. Kalisto, Ters you do more complicated maneuvers and has unleashed Fury of the Furies also has a portraitor landscape-view option. upon the U.K. The shop carefully The general screen layout may be too small Coktel Vision's Inca II: Wiracocha selected a title for this international for some, and the sound effects and animaproduct, offering a choice of lanrion are merely \"OK.\" With these soccer Infogrammes has just released the Frenchguages in English, French, Gergames it's all a matter of personal choice, but language version of Alone in The Dark Ilman, Italian or Spanish. These Furries are kick off fans will definitely enjoy this one, as (AITD II)—with the English version almost cutesy little balls of fluff that have certainly available as you read this The sequel certainly available as you read this. The sequel arrived here from another planet. boasts more animation, a larger gaming Upon their arrival the expected world, better NPC artificial intelligence (they civic reception didn't materialize. now chase you!) and a plor involving bootlegs and their King was abducted. gers and gangsters. No longer set in one locaThrough 90 levels of platform action, the keenly awaited thriller now includes tion with lots of bonuses and anirden maze, underground mines, and a mations, you control the four wonderfully drawn pirate ship in addition to remaining Furries in their attempt the trademark creepy house. AITD was a to recover His Fluffiness. It sports surprise hit for Infogrammes and established an awful plot and totally unorig. them on the world stage, but AITD II looks inal gameplay, but it has good rich enough to meet gamers' expectations for graphics and is quite addictive. a solid sequel. AITD II will be released in the Worth noting of the last three U.S. by Interplay partner, I-Motion. items is that both Infogrammes More Gaelic news marches in from Coktel and Coktel Vision show everyAlone in The Dark II from Infogrammes Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Taurel KES 310 ZAME STONES & BONES GRAPHICS MODES SPEED DEVIL THIRD GENERATION PINBALL Fast, full-screen table scrolling Totally authentic ball movement Great sound effects and music High resolution color graphics 4 unique new tables with features that will keep you playing for hours: NEW! Variable table angles Variable table scroll rate Full table tilt 2 graphics modes to let you use each table in two different sizes RealMotionTM Pinball Fantasies is the first game to use exclusive ealMotion technology \"Cauletely redefines pinbell simulctions and ilic lest ci ile to bring to you the most accurate, realistic, dynamic arcade excitement possible on a computer. none are o purely enjoyelle as the \"Now Available From A Store Near You, Or Call Us At 716-872-1200 For Ordering Information\" Ramps and Tunnels Ball Traps Flashing Bumpers Jackpots and Bonuses Rollovers Drop Targets PARTYLAND ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS make will Le scrambling te muerthe etencer PC Enter citurit BILLION DOLLAR GAME SHOW \"Many piloal games heve qepeared one from 21st Century Electronic eames CENTURY 21st Century Entertainment Inc. P.O. BOX 415 WEBSTER, NY 14580 Circle Reader Service #30 "


"OS will many other soccer fans a small conThis month's final entry is another solation for those who will not see their conversion, Oscar for the new Amiga team in the forthcoming USA World CD 32. On that platform, Oscar was Cup! presented as the next Sonic/Mario, but Krusty's Super Funhouse is a spin-off as yet this seems remote. In any event, a from the Simpson's cartoon series, and U.K. software house converted him to features as its hero Krusty the Klown. His the PC and created another very average house has been invaded by packs of rats, platformy, arcadey, bounce-em-around. and using a patented Pied Piper device he INTO E N LLUE The graphics are confusing with not must lure them to their doom. More like enough thought having been given to a combination of Lemmings and Push the contrast between the main screen WO480000002610 3 : Over, this is an above average arbackdrops and the character's animation cade/strategy game that is ideal to burn Waggle your joystick in Krusty's Super Funhouse sprites. Everything is overly busy, and away half an hour or so. Oscar will only appeal to total platform Digital Integration of Tornado fame has of weak wrist. Arcade action games have not addicts who will likely find something better released a little stocking filler with a flight been the PC's strong point (which is no to waggle their joysticks at anyway. longer understandable considering the qualsimulator called Merlin. A very simple and The above games and most of the other limited game, it revolves (it's a helicopter sim ity of graphics, sound support and sheer proc games mentioned in past Over There colessor speed of new PCs). Unfortunately US you see...) around landing your chopper on umns can be obtained from: Gold's in-house produccion of Street Fighter the deck of a frigate. Designed for the Royal 2 is unlikely to be a title contender. Despite Navy and subsequently used on a British TV Strategic Plus Software, 28 D&E all the basic ingredients—the competitors, game show, it is being sold in the U.K. for the The Courtyard, High Street, the special moves—and all the hype about Hampton Hill, Middlesex. TW12 equivalent of about $10. With three levels of playability, the atmosphere and the impact of 1PD, Tel 01144-81-977-8088, difficulty and percentage scoring, it's best left for a short diversion or team competition. hefry welts and bone-crunching action is just Fax 01144-81-977-4822, not here. The usual lament of many PC or on CompuServe at 1000014,3466. On the arcade front there aren't many biggamers about arcade conversions is once ger titles than Street Fighter. Totally rampant again true: too late and too little. Mortal Robin Matthews can be contacted on and almost undefeated on virtually every conCompuServe on 76004,3456 and welcomes sole and non-PC format, Street Fighter II now but in the meantime Street Fighter 2 remains compliments, comments and requests enters the PC ring rather late and with a touch (within reason!). CGW merely a \"wannabe.\" SPECTRUM OM SIPM PST SALINAS CA ELECTRONICS CURRENT PRICES registrert Ande) ADSD Raverlot F35 bak Legons su trv. L. THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit 30 of the games listed below (including Might and Magic 1-4, Ultima 4-7, all SSI AD&D games, Bard's Tale 1-3, Wizardry 6-7 and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game, CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3, 4 or 5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Roque. Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4. Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 7 pt. 2). Savage Empire, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 of 2), Countdown to Doomsday, Eye of the Beholder (1. 2 or 3), Darklands, Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1. 2 or 3), Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Planets' Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania.  HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available, Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Mastercard VISA Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. Arnhe Dark HOURS: P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 6AM-11PM PST 93912-6295 7-DAYS 1-800-983-4321 CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES ask for catalog JEWELOSE Sacoucas 10 Your Colacton. Herplay Dune Th Guest Gunship 2000 ADAD N om: Geries Ourse Spice Huk ADSD Dark Sun Fon Helix Spaceward Ho-WIN a DOS ADSD Dungeon Hack King's Quest 6 Spekeep ADSD Eye of the Behoder II Legend of Kyanda Srike Commander ADSD Eye of the Beholder Tc Rebel Assait Subver 2050 Reum Zork Sndcate: American Revor Alone in the Dark Secret Weapons of the Lutatie Task Force Admiral Pack Ampada Space Quest 4 IFXTactical Fighter Experiment Nic Bron CD9 35 Sa Wars Chess Tie Forte Boodnet Wing Commander Uina 6 V by Victory Gold Ino Sword Comanche wExpanded Missions Daemonsgate AD&D Dungeon ka AD&D. Raronion Dana Unlashed When Two Wart's Wa Dune Wing Commander kademy Great Hard Backes Damansara Dark Legons 300 System von Halt Dala v Escape rom Monster Honor humeyman Adiect Dunell bin Warden Footal Labyrinth of Tmé Dungeon Master Lemmings Marts: Experimental Fighter Eye of the Border la Los Fles d Sherlock Holmes Rabal Art Front Page FB.Pro Mad Dog Horee Reum b Zork Harpoon 1 Outotis World Shadowcase Bed the Dead Road Rash Sexe Commando Wl Tacical Options Kasparos Gombit Shadowcase TFX (lacical Fonter Equal Legends of Valou Shook Wane Uma V1 Master of Orion Ura Underworld ! Microsof Arcade-WN Super Wing Commander Uma Underworld Wing Comen. I 958 Operation: Crusader Todd Edipse Wing Cormanda 1 Dolute Ond his Word ATARI Wag Carmander 2 Delue $39 Populous Trials of the Olympian Gods 28 kguar System Wing Commander l/Uitma VI $30 Power Hangar Wolpack $39 7 Cies of God commem.ed.) WE ALSO SELL: MAG SEGA SNES WE SELL ALL COMPUTER & VIDEO ENTERTAINMENT PRODUCTS ALL SALES FINAL, NO REFUNDS PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, CONTACT PUBLISHERS FOR DEFECTS 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS) MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add 7.25% sales tax / HANDLING $2 PER ORDER SHIPPING: FREE SHIPPING WITH $100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 ADD $5 PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD $7 OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD $6 Circle Reader Service #103 Computer Gaming World 38aasxa3388x38 Raas&#2983&&  hoa GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #60 Page 126 "


"NO COPS NO LAWS NO WIMPS k The Softw d olworks CD ROM  c TA RACE For the store nearest you or to order, call 1-800-234-3088 Circle Reade Service #102 THESE ME Place In ACTION ... ARE YOU A GIRLIE MAN OR A MEGARAGER? Available on IBMCD-ROM and Sega\" CD. Coming soon to 3DO Choose your vehicle wisely. It may be the only thing that keeps you alive when you battle evil enemies like The Eviscerator and Rabies. APS: 3 WAY-IN SCORE: 6548 Winning is all that counts in this over-the-edge virtual driving experience. Strap in and hold on for the ride of your life! MEGARAC ***** *WIN OR DIE! Spectacular fully rendered animation and amazing 3-D graphics make MEGARACE a one-of-a-kind virtual driving experience. Over 29 minutes of digitized video commentary, 15 full rendered tracks, hot rock music track and the virtual ride of your life (or death). WIN OR DIE! . The State Bath le Core 1995Cytrative Entertainment. Als tamat email sinds Machines C IX. the logo and informes. Malipay de l The 30 CM . Sett a tenir Sega Enterprises La THERE IS N w "


"REVIEW Sam Goldwyn Doesn't Live UOLLYWOOD Here Anymore Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul by Johnny L. Wilson Himelfahrt Studios Movies: 2 studio Not I 586,464,000 Hinnoifahrt Studios 1994 1995 Game Level: Still Green 358,299,00 Hinnelfahrt Studios 1994 1925 GAME Legels Movies: 2 Studio Not HINNOIfalipt Studios Movies : 1 Studio Net Himmelfahrt Studios 199 198 CHA Lop1: Ôn Hu An HARTAst Studios nyone who thinks that great games Just to get the Hollywood Mogul Hall of Fame and great films need blockbuster negatives out into 1994 1995 Cane Level: graphics and THX sound should the open, Carey move on to another review. Anyone who De Vuono's Hollythinks that a fascinating game, like a great wood Mogul has a film, depends on design or story should read crude visual look, $94.8697888 on. since it was written =tsu, Tana Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul (Mogul) in Visual Basic, and Movies: Studio Met does what no other computer game has ever your primary task in-340MX Hard done before: put you in charge of a Hollyvolves balancing stuHall we sv Farne wood studio. This seems an untapped source dio and production Hollywood Magul of game ideas, and I'm surprised it hasn't been spreadsheets with done before. There have been similar games, creative concepts, like the BASIC program from Softside magazine that I typed into my of more expensive and graphically sexy Apple II. With it I played the role of games on my shelves. HOLLYWOOD a Broadway producer by making less STAGE Project Development STAGE Why? I think it is because the game than a dozen decisions per show on Financial Report gives me an opportunity to create 10 Leave The Studio Lot some simple spreadsheet-type pages. imaginary movie packages as I think Help Later, I tried Prime Time, a TV netCall It A Day they ought to be created, then sit back work executive simulation from and watch the results that I can influHinnelfahrt Studios now defunct First Row Software. ence, but not control. Like these ancestors, Mogul doesn't High Concept have any special effects, but like the hero in Damn Yankees, it has both The game immediately places you in Etudio.GRUNDELEG, 251. MUS T the most powerful post at a major film heart and soul. studio. At the easiest difficulty level, the Baxter lists of talent and POST-PRODUCTION MONTH 1 OF 3 lists of talent and studio is worth a billion dollars and has marketing spin. You $150,000,000 in the studio's working acPOST-PRODUCTION MONTH I OF 3 get the feeling that F. The Gone Ranger PRE-PRODUCTION NEXT MONTH Scott Fitzgerald's PRE-PRODUCTION MONTH 1 OF 3 has-been screen Hollywood Mogul writer, Pat Hobby, would feel right at Carey DeVuone's Hollywood Mogul $59.99 home in this studio. SYSTEM: IBM Yet, I have found REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, VGNEGA graphics. 2MB hard drive space; supports mouse myself spending doz PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNER: Carey DeVuono ens of hours as a Hol PUBLISHER: DeVuono DeVuono Games Los Angeles, CA lywood bigwig rather (800) 350-5550 Exit Projects In Development than playing dozens JanuaM 1999 Intr o tu tudent als or the woman who aleliver the Ohan tid Capitol Punislinent Someone I Killin the Hapa who raise our taxes. Comedy 1993 Romantic An ant noutor LUUUUr the Joo Hoking his wa through the KARA Sutra An usor OS editor HAGDS enemies on his 11 TOH which no one en returns Wilson's List Thriller TITLE: PRICE: Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"Multimedia Specialists e Pro 16 1-800-233-0010 MEDIA VISION Pro 16 CD III The ultimate multimedia upgrade kit! Features Sistem the new triple speed NEC 3xi and the Pro Audio Spectrum 16. Includes Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia for Windows, B17 Flying Fortress, Greens and Railroad Tycoon. NEW! Tech Support: (608) 233-8832 P.O. Box 55164 Madison, WI 53705-8964 Visa & Master Card welcomed! Hours: M-F 9am 6pm Sat. 9am -1pm CST $819 CREATIVE NEC CHINON CDS535 Double Speed CDROM drive OPLEXTOR MultiSpin 3Xi CREATIVE LABS, INC. SB Edutainment CD 16 Inlock your EDLENINUENI OD 16 C's potenal with this omprehenive 16-bit it. Features a large library of ntertainment titles as well as D-quality audio components nd a double speed CD-ROM rive. Power users. this is your CD-ROM drive! Lightning fast internal triple speed drive with 195ms access time, 450KB/sce transfer rate, and a continuousflow 256KB cache. Exceeds MPC level 2 specifications, and is PhotoCD Multisession, and QuickTime compliant. Switchable SCSI-1/SCSI-2 interface. * -o . With an access time of 250ms. and a double speed data transfer rate of 300KB/sec and a 256KB buffer, the CDS-535 is one of the fastest drives around! PC Magazine Editor's Choice! DM3028 Double Speed Plus CDROM drive This high performance SCSI2 CD-ROM drive is intended for demanding multimedia applications such as animation. graphics, 3-D modelling and full motion video. It features a 240ms access time, a 64KB buffer and a 335KB/sec transfer rate. $459 $449 $299 $259 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE 749 339 405 459 139 629 IM UPGRADE KITS iscovery CD 8 iscovery CD 16 Hutainment CD 16 igital Edge CD reative Omni CD int. reative Omni CD ext. IV Pro 16 CD IV Pro 16 CD II V Pro 16 CD III (NEW) ouble FusionLX usion CD 16 98 199 299 335 Fusion DoubleCD 16 Memphis Memphisto CD-ROM DRIVES Chinon CDS 535 internal Chinon CDS 535 int. w/kit Chinon CDX 535 external Chinon CDX 535 ext. w/kit Creative Omni CD int. Creative Omni CD ext. Mitsumi FX001D NEC Multispin 3Xi internal 329 NEC Multispin 3Xe external 545 NEC Multispin 3Xp portable 419 NEC Multispin 4X Pro (NEW) 934 Plextor DM3028 internal 259 Plextor DM3028 int. w/kit 319 Plextor DM5028 external 379 Plextor DM5018 ext. w/kit 429 Toshiba 3401B internal 349 Toshiba 3401E external 458 Sony CDU-33A 169 Sony CDU 33A w/kit 211 Sony CDU-561-01 int. 269 Sony CDU-7811-10 ext. 489 394 SOUND CARDS Pro Audio Studio 16XL Pro Audio Studio 16 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Pro Audio Spect 16 basic Pro Audio Power Pak 59 Sound Blaster 16 ASP/MCD 189 Sound Blastet 16 MCD 155 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2 175 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2/ASP Call for speakers, video capture cards, and SCSI controllers. Chinon CDX as external 729 819 355 389 424 199 325 189 449 205 CD-ROM TITLES We only sell CD-ROM! 33 42 29 42 th Guest th Guest 2: 11th Hour dventures dvs of Willie Beamish egis: Guardian of Fleet ir Warrior lladin and His Lamp lone in the Dark manda Stories rthur's Teacher Trouble 17 Flying Fort. W/SS2 ackroad Racers attle Chess Enhanced etter Hms Healthy Cookin lue Force: Next of Kin uzz Aldrin Rce Space Campaign astles 2 haos Continuum hessmaster 3000 Compton's Encyc. Upgrd Conan The Commerian Long Robin Hood WIN Conspiracy critical Path Lurse of Enchantia yberRace aemonsgate Tark Seed arksun ay of the Tentacle inosaur Adventure racula Unleashed Fragon's Lair Pune Dungeon Hack EcoQuest Search Cetus Eric the Unready Espn Baseball Espn Football European Racers Eye of Beholder Trilogy Eye of the Beholder 3 F15 Strike Eagle 3 FA 18 Hornet Fantasy Empires Gabriel Knight Game Paki Game Pak II Gateway 2 Goblins 2 Great Naval Battles pack Gunship 2000 w/Scenario Harrier Assault SVGA Hell Cab Hi-Tech Aircraft High Command Humans Inca Inca 2 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis Interplay's 10 Yr Anth Iron Helix Jones in the Fast Lane Journeyman Proj, The Just Grandma & Me Jutland King's Quest V King's Quest VI King's Quest VI Upgd King's Ransom Labyrinth of Time Lands of Lore Last Dinosaur Egg, The Laura Bow 2 Lawnmower Man Legend of Kyrandia Lesuire Suit Larry 6 LifeStyle's R&F Cookbook Loom Lord of the Rings Lost Treasures Infocom II Lost in Time Mad Dog Mcree Maniac Mansion 2 Mantis Exp Fighter Mario Teaches Typing Microsoft Golf Newsweek Interactive #1 Oxford English Reference PC Globe Maps & Facts Patrician Planit Adrenaline Planit Paradise Planit Earth Police Qst 4:Open Season Protostar Quantum Gate Quicken CDROM Rebel Assault Return to Zork Ringworld Sam & Max Hit the Road Scrabble Deluxe Secret Wpns of Luftwaffe Secret of Monkey Island SimCity Enhanced Space Quest 4 Space Shuttle MPC Spellcasting Party Pack Spirit of Excalibur Sporting News Pro Football Star Trek 25 Enhanced Stellar 7 Street Atlas 2.0 USA WIN Strike Commander/Tactical Stronghold System Shock T2 Chesswars Team Yankee 2 Tetris Gold Tony Larussa BB 2 Tortise and the Hare, The Total Baseball Ultima UW & Wing II W/spch Ultima Under. 1 & 2 Video Cube Weekwad Games of the Galaxy Where in World Dix Who killed Sam Rupert Wing Command/UIT UW Wing Commander III Wing Commander II Complete Wing Commander/Sec. Mission 39 Wing Commander/Ultima VI Wolf Pack Word Tales World Circuit Gran Prix World of Xeen Wrath of the Demon 32 41 39 42 36 32 44 "


"Memo To The Executive Producer (Strategy) Some very basic strategies have assisted me creative talents of screenwriters and direcgreatly in bringing my studio into the black. fors to the appropriate genre. The charts First, I make a conscientious effort to follow which accompany this article should enable the famous Katzenberg memo (a famous you to do this at a glance. Third, I try to keep Disney internal memo that said, «The story costs low. Obviously, the less money at risk, is the key!\"). I try not to produce scripts that the more likely you are to turn a profit. are \"Okay,\" but try to find the right screenFinally, the most important advertising in writer to rewrite them until they are \"Very the game is newspaper advertising. Most Good\" or \"Excellent.\" Sometimes, the most movie-goers get their information from expensive talent will see an «Excellent script their local paper, and I have never had a and decide to work for scale ($50,000) plus successful box office hit without heavy print points. This is worth shooting for. Second, advertisement. I spend considerable effort matching the count with which to start making movies. At the toughest level, the studio's worth is only $200,000,000. Naturally, you start the game by deciding to make a movie. The game allows you to buy an original screenplay (scripts with a generic quality value pre-selected by the designer), purchase rights to a blockbuster novel (with a random quality value), develop a custom idea (a random chance based on the gamer's concept), or later in the game, develop a sequel based on an earlier success. If you buy an original screenplay, the game will tell you that other studio executives think the script is okay, good, or very good. Based on that evaluation, you will be ready to move to the budgeting process. If you elect to buy rights to a novel or develop a custom idea, you will have to select a screenwriter and wait for a script to be written. Screenwriters may be excellent in one particular genre or tremendous with any script. After matching the cost and the talent you need with the screenwriters available, you can get a script in two game months. If you elect to develop your own idea, you ger to try some extra activities before hiring a screenwriter. You select a title, write a three line synopsis of the movie, determine the genre, and decide the casting requirements (number of actors, actresses and supporting characters). Then, you can select the screenwriter. No matter which you choose, you will get the consensus opinion of the executives and be able to move from your initial high concept of the film to the budgeting process. The budget, of course, is crucial. Director Talent Genre Comedy Budget Budget Action Comedy Drama Action Comedy Director Mark Spangus David Holloway Wayne Flannigan Wild Bill Cavner Milly Siegle Quentin Kenlingsworth Arthur Artphure Thomas Moretti John Barry Hill Hash Jones Tommy Boxman Gwendolyn Hughes Roland Verde Bud Quirk Lori Wheeler Christopher Pell Johnny Divoli David Houston Zack Splatt Steven McShane Rachel Bornstein Larry March Ernie Brackman Monica Li Squid Keel Stephen Wadsworth Andrea Down Charles T. Wells Tim & Jim Stone Edmar Soriano Todd Howe John Banks Chyna Almundine Action Action Sci-Fi Horror Action Let's Do Lunch In the budgetary process, you get to determine the shooting locations, total production budget and special effects budget. Then, you can hire a producer (they are listed in the order of their box office success ratio) and director (they have different areas of expertise; see the accompanying chart to avoid excessive right-mouse clicking). Directors, like actors and actresses, are hired by \"doing lunch» with their agents and negotiating a deal. You \"do lunch\" a lot in Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul, and the negotiations have a lot of impact on your movie's bottom line. An actor or actress may demand a luxury trailer on the ser rather than a personal trailer; expect the studio to foot the bill for a personal make-up artist, trainer or hair-stylist; ask for a charter jer to location sites; or force the studio to pay for a hotel suite for his/her lover. You get the privilege of trying to talk the agent into asking for lower salary, per diem Comment Most successful in genre 4 of Top 10 All-Time Money Makers Cream of the crop King of action/adventure Woman director, comedic genius Award-winning British director Two big hits, former actor Orson Welles-type wunderkind, hit or miss Journeyman director, still packs punch Militant NYU film school graduate Australian wonder. Great eye for action je for action Former assistant director, ready to solo Comedy's heir apparent 3rd generation director Television commercial director Wants to do big budget B-movie action king Ambitious Sci-Fi director King of Horror, Wants to do big budget Former screenwriter, 6 huge action hits Young hot director just out of film school Former bartender to the stars Ear for dialogue, putting audience inside the film Former Miss Taiwan Kid Squid rocks to a different drummer Macabre movies/blood and gore TV director moving to big screen Fast and efficient. Suit buzz: A winner Twins who do everything together Twins who d Former 7'8\" basketball star Former script doctor, strong on dialog a nts to move to other genres Eye for dialogue Wants action/adventure Romantic Comedy Rock Horror Comedy Comedy Horror Sci-Fi Romance Christine Plenty Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"$13.000.000 Dario Opticals 123,600. each of the stars and sit back and wait for the world premiere. The premiere shows credits for the film (simple reversed out ASCII characters DEBBBBBBBB Verul Good S 31.400.000 5950, 900 $550, 690 I ASA EO April 1995 e Green Light or points (percentage of profit potential to be realized from box office net). DeVuono says there are more than 150 different variables in the success or failure of each movie. After supervising the production through simulated months of development, pre-production, production and post-production, it's time to test screen the movie. You don't get to choose your demographics or the sercing for this test, but you do get some instantaneous figures on the potential for each film. This will enable you to decide how many screens will show the film and how much money will be spent on broadcast and print advertising. Then, you derermine billing above and below the title for Hork. Shpet BBBBBBBBBBBBBB ETTE Gm Suspense Thri 110 SCREENPLAY IS COMPLETE Bradford Tranfawell Thomas Ganzer Ernie Brackman Resmi renente Gabriel Falconer Aaron Kiplinger Stella Mart Not Required Supporting Talent: 3 MOVIE May 1994 BIJOU 55@, 088 550,000 $250, 900 TIPATER Tickets ELD GUT 5380, AGS 158 TL GOD. Bili Swartz The Dead Man's Hand Conrold Helurich Change Billing Use This Buning Writing Talent Writer Genre Comment Joe LaBritz Former child star, best writer in town Stephen W. Hull The out of there stories Margaret Fostly Romance Queen of Romance Comedy Binky Everstein Rock Sex, Drugs and Rock 'n Roll Melvin Dainty Action Big action, big violence Buck Macklin Action King of action/adventure James Tinaglia Comedy Architect of quality comedy Lisa Well Drama Three hanky, edge of seat drama writer Andrew Brace Sci-Fi Extremely gifted scripter George Montgomery Action Action writer Bradford Tranfawell Mystery Great drama and mystery writer Powder Renford Action Great dialogue, rewrites for big stars Howard Trey Mystery Terrific mystery writer Thomas Dunningham Comedy Great comedy writer, book adaptations Susan Adams Drama Terrific drama writer Flip Stevens Hot-shot college kid with flair for crazy antics/break neck pace Melody Brook Drama Drama and comedy, difficult to work with Roger Drake Action Action/adventure with funny banter Connie Zimmer Rewrite specialist, recommended Jake Poww Comedy TV writer, strong comedy, action, sci-fi Brydal Dayes Romance Former super model, romantic comedy-Bet on it Terry & Teri Thandle Husband/wife action team Paul Martin Great script doctor-use for all rewrite needs Lora Wadsworth Drama Drama, book adaptations-keep away from sci-fi Steve Le Maux Action English major fresh out of school-action, action, action Robert F. Marquine Best-selling novelist-prima donna Caroline Daroline Comedy Great comedy writer, superb on rewrites Crazy Joe Spiff The rewrite maniac-maybe Andrea Towlen Heir apparent in the book adaptation department Mark Durk Comedy Former mailroom assistant, knack for comedy and action Martin Howard Shellup Suspense Sci-Fi and suspense, rewrites Marina Rosovodkskovik Former Russian poet-hmm? Tanya Ooo Former Zack Zimmer mistress Francis Mark Powell Bartender-turned-waiter-turned-actor-turned-writer Marilny Ooo Former Zimmer mistress, angry enough to be great 2 B . 130/956. GODINE coming out of a black screen) and segues into a U.S. and world map to display the domestic and worldwide box office grosses. DeVuono deliberately drags out the credits with some random additions in order to keep the \"world premiere\" showings from becoming commonplace. If you make money for the studio, you end up in the Hall of Fame. If you fail, you are destined for the backlot of movie history. What Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul does not let you do is to mirror reality by starting with a small, limited release and expanding distribution should the movie catch on. It also doesn't let you tailor a re-release around the award season. There is, of course, a practical reason for this. Mr. DeVuono couldn't pur actual industry awards into the program without licensing the names of the awards from the groups that own those awards. However, award sequences may be added to future versions of the game, assuming the original release does reasonably well in the marketplace. Further, it does not let you make up any of your losses in the theaters with video distribution (or selling licenses to toy manufacturers and computer/videogame publishers). Thumbs Up Even with these minor limitations, Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul is a fascinating exercise for the detail-oriented strategy gamer. Gamers who prefer statistics-based strategy games over action-oriented, visually rich games should love the quality design and unique subject matter of Hollywood Mogul. It gets my box office dollars, in spite of the low production values. CGW The End April 1994 Page 131 "


"THE VIEW IS SPECTACULAR. THE ACTION IS ON THE EDGE. THE THRILL 18 REAL THERE IS ONLY ONE WAY TO MAKE IT HAPPEN. TM COMANCHE CD The rotor blades are turning. The fuselage dips. Your chopper is reflected in the river beneath you. Watch out! It's reall Or is it? With Voxel Space from NovaLogic your sense of reality is given the ultimate challenge. With twelve detailed terrains, from arid desert gorges, lush mountain valleys to frozen wastelands and wide river basins, Comanche is the promise of 3-D simulation acton come to life. With Comanche CD you'll take on 100 complete missions. And when the Pentagon calls you they'll never know you were trained on a personal computer. Suggested price of Comanche CD $74.95 Requires IBM-PC compatible with CD-ROM drive GRE Winner of numerous major awards including: Best Simulation Video Games and Computer Entertainment Action Game of the Year PC Games Plus Best Graphics of the Year Computer Game Review NOVA LOGIC Actual screen images. Circle Reader Service #82 "


"TM WOLFPACK Now on CD-ROM! Since its release, WolfPackTM has set a new standard for submarine simulations. Winner of Tilt Magazine's Tilt D'Or award for best simulation, it has consistently topped the best seller charts, earning raves from the reviewing community: Wolfpack can only be classified as a genre buster, one of those rare games that sets a new standard for other releases in the same field to live or die by. Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The graphics for Wolfpack are stunning.\" Wargamer Now Wolfpack is available on PC CD-ROM. The same compelling game play of the floppy version allows you to command either a WW2 submarine wolf pack or the surface fleet. Historically accurate, your weapons and instruments are precisely keyed to the war year that you choose to play, A full construction set is included to allow you to re-create actual battles. From NovaLogic the creators of Comanche Maximum OverkillTM and Ultrabots Wolfpack CD-ROM also includes: 58 new missions, 70 total. Over 5 minutes of breathtaking animation sequences. Pick up a copy at your local software store and find out what underwater warfare is all about. NOVA LOGIC Actual screen images. Circle Reader Service #83 "


"REVIEW REBOUNDING IN THE STRATOSPHERE NBA Photo Courtesy of LA Lakers Strat-O-Matic Basketball Drives Hard To The Hard Drive by Jim Gindin most major statistical categories, except in field goal percentage. There, the great performances seemed almost random. Pervis Ellison of Washington led the league at .577 in one replay, but dropped to 536 the next season, while Charlotte's Johnny Newman rallied from .565 to a league-leading .597. Three-point shooting provided even more 18:53 -2-8. SCOTT 1 9. TIIREATT LA A PTS Re As P S. TIRETT 2 H H H D.SCOTT OHH 8 ? 11 11 U.DOC A.GREEM H H H 11 V.DIVAC # # 10 11 Button PTX koos D.HROUMH11 H11 R. LEU18 0 8 11 K.MALE H H H 11 D.ANDEL.NO 11HH 11 R.IRISHI 68 11 with my game plan to see what combinations of players and strategies will improve the team's winning percentage. The strategy that yields a few more wins might be one that limits Olajuwon's point total a little. It might also require stretching Olajuwon's talents to get his point total past 30 per game. This is why flexibility is so crucial in good game design. Altering a game plan must produce differing results. Many games achieve statistical accuracy by using players' exact shooting percentages and assigning them a certain number of allowed shots per game. Once those shots are taken, the player is \"exhausted\" and will completely lose his effectiveness. In SOM Basketball, because shooting percentage is not the sole mechanism for achieving scoring accuracy, more options are available when coaching. Fatigue is a much more complex system as well, with several factors leading to the gradual loss of a player's effectiveness. Despite Strat-O-Matic's flexibility, the design still commits some flagrant fouls. For instance, strange things happened during the first game of a crucial playoff series berween Houston and Chicago. Apparently, the game's algorithms decided Chicago wasn't going to play defense, and Houston racked up 20-for-26 shooting from three-point range. Even though Kenny Smith was 9-forStrat-O-Matic Basketball ORIJ.UORTHIY trat-O-Matic, the company best known for their text-intensive and statistically sound baseball simulations, has recently taken to the court with version 1.0 of StratO-Matic Basketball. Like the company's other titles, this game is a coaching simulation that uses icons and a crude representation of a basketball court for graphics. During play, a basketball dances berween player names on the court, and when the human coach needs to make a decision, a nest of icons appears in the corner of the screen. Decisions are required for shot selection, some pass selection, and offensive and defensive alignment. In sports games of this sort, three aspects stand out as being necessary for success. The game must, of course, provide statistical realism, but it must also have enough flexibility to give the player a true feelseronte ing of coaching and an interface that captures the flow of the game. Of these goals, statistical realism is perhaps the easiest. If you provide the correct percentages, random number generation tends to allow statistical accuracy over the course of an entire season. SOM Basketball does fairly well in this category. In simulations of the 199293 NBA season, the same players routinely led the league in scoring. Chicago's superhero Michael Jordan always led the league, with Dominique Wilkins of Atlanta and Houston center Hakeem Olajuwon trading the second and third positions. Of the top 10 scorers in the NBA, only Olajuwon was consistently a couple of points better than in real life. SOM Basketball garnered similar results in 1-0. GAFEN DAMES LOITIIV BEST PLETEC US. KEVIN GAMLE Out offene thist l'ass SE variation. In every season simulation, one player shattered the NBA record for shooting percentage. Team shooting percentages remained constant with NBA results, both on offense and defense. When Newman improved, teammate Larry Johnson faltered. SOM Basketball operates under a situational system, with shooting percentages calculated individually for every play. If you are playing full seasons, you don't necessarily want players to duplicate performance game after game. The best attitude to bring into season replays is that the real-life statistics are just one manifestation of bringing 300-plus athletes into an NBA schedule. When I coach Houston, I might experiment TITLE: Strat-O-Matic Basketball PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: VGA graphics, 2MB hard drive space PROTECTION: Key Disk DESIGNER: Bob Winberry PUBLISHER: Strat-O-Matic Game Company, Inc. Glen Head, NY (800) 645-3455 Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"Conquer Memory Nothing masters memory like QEMM». And now, for just a few dollars more than you would pay for QEMM alone, getQEMM7 with some of the hottest games around! Game Game* Game Pack 1 Pack 2 Pack 3 QEMM & 2 HOT GAMES QEMM & 2 HOT GAMES INGRED SSPECIPRIVATCER MOM ISOLD OUT Dua per QEMM was once the power users' secret. Now it's the power players' secret. As Compute Magazines reviewer said: «If you're a Power user who wants to play with the monster games, then MemMaker probably won't free enough memory. You'll need Quarterdeck's QEMM 7 memory manager utility, which not only will free up more than enough memory but will even optimize parts of your multiply-configured system.\"No wonder its the number one selling PC utility. And now, it's virtually free when you buy our game packs. Check with your favorite retailer or call Quarterdeck direct. With QEMM on your side, you'll never be defeated by the memory monster again. Game Pack 2 includes the hot Aces of the Pacific, a realistic World War II fighter simulation and Front Page Sports: Football, a superdetailed Sports simulation Game Pack 3 features Shadow Caster, the exciting graphic role playing game and Privateer, a challenging space adventure in the Wing Commander Series. Quarterdeck PC Connection (800) 243-8088 800 Software (800 888-4880 Circle Reader Service #120 (800) CompUSA for the dealer nearest you Quarterdeck Direct: (800) 354-3222 MicroWarehouse (800) 367-7080 01993 Quarter Jak Office Systems Trademats are property of their respective owners "


"11:13 S. THREATT 2 1 9 11 J.UORTHY . U.DIAC Boston PTS RAF D. BROUNH H R. LEWIS HA K.COMBLE A. ANDELNA R.MRISHO VS. HERGIE LEWIS DION COTT 3pt Pron 10 all on his own, the Chicago defenders Sometimes the choice is obvious. Sometimes never guarded him closely. Olajuwon wasn't it isn't. silent, either, hitting 20-for-38 from the field, On occasion, the player with the ball has grabbing 14 rebounds and blocking nine the option of passing to a teammate, and this shots in a 45-point performance. He was only is where coaches can concentrate on exploitdouble-teamed when teammate Roberting weaknesses in the computer defense. Horry played the small forward position. With Houston, the temptation is to feed the In this case, the game outsmarred itself. It ball to Olajuwon at every opportunity, but gives the human player more tools than it Olajuwon does have his off games, in one case affords the computer coach. No NBA team only making 12-of-34 shots. Concentrating has ever hit 20-for-26 from three-point range, on another player on offense might have not because NBA players aren't capable of turned a 14-point loss into victory. shooting that well, but because a coach will During breaks in play, coaches can change play closer defense against perimeter shooters defensive assignments. Coaches may use halfif a team is making three-pointers early in a court or fast-break offenses, and half-court or contest. The trade-off of closer perimeter de pressing defenses. On offense, you must specfense is that a coach can't then double-team ify two players to remain mostly in the key a player like Olajuwon as effectively. But arca. On defense, one player is assigned to the SOM Basketball's computer coach neither stopped Olajuwon nor the three-pointer, and the result was a 27-point Houston rout. In the other games of the series, the threepointer was not falling (26-for-69 in five games), and the offense relied much more on Olajuwon. The defense still didn't doubleteam, and Hakeem averaged 39 points in the series. Because of this, Houston won four-ofsix games against the NBA Champion Bulls. The flexible design allows more positive results, however. Chicago played one game without Jordan entirely, but still won as Scottie Pippen scored 21 with 10 rebounds and GAME W WOW WOW HB cight Chicago players scored eight or more points. A less flexible game would never allow key as an intimidator. Defenders for the three an entire team to compensate in that manner. offensive players in the perimeter may indiIn another game, Horry scored all 13 of his vidually choose to play close, normal or sag points in the fourth quarter to rally Houston defense. Any player can play it safe\" on to a come-from-behind victory. Again, less defense when in foul trouble, allowing basflexible games don't have room in their algo kets when they would usually contend a shot. rithms to allow for streaky play. This greatly or streaky play. This greatly All these options lead to enormous var All these options lead to enormous variety increases the \"feel\" a coach has for being in a real basketball game. Is the three-pointer goUnfortunately, the computer AI will not ing to work today? Does Jordan have his take advantage of many of these options, shooting touch? Who do I go to in the fourth especially on defense. The Al generates a quarter? game plan at the start of a game and does not deviate, even if it means calling a time out A Full Key Press while Jordan has the ball on a fast break in order to make a substitution. SOM Basketball also provides a feel for According to Strat-O-Matic's designers, coaching through its innovative interface. During game play, most of the screen depicts : team defense is much more important than a half-court offense with labels for each individual defense. Thus, there are usually player. After a few passes, the coach is given very few differences between defenders' indioptions to shoot based on the situation. Invidual ratings at the same position. For examside shots give the option to make a \"power ple, Phoenix's Charles Barkley scored 28.9 move toward the basket. Sometimes the points per game in a season's worth of games player must choose between an outside shot, against Charlotte, whose Larry Johnson is not penetrating towards the basket, or pulling up considered a good defender. But he scored for a three-pointer. The bottom of the screen 28.1 points against Cleveland, facing an exshows a graph representing the probability of cellent defender in Larry Nance. Scoring is success with each of the available shots. not affected by individual defensive abilities, although they do influence shot selection; Barkley attempted 242 outside shots against Nance, but only 115 against Johnson. A League Of Your Own The game comes with an automatic league play option that allows you to import individual games played on another computer, making multi-player leagues a possibility. Each team has a small set of profiles which set rough estimates for player assignments at each position. Before each league game, the computer uses these profiles to generate a game plan. On a 486-33MHz, SOM Basketball can recreate one game in about three seconds and a full NBA season in about 50 minutes. It keeps a full set of statistics for each player and team, and can quickly generate leader boards for both raw stats and per-48-minutes-of-play stats. The league option will also create a schedule for your new league, but the program has trouble with divisions having different numbers of teams. The program cannot generate a playoff schedule, so you must figure out the playoff teams and manually add the games to the schedule. Injuries are possible in Strat-O-Matic but last only a couple of games. They are not recommended for league simulation, since the computer can not generare a game plan without players eligible at The game's copy protection is another sore point, though it is better than previous StratO-Matic releases. The original scheme allowed only one installation from the master disk. The copy protection also failed when users upgraded to DOS 6.0, an event which upset many customers. In response, SOM Basketball uses key disk copy protection, so you must pull out the original disks every time you play. Overall, Strat-O-Matic Basketball has made a solid entry into the computer basketball simulation market. Play is entertaining and provides a type of realism which effectively provides a type of realis simulates the decisions made by NBA coaches. The game provides a strong level of statistical realism as well. If the computer AI was better at adjusting to game situations, especially defensively, I would unreservedly label this product a \"must-have\" for any sports simulation buff. As it stands, playing against the computer is a little like going one-on-one with a one-armed man: he might be a challenge on half of the court, but you always have a weakness you can exploit. CGW Daf Must Hasil Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"Hear voices from the past STAR W A Piloting the U.S.S. and DVEREE! Enterprise\" is a thrill in itself. But now the actual voices of William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and DeForest Kelley will make your adventure truly out-of-thisworld through the space-age power of CD-ROM. You'll test your intergalactic problem-solving savvy during eight separate journey through stunning 3D alien worlds — with light years of action beyond our regular DOS game! It's an epic experience that gamers everywhere are talking about. So call 1 (800)969-GAME today for more information, or visit your local retailer OPD Hear Captain Kirk shout familiar commands, Spock coolly share his classic Vulcan wisdom, and much more...thanks to the voice-over talents of William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and DeForest Kelley Authentic musical score and sound effects from the TV series enhance the Star Trek experience The stunning color of space and alien worlds comes alive through 256 color VGA graphics Al-new exciting ending to one of the best-selling computer games in the world Easy point-and-click icon interface Rather than read screens of text, you can concentrate on the game's action as all the actors play their roles STAR BY GAMERS FOR GAMERS Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 TREK Circle Reader Service #117 GTH CIRCUITIVE ENHANCED C I NE MATIC ROM MULTIMEDIA DOS "


"REVIEW Pile Up! UTM Will Accolade Get A Late Hit For Unnecessary Roughness? by Bernard Dy VTT hile the NFL season will be over by the time you read this, the playoffs for the best computer football game will still be on. Accolade's latest entry into the goal-line pileup is Unnecessary Roughness, a game that loudly boasts of rotoscoped 3-D SVGA graphics and unlimited camera angles. For crazed football fans who could care less about the hype, the obvious question is whether Unnecessary Roughness is tough enough to play with Dynamix's Front Page Sports: Football Pro and Micro Prose's Coaches Club Football. Grint A Rough First Quarter From the beginning, Unnecessary Roughness stability was in question. The product installed easily, but getting it to run was tricky. Sound effects and music played properly, but the voice of Al Michaels lacked the smoothness it enjoyed in Accolade's own Hardball 3. On-line help suggested Pro Audio Spectrum 16 users switch to Sound Blaster mode, which helped, but Michaels' dulcer tones were still marred by scratches and pops. Once running, Unnecessary Roughness opens with an interesting introductory sequence (which has nothing to do with football, or roughness, for that matter!) and then reveals its main menu. The menu of game options is similar to other foorball games, including exhibition games as well as seasonlong replays. The mandatory playbook is included, offering you the option of creating new plays, and an editing function allows you to input statistics for teams and individual high resolution visuals are very nicely deplayers or create teams from scratch. With the railed, but the graphics at the lower detail exception of a few new conventions, the inlevels are so reduced, it's like playing a differterface is easy to navigate. The play options ent game. In high-res, uniforms are embelscreen, for example, lists categories such as lished with stripes on pants and jerseys, a dash graphics level, passing mode, play/coach of color spices up the helmet logos for each team and, best of all, the uniforms sport player numbers that can actually be seen during play. In other football simulations, the numbers must be called up as an option, floating above the player, rather than being readable on the jersey itself. Unnecessary Roughness' numbers, while not always visible from certain angles, stay on the jersey and don't obstruct the view of the field. The uniform editor allows modification of all the colors and even includes an icon painter to create a logo, though the logo doesn't appear on the uniforms. The gridiron itself has clearly defined hash marks, sidelines and end zones. Another of Unnecessary Roughness strong mode and sound levels. Each item is easily points is the Accolade Infinity Cam. It offers accessed, and the flexible interface supports excellent views of the action, similar to those keyboard, keypad, joystick and mouse. After familiarizing yourself with the pre-game for camera can easily be zoomed in and out, or malities, you will find that like its primary rotated around the held, and the program rotated around the field, and the program competitors, Unnecessary Roughness attempts pauses when you shift views so that play is not to appeal to a variety of users by interrupted. The Infinity Cam is a neat feaoffering both coaching and ar Unnecessary Roughness cade modes. After selecting which mode to use, the screen ACCOLADEswitches to a zoom-in of the Unnecessary Roughness $59.95 inevitable coin toss. SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386-33MHz or better, 4MB Up to this point the graphics RAM, 8MB hard disk space, SVGA/VGA graphics: are standard fare, but the actual supports all major sound game graphics are much more PROTECTION: Documentation look up PUBLISHER: Accolade, Inc. impressive, assuming that you (408) 246-1053 WELTHEA run it on a fast enough machine (at least a 486-25MHz). The IS FUTOTTA FUPCR VGA GRAFICSI TITLE: PRICE: cards San Jose, CA Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"ture, especially when you can pan to a receiver while the ball floats in mid-air! The replay feature of Unnecessary Roughness also uses the Infinity Cam and allows the focus to be shifted to the player of your choice. As nice as the graphics are, they are unforrunarely spoiled by sparse animation. Compared to Football Pro, Unnecessary Roughness appears to have much fewer animation frames per second. Player movements are choppy, and tackles are a two-step process—one moment the running back is hitting the hole, and the next he's on the ground. Upon further review of the instant replay, the defensive player looks like he falls in front of the back, then the back goes down. This is hardly as realistic as Football Pro, where the backs sometimes straight-arm, lcan forward, or spin as the defensive players drag them down. The linemen are a laughable example of the lack of detail, crouching motionless until someone nears them. They actually do a decent job of picking up the blitz, but are nowhere near as impressive looking as in Football Pro or even CC Football when forming a protective pocket for the quarterback. FIRST Down San FRANCISCO OD 35 vandens 25 Y 2 log muidu TACKLE ORUL For Som Ford. Pinus 3 ORIGID... San FUCIOCO TIMEOUIS Are You Ready For Some Action? Pro mode is much like Advanced, but also resembles football, even from an arcade includes the receiver control elements after standpoint. the pass is thrown; it is by far the most diffi In coaching mode, the play editor is easy to cult to master. use and allows for a myriad of possibilities, One major problem with Unnecessary without any programming. After basic formaRoughness is that it does not seem to matter tions are loaded, each player can be individuwhat the speed ratings are for players. Defenally accessed. A series of pop-up menus allow sively, all the players can run faster than the assignment of routes, run speeds, delay inoffensive players, which despite Lawrence structions and blocking direction. After all Taylor's remarkable attributes, simply isn't assignments have been set for selected players, the case in reality. In Unnecessary Roughness a defense can be loaded and the plays can be you will see defensive backs catch receivers practiced. During a game, plays are selected like John Taylor from behind, even with a from the playbook built by the coach. 15-yard lead! The value of an NFLPA license Though each page is limited to displaying six plays, each team can have up to ten play books, which should be enough for most aspiring coaches. There's A Flag On The Play The AI is going to be a disappointment for those familiar with the competition. Unnecessary Roughness seems to choose plays based solely on down situation, completely ignoring opponent tendencies. I created a custom play where Flipper Anderson would fake an inside Young tinaw tung POBB Toro Fun cut before breaking back to the sideline, finishing out the pattern as a fly route. Despite my repeating it on multiple downs, the computer stopped it only inter0 0 0 0 0 mittently, allowing me to pile up 0 0 0 0 0 an unrealistic share of 60-yard gains. Big plays are fine once in a while, but sometimes Unnecessary Roughness gets ridiculous. If a QB can evade the rush for more than four seconds, the entire defense suddenly abandons coverage and starts running after him, allowing him to toss a long ball to an unguarded receiver. Although a pending patch will hopefully address the issue, it is unbelievable that such an obvious error was allowed to appear in a supposedly is that you can have real names marched with finished product. realistic performances, but this value is The program supports printouts and trades stripped from the game by its generic apat the individual team level, but it doesn't proach (at least in appearance) to speed. In march the competition's features for league some arcade games, this is used to provide trading and multiple season play. Ultimately, balance, but Joe Montana Football modeled then, I have to flag Accolade for an illegal speed ratings better, with no loss in playabilprocedure. Even judged solely on its own ity, and it was released years ago. merits, ignoring the competition, Unnecessary With the speed ratings as they are, the Roughness obviously lacks testing. For whatrunning game is a little harder than intermeever reason, Accolade did not collaborate this diate mode passing. Against speedy defensive time around with MindSpan Technologies, players, it is a rare occasion when a running the creative talents behind two prior PC hits, back can turn the corner on sweeps and reHardball 3 and Joe Montana Football. The verses, and QB bootlegs are nearly result is a game which fails to score on either impossible. I got better results running bethe arcade or the football simulation fields. tween the tackles, where blockers could run Unnecessary Roughness could have been a coninterference. The game simply over-emphatender, if it had only spent a few more months sizes passing to the degree where it hardly in training camp. Cw TIMEOUTSOL KICK OFF COU1B KICK KICK RETURN LEFT ONSIDE LEFT RICK RETURN OHSIDE RICHT KICK RETUR RIGHT Despite the animation problems, Unnecessary Roughness matches up fairly well with its competitors from an arcade standpoint. When using the joystick, the players aren't constrained by some mathematical equation which limits movement based on weight or momentum, as they are in Football Pro. Football Pro, as a result, is a much more realistic coaching game than Unnecessary Roughness, but as many have discovered, it is difficult to play in action mode. The quick joystick response makes things possible in Unnecessary Roughness that are almost absent in Football Pro or Coaches Club, such as reversing direction quickly, throwing on the run, or following lead blocks through heavy traffic. Unnecessary Roughness' arcade passing modes are numerous, offering a level of competitive play for each type of gamer. In the basic mode, action freezes while the quarterback checks each receiver, with the computer controlling the receiver until the pass is either caught or incomplete. Intermediate passing is more complicated, as you gain control of the selected receiver as soon as the pass is thrown. and it is up to you to get him to the reception point. Advanced passing opens up three passing windows where you can see the receivers running their routes, with real-time action bringing the added pressure of the pass rush. April 1994 Page 139 "


"ROCK & BACH STUDIO Mosi Exploration COMPUTER Express = Ages 7.14 Produce your own action packed music videol Assemblea band from o lorge cost of outrageous characters with their own indi vidual music styles. Teach thom your songs, or choose from a funky collection of programmed solections Conduct, load the jom, or let them go wild on their own. You control the sound and light mixer. Put it all together and create videos for your friends to play! See how sound is related to music. Try out the instruments in a symphony orchestra Travel through music history with Buch, Mozari and others. Features SVGA graphics and digitized sound, Binary Zoo: DOS KID KEYS Ages 4.8. A mogi cal typing pro gram that builds skills for young children. A friend Kid Keys ly dragon named Keystone guides children through three exciting activities that familiarize them with basic key board functions. Kids can explore the keyboard with unique and ani moled imagery in the Magic keyboard. As they type, different an mations appear that reinforce letters and key post tions. Once children are familiar with the key board, they can play Dragon Tunes and the Alphabet Song Game Features easy to read typo. digitized speech, music and sound offects. Since 1985 800-228-74495 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $21 $28 Davidson DOS GUS GOES TO CYBERTOWN CD MATH ACE Turns your kids on to math Captivating arcodestyle that has als on to the GREAT COMPUTER ADVENTURE Begin a heart pounding BU12 adventure when you find the secret mes sage from the lost children. In your quest to save the chil dren, you chal lenge the gremlin, search the cave attic and other hiding places, solve riddles, puzzles and unravel trou hling mysteries. Learning about computers has never been so excitingl Teaches and entertains children ages 7-12 Pat your skills against the gremlin and play the game again and again for hours of fun and learning WAT MONARCH NOTES CD Enter the multimedia world of literaturel Watch excit ing, amusing animations, and entertain ing, informativo videos. See phologrophs of famous authors and listen to hundreds of norroled pas sages and quo tations An interactive multimedia CDRom for the whole family with learning activities for those under eight years old Join Gus, the hippest most lov able dog over created for an exciting learning experience in Cyburtown. Search for the elusive cyber buds, three of the most original and intriguing friends your kids will ever love. It's a magical town with lots to explore! Experience the Pet Shop, the Toy Store, and the Time Travel Park Features complete interactivity, coptivating graphics and animation, tich digitized soundtrack, full motion video, digi tal photos and spoken directions gome, essential skill Monarch der Wide Provides the complete text of every Monarch Note Study Guide ever published covering the works of 226 authors, Highlighted text allows you to jump to related topics and view popup definitions and examples of literary terms. Animations of key events along with rare video interviews with notablo authors will entertain you as you leam the classical $39 Bureau of Electronic PublishingDOS-COV building exercises, and an intro duction to 70 major math con cepts. Features engaging graphies, MIDI music and sound effects. Hundreds of real world challenges with Bat Bot your animated math navigator. More than 3000 math problems with a visual math function generator. Also features Smartlab, on interactive math workshop Magic Quest: DOS, MAC $21 ATI: DOS $28 $34 Modern Media Vonturat DOS/MAC CDP S ONOVAN READING &S REFERENCE Beginning Reading WIN.. BookMaster for Speed Reading ........ Cinderella CD.... . Dinosoft Phonics.. Dragon Tales CD Follow the Reader ........... Gus Goes to Cybertown CD....... Heather Hits Homerun CD... Jr. High Grade Builder 3 Pack Just Grandma & Me CD........ Long Hard Day of the Ranch CD.... Mind Castle....... . ............. Moving Gives A Stomor Mud Pubble CD... New Kid on the BloeV Once Upon A Time' Paper Bon Chemistry Works DOS/WIN. Dinosoft Addition & Subtrach Dinosoft Math Flashcards... Dinosoft Multiply & Divide..... Eorl, Aoth C Early Math WIN.... Geometry Concepts Kid Cod WIN... Learn About Fractions Line & Shape Eater CD. Math Blaster Spot WIN Math Blaster Spot/Kid Works Il Math Blaster WIN Math Rabbit Enhanced.. Math Rabbit WIN Mathology Mega Math..... Mental Math Gomes 2.0... Millie's Moth House Operation Neptune....... Request your Super Solvers Midnight/ Super Solvers Out Ny. Free T-Shirt Treasure Math Stormy Treasure Moth Story with purchase Treasure Mountain What's My Angle Young Math.... che CD NON American Heritage Dictionary .......... Americans in Space CD.... Animals: San Diego Zoo CD. BodyWorks 3.0... Body Works 3.0 CD............ CNN Newsroom Global View CD Compton's Encyclopedia CD Creep Crowlies CD.. Cute 'n' Cuddlies.... Dictionaries & languages CD Dictionary of Living World CD... Dinosaur Adventure CD.. Dinosaurs by Microsoft CD Dinosaurs! MPC Encyclopedia CD... Discovery CD Pack...... . Encarta MPC Encyclopedia CD.. Greatest Book Collection CD......... InfoNation Rating USA to Z...... J.F.K Assassination CD......... Key Dictionary Plus.......... MS Dinosaurs Multimedia CD ......... Orbits: Voyage the Solar System ...... Webster's Dictionary....... 3D Dinosaur Adventure... Body illustrated.... Company of Whales CD Computer Works .... Concentrale ....... Dondy Dinosaurs CD DinoPark Tycoon....... Discover Space ....... EZ Cosmos 4.0 Earth Treks.... Eco Quest Search for Cetus CD... Ecology Treks............... Great Computer Adventure. Jurassic Dinosaurs CD Jurassic Dinosaurs WIN.... Kid's Zoo CD... Kid's Zoo DOS/WIN. Oceans Below CD Odell Down Under WIN.. Oregon Truil Deluxo.... Pepper's Adventures in Time... Quarky & Quaysoo's Science Science Adventure 2.0.... Spoce Adventure Space Adventure CD............ Space Adventure II CD.... Time Riders American History Time Treks.... .... ..... Undersea Advonture WIN..... Webster's Dictionary WIN Where in America's Past Carmen ..... Where in Space Carmen Deluxe .......... Where in Time Carmen?........ Where in the World is Carmen?... Wild Science Arcade w/T-SHIRT Zookeeper ........... Zugs Race Through Space NIN WIN Kids CD rograms... book CD Tale of Peter Rabbit CD Talking Classic Tales CD Talking Jungle Safari CD... Tolking Phonics Plus .... Tell Tale Heart CD Thomas' Snowsuit CD...... Tortoise & The Hare CD... Treasure Cave Ugly Duckling CD ........... Who Wants Arthur CD. Zugs Dinosaur World.... Aluddin Print Kit.... Animation Studio WIN Botty Crocker Boys & Girls.... Creation Stories CD. Creative Writer WIN Fine Artist Kid Cuts..... Kid Doodle WIN..... Kid Fun CD Kid Pictures... Kid Pix Kid Rhymes Kid Works .... . Learn to Play Guitar CD. Lenny's Music Toons CD Lenny's Music Toons WIN Logo Writer .......... MetroGnomes' Music...... Miracle Piano System ......... My Computer Diary .......... My Own Stories. PC Crayon... Peter Pan:Story Painting Ady.... Peter Pan Story Painting CD Print Artist WIN..... Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 .......... Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 WIN. Print Shop Deluxe Comic WIN. Print Shop Deluxe Comics. Print Shop Deluxe Companion............ Print Shop Deluxe Companion WIN...... Print Shop Deluxe Sompler.......... Print Shop Deluxe Sampler WIN..... Show & Tell for Kids. Sound Source......... .. Story Book Weaver ........... Student Writing Center CD Wild Learning Safari.......... Mario Teaches Typing Movis Beocon Typing 3.0 Mavis Beacon Typing CD. Typing Tutor V Plus.......... Typing Tutor V Plus WIN... CREATIVITY SCIENCE & HISTORY M CD. Aesop's Fables Aladdin and Hit Always Arthur Amanda Stories BINARY ZOO Arthur's Teacher Bailey's Book Hd Rock 'n Bach Beauty and the Boginning Readin Mystery at the Museums Beginning Reading Wild Seience Arcade BookMaster for Speed W e nce a Cinderella CD .......... Dinosoft Phonics Dragon Tales CD Follow the Reader Gus Goes to Cybertown CD... Math Blaster Spot/Kid Works 11 Math Blaster WIN Math Rabbit Enhanced... Math Rabbit WIN.......... Mathology Mega Math Mental Math Games 2.0 Millie's Math House....... Operation Neptuno......... StickyBear Math Tutor. Super Solvers:Midnight Rescue... Super Solvers: Oui Numbered..... Treasure MathStorml........ Treasure MathStormI WIN.... Treasure Mountain What's My Angle.. . Young Math ........ ongame Tutor g Tutor cient Empires.. n Bunny CD abbit CD. : Tales CD... Tales CD Talking Ph Tell Tole H ... Mind Castle..... Mud Pubble CD... New Kid on the Block CD Once Upon A Time 1... Paper Bag Princess CD. Poier and the Wolf CD Phonics Plus...... ... Reader Rabbit ............... Reader Rabbit! WIN Reader Rabbit I WIN... Reader Rabbit lll........... Reader Rabbit Ready for Letter Reading Adventures in Oz Reading and Me Talking Ready, Set, Read WIN........ Rusty & Rosy Volume 1 WIN Rusty & Rosy Volume 2 WIN Scary Poems for Rotten Kids CD... School House: 30 Programs........ Sleeping Beauty Storybook CD Speed .......... Speed Reader WIN............. StickyBear Reading Tutor StickyBear Reading Tutor ........ Super Solvers Ancient Empires..... Tale of Benjamin Bunny CD............ READING 2nd Math Alge Blaster 3 WIN........ Alge Blaster Plus Algebra.... Algebra By Example ....... Bull's Eye Math Calculus WIN Championship Blackjack MATH Aesop's Fables CD........ Aladdin and His Lamp CD.... Always Arthur CD Amanda Stories CD ..... Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD Bailey's Book House.......... Beauty and the Beast CD.. Beginning Reading CD Advanced Spelling Tricks CD Advonced Spelling Tricks WIN Alphabet Blocks WIN..... Basic Spelling............. Basic Spelling CD ............ Mario's Fun with Letters ........ Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Spell i Plus... Super Solvers:Spellbound Super Solvers Spellbound CD Word Attack 3.... Word Munchers Word Tales CD Yobi's Spelling Tricks WIN... SPELLING S "


"Kaleng TALKING PHONICS PLUS HISPA Ages 4 to 8. Build award winning PHONIC reading, spelling Plus and vocabulary skills and each chil dren to love to red! A playful. rewarding and invigorating explo ration into essential language skills Teaches beginning, middle and ending consonant sounds as well as long and short vowels, Voice onhanced see and say technique with special rewards offer encouragement every step of the way. Five multiple level activities keep learning fun and challenging BIG GREEN DISC An interactive THE BIG documentary on GREEN DISC the future of our planet. Informes you of the environmental issues threatening our planet and what you can do to help solve them Looks of prob lems including global warming pollution, ozone depletion, acid roin, and the potential solu Tions: recycling, alternative energy sources and conservation. After examining the facts, enter into an eftvironmental debate. Fully narrated with stun ning photography throughout features specially filmed video sequences, in-depth photo sotes, and animated diagrams ALGE BLASTER 3 Ages 12 to adult Newest version of the world's best ALGE-SLASTER 3 selling algebra program. Guides you through on entire year's alge bra curriculum, using an inferoc tive tutorial approach Four unique activities with all new SVGA graphics, animations and sound will help you develop a be! ser understanding of the algebraic process Learn how to solve equations and translate word prob lems into algebraic expressions. Two challenging now graphic games will ensure that you become o grophing expert Covers all subject areas and Features on screen hints MARIO'S TIME MACHINE Join the Mario Brothers on a wild MARIO'S ride through time TIME MACHINE as they to live great moments in history in this new series Take a romp with the dinosaurs during the Jurassic per od, stop off in ancient Egypt to meet Cleopatra, and arrive just in time to witness the first successful powered light of the 20th Century-all in a day's work for the popular plumbers. See Morio visit the workshop of Thomas Edison, ride along with Nail Armstrong and cheer for Bobo Ruth, in addition to witnessing scores of other historic events Entertaining and educational for the whole family Stone & Associates: DOS $27 $55 $33 Sony Imagosoft DOS-CD $28 Software Toolwork: DOS Davidson: WIN VITSIE Vic NO. 11 DOWNING STREET CD Join Ninja Ha 1 Buting Nanny and Sherrloch Sheltie in \"No. 11 Downing Street, the premier episode of a continuing mystery serios, set in exotic lections around the world, as our heros purse the secret of Ninja Nanny's heritage and her tumored for tung in lost treasure Historical facts and notori ous tidbits linked to the story to contained in the online DictioPedia NinjaNannica. Features more than 90 videos. Animations of wacky characters are drawn in detail and shown full screen Silicon Alley: DOS-CD COMPANY OF WHALES The Discovery Channel, the leader in real. world enter tainment, tokes you on a spell binding multimedia journey with nature's most speciuc lor creclures IN DIE COTTON Experience extraordinary encounters. never before captured on film, with some of the trust whales on Earth Investigate their intriguing social behavior and intelligence. Listen to whole communications and understand the mystery of their songs. Includes 45 minutes of exclusive video and more than 200 compelling photos and illustre tions Discovery Channel: DOS-CD VITSIE VISITS DINOSAURS Dino Riflic facts and fun! Welcome to the fun filled anything can happen world of Vitsiol With the help of a singing, donc ing, irresistible on-screen pol, children will embark on a faci-filled interactive journey of discovery. Your child will soon be playing games, singing songs, making crafts and selecting videos, all while learning about the hugely entertaining. every fascinating subject of DINOSAURSI In. depth dine data is carefully researched to give up-to-date scientific information, Come sing and play with Vitsio! ODELL DOWN UNDER Unlock the mys tories of the exotic under: sea world of Australia's ODEN Great Barrier Reef and learn what it takes to survive Oso fish Features facts about any of the 81 life forms from on animal's preda tor and prey to its special abili ties and social behavior. Create your own fish, giving it the per foct balance of spoed, endurance, agility and size to increase its chances for a long, healthy life in the Great Barrier Reel Encourages users to exercise thinking skills and deductive reasoning, while improving reading comprehension illustrates a living ecosystem and its daily struggle to soy in balance. MECC: WIN, MAC $44 $31 $29 $34 Timo Wamer: TBM/MAC CD GEOGRAPHY Across the USA Discovering America... Expert Maps... Lost Tribe My First World Atlas Mystery at Museums w/T-SHIRT... PC Globe Maps & Facts PC Globe Maps & Facts CD PC USA 3.0.... Where in USA Carmen Where in World Deluxe..... Where in World Deluxe CD. Where in the USA Deluxe World Atlas 4 O WIN LANGUAGE Berlitz Think & Talk French CD Berlitz Think & Talk Italian CD Berlitz Think/Talk Spanish CD Language Assistant French 5.0 Language Assistant:French WIN Language Assistant:German 5.0. longuage Assistant German WIN...... language Assistant Halian 50 Language Assistant:Italian WIN tonguage Assistant Spanish 5.0 language Assistant Spanish WIN Learn to Speak Spanish CD. Lyric language French CD Lyric language Spanish CD Vocabulearn French I..... Vocabulourn Fronch I WIN....... Vocabuloarn Italian I......... Vocabulearn Japanese Vocabulearn Japanese I WIN... Vocabulearn Spanish ................ Vocabulearn Spanish I WIN .. EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 603 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 40 . Doty ! E FAX:0011-508-443-5645. XI. CompuServeID:70007.15347 UROBLADtFN.  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS  110 EARLY LEARNING TEST PREPARATION ACT w/Cliff Notus. Biology Studyware... Calculus Studyware.... Chemistry Studyware...... GMAT W/Cliff Notes... GRE w/Culf Notes LSAT W/Cliff Notes....... Physics Studyware... . SAT 1 Personal Trainer WIN SAT I Studyware... Scoto RX for ACT at Homo... Score RX for GRE at Home Score RX for LSAT at Home Score RX for SAT at Home... 395 MACINTOSH TITLES MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE 196 My First World Atlas My Own Stories ... Now Kid on the Block CD Odell Down Under Oregon Trail Peanuts: Yearn to learn CD Phonics Playroom 20. Principles of Chemistry...... Post Post Goes to the Moon... Reader Rabbill Reader Rabbit Ready for letter SAT Studyword Spell It Plus StickyBear Reading Room..... Super Solvers Out Numbered... Super Solvers: Spellbound Treasure Math Storm... Tree House... Vocabulearn Freoch. Vocabulearn fralian L. Vocabulearn Spanish ...... Where in America's Past 339... Where in Timis Carmen? Where in the World Deluxe Where in the World is Carmen??... Your Personal Trainer SAT Zookeeper... Advanced Spelling Tricks..... A World of Discovery.... Alphabet Blacks CD Animal Tales CD...... .. Backyard Barney Bear Goos to School Berenstain Bears Fun LunchPak.. Berenstain Bears Junior Jigsaw.. Berenstain Bears learn At Home... Buster's First Thunderstorm CD...... Cuckoo Zoo Cuckoo Zoo CD.... Falty Bears B Day Surprise CD Falty Bears Birthday Surprise....... Fully Bears Fun Pack CD First letters & Words First Shapes...... ...... Fisher Price Classics.. . Fisher Price Picture Dictionary Kid Keys Kid Pix Companion WIN Kid Pex WIN Kid's Stuff KidDesk...... Legend of Oz CD Mario Early Years Collection CD Mario Preschool Fun.... Motio's fun with Numbers Mcgeo Series Bundle..... Memory lane.......... Mickey Mouse Mousepad Mickey's 123's Enhanced. Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles Mixed Up Fairy Tales.... Mixed Up Mother Goose CD My letters, Numbers and Words Number Munchers Peanuts: Yearn to learn CD... Peonuts: Yearn to learn WIN. Playroom 2.0.. Power Hits Kids ... Pult Putt Goes to the Moon Putt Putt Goes to the Moon CD.... Putt Pult Fun Pack Poll Punt Fun Pack CD.. Punt Pun Joins the Parade Race the Clock CD....... Scooter's Magic Costle..... Slater & Charlie Go Camping Snoopy's Gamo Club........... Stickbear Preschool CD......... Stickybear Preschool ............ TreeHouse... Word Munchers AR Partner 570 Speaker System ........... Altec ACS100 Speakers................ Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers.... labtec SS-700 Speakers.... Audio Magician Plus 16....... AudioMan... Port Able Sound Plus Pro Audio To Basic........... 106 Pro Audio Studio 16... Pro AudioSpectrum 16 131 Reelmagic Multimedia Playback ...... Sound Blaster 16 Basic 133 Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP. Sound Alaster 16 SCSI-2 185 SoundMan 16 ............ ... CDU31 ALL/12X CD Complete Kat....... CDU31 ALU/N2X CD Starter Kit.. Discovery Int. Dbl. 16 bit Kit Edutainment Kit External 599 Fusion Double CD Internal Kit... Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit.... MultiSpin 3XE Ext. 195m.......... MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms...... OmniCD Upgrade Kit..... 299 PAS-16 ll Multimedia Kit...... ... 599 Reno CD-ROM Portable Player Texel DM3028 Int. 240ms...... 349 Texel DM5028 Ext. 240ms....... 107 469 MACINTOSH TILES EARLY LEARNING Addition & Subtraction Advanced Spelling Tricks Advanced Spelling Tricks CD... Algebra Algebra Blaster Plus... Alphabet Blocks Alphobet Blocks CD Amazon Trail Animal Tales CD Basic Spelling...... Basic Spelling CD..... Beginning Reading Beginning Reading CD Body Works 3.0....... Colculus Studyware.... Cuckoo Zoo CD Dinosaur Adventure.... Early Moth... Early Math CD Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise Fotty Bears Fun Pack .. Kid's Art Center..... Kid's Studio.... .. Kid's Typing KidDesk Lifemup: Animals CD..... .. Lifemap: Animals w/Backbones CD... Mac USA 2.0............... Mario Tuaches Typing Moth Blaster Plus Math Rabbit 2.0..... .... Millio's Math House ....... Mind Castle BOO 228-7449 Orders Only, 508 443-6125. all other business Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday 8AM till BPM, Saturday 9AM till SPM. All other Business Monday Friday9AM till 5PM. Most orders ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic com. ponents are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses. International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 por order up to 6 lbs $1 per lb. above 6 lbs. UPS ground handling charge $3 por order Actuni freight charges apply for computers, hard disks, Bernoulli's tape backups, printers, Multimedia kits, mondors, otc. Alaska, Hawaii, outside continental US, APO/FPO call for information Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not available outside the U.S. Please call for more informa VIST tion. Not responsible for errors or omissions, Mastercard, Visa, Discover, American Express, prepaid ordors, purchase orders, wire transfor, cash, and cashions chock accuptod. Personal and Company Maslar checks allow 14 days to clenr. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped. We check for stolen credit cards All refums for credit repair, or exchange must have a rotum authorization number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking fee. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of Satisfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manufacturer's warranty. Dotective items replaced immediately. All item numbers represent 3.5 floppy. except where noted Educational, government, and corporato purchase orders welcome. Circle Reader Service #48 "


"Letters from Paradise 2 ESPANA VAD Thin Dolphin ing the kind of quality Windows entertainWhat a shame! If it had modem support, I Although Twin Dolphin Software did go ment product that Twin Dolphin seemed would have to vote it best game of the year! out of business in December of last year, there incapable of recognizing and exploiting in the Sob, I wish I had access to a PC network. are a few important points in your article marketplace. Unsigned (READ.ME, February '94] that I'd like to Andrew Mayer Orlando, FL clarify since they relate directly to myself and JACKT Design a number of people that I work with. Id's technical geniuses are trying to exorcise the San Francisco, CA Thanks for the additional information. The demons from the modem routine and expect to In particular I'm concerned about the imhave modem play fully implemented in the verCGW article merely stated that the Windows pression given that the sales performance of products were unable to keep the company sion 1.2 update. the Windows games might somehow have afloat. We appreciate your insight as to why it been responsible for the failure of the comWhere's The Bucks? pany. In October of last year, almost half the was neither possible for the Windows products Start pushing the game producers to exproduction staff of Twin Dolphin (including to sustain the company nor actually to be expected by the business plan. plain why a read-only, uncopyable format myself) were laid off. After the completion of such as CD-ROM costs $10-$20 more than Smoking Guns, all remaining work was to be New Riftwar In Krondor? regular floppy games, since they claim that directed toward Forgotten Castle, which killed Is a sequel planned for Betrayal at Krondor the costs are so high mainly due to pirating? all Windows game development at the comDana Harmel pany. It is important to note that up until the Brian Eshelman Izmir, Turkey layoffs, all the Windows games were on Bremerton, WA As it presently stands, schedule, and in fact Nanotank had been completed, but was unable to ship on its Dynamix has no intenBy Rich Tennant original date due to management not having tions of doing a sequel to ORKATENNANT contracted the cardboard boxes in time. Even Betrayal at Krondor, when the games were shipped, only 5,000 although the company copies of each were produced, hardly enough has the option to do a for the company to use as a revenue base, sequel shoula mey begin especially since they reached the shelves less work prior to 1995. A than a month before the company's demise. significant amount of This lack of intent is also made clear in a design work had albusiness plan released to the employees ready been completed around the same time as the games went out on the sequel, but Dyto the retailers. If any other proof of Twin namix elected to termiDolphin's lack of support for its Windows nate both the project DOGMATECH products is needed, simply note that there was and the project's guidno advertising budget for these products, ing force on the comgames which were already produced! At the puter side, John Cutter. same time, they were contracting full page ads Cutter and his game defor Forgotten Castle, which was and continues sign talents are curto be vaporware. rently looking for home. These two games were the only products The DOOMsthat ever reached the shelves, each created in four months by a small team of dedicated day Defect \"I'm afraid I don't understand all the reports of ar professionals. Since the layoffs, myself and Id seems to have Upgrade having a delayed release date. Unless... four other members of the Windows develcopped out on their opment team have started JACKT Design. promise of modem wait a minute How many people here DIDN'T KNOW I was speaking in dog. months?\" This small company is committed to producsupport for DOOM. MO RODODD TECHNGAD BORSA Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"THE HOTTEST 3-D ACTION SINCE WOLFENSTEIN! AKE STONE ALIENS OP GOLD Terror has been unleashed! And now...the violence that plagues a distant research colony threatens the planet Earth. PARENTAL WARNING PC-13 GRAPHIC VIOLENCE As British military agent Blake Stone you're thrust into deadly combat against the malevolence of a mad scientist and the insidious mutant army under his command. Dr. Goldstern, driven by his insanity and bent on the annihilation of mankind, won't rest until he rules the known universe. The forces of heroic good and villainous evil collide in this life-or-death struggle to control Earth's future, Sign up to fight as Agent Blake Stone. The fate of humanity is in your hands! Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME1 2 3 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive Episode One, The Star Institute. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section, The BBS phone lines are: Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence. Engaging Adelb music; Intense found BlasterTM sound effects 3-D texture mapping virtual reality in 256 colors 981 (508) 365-2359: 2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036: 9600-14.4K (508) 368-4137: 14.4-16.8K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchasech by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY Jake on dozens of vicious opponents in combat APOGEENI Battle through 60 levels of 'heart-pounding terror! JAM PRODUCTIONS SOFTWARE P. O. BOX 496389 GARLAND. TX 75049 Blake Stone: Allens of Gold requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, mouse, Adlib, Sound Blaster or compatible cards are optional. Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #37 A001CGW "


"SAM-MAX FREELANCE SAMEMAL POLISEL YOU ARE A CRUEL AND HATEFUL BEAST. MAX THAT WAS CLOSE! IMAGINE IT, MAX WE WERE ACTUALLY BURIED ALIVE BY ASORQY BAND OF GASSY SNELLING PIRATES WHO WOULD HAVE WOULD DIGUS UPES RIFLE SUR WALLE 13? LOOKS LIKE THE CHEESE IS FINALLY HITTING THE FAN IK IN WORLD WAR II.GET THE CAR KEYS! HT THE ARE  YOU DON'T EVEN CARRY A YEAH BUT NOW : CAN FASHION ONE FROM THIS UVOSOME MONKEY Mirim IT 3 STIC WARM WOOF! NO TIME FOR INCOMPRENENSIBLE VIK YAK LITTLE BLODY.. COME ON ME. HIF WELL, THIS SEEMS TO BE A LIKELY SPOT FOR HITLER'S MISGUIDED GENIUSES TO EL FOUND DESIGNING THE MOST ENTSCHUDGEN SIE FRAUEN 15T OIES DER ZUG NACH FRANKFURT? MEAN...CWAY YOU EARPARIC MAKERS OF ALL THAT 15 VILF AND DESTRUCTIVE. MY PAL MAX WOULD LIKE TO MAKE A PLEA FOR PEACE ICH WERDE DICH IAEINEM HAUS SCHAKAL OTTO FUTTERN. WELL MAYEE THERED BENO MORE WARS AND YOU'D GET A CHANCE TO START WHIPPING THAT MOUSTACHE BACK INTO SILIPE TIME, OR UNTIL THE NEXT . Oh So SCART WELL WE GOT THROUGH THAT WITH JUST APINCH OF VOLCNCC, ALTHOUGH I NEVER THOUGHTID SEE MY BEST FREND PUT HIS MOUTH ON HITLERS HEAD. IN BIT YOU KNOW? I HAVE THE CREEPY FEELING WE MAY HAVE INDELIBLY STAINED THE SENSITIVE FABRIC OF TIME FROM DOING THIS! ES There are two good reasons TM &  1991 by why CD-ROM products have STEVE PURCELL LETTE DEPOY. 2. LOIS BUHALIS cost more than floppy products. iera CWRESOWENT KALANI STREICHER First, they usually require more art, story and game to fill up the CD. This raises the production budget. Second, there has been a smaller installed base (total number of CD-ROM equipped gamers) for CDROM products than there has been for floppy products. So, publishers had to make more money of each individual unit. That trend seems to be THREATENING AND PECULLAR changing. The good news is FLYING WEAPONS OF ALL that companies like SSI and New World Computing are selling games on CD for significantly less than the floppy versions. We think this will continue to be true with regard to compilations and bundles that use the CD as a delivery mechanism, but we might even STOP MYSELF PBTHHHHH! see some price reduction in the CD-only products in the futtere. I am writing in response to David Bisman's letter in CGW #115 about the cost and worth of CD titles on the computer gaming market. While a higher price for software (originally intended to MENS UTILE ALL be on floppies) transferred onto a CD format might be higher in Austra The Merits Of Marketing drivel like \"Fake Your Own Funeral and Ger lia, one can get an excellent deal on such here just an observation... Ready for the Most Incredible Role-Playing in the States. Take, for instance, the World of Game Ever to Hit the PC!!!\" (when in reality, Xeen game by New World Computing, a It's one thing to go to a new car dealership the disks in the box house a flight simulator, and find a slick salesman willing to croon like compilation of Clouds of Xeen and Darkside of and a rather poor one at that). Even worse are Harry Connick Jr. over a below average sedan the air-filled, ultra high-gloss, tetra hexagoXeen. While each game is sold individually for lly for whose base sticker price is inexplicably two nal-shaped boxes they're coming out with over $45.00, I have seen the CD title, World thousand dollars more expensive than last these days (Greenpeace's worst nightmare), of Xeen, sold in computer stores for under year's model largely because its new \"Durodesigned to prolong software outlet shelf life $38.00. As I mentioned before, things might Splatter 2010\" patented paint finish is now at the expense of a bona fide marketing be different in Australia, as opposed to here guaranteed to resist the nuclear heat generscheme. in the continental U.S. ated from a 20 megaton explosion at a disSo, two thumbs up to Martin E. Cirulis in this letter is not to say that tance of half a mile. You have to almost expect his February review of Command Adventures: we should overlook software produced prithe hard pitch. Starship for letting the Big Kahunas at Merit marily for floppy disks. I have played (and However, computer gamers should not be Software know that the public is not as bere-played) countless games off my hard drive subjected to the same insidious sales and marnumbed as they obviously think. There's absuch as Quest for Glory: So You Want to be a kering screen shots (providing you own either solutely no excuse whatsoever for Hero?, SimCity, and the original Might on video card A or video card B), live action \"...splicing) control panels along the bottom Magic during my 14 years of life and I still animation stills that make it look like you're of the animation screen shots to give the enjoy them, even in the shadows of the many in complete control of the greatest thing since impression that you actually play against that \"speech-endowed» (etc., etc.) CD games we Voxel Space (when it would actually require kind of graphic splendor (p. 112].\" And, in a Cray to handle the graphics), support for 30 all fairness, don't even begin to think that have today. sound boards (except for SoundBlaster, as Merit Software is the only publisher guilty of Jamie M. Spencer you later woefully observe in the such practices (How about that box for the Herndon, VA README.DOC), and seemingly endless original Wing Commander?). BABY'S FIRST BOOK TERRIFYING ETWAF The TASTES JUST LIKE Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"po LAUNUD Join your kids on an adventure they'll Cenever forget! TudowDO LUNANDI HowTE MODEL BOS CE Howie MANDEL Take them to Tuneland\", a magical place of fun, music and laughter! Tuneland stars Howie Mandel as Lil' Howie, a loveable, animated playmate, in the first fully-animated interactive cartoon. Join your child and Lil' Howie for hour after hour of playing, singing and learning that computers can be fun. Oh! By the way, Mom and Dad, when you play with Tuneland by yourself, Lil' Howie promises not to tell! See your nearest software dealer today! \"The best product of its kind I've seen all year.\" Gina Smith Editor-in-Chief, Electronic Entertainment DESKTOP Magazine PAYGROUND SERIES Circle Reader Service #31 7th LEVEL 7th Level, Inc., 5225 San Femando Road West, Los Angeles, CA 90039 01993 7th Level, Inc., Tuneland, Desktop Playground and 7th Level are trademarks of 7th Level, Inc. All rights reserved.  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: IBM, Tandy or compatible 386 25 MHz or better with a minimum of AMB of RAM, SVGA display and CD-ROM drive with CD audio connector, MPC compatible sound card, MS-DOS 3.3 w/Windows 3.1 or later. Optional: amplified speakers, headphones. Available at: Best Buy  COMP USA  Computer City  Egghead Software  Software Etc. "


"Remember those \"Crazy Glue\" UHF-only an up-to-date machine, but it looks like we'll solutions to war, even at the computer game television ads back in the late '70s and early have to wait. level, will move the human species forward. '80s when the fearless construction worker Committed To An Institution would place a drop of super adhesive on top Albert Rosenfield Denver, CO of his special helmet and suspend himself Sid Meier says that a multi-player version Philosophically, we believe that games have a from the bottom of a girder a few seconds of Sid Meier's Civilization isn't cost feasible later to the amazement of thousands of Star because the base of modem and E-mail users multi-faceted impact. Sometimes, it is cathartic to be able to do what you would never do in real Trek fans (only to fall and be hospitalized for isn't large enough. What happened to that life. At other times, it is interesting to explore the next six months after the director yelled pioneering spirit that inhabits all those Civ options that you could have in real life. Some\"Cut!\")? Let's hope today's computer entersettler units, Sid? A \"hacked\" version has been times, you learn what isn' good to do and tainment marketing gurus don't have the out on the Internet, and the crazed mob puts sometimes you learn what is efficacious. We feel words «adhesives manufacturer\" printed anyup with its clunkiness until Sid sees the gold, that when more options and paths to success are I guess. Sid Meier's Civilization is a classic where on their resumes. included in a game, it allows gamers the freedom Jim Corbin game; by allowing users to play vs. each other to explore many different possibilities and enLowell, MA (instead of only vs. the «cheating computer), hances the value of the game experience. This it could well become an institution! Pardon the short answer, but we seem to have month's editorial explores this subject further. Glen Cox super-glued our fingers to an old Wing ComFt. Collins, CO The Last Word mander box. And here we thought Sid Meier's Civilization We thought we'd let a reader have the last Ass-inine Answer already was an institution. There is always talk word for a change. Will Electronic Arts ever make M.U.L.E. of a multi-player version of Civ, but we are still I have recently started reading CGW and for IBM compatible machines? waiting to bear whether or not such a project has find it a very informative resource. It has been green-lighted. We know there is interest helped me in many instances lately to make Emory Gerhart within the halls of MicroProse, but we don't informed decisions about which games to know whether there is commitment or not. purchase. I also appreciate the way it covers No. Electronic Arts was working on a many different types of computer-related videogame version of the game, but the design Give Peace A Chance gaming subjects, both hardware and software. was terminated because of creative differences It is enjoyable that Master of Orion has made Ron Dunning between the publisher and the designer. Many efforts to make diplomacy and peace profitMilton, FL of us would love to see a version of M.U.L.E. for able. Maybe having people learn alternate CGW KAYBOARD COMMANDI PREMIUM TEMPLATES FALCON, MIG OR HORNET COMMANDER UTILITIES *Finally! Total control of your Falcon 3.0, MiG-29 or Hornet squadrons and campaigns!! a $19.95 PER SET! 3.0 squadrong BARTOS For one low price you get all six: ONLY FALCON COMMANDER OR PALCCALC/MIGCALC/ILORNETCALC: Superb campaign intelligence gathering . MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES tools. Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed info on every site, ground forces & all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption, Waypoint timing Strategic Tactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet\". Even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat!! ONLY $24.95!! 13/MIG/HORNET REQUISITION: Take full command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons! Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status. IMPORTANTI: WFCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! MCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND MIG-29: D.A.F. FALCON MAPPER: The famous Red Flag, Instant Action and HUD customizing HCU is compatible with Falcon.0 AND Hornet: N.S.F. utility! Change default theaters for Red Flag and Instant Action. \"Declutter\" HUD. Set default IA difficulty level. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. New graphical Premium Templates TM standardized, color-coded layout map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and more! destroys \"Keyboard Confusion\"!! SHOW13: Viewer for screen shots taken with Falcon's secret screen-capture program! View shots individually or in 'slide show. New conversion feature saves screenshots to popular .GIF or PCX formats. Includes easy instructions for Falcon's hidden capture commands + KCCMENU: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use ready-to-go menus Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion or customize to your preference. Add new menu items or create sub-menus to other and increase one's gaming pleasure. CGW sims, games, TSRS or bat files. Completely unloads from memory while running selection! INTERNETOVNI Falcon 3.0/3.01/MiG-29 Aces of the Pacific # KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut.wrenching, action-packed Red Flag Strike Commander Secret Weapons Luftwafle missions. Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Privatoor MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 Tornado fly these \"Volunteers only thrillers! Strike Eagle 111 Jotlighter I & II X-Wing B-17 Flying Fortress DIICOVER Gunship 20001 &1 To Order Call Computer Express: CY Air Combat VISA Comanche: Max. Overkill F117A Stealth CHECK SIX!! 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 8:30-6:30 EST Mon-Sat IND All other inquiries to: Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave., 402. Davie, FL 33330 800-262-6066 * High Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock M i ni Utilities and Premium Temple e xolud Condor Com akonnas mot MC 29: Day A t Nike Fichier anstrenorulote * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard Circle Reader Service #68 Page 146 Computer Gaming World FR S Template Special: 1 BESBAny 3$30.00, Any 4 or -$12.95, Any 2$21.50 % e confusion Z m ore $9.25 each!! A.T.P 999 "


"LOTERPLAY'S 10 YEAR ANTHOLOGY CLASSIC COLLECTION TAS BETALLS UNKNOWN WASTELAND Dragon Wars ActIGhess STAR TREK ENVIER 1983 INTERPLAY 1993 Ten years in the making, but available for a very limited time. The Classic Collection contains ten extraordinary DOS games from the ten most exciting and influential years in computer game development from Interplay. And they're all together-on one CD-ROM. These are the games that not only won your respect, but the attention and accolades of computer game critics all over the world. The games that made history The games no gamer should be without Tintaplats Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Circle Reader Service #118 Star Trek &O 1993 Paramount Pictures. Star Trek is a registered trademark and the U.S.S. Enterprise is a trademark of Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. The Plot of the Lord of the Rings, characters of the Hobbits, and the other chanceters from The Lord of the Rings are George Allen & Unwin Puhishers ltd. 1966 1974 1979 1981: All other pruduct and corporate names are trademarks and S m alomarks of the S tive owners.  1993 Interplay I'rinductions, Inc. All rights reserved "


"Just looking at My (Imagine what pla Vou stumble upon I a battered old book and find yourself transported to the island of Myst. Now you have no other choice but to explore. As you do, it quickly becomes apparent that something has gone wrong. Terribly wrong. An ancient betrayal must be unveiled. Secret books concealed on the island of Myst lead the way to worlds born of a master storyteller's imagination. Yet one by one, they're being destroyed through the treachery of his sons. But which one? Broderbund DIVUCIUUIU CYAN CYAN Myst is a trademark of Cyan, Inc. All rights reserved. Macintosh and QuickTime TM are registered trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. MPC is a registered trademark of the Multimedia PC Marketing Council.  Copyright 1994, Broderbund Software. Inc. and Cyan, Inc. To order, see your local dealer or call 800/521-6263 and refer to code 354. "


"Now Available on MPC est is an adventure ing it must be like) BU Only you can untangle the web of lies and deceit that shrouds the 5 worlds of Myst. So stop imagining. And live the adventure that tens of thousands of Macintosh users have already experienced. Available on Macintosh and MPC CD-ROM 5 complete worlds to explore No inventory or time constraints Over 2,500 photorealistic images Non-linear game play Original soundtrack  QuickTime\" video and animation CHOICE SERED The Surrealistic Adventure That Will Become Your World 19 93 AWARD CST GAME Circle Reader Service #115 "


"REVIEW THE PRINCE OF BRIBES Renaissance Entrepreneurship In QQP's Merchant Prince by Tim Carter FLORENAS \"...for a man who strives after goodness touch that nor only makes the map more keeps the player's maintenance time to a in all his acts is sure to come to ruin, since attractive than would an empty screen, but minimum, as \"milk runs\" can be established there are so many men who are not good.\" strongly evokes the flavor of the period. and then largely left alone. Machiavelli, The Prince \"The interface for Merchant Prince is natural Trade is not an entirely safe endeavor, as n o did Machiavelli rationalize the need and easy to learn. All of the commands can bandits on land and pirates on the seas can for immoral actions in order to succeed be given by mouse, and it is relatively easy to capture valuable cargoes and destroy trading in politics. As one might expect of a reference information on cities and commodunits. Storms in deserts and on the oceans can strategy game based in The Prince's era, ity prices. This makes trading a simple busialso wipe out traders, although natural caQQP's Merchant Prince is rife with opportuness once enough money is generated to build lamities tend to be easier to avoid than their nities to cheat, murder, and otherwise under the necessary roads, fleets and caravans. The man-made counterparts. Protection through mine one's opponents. Of course, manual is useful and plainly written, alhired guards uses precious funds and cargo skullduggery is only a subset of the successful though it lacks a section on tips or strategy. Space-commodities in limited supply early Renaissance businessman's tasks. As the Each of the designers gives a few suggestions, in the game—but if pirates or bandits are leader of a trading faction in Venice, the but an extensive discussion is conspicuously allowed to succeed in a given area, their player must develop trade roures by land and absent. strength will increase enough to require ofsea to reach 44 cities with 18 diffensive military action. ferent commodities. The cost and availability of commodities Competition is offered by three does vary from game to game, even if the other trading factions, cach of historical map is in use. Some cities will be which can be controlled either by well supplied with a particular commodity in a human or the computer. As winsome games and not in others. This lends the ning and losing are judged through WYYY trading process a degree of uncertainty and one's popularity, the key to victory wala 6aY CY forces players to adapt to the particular conis generally politics, rather than ditions of each game. If the historical map wealth; money alone will win neibecomes dull, alternative world maps can be ther people's hearts nor their regenerated by the computer and saved for spect. Of course, it is here, in the re-use. These random maps usually present realm of politics, that the worst in V nove points left... the biggest challenge to players, as a newlyplayers will come forth; backstabThe mechanics of trade are straightforward generated world is rarely as conducive to profbing, blackmail, underhanded trickery and once the world has been extensively explored. the world has been extensively explored. itable trade as the historical model. other delights of intrigue will be the player's The base price for each commodity is fixed in Once a few trade routes are up and producconstant companion...and threar. each city for the entire game, though special ing a steady supply of cash, it is time to enter events, such as plagues, sieges or excommunithe political arena. Make no mistake about it, Terra Incognito cation can temporarily alter the price of goods in a particular Merchant Prince Technically speaking, Merchant Prince is a city. well constructed program. The graphics, Only a few commodities are while not particularly dazzling, are effective available in each city, and then MERCHANT and casy on the eyes—a real plus during those TITLE: Merchant Prince only in limited numbers. Howlate night campaigns. Like many empireWRANE ever, once a profitable trade SYSTEM: IBM building games, the world is only revealed REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz or better, 1MB through exploration. Unlike most games, the route has been established, the PROTECTION: Documentation look up terra incognito is not represented by blank units involved can be proDESIGNERS: Several Dudes Holistic Gaming agions of game screen, but by an overlaid grammed to follow a set route, PUBLISHER: QQP Flemington, NJ renaissance-style map of dubious accuracy buying and selling pre-deter1908) 788-2799 coop. becoming more prone to error the farther one mined amounts of goods in is from Venice. This is an extremely original cach destination city. This Mode PRICE: $49.95 RAM, VGA graphics, mouse Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great w ork!! Robert Steaus Burbank Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxydo magnum! for PC, Mac, A500 A2000, ST, TT or Falcon Computers. Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now at a store near you! Mac: IMB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.SMB RAM, EGA or VGA, Soundbla. or Adl. optional. 0172 My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent produch. R. S., Germantown ALESSIIVERINGSDAG Tenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. Michael C. Moore, Columbia This is, without question, the most impressive game have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming / keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Horrow Oryd Credits: Best Brain Game MocWorld Game Hall of Forme 1993 Game of the Year Computer & Pidagogik 06/93 Score this game a solid 10 Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. A must for your games library. Amigo Work 06/93 Game of the Month. Mae Welt 02/93 Top of the Charts Brain Teaser Category, PC Games German edition This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH 100 new landscapes New objects and game elements to explore. The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. Il look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, CT I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not impossible. At first I thought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Oxyd magnum! is an entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia Call 617-497-1130 for the Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego Get a free appetizer for PC, Mac, Amiga or ST: Send S 4.00 for shipping & handling for 10 challenging landscapes of Oxydto Dongleware, 35 Howard Street, Cambridge, MA 02139. Send S 4.00 for a 5 level teaser of Oxyd magnum! (PC or Mac only) I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks Ok so we got hooked! Circle Reader Service #54 "


"NONE NONE NONE NONE NONE NONE 376 NONE NONE 241 NONE IRRRRR NONE 393 NONE NONE NONE E NONE xata Kralls. politics is dangerous and terribly expensive, 236 enemy armies and marauding brigbut the payoffs are potentially huge. As one 287 ands, and they may hunt down and might expect of a game that quotes Machiaveliminate pirates or bandits who 443 elli throughout its documentation, nice guys threaten the trade routes. definitely finish last. $CLL UniE Players can also assign mercenarMatch >> 0 The Unhappy Marriage ies to attack the ships or caravans cargo Of Church And State WW of their competitors, although if 253 they are caught in the act, they The building blocks of political power in stand to lose considerable popularMerchant Prince are senators, and they can be 264 Seit ALL ity. In the dirty tricks department, bribed in order to control their votes in the EQUIP 49/10 PER TURN players can hire arsonists to burn Venetian Senate. If you buy enough votes to Commodities their opponent's villa, rumorcommand a majority in the senate, you may each costs a lot more up front. Unlike senamongers to ruin the reputation of be clected Doge. The Doge has the ability to ir em tors, however, cardinals pay back their emnominate members of the other factions to their competitors, or assassins to kill local ployers the four executive positions in the governthrough a e of the percentage of politicians, cardinals or even the Pope. Dirty the politician ment: Council Head, Admiral, General and indulgences they collect. Over time, cardinals tricks are definitely an effective way of reducRoads Commissioner. Each of these positions tend to make good investments, provided ing the popularity and influence of your opprovides the player who occupies it with parthat one of the other factions doesn't serve ponents, but the penalty for getting caught ticular opportunities and advantages. The them poison cocktails. can be far greater than the potential payoff. faction which holds the title of Doge may also The position of Pope, while not providing Furthermore, it is impossible to defend occupy one of the executive positions, but the political clout of Doge, does provide more against dirty tricks from the other side, and they must assign the other three to their immediate gratification in financial terms. often all sides end up losing if things get out competitors. This makes for some interesting The Pope sets the indulgence rate, which of hand. political bargaining, particularly when playcontrols the income from cardinals, as well as ing against human opponents. the number of cardinals for sale. Fifty percent The Good, The Bad The Council Head has the power to accuse of the income from the sale of cardinal ships And The Very Rich other senators of treason, leading to their goes straight into the pocket of the Pope. There are a few bugs in the initial version removal and execution. He therefore has the Furthermore, the Pope has the power to exability to control who has influence on the communicate a particular city. This radically of Merchant Prince. The game tends to lock senate-an important position if one wishes increases the cost of goods in the city, so that up occasionally, particularly when exploring to remain as Doge or rise to that position. The a trading fleet selling high-value goods can the extreme eastern edge of the map. (An Admiral and General command Venice's increase its profits greatly if its destination is update file is available from QQP which armed forces, essentially providing players excommunicated immediately before it ar solves this problem.) The computer oppowith a free military force to use at their disrives. nents are competent and can occasionally be cretion, provided that Venice is always adepretty sneaky, but like most Al opponents, quately protected. Rent-An-Army they aren't much of a match for a human in Bribing and maintaining senators is an exU the long run. The main problem is that the pensive business. Each senator requires a alike most strategy games, Merchant P Prince players do not build their own military computer is not very good at building trade yearly salary, as well as the occasional lump networks, which is odd since this is the simforces. They may rent mercenary armies sum payment, to keep him loyal. Furtherplest aspect of the game. Those who consiswhere available, provided they can afford the more, senators are extremely vulnerable to tently defeat computer opponents with ease dirty tricks. They can be assassinated, accused price. Those with grander ambitions can get can take heart, as Merchant Prince can be of treason, or simply die of natural causes. In themselves appointed Admiral or General of Venice, which gives one command of the played by modem or via E-mail, where the a competitive game, one can also expect the Home Elcer or Army respectively. Military opportunities for both alliances and backother factions to offer one's politicians large forces can attack cities which refuse to trade stabbing a payments to switch sides, requiring similar payments to keep them loyal. with Venice in the hopes of overthrowing the Because the emphasis in Merchant Prince is hostile regime and thus opening new trade on trade, rather than conquest, not all gamers Owning politicians is not to everoutes. They must also defend Venice from will find it to be a particularly satisfying exryone's taste and is hardly affordO perience. Furthermore, with victory tied to able at every turn. A more profitDE MOU total popularity, rather than the destruction able, though less powerful COST PER TUENERICO and abject humiliation of one's opponents, alternative is to buy a chunk of the HOMES NYWHERE the game may not appeal to the purely miliChurch. Cardinals go on sale periCancel taristic. Nonetheless, Merchant Prince is a odically, depending upon how desfinely balanced, well presented, and intensely perate the Pope is for money (The enjoyable game. The random map oprion Pontiff's Black Collar Sale, perColleoni til and the changes to commodities each game haps?). The Pope is elected someGazzamela Nardinc give it considerable replay value. With games what like the Doge, except that f /2.810 abbasid lasting up to 40 hours, players can look forthere are considerably more cardiward to more long days and nights in front of 3.10 Gupta nals to buy off than senators, and their PCs. CGW Here XGNIS UNIT ICONS ATK/DEF MOVEMENT MARINE 3/3/15 SIEGE TRAIN FUSILTERS US2/8 SI CAVALRY 372/10lbauen HORSE RRCRER FOOT EN Montefeld Fal ARCHERS Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"MORE ENERGY MORE LEVELS ACTION REPLAY GIVES YOU THE POWER TO BUST-YOUR GAMES WIDE-OPEN! JUST IMAGINE THE POWER TO FREEZE ANY PROGRAM AND TAKE ZOTAL CONTROLSMORE POWER MORE LILLES HALILUN LAS GAME BUSTING CODES $800 HINFINITE CHEAT GENERATOR Action Replay has a powerful CHEAL FINDER feature that actually scans through the game in its FROZEN STATE and finds the locations that control lives, ammo, objects etc. etc. in fact anything within a game that can be counted! The unique CHEAT GENERATOR then gives you a chealcode for hal game. Simply press a key to restart the game and Iyou are invincible!! Cheats can be saved to disk or entered again pro-later date. CTION CEREIRO TE PROGRAM SAVE Freeze your program at any point and save entire contents of memory, including extended memory, to floppy or hardrive. When you reload the program it will resume at the point it was frozen. Ideal for saving a game at a difficult point or for programs with tedious 'password loading systems MONITOR FEATURE Display the entire contents of memory in its frozen state. View as HEX or disassembly includes a memory search facility. Output to printer available. SCREEN GRABBER At the press of the Action Replay freezer button you can grab a standard VGA screen from any program and save it out as a standard Pox file suitable for your graphics package. FREEZER DOS COMMANDS Directory, formal and save commands are available even when the program is frozen. SLO MO FUNCTION Allows you to play a game at your own pace, Select from about 10% to full speed. POWERFUL HARDWARE Action Replay is a powerful plug-in card with both advanced program freezer circuitry and over IMB of its own on board Ram so it uses less than 1K of the PCs own memory! VIRUS CHECKER Powerful virus scanner searches for viruses and allprts the user if detected. SIMPLE INSTALLATION System requirements Plug-in and go! 286/386/486 DOS 3.2 and above Circle Reader Service #121 ADVANCED CHECKS MADE PAYABLE TO.... ADVANCED CONSOLE TECHNOLOGIES INC. ACT 1 -24 HOUR MAIL ORDER HOTLINE VISA S Baran vastercard FAX: (708) 706 6 7 2 1 PLEASE ADD $5.00 S&H DOAD UUTE 12. SCHAUMBURG IL 60173 700 7720 DEDER HOTY CONSOLE TECHNOLOGIES INC. long woon en "


"WHY THE F' IN FM SOUND BOARDS MEANS 'FAKE. With a headline like the one you just read, you might think an ad such as this represents a slanderous assault on the makers of FM synthesis sound boards. Well, it isn't. It's really more of a story about how all good things must come to an end. If only to make room for better things. Like the UltraSound MAX sound board. Until recently most, if not all, PC sound boards used a technology developed in the 1970s called FM synthesis (frequency modulation). In fact, the most popular sound board on the market today still generates sound via FM synthesis. However, UltraSound MAX (also known as just the MAX), the newest sound board from Advanced Gravis, incorporates a higher technology called wavetable synthesis. Even Van Gogb cald What's the difference? appreciate the CD quality und delivered by the MAX Put simply, FM synthesis fabricates or \"mimics\" sounds with tone generators using mathematical formulas, while wavetable synthesis creates sounds using digital recordings of the actual sounds, known as samples. Therefore, the sounds created by the MAX are real, while the sounds created by FM synthesis boards are fake. (Thus, the impetus S in many cultures, foyers and other for this advertisement.). fakers are sentenced to life imprisonment. And whether it's a guitar or a gorilla, the digitally-recorded sounds you hear will come F = ASIN ( 2 = + Isin (2 ) straight at you in 16-bit, 44.1 kHz sound with over 90 dB of dynamic range. In essence, compact disc quality. (Say goodbye to those This the mathematical formula www by 23 wunderli to horrible, tinny game sounds you thought you were stuck with.) DAWW 1 create the sound of a piano. I prefer to record a rail pian. "


"Recording with the MAX exceeds industry standards as well -16-bit, 48 kHz and 4:1 ADPCM hardware compression. Which means your Siniwan recordings sound remarkable, yet use only a quarter of the disk space. Then there's also the general MIDI patch set included with the MAX. Basically, it's like having a 192-piece orchestra in FA vynthesis originated when people thought your computer. What's more, the MAX's unique RAM-based there wounded gowd. Need we say more? system lets you modify any existing instrument, as well as create entirely new sounds. (Try that with a ROM-based sound board.) Now for those a little less into music and a little more into gaming, rest assured our engineers haven't forgotten you. UltraSound MAX features two technological breakthroughs destined to radically change the nature of gameplay for years to come. The first allows you to experience 32 digital or synthesized voices at once, a feature exclusive to the MAX. The second is a revolutionary new concept called 3D Holographic Sound, which is simply the audio equivalent of virtual reality. Together, they will not only add substantial depth and dimension to your gaming experience, they will revolutionize how games are developed from now on. Imagine. You're on night patrol, deep in the jungle. It's pitch black. When suddenly, you hear the rustle of leaves above you and to the right. It's the enemy. You immediately turn and act, as if on reflex. birba full 192-instrument MIDI. you owla Ivecome the world's na great compwer. Or not. Now that the MAX is here, such encounters can and will happen. No wonder Psygnosis, SSI, Sierra On-Line and LucasFilm are only a few of the developers starting to capitalize on the MAX's vastly superior performance. Of course, it's going to take some time for all software developers to unleash the powers of Ultrasound MAX. But until then, you'll be happy to know the MAX will run games designed for prior sound board ULTRASOUND technologies like Ad Lib, Sound Blaster and Roland MT-32. In fact, PC journalist John C. Dvorak wrote, \"...the Ultra Sound has a Sound Blaster emulation mode so good that it sounds better than the Sound Blaster itself.\" Thank godinaw ae're not fake. We're for real. So if you have yet to put sound on your computer, or you're simply looking for the best way to gear up for the future, visit your favorite computer retailer and take home the UltraSound MAX. Advanced You'll discover that while imitation may indeed be the highest form of flattery, it doesn't remotely compare to the real thing. ** GRAVIS All brands and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. For more information, contact a local computer retailer or all (604) 431-5020. 1994 Advanced Gravis Computer Technolocy. Lud. 1790 Midway Lane Bellingham Washington 98996 Circle Rearler Service #114 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD 71 Designing Wargamers by Alan Emrich eep inside every warWar in Russia, to name only a few, all have built in gamer lurks a warscenario builders. These designers had the foresight to game designer. Just as include, from the first release of their product, the tools we love to play with the possiwe need to answer our own what-if questions. bilities of history, so we'd love Other notable games, including Global Conquest, to tinker with the possibilities Carriers at War and Harpoon, had scenario builders of our games, injecting our available separately after they were published. Down game philosophy and under the road, future war and strategy games that will break standing of history into an exthrough the enclosed universe barrier include Comisting design. Unfortunately, mand HQ, Warlords II, Harpoon II, Wargame ConstrucArt by Roxiger MacGowan: Copyright 1994 RBM Graphics most computer gaming strategists are not programmers, and even if they were, they wouldn't have access to the source code written in Cor «I Came, Greek or some other foreign language. With a paper boardgame, it is a fairly simple matter to jot down a few rule changes and make up a few new counters, but in their digital form, games exist in a closed box. That computer games lack such freedom is a particularly bitter pill for readers of this column, as we are a bit more educated than most. A love of history combines in wargamers with the desire to explore \"what ifs,\" quite often those not touched upon by the game's tion Kit II and The Perfect General II. Although most designer. While people and paper role-playing games of their scenario editors will be sold separately, we at (and increasingly computer role-playing games) Computer Gaming World wish to heartily commend abound with adventures and scenarios easily exchanged those designers and their companies. Placing power in among enthusiasts, comprising an almost limitless the hands of the players is a wonderful trend, one that gaming universe, computer wargamers are, for the most we hope continues. part, stuck with the scenarios and game systems that come in each game box. Call To Arms I Played, I Conquered» If They Build It, Finally, let me remind you that CGW is still waging Will You Come? its own war against the enclosed universe phenomena. We encourage our readers who have a wargame article Many computer game companies and designers have that provides strategy, game replays and analysis, new recognized the limitations of a computer game's enscenarios, player's aids or other supplemental «non-reclosed universe, and this is particularly good news for view\" material to step forward. I want to hear from you, computer wargamers. On the one hand, we have the and can be reached at our various on-line addresses (see open-ended \"anything goes\" of a do-it-yourself kit like the magazine's masthead) or directly by telephone here Aide de Camp. Looking at games recently released, at CGW, (714) 283-3000 ext. 25. Your hobby needs Empire Deluxe, Campaign II, Flight Commander and you! Cow Page 156 Computer Gaminy World "


"Cao Cao Genghis Khan It took 1400 years, but we finally got them together! CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF 1:31 will icture this, two of history's most ruthless and ambitious leaders in the sante room. Now, throw in the fact that both are looking towards world domi nation with massive armies following their every command. Sounds interesting, doesn't it. This winter, Koei's bringing Genghis Khan and Cao Cao Romance together to a store ncar you, and it's going to be of the three kingdoms. exciting. After all, Genghis Khan is out to lead his DRAGON 0# DESTINY Mongol hordes victoriously across Asia and Europe in GENGHIS KHAN II: CLAN OF THE GRAY Wolf and Cao Cao's devising new ways to reunite China after the collapse of the Second Han Dynasty in ROMANCE OF THE THREE SEAL AN ALLIANCE. PREPARE FOR DISEASE & DISASTER! KINGDOMS III: DRAGON OF DESTINY. The contest for world domination is about to begin. Are you ready? CONQUER THE WORLD! SEIZE THE BATTLE ADVANTAGE VGA color Mouse support Sound Blaster & AdLibTM sound support KOEI ALSO AVAILABLE FOR SNES & SEGA. KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415)348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). PC KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Highway, Suite 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 Compatible Genghis Khan Iland Romance of the Three Kingdoms III are trademarks of KOEI Corporation Circle Reader Service #69 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW * In Order to Form a More Perfect General An Early Look At QQP's The Perfect General 2 by Alan Emrich T hen The Perfect General was still a \"sound,\" excellent gameplay (albeit without Most notably absent were the modem/serial board wargame played on an old strong Al support) and, best of all, modem play features and the AI, so I cannot comment V wooden tabletop, it included maplay. For wargamers who couldn't keep up on those. However, most of the nuts-andchine-gun units, versatile engineer units and with Command HQ's real-time action, The bolts gameplay features are in, and there is aerial bombardment. When it first appeared Perfect General stepped in at just the right plenty there to see. as a computer game, the difficulties of promoment to give them a turn-based triumph, To begin with, there are new things to see mming a well-balanced game and getting and they all seemed satisfied on the map. Objectives are now color-coded it to market had forced those elements out of Of course, Bruce, ever the perfectionist, to indicate player possession, and there are the game. Leaving game features on the curwasn't satisfied. As for any good game delittle flag symbols next to them when the ting room floor was not a decision with which signer, the time following the release of a point values are not displayed. No longer will designer Bruce Williams Zaccagnino was ever game is time for dwelling on the things he you have to guess who controls larger city comfortable. wanted to include, if there had been just a objectives. Airfields are another important Yet, when The Perfect General made its little more time. The ideas and features which new addition. They are the fixed locations debut, the gaming public ate it up, and QQP he has longed to incorporate, plus feedback where planes can be based, as I'll discuss when was fixed on the map of strategy gamers evefrom Perfect General enthusiasts over the past I get to the new units. rywhere. The Perfect General was widely refew years, have evolved into a list of design garded as having the right \"look\" and esign Bridges now have individual levels of specifications that are presently being forged strength assigned to them; each can take from into The Perfect General 2. Although Brdors Gone Display Score: 50 to 50 EDHE one to three hits before being blown away, Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky of and these are indicated on the map. ManWhite Wolf Productions are not remade terrain features also have some new turning to program the sequel after twists. Players can select minefields to be doing the original Perfect General either hidden until found or openly disQQP has put their own boy-wonder, played. Other pre-game selections allow for Andrew Visscher (Solitaire's Journey), variable weather and the repair of units in on the task. cities. Initial Scouting Report Engineers will be busy working the land in The Perfect General 2. Not only can they build For Andrew, the journey is no and destroy bridges and minefields, but now longer solitary, since he collaborates they can destroy roads and improve fortificaheavily with Bruce. As a result, he is tions (every unit can now, with time, fortify building the game in stages and, at the its position) to fortresses. Look for engineers The maps already look great, but the \"placeholder\" time of this writing, it had not yet to be able to clear forests, repair railroad graphics of many of the units will be improved upon. evolved into a working beta version. tracks and fix roads. With so many wonderful Rirplane attack destroyed Defender's Machine Gun . Start stat LI . Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"urders Gane Display Orders Gane Display Preparing to move Infantry more Unit elect Unit orlify Movenant Novenant The rulo enttings for this gone are! Gana type: Balanced Gonn length: Short gano 5 turns Kill style: Partial kill Hit style: Randon hit Sighting style: Linit to LOS Ninos ara: Hidden until found Environnont offocts are: Variable Unita in friendly citins ara: Repaired Player 1: Hunan Player 2: Computer ontinuo Heavy Tank Danage: GBX F l : 1.01 Forest Rare Alt: 30 Clear Range: On Alt: 3 Units Purchaund: 5 Mine Machine Gun Enginner Sewu Pinconent Armorad Car Light Tank Seora: 50 to 50 7 9 the probabilities used to reScore: to 3 4 0 02 solve the airplane's attack, is that players have much more precise control over an airstrike. While artillery (especially Mobile Artillery) is prone to scatter, when an airstrike is conducted, a player can specify any hex within a two-space range of the preplotted targer hex. Once the final target hex is selected, airplanes never scatter and always strafe that hex. This makes There are still plenty of variable game settings. them more reliable for blowUnits can improve their positions. Units that have including a couple of new ones. ing bridges and attacking spemoved are marked with slashes. cific units. For fans of the old ssibilities for engineers now, I was only a artillery units, though, some scenarios now While still under development, it appears that bit chagrined not to see \"Drain Swamp\" and provide «off board\" artillery support. an attacker will have to win a scenario in order \"Urban Renewal» as choices. (Ed: For those For those, like me, who enjoy a good infanto progress to the next one in the campaign new readers unfamiliar with Mr. Emrich's sense in hopes of reaching the end goal. try slugfest, behold the machine gun. Both of humor, the last sentence is so tongue-in-cheek we thought he was having an epileptic machine gun infantry and armored car units More importantly than linking scenarios together, though, are the alternative victory attack.] Unit purchase for the Attockar. Player1 900 Buy Points Roanining: 23 Wand: 32 conditions. In addition to the present garriFresh Troops son-somewhere-and-receive-its-points-ever Unit Cost Unita Purchased y-turn, such elements as simple end-of-game For players who remember heavy Infotry possession, controlling regions and casualty tanks and artillery as the queens of the counting might be considered. These varibattlefield in The Perfect General, its Borook ances alone will add considerable depth and Armored Car w/NG sequel addresses this perceived imbalnuance to the battles fought in this sequel ance. Among the new unit types is the Mediu lank product. «Elephant» tank. This pricey, superheavy armored unit packs a lot of Finally, The Perfect General 2 is being built firepower and takes considerable with add-on products in mind. This means Telp.1 damage (when playing with the Parthat the game's engine is being programmed Elephant Tank 15 BIB tial Kill option), but only has two to give it a lot of flexibility for future expanmovement points per turn. While sion. A scenario builder will be one of the first Ploconent horen valobln: 23 great for defending a town or hill, it add-on products. This will give players the A look at the current list of units has major problems keeping up with power to create maps, unit availability, sceand their build point costs. a driving attack nario perameters and so forth. I've seen the The antidote for artillery seems to be airhave been included in The Perfect General 2. tools for this kit and found it all to be very planes. Air units can only be based on airstrips While they don't pack the oomph of bazooka easy to use. I only hope they allow players to units against armored targets, present link their custom scenarios into campaign (limiting their operating radius and making playtesting gives them the advantage of being games, but that was not decided at press time. them vulnerable to being overrun) and fly one able to fire once during each Fire Phase. That, mission per turn, plotted pretty much like an an friends, makes for some interesting situations. friends m artillery strike. The main difference, besides More Than Perfect? No longer can sheer numbers of arScore: 50 to 50 cm 120 Viewing Los for one hou. mored cars whiz past a defender simWhile much remains to be done on The ply because he could not kill them fast Perfect General 2, I like where things are going enough. Now, it seems, intermeshing with this project. The added diversity, with machine gun nests with adequate aronly a minimal increase in complexity, keeps tillery support can make a defender the product easy enough for beginners to tough, but the attacker has tools availlearn. If the new package includes a \"tutorial able to work through such defenses. campaign» of scenarios which progressively In other words, a balance in the unit add more unit types, that should case players mix has been achieved that, I expecr, into the new features found in The Perfect wargamers will heartily enjoy. General 2. Vereran wargamers, however, will take to these new features like fish to water, Campaign Games and we'll have those tanks lined up along the hill crests and treelines before you can call in At QQP they think big, so The Peran airstrike. QQP has really breathed a lot of Airplanes are, naturally, based on air strip hexes. Units fect General 2 will include \"campaign new life into an old favorite, and I'll be there that have fired are marked with a large dot. games\" that link up several scenarios. when the shooting starts. Cow  Hoavy Tank Mobile Artillery Light Artillery Heavy Artillery Fortification egen Kapil on LOS LOS View . Infantry Danage: OX Fuel: 1.0 St Anril 1994 Die "


"SNEAK PREVIEW More Lords, Too main SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development A Sneak Preview of the Warlords Il Construction Kit by Alan Emrich Like castles, temples and ruins can also be named and given descriptions if desired. There are also little roadsigns that can be used to give hints to players or as billboards for one-liners or other readable frivolity. (I litSedit Army Picture T he great thing about lurking on computer bulletin boards is that you can \"listen to other people's conversations and not feel the eavesdroppers' guilt. I love listening to people debate the finer points of the latest game, but I especially like reading bulletins where gamers tell the software publishers what they'd like to see in the next game or even in an update of a current game. Imagine my pleasure, then, when a \"wish list\" from the collective consciousness of online gamers actually became a real product. Unlike many games these days, where sequels are begun almost as soon as the original product has shipped, the Warlords II Construction Kit was not something that Strategic Studies Group (SSG) expected to publish. But when hundreds of Warlords 11 players spoke, urging SSG to create a powerful editor for aspiring strategy game designers, SSG listened. coastlines, forests, mountains and hills take shape with a crisp, ready-for-play look. You can only paint continents with generic terrain types, but you can individually select from the 20+ specific tiles for each type of terrain in the palette. If you want a volcano in the middle of your island, the proper look is a click or two away. Read All About It After the main geography is in place, you can sprinkle the landscape with castles. These can be customized with your own names and descriptions. After clicking on a button and then selecting the castle you want, a screen pops up that allows you to type in text on pre-ser lines, cach with a fixed length. In addition to this personalized chrome, there are choices that must be made in order to make a scenario playable. Castles require that their income level be ser, with the default at 20 gold pieces per turn. You can also determine the types of units a castle can prode duce (up to four), keeping in mind that the castle's defense level will be based upon those selections. . GEE Caned Fun Default Turround Copy.. Shirika la Amy Chwn Creating new unit icons is limited only by your imagination (and talent). tered my first scenario with Burma Shave billboards. While I experienced some difficulty getting the on-map icons for these objects to look right, they've always functioned properly in my test games. SSG Scenario Cornando Map Army DESENTANT One Size Fits All The main screen in Warlords II Construction Kit is divided into windows of roughly the same size and shape as in the original Warlords nal Warlorde Il game, giving it an immediately familiar feel. The main display will be the site for your game creating Genesis—where you will separate the dry land from the water and place castles with the command \"Be fruitful and multiply Catapults.\" You can start your new worlds using an old Warlords map as a template, or you can start from a blank slate. As in any computer paint program, the features of the landscape are selected from a palette and drawn with the mouse using a combination of clicks and drags, but instead of painting in pixels, you paint in whole terrain squares. When initially placed, the terrain tiles are ugly and squarish, lacking the smooth contours of natural geography. With the selection of the Smoothing option from the menu, Edit Armies Kama una Car Nord War Emil Chlong None Strength Elad, 3 03 Group Enemy glow Stars Led OK: C3 Grubrim Fortified OVED od BOON (Any Temple Antyy 2222 ASSA ABY HART*30 Edit Picture Canal 0 LORESTERNETTO Ener uya: CMS More Detai Cutting The Muster The unit editor is where we amateur artists will really get our pixel's worth. Every attribute of a unit, including its combat strength, movement allowance, time to build, cost, special movement and combat features can be changed. The really fun part, though, is that the built-in icon editor allows players to modify, copy or create from whole cloth every unit icon in the game. Do you want Amazons. Modify the old Orcish Mob a bit, and you got 'em! For a World War II motif, simply draw tanks and bombers. The paint tools are very easy to work with and can become quite addictive playthings. If Edit Features Every new unit type can have its characteristics very specifically defined. "


"TIGERS IN THE PROWL HPS Simulations, the WARGAMER'S Computers Company, and designer Scott Hamilton bring you the ULTIMATE WWII tactical combat simulation. overing the ENTIRE Eastern Front from 1939-45, Tigers On The Prowl includes a detailed database of hundreds of fighting vehicles, weapons, and force structures for the Axis, Allied and Soviet forces. Likewise, combat is resolved by precise calculations of armor thickness and round penetration at the instant of impact. It also features morale, hidden movement, communications, airstrikes, night fighting, forest fires, and much more. Designed for all levels of wargamers, Tigers On The Prowl includes 5 scenarios, a VISA/MC: CALL flexible scenario builder, and three levels of complexity. Orders are given to platoons or sections, with a maximum of a supported com(408) 554-8381 bat brigade on each side. Can be played Dealer Inquiries solitaire against the computer, or by Welcome two players either face to face or by mail/e-mail. Tigers On The Prowl can use maps and symRequires VGA, bols created with Aide De 570KB free RAM Camp. Tigers On The and 2 MB hard disk Prowl is as real as space. Mouse optional. HPS Simulations you can get withFor IBM and compatibles. P.O. Box 3245 out being there. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Circle Reader Service #62 . con "


"you liked the shareware icon editor for Global Conquest, just wait until you get your hands on this one. . Power To The Players . . new c omed Done Once a new scenario starts to fall into shape, you can set the final parameters of your grand design. The number of players, their colors, starting funds and initial city (cach empire's capital) are all defined by the user as part of a complered custom scenario. Naturally, the scenario should have an original name and a brief description, and you can even import an original picture for the scenario's introducSSG Scenario Commando Map Et Featured More Detail tion screen, as long as the file has been SSG saved in .pex or Ibm format. During playtesting, it's useful to Edil Cit have the computer players challenge Nate alla Tucang 12 KUU cach other while you sit back and CA 96 observe the results. Keeping an eye on 34 even castle/ruins placement and makGU ing sure there are enough ports will 1998 obviously be important factors in deSedan signing new scenarios. altele As powerful as the Warlords II Construction Kit is, there are a couple of 20 trifling limitations to its design. First, wer didlo wo my the map size is fixed at the original Warlords 2 map size. Larger worlds Every city, temple and road sign can be custom tailored. are not possible, and smaller worlds may pose problems. While you required whenever you smooth or redraw the don't have to use all of the area availentire map. However, since only paranoids able on a map, the computer AI will like me) save every few moments, this still assume the large map size and may shouldn't bother most users. waste time scouting the empty areas Overall, Warlords II Construction Kit is during play. shaping up to be an elegantly designed tool The other concern involves the time for strategy gamers who, like comic actor Tim required to update the information on Allen, want more power!\" All the power a the strategic overview map (to the Warlords player could ever want is here, waitright of the main playing area), so that ing for creative gamers to pore their creative its information coincides with the opjuices into empty Warlords worlds. Warerational map. It does not update as gamers may even reach the unsettling concluyou paint, so some significant procession that creating worlds can be as fun as sor power and a bit of patience are conquering them. CGW e Create Army Set Edit Army Set Save Army Set Use Army Solu . .... . ..... . Edit Features 14 dagen po More Detail Our CGW island scenario is taking shape. NEW PRODUCT What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? NEW PRODUCT The Mark II WCS (Programmable Throttle; Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS And... FCS (Joystick) Thrust Master Controls RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (503)689-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #107 Pano 162 Computer Gaming World "


"\"LET THERE BE PAX!\" Play PAX IMPERIA, the strategic, multi-player simulation of intergalactic empire building. DOS, Mac and network versions available. along with full color posters of this Great Moment From The Future. \"totally engaging throughout\" -Computer Gaming World \"a definite must for Mac gamers\" Dragon Magazine AJAXY \"strategically elegant\" STIMPERIA Mac Home Journal PAX IMPERIA.. lets you live like a King and play like an Emperor! Available now at your nearest dealer or call 800-769-2768. CompuServe, GO: GAMEPUBC Visa, Mastercard, check or money orders accepted. Change ing. Changeling Software, Inc 596 Elm Street Windsor Locks, CT 06096 I Imperial Stardate 2407... Melina Pariknova Lands The Fleet In The Vega System. Circle Reader Service #45 "


"REVIEW Dragon Of Destiny Koei Romances The Throne A Third Time by Terry Lee Coleman 7.Ye? 11. Rulere la any times has the tale of The Three Turban Rebels. The prudent leader is ever characters having many traits to add more | Kingdoms of Old been spun. At all vigilant. richness to the tale. It takes an experienced IV times it was told with sincerity and And what of the good earth itself? Dragons eye to discern Loyalty, War Ability, Political eye to discern Loyalty, War Ability to with a clear heart. Yet there was a confusion of Destiny allows the arrogant leader to make Acumen, Training and Acumen, Training and Morale, and where in the carlier tellings, a blurred vision of those mistakes. As leader, will you benefit from a best to employ men with these attributes. The happenings that kept those in the West from bountiful harvest, or will your lands fall prey game is most helpful, in that appointed govunderstanding fully the struggles of that tuto typhoons and famine? What will you ernors issue decrees and run their cities with multuous time. The great tale-tellers of Koci charge the people in taxation? In real life, out your involvement. Advisors will explain spin the tale for a third time, so let us listen Kong Zhou fought many wars, and mcrcithe complicated issues of the lands you concarefully to this view of The Romance—the lessly took more than his people could give. lure of power, of greatness.... Even so, the gamer should be wary, as bad There were in that time many advice and bad governors will betray you and Lu Bu's Messenger/09 Lant great men aspiring to be Emperor Hould you invade your people. of all they surveyed. Cao Cao was Scattered Like Tea Leaves the most famous, and the most Ternis Food 333 misunderstood. His grandfather Upon The Waters was a eunuch, yet Cao Cao rose The men of Dragons of Destiny are numerabove his humble beginnings to ous as the grains of sand, and they will sift carve out a great kingdom from the through your hands unless they are molded Advisor: Xon tu heart of China. Perhaps you could That tern is not like clay into a single unic. After your men are be as great as Cao Cao, but you acceptable. trained, you cannot simply set out to conquer must follow carefully the path Koei your enemies, such is the depth of the game. sets for you. Dragons of Destiny ofSep. 194 Autunn Advisors may be sent to threaten the weak or fers a wondrous look at 33 of the to make secret alliances, to crush the stubborn great leaders of this tumultuous age. Some are A game that allows you to make the same foes who insult you with their resistance. The great warriors, others are great diplomats, mistake is an honorable one. Entering the game pits silicon fiends against you, which while still others have more subtle skills, often game of Dragon of Destiny requires that you take on the form of great men and move hard to discern. You must put aside your not only think as a warlord, but as a leader in against you in intelligent and devious fashion, nobler instincts and even learn to use assassins times of peace. severely testing your skills. against your enemies. Great armies must be You must first build an economy by selectst build an economy by selectKoei goes to great lengths to make this a raised, bitter sieges must be won, and the seasing the right men to develop and cultivate the fitting tale for the warrior's delight. Devils must be mastered, or ultimate success will not land. Trade routes must be established, excess paint pictures in 256 colors before your eyes, find you. goods must be sold for the accumulation of the beauty of the changing seasons threatenthe gold. Unscrupulous types Learn the Land, Know the People must be dealt with in a Romance Of The Three Kingdoms TT manner which heightens Many histories leave off the hardships of your reputation. Knowing home-but from where does the strength of to whom and when to Romance Of The Three Kingdoms III: Dragons Of Destiny the strong ruler come, if not from the happi delegate authority is a $59.95 ness and health of his people? Benevolent rule game within a game, but is REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, VGA graphics, 4MB in Dragons of Destiny will bring glory and essential for the ruler to hard drive space; supports Adlib and Sound Blaster sound cards inspire loyalty among your officers and villagexpand his sphere of influers. Know still that there are those who float comune # OF PLAYERS: ence. PROTECTION: as leaves on the winds, ready to change alleKoei Corporation giance or incite rebellions among the unwary. Unlike most wargames, Burlingame, CA (415) 348-0500 Even the most quiet and beneficent peoples Dragons of Destiny has eleare subject to raids from the dreaded Yellow ments of role playing, its TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: IBM mouse 1-8 (same computer) None of The Threr e n PUBLISHER: Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"THE GRANDEST) FLEET CIDROCORTS Quantum Quality Productions Inc Only one fleet will be left afloat in this thrilling masterpiece from QQP. Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat and the exhilaration of VICTORY!!! Develop cultural resources and manage the growth of your population. Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations shipbuilding facilities and SUPERSHIPS. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis... or end up in Davy Jones' Locker.  MODEM PLAY (A QQP Hallmark)  City Economics-Cultural and Industrial aspects  Campaign Play  Player History  A wide selection of ship types  Random Maps-unlimited variation  A truly challenging Al  Battles Include: Falkland Campaign, Batue of Northcape, The Bismark-Tirpitz Connection, Surigao Straight, Yamamoto's Trap, etc. Plus some \"What if\" Battles  A tactician's and strategist's delight!! \"The Grandest Fleet\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #92 "


". to Reg ing to sway you from your condifferent periods of China's history all have a quests. The terrible spectacle of different story to tell, of feats performed over conflict is brought near with deep, Market three generations. You may pit your forces stereophonic sounds, and the maragainst Lu Bu, the greatest martial warrior of tial beauty of the troops arrayed in the age, avoid the assassination of Yan Baihu, full lines, is resplendent with color, or the disgrace of Meng Huo, who lost eight awesome to behold. battles. The cast of history is talented and In order to understand combat, eclectic, and all are worthy opponents. we will look at the battle of one The journey would not be complete withwould-be conqueror versus Liu Bei out chrome, and Dragon of Destiny has plenty near the great Yangtze River. Terr to spare. Hua Tuo may be sought for his Jun. 194 Summer Liu Biao's troops in 23. Jag Xia Tso was a mighty warlord, having have invaded 36. Lu Jiang. famous healing abilities. Political emissaries built a mighty host which scattered may be imprisoned, spies put to death, or his enemies before him. In the then landed and captured the city, the despared by your beneficence. A ruler may be fields near Fehei, Terr Tso deployed his great fenders of Wu having little stomach for furforced into sudden exile or disowned by his army against Liu Bei's lesser force. At the ther bloodshed. Perhaps Liu Bei could have kinsmen should his conduct be unworthy of crucial stage of the battle, Tso unleashed his defended better, but for a silicon demon, he a true leader. You will hear tales of great deadly crossbows, their accuracy a telling fought well and bravely. Books by Sun Tzu, Meng De and others, blow to the defenders. Firebolts demoralized In Dragons of Destiny. the enemy is not which, when found, show the Way of Peace the enemy camp; victory seemed at hand. always found in the open, but must often be (or War) and raise Intelligence and Political Unbeknownst to our hero, Liu Bei had besieged in mighty fortresses. If the enemy is Acumen. bribed two of Terr Tso's lieutenants. The ill-prepared, he may be starved out. More Mighty Stallions, such as Gray Lightning shameless ones changed sides and drove their likely is that the assaulting army will soon and Red Hare, add mobility to a leader's former comrades from the field, inciting ruhave scant rice for the bellies of its warriors forces. A commander riding one of these mors and causing Terr Tso's remaining loyal and must conquer the town by force. The historic steeds need never fear capture, even units to fight amongst themselves in the con citadel will be surrounded by walls, but these in defeat. The lucky general wields the Sword fusion. are only one of the obstacles which will con of the Seven Stars or the Black Dragon, whose His army crushed, Terr Tso left for home. front you. Many questions arise: menacing blade strikes fear into one's enemy. Slowly, he rebuilt his forces from the wealth Should we use fire and risk damIt is the calm ruler who holds the Hereditary of his lands and paid tribute to Liu Bei. aging the precious citadel? Working on the loyalty of his people, Tso How loyal are the troops of the eventually brought his kingdom near its forenemy? mer prominence. After dealing with lesser Can we climb the walls or must warriors, Terr Tso knew it was time to face the attack be through the gate? 11.Luo Yang 0 Ruler: Cao Cao Liu Bei again, and he stopped paying tribute Should the cavalry charge when Governor: Cao Cao Advisor: Xun Yu to his hated enemy. The war began anew. the walls are breached? Knowing of Liu Bei's prowess on land, Terr Has the defender dug pits to trap Tso felt that the winds of fare had to blow Sold my valiant warriors? OFF differently upon the seas. Secretly, his fleet Do I walk headlong into an amcrept to the coastal city of Wu, finding Liu bush? Feb. 194 Spring No.11 Cao Cao is plotting strategy. Bei there with his fleet. Liu Bei stood high on What do I know about my enthe flagship Dragon's Fire, his 7-foot frame emy and his generals? laughing at Terr Tso's smaller fleet. Terr Tso Seal, where peace reigns. The generous ruler The variety of tactical decisions make for a was unafraid. He had built wisely-his galleys may even give these powerful items to his game which will cause even the veteran gamer were armored, unlike those of Liu Bei. Evensubordinates in his quest for victory. to bite his nails from the tension. Triumph in tually, Tso's ships caught up to Bei's smaller, Dragon of Destiny is a most fulfilling experiMany paths, then, make for a rich and quicker ships, and Tso had his revenge, ence for any would-be general. evocative tale of the journey to the Emperor's though the fighting was bitter. The troops chair. Koei has brought many spices to this, It Is The Teller their third telling of the tale. For the first Jul. 196 Who Makes The Tale time, it is possible for the worthy gamer to envision himself as one of the many heroes, To know why Dragons of Destiny so true is the telling, so rich the background Cao Cao | is so successful, one need merely of the tale. Those marginal warriors who wish (Yuan Tan look at the careful details spread a simple fight, devoid of passion, lacking in Xu Chu i Soldiers throughout. The 33 historical subtleties, will be overwhelmed by the expeDef 15300 Att 39900 characters become much more rience. On the other hand, those with fire in Der 630 than a series of numbers, each havtheir blood, who relish the thought of batXiahou Mao's move. ing his or her own personality. Battling the best leaders of Chinese antiquity, Der 188536 les can be waged on 22 historical will find rapture in The Romance of the Three Att 114376 sites, plus many more at sea. Six Kingdoms. Go now, and conquer.... CGW Popu 52 7 82000 Cold Day Clear Yuan Shao Vs Fund Att 114 Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"IBM CD-ROM AMIGA CD32 OFTWARE XPRESS Save 20-50% On Software IBM DISK CATALOG FREE! HOT! NEW RELEASES! FASTNA SHIPPING -\"FREE! CD-ROM HUNDREDS To Choose From! CD32 > JOIN AND SAVE! P.O. Box 324 Jefferson. WI 53549-0324 Blade Destiny:Arkania Vol 1 (Sir Tech) $34 95 3 00212 Body Blows Galactic Team 17) $25.95 300222 Caesar (Impressions) $30.95 300237 War In The Gulf (Empire) $24.95 300245 B-17 Flying Fortress IBM TEX Hocky League Simulator 1 (Bathezda) $25.95 300206 Battles Of Destiny (QQP) $29.95 300232 Mortal Kombat (Acclaim) $34.95 300252 Dagger Of Amon Ra (Sierra) $34.95 300270 Operation: Fighting Tiger (Spect Holo) $19.95 300276 Microcosm (Psygnosis) $47.95 300351 Fantasy Empires (SSI) $37.95 300125 Labyrinth Of Time (Elec Arts) $44.95 300167 Ringworld (Accolade) $32 95 300175 Wacky Funsters (Accolade) $16.95 300176 Alone In The Dark (Interplay) $44.95 300177 Ultima Underworld I & II (Origin $54.95 300180 7th Guest (Virgin Games) $49.95 300188 SimAnt (Maxis) $44.95 300190 Inca (Sierra) $34.95 300196 Dragon's Lair (Readysoft) $32 95 300262 Star Wars Chess (Soft Toolwks) $24.95 300287 Journeyman Project Gametek) $39.95 300303 CD32 Solitaire's Journey (QQP) $29.95 300272 Out Of This World (Delphine) $29.95 300274 Zool: Ninja Of The 'Nth Dim Gremlin) $32 95 300285 Arctic Baron (Silmarils) $23.95 300288 Patrician (Readysoft) $26.95 300294 Might Magic Ill: Isles Of Terra (New World) $35.95 300310 Jurassic Park (Ocean) $27 95 300311 Campaign Il: 50 Years (Empire) $29.95 300317 Power Monger (Elec Arts) $29 95 300330 Castles 11 (Elec Arts) $29.95 300337 Terminator 2: Arcade Game (Virgin Games) $27.95 300352 CD-ROM ocean2 TFX (Ocean) $39.95 300248 Aces Over Europe (Sierra) $39 95 300021 Gateway It: Homeworld (Legend) $31.95 300041 Simon The Sorcerer (Infocom) $26.95 300044 Master Of Orion (MicroProse) $29.95 300057 SimCity 2000 (Maxis) $36.95 300059 Sam & Max Hit The Road (Lucas Arts) $31.95 300066 Mechwarrior 2: The Clans (Activision $37.95 300068 Indian Jones Fate Of Atlantis (Lucas Arts) $29.95 300081 Shadow Caster (Origin) $46 95 3 00246 Lucky's Casino Adventure (OOP) $35. 95 3 00083 Spaceward Ho! (New World) $29.95 300093 Microsoft Flight Scen: Paris (Microsoft) $24.95 300099 TIE Fighter: X-Wing II (Lucas Arts) $39.95 300127 IndyCar Racing (Papyrus) $37.95 300153 SSN-21 Seawolf (Elec Arts) $41.95 300155 Ultima VIII: Pagan (Origin) $47.95 300159 Amazon: Guardians of Eden (Access) $34.95 300160 Hand Of Fate Westwood) $34.95 300163 Unnecessary Roughness (Accolade) $32.95 300165 NHL Hockey (Elec Arts) $41.95 300166 Tony LaRussa Baseball II (SSI) $35 95 300203 AMIGA Brutal Sports Football (Millennium) $2495 300362 World Of Legend Wonder Dog (Mindscape) $16.95 300374 (Core Design) $24.95 300368 Bubba 'n' Stix Donk! The Samurai Duck (Core Design) $19.95 300375 (Supervision $25.95 300369 Seek And Destroy Diggers AGA (Mindscape) $19.95 300382 (Millennium) $32.95 300371 Simon The Sorcerer Ishar 2 AGA (Infocom) $31.95 300044 (Silmarils) $27.95 300373 Alien 3 (Virgin Games) $24.95 300181 IBM & AMIGA Uridium 2 Rules Of Engagement II (Renegade) $24.95 300221 (impressions) $37.95 300002 Bob's Bad Day Creepers (Psygnosis) $24 95 300226 (Psygnosis) $24.95 300010 Dennis The Menace Crusadrs Of The Dark Savant (Ocean) $24.95 300230 (Sir Tech) $34.95 300013 Mortal Kombat Blue And The Gray (Virgin Games) $19.95 300252 (Impressions) $34.95 300030 Frontier: Elite II Dune Il Gametek) $27.95 300313 (Virgin Games) $29 95 300036 Alien Breed II Tom Landry Football Deluxe (Team 17 $25 95 300315 (Merit) $24.95 300060 Cannon Fodder Kings Ransom (Virgin Games) $27 95 300318 (Readysoft) $29.95 300070 Jet Strike Street Fighter II (Alternative) $24 95 300321 Capcom) $24.95 Kingmaker: Space Hulk (U.S. Gold) $32.95 300322 Elec Arts) $34.95 300092 Global Domination (Impressions) $29.95 300103 Hired Guns (Psygnosis) $31.95 300109 Lost Vikings (Interplay) $2495 300113 Syndicate (Bullfrog) $34.95 300135 Pinball Dreams (21st Century) $24.95 300147 DarkSeed Genesia Merit) $34.95 (Mindscape) $27.95 300323 300185 Dune Cyberpunks (Core Design) $25.95 300325 (Virgin Games) $29.95 300188 Micro Machines (Code Masters) $24.95 300331 Morph AGA (Millennium) $27.95 300334 Wiz 'N Liz (Psygnosis) $27.95 300341 Skidmarks (Acid) $24.95 300344 Soccer Kid AGA (Krysalis) $27.95 300345 Chaos Engine AGA Tornado (Renegade $19.95 300347 (Spec Holo) $39.95 300047 Fury Of The Furries Legend of Kyrandia (Mindscape) $27.95 300349 (Virgin Games) $29.95 300187 Ryder Cup AGA Koshan Conspiracy (Ocean) $24 95 3 00356 (UBI Solt) $29.95 300210 Settlers Legends Of Valour:Dawning (Kompart) $32.95 300357 Us Gold) $35.99 0 4 Star Trek: Judgment Rites Interplay $31.95 300065 Guadalcanal 1942-1943 (SSD $41.95 300280 Companions Of Xanth (Legend) $32.95 300286 Star Wars Chess (Soft Toolwks) $38.95 300287 Archon Ultra (SSI) $29 95 300289 Quest Glory:Shdow Of Dknes (Sierra) $36.95 300290 Gabriel Knight (Sierra) $37.95 300291 Police Quest IV:Open Season (Sierra $36.95 300292 Leisure Suit Larry 6 (Sierra) $35.95 3 00293 Carmen San Dieg Space? Dix (Broderbund) $35.95 300295 Spectre VR (Velocity) $30.95 300299 Pax Imperia (Changeling) $34 95 300300 Terminator Rampage (Bathezda) $35.95 300302 Comanche: Over The Edge (Nova Logic) $29.95 300304 Walls Of Rome (Minderaft) $35.95 300307 Command Adv: STARSHIP (Merit) $31.95 3 00308 Frontier: Elite II (Gametek) $33.95 300313 Syndicate: American Revolt (Bullfrog) $17.95 300343 Labyrinth Of Time (Elec Arts) $27.95 300167 Pirates Gold (MicroProse) $27.95 300121 DIGeneration IRON HELIX (Mindscape) $27.95 300283 Iron Helix Zool: Ninja Of The \"Nth' Dim (Spec Holo) $49.95 300035 (Gremlin) $2795 300285 Return Of The Phantom Liberation: Captive 2 (MicroProse $37.95 300004 (Mindscape) $31.95 300320 Aegis: Guardian Of The Fleet Mean Arenas (Soft Sorcery) $44.95 300061 (ICE) $27.95 300335 Mad Dog McCrec Fire Force (Amer Games) $31.95 300076 (Elec Arts) $27.95 300338 Rebel Assault Oscar AGA (Lucas Arts) $37 95 300080 (Ocean) $27.95 300340 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands Trolls (SSD) $46 95 3 00087 U.S. Gold) $27.95 300342 Conspiracy 7 Gates Of Jambala (Virgin Games) $39.95 300104 Core Design) $27.95 300377 Dracula Unleashed Whale's Voyage (COM Sim) $44.95 300107 (Empire) $27.95 300378 Loom Chamber Of Shaolin (Lucas Arts) $23.95 300112 (Code Masters) $27.95 300379 YESI Count Me INI Send me nry INTRODUCTORY selection Ilsted below (Which I am already recalving at up to 50% orr) and I agree to purchase at least one moro selection at your full price within the next year. Selection Number: Price: Pricem Seraction POP TF-Oskg curom (Check One Selection Format IC Dnel IBM 0 3.5\" Disk OCD-ROM AMIGA O CO32 IBM (totes With or draw) U AMIGA IRTH 35\" Dish 5.25 DISA Please Send Me Future Catalogs In The Following Format SEE HOW EASY IT IS TO SAVE UP TO 50% ON YOUR SOFTWARE PURCHASES. Just fill in and mail the coupon in this ad (Select payment method) and we'll send you your introductory package along with a copy of your first disk catalog  You ngroo to buy just ONE moro colection from us in the next year (Priced $10.05 or above) you may decide to discontinue receiving our catalog at any time thereafter. Our regular prices are normally at least 20% lower than the suggested retail price. (A shipping and handling charge will be added to all orders of $100 or less, FREE shipping for orders over $100, excluding tax). FREE Disk magazino nach month. Each magazine contains 250 items and can be saved to your hard drive to keep an archive of up to 4 months of items. This will give you up to 1,000 different items to choose from. Each item is described in detail and most items also have a picture description. If an item is not in your catalog and you are looking for a specific title you can request it in our REQUEST section of the catalog software program.. . YOU control what you want and what you don't want. Use our Easy Order method of placing your order via your computer modem if you are paying with a credit card or C.O.D. (The call is FREE) or use our convenient order card which will be included in each maling. Orders are usually shipped out within 1 week of your order. . Our BONUS plan is designed to save you 20%-50% on many of your purchases through our company. Once you have fled your agreement with us you will be entitled to take a selection at 20%-50% off our regular price with each selection you purchase al fut price. Depending on your purchasing habits, you can save 100's of dollars on your annual software purchases. . You always have the option to purchase your software in any format that the selection is available in. (CD-ROM CD32, 5%\" or 3X\" Floppy Disk) Our company supports IBM & AMIGA Computer systems only. We also carry Sega Genesis, Sega-CD, Super NES and Game Boy products. Use your Croda Card to place your order. (No Surcharge on Credit Cards) You may also Pre-Pay with a personal check only by sending us your check with your order (Using our order cards) but please allow 14 days for the check to clear. We also accept C.O.D. Orders C.O.D. order must add $5.00 to their order total . GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O's WELCOMED. We will also have special interest issues full of educational and productivity software.  If the Application is missing, write to: Software Express, P.O. Box 324, Jefferson, WI 53549-0324. Charge to my Credit Card : MISSTERCARD Chech method of payment: Payment is Enclosed As Serron PIC AUS 54 SMPN PUSTAKA APNIMe! Acct. No. LIC.0.0. M Salection Price RUS H. Jpping PENS 35 DO COD Cree PLUS Tarapolcanel Expire Date: WI Residents Add 5.5% Tax facing walng a CODA Slanicure Name Send To: Address Apr.City State ZipPhone Number 1 WE DO NOT SHIP TO P.O.BOXES Software Express P.O. Box 324 Jefferson. WI 53549-0324 Shipping is FREE with an order over $100 Circle Reader Service #101 "


"Opponents Wanted The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (ADD, GURPS), play-bye-mail games (Diplomacy. ASL), Empires at War (a Napoleonic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 (2400 8-N-1) Free access. The Gaming Connection BBS in Everett, WA specializes in connecting modem-tomodem players. Give it a call at (206) 742-4044, twenty-four hours a day. Join a Gaming Ladder and make new friends to challenge. Empire Deluxe and Harpoon scenarios, plus access to everything (including over 5,000 files) available on your first call! Those wishing to place their own free ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the CGW Poll card), letter, FAX (714-283-3444] or E-Mail (Prodigy (EXPT40B], CompuServe (76703,622]. The Sierra Network at Box 1048, GEnie or America On-Line at CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each month if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However, . Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing Games being played other than direct by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers.  Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. The Networks The following are voice contact numbers for many of the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information on these networks. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Novalink (formally Digital Dreams) Network: (800) 274-2814 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 The ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 x556 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Bulletin Board Systems Modem Gamers Forum BBS: Home of the Game Matcher Door for finding head-to-head gamers like you. A message area devoted to every modem capable game known to mankind. Find opponents for games like 688 Attack Sub, Seawolf. F-29. Knights of the Sky, The Perfect General, Command HQ, Populous, Powermonger, Tom Landry Football, Mech Warrior II, etc. Tournaments, hints, tips, and strategy articles available, along with patch files and updates for your modem gaming software. Two versions of 7W2002 on-line (one exploiting the software bugs, one cleaned up game)! Mention CGW for long distance validation. Seeking Amiga, Mac and Atari users to form an even larger opponents base. Running Renegade BBS 7-17 software. Sysop: vare. Sysop: King Crumb Babylon, NY (516) 893-4120, 14.4k. 8-N-1, 24 hours. If you are looking for the best military PC flight simulators coverage, then you must check out SimNet based in the San Francisco Bay area. This new network is expanding nationwide currently with 20 BBS systems around the country and still growing. SimNet is originating from the Trade Center BBS (SimNet Headquarters). Call (415) 340-0197. There are four nodes, 2400 to 28800 baud, 24 hours per day. Full access on your first call, no fees. SysOp: Gabe \"Joker\" Turk. Modem opponents wanted section online. Over 1.2 Gigs of files, including instant support from Thrust Master, Inc. The Dakota Central Telenet BBS in Carrington, ND (58421) is a BBS with many challenging on-line games and over 30,000 files available to download free of charge. On-line games include the massive Land of Devastation post-nuclear war RPG with an available EGA graphic user interface, plus you can battle other traders and aliens in Trade Wars 2002 (tournaments start frequently). Explore with your character in the combat-happy RPG Wizard's Arena, and make big booms with others like Nuke War and Naval Battle. Trivia and card games are also on-line. Huge games file area. Free access, with a small fee for total access. 3 nodes; 300-14,400 Baud, 8-N-1. Call (701) 674-8115, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The Informer BBS under SYSOP John Custer is running flight sim updates, Cracks, flight sim conferences. This is the home of SIMNET, the flight sim network of the 510 Tactical Fighter Wing (sponsors of SIM CON 93). We also have a direct link to Thrustmaster tech support and many pilots to answer your questions. (415) 468-6713. 6714 or 6715. Call Little Caesar's Nightclub at (416) 238-8238. All wargamers should check out message base #13 for discussions on computer wargaming. Find an opponent or leave a review. All computer platforms welcome. The Elfspire Tome is a Fantasy Role-Playing Game Master's resource bulletin board. We feature role playing echoes, on-line games, fantasy clip art and much more. 1200-9600 Baud. (415) 595-2387. \"The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn, IL invites you to join their Trademar 2002, Global Warand Chess games. Many filcs available for download, Netmail, instant access and more. \"A world class, American BBS\" (pmc 11/93). Call (708) 424-6136. Will you hack and slash your way through a real-time, multi-user dungeon (MUD) or attempt to conquer an entire galaxy? It's your choice when you call The Batboard BBS in Columbia, MO. Enjoy the true ADOD action of Legends and the professional e-mail game VGA Planets (with an off-line VGA interface) or tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including ANSI Pro Football, Chat Roulette, BandWarz, role-playing. strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for highest monthly scores, with full access on your first call (and it's free)! Two CD-ROMs on-line, with the latest in quality shareware games! FidoNet echoes (including GAMING), multiline chat, the adult role-playing game Wild Side visit today for the best in multiline diversions! We're always open 24 hours at (314) 446-0475 with 14400 bps supported. By Arca Code Grognards, unite! Rather mature gamer (who confesses to remembering initial release of Avalon Hill's Gertyshurg) is stranded in the wilderness of LaGrange Park, IL and wants to find other wargamers familiar with Aide de Camp. Hopefully, we can play some Flat Top electronic, double-blind. Also looking for a good. long session of Grigsby's Pacific War to play by file transfer (I'm not only willing, but eager to be the next Nagumo). Byron Inglesh, CompuServe 173322,203). Miami, FL player throws down his gauntlet to anyone who challenges him in a game of Battle Chess (either disk or CD-ROM). If you have a network with Internet access, respond at CJHM22A@PRODIGY.COM or call Stephen Hertz at H-(305) 448-8425. Secking local opponents for modem gaming. Will play The Perfect General, F-15 II and many others. Call me in Syracuse, NY at H-(315) 622-2201. Ask for Jerry any time between Sam and 10pm. Looking for a local opponent to meet for face-to-face game of Clash of Steel, Warlords Il or other board and computer wargames. I'm in Hartford County, MD. Call Josh at H-(410) 939-1021. Seeking modem gamers in the Omaha area for F-15 III. Seawolf. Command HQ and others. Call Greg Seewald at H-(402) 597-2837. Opponents sought for Empire Deluxe, Conquered Kingdoms, The Perfect General and Global Conguest. Will also play other modem capable games (I have a PPI 14.4 modem). I can't afford long distance, but will consider PC Pursuit. Contact Gene Gooldy between 12pm and 10pm any day at H-(410) 923-6188 in Anne Arundel County, MD. Local modem opponent wanted for almost any flight sim or Robosport. Call Al (The Cheesy) at H-(415) 593-1989 in the San Francisco bay area. Wanted in the San Francisco area: Head-to-head Falcon 3.02.1/MiG 29 1.01 players. Will also play F-15 11/Tornado. I can play at speeds up to 14400 Baud and am a member of the 510 Tactical Fighter Wing. All challengers welcome. Call H-(415) 468-2021. Local (Contra Costa County, CA) modem opponents wanted for Falcon 3.01 (or allied) and The Perfect General. Contact Joseph \"Joc Cruise\" in Concord, CA at H-610) 827-0283 anytime. Beginners are more than welcome! I have lots of free time, so if you are interested in another game, or want to play face-to-face in any game of your choice, please call. Novice players of Falcon 3.0 and MiG-29 are being sought in the Austin, TX area. I have never played either of these games by modem, but am eager to try. Modem speeds up to 14.4k supported. Call Mark Mills at H-(512) 474-5505. Managers wanted for 20-team, Full Count Baseball play-by-mail league. Contact Bill Hartmann at: GCBF, P.O. Box 260171, Bellerose, NY 11426-0171 or call before Spm EST at H-(516) 825-0057. Seeking local opponents for Command HQ. 688 Attack Sub, The Perfect General or any other game of your choice. Please call David in the Vancouver/Lower Mainland area and let's do battle. Phone me at H-(604) 264-7998. Seeking local opponents for Command HQ or The Perfect General in the Chicago area. Contact Joe at H-(708) 782-6272 evenings. Brigadier General \"Shifty\" Pierre challenges you to battle in The Perfect General. The battle \"Stuck in the Middle Again,\" short game, partial sighting, random hit. It doesn't matter where you live, I have PC Pursuit and I'll phone you. Or, what about a war for control of the planet in Empire Deluxe? CGW Tournament rules. Wrap on. I live near Chicago. Voice: H-(708) 479-4344; BBS: (815) 886-0109. Local opponents sought for The Perfect General, Falcon 3.02 and other games in the NYC area Contact Lorenzo \"Wren\" Lamberty at H-(718) 597-3588 anytime after 4pm. Seeking opponents for modem play in the Colorado Springs, CO area. I would love to play The Perfect General, Empire Deluxe, Modem Wars, Knights of the Sky or anything you've got a hankering to lose at (hehehe). Contact Steven Woodcock at either of the following: H-(719) 392-2975 or by email via the InterNet at: swoodcoc@oldcolo.com Local opponents wanted for Falcon, F-15 III or Tornado. Call Rod in Memphis, TN at H-(901) 527-8764 or W-(901) 525-2557. Opponents wanted in the Longview, TX arca for Conquered Kingdoms by modem. I am also interested in any type of modem strategy game. Call Bill Anderson at H-(903) 663-2120. Mediocre Empire Deluxe player seeks same for modem or email contest. Ask for Johnny at H-1909) 676-7251. Looking for PBEM opponents for Second Front, Carrier Strike or just about any other wargame. Contact Ernest Calridge in the Toronto area after 6pm at H-(905) 238-8238. Seeking local opponents for modem game playing. Will play F-15 III (soon to get Falcon 3.0). Call me in NYC. Beeper #, call any time (917) 858-6496. Will call back as soon as possible. Cow Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"The Marketplace Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (714) 283-3000 x37 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. VERIFIKIRKKO FREE Software! FREE Hardware! SERRA Become a Beta Tester! It's casy! Companies can't afford to pay employees to play games all day in search of programming errors. They need you to test their newest games and hardware. You can keep what you test Free! For a complete information package on becoming a Beta Tester send $9.95 + $3.95 S/H to: CCB Enterprises PO Box 336 Saint Marys, GA 31558 \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" MAGIC MIRROR I... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD., Clinical Psychologist, $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind, $39.95. THREE GATES ... skryeing, awareness shifting, I Ching and runes, $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. PHOENIX FIRE... high-tech Ouija Board, $39.95. MAGIC MOUNTAIN ... weird adventure, male and female versions, not for children, $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 KIRKKALER MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (after 5 p.m.) Circle Reader Service #125 MIDNIGHT GAMES FINEST IN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT SINCE 1984 LEGENDS A RICHLY DETAILED AND REALISTIC COMPUTER MODERATED PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME SIMULATION COMBINING THE FINEST ELEMENTS OF FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING AND EMPIRE BUILDING! RULES BOOKS $15.00 CAMPAIGN MODULE $15.00 (INCLUDES SET-UP AND MAP) SUKIMWMMMMWWW Circle Reader Service #42 Games Too Expensive? Consider Pre-owned Software \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Save big $$$ over new Original disks and manuals Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) IBM AMIGA C64 gaming is? If you don't, we can help you Hard-to-find classics plus explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper all the latest releases Mayhem has been leading the way for Call or write for free catalog over 10 years by informing people about (specify computer) PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographBare Bones Software ies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and com940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 panies that our readers participate in. 1-800-638-1123 Paper Mayhem has been improving with Customer Service: 304-529-0461 the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. Circle Reader Service #39 So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take adThe NEW vantage of PBM gaming. CAPE COD CONNECTION Send subscriptions to: ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL PAPER MAYHEM Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line Dept CG,1518 Adams St. Shopping is available. . Download our complete Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel Catalogs, updated daily with new products.  OnUS Subscriptions: Line Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used Single issue $5.00 software listing available today. Have us sell your 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 used software on consignment. FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; Robert Berry, Proprietor 1 year to Europe $51.00; 1 year to Australia $57.00. 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign sub BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 scriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 Circle Reader Service #87 Circle Reader Service #43 Page 169 MIDNIGHT GAMES PO BOX 280 DEPT G MEDFORD OR 97501-0019 BBS# 503-857-8537 PHONE# 503-772-7872 FAX# 503-772-0636 COMPUSERVE# 71241,455 GIVE OUR MULTI-LINE BBS A CALL AND CHECK OUT THE LATEST IN WINDOWS AND OS/2 SHAREWARE, OR VISIT OUR GAMING SECTIONI Circle Reader Service #77 April 1994 "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX BY GAMES & PRODUCTS Free Info. # Product Free Info. # Company Page Product Company Page 119 i a = 36 115 61 151 No See . o 1942 Pacific Air War MicroProse 118-119 79 Mail Order Multimedia Multimedia Specialist 129 Products Aces Over Europe Sierra Dynamix Mail Order Peripherals Direct Way 3000 Action Replay Advanced Console Technologies Mail Order Products Chips & Bits 70-79 Al Qadim Strategic Simulations, Inc. Mail Order Products Computer Express 140-141 Arena Bethesda Softworks Mail Order Products Mission Control 172-173 Armed And Dangerous Titan Games Games Mail Order Products Sideline Software Axis Baseline Publishing 107 101 Mail Order Products Software Express Battle Drome Sierra Dynamix 4-5 103 Mail Order Products Spectrum Electronics Best Girlfriend Aldealabs 58 102 Mega Race Software Toolworks 127 Best Neighborhood Ever Activision 36 91 Microcosm Psygnosis 122-123 Bio Forge Origin Systems Cover 4 Microforum Family Microforum 114-115 of Products Blake Stone, Aliens of Gold Apogee Mortal Kombat Hi-Tech Expressions 179 Breach 3 Impressions Myst Broderbund 148-149 Busiest Neighborhood Ever Activision NVN National Videotex Network Comanche CD Nova Logic, Inc. /EA Outpost Sierra On-Line 44-45 QEMM Game Packs Quarterdeck Oxyd Magnum Dongleware Publishing Cyberman Logitech Pax Imperia Changeling Software Cyberstrike GE Information System PBM Magazine D-Day Paper Mayhem Impressions Pinball Fantasies 21st Century Entertainment Daemonsgate Imagitec Design Inc. Dark Legions Powered Partner 622 Acoustic Research Strategic Simulations, Inc. Pre-owned Software Bare Bones Software Disciples of Steel FormGen Corporation Cover 2 Ravenloft Strategic Simulations, Inc. Doom ID Software Cover 3 Reel Magic Dragon Knight III Megatech Sigma Designs, Inc. Romance of the Three Koei Electronic Shopping Cape Cod Connection Kingdoms Mall BBS Seawolf Electronic Arts 100-101 Epic Pinball Epic Mega Games Sierra Products Sierra Direct 96-97 Falcon & MIG Keyboard Commander Corp. Commander Utilities Sound Blaster 16 Creative Labs 63 Falcon Mach V Falcon Northwest Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Interplay Quackers Mallard Software 41 86 Strike Commander Origin Systems G.O.R.G. Microforum 69 . Subscriptions Computer Gaming World Game Player TV AlTech International 11392 The Grandest Fleet Quantum Quality Products 165 Gaming Forum CompuServe 47 51 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 38-39 Growth And Adventure Sw. Blue Valley Software 169121 The Infinity Machine REM Software Hollywood Mogul DeVuono DeVuono Games 65 107 Thrust Master Controls Thrust Master Indy Car Racing Papyrus Publishing 51 62 Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations Inherit The Earth New World Computing 91 31 Tuneland 7th Level Inc. Interplay's 10th Year Interplay 147 99 TV Gamer Plus SIIG Anthology Ultimate Role-playing Aid Gosselin Computer Consultants 126 Isle of the Dead Merit Software UltraSound Advanced Gravis 154-155 Judgment Rites Interplay Movie & Sound Pack Universal Cockpit Simulations Systems and Joystick Kingmaker Avalon Hill Pre-owned Games Gamer's Gold Lands Of Lore Virgin Games Soundman Logitech Legends Midnight Games Wings of Glory Origin Systems Legends of Future Past Inner Circle Technology 83 Wolf Pack Nova Logic, Inc./EA Lunicus Paramount Interactive 23 Mail Order Edutainment Sw. Computer Express 86-89 No Reader Service Number. Please call advertiser for information. w . Evo    hoa Y Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX BY COMPANY Free Info. # Company Product % Pinball Fantasies 125 21st Century Entertainment 7th Level Inc. Acoustic Research Activision Tuneland Powered Partner 622 Busiest Neighborhood Ever Best Neighborhood Ever Action Replay Activision 3925 Advanced Console Technologies Advance Gravis Aldealabs AlTech International UltraSound Best Girlfriend Game Player TV Blake Stone, Aliens of Gold Kingmaker Pre-owned Software % 6 Axis 25 77 16978 107 79 49 80 16981 A Arena Growth And Adventure Sw. 163 Myst Electronic Shopping Mall BBS Pax Imperia Mail Order Products Gaming Forum Mail Order Edutainment Sw. Apogee Avalon Hill Bare Bones Software Baseline Publishing Bethesda Softworks Blue Valley Broderbund Cape Cod Connection Changeling Software Chips & Bits CompuServe Computer Express Computer Express Computer Gaming World Creative Labs Crystal Dynamics DeVuono DeVuono Games Direct Way 3000 Dongleware Publishing Electronic Arts Epic Mega Games Falcon Northwest FormGen Corporation Gamer's Gold GE Information System Mail Order Products Free Page Info. # Company Product Page 118 Interplay Interplay's 10th Year Anthology 147 145 68 Keyboard Commander Corp. Falcon & MIG Commander Utilities 146 99 69 Koei Romance of the Three Kingdoms 36 70 Logitech Soundman 36 71 Logitech Cyberman 15372 Mallard Software Quackers Megatech Dragon Knight III 154-155 Merit Software Isle of the Dead Microforum G.O.R.G. 113 76 Microforum Microforum Family of Products 114-115 MicroProse 1942 Pacific Air War 118-119 Midnight Games Legends 169 Mission Control Mail Order Products 172-173 Multimedia Specialist Mail Order Multimedia Products 129 National Videotex Network NVN 169 New World Computing Inherit The Earth 148-149 Nova Logic, Inc./EA Comanche CD 169 83 Nova Logic, Inc./EA Wolf Pack 163 85 Origin Systems Wings of Glory 70-79 Origin Systems Bio Forge Cover 4 47 86 Origin Systems Strike Commander 121 86-89 Paper Mayhem PBM Magazine 140-141 Papyrus Publishing Indy Car Racing 67 90 Paramount Interactive Lunicus 63 91 Psygnosis Microcosm 122-123 38-39 Quantum Quality Products The Grandest Fleet 65 120 Quarterdeck QEMM Game Packs 52 121 REM Software The Infinity Machine 151 93 Sideline Software Mail Order Products 100-101 Sierra Direct Sierra Products 96-97 Sierra Dynamics Aces Over Europe Sierra Dynamics Battle Drome 4-5 Cover 2 Sierra On-Line Outpost 44-45 Sigma Designs, Inc. Reel Magic SIIG TV Gamer Plus 126 100 Simulations Systems Universal Cockpit and Joystick Software Express Mail Order Products Software Toolworks Mega Race Spectrum Electronics Mail Order Products Cover 3 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Ravenloft Strategic Simulations, Inc. Al Qadim Strategic Simulations, Inc. Dark Legions 107 Thrust Master Thrust Master Controls Titan Games Armed And Dangerous Games 109 Virgin Games Lands Of Lore No Reader Service Number. Please call advertiser for information. . Subscriptions Sound Blaster 16 The Horde 165 A 3 58 . Hollywood Mogul Mail Order Peripherals Oxyd Magnum Seawolf Epic Pinball Falcon Mach V Disciples of Steel Pre-owned Games Cyberstrike Ultimate Role-Playing Aid 8 Gosselin Computer Consultants Hi-Tech Expressions HPS Simulations S3 Mortal Kombat Tigers on the Prowl Doom ID Software Imagitec Design Inc. Impressions Impressions Inner Circle Technology Daemonsgate Breach 3 D-Day Legends of Future Past Star Trek: Judgment Rites Movie & Sound Pack Star Trek: 25th Anniversary 108 31 Interplay 117 Interplay April 1994 Page 171 "


"MISSION Call 800.999.7995 FREE SHIPPING! ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. VIA UPS GROUND WITH COUPON. BIKINI BEACH By RomAntics Careful slippery when wet. Delve into an occan of pleasure with seven lovely beach bunnies on location as they romp in the sun. Close your scene. In the surf or on the sand Mac and Windows compatible CD ROM $59. FINGERS FOR WINDOWS by PC Compo-Net Learn to type. Icarn. New language, or lam both at the same time! Over 2.500 More than just the w il bir excercises in each language. citing practices, Fingers for Windows comprehensive 10 key instruction. Hear the voices of native speakers, bundreds of usctul phases for travel. Types in: Inglish, Spanish and French CD ROM $59. SCISSORS STONES SCISSORS N STRIP POKER PRO STONES By Artworx by Pixis Interactive Combines the strategic play Beautiful women engage action of 5 Card Draw Poker vou in an all or nothing with some very different cablu head-to-head competition of stakes. Laura. Kami and Greta high stakes, the stakes are are three gorgeous opponent: who are willing and able to let it not for money but rather for all for the chance to \"heat the articles of clothing. Your pants off you.\" You can play goal is to make your opponents are all without have against one, two or three oppoing to expose yourself. Scissors N Stones is the first interactive crotnents simultancously. Dik $34. ic game that its full motion video merged with 3D generated animation that adds an extra dimension of realism. never before Data Disks I thru 6 S20. c.ch available. Includes, Realistic 3D walk through sequences. Full per son point-of-view, Addicitve gameplay, multiple opponents. CD ROM $69. WINNER TAKES ALL WINNET: DREAM MACHINE By Vivid Video By New Machine A lascinating interactive adult video game of chance. You More DREAM The most innovative CD the points and a host of Vivid MACHINE ever! Navigate through a megastars like Racquel. Justine 3D world where your Inay. Ginger Lynn, Ashlyn Gore ultimate fantasies com will pay off in exciting visuals that alive, The Dream will leave you breathless! Round henka dream Machine's bouitul host and Round you go, risking it all not a dream? c's will lead you on an for a host of sizzling beauties... interctive journey .ind they're worth it! through your imagini CD ROM $39. tion. The only CD that adapts to your choices. As seen on Donalue. Joan Rivers and CNN CD ROM $69. NEURODANCER by Pixis Interactive INTERACTIVE Roam the NeuroNET bv ADVENTURES OF hacking into the forbidden worlds of dark mysteries, BU SEYMORE danger and sexuality. Use your computer and VidFone by New Machine to obtain (nough credits to Join the legendary hunter View the crotic Neurodancers Seymore on a madeapped who roam the computer net 10-195 adventure. Help Seymore works in search of willing meet and mate with the viewers. Featuring 3D anigirls of his dreams. Sermore needs your help, so INTERmation, interactive gameplay, TFUI Interface and live motion video, Requires: 186. SVGA.4 MB of Hard Disk Mb RAM. ACTION is required. CD ROM $69. (DROM $69. w NEURODANCER FPEWA COA BOM Wrt of Picking Up ART OF PICKING UP GIRLS by PC Compo-Net 22 gorgeous girls share their Secret desires with radio D.I. Steve Morris, as he mums Southern California searching for the answer to man's eemal quest. The Art of Picking Up Girls is the ultimate guide for mwen of all ages. Candid. lively and clucational CD ROM $59. Stary Mo 0.1 STEVÉ MORRIS MOVIE ALMANAG By New Machine Surs, directors, studios, all at your fingertips. Over 750 reviews, 250 Saar biogra Adult Movie ALMANAC URONISUKIDO: LINN C SIZZLE By Sweet Dreams Make your own Screen Saver and create wall paper. DOS or WINDOWS compatible. We knew you were sick and rired of cumbersome. troublesome viewers that were supposed to be easy to us. Say Good Night to the viewers of the past! Try Style Now! CD ROM $39. ORUTSUKIDOJI By New Machine Is there any hope for humanity? Will the legend of the Overtiend OF THE WILL become reality? From the animation geniuses who created Spice Cruiser Yamato, this is the astounding and controversial theatrical masterpiece which singlehandedly launched a whole new genre of Japanese animation Detinerely not for children! CD ROM $49. with   ,   high res images. Jim Holliday gives you all the inside frets, history & trivia of the industry! Includes promotion clips from the LIST Disc library CD ROM$69. Vn000-000005 "


"IBM DISK GAMES CD ROM E N RA L ADULT MOVIES .40 44 Barlow Affair... Bikini Beach .. Busty Babes 2 Digital Dreams Double Play 1... Erotica ..... Exotic Girls ..39 Girls in Vivid .................. .44 Girls of J. Stephen Hicks II ......29 Girls of Risque ..................44 High Volume Nudes ..................39 Island Girls 3 in 1 CD ............39 Northern Delights 1 or 2...........44 Super Models Go Wild ............49 Virtual Vixens.. .69 ADULT INTERACTIVE Blood Net .. -35 w.40 After Dark Trilogy Amorous Asian Girls Best of Inferno Best of Vivid Betrayal ...... Busting Out College Girls Deception .... Girls of Mardi Gras Hidden Obsessions ......... House of Sleeping Beauties .... Inferno ... Kama Sutra . .. Legends of Porn Il Mystique of Orient New Wave Hookers... One-Nine Hundred ..... Pinch of Pepper ........... Princess of Persia Racquel Released me RainWomen ... Sweet Dreams Traci I Love You  ..14 Adult Sampler Buttman's Euro Vacation .......39 Cat and Mouse ...49 Condo Cuties Digital Dancing Doors of Passion ..... Hot Wire (High Society Mag) ...59 LA. Strippers .......... Maddam's Family Night Watch .......... ...40 Wicked .30 Wicked Whispers ....... 6 Force Toke . .. FREE SHIPPING On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground Simply send in coupon with your order! .....30 .65 Offer expires 04/30/94 .....37 Aces of the Deep Aces Over Europe ...............45 AD&D Al Qadim Genie's Curse45 7th Guest .45 Groliers Encyclopedia 6...........79 Sherlock Holmes 1 or 2 ...........37 AD&D Dungeon Hack.. . AD&D Al Qadim Genie's Curse 45 Hell Cab .......... ..........63 Sherlock Holmes Ill........ AD&D Fantasy Empire... AD&D Dungeon Hack... ...40 Interplay's Classic Collection .47 Small Blue Planet .......... Air Warrior ............. AD&D Fantasy Empires ...........45 Intro to Wordperfect 5.2 ........37 Software Vault: Games Collec.34 Archon Ultra ........... AD&D Ravenloft .......................54 Iron Helix ........................... ..62 Software Vault: Gold Collect...34 Arctic Baron... Aegis Guardian of the Fleet....53 Jurassic Park Software Vault: Windows .......34 Axis The GameCheater.......... Alladin &his Wonderful lamp....38 Just Grandma and Me ..........37 Software Vault: Platinum 94....40 Beat the House ................... Alone in the Dark ......... .....52 Kings Quest 6 .......................30 Star Trek 25th ....... ........60 Betrayal at Krondor Armored Fist ............. .45 Lands of Lore ...... 43 Street Atlas USA Arthur's Teacher Trouble ... ....40 Lord of the Rings ..47 Strike Commander .............58 Bloodstone... Astrology Source .......... ..52 Mad Dog McCree........... 42 The Journeyman Project ..........47 Caesar ....... Backroad Racer Man Enough ..44 The Tortoise & The Hare. Carrier Strike Battlechess Enhanced Mayo Clin.Family Health Guide 43 Tony LaRussa 2....... Carriers at War 2. Blood Net Mayo Clinic Total Heart ..........40 Tornado ....... Civilization Windows ... CD Rom Caddie Mechamander Ultima Underworld 1&2... Clash of Steel .. Comanche CD Mist..... ...... Where USA Carmen Dlx...... Cobra Mission Conspiracy .43 MM 2 Day of Tentacle ...........45 Where World Carmen Dix......39 Comanche Bundle...................45 Cyber Race Oregon Trail .........................40 Wing Commander 2 Dlx .........34 Comanche Mission Disk 2.......35 Daemonsgate Peter Pan Story Paint Adven ..45 Wing Commander Dix...........34 Cyber Race Dark Sun Shattered Lands .....54 PhoneDisc Residential USA .....59 Wolfpack .. . ........38 Daemonsgate .............. Dracula Unleashed. ........52 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon ....47 Dark Sun Shattered Lands ...52 Dune Putt Putt Joins Parade .........39 ADULT CD GIF'S Delta V... European Racer Putt Putt's Fun Pack..... Detroit ....... F15 Strike Eagle 3 Rebel Assault ..................52 3D Darlings ......... Dominion...... Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise 45 Return of the Phantom ..........47 3D DreamGirls Doom Shareware. Fatty Bear's Fun Pack Return to Zork.. Amateur Models Dragon Knight 3. Flight Sim Toolkit ... Scooter's Magic Castle ..........45 American Girls .. Eagle Eye Mysteries London.35 Gabriel Knight .......... Scrabble Deluxe........... Asian Ladies ........ Earth Invasion Windows Global Explorer........ Shadowcaster Asian Palatte. Eight Ball Deluxe... Elder Scrolls The Arena..........43 Empire Deluxe ............. Empire Deluxe Windows...........37 Links Course Banff Springs ...22 Sailing Simulator III VGA.......49 Flight Stick Pro CH Products..65 Empire Dix Scenario Builder..22 Links Course Innisbrook ........22 Sailing Sim East or West Dsk..32 Formula Ti..... Eye of Beholder 1.2.3 Bundle..52 Links Course Mauna Kea ......22 Sam & Max Hit The Road.........37 G Force Yoke ... Eye of the Beholder 3.............37 Links Course Pebble Beach....29 San Francisco Scenery Disk..32 Gameport III Automatic F-18 Hornet..... ...35 Lucky's Casino... ...40 Shadowcaster ...................45 45 Machi.... Falcon 3.0 .... ..50 Master of Orion .. ...45 Siege Walls of Rome...............40 PC Command Control ........ Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 Meadowlark Bridge Windows 39 Sim City 2000 Rudder Pedals Falcon Fighting Tiger Mechamander Sim Farm..... Virtual Pilot ... Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise 35 Metal and Lace....... .....34 Slater & Charlie Go Camping 32 Weapons Controller Mark 2....99 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack..........24 Metal and Lace Upgrade..........6 SSN-21 Seawolf ... Flashback .35 Microsoft Arcade Windows...34 Star Reach ........... SOUNDGARDS Fleet Defender F-14 Tomcat ..50 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0.......45 Star Trek Judgement Rights.37 Flight Light............ ......22 MM 2 Day of Tentacle .........40 Street Fighter II............ Ad Lib Gold 1000 Flight Sim Toolkit Windows.....59 Mortal Kombat..................40 Strike Command Mission 1.....22 Digital Edge CD ROM Kit.......695 Front Page Football Pro ........47 New York Scenery Disk........34 Strike Commander ...............39 Discovery CD 16 bit Internal 595 Gabriel Knight.....................43 NFL Coaches Club Football.....43 Strike Commander Speech ...20 Edutainment 16 Internal.......595 Gary Grigsby's War in Russia 47 NHL Hockey 94........................43 Strip Poker Pro Disk 1-8 ea....20 Pro Audio Spectrum 16........ Great Naval Battles 2..........47 Oper. Crusade North Africa...47 Stronghold ................. Sound Blaster 16..... Great Naval Bat. Admiral Pk..54 Pacific Strike... ..................50 Sub Wars 2050 .................... Sound Blaster 16 ASP ...... ..219 Harpoon 2............. .. Pacific Strike Speech Pack....22 SVGA Harrier ...... Sound Blaster Deluxe. Harpoon 2 #2 WESTPAC.. ........30 Paris Scenery Disk. Syndicate Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe ......122 Harpoon 2 Scenario Editor....30 Perfect General Bundle..........37 Syndicate American Revolt....25 Sound Blaster Pro MCA.........258 Heirs to the Throne.... Peter Pan Story Paint. Adv. Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 .........159 High Command ... ..47 Police Quest 4.................. .....43 Terminator Ranipage.......... Sound Machine Sound Kit.. Incredible Toons..... 32 Powerboating Simulator III...49 The Blue and The Gray..........43 Soundman 16... IndyCar Racing ..... Prince of Persia 2....................45 The Great War 1914-18........47 Ultrasound....... Isle of the Dead. Privateer ................. ..52 The Merchant Prince............40 Voice Blaster.. Jeopardy Alex. Privateer Mission Disk 1.......25 Tie Fighter.................. ..43 Wave Blaster Jurassic Park. Privateer Speech Pack..........22 Tigers on the Prowl... Kasparov's Gambit. Pro League Football...............37 Tom Landry Football Deluxe..32 ACCESSORIES Kid Pix Putt Putt Goes to the Moon...35 Tornado 52 King Maker.......... Putt Putt Joins the Parade ...33 Art of the kill.... King's Quest 6 ....... .......47 Putt Putt's Fun Pack .............25 Ultima 7: The Serpent Isle .....50 Cyber Man......................... King's Ransom Quarterpole ............ ..35 Ultima VII Silver Seed.............22 Gameblaster.. King's Table Quest for Glory 4 Ultima VIII Pagan..... ....... Koss HD/4 Speakers..............44 Kingdoms of Germany.............37 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe ....... .43 Ultima VIII Speech Pack.........22 Notebook Gameport.............42 Kronolog The Nazi Paradox ...43 Real Weather Pilot. 27 Unlimited Adventures ......... Sound Blaster Speakers.... Lands of Lore ....... Red Crystal ..... Unnatural Selection.......... Supra V32 Int. Fax Modem.....169 Leasure Suit Larry 6..............43 Return to Zork.. Unnecessary Roughness........37 Legend Kyrandia 2 Hand Fate40 Romance of 3 Kingdoms III....42 V Victory 4: Gold Juno Sword 43 Links 386 Pro ......................42 Attention Victory at Sea........... Rules of Engagement 2 ..........43 V for Victory 1.2.3 Pak... International Video Jam........ .. Customers! Methods of Payment Warlords 2 ... ......... We specialize in overWe accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money Washington Scenery........ WC 2 & Speech Pak............ seas sales and ship to orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to WC 2 Special Ops 1&2... many countries dally! clear. School, State & City purchase orders When Two Worlds War Please make sure to accepted. Where Space Carmen Deluxe 43 Include phone number Shipping Wing Commander & Ultima 6 39 with your order! Hope Wing Commander Academy ..32 UPS Ground ($5 minimum)/UPS Blue ($7 Wizardry Trilogy 2......... .37 to hear from you soon! minimum); APO & FPO ( $7 minimum); World Circuit Grand Prix .......37 Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax WW II Battles of South Pacific 37 CD Rom Caddies $7. (1-10) X Wing MD 2 B Wing.................22 orders) Send money orders or checks to: X-Wing... $6 (11-20) $5.50 20+ MISSION CONTROL X-Wing Mission Disk 1 356 Glenwood Avenue JOYSTICKS Mitsumi Double Speed Dept. CGW0494 Internal CD Rom Drive ACM Game Card. East Orange, NJ 07017 High Performence Operation, Analog Plus ......... Flight Control Pro 250 ms access time, powered Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! Flight Control System tray loading, double shellFlight Control Yoke............. dust-sealed mechanism. Flight Stick...... On Sale! $235. ...189 40 Get the facts via FaxBack... Call 201.676.7454 from your fax machine. Receive information on new releases, Adult CD rom, specials, and more. ...45 34 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK 42 TOWI...............42 Tower.. UNIQUE aslov COMMUNIQUE Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Order our color catalogue filled with New items, CD Rom, Adult CD Rom, Discount Coupons, Complete Listings and more! FREE with your order, otherwise send $2.00. (Outside of US and Canada send $5.00) .34 ....... MISSION CONTROL Circle Reader Service #78 "


"Slam WA Taking  Compton's New Media 2320 Camino Vida Roble Carsbad, CA 92009 (619) 929-2500 USA WARS-WORLD WAR II: No, Compton's hasn't suddenly decided to start marketing wargames. What we have instead is BlitzQuiz, a multimedia quiz show for 1-2 players, where your knowledge of WWII can make the difference between winning and losing against historical personalities. While the trivia is interesting, the game seems more suitable for those with a historical bent. 2,000 photographs give a good overall pictorial view of U.S. involvement in WWII, backed up by the biographies and battle descriptions you expect from a multimedia product. A good attempt at making history accessible to the masses. IBM, IBM Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #3. The Elder Scrolls: Arena A quick look at titles now appearing on a store shelf near you. LLCLEARLESS Trump Castle 3 CD-ROM Bethesda Softworks PO Box 7877 Gaithersburg, MD 20898-7877 (301) 963-2002 THE ELDER SCROLLS-ARENA: This role-playing epic looks like a cross between Ultima Underworld and Might and Magic: World of Xeen, and continues a tradition of involved, in-depth role-playing games while pushing the edge of the 3D envelope, especially in the realm of light-sourced graphics. This may well be the biggest\" world, in terms of game play, that will reach store shelves this year. Not only is the game world huge, but Arena is only the first chapter of a series of games that will connect to each other a la New World's World of Xeen. Although its interface is less than fully intuitive, role playing fans will find the storyline and game world rich and compelling. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #1. More PBMS were used by the 1Republic of range CArnee de 1 Aire 2-Nationalist Chinese 3Netherlands East Indies ABRAL, SRCA EMMA alt.) Correct 1 50:25 Deadly Games 275 Community Drive Great Neck, NY 11021 (516) 482-4000 U-BOAT: This submarine simulator for the reflex-challenged is a fine addition to Deadly Games' stable of Macintosh «strategy simulators.\" Like their Bomberand M4, U-Boat gives you a command perspective with a full, simulated crew in support. As it was during WWII, operations on a submarine are a game of patience, once described as «long stretches of monotony punctuated by minutes of sheer terror.\" Fortunately, time can be compressed so you can quickly get to the \"sheer terror\" of your tours of duty and confront what lies on the ocean's surface. Easily learned, with a strong \"you are there\" feel, U-Boat incorporates the details in such a clever way that the challenge always lies in using proper techniques rather than fighting the simulation's mechanics. The terrific sound effects particularly enhance the game play experience. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Patton USA Wars-World War II U-Boat Femme ha scelta come la PI * Capstone Software Airport Corporate Center 7200 Corporate Center Dr., Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 TRUMP CASTLE 3 CD-ROM: The CDROM conversion of Trump Castle 3 might offer extra glitz with better SVGA graphics and modem/network play, but it is still the same game found on the floppies. Like the original, the package gathers a gaggle of gambling games, including poker (both video and table), blackjack, roulette, keno, baccarat, craps and a variety of slot machines. A custom face maker lets you define the look of the character that interacts with the toys at Donald's palatial pad. IBM CD-ROM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #2. Score Digital Empires Inc. 313 East Willow Street Suite 314 Syracuse, NY 13203 (315) 479-6244 SHIH DAO: Certain games have the insidious quality of suspending time while you play, and Shib Dao is one of them. Tiles, randomly selected, must be placed by pattern or color in order to form sets of four and make the highest possible score. Much more difficult than it sounds, the game is good both for those short coffee breaks, or simply for those who have trouble sleeping. Fans of other tile-based games such as Ishido should find that their game-playing pattern will make a perfect Shih Dao Page 174 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best for less Legends OF FUTURE 1993 Winner Computer Gaming World Special Award for Artistic Achievement! TM PAST\" \"...A remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) «... no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) Now you can play the award-winning multi-player online game Legends of Future Past for as little as $1.80 per hour! Ureate your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting, intrepid and interesting people who populate these everexpanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. New Lower Rates: $12.95 refundable sign-up fee includes two (2) free hours. $9.95 a month includes five (5) hours online time. (Not applied until after 30-day trial membership) Additional hours charged at $1.80 hour total via direct dial and Internet, or $3.60 hour total fee via CNS local dial-ups. No surcharge for connecting at 14400 baud or during daytime hours. Also available on SprintNet call for prices. If you are on Internet: telnet to novalink.com, or write info@novalink.com.  No special software required.  Toll free number customer service and technical support.  All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older to use NovaLink. American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. .and you can try it free! Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant Knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. Noval MAKING THE WORLD A BIT SMALLER Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence. Not only will you interact with people just like yourself you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come try it for yourself. 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info info@novalink.com. telnet novalink.com 79 Boston Turnpike, Suite 409. Shrewsbury, MA 01545 Circle Reader Service #67 "


"BOCEDUCEDUREEHOOSE match with this game. IBM Windows (Shareware, registered version $20.00, offering more screens and tile sets). Circle Reader Service #5. de Rana LLLLLLL POE LEZOECDODONCEECCCCCC Oxyd Magnum Dongleware Publishing, Inc. 35 Howard St. Cambridge, MA 02139-2909 (617) 497-1130 OXYD MAGNUM: When Oxyd was first released, it gained much acclaim from braingamers. Now, this new, enlarged version for 1994 offers more, and more vicious, puzzles. The goal is to \"mouse\" your marble in the right direction and speed in order to hit bumpers in a maze. These bumpers must be properly matched, which means discovered and remembered, much like the classic game Concentration. Of course, perils abound, so you must roll over helpful objects while avoiding nasty marble killers. The puzzles begin easily enough for those new to Oxyd, but they are absorbing and will quickly pull players deeper and deeper into its 100 devilish mazes. IBM and Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6. are many, many hours of exploratory game play here, purting Frontier in that category of insidious adventures that can become less of a game, and more a way of life. Amiga, IBM ($64.99). Circle Reader Service #8. NFL '94: For those gamers who wish the football season would never end, Konami has revamped its old NFL game to include VGA graphics and better sound. Be careful installing though, as even the myriad of sound drivers included fail to solve all of the compatibility problems. Additionally, the game tries so hard to be a faithful reproduction of NFL football, that it takes almost as much time to play a game as it would in real life. A mouse is supported, but the keyboard is the true interface here. All the obstacles a potencial coach could face are included, with penalties being handled pretty well, as they are supposedly based on individual team tendencies. Injuries affect not only a single game, but can have far-reaching effects in league play, a nice touch-provided it happens to the other guy's team, of course. Front Page Sports Football fans will probably punt, but others might want to give NFL '94 a second look. IBM ($59.95) Circle Reader Service #9. TURN 202220150 1108 LLLLLLLL IND Expert Quiz Show For Windows Actual 142 km St 1000 km / Rrmed Huming Missile Relatarzlo Lave Station y Frontier-Elite 2 Expert Software P.O. Box 144506 Coral Gables, FL 33114-4506 (305) 448-2074 EXPERT QUIZ SHOW FOR WINDOWS: When there is a trivia game going on, everyone seems to have the answers. Fortunately for those who enjoy the more trivial of pursuits, this product has two things to recommend it. First, the questions are not of the all-too-easy, lowest-common-denominator type. They are, in fact, a good assortment of questions that a college-educated player would have known the answer to at one time. Its second strength is its price, a pittance at $14.95. Unfortunately, the answers must be perfectly spelled and hyphenated or the program will count them as incorrect. While this can be annoying, the game's gameshow approach and its ability to create a database of correct answers for each game make it a cut above the average trivia game. IBM with Windows ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #7. Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6655 THE CLASSIC 5: They play more than Checkers next to this virtual pot-bellied stove. From the 17th Century comes Backgammon, offering a choice of offensive or—dare we say it-defensive styles of play. The main problem is that it doesn't really matter which style the computer plays-it lacks depth. Bridge is the token card game, and while it isn't bad, we would have preferred Rummy, or even Whist, dahling. The Chess algorithm here will hardly be confused with Interplay's Battle Chess engine, but it does play an entertaining game. Go was a pleasant surprise, and kept our interest for a while. Would-be casual strategists would enjoy Checkers the most, as it features an engaging and opportunistic AI. The VGA graphics are largely wasted, as are the sounds, which are primarily Sound Blaster wake-ups in PC Speaker-land. For those tired of shuffling cards and rolling dice, it offers familiar gaming friends in a single package. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. 02 23 Play Down To O ct 051 NFL 94 Gametek, Inc. 2999 N.E. 191st Street, Suite 500 North Miami Beach, FL 33180 (305) 935-3995 FRONTIER-ELITE 2: The universe of space games continues to expand with this long-awaited sequel to Elite. In the tradition of Sun Dog, Space Rogue and Starflight, Frontier offers up an EMORMOUS universe in which you can explore, fight, trade and establish a reputation with various political alliances. Though its polygon graphics and iconic interface have some rough edges, there Mallard Software, Inc. 3207 Justin Rd. Flower Mound, TX 75028 (214) 539-2575 FAST ACTION PAQ—THE FIRST CHALLENGE: Long known for their aviation and space simulation products, Mallard The Classic 5 Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"AV E call for more! 12 29 GUNSHIP 2000 VGA HALLS OF MONTEZUMA HAAD NOVA HARDBALL 3 HARPOON HARPOON DESIGNER SER HARPOON EDITOR HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINA VGA HEAVEN & EARTH HEAVY METAL HEROES OF THE 357TH HEROES OF THE LANCE HIGH COMMAND MILLSFAA  HOVERFORCE HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 1 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 2 HOYLE'S EK GAMES VOL 3 HUMANS HUNT RED OCTOBER HYPERSPEED IMMORTAL INCA INCREDIBLE MACHINE VGA INDIANAPOLIS 500 INOY JONES FATE ATLA INDY JONES: LAST CRUS ISHIDO ISLAND OF OR BRAIN VGA MANTIS EXP FIGHTER-VGA MANTIS EXP SPEECH PA MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISS MEAN STREETS MECHWARRIOR MEDIEVAL LOADS MEGAFORTRESS MEGAFORTRESS MISS DK MEGATRAVELLER 1 ZHOD MEGATRAVELLER 2 MERCHANT COLONY MICHAEL JORDAN FLT SIM MIDWINTER MIG 29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 1 MIGHT & MAGIC 2 MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 MIGHT & MAGICS MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MILLENIUM MINES OF TITAN MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE ML BASEBALL 4 USAT ML BASEBALL GMOWNER ML BASEBALL MANAGERS ML FOOTBALL 2 DOUBLE DRAGON 2 DRAGON FORCE DRAGON LORD DRAGON WARS DRAGONS OF FLAME DRAKKHEN DUNE DUNE 2 DUSK OF THE GODS EARTHRISE ELVIRA 1 ELVIRA 2 EPIC ERIC THE UNREADY ESCAPE FROM HELL ETERNAM EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF BEHOLDER 2 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3 RAILROAD TYCOON RAMPART REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA RED LIGHTNING RETURN OF PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REVOLUTION 76 REX NEBULAR COS GEN RIDERS OF ROHAN RISE OF DRAGON-VGA ROAD & TRACK GRAN PR ROAD TO FINAL FOUR ROBOSPORT WIN HOCKETEEN. ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS 2 ROME: PATHWAY TO POW RULES OF ENGAGEMENT RULES OF ENGAGMNT 2 SAVAGE EMPIRE SCRABBLE SEAL TEAM SEARCH FOR THE KING SECOND FRONT SECRET OF SILVER BLADE SECRET WEAPONS LUFTW SENTINEL WORLDS SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT 12 16 16 24 16 16 15 WE'RE BUYING! GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 WE SELL USED GAMES STORMOVIK STREET FIGHTER 2 STREET ROD 2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE COMMANDER SP STUNT DRIVER STUNT ISLAND STUNTS SUMMONING SWORD OF ARAGON SYNDICATE TANGLED TALES TANK TASK FORCE 1942 TEAM YANKEE TEENAGE MNT ARCADE TEENAGE MNT MANH MIS TEGEL'S MERCENARIES TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2029 TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 TEST DRIVE 3. ROAD&CAR THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF WAR THEIR FINEST HOUR THEXDER 1 THUNDER HAWK THUNDERSTRIKE TIMES OF LORE TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA BB TONY LARUSSAULT B3 TOP GUN DANGER ZONE TORNADO TRACON TRACON 2 TREASURES SAVAGE FR TRILOGY TRISTAN PINBALL TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000 VGA TYPHOON OF STEEL ULTIMA 4 QUEST AVAT ULTIMA 5 WARRIORS DE ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPH ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRT ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 7.5 SILVER SE ULTIMA TRILOGY 1 ULTIMA TRILOGY 2 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS SANCTIONE UMS 2 UNCHARTED WATERS UNDER FIRE UNLIMITED ADVENTURES UTOPIA V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBR VIKING CHILD VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH WAR IN THE GULF 24 WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WAXWORKS WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 1 WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 2 WC 2 SPEECH PACK WC SECRET MISSION 1 WC SECRET MISSION 2 WC ULTIMA 6 CD WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WEAVER COMMISIONERS WEAVER MLBPA PLR ST WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WR WHERE IN WORLD CSD WHERE IN WALD CSD-CO WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WING COMM ACADEMY WIZARDY 4 WIZARDAY 5 WIZARDRY 6-COSMIC FOR WIZARDRY 7-CRUSADERS WOLFENSTEIN 3D WOLFPACK WONDERLAND WORLD CIRCUIT WORLDS AT WAR X-WING X-WING B WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURS YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT IBM & MAC GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Specify IBM or MAC. Call, fax, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment. Games will not be accepted without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S GOLD 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a \"Wish lisi\" of litles you are interested in. 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 5.7 working days of receiving your games. Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Games must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX, DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 40 BOXING 688 ATTACK SUB 7TH GUEST-CD A-TRAIN ATAC A10 TANK KILLER 1.5 ABC BOXING ABC MONDAY NIGHT FB ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACTION SPORTS SOCCER ACTION STATIONS 11 ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH AIR BUCKS AIR BUCKS VER 1.2 AIR FORCE COMMANDER ALL AMERICAN COLLG FB ALONE IN THE DARK ALTERED DESTINY AMAZON AMBUSH ANCIENT ART WAR. SEA ANCIENT ART WAR SKY APBA FOOTBALL ARE WE THERE YET? ARMADA 2525 ARMOUR ALLEY BAT 817 FLYING FORTRESS BAD BLOOD BALANCE OF POWER 1990 BALANCE OF THE PLANE BARD'S TALE 1 BARD'S TALE 2 BARD'S TALE 3 BARD'S TALE CONST SET BATTLE CHESS BATTLE CHESS-CO BATTLE ISLE BATTLES OF DESTINY BATTLETECH 1 BATTLETECH 2 BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BIG BUSINESS BLITZKRIEG ARDENNES BLOODSTONE BLOODWYCH BLUE ANGELS BLUE FORCE:NEXT OF KIN BO JACKSON BASEBALL BRAIN BLASTER BREACH 2 BREACH 2 SCEN DISK BUCK ROGERS 1 BUZZ ALDRIN RACE INT CAESAR CAESARS PALACE CAMPAIGN CAR & DRIVER CARRIER COMMAND CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CASTLE OR BRAIN VGA CASTLES CASTLES 2 CASTLES-NATHAN CMPN CENTERION OFNOR ROME CHALLENGE OF 5 REALM CHAMBER SCI MUT PRST CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN CHESSMASTER 3000 WIN CIVILIZATION CLASH OF STEEL CLUE MASTER DETECTIV COASTER CODE NAME ICEMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST covAD  CONAN CONFLICT: KOREA CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT CONQUESTS OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF LONGBO CONTINUIM CORPORATION COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION CRACK DOWN CRIBBAGE GIN KING CRIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRUISE FOR A CORPSE CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CYBER EMPIRE CYBERGENIC RANGER DAGGER OF AMMON RA DARK CENTURY DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN DARK SUN DARKLANDS DARKLANDS MASTER ED DARKSEED DARKSPYRE DAVID WOLF: SECRET AG DAY OF THE VIPER DEJA VU 2 LOST IN LV DEATH KNIGHT OF KAYN DICK TRACY DONT GO ALONE All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation de Call for current title availibility MER'S WE ACCEPT ONLY VISA/MasterCard/Discover 3 Money Orders/Cashiers Check in Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S9 2nd Day Air GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street  Sioux Falls South Dakoto 57105 15 32 25 19 18 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3-CD F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 3 F19 STEALTH FIGHTER FALCON 3.0 FIGHT TIGER FALCON 3.0 FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRE FIGHTING FOR ROME FINAL CONFLICT FIRETEAM 2200 FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLIGHT OF INTRUDER FLIGHT SIMULATOR 4.0 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 FLOOR 13 FOUNTAIN OF DREAMS FOUR CRYSTALS TRAZER FREDDY PHARKAS FATA FREE DC FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL FRONT PAGE FB PRO FULL METAL PLANET FUTURE WARS GARY GRIGSBY PACIFIC GATEWAY GATEWAY 2. HOMEWALD GATEWAY SAVAGE FRTR GENGHIS KHAN GHOSTS & GOBLINS GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBAL EFFECT GOBLINS 2 VGA GOBLINS-VGA GODFATHER GOLD OF AZTECS GOLD OF THE AMERICAS GRAIL QUEST GRANDSLAM BRIDGE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NB AMERICA ATL GREAT NG SUPER SHIPS GREENS GUNBOAT GUNSHIP GUNSHIP 2000 SCEN DSK JCK NICKLAUS GRTST 18 JACK NICKLAUS SE CRS JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATU JACK NICKLAUS UNL GOLF JAMES BOND STEALTH JET FIGHTER 2 MISSION JET FIGHTER 2.0 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL JUMP JET KEYS TO MARAMON KGB KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 4. EGA KING'S QUEST 5 VGA KING'S QUEST 6 VGA KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY L'EMPEREUR LAKERS VS CELTICS \"LAND.SEA AIR TRILOGY\" LANDS OF LORE LASER SQUAD LEATHER GODDESSES 2 LEGACY.REALM OF TERR LEGEND OF FAERGHAIL LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEMMINGS LEMMINGS 2 LEXICROSS LHX ATTACK CHOPPER LIGHTSPEED LINE IN THE SAND LINKS 386 PRO LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LOST ADMIRAL ENHANCED LOST FILES SHERLOCK LOST IN LA MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 1 MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 MAGIC JOHNSON MVP MANHOLE MANHUNTER SF 27 ML FOOTBALL DELUXE MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONKEY ISLAND VGA MOONBASE MURDER NASCAR CHALLENGE NFL COACH'S CLUB NFL FOOTBALL NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '91 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '92 NIGHTBREED NO GREATER GLORY NOVA 9 VGA OBITUS OIL'S WELL OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD PALADIN 2 PAPERBOY 2 PATRIOT PERFECT GENERAL PIRATES PLANET'S EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 1 VGA POLICE QUEST 3 VGA POLICE QUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS: MOVIES POWER HITS. SCI/FI POWER HITS, SPORTS POWERHITS: BATTLETEC POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PROPHECY 1 PROPHECY OF SHADOW PROTOSTAR PSYCHIC WAR QUEST FOR GLORY 1.EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1-VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 2-EGA QUEST FOR GLORY3-VGA SHADOW SORCERER SHADOWGATE WIN SHADOWLANDS SHERLOCK HOLMES -CO SHUTTLE SIEGE SIEGE EXP.DOGS OF WAR SIERRA ADV BUNDLE SIERRA FAMILY FUN PK SILENT SERVICE 2 SILPHEED SIM CITY SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 1 SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 2 SIM CITY TERRAIN EDIT SIM ANT SIM EARTH SIM LIFE SKATE OR DIE SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY SORCERIAN SPACE 1889 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 2 EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4 VGA SPACE QUEST 5-VGA SPACE QUEST BUNDLE SPACE ROGUE SPACEWARD HO! SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCRAFT: ASPECT SPELLJAMMER.PIRATES SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR STAR CONTROL STAR CONTROL 2 STAR FLEET 2 STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STARFLIGHT 1 STARFLIGHT 2 STELLAR 7 17 Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listed-we've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. All sales are final defec. tive games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. 16 14 weBuy& SELL 12 Circle Reader Service #58 "


"mulusunak 2018 20 WIEC 33X32 has just hatched a new line of games called Quackers. The premier offering is a compilation of four Windows action games entitled Fast Action Pag: The First Challenge. Included in this quatuor of titles are: Flak Attack (a Paratrooper clone) which puts you in charge of a flak cannon defending a military outpost; Bubble Trouble (a variant of Asteroids) placing you at the helm of a starship caught in the midst of roving subspace vortices; Mole's Quest where you direct the antics of Monty the Mole as he hunts for his misplaced belongings; and Bot, which pits you against heavily armed robots. Of these four action games, Mole's Quest is the only truly memorable title. All of the games have a decidedly shareware look and feel to them, but for the price, it is an interesting collection. IBM with Windows ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #11. must move armies (and elephants) in an intricate point-to-point web of movement. Leaders can do everything from counting noses in the ranks to setting diplomatic, economic and taxation policies. This in-depth examination of this broad reaching ancient war has put a lot of power in the user's hands, but the gamer is forced to wear so many hats that movement of troops is virtually impossible, much less combat. Even devotees of the subject will find that Hannibal had an easier time getting elephants over the Alps, than they will have in figuring out this muddled simulation. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #13. Fast Action Paq: The First Challenge 20 Octave Systems Inc. 504 A Vandell Way Campbell, CA 95008 (408) 866-8424 1. Caribu tuwa 21200 his Silver PUZZLEMANIA: If you and your per have a standing disagreement about whether you can leave jigsaw puzzles unattended, this product may help you out. 24 cartoon frames have been immortalized, from Bananasaur Blab to Sam's Secret Sauce, in classic puzzle form for your Windows delight. A nice touch is that the puzzles are cut in large pieces for youngsters, medium-sized for intermediates, and eye-strainingly small for fanatics. To keep interest after all the puzzles are finished, a \"mystery puzzle\" offers no clue as to which cartoon it is, requiring a bit more time to finish. On-line hints, partial solutions, and the obvious convenience of saving the puzzle to the hard drive make for a fine tension-releasing product. If something seems to be missing, you can always let your pet chew on the game box. IBM Windows ($29.95) Circle Reader Service #14. This cits.o Masque Publishing, Inc. P.O. Box 5223 Englewood, CO 80155 (303) 290-9853 Solitaire Antics SOLITAIRE ANTICS: There are ants on my desktop! Ants on my desktop! Quick, hand me the Raid!! Whoa! Wait just a minute. Those ants are supposed to be there. Solitaire Antics is full of them and you don't have to be an anreater to enjoy them. This humorous collection of solitaire card games, 21 in all, offers some of the most popular solitaire games (Klondike, Golf, Canfield and Yukon) 2 with three levels of difficulty to choose from. LLO Win a game and you're treated to one of 55 We entertaining animated \"ant-ics» on screen. Hannibal Four card decks are available to choose from; eleven Windows wallpapers are provided for backgrounds. You can even play music CDs through the game's interface. Whether you're an entomologist or not, Solitaire Anties is one fun, quality title guaranteed to «kill'em dead.\" IBM, IBM with Windows and Macintosh ($24.99). Circle Reader Service #12. 1. 212.. *** . NUM Raymond Lueders Studio P.O. Box 755 Streamwood, IL 60107 (708) 697-9400 Puzzlemania TECHNITIATED Jareti 81) Dis craih 10 Out o data 12 Marco 30 Gure film 25) Device to Hitlerond 02) Tall 1) Fotel Micro League Interactive Software University Office Plaza, Bellevue Bldg., Suite 201 262 Chapman Rd. Newark, DE 19702 (800) 334-6572 HANNIBAL: Scipio Africanus and Jesus didn't exactly have the same definition of salt of the earth.\" The former used salt to destroy the fields of Carthage and the latter used the expression to talk about enhancing life. This product, a German import from Starbyte Software, meets neither definition. An unbelievably detailed examination of the Second Punic War, the game certainly qualifies as a magnum opus with its daily (yes, daily) game turns, and circa 700 towns through which one 1 E 12) RF 25) lf 2) Lang 222 Peraler i low 10) I BICA 11) Mar 1 96> Last und 2) Beir desire 573 Password 0 58) er 11) Vins detected 92) MEI THE JOKER: Pranksters of the computer world, rejoice! Out of Raymond Lueders Studio comes a sneaky program that will make all your friends believe they've crashed their hard drives. This maniacally grinning program surprisingly supports SVGA and requires 11MB hard drive space. After installation, you gain the ability to quickly download virus-like joke routines onto other computers via floppy disk. After your (former?) friends calm down, you can assure them that, unlike real viruses, these programs go away. An interesting sideeffect of The Joker is that you may use it on your own system as a security measure. Humorous, although not for the faint-of-heart. IBM ($29.00). Circle Reader Service # 15. CIIch wrot to view example... Cree res I E 1.1 The Joker Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"Prepare for Kombat on your PC! Experience all the action of the arcade sensation! KOMBAT FREE Mortal Kombat Tattoos in every box. _ Aklaim entertainment, in c. Distributed by UltraTech To order see your local retailer, or call 1-800-447-6543 (MC/VISA/AMEX). Mortal Kombat is available for the Amiga and IBM/Tandy & 100% compatible PCs. Mortal Kombat  1992 licensed from Midway Manufacturing Company. All rights reserved. Distributed under license from Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. by UltraTech (212) 941-1224 Circle Reader Service #61 "


"military film footage gives, at times, a neodocumentary feel. Mac graphics, especially in wargames, are often overblown, but here they are detailed and effective while still gorgeous. As one might expect, the scope of the game is so vast that it will take some time to assimilate the experience. Even with the intuitive icondriven interface and a hefty reference manual, figure on a long learning curve with this one. Mac ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #18. RJ Best 5214-F Diamond Heights Blvd., Suite 701 San Francisco, CA 94131 (415) 252-6464 CITADEL OF THE DEAD: What a flashback! Some of us actually remember the very first Wizardry game, where a brave party of adventurers returned again and again to a single dank dungeon. In this bit of budgetware, players will enjoy a similar romp, although in 256 colors. Like the Wizardry games of old, graph paper is required as there is no auto-mapping feature. Real CRPG gamers can make their own maps, and for 13 levels of exploring, hacking and puzzling fun, your party of four can be playing with nary a scant look at the docs. For those seeking inscant dungeon gratification at reasonable prices, a new gauntlet has been hurled. Macintosh ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Citadel of the Dead Declare Solitaire Durand (1 Tack) Tag: 1990 2008 Seoret 21st Century Entertainment, Ltd. P.O. Box 415 Webster, NY 14580 (716) 872-1200 PINBALL FANTASIES: The European pinball wizards of 21st Century sure play a mean, fast and frenzied pinball. Fantasies has the colorful sights, sounds and intricate table designs of the original Pinball Dreams, but also includes new features that make the games casier to play. Among these features are a hi-res mode that enables you to view half of the table at a time (as opposed to only a third) and several screen scrolling options (soft, medium, hard) that allow you to customize the scrolling motion to your tastes. The four tables in this package include Partyland, with its amusement park atmosphere; Speed Devils, with a road racing motif and appropriate looping ramps; Stones n Bones, in a typical horror setting and Billion Dollar Game Show, with its take-off on Wheel of Fortune (and its lovely hostess). IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #19. The New Bicycle CD-ROM Collection Barnett Beeple COR T I Swfte International, Ltd. Stone Mill Office Park 722 Yorklyn Rd. Hockessin, DE 19707-8701 (302) 234-1740 THE NEW BICYCLE CD-ROM COLLECTION: This very respectable collection of four basic types of card games offers more than might first appear. In each category (cribbage, bridge, poker and solitaire), there are options and variations that provide a comfortable amount of personal «suit\" ability for any player's taste. With a typical Windows interface, the sounds and animations are sharp, and game histories, rules and next-play suggestions are always just a mouse click away. We were particularly impressed with the unexpected breadth of the poker game (where you can choose to play baseball and define your own wild cards) and the inclusion of 50 different solitaire games. Now all we need is more time to kill. IBM CD-ROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #17. Cemete Victory At Sea Pinball Fantasies Virtuali sri via Rasori 8 20145 Milano, Italy Contact: Laura Maestri Tel: 31/300.174 Fax: 31/300.214 SCENERY ITALY 1.1: Many US gamers frown upon European products, because of the difference in interfaces, as well as the emphasis on arcade products. This scenery product for owners of Microsoft Flight Simulator 4.0band 5.0, may cause many American flight sim addicts to change their minds. Italian navigational aids, such as VOR, NDB, TACAN and ILS are included, in addition to over 150 real Bottlang and Jeppesen charts, allowing for real IFR and VFR flights. Some 160 different scenery files combine with over 5MB of data to provide smooth transitions from one area to another during flight. The 100-plus airports for landing include one in France and three in Switzerland for those hardy pilots willing to fly over the majestic Alps. You might even buzz the Vatican and wave to the Pope. IBM. Circle Reader Service #20. Cow Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc. 2105 S. Bascom Ave., Suite 165 Campbell, CA 95008 (800) 653-1360 VICTORY AT SEA: Amid great anticipation, James F. Dunnigan's epic on the Pacific Theatre in WWII finally makes it to your local software store, but only on the Macintosh for the time being. Hard to argue with the research, since it was done by Al Nofi, noted historian and long-time associate of Dunnigan since their Strategy & Tactics magazine days. Despite the obvious similarities to Gary Grigsby's Pacific War, Dunnigan's work is certainly spiced differently. Lots of digitized OVERNOR Scenery Italy 1.1 Page 780 Computer Gaming World "


"* COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. Induction Ceremony! Battle Chess Interplay, 1988 Battle Chess The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Sid Meier's Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Empire (Interstel, 1978) F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Pirates (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1990) Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc, 1984) Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Zork (Infocom, 1981) When Interplay's Battle Chess was released on the Amiga in 1989, it shot straight to the top of the CGW Poll. Its beautiful and funny animations showcased the Amiga's sound and graphic capabilities, and put an interesting new twist on an ancient game. Not only did Battle Chess become a perennial in the CGW Poll ratings, but it became a showcase product for the first level of multimedia standards. It sold hundreds of thousands of copies covering just about every game platform imaginable, and spawned an entire genre of animated chess products. By introducing Battle Chess, Interplay became the Franklin Mint of computer chess publishers. Interplay has improved the chess engine and animations in several updated versions, the most recent of which is their claymated Battle Chess 4000. Attention to detail has always been a key factor in the Interplay success formula and has been a hallmark of each of their sequels to Battle Chess. We welcome this innovative product into our showcase of computer game history. April 1994 Page 187 "


"Reader Poll #115 CON Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Dracula Unleashed Viacom Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom The Seventh Guest Virgin Star Control II Accolade Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 10 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra SCORE 10.09 9.91 9.79 9.69 9.56 9.55 9.32 9.28 9.20 9.17 Top 100 Games GAMING WORLD The al Computer Game Magazine Type    unhemsid ST ST RP SP WG AD AC Top Role Playing Games ST OOO AWN GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.29 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.80 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.53 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 9.42 Might & Magic 1!! New World Computing 9.41 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.35 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech WG AD ST RP AD SI 9 10 9.10 WG AD WG WG SI WG Top Simulation Games SI SCORE 9.75 AD.RP AD WG,ST Game Company 1 Doom Id Software 2 Links 386 Pro Access 3 Master of Orion MicroProse Sim City 2000 Maxis 5 Ultima Underworld Origin 6 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 97 Warlords 11 SSG 8 Day of the Tentacle LucasArts 9 Wing Commander 11 Origin 10 Solitaire's Journey QQP 11 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 12 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 13 Dune 11 Virgin 14 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 15 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 16 X-Wing LucasArts The Perfect General QQP 18 Dracula Unleashed Viacom 19 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 20 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 21 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 22 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 23 World Circuit MicroProse Quest for Glory III Sierra 25 Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom 26 Conquered Kingdoms QQP Lands of Lore Virgin 28 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 29 War in Russia SSI 30 Privateer Origin 31 Ultima Underworld II Origin 32 Might & Magic III New World Computing 33 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 34 Hardball lll Accolade 35 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus 37 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing Eye of the Beholder II Ultima VII Origin 41 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 42 The Seventh Guest Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 44 Star Control II Accolade 45 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 47 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Syndicate Electronic Arts 49 Lemmings Psygnosis 50 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts O NOUA ONGAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte World Circuit MicroProse Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Gunship 2000 MicroProse Stunt Island Disney F-117A MicroProse Score 10.55 10.41 10.39 10.38 10.29 10.13 10.10 10.09 9.98 9.97 9.93 9.91 9.81 9.80 9.79 9.75 9.75 9.69 9.68 9.63 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.56 9.55 9.53 9.53 9.52 9.47 9.44 9.42 9.41 9.38 9.37 9.35 9.35 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.32 9.32 9.28 9.27 9.27 9.25 9.25 9.21 9.20 RP AC 9.59 9.56 9.38 9.35 9.25 WG 9.19 AC RP 9 10 9.02 9.00 8.92 Top Strategy Games SSI HORION 1 on AWN GAME Master of Orion Sim City 2000 Solitaire's Journey Dune II Chessmaster 3000 Syndicate Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Kasparov's Gambit The Lost Admiral The Incredible Machine MOROP DE RP SI SP RP SI WG RP RP RP SP AD ST AD.AC WG SP SI ST.AC AC.ST COMPANY MicroProse Maxis QQP Virgin Software Toolworks Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Electronic Arts QQP Dynamix SCORE 10.39 10.38 9.97 9.81 9.32 9.25 9.15 9.07 9.05 8.92 7 8 9 10 AD "


"SI awarlord's AD WG ST Top Wargames AC AD RP RP AD VOU AONRP GAME Warlords II V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General Carriers at War Construction Kit V for Victory: Utah Beach V for Victory: Market Garden Conquered Kingdoms War in Russia Pacific War V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword COMPANY SSG Three-Sixty Pacific QQP SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific QOP SSI SSI Three-Sixty Pacific SCORE 10.10 9.93 9.75 9.68 9.63 9.58 9.53 9.47 9.34 9.27 9.19 9.17 9.16 9.15 9.14 9.11 9.10 9.10 9.09 9.08 9.07 9.07 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.02 WG ST AD RP AD,RP 9 10 ST AD AD DOOM LucasArts Sierra SSI Electronic Arts Spectrum HoloByte Sierra SSI Sir-Tech Sierra Origin New World Computing Electronic Arts Accolade Sir-Tech Sierra QQP Legend Sierra MicroProse Sierra Disney QQP Sierra SSI SSG Dynamix Sierra LucasArts I-Motion Dynamix MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra MicroProse Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Legend MicroProse 9.01 Top Action Games SI AD SI WG,ST AD WG WG 2 3 GAME Doom Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Privateer Lemmings Tetris Classic Rebel Assault Oh, No! More Lemmings Prince of Persia 2 Out of this World AD 51 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe 52 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... 53 Clash of Steel 54 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 55 Tetris Classic 56 The Castle of Dr. Brain 57 Eye of the Beholder Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant 59 The Dagger of Amon Ra 60 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 61 Empire Deluxe Kasparov's Gambit 63 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. 64 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 67 Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 69 Gunship 2000 70 Police Quest 3 71 Stunt Island Battles of Destiny 73 Space Quest IV Western Front 75 Carriers At War 76 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 78 Rebel Assault Alone in the Dark 80 The Incredible Machine F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 83 The Island of Dr. Brain 84 F-15 Strike Eagle III 85 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 86 Indianapolis 500 87 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 88 Rex Nebular 89 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 90 Tony La Russa Baseball II Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 High Command 94 Heart of China 95 Veil of Darkness 96 Gateway 97 Starflight II 98 Pools of Darkness 99 MiG-29 100 Great Naval Battles COMPANY Id Software Origin Id Software Origin Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte LucasArts Psygnosis Broderbund Interplay SCORE 10.55 9.98 9.52 9.44 9.21 9.14 8.95 8.92 8.60 8.57 AD AC 10 toets Top Sports Games 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 8.96 8.95 8.95 8.92 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.88 8.87 8.83 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.74 8.72 8.71 8.68 8.67 8.64 AD AD SSI RP SP NOTION GAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Pro Hardball III NHLPA Hockey Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony La Russa Baseball II NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge 4-D Boxing Wayne Gretzky Hockey III COMPANY Access Dynamix Accolade Electronic Arts Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Bethesda SCORE 10.41 10.13 9.37 9.33 9.27 8.78 8.54 8.50 8.37 8.30 SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Three-Sixty Pacific Dynamix SSI Legend Electronic Arts SSI Spectrum HoloByte ST ST WG AD RP AD RP RP SI WG,ST 9 10 SSI Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. R = Top game of type. Magenta New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST=Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"-Aluhat's not What You've Been Playing Lately VON d ovisno Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulared opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out.. keep em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #115, February 1994 Doom (id Software) Master of Orion (MicroProse) SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) Aces Over Europe (Dynamix) IndyCar Racing (Papyrus) Privateer (Origin Systems) Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix) What Do You Think? \"Doom! Doom! Doom! No other game even compares to the addictiveness of NetDoom with four devious players! Too bad all those overpriced entertainment systems (SEGA, 3DO...) can't network. When was the last time you chainsawed your best friend? The only game I've stayed up 72+ straight hours to play.\" Anonymous Doom Fiend, Flagstaff, AZ 9 e PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software December, 1993 PC Games (MS-DOS/Windows) Rank Title and Source Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 (Microsoft Corporation) Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Police Quest IV (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Star Trek: Judgment Rites (Interplay Productions, Inc.) Aces Over Europe (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Leisure Suit Larry VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) X-Wing: B-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Wolfenstein 3D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) 14. Links: Pebble Beach (Access Software, Inc.) Quest for Glory IV (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Microsoft Arcade (Microsoft Corporation) Indy Car Racing (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Master of Orion (MicroProse, Inc.) Return to Work (Activision) 20. Comanche: Over the Edge (Novalogic, Inc.) Amiga Games Rank Title and Source AD&D Gateway to the Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Road Rash (Elcerronic Arts) The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts Entertainment) King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) PGA Tour Golf (Electronic Arts) Macintosh Games Rank Title and Source SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) Myst (Broderbund Software, Inc.) Chessmaster 3000 (The Software Toolworks) SimCity (Maxis Software) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft Corporation) CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Microsoft Encarta (Microsoft Corporation) Return to Zork (Activision) Gabriel Knight (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) WolfPack (Electronic Arts) AD&D Dungeon Hack (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Dracula Unleashed (Viacom New Media) Might and Magic: World of Xeen (New World Computing) .99 1*** cim \"Linking four people together for a game of Doom is the quickest way to destroy a productive, boring evening of work. Love those guys at Greg Jack, Indianapolis, IN \"The only thing missing in football simulations is the ability to place bounties. I'd really like to see eleven defensive players rush to the sidelines and bury Buddy Ryan... Pass this on to MicroProse and Dynamix. Mark Francis, Richmond, VA ima ** \"Been playing MOO til the cows come home fortunately, I don't have any cows, so I'm gerting a lot of games in!\" Mike Brenner, Fairfield, CA \"Help! My space empire has fallen and I can't stop playing!\" Emperor In Exile, Worcester, MA \"Can't talk. Playing Master of Orion.\" T. Madden, St. Louis, MO ******* One \"IndyCar Racing is the best race sim ever. The handling is superb and it has the best graphics of almost any game on the market. It's like you can feel the car go around the track, and when you're going to lose control. There are some minor things that would make it better, like choosing your own car colors and the ability to look left and right.\" Marty N., Grande Prairie, Alberta, Canada This list is based on units sold by ten retail chains representing over 1300 stores. For more infor mation, please comact PC Data al (703) 435-1025. \"Frontier II: If you have a life outside the house, forget it. This game is v ery, very addicting. Its out of this world!! -Lost In Space, Omaha, NE Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"patches The Patch File Yomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of Merchant Prince Update: Corrects some minor bugs in QQP's latest. possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities 12/29/93 and glitches seem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Consumers ** Metal and Lace V1.42A Update: Fixes a few minor bugs and adds an and publishers are both frustrated at the need for adding parches into Easy and Hard mode. 1/20/94 \"buggy programs, but they seem to be an interim solution that is going to ** Mortal Kombat PC Update: Improves sound card support, fixes crash be with the hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform conbugs, and requires less conventional memory. 1/21/94 figuration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platNFL Coaches Club Football V2.0 Update: Corrects some rare problems, forms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a reguimproves the AI, and adds some new features. 12/14/93 lar list of the latest updates of which we are aware. These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks ** Police Quest 4 Floppy Patch: Corrects various memory allocation (e.g., CompuServe or GEnie), but can also be obtained from individual errors and lockups, and speeds up the game restoring process. 1/21/94 software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of ** Police Quest 4 Floppy Handcuff Patch: Allows more time to handcuff purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest Walker. 1/21/94 versions/patches to their games. ** Quest For Glory 4 Patch: Corrects various memory allocation errors (*** indicates new files) and lockups that some player have been encountering, in addition to a few Clash of Steel V1.1 Update: Fixes a number of small bugs. 11/18/93 puzzle bugs. 1/21/94 ** Comanche: Maximum Overkill Update: Includes several hardware Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Version 2: Fixes a few problems and adds some fixes, including a fix for the Pentium and the Diamond Stealth Pro video features. 11/23/93 card. 1/27/94 Rebel Assault V1.4 Upgrade: Fixes joystick control and calibration probCompanions of Xanth V1.1.0 Update: Corrects graphic corruption problems, as well as some random lock-ups. 12/16/93 lems associated with Microsoft (18.2+) and Logitech (V6.13) mouse driRules of Engagement 2 V1.07 Update (Amiga): Update to the Amiga ververs. 12/23/93 sion of Impression's game. 12/02/93 Conquered Kingdoms Update: Fixes some save game problems that have Solitaire's Journey For Windows Patch: Corrects minor bugs in the been reported. 12/22/93 Windows version of SJ. 11/11/93 ** CyberRace CD-ROM V1.2 Update: Lowers the base memory require**TFX Patch: Fixes the unexpected interrupt error message due to hardments, fixes the save game problems, and remedies joystick problems (espeware conflicts, in addition to unexplained crashes. 1/24/94 cially with Phoenix BIOS). 1/20/94 ** War in Russia V1.1 Update: Makes many adjustments to the game Empire Deluxe V3.11a Upgrade: Updates Version 3.11 to Version 3.11amechanics and fixes minor bugs. 2/08/94 Corrects a number of minor bugs and extends the sound card support. World of Xeen CD-ROM Patch: Fixes the problems with switching CDs 12/02/93 and with the boat ride into Rivercity. 1/03/94 Fantasy Empires V1.1 Update: Fixes the Multiplying Siege Engine Bug, the Disappearing Hero Bug, and eliminates most random crashes. The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten 11/25/93 Gabriel Knight Floppy V1.0A Patch: Corrects various memory allocation Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for and \"Fatal-\"errors that some players have encountered. 12/16/93 us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted on** Gabriel Knight CD-ROM Update: Fixes all known problems and line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can speeds up the game restoring process. 1/21/94 be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by ** Hornet Patch: Fixes many bugs and adds several new features to Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated Spectrum HoloByte's new combat sim. 2/07/94 weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly IndyCar Racing V1.02 Update: Fixes random crashes/hangs and low \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a memory problems. 11/25/93 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We Kasparov's Gambit Version 1.1: In addition to restoring the chess engine provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" to the full strength of the original 32-bit Socrates Il program, this patch in computer gaming. also improves driver setups, low-memory detection, time controls, ratings SNNALLILOPO and much more. 12/3/93 ** Legend of Kyrandia V1.3 Update: Fixes random lockups and corrects some of the phrasing used by the characters. 2/04/94 TIP TEN SENKED GAMES Leisure Suit Larry 6 Update: Fixes the \"Oops errors\" that occur while leek of January 28 to February 3 playing. Also contains the bonus sound effects for 8-bit sound cards. 11/24/93 RANK SCORE TITLE RANE SCORE TITLE ** Links 386 Pro Version 1.21: Corrects many major and minor bugs. 2353 Castle Wolfenstein 3) 1852 Sevenll Cuest 1/28/94 2361 X 71851 Tom ** Lost In Time CD-ROM Update: Fixes problems with several CD dri02247 kg uest UT 8 114 Tomander 22U Sim 14 ZAPA 4 1414 Links 385 Pin ves (Mitsumi, Orchid) and certain Sound Blaster-compatible audio cards. 2023 Civilization IA 1485 Front la fontball 2/09/94 Lucky's Casino Adventure Update: Enables the program to recognize MICROSOFT. HEUTEODDESPU most VESA drivers, and allows the users to set the IRQ and Base address WINDOWS FUDDV SE JOS! for any sound card. 12/30/93 COMPATIBLE Se LOVcon tecay Look Master of Orion V1.3 Upgrade: This patch features tougher opponents, Menu Jump Path H-Z Xret Lopy Tools ? Exit puu adjusted playbalance, and legions of minor combat tweaks. 1/06/94 April 1994 Page 185 "


"THE RUMOR BAG WELCOME TO THE GUINNESS HOP STORE POT OF HOPS by George Bernard Swyfte t was out by Christ Church and down by The diminutive gentleman entered the Museum would precede the Mystery of Hotel the levee that my vivacious blonde inconversation at this point. «Sounds rather like Victoria, I knew that he knew what he was L formant and I encountered the Guinness colonial days doesn't it, what with the bigger talking about. So, I proceeded to wish for Brewery. We walked in the door on the other game companies takin' a stake in the smaller what nearly every CGW reader would wish side of the famous sign of the harp and were companies and motion picture companies for. \"I wish MicroProse would publish a mulimmediately assaulted by the scent of hops. takin' a stake in them.\" tiplayer version of Sid Meier's Civilization.\" Sure and I know you're not going to believe I complimented him on his astuteness and me, but we saw the little imp long before we He had us close our eyes again, and I asked him if he was interested in computer reached the tasting room. Indeed, we had just games. \"Of carse, I am,\" was his reply, \"I'm a thought I heard the brief flutter of flipping walked by the exhibit in the Guinness Muleprechaun I am and we're interested in all pages, but it was only a moment before he seum that showed how they used to rake the sorts o' mischief.\" replied, «Shore and it's done.\" grain bins by hand and I had just told my Since he was so interested. I told him that I was thrilled. I had only heard from my lovely companion that it would make a grear MicroProse is working on a game like Sid sources that they mig! set for Serf City from SSI. It's supposed to be Meier's Civilization that covers the Age of In fact, I had it written down in my notes to a puzzle/management game that's someColonization. I had no sooner told my news, check at a later time. where in the Lemmings meets Stronghold vein. however, than my companion said, \"And if \"Want to know anything else?\" he asked, He was sitting on a bag of hops and, even you want multi-player conquest, I heard Kes\"The name of SSI's upcoming tank game, «T though he wasn't as small as one of those mai is working on Empire Deluxe for a major \" Wargame Construction Kit II: Tanks instead of special effects-induced characters in the old on-line network.\" Rolling Steel? The name of the fantasy game Disney film (Darby O'Gill and the Little PeoSuddenly, with a wicked grin, he said, \"Ya' coming out of Texas from SimTex, Masters ple), he was smaller than standard issue and know, your ladyfriend is so lovely that I'll of Magic. They're gonna' call it MOM for as I was to discover, significantly smarter than make you a bargain.\" same. I would have thought he was part of short. Maybe that Interplay's bringing back \"What kind of bargain?\" I asked. the original cast of Star Trek for the Judgment that rumored Dungeons & Dragons movie \"Leprechauns have special powers. If I can Rites CD? The fact that they've started work that has apparently advertised for special efgrant you three wishes,\" he chuckled, \"you on their fourth Star Trek product?\" fects technicians in the Hollywood trade pahave to let me kiss your lady.\" pers, except they only have little people of I was amazed. The man was at least as Since neither of us actually believed in lepdwarven descent, and I couldn't imagine this well-informed, maybe more, than I was. I rechauns, she thought it was a harmless pasfellow with the traditional beard. changed my last wish to a desire for an aptime to play along with the good-natured My companion must have been thinking fellow. So, I started out with something easy, pearance on the Letterman show. \"Done!\" he the same thing because she asked me if I knew something I could check. «I wish I knew what said and jumped up on the bag of hops and that SSI and TSR were parting ways, and that Papyrus was up to.\" He said that was probplanted a wet and wild kiss on the sensuous SSI was working on its last two projects under ects under ably easy, but we both had to close our eyes ablu easy but we both had to close our eves \"ps of my lo lips of my lovely companion. the AD&D license. Then, she told me that and believe. After a moment, he told us to \"How old are you?» he asked me as he Nick Beliaff, former New World producer open our eyes and said, «Did you mean the walked quickly toward the tasting room. and producer extraordinaire at SSI for many NASCAR stock car racing simulation or the years, was also leaving the SSI fold. She told remake of the Tom Snyder Productions Math «Forty-three,\" I replied, «Why?\" me he was joining Northstar Studios and Mysteries Series?\" He shook his head and shouted back down working with ex-New World financial guru I wasn't sure that he really knew about the the hall, \"Forty-three years old and he still Ron Spitzer. The plot thickened, however, new IBM versions of the latter with SVGA believes in leprechauns.\" He tossed my notewhen she told me that Interplay had a stake graphics and enhanced audio soundtrack, but book back toward us and laughed as the in Northstar. when he went on to say that Secrets of Vincent's barmaid drew a stout from the tap. CGW Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"FROM THE CREATORS OF THE AWARD-WINNING WOLFENSTEIN 3-D \"The graphics are superb, with lighting effects and art that could only come from dark and demented minds.\" Computer Gaming World \"You want action? You want gunplay? You want gore? ...DOOM has it all.\" PC Entertainment \"...if you have saliva, prepare to drool now.\"\"...an absolute musthave for PC action fans.\" Electronic Games WANT TO BE A HERO? GO TO HELL! DOOM is a lightning-fast virtual reality adventure where you're the toughest space trooper ever to suck vacuum. Scientists stationed on a far-off moonbase have opened a gateway to Hell, releasing a monster-infested holocaust upon the universe. You're the last marine remaining on the base after the invasion. Your mission is to survive!  Four-player combat over network  Two-player action over modem Incredibly detailed 3-D world,  Blood-curdling stereo sound effects  Hair raising demonic denizens of Hell Awesome foe-fraggin' weapons Call 1-800-IDGAMES id Order the entire DOOM trilogy for $40.00 or get episode one, Knee-Deep in the Dead for the cost of shipping and handling. Or download episode one from Software Creations BBS. (508) 368-4137 @ 2400-14.4K baud Canadian customers call 1-800-661-7383. INC SOFTWARE Requires a 386DX PC compatible or better; hard disk drive; VGA graphics; 4 Megabytes of memory. A 486 is recommended. Multiplayer options require a network which uses the IPX protocol, a modem, or serial link. Digitized sound effects require a 100% Sound Blaster compatible card, Gravis Ultra Sound, or Pro Audio Spectrum-16. DOOM is a trademark of id Software, . Other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #63 "


"AN ORIGIN INTERACTIVE MOVIE tripped of memory, artificially enhanced with both human and alien technology, you are intended to be the perfect untraceable assassin for the scheming Mondite's master-stroke. But it's more than a science-fiction computer game it's an ORIGIN Interactive Movie. We've made a movie for you to star in, not just another game to play. Your interaction advances the story as you take your animated 3-D synthetic \"actor\" through a dramatic action-packed adventure. Actual screens may vary.  Employs the camera and editing techniques found in your favorite movies from varied camera angles to rapid-fire cut sequences, long shots and doseups for emotional impact.  Eliminates the artificial breaks between interactive and viewed portions of a game the story is melded into a single cinematic experience.  Directs the pacing and tempo so that the plot flows swiftly but smoothly, fueled by your decisions. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, WE RECOMMEND AN INTEL486TM DX2 OR PENTIUM PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 RIGIN Copyright  1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. BioForge and ORIGIN Interactive Movie are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Intel, Intel486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. We arcate world An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Circle Reader Service #84 "

