Features
20

1 Dagger + 1 Corpse + 1 Bow = 1 Mystery
Sierra's Laura Bow ll, The Dagger of Amon Ra
as autopsied by Chuck "Coroner" Miller

22

Raising the Stakes at The World Series of Poker
Las Vegas' own Mojave Sofware Creates an Adventure in Gambling
Lonnie Brown covers the bets

28

Brooks Pours Over Global Effect
Will EA Stand For "Environmentally Accomplished" or "Ecological
Apocalypse?" as seen under the macroscope of M. Evan Brooks

32

Gateway Gives Players the "Hee Chee Jeebies"
The Recounting of a Legend Product
by Charles "Leap Before You Look" Ardai

34

QQP's Solitaire's Journey
After 100+ Variations, Allen Greenberg Redefines "Pooped" Deck

38

A Scottish Treasure Hunter Dives a Little Deeper
Strategy Tips for Microplay's Sea Rogue
by T. Liam "Deep Sea" McDonald

42

There's Mordor Than Meets The Eye
Allen Greenberg Takes A Gandalf at
The Two Towers from Interplay

48

Legends of Valour Preview
Robin Mathews Goes Underground to Cover
This U.S. Gold Fantasy World

52

On Track With Wallace "Pit Stop" Poulter
As He Negotiates Accolade's Grand Prix Unlimited

58

Dark at the Top of the Government
D.C. True's Shadow President exposed
by Wyatt Lee

60

Caging The Big Bird on a Small Cartridge
Spectrum Holobyte's Falcon Locks Onto TurboGrafx
by Mike "Moondawg" Weksler

62

Accolade Imports Hot Horror!
Melting Over HorrorSoft's CRPG: Waxworks
by the House of Johnny Wilson

66

All Coin-Op'd and No Place To Throw?
Take No Quarter with Domark's Pitfighter
A "Gloves Off' Review by David Wilson

68

Encyclopedia Lemicologica
Robert Gardner, Jr. Leads Gamers Through
The 'Wicked" Levels (Before Falling to His Doom)

80

Cover to Coverage
X-Wing Zooms in From LucasArts
by that Rebel Devil, Alan Emrich

88

Is He Really a Go Master?
If So, Then Tim Carter Would be a Nemesis' Nemesis!

96

A-maze-ing? Minotaur: The Labyrinths of Crete
Bungie Software Jumps into Macintosh Network Gaming
by William C. Fisher "-King"

98

Lies, Damn lies and Power Politics
Appropriately Done in This "Media Age" by Cineplay

Computer Wargaming World
104

Up From the Foundations with Interplay's Castles 2
A detailed Preview by Alan "Free Mason" Emrich

106

Tactics for Dynamix' Aces of the Pacific
by Mark "Kamikaze" Crowe

110

A Replay of RAW's Fireteam 2200 Shows it's Still a"Dirty Job"
by "Machine Gun" Michael Peck

114

A Carrier Strike Replay from the Side of the Rising Sun
by Evan "Tailhook" Brooks

122

Space: The Galactic Frontier
as probed by Samuel B. Baker II

126

Discover the Spoils of War
along with Dave Arneson

132

Moral Justifications for Treachery Made Easy
by Alan "Knife-in-Back" Emrich with Roger "Bleed Them" White

138

A Replay of the Future in SSI's Conflict: Korea
as reported by Michael "Pusan Perimeter" Peck

142

Reviewing the Seige Mentality as Pure Mindcraft
Chris Lombardi comes off the wall

145

Tips, Tactics and Tables for Seige
by Chris "Ladder Day Saint" Lombardi

148

A Compass and A Star to Steer By for Lost Admirals
by Tim "Cutlass" Carter

152

Deadly Games Battle of Britain 2 Brings History to Life
Alan Emrich reports from RAF Headquarters

154

Bogie Down to Fighter Town
by Mike "Moondawg" Weksler

Departmns
8
16
16a
26
54
56
74
76
84
90
94
102
147
156
158
158
159
159
160

Taking A Peek
Inside The Industry
CGW Poll Questions (Margin of Insert)
The Rumor Bag (Heeee's Baaaaaaaaack!)
Scorpion's View (CRPGS: Evolution & Philosophy)
Conversions Received
Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints)
Letters from Paradise
Over There (European Games Report)
Kids & Computers (Edutainment)
Stock Watch (Broderbund)
Computer Wargaming World Editorial
Opponents Wanted (Reach out and Crush Someone)
The CGW Poll
PC Research Top Games Lists
What Have You Been Playing Lately?
Hall of Fame
Advertiser List
Editorial (It's Only A Game)

Peek
Accolade
San Jose, CA
SNOOPY'S GAME CLUB: "Good
grief!!" This tripartite game package is
for youngsters ages 3-8 and, naturally,
features those lovable Peanuts characters. The package includes a memory
game (flipping over tiles to find matching pairs), animated puzzles with four
to 64 pieces each and a look-alike hunt
against the clock. Peanuts characters
represent the game's Al for young ones
to compete against and the skill levels
can be set low enough so that no toddler
will ever feel like poor Charlie Brown.
Complete with 4 crayons and a picture
to color, kids can mail back their colored picture for automatic membership
into "Accolade's Kids Club." IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Apogee Software
PO Box 476389
Garland, TX 75047
COMMANDER KEEN — "GOODBYE GALAXY": Yet more quality
shareware from the Kings of Directsoft, Apogee. In this series of action
adventures, Keen must run, jump and
pogo his way through an action landscape frought with peril. Like the more
involved action games, in this one Keen
can find secret passages to underground caverns and other secret areas
filled with goodies. Kids will be keen
on Keen without stripping their parents
of the green. IBM (Shareware — $39
for 3 game series). Circle Reader Service #2.
COSMO'S COSMIC ADVENTURE:
This exceedingly cute action game is in
the best tradition of the running, jumping, scrolling, die-a-lot games popular
on dedicated game machines. This one,
however, is visually creative and includes a number of novel game play
innovations (with a
Jim-Henson-on-Loco-Weed-style purple and green
polka-dot character that has suction
cups for hands and can climb walls, as
well as gaze up and down with the
screen scrolling in syncopation with his
head's motion). To top it all off, it's
reasonably priced. IBM (Shareware —
$39 for 3 game series). Circle Reader
Service #3.
WORD RESCUE: The Bad Guy Illiterati have conspired to rid the world of
books! And it's the 4-8 year old
player's job to help Benny Bookworm
save the world's literature by matching

up simple words with their picture
while avoiding the baddies in the way.
Unfortunately, its Nintendo-style action may be too difficult for its educational age-range. IBM (Shareware—
$15 Registration). Circle Reader Service #4.
Centron Software Technologies, Inc.
1500 NW 3rd Street #101
Deerfield Beach, FL
GAMES MASTER FOR WINDOWS:
From the people who brought you Puzzle Master and Casino Master now
comes their multi-pack of "Mac-like"
Windowsware. Games Master is a grab
bag including Dominoes, Blackjack, a
Pyramid solitaire card game, some
Tetris looking puzzle games and a host
of "slider" puzzle variations. It is, essentially, standard fare for minds that
like to wander as they look through the
Windows on their computer. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
Cineplay Interactive
2580 NW Upshur
Portland OR
WILL VINTON'S PLAYMATION:
Anyone who has been to an animation
festival these days may have noted the
increasing number of computer-generated animated shorts. Now, with this
robust package, amateur animators can
try their hand in this new medium. Features include the ability to model and
render objects with splines and patches
(as opposed to polygons), a library of
objects and basic shapes, quickly generated multiple views, libraries of complex character motions and a plethora
of shadowing, mirroring, light tracking
and image wrapping capabilities. Is the
next Max Fleischer or Chuck Jones lying dormant within you? IBM
($499.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Compu-Teach
78 Olive Street,
New Haven, CT 06511
DESTINATION: MARS!: This fantastic little skill and knowledge builder not
only bolsters students' factual knowledge about the space program, but also
gets them to think rather than just looking things up in a book. Players, ages
11-17, begin as crew members of the
space shuttle, working their way up
through the ranks to conducting missions on the space station and, finally,
leading the expedition to Mars. Along

Peek
the way, they are routinely asked for
simple programming tasks and must
deal with unexpected turns of events
which are solved with a little thought
and some occasional eye-hand coordination. A condensing of the entire
space program in a box, this product is
not only educational, it is downright
compelling to play! Apple II, IBM,
Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service
#7.
Davidson & Associates
Torrance, CA
HEADLINE HARRY & THE GREAT
PAPER RACE: The player, as the rising young ace reporter for the U.S.
Daily Star, must wind his or her way
through U.S. history (1950-1990) and
geography to save the paper from being
scooped by their rival publication, that
refugee from the bottom of a birdcage,
The Diabolical Daily. One must gather
clues and race from city to city, conducting interviews without wasting
time on fruitless prospects, in order to
beat the motly assemblage of reporters
the rival's scandal sheet. Under the tutlage of Daily Star editor Headline
Harry himself, any reporter might find
that he/she has what it takes to climb
the ladder to a Pulitzer. Ideal for the
Carmen Sandiego set, Headline Harry
is newsmaking in more ways than one.
Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service
#8.
Dr. T's Music Software
124 Crescent Rd.
Needham, MA 02194
BOOM BOX: As if hearing the digitized voice in Wing Commander
weren't enough, here is yet another reason to own a SoundBlaster card! Boom
Box is a software "toy" that is, in effect,
a do-it-yourself music maker. Users
can create their own mixes, save them,
import saved tunes and remix or add
reverberations to them with remarkable
ease. One can also import IFF, VOC
and WAV samples. While designed for
even the computer illiterate to use with
ease, a bit of DOSy knowledge would
help when it comes time to save and
load files. Beyond that, users can call
their own tunes and jam 'till their brains
turn to jelly. IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #9.
Impressions Software
7 Melrose Drive,
Farmington, CT 06032

AIR FORCE COMMANDER: In a
world of flight simulators, it is interesting that we get two aerial strategy
games, almost back to back (see the
Battle of Britain 2 review on page 152)!
Air Force Commander puts players in
an "Operation Desert Storm" kind of
atmosphere, turning their computer
into a central control display with a
green lined map and radar static. Airbases are alerted and sorties conducted
by individual airplanes as they attack or
defend targets in hostile lands throughout the Middle East and Persian Gulf
regions. The player must be part air
traffic controller and part minister of
production to balance all the factors
needed for successful play. Modern
and thought-provoking, this real-time
strategy game has enough scenarios to
get players going quickly and keep
them exploring for quite a while.
Amiga, IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #10.
KarmaSoft
PO Box 1034,
Golden, CO
BOPPIN': Can violent arcade games
really warp a young mind? Well, the
creators of this bizarre spatio-logic
game might be used as supporting evidence. The premise: the nauseatingly
cute Sweety Hunnybunz, the singing
treacle bear, has captured all the video
game Bad Guys and locked them in
geometrical prisons leaving hundreds
of video game Good Guys out of work.
Two players can simulateously play
Yeet and Boik on their escapade to free
the imprisoned Bad Guys and get their
buddies out of the bread lines. While
not exactly stimulating or original as
far as its game mechanics go, Boppin'
is a daffy, self-deprecating critique of
arcade culture. Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #11.
LucasArts
San Rafael, CA
SWOTL: Do 335 Pfeil-Aircraft Disk
Just when one thought LucasArts and
the Third Reich had exhausted their
rightful allotment of aerospace innovation, they come out with the Dornier Do
385 "Anteater", "the most dangerous
piston-engined fighter ever built!".
From the odd look of its front and rear,
push-pull prop design, one must wonder just whom it was dangerous to.
Regardless, the Do 385 was one of the
Reich's last desperate attempts at air-

Peek
superiority, and is the last of LucasArts' planned aircraft add-on disks.
IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
#12.
New World Computing
Hollywood, CA
VEGAS GAMES ENTERTAINMENT PACK: New World tries to increase their market share of worker
unproductivity with their first entry
into the 'lite' gaming market. This Windows package contains a rather ordinary collection of Vegas diversions
including a 'Jacks or better' video
poker game, a Black Jack table, 3-barreled slot machine, keno board and roulette table. Definitely a casual package
for the casual gambler. IBM ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.
Norsehelm Productions
P.O. Box 494388
Redding, CA 96049-4388
RAGNAROK: What at first glance appears to be a role-playing/adventure
game, turns out to be more of an exploration and item management exercise
of the most mind-swamping sort. Players will run their little horn-helmed
warrior around a VGA landscape,
hoarding hundreds of weapons, suits of
armor, magic items and food stuffs
while bashing the 200 hundred monsters that inhabit these realms, based
loosely on Norse myth. Its primitive
interface, along with its repetitive and
number-intensive game system (which,
BTW, owes much to an older Macintosh shareware game) makes this one a
diversion for only the most stalwart and
easily amused adventurer. IBM. Circle
Reader Service #14.
Recreational Software Designs
24 Nathan Lord Road,
Amherst, NH 03031
GAME-MAKER: Based on the assumption that it is as much fun to design games as it is to play them, here is
a program to help fulfill the needs of
wannabee arcade game designers.
Game Maker is a strong set of tools in
the form of a CAD (Computer Aided
Design) program that allows players to
design, program and "paint" their own
arcade/adventure style games (the kind
where a single character must overcome the obstacles in a world through
the acquisition of wealth, power and
objects). Users can create maps, characters, monsters, items and all the other

goodies that their imaginations can
dream up. Monsters can even have a
certain amount of AI put into them. In
addition to a bit of "painting" customization, sounds, too, can be adjusted to
suit. IBM ($89.00). Circle Reader
Service #15.
Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA
KING GRAHAM'S BOARD GAME
CHALLENGE: The game company on
the hill has launched a line of budget
software for IBM computers which feature simple little games. Each package
is about a half-inch thick (although the
packages themselves are entirely disposable) and comes with a single 3.5"
disk and generic installation instructions. Documentation beyond that (like
how to play the individual games) is
on-line. Each package ostensibly ties in
with a Sierra game series (some games
are directly from the adventures) and
sells for $9.95 (although the marketing
people have cleverly marked out
$14.95 above that price). The two
games in the King Graham package,
Checkers and Backgammon, look as if
they are similar to those found on the
Sierra Network. IBM ($9.95). Circle
Reader Service #16.
LEISURE SUIT LARRY'S CASINO:
It seems as if Larry Laffer has purchased the Tramp Casino in Atlantic
City at a foreclosure sale. In this minipackage he offers gambling types the
chance to take their chances on a slot
machine, a Black Jack table and a video
poker machine. Surprisingly (and
thankfully), the package does not include a lounge act. IBM ($9.95). Circle
Reader Service #17.
PARLOR GAMES WITH LAURA
BOW: Computer Gaming's "That Girl"
takes time out from sleuthing to play a
few parlor games; namely, Dominoes
and Yacht — a Yhatzee derivative.
These appear to be jazzed-up versions
of games from Sierra's Hoyle's Book
of Games series. IBM ($9.95). Circle
Reader Service #18.
ROGER WILCO'S SPACED OUT
GAME PACK: If you didn't have
enough quarters to play Ms. Astro
Chicken in Space Quest IV, if you
didn't get enough quality time with the
Monolith Burger assembly machine, or
if you just didn't get to see the gory
death screen enough times in the sand
skimmer sequence, then Sierra opens

Peek
up this little space portal of opportunity
to give expression to unsatisfied drives.
Cut and pasted out of the Space Quest
game, this package is for the truly
masochistic. IBM ($9.95). Circle
Reader Service #19.
ROBIN HOOD'S GAMES OF SKILL
& CHANCE: Brave Sir Robin invites
all-comers to a little tournament commemorating his heroic deeds in Conquest of the Longbow. Included in this
package are all three major action sequences from Longbow, including the
archery practice sequence, the Nine
Men's Morris strategy game (a medieval board game of skill) and the famous
stick fighting 'game,' played first by
Robin and Little John. IBM ($9.95).
Circle Reader Service #20.
Three-Sixty
Campbell, CA
INSIGHT: Who are you? And why do
you behave the way you do? We are all
seeking Insight into our own nature and
this software package appears to be a
clear and focused lens with which to
view ourselves. Based upon the Kahler
Process Model, this program will analyze one's answers to a 30 minute questionaire and provide a personality
inventory based upon 6 categories.
With this information, the model will
then provide Insight into one's stress
coping mechanisms, and how one responds to different sorts of work environments and personality types. What
are one's strengths? Which sorts of
situations energize? Which deflate?
How can one recognize one's own personal stress signals so that self-defeating behavior can be avoided? When
combined with the audio tapes included
in the package, this model may provide
useful answers to the difficulties inherent in our stress-rich worklife. IBM

($99.95). Couch and Austrian psychoanalyst not included (or needed). Circle
Reader Service #21.
T&E Soft
Lafayette, CA

PEBBLE BEACH GOLF LINKS
AND WAIALAE COUNTRY CLUB:
If one can get the kids off of the Super
Nintendo (send them to bed early!),
perhaps one can pick up the controller
and try out these Pacific golf courses.
Though the graphics can't touch Access' IBM Links, they are still quite
nice, and the swing mechanics seem a
bit easier than most computer-based
golf games. The standard golf amenities are included in these packages:
tournament play, grid-marked greens,
and tips from the club pro. These games
certainly put the 'tee' in Nintendo. Super Nintendo. Circle Reader Service
#22.
U.S. Gold
San Jose, CA

CRUISE FOR A CORPSE: It seems
U.S. Gold has been cruising for code in
Europe these days and has turned up
this adventure game from Delphine,
the producers of Out of This World and
Future Wars for Interplay. Although
the French game group has used their
characteristic super-smooth animation
technology in this one, it seems they
have lost some of their former gameplay shine. Once past the frustrating
code-wheel copy protection, one discovers that this is a rather ordinary murder-mystery adventure with a rather
inconsistent interface and dull graphics. If one can't find the stiff in the
game, then one can certainly find one
in the box. Amiga, IBM ($54.95). Circle Reader Service #23.

Inside The Industry

MicroProse Acquires
Paragon Software

Sierra Adds Bright Star
Technology

MicroPse(In.,NASDQ:MPR
recently announced the purchase of
Pennsylvania-based Paragon Software
Corporation, current publishers of the
Mega Traveller and the Twilight series
of role-playing games. MicroProse,
which published Civilization,
Darklands and F-1 17A Stealth Fighter,
has distributed Paragon products for
several years. The acquisition is intended to strengthen what has been perceived as a healthy partnership.
Paragon has invested heavily in the
creation of state-of-the-art design tools
and MicroProse expects that research
and development to pay off as the parent company continues to broaden its
product line over the next few years.
Paragon's titles will now be marketed
under the MicroProse label.

In addition to signing an exclusive
marketing agreement with French
educational (and entertainment) software publisher, Cocktel Vision, Sierra
On-Line (NASDAQ: SIER) has continued its expansion into the growing
educational market by acquiring Washington-based Bright Star Technology.
Bright Star, the Macintosh-oriented
publishers of critically-acclaimed
products such as Alphabet Blocks and
Talking Tiles, is expected to both
strengthen the fast-growing educational/edutainment line at Sierra and
add additional technologies, in terms of
synchronized speech and HyperAnimation. In integrating Bright Star into the
corporate structure, Sierra is expected
to use the same successful strategy of
allowing the new subsidiary to function
as a wholly-owned, independent unit of
Sierra (i.e. in the same manner as the
parent company has allowed Dynamix
and The Sierra Network to function).

Zelos! and Ebook. ICOM, of course,
is best known for its Deja Vu and Shadowgate graphic adventures for the
Macintosh (published by Mindscape)
and their own Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective. NovaLogic is best
known for Wolf Pack (published by
Broderbund) and The Rocketeer (published by Walt Disney Software), but
is expected to turn heads with its upcoming Maximum Overkill and Ultrabots products. Humongous
Entertainment is Ron Gilbert's (Secret of Monkey Island and LeChuck's
Revenge: Secret of Monkey Island II)
new company and is expected to publish a children's graphic adventure
(Putt-Putt Joins The Parade) as its first
product. Pop Rocket, Inc. is the new
company of Joe Sparks (co-developer
of Reactor's Spaceship Warlock CDROM product) and is expected to
launch its first product as a rock and roll
adventure called Total Distortion.
Zelos! is a publisher of informational
CD titles and Ebook is the publisher of
optical-based art and literature titles.

Accolade Signs with
MLBPA
Broderbund Purchases
PC Globe
After a lengthy period of legal maneuvers and counter-offers, Broderbund Software (NASDAQ: BROD)
finalized its acquisition of PC Globe,
publishers of PC Globe, MacGlobe and
geographical learning games, on July 2,
1992. Broderbund, publishers of the
Carmen Sandiego, Kid Pix, Print Shop
and Living Books lines of products, reputedly offered circa $1.5 million for
the geographical software company.
PC Globe was reported as being sought
by two other companies, including IntraCorp, before the Broderbund deal
could be finalized.

Electronic Arts Signs Six
New Affiliates
Electronic Arts Distribution, the
distribution arm of Electronic Arts
(NASDAQ: ERTS), has signed six
new "afilliated labels." Prior to the
signings, EAD had suffered the loss of
agreements with The Software Toolworks and LucasArts Games. With
the signings, Electronic Arts affirms
its commitment to CD-ROM entertainment titles. All of the six new affiliates
are CD-ROM publishers: Pop Rocket,
NovaLogic, Ebook, Humongous Entertainment, ICOM Simulations,

Accolade announced on July 29,
1992 that the company had reached an
agreement with the Major League
Baseball Players Association to publish a data disk with digitized color
photographs of actual players. The
HardBall III MLBPA Players Disk will
feature authentic player photos and statistics (through mid-season 1992) from
all 26 major league teams. The MLBPA
disk is expected to debut in August of
1992 at a suggested retail price of
$24.95 and will be followed by a companion disk, The Big League Ballpark
Disk, in September of 1992 (as MSRP
of $24.95). The latter disk will feature
18 accurately modeled professional
stadiums.

Review

Laura Bow in
Whodunit, Art Deco Style

by Chuck Miller
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
GRAPHICS:
SOUND:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

C

Laura Bow in The Dagger of Amon Ra
IBM and Compatibles, 288 or Better
$89.95
VGA-258 or EGA-18, Tandy VGA Only
All Major Sound Cards
Document Look-Up/Symbol Identification
Bruce Balfour
Sierra On-Line, Inc.
Coarsegold, CA

ruising on a luxury liner can prove
such a relaxing experience. The gentle
rocking of the ship as it cuts through
the ocean waves, inhaling the fresh sea air
and gazing upon clear, blue skies all add to a
peaceful, restful journey. Unless, of course, one is unfortunate
enough to be strangled in his sleep and stuffed conveniently
out of sight in a luggage trunk. Then it's simply "rest in peace,"
my friend. Thus begins the second installment of the Laura
Bow mysteries — The Dagger of Amon Ra.

News Tribune (the Trib). Her first assignment focuses on the newly discovered Dagger which, as events reveal, was stolen
shortly after it arrived at the Leyendecker
Museum. Thus, her task is to investigate its
theft. However, what starts as a simple assignment soon involves Miss Bow, and the
player, in a deadly string of murders. If not
careful, her name may appear in the obituaries rather than as the byline to her story.

Automated Conversations

Cub Reporter, Bear of an Assignment

The Dagger of Amon Ra is a traditional Sierra animated
adventure, though much improved over the original Laura
Bow mystery, The Colonel's Bequest. All actions are accomplished through Sierra's new icon-based graphic interface,
including talking with other characters. This simplicity of
interaction has opened up adventuring to a larger audience by
making it easier for the neophyte to successfully complete a
game. However, the experienced adventurer may feel a bit
cheated by the loss of "verbal" interaction and the speed with
which he or she can now complete a quest.
Sierra, however, has improved their icon-driven interface
in this latest effort with the addition of the "Ask" Icon. Earlier
releases employed only a "Talk" icon which severely limited
character interaction. At least now the player can question
those he or she meets about numerous people, places and
items.

College-educated since her last appearance, Laura Bow
finds herself a cub reporter for the New York Daily Register

Dagger is presented sequentially in a series of six acts. The

A Stab in the Dark
The year is 1926. Art Deco, the Charleston and speakeasies
are in vogue. It is also a time of great fascination with
discoveries unearthed in the field of archaeology, especially
relating to ancient Egypt. As such, the excavation of the
Temple of Amon Ra by the eminent Egyptologist Pippin
Carter, Ph.D. has received more than modest attention, especially one artifact — the Dagger of Amon Ra. Suspicion,
intrigue and murder will envelop all those who come into
contact with it.

Play Acting, Adventure Style

Review
first two acts involve mostly fact gathering, though several
important items are obtained. Act 3 provides the real "meat
and potatoes" of the adventure, where most of the game's
object-oriented puzzles must be solved and during which
much of the evidence necessary to successfully complete the
game is acquired and examined, usually at the scene of a
murder. Little changes in Act 4, though the pace does increase.
However, Act 5 introduces a major change in the tenor of the
game, becoming more urgent and frantic. The final Act places
the player in the crime solving sequence where Miss Bow
must exhibit her superior sleuthing abilities.
All considered, the flow of the story moves along well with
only a few exceptions. Game play in the first two acts seems
rather slow and repetitive, unduly constraining the player's
options, due to a limited number of locations and puzzles, and
requiring an excessive amount of questioning of suspects.
Although possibly designed to provide some variety in play,
it actually results in a rather slow and somewhat boring
beginning to the adventure. Until Act 3 begins, the actual
puzzle solving is too sparse to maintain a strong interest on
the part of the player.
Once into Act 3, however, The Dagger of Amon Ra becomes
quite absorbing. The puzzles employed are logical and varied
in complexity. There is also a real sense of suspense developed, enough to startle one when "happening" upon a murder.
From this point forward, the game is very difficult to set aside.

Works of Art
The Dagger of Amon Ra is a visual and aural treat. From the

gorgeous hand-painted, Art Deco-style backgrounds to the
evocative roaring 20s orchestrated soundtrack, a certain richness permeates the atmosphere of the game. Those involved
in the creation of Dagger should be justifiably proud of their
efforts, having provided a beautiful, ambient world to explore.
Animation is well executed, though character movement still
needs some improvement. While most movements appear
lifelike, a few tend to exhibit a sort of nervous "jumpiness."
Steve Dorian, in particular, has a stilted, robotic way of
walking reminiscent of Monty Python's Ministry of Silly
Walks. Hopefully, Sierra will smooth out the animated wrinkles in future releases.
Documentation has received significant attention, and lends
a sense of authenticity to the adventure. Provided is a brochure
on the Leyendecker Museum, complete with a map of ground
floor exhibits, and a booklet entitled the Official Guide to the
Leyendecker Museum which contains, among other things, a

description and depiction of the Egyptian gods (used for
copy-protection).

Cab Fares and Caveats
As usual, a few criticisms must be leveled against this
otherwise fine product. Cab rides are, unquestionably, too
long! These "jaunts," apparently tied into the length of the
accompanying music, cannot be bypassed. Taking the cab
quickly became a tedious and unwelcome process.
A more critical concern involves items essential to the game
which can become "lost" or unobtainable if not acquired
before a new act begins. For example, if the player fails to
collect the boot found in the medieval armor display during
the fourth act, it will be gone once Act 5 commences. (Two
other critical items which should be procured before reaching
Act 5 are the cheese from the security office and the snake oil
from the mammalogy lab.) A new act should not commence
until the player has acquired all that is necessary for use later
in the game.
A final matter concerns the game's conclusion. Once Act 5
ends and the last act begins, the player has no further opportunity to examine any evidence collected. Only his or her
memory and written notes are available to aid in identifying
the murderer(s) and motives. This is rather an abrupt way to
inform the player that he or she should have been writing
everything down during play, as there is no access to one's
inventory at the conclusion of the game.

Final Deductions
Laura Bow in The Dagger of Amon Ra proves itself to be

another quality adventure from the fertile minds at Sierra. It's
refreshing to see a game presented from the perspective of a
female character, as well as to find a subject treated seriously
while maintaining both a strong sense of realism and a touch
of humor. Once past the rather slow-paced, moderately interesting first two acts, game play becomes quite enthralling —
so much so that the rest of the game seems to pass much too
quickly.
Regardless, armchair detectives and amateur sleuths alike
will find The Dagger of Amon Ra an enjoyable adventure and
a nostalgic excursion into 1920s America. Though one could
wish for more object-oriented puzzles in the early stages, and
a bit more game play overall, few will not enjoy their stint as
a reporter for the Trib — and you can quote me on that!

Review
here are poker games.And then there is No Limit Texas Hold
'em. It's the game that separates poker players from people
who sit around a table and play a game with one-eyed jacks
and deuces wild.
No Limit Texas Hold 'em is the game used to determine the world's
best poker player. Each May, at Binion's Horseshoe Casino in Las
Vegas, 216 card players pay $10,000 each to get into the tournament.
Eventually, two players will sit at the same table. One of them will
walk away with $1 million.

T

This tournament is the showcase of World Series of Poker Adventure, a game designed to give a player the feeling of going to Las
Vegas, visiting a casino, sightseeing at Lake Mead and competing in
the World Series. The game is from Mojave Software, a Las
Vegas-based company. Although it's a new company, the game's
programmer, Wayne Russell, already has a top-notch computer
poker game to his credit: Ante Up! at the Friday Night Poker Club
from ComputerEasy.
Russell, a self-taught programmer, has worked
closely with Jim Albrecht,
coordinator of the World
Series, and several past
World Series champions
to make the tournament in

in order to win at the "ring games" where six-to-eight other players
gather round for seven-card stud, Texas Hold 'em, or its variation,
Omaha.
In addition, there are 24 floors to explore within the hotel. Mostly,
they're all the same. So, the most useful spot is the player's own
room. It contains a gambling log that shows the length of time
invested in playing video poker, slot machines, blackjack, and poker.
It keeps a running breakdown of the money won or lost at each game
and a rate of winning or losing per hour.
Players will soon learn that if they are to earn the $10,000 needed
to enter the World Series, they'll have the best odds at the poker
tables. There are also "satellite" games available: at these tables
where one may compete in a no-limit hold 'em game against eight
other players. There's a $1,125 buy-in which gets each player $2,000
in chips. The catch: Only one player will walk away a winner, with
a $10,000 prize. That's
the best way to get into
the World Series: win a
satellite. Playing in one is
an experience.

The Shark's Quest

World Series Adventure
as realistic — and hard to

win — as possible.
In this single-player
game, players sign in with
their name, nickname,
hometown, and age. The
on-screen player who
walks around the casino
can be either sex..

World Series of Poker
On $59.95

No-limit Texas Hold
'em seems like an innocent enough game: Two
cards are dealt face down
to each player. A betting
round follows. Then,
three cards are turned
face up in the center. The
cards on the table serve as
"community" cards —
players combine them
with the two they hold to
form the best hand. The
first three cards are followed by a betting round, after which another
card is dealt face up to join the trio. A betting
round is followed by a fifth, and final, face-up
card. Then, a final betting round.

Once registered, the by
player will fly to Las Lonnie Brown
Vegas, where he or she is
greeted at the airport by a Binion's limo driver
and taken to the casino-hotel's registration
desk. Each player has $5,000 in seed money,
grandpa's gold pocket watch (which keeps real
time) and a return airline ticket. The latter two
items can be hocked for cash should the first
item disappear.
Which it soon does. Upon walking past the
registration desk, the player encounters a video
poker machine ($1, $5 or $25 tokens available). There is also a slot machine that usually will take in more
money than it dishes out. If one prefers, a blackjack table is available.
Like some casinos, the dealer only uses one deck, so anyone who
knows anything about counting cards is likely to be able to add to
their stake at this table.
If players get bored, they can wander outside and find a travel
agency offering a trip to Lake Mead or a theater offering several acts.
More useful, however, is the pawn shop and a book store. Here,
books with helpful articles can be purchased. They'll be sent up to
one's room in the hotel for leisure reading. The articles, about 15 to
20 screens of text, offer poker playing tips from Bob Ciaffone, Mason
Malmuth and David Sklansky — some of the world's best card
players. It's money well-spent. Players are likely to need this advice

Shoot Out On
Seventh Street

One would think that, with five cards out of
a possible seven exposed, it would be easy to
judge how good the hands held by oneself or
the other players might actually be. Unfortunately, fortunes have been lost on that assumption.
To complicate matters, there are "blinds."
These are mandatory
bets made at the start of
each hand. The player
clockwise from the
dealer bets a "small blind," and the player to his left bets a "big blind,"
which is double the small blind. Blinds usually start at $25 and $50.
The deal moves around the table, so all players have to bet the blinds.
They increase as the game progresses. During the four-day World
Series of Poker, the blinds reach $15,000 and $30,000, and that's
even before a card has been dealt. When "the blinds go up," players
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

World Series of Poker Adventure
IBM
$59.95
None
Wayne Russel
Mojave Software
Las Vegas, NV

Review
don't have an option of sitting out too many hands. If they do, they'll
quickly go broke. So much for card play. What about the game?

Buffet Quest
The adventure part of it—walking around the casino, touring Lake
Mead — is a cute diversion. There aren't any puzzles to solve and
the floor show in the theater isn't a graphic spectacular. If one
ventures out to Lake Mead, however, it may be a good idea to click
on the trash can. There is occasionally a bit of money to be found.
Like everything else in Las Vegas, however, these activities are but
sideshows to the gambling at center ring.
The poker games are where the best graphics reside. The card table
is shown from an overhead view. The cards and chips are realistic.
Bets are made from pop-up buttons using the mouse (the game
requires a hard drive, mouse and VGA monitor).
The tables are the same for the ring games, satellites, and World
Series. At the World Series, however, players are given four information screens in addition to the poker table. The first and
most
important
screen is a map of the
24 tables, with nine
players to a table.
These screens are reduced in number as
players are knocked
out and tables are
combined. On the
right side of that screen are two vertical bar graphs. One bar indicates
the number of players remaining in the series and the other shows
the gamer's relative position in terms of chips. Above the bars are
statistics: the day of the tournament, the number of hands played by
the player, the number of players remaining, and one's winnings.
The second information screen shows the 17 levels with their respective amounts of antes and blinds. At timed intervals, the antes and
blinds increase in the World Series until they reach their highest
level: a $3,000 ante with blinds of $15,000 and $30,000. Players are
less apt to fold their hands when they've had to put up at least
$18,000. Two other screens show the prize breakdown for the 36 top
finishers and list the rules of No Limit Texas Hold 'em.
Hold 'em is a difficult game to play expertly. Like any card game,
luck is involved. But time and again, many of the top finishers in the
World Series have been there before because they rely on skill. This
computer game closely mimics the top players. "If I hadn't known
that a computer was playing these hands," said David Sklansky,
author of several books on Hold 'em and a World Series player, "I
would have guessed a human was betting them. At least 90 out of
100 of the hands were being played the way a skilled player would
bet them."
To sum up: World Series of Poker Adventure escorts players in
and out of Las Vegas with their wallets left in one piece. The video
poker, slot machines and blackjack tables let players experience a
casino. Many gamblers shy away from the poker tables because they
don't know how to play. Many gamblers who go to the tables lose
money because they don't know how to play properly. World Series
of Poker Adventure can show them how it's done right. And the
computer is polite enough to not even chuckle when it rakes in a big
pot.

The Rumor Bag

Rumor Guy Expands Base of Support
by H. Ross Stassen

A

lot of people will tell you I ran out
of money. Other people will tell
you I ran out of courage. Who
knows why it happens? Sometimes, you
just know you have to throw in the towel,
whether it's for the good of the country,
your family, or even the readers of this
magazine. RAW Entertainment knew it
was time to decide not to publish their
Struggle for Guadalcanal game and I knew
it was time to abort my unsuccessful run for
the presidency.
It all started when I rushed into my storefront campaign headquarters and passed the
"boiler room" of Young Interactive volunteers from the local university who were
busy pasting address labels on campaign
brochures. I bumped the corner of a desk
and was about to spew forth a character
string of expletives (to be deleted later)
when a reporter came through the door. "No
comment!" I quickly substituted for the cathartic cuss words I wanted to enunciate.
In response, a perky, blonde co-ed smiled
with an admiring gleam in her eyes. I
quickly grabbed one of the brochures she
had been labeling and faced the reporter.
"Do you know what this is?" I challenged
the press thug.
"Prefabricated muck?" he responded.
"No!" I retorted, "It's a pile of dreams: the
hopes and aspirations of the American people." He argued that it was the same old
stuff. Then, he went over the line. He said
my campaign brochure was like a computer
game engine that was used over and over
again with only the plot lines changed. I said
there wasn't anything wrong with a successful game engine being reused. "In fact,"
I said, "SSI plans to develop an AD&D
Gold Box Construction Set where people
can design their own role-playing adventures. That's power to the players!"

I turned to walk into my office and the
reporter issued a challenge to my back. He
told me he was writing a story about my
skepticism concerning Wing Commander
III and asked how a cynic like me could
justify being a candidate of hope. I pirouetted with the grace of a drunken gorilla and
told him the cold, hard truth. "I didn't say
WC3 was not going to come out. I said it
would be real difficult for it to come out
while Chris Roberts' team is still trying to
finish Strike Commander. I also said that I
had heard from an impeccable, if not improbable source, that Origin was doing preliminary design work on a space
pirate/space merchant-style game, tentatively called Trade Commander. It takes
place in the Wing Commander universe, but
has a completely different emphasis than its
counterpart series. Further, Wing Commander III is currently being written and
should see the store shelves in 1993." I
decided not to press my luck and suggest
that my source might have been from the
Wing Commander universe itself. No, best
keep my sources to myself.
And to think I had thought the hate mail
from people who didn't like my "Rumor
Bag" column was vicious. Here was this
guy who really wanted to prove me wrong,
right in front of my adoring public. You'd
think I was Adolf Hitler instead of the lovable old rumor guy. Good thing I didn't tell
him that FormGen was planning to publish
Id Software's new game based on Castle
Wolfenstein 3-D. Entitled, Spear of Destiny
($59.95), it is expected to have new levels,
new music, and be more puzzle-intensive
(particularly in terms of secret passages).
I went into my office and wearily sat
down at my desk. I looked out at those
hard-working young volunteers and realized I was tired of being second-guessed.
Once the press twisted my words around,
how could they be expected to believe, for
example, that I knew that RAW Entertainment's Napoleon game for the IBM was
going to be a completely different game
than their current Napoleon I on Amiga?

Would, in another situation, they believe
that I was not "covering up" if Mindcraft
announced that they were adding modem
play to Siege and all I knew was that they
were seriously considering putting it into
the product? Would these bright young
minds be disappointed in me if I revealed
that SSI will be the U.S. publisher of Legends of Valour (sneak previewed elsewhere
in this issue), even before SSI publicly announced the product? Or would that be
considered a dirty trick?
Speaking of dirty tricks, I glanced over at
the office copy machine where the "covert
campaign" unit was supposed to be copying
faux position papers, allegedly written by
my opponents and outlining absurd proposals which they were, according to our fiction, planning to enact. It turned out the
workers were taking a break and making
multiple copies of a White Dwarfmgzine
article that had pictures of Electronic Arts'
upcoming Space Hulk computer game. The
game is based on the Games Workshop
role-playing game where players maneuver
miniature figures (either Genestealers that
look suspiciously like cousins to the film
monster in Alien or Space Marines assigned
to clear the Space Hulk of the alien presence) through the corridors and rooms of an
aging spaceship. I wondered what my alien
source would say about this. Anyway, it's
supposed to ship on both IBM and Amiga
in December of this year. I thought about
telling them it was wrong to copy the magazine article, but then I remembered what
kinds of dirty tricks I had recruited them to
do for my campaign and turned back to my
desk. "Ah, well," I rationalized, "most people will want to see those screen shots in
color, anyway."
The phone rang and I picked it up with
some trepidation. As I feared, it was yet
another reporter. "How do you stand on
American jobs going to Canada?" I asked
for a clarification. "How do you stand on
Canadian companies converting American
board games in computer games?"
I suddenly realized that he was talking
about NextWave Software Corporation
and their contract to produce the IBM version of Avalon Hill's Advanced Third
Reich. I told him that I thought Avalon Hill
should be congratulated for contracting the
game out to an experienced group of IBM
programmers. He told me I was unAmerican. UnAmerican? That's worse than being
told I write lousy columns. I decided then
and there that I was through with politics for
good. As for writing lousy columns? Some
beings think my writing is out of this world.

,

Review

Political Correctness for the Personal Computer
by M. Evan Brooks

S

NAME:
Global Effect
SYSTEM:
IBM, Amiga
SYSTEM REVIEWED ON: IBM (386-33)
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE
$49.95
PUBLISHER:
EA/Millenium
DESIGNER:
Toby Simpson
PROTECTION SCHEME: Manual Look-Up Scheme

imCity meets Sim Earth meets Balance of
the Planet and add a touch of Command HQ
— these are the disparate elements that go

into making up Electronic Arts' latest release
Global Effect, a British import, hereafter referred
to as GE. On first examining the parameters of the
product, this reviewer was struck by its appeal —
the "world-builder and monitor" aspects were a
Johnny Wilson-type attraction and the "twoplayer modem capability" was an Alan Emrichtype magnet. So, why assign the product to the wargames editor?
Does the word "bushwhack" mean anything?
In order to review this simulation, I carefully prepared myself—
driving to MacFishy, I purchased a "Dolphin Burger" and ran down
a squirrel on my way home. Making sure to discard the non-biodegradable trash on the grass, I was ready (after turning on the air
conditioning to maximize the output of flurocarbons). Let the Game
Begin!

GE is a world construction/maintenance simulation. It has an "open
world" scenario as well as eight pre-designed scenarios (e.g. unstable
world, frozen world, mineral rich world, etc.), and that's just for the
"Create a World" option. The "Save a World" option offers four
different scenarios (post-nuclear, post-industrial, global warming,
and natural resource-depleted). "Rule the World" offers two variants
— military or industrial.

Don't Believe Everything You Read
(Documentation)
The documentation may be summed up as completely and totally
insufficient. Other comments may be added such as misleading,
sparse and downright incorrect. The construction tools are explained,
but a much-needed tutorial is lacking. Cause-and-effect explanations
are left to the player to determine from his/her own experience or
lack thereof.
In fact, some of the documentation is just plain wrong. In explaining the use of solar power, the documentation notes that it can power
up to 25 city blocks. In game play, I found that a 1:1 relationship
between solar panels and city blocks was mandatory in order to avoid
power outages (at least until technological investment increased its
efficiency). Similarly, we are informed that sewage farms "are
needed near large cities." Actually, they are needed in any city, and
more importantly, the sewage farm must be physically adjacent to a

city block (haven't the designers ever heard of
pipelines?). If this is not done, the population
will decrease from disease, thereby leading to a
fatal dose of coprophagy. This essential information was revealed by an EA technical representative who pointed out that recycling plants
are "stand alone" and therefore, the documentation meant "immediately adjacent" when it referred to "nearness" for sewage plants. Ahh, the
subtleness of those British designers when it
comes to semantics! (As the misanthropic cynic
once observed, we are two peoples "... separated
by a common language.")
In terms of "Environmental Effects," the
documentation says that this "section is purposely scarce [sic], in order for the game to be
more difficult" (page 74). The manual is correct
— it is scarce, and inexcusably so. The game is
difficult enough without the designer having to
obscure the operating parameters. The fatuous explanation for its
brevity is completely unsatisfying, unless one is a masochist.
This simulation showed a great potential, but its manual documentation would force the user into an arduous and unnecessarily difficult learning experience.

It's Got The Look (Graphics)
The graphics are well done. City blocks expand on their own
initiative (and must be carefully controlled by the player in order to
avoid bankruptcy). Power refineries and storage facilities are clearly
delineated, and the open gas flames pouring from oil "cracking"
refineries add to the local color. The perspective is an overhead view
a la SimCity. The construction tools are logically defined and drawn
(e.g. batteries for energy-producing power, reservoir-type facilities
for energy storage).
On the screen itself, one can view the playing area, as well as two
smaller graphs (environmental balance and global warming). These
graphs must be carefully monitored as the smallest deviation could
set a fatal trend.
Special options allow environmental detailed data reports (which
again cost power to access), as well as obtain seismic reports (essential for determining the location of oil, coal and other natural resources).

Blueprint for a Better World
(Game Mechanics)
A "look-up" protection scheme requires the user to match four
geometric shapes with an icon. Only then will the game actually
begin to load — which presents a problem. There is no provision to
quit a game and begin another; one must go through the entire tedious
process again.
Unlike SimCity, where the construction tools were physically on

Review
the screen, GE uses a "Tool Selection" window. There are thirty
building tools which are arranged in a continuous strip, and one
merely scrolls through the list.
It looks simple, but elegant, until one begins to play. Since the game
occurs in real time, the player's attempt to find a much-needed tool
could well be accomplished in an "untimely" fashion. One can create
"user-friendly" macros; simply select a tool, press down the shift key
and then select a function key. That tool is now called up by the
function key; thus, one can have up to twelve short cuts. I recommend
that the following tools be used in macro-mode: plant trees, chop
trees, destroy man-made block, city limit, power cables, pipelines,
city block. Beware! The macro functions are not saved to disk and
must be reset every game. Sometimes, the "tool selection" process
goes awry and the strip just scrolls continuously. At other times, no
matter what one's desires may actually be, merely placing the cursor
on the map causes the program to immediately construct whatever
icon has been selected before the player wants or desires any action,
thereby assisting in one's rapid energy depletion.
City blocks can self-generate, but when one
fine-tunes the environment, he will want to
place the city block in a planned location. Pipelines and power cables are probably the most
important macros to set. Of course, each player
should develop his own preferences (and make
a written list of what those preferences are).
A rather unusual game mechanic is TANSTAAFL ("there ain't no such thing as a free
lunch"). One lives and dies based on power, but
everything costs power — even scrolling the
map! To get a report, to see a map — nothing
is free. This becomes frustrating when a problem occurs and the player has no way of moving
to the troubled area.
GE would seem to be pre-set for modem play
and in fact, the documentation notes how to set
up a null modem cable for play. However, the
manual recommends against telephone modem
play. So much data is transferred that self-correcting protocols have not been used, and anytime the modem would pause to recalculate line
speeds, the game would crash. The manual goes
on to say that "the modem facility is present,
but use it with care." Right!! That gives a player
confidence!

Slim Earth (Game Play)
There is a real game in the box. Unlike SimCity, which has been
described as a "software toy," GE possesses game playing, competitive elements. It resembles the oft-told story of the boy opening up
a present on Christmas Day only to find it full of horse manure. The
boy smiles, because he "knows that there's a pony in here, somewhere."
Most scenarios begin with a major, albeit concealed, problem;
unless the player takes rapid action, the entire world will enter a fatal
ice age within fifty years. This is not mentioned in the documentation
and immediate action must be taken for survival. Actually, any minor
deviation from global "norms" seem to rapidly escalate into lifethreatening crises which then take years to correct. There is no
friendly GAIA model underlying this ecosystem as in the simpler
levels of SimEarth.
The discussion herein is based on the "Green Field Scenario,"
ostensibly a one-player scenario. Carbon dioxide (CO 2) levels rapidly decrease after a small hole appears in the polar ice cap ecosphere.
`Why?' is not explained or discernible, but unless one takes quick
action, the game will end by year 55.
Using the default planet settings is a road to extinction. Pump up
the coal/mineral reserves, and immediately build coal-powered cit-

ies. Power is minimal, so only one mine should be developed. The
city should be powered by three ugly belching coal power plants,
sufficient to pollute their way into a CO? surfeit. Cities themselves
should be carefully constructed; allowing the AI to expand a city is
also fatal. Each city should be carefully defined by "City Limits" and
trees as to minimize power consumption. Once the power plant
appears, cities begin their own growth unless controlled. Therefore,
have service tools (farms, sewage and recycling facilities) present
before bringing the power station on-line. Keep the city small; a total
area of 15 blocks should be more than sufficient.
The cities should be blocked in by trees. However, a one tree depth
will often prove insufficient. If a tree "fell in the forest" and the player
was elsewhere, his return to the site would find a city growing and
using power in an aggressive and game-losing manner. Use a
thre-osixdpfblckngites.Thvacolgibnus
by increasing one's power rating. After the CO 2 levels stabilize, plant
more trees and convert to nuclear fuels. The NIMBY (
not-imybackrd)soentxi,suclarpnthemidsof
urban centers will yield no negatives beyond
the occasional "melt-down" — and, given the
plethora of global disasters present, such a
"melt-down" is a "minor" problem. By the time
one converts to nuclear energy, power levels
are not a problem, so one can invest in technology for "natural" energy sources. It is expensive, but necessary for longer-term survival.
Now, we have a basic scenario which kills the
player without fair warning. But, if one wishes
to continue, there are computer opponents.
While the manual notes that they are "very
capable," this reviewer played a military option
only to find that the computer opponent had
expired by year ten all by himself. Maybe he
knew something about the coming Ice Age and
couldn't be bothered with short-term conflict?
The military option seems to be a virtual afterthought and one which again is poorly documented.
There are other points of confusion. As the
Ice Age comes to its inevitable and fatal conclusion, one is rewarded with a picture of nuclear devastation. Either the ice is radioactive
or else the program has another "minor" flaw.
I suppose that the military conflict portion can
be interesting; I suppose that the ecological
protection can be interesting. However, with the flaws and traps for
the unwary player, caveat emptor.
Special attention should be paid to the placement of pipelines and
power lines. They are not allowed to cross one another, and the more
egregious error would be to place the pipeline between a water
treatment plant and a sewage facility too close to one another; they
would loop and create either very bad water or over-cleaned sewage;
in either case, not the most effective use of assets.

Making a Sow's Ear out of a Silk Purse
(Conclusions)
GE has all the elements of a mega-success — it is interesting,
well-conceived and possesses depth. However, it is a "diamond in
the rough" and appears unfinished. If the manual had been more
complete, if the interface had been made more user-friendly, if the
scenarios themselves were more forgiving, if, if, if ..
A lifetime member of the Sierra Club with a Ph.D. in ecological
engineering might have the drive and stamina to delve into the
mechanics and playability of this product. As for the rest of us,
Global Effect is closer to SimChernobyl than to SimCity.

1

by Charles Ardai
now, at last, Fred Pohl has his turn in the
spotlight, courtesy of Legend Entertainment, publisher of the popular Spellcasting
series (and, arguably, the best publisher of
"old-style" interactive fiction currently active).
Gateway is based on Pohl's award-winning Heechee novels, which tell of a future
in which humans happen upon the artifacts
of a long-vanished alien race and, though
they know almost nothing about the aliens,
learn to use the artifacts for their own enrichment. In the humans' favor is the fact
that Heechee spaceships are very

TITLE
Gateway
SYSTEM:
IBM (640K, Hard disk)
PROTECTION: None
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNERS:
Mike Verdu, Duane Beck, Mike Linder,
Glen Dahlgren, Bob Bates
DISTRIBUTOR: Accolade,
San Jose, CA

easy-tou,hvingpramedstino

S

cience fiction writer Frederik Pohl
has won acclaim through the years
for transcending the apparent limits
of his genre. He mixed science fiction and
fantasy; he told stories about aliens who
were plausible extraterrestrials, not rampaging, bug-eyed monsters; he wrote
about ecological threats long before it
was fashionable (and has continued to do
so, with great conviction, now that it is);
and he wrote fun, pulpy adventures without abandoning the core of scientific verisimilitude that makes the best sf come
alive.
Pohl is not the only writer who did these
things, of course. All the greats did, first in
the pages of magazines such as Astounding

and Amazing, then later in dime paperbacks,
and most recently in hardcover bestsellers.
However, it is important to put Pohl in the
same category as the other greats — Asimov, Clarke, Heinlein, Bradbury — where
he belongs.
Part of being up there with the giants of
the field, it seems, is having one's works
adapted to various non-literary entertainment media. Heinlein, Bradbury and Clarke
all saw their novels turned into interactive
Fiction by Telarium; Asimov's robot novels were the basis for a text adventure from
Epyx and a VCR game from Kodak; and

and simple controls. Unfortunately, no one
knows what these destinations are or what
one might find at them. So, traveling in a
Heechee ship is like a game of cosmic Russian Roulette: you pays your money and
you takes your chances.
Some (most) missions end in fiery destruction. Others produce limitless riches in
the form of new Heechee technology. The
risks are high but, since the rewards are
higher, there is no shortage of foolhardy
adventurers ready to give interstellar prospecting a shot.
In Gateway, the player takes on the role
of one of these foolhardy adventurers, a
lucky soul who, having won a lottery, now
has the wherewithal to buy a ticket to the
Gateway space station, where a thousand
Heechee ships are docked. From there, the
player has two responsibilities: going on
prospecting missions to recover any valuable technology he can, and staying alive.
Both are as difficult as they sound.
Once the player has proven himself by
going on a number of successful missions,
a third duty is introduced: the player has to
go on a secret mission for the officers of
Gateway, traveling to five planets and turning on long-dormant Heechee force-field
generators to shield humanity from the gaze
of evil aliens known as the Assassins. In the
meantime, just to keep things interesting, a
number of mysterious subplots unfold on
the space station itself and between missions, the player has to take time out to
investigate these. Finally, when the generators are all activated, the player returns to
Gateway expecting a hero's welcome. Instead, he faces his oddest challenge yet: a
surreal showdown in a series of Assassincreated virtual realities. The game's final
twist is not the shocker it would like to be,
and will not surprise anyone who has seen

the movie Total Recall, but it still packs a
punch.
Pohl's influence is felt throughout the
game: in the plotting, in the slang used by
various characters, in the "hard sf' feel of
the station and the spaceships, and in the
bits of exposition that creep into the game
here and there. The heart of Gateway, however, is the series of puzzles the player has
to solve while seeking out strange new
worlds and new civilizations, and these
puzzles owe less to Fred Pohl than to the last
decade of adventure game design. Except
for a handful of puzzles centered around the
fad of the moment, virtual reality, most
would not be out of place in a golden oldie
such as Starcross or Planetfall. (The puzzles are, for the most part, pretty good. It's
just that, like the story, they feel as though
they date from an earlier era.)
In addition to the puzzles, the storyline,
and the cachet of Pohl's name, Gateway
offers an excellent and varied soundtrack,
good graphics and a couple of nice animated sequences. The game even comes
with a hint book and maps for the benefit of
players apt to make use of such aids. The
only thing lacking, in fact, is the one accessory one would like most: a copy of one of
Pohl's novels, to help players delve deeper
into the Heechee mythos once they are
hooked on it. Fortunately, there's always
Barnes & Noble.

The Way of the Heechee
Gateway looks and plays essentially the
same as all previous Legend games. There
is a graphics window, a text window and a
number of "assistance" windows such as a
compass rose indicating directions in which
the player can move, a list of verbs the
player can use, a list of objects, and quickclick buttons for some commonly issued
commands. These "windows" are not windows in the sense of being movable and
alterable in any substantial way. They are
simply an arrangement of information on
the screen intended to be optimally useful.
The most important and useful, of course,
is the text window. I found myself ignoring
the rest for large stretches of the game. A
player who doesn't like to type might find
the word-lists helpful, but they still strike
me as an exceptionally cumbersome technique for building command sentences. The
compass rose is nice and the graphics are
good; these windows, at least, provide useful amenities. However, amenities describes exactly what they provide. Gateway

Gateway
is essentially a text adventure with amenities.
The game also has a few other command
screens which one encounters whenever
one uses some technological device,
Heechee or otherwise. Flying a spaceship,
for instance, requires one to enter course
codes into a control panel, as does opening
a Heechee dome on one planet. There are
also special screens for the trivia game in
the Gateway casino and one's "Dataman"
personal computer. These screens, along
with the full-screen closeups that are sometimes used when an important conversation
is taking place, give the game a little more
visual variety than it would otherwise have.
There are three kinds of puzzles in the
game: puzzles of interaction, situational
puzzles, and logic puzzles. The first type
mainly comes up when one has to meet
with, and get something from, one's fellow
prospectors on Gateway. There is a bit of
tedious waiting around for people to show
up ("I'll meet you in the bar at 20:00," "The
briefing is at 8:45") and more than a bit of
not knowing just what to say to keep these
people talking. (A lot of conversations involve typing "wait" or "listen" over and
over.) Some of the conversations require
skill to navigate, though, and most are wellwritten. Editing would have made them
shorter and shorter would have been better
(because some characters do ramble on),
but for the most part the interactive puzzles
are fine.
Situational puzzles are ones which require the player to do something with the
tools at his disposal in order to overcome an
obstacle. The puzzles on Kaduna 3 and
Nemira 3 are of this variety and they are
quite good. How does one get past the venomous, inflated pufferslug that is blocking
access to the shield generator or cross the
alien-infested swamp? How can one get the
cylinder out of the alien's hut without waking him up? The solutions do not always
make a great deal of sense (such as the odd
puzzles involving a tuning fork), but most
are fine.
The weakest puzzles in the game are the
logic puzzles in which the designers indulge
much too frequently. Which symbol in a
row of five does not belong? What color
flag goes in which opening of the Heechee
machine? Which path should one follow
through the maze of rooms painted with the
colors of the spectrum? Puzzles like these
do not proceed from the situations in the
game; they are pure abstractions, a holdover

from the days when adventure games were
less interactive fiction than they were extensions o f the puzzle page of Scientific American. In Gateway, they seem jarring and
inappropriate. It doesn't help that they are
all painfully simple, too much like breadcrumbs in a too-small meatloaf, trying desperately to act as "stretchers."

Heechee Weaknesses
There is a reason that the designers of
Gateway might have decided that they
needed stretchers. Though it takes a long
time to get through the game, a lot of this is
because of time used up in navigating the
station and flying around in the spaceships.
Each alien planet, once one arrives, consists
of only six to sixteen locations. The space
station itself only has three levels, none of
which is especially extensive. The game
may not feel small, but it is, and if it doesn't
feel small, it is because it is puzzle-rich. It
is a pity, though, that the designers' solution
to making the game puzzle-rich was to
throw in a lot of easy, throwaway puzzles.
Even worse are the shameless and annoying stall tactics that are used to make the
game longer. Every time one wants to go on
a mission, for instance, one has to exit one's
spaceship, show a badge to an agent, enter
the ship, close the hatch, put on a spacesuit,
sit down, program a course code painstakingly (in the illegible Heechee alphabet)
into the computer, launch, sit through the
same launch animation, orbit, sit through
the same landing animation and land.
The first time one goes through this sequence, it is fun: the animations are good
and the activities are not yet repetitive. The
second time one is put through the paces, it
is already less fun. By the sixth or seventh
time, most players will be climbing the
walls and pressing the space bar to cut the
animations short. Frankly, I just cannot believe that it is good game design to force the
player to engage in long sequences by rote.
Once the player has gotten through the sequences a couple of times, the program
should create a new and much shorter segue
to replace the animated obstacle course.
When one gets to the planets one finds
them all well drawn, but not strikingly so:
one gets swamps, forests, jungles and all the
other usual terrain. Further, the music that
accompanies the various scenes is very
good, but this may not be a good thing.
Music is the last thing I want in a text
adventure, since it distracts from the text
and, indeed, prevents me from immersing
myself in the story. I found myself con-

stantly trying to read faster to keep up with
the music. [Ed: After polling the editorial
staff, we discovered that there is a tremendous polarization on this issue. Some people like background music when they are
reading. Others don't. The latter will not
enjoy soundtracks behind their text adventures.] Sound effects are good but spotty:
sometimes the game says "You hear an
alien scream," but sometimes it actually
produces the scream and it is never really
clear why it does one rather than the other.
Maybe most distressing are the elements
of the story that go undeveloped. In principle, there is supposed to be a risk involved
in being a Gateway prospector; prospectors
are supposed to die more often than they are
supposed to succeed. Granted, one doesn't
want to die constantly in a game, but the fact
is that it is possible (if one programs the
course codes correctly) never to be in any
danger at all. This seems to directly contradict the premise of the game. Then, too, one
is amassing great wealth as a result of one's
successes, but the financial side of the game
is completely ignored. There is nothing to
buy except drinks for one's comrades, so
the millions just pile up, an end in themselves.

Closing the Gateway
Gateway is a good enough game, but
good enough for what? It is certainly playable. It is generally entertaining. It takes
place in an interesting universe and is well
plotted. Yet nothing about the game makes

it compelling; nothing makes it feel fresh,
different, or new. Just as it is full of filler
puzzles, it is a filler game, treading water in
the shallows of interactive fiction. Pohl is
well served by the game, which is faithful
and respectful to his work. Players, unfortunately, are less well served, and Gateway
will most likely join Rendezvous With
Rama, Fahrenheit 451 and their like in a
dusty corner of adventure game history.

Review

Journey to the
Center of the Mind
QQP's Solitaire's Journey
by Allen L. Greenberg

TITLE:
Solitaire' s Journey
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION. Documentation Look-Up
DESIGNERS: Andrew Visscher
Bruce Williams Zaccagnino
PUBLISHER: QQP
Flemington, NJ

uried deep within the shadowy recreation department of humanity's
collective unconscious, lies a primal
urge to seek diversion and entertainment
using the most mundane of objects. A deck
of cards easily fulfills this need, as do many
computational devices. After careful study,
recreationologists have actually been able
to document the amazing efforts of primitive mathematicians to run a respectable
game of Hunt The Wumpus on an abacus!
Even more astounding is the method by
which these ancient hackers were able to
"download" the program, using only campfires and bongo-drums. That these early
efforts at computer gaming remained unknown to historians for so long is now
attributed to an obscure sect of abacus programmers whose name roughly translates
as "the origin." Managing to confuse and
confound other engineers of their day, this
group had apparently become obsessed
with the fear that their species would fail to
climb the evolutionary ladder unless they
immediately began using abacuses
equipped with increasingly large numbers
of available beads.
While one may choose to question these
facts concerning ancient abacus gaming,
our knowledge of the history of playing
cards remains nearly as limited. It was not
until the 19th century that the rules for
solitaire, or "patience", were actually recorded. The earliest 14th century references
to this popular diversion may be summarized in one word — "Don't!" Considering
the game's high addiction potential, this
attitude may not have been unreasonable. It
has been conservatively estimated that there
are at least 350 variations of solitaire being

B

played throughout the world today. Of
these, the best known is "Klondike" (often
mistakenly referred to as "Canfield") and it
is this game which has most frequently been
adapted for play on a computer. Klondike,
Canfield and a number of other variations
have previously been bundled into several
commercial packages available for PCs.
With the release of QQP' s Solitaire's Journey (Journey), a whopping 105 solitaire
games are now available in one package —
over twice the number of variations which
have ever been marketed in any other such
software product.
The structuring and setup of a solitaire
card game is well-known. For most games,
cards are dealt from a stock-pile onto a
tableau where they are put in a special order
and, finally, placed on a foundation from
which the final score is tallied. This happens
according to a set of rules which range from
brief and simple to mind-taxingly difficult.
In addition, each variation also features a
unique blending of luck and strategy. Each
game is played with either one or two 52card decks, so that a maximum score of
either 52 or 104 points is possible. However, Journey also provides for additional
realms of conquest by organizing clusters
of games into tournaments, quests and journeys. Meticulous records and statistics are
maintained for each individual who uses the
program. This will prove useful not only for
establishing healthy competition between
large numbers of players, but also for employers who are looking to estimate the
number of pay-hours to deduct from office
personnel who are unable to resist favoring
this activity over their assigned chores.
A mouse is strongly recommended for
playing Journey, with which the player first
points to the card or cards to be moved and
then to a destination. Use of the keyboard is
also possible, but is somewhat clumsy. Using pull-down menus, Journey allows for
several options during play. Perhaps the
most useful of these is the ability to take
back one move at any time during the game.
There is also an "auto-play" function which
will move to the foundation any cards from
the tableau which may legally be transferred. The value of this is that once a
victory has been assured, the player is
spared the effort of moving one card at a
time. This is certainly useful, though it may

turn out to be a strategic error if used too
early during the game. At any time, a game
may be restarted using either the same sequence of cards — so that the player may
go back and attempt a different strategy —
or a newly shuffled deck. Games in progress may be saved to disk, but these are
erased once they are reloaded into memory.
Peeking under piles of cards, cheating, or
altering the rules are all strictly prohibited
by the program. Loudly voiced profanities
are not restricted, although QQP apparently
does not accept responsibility for the consequences should the player be moved to
use them.
The instructions for each of the 105
games are available at all times from a
pull-down menu, and appear as a series of
information windows. A quick illustration
of the game's layout is followed by an
optional, slightly more detailed description
of how the player is to proceed. For the most
part, anyone who has ever played Klondike
solitaire should have very little trouble following these descriptions. However, there
are a few cases where these rules may be
slightly confusing, and a less condensed
description is desirable. Unfortunately, the
game's manual, where one might hope to
find such a description, turns out to include
exactly the same sentences as those which
appear in the program itself.
Tournaments, quests and journeys bring
together different clusters of the individual
games. Tournaments include up to ten
games, the simple object of which is to
obtain the highest total score. Each participant, however, is given a different shuffling
of the cards, so that players are clearly not
competing under the same conditions. The
program contains several tournaments
which group together games based on level
of difficulty. The user also has the option of
bundling together any of the 105 games in
order to stage a tournament of his or her own
design.
For a "journey," the player is presented
with a map of North America from which a
cross-country route is selected. Moving
from city to city, a monetary reward is given
for each point earned in the solitaire games
found at the various locations. Cities are
each assigned a level of difficulty, and the
player often has some choice as to which
cities to avoid or pass through. At journey's

Review
end, additional points are assigned for completing the tour in the least number of days.
The goal is to bring in enough cash to cover
travel expenses, as well as show a sizable
profit at the end of the trip.
Quests take place inside a building. An

architect's view displays an entrance, a series of rooms and either an exit or a staircase
leading to another level. In each room are a
pile of gold bars as well as a choice of three
solitaire games. Entrance to any of the
rooms is forbidden until one of the three
games is played. Some passages are also
blocked by locked doors, the keys to which
are found elsewhere in the building. Some
rooms may also contain bonus gold. The
goal here is to collect a required number of

gold bars while passing through the least
number of rooms on the way to the exit.
While there are rewards for winning the
individual games in both the quests and the
journeys, it is only necessary to achieve a
certain number of points in order for a game
to be considered a success.
Journey's sounds and graphics are
competently produced. There are
several card designs available, as
well as a variety of screen background colors and patterns. Likewise, there are also a number of
simple tunes which may be selected
to accompany game-play. The music
is somewhat repetitive, however, and
it is difficult to imagine that anyone
could concentrate on the game while
hearing Journey's hurried boogiewoogie signature theme. The slower
music, played at low volume, creates
a more conducive, almost subliminally tranquil, effect.
Composing a "wish-list" for future Journeys is difficult to resist. As already mentioned, a manual which includes a less
condensed set of rules, along with some
game-specific strategy hints, would have
been very much appreciated. Some players
will also doubtlessly crave a
pek-andchtmo—pinwhcasbe
available to solitaire players throughout its
non-computerized existence. There is only

one, brief "reward" animation sequence
which is shown each time the player wins
one of the 105 games. Given the obsessive
attachment some players will develop towards certain of these games, a large variety
of congratulatory messages would greatly
enhance the fun, with the most elaborate of
these held in reserve for the most difficult
games. Obviously, the delight of these rewards should be denied the peekers and
cheaters, should these suggestions be put
into effect.
Among the astonishing facts which may
now be added to the journals of recreationology is that QQP admits to having
played "tens of thousands" of solitaire
games in order to provide an average, realistic score for each of the 105 variations in
their package. May we assume that is "tens
of thousands" of games for which QQP's
employees were paid? Given the current
minimum wage, and the nature of the work
involved, it is difficult not to conclude that
QQP now receives a dizzyingly high number of employment applications. Until
funding for this type of research becomes
more plentiful, it is likely that the rest of the
world will simply have to purchase Journey
and pursue their research independently.
Even under these circumstances, Journey
will prove an effective way of satisfying
that primal appetite for entertainment.

Strategy

by T. Liam McDonald
Thomas Liam McDonald is the
author of Sun Tzu's Ancient Art of
Golf (Contemporary Books, November, with Gary Chapin), and the
forthcoming projects: Myths to Golf
By (humor), UNIX for the Kingdom
of Heaven, a biography of Peter
Straub, and The Grand Scams.
icroPlay's Sea Rogue starts
players on the road to salvage
riches with only a rickety little trawler, a few pieces of

M
botm-fhelinqupt,adcrewh's

only as loyal as the last payroll is
timely. The prospects are not great for
one to succeed, but, with the right
purchases and moves, success is attainable. Sea Rogue is a nautical roleplaying adventure with a light combat
element added for an extra (though
actually pretty minimal) challenge.
The first step of the game is to generate a crew, which is comprised of a
Captain (the player), Weapons/Diving Officer, Sensor Officer, Communications Officer and Engineering
Officer. Each has his or her own station and duties. Automatically generated numbers define an individual's attributes (Dexterity,
Wisdom, Intelligence, Charisma, Loyalty, Endurance), and
bonus points can be allocated for such things as Wreck Research, Diving, Treasure Appraisal, Underwater Combat, etc.
As one succeeds in uncovering wrecks, one's crew members
gain points which, in turn, can be added to the required skills
at various ports of call.
Since, most of the time, only four members of the crew will
be diving, it is best to choose up front which four this will be,
and allocate diving points appropriately. The captain's major
strengths should lie primarily in his Treasure Appraisal and
Diplomacy (later, Safecracker skills are crucial); the Weapons/Diving Officer, in Combat, Evasion and Ordnance Handling; the Sensor Officer, in Signature Recognition; the
Navigation Officer in Treasure Maps; the Communications
Officer in Wreck Identification; and the Engineering Officer
in Repair Equipment and, to a lesser degree, Damage Control.
Diving and Underwater combat points should then be added
to each of the four crew members who shall be on the diving
team. It is also important to add Wreck Research to the entire
crew, since this will determine one's potential for success in
finding new wrecks when going to the library for research.
Once the ship is fully crewed, the real play begins. Of the

three levels (novice, intermediate and
professional), only the last two involve extended combat. So, it is best
to start as a novice. After a certain
number of wrecks, successful players
will be bumped up to intermediate and
professional anyway, and in the novice level one has some decent time in
which to earn enough money to trade
in that leaking trawler for a spiffy new
research craft. Ultimately, this will
lead to the purchase of the Sea Rogue
itself: a high-tech submersible that allows one to go after modern wrecks,
including the Titanic and the Bismarck.
The main struggle in the early part
of the game is fuel management. One
launches from North Carolina with
300 units of fuel and the coordinates
of a wreck off the coast of Florida.
The basic tactic is to get to the location
and uncover the wreck inch by inch,
avoiding the use of explosives for excavation at all costs, especially early
on. Different countries will be scrutinizing the player's character as play
begins and building a strong archaeological rating early on is
an important factor in keeping them off his/her back. In the
novice level, one must arm the first diver with a speargun (for
sharks) and the other three with metal detectors or two metal
detectors and a sandsucker. (The sandsucker increases the
number of squares a diver can uncover.) In the more advanced
modes, where enemy divers present a particular problem, an
additional diver should be armed with a knife or speargun.
Once on the ocean floor, one should go to the overview map
in order to see the shape of the debris as it lies in the silt. Not
all the treasure will be located within the body of the ship:
some will have been thrown free. So, to use the time most
efficiently, it is best to scour inside and beneath the wooden
beams, then in a constantly increasing radius. If any sea chests
or ballast stones are visible on the surface, it is always a good
idea to excavate around and below them. Chances are more
treasure is in the vicinity. One must, of course, beware of
mines and not try to dig beneath them. Astute readers will
wonder how this reviewer knows it doesn't work.
Divers should be ordered to cover every square within the
wreck site with the metal detectors. Though most encrusted
items can be found with the detector, gems usually cannot. As
the game progresses and the player's character has 30 or so
wrecks under his/her belt, the captain will probably feel less
inclined to go over the site square-by-square. In such a case,

Strategy
one should opt for the vacuum method. This, however, creates
two problems: 1) it keeps players from being able to look at
the ship's bell (often the key to identifying a wreck) and 2)
causes one to definitely miss some of the treasure. Once the
decision for a method of recovery is made, it cannot be
changed, so it is important to have the Communications
Officer attempt a Manual Identify before the method of recovery is chosen.
Several things aid one in double -checking this identification
before accepting it. (And, since the officer's identification is
usually wrong, especially early on, it is best to double-check.)
First, take the geographical location into consideration. That
automatically narrows down the field of search. Then, on the
first trip down, counting the number of cannons on the ship
can be a vital clue. Some are iron, some are bronze. The bronze
cannons are more rare, so if there are any present, that narrows
the possibilities further. The dates of the coins and the cannons
are the exact date of the wreck, which for many excavations
is enough to determine the name of the wreck. When there is
more than one wreck from the same year in the same area, the
types and combinations of artifacts brought up are key to
identification. Several ships may have muskets listed on their
manifests, for example, but only one may have carried muskets and religious artifacts. So, to get full value for one's
effort, it is necessary to identify the wreck carefully, at least
until one has the $50,000,000 for the Wreck Identification
Computer.
Okay. With a cargo-bay full of gold, silver, jewels and
artifacts, even the name of the ship it all came from, it only
takes a quick trip to the captain's cabin to appraise said
treasure, find the nearest port of call that has an artifact society
or nautical museum and sell the treasure to them. They buy
the treasure and the bank deposits the gold and silver. So, it is
time for another assignment. Where to go? The tavern, of
course! Buy a drink (it helps the game, really), have a few
words with the bartender and talk to the patrons. This might
take a couple tries, maybe even a couple of drinks, but sooner
or later someone always offers to sell a map. Buy them all!
Period. None are fake.
It is also possible to encounter someone who knows a little
something about a wreck. These people are useful and they
keep popping up throughout the game, each time with another
clue to a wreck sight. These are filed in the captain's archives.
Wise players pay attention to them! Also, if there's a library
in a given port, it is worthwhile to spend a week researching
wrecks. Until players build some decent Wreck Research
points, it will mostly be hit and miss. It's also a very good idea
to hire several different researchers. It's hard to track whether
they are being useful or not, but later on they'll all be hired
out, and players who failed to hire them will definitely regret
not having a few scattered about the world.
Financial management is crucial to this game, particularly
in the initial phase. If a captain can manage to steer clear of
storms, he/she won't have to repair the ship, which keeps
those expenses down. Still, one must have a constant supply
of fuel. Hence, one's first purchases (see chart for locations)
should be a fuel efficiency device and cargo bay extenders.
The former allows the ship to sail further on less fuel and the
latter is for those particularly large hauls. These will "follow"
the player during upgrades, so one should not hesitate to
purchase them as early as possible. One cautionary word,

however, don't over-purchase equipment too early. It is possible to run out of money to pay the crew. Therefore, one
should try not to buy too much else (except fuel) until enough
money is put aside for the research vessel. The next step
should be a map decoding computer (essential!), communications decoding module and hull reinforcements. As enemies
enter the picture and one becomes captain of the Sea Rogue
itself, the bulk of one's financial resources will be spent on
torpedoes, decoys and other offensive/defensive purchases.
This reviewer has yet to find the U.S.G.S. mineral detector
even marginally useful, but who knows?
Careful players will get the Sea Rogue sooner than they
expect, thus allowing them to go after the modern wrecks with
the probe. Then, it is wise to stock up on hull-cutter torch bars,
just in case. An extra probe might also be nice. Further, when
given a choice where to start, choose the purser's office or the
captain's cabin: there are usually safes here. Steer clear of
cargo bays where it looks like ordnance may be stored. Probes
do, after all, blow up. Finally, watch the battery very carefully.
If it runs out, one is out of luck as well as electricity.
A lot of the modern wrecks aren't nearly as profitable as the
wooden ones. Many have already been excavated. Still, the
ultimate goal is for the big, famous modern wrecks (which
will only become available to one after the first hundred have
been recovered). A player just might send that probe down
into just another cargo ship, only to discover that he/she is
"dancing" in the ballroom of the Titanic.

Review

Towering Observations On Tolkien:
by Allen L. Greenberg
TITLE:
The Two Towers
SYSTEM.
IBM, Amiga coming in fall
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: Documentation Based
PUBLISHER:
Interplay
Santa Ana, CA

"It is impossible to look at the mythical
perfection of Middle Earth, its legendary conflicts and unforgettable characters, and not ask oneself, 'Where is the
theme park?' True literary immortality resides not on the printed page but, rather, in
the bloated costumes worn by actors waiting to greet middle class parents with their
children's chocolate-covered fingers in one
hand and a credit card in the other! Does
1992 not mark the centenary of J.R.R.
Tolkien's birth? Where, then, are the action
dolls? Is Bilbo Baggins not, at least, as
archetypal a figure as GI Joe? Furthermore,
why have these creatures not found their
way into a breakfast cereal? Need that most
important of supermarket shelves be completely ignored by the sucrose-hungry
masses to whom hobbits and elves are as the
stars themselves? Love of a fictional character is not found in the hearts of its readers
but, rather, in the amount the parents of
those readers are willing to spend on a
worthless item bearing that character's image! Most shocking of all, what pacifistic
pauper is producing the computer and video
games? Has no one considered the intellectuals whose trigger-fingers ache to blast the
Balrog, waste the Wargs, toast the Towers..."
– excerpt from a recent issue of the Jour nal of the Society for Creatively Unethical Money Making (S.C.U.M.M.).
Such ravings serve as a reminder that the
forces of evil are infinite. For J.R.R.
Tolkien, having reached the middle section
of his vast tale while living under the threat
o f Nazi Germany, Middle Earth was rapidly
becoming the victim of a powerful corruption which would dearly test the heroic nature of his characters. This over-powering
sense of supernatural gloom and despair in
an otherwise whimsical setting will remain
with his readers long after the reams of
fantasy trivia have been set aside.
For The Two Towers (Towers), the second in their series of computer role-playing
games based on Lord Of The Rings, Interplay has also put together a scenario rife
with evil and darkness. Like the first entry,
it is a sprawling and ambitious project
which is abundant in detail. Tolkien fanatics

who are still arguing the merits of Volume
One will doubtless find even further
grounds for debate with the release of Towers.
In contrast to the somewhat leisurely
opening of Volume One, Towers bursts immediately into battlefield action. Kneedeep (or, in the case of the hobbits,
shoulder-deep) in orcs, members of the recently broken Fellowship now look to serve
the cause against evil, each in his own way.
Frodo Baggins and his eternal companion,
Sam, remain determined to fulfill their mission by carrying the One Ring to Mount
Doom. Passing through the grisly swamps
which bear the visages of fallen warriors,
through the beleaguered Ithilien and into
the spidery Cirith Ungol, these two heroes
will be hard pressed to find trustworthy
allies. Most important among these is
Faramir, brother to the misguided Boromir
whose fate was described in Volume One.
With a yellowed eye fixed on his "preciousss" ring, Gollum remains nearby,
often offering help yet always threatening
betrayal.
"Gandalf Returns" might easily describe
the early adventures of Aragorn, Gimli and
Legolas, who must then begin assisting in
the defense of Rohan and Gondor against
the debased wizard Saruman and that
UUBG (ULTIMATE, Ultimate Bad Guy)
Sauron. Pausing only to help minimize the
damage being inflicted by Saruman's
hoards, this formidable quartet must find
their way into King Theoden's presence and
convince him of his misplaced confidence
in Grima Wormtongue. Through the halls
of Theoden's Golden Hall and out onto the
battlefield of Helm's Deep, this group provides Towers with its greatest degree of
hack 'n slash.
Finally, Merry and Pippin are about to
become acquainted with Middle Earth's

most stalwart shrubbery, the Ents. Slow to
anger, yet devastating in their retribution,
these killer vegetables need assistance in
getting their war-machine up and running.
The two hobbits and their army must then
deal with the distrustful Dunlanders and
then move on to assault Saruman's stronghold tower in Isengard.
In order to accommodate this increasingly complex, multi-branched story, the
game's designers have introduced an unconventional device for moving the player
from one location in the book to another. At
certain, secret "trigger points," the program
will suddenly put the current adventure
party "on hold" while the player is whisked
away to supervise the quest of some other
group of characters. Thus, Aragorn's explorations will suddenly be replaced with
Frodo's, which will in turn give way to the
adventures of Merry and Pippin. Upon returning to an area, the player will find all is
as it was and the group may continue as
though there had been no interruption. The

sudden switch to another sub-plot appears
to be triggered by the current party reaching
a particular destination. Hence, the player
may stay with one group fora while, as long
as it avoids reaching that location.
The sudden switches from one party to
another is at once both an interesting innovation and a sudden interruption which may
leave some players wishing for extra control over the adventure. However, it most
likely represents rich, new territory to be
explored in future adventure and role-playing games. The use of these multiple-parties
with their cliff-hanger junctions clearly
gives Towers a depth of narrative which
would not otherwise have been possible. In
the future, Interplay may wish to consider
allowing the player at least a vote in the
decision making process as to whether it is
time to switch locations. Or, perhaps, giving
the player some advance warning so that he

Review

or she may feel free to tie up loose ends
would not be unreasonable.
As they did in Volume 1, Interplay has
expanded on certain elements of the original story in Towers in order to enhance the
game. As a result, the program contains
several characters and locations which are
not to be found in any of Tolkien's books.
Most of these, however, have been blended
in so inconspicuously as to require a major
Tolkien concordance in order to weed them
out. Other additions are a bit more obvious,
such as a mini-quest which requires a thorough exploration of King Theoden's Golden Hall, or another taking place in the caves
below the fortress of Helm's Deep. The
actual battle of Helm's Deep has also been
modified in order to fit the format of a
role-playing game and thus resembles a major street-brawl rather than a meeting of
armies.
Players who have completed LOTR Volume I will be at an advantage in Towers,
provided they remembered to save the ear-

her game at its conclusion. The majority of
a character's inventory will be carried into
the new game, and each character's statistics will remain the same. The various skills
which were learned, however, will not survive the transition and dead party members
will not auto-resurrect, with the exception
of Gandalf whose special role in the book
dictates otherwise.
Towers makes use of the same game mechanics and interface used in Interplay's
LOTR Volume One. An unobstructed, fullscreen display gives an eagle's eye view of
the animated characters and their surroundings. For the most part, the adventure-game
two-dimensional display has been dropped
from this outing. The characters' wanderings are controlled by the mouse or the
keyboard, and the view scrolls smoothly in
four directions. Pressing the right mouse
button calls up an icon-based menu for issuing non-movement commands. Although

most orders are input by mouse, some typing is required during conversation with
non-playing characters. In general, the use
of the menus has been simplified in Towers
in that the player need no longer exit and
then re-enter a menu in order to switch
control from one party member to another.
The most meaningful enhancement to this
version of Middle Earth is an auto-map
feature which is available from the character menu or at the touch of the "a" key.
Several other improvements are also noticeable in Volume 2. In particular, the graphics
have lost some of their cartoon-like appearance in favor of a more painted or realistic
look, and the animation appears more natural. The many open fields still have a
slightly sparse appearance, however, and
certain encounters are only described in the
text and not displayed on the screen. Enhancing the pictures is a delightful mixture
o f baroque and medieval background music
which makes a sound-board well worth
owning.

capture the spirit of the original book, it may
be helpful to recall the thousands of paintings, animations, drawings and sketches
based on LOTR which have been published
during the last several decades. Of these,
even the most outstanding did not find acceptance with each and every one of
Tolkien's readers. Like these works of art,
Interplay's program is only one reflection
of LOTR and not the author's original creation. The best answer as to how well the
game conveys the essence of the book is that
it is obviously put together with a great deal
of care and talent. Beyond that, each player
will simply have to decide for him or herself
just how well this particular interpretation
satisfies their own expectations.
Interplay drew a disproportionate
amount of fire following its release of Star
Trek because of that program's lengthy
hard disk installation procedure. For Towers, the process has been mercifully shortened, although the installer must still stand
by the computer throughout the process in

Although reviewers for Computer Gaming World are forced to endure years of
rigorous training prior to accepting their
posts, a game which carries the Tolkien
name still presents certain unique problems
in its evaluation. Does the product artistically reflect the tremendous appeal of Lord
Of The Rings? If so, does it make for worthwhile interactive entertainment? Many reviewers, including myself, have lamented
the quality of many of these programs and
questioned the value of further computer
products based on this same material. Interplay's product, however, clearly deserves
to be judged separately from the others. Few
would argue the point that this company has
produced some of the most outstanding
computer role playing games on the market
and there is no reason why players of such
admirable products as Dragon Wars should
not find Towers equally entertaining.

order to switch floppy disks. Players may
wish to use this otherwise wasted time in
order to review the game's healthy sized
instruction manual which covers both game
play and background material for the story
in adequate detail.
"Roads go ever ever on... " mused the
poet, adventurer and thief-for-hire, Bilbo
Baggins. Towers features a seemingly infinite number of these to be traveled and
explored through some of the darkest and
most evil moments of LOTR. Veterans of
Volume One would be wise to let their
feelings for that game guide them in making
a decision in investing in this follow-up.
Newcomers to the series may be confused
with the flow of events, yet still find Towers
a worthy piece of entertainment. While not
quite packing the commercial potential of
theme parks and breakfast cereals, Middle
Earth and the computer have not quite exhausted their relationship.

Sneak Preview

LEGENDARY EFFORT
Unveiling Images of Legends of Valour
by Robin Matthews

O

ne of the major software distributors in the United Kingdom
and Europe is the Birminghambased U.S. Gold. They specialize in
importing U.S. software, including
such labels as: LucasArts, Strategic
Simulations, Inc., New World Computing and, most recently, Sir-Tech
Software. The above list reads like a

`Who's Who' of computer role playing
and adventures, and it seems as though
over the years, they may have learned
from these masters of story telling as
they prepare to launch their own CRPG
—Legends of Valour. OK, I hear all the
protests, "Not another Legend of something or other!" Well, this time, Legends could be made of this ...
[Note: The sections of this sneak
preview which are printed in italics
describe portions of the game's story
and events. Readers who wish to
avoid information which may tip off
portions of the plot may wish to skip
over these sections.]
Legends of Valour is the brainchild
of one Kevin Bulmer, designer of the
graphically impressive Corporation,
and is due for release sometime in late
1992. It is a single player role playing/graphic adventure set in the mythical land of Wolfbrood. The plot has a
familiar ring — the player's character
receives a letter from his/her cousin
Gareth and, after coming into an inheritance following the tragic death of
his/her father, sets out for the town of
Mitteldorf. Character development is
easy and features a choice of human,
dwarf or elf, as well as male or female.
An interesting touch is that one can also
select "body size" with either Ectomorph (skinny), Mesomorph (muscular) or Endomorph (fat). One cannot
help but wonder how many are going
to be brave/honest enough to select the
latter?

In accordance with usual CRPG practice, there are characteristics and abili-

ties that vary with the player's race.
These include: strength, memory, manipulation, health and appeal. Naturally, the race selected will affect the
character's starting point (one of six
villages) and will also set the type and
quantity of the character's initial trade
goods.
Travelling to Mitteldorf, the protagonist pauses by the side of the lake and
ponders the future, while overhead, a
majestic dragon swoops down on its
prey. Then, looking out onto the lake,
one observes a giant Manta Ray scavenging the lake bed, oblivious to the
fisherman in his coracle. [Note: The
scenes are supported by fully digitized
256 color graphics, created using the
latest CAD technology.]
After a short while, the hero/heroine
reaches the town of Mitteldorf and the
game really hits its stride. Movement is
not in squares and turns are not executed in 90 degree chunks, but is completely 'free form' and allows the
player a complete venue in which to
explore the gaming world in non-linear
fashion. The sensation is similar to that
found in Ultima Underworld, except
this movement is smoother and
quicker. It is also superior in that when
one's nose is up against a wall, the
individual pixels do not dominate the
view. Indeed, the graphic quality is
quite astounding, particularly since
U.S. Gold insists that the engine will
work on 286, 386, 486 and Amiga (1
Meg). To run on slower machines,
rather than adopting the approach taken
by many software houses and reduce
the level of detail, US Gold has inserted
a facility that maintains the detail level,
but reduces the size of the gaming window.
The interface is completely mousedriven and point and click with the
interesting development of a window
showing objects in the character's current location. So, if one stumbles across

the hilt of a sword when walking into
an area, the hilt will appear in the window and can be used immediately or
put into the inventory. The main screen
contains stats information, movement
arrows, action verbs, inventory and a
compass rose in a surprisingly uncluttered display. The whole program has a
feel of quality and it looks as though
U.S. Gold has really learned from their
years of distributing the best about.
Anyway, back to Mitteldorf. Upon
entering the town, one discovers plenty
of items and objects strewn all over the

place , but no people (cue the Twilight
Zone theme)! What has happened?
Where is everyone? Should one pick up
a certain sword, embedded in the
ground, the sound of thunder reverberates through the empty town in the most
dramatic omen since Arthur pulled Excalibur from the stone. Should the
character panic and decide to retreat,
the next discovery is that Mitteldorf is
not deserted. It still has two of the
biggest guards ever seen barring the
town gates.
The 3-D world is created with shaded
texture-mapped graphics, with locations having a variety of fixed sprites,
scaled in real time — trees, obelisks,
lights, pillars, tables, stalagmites, stalactites and fungi. These attempt to create unique locations, giving the town a
depth and 'feel'. The town itself is
huge, and a detailed auto-mapping feature is included.

Sneak Preview
Now, back with these guards, they
tell our hero(ine) that the town is in
quarantine by order of King Farley
Dacre. Being truly heroic, the character
uses conversational skills to fmd out
that, in fact, there isn't a plague — just
an awful lot of funny goings-on. Satisfied that our hero(ine) is an OK person,
they let the character go his/her way,
which means on to the Custom House
where goods can be traded.
Trading is an important part of Legends of Valour and allows one to earn
some cash, obtain items and even solve
some of the massive number of quests.
The main tradeable items are: gems,
spices, pigments, grain, hides and ale.
Naturally, these have a different market
value in each village.
A sub-plot informs the protagonist
that the Custom House Keeper's
daughter does not approve of her father's swindling of novice traders. So,
if she can be found, one might be able
to persuade her to hand over access to
her father's stock — allowing one to

actually sell the goods back to him at a
profit!
A priority is to fmd somewhere to
spend the night and The Travellers Inn
is one of eight Inns or Hostels that exist
in Mitteldorf. These allow one to rest,
but food and drink may be a greater
priority, at this point! The Hanged Man
is open for trade, and the menu is quite
mouthwatering. Bugburger, Fried
Zombie Brains and even Minotaur pie
are typical of the understated but
tongue-in-cheek humor that pervades
Legends of Valour. Eating and drinking
play an important part in maintaining
health levels, as undernourished characters are more susceptible to disease,
while overindulgence causes indigestion. Too much of the demon drink is
rather more serious. The effects are
clearly seen by the staggering movement and impaired vision, but one can
even be arrested and incarcerated for

public intoxication. In addition, gambling is as prevalent in Legends of Valour as it is in other CRPGs. Mitteldorf
boasts a casino where games of chance
include a form of "Find the Lady" and
of "Crown and Anchor," while the speciality of The Hanged Man is "Cockroach Racing." This level of detail is
typical of Legends of Valour and the
attempt to create a rich alternate world,
complete with traditions and local customs.
In the story, the player's character
takes in too much of one of the local
customs and falls out of the pub much
the worse for wear. Things have
changed, however. It is now night time.
[Note: Mitteldorf has a full day/night
cycle, varying according to the time of
year.] The shops and inns open and shut
according to strict opening hours, but
beware the night — it is the domain of
werewolves, vampires and ghouls. One
stumbles around the streets of Mitteldorf, well under the influence, bouncing off walls in a totally disorientated

fashion and careens through a doorway, down some stairs and into total
darkness. Struggling to fmd tinderbox
and kindling, one hears some strange
noises and, as soon as the room is illuminated, it becomes clear that the character is in a strange cavern. Two
waterfalls cascade down the wall and
the room is full of pungent giant mushrooms, when something stirs behind
the character, giving off a horrible guttural sound. All of a sudden, the character discovers that the fall downstairs
and the environment has been sobering.
The character returns to ground level,
leaving the strange cavern and its apparently stranger inhabitant, but knowing that he/she will have to return.
Sooner or later, a CRPG always requires combat. In Legends of Valour,
this can be enacted in either real-time
or auto-combat mode. Strength and
manipulative skills are combined with

weapon characteristics and attack strategy to determine attack value. This is
compared with a defense value, calculated in a similar way, plus a random
factor.
Magic also plays an important part in
Legends of Valour, with both offensive
and defensive spells to be learned
within the arcane halls of the Magic
Guilds. Other Guilds exist, including a
Thieves Guild. Membership in the latter precludes some activities, but does
allow one to steal from others with
impunity. Without membership in the
medieval equivalent of a special interest group, one found stealing items is
likely to be arrested and taken before
King Dacre. In Dacre's court, justice is
swift and blind, a place where, more
often than not, guilty characters will
find themselves imprisoned for a couple of weeks.
NPCs abound in the game and can be
conversed with via a wonderful 'OW
command. Fortunately, there is a very
active grapevine, especially with cer-

tain characters. For example, if one per-son in The Hanged Man knows that
someone has stolen some wine, it won't
take long before everyone he meets will
know about the vintage acquisition.
The game carries these conversations
along and, eventually, a guard may
overhear. Thus, the next time the guilty
party bumps into an official, it will be
time to visit the King's court as involuntary guest.
In short, Legends of Valour features
the large town of Mitteldorf, plus underneath a massive network of manmade dungeons and sewers connected
through a natural cave system. These
underground areas have the same
movement system, and an eerie claustrophobic environment is created. It is
a stimulating new perspective on fantasy role-playing and offers a stimulating new venue for CRPG aficionados.

Review
World Championship every time. Garners
can build a European-only tour or any other
combination desired.

Car on a Hot Tarmac

Racing
Once into the cockpit, GPU improves.
Finally, a racing game where driving is an
acquired skill and not a given. The first time
user will almost always crash, as the controls and many options take some getting
used to. Hence, practice is the order of the
day and the night. Players must learn to
anticipate the moves of the other drivers,
whose speed and aggressiveness is controlled by the level of difficulty, in order to be
successful. For this purpose, it is wise to use
the instant replay feature to study the driving skill displayed at entering and exiting
the corners of the tracks.
Each race has a qualifying lap and the
number of race laps, competitors and
weather is all adjustable. The maximum
number of competing cars is 16. A nice
piece of chrome allows the user to drive a
manufacturer's car, such as WilliamsRenault, while keeping the two drivers from
that team in the race. I particularly enjoyed
the experience of challenging Mansell and
Patrese while also driving a WilliamsRenault.

Accolade's Road &

Track Presents Grand
Prix Unlimited
by Wallace Poulter
TITLE:

Road & Track Presents
Grand Prix Unlimited
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: Code Wheel Look-Up
DESIGNER:
Torn Loughery
Accolade
PUBLISHER:
San Jose, CA

hoenix, the opening round of the season. Clark's number 5 has the pole,
Senna next to him on the front row.
The Williams-Renault pair of Mansell and
Patrese sit behind, awaiting the start impatiently. The green light launches 16 screaming machines toward the first corner. Clark,
accelerates away from Senna as they dart
into the first corner, a right hander. Behind
them, Schumacher and Brundle are fighting
it out with Mansell and Patrese for only one
line on the track. In the ensuing melee Clark
is hit from behind and on the rain slicked
surface it is enough to send him spinning off
the course. Tragedy strikes as the car hits a
tree!

p

not have been overlooked. More importantly, it is indicative of such problems
throughout the product.
Speaking of fives, GPU has five levels of
difficulty, three levels of graphic detail and
a number of driver aids such as auto-shift
and lane control. The latter is an improvement over World Circuit's tendency to keep
the car on track at all costs. So, GPU still
looks like a strong contender.

Gear Missed
Alas, there does seem to be engine smoke,
however. The annoying music track and
dragster-style starting lights can be dismissed as small matters, but starting from
the back of the grid is particularly frustrating. The user has to wait a significant
amount of time for the cars in front to move
and even then, anything more than 10 mph
is liable to cause a crash. To quote the
manual "A Formula One race car needs only
2.7 seconds to go from 0 to 62 mph." Unfortunately, that's not true in this game.
In addition, the driving model seems to be
such that the player will slide through corners regardless of the car's set-up. I tried it
with several combinations (although, obviously, not every possible combination) and
still felt that the car was more difficult to
control than it should have been. More definite is the frustration many have encountered when entire sections of the track
disappear while one is travelling at a high
rate of speed. This definitely needs to be
repaired in Accolade's programming pits.

Qualifying
First, there was MicroProse's World Circuit, and now there is Road & Track Presents Grand Prix Unlimited (GPU) from
Accolade. This summer has been a delight
for the Formula One fan. Once again the
legends and myths of all that is Formula
One, come swirling to the fore. The days of
heroes. Villeneuve, Clark and Hill, still racing in our minds. Today's warriors are
Mansell, Senna, Schumacher and Patrese.
GPU has them and more.
First impressions are positive as the product comes with five real life car setups,
Williams-Renault, McLaren-Honda, Ferrari, Tyrrell and Bennetton-Ford, 21 F-1
circuit tracks, named drivers and a course
designer. This constant design decision
made by Accolade, of allowing the user to
add to the product through the use of a
playbook editor or course designer, is a
practice theme that should be applauded.
GPU's qualifying lap puts it on the front
row, next to World Circuit.

Warm Up Lap
However, doubts begin to creep in when
the manual displays such items as "Grand
Prix Racing's All-Time Top 5's (Through
1991 Season)," which lists Wins as Alain
Prost (44), Ayrton Senna (33), Nelson Piquet (23), Nigel Mansell (21) and Gerhard
Berger (6). What was obviously meant was
the top five, in number of wins, of the
current drivers, but it is a detail that should

The Circuits
GPU allows the user to partake in a single
race, strive for a World Championship or
try his/her hand as a course architect. All the
famous courses such as Monaco are here. In
many instances, however, the courses are in
name only. Unfamiliar buildings and layouts greet the user. Worse still is the proliferation of trees alongside the course. In a
product that claims "Grand Prix Unlimited
was designed for the most demanding racing enthusiasts — perfectionists that stock
cars could never satisfy," such lack of attention to detail is baffling.
Further investigation of the course editor
shows that while there are an impressive
number of objects made available to the
user, they are not editable. Nor can the
budding designer import new objects. This
is a step backward.
GPU may end up being in a situation
similar to Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf,
where the the courses designed by users are
significantly more enjoyable than the ones
provided with the game. In addition, a "Circuit Creation" option allows a unique

Play it again Sam
One area of notable improvement is the
instant replay feature. This mode is
easy-toundvrie.Asotalr,
strategies and skills can be learned via this.
In addition, the course architect allows the
placing of camera positions around a
course. This and the variety of angles offered makes it the state of the art within
racing products.

Conclusion
Road & Track Presents Grand Prix Unlimited is an extremely frustrating product.
There is a gem of a design waiting to be
discovered yet this excellent design work
has been compromised by the implementation. To return to the opening metaphor,
GPU DNF (Did Not Finish) after suffering
a blown engine (pun intended).

Opinion

as told by Scorpia

O

rice upon a time, life was simple.
You bought a game, put it in your
disk drive and, if it didn't work
properly, nine times out of ten the cause
was a defective disk. You exchanged it at
the store, or sent it in to the company for
replacement, and that took care of the
matter.
After the game was up and running,
your only problems were the devious
puzzles and deadly combats that are part
of any adventure or CRPG. Worries
about running out of space, insufficient
RAM, graphic compatibility or CPU
speed rarely, if ever, intruded on your
enjoyment.
In a word, the computer environment
was stable. Hardware drove the software
and programmers coded within the narrow confines of the 8-bit environment.
Designers may have railed at times
against the limitations, but standardization allowed games to be produced
quickly, with a minimum of bugs, and
ported to other platforms in a relatively
short time.
Those golden days are gone forever.
The open meadows of the 8-bit world
have been replaced by the jungles of the
16/32 bit machine, and the underbrush
isn't going to be cleared out any time
soon. Today, garners often spend more
time fussing, fretting and cursing over
system configurations than they do over
the games they're trying to play. Hightech programming is pushing hardware to
the edge — and some would say, already
over the edge.
Such a sentiment, especially in the MS
DOS segment, is not surprising. Open
architecture has brought with it both
blessing and bane, and these days, the
down side seems to have the upper hand.

Hi powered computers have allowed for
larger and more complex games, complete with superb graphics and musical
accompaniment undreamed-of in the old
8-bit era. However, this same technological progress has brought with it a two-fold
problem.
First is the current state of computer
gaming. The open environment of MSDOS allows for a wide variety of personally-configured systems with any number
of peripheral devices and cards attached.
Further, many of these, while quite similar, are not exactly the same. The very
freedom that allows for a custom system
thus creates a programmer's nightmare.
Drivers must be written for the most
popular sound boards. Graphic cards
must be taken into account. Different
BIOS arc investigated. Various brands of
IBM-compatible computers tested. And
there are the treacherous waters of DOS
itself, with its 640K limit and the kludge
of extended and expanded RAM. All of
those need to be tried in different combinations on different computers and it isn't
possible (or feasible) to do every one of
them; no product would ever see the light
of day. Therefore, a cut-off point, a certain minimum configuration, has to be
determined, and usually this is on a
game-by-game basis.
Even then, difficulties arise. More and
more game manuals these days include a
section on modifying CONFIG.SYS and
AUTOEXEC.BAT files in case the game
won't run on a particular set-up. Directions arc also given for creating a "plain
vanilla" (or no-frills) boot floppy as a last
resort before calling the tech Imes.
Further, the more complicated the game
and its code, the more difficult it is to beta
test the product. There has been hardly a
major release in the last year that has

come out (a) on time and (b) without
severe bugs. Gamers are becoming increasingly upset at being put in what they
consider a "pay to playtest" position: instead of buying a finished product, they
end up with games that require patches
and upgrades to run properly; patches and
upgrades produced on the basis of bug
complaints from those same gamers.
This situation is bad enough. It is being
made worse by the second part of the
problem: the accelerating pace of the
technology itself. As games drive systems to the limit, new hardware comes
onto the market in response to the push,
a situation that is causing increasing anger and confusion, particularly in the MS
DOS market, the lion's share of computer
games today.
There will always be a cadre of hardcore enthusiasts who know all the technical details, all the ins and outs, who arc
up on the latest innovations and products,
but these people do not make up the majority of gamers. The average gamer has
no such expertise, and must rely on the
advice of friends, family, magazines or
store salespeople to make a purchase —
and these may not really be aware of what
is necessary to properly run today's "latest and greatest."
Imagine going out to buy your first
power computer and being confronted
with a chaotic swirl of numbers, buzzwords and jargon: 386, 386SX, 386DX,
486, 486SX, and 486DX, plus their attendant CPU speeds, ranging from 16-50
Mhz; graphics standards like VGA,
SVGA, and VESA standards; IDE and
SCSI; and second generation sound cards
with, mainly, incomprehensible specs.
It's almost enough to send anyone running for the closet and the old Commodore 64.

Opinion
Even the more savvy gamers are having
a hard time sorting out the tidal wave of
new products. Further, there is an underlying fear: the fear that in six months to a
year, if not sooner, an upgrade (possibly
a whole new system) will be necessary to
keep pace with the requirements of the
most recent games. People hesitate to buy
anything they may regret only a short
time down the road. Nor can everyone
afford to upgrade their existing computers, or buy a new system, at that rate. Not
everyone wants to, either. Many are already deciding there are just some games
they'll have to live without, for the time
being, or longer.
It is time for the game companies to
slow up a bit. Sad, but true, it's the software -- game software — that is causing
today's breakneck advancements. No one
needs SVGA for bar graphs, a 50 Mhz
processor for databases, Carnegie Hall
concerts for spreadsheets, or 4 meg of
RAM for a checkbook program. Only
games have these requirements, and the
requirements are getting out of hand.
Progress, of course, is not going to stop,
nor should it. However, the pace can certainly be moderated and the pressure on
everyone eased a little, by companies taking time out to work with existing technology instead of always pushing for the
high end.

Many of the reasons why this is necessary have already been detailed, but there
is another, and perhaps it is the most
important one of all. Strip away the pretty
pictures, the music, the fancy mouse interfaces, and study the content alone.
Does it look familiar? Have we seen
this before, say five or six years ago or
more? Despite all the frills, all the razzledazzle, aren't we getting just the same old
MOTSOS in a new package? MOTSOS
that aren't exactly kosher, since the acronym stands for More Of The Same Old
Stuff?
When the 16-bit era began, it held out
much promise as to what could be done
in terms of enriching the contents of
games. Unfortunately, too many designers became sidetracked by the enticing
but extraneous extras of graphics and
sound. Most of the huge amounts of disk
space required by recent games is occupied by that same graphics and sound;
very little, relatively speaking, is needed
by the game itself. Gamers are beginning
to catch on to this, if they haven't already.
There is an increasing undercurrent of
dissatisfaction among game-players.
Yes, the pictures are beautiful, the music
is orchestral-quality, the interface simple
and easy to use, but when the game is
finished, there isn't so much feeling of
satisfaction with it. Rather, one has the

impression that the game was only a vehicle for displaying the virtuosity of the
artists and composers.
So, it is definitely time for designers
and software houses to get back to basics.
Blockbuster visuals and sound should be
used to enhance a game, not overshadow
it. More thought and effort needs to be put
into the game itself, to create products
that are innovative beyond mere technical
gloss.
This goes hand-in-hand with slowing
down the technology pace. Only the two
together — moderate progress and improved content — can really produce
quality, enjoyable games on a consistent
basis. It will take some of the pressure off
the programmers, allow for better beta
testing, and help gamers to choose their
systems with less confusion and run the
games with fewer technical problems.
The gaming world will never be perfect; there will always be difficulties and
incompatibilities somewhere along the
line. That is the price we all pay for advancement. Whether or not that price is
worth paying depends on what the software companies choose to do; let us hope,
for everyone's sake, that they make the
right choices.

Sneak Preview
The following article is a sneak preview, covering a work
in progress. CGW is proud to present this coverage of a
developing game design in the interest of informing our
readers. It is not intended to take the place of a review, which
will appear in a future issue, based on the published product.
S
hallhall
we play a game of Global Thermonuclear War?"
The digitized voiceover from the lightweight movie
thriller, War Games, haunts me as I press the on-screen
button, see the message "Accessing Shadownet" and watch a
global map appear on my computer screen. Senator Estes
Kefauver had warned the U.S. in the '50s of the Cosa Nostra
as the "invisible second government," and outgoing President
Dwight D. Eisenhower warned the
country in 1960 of the machinations
of the military-industrial complex.
Now, D.C. True puts the player in the
real seat of power. The player calls the
shots via a computer network in which
he or she can tap into cabinet briefings, situational updates and the CIA
World Factbook, as well as push the
buttons (both figuratively and literally) that command vast minions in
the executive branch to carry out the
"shadow administration's" policies.
There is only one catch. Since the
country is, at least nominally, still a
democracy, the "shadow president"

must maintain enough popularity to be
able to assure re-election. In this way,
the almost unlimited opportunities to
use power are somewhat balanced by
the need to maintain a high quality of
life, a reasonable level of security and
the appearance, if not reality, of genuine leadership.

If one can imagine Chris Crawford's

Balance of Power and Jim Gasparini' s
Hidden Agenda combined into an updated geopolitical simulation, it is
possible to picture the flow of play in Shadow President.
Whereas both of the previous political "games" were largely
crisis-driven and players could not really intervene until opportunities were thrust into their laps, the decision maker in
Shadow President can jump in at any place, at any time and
change policies right and left. Such an aggressive decision
maker is not likely to be successful, but the possibility is
always there.
One merely moves the cross-hairs over the country or region
where one wishes to intervene and double-clicks. Then, the
cross-hairs are moved to the left side of the map and a pop-up
menu appears. From that pop-up menu, one can increase or
decrease humanitarian aid; invest or divest in the country's
economic system; spend money to prop up a nation's political
system or reduce funds to undermine said regime; increase or

decrease military aid; or increase/decrease nuclear assistance.
By clicking on the small buttons on the menu, one can enter
the realms of the U.S. State and Commerce departments
respectively, enter the war room, visit the intelligence community or order a nuclear strike. In former geopolitical games,
the player was strictly reactive. Now, gamers can be proactive.

Leadership 101
Once the player sits in the chair of the Shadow President,
there is almost a sensory overload of information available to
him/her. Fortunately, any information needed is accessible on
a "need-to-know" basis from the panel of advisors (portrayed
and accessed, appropriately enough, by a panel of icons bearing the portraits of said advisors and
located directly under the global situation map). The White House Chief
of Staff briefs the shadow executive
on the most imminent crises, giving
an overview of the global situation.
The National Security Advisor offers
specific information about anxiety
and ambition levels (i.e. threat evaluation). The Secretary of State informs
the player about the diplomatic and
political situation and the Secretary of
Defense can offer specific troop
evaluations. The press secretary
keeps the president advised of global
news and popular reactions, while the
CIA liaison offers both accurate in-

formation (from the CIA World
Factbook) and distorted information
about a given country, depending
upon the intelligence community's
agenda. Finally, the president has access to an economic advisor that
keeps him/her apprized of trade relations and economic commitments.
In short, this approach to briefing
the player is similar to that taken in
Hidden Agenda. In some ways, the
alleged personalities of the advisors
are sublimated to their official purpose in the game. That is, they provide information with very little
spark in that the writing is almost
strictly dissemination of data and not conversational. In other
ways, they are stronger personalities than those in the earlier
game, because they will inject personal comments when they
are asked for advice and they will resign over policy disagreements. Nevertheless, the advisory panel allows players to
access the right information more efficiently than simply
having the old "open a file" on-screen schtick in order to brief
the president on a given situation.
When briefed on a given situation, the player has the option
of moving to the halls of decision noted earlier. At these
decision venues, the gamer has a bonanza of policy choices
available, each with its trade-off repercussions in terms of
leadership and personality points. On the social and diplomatic agenda, one can encourage social or human rights
reform; dispatch a peace envoy; initiate a cultural exchange

Sneak Preview
program; attempt to improve diplomatic relations; act to
strengthen economic ties; or issue a statement of condemnation for some antisocial act. On the economic agenda, one can
encourage investment in a foreign country; offer most favored
nation status to a given country; or order the U.S. to regulate,
restrict or block trade from that country. Such policy decisions
are significant, because they allow the gamer to be proactive
early in the game before the world stands on the brink of total
destruction.
Yet, the truth is that many strategy gamers are also wargamers with a very serious military bent. Such players will
not be disappointed in the level of military options available
to them. Once one enters the war room/situation room, one
can order peace negotiations; discourage/encourage military
spending in a given country; perform a surgical strike on a
country's military capacity; or initiate the deployment of
troops and attack a country. If that is not enough, the nuclear
decision venue offers not only the opportunity to discourage/encourage nuclear spending, but the opportunity to execute a nuclear strike, as well.
Finally, gamers have a wide array of covert actions to
perpetrate under the CIA menu. They can supply arms to
rebels (presumably bullets, beans and bandages); commit
espionage; sabotage economic assets; elicit a coup d' etat; or
assassinate a leader. After all, who cares if President Ford's
intelligence community reforms in the late '70s promised to
remove the latter two options from the covert action menu?
Spying is a dirty business, right?

This Means War!
Sooner or later, most garners are
going to order some kind of action that
will precipitate war. It is inherent
within the mind of the gamer to test
the boundaries of a given simulation
and, even for this relative pacifist reviewer, this usually means pressing
one's luck until the game's algorithms
jump up to bite one on the derriere.
Shadow President is no exception to
this rule, but the good news is that it
continually offers disengagement options for gamers who wish to retreat
from their oftimes hasty involvement
in military conflict.
When one enters the war room, one has the option of
deploying troops in a given country. Naturally, if one has not
declared war on a given country, the game will not allow one
to deploy troops there, but the Secretary of Defense will
usually let the player president know that X-number of troops
have been deployed in a neighboring country, pending the
attack order. Of course, placing those troops in neighboring
countries does tend to increase the anxiety levels in those
regions and may precipitate an attack from one's anticipated
opponent or an unexpected antagonist, just from their presence in the region.
If all goes well, however, the president can order an attack
and the screen will provide continual news updates in a small

window, while two dominating windows display dynamic
assessments of troop strength and damage verified.
The Troop Assessment window continually updates the
number of troops (both friendly and enemy) in the field,
available and fit for duty, as well as providing a percentage
estimate of the "Will to Fight" on both sides. As one can
imagine, that Iraqi will to fight drops almost as drastically in
the game as it did in the actual Gulf War. At the same time,
the Damage Assessment window provides information on
military deaths, civilian casualties, equipment losses (in thousands of dollars) and total economic losses for both sides,
respectively.

Not Just Number Crunching
One fear that I had in starting to play this game was that it
would strictly be a number crunching game. I was afraid that
it would be like Crisis in the Kremlin in that most policy
decisions would be made by budgetary decisions, except
when one is interrupted by a crisis. Instead, players can focus
on managing where they want to manage. It does not simply
have to be via number crunching, although the option for
changing aid packages and throwing dollars at various problems exists. Instead, one can develop a diplomatic and political agenda that focuses on winning potential trouble spots
over to the western world or even establish a military agenda
of imperialistic conquest. Indeed, Shadow President seems to
have the most open strategy track yet in a geopolitical game.
Shadow President also does not seem to have its own

underlying political agenda. one
senses that the game may well reflect
the centrist ideology of the design
team, but one does not get the sense
that you have to be a centrist in order
to enjoy playing the game. Every action seems to have a reaction within
the game, but one does not get the
sense that these reactions are leading
one to a pre-determined response. Of
course, when all the algorithms are in
place, the game may not be quite as
open-ended as it currently seems.

Appoint Counterpoint
The one major change I would like
to see in the game is the provision for appointing one's own
cabinet members that reflect either the president's own ideology or a political balancing act. As the game stands, one has
the sense that this is a formidable, competent and moral
cabinet, but the player does not get to build a coalition (as in
Hidden Agenda) nor his/her own team. Such a feature would
bring an additional sense of realism to the game, as well as
introduce an entirely new catalog of variables.
Shadow President is a fascinating product that reflects considerable expertise from a team of designers who understand
political science. Better yet, it offers enough solid information
about the real world balanced against enough game challenge
to keep those of us would-be world leaders coming back for
more. If anyone wants to know whether they are made of
statesperson or imperialist material, Shadow President offers
them the right diagnostic test site to answer the question.

Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature
articles based on "Works in progress" that CGW's editors have
deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to
provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish
appropriate review coverage when the game is completely finished.

and Flares. One can also bring along a 300 gallon fuel tank for those
longer hauls.

o, TG-16 Falcon is not a new variant of the Air Force jet

Like its "big brother" simulations, TG- I 6 Falcon has a number of
training missions and a mini-campaign (with 16 missions spread out
over five simulated days). For each mission, pilots will be briefed
regarding the targets, defenses, and appropriate weapons and tactics
to employ. In the course of these missions, one can expect to
encounter hardened targets with AAA (anti-aircraft artillery) gauntlets to fly through; take out SAM sites using Shrikes; and face wave
upon wave of fighter aircraft, ranging from MiG-21s to MiG-29s, in
the fighter sweep mission.
Upon the successful completion of a mission, pilots are presented
with a debriefing screen showing the number of enemy aircraft
downed, ground targets destroyed and one's total score. Missions
may be replayed immediately by entering the appropriate password
or using the data save feature with five "save slots" found in this beta
version of the simulation. For the ultimate in dog fighting, players
can fly head-to-head with two Turbo Express units linked up with a
proprietary cable.

N

fighter, it is a new cartridge game developed by Spectrum
Holobyte for the TurboGrafx 16 and Turbo Express machines. The cartridge version, when compared to the personal computer based versions of Falcon, is reminiscent of the relationship
between the Spirotot drawing kit which I had as a youngster, and the
more complex Spirograph drawing kit bigger kids played with.
Spirotot, although boasting less moving/drawing parts, was still fun
and challenging to its target market segment. Even so, TG-16 Falcon,
when compared to its more complex personal computer based counterparts, is fun, challenging, and like most good cartridge games,
engrossing.

Scramble
TG-16 Falcon seems to be a blend of the many versions of Falcon
(Amiga, Atari, Mac, and PC) which have gone before it. The cartridge most resembles Falcon AT, but uses Falcon 3.0's SAD (situational awarness display) top-down 360 degree view radar, thus
eliminating the need for a TWI (threat warning indicator). The
moving map has likewise been eliminated. The HUD (head-up
display) will also be familiar to Falcon AT users — all the HUD
symbology, with the exception of the five mile ranging scale and
target aspect angle caret, is there: moving scales for heading, altitude
and airspeed, missile aiming reticles, TD (target designator) boxes,
missile lock diamonds — even the LCOS (lead computing optical
sight) gunsight or "snake" has been included. Navigation to the target
is accomplished with arrows at the bottom of one's HUD pointing
the way, replacing the INS (inertial navigation system) cursor.

"Green 'Em Up"
TG-16 Falcon is fairly close to its big brother Falcon 3.0 in that it
can fire the active radar homing AIM-120 AMRAAM. However, it
would have been better to include a more recent model of the AIM-9
sidewinder. The one in the simulation seems to resemble the AIM-9J
which requires a close-in shot at the rear quarter. Since it is relatively
difficult to get in that position with the MiGs in this simulation
performing both horizontal and vertical maneuvers, as well as only
being bit-maps with a few variations in their position (they sometimes perform the "floppy halibut" maneuver by flashing their topdown views even when their lift vectors are pointing away), it is
tough to make use of these missiles. Other weapons include: AGM65B Maverick (air-to-ground missile), MK-82 5001b iron bombs,
and the AGM-45 Shrike (anti-radiation missile). Countermeasures
include the ALQ-131 ECM (electronic countermeasures pod), Chaff

"Tally Ho, Eleven 0' Clock,
Base Plus Ten!"

Fox Two! (Critical Remarks)
Since the intro screen is a digitized F-16, it would have been nice
to have seen a more prodigious use of digitized art for some of the
other screens. For instance, after one returns from a successful
mission taking out several SAM sites, one is treated to a congratulatory screen which shows pilots running to one's landed aircraft. This
goofy scene screams for the pilots to be wearing party hats. As for
the music, some of it is easily recognized from Falcon 3.0 and is
done quite well, while other parts of the music are more suitable for
a cozy little Italian restaurant.
Controlling one's aircraft in combat is rather difficult with the
paddle and was considerably easier with the Turbo Stick. Perhaps a
seasoned cartridge enthusiast will feel right at home, but I found it
clumsy to fly with the left hand all the time.

Return To Base
TurboGrafx 16 Falcon was more interesting than most cartridgebased air combat sims in that it had clear objectives and more realistic
confrontations with regard to the number of enemies encountered.
The simulation is as good a port from the PC as one would expect
given the hardware limitations. It is a shame that TG-16 Falcon's
time over target is so late.
TurboGrafx 16 Falcon is developed by Spectrum HoloByte and
published by Turbo Technologies, Inc and should be available as
this magazine goes to press (the end of August), with a suggested
retail price of $49.99.

Sneak Preview

Did You Want The Hot Wax?

A Sneak Preview of
Accolade's Waxworks
by Johnny Wilson

Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They
are feature articles based on
"works in progress" that
CGW's editors have deemed
worthy of early coverage.
These articles are not intended to provide the final
word on a product, since we
expect to publish appropriate
review coverage when the
game is completely finished.
ombine the eerie
tableaus to be found in the classic short story Waxworks, a Vault of Horror comic story ("Portrait in
Wax") and the classic 3-D horror film House of Wax with a
story that resonates with the best of the '60s era Creepy
magazine stories. Then, add a pinch of adjustment to the
interface and several slices of gruesome graphics from Horrorsoft's previous Accolade bestsellers (the award-winning
Elvira series) to this smoldering mixture of the macabre. The
result should be something like Wax Works, the latest in the
Horrorsoft scareware packages to be published by Accolade
(as of press time, the game is expected to be released in
November).

C

Now On Display (The Story)
The short story entitled Waxworks was originally published
in the famous British publication, The Strand. It was one of

the first short stories to exploit a basic fear, that fear that the
figures in a wax museum might be something other than wax.
In the case of the story, one of the figures was a live murderer.
In the case of House of Wax and the story in Vault of Horror,
the figures were actual human corpses covered with wax. In
the Wax Works CRPG, the figures serve quite a different
purpose.
In the Creepy comics series (published in the '60s by Harris
Comics and currently being reprinted by Dark Horse Com-

ics), the protagonists (none of
which could be considered
heroic by any stretch of the
imagination) arrive at an old
(dare we say "creepy?")
house through various mysterious machinations, only to
discover that they are trapped
inside as the guests of their
old Uncle Creepy. As the plot
progresses, they discover that
their forebears had engaged
in complex, occultic rituals
and, in exchange for power,
had sold the innocent souls of
their descendents to the forces of Hell. So, the creepy old
house turns out to be a nexus point for several dimensions and
each of the rooms within the house turns out to be an alternate
dimension where the protagonists "get theirs."
In the CRPG, the Wax Works player becomes the heir of his
weird Uncle Boris' dilapidated, old, Victorian-style house.
The player soon discovers that this is not just any house, but
it is (like the upstairs flat in the 19th Century British story)
actually a museum housing a full collection of wax figures.
Also, like the flat in the earlier story, it is a collection that
celebrates criminals and alleged witches. In addition, the
game throws some monsters from film and history into the
mix of Uncle Boris' collection. Unlike the short story, however, and much like the comics series, each exhibit is to be
found in a different room and each room is the dimensional
interface into another world. In the course of the story, the
player is also likely to find out some unpleasant truths about
Uncle Boris and his long-lost twin brother, Alex. There was
a reason that Alex liked to spend so much time at creepy, old
Uncle Boris' place and it seems that certain rituals from the
past were to impact a future generation in this story, as well
as in the old comic series.
So it is that experienced Elvira players will now be aware
of the fact that the layout of the game is much like Elvira's

movie studio from Elvira II: The Jaws
of Cerberus. Instead of solving the puzzles and defeating the monsters on three
different movie sets, however, players
will spend an expected 100 hours of
their time travelling into other dimensions via the wax figure tableaus in each
room. There are five "worlds," each
slightly larger than their Elvira II movie
set equivalent. Two of these alternate
worlds are Ancient Egypt and 19th
Century England, though only Ancient
Egypt was implemented in our early
version, and the game will include the
obligatory haunted cemetery to be
found in virtually any horror game.

(Inter)facial Expression
(The Interface)
At first glance, players will think that
the screen has not changed since the
Elvira series. The player's character is
still shown in the upper left-hand corner and the whole game is still icondriven. Yet, there is an additional
button on the right hand side of the
action window where players can access Uncle Boris in the afterlife via a
crystal orb, as well as cast spells via the
device. Obviously, this is analogous to the functions fulfilled
by both Elvira and her recipe book in the previous releases.
On the left side of the window, there are two major differences. If one does not like the navigational icon used in the
previous games, there is now an option of using a compass
rose with the directions marked (very useful when navigating
the pyramid). One can change back and forth between the two
navigational icons at any time.
The other change is the fact that there are no longer any
numbers placed around the stone icon representing the player
character. This is because the game handles damage differently than it was handled in Elvira II. In that game, the hit
points were divided among various portions of the player
character's anatomy. If any particular portion of the body
received more damage than the hit points allotted, the player
character died immediately. Such a damage system was similar to that used in the "people and paper" role-playing system,
Runequest, but was not received well by a majority of the
Elvira II garners. Being used to games where all damage was
deducted from the total number of hit points, most garners
preferred the total hit point-system. So, Horrorsoft accomodated them and returned to the previous manner of handling
damage.

be long before one of the classic
Horrorsoft death scenes will appear on the screen. Garners with a
squeamish stomach are well-advised to stay away from these
games, since British computer game
artists tend to love showing internal
organs and decapitation scenes.
Of course, one of Horrorsoft's
classic design features is the fact
that the player's character begins
the game with no weapons whatsoever, save his fists. So, the very first
order of business will be to find a
weapon and, as is typical of the
genre, the best place to find such a
weapon is where it has been discarded in the corpse of a former victim. WaxWorks is no exception and,
again, the squeamish need not apply.
In Ancient Egypt, for example, we
found our first weapon in the back
of a gruesome corpse.

Uncle Boris Took
Some Wax (Conclusion)
WaxWorks looks like it will have
the strengths of the original Elvira: Mistress of the Dark game
(the hit point system and interesting spellcasting procedure)
combined with the strength of Elvira II: Jaws of Cerberus
(with its interesting and discrete venues to explore), along
with some interesting plot twists that should connect with
many fans of the horror genre. With a tip of its hat to some of
the oldest stories in the genre and a fascinating substitute for
"good" old Uncle Creepy, WaxWorks looks like it might
please genuine horror fans more than its predecessors. CGW

To get COW readers in the mood for
their WaxWorks horror game, Accolade
is giving ten lucky CGW readers the
"scare of their lives" -- a horror video
four pack of some of the creepiest
pieces of celluloid ever to run through
a projector, including:
Little Shop of Horrors (1960) the
original with Jack Nicholson, not the
goofy musical.
Night of the Living Dead (1969)
George Romero's classic story of
flesh-eating zombies.
The Mummy (1932) The Boris Karloff
classic,

Garners at the Bat (Combat)
Combat is handled in precisely the same way as it is handled
in the previous CRPGS from Horrorsoft. Players select their
ready weapon by opting to "Use" one from their inventory and
receiving the text message that the given weapon has been
chosen as the ready weapon. Then, when encounters with
guards, monsters, undead and other fiends occur, the player
activates the combat icon. The cursor is placed over the area
on the enemy where the blow or thrust is to be placed and the
player clicks with the mouse button. I f the player is successful,
the familiar blood spurts will shoot out from the graphic image
of the enemy. I f the player is unsuccessful, it certainly will not

Mystery of the Wax Museum (1933)
Starring Fay Wray.
To he eligible to win this "fearsome
foursome", send your name, address,
phone number, and age to: WaxWorks
Film Giveaway, do Accolade, P.O.
Box 1946, Cupertino, CA 95015-1946.
Ten winners will be chosen at random.
Complete contest rules available by
writing: WaxWorks Sweepstakes, do
Accolade, 5300 Stevens Creek Blvd.
#500, San Jose, CA 95129.

x

Review

by
David
Wilson

TITLE:
Pit-Fighter
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM
REVIEWED ON: Amiga
PRICE:
$39.95
# OF PLAYERS: 1 or 2
DESIGNERS:
Tengen/Domark
PUBLISHER:
Accolade
San Jose, CA

t's a hard-knock life in the boiler rooms,
warehouses and back rooms of the pitfighting circuit. No holds barred combat
abounds in the jerry-built rings of this organized war for profit. Knives fly into the
contest area. Bar stools blind-side a fighter
with a satisfying crunch, sending him toppling to the ground. A fighter kicks his
opponent when he's down. Mercy passes
among pit-fighters like honor among
thieves.
Pit-Fighter is Domark's conversion of
the extremely popular coin-operated arcade
console in which players struggle to reach
the top of the heap of maladjusted miscreants in the World Pit-Fighting circuit. The
first question from those familiar with the
arcade version will be: "Is this game anything like the original?" After witnessing
the string of poorly done arcade to computer
conversions over the years, it is my pleasure
to answer with a resounding "Yes." With
the possible exception of playing with a
joystick rather than buttons and a joystick,
this game is the arcade game teleported to
the home computer. The graphics are nearly
as well done, the movement is smooth and
the combat plays the same. Arcade fans who
enjoyed this game in the stuffy and ill-lit
back room of "Donkey Kong's Quarter Crematorium" (where one brings money to
bum) will not be disappointed.

PIT-FIGHTER

Mad Miles is aptly named as he not only has
time for the pain, but seems to enjoy it. The
Executioner dresses funny (his momma's
fault, no doubt) and he probably smells bad,
too. Heavy Metal wears a Brillo pad on his
head and a chip on his shoulder. C.C. Rider
is a biker who enjoys the feeling of a cue
stick cracking into a rival's skull (his idea
of a 'solid break'). The Chainman is something of a bull in a china shop; his favorite
move is a head-first toro charge. The Ultimate Warrior is currently undefeated and

I

Entering the ring, brawlers will find a
Venice Beach-like variety of opponents to
battle. The only nice guys in this game are
the player's characters (Well, who writes
the scripts?). Everyone else is a villain.
Angel is pretty enough, but I wouldn't be
caught on the street end of her spiked heels.

A single player may duel against the computer or two players may slug it out at the
same time. When two players cooperate in
a game, they will, naturally enough, face
two opponents. The screen gets a bit
crowded and players not only strike each
other on occasion, but inflict damage as
well. This is a much-needed addition to
two-player fighting games.
Grudge matches are fought at various intervals throughout the game. In a two player
game where players are not cooperating,
players will face each other in a match for
three knockdowns. The first player knocked
down three times loses the grudge match
and is chased from the ring with a chiding
"You Loser!" from the computer.

Exploiting Features
Perhaps the simplest way of getting
through this game is a type of "cheat." Begin play with two joysticks plugged in, but
only play the game as a one-player game.
When the current fighter is finished for
seems to combine the worst traits of all the
toughest fighters.
Preparing for combat with these stalwart
foes involves the player choosing his fighting persona from one of three combatants,
each with a unique fighting style. Kato is a
Bruce Lee-type fighter with a fast and furious combination, a power backhand and a
flip kick. Buzz is an ex-Pro Wrestler who
utilizes a body slam, a head butt and pile
drivers to make his competition say "Uncle." Ty, a kickboxer by trade, swings into
action with a spin kick, a flying kick and a
roundhouse.
In addition to the normal moves, players
are encouraged to practice the fine art of
brutality. A bonus is awarded to those who
use dirty tactics like tossing barstools, using
pool cues as clubs, and basically throwing
anything and everything they can get their
hands on. A player who kicks a competitor
who is down for the count will not be penalized, but rather rewarded in cash. A
cagey fighter will avoid his enemy long
enough to throw an item and knock him
down.

good, push the button on the alternate joystick and play through the rest of the game
as another fighter. Thus, it is possible to
exploit the feature that allows a second
player to join the game at any time (sort of
like the way wrestlers "cheat" in tag-team
matches).
Pit-Fighter delivers a strong punch to the
world of computerized fisticuffs. It offers
the two-player option missing in many
fighting games and enough roughhousing
to suit the most violent gamer. Overall,
Pit-Fighter successfully reproduces a challenging arcade fight game on the home
computer screen.

Twelve Steps To A Fur-Free Life
Solutions For The Wicked Level of Oh No! More

by Recovering Lemaholic
Robert Gardner. Jr.
level, quickly have him dig through the
ladder and repeat the instant a Lem hits
the second ladder. This will put them onto
the lower ladder with no place to go except out the exit.

Wicked 1: Lemming
Tomato Ketchup Facility
UFMCAHVNDP
Make the first lemming on the lower
level a bomber when under the right side
of the chute. Make the second a bomber
when he reaches circa 1/8 inch past that
same point. Doing this creates a steep
crater on the right and a gentle slope on
the left, turning the Lems back to the exit.
On the upper level, make the first Lem a
climber and, when he has climbed over
the one-way wall and dropped into the
depression in the girder, order him to
mine. He should take a whack or two and
turn back to the left. Make him bash
through the one-way wall and then, forget
him. Let the next lemming to reach the
girder walk to the right side of it and have
him dig. When he is near the bottom of
the thick metal plate that surrounds the
girder, transform him into a bomber. He
will blast a hole in the side of the girder,
and, at the same time, provide a safe
landing for those less courageous Lems
who follow him. They will all walk into
the crater on the lower level and back to
the left and to the exit. Set the flow to 99
and get ready for level 2.

Wicked 2: Super Lemming
NICMITWODR
Let our super hero go right, then turn
back to the left and mine down the reinforced area. This will turn him back to the
right. Be prepared by clicking on him
rapidly as he mines into the reinforced
area and you will be able to make him
mine the instant he turns back. This will
drop him down onto the "table" below,
saving his little hide. Make him into a
climber and watch him go. Have him dig
through the several layers until he drops
out and runs up the incline. Let him build
stairs to the last platform prior to the exit.
The first part of this one is easy, but when
you get to that last platform, you must dig
until he is just about to fall, then build.
You must then quickly make him bash

Wicked 4: Oh, No, It's the
Fourth Dimension
CILVUFMQDO

when his bridge clears the other side and
before his little head bumps the ceiling.
He will then step from his bridge at that
point and trot off to the exit.

Wicked 3: This Corrosion
MCALVUFPDF
There are two ways to do this one. Each
requires that you have #1 build at the right
to seal and that you have #2 build to slow
him down. Then make a climber and let
him drop to the second level and build at
the edge. When he reaches the red ball he
will turn back.
Now, let the climber return to the red
ball, go over it and drop to the lower
platform. Have him build immediately to
turn him to the right and then build again
over to the larger area. When he drops off,
let him climb and then turn back to the
left. When he reaches the edge, have him
build. He will hit the lower platform and
turn right again. Let him build up and
bash the pole and go out the exit. Build a
ladder to let the remaining Lems escape
and as the first Lem drops to the second

Make the first Lem on the lower left
build just as soon as his furry little feet hit
the floor. Have the first Lem on the lower
right build to seal off the area andprevent
unnecessary casualties. As the first two
Lems enter the area on the upper left,
make them bombers as they hit the floor
(they will blast a path to the compartment
below). Ignore the Lems who will be
entering on the upper right, they aren't
going anywhere. Build across from the
lower left to the lower right. Leadership
techniques will be challenged, because it
is necessary to try and save those who
follow that builder across from left to the
lower right. Forget it! There are not a lot
of bridges to waste and besides, they
knew what they were getting into when
they enlisted. On the lower right, catch a
Lem going left and make him a climber.
As soon as he stands up, let him build.
Again, on the lower right, start a bridge
to the left but be sure it is too short to
allow the Lems to get out. Once the
climber's bridge has reached the silver
stairs, restart the bridge in the pit. On the
upper left, as a Lems steps off into the
hole made by the two Lems ahead of him,
make him into a bomber. He should detonate at, or near, the right side of the small
compartment below. If he does not blow
through, then make another bomber at the
same spot. Once you have an opening at
this point, let a Lem walk up to the top of
the silver stairs and build. Continue his
building beyond the door of the exit.
When he (or another Lem) drops off, let
him go up to the trapped Lems at the
upper right and bash them free. Free at
last!

Wicked 5: Chill Out! —
FAIRVLLBEK
This one is an "Easy if you know how"
level. Have Lem #1 dig the instant his
paws hit the ice. Just as #2 is hitting the
surface, make #1 bash. If your timing is
right, #2 will go left and start to build. As
soon as he starts to build, pause the game
and use the F2 key to increase the flow to
99. Re-start the game, keeping your cursor on #1, and make him dig, bash, dig,
bash, in small increments until the other
Lems are all heading to the left. At that
time, either let #1 walk all the way to the
end and start back, or let him dig through
the ice (make him a floater first) and go
to the end. Letting him walk across the
top is a bit faster. Once he starts back to
the left, make him a climber and that nets
a 100% success rating.

Wicked 6: Pop Til You Drop
— LICIHTWOCJ
There is no one "solution" for this level.
All I can do is give you a strategy, as
there's no way to do it the same way
twice. With forty bombers (much more
than needed), it is useful to save both
blockers and the allotted four miners until
they can really be helpful. I seldom use
builders in this one, but they can be useful
in the event some Lems end up in an area
where you don't want them. My approach
here is to try and concentrate the Lems
from the first and second chute into one
area on the left and to do the same with
the Lems from the third and fourth chutes
on the right. I start by having the first Lem
out of #4 walk as far right as possible and
make him into a bomber. I then have the
first one out of #1 walk to the left and
make him into a bomber when he turns
back. You know approximately how far
a bomber will walk before he detonates,
so it's a matter of adjusting between each
bomber. Have the Lems from the two
inside chutes clear a path toward the outside. After that, it's your task to detonate
additional bombers in such a manner as
to go downward and toward the center.
Once you get started, you will (sooner or
later) see that the material through which
you are moving is structured in such a
way as to recommend the use of a miner
to do what might require the efforts of
several bombers. There may also be
places where you need to be more precise
than you can get with a walking bomber.
If that is the case, use a blocker and then
detonate him. This one does require a
skilled hand, but if you have come this far
in the game without skipping a lot of
levels, you are up to it.

Wicked 7: The Last Lemming

to Lemming Central —
LRVLLFEDED
Place a blocker on the far right and
make a bomber of the first Lem from the
left when he reaches the sixth notch from
the right. When he detonates, the second
Lem from the right will drop through and
walk to the right on the level just below.
Make him a blocker at the right edge.

Have the first Lem to reach the lower
blocker turn and become a bomber. Make
the next two Lems to reach that blocker
bombers also, but let each one take about
three steps further than the one ahead of
him before you click on him. The idea, of
course, is to stagger the point at which
they detonate so that the little guys and
gals who follow will not have so far to
fall. Don't want any unnecessary casualties now, do we?

Wicked 8: A Towering
Problem — RVLHGILEEF
Look at the floor. It's divided into segments. Activate a bomber four segments
away from each pole you want to blow.
Before a bomber reaches the pole, make
him into a climber. If you mark off the
notches ahead of time, (with lipstick or
grease pencil) you can have several going
at one time. The bomber will climb just
high enough to clear the pole without
making a hole in the floor. Be ready to
quickly build as soon as the last pole is
blasted. You can save 2 additional Lems
by having the
ones behind the
builder,
build
also. Liberal use
of the F 1 1 key
can be a great
help on this one,
too.

Wicked 10: Temple of Love
— DLGIHTTGEP
Make Lem #1 a floater and let him go.
Place a blocker just to the right of the
"notch" in the floor over the floating slab.
When #1 gets down below and to the far
right, have him build over small opening
there (only one try allotted!). Allow him
to walk down to the bottom of the stairs
and build (3 times). Let him step off and
walk to the far left. When he reaches the
very edge, build (4 times) and make him
into a blocker (if he is not on the very edge
at the start of the build, he may bump his
head and turn back). Catch a left moving
Lem and turn him into a climber. Let him
drop between the walls, into the pit and
dig while he is still facing left and just an
instant before he hits the wall. He will
drop through, and go up to visit the
blocker at the top of the stairs. If you still
have two builds left, you can build into
the blocker and on to the exit. If not, you
can still make it with one build, if you hit
the blocker and take a couple of steps

Wicked 9:
How on
Earth?
VLHGAHVFEO
Let Lem #1
block on the
right edge of the
platform
and
have Lem #2
walk all the way
to the left and
build. Have Lem #3 block behind the
builder (leave distance between him and
the builder). Have the builder start a second set of bridges. Let him turn, walk
down to the blocker and twice walk back
to the top of his bridge and add one more
plank. At this time, make him a floater.
On the next trip up, let him step off and
float down. Upon touchdown, let him
step as low as he can go without falling
and begin to build again. When he is over
the first floating platform, let him step off.
One build from the edge of that platform
will take him to the next one. Build from
just to the left of center of the second
platform over to the green crystal and
from the center of the crystal over to the
exit. Go back and make the left blocker
into a builder. He will either build to the
right or into the blocker and then to the
right. The idea is to have the Lems drop
down onto the long bridge from the lower
left, breaking their fall, and then follow
the trail blazed by #2, all the way to the
exit.

down before you build. Once you start the
last bridge, go back and detonate the
blocker on the far right. That's it!

Wicked 11: Rocky Road —
LGALTTDHEM
Let the first Lem walk up to the rock
barrier and dig. When he is in about
"Lem" deep, have him bash. Then select
a blocker who will leave the basher and
two Lems behind him. While he bashes,
step up the Lem-flow to 99. Leave the
basher bashing, but before he drops out at
the end, make another blocker of the Lem
closest to him. This will isolate one Lem
between blockers. Allow the basher to
drop out and then, bash through the tree
in front of him. When he breaks out on
the other side, detonate the blocker on the
right, freeing the single Lem. When the
lead Lem walks to the next barrier and
turns, let him build up to the "floating"
rock island (the freed Lem should be there
by now). Let one walk about a third of the
way up on the island and then make him
block. Have the other Lem build from him
over to the mass at the right. Let him then

walk to the far right side, down low and
build over to the next rock formation. Let
him walk, but just before he gets to the
end of the green growth have him mine
down to the lower area. Watch Out! There
is a Lem eating tendril in front of him.
You can just see it sticking up. Build over
it. Then, go back, detonate the first
blocker, releasing the others. Let your
lead Lem walk up to the crest and build
from the edge of the gap over the other
side. One build will do it. Once he is on
the other side, let him take one step up
onto the first clump of green growth and
mine. He will drop down near the exit,
having displayed courage and initiative,
above and beyond the call of duty, under
hostile conditions, to lead the way to
safety for his fellow Lems.

Wicked 12: Suicidal
Tendencies — GILVVLHIEN
This is really one of the most straightforward levels in the Wicked bunch. Still,
I almost freaked out when I saw all those
chains, etc. Just put blockers in place after
letting Lem # I get by. Be sure the blocker
on the right is centered on the support
beam or you may lose a batch of Lems
later on. Have the lead Lem build from
the top center of the last step on the incline
to the first platform. After that, build from
the very edge of each platform and he will

build over one pedestal and land on the
other. Repeat with each platform. On the
last one, you can build back a bit from the
edge. When a Lem starts up the incline
over the exit, have him mine at a
point directly above the left edge
of the platform which is suspended
by the chain. When he drops out
onto the platform, build from the
edge, over to the exit. Once he
starts to build, you can increase the
flow to 99 and blow yer blockers.
Now, wasn't that easy?

over to the main structure (I mentioned
luck. At times, the builder will build too
far through the chain and will miss the
hook when he falls). When the Lems are

Wicked 13: Almost Near
Virtual Reality —
GEHPUDLJEL
This one takes nerves of steel and
no small amount of luck. Let Lem
#1 build to the chain. Make Lem
#2 a blocker on the right. He won't
destroy the bridge if he is not standing on
it. Let Lem #3 build to the metal on the
left (to save a few, you might want to have
the next couple also build behind him).
When Lem #1 walks back to the blocker
and then back to the chain, let him walk
through the chain and drop to the "hook
device" below. This is where the nerves
of steel come in. You have to stop the
Lem and have him build on that device
(F11 key, please). You'll need to do this
with all 3 chains. On the last one, build

on the main structure, build a little more
than two blocks back from the right side,
up to the first "step". When he steps off
the step, let him walk to the right corner
and turn, then quickly build. When this
stair is almost complete, increase the flow
to 99 and blow the blocker. When #1 has
reached the next level and has walked to
the left wall and turned, have him build
from the seam on the first block. When
the rest of the crew show up, and the
bridge to the exit is well underway, make

a blocker on the bridge. If not, then the
fall as the bridge nears the exit, will be
fatal. When you reach the exit, detonate
the blocker and repair the bridge. It's not
easy.

Wicked 14: The Lemming
Learning Curve —
MHPUDLGICEE
Lucky Lem #1 gets to become a miner
when he is just past the third floor notch
from the right, causing him to fall onto the
floating slab and to the floor below. Once
more, have him build just after he steps
over the third notch from the right. Catch
a left-moving Lem and make him a
blocker at the far left. When the stairs
reach the wall, let a Lem bash on through
to the exit and then, turn the release rate
up to 99. The blocker can be detonated as
soon as there are no more left-moving
Lems.

Wicked 15: Spam, Spam,
Spam, Egg and Lemming
MPUDLGALEO
You can save a second or two and
maybe one Lem by placing the finder
near the bottom of the screen and making
the first Lem a floater at the last second.
Let him walk to the seam between the last
two blocks and mine. After about two or
three strokes, have him build to turn him

around. As he turns, have him build up
toward his falling buddies. When the first
Lem to be saved walks off, make him
block at the right. Let the builder walk off
the left side and build as soon as he lands
on the lower block. Make a blocker on the
upper left. When your builder steps off,
he will land on snow below and walk up.
Before he can turn, have him bash. When
he emerges, have him build at the water's
edge, step off onto the snow cloud, walk
up and mine. As soon as he is deep
enough to turn those who follow, make
him build. Let him step to the edge of his
mine and build all the way up until he
finishes his stairs against the ice behind
the steel block "ledge." Then, let him take
several steps down his bridge and build
over to the ice cloud, just above the one
he mined. From there, build to the exit.
As soon as he starts his second set, blow
the blocker on the left to free the others.
Go back and watch the builder, because,
unless you started him very low, you'll
need a third bridge to complete the job.

Wicked 16: Five Alive —
PWLHGILMEM
Make Lem #1 a bomber when he is in
the center of the first full brick after dropping from the chute. Skip Lem #2, and
make #3 and #4 into floaters. When #1
detonates, quickly make #2 build from
the very edge of the little gap. While he

is building, #3 and #4 will walk over, but
since they are floaters, they will be safe.
The others will walk down the incline to
safety. When #2 is finished building, he
will follow.

Wicked 17: Down the Tube
— ULHGEITNEI
Let #1 walk away and have #2 build the
instant he hits the top of the globe. Let #1
walk back to the left and, when his feet
are just about level with the center of the
globe, build into it. Make #3 a climber
and he will go over the barrier to the right.
Make him build when he is two steps past
the notch in the tube. When #4 drops out,
have him build behind #2 (do not restart
#2's bridge at this time). Watch #1. He
will walk to the right and back to the left
and then, over the globe. Allow him to go
to the left barrier and back to the right.
Make him build into the globe just as he
did on the other side. Now, all the Lems
are sealed in tight. When #3 is finished
with his bridge, he will step off and fall
to the lowest platform. Let him walk to
the right and drop down to the exit. Allow
him to take two or three steps and turn
him into a blocker. Now, go back and
restart the bridge built by #2 and increase
the flow to the maximum.

Wicked 18: Lots More
Where They Came From —
DLGIHTUOEI
You can save 100% on this level, but it
may not be worth the trouble. Begin by
having Lem #1 build from the far right
edge and then, build a barrier on the left
by having 3 or more Lems build contiguous bridges, each one behind the other

won't walk across it, those who follow
him will. You must get two of the three
bridges done this way. The other, you can
use a second builder on. I have never been
able to do this with the second bridge.
Wherever you are when there are only 65
seconds left on the clock, pause, hold
down the F2 key and step up the rate to
99. When you have that done, go back to
work. After reaching the top of the stairs,
under the exit, build quickly to save the
Lems from the hammer. Use your last
bridge to seal the tiny crack at the top of
the stairs leading into the exit. Remember,
if you don't have at least two bridges
which start off "hanging" from the tip of
the ledge, then you might as well nuke
'em and start all over again. Good luck,
you will need it for sure in this one.

Wicked 20: The Lemming
Funhouse — GILVWLHQEG
and be sure that all are touching. Keep
Lem #1 building until he reaches the
floating "iceberg". Keep the others building just to keep them safe until #1 finishes
his work. Once that is done, make a
climber and allow him to go up and over
the top. When he is in that little "valley"
about one-third across the "iceberg", just
short of that tall peak, let him step up just
a bit and mine. When he breaks through
on the right, have him build, build again
and then, mine through his bridge and
drop to the block below. From there, build
over to the exit. Make another climber
and let him get into the tunnel dug by the
first and build. When he reverses, let him
get to the little valley which is about a
quarter of the way across from the left and
again, step up slightly and mine. That
should cause him to exit right at the
bridge that #1 built. If it looks too close,
have him build as soon as he breaks
through, to prevent a possible threat to the
bridge. By the way, the flow can be increased at any time after #1 completes his
bridge.

Wicked 19: Up, Down or
Round and Round —
HGELVWLPER
This one can be unbelievably difficult.
It is rather straightforward, but the timing
is ludicrous. Let the little fellows drop all
the way to the bottom. Have #1 bash
through the first column and let him
bounce off the second column and allow
#2 to have that one. Do this because, if #1
does both columns, then he and #2 will
be together when you need your first
bridge built and that's not good. When #2
is right at the very edge of the platform,
freeze him with the F11 key. He needs to
be almost hanging off the edge. If you
can't get him that way, let him go by and
try the next Lem. When you do get one in
that position, place the cursor over him
and depress the mouse button, then hit the
Fl 1 again. If you caught him just right,
you will have a bridge that appears to
hang in space and though the builder

Start #1 building on the last seam of the
last brick. The bridge will not quite reach
the far wall. Let #2 walk off the bridge,
fall below and walk down the incline
where you will make him a blocker just
in front of the "Death Machine". When #3
drops off the bridge and heads left, let him
get down low and build to seal that gap.
(Note: if he turns, then use the next guy
to finish his build. Have the first Lem to
hit the blocker start a bridge over the
small gap on the lower level. Make the
Lem behind him a blocker (but not too
close to his bridge). When the builder
comes back to the blocker, he will walk
over his bridge. Let him go and build his
last bridge to the exit. As soon as he starts
(or before), increase the flow to 99 and
then, detonate the left blocker. That will
get it. Now, you're a hero!

ind your step, now. The mailbags
have kinda spilled all over the
floor. Sorry about that, but with
one thing and another, Fred and I simply
haven't had the time to do much cleaning
up in here (besides which, he just got back
from the Grues convention and isn't in the
mood for housecleaning). And that mail
keeps coming in; people will insist on playing games. Heh.
Before getting to the good stuff, there are
a couple things I have to mention.
Over the years, I've naturally received a
lot of letters from a lot of gamers (you could
tell that just from all the mail sacks lying
around!). Most of them are just typical requests for help, but there are two types of
letters that are really irritating.
The first is the letter that begins "I read
your column every month in CGW," ends
with "please answer these questions as soon
as you can," and does not have a SASE
enclosed. Sometimes, of course, the person
is just in a hurry and forgets. However, I get
too many letters like that for everyone to be
quite so absent-minded. It's just amazing
how people's literacy can desert them when
they get to the bottom of the article. Or
maybe they think I'll be so touched by their
plight that I'll cough up the postage on my
own. Nope. It doesn't work that way.
If you live here in the United States, you
have to include that SASE if you want a
personal reply. Only people living in foreign countries are exempt from including
return postage.
The other type of letter that sets my teeth
on edge is the one that says either "Please
send me a list of all the weapons and armor
and magic items in Game X and what they
do" or "Can you send me the maps for
Dungeon Yin Game Z?". Nope. I can't, and
I wouldn't if I could.
It's one thing to answer a question about
a particular item that has someone puzzled,
and quite another to provide detailed maps
or lists of equipment.
Anyone who wants that kind of information should buy the hint book, which usually contains all that inside stuff.
Whew! Okay, now that's taken care of,
let's look at the latest crop of correspondence.
Ultima Underworld: Some folks are
having trouble finding the blade to the
Sword of Justice. That's not surprising,
since the item has been very carefully
tucked away on level 3, in a place that isn't

M

easy to reach (no, not the northwest corner).
You'll have to push aside a little foliage to
start you on the right path.
Indy/Fate Of Atlantis: Down in the
depths of Atlantis itself, Indy is having a bit
of difficulty getting Sophia out of the cell.
Not that he can't lift the cell door; he certainly can, but Sophia doesn't trust him to
hold it up long enough for her to scoot out.
What to do? Go on without her for now.
Really.
Some further explorations and puzzlesolving are needed before you find what
you need here. You might even say that the
best solution to the game hinges on this.
Dagger Of Amon Ra: Laura Bow is
back, and as usual, in trouble. If not much
seems to be happening at the big museum
bash, keep in mind that eavesdropping is the
name of the game. There are fourteen (count
'em, fourteen) conversations she has to listen in on. A little excursion to the Gift
Shoppe is also in order. After that, things
might start to happen.
Dark Queen Of Krynn: Right up front,
I'll tell you that there just ain't no way
you'll ever get through that door at the top
of the lighthouse. It's closed and staying
closed, whatever you try. So, instead of
beating your brains out up there, spend
some time in that little area reached from
the garbage pit and beat your brains out on
the walls.
Ultima VII: Can't get to the hydra, eh?
Not that you're exactly eager to take on this
three-headed monstrosity, but you know
how it is, a hero's work is never done.
Anyhow, there has to be some way to reach
the critter, even if it isn't obvious. This
problem calls for a hands-on solution, getting into the middle of things, and a Polaris
orientation.
Might & Magic III: From CGW reader
Steve Fox comes an easy way for you to
bypass the annoying lever puzzle in the
Fortress of Fear (a matter about which I
receive several letters a month). There is a
spell you can use to (ahem) see a little better.
By walking around the perimeter of the
stone head room, you can catch a glimpse
of the mummy king's lair, and teleport in on
your own.
While this might be cheating a little bit, it
sure beats running around a dungeon and
pulling levers!
Elvira II: Gamers are running into all
sorts of problems in this game, which is no
surprise. One has to do with brains. There
are two brains, and you need them both. But

which one you use at which time is important. Frankie's cerebrum, for instance,
shouldn't be touched for a long time. Like
about until you're ready for the end game.
And be careful about close-up views while
you're holding the wire-cutters, or you
might end up doing something you hadn't
planned on.
Magic Candle II: Some folks have the
mistaken impression that Orcbane is at the
bottom of Drakhelm. Nope, it's much closer
than that, say, on the first level. Somewhere
in the neighborhood of the joyful spade, or
something like that; my Orcish is a little
rusty these days. But I'm sure you'll manage to find it, if you read the signs right.
Eye Of The Beholder I: - We're getting
down to the end of the bonuses now. Not
many left, just levels one and two to cover.
In the case of level two, you may have
noticed some peculiar carvings on the walls
here and there. As a matter of fact, there are
four of them altogether. And, while they
may not look like it, they happen to be
carvings of weapons. Small weapons. Just
be careful that you don't give up anything
magical.
Bane Of The Cosmic Forge: Seems like
a few people out there have been reading
the hint book lately. I've gotten several
inquiries about the magical sword Excalibur. Yes, it really exists. However, obtaining it is another matter.
First, it doesn't show up until very far into
the game. Then, a dinosaur is involved.
Finally, the chance that the sword will show
up as a treasure is very small; if I had to bet
on whether you'd get the sword or Strike
Commander will be out by Christmas '92,
I'd put my money on Strike Commander.
Come to think of it, though, I'm not sure I'd
care to bet on either one of those (grin).
That's it for this look into the mail bag. In
the meantime, if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games
RT).
By US Mail (enclose that SASE if you
live in the United States!): Scorpia, P.O.
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY
10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

exist and the marketplace was limited to those hearty souls who
loved to type and tirelessly responded to the admonition, "I don't
understand that word," but that was 8 years ago and those were
books. Now we're doing movies. And while many people prefer
the former, we are confident that it will be multi-media products
like Leather Goddesses of Phobos 2 which will, in the long run,
help to expand the base of end-users and ultimately result in many
more products being developed.
Peter Doctorow
President, Activision/Infocom
We think mixed emotions is exactly what the Leather Goddesses
of Phobos 2 review should have evoked It was a mixed review
which recognized both the technological advances within the
game without affirming what the reviewer perceived as the
trade-off of less-challenging game play for audio-visual effects.
We trust your reasoned response will underscore the rationale
behind that trade-off and encourage those looking for a simpler
style graphic adventure to give it a try.

Essaying Forth
Essay question? Cite specific examples? Be specific? Wow, a
computer gaming magazine with a sense of humor — Who'd
have thunk it?

Prognosis for Phobos Phobia
It was with mixed emotions that I read your review of Leather
Goddesses of Phobos 2. It seems clear to me that you must be
among those who long for the good old days when films were
black and white, comic books were a dime and you could get an
American-made gas guzzler with a distinct personality, meticulously designed tail lights and a grill reminiscent of a gargantuan
grin. Mind you there is nothing wrong with any of these bits of
memorabilia or those who long for yesteryear. In fact, thanks to
this faithful band, both The Lost Treasures of Infocom and the
latest release of Volume 2 of these classics are selling extremely
well. Those products are well-written, contain imagery that can
be best visualized via the printed word and have stood the test of
time. But sadly, the merry band that was Infocom can no longer
be supported with such text adventures.
Excerpting from your commentary, I found that you properly
recognized that our 1990s version of Steve Meretzky's original
hit did still provide the user with the option of playing the part of
either a male or female protagonist, had an interface that was
"intuitive and unambiguous" and "includes the most ambitious
speech support effort ever packed into an entertainment product."
Not bad, I'd say. In addition, you also pointed out, quite correctly,
that the game package includes the LifeSize Sound Enhancer, a
device that requires no additional computer hardware and provides high-quality digitized audio.

John Hamilton
State College, PA
John gets a big A+ for being the first reader to recognize that
the essay question (at the end of CGW #97's questions for the
CGW Poll) was intended to be humorous. Fortunately, he wasn't
the only CGW reader to recognize the humor in the question.
Unfortunately, some readers were offended. Interestingly, we
received some fascinating answers. So, here follows the results
of the "final exam" for CGW Poll #97.
I am now comparing and contrasting my two favorite computer
games, while paying particular attention to the archetypes of each
given genre, the distinctive styles of each designer and the
contribution of each to the technological and social advancement
of the hobby. I am also citing specific examples from historical
milestones within the genre and am analyzing why these games
are watershed accomplishments. I am being specific. I am now
comparing and contrasting ...
Henry Poyker
Brooklyn, NY
Our first temptation was to flunk Henry for simply vomiting the
faculty's words back to us. Then, we decided that we were vain
enough to be flattered and gave him an A for answering in the
spirit of the question.
Are you serious about this question? Sounds a bit pompous to
me. Let's face it, this is entertainment, not a new philosophy.
We're not creating a new world order.

Our goal is to appeal to the expert users, such as yourself, while
at the same time to make a contribution to the movement to
broaden the marketplace for interactive entertainment and to
attempt to entice those who have, to date, held out and not
purchased a computer with products that will appeal and not be
quite so difficult to install, play and successfully complete. To
find a happy medium between these two honorable goals is
admittedly difficult. Our subsequent products may well be more
acceptable to the former camp. However, to continue to provide
text adventures at a time when the medium is becoming increasingly more visual would be a mistake, in our opinion. To provide
a graphic adventure with puzzles that are obtuse, at a time when
novices are beginning, albeit slowly, to enter the marketplace
would be counterproductive to the industry's goals. Analogously,
I personally avoid, at all costs, the crossword puzzles from the
Manchester Guardian because they are so abstruse and difficult.

No, we weren't serious. Yes, it was intended to sound pedantic,
if not pompous. Yes, the primary purpose of computer games is
to entertain, but we disagree with the underlying assertion that
these are just games. See the editorial in this issue for some other
thoughts on this matter. Good thing you took the course
Pass/Fail, since you disagreed with the faculty. Fortunately, you
bought the magazine and that guaranteed a passing grade.
Your question number 60 on CGW Poll #97 is too demanding. If
you want this kind of information, how about a contest? It's bad
enough that you already don't give anything to readers who fill
out these polls which you feature in your magazine.

I can appreciate your recollections about the old days when
Infocom was king, when graphics in 256 colors (or more) didn't

Bob Schreur
Portage, MI

Jim Yencer
Fairborn, OH

Bob, I'm afraid we can't recommend you for graduate studies in
CGW Humor. We have submitted your essay to the Reader
Relations Department, however, and it has resulted in a prize for
this issue's question.
My favorite computer games are Lemmings, which encompasses
Ralph Waldo Emerson's sentiments of "Returning Home" along
with motifs of "Death of a Salesman" and Jean-Paul Sartre's
existentialism and Links, which is about golf.
Anonymous
Buffalo, NY
We regret to inform you that we are deeply suspicious of plagiarism, since your answer sounds like one of our editor's more
pompous editorials. Well, we'll give you an honorary doctorate,
anyway. He's not bright enough to catch you.
My favorite games are Civilization and Ultima Underworld.
Because I said so!
Jim Eckart
Rochester, NY
Well, that's good enough for us.
My two favorite games so far have been Civilization and Revenge
of Doh. I have not studied the history of games or played games
long enough to tackle your essay question. Suffice to say, both
games are challenging, well-presented, and very playable.
James Logan
Stamford, CT
James, you'll obviously have to take several months out of your
life and undertake a course in remedial computer gaming if you
want to get higher than a B+ on this essay. If this grade was
important enough to you, you know you'd do it. James? James?
Just kidding, James.
In a vein of seriousness, we wish to thank everyone who responded to the question in any manner. We may publish some of
the longer responses in a later issue.

Recharted Waters
I enjoyed the article on Uncharted Waters in your May issue. It
was a good article, but here are a couple of addenda to assist with
the frustration factors.
First, to gain port loyalty to Portugal, use many repetitive investments. Twenty to twenty-five $1,000 investments will produce a
100% alliance potential whereas one $60,000 investment only
produces about a 17% alliance rating.
Second, the shipyard at Naples will have to receive at least five
$60,000 investments before it will allow the player to obtain
heavy galleons.
Third, keeping as many ports allied to Portugal as possible
reduces the economic factors of Spain and Turkey, reducing their
capacity for both offensive and merchant operations.
Fourth, it is a good idea to recruit Conrad and Americus early.
Build their loyalty to 100% and release them. They will stay
friendly and helpful in later quests.
I agree with Mr. Arneson's analysis of the game. I had hoped for
a superior version of Pirates and got great potential unfulfilled.
Perhaps, Koei will come out with an Uncharted Waters II.
Dr. Frank R. McGinity
Baltimore, MD
We also suggest that anyone interested in colonial conquest and
economic management games take the time to read Dave Arneson 's sneak preview of RAW Entertainment's upcoming
Spoils of War, starting on page 126 of this issue.

Is It Just A Game?
I have two points to make. First, I've purchased your magazine

for the better part of a year now and recently subscribed in
December. After purchasing the December issue, I must say that
I picked the right computer game magazine to subscribe to.
I missed the review of Xenocide and have not seen the game, but
I must applaud your efforts to look beyond the surface of games
and examine the social implications of them. Anyone who doubts
the importance of doing so need merely take a look at the sick
games spewing forth out of Germany. I'm sure you know exactly
what games I am referring to. I hope that such games do not make
their way to the United States and I certainly hope that your
magazine never gives them an iota of recognition. I doubt very
much that Xenocide approaches the low of these games, but thank
you for alerting your readers to the implications of games.
Second, would it be possible for you to ask/tell your advertisers
to differentiate between MCGA (320x200x256) and 256 color
VGA (640x480x256)? Too often, the advertise "256 color VGA,"
when in fact it is MCGA (for example, Wing Commander and
Eye of the Beholder). As an alternative, maybe you could have a
running list in the magazine of games reviewed, showing their
true top-end resolution, sound support, CPU really required and
other "listable," vital information.
Oren A. Levy
Davis, CA
We hope that batting .500 is satisfactory. As you will notice in
this month's editorial, we expect to continue considering the
moral, philosophical and social implications of games. As for the
questions of resolution, let 's be honest. MCGA is a subset of VGA
and is compatible with a VGA card So, computer game publishers consider MCGA resolution to be within the lowest percentile
requirements for listing a product as VGA on their stickers. Since
all of the companies use this lowest percentile benchmark for
their labels, no one company is going to unilaterally change their
labels and provide their competition with an advantage. Most
marketing departments fear that such truth in labeling would
mean that customers would purchase Captain Zombie and the
Glucose Smashers from Benedictine Software because it had
VGA on the label as opposed to their own Dan Quayle "Foot in
Mouth" Aerobics Workout with an MCGA label. We haven't
made the distinction because the resolution seems largely irrelevant to game play and even, to some extent, game value. We
would personally prefer excellently rendered artwork in MCGA
mode to mediocre graphics in VGA resolution. We know the
potential is greater in the latter, but do not assume that the
quality is necessarily greater therein.

Bird of Interplay
Allen Greenberg's "John Carter of Interplay" is pompous garbage. I have finished Out of This World and have one question:
Why did Interplay "give us the bird" after a spectacular final
sequence — ruining an otherwise very good game?
Bradford William Yul es
Humble, TX
Interplay's Vince DeNardo says that the sequence (where the
player's character mounts a giant bird and flies away) was
designed to match the soaring spirit of those players who finish
this epic quest. Now, that's marketing! Of course, more cynical
gamers would suggest that it sets up a sequel and might allow
Interplay to 'feather" their nest with a future success. As for
Greenberg's article, we find his "garbage" to have more nutrients than the so-called "entrees" of less thoughtful reviewers. We
thought his introduction was appropriate in setting the stage for
the game and as a result, was both interesting and informative

remember when kids used to grow up at the behest of the
marketing department of Lucasfilm. Star Wars was all the rage
in the late 70s and early 80s and nary a kid could go to bed without
donning Star Wars pajamas and tripping on a few Star Wars figures
in the dark as they climbed into bed and slept between their Star Wars
sheets with visions of light sabers and X-Wing fighters dancing in
their heads. Actually, most people reading this whose age is in double
digits grew up with the Star Wars mythos and can (much to the
annoyance of others who have lost touch with their youth) recite bits
of dialogue from the many memorable scenes of that unforgettable
first film. How many times while playing a flight sim have joystick
jocks heard a little voice in their head saying "Stay on target," or
"They're coming in too fast!" from the famous trench scenes on the
Death Star?
The original Star Wars (subtitled "Episode IV - A New Hope")
blew the lid off of high-tech science fiction as a genre, turning it from
pulp to pop and making such a fortune at the box office that, among
other things, it set George Lucas free to set up companies to develop
products in an industry other than film. One such company was
Lucasfilm Games (nows) LucasArts Games, founded in 1982 with
a $1,000,000 grant from Atari. Making good computer games,
however, takes more than money. Good ideas and the talent to
implement them are every bit as important and, for that, George
Lucas set up his Skywalker Ranch in northern California.

I

Skywalker Ranch is a retreat for the rising stars George Lucas has
gathered for everything from film production to sound effects engineering to computer game production. While Indiana Jones has been
carving his niche as a youth on TV, as the resourceful hero of the
movies and in computer adventure games, little has been done with
the Star Wars license (in terms of disk-based computer games). Star
Wars has moved inexorably from pop to nostalgia. Like the old
soldiers they are, Luke Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Princess
Leah seem to be fading away.
The fourth grade and under crowd has never seen a new Star Wars
movie release. Many are far more familiar with ninja turtle heroes
Michelangelo and Leonardo fighting the evil Shredder than with
Luke and Han Solo stopping the evil Darth Vader. To counterpoint
this sense of absence, however, NBC brought in amazingly high
ratings for their July '92 showings of both The Empire Strikes Back
(a 10.6 rating with a 19 share) and The Return of the Jedi (an 11.6
rating with a 21 share), meaning that interest in the Galactic Empire
and Rebel Alliance is not dead, merely dormant as we wait for the
next Star Wars movie. (I thought the product slippage was bad in the
software industry until I realized it might be another ten years before
the next Star Wars movie comes out). Based on these television
ratings, many people still trust "the force." Armed with these facts
and the knowledge that Wing Commander has been sitting at the top

of the computer gaming charts for a long time, LucasArts Games is
adapting their Star Wars license to fly straight on at "Blue Hair" and
the Kilrathi. This time, the space duels will take place in X-Wing:
The Star Wars Space Combat Simulator.

A Long Time Ago, In Galaxy Far, Far
Away...
Without mincing words, Larry (Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe)
Holland and Ed (RoboSport) Kilham are taking aim at Chris Roberts
and his megahit Wing Commander series in the same way that a
sniper takes aim through a rifle scope. X-Wing isn't out to blaze a
new high-end technology path, but to follow it in an attempt to excel
beyond its illustrious predecessor. Where Wing Commander set out
to give players a feel for Star Wars,X-Wing is now bringing the circle
full around by trying to use the Star Wars genre to "out Wing
Commander" Wing Commander. Pilots, to your fighters! The real
"star wars" are about to begin.

Hard to SWOTL?
While X-Wing is a game fought in the vacuum of space, it cannot
be considered in a vacuum without comparisons between itself and
the reigning emperor of computer entertainment, Wing Commander.
There is one major philosophical difference between the two games,
however, that must be constantly kept in mind (and one which makes
perfect sense when considering the strengths of the design team for
X-Wing). Where Wing Commander is an action game wrapped
around a non-interactive movie,X-Wing is more of a flight simulator
fleshed out with some interactive transition scenes. Although Secret
Weapons of the Luftwaffe is not the model for X-Wing (which is odd,
considering the movie combat sequences are all based on WWII
aerial combat footage), the cut and thrust of the design is simulation
over arcade game.
The question is, what kind of "simulator" can you have for star
fighter combat? If Newtonian physics were the rule, counter-thrust
would have to be meticulously applied in order to stop a ship, which
could, theoretically, glide, roll and drift into space indefinitely.
Another problem that would have to be overcome is the disorienting
lack of sound or "horizons" in space combat.
Granted, all of these elements have been factored out of the flight
simulation equation for the sake of playability (not to mention fun)
and, while there's still no sense of gravity in the flight model, there
is definitely more of a flight sim feel to the maneuvers one can
perform, particularly when rolling the fighter through turns (i.e.,
there is more of a sense of "banking"
while turning than in Wing Commander).
Several artificial "horizons" (such as
large ships) may be available on screen,
but players will have to contend with
being at multiple angles, which can lead
to an interesting sense of disorientation of
a different sort. Even the "braking" systems and other "anti-Newtonian" elements will be an automatic function of the
game's engine and not something the
player will have to deal with consciously.
The key to this "flight sim philosophy"
is the extensive use of polygons in XWing. With the many advances in polygon technology, more can be crammed
onto a screen and memory restriction/processing time corners can be
more effectively cut while maintaining clarity levels in order to
manipulate more and more polygons at an ever increasing frame rate.
The practical upshot of all this for gamers is to see more and better
defined polygon images (since they are being made up of several
polygons each) which maneuver in a smoother scrolling fashion.
Consider the look of a "film" replay in Wing Commander II and
notice how each ship seems to fly and shoot with exacting, octagonal
precision — this will not be the case in X-Wing. Each mission will

end with a complete film replay (a la SWOTL) for your viewing
pleasure, which can be manipulated and stored for repeated viewing.

Joining the Rebellion
Players do not begin a game of X- Wing as another Luke Skywalker.
Instead, one is recruited into the Rebel Alliance after hearing the
stirring speech of Mon Mothma at a rally. As a raw recruit out to
overthrow imperial tyranny and restore the Old Republic, one must
prove his or her mettle as a pilot before flying in combat. This segues
into the first third of the game, which consists of obstacle courses
and training missions with plenty of lessons and reenactments of
"historical" battles. Sadly, while obviously intended as a raucous
introduction into the X-Wing system, many of the hard core joystick
jocks will probably poo-poo this segment of the game entirely. This
would be a shame, however, as the design team is taking special care
to make this a particularly challenging set of missions against the
clock and increasing pressure from enemy targets. In effect, this is
the "arcade" part of X-Wing and one which could almost stand on its
own.
This combination of the pilot's proving ground (for flying skills)
and the Combat School (for target practice) is geared for each of the
three mainstay Rebel Alliance fighter types, the A-Wing (the "economy model" outpost fighter), the Y-Wing (a medium "fighter-bomber") and the ultimate, X-Wing (death dealing fighter supreme). Both
the X and Y-Wing fighters require the assistance of a Droid (like an
R2 unit) to assist in plotting courses, jumps and making repairs.
Players in A-Wing fighters will have to conduct these duties themselves (which could prove wonderfully stressful in the heat of battle).

Blueprints for Flying
As previously mentioned, the ships themselves are multiple polygons. The cockpit and interior images of a fighter are bit mapped,
however. Also bit mapped will be numerous special effects (explosions, etc.) and the transition scenes. These transitions between
scenes take place not on the Tiger's Claw, but on the Calamari Star
Cruiser, Dreadnought and at a Calamari space port. (For the record,
the Calamari play a very large role in X-Wing, and the squid jokes
were flying fast and furious as the game was being developed.)
While at these friendly locations, players will try to earn their
"ratings" for better fighters, receive mission assignments and briefings, check out fighter blueprints, watch films or join one of the three
"combat tours" (mission series). In actual flying, save for the nuances
of a more "flight sim" feel to the controls, X-Wing has a very Wing
Commander-like feel to it. Quick reflexes and straight shooting will
make a pilot effective, while smart play
will make him deadly. Moving from a
Rapier to an X-Wing will not be a shocking transition for players.
Smart play comes, as it so often does,
from becoming "one with" the instrumentation (by using "the force," no doubt). To
that end, players familiar with the radar
scope on Wing Commander will have to
make some adjustments (both figuratively
and literally). Two radar scopes will appear, one in each of the upper corners of
the HUD (Heads Up Display). The default
settings for these are to put the "forward"
sphere on the left and the "reward" sphere
on the right. Players can, however, customize these half-globe spheres to be top and bottom, left and right
or any combination they choose.

It's Darth in Here
Naturally, the game will have full sound support and will be
competing with Wing Commander in the use of digitized voices. A
subdued soundtrack will play throughout the game but the sounds of
combat will be a little different (taken, as much as possible, from the
films). Even one's R2 unit will screech and beep with information

(printed out in plain English along the bottom of the screen). Players
can communicate back to their R2 unit and comrade pilots in a
2-menu approach similar to Wing Commander. Hopefully, in XWing, single keystroke hot keys or programmable macros will be
added to allow players to perform these crucial tasks more quickly
and efficiently than was done in its spiritual predecessor.
Also, during combat, a certain amount of "background chatter" will
be ongoing over one's "com," adding a nice measure of intensity to
stimulate a player's audio senses and give an added sense of really
"being there" in battle. Players do not communicate with their base
during missions, nor is fuel ever a concern (despite "jumping" to and
from a battle site). Unlike Wing Commander, multiple "nav points"
are not on the mission roster.

What Becomes a
Rebellion Most
Life is no picnic for the Rebel Alliance at the outset of the X-Wing
story. Critically short of everything but courage, X-Wing picks up
with the first of the three "tours of duty" (Hmm, shades of SWOTL)
as an immediate "prequel" situation to the first Star Wars film. It's
guerrilla tactics time with the object being, not merely to destroy
everything in site (pun intended), but to collect everything which the
rebellion might find useful. In other words, "hit-and-run" operations
are the first order of business and a primary focus of the early game.
Players start off as no hero, either. Instead, one begins as a mere
"cog in the machine," following orders and leading missions of little
consequence. Upon returning to base, a variety of greetings might
take place. Various levels of the generic "glad to see you" screen,
accented with differing degrees of enthusiasm based on one's mission success will be the norm. This could range from a near-reprimand to delirious ovations and a "medal" ceremony (a la the end of
Star Wars). Limping home in an X-Wing shaped hunk of Swiss
cheese might have a player evacuated to the medical tank (as seen at
the beginning of The Empire Strikes Back) while ejecting might
mean either drifting off forever into space, being rescued by the
Rebel Alliance or the Empire (followed by horrendous torture conducted by the Dark Lord of the Sith himself). Of course, many times a mission
will end (before being replayed again, that
is) with the traditional "flame and burn"
death-by-fireball sequence (done in a variety of ways by the gruesome graphics
gurus who revel in such things). This,
naturally, is followed by the "burial at
space" as our hero's corpse burns up forever in the atmosphere of a nearby planet
(unless, of course, one is Mr. Spock —but
that's a different idiom).

That's not the AT&T
Logo, That's a Death
Star!
The second tour of duty involves stealing the plans to the Empire's
rumored new "secret weapon." Deploying probes, intercepting Imperial ships, rendezvousing with spies and other cloak-and-dagger
missions abound as the player ultimately tracks down the blueprints
of their impending doom. For those who are interested, the storyline
will probably work out to about 15% "from the movies" and 85%
original (albeit parallel), but keeping the universe correct and maintaining strict continuity. Thus, one will not feel like they are playing
a pre-traveled, linear adventure game type of plot through the three
tours, however familiar things might appear to Star Wars movie fans.
Fortunately, the last of the tours of duty has much to do with
undermining the Emperor's "technological terror." Not surprisingly,
it ends with a stirring recreation of the climactic fight above, and in
the trenches of, the Death Star itself. While most players may not
have "bull's-eyed wamp rats with their T-16s back home," like Luke

Skywalker did, by the time they reach that fateful exhaust port on the
Death Star (in just the nick of time, of course) the adrenaline will be
pumping mightily and the reward will be truly worth it.

Hide the Mirrors
While playing, one does not meet a good many of the primary Star
Wars characters. Don't expect to run into Luke, Han, Leah or
Obi-Wan any time soon. Oh, one will hear of their deeds (thus
providing a good degree of continuity with the films), but don't
expect to rub elbows with the stars (in a manner of speaking). While
players will encounter many of the "minor" pilot characters (such as
Deak, Dack and Biggs), the player most conspicuously absent will
be one's own self! Yes, unlike "Blue Hair" from the Wing Commander series, one never sees what their character looks like and is
only ever referred to in the game by the player's name selected. Thus,
not only is X-Wing gender non-specific, it is also alien race non-specific (for those who thought a Wookie couldn't fit in one of those
tiny A-Wings, well .. now they can!). Thus, LucasArts killed the
two birds of painting more graphics and staying "politically correct"
with this one stone.
To make sure that players can get into the game's fiction, a
96-page, paperback novella by Rusel DeMaria will be included in
the package (along with a more sparse set of documentation than seen
in other LucasArts flight simulators, such as those found in Their
Finest Hour and SWOTL). This novella will primarily be focused on
the hardware and technical aspects of being a Rebel Fighter Pilot,
with a bit of fiction thrown in to weave the plot together (not unlike
The Claw Marks). For the collector of Star Wars memorabilia, this
book will only be released in copies of X-Wing.

One-Sided Affairs
Players will only be allowed to fly for the Rebel Alliance in
X-Wing. Furthermore, the rebels have only the A-Wing, Y-Wing and
X-Wing fighters to choose from. For those who aspire to the Imperial
service, they will have to wait for whatever "sequel" products might
ensue, depending on the success of X-Wing. In my opinion, sequel
products will be a certainty. X-Wing is likely to be a fully supported
product, complete with add-ons and game
modules. The engine is being designed to
easily incorporate campaign editors, mission builders, new ship technologies and
all of these other things you can buy
separately (over and over again) once
"hooked" into the product line.

"Ex-Wing"
Commanders?
Many of us left the movie theaters in the
Summer of 1977 with the dream of flying
an X-Wing fighter and saving the galaxy
like our new-found hero, Luke Skywalker
did. Sensing that the time is right (and the
market is safe), LucasArts is finally giving
IBM computer owners their chance as they aim for a hopeful Christmas release. Switch all power to front deflector screens, kids. We're
going in and we're going in full throttle. (That should keep those
fighter's off our backs!)
Although X-Wing is clearly aimed at Origin's Wing Commander
series, I don't think the Texas-based company will have to worry too
much (one can almost hear Chris Roberts' impression of Imperial
Governer Moff Tarkin saying "Evacuate? In our moment of triumph?
I think you overestimate their chances."). Well, X-Wing' s chances
are good — very good. However, I believe that this galaxy is big
enough for two outstanding tactical space fighter combat games.
Frankly, when the Rebel Alliance recruiter comes to Earth, it
shouldn't be too hard for experienced wing commanders to "force"
themselves into an X-Wing. (Say, whose voice is that which keeps
telling me to switch off my targeting computer, anyway?)

Review

Over There
enCore! enCore!
by Paul Rigby

K programmers continue their
assault on the graphical adventure scene (Revolution/Virgin
UK's Lure of the Temptress has already been mentioned within these
pages). Core plans to get in on the act
with its very first graphic adventure
—CurseofthEncai.
Core's Ian
Sabine, who is working on the PC version of Curse, dived straight in with a
rough description of what the game is
all about,
"It is an icon-operated graphical adventure. You take the part of a twentieth century kid who has just been
transported off to this magical world.
The idea is that a witch needs a young
boy as an ingredient in a rejuvenation
potion — you are the unlikely target.
Once you get there the witch has you
taken off to the dungeons where you are
to be held (upside down in manacles)
until she is ready for the spell."

U

The aim of the game is to (surprise!)
kill the witch and dash back to one's
own time. The game follows the classic
design format. That is, the player sees
a series of scenes, connected together
with horizontal scrolling sections. Of
course, the player's on-screen will be
able to walk deeper into the screen as
scaling characters will be included.
This should provide a more realistic
effect such as that utilized so effectively in LeChuck's Revenge: Secret of

Monkey Island II.
The most unique aspect of the game
is the interaction interface. In the world
of graphic adventures, this one area has

caused more arguments and consternation than any other. There is the Sierra
approach whereby clicking on Talk allows the character to gibber away without any player control at all. Then, at
the opposite end of the scale, there is
the complicated parser effort which
warrants the "hunt the right word to get
a character to do anything" approach.
Core have taken a unique approach to
the problem by tackling interaction in
two ways. The most interesting innovation in this game is that the characters
in the game talk in a graphic format.
"There is a shopkeeper in the lakebed, explained Ian, "selling oxygen.
The only way for him to tell you that he
wants a worm without actually spelling
it out in so many words is to produce a
speech-type 'bubble' from the character with a worm inside it. We could say
'worm = oxygen'."
So, everyone talks in pictures. Weird,
eh? The programmers have also stated
that the lack of text speeds up gameplay. One other point that Core is
shouting about with regard to Curse is
the size of their product (the gameplay,
not the box),
"It's going to be twice as big as any
Sierra game in every respect. We really like playing Sierra games, but we
solve them very quickly. We wanted
our game to be larger and offer a lot
more enjoyment."

Screams in the Dark is not the bedtime realization that you've failed to
renew your CGW subscription but,
rather, the new Cthulhu-based game

from Infogrames. Slated for a preChristmas release on the IBM, Screams
reminds me of an Eternam or even an
Out of This World-type product as the
game world is totally polygon driven
with a variety of interesting and movielike camera angles. An arcade/adventure with a difference, Screams is based
in the old manor house, Derceto, where
the resident owner, a painter, has committed suicide. The player chooses one
of two characters to find out if the suicide was really the cause of death. The
after-dark roaming of the Cthulhu-like
monsters and demons are likely to convince the player otherwise. The game
includes object-oriented puzzles interspersed with arcade sub-games.
Ancient Rome seems to be in vogue.
In addition to Impression's example
mentioned last month, Millennium,
creators of Global Effect, are working
on a new game based on the Empire of
old. Starting as a lowly slave, the player
must achieve recognition and reward in
rising to the heights of Caesar. Many
adventures are in the offing: in Herculaneum, Hector must find a means of
gaining passage off the island before
the volcano erupts; in Britannica, he
must lead his troops to defeat the ancient Britons. Rome features a point
and click interface. Available on the
IBM and Amiga in October.
Russell Ferrier, in charge of CD development at the UK software house
Domark (until recently), described
Domark's latest CDTV product
—TrivalPust,

Review
"For CD, Trivial Pursuit (which will
be released on two disks) we did no
amount of porting, shovelling or dumping. We went right back to the origins
of the game itself and looked at the
nature of it."
"We started with new questions.
Then, we wondered how we could
flaunt the capabilities of CD. We felt,
with the home market we are aiming
for, that the CD version had to look like
a film or TV product. So, we arranged
to have a unique, digitized photograph
for every one of those questions. There
followed an arduous task of finding
photo libraries that were, firstly, reasonable in their prices and, secondly,
had a good stock of material to select
from."
The resultant pictures can be used as
clues in Trivial Pursuit but are not designed to give away the answer. In
some cases they are utilised as red herrings. In addition, Chris Langham was
brought in to interject humor into the
game. Chris was the script writer for the
majority of the Muppet Shows (remember that?) A master of ceremonies (an
animated cartoon bird character) was
designed who provides interaction with

the players (he congratulates, commiserates, chastises and so on). There were
200 of these 'links' between questions
to provide the required atmosphere.
Also, every one of the questions are
spoken. For each of the six main categories Domark created an individual
character, in addition to the Master of
Ceremonies. For Science/Nature you
get Einstein, History—Napoleon, Geography — Columbus, Art/Literature
— Shakespeare, Sport/Leisure —
Adonis and Entertainment — Mae
West. Kate Robbins (impersonator) did
the Mae West voice and Patrick Mower
(actor of sorts) did the five male voices.
The Andre Jacquemin studios (where
the Monty Python soundtracks were
created) were used to record the sound.
Sound effects, such as cheering, thunderous applause, etc, are also included.
If the player wins the game, the bird
goes haywire, falls of his perch and so
on. Release is slated for pre-Christmas
with IBM-based CD-ROM and CD-I
versions in the cards for later release.
Anyone who would like to contact me
can do so on CompuServe
(75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern
Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW

[please include three 'international reply coupons' for a reply].
Note: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World,

318 Kensington, Liverpool, England,
L70EY.
Tel: 01144-51-263-6306.
Premier Mail Order,

Trybridge Ltd., 8 Buckwins sq., Burnt
Mills,
Basildon, Essex, England, SS13 1BJ.
Tel: 01144-268-590-766 Fax: 01144268-590-076.
Software City,
Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple Street,
Wolverhampton,
WV24AN. Tel: 01144 902-25304
24-hour credit card hotline: 01144 90225304.
All of the above telephone numbers
assume you can dial direct. If you have
any trouble contact the international
operator.

Review

Toyogo, Inc.'s Nemesis GO Master
by Timothy J. Trimble

TITLE:
Nemesis GO Master
SYSTEM:
IBM, Macintosh
#PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE: $89.00
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNERS: Bruce Wilcox
PUBLISHER:
Toyogo, Inc.
P.O. Box 25460
Honolulu, HI

t seems unusual that a game that was
invented over 4000 years ago with
rocks and scratches in the ground
has progressed to the point of being
played on a computer system. The
game, of course, is called GO and it
originated with the Japanese, which explains the use of words such as Joseki,
Ko, Sente, Seki and Fuseki. Anyone
who understands what these words
mean is bound to be familiar with the
game of GO already. Fortunately for
those who are not familiar with these
words, the game of GO is actually easier to understand than the Japanese
words associated with the game. It is
also fortunate that whether one is a
novice or an expert at the game of GO,
the Nemesis GO Master (Version 5.02)
[Nemesis] from Toyogo, Inc. can provide endless hours of enjoyment and
education.

I

Toyogo Does Windows
With their latest version, Toyogo has
provided support for Microsoft Windows with an interface that is very similar to their Macintosh version of the
program. The strong point of this interface is the use of an "Icons Window"
that contains graphic icons (pictures) to
represent various functions of the program such as displaying liberties, current score, patterns, groups and hints.
Set-up and editing of the board and
playing pieces can also be controlled
from the graphic icons. Further, the
Icons Window also allows the player to
"step" through the tutorials and previously played games. A game clock is

also kept in the Icons Window and records the time used by each player
(similar to chess clocks). One of the
drawbacks of the graphic environment
under Microsoft Windows is that
Toyogo did not take full advantage of
the graphic capabilities of Windows.
The playing board is a bland black on
green and the rest of the screen is black
on white.
Starter Kit (by Crystalline Creations,
Inc. and Bruce Wilcox) is enclosed
with the program. This 36 page booklet
gives a very clear and illustrative introduction to the how and why of playing
GO.

AI Worthy Of Kyudos

One of the unique features of Nemesis
is the use of "books" (disk files) for
storing games, tutorials and documentation. In order to save a game a book
must be opened or created. Multiple
games can be stored in the book. After
a book is loaded a table of contents is
displayed with a listing of the stored
games. Once a stored game is loaded
then it can be "stepped" through, one
turn at a time. The nice feature about
this is the ability to add notes in the
message window for each move. The
tutorial works in this manner also. The
moves can be stepped through with detailed instruction presented in the message window. Along with the built- in
tutorial, a booklet called the Instant Go

Nemesis GO Master does a good job
of presenting strong GO playing ability
up to a level of 13 kyu. (A beginner is
rated at 35 kyu and works toward a
rating of 1 kyu. After that ratings are
measured as "dan" with 1 dan being the
next step after 1 kyu. Top U.S. amateurs are measured at 7 dan.) This rating
can be adjusted back to 35 kyu for the
beginning player. A handicap can also
be assigned to the player by placing
from 2 to 9 stones at the beginning of
play. In handicapping, Nemesis supports both Japanese (placing handicap
stones in fixed locations) and Chinese
rules (placing handicap stones anywhere). Outside of handicapping,
Nemesis also supports other characteristics of both Japanese and Chinese
rules.
The configuration portion ofNemesis
provides a very extensive range of features that can be changed by the player.
The board size can be set for 9x9,

Review
13x13 and 19x19 grids. This also affects the playing strength of Nemesis
since the ratings are based on the
1 9x 19 board and Nemesis becomes
much weaker with smaller boards.
Handicap, playing strengths, time
clocks, komi points and various
board display features can also be set
from the configuration feature.
Teaching and wisdom levels can also
be set, which provides the player with
various levels of input from the program. If wisdom is set to "All Wisdom," then Nemesis will display the
different playing positions that it is
considering before making the next
move. Other settings for wisdom are
No Motives, No Wisdom and Some
Wisdom. The timing of the tactics
display can also be set as No Display,
Fast Display, Medium Display, Slow
Display and Wait at Result. The
drawback to this is that there is no
way to interrupt the display of the
tactics once it has started. If Nemesis
takes two minutes to display the tactics and thinking of the next move

then the player has no way of interrupting and canceling the tactical display for that turn.
For those who are interested in playing with real opponents via a telephone call, Nemesis supports the
ability to link to another Nemesis program through modems. The setup and
use of the modem feature is quite painless and easy to use. (For those who
are searching for remote opponents
is supported via the modem
—Nemsi
lobby on CompuServe and players
can also be found in the Chess Forum.)

GO for the Gusto
Although garners who require sterling graphics to draw them into a game
may be disappointed, Nemesis GO
Master has plenty to offer in the way
of instruction, competition and
satisfaction. Overall, Nemesis GO Master
is a good program for both the beginning and intermediate GO player.

Kids & Computers

Catch of Two Tales
Capstone's An American Tail: The Computer
Adventures of Fievel and His Friends
by Judy Muldawer
n American Tail: The Computer Adventures of Fievel
and His Friends is actually two different computer
adventure games based on Steven Spielberg's movies,
An American Tail and An American Tail:Fievel Goes West.
The adventures begin at the turn of
the century as Fievel Mousekewitz,
a young male mouse, and his family
flee the Russian cat-cossacks. They
sail toward America, a land where
they believe there are no felines and
the streets are paved with cheese. En
route, Fievel is separated from his
family, and he finds himself alone,
poor, friendless, and lost in a new
land. Naturally, the immediate task
for the player is to assist Fievel in his
quest to locate his loved ones. In the
course of doing so, many adventures
impose themselves on the computer
screen. The player not only has the
opportunity to help Fievel locate his
family, but he/she gets a chance to
save the mice from the cats by using
Fievel's special plan. Before reaching this climactic point, however,
the player will need to direct Fievel
through a veritable scavenger hunt
to obtain a variety of objects; an
obstacle course of potential trouble;
a potpourri of simple, entertaining
games; and a gauntlet of intriguing
questions to answer. Then, once the
first adventure is completed, the player has the
TITLE:
PRICE:
System:
opportunity to begin Fievel's trip westward, a
new game with a new theme that ends, predictPROTECT: None
PUBLISHER
DESIGNER:
ably enough, in an "Old West Showdown."

unfurls. He must play some difficult games of Concentration,
Simon Says, Dots, Shoot Out and others. He has to assemble
a jigsaw puzzle without a picture to guide him. He must find
the proper exit signs and avoid the inevitable—cats! He learns
that he cannot trust every
stranger in his new land and that
good friends are helpful. So far,
so good.
Fortunately, help is available
to the youngsters who try to
solve this adventure whenever
they find themselves lost. Rather
than being lost themselves, they
can click on the cheese-shaped
cursor on Fievel's hat. In addition, the manual includes a hint
sheet to assist Fievel in his adventure and provides helpful tips
on the various games, as well as
solutions to some common problems encountered in Fievel's
travels.
Further, although the graphics
are excellent replicas of those
found in the original movies, the
player cannot help Fievel succeed by moving through wordless paths. Good reading skills
are a necessity as Fievel meets
and must speak with numerous
characters. Words such as 'ambitious,' discouraged," floundering' and 'souvenir' suggest a
reading level beyond most elementary school children's skills. Although a
An American Tale
IBM
two page vocabulary list, complete with definitions, is also included in the manual, I find it
Jonathon Sposato
difficult to believe that any child will actually
memorize word definitions in order to play a
FL
computer game.
There Are No Cats in ComThe graphics also offer a visual variety of
puter Games (Problems)
cartoon characters and backgrounds, designed to entrance and
However, as in any adventure, things don't always go
mesmerize most any youngster. Unfortunately, the sound
smoothly. Fievel encounters numerous pitfalls as his story
implementation does not score the same high marks. Hardly

A

Kids Computers

any moviegoer can think back to the original theatrical length
cartoon and imagine An American Tail without its memorable
standards like "No Cats in America" and "Somewhere, Out
There." Yet, the sound card support in the game is restricted
to one tune which, although lively, remains basically the same
throughout the entire game.
Finally, this is not a game that can be completed quickly.
Therefore, the option to save frequently is a must. The authors
have allowed for six different games to be saved and retrieved
easily through the use of icons. Thus, the player can turn off
the machine and resume play where it was saved to disk.

And The Games Aren't Made For
Teens (Recommended Ages)
As I personally solved these tales, I had difficulty deciding
which age group would be best suited to these adventures.
Although the story could be targeted for any age group, the
graphics, characters and storyline indicate an elementary
school level. However, the difficulty of many of the games
played within the adventure would suggest an older child.
The necessary reading vocabulary would be most appropriate
for a bright high school student or an adult. Even the helpful
hints provided by the publisher would not assist someone
incapable of reading them.
So, in order to target an age group, I asked several youngsters to assist me. The adventures were tested by one
seven-year-old, one ten-year-old, one twelve-year-old, and
one-sixteen-year old. The seven-year-old was excited at the
prospect of playing a computer game with the Fievel themes.
In fact, she was the most enthusiastic of the test group and also
the one most familiar with the films. However, she needed
constant adult help with the required reading skills and is still
in the process of solving the first adventure. She is enjoying

playing the games and intends to spend additional time at the
computer. She will, of course, need continual adult assistance
if she is to succeed.
The ten-year-old became frustrated with the difficulty of
some of the inner games, and at one point saved his adventure,
but threatened to never return. Coaxed by me, he later retrieved his game and solved it several hours later. However,
he required parental encouragement and assistance with the
vocabulary and the inner games in order to successfully finish.
The twelve-year-old solved the adventures within a few
hours of non-stop play, but he also needed parental assistance
with much of the reading. The sixteen-year-old quickly solved
the first adventure, but became bored while solving Fievel
Goes West and ceased trying.
All of the testers agreed that although the graphics were
excellent replicas of the ones in the films, they would have
been better had they been animated. They also concurred that
the single tune played throughout the game was delightful at
first, but quickly became monotonous and later, annoying.
They also believed that use of speech and different melodies
would have greatly enhanced this software.

Somewhere, Out There (Conclusion)
Solving these adventures promotes a feeling of accomplishment. However, because it is so difficult to assess any one age
group as a target for An American Tail, the best use of this
adventure game for children might be to share it as a group
experience. In this way, children and adults can assist one
another and, together, share the joy of accomplishment when
the adventure is completed. I recommend this game as a
family project for parents and children of elementary school
age.

Where on Wall Street is Carmen Sandiego?
Broderbund Software (NASDAQ: BROD) is best
known for its Print Shop and Carmen Sandiego lines of
products. Indeed, Carmen has not only spun off an
on-line version of the game (on the Prodigy network), but
a Saturday morning television series and non-computer
products like the Carmen Sandiego jigsaw puzzle.
Broderbund's investment in the Living Books series is
also expected to be a successful product line for the
publisher.
At the end of March, 1992, Broderbund announced its
second quarter earnings. For the second quarter (which
ended on February 29, 1992), Broderbund announced
a 42% increase over the same quarter in 1991. That
brought the results for the first half of the fiscal year up
34% from the revenues during the same six months of
the previous year. Per share earnings were up to $.28
per share over the $.20 in the second quarter of Fiscal
1991 and $.63 per share over the previous years $.52
per share over the same six months.

The stock price for Broderbund spiked upward on good
earnings news in March and similarly with the third
quarter results announced at the end of June. Revenues
for the quarter ending May 31 were up 29% from the
same quarter last year, with income up even more
dramatically ($.16 per share or 40% up from last year's
$.12). Although the earnings report brought the totals for
the nine month fiscal period to a 33% increase over the
comparable period (and net income to $.79 per share
over the $.64 of a year ago for an increase of 29%).
Immediately thereafter, the stock price drifted off with the
malaise in the rest of the market. Wall Street has a "What
have you done for me, lately?" memory, so even Broderbund's solid fundamentals and the recent acquisition of
PC Globe Software and affiliation with New World
Computing (with Maxis leaving Broderbund's distribution network, the addition of New World and PC Globe
products should take up any slack) have not helped the
stock in recent days.

Review

Well Met On The Met
A Designer Looks At Minotaur
by William C. Fisher
TITLE:
SYSTEM:

Minotaur: The Labyrinths of Crete
Macintosh Plus or higher, System 6.0.5 or higher, and 1 megabyte of RAM
8-bit video and 2 megabytes of RAM required for color operation.
System 7 compatible. Combat requires a connection to at least one other
Macintosh via modem, cable, or AppleTalk.
PLAYERS:
Two to seven players, each on a
different Macintosh. One-player exploration mode also available.
PRICE:
$89.99
PROTECTION: Unique serial number, checked
against all other running versions.
DESIGNER:
Jason Jones
PUBLISHER:
Bungie Software Products Corporation,
Chicago, IL.

William C. Fisher has been involved in the computer gaming
business for more than ten years. He worked as a designer and
manager at Mattel Electronics, and then, founded Quicksilver Software, Inc. The company develops software for entertainment, education, and business markets. Their most recent title is Castles,
developed in conjunction with Interplay Productions. The company
is now working on a number of original product designs, but is not
currently designing a network game.

M

inotaur is a medieval fantasy combat simulation designed to
run on a group of up to seven connected Macintosh computers. It is a multi-player game designed especially for hardcore gamers who enjoy a modicum of devious scheming and backstabbing with a few close friends. It begins much like any fantasy
role-playing game: with character creation. A total of 60 points may
be allocated between three categories: Brawn, Agility, and Lore.
These represent damage caused by physical attacks, ability to attack
or defend, and effectiveness of magic spells. Players are saved to disk
between games and retain rather humorous logs of their previous
battle results up to, and including, their eventual retirement.
Once a player has been created or loaded, he or she may practice
exploring a randomly generated maze filled with powerful items,
spells, armor and weapons. This practice mode exists merely to allow
the player to practice navigating in the maze, casting spells and
testing the benefits of the various items found within the maze. The
computer opponent, Bill the Pincushion, never gets hurt and never
attacks, although it is possible for the player to die through extreme
ineptness.

A player is considered defeated when his Vitality points reach zero
(depicted in the center of the screen by a large bar graph). Vitality,
of course, can be sapped by physical combat, magical spells, poison
or by contact with any of the Stalkers which wander the maze.
There are over eighty different objects in the Minotaur labyrinth.
Players accustomed to fantasy role-playing games will enjoy the
wide variety. In addition to the predictable progression of weapons
and armor, there are several magical weapons (Excalibur, Durandal,
and some which only appear when four or more people are playing)
and magical suits of armor (the Aegis of Zeus and Ethereal Plate
Mail). A small sampling of other objects includes: Binding Salve,
which attaches the hapless opponent to the floor; the Rust spell,
which destroys the opponent's weapon; and Shadowgate, which
teleports the opponent to the player's current location. Many of these
objects and spells can be counteracted by the use of other objects
found in the maze.

Devious use of these items and
hand-to-hand combat against one or
more human opponents is the heart
of Minotaur.
Minotaur provides for varied interactions between the players, from
simple messaging to commands
which support the making of alliances. It's a sort of Groupware for
the entertainment set. In the end, of course, there can be no more than
one player left standing, so alliances never last.
Game play strategies vary, but the basic technique is the same:
gather enough goodies to make a focused attack on one opponent,
do your worst, and then, escape to regroup. Naturally, this is not as
easy as it sounds. The player must understand the strengths of each
object and sort the objects so they may be used quickly and decisively
when in battle. The player must also be concerned with defensive
equipment and quick means of escape, since the opponent will be at
least as well armed and probably will be expecting the attack.

Donald Segretti Memorial Strategies
1. Seal The Forcewall, Luke!
Seal off a dead-end corridor with a Forcewall spell as soon as a
Stalker wanders in. Then, cast a Shadowgate spell to teleport an
unsuspecting opponent into the trap. Then, use the Feather of Levitation or an Inverse Space spell to escape the danger zone, leaving
one's poor opponent to be pummeled by the Stalker until the Forcewall expires.
2. That Old Lack Of Magic
Pick up a good non-magic weapon and armor. Then, create the
same type of sealed chamber as described in the "Seal The Forcewall,
Luke!" strategy. Shadowgate several opponents into the chamber and
follow this up with a Negate Magic spell. Of course, all of their
magical weapons and potential spells will no longer work. Of course,
it is wise to have an emergency exit plan, just in case one has
miscalculated.
3. Department Of Transposition
On those occasions where one finds himself or herself entrapped
by a nefarious opponent, the Sceptre of Transposition has tremendous value. It enables one to transpose positions with the enemy. It
is, essentially, the artifact most suited for hoisting one's opponents
on their own petard. On a different tack, the Stasis Crystal prevents
the player from being teleported into a trap, even by a teleporter.
4. Playing The Stalk Market
The Armageddon room, found at the end of each game, is a very
intense challenge where the player faces all opposing forces, plus the
Stalkers, in a tiny space. Fortunately, there are ways to avoid the
Stalkers, however. One can use an Inverse Space or Feather of

Review
Levitation spell and hide inside/above one of the walls. Or, blow out
one of the walls so that the Stalkers wander out. This strategy makes
it more likely that the game's climax will be a "High Noon" style
duel among human players.

Net Results
Minotaur is an engaging and playable game. It works well over a
standard AppleTalk network and seems to be quite solid. In hours
upon hours of play, nothing whatsoever
was found that would qualify as a bug.
There are some idiosyncrasies, however.
First, the game makes absolutely no
use of the Macintosh mouse. Although
expert players may work best when they
are able to issue rapid-fire command sequences from the keyboard, new players
may find the large number of command
keys somewhat intimidating. Also, it is
fairly easy to accidentally drop an item
in the heat of battle instead of using it or
to cast a spell instead of using an item.
Second, the game (as might be expected) moves as slowly as the slowest
machine on the network. With a Macintosh II connected to a Macintosh LC via lightly loaded AppleTalk, the keyboard did not always
respond immediately. The result was that both players tended to
bump into walls and miss making turns in the maze, despite efforts
to the contrary. This was a slight frustration. The moral is to use the
fastest machines available.
Third, there is no real single-player game. The "One Player Exploration" option exists merely to allow the player to practice naviga-

tion, spellcasting and item examination. I realize, of course, that
creating a computer player who plays as well as a human opponent
would be nearly impossible in a game such as this. Still, it would
have been nice if Bill was, at least, capable of doing some basic tricks
and putting up a fight when attacked. The game is intended for
multi-player use only, but this player sometimes wished, late at night,
to have even a crude computer opponent against whom to test and
hone his meager skills.
Finally, players are arbitrarily retired after they participate in 50 matches, regardless of skill level. This keeps any one player
from becoming far more powerful than others in the game. This limitation, like socialism, may have a noble purpose in
redistributing wealth (whether it be artifacts and skills within the game or real-life
property in the political system), but it goes
against the grain of human nature and is
likely to disappoint many true FRP garners
accustomed to the ever-expanding abilities
of their favorite characters.
Minotaur addresses a more hard-core
gaming audience than other network games
like Spectre. There is definitely a learning curve to the game. With
a group of dedicated opponents, this can make for deep and longlasting challenges which evolve and become more sophisticated (and
devious) over time. This game has no obvious "system" for victory.
Fans of mindless violence may prefer a less complex game. Those
who enjoy fast-thinking and ad-lib strategizing will find long-lasting
enjoyment from this game.

Sneak Preview

Where in the Gallup Poll is the
Karma Chameleon?
Cineplay Tosses Power Politics Into The Ring
by Johnny L. Wilson

The following article is a Sneak Preview. It is an advance
look at a work in progress and, as such, may not reflect the
full perspective on the finished product. CGW presents this
article for purposes of topicality and interest as the presidential election approaches.
n 1948, the cover of Life magazine showed a picture of
Thomas E. Dewey crossing the San Francisco Bay on a
ferry boat. The banner headline was "The Next President" with no question mark and no weasel words to indicate
that Dewey could possibly lose. The New York Times, The
Wall Street Journal, Time and Newsweek all predicted a
Republican sweep. Alistair Cooke, the commentator who was
later to introduce so many "masterpiece" productions to the
PBS audience, entitled his Manchester Guardian column for
November 1, "Harry S. Truman, A Study in Failure." The
Chicago Tribune printed its morning edition well in advance
with a banner headline that read, "DEWEY BEATS TRUMAN."
The pundits were wrong.
Truman managed to beat
Dewey with a ferocious,
fighting campaign that was
often called the "Whistle Stop
Campaign" (so-called for the
Republican charge that Truman's presidential train
stopped at every little whistle
stop on the president's trek
westward to accept an honorary degree at the University of
California at Berkeley). Truman's "human touch," reported one paper, was what
had turned the tide. Cineplay's Power Politics allows
gamers to run the same kind
of hard-hitting presidential
campaign that Truman ran to
a degree no presidential election game has ever done before.
Up to three players can "hot seat" (take turns at the same
computer keyboard and monitor) campaigns of four, eight or
twelve weeks in simulated duration for "almost" any election
(authentic or imaginary) from 1960 to the present.

I

Windows on the Political Process
Power Politics runs under Microsoft Windows and is, potentially, to presidential election games what the serious twoplayer (no Al) simulation from Campaigns & Elections
magazine, On The Campaign Trail, was to senatorial campaigns. The latter allowed player candidates to create targeted
mailings using specific demographics and issues; produce
issue-oriented commercials and make media buys using ratings/time slot information; bring in celebrities related to the
party's platform; hold fund raisers; and make personal appear-

ances. It did not allow player candidates to create their own
profiles (one had to campaign with the fictitious candidates
provided) and did not offer an interesting debate mechanism.

Power Politics allows player candidates (whether based on
real candidates or custom-designed candidates) to make national, state or city-by-city media buys on specific issues; hold
fund raisers; make issue-oriented campaign appearances;
schedule the vice-presidential candidate's speeches and fund
raisers (an elegant and useful touch); research national, state
and city opinion polls; order dirty tricks and participate in
debates centered around four campaign issues.
The flow of play is relatively fast and elegant, centering
around a simple "point and click" interface. When the game
begins, players either create their own candidate or load one
of the standard candidate files for Democrats (from JFK and
RFK up through the current crop), Republicans (from Nixon,
without running mate Lodge or later candidate Goldwater, to
Baker, Buchanaan, Bush, Duke and, inexplicably, George
Wallace) and Independents (Perot, Wallace, Jackson,
Schwarzkopf, Commoner,
Powell et.al.). Then, one
presses typical on-screen
Windows buttons to select
the options for: campaign
funding (limited, normal or
exorbitant), debate frequency (one, two, three or an
unlimited number per week),
random events (none, few or
normal), campaign length
(four, eight or 12 weeks), incumbency advantage (none,
some, significant) and random news (sparse, normal or
prolific).
Once the options are decided upon, each candidate
plots his/her vice-presidential candidate's schedule for
the first full week (pointing and clicking on one state for each
day and whether the candidate will be fund raising or campaigning) and then, his/her own schedule for each day. One
clicks on the state where one wishes to campaign and chooses
each campaign action within that state from a menu. Each
action drains a certain amount of energy and, as in Strategic
Simulations, Inc.'s election classics (President Elect and
President Elect '88), fatigue can cause candidates to alienate
special interests and voters.

Speaking on the Issues
Each campaign action will center on a particular issue
(abortion, gun control, taxes, education, environment, nuclear
power, health care, death penalty, crime, unemployment, defense cuts, and civil rights) and the demographics for each
city/state will affect how the candidate's position on that issue

Sneak Preview
will affect the voters. Since the issues are so important, the
wise candidate will check to see how his/her positions match
up with the positions on that issue held by the majority of
voters in a given state.
When I campaign in a state, I immediately find exact
matches between my candidate file and the state's demographics. Then, I check my overall standing in the state. If I
have a significant lead, I may only make one or two appearances in a state. If it is close, I will make several appearances,
as well as a media buy. In states where I have no perfect match,
I will make a statewide media buy in which I have "Image
Building" commercials blitz the state. Such commercials do
not run any risk and they can help more than appearances
where one differs from the bulk of the populous.
In states where I have some matches, I will conduct a city
poll and make appearances in those cities where I am faring
poorly, pounding away on those issues where I am in complete
agreement with the general populace.
This capacity to play "Karma Chameleon" on the campaign
trail is, at the same time, one of the game's greatest strengths
and greatest weaknesses. It is its greatest strength because it
is much more entertaining to gear one's campaign to the issues
and exploit the differences between one's opponent(s) and
oneself. I enjoy it much more than President Elect where one
simply schedules appearances with no agenda whatsoever and
On The Campaign Trail where an issue-oriented appearance
works against, as well as for, the candidate.
Unfortunately, the latter is the most realistic approach. In
the real world, Benjamin Page's "Theory of Ambiguity" is the
dominant theory in campaigning. This theory states that most
issue-oriented candidate appeals entail costly trade-offs in
support for that candidate. That
is, every definitive position alienates some voters. In On The
Campaign Trail, players are almost inevitably penalized for
any issue-oriented stances, particularly when the opponent is
smart enough to deal with amorphous leadership and unity issues.
Now, whereas a student of history might be reminded, upon
playing On The Campaign Trail,
of Truman's Dallas speech in
1948 when he assailed Dewey's
ambiguous appeals to unity
("Republican candidates are apparently trying to sing the
American voters to sleep with a
lullaby about unity. ... They
don't want unity. They want surrender."), Power Politics does
not make (at least, in the alpha version we played) any
allowances for information contamination. One can play
"Karma Chameleon" and only take a stand on abortion in
states that agree with one's position, but in the real world that
information goes all over the country. Power Politics does not
currently take this information flow into consideration. Still,
it makes for a much more interesting game than the Benjamin
Page strategy.

Dirty Tricks
Another factor that makes Power Politics more entertaining
than its predecessors is the possibility of using dirty tricks. In
the 1960s, Young Republicans like Donald Segretti and company practiced a ruthless form of campaign espionage known

euphemistically as rodent copulating (that's the closest we
will come to printing their term). They would do everything
from printing phony campaign literature for the other side to
creating traffic jams or staged demonstrations to disrupt an
opponent's schedule. Power Politics allows players to select
strategies like: political espionage, media bribes, illegal contributions, spying on opponent, investigation of opponent's
past, leaking false stories or lying about one's personal history. More typically, one can also indulge in a current fad from
both parties, the use of negative advertising. Fortunately,
Power Politics has built-in mechanisms where these tricks can
backfire on the candidate who uses them, but when one is
desperate, they are there to use.

The Great Debate
Unfortunately, the debate mechanism is largely simplified
from the elegant, but thought-provoking structure of President Elect. In the older game, player candidates had to choose
the percentage of their proposition/rebuttal they would spend
with particular tactics in order to respond to a given issue.
Player candidates might bore their simulated audience to tears
with facts ("Discuss Relevant Considerations"); cut right to
the chase with their own positions ("State Own Position"); go
for the opponent's jugular ("Attack Opponent's Position");
paint one's opponent as somewhat ludicrous ("Criticize with
Witticisms"); or attempt an end run around the issue ("Kill
Time"). By using this system, the older game allowed clever
players the opportunity to handle difficult questions, the ones
that could potentially hurt their candidacy, with such aplomb
that their answers could actually gain votes rather than lose
them.
In Power Politics, no nimble debating strategy is required.
The issues which are selected will impact voters in all 50 states
and the player candidate
has no input on answering
the questions. He/She
wins or loses on the candidate's profile on the issues
and not on a given performance. Yet, such close
elections as the 1960
Nixon-Kennedy contest
often hinged more on the
electorate's perception of
the candidate's performance rather than on the answers that they gave or the
substance of their arguments. As one who is a fan
of debating in any form, I
miss the more interactive
debate feature.

Election Night
The final returns on Power Politics will not, of course, be
in until the game is published. Our preliminary projection is
that the game will be well-received among strategy gamers
who enjoy presidential politics. It offers entertainment value
that has often been missing from simulations in the past
(opportunity to select and manipulate issues) with some new
and useful features (the ability to turn off the deadly incumbency advantage factored into the President Elect games,
presentation of useful poll data with national, state and city
breakdowns and capacity for dirty tricks). It may not offer the
most accurate demographics of political simulations and may
not accurately reflect one of the most important principles of
democratic politics, but it may well be the most enjoyable
game of presidential politics yet.

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD
"I Came, I Played, I Conquered"

Broadsides & Gripeshot
by Alan Emrich

A Grognard by
Any Other Name

Computer
WARGAMING WORLD
102
Editorial: How Much Control?
104
Sneak Preview: Castles 2
Rebuilt for Wargamers!
106
Tactics: for Aces of the Pacific
110
Replay: FireTeam 2200
114
Replay: Carrier Strike
(Evan Brooks Turns Japanese)
122
Review: Galactic Frontiers
A new strategic space conquest game
126
Preview: Spoils of War
Dave Arneson meets RAW Entertainment
132
Book Excerpts: Global Conquest: The
Official Strategy Guide by Alan Emrich
138
Replay: Conflict: Korea
142
Review: Siege
145
Tactics: Siege
147
Opponent's Wanted
148
Tactics: The Lost Admiral
152
Review: The Battle of Britain
From newcomer Deadly Games
154
Review: Fighter Town
The "big" flight simulators
Computer Wargaming World is published

twelve times a year as a free supplement in
Computer Gaming World.

his year, the CGW editorial staff will be
making it's appearance at the national
gaming convention, Origins (which is being held in conjunction with the Gen-Con Game
Fair in Milwaukee, WI). While several new
board wargames will be revealed at this gathering
of about 10,000 gamers, one computer game that
has been the focus of much discussion here is also
on schedule for release at this time.
Computer EastFront is an IBM Windows
translation of the Columbia Games boardgame
of the same name (they will also be releasing the
companion boardgame, WestFront which, hopefully, will inspire a companion computer game).
This is the game which brought up the "games
sans brains" discussions here and on Prodigy
Interactive Network some time ago. The game
has no artificial intelligence (if you play it solitaire, you must play both sides and "change
hats"), but instead offers extensive play-by-modem and E-mail features. It's a wargame designed primarily for human connectivity and we
hope it blazes a solid niche among our community of readers.

T

them of some of the hex-by-hex burdens. Those
among us with less time to spend gaming, or who
simply don't want to work as hard playing wargames as they have in the past, are attracted to
this "delegation of duties to the computer" aspect
of wargaming command. After all, when you
leave school to face those "real world" responsibilities like a career and family, time for gaming
becomes a precious commodity, so any time
saver that can be found is welcome. Generally,
then, older gamers tended to like these novel Al
features. Again, with considerable self deprecation, I've dubbed this group of gamers the "gray
hairs."
Now, not everyone fits neatly into either one
category or the other. Personally, I'm very much
both. I happen to respect and enjoy both aspects
of unit management, but have to be much more
selective about the amount of time I spend as a
control freak. The boardgame Advanced Third
Reich and computer game Second Front are my
dedicated, intensely controlled "regulars." It's a
lot easier to boot up Carrier Strike or an SSG
Civil War game and knock it around for the
evening.

Hands On Vs. Hands Off
Recently, there has been much debate stirred
by the Gary Grigsby game Carrier Strike released by SSI. It was not a debate about strategy,
pricing or customer support, however. Instead,
this debate was about the inclusion (and exclusion) of a certain element of game play. To wit:
in Carrier Strike the player assumes the role of
Nimitz or Yamamoto. Thus, players can order
their fleets out and launch air strikes from their
carriers, but land-based air operations are beyond
the player's control. Instead, they are handled by
the game's AI. Similarly, search aircraft from
individual ships cannot be moved willy-nilly,
hex-by-hex under direct human guidance, but
instead fly in correct search "patterns," again
conducted by the game's AI.
This has upset many wargamers. Some of us
actually like to control every aircraft and soldier
in the Pacific Theater during WWII. After all,
many of us have been board gamers for years,
where such direct player control is mandated.
However, among the many innovations which
computers have brought to traditional board wargamers is the advent of limiting one's command
abilities. The many games from SSG (particularly among the plethora of Battlefront clones) all
emphasized this loss of direct player control. As
I discussed this entire matter with others, I believe
it was Jim Dunnigan who, in a comment on
GEnie, labeled such players "control freaks," a
name which I've stuck with for its self deprecating humor and biting ring.
On the other end of the spectrum are the wargamers who like to have the game's Al relieve

What I want to do in presenting this discussion
is to get wargame designers to think about what
level of control they will force players to give or
take from a game's engine. In the best of all
possible worlds, a wargamer could ask the Al to
perform any specific task (or phase) and then
allow the human player to peruse the computer's
orders and make any specific changes or tweaks
desired.
A pipe dream? No. Seeing is believing and I've

seen this very feature included in H igh Command, the new strategic wargame from Colorado
Computer Creations. There, players can delegate out any part of a game turn on a
phase-by i.Onc,satheproduibn
handled by the computer, one can go in and
change the building of submarines to cruisers or
armor as each production site is inspected. Hopefully, in future games, players will have the option to control as much or as little of the minutiae
as desired (with the default being an "historical"
setting).

Politically Incorrect
Finally, I've been called on the carpet (by my
fellow gamers on some of the networks) for my
use of the insensitive terms "control freak" and
"gray hair." If this should offend, I can only
recommend not taking things so seriously.
Gamers are considered "different" by the rest of
society and are often perceived as being "pointy
headed." Bask in it. Revel in your weirdness. I'm
a wargamer, both a control freak and a gray hair,
and I'm proud of it. You should be, too.

The real story
by Alan Emrich
The following article is a sneak preview of a work in progress. It
is not intended to provide a "Buy" or "Don't Buy" recommendation
for our readers, but solely to inform our readership of what we
consider to be a very interesting, upcoming product.

N

ature, like most slovenly

gamers I know, abhors a
vacuum. In the case of
the death of a powerful monarch, it leaves a void that simply
must be filled. Like the death of
Alexander the Great, when
King Charles of Bretagne died
heirless, the powerful warlords
he had led needed to choose a
leader from amongst their
ranks. Quickly, the issue became heated and, amidst the
chaos of the ensuing power
struggle, only one warlord
could emerge triumphant. For
players of Interplay's forthcoming Castles 2, this will require more than mere castle
building.

Laying a New Castles Foundation
Where Castles was, in effect, "Sim Mason," Castles 2 is more of
a Perry Mason. Designed from the beginning as a heads-up strategy
(dare I say "war?") game, players must use all of the cunning and
wisdom of that famous TV lawyer if they are to navigate the
treacherous seas of intrigue and diplomacy. The head that wears the
crown in Castles 2 is truly heavy. The plots and intrigues are vast
and can be influenced by a mind numbing myriad of player options.
What was once a solitaire only game that quickly became just
another brick in the wall, Castles 2 is a five-sided contest worthy of
any power politics strategy game. Played on a fixed map, a pre-game
screen allows users to adjust the initial placements of commodities
(the gold, timber, food and iron which are the key element of the
game's economic engine). Starting territories are also randomized a
bit for each player, include the odd province here and there belonging
to the Pope. From this opening screen players can toggle on and off
many of the "extraneous" features (films, music, plot and the tactical
battle resolution system) so that they can just concentrate on straightforward empire building. Still, the richness that is promised in this
opening screen is vast, indeed.
Played in "real time" (i.e., the clock is always ticking), difficult
decisions must be made under a realistic sense of urgency, as one's
enemies plot and time their moves against the peace of the player's
own demesne. Truly, the "real time" aspect of a multi-player strategy

game almost begs for modem play. (It is my understanding that if
and when a first supplement disk is produced, the modem play feature
is first on the list for inclusion—welcome news for strategy gamers).
To speed through the few lulls in the action, players can simply "lean"
on the right mouse button and the game will proceed at warp speed
until interrupted by the next event
occurring.
Castles 2 is played on an area
map of that part of Bretagne
where the civil war is taking
place. There are five warlords and
the Pope, all vying to create a
hegemony over the land. Naturally, each area offers its owner a
certain commodity and the economic system of the game is
based on stockpiling these resources which include: food,
stone/timber, and the extremely
important metals of iron and gold.
Securing access and constantly
mining/refining/harvesting these
resources is the key to wealth and,
as in many fine strategy games,
wealth is the key to power. Of
course, securing good relationships with other players (particularly
the Pope), is only slightly less important. Let them deteriorate and
you'll have saboteurs flooding your lands. Let them deteriorate
enough with the Pope and watch out for the dreaded "black cross of
excommunication (i.e., this is the Pope's way of declaring "open
season" on a player).

Halls of Administration
Players will spend most of their time playing Castles 2 in trying to
efficiently divide their abilities (and attention) between several tasks.
At the beginning of the game, one has low ratings in the three
attributes of administration, military and political. To perform a task,
such as recruiting soldiers, requires a certain commitment of one's
military attributes over a period of time. Optionally, players can
throw some political or administrative talent behind the task to help
expedite it, but often this will leave them without enough points to
conduct a critical task in those areas.This will commit that player to
the option and reveal a "time bar" which counts down the days until
completion. Every decision is a trade off in Castles 2, and concentrating one's resources "here" (say, recruiting soldiers) means that
they won't be available "there" (say, for sabotaging a neighbor). At
least, not until the player has raised their ratings points by successfully conducting endeavors over a period of time.
One activity that a player can perform is to call a council meeting

Sneak Preview
of his knights. This will tell a player his ranking in strata of warlord
prestige and indicate which players have been either blessed or
excommunicated from His Holiness. It also presents a report on any
unrest in friendly provinces and a quick breakdown of where a
player's score is coming from.
Players will generally have a score (assuming the scoring system
survives intact through further playtesting) between 2,000 and 5,000
points. Points are, naturally, awarded for one's ability, stocks of
good, territories owned, favorable relations with other players and
"wise decisions" made in reaction to the various story lines (which,
I understand, can change from game-to-game — i.e., there's likely
to be some kind of dynamic intelligence built into the storylines that
adapts them to on-board circumstances in such a way as to make
today's "wise decision" into tomorrows blunder). When a player's
score is high enough, the Pope nominates that player for king and,
unless knocked down a few pegs pretty quickly by the other players,
the game will end with that player winning.

"Don't Bother Me Now!"
At the game's beginning, a player can be performing no more than
three tasks and no more than one
which concentrates on each
prime attribute. Each task, if successful, increases the chance that
a player's attributes will rise and
unsuccessful use of attributes
can lower them quickly (particularly one's military attribute,
which is subject to rise and fall
with the army). Thus, persistance is the key to empire buildA whole political subgame
goes with the smoothly integrated economic and military aspects of Castles 2. Scouting,
spying, parleys and sabotage become standard tools of "diplomatic warfare." The diplomatic
front is an ever fluctuating area,
however. Many plot lines in the game's stories (the same types that
added so much flavor to the original Castles) feature diplomatic
byplay. Still and always, though, one must keep appeasing the Pope
(who looks ascance at attacking any other player in his good standing). Many "off board" characters are included in the storylines (such
as the widowed Queen, mercenaries, et al) who can aid or hinder a
player.

Where's The Castles?
The castles are built in a simplified manner and are used to fortify
a province to make it less vulnerable to enemy attack. Naturally, it
requires a huge expenditure in time, resources and abilities. Players
can still custom design their walls, towers, doors and keeps, but need
not worry about the brick-by-brick details. Selecting the ground,
design and building plan (keep first, outward, inward or even) is all
that is needed. No more attention is necessary. Custom designs can
be saved and reused in different territories. Players better make sure
that they are happy with their original choices, however, as the game
makes no provision for returning to a territory and expanding the
castle.

Who Goes There?
The two different troop types have been slightly expanded. Not
only can a player recruit infantry and archers, but also knights (very

expensive). Knights are great in an open battle, but less effective in
seiges. That's what the even more expensive array of seige equipment is for.
In addition to fielding an army, one must maintain it. Every spring,
the play must have ample reserves of gold to pay them and every fall
they must be supplied food for the winter. Postponement (or worse,
failure) to meet these obligations results in desertion that can quickly
lead to ruin.

I

The Black Market

Trade is another key element of play. One does not always start
out with access to a balanced economy. Gold is needed for virtually
everything, but when it comes time to feed the troops in the fall, they
can't eat gold. The same is true when the army marches. Since, as
we all know, they march on their stomachs, if there's no food, they'll
stay put. Iron is required to recruit infantry, timber for archers and
castle building, and many endeavors require appropriate commodities. If one doesn't have them, they must either be conquered (not
always feasable) or traded for. While sending a merchant to a
neighboring province may or may not net the player a good deal (over
time), visiting the local "Abdul's
Select Shoppe" just outside the
castle wall will present a quick
exchange opportunity at the
black market. While quick, the
prices are high and more than
once has this trader met with traitors who took his goods and gave
nothing in return. (If I wanted
that, I'd pay more taxes [grin]).

Siege Burgher
The combat system features
three types of units: infantry,
archers and cavalry. Many battles will be fought in the open,
tactically. This will use a system
which is enhanced from the
original Castles, but does not offer any visual enhancement from the isolated figures of the first
product, although it is fair to speculate that a more detailed "module"
might be forthcoming as an add-on product, should Castles 2 be a
hit. Sieges are conducted with the building of various siege equipment (catapults, ballistia, siege towers and so forth). In the alpha
version examined, however, the integration of these tactical combat
features was not yet in. However, players who enjoyed the original
Castles will find the systems similar, with improvements and additions in the new Castles 2 version of tactical combat.

Mini-Movies
Castles 2 has some terrific plot lines already (many more will be
added by its release this fall) and includes ambient video ("mini-movies") to accentuate play. These black and white bits of animation are
amusingly appropriate and, a brief (and welcome) respite from the
real-time tension of the game. Players will be particularly amused at
seeing the king's reaction to "bad news" and inspired to see the troops
preparing for battle.
Castles 2 has evolved into a fine game of strategy and management
set in a medieval motif. Rich in detail yet easy to understand and
control, Interplay seems to be finding a nice balance while "building" Castles 2. This game won't be for the SimCity crowd that the
original Castles might have particularly appealed to, but strategy
gamers are going to want to take a look at this one.

Strategy

y now, anyone who has decided to brave the challenge
of torpedo bombing in Aces of the Pacific knows that it
is not as easy as swooping in, dropping a torpedo and
watching the ship roll over. Torpedo bombers are slower, less
maneuverable craft than most computer pilots are used to and
torpedoes (especially the Mark 13) are weapons that are much
less reliable than most garners prefer.

B

Running Down The Checklist
First off, a look at the equipment is in order. The aircraft, a
Grumman TBF Avenger, is called "Turkey" with good reason:
It's slow and easy to shoot at. The game's documentation
states that the Avenger could take a large amount of damage
and still fly, but anyone who experiences a couple of involuntary splashdowns is likely to think they're talking about
another airplane. The flight manual, after all, implies that the
top speed is about 270 mph. Well, that's what it might do in
the states, but out over the Pacific, one is only likely to see
that speed going downhill with
a tailwind. In general, pilots
can plan on reaching 225-230
mph in level flight with a fish
strapped to the plane's belly
and two crewmen in the back
(a radioman and a gunner), trying to protect the plane's "six"
with two .30-cal.'s for firepower.

Learning To Drop
A Torp
Training is a priority for
those who want to put a live
warshot into the side of a Japanese boat. Players select "Torpedo Bombing" from the "Training Mission" menu and immediately find themselves on a weapon run towards a derelict

by Mark Crowe
vessel. With flaps halfway down and airspeed throttled down
50%, it should be possible to descend to cherubs one (one
hundred feet) and level out, aiming slightly forward of amidships. As the airspeed drops
toward 100 mph, the
Avenger should gradually
lose altitude as it approaches the target. The
best chance of putting a live
fish into the target is to release at an altitude of 20-40
feet with a speed of less then
100 mph. The flight manual
recommends a drop about
1,000 yards from the target.
Since there aren't any yard
markers out there, however,
experienced pilots will soon
discover that dropping the
fish about 3 ship's lengths
away from the target works
out to be 1,000 yards, give
or take. Then, immediately after release, one should go to full

Strategy
yards, give or take. Then, immediately after release, one
should go to full throttle and begin a slight right-hand climb
away from the vessel. After 30-60 seconds, one either gets a
report of successful results or discovers that he has dropped a
log. Either way, it's time to hit the ESC button to end the
mission. Then, one can simply keep using the Replay Mission
option in order to go up against the derelict until one masters
the technique.

Going To Battle
Once the training is over, it's time to face someone who can
shoot back. Select "Anti-Shipping Strike" in the "Fly Single
Mission" menu. Then, it's time to set preferences, check the
flight map and verify that there is, indeed, a Mark 13 fish on
board. Sometimes, the ordnance men load the wrong payload
by mistake and a cautious pilot is more likely to remain a live
pilot.
CAUTION: Tokyo Rose
was able to get some misinformation into the briefing packet
about the skills of the Japanese
pilots. Anytime one's intelligence briefing claims that
there are only Novice Pilots
flying in the area, one should
automatically prepare to face
the enemy aces which will,
more than likely, be (f)lying in
ambush. Regular Pilots is,
however, an indicator that
there are more reasonable opponents in the vicinity.
After clicking on "Begin
Mission," pilots will find
themselves on the deck of a
flattop (or possibly in the dust of Henderson Field) and ready
to take-off. Once airborne, of course, it is tempting to use
autopilot to speed up the trip to the target, but the trade-off is
the loss of the ability to conceal oneself and the likelihood of
getting bounced by fighters on patrol.

Staying Alive On The Way To
The Target
If a pilot is bounced by enemy fighters, it is possible to run,
but even more probable that once the Japanese fighters have
seen one of the good guys, that they'll stick on his tail like
glue. Naturally, the gamer's chances of beating the aggressors
is slim (Where is a fighter escort when it's needed?) and the
Avenger may end up imitating a porpoise before the player
knows it. About all one can reasonably do is initiate evasion
tactics to their utmost (especially the skid), listen to the gunner
and try to stay alive long enough for the gunners to knock out
the fighters.

Sinking Some Ships
Once the target area is acquired, one can choose which target
or targets are of primary consequence. Pilots get to make the
decision between concentrating on a single target or sending
their flight against multiple targets. If there is a high value unit
in the group such as a battleship or cruiser, there is a better
chance to watch her roll over if everyone is sent against her
alone.

Note that while special tactics, like the anvil, look great on
paper, they are extremely difficult to setup with a limited radio
vocabulary. Also, any pilots who use the autopilot option to
get to the target area will find that it tends to dump one right
on top of the target area at about angels five, not a good
position for a weapon run. So, it will be immediately necessary for those who arrived via autopilot to descend. Diving
away from the targets to cherubs five and slowing to about
60% power before turning back toward the target should
accomplish quite a bit, particularly as the player continues to
descend to cherubs one. AA fire tends to get thick around
angels three and thins out as one drops below cherubs four,
but the enemy gunners must need better glasses because they
don't often score any good hits. Now, it's time for that final
run, deja vu from that practice with the derelict. Once the drop
is made and the plane heads outbound, pilots will want to stay
low in order to avoid AA. There simply isn't much below
cherubs two.

Cleaning Up And
Heading Home
After the drop, the only
thing left to do is damage
assessment. Many pilots
may find it cathartic to pump
some lead into the Japanese
boats, but it does little or no
damage and wastes ammo
that might be needed later,
especially if one is bounced
on the homeward trip. Once
one's flight has dropped all
torps, using the autopilot option should get one back to
one's carrier (or field). Then
it's off to the debriefing to
find out how successful, or unsuccessful, the mission actually
w as.

Bugs on the Windscreen
There are several things that may make missions unpleasant
when flying the Avenger. Among them is the fake novice pilot
gambit brought up earlier. Also, finding out one has been
loaded for strike when one is supposed to have a torpedo is
something else that can cause serious gnashing of teeth and
joystick destruction. Loss of aircraft control can also be a
problem. If the latter occurs, (usually
while evading an inbound fighter), one
should hit F10 and recalibrate the system. Otherwise, one is stuck with a
craft that will not respond to any input
and one's on-screen alter ego soon becomes cannon fodder. Being prepared
for these problems may make them less
bothersome when they crop up.
Well, now it is time to head out and
send some enemy sailors swimming.
Good luck and good shooting.

Circle Reader Service #59

Replay

Merger Most Foul —

Corporate Warfare in the 23rd Century
A Replay of RAW Entertainment's

Fireteam 2200
hen alien task force meets corporate mercenaries, the action
can be fast and furious. This
article serves to describe futuristic armored combat between mercenary
groups within the setting of RAW Entertainment's Fireteam: 2200, a tactical simulation of an era when
corporations resolve market disputes
with tanks instead of lawsuits. In this
episode, a Centauri Faction task force
(controlled by the computer) has been
sent to capture a mining village, while
our smaller (human-controlled) Lumani Corporate team (aka Peckforce)
has been assigned the heroic task of
delaying the advance.

W

Not Exactly
Think-Tanks
There are two crucial facts one must
understand about Fireteam: 2200.
First, players only give general orders
to their units, and second, 23rd Century
soldiers are incredibly stupid. Other
than the Command Tank, which is personally controlled by the player, vehicles are given up to three objectives.

Since Peckforce had to reach the village quickly, speed was a prime consideration. Helicopters and hovercraft are
fast and heavily armed, but their thin
armor dooms them to a one-way flight.
Conversely, the heavier tanks are too
slow. We finally opted for five vehicles: two recon tanks, which combine
speed with good armor; a third, more
heavily armed, medium hovertank for
quick fire support; a light tank for its
speed and economy; and finally, to add
real muscle, a slow but devastating
heavy tank to serve as the Peckforce
command vehicle. Ideally, the lighter
vehicles would screen the enemy Centauris from the village while the heavy
tank waddled up.

lighter vehicles moved in a straight diagonal path toward the bridge, while
our heavy tank took a road that ran due
east and then straight north into the
town. Although the dog-leg path was
longer, it was quicker, because all vehicles move faster on roads. Ironically,
the behemoth reached the bridge at
about the same time as the other tanks,
who, naturally, took the nature walk
through the scattered woods in their
paths.

Where's A Traffic Cop
When You Need One?

Mix-and-Match
Mercenaries
When the call came into the Peckforce HQ, we knew we had to move fast
before the Centauris overran the objective. The first task would be to put
together the right kind of task force to
fit the mission. Even with 23rd Century
technology, choosing units for an armor group involves tradeoffs between
speed, armor and firepower.

by Michael Peck

The problem is that they will head
straight for those objectives without
bothering to take the best route. Thus,
a tank told to head toward a village will
go in a straight line through woods and
towns, although a nearby road offers a
much faster route. Plotting vehicles to
negotiate a road with several turns is an
ordeal. This is a common problem in
tactical games like Kampgruppe, but
surprising in a game where the computer-navigated tanks are 300 years
more advanced. Given this limitation,
we elected to make the heavy tank the
Peckforce command vehicle. Under
human control, it could take the road all
the way to the objective. Otherwise, it
would never reach the battle in time.

Over Hill and Over Dale
At precisely 7:00, Peckforce clanked
and hovered toward its objectives: the
bridge south of the town, the town center (where the Centauri objectives were
located) and finally our objectives
north of the town, respectively. The

At the bridge came the first lesson in
traffic management, when Sparky (recon tank) blocked the path of Waco Kid
(light tank). In Fireteam, when one
tank's path is blocked by another, the
blocked vehicle does not wait a turn or
two for the obstruction to clear. Instead,
the tanks moved around the obstacle,
which in this case meant they became
tangled in the woods along the road.
Shouting imprecations about our
troops' ancestry, we plowed our heavy
tank over the bridge.
Our haste grew when the airwaves
crackled with frantic voices and the
boom of a 120-millimeter cannon as the
commander of the Terminator (the
hovertank) reported engaging the enemy inside the town. Although a
datalink to Terminator would have
shown the positions of the Centauri
units, we were too busy driving our
tank to spend three or four turns watching a datalink display. Instead we drove
straight up the road, while the smaller
vehicles fanned out towards their objectives. The village may have been
pretty, but the drive was nerve-wracking as the burg's modest sky-line
blocked line-of-sight.
A left turn around a corner, and bang!
— we find two Centauri recon tanks

Replay
surrounding a nearly crippled Terminator. It would have been nicer to engage
them at long range with our big Gauss
Cannon, but we're a mobile fortress
and we decided to risk it. Unfortunately, this meant that the Command
Tank was to become everyone's target,
when, after another exchange, the Terminator dissolved in a puff of greasy
smoke. Still, we had an awesome Gauss Cannon and a
105-millimeter secondary
gun. Surprise! Only one
weapon can be brought to
bear at a time. So the Gauss
Gun fired every other turn,
while the two Davids were
firing two shots to our one,
and maneuvering to take us
in the flank.
Meanwhile, our recon
tanks had reached their objectives, but taking the time
to order them to help us
would have kept us from being able to fire in our own
defense. Fortunately, a heavy
tank can take a lot of punishment, and our Gauss Cannon managed
to deal with both of our opponents before we suffered any critical hits. In the
meantime, Sparky took out a third recon tank.
Scarred but whole, the command tank
moved north, as Sparky came under fire
and suddenly went off the air. As we
rumbled toward the scene of the firefight, there was another surprise in a
nearby woods. It was a Centauri laser
tank with nasty dual can-openers, moving south. Since we were both moving,
our first shots missed. As it moved past
us into the village center, it disappeared
off our scanners, so we reversed to get
it before it picked off our light vehicles.
We went down the road and our opponent announced his presence with a
laser shot that damaged our scanner.
Gauss bolt and laser beam crisscrossed
through the superheated air as we
banged away at each other. Now, the
speed of the heavy tank became a liability; the Centauri had taken cover
among the houses and it would take
time for our behemoth to enter built-up
terrain (moving would also throw off
our aim). There were more hits on our
scanner and propulsion systems. Fortunately, however, a few hits from our big

gun managed to dispatch the Centauri
to wherever mercenaries regroup.
With most of the Centauris destroyed
and our objectives taken, we had accomplished our mission and earned
both glory and cash. It was too bad
about Terminator and Sparky, but
wherever they were, we knew they
were glad to see us split their shares.

Debriefing
All in all, the battle went well for
Peckforce. We reached the village just
in time to prevent the Centauri recon
tanks from overrunning their objectives. We did lose two of our five vehicles, partially because they engaged the
enemy piecemeal as a result of the tangle at the bridge. Other than better traffic control, the choice of a hover was
probably unwise; a better armored recon tank could have reached the village
just as fast.
The key to this battle was our heavy
tank, or rather its use as a command
vehicle. Heavy tanks and self-propelled guns are too unwieldy unless
human-controlled (or unless they can
travel straight down a road).
In turn, the battle demonstrated that
the most important vehicle in Fireteam
is the command tank. Players who enjoy zipping about the battlefield should
pick helicopters and hovercraft. Those
who like point-blank gun duels should
pick heavier vehicles. For the most
part, the rigidity of computer-controlled units means the command unit is the
only piece that can function as a reliable
reserve, reinforcing threatened areas or
maneuvering for a flank shot.

But don't be fooled by the size of a
vehicle. Although a heavy tank mounts
three weapons, only one can be brought
to bear on a given target. The secondary
weapons can be useful for firing smoke
or high-explosive ammunition against
infantry, or as spares should the main
weapon be damaged. But unlike the
gargantuan tanks in Ogre/GEV, big vehicles can't take out armored
divisions in a single volley.
Further, our battle with the
two smaller tanks showed
that enough rounds will damage even the most heavily armored target. The best
defense is positioning vehicles correctly. Even in the
23rd Century, the vulnerable
spots are the flanks and rear.
This is especially important
for units like hovercraft and
helicopters, which have
"glass" tails. Conversely,
when human-controlled, the
airborne craft can maneuver
quickly for a flank shot.
Finding cover under tire is
a tricky proposition. Sometimes, a helicopter or hovercraft can quickly move
out of firing range or line of sight, but
a heavy tank will find it difficult to get
out of the way. Sometimes, the only
defense is to lay smoke or grit teeth and
fire back.
As the game amply demonstrated,

Fireteam puts a lot of strain on the
command vehicle. Unfortunately, the
load is usually overwhelming. For example, datalinking enables a player to
see the sensor scans from other vehicles
and get a true picture of the battle, but
datalinking means a player can't control his tank or fire his weapons. In the
middle of a firefight, it takes great selfcontrol to cease firing and absorb hits
while issuing orders to other units. The
only solution is to park somewhere
safe, or plot a long movement path in
advance, before datalinking. The alternative is to buy a cheap command tank
or recon chopper and sit outside the
battle giving orders. But this reduces
the most flexible combat unit to a spectator. So, for this commander, once the
battle starts, it's everyone for himself.
One factor is certain, however, those
aliens will be back —breathing murder
instead of merger.

The Rising Evan

CARRIER
STRIKE
C

A Campaign Replay
(Part II)

by M. Evan Brooks
arrier Strike is one of the few simulations that this

reviewer just could not put down. Thus, this replay will
cover the campaign, but from the Japanese side. Also,
strategic and tactical suggestions will be offered for the
player's edification.

bombers make up for the deficiency in this early part of the
Pacific War.

I. Coral Sea
It is 8 May, 1942. My assignment is to seize Port Moresby
and cause as much damage to the American fleet as possible.
Enemy activity is noted as heavy, but I am confident that my

II. Midway

carriers will carry the day. Since I have four carriers (Hiryu,
Soryu, Kaga and Akagi), I am sure that I outgun the American
opposition.
As I am to learn later, the Americans get three fleet carriers
— Yorktown, Enterprise, and Hornet. Utilizing Japanese float
planes (a tremendous advantage; the Japanese do not have to
divert dive bombers from their more "critical" tasks), I find
the American carriers in short order. Multiple strikes (three in
a day) lead to the sinking of all three American carriers as well
as two heavy cruisers, a light cruiser and four destroyers (an
additional nine destroyers suffer varying degrees of damage).
My losses are minimal; minor damage to the Hiryu, a battleship and two heavy cruisers and a destroyer (although a light
cruiser and three destroyers are sunk), but the loss of American carriers is devastating.
Early spotting efforts coupled with the Japanese ability to
strike with a longer range yield a tremendous advantage. The
worst possible scenario is to begin with the Japanese and
American forces within close proximity of each other. However, when one must close to engage, the advantage is with
the Japanese. It is disappointing that the Japanese dive bombers can only deliver a 250-lb bomb payload (as opposed to the
American 1,000-pounder), but the better Japanese torpedo

There is NO Midway. The Americans are too weak to risk
a major engagement and simply decline battle. Another 1,000
points of mission success.
III. Port Moresby II
It is 16 July 1942. The American fleet decides to give battle
rather than surrender Port Moresby and the stepping stone to
the Australian mainland. I only get three Japanese carriers
(Hiryu, Kaga and Akagi), but I am undeterred — To the Glory
of the Emperor!
The battle lasts for three days, much to my surprise. The

Wasp had been sunk at the conclusion of day two, and I had
not expected the Americans to stick around for more. But they
did not withdraw, so I was able to cause additional damage.
Since the Japanese fleet lacks radar, one must insure that
sufficient float planes have been launched to give some warning. Even so, some American strikes seem to come unannounced, but luckily, they are small.
Confident that the Japanese surface fleet outguns the Americans, I eagerly give battle, only to suffer moderate damage. In
fact, by day three, the surface fleet disengages on its own. My
consolation is that they have given more than they have
received. Actually, my tactics have not been pretty; I was just
able to find the Americans early and launch often. In fact, this
is the key to success — like basic infantry tactics: find, fix and
destroy. However, unlike land combat operations, a mobile
reserve is a waste of assets. Use it or lose it!
Three American carriers have been sunk (Lexington, Sara-

toga and Wasp), as well as two heavy cruisers and three
destroyers. American ships damaged include a battleship, a

when losses are high. In this case, it is the first and last
appearance of the British; they must have learned not to
challenge Imperial Forces. However, Nippon has not emerged
unscathed. The Shoho has been sunk and the Shokaku damaged. Only carriers have incurred damage on both sides, but
with the American withdrawal from battle, it simply was
impossible for the Japanese to cause additional damage.

light cruiser, three destroyers and an oiler. My damage is
minimal on my three fleet carriers, although the light carrier
Shoho is going to be in dry dock for four months. A destroyer
has been sunk, and damage incurred by two light cruisers, two
destroyers and a transport (the latter of which was hit by
land-based aircraft staging from Port Moresby). Overall, another successful battle.

IV. Milne Bay
26 March 1943, and I must transport troops to Milne Bay
and engage the enemy. Enemy opposition is expected to be
moderate, and my three carriers should be sufficient to teach
the impetuous Americans another lesson in carrier warfare.
Initial launches occur at 0640, and strikes rage back and forth
across the seas. The Japanese manage to stage three strikes
during the day, and when it is over, two Allied Fleet carriers
are sunk — the Essex and the British Victorious. British
carriers can be employed to the Pacific to assist the American

Given the American declining battle often, campaign totals
are:
Victory Points:
9,823
-0Damage
7,311
534
It looks like a long haul for the Americans.

V. Milne Bay II
28 August, 1943, and enemy opposition is expected to be
heavy. That is fine; Japanese morale is high, and I am optimistic. My four carriers (Hiryu, Soryu, Shokaku and Zuikaku)

/

other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders

Circle Reader Service #86

are ready. Once again, I am lucky to find the American carriers
first and strikes are promptly launched in the early morning
hours. The enemy carriers seem to number a fleet carrier and
two light carriers (later discovered to be the Bunker Hill and
the Monterrey and Cabot respectively). Much to my chagrin,
my strikes seem to concentrate on the smaller carriers and
ignore the fleet carrier. I cannot explain this aberration, but it
just means that additional strikes are required for maximum
damage.
The American counter-strike is savaged by my CAP; literally fifty percent of the American strike is splashed. However,
a second strike bypasses my CAP entirely; luckily, it is small
and only a single hit is made on the Soryu. My second strike
is prepared and launched by 0920, but American flak is
beginning to take its toll. The American response to my strike
is destroyed by my CAP, and literally no aircraft remain to
threaten my control of the seas.

very heavy. When I examine my order of battle, I am reassured. I have six carriers (Hiryu, Soryu, Shokaku, Zuikaku,
Junyo and Hiyo). This should allow me sufficient forces to
destroy the American carriers as well as bomb the enemy
airfields!
However, the Americans are difficult to find. I begin to
worry —how many carriers does he have, and where are they?
In the meanwhile, I arm my planes with HE and strike Milne
Bay. When I do find the American carriers around 1200, there
are only two carriers. Where is the rest of his force? My strike
is not as successful as I hope, since the American task force
disappears into a cloud bank, and it takes 40 minutes for my
planes to find them.
American flak has grown more effective, and I lose 17
aircraft to flak alone. While I secure multiple hits on the fleet
carrier, the light carrier emerges unscathed. My second strike
is more successful, but my third strike attacks a surface force
only. A bad sighting report has forced me to waste a strike!
Day two of the battle is tense. I receive a report of a 235+
strike coming at my fleet. Where have the Americans been
able to mount such a strike from? The answer becomes obvious —most of it is land-based. B-25s hit a transport, but their
assault against my carriers is faulty, and they get one hit from
40 aircraft. An American sub hits my oiler, and the battle ends
after day two as the Americans withdraw.

VI. Milne Bay III
September 28 1943, and enemy opposition is expected to be

I was only able to sink a light carrier (Langley), although the
fleet carrier (Intrepid) will be laid up in repairs for five
months. Three American surface ships suffer minor damage,
but overall, it is not the imposing victory that I had been
hoping for.

VII. Milne Bay IV
The Americans have licked their wounds for months. But
now they come out; opposition is expected to be heavy. The
months of March and April seemed to offer battle, but American Forces declined to engage. The date: 1 May 1944. I plan
to destroy the American carriers once and for all.
My four carriers (Hiryu, Soryu, Shokaku, and Zuikaku)
should be enough for the task. Contact is made early, and now
I begin to worry. My flak is 1649; the American task force has
a flak value of 3472. Will
this cause a problem? Between the American CAP
and the flak, I literally lose
50% of my strike — 75
planes shot down. And my
strikes have caused little
damage; mounting everything remaining in a '
go-frbke'sti,Izoh.
In fact, only four fighters return; my bomber forces are
gone forever. I now realize
that the tide has irrevocable
turned, and hope to escape
with as little damage as possible.
With the Americans pursuing, I use my surface fleet as
a pawn. It manages to engage
the carrier task force, and allows my damaged carrier force to
escape to the north. It is severely mauled, but breaks contact
at night, and I decline to continue the battle.

VIII. Turn Tail & Run
The final two months of the Pacific War consist of my fleet
cowering in its bases. I refuse to engage; I cannot take on the
American carrier fleet, and it is counterproductive to attempt
to do so; better to surrender a thousand points per month.
The final campaign score: Japan: 30,173,U.S.: 2,720.

IX. Lessons Learned
1. FIND THE ENEMY EARLY. The Japanese have a
tremendous advantage with their float planes; the Americans
have to divert bombers. But always engage in search. While
the default pattern may give you clues, be careful and be
willing to adjust the pattern based on your intuition. Search
planes should be launched no later than 0540, so that their
reports come back at first light. A early launch (e.g. 0400) can
be counterproductive if the planes sail over a nearby enemy
fleet under cover of darkness.
2. LAUNCH EARLY; LAUNCH OFTEN. CAP should be
in the air before the search planes ever leave; it can be
launched in darkness without ill-effect and it should be present
at first light. I recommend using two-thirds of your fighters
for CAP. As for the bombers, begin launching at 0540 or 0600;
do not assign a target until you get the maximum two turns of
launches aloft. If there are no enemy task forces available,
assign an enemy airfield as the target — even if it is 500 miles
away. The strike will begin to move off, and it can be redirected to a task force when necessary. If nothing is found, the
strike will return when it realizes that it cannot accomplish the
mission. One can launch up to three strikes per day; if possible,
do it. WARNING: Version 1.2x has corrected some of the AI
flaws. It does not allow a computer opponent to sortie out until
it has accumulated a reasonable task force, but more important, it checks time in air for aircraft. Three strikes per day will

cause an attrition rate that is more historical, but totally
unacceptable to the human player. If you are using version
1.2x (available for download on GEnie), NEVER launch the
third strike unless you are positive that you can sink a carrier,
and even then, consider the consequences.
3. USE IT OR LOSE IT. Naval tactics do not use reserve
forces. Captain Hughes' classic treatise Fleet Tactics repeats
this maxim — ignore it at your own peril. While it may be
acceptable to unready those four torpedo bombers that you
could not fit into a larger strike, it is not smart to hold back a
viable strike and wait for a
better target. Remember,
strikes can be retargeted;
planes on sinking ships are
flotsam.
4. DO NOT OVERSTAY
YOUR WELCOME. Discretion is the better part of valor,
etc. You've got to know when
to withdraw. Losing carriers is
not a winning strategy; the
Japanese especially have to
understand that eventually,
they cannot win. Amass a
large lead, and don't risk it for
minimal return.
5. SURFACE COMBATANTS: THEY WERE EXPENDABLE. The name of the
simulation is Carrier Strike.
Carriers are the victory point makers. Surface combatants are
useful to mix up the carriers, but have little utility otherwise.
In fact, the carrier is probably overemphasized. Victory points
for land bombing is minimal; thus, one should always be
armed for naval attacks (Armor Piercing and Torpedoes) and
not ground targets (High Explosive). This is historically incorrect, but one must make adjustments.
6. CHEAT. Finally, if you are still having trouble, you can
`cheat' your way to victory. Besides, who's going to tell on
you? Begin a scenario, and save it immediately. Restart the
saved game, only this time with the computer as the other side.
Take notes on order of battle and locations. Finally, quit again
and resume as your original side; you have just broken the
Purple Code.
Also, remember that carrier strikes are random affairs. A
supremely successful strike can be replayed into a disaster just
by the luck of the draw. Save your game before a strike, and
if things are less than optimal, try it again.
Actually, the Al can be handily defeated, so one should
rarely have to resort to this Draconian fix. But for the novice
wanting to impress, well...

5.

Review

Spinward Go The Spaceships
Settling SoftStream's
GALACTIC FRONTIERS
play or by the player before the game
starts.
There are six different games: Beginner, Intermediate, Advanced, Home
Planet, Campaign and Custom. The
first five games vary in their length,
victory conditions, economic settings
and other parameters. The custom
game is completely configurable.

by Samuel B. Baker II
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Galactic Frontiers
Macintosh
One to four (on the same machine)
$59.95
None
Russel Lowke
Soft Stream
South Dartmouth, MA

I

t is always nice when a new hat is
thrown into the ring of computer
gaming. Both SoftStream Internations (another "SSI") and their Galactic Frontiers are new additions to this
hobby/community. While SoftStream
has launched its product line with a host
of Macintosh games (mostly based on
popular card and parlor games), Galactic Frontiers is the "different" title in
their product line.
Cut from the same cloth as Reach for
the Stars, this game casts one in the role
of a Warlord trying to impose his will
upon 24 nearby planets. The events
take place after the collapse of the First
Empire, precipitated by inadequate
communications that existed before the
invention of a trans-light drive. The
Warlord's task, then, is to reunite the
remnants of this empire under his enforced leadership.

Simians In Space
Players begin with one planet and
their choice of any of the four races;
Humanoid, Simian, Amphibian or Insecta. Each turn every planet will produce a certain number of ships
depending on the class of the planet, the
amount of industrial development and
the cost per ship. The cost per ship is
set by the type of game one chooses to

Every turn each system produces a
certain number of economic points.
The number produced may increase
with time, depending on the game settings. These economic points are immediately converted into ships at a set
rate determined at the start. Everything
that one does to develop a planet costs
one ship, except constructing a Star
Gate or Star Cannon. Star Gates or Star
Cannons (only one of these options can
be active) require the expenditure of
multiple ships over several turns. If two
systems each have a Star Gate then
travel between them takes one turn, no
matter the distance. If a system has a
Star Cannon, any ships moving from
that system move at twice normal
speed.
Normally, ships appear on the planet
that produced them, but in the Home
Planet game all ships are placed on
one's starting system. Ships move a
given number of points per turn. The
number of turns that it will take to move
to a planet can be found by grabbing a
ship and dragging it over to the destination. At the standard movement setting,
the maximum time a ship will take to
reach a planet is five or six turns. Different numbers of ships from the same
planet may be moved by pressing different combinations of the shift, command and option keys.

Random Demoralization
At the beginning of each game the
planets are shuffled and distributed randomly over space and then the players
(computer and human) are allocated.
There are five statistics for each planet,
all of which may be improved by one
level a turn. Class (from one to nine)

represents the economic ceiling for that
system. Industry (from zero to nine)
shows how much of that planet's potential has been developed. Fortifications
(zero to *) indicates how many forts
have been constructed. Each fort has
the combat effectiveness of at least two
ships in combat. Radar (also zero to
nine) shows the strength of the sensors
installed on the planet. The Tax rating
(light to cruel) tells how heavily the
beings there are being extorted.
The species have three ratings presented as percentage attributes: build
(construction aptitude), attack (offensive warfare proclivity) and defense
(defensive capacity). The Insecta are
best at production, the Amphibians are
strongest on defense, the Simians have
the fiercest offensive punch and Humanoids have, as usual, the most balanced set of attributes.
At the beginning of a turn, random
events are reported as applicable. Black
holes, for example, delay ships for several turns and, once found, will be encountered every time a ship's path gets
too near its location. Novas destroy the
system they occur in. (Ouch!) Plague
will reduce the number of ships in a
system and its output for a number of
turns. Eventually, a cure will be found
and the effects disappear. Riots occur
both as a random event and as a result
of taxation. The system under rebellion
reverts to the control of the player who
had it the longest previously. Often,
this will be the First Empire, which
owns all neutral systems at the start.
Victory may be determined by points
for battles fought and planets occupied
and developed, or by conquering all the
planets. In both cases, a turn limit is set.
There are two questions facing the
player each turn: do I spend ships to
build up my infrastructure on this
planet, and where do I engage the enemy? As quickly as possible, one
should send groups of four to five ships
to all the neutral systems that one can

Review
see at the start. Develop planets immediately and build forts. Forts defend
better than ships and help quell those
nasty tax rebellions. Start work on a
Star Cannon right away. For a long
time, the home system will provide the
majority of one's might. Getting them
to the action in a hurry can save the day.
Build the radar on frontier planets up to
four as fast as possible. Most times, it
will then be possible to concentrate
one's defense on the large incoming
raids. Once one is in contact with the
enemy, expansion should be carefully
planned and executed one planet at a
time. The other races will constantly be
sending raids to the border systems.
Until one needs a Star Cannon to get to
an enemy planet, they should be eschewed as (under some options) the
Star Cannon may then be pointed right
back at oneself.
For one's first game the Insecta are
the easiest to win with. They produce
25% more than the Simians and Amphibians, and thus provide the most
rapid base for expansion. I have vivid
memories of a game in which I played
the Amphibians and felt big and bad
having amassed c300 ships on one
planet, ready for expansion. The next

centered on the screen and the planets
are named differently for each person.

turn, the Insecta showed up with c400
and I won. There were 29 ships and five
forts left. The turn after, the c500 ship
main body showed up and reduced the
planet to rubble.

Customization and
Criticism
Every parameter of this game can be
altered, many may be turned off. For
example, each of the random events
may have its frequency raised or lowered and, in turn, each may be eliminated. I found it very easy to tailor the
game to suit my preferences. Since the
preferences may be saved, there is no
need to constantly recreate them. There
are also options that make it easy to
have multiple players share the same
machine. Each player's systems are

To pick some nits, it would help if
there was a way to page through all of
one's planets each turn to make sure
that one is not skipped, or if the planets
could change color or background
when they are modified. Further, radar
should be better explained. A popup
appears when the radar strength
reaches four, saying that one may now
detect a raid that is two turns away.
There is no explanation for levels five
through nine. Radar also only seems to
work for one system, so one cannot set
up picket systems as a tripwire for raids
to the interior of one's empire. It seems
like this should be a natural strategy.
This is a very good beer-and-pretzels
game. One can play a few turns while
waiting for a download to complete, or
at lunch time. The game is hard to walk
away from as it is always tempting to
see how the turn will be resolved, much
like trying to stop eating popcorn. If
one is looking for the next Reach for
the Stars, this isn't it. It is a simpler
game, though quite good at what it tries
to accomplish. Popcorn anyone?

by Dave ArnesonIARY: April 14, 1799 — One stinking jungle after
another. The last settlement we tried to establish perished within the fortnight. This land consumes lives like
afire consumes wood. We pray that the navy will deliver more
colonists soon or the Bluevanians will overrun us. Already
their disgusting settlements dot the land wherever we look.

D

In The Beginning
A perilous new world awaits the unwary in RAW Entertainment's Spoils of War (Spoils). Spoils is touted as a
strategic/management wargame. Players do not assume the
identity of an individual explorer (as in Seven Cities of Gold)
or the role of an Enterprising ship's captain (as in Uncharted
Waters). Rather, one assumes
the prodigious responsibilities associated with the Chief
of Colonial Exploration and
Development for a burgeoning colonial "Wannabe."
The initial phase of the
game requires astute recruitment of explorers on the
player's behalf. These explorers come in three types: Governors (with the highest
proficiency in settlement and
administration), Generals
(most proficient at exploration and fighting) and Admirals (most effective in battling
enemy ships and transporting
explorers and gold). Later in the game, Commanders can be
recruited to administer Ports and larger settlements.
Once the initial recruitment is completed, it is necessary to
consider the colony's expenditures in research and development. It is worthwhile to consider developing superior ships
and tactics at the start of the game. Such "technology" will
definitely be useful as the game progresses. The other options
are best left till later.
Then, each explorer must be equipped. There are limits as
to how many elements one explorer can handle. When an
Admiral is recruited he comes with some ships (2), supplies
and some money. Naturally, one will need to buy ships almost
immediately because the competition almost always ends up

with fleets of eight ships within a few turns. So, the very first(
logistical decision must be to make sure the Admiral has eight
ships, three-to-four Marines and at least 6,000 supply points.
Naval battles use up supplies at a fierce rate, so stock up
whenever possible.
Much the same has to be done with Generals and Governors.
Generals are better at exploring since they use up fewer
resources. At the start, they should be equipped with two
depots, two engineers, and a dozen colonists. Generals, assigned later in the game, should bring over gold and colonists.
Then, it will be possible to trade off the colonists to the
governor and use the gold to raise troops in the settlements.
This will set up the General to prey on the competition and
the natives. Generals assigned to combat duty should
have, at least, 6,000 supply
points (3 depots) when they
take to the field.
Governors are better at
making settlements and gathering 'profit' (plunder),
hence they use up fewer resources than Generals when
doing this. At the start, they
should be equipped with two
depots, two engineers, and a
dozen colonists. Later, they
may require a garrison of
troops, but colonists are the
key to developing the New
World.
Commanders are administrative lackeys. They garrison important locations, so they will need plenty of troops. Beyond
that, one merely needs to keep them loyal and well-trained.
Indeed, one needs to keep all explorer classes well-rested and
loyal. This only takes a little time and money and as well worth
it, since it is hard to send out new explorers to replace them.
Plus, whenever an explorer is lost, everything that they have
is lost with them.
Occasionally, an explorer will volunteer their services.
When one lacks funds, this is a great boon. One can use the
explorer immediately or, here's a nasty idea, exploit them and
dismiss them. It is entirely feasible to have the unfortunate sell
everything they own; 'unload' the gold into the player's own

Sneak Preview
coffers and then, dismiss the boob. Needless to say this will
not do one's reputation a lot of good, but hey, a gold piece is
a gold piece.

DIARY: February 3, 1798 —
We finally finished loading the colonists on the ships. I am
uneasy about not taking any troops with us. The Admiral
assures us that his ships and
Marines are all the protection
that we will need. We pray
that this is true.

This Land Is
Your Land
Then, it is ship launching
time. The game generates terrain as the player explores
(not when the game is set-up
as in Seven Cities of Gold).
Hence, the face of the world
is forever changing. Eventually, each terrain will be displayed on the map. Once this
occurs, the player needs to
stop and unload an explorer
on that terrain, immediately.
Interestingly enough, Admirals can only find open sea and
beaches, while Generals and Governors can only find the other
terrain types (but not beaches and open sea).
This latter fact can lead to a weird tactic. If one takes one of
their Admirals and sails him around the enemy colony, the

enemy can quickly find himself stuck on a small island and
only able to leave by getting ships there.

I Claim This Land In The Name Of..
Players had just as well get used to the idea that they are
going to go through colonists like Howard Hughes went
through tissue. One needs to establish a shuttle to bring new
colonists continually from
one's homeland to the colonies. One never gets the colonies themselves developed
enough to provide colonists
for one's newer colonies.
Fortunately, one can, at least,
raise armies in the colonies!
By and by, pictures appear
to indicate that a settlement is
taking hold. This is nice. Visual feedback is always welcome. The pictures are
pretty, but they will never be
confused with great art. Of
course, given a choice, most
garners will opt for greater
depth in game play rather
than for great art, anyway. There is also a minimal amount of
sound support. Again, it was interesting, but not great. Of
course, one doesn't really count on sound support to make
wargames interesting.
I suggest establishing a port early on and then, planting

Sneak Preview
settlements close by. Then, it should be safe to send a few
Generals inland to find some high profit areas for future
settlements and mines. Exploitation is the name of the game,
so it is wise to develop each area claimed to the max, so keep
those colonists coming.
Further, each Governor and General should have two Engineers, respectively. Then, it should be possible to accomplish
virtually any task one could set for them to do within the
context of the New World. One should also keep a good army
near any frontier shared with an enemy. Of course, players
who are using the 'Cayas' option must also watch out for the
local natives who will not take quietly to being exploited.

DIARY: May 18, 1804. Yet another foul Bluevanian colony
has felt our wrath today. As usual we walked in and took what
we wanted. There are rumors that the Blues are sending an
army to halt our deprivations. I doubt if they have the courage
to face us. In any event I will lead the army back to the port
and send the gold home. His highness will be most pleased.
If the competition is close by, an offensive operation is never
out of line. In 'Spoils,' any General or Governor from any side
can walk into a settlement and profit from the effort.
Sea battles are even simpler. For starters, there is no wind
direction just wind strength. Ships may be deployed in a band
two to three squares deep along one edge of the playing area.
The player is limited in the number of orders which can be
issued per turn with regard to: number of troops per ship, sail
settings, ammunition type and ship's heading. All this must
he done by issuing orders to the individual ships and only one

order per ship per turn is allowed, so it is impossible to change
the ship's heading and slow down at the same time.
Basically, sea battles are slug fests. One will want to keep
the ships with Marines on them in reserve so that they can
board Enemy ships late in the battle. Naturally, since ships
have a chance to sink when they take a lot of hull damage, it
is wise to avoid closing with the Marine-bearing ships until
one is ready to board the enemy ships.
Only ships with Marines can board and only a few of one's
ships can carry arines. On the other hand, concentrate on
destroying the ships carrying the enemy Marines and do not
worry about being boarded.
Boarding is hard to accomplish, but capturing ships is the
only way to get more than eight ships in a fleet. By capturing
enemy ships, an Admiral can have as many as fifteen ships
under his command, but this leads to another problem. Since
ships always move in the same order, it is often hard to control
the traffic congestion. For example, one can only give one
order per ship per turn. So, shortening sail and forming a line
to face the enemy takes several turns and the foe will be at
hand before one can get organized. It would have been nice to
have a 'delay' option here to simplify things for the Admirals.
As it stands, though, the best tactic is to mass along one side
and overwhelm part of the enemy fleet. Then, the rest can be
dealt with (preferably, going after an enemy's 'higher' numbered ships). That way, once all the enemy supplies are
destroyed, his remaining ships will surrender.

Dirty Tricks Department
Unscrupulous gamers can activate one other country as a

Sneak Preview
"live" player. Then, they can have that country always give all
its money to them as a gift (yeah, that's it) at the start of each
turn. Since this other human player never buys any explorers,
the computer skips over all this other "human's" moves and
the "dirty player" will not be bothered.

Missive From The
Colonial
Governor
(Conclusions)
Spoils of War tries to be
three types of games: Colonial Exploration, Colonial
Exploitation and Colonial
Warfare. Unfortunately, the
three do not mesh well into
the overall game system.
The winner is the one that
ends up making the three elements work the best, but this
is neither smooth nor fun. Indeed, none of the elements
seem to have been properly
developed.
My overall impression is that there is a lot of game here.
Frankly, almost too much game. Most aspects are pretty
complex and, when combined with the numerous events occurring, the player is likely to get bogged down. With thirty
or more characters working for one, the tasks seem endless

rather than edifying and, unlike many games, it is not possible
to put any mundane administrative duties on 'automatic.'
There is depth to this game and there are problems. Each
game will be significantly different. This is a game of choices
and it is not obvious which choices are good and which ones
are bad. Thus, each game will
present the player with different challenges. Frankly, that
makes up for a lot of shortcomings. So, I'm willing to
keep playing and I can't wait
for the production version, but
those who want a userfriendly game with state-ofthe-art graphics and sound are
looking in the wrong "new
world."

3

Bonk Excerpts
Excerpts from the latest CGW Presents Book Global Conquest:

The Official Strategy Guide
by Alan Emrich
Alan Emrich's strategy guide for Global
Conquest has an entire chapter devoted to
the use of diplomacy to win the game. CGW
presents a portion of that chapter for our
readers' enjoyment and edification.

W

hile it would be impossible to transform you into a combination of Tallyrand, Bismarck and
Kissinger overnight, some diplomatic principles (and unprincipled techniques) apply nicely to this "social element" of human
player interaction in Global Conquest.

"No Fault" vs. "Down and Dirty"
Divorce
At some point, you probably will want to dispose of all diplomatic
pretenses, shuck off those constraining treaties and give your opponent a good thrashing. There are two, diametrically opposite approaches to declaring war on another player with whom you have a
treaty: 1) by a formal redressing of troops for a subsequent, proper
"stand up" fight after announcing your intentions well in advance or,
2) by using every power at your disposal to launch as cruel a sneak
attack as possible the moment you're able to.
Those who would employ the former, honorable, method of declaring war will not find much help in reading this chapter any
further. Treacherous, back-stabbing weasels, however, are about to
learn some of the best dirty tricks in the book and are encouraged to
read on.

Remembering Pearl Harbor
Since you haven't stopped reading, it is fair to assume that you are
(at least potentially) the dastardly type. Good. Global Conquest,
when played with other human players, is the right game for you.
The best way to carry out this Pearl Harbor technique is to position
your units in good combat positions near the intended victim's,
particularly on his economic objectives, during the treaty-enforced
period of mutual non-aggression. Be sure to give your infantry units
plenty of time to entrench on these sites and other good, defensive
terrain from which the opponent's units can be attacked. Once in
position, drop the last vestiges of your treaty. A cease-fire can be
removed unilaterally in one turn, but alliances and teammate status
take two and three turns, respectively, to break on your own. This is
unfortunate, as it will usually signal your intended victim of your
intentions in time for him to take some precautions.
To achieve greater surprise, make fewer preparations. To lull your
opponent into the proverbial "false sense of security" you can create
by sharing a long term cease-fire with him. Then, suddenly, in one
Planning Phase, order your troops to ruthlessly march against your
"friend." At the last possible second before the Execution Phase
begins, declare war by breaking the cease-fire, leaving your victim
no time to react that turn.

The Zen of Diplomacy
The goal of diplomacy is the same as strategy or tactics — to

improve your position. Diplomacy, however, does so by mobilizing OPFs ("Other
People's Forces"). Since all the players
start with comparable size forces and since
the early phases of most Global Conquest
games are an exponential growth phase,
even small advantages, if created early
enough, can mushroom into big advantages by the middle of the
game.
The 25% alliance bonus, for instance, can start from the very first
turn of the game and can be double or triple dipped per turn if you
are a skilled diplomat and take the time to pursue it. An alliance with
every player in the game is the diplomatic "crowning achievement"
of Global Conquest, but, of itself, will not win you the game. It is
inevitable in this game that, at some point, you will have to fight
someone.
Diplomacy takes as much practice as military strategy or tactics
and the first "Koran" in The Zen of Diplomacy is the "prisoner's
dilemma." The name "prisoner's dilemma" was coined for this
phenomenon in the 1950's by a mathematician who had just seen the
opera Tosca. If you know Tosca, you will think of the choices faced
by Tosca and the jailer. Here is a Miami Vice version of the same
situation:

The Prisoner's Dilemma:
One afternoon you find yourself standing beside your late-model
BMW facing a small park. On the seat of your car are two briefcases:
one contains bags of a white, powdery substance that the Drug
Enforcement Agency says is hazardous to your moral well-being —
and, thus, is of considerable commercial value. The other contains
bags of a white, powdery substance that your mother says is "good
for you" —and, hence, is of no commercial value whatsoever.
On the far side of the park is a "business associate" standing beside
his late-model Porsche. In his car resides a briefcase filled with dollar
bills. There is, probably, also another one, presumably filled with
yesterday's newspapers.
Strolling about the park in a leisurely fashion is a member of the
"city's finest," so neither of you will have the opportunity to do any
kind of on-site inspection of the goods which you are about to
transfer.
The associate reaches into his car and pulls out a briefcase. He starts
walking for the bench in the park where you will make the hand off.
The time has come.
Which briefcase do you take with you?
This is the prisoner's dilemma: a situation where two parties have
the choice of "cooperating" and working together or "defecting" and
not working together.
As a Diplomat, your goal is to anticipate and influence when your
partner cooperates and defects. The most consistent method to assure
this control is to show your partner how your interest and his are
mutually served by either cooperating or defecting.
One issue which you will need to address early on is how long is
your relation with this partner going to be? The shorter the relation,

Book Excerpts
The Moral Justification Chart
Beneficial:
"I am only trying to assist you in gaining allies by sympathy."
"That which does not destroy you makes you stronger."
"Yeah, I attacked you. Isn't it great? Now they think that we're enemies!"
Big Lies:
"I have legitimate territorial claims here."
"I'm liberating your oppressed peoples."
"I didn't want to waste the bullets we issued with your name on them."
"I have no further territorial demands."
"I want to ensure peace reigns throughout this region."
"Your unit's chemical emissions were destroying the ozone layer."
"My military is no longer under my control."
"You must be seeing things."
Diplomatic:
"This is only temporary."
"Consider it a compliment that someone is paying attention to you."
"I could stop, of course. For a price."
"I'll let you attack me next time. (Wink, wink, nudge, nudge)."
Fated:
"The omens were favorable."
"Think of this as global Darwininsm in action."
"Because you were there."
"Haven't you ever heard of Manifest Destiny?"
"Summa seder non capit duos" (The highest seat does not hold two)
"My horoscope today advised me against long relationships."
He Might Win:
"This was a preemptive move."
"I believe in doing unto others before they do unto me."
He is Winning:
"You're winning. Next stupid question."
"I don't think the winner has the right to ask that question."
His Fault:
"1 believe that we have a misunderstanding on YOUR part."
"Your feeble attempts at a diplomatic solution have failed miserably."
"And you believed me?'
"I'm only respond to your covert hostility."
"You misrepresented your actions as hostile."
"What made you think that I Wouldn't do that?"
"You shouldn't have given me all that support."
In Your Face:
"So sue me."
"Well, what good is power if you don't use it?"
"Don't give me that 'Et tu?' jazz!"
"Look, If I'm so two-faced, would I be wearing THIS one?
"I'm not speaking to you."
Oh, That?:
"That was just a training exercise."
"That was just a mere 'border incident."'
"That was just a large reconnaissance-in-force."
"That was just my new fund-raising technique."
Oops!:
"Did I forget to mention that you were in my way?"
"Oh, was that you I invaded?"
"My dog ate the manual. I didn't know I could do that."
"Temporary insanity."
"I hit the wrong mouse button — twice."
" I'm still learning this game. How do I pull back?"
Revenge:
"This is payback."
Technical Difficulties:
"What? I'm having line-noise problems. What you're seeing could be a COM glitch."
"Sorry, these LCD screens are just s00000 hard to read."
"It must be that new computer virus that's going around."
"Um, I think my keyboard jammed."
"What happened? I let my (spouse, child, friend, etc.) take over for a moment while
I went to (answer the door, go to the bathroom, get something to drink, etc.)."
Third Parties:
"I was talked into this action by
." (the victim's closest ally)
"The devil made me do it."
"It was either rally them against you or they would rally against me."
"I have to do this on the advice of my attorneys."
"Alan Emrich recommended this in his book."

the more reward you will gain from defecting. Here are some choices
for how long this relationship is going to be:
I . It will last a turn.
2. It will last the duration of the game.
3. It will last for duration of many games.
4. It will last a lifetime.
To ease up on the "hard feelings" that show up when the time comes
to defect, make sure that the person you are playing with has a clear
understanding of this defection in the same time frame that you are
committing it in.

Ways of Defecting
The "Pearl Harbor" method is one of several ways of defecting.
Some others are the "go your own way" and "draw the line here"
endings, each of which is more peaceful and forgoes any immediate
opportunity for a surprise attack. In future games with these same
players, these more amicable endings can pay dividends by establishing you as someone who is reasonably trustworthy.

What To Do With That Ugly Knife
Sticking in Your Back
Handling a defection crisis is the ultimate diplomatic test and there
are many choices you make in reaction to it. The reflexive response
is to yell, "Traitor!" and throw everything you have against that slimy
so-and-so while your soul is brimming over with righteous indignation and blood lust. However, this seldom works out well.
Other choices include "turning the other cheek," which is effective
if the defector is small and he realizes that you have been protecting
him from someone a lot bigger and meaner than you are. The "run
for cover" approach is designed to get you out of the way of the
defector so that you can conduct a "Flavian" (or "guerrilla") defense.
Hopefully, it won't be too long before the defector has trod on the
toes of another player, at which point you can switch from a Flavian
defense into a "let's you and me get this rat" combined offense by
joining the defector's latest victim.
Defection is not the end of the world, however. It is merely a
reshuffling of the deck. It just means that, in addition to playing hard
with the units on the screen, you are going to have to play smart with
the people around you.

The Moral Justification for Treachery
After ruthlessly stabbing someone (or "defecting"), whether it is
before his eyes, right under his nose or behind his back, he'll
probably ask the usual victim's plaintiff plea, "Why?" Every victim
wants to know "Why me?," "How could you do such a thing?" and
so forth. Since you're not really a bad person, after all, here are some
handy answers for those niggling little diplomatic questions that
victims so often ask. After you've been caught red handed, these
excuses should, at least, amuse the other players in the game and
keep it "light" and "up" despite your contemptible, treacherous
deeds. [Ed: The books contains almost 40% more one-liners and
excuses than are presented here.]

Signing Off From the State Department
While diplomacy is, after all, just another means to the end of
winning the game, many (brutal) players won't deal with others in
any sort of diplomatic sense at all. They consider all attempts at
diplomacy a simple waste of time. Perhaps they're right? In Global
Conquest, time is very important and wasting it can have fatal results.
Time, then, will be the subject of the next chapter

Replay

One Korea or Two?
by Michael Peck

T

he following is a replay of Conflict: Korea by Strategic

Simulations, Inc. The article focuses on the first month of
the "Tomorrow's War" scenario, which postulates a surprise North Korean attack across the Demilitarized Zone in 1995.
The UN player was played by Michael Peck, the Communist by
Ken Hess.

June 25-30, 1995 (Turn 1)
SEOUL, Korea (Dissociated Press) — War returned to the
Korean peninsula this morning, after North Korean troops
launched a massive pre-dawn assault across the Demilitarized
Zone. Reports are fragmentary, but North Korean forces are
apparently pushing toward Seoul, the offensive creating heavy
casualties on both sides. Fierce air battles can be seen in the skies
overhead, but cloudy weather is hampering air support for United
Nations troops. Although American forces are heavily committed
in the Persian Gulf, a carrier battle group is reported en route to
the Sea of Japan.
The North Korean plan was pure and simple — Blitzkrieg. The
Communists had learned from 1950, when their offensive was
dispersed on three axes. This
time maximum force would be
massed against Seoul, which is
the closest city to the DMZ
(victory is basically determined
by capturing urban hexes). But
the South Korean capital had to
be captured within four or five
weeks, before American reinforcements and dwindling supplies (no Soviet or Chinese aid
this time) halted the offensive.
The North Koreans began by
stripping the east coast of artillery and sending it west, where
it could support the Seoul
thrust. Massed artillery was a
Communist trump in 1995,
with more than a dozen huge
artillery brigades available.
Still, artillery is limited to a
two-hex range and the border was so packed with NKPA (North
Korean People's Army) troops that there was no room near the
front. Indeed, the two unit-stacking limit, coupled with the huge
armies on both sides, made congestion a major headache.
The Communist solution was to use the game's unit combination feature to combine the artillery into "super-brigades" of three
or four brigades each. This let the artillery stack within range of
the DMZ, although it made them more concentrated targets for
airstrikes.
Air combat marked the beginning of the battle, with the North
Korean air force taking heavy blows. Communist pilots had short
and glorious careers, but every UN squadron committed to air
superiority meant one less airstrike. Fortunately, cloudy weather
mitigated the initial UN air attacks.
Combat this turn was predictably bloody along the heavily
mined and booby-trapped border (casualties are multiplied along
the DMZ). The game rewards high-odds attacks, so four massive
NKPA corps overwhelmed the lone Republic of Korea (ROK)
division north of Seoul, while other formations destroyed the
outnumbered defenders to the northeast of the city. Overstacking

blocked the defenders from retreating, and units which can't
retreat are decimated. The survivors were overrun during the
second Communist phase.
The UN player, with his troops outnumbered and strung out,
agreed that Seoul would decide the game. The plan was to hold
until US reinforcements (particularly aircraft) and ROK reservists arrived. ROK divisions scattered throughout the country
marched toward Seoul, slowed by fleeing refugees which clogged
the roads. This was a major problem in the hilly and largely
roadless Korean peninsula where movement is channeled along
highways. To ease congestion, ROK divisions were massed into
single corps.
At the front, the defenders began the game entrenched, so there
was little incentive to move. In the air, all Allied squadrons were
allocated to air superiority; though the grunts on the ground
cursed the lack of air strikes on the enemy hordes, winning air
superiority would free more planes for ground attacks in the long
run.

July 1 - 7 (Turn 2)
SEOUL, Korea (DP) — Intense fighting continues to
rage throughout the Korean
peninsula as North Korea continues its drive on Seoul. US
Marines have arrived at the
southern port of Pusan, but
they are being delayed by refugees clogging the roads. Military sources say the ROK
forces along the DMZ have
been badly hurt, although the
North Koreans have reportedly suffered heavy losses in
men and equipment. One
bright spot appears to be in the
air, where clear skies have allowed Allied planes to achieve
partial air superiority and begin interdicting Communist
supply lines.
The UN moved first this turn, which meant it had to make its
dispositions before seeing Communist movements. Fortunately,
help was on the way as 15 ROK reserve divisions popped on the
map. They were weak, but still potent, when combined into
four-division corps. However, refugees still jammed the roads.
To avoid the refugee-jammed roads, the US Marines (who have
a small amphibious capability in 1995) were shipped to Pusan to
the port of Inchon, near Seoul. Meanwhile, at the DMZ, the
ROK's and the US 2nd Division remained in place and entrenched.
With control of the air, the UN allocated almost all squadrons
to interdiction. It was a difficult choice. Although massed airstrikes would have blasted selected NKPA units, interdiction
affected the Communist supply stockpiles, which determine the
readiness of all units. Equally important, the side with more
supplies has the privilege of moving second. Though the effects
of interdiction take longer, they are far more devastating in the
long run than air strikes.
The second turn found the Communists with a bulge punched
into the DMZ near Seoul, and their spearheads just two hexes

Replay
Predicts Tomorrow's War
from the city. The last kilometers would be the toughest, however,
since intelligence reports showed strong ROK corps in their path.
Though the NKPA still has plenty of firepower, the offensive was
already losing a little steam. The problem was not losses (replacements were fairly plentiful) as much as readiness lost due to
movement and combat. The only cure was to rest, a luxury the
communists could not afford. Also, congestion and stiff movement costs for terrain made it hard to withdraw the first wave and
bring up reserves. Fortunately, numerous Communist reserve
divisions were on their way from the far north.
Again, amidst a fiery hail of Katyusha rockets, the Communists
blasted the ROK defenders, who found their retreat path blocked
by units behind them. Nevertheless, the larger UN corps and
concentrated artillery had taken a large chunk out of the NKPA
first wave.

July 8 - 14 (Turn 3)
SEOUL, Korea (DP) — Despite fierce and desperate fighting,
the North Korean offensive appears to be running into trouble.
Although cloudy weather
again hampered air support,
ROK and American troops are
still holding the outskirts of
Seoul, while the North Koreans seek bridgeheads for a final assault on the capital.
However, ROK forces have already mounted several successful counterattacks on
NKPA spearheads.
Divine intervention (or its
atheistic equivalent) arrived
for the Communists in the
form of cloudy weather, which
hampered UN aircraft. Nonetheless, the North Korea supply level was almost lower
than the UN's, whose logistics
would soon surpass theirs.
Lack of supplies meant the
Communists moved first this time. Some of the depleted firstwave corps around Seoul were withdrawn to refit, to be replaced
by newly arriving reserve infantry corps. Two corps were already
adjacent to the Seoul suburbs, but stood little chance of dislodging
the defenders. The plan was to widen the breach in the UN lines
and bring more force to bear against the city.
With a chance to see the Communist moves first, the UN player
guessed where the Communist blows would fall and reinforced
the line. Space was left behind the defenders so they would have
room to retreat. The Communists succeeded in dislodging two
strong ROK corps, but at a stiff price. A ROK counterattack on
the east coast annihilated a North Korean corps, which suffered
from lack of local artillery.

July 15 - 21 (Turn 4)
SEOUL, Korea (DP) — The tide is beginning to turn against
the North Koreans, whose offensive has bogged down short of
Seoul. ROK troops, backed by American artillery, drove back
two North Korea mechanized corps north of Seoul. Meanwhile,
Communist troops are said to be short of fuel and ammunition as
UN aircraft hammer their supply lines by day and night. A wing

of B-52s which arrived last week is said to be particularly
devastating.
With supplies low, the Communists again moved first and
ordered one more multi-corps attack against two ROK corps
north of Seoul, but a UN counterattack went in first and destroyed
two of the NKPA corps, who could not retreat because of the
artillery stacked behind them.
At this point, with supplies ominously low and the weather
forecast indicating three more weeks of clear weather and uninterrupted bombing, the Communists elected to come to the peace
table.

Analysis
This scenario seems difficult for the Communists to win; unlike
1950, the UN forces, especially the ROK troops, are quite formidable. In hindsight, some artillery should have been left to support
the troops on the east coast, who could have acted more aggressively to divert UN troops. On the other hand, there's little of
value in that sector, and the terrain would have allowed the UN
to hold it with small forces. For
its part, the UN might have diverted some air power for airstrikes on the Communist
assault troops. The UN had also
benefited from the good
weather; a couple of storm
turns and interdiction would
have suffered.
Both sides learned that logistics are the heart of the game.
The side with fewer supplies
moves first in the initial phase
and last in the second phase, so
a poorly supplied attacker will
find the defender reinforcing
his line at crucial points, and
plugging breaches before they
can be exploited. The lower a
unit's readiness, the greater the
chance supplying it will permanently drain the stockpile, so unnecessary movement and combat
should be avoided. Similarly, sea, rail and air movement arc
useful but drain supply levels.
Tactically, the game favors overwhelming force; don't attack
without high odds or across unfrozen rivers, which halve attack
strength. Units of different nationalities cannot attack together,
so different armies should be kept concentrated.
Defensively, the harsh terrain tends to channel advances along
the few roads, so a weak roadblock can halt an advance. Roadblocks also give other units time to entrench. Since no combat
(other than overrun) is allowed during the second phase, even a
weak second line is sufficient to limit a breakthrough. Do not,
however, sacrifice depleted units without good cause, because
units totally destroyed will come back as completely green outfits.
In 1950 and 1995, the Communists will usually have strength
of numbers, while the UN will have firepower (particularly in
1950), air support and amphibious movement. It is how well each
side takes advantage of its capabilities that will determine victory
in Conflict: Korea.

Review

Apocalyptic Siegers
Mindcraft's Phantastic Simulation of Castle Warfare

by Chris Lombardi
TITLE:
Siege
PRICE:
$59.95
SYSTEM:
IBM
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNERS:
Ali Atabek, Larry Froistad,
Patrick Hughes, and James Thomas
PUBLISHER:
Mindcraft
Torrance, CA

ften the best ideas are those that
seem most obvious in retrospect.
Take the siege as the subject of a
wargame, for instance. The siege is a fascinating study in tactics, requiring, in the
attacker, shrewd planning, timing, diversion and indirection; and, in the defense,
requiring anticipation, a fluid responsiveness and judicious use of resources — all of
which is focused into the tight, hot frame of
action surrounding a single city or fortress.
One has to wonder, then, why the topic
has nary been approached in over 10 years
of computer gaming. Could be the lack of
computing power until recently, or hesitance in the face of its many and complex
aspects, or simply an oversight of the obvious. Regardless, it remained overlooked
until Mindcraft attempted to get their designing minds around the topic in their first
strategy entry, Siege.
Siege is a detailed, and nearly complete,
simulation of the combat aspects of castle
warfare, set within the fantasy universe of
Mindcraft's two-part Magic Candle roleplaying series. The land of Gurtex, as Magic
Candle's home is called, is inhabited by the
overworked and aging cast of Tolkien's
Lord of the Rings and is ravaged by the wars
wrought within the fantasy genre's favorite
dualism. The player assumes either the role
of attacker or defender in one of 24 siege
scenarios involving one of four beautifully
designed and resplendently depicted castles
and fortresses.

O

The player commands up to 400 characters at one time, in groups of up to 50, while
warring against the computer's equal complement. The unit mix is impressively varied, with over 50 possible creature types,
providing opportunity for combined arms
tactics of the broadest sort. Players oversee
the action from an omniscient "eye in the
sky" which has three levels of focus, from
a complete campaign view encompassing
the entire playfield, down through an inter-

mediate view, and finally to a magnified
view where one can watch individual creatures fight in detail. It is at this most detailed
level that one can most appreciate the beautifully rendered VGA graphics and the loving work put into the castle designs. Each
character's activities are animated and the
detailed view reveals a very busy battleground. Hand-to-hand groups hack and
slash, wizards send magical fire balls flaming toward the enemy, streams of arrows fly
every which way and boulders launched
from catapults come crashing into characters with a crunch and a bounce. All of this
carefully crafted carnage is continually accompanied by battle cries,
screams of dying warriors and the
sound of catapult mechanisms lofting
their loads. Siege captures the sights
and sounds of battlefield chaos like no
wargame before it.
To command one's host of heroes,
orcs, wizards, goblins, etc., one has a
robust list of options accessed via a
partly iconic, partly menu driven interface. After highlighting a group
with a mouse click, one can give basic
Goto and Fire-At commands, as well
as specific orders to Defend or Attack
defined areas, Target a specific enemy
group, Reinforce, Replace, or Relieve a
friendly group, or Release wounded creatures to return to the hospital for rejuvenation. The mouse interface, when combined
with keyboard hot keys, makes the issuing
of commands speedy and fluid.
In addition to these basic commands
given to the fighting creatures in one's
army, there are a number of commands that
govern the actions of the busiest group on
the field — the engineers. This tireless

bunch operates catapults (using both regular and flaming ammunition), fires ballistae
(huge crossbow-like machines), pours oil
on attackers through the crenels, builds
bridges across moats and crevasses, sets up
or destroys ladders, erects siege towers and
swings battering rams — withstanding the
enemies attack all the while. As one can see,
Siege encompasses nearly every aspect of
classic siege combat; except perhaps, miners, the effects of disease and starvation,
and the lesser known, perhaps legendary,
cattle-pults.
Play passes in 'real-time' with the player
able to pause the action at any point. Ten
minutes passes at each tick of the gameclock, and a complete siege lasts 20 days.
The objective of the attacker is to raise
his/her flag on the flagpole at the heart of
the defender's castle and keep it there for a
full day. The only other victory condition is
the case where either side has lost all of its
engineers or flags. Casualties are given at
the end of each day, expressed as a ratio of
friendly to enemy kills (ie. 4 attacker losses
to the defenders 1), and if this ratio strongly

favors one side, then the other side risks
desertions from its ranks.
While the victory conditions are straightforward, they are perhaps too much so. One
can take a victory by a gnat's eye or soundly
trounce the enemy, but both are simply
labeled as victories. After a few play sessions, one wants a more sensitive gauge by
which to evaluate one's performance — at
the very minimum a final tally of casualties.
As it stands, one can only keep track of
his/her own casualties by tallying the daily

Review
report, and the enemy's losses can only be
guesstimated with the foes/friendly ratio.

The Silicon Sieger
Considering the amount of organization
necessary to pull off a successful castle
assault, Siege's computer opponent does
fairly well. In most situations, it will follow
a standard siege procedure; send in the missile troops and catapulters to soften up the
player's missile defenses, move in the engineers to create an access to the castle, and
quickly follow up with masses of grunt
troops. After extended play its approach
becomes somewhat predictable and its idiosyncrasies show through. One will find
that it likes to create staging grounds where
it will mass many troops in a threatening
way. Unfortunately, it doesn't use these
masses to its advantages. It lacks a killer
instinct. I've found that the AI will send two
or three strong waves and then its attack
peters out. Many times these first waves
have left me swaying on the ropes, but the
computer hasn't the sense to finish the job.
If one plays games for an ego boost, this is
acceptable, but if one plays for a challenge,
one must resort to the most unbalanced of
the 24 scenarios and set the difficulty level
to the extreme setting (the difficulty levels
determine how many troops one can have
on the field at one time).
With so many moving parts on the screen,
and with a continually thinking Al, one

might wonder about the speed of
game play in real-time. On my 38616, Siege runs smoothly with the action continuing at a nice clip (often a
bit too fast for my wetware), and with
the computer taking only brief and
sporadic pauses to counter my dazzling strategies. It does quite well for
me in this respect, though I've heard
that the game may bog down a good
deal on a lower-end 286.

Host Your Own Siege
Party
Fortunately, one is not limited to the
provided 24 scenarios, as Siege has a builtin scenario editor. While the castles and
surrounding grounds cannot be altered,
army compositions can. The 53 creature
types can be mixed and matched to one's
fancy, and the surrounding environs can be
dressed up with odds and ends for a little
atmosphere. This certainly gives Siege an
added element of replayability and depth as
experimenting with different 'What if scenarios can often be more fun than playing
those provided. I can imagine a dedicated
Tolkien fan going nuts with the editor and
recreating the climactic sieges of Minas
Tirith or Isengard.

Chinks in the Wall
The initial production run of Siege was
released with a few bugs that rendered a few

of the scenarios unplayable. This was immediately fixed in a second version, so only
a few unlucky ones need worry about getting the update.
Despite this initial hiccup, Siege is an
all-around unique and engaging simulation.
The interface and aesthetics are top notch,
and the subject is roundly and successfully
treated. If the computer AI had more of a
cruel streak, the game would be outstanding. In many ways Siege is like QQP's The
Perfect General; a wonderful game system
with a mediocre AI and great two-player
potential. Modem play would really put
Siege over the top and I'm happy to pass the
rumor of rumors: there is plenty of grumbling at Mindcraft indicating that they are
considering such a possibility.

Strategy

Zen and the Art of
Catapult Maintenance
Tips and Tactics on Mindcraft's

Siege
by Chris "The Underminer" Lombardi
any historical sieges were won and
lost, not by superior tactics or valorous fighting, but by treachery.
While the following article does include
tips on superior tactics, it also suggests...well, let's call them, methods by
which to exploit certain advantages inherent in Siege's mechanics. Enjoy, and may
the day go to the human.

M

Bringing Warriors
Together
It's an irritating fact about Siege's mechanics that two clashing groups often do
not attack one another full on. More often
than not, the two lead creatures of each
group will fight one-on-one while the others
sit idle. While this can be used to one's

tant units in the game. These troops not only
include heroes, but dreadknights, mazemasters, elementals — basically, any group
that combines a fearsome attack with a
daunting defense. Judicious and frequent
use of these units can mean the difference
between Leningrad and Jericho. They
should be at the spearhead of a wall assault
and at the hot points of a castle defense —
but they should be clucked over like a hen
to its chicks. One is usually only blessed
with a few such troops and the loss of a
couple can be a major setback. The key is
liberal use of the Release command whenever any units have lost 50% of their health.
Injured units can then retum to the hospital
and rejuvenate. This is a good strategy with
any group.
While on the subject of injuries, Purple
Wizards and Zorlim have a special ability

course, ballista bolts don't bounce like a
boulder, and they don't explode, either, but
they can still quietly whittle down the enemy very quickly.
The computer AI is especially bad about
avoiding such artillery fire. One may notice
that the Al sets up 'staging areas' on both
attack and defense where it will often pile
up dozens of troops. These areas are prime
targets for engineer attacks. Three catapult
units can inflict severe casualties while the
Al, seemingly oblivious to the situation,
will leave its troops to be decimated, whereupon it will send more ("Go ahead, kill 'em!
We'll make more!"). This is a cheap way to
keep the kill ratios up, and thus the enemy
desertion rate, high.
By the way, engineers are a primary target
for the computer Al. One will find that the
moment the computer breeches one's walls,
it will send its troops on a bee-line course
toward engineer groups. With this in mind,
it is often a good strategy to have at least 5
soldiers Escort every engineer group (if you
can spare the men, of course) so that when
they are attacked, the escorts can hold-off
the enemy until reinforcements arrive. This
may be a good idea with vulnerable archer
groups, as well.
When, on the defense, keeping ladders off
of one's walls can mean the difference between solid lines and ores crapping in one's
privy. One may have noticed that an unoc-

strategy
Siege Charts and Notes

NOTES:
— All numbers, except TEMPER and range are percentages.
— The DAMAGE and PROTECT factors are a combination of the
creature's weapon and armor ratings, and the creature's inherent fighting abilities.
—The TEMPER factor is a general rating of a creature's courage. The
higher the rating, the more casualties a group of creatures will take
before retreating.
-- Spiders and Air Elementals can climb walls unaided.
— All creatures have 15 hit points.
-- A creature will attack once per animation frame with a full 'fatigue
bar'. This drops to once per three animation frames as the 'fatigue bar'
reaches its lowest point.
Using The Numbers
When two creatures fight, a hit is determined by a random number from
1 - 100. If the attacker's random number is less than its ATTACK%
minus the defender's DEFENSE% then the attacker hits. For example,
if a Dwarf Warrior (Attack% = 30) attacks an Orc Warrior (Defense%
= 5) then the Dwarf has a (30 - 5) = 25% chance to hit. Whereas the
Ores counterattack against the Dwarf would have a (30 - 15) = 15%
chance of landing true.
Damage is assessed by subtracting the defender's Armor Rating from
the attacker's Damage Rating. For example, if the Dwarf hit the Orc,
then the Orc would lose (40 - 25) = 15% of its 15 hit points.
A hit always does an automatic I% of damage, even if the equation
produces a negative number.

Opponents Wanted

Strategy

And A Time For Every
Surface Action Under Admirals

Advanced Strategy for
The Lost Admiral
by Tim Carter

O

ne reason that The Lost Admiral
(TLA) is one of my favorite games
is that it really does live up to that
all-too-elusive goal: easy to learn, but
difficult to master. Despite its simplicity,
TLA lends itself to some very sophisticated strategy. This article is designed to
help those players who have got the mechanics of the game down and are now
working on getting beyond the middle
ranges (5-7) of difficulty.

To Everything There Is
A Sea Zone
(Operational Planning)
Before creating a navy, players should
have a good idea of what their overall
strategy will be. Winning consistently requires the creation of a force which meets
the specific needs of a given scenario or
campaign.
To better organize operational planning, it is useful to divide the map into a
series of zones. Most of the maps naturally suggest zones due to geography.
This is more difficult for map #9, in which
case players should conceptualize zones
based on groups of cities. What is required, at this point, is a set of operational
plans for each zone which, when combined, add up to an integrated strategy for
winning the scenario as a whole.

A Sea Zone to Raid
For instance, some zones should be designated as raiding zones. A raiding zone
is one where either the player is too weak
or the potential payoff too small to warrant a larger effort to control the area. The
goal for that zone, then, becomes sea
denial. In this case the most effective
forces will be small garrisons along with
some inexpensive raiding forces to keep
the enemy busy. If used properly, a small
force of light units (destroyers, PT boats
and submarines) can keep a much larger
enemy force tied up. Even if raiding units

are wiped out, they can have a tremendous impact on the total points that the
enemy can gain from the zone if they can
manage to occupy enemy cities or sink
enemy transports before their demise.

A Sea Zone to Contest
Often, players will not have enough
forces to dominate multiple zones, but
will be unwilling to write off important
areas to raiding forces only. In such cases,
planning to contest a given zone is usually
a good idea. The objective in a contested
zone is to be able to deal with raiding
forces, protect
friendly ports
and give an enemy fleet a difficult time on the
open ocean.
Contesting
tactics will set
the scene for the
endgame, particularly in
longer scenarios. In many
situations it is a
good idea to
plan to contest a
central area at
the start of a scenario, then rely
on reinforcements (either in
the form of
forces which have been initially deployed
elsewhere or new builds from a conveniently located 200 point port) to control it
by the end of the game.
The forces required for contesting a
zone depend on the anticipated strength
of the enemy fleet. A good rule of thumb
is to determine how key ports will be
garrisoned and then, construct a fleet capable of dealing with threats to the garrison. For instance, if an important port can
be covered by a coastal gun emplacement, then less ASW forces will be

needed, but submarine forces should be
optimized. In such a situation submarines
are less of a threat than heavy units. Furthermore, it is easier to reinforce with
ASW units than heavy units due to their
speed and low costs.

A Sea Zone to Control
In most scenarios sufficient forces will
be available to provide players with a
good shot at controlling at least one sea
zone. Controlled sea zones provide guaranteed points; players should be careful
to have enough transports and AT boats

to occupy all of the ports in a controlled
zone.
Geography is an important factor in
deciding where to try to establish control.
If a zone can be easily isolated, an attempt
can be made to gain control with a relatively small force. In general, there are
two key geographical factors to consider
when deciding how to classify zones.
First, what is the value of the cities within
the zone? There is no point committing a
large fleet to control an area with little
payoff in terms of points. Second, how

does the controlled zone relate to the
zones around it? If control can be established early, as is often the case, can the
forces in the zone easily reinforce another
zone?
Note that control does not necessarily
require a huge amount of force, it simply
requires a relative advantage
over the opposition. However,
in most scenarios, control of a
key area will require a major
part of the fleet. The crucial
question is: how much is
enough?
By thinking in terms of raiding, contested, and controlled
sea zones, players should be
able to develop a framework
for constructing initial forces
and initial strategies. Keep in
mind the points payoff for
each map. Some zones may
require a massive effort simply
because they contain the majority of cities and therefore
points.

And A Time to
Stay Out of Davy
Jones' Locker (Tactics)
Good strategic planning alone will not
win games on its own. The second half of
becoming an admiral is a solid understanding of the tactics necessary to succeed in battle. Because combat results are
fixed, detailed planning is possible.

Tactics must be linked to strategy. If the
map has been divided into zones, then
steps must be taken to reflect this. For
instance, if a zone has been surrendered
an attempt should be made to isolate it
from areas which contain friendly ports.
Gun emplacements are particularly use-

ful for this task. Often, the areas that allow
gun emplacements will be situated in a
way which naturally suggests how to divide the map.

A Time to Attack
The nature of the combat system in The
Lost Admiral gives a definite advantage

to the player with the better intelligence.
The only cost-effective way of gaining
information on enemy forces throughout
a scenario is through the use of aircraft
carriers. The ability of these units to see
two squares in every direction is the key
to winning, large scale engagements in
TLA.
Obviously, the key matchups in a large engagement are
submarines on battleships, destroyers and PT boats on submarines, and heavy units
against destroyers and PT
boats. Unless these match-ups
are obtained, players will be
faced with a grinding war of
attrition which will usually result in the majority of both
fleets making a swift journey to
the bottom.
Getting the right match-ups is
a rather obvious recommendation and one that even novice
players will pick up on almost
immediately. The key to winning is not only to get favorable
match-ups but to prevent the
opposition from doing so.
While it will rarely be possible to constantly get the perfect match-up, the key
to victory is ensuring that one's enemy is
constantly forced to accept sub-optimal
matche-ups. Positioning is the key to accomplishing this.
An example of this tactic is the use of

envelopment. The logic behind enveloping tactics is simple: since each unit has
an advantage against some opponents,
but not others, it makes sense to attempt
to match up as many friendly units as
possible on the same turn. This will prevent the opposition from responding in
kind on his turn. This is particularly crucial when using fragile forces such as
submarines.
If an attack can simultaneously strike
both forward and rear echelons of an enemy force, it may be possible to match
submarines against heavy units while
also engaging enemy destroyers. At the
very least, one should attempt to block
access for reinforcing enemy units.
A risky, but useful, tactic is to discover
the deployment of the enemy fleet and
then place one's own forces to obtain
advantageous match-ups during the opposition's turn. For instance, if t le enemy
is leading his fleet with battleships, place
submarines in their expected path. This
can give one a "double turn" and lead to
early destruction of an enemy fleet. Of
course, it can also lead to disaster if enemy movements do not unfold as expected.
It is important to constantly consider
what one's own fleet will look like at the
end of the combat resolution phase. Getting good match-ups is not enough if it
merely leads to an exposed and vulnerable fleet that can be easily attacked by
following enemy forces. The mark of a

skilled admiral is the ability to damage
the enemy without suffering commensurate damage in return.

Raiding
Raiding can have two forms, both of
which aim to destroy enemy transports,
harass his forces and prevent him from
holding cities. Raids can be launched directly against enemy held ports in order
to sink transports and deny the enemy
victory points. Light forces can also be
used to skirt enemy fleets and attempt to
destroy transports that are at sea but
which are lightly escorted.
Raiders are usually comprised of destroyers, PT boats and submarines. Since
it is difficult to anticipate in advance the
forces that the computer is likely to use to
garrison ports, the mix of raiding forces
is really a matter of personal preference.
If large enemy forces are anticipated,
submarines may be the most effective
unit. Their stealthy capabilities can more
than compensate for the additional cost.
Remember that ports can "see" two
squares into the ocean. If submarines arc
being used as raiders they should submerge while out of sight of target ports.
Otherwise they may find heavy units
coming out to meet them while they are
still on the surface.
Keep an eye on the build screens. In
scenarios where reinforcements are important, try to identify those cities which
are crucial to the opposition's ship build-

ing industry. Often a single city acts as a
bottleneck by providing most of a crucial
resource. By concentrating raids on bottleneck cities, a kind of economic warfare
can be waged which will often pay important dividends in the endgame.
Occasionally, it is useful to have AT
boats or transports accompany raiders.
After all, if the garrison of an enemy city
is going to be destroyed, why not replace
it with a friendly one? The decision to
send transports will depend largely on
available resources as well as the nature
of expected enemy forces. If the enemy is
weak this will be highly profitable.
Often the computer (and human) opponent will only use light forces to garrison
cities. If a city is considered crucial (i.e.,
a 200 point build city or a 500 point
enemy home port), then including a
heavy unit in the raiding force is not a bad
idea. In such cases, cruisers arc an excellent idea.

Turn, Turn, Turn
Following these principles should provide for more frequent success in The
Lost Admiral scenarios. Of course, as
good as the artificial admiral is, it may
find a way to supersede even these tactical considerations.

THE BATTLE OF BRITAIN
"A" Musings From Deadly Games

by Alan Emrich

The Battle of Britain 2
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
Macintosh
PRICE:
$54.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER:
Rene Vidmer
PUBLISHER:
Deadly Games
122 Penns Grant Drive
Morrisville, PA 19067
(215) 295-2284

"Upon this battle [of Britain] depends
the survival of Christian civilization.
Upon it depends our own British life, and
the long continuity of our institutions and
our Empire. The whole fury and might of
the enemy must very soon be turned on
us. Hitler knows that he will have to
break us in this island or lose the war....
Let us therefore brace ourselves to our
duties, and so bear ourselves that, if the
British Empire and its Commonwealth
last for a thousand years, men will still
say: 'This was their finest hour.'"

W

hen France surrendered less
than six weeks after the Germans rolled over her eastern
border on May 15, 1940 — England
stood alone, and defiant. The preceding
quotation from Winston Churchill's famous speech to the House of Commons
set the stage for the great aerial campaign
launched by Hitler's Luftwaffe against
the island nation of Great Britain. The
hinge of destiny turned upon this battle.
This page in the annals of military history was made for wargaming. Many
flight simulators, the most notable being

Their Finest Hour from LucasArts, already exist. Now, however, there is a
simple, intriguing strategy game from
Deadly Games.
The Battle of Britain 2 is compactly
packaged in a 6-inch square by half-inch
deep box, which, frankly, I almost confused with a CD-ROM product by "judging a game by its box" before opening it.
It works with all Macs (Plus through IIfx)
and is, mercifully, System 7 compatible.
The three disks take up a good 5 MB on
the hard drive, but both black and white
and 16-color versions of the game can be
played.

Eagle Day
Battle of Britain 2 takes players out of
the cockpit and places them 50 feet below
ground in the war room at Uxbridge. As
best visualized in the film The Battle of
Britain, one must picture that war room
with the giant tote board on the wall and
a huge table-map of south-east England.
Servicewomen would maneuver models
of both side's air forces on the map grid
while the air marshals looked down from
the balconies above it to constantly visualize the ever changing situation. From a
computer recreation of this "vantage
point," reports arrive to the player, who
must order the squadrons of the 11th
Group RAF to defend their island.
On August 10, 1940, the Germans
launched their great air offensive, code
named "Eagle Day." A map of the southeast portion of England is displayed as the

main screen graphic. It is divided into
seven air zones, each of which is centered
around a major air base. Each day begins
by checking on the button for the ULTRA
(secret intelligence) reports of expected
enemy activity. They guesstimate either
light, medium or heavy activity from the
Luftwaffe. With that, fighter groups are
put on patrol and placed somewhere in
their operational radius, hopefully protecting the right targets.
Once initial assets are airborne for the
day, clicking on the clock advances time,
followed by a teletype report. This could
read anything from "all's quiet" through
an early warning from one's radar stations to an announcement that a given
target is presently being bombed. The
player's careful reaction to these snippets
of information and reports represents the

Review
key element of decision making in The
Battle of Britain 2. Fighter squadron
status is shown on reproductions of the
tote boards used by the RAF (Royal Air
Force) at that time. Actually, the "feel" of
the period is excellently portrayed in The
Battle of Britain 2.

don. Known as "the Blitz," it was a great
military blunder and one which the
game's AI may, in fact, recreate during
play.
Although the documentation in The
Battle of Britain 2 is superb, it is also

"They'll Never
Bomb This
Place... "
"... or my name is Meyer,"
said Herman Goering when
asked about the safety of Berlin from British attack during
the height of the Battle of Britain. When the British succeeded in conducting a
daring, sneak raid by night
over the German capitol,
Hitler issued a new directive.
Even as the British were desperately losing the battle because the Germans were
pounding their radar stations
and air fields in preparation
for an invasion, Hitler wanted
to answer back for the raid on Berlin with
a "terror bombing" campaign of London,
claiming that for every hundred kilograms of bombs dropped on Berlin, he
would answer with a thousand on Lon-

remarkably brief. In fact, I read it from
cover-to-cover in less than 10 minutes
and felt very familiar with the game by
the end of a half-hour with it. Frankly, the
game is easier to learn than Chess and, in
many ways, more absorbing.

In addition to the documentation, there
is a reprint, in booklet form, of the Royal
Air Force War Manual (Part I. Operations). Created by the Air Ministry in
August 1940, it is not only a page out of
history, but a mini-manifesto for smart
play. Each battle ends with a report, and
each day is capped off by reading the headlines in an attractive
looking graphic of the London
Daily Mail. The campaign lasts
a month, punctuated by respites
provided by rainy weather.
Simple and charming, the
"command perspective" gave
this game tremendous playability.
Playing The Battle of Britain
has me very much inspired and
wanting to see the movie of the
same name again. It is easy to
see this game as an almost sterotypical piece of Macintosh entertainment software: compact,
absorbing and full of replay
value. In the words of Winston
Churcil:"Nevntfdo
human conflict was so much owed by so
many to so few." Don't miss out on The
Battle of Britain 2 if you want a gaming
distraction that is, at once, enjoyable,
pleasant, easily learned, historical and
"lite."

Review

If Disney Met Howard Hughes
The Ultimate Simulator
by Mike "Moondawg" Weksler

f Walt Disney and Howard
Hughes had been able to get
together and form a Virtual
Reality entertainment facility, the
end result would no doubt be
similar to Fightertown. Fightertown, nestled in an industrial
complex next to the El Toro Marine Air Station, is the world's
first civilian air combat simulator
fighter wing and the brainchild of
three former aerospace engineers
with previous experience in designing military simulators.

I

The World Is Virtual,
The Cockpits Are For Real
The cockpits are designed and/or refurbished from military aircraft
simulators by Kinney Aero, which also designed the flight models.
The cockpits include: an F-111
Aardvark, an F-104 Starfighter,
an F-4 Phantom, which will be
operational as this issue goes to
press, and an F-16 Falcon, due to
arrive at Fightertown this Fall.
The cockpits are linked via a proprietary network that is called
Fighternet, which has the ability
to eventually link up to 40 cockpits.
The F-111 and the F-4 are both
two-seaters and seeing one's
buddy in full flight regalia: flight
suit, helmet, and harness, when
flying a combat mission is nothing short of a mind-blower in the
suspension-of-disbelief department. Air crews are even "hot-miked" to each other so they may
communicate between themselves on a closed frequency.
Each cockpit is positioned in front of its own 10' by 12' screen.
The virtual landscape is projected onto this screen with a one-thousand line resolution. HUD (Head-Up Display) information (altitude,
airspeed, and heading) is projected onto this screen as well. The
Head-Down display is located in front of each seat and provides
information relating to one's aircraft and flight status. Also displayed
are three Multi-Function displays (MFDs) which cycle between
weapons status and checklists, air-to-air and air-to-ground radar, and
navigation info and the ILS system. HUD symbology in combat is
limited to an LCOS (lead computing optical sight) gunsight and a
TD (target designator) box which frames a target locked up on the
radar.
The avionics are fairly simple to allow for "off-the-street" enthu-

siasts to climb in and acclimate
rapidly. A jet air combat simulation jock will catch on immediately. For example, there is no
"boresight" or through-the-nose
view radar, only a top down view
similar to Falcon 3.0's SAD radar
mode. Cockpits have several of
their switches slaved to the simulation so that one pulls the real
gear lever or flap lever to activate
the respective equipment in the
simulation. Most new pilots will
be "elbows and thumbs" for the first few flights until their level of
situational awareness increases to handle all of the inputs from the
simulation and the various controllers and other air crews on the
radio.

Sierra Hotel
Combat missions include both air-to-air and air-to-ground with the
former encompassing a modem
air combat simulation fanatic's
dream—two full-blown cockpits
linked head-to-head for the ultimate in air combat action. Additionally, missions may include
providing a CAP (combat air patrol) for a strike force scrambling
to intercept inbound bandits.
Weapons include an older Aim-9
Sidewinder variant requiring a
rear aspect shot, an A-120 AMRAAM type missile which is
long-range "fire and forget," and
a 20mm cannon.
Strike missions are currently
carried out with guns-only passes
but Mk82HD Snakeyes should be
implemented soon. Additionally, there are a variety of recon missions available. Missions may be flown in weather ranging from clear
to less than one mile visibility either during the daytime or at night.
The virtual world is full of air fields, islands, cities, a carrier, and
a hostile city which boasts an enemy air base replete with enough
SAMs (surface-to-air missiles) and AAA (anti-aircraft artillery) to
humble even the most able of simulator jocks. A flight past the
nuclear plant and up the canyon on Catsclam is a must see.

Go on down... they'll throw a MiG on
the 'barbie for ya!
Short of full immersion virtual reality, Fightertown is the hottest
thing around. Fightertown USA is located at 8 Hammond Road, in
Irvine, CA 92718. Their number is (714) 855-8802. It is closed on
Mondays.

Bestseller List

Editorial

It's Only A Game!
by Johnny L. Wilson

State of the Magazine: Sometimes, we get letters telling us
to lighten up. After all, goes the rationale, these are only
games. In addition, some of our readers are absolutely offended at the idea that we take seriously the moral, philosophical underpinnning of computer games and actually believe
that these entertainment experiences have applications for
community building, cultural understanding and individual
edification in addition to being fun.
So, it was with great interest that I read a lengthy book
review in the Los Angeles Times which covered a new anthology of the baseball stories of Ring Lardner. The review began
by citing a comment by F. Scott Fitzgerald which had virtually
accused Lardner of wasting his time and talent by writing
about "a boy's game, with no more possibilities in it than a
boy could master, ..."
It should be fairly easy to imagine how this disparaging
remark from one of my all-time favorite authors would have
hit me like a plague in Global Conquest (which knocks every
unit in a burb down to one strength point). Fortunately, I did
not stop reading the review at that point. After all, I love to
read both Fitzgerald and Lardner, often finding myself quoting the title of "You know me, Al!" whenever I mess up (You
Know Me Al being a series of letters from a nearly washed-up
minor leaguer to an earlier teammate who had already seen
the light).
So, it was with great exaltation that I read a quotation from
Virginia Woolf stating a position diametrically opposed to
Fitzgerald's. The British critic, who cared nothing about the
game of baseball itself, stated "It is no coincidence that the
best of Mr. Lardner's stories are about games." She went
further to state that writing about baseball had allowed Lardner to solve one of the most difficult problems for an American
writer, "it has given him a clue, a center, a meeting place for
the diverse activities of people whom a vast continent isolates,
whom no tradition controls. Games give him what society
gives his English brother."
Even though Virginia Woolf never saw a computer game in
her life, she has underscored the positive effects of the hobby.
If baseball, the national game, was a centering force early in
our century, how much more can computer games provide
both a focus and a forum for our society on the brink of the
information age. Where the national sport has offered meaning and mythos in the past, but has been somewhat devalued
by the corporate machinations of modern baseball, computer
games have the opportunity and potential to humanize the
machines at the center of the technological revolution, as well

as to communicate knowledge and transform that knowledge
into meaningful myth.
Sure, it's just a game, but games are a laboratory for human
interaction and an analog for real-world systems. As a laboratory, we find ourselves able to experiment with new and old
approaches to problems, without authentic risk. As an analog,
we are able to learn concepts and discover insights that should
inspire us to do further research (after all, we probably are not
going to play a game on a subject unless we have some interest
to begin with).
Sure, it's just a game, but games are one way that human
beings communicate in code with each other and the new era
of connectivity which seems to be opening up in computer
games may be our generation's ritual dance that supplies
meaning to the hunt, rat race and struggle to be found in life.
Maybe those humiliating defeats and disrupted alliances in
wargames and multi-player games will teach us that aggressiveness is not always rewarded. Maybe those significant
drops in simulated portfolio value to be experienced in investment games will keep us from making the same mistakes in
our real retirement portfolios. Maybe the recruitment of that
untrustworthy NPC into our fictional parties will put us on the
alert when we have to make real personnel decisions at work.
Maybe...
State of the Industry: Within the industry as a whole, we
find ourselves torn between the harbingers of "doom and
gloom," who point to the failure of CD-I and CDTV to
generate much interest for optical-based, interactive products
within the mass market of consumers, and the prophets of
affluence, who point to computer game companies as potential
take-over targets for the entertainment conglomerates. We
find ourselves nodding in a measure of agreement with both
sides, but end up having to serve as a voice in the wilderness
by reminding everyone that it will be quality software that will
eventually intrigue the masses enough to get over their inherent fear of the hardware and, as a result, become involved with
entertainment software. The entertainment conglomerates
may well move in when the interest is there, but they certainly
have no need to "move in" until the public perceives the value
of CD-based interactive entertainment as being more than
simply "the same games with digitized voice and more pictures." Until those "must play" games are available on CDonly formats, we really have no idea of the potential for
CD-based interactive entertainment.

I

