"PC CD-ROM  ON-LINE  HARDWARE REVIEWS & TIPS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine Bonus Section! PLAY TO WIN Exclusive.. Be Elder PLAY TOWIN Scrolls DOOM II, TIE Fighter, Master of Magic, Armored Fist, Aces of the Deep Colonization, and more Great Games lus.. Simulations 191 Armored Fist. Fleet Defender Gold, Dawn Patrol Adventure 121 Under a Killing Moon, Star Trek Tech Manual, Dark Sun: Ravager, Relentless Action 152 Rise of the Robots, Blackthorne, Metaltech: Earthsiege Strategy/War 207 Panzer General, Battle Isle 2200. Reunion, 1830 Daggerfall "


"«Triad is a truly awesome game!\" But don't take our word for it. RISE METRIAD DARK «Rise of the Triad is sure to have every DOOM freak in the world lining up just to drool all over it!\" Interactive Entertainment \"Rise of the Triad provides everything an action gamer could want.\" Oomputer Game Review «This game is the most multiplayer-friendly product we've seen. Death Match will never be the same again. Computer Gaming World  Tauntyour opponents with RemoteRidicule during 11-player network games. An industry firs-Violence Level Adjustment with password=only get gore if you want it! MODORIUO TIR USE RY Die as one of five unique characters (male & female) on over thirty levels of action! This is the game you've been waiting forie-An all-out blast-fest. The unrelenting blood and fire rampage of you most twisted-nightmares. With ten incredibly vicious weapons, you annihilate the enemy. Your machine gun blasts holes in the walls! Sparks and metal fly as you blow apart everything in sight. Mass destruction has never been this fun! INCORPORATED Created by Apogee Software Ltd, and distributed by FormGen Inc. 7641 E. Gray Rd Scottsdale, AZ, 85260 (800) 263-2390 Available on disk and CDSupports serial, modem, and 11-player network (individual or team) play. s loody bags not included) Circle Reader Service #43 "


"The wordsy the Realm invite you to join ohrank DE Build your castles Marshal your resources Test your troops in siege.. ..and battle Take the challenge VOUS Go for the Crown! 1972 \"****1/2 !!!\" Computer GamingWorld \"They've got a winner here..\"! Strategy Plus \"A rarity...worthwhile at twice the price...\"! PC Gamer GOLDEN TRIAD AWARD!   / Review EDITOR'S CHOICE AWARD Impressions PC G Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #77 "


NA


"An Awesome Adventure chanbnent and scarpe of EXPERIENCE THE MOST HEARTWARMINGLY HUMOROUS CINEMATIC ADVENTURE EVER. CREATOR ROBERTA WILLIAMS PRESENTS THE SEVENTH CHAPTER IN THE BEST-SELLING COMPUTER ADVENTURE SERIES OF ALL TIME: KING'S QUEST VII: THE PRINCELESS BRIDE. JOIN PRINCESS ROSELLA AND HER MOTHER VALANICE AS THEY BATTLE THE EVIL ENCHANTRESS MALICIA FOR THE SURVIVAL OF THE MAGICAL REALM OF ELDRITCH. DON'T MISS THIS BREATHTAKINGLY BEAUTIFUL EPIC ADVENTURE FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY. FOR YOUR COPY, SEE YOUR LOCAL DEALER OR CALL: 1 800-757-7707. KING'S QUEST THE PRINCELESS BRIDE SIER R A 1994 Sierra On-line Inc Circle Reader Service #98 "


"NOT AVAILABLE IN STORES To order call Epic MegaGames 1-800-972-7434 \"THE BEST ARCADE PLATFORM GAME FOR THE [PC] EVER\" PC GAMER ACKRABBIT JCD-ROM Incredible 3D bonus stages and over 90 levels of action! *X08/30 1:47 Hamm mm Adjustable difficulty level. Suitable for all ages and skills. Playable directly from CD. Includes a new bonus stage selector and 30 new levels the toughest Jazz levels with the hottest graphics we've ever done. OOUUU 7505:4919 09SKED \"Plays like a dream\" rated as high as 94%! Remember the Tortoise and the Hare? Well, it's 3,000 years later and they're at it again. This time it's a fight for the galaxy and the love of a beautiful princess. Jazz Jackrabbit is high-speed action through and through with 4-button joystick support, gorgeous graphics, hilarious cartoon-quality animation sequences and awesome digital sound-effects and music. All nine episodes, 90+ levels, on CD-ROM are only $49. The six episode 60+ level version on floppy is $39. Both include a 36 page color manual with the Jazz Jackrabbit comic by reknowned artist Nick Stadler. 90003419 5:1319 2009 EPIC 01. 1 OSE. Tootan TRY THE SHAREWARE VERSIONS TODAY! On CompuServe GO EPIC and visit the Epic Forum or call Exec-PC BBS at (414) 789-4360 or on the Internet ftp them from the /msdos/games/epic    High-speed action you'd expect to find only on a cartridge. "


"CALL 1-800-972-7434 TO ORDER! Try these games on CompuServe just GO EPIC ONE MUST FALL \"MOVE OVER, DOOM, FOR ONE MUST FALL: 2097 IS A SURE WINNER!\" GAMEBYTES ROVIN NATONO 172, 490 11 robots with over 120 frames of 3D animation per robot! Supports dual joystick head-tohead combat in 5 unique arenas 214&SKP  EQUtt hot PATOS Ferih 80SPURSUARA LORO NEU TOURNANCE EN C666 S A POBLIKE Win cash to upgrade robots, get training & buy new moves Pilot giant 90ft robots that fight with the kind of \"feel\" you've been waiting for in PC combat games. Play head-to-head against your friends or fight your way through increasingly difficult tournaments. Use your winnings to upgrade, trade robots and purchase training in an attempt to defeat diverse enemies with unique personalities. Features multi-channel, metalcrushing sound effects and heart-pounding digital music. One Must Fall 2097 is only $39. Or, get the game, the massive OMF Strategy Guide and a cool color poster for only $49. PRINCIL REFCAT Please add $4 s&h. Visa, Mastercard and checks accepted. MD residents add 5% sales tax. Every order includes a bonus shareware game. Inquiries? call us at 301-983-9771. In UK/Europe call us at +44 (0)1767-260903. TRVXN4 TO KEEP HIV DOVE DUV, EM Run out of cash! and your repairs are over! Epic MegaGames Inc. 3204 Tower Oaks Blvd #410 Rockville MD 20852 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ISSUE 126 JANUARY 1995 ISSUE 126 PLAV TO WIN! | Great Strategy ticles For im 38 Armored Fis 44 Serf City 52 Star Crusade 56 Lords of the 64 TIE Fighter 74 Colonization 84 DOOM 11 96 Aces of the 102 Master of New 116 Panzer Gece Games "


"FEATURES 32 32 SNEAK PREVIEW! THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL Life gets a lot more interesting once you leave the ARENA. CGW's Editor-in-Chief explores the new role-playing concepts slated for the sequel to THE ELDER SCROLLS: ARENA. 182 GOLF GAME ROUNDUP Pete Scisco presents an \"airing of the greens\" with regard to MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0, PGA TOUR GOLF 486, and PICTURE PERFECT GOLF. ADVENTURE / ROLE-PLAYING Unscrolling DAGGERFALI 121 SCORPIA'S STING Curious to discover if a misfit jester can amuse her, the reigning queen of role-playing receives Westwood Studio's KYRANDIA 3: MALCOLM'S REVENGE. 126 SCORPIA'S TALE Ravaged by the latest DARK SUN, we petition counsel from the pincered player who has killed more creatures in WAKE OF THE RAVAGER than all the Mind Flayers in the Underdark combined. 132 UNDER A KILLING MOON Inspector Charles Ardai unravels the mysterious nature of Access' photo-realistic, 3-D, four CD-ROM extravaganza. 138 STAR TREK INTERACTIVE TECHNICAL MANUAL \"Welcome aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise, NCC-1701-D. Please wipe your feet.» Alan Greenberg and Commander Will Riker take you on a guided tour. 142 RELENTLESS Will this tale of Quetches cause Charles Ardai to kvetch? Find out about one of the most innovative games of the year. 148 DRAGON LORE Mindscape went to the Old World to discover this 3-D adventure, and Peter Olafson tells us the tale. 132 Deadly lines in o Under A Killing Moon 152 Metaltech Barthsiege 00: 12:88  52 PM HPH 152 METALTECH EARTHSIEGE Jeff James encounters heavy metal in the form of mechanized, rocket-firing juggernauts. 158 RISE OF THE ROBOTS Street fighting in the 21st Century pits you against 3-D rendered, malignant robots, but George Jones knows how to kick some 'bot. 162 CYCLEMANIA Don your leathers and pull on your brain bucket, we're headed into digitized terrain at 160 miles an hour, with «Hop-along\" Gordon Goble at the controls. 168 BLACKTHORNE Charles Ardai wields a shotgun with abandon in this swashbuckling, ultra-violent Interplay saga. 172 THE FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI If you think carnage is cool, Mark Clarkson's tale of slaying Samurai and mauling mutant lizards will slay you, too. Cyclemania AUVA IMO.NO BO POSITION 4 OUT OF OUT OF_$ "


"194 Armored Fist 176 GLIDER PRO Eden Maxwell guides a spunky little flyer through a 270-room housing complex without once crashlanding his hard drive. S COALG RENRENINGS S OROTHO ADAR 11001 SIMULATIONS TESTETISTELUT USER COXTEUL 350 191 BOGEY'S BAR & GRILL Tom Basham flies in the face of special interest groups to show you how sim jocks share their obsession. 194 ARMORED FIST NovaLogic slams its ARMORED FIST on the table, unleashing modern US and Russian armored vehicles and helicopter gunships. 200 FLEET DEFENDER GOLD Tom Basham takes the stick of MicroProse's F-14 simulator with digitized audio, multimedia glitz and a mission builder. 202 DAWN PATROL Michael Rymaszewski wraps on a cravat and climbs into an open-air WWI-vintage cockpit for a final showdown with the Red Baron. Lailato Video 0072700 luca. anges.imviSDD regu AIL 300380i 202 Dawn Patrol ** STRAT E GY/ WAR GAMES BIL All 30038 7998 rt P10TH Nieuport Neron Navigolo Tore Info Hone W LOUKACI Heading 16\" Speed 76 p Rolfu 29° Range Rel 29 Ranges les Near Linery Range 0 1117 statura DEPARTMENTS 207 BROADSIDES & GRIPESHOT Savor some chestnuts with armchair general Alan Emrich as he relives the year in wargaming 212 PREVIEW! 1830: RAILROADS & ROBBER BARONS Johnny \"Tycoon\" Wilson lays tracks and stock market traps as he climbs aboard Avalon Hill's new railroad empire builder. 216 PANZER GENERAL Feast your SSIs on this SVGA strategy game that puts you in command of the Panzers in 1939. Field Marshall Terry Coleman reports. 224 WARCRAFT: ORCS & HUMANS Few humans understand the armed struggle between humans and orcs as well as Chris Lombardi, whose parents were one of each. 228 BATTLE ISLE 2200 Accolade takes us back to the future in this sci-fi slugfest from Germany. Martin Cirulis conducts the briefing. 14 EDITORIAL How Can Games Be Both Early And Late? 18 INTERFACE Letters, E-mail and Flaming Arrows 24 READ.ME The Latest Buzz, Whir And Click 236 OPPONENTS WANTED Fresh Meat For Ravenous Gamers 238 SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Games For The Gore-Averse 242 HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL C++, The Language of Gaming 248 UNDER THE HOOD The Game Player's Toolkit 254 NOW PLAYING Quick Plays Of The Latest Games Released 267 HALL OF FAME All-Time Great Games 264 ADVERTISER INDEX The Ad Finder And Free Info Center 268 TOP 100 Readers Rate The Top Games 270 PATCHES Game Files To Kill Bugs Dead 272 THE RUMOR BAG The King Contact 216 Panzer General E LE LECTET: E DEEDELLO 100 "


"Scope out the terrain. Siew your turret Lock on target. And brace yourself for a fire storm! WEncounter startlingly realistic prebud missions or construct your own Dig trenches, lay mines, even plant trees. You're in the heart of an advanced fighting machine. Peering through the thick smoke billowing off your last victim, you feel you're being watched. Switching to thermal shows something hot behind the trees ahead. Advanced optics zoom in and reveal a Soviet T-80 tank turning its turret toward you. Now is not the time to hesitate... Lock and load. FIRE! Choose American M1A2 Abrams main battle tanks, M3 Bradley IFV's equipped with thermal sights, Russian T-80 tanks, or BMP APC's equipped with image intensifiers. Forge ahead on the digital battlefield of the future in this modern tank simulation from NovaLogic (the creators of Comanche, WolfPack and Ultrabots). Engage your enemy in accurate battle environments where you encounter translucent smoke, explosions and grenades. Strap on your helmet for the ride of your life! Command multiple tanks over 3-D, Voxel Space (patent pending), terrain and call in remote artillery or tactical air support to ensure victory. Suggested Retail Price $69.95 Available for PC 3.5\" and PC CD-ROM com cum TE Aru ! Cum Sueco Nontogs and dars otraviton Utrata Vuci toovalnica 210 Circle Reader Service #218 "


"YOU ANIN Your heart is racing Th-thump. Th-thump. It's pumping as fast as your legs. You don't notice the gentle breeze, the noon-day sky. Raha PATVIA W Starter Scises Winter Suma Prawo \"Truly innovative. \"Strategy Plus You are totally focused. On the smell. Just the smell. Could be the first thing you sink your teeth into, in days. Dust, pebbles, sticks. They're flying Then you pounce. Suddenly. Stealthily. You break its neck. You're hungry. You are such an animal. \"It's addictive.\" PC Gamer Wolf photocopyright held by Wolf Haven International: Jetty Roberts Photography, 1994 Sanctuary Woods Multimedia, Inc. All rights reserved. The I-enterta "


"HAL, YOU. Really. In this wilderness survival adventure, that's exactly what you are. A wolf. And you experience all the sights, sounds...and smells... firsthand. Mating tips included. That's what makes this game unlike any other. It's realistic. So realistic that it just might blow you away. (Or maybe a predator will.) Will you survive? You'll have to hunt. Fight. Mate. (Hey, maybe it's not so hard after all.) See your retailer or call 800-943-3664. WOLF ENTERTAINMENT and the Wolf logo are trademarks of Sanctuary Woods Multimedia, Inc. Sanctuary Woods is a registered trademark of Sanctuary Woods Multimedia Corporation SANCTUARY WOODS Circle Reader Service #309 "


"EMIGHT COMMANDER Choose from 112 Jet Aircraft spanning all 4 generations of combat aircraft. A Powerful Game Simulation of Modern Aerial combat DATA LIBRARY Point & Click Battle Generator delivers an easy Scenario Builder. RICAR TV ULICO FUSTANZ Choose from a myriad of armaments! Actual screens may vary. Coming up on the heading...IMPACT! FLIGHT COMMANDER 2 puts YOU in command of the strike force hunting SCUD sites during Operation Desert Storm, or leading a Wild Weasel flight into North Vietnam. Dive your F-86 Sabres out of the sun into a swarm of Red Chinese MIGs, or knock out Soviet T-80 tanks Jeading the advance into West Germany! FLIGHT COMMANDER'S Scenario Generator lets you dictate opponents, level of difficulty, and time periods from the Korean War to the present and beyond! Choose from 5 different campaigns or use the Point & Click Battle Generator to create new scenarios! You will never run out of fresh challenges. No two missions are ever the same! Truly a state-of-theart game that requires use of your brain, not a joystick. CD ROM coming soon n The Avalon Hill Game Company DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. a 4517 Harford Road Baltimore, MD 21214 BIG TIME Available on: PC Compatibles, 386 or better with Microsoft Windows 7.4MB of RAM. 3.5\" High Density Floppy. Hard Disk Drive, Mouse, VGA or SVGA color graphics. Sound Support for Sound Blaster AW32, Sound Blaster 16. Sound Blaster Pro and Compatibles. Pro Audio Spectrum and Roland. Also available on Macintosh with 4MB of RAM, and Hard Disk Drive. SOFTWARE TNC. CALOR Flight Commander 2 can be found in computer game stores near you. For order information or for the name of a retailer near you, call 1-800-999-3222. Ask for Dept. CGW 12 Circle Reader Service #294 "


"It's 1999, and the Russian Bear is Back! TM Combat Information Center-Choose your play options DE PRATI SE SEITE TITROCITIEI Air Missions Display-Send your aircraft on dangerous missions hirinovsky has seized the reins of power in the Kremlin, and he's got his eye on warm-water ports and rich oil deposits in the Persian Gulf and Indian Oceans. While the Kirov cruises toward Bahrain, and Typhoons prowl the Gulf, where is the United States? The has arrived! Your're in command of a U.S. Navy task force, with a full range of hardware at your command. Nimitz class carriers, with their Tomcats and Hornets. Ticonderoga-class cruisers, searching the seas and skies with powerful radar. F-117A Stealth Fighters and P-3 Orions support you from airbases. As a fleet commander you've got better things to worry about than the endless details of running a ship. Don't worry-your computer will handle the non-essential work, leaving you to focus on strategy and command. If you're good enough, the sea lane's remain open, the Russians don't get their client states, and America's interests are served. Fail, and your ships are sunk, along with the future of the free world. 5th FLEET gives you a new engine-a new design and a new standard for Modern Naval warfare. Play against a wily computer opponent, at variable levels of aggression and difficulty, \"hot-seat\" a friend on the same computer, or play via E-Mail. Whichever way you play the game, you'll agree 5th FLEET splashes the competition! DIXI CHA Battle Results Display-See the damage your units cause Actual screens may vary. 5th FLEET can be found in computer game stores near you. For order information or for the name of a retailer near you, call 1-800-999_3222. Ask for Dept. CGW1 The Avalon Hill Game Company 4517 Harford Rd Baltimore, MD 21214 ROM CD-ROM available now! Circle Reader Service Available on IBM PC or compatible, 386 or better processor 2MB RAM, HD 3,5 Floppy, Hard Drive VGA Graphics Card & Monitor, Mouse, Soundblaster or compatible sound cards. STANLEY ASSOCIATES "


"Rants & Raves White Rabbit Syndrome Why Too Many Computer Games Are Ripped From The Womb by Johnny L. Wilson ots of computer gamers would The date is further stretched by unanticSmall and large publishers alike have to like to paraphrase the White Rabipated technical problems and the late adsell games into the retail channel in order bit's refrain from Alice in Wonderdition of new features. The first set of to pay their bills. They can't collect adland to read, \"It's late! It's late for problems can be as complex as: changing vances for games in beta testing, so ecosome very important play. No in mid-project to a true 32-bit C compiler nomic reality forces them to release their time to beta test, let's fly—it's late, it cost one company over three months of babies as premature infants—hoping that it's late, it's late!\" They wonder project time), discovering that the addition the intensive care of aggressive patching how a game can be delayed many months of modem play disrupts the Al for solitaire can see the new lives through. overdue and still be incomplete and with play (more than one company opted to Even cash-rich companies have to remajor bugs. How can it be both late and ship a game without promised modem lease games prematurely in order to hit premature at the same time? play because they couldn't solve the probthe End of Quarter (EOQ). Public compalem efficiently); or having a programmer nies need as much revenue as possible in THE LATE, GREAT HIT who didn't comment the code leave in the a given quarter because most investors An industry leader once put the issue in an middle of a project. judge them on their current earnings verenigmatic phrase that sounded vaguely like Such technical problems can be exacersus those of a year ago. If you can get doggerel, \"Software travels at the speed of bated by the second set of problems. The your product on the market and receive software.\" Ernest Adams, one of the direcmarketers determine that the game must promise of income before the EOQ, you tors of the Computer Game Developers be reworked to take advantage of a new may be able to enhance your balance Conference, put it a little more logically video card or that a game must have this sheet and make your investors happy. when he explained last conference that or that \"Gee Whiz\" factor in order to Even private companies who do not have software engineering is about \"solving compete in the marketplace. Such retooltheir earnings reported in public forums problems in new ways.\" He went on to saying always takes longer than anticipated. may feel forced to hit the EOQ in order that no one knows how long it will take to to build up their earnings and make their solve these problems because \"no one BUCK FIXES vulture...er...venture capitalists happy. knows how long it will take.\" No one knows But, of course, you want to know why the Venture capitalists expect a relatively how long it will take to get better graphic products ship too soon, not why they're quick and generous return on investment. compression. No one knows how long it late. The products are largely shipped too Bad quarters make these people nervous, will take to integrate the physics model of a soon for financial reasons. These financial so even private companies may occasionsimulation with the game's player interface. reasons apply to small private companies ally rush a game to avoid the EOQ blues. In fact, the more game designers and proand large public companies alike. The Finally, there is the retail pressure. Regrammers try to make things better, first reason is cash flow-pure and simple. tailers like to move merchandise swiftly. So, stronger, faster, the less anyone can tell Small developers are paid on the basis of they want to know when the game is going when it is going to be done. milestones, reaching certain previously to be on the shelf. The marketers tell them Meanwhile, it takes months of lead time agreed upon performance points before that the VIRTUAL SPROCKETS DANCE CLUB to interest distributors, the large retail they are paid. In many cases, the developwill ship on December 7th and the retailers chains, and consumers. So the marketers er depends upon the milestone payment set aside X number of dollars to buy the bug the game design/programming team in order to survive. So, they cadge togethgame during that quarter. If the product for a delivery date, who in turn make a er enough code to do the task under cerdoesn't ship during that quarter, the pubguess. Each guesstimate is off by a random tain optimal conditions, even if they don't lisher has three choices: 1) ship it premafactor based on how many new problems have time to test all of the conditions. turely, 2) find another product (usually the programmers are trying to solve. The They eventually have to go back and fix European) to take its place (assuming the more neat stuff they try to put in a product, the problems causing further delay), but buyers are willing to accept the substituthe less accurate the delivery date. they get the quick cash. tion), or 3) allow a competitor to earn those 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"Sento VIDEO SHOWS DIGITIZED IN PRODUK Syrup Spa pu oboue MUSIC TELEVISION WELCOME WE TO MTV PE CD-ROM SIST CEREB Lana Poworn-vixon with third eye. 3 CINEMATIC, REBRAL, TIC, ADVENTU Lowla Scuddur Head of Security at the Alexandria-playing with his gun \"aparky IN THE FUTURE, THE POSH JET SET, HELL-BENT ON SYNTHETIC EXPERIENCE GO TO CLUB ALEXANDRIA TO GET THEIR FIX OF V 19 (VIRTUAL REALITY)... TROUBLE 15 PEOPLE ARE GOING BELLY-UP LIKE FLIES. MATURE NOW YOU-SAM FROST (CYBERPLUMBER)-HAVE 4 DAYS YOUR LOGIC, INSTINCT AND THE THINGS YOU TRIP OVER (IN 40 DIFFERENT LOCATIONS ACROSS 17 FLOORS IN THE ALEXANDRIA) TO FIGURE IT OUT... AND STAY ALIVE. MATURE REALISTIC VIOLENCE 90 MINUTES OF VIDEO WITH OVER 40 ACTORS-DIRECTED, PRODUCED AND EDITED BY MTV ORIGINAL IYTV SOUNDTRACK Richlu 7-runowned Bonic artistumugly banking in his Alchio 7 Paradox Pod. neumeDIA TM For more information on Club Dead call (800) 469-2539 Circle Reader Service #358 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD defaulted dollars by not shipping anything. In either of the last two cases, the publisher will have to 'esell the buyer on stocking the game in a later quarter. Considering what that can do to cash flow, patching a premature disk is lots more economical than missing the boat. In fact, dollars to buy are so important that one major consumer retailer is reported to have run out of dollars to buy for this holiday season. Yet, so many titles had slipped into the holiday quarter that the buyer invited software publishers to place their products in his stores, basically on consignment with the promise of reorders if they did well. So, timing is extremely important for the publisher who expects to be able to get the games in the stores. It's easy to see why publishers have gotten into the habit of publishing now and paying the price of fixing games later. Competitive pressures, business pressures, technological challenges and the desire to create the latest (pum intended) and greatest all add to the vicious cycle. Unfortunately, the lack of dependability may well end up leading to another vicious circle-the one where gamers won't buy the games because they can't be sure of value. The fact is that such publishers are virtually mortgaging the future on a misbegotten present of buggy games. Some day, some of them are going to have to pay the piper. In fact, one could reasonably argue that they are gambling an entire industry on the consumer's money. While you may not like the answers to the \"late and buggy\" questions, we hope you understand the issues better. \"Late\" games are a fact of software life, and we'll have to deal with that. Yet exceptionally buggy and/or incomplete software, while being understandable from a short-term business perspective, is not healthy for our hobby in the long run. We truly hope that publishers will focus on long-term value and a trustworthy relationship with their customers. That would make for some welldeserved celebration on both sides. The #1 Computer Game Magazine JANUARY 1995, NUMBER 126 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi Managing EditorKen Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Terry Coleman Allen Greenberg George Jones Interchange Editor Alan Emrich Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games), M. Evan Brooks (Wargames) Tom Basham (Simulations) Contents are copyrighted by Ziff Davis Publishing Co., 1994. Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollar's made by check or money order down upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription CIVICe questions, address changes on ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-4450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (308) 1-17-9330 or fax to (303) 143-5080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: 1.0. Box 57167. Boulder, CO 80329-7167 Editorial Offices: 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). S6.00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept.. Zifl-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com America On-Line: CGW Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Prodigy: EXIT 101 Fax: (711) 283-3144 Genie: CGW For advertising information only, call: ImagiNATION: Box 10:18 Lee J. Unincke, (714) 283-3000 x41 HOW DO WE RATE? The Guide To CGW's Review Rating System For quality reprints in quantities of 100 or more, contact REPRINT SERVICES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD, 315 5th Avenue N.W. St. Paul, MN 55112. (612) 582-3800, FAX (612) 633-1862. ***** Outstanding: That rare game that gets it all right. The graphics, sound, interface, and, of course, the game play come together to form a Transcendent Gaming Experience. Dickins * Very Good: A quality game that succeeds in many areas. May have minor problems, but is still worth your time and money, especially if you're interested in the subject matter/genre. Wanac Publith P Average: A mixed bag. Can often be a game that reaches for the stars, but falls short in significant areas. Can also just be a game that does what it does well, but lacks flair or originality. ** Weak: A game with serious problems. May be buggy, may not have much play value, may be ill-conceived—and you may want to think twice about buying it. Abysmal: That rare game that gets it all wrong. Usually a buggy, incomplete, and/or valueless product. ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY Chairman: Eric Hippeau Consumer Media Group President: J. Scott Briggs Executive Vice President: Mike Edelhart Vice President: J. Thomas Cottingham VP. Editor-in-Chief Computer Life: John Dickinson Vice President, Marketing: Ruth P. Stevens Director of Electronic Publishing: Sherry Huss Business Manager: D. Ian McKinnon President, Business Media Group: Ronni Sonnenberg: President, Computer Intelligence/InfoCorp: Bob Brown; President, Information Access Company: Robert Howells: President, International Media Group: J.B. Holston III; President, ZD) Expos: Bill Lohse; President, Zill-Davis Interactive: Michael Kolowich; President, Zifr Technology Group: Ken Jeffers: Senior Vice President, Circulation: Baird Davis: Senior Vice President. Rachel Greenfield, Vice President. Assistant to the Chairman: Tom McGrade, Vice President. Circulation Services: James E. Ramaley: Vice President. Controller: Howard Sckolnik: Vice President, Creative Services: Herbert Stern; Vice President, General Manager: Bruce W. Bourne:Vice President. Human Resources: Rayna Brown: Vice President, l'roduction: Roger Herrmann: Vice President, Research: Rolf M. Wulfsberg: Vice President, Strategic Planning: Robert Zill: Vice President, Techmology: Bill Machrone: Chief Information Officer: Wellington Y. Chin: Internal Marketing Consultant: Paul H. Chook: Editorial Director: Lewis D'Vorkin; Executive Director, Information Systems: Owen Weekley: Executive Director, Marketing Services: Tim Manning Production Director: Walter 1. Terlecki; Director of Licensing: Jean Lamensdorf, Director of Public Relations: Gregory Jarboe ZIFF COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY Chairman and CEO: Eric Hippeau Senior Vice President & Chuel mancial Officer: Bruce R. Barnes Senior Vice President: Steven C. Feinman Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary: J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, Business Mannger: T.1. Thompson Vice President, Controller and Treasurer: \"Timothy J. Mitchell Chairman Emeritus. William B. Zill, Jr. 16 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"Mt you want to go all out for games, the Falcan is the best bet for your money.\" -Computer Gaming World F.5.176 SUPER-MEGA-FIGHTER INSTALL PROGRAM PLEASE SELECT THE DETAIL LEVEL YOUR PC SUPPORTS: For 386, and slow 486 machines For fast 486 and Pentium machines Falcon MACH V's only It's a cruel fact of computer gaming: better graphics demand more computer power. Smoother animation requires a higher frame-rate. Your eyes can see 30 frames every second. If your computer is doing anything less, your game won't play smoothly. And if you think today's games are demanding, just wait until you see tomorrow's! The Falcon MACH V and MACH Vp are not your average computers. They were specifically designed with the needs of gamers in mind: extreme frame-rates, brutal amounts of CPU power, unreal hard disk transfer rates, and all of the multimedia and gaming extras that you'd normally have to add yourself. Sure, they're great for spreadsheets, word processing, and general business any computer can do that. When you're ready for something more, you're ready for a MACH V. The MACH V $1,995 Featuring an AMD 486 DX/2-80M. API, negabytes of RAM, and a 125 megabyte Enhanced IDE hard disk The 2,995 Featuring an Intel 90 MHZ PENTIUMTM CPU, 8 megabytes of RAM, a 540 megabyte Enhanced IDE hard disk, and a SoundBlaster 16 Optional 15\" monitor shower Each MACH V system comes standard with our VESA Local Bus graphics and Enhanced IDE hard disk controllers, 1.2 & 1.4 megabyte floppy drives, mini-tower case. 101 key keyboard, 250ms double-speed CD-ROM. Creative Labs SoundBlaster PRO or 16 M. Labtec multimedia speakers. CH Products FLIGHTSTICK PRO and dual high-speed joystick ports, licensed Microsoft DOS6.22M and Windows 3.11 M. 3 button mouse, and a 14\" non-interlaced full-screen SVGA monitor. Each MACH V is custom built many different processor speeds and upgrades are available, please call for pricing and availability. THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE FALCON NORTHWEST To Order Call: NEW LOWER PRICING 1-800-258-6778 & 10 Free CD-ROMs with COMPUTER SYSTEMS each MACH V! 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Ph: (503) 269-0775 Fax:(503) 267-2575 Financing Available On Approved Credit Circle Reader Service #141 "


"AWESOME Interface LETTERS FROMC GW READERS DIGITAL to develop encryption techright of the owner of a TSR rule set the mutation of the entity DODGE CITY niques, systems for encoding to post his or her variant rules or known as TSR. We at TSR are concerned with and identifying works.\" unofficial character classes. FurDo you know what TSR the misinformation presented Like software designers, ther, we don't see any problem with stands for? in «Showdown On The Elecmovie makers, singers, writposting original fiction based in a a) Tactical Studies Rules tronic Frontier,\" by Johnny L. ers-TSR has protected its TSR world if the author is not b) They Sue Regularly Wilson. In Wilson's column, games, art, characters, systems charging for the story. Finally, the c) They Suck Royally he stated that TSR has and properties through naTSR policy statement allows materd) All of the above (the corclaimed that playing the tional trademarks and copyial to ONLY be uploaded to rect answer, of course) DUNGEONS & DRAGONS rights which protect their MPGNet and AOL. Il strictly for The above joke is at least 15 (Registered) game over the Inpublication-electronically or bids other uploads to other sites. We years old, but its implications ternet infringes on TSR's on paper. We're committed to stand by the editorial. The followare as valid today as they were trademarks and copyrights. providing creative outlets for ing letter takes an even stronger then. TSR has a legal departTSR has made no such our fans on the Internet and stand than Johnny Wilson's. ment whose devotion to duty overture regarding gaming. other nets. There's an FTP site I am a long time reader/subborders on the maniacally obIn fact, we encourage and (Itp.mpgn.com) that carries scriber of CGW and also a long sessive. Something of a laughsupport play-by-play chat and and distributes works which time resident of Wisconsin. I ing stock within the game play-by-email gaming. We are incorporate TSR's trademarks read with great interest your industry for the outrageous only concerned when unliand copyrights under special \"Rants & Raves\" article in the things they do (You ARE censed people or companies license. Writers can send their latest issue. Your statements aware that TSR obtained a use TSR properties (names, work to this public access site about TSR's intent to oversee copyright on the word \"Nazis\" rules, etc.) in their own pubfor distribution to the net at the use of its trademarks on because of its use in their Indilished works. NO charge. When writers do the net alarms me to the point ana Jones RPG game?), they Mr. Wilson refers to an upsend their works, we ask them of breaking out in a cold are deadly serious when it coming showdown regarding to include a small block of lesweat. I've been in the Wisconcomes to money. When they \"excessive diligence.\" I hope gal text acknowledging TSR's sin game scene before D&D tell you that they will \"make he is aware that what he refers copyrights and trademarks. made it big, and have been an earnest attempt to prevent to as a \"showdown\" may be in And there are ways to concloser than most at watching this infringement of (their) fact an \"airing.\" The real tinue gaming until Congress showdown is brewing in Washcatches up. Try the MPGNet The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant ington, D.C. Last July, represite or AOL:TSR (coming sentatives of the American soon). TSR has been on Genie \"The overlooked versatility of the Commodore C-64 Association of Publishers since 1990, long before the (AAP) spoke of the \"appalling term \"info superhighway\" was PAPERWEIGHT PAPERWEIGHT A T SNACK TABLE lack of respect for intellectual invented. We're exploring new property\" on the Internet, and connections even now. We declared that \"universal serview the Internet as a key to vice and access are not an invifuture global gaming, tation to undermine the rights Robert Repp of intellectual property ownManager, ers.\" Mark Morril, general Digital Products Group counsel of Simon & Schuster, TSR, Inc. said on behalf of the CIC, HAT & GLOVE DRYER NIGHT LIGHT \"copyright...is a critical securiThe editorial in question did not ty issue. These extraordinary take TSR to task for protecting its new communications networks existing property. TSR's letter to should cause the market for sysops warned them not to post rule copyrighted works to explode. variants or unofficial character But if the networks are not seclasses, particularly if they used cure, the opportunities for such terms as \"Mit Dice\" and \"Arunauthorized use will explode mor Class.\" We do not advocate the as well.\" Morrill urged the adreprinting of existing published ministration to \"support and charts and tables on the Internet. encourage the private sector However, we strongly affirm the HENNAATT 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Ridelike a maniac. Without becoming a kidney donor. Talk about insane. We packed Cyclemania with over 400MB of treacherous road footage, put it on a CD-ROM and threw you in the middle of it all. You've got six screaming bikes to choose from and tons of obstacles like rocks. oncoming traffic, road pylons and guardrails to contend with. There are even different race and opposition levels to choose from. And when it comes to graphics, Cyclemania is about as advanced as it gets. We have technology that can actually scroll real road footage and synchronize it to the speed of your bike. Which, by the way, can reach 160 MPH. (Watch out for cows.) As Computer Game Review puts it: \"From a technical standpoint. this game is a winner. The digitized road footage looks stunning.\" In other words, it's as real as racing gets. Without that annoying death part. CYCLEMANIA A RACING GAME BY SPORT ACCOLADE Cyclomania is a trademark of Accolade, Inc. and is licensed by Compro Games UK, Ltd. Sport Accolade and tho Sport Accolado logo are trademarks of Accolado, Inc. 1994 Accolade, Inc. Circle Reader Service #256 "


"trademarks and copyrights\", Inc. and are used here without it as the computer game equivagames based on character developthey aren't kidding around their permission. lent of writing an original story ment (usually involving attribute I am afraid that the net is Sad, isn't it? each month using your spelling improvement and/or promotion), in for a real legal battle, and Good luck words. Seriously, the reason for Simulation: Games that usuit's the little guys (those sys Bill Tricomi the emboldened company names ally model real world vehicles in admins overseeing TSR-type Madison, WI in \"The Rumor Bag\" is to enable real world environments, from the games) who will soon be findpeople like you to skip the fiction first-person perspective. ing themselves in court if they We actually thought it was Lucasand get straight to the rumors. Sports: Games that present eidon't pay those \"licensing film that tried to trademark Nazi ther a strategic, action or hybrid fees\" referred to in your artiand Ark of the Covenant. Either GETTING approach to sports on the computer. cle. I applaud your attempt to way, we guess they haven't heard TO KNOW YOU Strategy: Games that emphaget TSR into the October disabout the infringement upon the November was not just the size strategic planning, resource cussion, but, knowing them as Original Copyright Holder. biggest issue ever, but the best management and problem-solving. I do, I would not be surprised issue ever! Did that sound W argames: Strategy games to learn that the only reAMERICA kissy? Would I actually get that present historical warfare sponse you get is a legal letter OFF-LINE anything for being kissy? from a command perspective. informing you that, without in the front of your magaCheck Six. We know these categories aren their express written permiszines, I notice that you're on Spider perfect, and that many games sion, you will not be able to AOL. However, whenever I try Wheaton, IL don't fit neatly into a single cateuse or make reference to any a \"Goto CGW,\" I get a mesgory, but we think the system is of TSR's \"valuable assets.\" sage saying it doesn't exist. Get anything for being kissy? Yes, useful for our Top 100 list and Also, be very careful what K. Davis if you hadn't signed your letter yearly awards, and besides, the aryou say in that discussion. I will Grand Prairie, TX anonymously, you'd have won a guments here in the CGW offices also bet that the TSR legal beabrand new car. over which games go where keep gles will be monitoring that We dont exist. In fact, the magaI am a recent \"addict» to our lives interesting. session to watch for any inzine you're holding doesn' exist. Computer Gaming World and be2. Every six months, we refringements regarding said You don'even exist. Actually, the gan buying your magazine in move games that are more than \"assets\". (I once attended a only CGW that exists on America June. I enjoy your magazine two years old from the Top 100. seminar at GenCon in which On-Line is an electronic mail adand consider it to be valuable At the same time, we consider the presenter had some seridress. You can send e-mail to us at for game comparisons and which of these \"retired\" games ous criticisms concerning TSR \"CGW,\" but there is no electronic keeping readers up to date with are worthy to be placed in the board games. He made a very magazine on AOL. We publish what is going on in general. Hall of Fame. The ratings of the strange request. He asked us on-line reviews on the PRODIGY Your Top 100 Games, Best Top 100 games are cumulative to shout out in unison the service and we have an interactive Games By Category, Readers' averages based on reader votes. name of some court case forum on Zil No. Current plans Top 10 and Premier Awards The Playing Lately list comes (someone versus somebody call for an electronic magazine on provide me with excellent infrom the write-in votes from else can't remember which) the new Interchange network formation. However, it also Question #61 on the CGW Poll every time he performed a viwhen it is available. provides confusion. Card, and is a generul indication sual clue. This clue was given 1. What are the definitions of which games are hot and/or after every comment that was TUMOR BAG for your categories of games? have a lot of replay value. Il's derogatory to TSR. After the How about releasing the re2. The Top 100 Games seem odd, but sometimes a game will seminar, we asked him exactly sults of questions/grades for to have little direct correlation appear on the Playing Lately list, what was going on. He told us \"The Rumor Bag?\" I mean, is to your Hall of Fame games or but not get a high enough rating he had been informed that this guy really PAID for his what people are playing to make the Top 100. ApparentTSR would be recording his column?! A trick for us readers 3. Another confusing thing ly, just because gamers are playseminar as a basis for possible is to look for highlighted is how a game's rating changes ing a game doesn't necessarily legal action! The court case benames in the story, read the so dramatically. mean they think it's terrific. ing cited throughout the semiactual rumor, and skip the Ed Medley 3. Since the Top 100 is based nar was one in which it had lame story. Keep up the ruMidland, MI on a cumulative average of ratbeen decided that attempts to mors, but pop the bag ings, the results are volatile early use legal action to silence D. Hartl Here's the straight scoop. on in a game's history, but the ratsomeone's criticisms was an inTraverse City, MI 1. Our category definitions ings tend to settle down after a fringement of free speech. Just have evolved over the years, but game is rated a few times. maybe, Johnny, you should get Actually, about half our readers the working definitions follow: that reference and keep it love the inside references and offAction/Arcade: Computer Send your letters to the editor to: handy, just in case! the-wall fiction that connects the games that emphasize hand-eye coCGW-INTERFACE, 130 Oh yes, before I forget to rumors, but the other half abordination and reflexes. Chaparral Court, Suite 260, Anacover my own ass, \"TSR\", solutely hate the format. We tried Adventure: Games that allow heim Hills, CA 92808. If submit\"D&D\", \"Nazis\", \"Indiana printing the rumors by themselves you to take an alter ego through a ting your letter by e-mail, please Jones RPG\" and \"GenCon\" in a half-page format, but that storyline or series of events. place \"Letter to Editor\" in the subare all copyrighted by TSR, wasn'l popular, either. Think of Role-Playing: Adventure jed line of your message. 20 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"EROES of Might and Magic he realms of Might and Magic are expanding! New lands have been discovered, and you must vie for their control against three other warlords. Now is the time to summon your heroes, recruit your armies and lead them to victory. Control every resource in your empire from your castles, docks and guilds to your archers, dragons and ogres. Keep a level head and an iron fist as you strive for total domination in the world of Heroes of Might and Magic. * Over two dozen different monster types  Customizable computer opponents * Dynamic musical score # Intuitive point-n-click interface # Exquisite SVGA Graphics * Indefinitely replayable Heroes vid 28 Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898 (818-889-6070 outside the U.S.), or by mail: P.O. Box 4302 Hollywood, CA 90078-4302 NEW WORIO COMPUTNE, INI  1994 New World Computing, Inc. Heroes of Might and Magic is a trademark of New World Compuling. New World Computing and its distinctive logo and Might and Magic are registered trademarks of New World Compuling, Inc. All rights reserved, IBM screens shown: Aclual screens may vary. Po!Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 Circle Reader Service "


"THE NEW MINDSCAPE PRESENTS DRAGON LOREM of the m Cotion that of th as Werner Onlike other raphies à actual game the opening ONLY THE REVIEWS ARE STRUNER FETHE DRAGON. on, entorvo g e gans a mento the heaventually 3D a there  Vi ctie test parts of G see it Character succint cken acter....Ihe cel animation is fl nies look like enes. ne in bmpared to these , actions are lifelike, and the characters really fit into the surand the characters were real jot cel animated drawings. Drag aying game with company to rounding environment core has taken the 3D concept and ng first-person DOS game, it certainly looks like it's developers are placing technology systematically overhauled the entire sys in Super VGA...a lightning fast mulahead of fundamental gameplay, it is in adventure/role playing game Struc due timedia experience timedia experien tion into a 3D environment, while maintaining the conventions of the e placing ter seen on any platform. DATE best-looking game I've ever This is one of the best, if not genre in detail. mental gameplaymores at least one design ere it appears many Inice to see that at least one design to put the interachasn't forgotten to put the 'interacltimedia gaming. . TOOKTA Sa poc live back into m tive' back into multimedia gaming. any platfo, no que ve b out to Dondupe. seasoned advenof the re nultimedia. Des Dragon Lore have of the ye ce that so many 'Cou ens' lacked? From wk en, the answer is a reso Dragon from the new generation of designs which uses new technology subtly and in more than one obvious way.... Dragon Lore is the first design out there to take the formula for a been playing, regular top-down RPG or adventure, and use it in a 3-D first-person environment. Action and adrenaline start pumpas early on, with a shocking start to your long quest. is seen as the prelin question that it the most talked-a! THE LEGEND BEGINS Dragant llore "


"The new Mindscape presents the graphic adventure that transports you into a whole new dimension: Dragon Lore, created by the developers of MegaRace\". Dragon Lore gives you full screen 3-0 graphics and animation that lets you view anything from various angles. It's \"first person\" and interactive, and the game actually adapts to what you're doing. 2 Raise your sword to destroy your enemies, or attempt to solve the gruesome challenges in a more intelligent way. You decide. Beyond technically amazing, the game play will keep you devoted to conquering the unleashed evil. Sound effects laced with grisly screams keep you riveted to the action. ing the at it will be ed about 8 In a quiet valley protected by the Dragon Knights, your father has been murdered by a traitorous knight who has vowed to destroy your family. Now you must regain your legacy and seek vengeance. Awaiting you are magic spells, vicious combat, intriguing puzzles, and sinister creatures that dwell in this lost domain. There's never been anything like it. For centuries. Only the new Mindscape could do it this well. ersion a be one nesmost multime 1983 audio visual in Lore appears to rich gameplay and puzzle me could be a lesson to de s was Myst ), that games deeply about gameplay and that audio-visuale Mindscape, Inc. 60 Leveroni Court MINDSCAPE Novato, CA 94949 For the store nearest you, call: 1-800-866-5967 Formerly The Software Toolworks Formats 3DOM and IBMO CD. System Requirements For IDM CD-ROM: IBM 386 MHZ (486 recommended) .4 MB of memory  MCGA Or VGA (256 color) graphics card . MS DOS 5.0 or higher Hard Disk CD ROM drive 150 KB/Second transfer rate minimum (double speed rocommondod). Mouse required Sound Card (Sound Blaster, Adlib. Pro Audio Spectrum. LAPC:1). Copyright  1995 Cryo Interactive Entertainment. All rights reserved. Copyright 1995 Mindscape. Inc. All rights reserved. Dragon Lore is a trademark of Mindscape. Inc. 3DO, the 3D0 logos, and the Interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of the 3DO Company. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. All rights reserved. All other product names are the trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders and are hereby acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #353 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Aliens Brainwash MicroProse To Bake Pizza And Make A CD MOM A recent trip to MicroProse can travel over water without Japanese planes like the offered some new information ships, the artificial opponent's Frank, George and on upcoming enhanced and ship logic is handled better; Tony; digitized speech new titles. The CD-version of exceptional spellcasters start with wingman chatter; MASTER OF MAGIC will feature with more spells; and diplomaand new sound effects version 1.2 and will be playable cy is better implemented. with both a default and from the CD. In the new verThe scenario disk for 1942: digital option. The big sion, the hordes will actually PACIFIC AIR WAR will add: monews for CGW readers is raid instead of sitting outside dem play; a mission builder that the scenario disk towns and cities; fewer heroes which includes New Guinea will fix the enemy Al so will appear than in the earlier and the Philippines; the opthat it uses deflection X-COM TAKES THE PLUNGE Slimy new aliens attack bout 400 underwater in X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP. version; special abilities are tion of flying P-38s and P-40s shots better. About 400 play-balanced better; spirits on the U.S. side, as well as new Army Air Corps missions and 200 modem-play missions are expected to be released on the disc. Mr. Roper wanna-be's can \"Tower\" status. As each rat The multimedia division is raise and lower rent (buting is achieved, more and hard at work, as well. New mulkeep an eye on the books), more construction options, timedia products will incorpoand even program the elevaSimTower rate instructional and historical like condominiums and recytors to keep tenants' stress cling centers, become avail modules accessed by photo-rerom the looks of their levels low. You can even able. Of course, cute, snappy alistic metaphors, such as a carlatest \"computer toy,\" name individual inhabitants graphics easily convey on rier for 1942 and a deserted Maxis will once be reand track them as they move screen information in several army camp for 1944: ACROSS sponsible for many sleepless different ways, THE RHINE. The former will nights. After managing and gamers emphasize training and stratecities, the Earth, farms, and hear and see gic planning, while the latter the nation's health care the hustle and will offer authentic recollec(whew!), it is time for on bustle of each tions from actual veterans. gamers to build and run day. But be On other fronts, the company their very own skyscraper. forewarned: is continuing its work on TRANS\"Sim-toy\" fans will be in towers can be PORTATION TYCOON and PIZZA heaven as they grow their come gargantu TYCOON. Whereas the former customizable high rise from an (up to 100 carries forth the RAILROAD TYa regular old corporate stories high and COON idea on several fronts, Pizplaza into a mammoth selfreally wide), ZA TYCOON is a tongue-in-cheek contained structure. SIMwhich, contrary view of the business world. At Tower has much of the look around the building. Unlike to conventional wisdom, is a times, you'd think Stephenson's and feel that made the origisome other Maxis games, good thing, unless you hap Snow Crash vision of the mafia nal SIMCITY a classic, includthere is a little more built-in pen to be the spouse or taking over the pizza business ing demanding inhabitants, \"game» to SimTower. As roommate of someone who (because they were the only human traffic jams, and qualmore tenants move in to the purchases the game. Avail ones who could guarantee onity of life additions like movie building, the \"star rating\" of able on Macintosh and IBM time delivery) was a reality, since theaters. There is also some the tower increases from one PC. Projected release: Janu you will occasionally have to rely neat micro management, as to five stars, and finally ary/February. on more resources than your LuwuTusuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 w on 2003/10/256 Year 2000 george X59  "


"Readers' PLAYING LATELY? Here are the games that your fellow players are blowing the most time with. Let us know which game you've been playing the most by writing the name of your current addiction in the \"Playing Lately?\" blank of the CGW Top 100 ballot (page 240). Results for CGW #124, November 1994 OP  2. 3. Doom II (id Software) X-COM: UFO Defense (MicroProse) TIE Fighter (LucasArts) . Master of Magic (MicroProse) own business acumen in order to succeed at the game. X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP is currently under development in the U.K. In this sequel to the best-selling X-COM, the aliens attack under the sea. The game itself will use an undersea mapping system which features plenty of topographic detail, some intriguing undersea buildings to explore/capture, new alien sea creatures to serve as foes, and a new mutation technology with which to experiment. Finally, those who are fans of the phenomenal MAGIC: THE GATHERING card game may wonder what MicroProse is going to do with their MAGIC: THE GATHERING computer game. The computer game will feature both a solo game, where players can earn new cards and practice developing their own decks, and an online game, where players will be able to compete via modem or on a commercial network in order to become the supreme duelist. The compulColonization (MicroProse) 6 . Master of Orion (MicroProse) Front Page Sports Baseball (Dynamix) Doom (id Software) 9. System Shock (Origin) 10. Aces of the Deep (Dynamix) \"With X-COM, Notable Quotes graphics are lousy.' I MOO, and MOM, Wit, wisdom and caustic quips laughed so hard I alMicroProse is sinmost got into an accigle-handedly refrom gaming's harshest critics dent on the way home.\" sponsible for Amused In Canada destroying any rem\"Frankly, I'm sick of nant of a life I might have had.\" DOOM-type games... except for SYSTEM SHOCK. Chris Hyde, Fremont, CA The incredibly immersive graphics have made \"ACES OF THE DEEP is great the best WWII me late for several engagements.\" sub sim of all time! If you thought SILENT SERJoe Justice, Hampton, VA VICE II was good, you ain't seen nothin' until \"I would have given MASTER OF Orion an you've played AOD.\" Ray Kelly, Omaha, NE \"A+\" if only it had a multi-player mode, espe\"So I go to the local computer store and say to cially modem or even an e-mail option. I the guy, 'How about that X-COM, isn't it the don't see why they weren't included; it's a greatest?' And he says, 'Yeah, it's alright, but the turn-based game.\" Missing Multi-play In North Bay, CA PIZZA FACES Sample a slice of the upcoming PIZZA TYCOON, a deliciously irrereverant take-out on the biz world. er game uses beautiful backgreat on-screen thanks to both grounds for the campaign the original stunning paints game, as well as dueling/trainings and their conversion to ing screens, that are based on 256 color SVGA graphics in the artwork on the cards high resolution. The game will themselves. The art looks use almost all of the 950 original cards and about 120 cards god-game concepts we've ever from the FALLEN EMPIRES exseen. As yet unnamed, this efpansion set. fort could be the company's Finally, the U.K. branch of real sleeper for 1995 and MicroProse is currently workcould well breathe new life ing on one of the most unique into the god-game genre. JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 25 "


"READ.ME BETA BAITS 00:00 provements deals with aira real battleship free-for-all, ly simple. You only decide craft operations. In GNB2, though, it's hard to ignore when to furl or unfurl the they seemed almost an afterthe hypothetical Plan Orange mainsail on your 17th CenGREAT NAVAL BATTLES 3 thought to what is essentially scenario, which features tury ship, and courses are a capital ship design. The latWWI-style surface ship aceasily set via waypoints. You The last installment of est version integrates air units tion...with nary an aircraft have little responsibility for SSI's naval war simulation much more into the overall carrier in sight. the helm. In battle, you de(GNB2) left gamers with a flow of the game. The search If the various battles lose termine the type of ammunisomewhat salty aftertaste. patterns, which previously retheir luster over time, you can tion for the cannon and The sumptuous graphics sembled a spirograph display always add some spice when the batteries must fire. were undercut by a design gone mad, are now much through the random scenario The strategic aspects are which placed too heavy an simpler to use and yet seem editor. A customizer screen reminiscent of other Impresemphasis on miallows you to adjust sions' games. That is, they cro-managementweapon data and efare essentially spreadsheets to the point where fectiveness (just how disguised by graphic menus. it simply wasn't would the U.S. forces To be sure, many of the much fun. The have fared with Long menus in use here are atgood news for armLance torpedoes?). Fitractive paintings which are chair admirals is nally, the random bat\"hot-spotted\" for menu that the latest vertle generator creates a choices, but they are menus sion of GREAT variety of engagejust the same, whether you NAVAL BATTLES ments, based on hisare recruiting sailors, hiring keeps the newtorically plausible helmsmen, outfitting your found graphic flaalternatives. The reship, or investing in cargo. vor while trimming play value of GNB3 is What makes HIGH SEAS the fat. Not only certainly enhanced TRADER more interesting than are the visuals of the 3D-rento have a more realistic feel. over that of its predecessors, a mere hybrid simulation and dered ships improved, but the scenarios cover a and the overall design is strategy game is the rolethe SVGA graphics also offer number of actions throughoughshaping up to be both more shaping up to be both more playing aspect. You begin as much-needed feedback with out the Pacific theater in historical, and certainly more the captain of a 17th century better explosions and gun WWII. In addition to the inentertaining, sailing vessel and must use flashes. A significantly imevitable Coral Sea and Leyte Projected release: February. your business acumen and proved interface allows for Gulf battles, there are a numseamanship in order to reeasy adjustments to ship ber of clever engagements inHigh Seas Trader claim the title which was speeds, loading and unloadcluded. Operation Swift Wind mpressions Software's stripped from your ancestors ing vessels, statistics and naviassumes that Pearl harbor first foray into first-perin an earlier generation. If gational controls. was a success beyond the son perspective games is you can build up your ratings Damage control is one area Japanese High Command's primarily a cross between a in four areas (nobility, daring, where the micro-managewildest dreams, prompting simulation and a strategy honor and loyalty), you can ment of details remains interthem to send all of the carrigame. The simulation asregain the title. Naturally, esting. Players can find outer might of the Rising Sun pects are pretty, but relativeyou'll need plenty of influfirst-hand why U.S. ships held against the U.S.ence to make this up better than Japanese, as sort of a \"Midway happen and influthey frantically attempt to put as it could have ence does not come out fires and seal hull breachbeen.\" The Aleucheaply, so you'll es in the heat of battle, on tians are the sethave to make advaneuch separate deck. The damting for tageous trades, fight age model extends to ship-toKomandorski Island, off pirates, and build ship battles, where where U.S. shipsup your estate into BONAD 3199 performance of damaged of-the-line interone fitting a member ships seems much more realcept Japanese of the gentler class. istic during combat. forces off the Expected Release: Another of GNB3's imAlaskan coast. For January/February SUITAENDELEA 112     26 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"PIPE UNE Bring Out Your Dead Nova star Resurrects SSI Wargames GRAT'S TRIAL IN THE WEST Long, long ago, when GA and CGW Hall of may make the gamers were gamers and VGA Fame member GETSHILOH biggest splash of was not yet part of the lexicon, TYSBURG: THE TURNall these veneraSSI dominated the computer ING POINT (see page ble titles, given wargaming battlefield. Recent267 in this issue). the scarcity of ly, David Landrey and the Esteemed designer good Napoleonfolks at Novastar Games have Gary Grigsby is repic games of late spurred interest in many older resented by Hall of (see the April SSI titles through a series of Famers MECH '94 CGW for our new scenario disks. Realizing BRIGADE and KAMPFcoverage of sevthat there was still a market GRUPPE, along with SL eral BATTLES OF for wargames with focused deSECOND FRONT, NAPOLEON addsigns and good AI opponents, WARSHIP and WESTon disks). All the Novastar acquired the rights ERN FRONT. Norm Koger's games are available for $15 from SSI to publish 18 titles, RED LIGHTNING and CONFLICT: each, or with bulk discounts many of which have been out MIDDLE EAST offer modern (groups of 5 games are $60). of print for some time. A Civil and WWII-era variety, while Those interested should conWar smorgasbord includes his STELLAR CRUSADE allows a tact Novastar at 3505 Midas such gems as BATILE OF ANTISci-fi break from the historical Avenue, Rocklin, CA 95677, ETAM, SHILOH: GRANT'S Trial, stuff. Still, it's Landrey's classic (916) 624-7113. REBEL CHARGE AT CHICKAMAUBATTLES OF NAPOLEON that RATTOR SINCLATIONS ESTIMATED RELEASE DATES BASED ON THE LATEST INFORMATION FROM GAME DEVELOPERS NAME OF GAME, COMPANY RELEASE DATE 1830 AVALON HILL ................1/95 ABSOLUTE ZERO DOMARK .......3/95 BEYOND SQUAD LEADER AVALON HILL ...gl/95 BIOFORGE ORIGIN .............2/95 BLACKBEARD AVALON HILL....01/95 BLOOD BOWL MICROLEAGUE .....2/95 BREACH 3 IMPRESSIONS ........2/95 BRETT HULL HOCKEY ACCOLADE ..1/95 BUREAU 13 GAMETEK .........Q1/95 CELEBRITY POKER NEW WORLD .3/95 CELTIC TALES KOEI ..1/95 CIVIL WAR EMPIRE ............2/95 COMMAND & CONQUER VIRGIN..4/95 DAGGERFALL BETHESDA ........3/95 DARK FORCES LUCASARTS ......1/95 FRONTIER: FIRST ENCOUNTER GAMETEK 101795 FULL THROTTLE LUCASARTS .....2/95 GOBLINS 4 SIERRA ............2/95 GREAT NAVAL BATS 3 SSI........2/95 HARVESTER MERIT ........... HEROES MIGHT & MAGIC NEW WORLD.. .......3/95 HIGH SEAS TRADER IMPRESSIONS .2/95 JAGGED ALLIANCE SIR TECH .....3/95 LANDS OF LORE 2 VIRGIN ......Q1/95 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT DOMARK ..Q1/95 LOST ADMIRAL 2 QQP .........Q1/95 LOST EDEN VIRGIN .............1/95 PERFECT GENERAL 2 QQP .......2/95 PERFECT WORLD EA ...........3/95 PHANTASMAGORIA SIERRA ......3795 PIZZA TYCOON MICROPROSE ... 1/95 POWERHOUSE IMPRESSIONS .....3/95 RAVENLOFT: STONE PROPHET SSI .........3/95 RENEGADE SSI ...... SPACEWARE HO! 5.0 NEW WORLD 2/95 STONEKEEP INTERPLAY ........Q1/94 THE PURE WARGAME QQP .......2/95 THIRD REICH AVALON HILL .....Q1/95 WINGS OF GLORY ORIGIN .......1/95 WORLD CIRCUIT 2 MICROPROSE Q1/95 ZORRO CAPSTONE ..............2/95 ..5/95 IN THE Game Developers Find A Place To Call Their Own; Help Finding That Perfect Machine To Call Your Own The burgeoning game de and even advice for programMeanwhile, if you're on a velopment community now ming students. There is an quest to meet that special.. has an on-line hangout of its available jobs listing, and a computer, check out the onown. The new Game Develspecial topic on design theory line version of our Ultimate opers Forum on Comhosted by game designer Game Machine feature from puServe (GO GAMDEV) Chris Crawford. Those interDecember. This WinHelp file beckons like a clearing in the ested in becoming members is designed to help you woods for game designers, of the Computer Game Dechoose the best machine for programmers and others invelopers Association can post your needs. The file is called terested in electronic entermessages to the CGDA and tainment. Current Forum find out about upcoming found in Library 13, The topics include game ratings, conferences. The Game DeHardware Zone of the Comdistribution, virtual reality, velopers Forum is an extendputer Caming World Forum writing, graphic art, music, ed service, but one that is on ZiffNet (GO GAMEvideo games, coin-op games, open to everyone. WORLD). Happy New Year! JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 27 "


"READ.ME Circuits Maximus Comdex Explodes With MPEG, 3D Video Serve Up A Platter of CDs The Sands Convention Center ially tool kits designed to take GS format augments General chipset from Crystal. in Las Vegas looked more like much of the work out of 3D MIDI, can address more for games, the most excita showcase for music and digiprogramming. The Render-sounds, and has more controls ing thing we saw was a tal video than one of the sights morphics REALITY LABS demo for the developer to tweak voice/data Doom demo. Media for the world's largest computwas the most impressive of the those sounds. Roland has indiVision's new modem has the er show. There were pro keyAPIs we saw, but Argonauts Bcated that they will cooperate capability to handle voice and board demos all around, and RENDER, Criterion's RENDERwith developers so that more data at the same time, in DOS! you couldn't walk ten feet with WARE, and Intel's 3DR were games will be compatible with CGW editors played a modem out seeing MPEG hardware in also displayed. GS, in addition to General game of Doom and talked to action. Orchid's KELVIN MPEG For the audio amigos, MIDI. GS devices include each other via a headset simulincluded Sigma's REEL MAGIC Roland held a developers conRoland's SOUND CANVAS line of taneously, with no reduction MPEG playback chipset right ference to talk about GS. The synthesizers and the new in performance! on the video card, which allows Sure, there were other highthe user to run Windows up to profile products at the show. 24-bit (16.7 million colors) WINDOWS 95 was very visible while also playing back MPEG running business software; and files (as opposed to the 8-bit Pioneer Pioneers New Multiple CD-ROM Drives there were dual Pentium moth(256 colors) with a stand-alone Can you believe it? CD-ROM is just now taking off, and al erboards, Power PC REEL MAGIC card). Sigma itself ready we're seeing multiple CD games. Have we chips on PCI motherwas out in full force with an taken one step forward and two steps boards, and even DEC MPEG version of Tsunami's back to the days of multiple Alpha chips on PCI new FLASH TRAFFIC, along with disk swaps during a game? motherboards all rumors of an MPEG version of Not if Pioneer has their way running in Windows WING COMMANDER III. with a line of multiple CD-ROM NT. But none of For 3D graphics, Matrox drives. The DRM60 series looks these could run had their new MGA IMPRESSION very similar to Pioneer's audio CDany of the current Plus and the MGA IMPRESSION changers, consisting of removable crop of comLITE 3D graphic accelerating cartridges that contain up to six discs pelling games. cards with bundled 3D demos cach. One big advantage of Pioneer's Bottom line, and games on a CD. The 3D approach is that users can simply buy by the end of Labs GLINT chip will be fea new cartridges as their CD-ROM col1995, we tured in a Creative Labs 3D ac lection grows, which coincidentally also should have celeration product sometime allows gamers to more efliciently orgagames that are next year. Yamaha had the nize their game collections. By using a written to utilize a new generonly demo which did 3D accel proprietary SCSI card as well as enhanced ation of video cards that comeration with texture mapping device drivers, computer systems should bine SVGA, full-motion MPEG Yet only a few games, such as have no problem identifying which disc is active during game video playback, and hardware 47 Tek's SENTO, have even be play. These drives also can double as audio devices, and your 3D graphics acceleration (with gun to tap the enormous po existing Pioneer CD cartridges will work with them. texture mapping). Additionaltential of these high-tech Pioneer is hitting the market with two different drives: a ly, with desktop PCMCIA readgraphics products. By next double-speed changer with an SRP of $895, and a quad-speed ers and PCMCIA modems and summer, 3D graphic accelera drive listed at $1395. While the prices do seem a little steep. sound devices, notebook users tion products should be avail dedicated gamers with some extra cash will definitely appreci should be able to get more utilable as either add-in cards, ate the convenience of having several of their favorite games ity out of their portable devices. daughtercards, or included on on tap at all times. And just think, you can have all of WING As Intel-based computers move popular video cards. COMMANDER III (4 CDs) in the Panasonic DRM60 at the same into the mass market, PCMCIA A number of third-party de time. We just hope gamers will never need the $2495 \"Big could become a welcome altervelopers have begun to crash Daddy\" 18 CD changer... native to cracking the case and the 3D party with APIs--essenmessing with circuit boards. 28 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"CROCHU Terra New! Blake Stone: Planet Strike! .. tops the original Wolfenstein\"...\" PC Review 20 . 0220 Features 20 thrilling new levels!  Realistic, detailed VGA graphics! Auto-mapper that helps you move through levels! Heart-stopping hazards! New enemies with cloaking and morphing abilities! Awesome weapons arsenal! Dramatic, heart-racing soundtrack and digital sound effects! Welcome to the 22nd century! The future is here in the form of Dr. Goldfire, a brilliant bio-scientist whose ghoulish genetic research has spawned a battle-thirsty horde of military mutants. Poised for attack, they await his com mand to unravel the universe! Only you, as Blake Stone, the galaxy's most intrepid agent, can infiltrate Goldfire's secret fortress on a remote planet and kick these creeps out of the cosmos! Powered by an advanced, fast version of the 3D engine originally used in Wolfenstein 3D\", this game has the fast, fluid graphics you love and ultrarealism that will keep you spellbound! The reviewers are already in orbit over Blake Stone: **Did you like Wolfenstein 3-D? If you did, you'll love Blake Stone.\" -PCM Magazine NaThere's more of just about everything ... Plenty to keep you on the edge of your seat!\" -Electronic Entertainment \"The first-person viewpoint and smooth movement will have you peering sideways into the monitor to see if there's another monster around the corner.\" -PC Magazine Get ready to launch the new galactic mission that will make or break Blake .... Planet Strike! INCORPORATED FormGen, Inc. 7641 E. Gray Rd, Scottsdale, AZ, 85260 (800) 263-2390 (905) 857-4141 Available on disk and CD. Wolfenstein 3D is a trademark of id Software. Planet Strike was not developed or produced by id Software. Circle Reader Service #57 "


"The love of humiliating any sticker who Challenges your title. COMOMONT You're takin' shots at twilight and the legs feel like rubber. Old rubber. Tryin to keep the cool through all the fouls and the trash talk, cause the rent's on the line. And so is your name. But you can take these guys. You think. We filmed top street ball players to capture all (SIPOLELSENE verore the action in Jammit-over 700 Frames of digitized blood, sweat and tears. Not to mention plenty of slams, fouls and air. Lots of air. Five authentic asphalt JA courts. Nine game variations. And enough trash talk to fill a gar: bage can. The fact is, JAMMIT we only left out one thing ! Available for PC-compatibles lon disk and CD-ROM), 300 and the Super NES. the rules Jammit. For people who know what street ball is all about. 222 FREE FREE   125 PCOOK) IPO. PGPROPAD 2 To get Jammit, visit your software retailer, or phone 1 800 GTE TODAY. GTE 1994 GIE Vantage Incorporated. All rights reserved. Nintendo, Super Nintendo Entertainment System and the olficial seals are registered trademarks of Nintendo ol America Inc. 300 and the 300 logos are trademarks of the 3D0 Como "


"FOR SUPER NINTENDO. PC CD R ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM 3DO Circle Reader Service #303 "


"When You Absolutely Positively Must Save | The World Overnight Bethesda's THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL. Leaves ARENA's Medieval Fed-Ex Image Behind SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development by Johnny L. Wilson NIE AXEOR BROADSWORD-WIELD-into the chivalrous equivalent of a character by a certain time, and these ING MEDIEVAL FED-EX PERSON CHAMPIONS-style superhero in THE ELmini-quests didn't really cohere into a OF THE ELDER SCROLLS: ARENA DER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL. I say mesolid plot. I say \"CHAMPIONS-style\" beseems to have found a Dark dieval Fed-Ex person because the cause the new character generation proAges equivalent of the phone original game featured a lot of minicedure allows players the luxury of booth (the garderobe, per quests where your character would delivobtaining additional talents by accepting haps) and transformed hersell ter a package or person to a certain certain disadvantages. Further the selec32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"BRICELLI RING BRACER IBRACER tion of certain disadvantages—whether of the underworld. Such reputations will even be a toggle so that those who don't they be phobias, physical limitations, or determine some of the mini-quests that want to risk having their abodes burglarunfortunate social ties and obligations will be offered to the characters and how ized can opt for a Panglossian world will set certain flags within the game that well the members of those social groups where no thief has gone before. can call certain encounters and plot twists will respond to them. The objects in the world have weight as at various points within the game. Also, characters will be able to join part of their definition and can not only be guilds, temples and knightly orders. Since purchased, but can be shoved off ledges, A MATTER OF CHARACTER characters can have multiple afliliations, pushed around to be placed as obstacles For example, a player might decide to bethis adds to player motivation because and more. Further, there is an Item Maker come a vampire character. Such a seduccharacters can advance in the ranks of routine within the game which allows you tress would immediately receive a each social group, as well as use their netto enhance items by using them on each strength and magical bonus by night, but working skills to glean information from other. So, a character could put poison on a would find it very difficult to operate in all of their affiliations. sword in order to cause continuing damage the daylight because she would lose But that's not all! Bethesda's design after an initial wound, and a character with strength by constantly taking damage and team wants to give characters a reason for magical ability could use magic to enhance would find her powers impaired. earning all the gold to be earned, as well an object's potency. Further, as with characUnlike CHAMPIONS, howevter creation, you can make objects er, advancement would dekutwa more powerful by allowing certain pend on how the character AMULETI HMULETT side effects to be bound into the was structured. Primary skills ob-ject's description. Your characcost more, but are the easiest ter might be able to turn undead BRACELET skills to improve within the creatures with a magic weapon, game. Major skills cost slightbut she might discover that her ly less, but aren't as easy to reputation takes a hit in some arimprove. Minor skills help the eas and social circles because of it. character at a reduced potenAnother new feature deals cy, but are extremely difficult with paying for objects. In DAGareas in which to advance. GERFALL, banks not only allow a To add to the role-playing character to deposit gold in a experience, DAGGERFALL will protected environment, but alalso emphasize language skills, KRISTAL CRYSTAL FORGET IT BUY STEAL low her to finance large purchasreputations among specific WINDOW DRESSING The shops and outfitters in DAGGERFALL let you try before es like houses, castles and boats. groups, and social alliliations. you buy. If you're thinking various states of dress should have an effect on They also grant the important Every character will have some other characters, this is your kind of game. letters of credit that were so imability with the common portant in a pre-ATM world. tongue, but depending upon the locale as a chance to customize the characters within the world, some of the nonplayer and their homes. In DAGGERFALL, players CAN WE TALK? characters may botch the conversations by will be able to enter stores and try on Conversation is still handled via a menuusing their native language or take offense clothes, weapons and armor. By pointing driven, branching strategy. However, the at \"Ugly American\"-style characters who and clicking, paper-doll characters may new conversational interface allows you to travel at length without bothering to learn be dressed and undressed at will. This isset-up your conversational goals in differany indigenous tongues. On the other n't just a cute feature, either, because the ent columns, determine the character's hand, use of indigenous terms and phrases clothes make the woman in some characbasic conversational stance (whether agcan enhance reaction rolls. ters' eyes, and the way she dresses will facgressive or polite mode), and select an enReputation is not a generic fame or tor into a character's willingness to talk tire line of questioning at once (for quick karma rating as in some pen and paper and the depth of the conversation. reading and ease-of-use). Further, your games or MicroProse's DARKLANDS, but it In addition, houses can be furnished character's language ability, clothing is a separate rating for various social with defined objects representing trea choices, social affiliations and reputation groups. Each character will have a changsure, objets d'art and furniture. The goal will affect the way that non-player characing reputation depending upon her acis the creation of personal space within ters react to her. tions and relationships to merchants, the game's universe and, hence, enriching Alert gamers will also notice some new peasants, scholars, nobility and members that universe even further. There will icons at the bottom of the main action IMAIRE JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 33 "


"of the game's meand palace buildings, as well. To these chanics, a player can have been added sound cues which offer choose which appropriate footfalls to match the texture postage stamp icon of the flooring. she wishes to associAlso impressive are the \"walking\" seate with which spells. quences for various character classes and New spells in DAGnon-player characters. The basic archeGERFALL include: types for each character are rendered in Identify (you no 3-D on Silicon Graphics machines. Then, longer have to go to a the animations are reduced somewhat interaction is now steal nede. guild to identify mayand placed in an animation language ic), Polymorph (abiliwhere the frames can be repurposed and ty to transform into cut to reflect any potential movement. other creatures), Speaking of movement, the new softShadow (the poor ware engine for handling 3-D movement SCENE STEALER ARENA's first-person perspective remains, but now cast man's invisibility), is much more intelligent than that in AREspells are marked by a customizable icon at top left, whose presence lasts Slowfall (essentially, a NA. The new engine is able to choose texfor the spell's duration. Featherfall spell), tures and swap buildings into and out of Telekinesis, Telepormemory extremely efficiently as the playscreen. One of the most important new adtation, Water Breathing, and Water Walker's character walks along. The more ditions is that of the Ear icon. Players will ing. Along with most of the spells from RAM you have, the more the new engine select that icon when they want their charARENA, these spells should make characters will use it efficiently. The bad news is that acters to be in an active listening mode. much more powerful. the game will require a minimum of 8 Think of it as an eavesdropping icon. MB of RAM in order to run well. Another way in which characters will WALK THIS WAY find information in DAGGERFALL is through As you would expect with new spells, ABSOLUTELY, POSITIVELY virtual books. These books will feature there are also new special effects. One efWith improved technology, then, what is both text and diagrams in order to enlightfect deals with polymorphing from nubile improved about the storyline? ARENA reen the gamer with regard to such matters nymphs into gnarled crones (see previous quired your character to put together a as flora and fauna. Such books tell how page) and others involve the transformawand of power by assembling the collected they evolved and feature beautiful artwork. tion from human to lupine and back. artifacts of a near-cosmic scavenger hunt. These were handled by an experienced DAGGERFALL promises to have more conSPELLBINDING CHANGES Hanna-Barbera animator, Louise Sannected situations and permutations to The magical system for DAGGERFALL has doval, who drew the extreme frames of drive gamers through the full-blown story. become significantly more robust than the moves and let the computer morph Suflice it to say that the basic story is somethat in ARENA. Naturally, a major portion the transitions. thing like H. Rider Haggard meets George of this extended power comes from the In addition to Sandoval's work, Mark Lucas in a plot where your characters must addition of a slew of new spells, but also Jones and Mark Jackson worked on charobtain artifacts before rival groups can obfrom the addition of a Potion Maker and acter design and the texture maps for the tain those same artifacts and use them for an on-screen icon which informs gamers buildings. The texture maps are considernefarious purposes. Hint: These rival of the status of duration spells. With the ably more complex and detailed than groups have a lot in common with the Potion Maker, you will be able to adapt or those in ARENA, not only giving the world \"bad guys» in DARKLANDS. rename the default recipes and customize a more realistic look, but allowing for So, when the heroes of Bethesda's THE potions by changing the mix for special multi-story buildings and larger temple ELDER SCROLLS series of computer roleresults. Some characters may well end up playing games need walking about with the equivalent of Batto absolutely, posiman's utility belt and having entire inven(RHIFE tively save the world tories of weird potions by the time they MX overnight, they'll Mot ric finish experimenting with all of the possihave new spells, new ble potions. weapons, new As for the duration icon, it's the perfect clothes and new reaway to let you know that your invisibility sons for doing so. spell is still effective. As long as you see the And, if it all comes postage stamp icon on the action area of together like it was the screen, you know that the duration looking at press spell is in effect. As the operative spell MORE time, DAGGERFALL'S reaches the limit of its duration, the heroes will deliver a postage stamp icon begins to flash and you RHEDSHGKUS BUTTO lot more satisfaction will know that you either need to recast it than those medieval THE APOTHECARY'S CRUCIBLE Old spellcasting hands will appreciate or prepare to deal with the results of its mixing potions in a screen that actually displays all available ingredients. Fed-Ex couriers in dissipation. Also, in keeping with the rest ARENA. CLOVER ENANC VEROM CLOUER SAINTS NAIR CLRCK POPPY MERCURY ERIN URTEE PUE WATER VLOEGWOO EXIT 34 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Never Lose Sight Of How Pinball Should Be Played. A truly great pinball game is more than great graphics and spectacular sounds, more than the latest arcade features like 3D ramps and three multi-ball play, more than fast ball movement and precise flipper control, and it's more than being able to see the whole playfield at once so you can aim your shots. A great pinball game has that unique quality of playability and neverending challenge that keeps you coming back for...just one more game and a shot at your new high score! SERND Washington Post-\"Crystal Caliburn perfectly captures the essence of a great pinball machine.\" DACOM New York Times -\"The realism is striking... [Crystal Caliburn] will be at the top of Silicon Santa's gift list this year.\" Inside Mac Games \"ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR\" * LIBERONG TILASHINC AWARD AUTOHIRD DOLOUR On Computer Game Review\"Crystal Caliburn sets a new standard. For realistic pinball on a computer, there's nothing like this game.\" CONSULTID EXTRABALL ALTO FAMI ATLEVADU . Electronic Entertainment=\"Crystal Caliburn is simply the best, most realistic, most challenging pinball simulation for the Macintosh yet.\" (Rating: 9 out of 10) SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: MACINTOSH: 13\" or larger monitor, 256 colors, and 4MB RAM WINDOWS: 386 or faster processor, Windows 3.1, 256 SVGA monitor, 4MB RAM. Supports SoundBlaster and other Windows compatible sound cards. GAMES Magazine-\"You'll forget you're playing on a two-dimensional computer screen... the realism is astonishing.\" CALIBERK HALIK TH MacUser-\"Electronic pinball's Holy Grail.\" (Rating: 41/2 out of 5) Solid State FINBALL. CrystalCaliburn WINDOWS Crystal Caliburn From the creative genius of Little Wing, developer of TRISTANTM and Eight Ball DeluxeTM for Macintosh. Available from your favorite retailer or mail-order catalog. Interactive DEMO on AOL and CompuServe. Andreas NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS! OPINBALL Crystal Caliburn StarPlay Productions, Inc.  PO Box 217. Greeley, Colorado 80632-0217. Tel 303.447.9562. Fax 303.447.2739 TM Crystal Caliburn and Tristan are trademarks of Littlewing CO. LTD. Other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"A CLASSIC TALE UNVEILED! OB Narrated by Charles Grodin (Beethoven and Beethoven's Second) (THE) EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES Om Rad Rastetta with he TV S r EU bets am, Two swinding or come baches HOMENA 3 The Emperor's New Clothes has. never been so much fun. Hans Christian Anderson's fairy tale is now an interactive journey in full animation. Kids can click through 13 screens featuring 256 brilliant colors, portrait quality art, an original score, lots of surprises and no confusing menus! Also included are free limited edition collector milk caps. The Emperor's New Clothes reveals hours of excitement. Also from Trimark Interactive, Thumbelina, another enchanting interactive storybook based on the fairy tale by Hans Christian Anderson. Pick them both up today! Available for Windows and Macintosh CD ROM. -Th e Maschets chrath Tapere metry Thy shown ples of their wordt in about their malloons CODD CD ROM TRIMARK INTERACTIVE Windows Shot Cila Nandor Senice 1226 "


"Set'em Up And Knock'em Down Bowl over your opponents with these winning strategies for 10 top games. Armored Fist 38 Serf City. Star Crusader. Lords of the Realm TIE Fighter Colonization DOOM II...............8 Aces of the Deep Master of Magic 04 Panzer General .........116 JANUARY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 37 Illustration by Digital Art "


"Fist Fighting TOW TO TOW How To Achieve Battlefield Supremacy In Nova Logic's ARMORED FIST by Tom \"KC\" Basham ommanding a platoon of tanks, especially MORED FIST (FIST) scenarios place you at a in the face of overwhelming odds, takes severe numerical disadvantage and often more than charging headlong into the start with your forces surrounded, and ranks of the enemy. Running valiantly many begin with your troops already takinto fortified enemy positions may be draing fire. Here's what I do to break matic but will most likely end your simuthrough the missions, especially the lated life rather tougher ones in the later campaigns. quickly. All ARIf You Ain't Cheatin' You Ain't Tryin' As the old saying goes: when all else fails, cheat! Many missions begin from unrealistic positions. Your forces have made serious tactical errors, they're surrounded, taking fire, and suddenly you inherit command. Yeah, right. The mission editor lets you change many things, but the locked\" campaign missions can't be edited, right? Well, they can be edited after a little bit of hacking. For those of you handy with a hex editor, such as Norton's DISKEDIT, \"unlocking» a mission is a relatively simple task. Be advised, NovaLogic does not endorse unlocking missions in this manner, and making a mistake hex editing the mission files could result in serious data loss. Be sure to backup your files before attempting any unlocks. Now that I've gotten the lawyers off my back, unlocking a mission requires only a one-byte change in a single file. Cam38 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"IS READY 820 8000 100 DB paign data resicles in first sign of trouble. It's quite irritating the FISTDATA subPLI1 UN:1 to be pinned under a hillside with a directory. All camthrown track, dug in BMPs on the ridge paign missions are above you waiting for you, artillery fire stored based on their raining down, and you hear over your geographical locaradio, \"Apache 196, taking fire, returntion. For example, BEBEK ing to base.\" Gee, it must be nice to have the Certain Fury SANA. HORTIR USER CONTROL that option. I've tried calling several hecampaign takes 2x za 32022] HARMS licopters in at once, but they simply place in Syria with won't stick around the relevant missions THE CHE The helicopters, therefore, provide little entitled SYRIAT.* combat value but are excellent recon asthrough SYRIA7.\". sets. Of course, they run like reptiles when Each mission rethe enemy starts shooting, but they generquires three files. For TURNING AND TARGETING Manual turret control lets you freely move the ally do locate enemy positions. Since the example, the first turret, but the Enter key still immediately locks visible targets. target data on your in-vehicle overhead Certain Fury mismap is generated from visual contacts, it is sion, \"Two Tribes,\" very useful to send a chopper over the requires SYRIAL.FSW, SYRIAI.FSE, and the pre-defined waypoints until you come next ridge to ferret out enemy positions in SYRIAL.FSG. Files with an \".FSW\" extento the first ridge. Carefully peek over the the valley before proceeding, sion contain briefings for players comrim, check for enemy targets, then alter manding Western forces. Likewise, * FSE your course to bypass those units or atFire From The Ground files contain briefings for players comtack them from their weak side. In most Artillery is your friend. Well-aimed armanding Russian hardware. *.FSG files missions, your two platoons receive sepatillery is deadly. Dug-in vehicles are nearly contain the meat of the mission and the rate orders and targets. Ignore these orimpossible to hit without a suicidal charge «lock» status. The ninth byte of the file ders. Re-plot paths for both platoons so toward them, helicopters run in panic like (offset 08h) is always set to 00h for an unthat all available units converge on a sinfrightened sheep when confronted, but arlocked mission and 01h for a locked misgle target at the same time. If you find tillery knows no fear. It plunges from the sion. Changing this byte from Olh to 00h yourself under attack from the onset, imsky like fire-breathing commandos exactin any FSG file always unlocks the mismediately withdraw all forces and reing a terrible retribution from the enemy sion, allowing you free editing rein. Logroup. Above all else, get away from the for even pondering the possibility of encate enemy positions, move your forces to enemy and call for help. gaging your platoons. Nothing is immune. better starting positions, identify targets, This brings us to the second rule: use From tanks to bunkers, from fuel tanks to increase artillery posts and delete enemy your support forces. What kind of help is satellite dishes, nothing can withstand a elements at will. Is this cheating? Probaavailable? You have two assets: air supwell-aimed burst of artillery. bly, but as they say, if you ain't cheatin' port and artillery, Air support, consisting How do you use artillery? The simyou ain't tryin' hard enough. of attack helicopters (AH-64 Apaches for plest, most obvious method requires dithe Blue and Hinds for Red), is virtually rect visual contact with the enemy target. Fire From The Sky useless in ARMORED FIST. Despite the Use the Enter key to lock a particular Unless you simply delete all enemy units, goals achieved by both of these helitarget, then call for fire support. The you still have to fight the mission even afcopter types in Afghanistan and Iraq, the specified target will receive a fatal blast ter you unlock the scenario and spy on gunships in Fist are basically cowards. nearly every time. Be advised, though, if the bad guys. Always remember two They'll quickly charge to your rescue, you can see the enemy, he can see you. rules: light on your terms and use your scout the region, then run for base at the While you're directing fire onto his posisupport forces. As the first rule implies, tion he's probably you must choose when and where the doing the same to fight occurs. The enemy will try to attack you. The secret of from favorable positions which are diffiartillery cannot be cult for you to defend, or try to defend found in the manupositions which are difficult for you to atLOALS PEAB KIKUTA al: manually point tack. Following the default waypoints your crosshairs over programmed for your forces guarantees VERBETEROY the top of an iman expeditious engagement but almost 30703 U TID pending ridge and always at a severe disadvantage. Most de2005 0120 the artillery falls on fault courses lead you into an ambush, IMG the other side. The expose your units on mountain tops, or lower your lead you into the heart of enemy defenNIE crosshairs are to the sive positions. As a general guideline: do ridge, the farther not follow the pre-programmed wayaway the shells fall. ARTILLERY TARGETING SECRETS Aim the gun over the horizon to direct points. If you're not under attack when Raising the artillery fire on the other side of the hill. the mission begins, try following along crosshairs drops the PL: 1 UN: 1 USER CONTROL UN 2993 DEDE JANUARY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 39 "


"EA CS LE 31 USER CURTEOL MPH STRATEGIES EXT O UNITOIT (00:00 OLKE Artillery also proIl your tank throws a track or takes 3031122 BRINGA vides excellent covengine damage don't immediately deer for a lighting spair. Depending upon your position withdrawal. When there may yet be hope. If you find forced to withdraw yourself stuck in the middle of flatfrom an advancing lands with dug-in T-80s in the surenemy, target the rounding hills you're going to die. But, ground very near if you cross a minefield and throw a your current positrack, or another of your units kills the tion and request arbadguy after he wounds you, your crew tillery. You'll have will attempt repairs. Usually after a advanced well clear minute or two the crew can repair a by the time the thrown track or a damaged engine and shells fall, and have you underway again. Therefore, hopefully the eneyou should endeavor to protect vehiSPY IN THE SKY Editing an unlocked mission reveals all the enemy's my will have moved cles which find themselves similarly secrets and gives you a chance to fight him on even terms. directly into the stranded. Unless time is running out danger zone. In the on you these vehicles can yet particishells closer to your current position. If worst case, enemy armor may think pate in the next battle. you know, for example, that an enemy twice about chasing you with shells I've found playing \"peek-a-boo\" a platoon rests in the next valley, then raining down. point your gun over the relevant hill and call for fire support. Watch where the Automatic Controls az shells hit on your overhead map. If the Are For Dead Men shells miss, adjust the position of your generally use manturret horizontally and vertically as reual turret controls quired and call a second volley. With instead of automatic TISAK UDELE continued adjustments you can expertly controls. Under the walk the artillery fire right onto the eneautomatic system, BLOOT my. I've found myself outnumbered pressing Enter would four-to-one at the end of a difficult mislock on to the first sion facing a well-defended enemy camp available target, but in the next valley. Rather than facing pressing Enter again MAN certain doom, I call in artillery and wait (for whatever reason) ARTI Many times, the artillery finishes off the causes the lock to THOSE GUYS ARE GOOD Another successful artillery barrage returns a T-80 remaining targets and the mission ends break and the turret to its raw component materials. in victory! Be careful, though; artillery is to align with the hull. limited. Call on it too often and you may I programmed the find it unavailable when you need it Thrustmaster FLCS first trigger position highly successful tactic. Move just bemost. The manual indicates artillery may as Enter and the second trigger position yond a hillside or just over a ridge, return on-line after some waiting period, as \"fire.\" I found myself often releasing catch the enemy's attention, then imbut I have yet to see that. tension enough that Enter would be remediately reverse behind or below the peated, thus breakhill and wait. If the enemy platoon is ing the lock when I reasonably close it will advance toward needed it most. With you. Kill the tanks as they pop over manual control the the ridge or peek around the hill. Deturret still locks on spite somewhat strict time limits in targets when I press most of the missions, I usually had Enter, but remains enough time for reasonably cautious, RUSH locked on the same move-then-wait advances. 30 40 50 target until I manuOverall, ARMORED Fist is a challengally move the gun. ing, enjoyable simulation of modern By programming armored warfare. Generally, though, turret controls to one the computer wins missions not of the FLCS' hat through clever artificial intelligence switches I can work but through vastly superior numbers. both the hull and the If you can reduce his numbers and RISKY RIDGE RUN Be careful crossing ridges or you'll be as exposed as this turret simultaneously turret simultaneously even the odds through combined-arms even the odds through combined-arms T-80. Seconds later he was skewered and barbequed by one of the while using the twousage, then the computer player stands Bradley's TOWs. stage trigger to aclittle chance. Good luck and good quire targets. hunting! GEB PL. 1 UN: 1 IGORLG ECHA NNE USER CONTROL HEIDY MPH Seluar 1838 ART 40 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"INTRODUCING MULTIMEDIA STACKER. You slide into the cockpit, case the throttle forward, and prepare for a good old-fashioned dog. fight. But suddenly, you come to a grinding halt. What's this? Not enough disk space or RAM? Well, don't surrender those controls quite yet. It also includes a free copy of Multimedia Cloaking a new technology from Helix Software that frees up extra memory by moving system drivers to a 32-bit protected area. So your favorite THE POWER TO LAUNCH MORE GAMES. games have more room to run. Multimedia Stacker is available on disk or 4.0 Because StackerMan is here with new Multimedia Stacker-the easiest way for you to more than double your hard disk capacity and give your system a big boost in RAM. Not only is Multimedia Stacker optimized for speed on multimedia systems, but it gives you the INDOWS CD-ROM and can be found wherever you see the Stacker Man display. So visit your local dealer or call 1-800-522-7822, ext. 9601 for information. Get Multimedia Stacker today. Because without it, you're grounded, Mister. STORAGE & COMMUNICATIONS MORE SPACE. MORE RAM. MULTIMEDIA Stac STACKER maximum disk space you can get. \"GROUNDED BY RAM AND DISK SPACE PROBLEMS? STACKERMAN READS YOU LOUD AND CLEAR! CHAFF FLARE E Outside of the U.S. call 1-619-794-4333 or fax 1-619-794-4575 for more information. 1994. Stac Electronics Stac and Stacker are registered trademarks of Stac Electronics, Multimedia Cloaking is a trademark of Helix Software. Actual compression results may vary Circle Reader Service #313 "


"He Who Laughs. Lasts. IN BOOK THREE OF the Legend of Kyrandia, you become Malcolm— the infamous Court Jester of Kyrandia. And you have one last chance to save your rude, misunderstood hide. GO TO THE ENDS of the Earth armed with swimfins and an inflatable pool toy as you attempt to solve the murders behind the mad monarchy. But be careful, because your country despises you. The Underworld entices you. And pirates double-cross you. It's a fantasy world filled with magic-and the trick is to stay alive. FEATURES CONTROL MALCOLM'S MISCHIEVOUS PERSONALITY and hilarious mouth with Westwood Studios' new interactive Moodometer. When conversing with Kyrandians, does it pay to be nice, normal or lie like crazy? THE LEGEND OUT Kyrandia LOOK 3. Malcolm's Revenge ENTER OVER 80 WILD SCENES rendered in deliriously advanced 3-D graphics! Discover harder puzzles, more absurd magic and good and bad consciences that offer dubious advice. WITH OUR \"NO-CLICK\" INTERFACING, assess options by simply moving your mouse to the lower screen. The action's faster and the graphics are bigger. ALTHOUGH MALCOLM'S WARPED, our new Supersound is exceptionally clear. Along with lively music, you'll hear real Kyrandian sound effects. "


"el ESETA Psh.Cocin Dantour THE KYRANDIA TRILOGY TERMICE Kyrandia Kyrandia Kyrandia NOW AVAILABLE: The Legend of Kyrandia, Book Three: Malcolm's Revenge URE ALSO AVAILABLE: AVAILABLE ON PC CD-ROM The Legend of Kyrandia: Book One The Legend of Kyrandia, Distributed Book Two: The Hand of Fate West exclusively by Vingede Westwood 21 Fables and Fiends The Legend of Kyrandia and Malcolm's Revenge are trademarks of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1994 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd Circle Reader Service #327 "


"Exercises In Feudality The Key to Winning at SSI's SERE CITY Lies in Urban Planning, Not in Dreams of Conquest by Michael Rymaszewski ERF Crry is a complex and potentially enthere does not seem to be much of a differtertaining game. I say \"potentially\" beence, regardless of what the manual claims. cause the manual that comes with this SSI The supposedly inoffensive Lady Amalie title is a bit muddled. While some things was the only opponent who attacked my are explained well (in fact, explained sevkingdom before I either attacked her or eral times in different sections), in most encroached on her territory, while the recases the information given is not only exputedly dangerous Count Aldaba and tremely confusing, but simply wrong. Homen Doublehorn turned out to be bumPart of the reason why the Serr Criy manbling incompetents. The rule of the thumb ual is so bad might be that it has been transseems to be the bigger the enemy kinglated rather poorly from German. It is dom, the more likely it is to start trouble. peppered with phrases such as \"zone The other consideration is the size of hatched in red and yellow,\" a the world you want to play with. I would foundry is called both recommend size 5 at the highest. It'll take a foundry and you a week of evenings to complete the a forge game in a size 5 world. A size 8 world, on (and a the other hand, could take up to a month! Blacksmith's Shop a forge), and an important menu icon is referred to as \"another icon.\" It all means lots of trial and error before you get things right. Making things even worse, some of the manual's strategy tips offer losing advice. The Pre-Game Show Before you start playing, you'll be asked to choose your opponents and the size of the world. You can also adjust the intelligence level of the computer opponents, level of initial supplies, and the growth rate, which simply means how quickly additional serfs become available. After you've played a few games, you'll want to choose the maximum difficulty levels across the board. Give your opponents maximum growth rates, initial supplies, and especially intelligence—they'll need it. As far as the personalities of your opponents are concerned, What Makes Johnny Grow The key to winning at SERF City is fast growth. It may sound simple, but it isn't. Fast growth involves a steady supply of building materials, a road network that is free of traffic jams, and enough highly trained knights to expand your frontiers. You have to meet all three of those conditions to win. You can have tons of wood and stones, and plenty of soldiers, but it will do you no good if you suffer traffic jams. I have managed to score brilliant military victories against much stronger opponents simply because their relief forces stood by helplessly, waiting for the roads to clear. Let's start with the traffic problem. There are two considerations here. One is building a good road network, something that's exhaustively explained in the manual. The other one, which is just as important yet isn't mentioned in the manual at all, is good urban planning. Ideally, if your buildings are in the right places, the items or merchandise they produce 44 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Multimedia? Right, I'm excited about video the SIZE of a postage stamp that moves like a mailman in a COMA Better go check your mail, Chris. OLD MULTIMEDIA REALMAGIC RealMagic\" is here now! Just add the RealMagic card to your PC for smooth, realistic digital video and 16-bit digital audio. MPEG does it—the powerful new digital video and audio standard that puts the «real» in RealMagic. RealMagic opens up a new world of interactive MPEG CD-ROMs including games, educational titles, music videos, movies and more. RealMagic is available as an MPEG playback card or a complete multimedia upgrade kit. What are you waiting for? Get RealMagic and get real multimedia. Almaye \"Old\" Video Image Full Screen Full Motion Full Sound For the store near you or more information on RealMagic, call 1-800-845-8086 RealMagic is available at: COMPUSA COMPUTER Oettino Circle Reader Service #128 THE COMPUTER SUPERSTOR ALGUNCA and other fine stores. 1994 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sigma Designs logo is a registered trademark, and RealMagic and Reel Magic are trademarks of Sigma Desions, Inc. All other brand and product names are property of their respective owners. REALmagic As Big As It Gets SIGMA DESIGNS "


"STRATEGIES should not have to be transported very far should be either the castle or the wareindicating rich deposits in places where to be put to use. house, surrounded by farms, pigs, and so you can't build a mine. Sometimes, you'll The first rule here is to group related on. This way, you get a neat two-way flow: get a mineral deposit sign stuck right on buildings. The sawmill should be right next arms and gold bars from one direction, the road. The only thing left to do in this to the lumberjack's hut. The foundry should food from the other. situation is to rearrange the roads so that be at the convergence of the roads from the This brings us to the second golden rule building a mine is possible. Sometimes, mines, and as close to them as possible. The of urban planning in SERF CITY: place you'll even have to demolish other mines. mill should be right next to the farm, and your warehouses correctly. If you've been in that event, check the nearby mines' the bakery right next to the mill. The buildlooking at what the computer-controlled production levels and decide for yourself ing that produces your \"raw\" materials rulers are doing, you'll find they tend to whether the whole thing is worth it. should be the one farthest away from the build warehouses in groups, close to each By the way, when you open your first storage spaces (castle or warehouse); the other. This is probably the dumbest thing Demolition menu, you'll find it's spelled you can do with them. \"Demolishen.\" A warehouse is called a First of all, in the event \"Stock,\" and a fort a \"Garrison.\" Don't let of a military defeat sevit confuse you (ah, those Germans). eral warehouses will go up in smoke; secondly, Arming the Forces this grouping leads to The biggest single piece of bad advice the horrendous traffic jams, manual contains is this: send out your as serfs from all over weaker soldiers to combat enemy forces, the place attempt to dekeeping the strong ones in defense. liver items for storage. This is the silliest thing you can do for The thing to do is to two important reasons. The first is that build warehouses well your first wave of green and slightly yellow apart, and then conlance corporals will probably not accomstruct other buildings plish anything. Unless the enemy guard around them-exactly hut has but a single soldier, chances are as if you were building a your guys will simply get killed, which THE BAKED GOODS BOROUGH A mill, a farm, and a bakery are series of boroughs or leads to the second reason. When they get carefully placed together to pump out biscuits faster than the towns, with the warekilled, you lose all their weapons and will Pillsbury Dough Boy. house acting as the have to manufacture a new sword and \"town hall.\" The roads shield for each replacement. one that delivers the finished product connecting those satellite towns are the I say \"the enemy guard hut\" because (planks, bread, tools, etc.) should be the main roads—the highways, if you like most of the military buildings the computclosest. This involves quite a bit of careful If you build in all the optimum places er opponents construct are of this variety. planning, not unlike Sim Criy, and is essenand get the roads right, not only will you tial not only to winning, but to really enjoywin the game, but you'll also be rewarded Driving Details ing the game. Otherwise, you'll find yourself with fast, interesting play. You'll also dispulling your hair in frustration. cover a new side to the game, as your suControlling the traffic in SERF City is exFind an area that will accommodate all per-efficient road network enables you to tremely important. What do you do if of the buildings belonging to a single change transportation and supply priorithe serfs keep taking routes you don't want them to take? group. Let's say you want food for your ties on the fly. It's possible to keep each The logic behind the transporter serfs' miners, and plan to build a farm, a mill mine operating at maximum capacity and a bakery. Try to select sites so that all while at the same time keeping new buildroute choices is simple. They always choose the shortest route between two three buildings are connected by a branchings popping up all the while. And it's adroad, but the bakery is the only building dictive fun, too. points, and in their peasant minds the shortest route is the one that has the connected to the main road. That way, the only serf to use the main road will be the Rebuilding Roads fewest flags. In other words, you can have two stretches of road, one twice as serf carrying the bread. The mines are the one area where you will Your mines will, of necessity, be located find yourself rebuilding the road network long as the other, but as long as the on a mountain. Build a functional network again and again. Sooner or later, every shorter route has more flags, they'll of connecting roads, and don't worry mine will cease producing, no matter how think it's longer. about building extra roads to facilitate rich the source—that's life. Demolish it You can get rid of the flags you've put construction, you can always destroy them right away. Then send a geologist to the up the same way you demolish buildlater. Ideally, you should connect iron ore burning mine's flag to do his thing. In ings. If you can't improve matters by fidand gold mines with roads carrying coal, most cases, he'll find a fresh deposit of dling around with the number of flags, and make them converge en route to the what you need. If he doesn't, tell him to don't be afraid to rearrange the road foundry. A little farther down the road, look around all the neighboring flags benetwork. If you've planned carefully, and construct a blacksmith's shop and, if fore sending him off to another mountain. have built warehouses in all the strategic you've got gold on that route, a gold which leads us to another point: quite spots, new porters will be there quickly. foundry. The next step down the road often, the geologist will put up the signs 46 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"FEEL THE RUSH. -153 OVER 1400 PLAYERS FROM THE NEL IH DEALISTIC MOTION CAPTURE TECHNER LIEPLAY THE ACTION FROM ANYWHER IN THE STADIUM WITH INTINITY CAM So you think you're ready to take a snap AYYOH KECHA W ALL HEAL HOL TEAM TEAM smell it and taste it when smell it and taste it when against 3000 pounds of defensive muscle. Team you break one deep with TAKE YOUR HITH WITH POWERFUL 20 URANNIE. You think you're Sterling Sharpe or Tim Brown. good enough to Whether you're playing head-to-head take it deep on with a buddy, anyone. You think getting into the you can go toe-toaction with toe with the big boys of the Helmet Cam, making mid-seaNFL. Well here's your chance. son trades, or watching the Unnecessary Roughness '95. replay of the worst penalty Unnecessary Roughness '95 is the first football call in history, this game is simulation so realistic, it's a rush. You'll feel it when you about one thing: How it feels when you play for real. TIONAL FOOTBALL L. pop one for 25 with Rush down to your favorite software retailer for S MAN Barry Foster or LEAGUE LE Unnecessary Roughness '95 or order direct by calling Jerome Bettis. 1-800-245-7744. PLAYERSE You'll live it when (Mention code U95PCI and yet you're tracking down halfbacks a FREE Sport Accolade T-shirt SPORT with Reggie White, Junior Seau with your or Rod Woodson. You'll see it, purchase!) ACCULADA Circle Reader Service #221 For IBM PC and PC/CD-ROM ANAL FOOTBALL in pop one 101 20 WIERPONT SECTION FULL OF INTALE STATS DUE LEADERS UPDATED EVERY Ruh Yor. SP UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS'95 t'nnecessary Houghness 95 is a trademark of Accolade, Inc. 1991 Accolade, Inc. NFLPA is a trademark of Natlonal Foothall Le Players Asestion and is used under license by Accolade, Inc. TM/1991 NFLP. Licensed by the NFL QB Club, Ine. The Sport Accolade logo and Sport Accolade are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. "


"STRATEGIES The manual indirectly advises you to build its 12-strong garrison is a good source of castle is no longer in jeopardy, you can lowguard huts, especially when the enemy is crossbow fodder. er the number of guards back down to near, because they take much less time to three, thereby gaining extra men for attack. build than the more elaborate watchtowers Military Menu Matters They'll also be well trained by that point. or \"garrisons.\" Well, sometimes that's The column of babble on page 40 in the okay, but generally guard huts are a mismilitary matters section is hopeless. It is Attack Advice guided move. The manual casually menbasically trying to say that if you open the Always attack with your best soldiers. Of tions that the soldiers in these huts do not recruiting menu, appropriately representcourse, being the grizzled veteran of a thouimprove their skills; this should have been ed by a shouting, running soldier icon, sand battles, you'll only attack when you're in bold type, for you'll discover it extremeyou can do three things: set the percentready. That, in SERF Criy, means attacking age of new serfs eligible for and capturing several enemy guard huts at military service, choose the the same time (like I told you, they build all quality of your attack troops, those guard huts with nary a watchtower). RG or change the size of your This move is particularly advisable if you've castle's resident forces. discovered you've got no gold in the viciniThe horizontal bar on top ty, and someone is pushing back your bor3199 indicates the percentage of ders. When you capture an enemy hut you new serfs eligible for miliautomatically capture whatever gold it contary service; I like to keep it tains, and increase your hoard while depletat 50% in the beginning, ing your opponents'. and will switch to 75% later If you've got gold, and your roads are in the game. brightened by a steady procession of glisCREDES The second icon in this tening yellow globes, bide your time. Push menu allows you to choose forward as far as you can with your guard THE HUH? MENU The soldier recruitment menu can be a bit between \"green\" recruits, huts and watchtowers. Build a fort or two baffling. The top bar sets the percentage of new recruits available represented by the soldier where you intend to attack. Then attack all with battle-ax, or battlethree opponents either at the same time, and the bottom fraction (3/3) indicates the size of the castle hardy veterans, represented or in very quick succession. Otherwise, any garrison in proportion to the number of troops in the field. by a knight flexing his musreasonably strong opponent you've left cles. This is where you untouched will attack you first, causing at ly important. Soldiers on duty in watchchoose the quality of your attack troops, least some economic damage. towers and garrisons do improve with and you should instantly switch to the follow up immediately with a second time, although they advance through the best by clicking beside the muscular wave of attacks. The targets for the first ranks rather slowly when compared to the knight. wave should be chosen solely for strategic ones in your castle or warehouses. HowevFinally, at the bottom of this particular reasons, with the objective being to move as er, they do get better, so you can maintain many of your buildings as a strong defense at all times while simultapossible out of reach of eneneously improving the quality of your my forces. The second wave army. Also, by choosing watchtowers you'll should be directed where it have at least twice as many soldiers availhurts the most-where the able for defense and attack (a watchtower capturing of a guard hut will can hold six men, a guard hut only three). destroy the maximum numThe manual recommends weakening ber of other enemy buildings. the guard huts even further, by sending If you have any more targets part of their garrisons back to the castle or and soldiers available, espewarehouse for fast, eflicient training. Uncially from way behind the fortunately, even the innocent, peaceful, front lines, launch a third atand presumably virginal Lady Amelia intack even before the second stantly attacked my guard huts as soon as I wave hits home. withdrew a single soldier from it. BURN & PILLAGE When you strike at enemy borders, hit several Capturing enemy castles is In order to ensure that your army wins guard huts at once, and place special emphasis on huts that, the toughest challenge of all, every fight that it starts, build watchtowers upon destruction, will eliminate as many important structures but it's well worth it. Before and forts wherever and whenever you can. as possible. making an attempt, check the Build a guard hut only when pressed for graphs and the position of time, but immediately construct a watchmenu you have two numbers forming a flags on enemy huts for some idea of enemy tower alongside. When these two strucfraction. Clicking on the plus/minus sign to strength. This time send your best knights tures are no longer a part of the first-line the side of these two numbers will change first, but then switch to green recruits, and defenses, demolish the hut, leaving the the size of your castle's garrison. Hint: imthen back again-there are dozens of solwatchtower, which will also yield three solmediately raise the number of castle dediers in there, many of them knights, and diers for intensive training or attack. Confenders to at least a dozen. After you've they aren't sent into combat in order of rank. struct a fort wherever you plan to attack; built a couple of lines of defense, and the You'll have the best odds when you alternate 48 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"Twisted Villain. Twisted Logic. Twisted Games. «IT BLEW ME AWAY!\" -Electronic Games «Blown Away uniquely blends multiple genres for a true interactive experience.» -Computer Player CD-ROM IMAGINATION For product and sales information call Ivi Publishing at 1-800-432-1332 dept. 315. Game 1994 IVI Publishing, Inc Metro-Goldwyn Mayer Pictures Inc. and Imagination Pilots, Inc. Distributed by II Publishing, Inc. under agreement with Imagination Pilots, Inc. Windows\" is trademark of Microsoft Corporalion. IVI PUBLISHING \"Blown AweyMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. and 1994 Metro Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures Inc. and licensed by MGM/WA L&M, TM used by permission. All Rights Reserved. All other morks are trademarks of their respective owners. MAIN RAC TIVE "


"The Greatest Adventure Awaits ...on the Net. Inter News STRATEGIES features both trees and several of those grey-black lumps that are rocks. Rocks are much better than underIf you're not on the Internet yet, ground granite, since buildyou soon will be. Every major online ing a quarryman's hut is service is rushing to provide Internet much faster and simpler access. Major software vendors are than a granite mine. Also, a rushing to include Internet access quarryman does not require in their products. Why? Because there's a fabulous food, while the miner does. world of information out there. The first buildings you A world big enough for millions should construct following the of real-life adventures. A world of EDM castle should be the lumberuseful software, product support, game jack's hut, the sawmill, and hints, real-time gaming, personal SIEGE & CONQUEST Strike at the jugular of your victims by the quarryman's hut. You'll interaction, bizarre sex, technological destroying their home castles. Once the castles are gone, the rest construct a forest ranger's hut information, graphic images... and more, more, more. is a simple mop up job. later, especially if there are a But how do you find your way around lot of trees and you need this uncharted virtual territory? the quality of the soldiers in each attack. more clear space for your buildings. ReTry to capture the castle of your member too that since you'll be expanding, strongest opponent as quickly as possible, you'll want to have building materials right whether it be the innocent Lady Amelia or next to the construction sites. the treacherous Rasparuk the Druid. The Evolutionary Newsletter Then whack the hell out of the other opSerfs By Land, Goods By Sea is the one newsletter that covers the ponents, burning and pillaging whatever The use of sealanes can help ease conInternet the way it should be covered. and whenever you can. You'll have to keep gestion if there is a lot of ground traffic, It's your up-to-the-moment monthly fighting effectively against men-without but setting up the routes can be confusguide to the fast-changing electronic castles, but they'll be much weakened. Af ing. To use boats, place a flag at two world. Professionally-written articles points along a lake and then construct a ter conquering King Ralph's castle I saw a get the \"newbie\" started, and give the experienced net \"surfer\" a head start. captain of mine mow down 11 of Ralph's Here's just a sampling of men, including two captains, three lieuthe topics we'll be covering: tenants, and assorted other characters. Top 100 sites, including WWW (World Wide Web), Gopherspace, telnet and itp. Moves in Brief Internet gaming: MUDs, With all of these tips in mind, we'll wrap MOOs and even stranger stuff; chess and this up by returning to the beginning. backgammon servers; even net Doom! Your first moves, and how quickly you E Commercial online gaming, systems make them, are extremely important. such as: CompuServe, AOL, GEnie, Prodigy. The first thing you have to do is choose ImagiNation and Microsoft Network. the site of the castle. This is more difficult path over the lake connecting them. Any Usenet in depth: we find the hot than it seems, for SERF Cry does not allow sea lane that runs against the shore is ilnewsgroups, and keep you up to date on you to pause the game while you are consid legal. The sea lane will show up as a the hot happenings. ering things. While you are out searching slightly different colored line on the > Plus lots more: reviews, interviews, bizarre cults, strange fetishes, movers, lake. Note that the boats will not transfor the perfect spot-fairly level ground, shakers, lurkers, flamers... with mounds of rocks, lots of trees, and min port serfs, just materials. Current, concise, complete and eral-rich mountains nearby-the computeruncensored. InterNews shows you the controlled opponents will grab the best sites Once you've done that, build guard huts Internet that no one else will. and begin building their kingdoms. where you want to expand, and replace Inte News Switch to the map the moment the game them later with watchtowers. If you can, starts, and pick an area near the center. build watchtowers right away. If you've got A year's worth of Sanity Don't worry about the terrain being too your roads right, building a watchtower $2495 hilly; if you do your road building right, takes very little more time than building a ups and downs aren't a problem. If you're guard hut, and the benefits are many. credit card orders: blocked in on one or two sides, you can alDo not hesitate to destroy all defensive 1.800.443.4294 voice ways expand in another direction. Get the structures well beyond the front line. 1.800.842.7123 fax geologist's estimate on the area's mineral You'll free up many soldiers you can profcheck or money orders: potential, but don't let it influence you too itably use. Sometimes, the space bonus will 305 Spring Creek Village much. If the area contains deposits of coal, pay benefits, too. Box 516, Dallas, TX 75248 iron ore, and gold, build immediately. Most importantly, always remember to inews@io.org Don't worry about underground granite: hit them before they hit you. Medieval All trade names are property of their respective owners. just make sure the site you have chosen life, eh? Circle Reader Service #346 50 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Build a Railroad Empire with Iron Horses and an Iron Will! SSD 1880 1 SHYC 15 Roll against history's greatest! INFO HISTORY STOOK TRANS Hal 7410 Railroads & Robber Barons Welcome to the 19th Century! With immigrants pouring in, America is poised for explosive westward growth. Magnates famed for their greed and business acumen rush to cash in. Can you handle the challenge? Lay track, build stations, purchase trains, and manipulate stocks to build an empire of iron and steel. History's greatest Robber Barons will try to stop you by undercutting your lines and buying out your stock. Your only weapons are money and trains. Will your empire succeed or fall under the wheels of the competition? PLROBGA SIMION ACCEPT CANCEL Break through the competition! Actual screens inay vary Railronds Moisio Rurais The Avalon Hill CD ROM COMING SOON Available on: PC Compatibles, 386 or better, 4 MB of Ram, 3.5\" High Game Company SIMTEX Density Floppy. Mouse, VGA color graphics. Sound Support for Sound DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. Blaster AW32, Sound Blaster 16, Sound Blaster Pro and Compatibles. 4517 Harford Road Baltimore, MD 21214 Pro Audio Spectrum and Roland. 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons can be found in computer game stores near you. For order information or for the name of a retailer near you, call 1-800-999—3222. Ask for Dept. CGW 1 Circle Reader Service #295 "


"No Longer Adrift In The Ascalon Rift Combat-Tested Tactics For STAR CRUSADER by Jeff James ith STAR CRUSADER, Take 2 and Gametek in mind that all vessels have shields which have taken the space combat simulator must be battered through to damage the genre into previously uncharted stellar hull of the craft. Shields regenerate quickreaches. Instead of being bossed around ly, so press the attack when you finally the galaxy by a superior oflicer and forced break through. Most weapons also diminto complete missions which you had no ish in strength over distance, making longpart in devising, STAR CRUSADER gives you distance fire-fights an exercise in futility. the opportunity to plan your missions and Learn to overwhelm the enemy with a barassemble strike forces with pilots and rage of weapon types at close range and ships of your own choosing. Fast reflexes you'll soon be master of the space lanes. When fighting in large, sprawling space melees with a melange of ship types and sizes, it's all too easy to get caught in the deadly crossfire between large capital ships, To avoid getting splatand tered in larger battles, hover sound stratearound the flanks of a friendgic doctrine are both ly capital ship. The capital ship essential to victory in STAR will keep up a steady barrage of CRUSADER since it requires you to fire on ships that are trying to attack you, do everything from flying your own and you can move quickly to engage a vessel to planning missions for your entire specific threat to the larger vessel. Capital squadron. ships, and some larger patrol ships, can fire backwards as well, so be mindful of When A Pistol Meets A Rifle... your position next to these vessels. Regardless of whether you choose to Some ships are extremely maneuverchampion the cause of the Gorene Empire able in a dogfight, making it impossible or the Alien Alliance, there are several bafor larger, more ponderous vessels to hit sic combat tactics that will help you get the them. There are two ways to defeat an endrop on the enemy. Success begins with cry like this, and they both involve your mastering the intricacies of each weapon afterburners. One option is to hit your aftype. If you're flying for the Gorene camp, terburners and speed away from your atyou need to know your torpedoes like the tacker, them turn and fire on him as he most intimate pieces of your anatomy, but approaches. If you're flying a hefty vessel flying for the Alien side gives you a much such as the Gorene Liberator or the Tanwider range of weapons. Il your ship has a cred Warlord, you have the added luxury limited number of torpedoes/missiles and of having a powerful weapon which costs other weapons, they're usually most effecnothing to use. When an enemy fighter tive when employed at a decisive moment races towards you, simply point the nose in the battle. If your goal is to eliminate a of your ship in its direction and hit the afTancred destroyer, you don't want to waste terburners, physically ramming the enemy all of your torpedoes on the escorts. Keep ship. This works best with a Gorene vessel, 52 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Samurai er, so avoid them fire more weapons, use more afterburners, like...mines and generally assume a very aggressive tacEven the mosttical posture. Fighting long, drawn-out batwell-laid plans of tles is a definite possibility in some missions, man and alien can and Gorene vessels are well-equipped for go wrong in the that role. Finally, all the Gorene craft generheat of combat. If ally share the same armaments and cockpit, your wingmen are making it very easy to jump from one ship sucking vacuum to the other without having to re-educate with regularity and yourself from square one. your mission obWhereas the Gorene player may often jectives always assume the same tactical posture due to seem out of reach, the similarity of ship designs, playing for you can use one of the Alien Alliance will give you a diverse the most trusted assortment of vessels to fly. For heavy slugGALACTIC ARACHNOPHOBIA The normally brave fests, the Tancred Tancred pilot can be forgiven for turning tail Warlord is unhere, because even his Samurai, with its doubtedly the best powerful plasma cannon, is no match for the choice. Loaded two spider-like Gorene ships on his tail. with a wide variety of weaponry and defended by thick as the Liberator has auto-repair capability. armor and As modern-day pilots will tell you, flying shields, the Warin a bee-line towards an objective at the lord should be same rate of speed over heavily defended considered your territory is akin to suicide. You'll want to \"designated hitNo Internat vary your speed and your heading often a rnage ter\"; use it when when you're in combat, making it as diffibrute force is neccult as possible for an enemy to draw a EL essary to complete bead on you. Finally, nothing works better weapons in a star-pilot's arsenal: namea mission. The Amien Guardian is perfectthan a timely save game. Regardless of calling. Accessing your communications ly suited for capture missions, as its EMP how tough a mission is, chances are you'll equipment and telling an enemy pilot torpedoes can penetrate shields, destroyeventually get it right and see your way that he smells like an unwashed goat (oring only the pilots on board. through to a successful completion. that his mother was a Tancred) can have This specialization is also a drawback for a number of benefits. He might get mad many Alien Alliance vessels. Whereas the A Pilot's Gotta Know His Limitations enough to forget what he was doing and Gorene vessels are capable of fulfilling a Perhaps the most important advice of all is attack you instead-perfect if he was afwide range of roles, your vessels are not to structure your actions around the mister your wingman or attempting to dequite as flexible. This demands an extra sion goals. When in a swirling dogfight, restroy something you're trying to protect. level of tactical planning, as you must caresist the temptation to fixate on one craft to In some missions, a valuable enemy fully craft each mission with a variety of vesthe exclusion of all else. Chasing down leader will attempt to escape. If you insel types, taking the strength and weakness fighters far from your objective may raise sult him enough, he'll turn around and of each into account. This difficulty is comyour kill rating, but it will also leave your take you to task for the insults. This tacpounded by design inconsistencies between mission objectives in shambles. Put your tic works best on unskilled, inexperivessels. While one vessel performs in one objectives first and victory will follow. enced pilots; veteran pilots are less likely fashion, another alien vessel will have a difThreading your ships through a mineto be affected by such schoolyard ferent cockpit, different weapons and diffield is one of the most difficult aspects of shenanigans. ferent performance. If you do switch sides the game, and can give you a fair share of to the Alliance, you'll also bring along some frustration if you don't know how to hanGorene Details And Alien Knights of the Gorene's technology, specifically dle it. The mines in STAR CRUSADER home When you're flying for the Gorenes, you auto-repair capability and the Intruder in on your energy output. Hit the afterhave three main advantages over your opstealth ship. Even with those additions, burners just once, and you'll have mines ponents: auto-repair, larger fuel reserves heading up the Alliance will be a tough job. screaming towards you from all directions and design similarity. Both the Scorpion With all of these extra factors to control, To survive minefield missions in one and the Liberator have auto-repair capabilileading the Alien Alliance to victory is unpiece, you'll need to take out the controlty, which lets them endure tremendous deniably more difficult than seeing the ling mine, which usually shows up as a amounts of damage and still remain operaGorene achieve their aims. flashing red blip on your radar. Should tional. Auto-repair lends itself well to ramRegardless of which side you choose, you manage to destroy this mine, all the ming tactics, so Gorene players can use that several personalities will be introduced other mines will cease to target and purtactic much more often than other races. throughout the game who are central to sue your vessel. They're still armed howevThe extra fuel means that you'll be able to the game's plot. So that the storyline may JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 53 "


"AMIEN GUARDIAN: With its EMP torpedoes, the Guardian is ideal for capture missions and missions that involve disabling enemy craft. STRATEGIES be properly advanced, the designers have infused some characters with impressive abilities to keep them alive during combat: When you're still playing on the Gorene side of things, your wingmen will also exhibit unique personalities during combat. Krugon Dept is one of the better pilots in the Gorene staff stable, and he can be used as a valuable wingman. Krugon has the disconcerting tendency to punch out of combat (either by jumping out of the sector or by ejecting) when his shields get low. Communicate with him before he leaves to keep him in combat. Kara Helmar is a dream come true for novice STAR CRUSADER pilots. She tends to be the protective sort, rushing to your aid when you're getting pounded in combat. Other pilots have unique characteristics as well. Learning to maximize the strengths and minimize the weaknesses of your primary wingmen is one of the keys to winning the game. AMIEN STARWOLF: This ship packs the Aegis field, a powerful weapon that can scythe through waves of enemy ships. The field does suck a lot of power, so use it sparingly. GORENE INTRUDER: Fast and hard to spot, the Intruder is an ideal reconnaissance craft. Next to useless for any other mission type, though. TRENDET FCFCF Strice GORENE LIBERATOR: A well-rounded strike vessel. Tough, durable and able to dish out gobs of punishment, the Intruder is well-suited for many mission types. GORENE SCORPION: An excellent dogfighter. The Scorpion packs a powerful wallop with its lasers and torpedoes, and is fast and maneuverable enough to tangle with most fighters. MAZUMAN BUCCANEER: The most maneuverable ship in the game. Speedy and nimble, this ship is essentially a futuristic version of the Japanese Zero. MAZUMAN CAPITALIST: A so-so strike craft, this vessel carries a neutron cannon that can injure and kill an enemy pilot—if his shields are down. This ship does work well when teamed with the Zemun Harbinger. Top Sun Once you've been given command of your squadron, you can start assigning ships and pilots to missions of your own design. The missions you assign will depend on your own playing style. If you aren't the greatest star pilot, assigning a number of your fellow pilots to a contingency mission will ensure that your mission goals are achieved. If you don't need that kind of security, send your pilots on an aggressive combat mission in order to gain territory from the enemy. Obviously, the better the pilots you send on the mission, the more likely it is to be a success. Additionally, sending your best pilots to the pilot academy-basically Top Gun for space jockswill ensure that you'll have a steady stream of fresh (if untested) recruits. Giving all your rookie pilots a last name starting with \"R\" (for Rookie) will make selecting the correct pilots for missions much easier. If you have the pilots to spare, defensive patrol missions will guard against any enemy advances into your territory. These tips and tactics should put you in a good position to begin experimenting with new tactics and strategies of your own. The Alien Alliance is a particularly good choice for gamers looking for a challenge, while the Gorene Empire is a better choice for novices. In either case, there is much to explore in the richly detailed world of STAR CRUSADER, and much work to be done to determine the ultimate fate of the Ascalon Rit. The author would like to thank Tom Rigas for his assistance in preparing this article. TANCRED SAMURAI: A good dogfighter, the Samurai carries a plasma cannon that gives it powerful offensive capability. TANCRED WARLORD: This one's a bruiser-easily the most potent ship in the game. With four laser cannons and two torpedo launchers, use the Warlord whenever brute force is the best option. Hier menighet ZEMUN HARBINGER: A good dogfighter, the Harbinger sports the awesome hellfire missile. This nasty weapon has the tendency to wipe out an enemy's shields, leaving him open to such nasty weapons as neutron cannons and energy siphons. ZEMUN PALADIN: A good strike vessel, the Paladin—which carries an energy siphon-works well when teamed with the Zemun Harbinger. The Harbinger can knock out the enemy's shields, while the Paladin can suck the poor sap's energy away with the siphon! 54 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"How to make sure your multimedia software talks to your hardware. TM Sound BLASTER Read the fine print on today's game boxes and you'll see the cautionary words with compatible sound card. That's because today's hottest games demand the PC sound standard-Sound Blaster Without it, you might get zip. No fantastic effects, no dramatic music, no true-to-life voices. Nothing. So we've teamed up with the best game designers to ensure 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. Just flip ahead to the following pages. You'll get a good look at some of the richest, liveliest, mostrealistic games. And when you see the Sound Blaster logo, you'll know you aren't missing a thing. BLASTER CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS. INC. Sound BLASTER COUTAINMENT COIG MULTIMEDIA IS CREATIVE CISTI 1994 Creative Technology Lid. The Creative Logo and Sound Blaster Logo are registered trademarks and Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Edutainment CD, Multimedia is Creative, and the Sound Blaster Compatibility Logo are trademarks of Creative Technology Lid. U.S. inquiries: 1-800-998-5227. International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore, TEL. 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. "


"The Man Who Would Be King How to Conquer Impressions' LORDS OF THE REALM and Have Change Left Over by Josh Bruce bsidiones multa consumunt tempora... (Sieges take a lot of time...) So reads the Latin letter sent from a seneschal to his lord during the Middle Ages, found in a French chronicle entitled, Deeds of the Counts of Anjou. The letter goes on to suggest that open battles are superior and cause those defeated to vanish like smoke. Of course, most historical lords would n't have agreed. In history, fortified defense was more relied upon than the rare pitched battles. Impressions' LORDS OF THE REALM accurately follows the historito cal philosophy win the You are game due more to prudent likely actions away from rather than upon the battlefield. LORDS OF THE REALM presents players with a castle design sequence that leaves Vauban looking like an amateur, and delivers a frighteningly realistic economic model, complete with crop rotation, fleece manufacturing, and dairy production. That's okay. I'm from Nebraska. I know cows. But for those of you who are not so blessed(?), here are a few pointers to get would-be kings through until the next harvest moon. In or der to more fully understand how to get the most from your puttering peasants and bodacious bovines, three separate things need to be addressed: the economic model, military concerns, and grand strategy. Nunc orant, alii pugnant, aliique laborant. (Now, [some of them] pray, others fight and others work.) Taxation is both an effective means of getting money from your people and controlling the population. As a rule of thumb, setting the tax rate to 15 will raise the happiness level of your people, 20 will maintain the happiness level, and 25 will lower it. At the beginning of any game, the tax rate should be set to 15 (or even 10) until you have a nice happy population with a steady increase in the number of people immigrating to your county. By controlling how much you tax your population, you will be able to effectively control how many people are in your counties, but you have to make sure that you don't let too many move in. I know that many of you insist on living in over-populated mega-cities; but if there's one thing Midwesterners know, it's that too many people cause too many problems. LORDS OF THE REALM seems to agree with me. Most strategy games, such as GENGHIS KHAN II and L'EMPEREUR, insist on having an economic model where the more people you can pack into a province, the better. But LORDS OF THE REALM uses a much more realistic system. Population can be easily increased by simply lowering the tax rate or increasing the rations. However, once you have more people move into an area than said area can support, real problems begin. The excess population will quickly eat any cattle or sheep that you have been raising and will deplete the grain stocks so drastically that nothing can be planted. Once this situation begins, there is nothing the player can do except try to buy new food stocks Tam 56 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Dragout Lore Armored warriors ride the wings of flying dragons. Trolls devise a Stirprise attack. To Survive, you'll need to stay alert. And have a Sound Blaster sound card. In Dragon Lore, every nuance of battle comes Between the roaring dragon and the screeching trolls, you can hardly hear yourself thinkto life with synchronized speech and sound effects. Bones crumble beneath your broadsword. A flailing mace rips through chainmail. And you hear it all with Sound Blaster. Just think of it as your most important weapon. Working together for sound compatibility. CATIVS * *    ]  *   H R  . C Sound BLASTER MULTIMEDIA IS CREATIVE MINDSCAPE formerly THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS 1991   ] crctivc Iiiitcr Cry 1991 work , Int . All uirilirIlle Softwaalf l '  t $ trweg , "


"12 W38 STRATEGIES from a traveling merone. Until very late in the game when a Pield: chant, or send in large army is needed, you should shy This Summer produce from other away from arms production and rely on counties that the hiring troops to fight your battles for player controls. Soryou. Mercenaries are far cheaper than ry, but enforced starStart of Summer 524 raising your own troops, both in terms vation does not a Harvested Sown of money and the effect it has on the naruler make. Eaten tive population. For example, to raise After the stocks Fertility excellenti Stolen 200 mercenary swordsman costs about are depleted, the Men needed in Autumn Hul Destroyed Labour 9570 650 gold, but to supply the same numhappiness of the Sola A Farm 191 119 ber of your own troops with weapons Bought population will take Herd 1387 1185 End of Summer 485 would cost over 3,600 gold and cause a a nose-dive until Sowing times loss of large drop in the happiness level for the open revolt breaks entire population. out in the region. In addition, the mercenary troops are of Once this stage is DIVINE BOVINE You don't have to be from Nebraska to know that you can a far higher quality than any that you reached, there is never have too many cows to feed the hungry hordes. could raise yourself. Much later in the nothing the player game, when enemy armies of over a thoucan do except pull out what little stock Once you have a respectable populasand men are marching back and forthhe has left in the area and write it off as tion which is moderately happy, start usyou will have to raise your own troops bea loss. By the way, it isn't usually worth ing people in the specialized tasks. The cause of the inability to combine several your time to march an army into a refour specialized tasks are: mining for mercenary forces. When this time comes bellious province and reclaim it, since iron, mining for stone, cutting timber, remember to recruit nothing but knights. the area will be a virtual desert after the and making weapons. Each of these comThey are very expensive, but well worth fight is over and the whole process will modities, of course, has its own special the investment as these forces are virtually simply start all over again. usage. While stone and timber are comindestructible and can wreak havoc on any The key to solving this problem is never pletely worthless unless you are currently force that tries to oppose them. to let a county's population grow faster building a castle, note that timber can be Strategically, when the time comes to than the food production. Whenever crops purchased quite cheaply from any traveltake the offensive you should move any need harvesting or planting, you should ing merchant. So, it is usually best to puravailable forces into the target county and transfer all of your available population chase wood and use the excess workers to head straight for the nerve center of the into these tasks until you have enough peocut more stone. Also, while iron is necescounty, whether it be a castle or the county ple involved to actually get the job done. sary for building your own weapons, the seat. If the county is not owned by another While you will lose any experience they mercenary option is significantly more player, then immediately attack the county may have gained over the past year workuseful. seat and destroy whatever forces the eneing in one of the specialized professions, it my can muster. These armies are usually is far more valuable to have a good harvest Milites auxiliatores...in expensis ejus small and poorly armed, but they can surthan to mine iron. Remember, all the timerant. prise you once in a while, so make sure ber points in the world won't help you if (Auxiliary soldiers...were in his pay.) that you have a respectable force before you start running out of food. While most strategy games have the marching in. On the other hand, having a happiplayer raising massive armies from their If there is a castle in the region, a ness level that is too low is another probown population, in LORDS OF THE REALM scorched earth tactic must be used. So lem that can rapidly lead to your the best army to have is a mercenary immediately lay siege to any castle that dismissal from a county. Oddly enough, happens to be in raising the people's happiness level is acthe county with one tually far easier than dealing with the of your armies, and problems of having one that is too high. use the rest to deIf your population seems a little glum, stroy whatever you can always lower the tax level to one, crops or villages import some food from your local merthere are in the chant, or order a few additional kegs of area. Leaving a few beer until they begin to cheer up. Cercrops to supply tainly, if one of your counties is about to your own besieging explode into revolution, you should imforce, move the rest mediately use all three of these methods of your armies into to raise the happiness level until you are any neighboring out of danger. It should be noted, howSummer AD 128 counties and deever, that the only way this system will stroy their villages work is if you have enough food to begin DOWN BY THE SEASHORE Empire building in LORDS OF THE REALM works best and crops as well. when you seize counties on the coast, and consolidate your position with with. If not, simply write it off as a The computer will castles and mercenary armies. doomed experiment. try to raise any 58 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 RAKE "


"CYBER Destruction looms in the year 2027. Global terrorists threaten to capture a doomsday device in Cyberia. But you can stop them. Armed with your instincts and a Sound Blaster card, you experience every detail. Interact with synthetic 3-D Ah, the crack and sizzle of another enemy ship turning to toast. characters and move in a beautifully rendered world. Stunning sound effects and a full musical score make every action sequence breathtaking. Call it a truly original experience. And with Sound Blaster, it's unlike anything you've ever heard. Working together for sound compatibility. CREATIVE CREATIVE CREATIVE LAES.IN Sound BLASTER MULTIMEDIA IS CREATIVE 1994 Xatrix Interactive Design, Inc. All rights reserved. Published and distributed by Interplay Productions, Inc. "


"STRATEGIES siege of one of its move much more slowly. Never attempt castles immediately to conquer a province unless you alby mustering large ready have at least 500 gold in your quantities of troops treasury. When you take a county, there from any adjacent will almost always be a drop in happiareas, and even ness and population, and there could from the one that be some serious starvation problems. contains the castle, Remember to have some extra cash on and hurling these at hand so that you can solve any probthe besieging army. Side lems you might encounter, and the new The best way to preview county can rapidly be transformed from vent this is by levelNorth a desolate desert into a prosperous ing the entire area. boom town. Killing all the peoTry to make friends whenever you can. ple and burning the VAUBAN. EAT YOUR HEART OUT This castle's majestic towers pose an Always accept any alliance that is offered crops may not make to you, unless it completely blocks your intimidating obstacle for any assaulting force. Rather than undertaking a you the most popuforces, and be sure to honor these agreecostly siege, raze the countryside and starve the garrison out instead. lar guy in town, but ments. Stabbing friends in the back alit will keep the othways brings a certain sense of satisfaction, er players so busy at simply running don't be afraid to retreat. But keep in but nobody will have a thing to do with the decimated provinces that they mind that forces under 50 men are alyou if you decide to do this too many won't have any time left over to deal most automatically destroyed during a times. The long term benefits of making with the siege. retreat, so you might as well let them alliances far outweighs any short term A note should be made about attacking fight to the death and take somebody benefits that you may get from attacking castles, or rather, not attacking castles. with them. your friends. The best way to take any fortress is by Secondly, once you decide to attack ansimply besieging it and not worrying Scutis scuta junguntur. other player, keep attacking until they are about building siege engines and ladders. (Shields were joined to shields.) destroyed. Keep all of your actions foWhile it is kind of fun to run around The first thing that you should do once cused on destroying their army and levelbuilding massive siege engines and layyou have an army and your economy is ing their castles until they are completely ing intricate assault patterns, the best on the right foot, is to begin building an eliminated. Also, ally yourself with other form of attack is to simply wait until the empire. Start by taking over several nobles that border your opponent, and try garrison starves. You should also take any Figure to get them to help troops that are assigned to building and 10 men in the conquest. By simply move them over to foraging. By doing this, you will doing this, a bloodless victory is assured. assure as quick a vicAlthough it may be fun to knock holes in tory as possible while the enemy's castles, it's not fun to repair helping your them once it surrenders. chances of one day becoming king. Bello subacti evanescent tamquam Now that you fumus.... have an understand(The ones subjugated in war, vanish ing of how LORDS OF like smoke....) THE REALM works, Most battles will not take place in a casboth economically tle, however, but rather on the open and militarily, it's field. Field battles are rather straightforMERCENARY MANEUVERS A Swamp the tan force was using as a shield time to grab your faward affairs, but a few things can be cannot prevent the red horsemen from turning them into flank steak. vorite morning star done to maximize your chances. First of Well-paid mercenaries have a talent for outmaneuvering the enemy. and set off to show all, try to outmaneuver the enemy by why you should be marching around the sides of his units. small counties by the coast, next to eneking. Remember to build plenty of castles Archers and crossbowmen are particumy lords and not too far inland, and and keep a very close eye on your popularly effective in immobilizing them build castles in these regions. By doing lation. Then, you'll be ready to follow the while you do so. Once your men are in this, you will be able to secure a safe area bard's advice, «Cry havoc, and let slip the position, swing back and attack from the for your men on the coast, where they dogs of war!\" side or rear of the enemy army. Secondcan concentrate on economic matters (Ed: All Latin quotations are brief excerpts ly, if he sends only a part of his army while leaving the lighting up to the from those found in Hans Delbruck's excellent against you, throw everything you have fringe counties. History of the Art of War, Volume III: Meat this small contingent and destroy it. Unlike most wargames, where the dieval Warfare, trans. by Walter J. Renfroe, then move on to attack his other units. faster you conquer territories the better, Jr. (Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Finally, if things start going too badly, LORDS OF THE REALM forces players to Press, 1990). O 60 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Your clues are hidden in the whispers of floating apparitions. Eerie piano music could be a sign of danger. Warnings come to you through strange murmurs. So, if you want to unravel Old Man Stauf's bizarre secrets, keep your eyes peeled, your One by one the guests arrive. Then the party really starts howling. nerves steady, and your ears open. And take this hint-make sure you have a Sound Blaster sound card. Every bone-chilling shriek, hair-raising scream, and breathless gasp in The 7th Guest seems terrifyingly real when played on a Sound Blaster. Forget about getting out alive without one. Working together for sound compatibility.  CREATIVE Sound BLASTER TRILOBYTE CREATIVE LADING. MULTIMEDIA IS CREATIVE INTERACTIVE entertainment 1992 Virgin Games, Inc., and Trilobyte, Inc. All rights reserved. The 7th Guest and Interactive Drama are trademarks of Virgin Games, Inc. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd. Circle Reader Service #280 "


" Only Digital Pictures gets you in the Game "


"Croducing Digital Pictures Lam City. Super-powered by a Pentium processor to put you in the game WITH SCOTTIE PIPPEN his ain't no candy-colored cartoon, but live, inour-face streetball. You're in the game, one-on-one. Drive, unk, shoot and steal anytime you want. But beware. You take on eal players, in 100% constantly interactive game play. No lags. No delays. Instant response. All in real video so sharp it'll knock you into the front row. ow's it done? The power of a Pentium processor, a 2x CD ROM drive and two atent-pending technologies from Digital Pictures: InstaSwitch for instant 112 Switch THE INSTANT action and DigiChrome for dazzling video. You'll need all this technological wizardry to face the wildest B-ball players this side f the 'hood. So go ahead, try taking it to the hole. Who knows? You may even arn enough respect to face Scottie Pippen himself. It's Slam City, baby. DigiChrome CD ROM RESPONSE VIDLO TECHNOLOGY n stores everywhere. It's why you bought a Pentium processor in the first place. TM DigiChrome and Intel Inside are registered trademarks of Digital Pictures Inc. and Intel Corporation respectively. Insta Switch d Slam City are trademarks of Digital Pictures, Inc. Pentium is a trademark of Intel Corporation.  Digital Pictures, Inc. D i p int o MY 67 That's Mister cottie Pippen to you. Brittany loves a winner. And only a winner. \"How'd you get up that high?\" When Movie Makers Make Games, Everything Else Is Just Cartoons. Circle Reader Service #344 "


"The Imperial Pilot's Secret Guide How To Make Friends In High Places And Annihilate Rebel Scum In LucasArts' TIE FIGHTER by Jason Kapalka he following excerpt is from a book found Or... you can suppress that knee-jerk of among the personal effects of a prisoner in \"loyalty\" and find out for yourself why this the Bulimak Imperial Re-Education Cenunofficial guide has remained in circulater. The inmate, a former pilot, unfortution among TIE pilots despite the dannately died of natural causes. The Imperial gers. It's not because of the inclusion of High Command is very interested in this \"The Cadet's Map of Outworld Bars and manuscript, and Lord Vader has promised Cantinas\" in Appendix A, nor the infato personally reward the author or authors mous (and, need it be said, pseudonyif they will step forward. mous) Captain Moonbarker's \"Budget Pilots should be aware that Guide to Pleasure Palaces of Imperial reading this docSpace\" in the center fold-out. Well, at least ument in part not entirely for these reasons. or in whole No, this guide's main purpose is a simple contra one: to give you the edge over the straightvenes arrow flyers who believe everything their flight officers tell them, like the oft-repeated maxim that the basic TIE is a state-ofthe-art space superiority fighter. Wake up! The standard TIE starfighter is an outmoded patrol craft, cheap and expendable...and so is its pilot. These are the cold economics upon which our Emperor Palpatine's grand stellar navy is built. Do you want to become another mark in some Imperial accountant's balance sheet? No? Then listen up, cadets, and maybe you'll live through your first tour of duty. An Imperial Ounce Of Prevention Section 12 of the Imperial Information Before you even get into your first furball, laws, and is punishable by up to ten years there are a couple of things you can do to imprisonment in the Outer Rim jail of maximize your chances of survival. First, your choice. make sure that you've subscribed to the speBut before cadets rush off to report this cial Imperial cloning program, known unoftreasonous text to your flight officer, reficially as \"Automatic Backup,\" and don't member that even a cursory mind probe deactivate your policy unless you want your will reveal that you have already read the whole career ended by one stray laser bolt. first paragraph, or rather, now, the first Second, be sure to grill your flight officer two paragraphs. Do enjoy your stay in the and the cloaked figure from the Secret OrBulimak Carcery. der for all available information before the 64 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"3:55 200 100 NO Cece HULL T: 1x mission. \"What is this Secret Order anyyou in their sightsway?\" we hear a chorus of cadet voices cry. move or die. When Perhaps when you reach the Inner Circle the middle light goes you'll know... \"And how do I get into the green, a capital ship Inner Circle?\" Hush... remember, survival or installation has a before promotion. We'll talk of this later... lock on you-run Always press \"G» to check your mission away, you can't shake goals as soon as you arrive on site, as this it. And when the screen is generally more concise and inforrightmost light starts mative than your commander, who's someblinking yellow, this SE SATCERE times (surprise!) long-winded and unclear. means someone is tryAnd finally, once the mission's over, for ing to acquire a misbetter or worse, be sure to ask for additionsile lock. If it goes red, al advice in the post-combat debriefing. they've got it, and The post-combat debriefing often yields you'd better crank up detailed and helpful information. Howevyour shields. Of CALL OUT THE CAVALRY! The Rebs will attack in waves in Battle 3, Mission 6, so it's a good idea to call for backup. Stay close to the platform and the er, if you're flying near rebel space, failing course, if you're flying a mission will almost inevitably result in a TIE Fighter, Intertwo Space Rangers and blast any ships targeting them. capture, and you won't be able to access ceptor, or Bomber, these hints. In such cases, it's often advisyou don't have any. As the rebels say... may you will normally outnumber the enemy able (though, it goes without saying, strictthe Force be with you. Good luck. when flying this craft, take advantage of ly against Imperial Navy policy) to hit \"Q\" this by attacking Rebels who are otherwise to quit the mission while still intact. Get Some Straight Ship Specs engaged. Never approach an enemy capithe additional info and try again. Keep in We expect all you cadets have been thortal ship in a basic TIE Fighter unless mind that you only have to complete the oughly lectured on the characteristics of you've got the reflexes of a womp rat and Primary mission goals in order to advance the various Rebel starfighters, but surpristhe luck of a Corellian smuggler. to the next mission. Secondary and bonus ingly few novice pilots have as firm a grasp TIE Interceptor: An improvement, but goals yield more points, but that won't do on the strengths and weaknesses of their not by much. You still lack shields, and the you any good if Rebels turn the frigate you own craft. This, of course, may be due to Interceptor's hull is not much tougher were supposed to be protecting into plas the Imperial reluctance to notice design than the basic TIE's. What you do have is ma and scrap metal. flaws, a tendency the recent Death Star deheavy short-range firepower and high Forget about your commanding offibacle points out all too clearly. Didn't anyspeed. Avoid long-range duels, get behind cer's exhortations to put in time on the one notice that stupid exhaust port? Here the Rebels and stay there. Occasionally InTraining Simulator. Frankly, very few acare a few more honest appraisals. terceptors, along with basic TIEs, will be tual combat situations involve flying TIE Starfighter: Don't let your com modified to carry torpedoes or missiles. through interminable lengths of space mander snow you into believing this ship Remember that 2.5 kilometers is the maxtubing. The Combat Chamber, on the is anything besides a flying eggshell. imum lock-on range for starfighters, and other hand, presents simulated situations Cheap to produce, sure, but that's no sothat attaining a target lock any closer than much closer to reality, and all wise pilots lace to the poor souls who have to fly these one kilometer is next to impossible. Capiwill spend time here familiarizing themdeathtraps. Maneuverability is their sole tal ships can be targeted at up to six kiloselves with their craft's basic controls. asset, and you'd best use it. Beware of colmeters, and it's a very good idea to do so. Don't worry about the TIE Advanced for a lisions and friendly fire, particularly when TIE Bomber: A much tougher hull, but while-you're going to be flying the lesser flying near your own capital ships. Since still no shields, so avoid heavy furballs. craft for some time. You have a hefty load of missiles, but be Concentrate on enersure to use them effectively, while the enegy management, my is still at long range. Up close, the TIE marksmanship, and Bomber can still outmaneuver sluggish working in harmony ships like the Rebel Y-Wing, but is no with your wingmen. match for a skillfully piloted X-or A-Wing. When you actually If you're attacking a capital ship, consider find yourself nose-totargeting the weapons systems first, and nose with insurgent take advantage of any ships in the vicinity starfighters, you'd that can board and reload you (by activatSEP SERRES better have an instincing the Shift-B command). Sometimes the tive understanding of cargo manifest on a missile-carrier will your craft's computer change to \"empty\" after you reload the systems. A quick reHYPER TECH HHEAD LN first time, but in most cases this is just typicap: when the tiny Concussion missiles fired. cal Imperial miserliness; board them leftmost light on your GREETINGS, NEIGHBOR The frigate Xerxes is about to get a few new dents again and you'll almost certainly be able to in Battle 4, Mission 5, courtesy of twin concussion missiles. pry another load of weapons from the red, someone's got tight-fisted clerks. 1:50 100 JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 65 "


"STRATEGIES Assault Gunboat: Shields at long last. alties occur as a result not of enemy action can fire missiles from up to 6 kilometers Be certain to crank up your recharge but of pilot error. A prime example is the away. If you're worried about return fire, rate at the beginning of a battle or at any TIE pilot who, in a hurry, attempts to inuse the \",\"toggle to target the ship's laser time when speed is not important. You spect multiple freighters or containers turrets first, and avoid making close atwill often be called on to disable fleeing while flying at top speed. Shields or no tacks until the vessel is crippled or enenemy craft with your ion cannons; reshields, colliding with a multi-ton gaged with other targets. When member that ships like the Corellian freighter will pancake any Imperial attempting to disable the fleeing commanTransport can outdistance you unless starfighter up to and including the Deder's shuttle, use the Enter button to practically all power is redirected to the fender. Slow to 1/3 speed when inspecting match speeds as you approach, or you're engines. Make sure your laser likely to overshoot the slowbatteries are well-charged beer-moving craft. In fact, fore you start the chase, or matching speeds is a good you may catch up but be untactic against practically all able to do anything. And Rebel starfighters. It still when making rocket passes at takes time for you to accelercapital ships, it's often a good ate or decelerate to the eneidea to redirect all shield enmy's velocity, so don't smack ergy forward, then back as Enter just as you roar up beyou pass the target, as you'll hind a Y-Wing snail. be forced to come in close and endure heavy flak. BATTLE 2 TIE Advanced: A superior Mission 1: Nothing too awcraft, combining the best atful, but you should try to intributes of the Assault Gunboat spect Modular Conveyer and the TIE Interceptor. If group Asbo and capture the you're good enough to be flyappropriate ship. If you reing one of these, you don't really want some bonus points, ally need our advice: try to take out the Light TIE Defender: This hyperCalamari Cruiser Falaricae. secret three-winged protoMission 2: As the Assault type has been the subject of Transports are otherwise enmuch heated discussion due gaged, you can use your to the inclusion of an experilasers against them with minmental tractor beam weapon imal risk. Keep an eye on the which in theory slows enemy middle light on your targetcraft down, making them easing indicator, as you may be ier to hit. In practice, the flying uncomfortably close to tractor beam is of minimum several enemy capital ships. utility, since you need to cenMission 3: The best way ter your sights over a target to take out Escort Shuttles is to activate it, and if you've with missiles; unfortunately, got your sights on the enemy, you don't have any. Beware why not just blast them? However, the closely-grouped freighters or containers, the Typhon's rear-firing laser. The best atDefender is so heavily armed, so masand be willing to make multiple passes if tack angle is from the side, but you'll only sively armored, and so fast that few pinecessary. be able to get off a few shots before you lots will really care about this minor Mission 2: When ordered to defend inpass the target. Good luck. problem. stallations or ships, a simple computer proMission 4: Four missiles will take out an Enough of the generalities. Onwards, cedure will make your task much easier. Escort Shuttle. Close to about 2 kilometers then, to detailed tactical advice on the varFirst, lock the target into memory with the to make sure none miss. If you opt to go ious Imperial campaigns, along with one Shift-F5-F7 keys. Call it up when necessary for the bonus points by inspecting the varor two dirty tricks. After all, why should with the F5-F7 keys. Then press \"A\" to lock ious capital ships, charge your shields Rebels have all the fun? onto the nearest vessel attacking your tar heavily first, then redirect all power to the get. An alternative procedure is to use the engines as you make your pass. DO NOT BATTLE 1 Threat Display (Z key) to examine enemy fly in a straight course. Most of the missions in this series are not ships' missions. Give priority to missile Mission 5: As the Y-Wings are armed very tricky, but serve as good examples for armed vessels-typically Y-Wings and Xwith missiles, be sure to take them out more difficult actions. Pilots unable to Wings. Y-Wings are much easier to kill than first. Use Enter to match speeds, and then complete missions 3-5 might as well hang X-Wings, and so should be attacked first if hit the \"_\" button a few times just to make up their helmets and fly Gar-Barges in all other conditions are equal. sure you don't overshoot the target. If you stead. Mission 6: Remember, when attacking can stay behind a Y-Wing, their slow turnMission 1: Far too many Imperial casucapital ships like the Rebel cruiser, you ing rate guarantees their doom. The Z-95 Duis 199 66 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"ECON EAST AFRICA THE VIRTUAL SIMULATION GAME THIS IS NO WALK IN THE PARK. Experience incredible moving animals, stunning landscapes and ruthless poachers. ECO EAST AFRICA takes you to an entirely new level in simulation games. For more information call IVI Publishing at 1-800-432-1332 dept. 380  IVI Publishing, Inc. All rights reserved. ECO game series concept owned and developed by Viridis Corporation. Microsoft is a registered trademark and Windows is a trademark of Microsolt Corporation. VIRIDIS CD ROM IVI PUBLISHING WINDOWS "


"nd BA enem STRATEGIES ) luntcr's pOSc little threat to the Tie about tle platform and, especially, the two blips cgual laser fodder. There are to0 Advanced or lie IsCont Califiel, but ale Space Rangels, Lock them into memoly many vulnerable talgets in this mission for fairly fast and maneuverable. Use Slhitt-C and attack any vessels tal_geing lic. In you to keej tack of each individually, so to get you'vinghman to cover you i7-95s particulan, ise nhissiles to destroy the just ling al_ound the Calgo le11_ies interrupt your attack on the Y-Wings. De Transjolts ilaat hyper_spde in [0 attack blast Y-\\Wings as they show up. strying 107 of the attacking lol' s vill then a little later on (notla Assault Mission 5: Get some distance from the nt you bonus points, so don't return t) T asts L after the CIVette). Tlc XIxes, ilhen Inload yOul nissiles into its ithe hallgal as SOOl as the TA's are blus slilittle d al's after tli tv AT's lasci )) Its. Make certain the resupply are destroyed, but you'll probably have to0 shuttle loesn't get destroyel. To reload, BATTLE 3 much on your hands to go after it unless it's best to come to a lead hal ve Mission 1: Ignole the enemy fightcl's un you leave the ATMs or latel. Stick close to the shuttle (.10 kilometers n less) before til you've finished inspecting the contain: the Rangers and the platform, nl don't hitting Shili-B. ti's. Ti'y to hanu\\'t your ship So that the geled avy on a hopeless chase. TLE you, and keep yolll' seed ureasonally ly. BATTLE 4 sion 1: It's a trap! Those familiar with ission 2: Six missils ill kill: Mission : D Suno t) li Dal ial Dolicy will not be sli Assign yOLII' wingh to attack l ust lis. tion [aY-Win turkey sli)). Desti()y the inniecliately send reinf vetteS early on. O b a se ments. Second, kill your two wingmen, contanels belol Youll get a message Saying, \"Alpha Vettes are doesn't work or play well with othes... stroyed, otherwise Ha ha. lol_get about shooting the mine Just edilect all power to the en 2001m in and identify the ol' (Ontainers. them belole you have When lt Osply arrives, is it as a shield the tilt [) click until ile sluttle appear's, then hcal out to identify it. Don't bother shooting at anyMission 3: This tling-keep your speed at may be a good time all times, and move evasively to ask to leinforce Mission 2: Ignore VOLil' winnen's sigIments (us1ng Shilt-S). gestion to attack the containers Don't Send you Onilic platforms guns will chew Wingmen I attack Use lastl's () destroy the attacking B-Wings the enemy capital which are no real threat unless you are ship, they just be MISSILE?  MISSILE? Using a Star Destroyer as a shield comes in ish enough to attempt a tional attack, then destroyed. X-ying handy from his tactic kill lie 7-95s. Now you \\vingllen will Red and Z-95 Gold akin lit containers, whil it bai: pose the greatest threat to the firical and should be deal u) ii )( ) sitions on the filis you're in close and destroy as many Contai with aCollingly. Use your Wingmen t) atlotecting tak targets that al ) fal' avay for you to Mission 2: DesiOytle clicitly Con_Vetes e will alTIVe when most of the conia Mission: Ifocus your ellon'ts on protecting the plation, which is much mol_evilmelable than the ligate, Watch out of the nirmed Tansports that appeal latel' (011. ission 5: This starts with waves of AWings hybel's,acil in. Try to kill as nu as possible witli lissiles, Cause liyie Vely difficult to hit with laSel's. You should generally ignore A-VingS, as their main Du1DOSe Is to distinct voll i n your mission goals, but in this particular niission they can cause you no end of glie, since you have to fly straight in urder to line up al_gets to missile attacks, thus giving the A-Wings plenty of time to lig VOL.. One Tiians sale, Ireload tissile and shoot Rebels or bonus points.. Mission 6: Anothe mission wlhei calling or l'einforcements is a vise Ove. The C yette can take care of itself; Wory ASSIgn your Wingme to one and unload your whole topelo load into the otlie. Next take out the shuttles and the transDolt, leaving lie (Ontainers for last. of cOlIT'SC, Clity(ily anywhic. sion 3: N) I'nally you will be in fo111cd if events have conspired to make achievement of your mission goals imp05 sible. But if Y-Wings destroy certain Coltainel's in ilhis mission, Transport Runnel and ilh (yo Shuttles will be unable to lock. and you will be unable to complete the mission. If the Transport of the Shuttles start spinning around in place. Youll 10aching Y-\\\\ings as quickly as you all, using missiles until you un out. Then Switch to lasers, and make sure your wingmen are attacking a target other than yolll (\\. Mission 1: Renelibel: pulle Tadal'. Oy use the missiles you've been saving to quickly take out the leimail film a safe distance, before Ik Alvancels alive on tle scene. Mission 3: You're here t() destroy the Convoy-Ignole enemy stalliglitel'S, maXImize you shield recharge rate, and relilect all lasel povel to the engines. Hit each al_get with one locke-you should be close, less than 5 kilometers (but greater than 0.0 kilometers, if you get the idea -and use Shift-A to send your \\ving men in to finish it off if necessary. Mission 4: Unless you have a lot of paience, it's a good idea to use tw) missiles each t() (lstuy as nully Tie Alvalleds as you can before they get in close, where they're lhi_cle to hit than 1 | avd in a anlstol. Assign you11\" \\'inglmen to take (ut the ()hes liat cle) get in clos. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD A NUARY 1995 "


"BASEBALI [The competition) TUNIGHT * PLAYER STATISTICS Chicago Cubs WE HAVE STATS. THEY HAVE STATS. EELS WE HAVE 3-D RENDERED\" MAJOR LEAGUE BALLPARKS. THEY HAVE STATS. Elle ELLE Delalu ELDE LE BB WE HAVE ALL THE MAJOR LEAGUE TEAMS, AND ALL THE MAJOR LEAGUE PLAYERS. THEY HAVE ALL THE STATS. What good are stats if your players look like a bunch of mutants? ESPN Baseball Tonight is the first PC TAYO baseball game to combine great stats with all 28 major league teams, all the players, and great gameplay. We filmed live players and digitized them into the game using 15.000 frames of player animation. So you'll see every detail, from the baserunner's nervous lead to the batter's depressed walk back to the dugout after he whiffs. PRINT Super VGA graphics display the game in 256 colors more than any other game. Even the management is K TONIGHT realistic. You can trade, edit and change players' stats. With over 10 minutes of video highlights, instant SONY replays and \"live\" commentary from ESPN's Chris Berman and Dan Patrick, this is the most realistic PC baseball game out there. If you don't believe us, our competition has plenty of statistics to prove it. For PC CD-ROM and floppy disk. Also available for Super Nintendo, BOB IMAGESORT EVERYTHING ELSE IS JUST PRACTICE. Sega Genesis and Sega CD. EST ges 2009 M A R UTBOARD Sport B C1904 SOURCE ESPN 40 B.. . DES T I NSIGLONAS I LEOCI SARANNO ERANGSARTERED INCONTRO DE AVERCA IN O19H NATE OF AMERICAN ALLROTS RESERVED OVEOMA VSA OTTENE R Circle Reader Service #311 "


"STRATEGIES Mission 5: First, lock the Shuttle, TransTie Defenders or the Cargo Ferries. close attacks on Assault Transports; you port, and Corellian Transport into your Mission 2: Lock the Hininbirg in yourcan usually get off a few shots before the computer. Kill time by shooting mines with memory and attack any ships that make gunners notice you, however. missiles until the Corellian Transport pulls an attempt on her. A huge pack of X Mission 4: This is very similar to the away from the platform. Dump all power to Wings will appear later. Your best bet is to last mission in Battle 5. First, use missiles your engines and pursue it. Time is of the keep them distracted from the TIE Deto take out the four immobile Z-95's essence here, and you might want to fire a fenders by flying into their midst. Keep an parked below the platform. Then lock the couple missiles at the Corellian as you apeye on your shield levels. Shuttle and Transport into your ship's proach in order to take down its shields, Mission 3: Lock the two freighters into memory; as they leave the vicinity of the thus making the job of disabling it much your ship's memory. Send your wingmen installation, pursue and disable them easier. Some pilots like to fire their ion canto deal with the X-Wings, and attack the quickly. Soon after, the Corellian Transnons in single rather than dual mode in orB-Wings yourself. Try not to use too many port Lucky Day will appear. Target it as der to maximize their rate of fire. Next go missiles on them. It's best to wait until swiftly as possible and follow, rerouting all after the Shuttle and Transport. Once the there's only one or two left before you try power to your engines. Again, you may platform is disabled, target it and hit Shift-I disabling them, as the others have a nasty wish to use missiles to weaken the ship's to make sure your wingmen don't inadvertendency to attack any disabled ships in shields before switching to ion cannons to tently destroy it. order to keep them out of Imperial hands. disable it. Corellian Transports can take at Later, a group of Assault Transports will least three missile hits; two should knock BATTLE 6 appear and attempt to disable the down most of her shields. Mission 1: Just concentrate on the B-Wings. freighters, and this is when those missiles The other craft pose no serious threat to the you saved will come in handy. Be wary of BATTLE 7 Mission 1: You'll probably exchange missile fire with a traitorous TIE right near the BONUS MISSION OBJECTIVES start. Dodge the missile if you can, but don't If you truly wish to serve the Emperor, keep these extra objectives in the back of get too far off course. Next head for the your mind at all times. containers. Use Shift-C to get your wingman BATTLE ONE to cover you as you blast them with lasers. Mission 1 Inspect Corellian Transport Group Yander Tugs are starting to haul containers away; Mission 2 Destroy all Corellian Corvettes be sure to hit those containers first. Capture Shuttle Scutz Mission 2: The heavy space bombs are Mission 3 Inspect Transport Dawn best fired from very close in. Reload from Mission 4 Destroy at least one of Escort Shuttle group Claf the Goya and fire as many as necessary. Capture Transport Gopher Keep an eye on the Harpax. Mission 5 Destroy all of X-Wing Blue Mission 3: Go for the Warhawk first. Destroy all of A-Wing Gold No subtlety here; just order your wingmen Mission 6 Capture 50% of Shuttle group Derris in and unload your torpedoes. Quickly reDestroy mine groups MX-A through MX-E, RQ-B,D,E.F load from Transport CUV 18fl and finish the job, if that hasn't done it. Lasers won't BATTLE TWO do a heck of a lot to the Protector's Mission 1 Transport Epsilon 2 completes mission shields, so keep loading up on those torps. Calamari Light Cruiser Falaricae destroyed Aim for the Protector's shield generators Special modular conveyor Asbo (Imperial Arms) captured first. Although TRN CUV 18f1 will scan as Mission 2 Transports Epsilon 1 & 2 complete mission having \"NO CARGO\" after the first time Destroy Frigate Dromon you reload, you will in fact be able to pick Mission 3 Destroy all of Escort Shuttle group Typhon up as many torpedo shipments as you All of Shuttle group Nazaar completes mission need. If you're greedy for points, hang Mission 4 Inspect Light Cruiser Falaricae around and blast the Modified Corvettes Inspect Modified Frigate Nabus Ferre that'll come warping in later. Inspect Frigate Shemsher Mission 4: Order your wingmen in and Mission 5 All Dimok & Riplobus craft destroyed fire all your torpedoes at the Harpago imEach TIE Advanced group completes mission mediately, then mix it up with the Gunboats. Consult your map, and try to stay close to BATTLE THREE the Gunboats in order to keep them from Mission 1 None using missiles. You can use the tractor beam Mission 2 Assault Transport Tiger completes boarding if you like, but frankly, it's no great help; betContainer CRM908A boarded ter to redirect that power to shields. Mission 3 Destroy Shuttle group Escape Mission 5: Once you've disabled the Mission 4 Inspect Shuttle Shakker Emperor's shuttle, immediately get some Mission 5 Destroy all of Shuttle groups Gamer, Bliss, Noway distance and take out as many of the other Mission 6 Transport Shark docks Escort Shuttles as you can using missiles, Inspect Shuttle Electra as they will attack MCRV Mescue when it 70 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"VOLENCE SOFTWEN THE ONLY WAY 'Your weapons: Five bombs, hover grenades and a really big gun. Run, jump and blast your way through 17 deadly levels. 3333333333E Hang around with goblins, mutants and other lethal lifeforms. Interplay Productions 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. Tataplaneerimise in BIZZARD  Interplay Productions, and Blizzard Entertainment. Blackthorne is a trodemark of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Now available for IBM and 100% compatibles Circle Reader Service #123 "


"STRATEGIES BATTLE FOUR Mission 1 Mission 2 Mission 3 Mission 4 Mission 5 Inspect Corvettes Charger 1 & 2 None None None Destroy Transport Tela tries to board. On the other hand, pilots who've tired of a career with the Empire can \"accidentally\" attack the Emperor's shuttle with torpedoes instead of ion cannons, thus accomplishing what millions of foolhardy Rebels have failed to do over the long course of the war. Don't expect many bonus points for this, however. BATTLE FIVE Mission 1 Mission 2 Mission 3 Destroy the following: TIE Interceptor Gamma 2 & 3 TIE Advanced groups H-Alpha and H-Delta TIE Bomber group H-Beta Shuttle Lambda Mine groups 1A & 1B Container groups Chi & Psi X-Wing group Blue Destroy B-Wing Red 1,2,3 Destroy Z-95 group Wolf Destroy Z-95 Wolf 3 Inspect at least one of Container Pi Victory Star Destroyer Protector must be attacked Destroy Heavy Lifter AAA Tow & Al Tow Destroy AW group Blue Destroy at least one of these groups: TIE Advanced H-Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta Attack Victory Star Destroyer Protector Destroy Modified Corvette group Wurger Shuttle Token completes mission Destroy ferries Badger 1 & 2 Inspect Frigate Olinor Destroy Modified Corvette group Wurger Destroy Shuttle Toten Transport Kolermigon is boarded Corellian Transport Geddawai captured AND NOW THE DIRTY TRICKS The \"Speed Kills\" Maneuver: When being pursued by an A-Wing, if you fly straight at a platform or capital ship and pull up at the last moment, the A-Wing will often careen directly into it. Crunch. The \"Free Parking' Stratagem: Position your ship as close as humanly possible to a friendly platform... nestled under a ledge is best. Attacking Rebels will shoot the platform instead of you. And we all know what happens to ships that shoot at Imperial platforms... The \"Heavy Load\" Tactic: In scenarios involving enemy capital ships, change your missile load to heavy rockets or space bombs before you begin. Approach the capital ships from the rear or front to minimize the angle of deflection, and let fly when you're in close. The heavy bombs can take down a cruiser's shields with just a few hits, so if you reload quickly you can dispose of a mighty vessel in minutes. The \"Cheat Like Mad\" Scenario: Imperial pilots with Internet access can locate some helpful hack programs at wpi.wpi.edu in the /starwars/TIE_Fighter directory, including a utility for letting you use a TIE Defender in any of the missions, and other interesting tricks. Mission 4 Mission 5 BATTLE SIX Mission 1 Mission 2 Mission 3 Destroy all Rebel craft Destroy all Rebel craft Destroy X-Wing Group Blue Destroy A-Wing Group Gold Destroy A-Wing Gold 3 Tugs 4f91, 4f93, 4f94, 14f1 complete missions Tug 4f92 completes mission Destroy A-Wing group Red Destroy ferry Bujiboi Mission 4 BATTLE SEVEN Mission 1 Mission 2 Destroy heavy lifter group Waq Destroy ferry group Whell Destroy all of: Y-Wing Red Y-Wing Gold Z-95 Blue Z-95 Red X-Wing Gold Destroy all Rebel craft Interdictor Harpax completes mission Destroy all Assault Gunboats 50%+ of TIE Defender group Delta completes mission None The Inner Circle That concludes the tactical section of this document, and none too soon, for already we suspect fingers are itching to flip to the \"Budget Guide to Pleasure Palaces.\" In fact, we may peruse those well-thumbed pages once again ourselves... but wait. Did someone say something? Something like, \"But what about the Inner Circle?\" Hmm. Some things are, after all, best left unsaid. But that said, we could note that scoring over one million points will net the ambitious pilot a small surprise. But no—perhaps we've said too much already. (The strategic portion of the document ends here, and is followed by several appendices of no great interest to the common reader. The center fold-out, unfortunately, appears to have been ripped out.) Mission 3 Mission 4 Mission 5 72 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"7 ICH E Y E F O R A N YEW 2 14) -70 ETA V W . 1  )) (5. 15 / 9] VT RETRIBUTION \" LYS 11 .. AN TERVENE V\\\"/ \" L 14 . 99* un . 32 **.\" 2 . ( JAYA V E] SCS1 LOOWIA P O R STATE OF THE ART GAMING TECHNOLOGY FOR YOUR PC CD-ROM AND 3.5\" DISKS FOR IBM PC & COMPATIBLES You lower yourself into your cockpit knowing that the annihilation of Krellan life is little reward for the millions of your race who have been \"harvested\". You have hatred in your heart and become driven by one compulsion .... retribution/retri'bju:f()n/ n. requital usu. for evil done; vengeance. Over 100 MB of animation and digitised speech. Logi-scape real time landscape generating technology incorporating new \"Deep horizon\" format.  11 major campaigns each with 4 highly strategic missions. 6 training missions to enhance performance. Superior artificial intelligence of the Krellan enemy. Exclusively commissioned musical score. Stunning range of in game SFX.  Box artwork by Kevin Walker 2000 AD/JUDGE DREDD. S4?! 7 ) 1 =) i 299, TURN THEY'VE HAD IT'S TIME TO THEIR POUND OF FLESH Gremlin THE TABLES 14 *  1984 Gremlin Interactive Limited, 8400 West Gross Point Road, Niles, Illinois 60714. Tel: (708) 647 4040. Fax: (708) B47 7828. | ALT | | | JE I Circle Reader Service #302 1011 enero "


"Of Noble Savages And Savage Europeans How To Ring The Liberty Bell In Sid Meier's COLONIZATION by Michael Rysmaszewski ike many CGW readers, I'm an old-time mentions the darker side of some fan of Sid Meier's games. I got hooked Amerindian cultures, such as slaughtering into computer gaming with PIRATES!, and prisoners by the thousand or cannibalism, spent many sleepless nights with CIVILIZAit is quick to point out that such practices TION and RAILROAD TYCOON. Through were entirely appropriate given their culmany, many hours of play, I learned that tural context. On the other hand, Euroin all of these games, the broad strategy pean brutalities are judged most severely; that worked best was somehow, historical and cultural considerto hit the oppoations are unimportant when it comes to nent, keep on European behavior. Although I might take issue with its approach, the manual actually suggests the best path to ultimate success in the game: appease the good guys (Indians), and be merciless when dealing with the bad guys hitting, and make (Europeans). This holds true even when money while you're you're playing the Spanish side. at it. Since COLONIZATION climaxes with a COLONIZATION is War of Independence which you have to slightly different. It win, it follows that there is one and only contains a whole one objective you should set yourself right bunch of comat the start: create a strong army and navy puter characthat will beat the stuffing out of any oppoters that you nent. As we all know, military might is exshouldn't pensive. So how do you get there, from a hit, at single ship with two colonist units, and no least not money in the treasury? unless they beThe First Hundred Years come perIf you're to win a game of COLONIZATION fect pests. These at the Governor or Viceroy level, you'll are the native inhabihave to achieve several objectives by the tants of the Americas time 1600 AD rolls around. You'll have to the Indians. have at least five strong towns producing a The manual to COLONIZATION mix of tools, guns, and valuable goods; a makes the point as to who are the bad standing army of eight to ten dragoon guys and who are the good guys very and infantry units, plus a couple of arclearly. A section at its end is devoted tillery pieces, and a navy that includes a to a general description of the Indian couple of privateers in addition to a mertribes featured in the game. It stresses chant ship, or ships. how advanced and sophisticated the Since arms are expensive, you might Indians were in their own way; when it think your priority should be to develop 74 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Introducing Avalon Hill's STALINGRAD RE 44429 HA B2A! DADE German assault on the Tractor Works. Tip options STONE PARING FRA IIII ETALNER GOPOH SA06 Stalin's powerful Red Army is poised along the Don River, ready to strike! e dotlent llar duties Planning Phase DMDC9ENNE OCESE Volume II EDUCER German infantry and armor race for the Volga. Actual screen graphics may vary Available for IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 386 or better. Min. 8 MB memory. HD 3.5\" Floppy Hard Drive SVGA-VESA graphics card & monitor supports AdLib, Roland and SoundBlaster. Following fast on the success of Operation Crusader comes STALINGRAD, VOLUME I of the World at War series of computer wargames. This collaboration between valon Hill and Atomic Games highlights the epic struggle that sealed the fate of litler's Third Reich. Multiple historical scenarios simulate the grim battles ending vith the annihilation of the German 6th Army. In a unique advance in computer aming, players will be able to switch from the sweeping strategic scale (depicting uch actions as the collapse of the Axis flanks) to the tactical scale (simulating the lock-to-block bloodbath within the city itself). Built upon the award-winning Crusader game system, Stalingrad is jam-packed with stunning graphics (the terrain ven changes as the weather changes!). Documentation includes a detailed, full-color anual and large battlefield map. talingrad is sure to excite even the most sophisticated gamer. The Avalon Hill Game Company 4517 Harford Road Baltimore, Maryland 21214 Stalingrad can be found in computer game stores near you. For order information, or for the name of a retailer near you, call Toll Free: 800-999-3222; ask for Dept. CGW 1. Circle Reader Service #234 Available for Macintosh Color systems. 5 MB RAM and HD required. CD-ROM Coming Soon! STATIG "


"03 YOKO Quebec Fors Closet STRATEGIES your colonies economically, and use the that produces a surplus of food, get horses extremely important. A privateer is inprofits to build your armed forces. Not so right away: they need time to breed. credibly fast, which makes it ideal for reThe most important things that your Generally, every free colonist or inconnoitering the New World. Also, by colonies produce are not cloth or cigars or dentured servant should be dispatched plundering any ship you come across, rum, but crosses and liberty bells. These to an Indian village to learn a skill. Also, you score a twofold coup against your are absolutely necessary to GREAT IDEEMIERS REPORT S ANGULOP2012 European rivals: you seriously handicap turn that little settlement the development of their colonies, and into a huge manufacturyou make money. In the early years, a ing, educational, and posingle merchant ship can yield as much litical center. If your as exports from all of your colonies over colonies are producing a couple of turns. Every chance you get, enough crosses and liberty hit the bad guys first, keep hitting them, bells, the rest follows autoand make money in the process. matically. New colonists English toren Ince Montreal furo keep pouring in, and Plundervol Building a Colonial Empire you'll find yourself makAs in CIVILIZATION and almost any other ing lots of money almost strategic game, developing your colonial by accident; all you'll have New Amsterdam towns into huge urban centers is of prima to do is put them to work. ry importance. You have two colonist HIT 'EM EARLY, HIT 'EM HARD A risky, yet extremely lucrative, early There is a limit on the number of Tory units on that first pilgrim strategy is to attack your close European neighbors immediately colonists a city can have without becoming ship. Use them to start two arter making landfall. If your single soldier can after making landfall. If your single soldier can beat the enemy's inefficient, and on the Viceroy level, it's as towns. Two towns produce single soldier, you've got a brand new city plus a boatload of booty. little as five. A farmer, a fisherman, a cartwice the number of crosspenter-that's three already, and you es and liberty bells. Also, right away you'll make sure a wagon train is the very first haven't even got any colonists producing have twice as many goods for sale. thing you build. You can use it as a mosaleable goods yet. When rebel sentiment Of course, you should choose the locabile warehouse, and it also allows you to is high, everything's easy: but what can tion of your towns with care, but that initiate trading with the Indians on a you do in those early years? doesn't mean you can afford to go exmuch more profitable level than when The trick is to have each town specialize ploring up and down the coast while othyou trade from a ship. Trading with the in a particular area. One town should be er colonial powers are grabbing land left, Indians is truly profitable only the first manufacturing goods for export, another right, and center. At the beginning, any few times around, but right at the beginshould have a tool-and-arms industry, and spot situated at least two map squares ning of the game you need every gold yet another simply supply raw materials. from the nearest Indian settlement will piece you can get. You should have a church and a schooldo. Remember that you can always pull The moment you've got all the tools house in every town. However, at the outup the stakes and relocate the colony and muskets you need, start saving monset you should probably designate one somewhere else later on: as long as you ey. No, don't import any expensive craftstown to be the center of religious freedom, haven't built anything, you lose nothing. and another to serve as a The main thing is to start producing as seat of learning many crosses and liberty bells as soon as By 1600, I like to pick BESAR you can. two towns and start cultiThe contine r e will expand dining. Isa Determining a good spot for a town neno Your Excellen Whi trea tas vating them politically. Put can be difficult, because the trees make sounding them all weaponta statesmen into the town Dentro embar everything look similar, Yeah, there is a halls and build printing Peter Stuyvesant Trade A COTE PO special key that allows you to see what Fans 13 0 0 r t (Elor st/b ati presses. Don't fall into the you'll get once you've removed the trees, Pau Radar M y Rolivar trap of endlessly improvbut even then some types of terrain look Thomas Rainy Rollical Advleur ing all the towns you curWUDSM Panas Rallglous Aduje quite alike. The rule of thumb is this: if rently have. Until 1650 at there's any water showing among trees, slaw Amsterdad the very earliest, you that map square is basically good only should be constantly for food. If you can't see any water, it's founding new settlements, good for food and other stuff, too. The THE ESCAPE CLAUSE Don't like the options you're given for the next and should only start to only thing you should worry about is the member of the Continental Congress? Just hit the escape key and concentrate on improvepresence of a nearby hill or a mountain, you'll get another set of choices next turn. ment versus expansion which will guarantee an adequate supply when you're a hundred of ore. men just yet. Concentrate on improving turns or so from declaring independence. Your first two colonies won't produce a the land around your towns as much as This tactic is dictated by, I'm sorry to lot of commodities for sale, but you should you can without annoying the natives; and say, unexciting game design. One of the make enough money to equip almost as soon as you have 2000 gold pieces, buy most important considerations in COLOevery new colonist with either tools or a privateer. NIZATION is the level of rebel sentiment in muskets. If you have at least one colony An early acquisition of a privateer is the colonies. This increases with the numGROOTED TO TRADE CARRARO WAS SETEST Ksip2 76 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"It's not just a game. The Elder Scrolls Now Available! WOU-09 \"... may well be the game that establishes the new formula in CRPG's.\" -Johnny Wilson, Computer Gaming World \"TES: Arena surpasses all other role playing games in depth and realism! A must buy for RPG fans!\" -Russ Ceccola, Electronic Games Magazine ...a must-have, huge role playing adventure. TES:Arena is the best RPG of the Year.\" Strategy Plus Magazine \"Sum it up in three words-GO GET ARENA.\" ---Zach Meston, Computer Player ESS IS BECHESDA SOFCURKS 1370 Piccard Drive Rockville, MD 20850  Tel. 301 926-8300  Fax. 301 926-8010 For VISA/MasterCard Orders Call 1 800 670-0700 For Hints Call 1 900 88-HINTS he Elder Scrolls: Arena and Bethesda Softworks are trademarks of Media Technology Limited. Copyright  1993-94 Media Technology Limited. All Rights Reserved. IBM screens shown. Circle Reader Service #40 "


"caly. STRATEGIES ber of liberty bells produced; but although home port; the other are the missions you begins, go to game option and switch the rebel sentiment concerns the population, set up in Indian settlements. Both of these \"end of turn\" option on. This will let you it is tied to a specific town. You can have a have their drawbacks: the immigration fortify as many soldiers as you want before town that's 100% rebels, but as soon as you from the Old Country is tied to the numthe enemy's turn. move a colonist out of it, you turn him ber of crosses produced in the colonies, This is all you have to do. The Al is farinto a Tory. In other words, the longer a and an ever-increasing number of crosses from bright here, and so the enemy soltown exists, the more rebels it has. This is has to be produced for each subsequent diers will keep fighting until you've capprecisely why it does not make sense to colonist. The Indian converts are very tured every single one, and gained up to start new colonies in the late stages of the good at farming, fishing, and fur-traphalf a dozen colonists in a single battle. Afgame; they'll contain a larger percentage ping, but not much else. ter a few turns, the enemy will reappear, of Tories, and have weaker defenses to and try to negotiate peaceboot, because you didn't have the time to Do not be misled by these build any. amiable overtures; they Make sure there is an armory in every are only meant to gain town that has a skilled carpenter. You can time until more soldiers build artillery there even without a gunarrive to teach you a les smith, and artillery is the best defensive son. Sure, you can agree unit there is. Build shipyards only in towns to peace, but as soon as that have a lumber mill, and ensure that there are several enemy there are two carpenters working in each; soldiers around your town, otherwise, the number of ships your town break the treaty. can subsequently build isn't worth the Capturing foreign shipyard. colonies is even better. Build a blacksmith's shop in every town Not only do you capture that is producing ore or you'll have a conTHE FAB FIVE Jefferson, Franklin, Drake, Pocahontas and Minuit the town intact, and make tinuous shortage of tools. Construct sec(left to right) are a solid foundation of leadership upon which a a little cash, but all the unond-level buildings whenever you want to armed veteran soldiers in produce something in meaningful quantithe town become yours ty and don't have the right specialist (a However, there is a great third source of without losing their veteran status. If you free colonist working in a rum distillery new colonists, some of which come with see a foreign colony right next to yours, produces as much booze as a distiller ready-built colonies: war against the other you should capture it as soon as you can, working out of his house). colonial powers. You'll be forced to fight a and the earlier in the game, the better. Finally, before you declare indepenwar against other Europeans sooner or latPlayers who manage to capture a Eurodence, make sure every town is protected er; that's the nature of the game. The trick pean rival's only colony right at the start by a fort, and the very important ones by is to fight it when you want to. of the game will be richly rewarded: they'll fortresses. The European troops' bom As soon as you encounter other Eurohave a constant stream of new colonists arbardment bonus is quite lethal, as you'll peans, their dragoons will start assemriving on nearby shores, often unarmed find out. bling in droves outside your towns-an types who will bleat for peace. Of course, K a ma EUROTRE RE019202 annoying tactic that was you should attack mercilessly when that carried over from Civihappens, and make them your own. On LIZATION. If you don't the higher difficulty levels, you'll gain Berna constantly improve your some insight into how the Al works: algemmes defenses, they'll attack, most every homeless colonist showing up and they'll win. will be a highly skilled guy. Ah, so that's Make sure you've got at how the computer players build colonies least one fortified artillery so fast! piece in the town that's unIn the unlikely event that no foreign E CZ (7) 142 (1) # 333333 Ssssss der pressure, and start troops appear on your territory, I would preparing for war. You recommend that you pick a European ri20 9 19 1 www. wasan don't need as many musval to start a war with as soon as you safely 29-AAKONDA kets as you do horses; you can-probably around 1620 or so. A sucalways want to attack with cessful colonial war is very profitable in DON'T TREAD ON US! With an 86% Rebel rating, a fortress, stockpiled mounted troops, so that more ways than one, and to top it off, at horses and guns, and an entire army behind its walls, this city is even if you lose you still least some of your soldiers will gain veterready for anything that the Crown can throw against it. have infantry that can be an status. fortified for defense. It goes without saying that a strong navy The Rewards of War Attack as soon as you have four or five can aid you immensely. As mentioned Building all of these structures is very nice, dragoon units. Always try to concentrate privateers are always a good investment but you'll need lots of people to occupy your attack on one unit so that you capas they usually bring you in profits fan them. The manual states that there are ture the enemy colonist before the end of above their cost. They also make excellen two sources of new colonists: one is your your turn. Important: before any warfare blockade runners, even though their cargo 78 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"THE DARK SIDE OF THE FORCE JUST GOT DARKER. AL DARK FORCES\" A FIRST PERSON, ORIGINAL STAR WARS CD-ROM EXPERIENCE. COMING THIS WINTER. LUCAS Dark Forces computer program 1994 LucasArts Entertainment Company, Dark Forces audiovisual display 1994 LucasArts Entertainment Company and Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization Star Wars is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Lid. Dark Forces is a trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. The LucasArts logo is a registered trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. ris CHECK OUT THE DARK FORCES SLIDE SHOW ON THE LUCASARTS BBS AT (415) 257-3070 "


"STRATEGIES capacity is limited. side, you can proceed to expand without Following Washington, you should elect Frigates are prohibitively expensive. worrying about Indian aggression, as long Bolivar, as he makes starting those lastYou should have one or two to protect as you remember to place every town at minute towns in the middle of the 17th your shipping routes, but concentrate on least one map square (preferably two century much easier. You should definiteacquiring privateers. With Drake in the squares if it can be managed) from any Inly get Peter Stuyvesant before the war of Continental Congress, a privateer has the dian settlement. This holds true whether independence to make sure you can afsame attack strength as a frigate. you're French, Spanish, or Polish. ford last minute purchases of artillery Special Cheat Alert: What happens if when a siege is on; and prior to that, you You're the Father, neither Minuit nor Pocahontas appear could use Adam Smith's assistance to build But Who's the Midwife? on the first list of choices you're present the four or five factories that are really In a twist on the Wonders of the World ed with? Just hit the Escape key! You'll worth the expense. concept from CIVILIZATION, the liberty be given another set of choices. This That's it as far as the necessary Foundbells your towns produce not only inmight lose you a turn at the beginning of ing Fathers go. Since your towns will procrease rebel sentiment, but also memthe game, but it's always worth it. duce more liberty bells than needed for all bers of your own Continental Congress. So, by judiciously hitting the Escape of the above (if you manage things right, Choosing the right Congress members is button, you've got Minuit and Pocahonof course), you'll also have the choice of a extremely important, since half of them tas. Your next Founding Father should few others. You should choose them acare absolutely worthless (poor Henry be Thomas Jefferson. His presence will cording to the subtle shades of your strateHudson is a good example). You'll get a greatly increase the effectiveness of your gy. For instance, if you had the good good clue as to which ones matter once efforts to make each town or city more fortune to afford missionaries and have a you've assembled a few. There's this productive. lot of converts, and you've got Washington group portrait, in which Benjamin If by that time you're heavily into naval preparing for war, you could take des Franklin proudly occupies the front and warfare, your next choice should be FranCasals. Your converts would then become center, seated on a comfortable armcis Drake. If not, choose Benjamin free colonists, and subsequently veterans chair—which confirms that going to war Franklin, and get Drake next. upon winning their first fight. when you want to is of prime imporAlter Drake and Franklin, it will be time A word of warning. Thomas Paine tance. And right next to him are Washto go to war with someone, so get Washsounds good for the later stage of your ington and Jefferson, two guys you ington. You'll have a strong force of vetercolonial development, when the tax rate is definitely want. an soldiers in no time at all. Washington's high and getting higher. However, my My first choices are always Peter Minuit presence is invaluable in assuring the copy of COLONIZATION repeatedly reduced and Pocahontas. Given those two on your quality of your army. the tax rate to zero starting from the War IVAITEUVERS COMMONLY PERFORMED VITFI ITEVI VIGIVAIT EXTREME. Barrel Roll Attack Offset Head-on Pass. The Immelman. y Barrel Roll. Rollaway. Low Speed Yoyo. 80 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"REISS REDES muth csis TOWN USANYAN Dich bourg ORDINE TW STRATEGIES of the Spanish Succession, when one of this requirement, particularly if you folkeep attacking every Tory soldier as soon the colonial powers drops out. It didn't low the strategy described earlier, and as it hits land. Launch massive strikes happen in every game I played, but made have at your disposal a bunch of veterfrom several towns at the same time: for things Paine-less, so to speak. ans-victors of the obligatory colonial instance, you can attack with all the drawar, in which they fought under George goons from two towns neighboring the Preparing for Independence Washington. one under attack, filling the gaps in with and Winning dragoons brought from farther back. AtI am lumping preparatack from several different directions, altions for the War of Indeways starting off with a lightning strike in pendence together with the back of the invading army. Then folwinning because once Fort ou la low up with a charge from the besieged you're well prepared, you town. If some of your dragoons lose, recan't help but win. mount them and fortify them if necessary The first requirement is before clicking on the End of Turn. to have all of your towns din po gent During the War of Independence, it is build a fort, unless you impossible to conduct intelligent naval don't mind losing them, warfare: Tory men-of-war appear out of and retaking them later. If Lebois Coton nowhere right next to their target town. Morror it's no trouble, build However, since keeping your ships in port fortresses around your is senseless, you might as well attack with most important cities. ONE IF BY LAND, TWO IF BY SEA The Redcoats have landed in the New them, too. A frigate and two privateers win Each town should have World, just outside of Michelbourg. With its dense network of roads ust outside of Michelbourg. With its dense network of roads almost every battle you send them to, ala couple of artillery and well spaced cities, this colony will be able to quickly move its beit sometimes with losses. You'll want to pieces, a couple of veterminutemen wherever they are needed. form your navy into operational groups an dragoons, and the like the above. possibility of raising another half a Finally and importantly, you should If you lose any towns, don't attempt to dozen dragoon units in an instant. It's have a good road network. Dragoons can retake them until the Foreign Intervenusually best to put all your free colonists cover a distance of nine map squares and tion arrives together with the bombardunder arms right away, and still have a still attack effectively. ment bonus. hundred horses and muskets cach in reOnce you've got all that, it's as easy as And that's all there really is to it. Fight serve. You'll have no problem meeting pie. Declare independence, and simplyon, patriots! MAITEUVERS COMMOITLY PERFORIVED WITH OTFIER JOYSTICKS. o Wing Man Extreme conforms to all required Warriors of the cyber skies rejoice: project WingMan Extreme is complete, the joystick has been perfected. Never has guidance control been so fluid, trigger action so responsive, view control so easy. Wing Man Extreme can be the difference between the thrill of victory and the ejection seat of defeat: a solid professional in a field of puny lightweights. Wingman Extreme is waiting at your dealer, or to get product information by 'fax, call 1 800 245 0000 and request document #7014. LOMTECH ATEW WINGIVAIT EXTREME. THE JOYSTICK WITH ATTITUDE! EGGHEAD SOFTWARE WAL-MART SOFTWARE ETL inmac BEY JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 81 joystick standards. ERASE "


"DOWN PLAY BALL ON AFC NFC   QTR AFC NFC REAL COACHING. REAL FOOTAGE. 300 TIME OUTS LEFT Team/ YOU WANT REAL? O.K. HOW DOES AUTHENTIC NFL PLAYS AND FORMATIONS RUN BY PRO PLAYERS SOUND? WE SHOT LIVE FOOTAGE WITH DIVING CATCHES, FUMBLING, BLITZING, INTERCEPTIONS, YOU NAME IT. WE'RE TALKING THOUSANDS OF PLAY OUTCOMES. IN FACT, THINGS GET SO INTENSE IN THIS GAME IT DOESN'T TAKE LONG TO SEE WHY NFL COACHES HAVE ALL THAT GREY HAIR. Live Action Football is a trademark of Accolade, Inc. 1994 Accolade, Inc. NFLPA is a trademark of the National Football League Players Association and is used under license by Accolade, Inc. TM/01994 NFLP. Licensed by The NFL QB Club Inc. The Sport Accolada logo and Sport Accolade are trademarks of Accolade. Inc. Al Michaels and Pat Haden's names are used under license by Accolade, Inc. Macintosh is a trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"WE'VE GOT AL MICHAELS GIVING YOU PLAY-BY-PLAY AND PAT HADEN DELIVERING COLOR COMMENTARY. SO CHOOSE YOUR PLAYS WISELY. TO TURN UP THE INTENSITY, WE PUT REAL FOOTBALL SOUND EFFECTS ON A SEAMLESS AUDIO TRACK. YOU CAN PLAY AGAINST THE COMPUTER OR A FRIEND. THERE'S INSTANT REPLAY AND TONS OF STATISTICS. WHAT MORE DO YOU WANT? ICE WATER POURED OVER YOUR HEAD? QUALITY AT ITS GUT WRENCHING BEST. SPORT IF YOU'VE GOT A PC OR MAC WITH CD-ROM, YOU CAN COACH 'TIL IT HURTS. JUST HOW REAL IS LIVE ACTION FOOTBALL? LET'S JUST SAY IT'S BEEN APPROVED BY THE NFL AND THE PLAYERS. LIVE ACTION FOOTBALL ACCOLADE Circle Reader Service #289 "


"Hell's Little Secrets The Hidden Levels And Cheat Keys Of Doom II by George Jones \"Up the ramp, over the ledge, an invisibility sphere awaits. Grab it, and into the Demon's lair... nothing jet back out into the lake of lava, this but bloody imp.\" time to the southeast side of the building kay, so you wound your way in and out, up surrounded by the lava moat, where and down, and all around the levels of you'll find a transporter. Step in, and DOOM II: HELL ON EARTH. Yet you still you'll appear in the central room high in don't feel like quite the man or woman the sky. Jump from the walkway over the you should be. Perhaps it's all those times lava lake to the southwest corner, and you didn't get 100% of the \"secrets,\" or enter the yellow door. Follow the toxic maybe it's just the simple fact that you stream to the south, where you will find can't win Level 30 without (gasp!) a recently opened, secret passage to the cheating. Or maybe you're just jealous besouth. From here you're home free. Use cause you can't find a legitimate entrance the teleporter, and you'll enter Mission to the secret levels (maybe you don't even 31, which is an authentic replication of know they exist!). an actual WOLFENSTEIN 3D level, right Whatever the case, we at CGW are not down to the swastika wallpaper. going to sit around and let you be a DOOM You haven't experienced fun until Il wimp. It is time to pump up. you've mowed down a few Nazi dirt bags with the chainsaw, and if you finish this The Nazis Meets the BFG Secret Level, you'll move on to Mission Heard the one about the chainsaw and 32, otherwise known as Grosse. Here the Nazi soldier? Doom II's 2 secret levels prying eyes will find COMMANDER KEEN take place in the land of WOLFENSTEIN 3D. (remember him?) hanging by the neck The truly lazy can warp to either level from four platforms. at any time using the \"IDCLEV31\" or Blasting the Brain \"IDCLEV32\" Most of the DOOM II levels are chalcheat, but lenging, but Level 30, Icon of Sin, feels Doomers with downright impossible the first few times integrity will be you play it. Until you figure it out. In achappy to know tuality, beating The Pinnacle of Evil is that there is a legitifairly straightforward. The focal point of mate entrance to this your attacks should be the exposed brain secret level in Mission 15, The Inof that overblown Goat from Hell. First, dustrial Zone. go all the way up to the highest tier, and On this mission, there is an isolattrip the skull-switch; this raises the tall ed, raised platform in the south platform on the bottom level. Brave the with a radiation suit and a molten lava down there and activate the switch on top of it. To reach platform, which will lower back down to it, you'll need to jump from ground level. Get on, and arm yourself a nearby ledge to the east. with the rocket launcher, facing towards After making the leap of the Boss. Pay attention here: When the faith, flip the switch and top of your rocket launcher lines up with drop off the platform the bottom of the arch-fiend's chin, fire into the lovely lava away. Your rocket should hit the brain lake. Sprint east (you'll hear it if you do). Repeat this atthrough the east tack one more time, and you've saved wall-opening, where the Earth! Do it quick though, because 84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"TIME BS SLIPPING AWAY. It's 3 A.M. As FBI Special Agent in Charge, you and your team respond to FLASH TRAFFIC, our nation's highestlevel alert. This critical communiqué is sent only in the event of a dire national emergency — say, when international terrorists plant a bomb in your backyard. The fate of Los Angeles is in your hands. Your mission: find the bomb and unplug the sucker before the City of Angels goes boom. So what do you wanna do, Boss? First-person dialogue interface A ONE IONO MOVE AND IT'S OVER IN A FLASH. Cinematic realism Tsunami Media presents TM    Filmed entirely on location Written by Chuck Pfarrer, creator of Navy SEALS and Hard Target. Original music compositions by Nation Rock Music. FLASH TRAFE CITY OF ANGELS THE ALL-VIDEO, INTERACTIVE TECHNO-THRILLER TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE CD-ROM Visit your local retailer, or call 800-482-3766 to order. "


"STRATEGIES BFG ROOM INVISIBILITY SPHERE TRANSPORTER YELLOW DOOR RAISED PLATFORM WITH SWITCH TELEPORTER TO MISSION 31 LEVEL 15: INSTRIALE you full weapons and ammo of every type, jacks your armor rating up to 200%, and gives you all three color keys. IDDQD: \"God Mode\" gives you permanent invincibility, without that annoying white and black tinted screen. IDBEHOLD plus one of the following letters gives you six different power-ups: I=invisibility S=berserker stimpack V=Invulnerability for 30 seconds R=Radiation suit for 60 seconds A=Computer map revealing areas you have not yet visited in gray. L=Light amplification goggles for 120 seconds IDDT: Use this code when you're viewing the map; the first time you type the code, you'll see the entire level. Type it again and you'll see all objects on the level as small green triangles that represent monsters (dead or alive), and objects. IDCLEV [+] level number: Warps you to the level number typed in. Be sure to type in two digits. For example, level 4 would be \"IDCLEV04\". The secret levels are numbered 31 and 32. IDCLIP: \"No clipping mode\" allows you to walk through walls across the whole level. Be careful though, for it is real easy to become disoriented here. during all of this, the number of monsters starts to skyrocket, making your job all the more difficult. An interesting \"nugget\" on the final level can only be found by using the \"No clipping» cheat. After typing \"IDCLIP,\" enter just below the goat's head. Inside you'll find a room containing the head of Cheater, Cheater, id programmer John Romero on a stake. Demon Eater For an added thrill, fire your weapons at Here are a number of cheats DOOM him. Guess he pressed a little too hard Ilers can use when they're caught in a on that last release date... bind, or just plain scared: IDKFA: \"Happy Ammo\" mode, gives POWERED SPEAKERS FOR THE POWER HUNGRY. Sit up. Lock up. Grab the stick. Pull the trigger. Blast the Zurtrons. Escape through hyperspace. Then cool down with some hot jazz. Feel the sound? The la rush? The riffs? No? You need a set of YST-M10 powered monitored speakers. Hungry for more? Just add a YST-MSW10 powered subwoofer. Call 1-800-333-4442 for the launch base near you. Tell 'em you're power hungry. OCC YAMAHA YAMAHA  by Yamaha Corporation of America. All rights reserved. Yamaho, YST, and the Yomaha logo are registered trademarks of Yamaha Corporation of America. Yamaha Corporation of America, Computer Related Products, 6600 Orangethorpe Avenue, Buena Park, California 90620 "


"WARNING Contains Mature Subject Matter TM DON'T GET CAUGHT! VOYEUR YOU'LL GET AN EYE-FULL OF EROTIC EXCITEMENT AS YOU PEER INTO YOUR NEIGHBORS' SORDID LIVES IN THE INTERACTIVE AND WICKEDLY SENSUAL WHODUNNIT, VOYEUR. POLITICAL BLACKMAIL...MURDER...SEDUCTIVE INTRIGUE... YOU'LL SEE IT ALL. BUT WILL YOU ONLY WATCH--HIDDEN LIKE A TRUE VOYEUR-OR WILL YOU STEP INTO THE DRAMA TO VIDEOTAPE THE ACTION AND RECORD THE EVIDENCE? THIS PHILLIPS CD-I HIT IS NOW AVAILABLE ON CD-ROM FOR IBM COMPUTERS AND IS COMING SOON FOR THE MACINTOSH. VOYEUR HAS THE CRITICS RAVING: \"VOYEUR IS A SENSUAL THRILLER THAT REALLY PUTS YOU INTO THE GAME.\" ELECTRONIC GAMING MONTHLY \"VOYEUR IS A MARVELOUS CREATIVE ACCOMPLISHMENT.\" COMPUTER GAME REVIEW \"THIS GAME BRINGS OUT THE VOYEUR IN ALL OF US...AND TRULY SHOWS HOW MUCH FUN A MURDER-MYSTERY/INTERACTIVE MOVIE CAN BE. HIGHLY RECOMMENDED.\" --COMPUTER PLAYER OREC REC REEC PHILIPS CD-ROM CINEMATIC MULTIMEDIA PHILIPS INTERACTIVE    Tilaplate REC IMCDROMICO Aversion H :993 Incilly Products 1993 Pilips.dateren or more information, call 1-800-969-GAME. Or see your local retailer. "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. Forening Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10172 PO Box 234 Dept 10172 Rochester, VT 05767 WING COMMANDER I THE ANES WING COMMANDER 3: Heart of the Tiger' in this technologically astounding sequel, you're a squadron commander and you must end the Terran-Kilrathi conflict. Guide personal morale. Features seamless melding of film and computer technologies. CD $54 CYBERJUDAS Deep within cyberspace, you control the most powerful nation on Earth You're armed with money, weapons and influence. You are the President and the Prey. Features Artificial Intelligence (A/I) engine, stunning 3D graphics, and 3 modes of game play. CD 548 THRUSTMASTER F-16 FLCS' A stick with almost unlimited programmability. It looks and feels like it was ripped out of the jet. The ultimate edge for a flight sim. A grip modeled after the F-16 Fighting Falcon, four 8-way hat switches, a dual stage trigger and 3 strategically placed buttons $112 CyberJudas. II FREE GRANDEST SHIPPING! *THE GRANDEST FLEET Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat & the exhilaration of victory! Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and superships. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis. Modem play and random maps. $35 Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. 'DEATH GATE' Locate the missing pieces of the World Seal! Travel to magical realms in this epic fan tasy adventure! Offers 3D-modeled animations and digitized audio. Based on the Death Gate novels. CD $34 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $19 $42 4 Plex Quad Speed Dr S459 500 XJ Epyx Joystick $8 Acoustic Resrch P570 $219 Advncd Grvs Ultrs Mx $179 Altec ACS 150 Subwir $109 Altec ACS 200 Spkrs $209 Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $169 Altec ACS 300 Sp wSb $239 Altec ACS 50 Speakrs $79 Audiophi Refr 10 A sp $122 Audiophi Refr 30 A Sp $189 Audiophl SW 20 A SD $139 Auto Cockpit $159 CH Game Card 3 Auto $25 CH Mach 3 Joystick $27 CH Pro Pedals $85 CH Pro Throttle $89 CH Virtual Pilot Pro S75 Cyberman $79 Flight Cockpit $219 Flight Stick Pro Fil Stk Pro X-Wng Bdl $72 Gravis Analog Joystick $29 Gravis PC Game Pad $19 Gravis Phoenix Joystk $98 Jet Stick $24 Joyswitch Labtec CS-150 Spkrs $14 Labtec CS-550 Spkrs $24 Labtec CS-800 Spkrs $32 Labtec CS-1000 Spkrs $75 Labtec CS-1400 Spkrs $99 Logitech WingMan $29 Logitech WngMn Extrm $49 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $59 MS FIt Sim 5 Grvs Jstk $49 NEC 3X1 Intern. CD Dr $429 NEC 4XE Ext. CD Dr $533 Notebook Gameport $42 PC Virtual Golf Club $119 Pro Audio Spct 16 Basc $96 Pro Audio Spectrm Plus $89 Pro Audio Studio 16 $119 Reel Magic CD Upgrd $599 Reel Magic Lite $289 Reel Magic Vid Upgrd $349 Sony SRS-PC20 Spkrs $29 Sony SRS-PC30 Spkrs $58 Sblst Omni CD Dr (3X) $344 SBist 16 ASP WSCSI-23214 SBlast 16 MCD (ASP) $179 Snd Blaster 16 Value $109 Snd Blaster 32 AWE $263 SBIStr Discovry CD 16 $309 SBist Edutnmt CD 16 $519 SBist Gamebist CD 16 $379 SBIst Omni CD Dr (2X)$207 Sound Blaster Value $58 SGalaxy BX2 wSpkrs $29 SGalaxy NX2 wspkrs $49 SGIX NXPRO 16 Mmd $299 SGIX NXPRO Mmd Kit $249 Sound Man Wave $188 Snd Scp 16 Bit Witbl $185 SoundMan 16 Teac Spr Qud CD Dr $342 Thrustmst Driving Sys $111 Thrust FCs Pro UProm $14. Thrust FLC Sys (F16) $112 Thrustmst Flight Systm $59 Thrustmst Game Card $25 Thrustmst Rudder Sys $99 Thrust WCS2 UPROM $14. Universal Cockpit $219 Universal Neverlock $39 VFX 1 Vrt Reality Hdgr $949 Vivid 3D Plus Sound $75 Vivid 3D Sound $58 11th Hour CD $51 7th Guest CD $48 Advnt Will Beamish CD $24 Alone in the Dark 2 $34 Alone in the Dark 2 CD $41 Alone in the Dark 3 CD $48 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon S35 Ameri Sweethearts CD $42 Beneath Steel Sky CD $41 Bioforge CD S47 Blackthorne $29 Blake Stone Episode 1 $9 Blood Society CD $34 Bloodnet $39 Bloodnel CD $41 Blue Force: Nxt Kin CD $19 Body Count $29 Buccaneers CD aprs CD $48 Bureau 13 CD Cadillacs & Dinosrs CD $49 Castle Wolfstn-Spr Dst $29 Castle Wolfenstein CD $42 Cast Wiftn 3D MD 2013 $24 Chaos Continuum CD $36 City 2000 CD $29 Companions of Xanth $32 Companions Xanth CD $32 Conan CD $26 Conqust Robin Hd EGA $29 Conqust Robin Hd VGA $12 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy CD $30 Corridor 7 28 $29 Covert Action S6 Creature Shock CD $39 Critical Path WIN CD $48 Cruise for a Corpse $12 $39 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 Cyberia CD $46 Daedalus Encounter CD$46 Dark Forces CD $46 Dark Seed CD Darkseed 2 Day of the Tentacle $19 Day of the Tentacle CD $42 Death Gate CD $34 Digital Dreamware CD $24 Dinonauts CD S29 Dinonauts WIN $24 Don't Go Alone Doom 2: Hell on Earth $44 Doom 2: Hell Earth CD $44 Doom Episode 1 $9 Dracula $32 Dragon's Lair 2 Tm Wrp $34 Dragonsphere $25 Dragonsphere CD $24 Dreamweb $34 Dune CD $29 Earth Invasion WIN $19 Electric Jigsaw $12 EH $24 Eric The Unready CD $19 Evolution $29 Evolution CD $29 Flashback $19 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki $34 Fortress Dr. Radiaki CD $34 Fourplay WIN $19 Fred P. Front Phrm CD $39 Free DC S9 Freelancer 2120 CD $41 Full Throttle CD $42 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight $39 Gabriel Knight CD $45 Gamma Force Gateway 2:Homeworld $24 Gateway Collct 182 CD $36 Gobliiins 1, 2 or 3 CD ea $19 Guy Spy CD Hand of Fate Hand of Fate CD (LGK) $39 Harvester CD $44 Heart of China EGA $34 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hell Cab CD $42 Hired Guns $36 Hook $32 Horde CD $45 I Have No Mouth $44 In Extremus $42 Inca DOS or CD $19 Inca 2 DOS or CD $19 Inca 3 CD $39 Indy Jones Ft Atintis CD $42 Inhert Earth DOS or CD S32 Innocent Until Caught $34 Iron Helix CD $56 Isle of the Dead CD $18 Jagged Alliance $46 Jonny Quest S26 Jurassic Park $29 King's Quest 5 VGA $29 King's Quest 5 WIN CD S41 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Quest 6 Upg CD S24 King's Quest 7 CD WIN $49 King's Rsm DOS or CD $33 Kronolog : Nazi Paradx $22 Labyrinth of Time CD $47 Lands of Lore 2 S42 Laura Bw 2 DOS or CD $24 Leather Goddesses 2 $19 Legend of Kyrandia CD $32 Legend of Kyrndia 3 CD$39 Leisure St Larry 5 VGA $44 Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD $44 Leisure St Lrry Anth CD $47 Loadstar CD $49 Lost Eden CD $39 Lost Files Sherick Him $26 Lost Treasrs Infocom 2 $19 Lst in Time DOS or CD $19 Lunicus CD Maelstrom CD $18 Magic Death CD $24 Man Enough CD $34 Manhole $19 Martian Memorandum $24 Mission Critical CD $34 MixdUp Faery Tale EGA $14 MixdUp Faery Tale VGA$29 Mixd-Up Mother Goose S29 Morph Man CD Myst CD S49 Nerves of Steel $22 Nerves of Steel CD Night Trap CD $48 No World Order CD Noctropolis CD Nomad $35 Nomad CD $36 Operain Bdy Count CD $29 Out of this World $19 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Pepper's Ad in Tm VGA $29 Phantasmagoria CD $49 Police Quest 3 VGA S24 Police Quest 4: CD $39 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $42 Psychotron CD $36 $57 $29 $22 $24 S47 $39 CGW JAN 1 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING IN US $4 par order Mail o Canada, PB, HAK APO EPO $a por order Worldwide airmail so peritom Handling $2 per shipment Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges All sales final Visa, MD and Discover accepted chocks hold 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash COD SB Dufoclives replaced with no product Mos items shipped same day. Shipping umes may vary Prce avaliability may change. Call for detalls, FREE GAME OFFER* See details below 'RISE OF THE TRIAD: DARK WAR' The world is doomed... unless you can change its fate. You're a commando who usually eats terrorists for lunch, but this bunch ain't going down easy! Offers 30 levels, eye-poppin' graphics & headto-head modem matches. CD 546 WINE 'FIGHTER WING is a new breed of flight combat simulation games, that offers flight combat experience with top fighter aircraft without the steep learning curve usually required. Offers superior detail, multiple player capability over a LAN and video footage from FirePower. $39 \"CH PRO RUDDER PEDALS' has dual operating modes with realistic pedal motion for flying. Also has independent throttle and brake control for realistic driving games. Offers an anti-skid base. S85 *FREE GAME OFFER WARCRAFT Spond the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid From Doc 1st through Jan 30th or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $75 GET \"WARCRAFT' Isa mystical land where evil orcs and noble humans battle for survival. Destroy the orcish hordes or crush the weakling humans... the choice is yours. With an ingenious arsenal of weaponry and powerful magic, these two forces collide in the ultimate contest. CD $39 'NOCTROPOLIS Dark-sheer, the greatest superhero of his day, fights his last battle. Now a homifying new evil is poised to invade the city upon Darksheer's departure for his retirement. Offers more than a full hour of video, an interactive movie style, and digitized video characters.CD $47 Airborne Ranger 5.25. Boom Box 3.5/5.25. Dr. Dooms Revenge 5.25. Gunship 5.25. Pirates 5.25, S.C.Out 3.5/5.25. Tinios 3.5/5.25, Microloague Baseball Managers Challenge 5.25. Microleague Football 2 3.5. Time Out Sports Baseball 3.5. MacArthur's War 5.25. Coffee Break Collection CD SPEND $150 GET Railroad Tycoon 3.5. Magic Candle 35.25 Mercenanes 5.25. Dragon Force 5.25, Command HQ 3.5, F15 SE 23.5, Red Storm Rising 35, Battles of Destiny 35 Heirs to the throno 3.5 Warlords 5 25 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $16 $44 $9 $6 $19 Psychotron MPEG CD $38 Quantum Gate WIN CD $45 Quarantine $35 Quarantine CD $39 Quest for Glory 3 $24 Quest for Glory 4 CD $44 Relentless: Twinsn's Ad $47 Relentiss: Twnsn Ad CD $47 Return of the Phantom $34 Return Zork DOS or CD$44 Return to Zork Anth CD $12 Return to Zik wAnth CD 544 Riftwar Legacy VGA $23 Ringworld $19 Ringworld CD $19 Robocop 3 $32 Robot City CD $48 SDI Sam & Max Hit the Rd $19 Sam & Max Hit Rd CD $42 Screen Antics WIN $19 Secret Monky Island CD$21 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 Shadow Caster $18 Shadow of Comet CD $29 Simon the Sorcerer $18 Skull Cracker CD $41 Space Quest 4 VGA $28 Space Quest 4 CD $12 Space Quest 5 VGA $15 Space Ship Brainlck CD 549 Spawn $42 Spellcasting 101 $16 Star Base $42 Star Reach Star Trek 25 Anvrar CD $51 Star Trek 25th Anursry $26 Star Trk Judgmt Rts CD $42 Star Trk NG Clict Ed CD$79 Star Trk: Judgment Rts $33 Star Trk: Sir Fit Acd CD $48 Stellar 7 CD S12 Surf Ninjas $5 System Shock $47 System Shock CD $47 Terminator 2029 $24 Terminator 2029 Op Scr $19 Terminator Rampage $42 Terminator Rampg CD $45 Terror of the Deep $35 Terror of the Deep CD $36 The Dig The Journeyman Prj CD$32 The Jrnymn Sp Ed CD $47 The Prophecy $19 Touche $39 Tuneland CD $48 Ultimate Domain $39 Ultimate Domain CD $36 Under Killing Moon CD $54 Voyeur CD $46 Walker $32 Warriors of Legend $18 Where Spc Carmn Dix $39 Where in Time Carmen $29 Where USA Crmn Dix $45 Where in USA is Crmn S29 Where in World Carmn $29 Where World Crmn Dlx $44 Where in Wrid Dlx CD $54 Who Killd Sam Rprt CD $24 Wing Com Ultima 6 CD $29 Wolt: Hunt or Be Huntd $39 Wolf: Hnt or Be Hnt CD $39 Wrath of Gods CD WIN $44 Yserbius $26 Zombie Dino CD $40 Zorro $39 500 CC Race Bike $29 Alien 3 $29 Alien Breed $19 Aliens Ate My Babysittr $27 Animation Classics 2 $42 Breakthru WIN $35 Cannon Fodder Cannon Fodder CD $22 Corpse Killer CD $48 Creepers $26 Crime Patrol CD $35 Crystal Caliburn WIN $29 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Dragon's Lair CD $34 Dragon's Lair Sng's Cst $34 Dragons Lair 2 CD $39 Dragn's Lr 2 MPEG CD $42 Drug Wars CD $35 Eight Ball Deluxe $31 Fire & Forget S16 Glider 4.0 $29 Goblilins 3 $19 Gorg CD S19 Incred Machine 2 WIN $29 Incredible Toons S29 Ishar 3 $33 Jump Raven CD $42 Jurassic Park CD $25 Lode Runner WIN $38 Mad Dog McCree CD S35 Mad Dog McCree 2 CD $35 Magnallux Runner $29 Mega Man X Metal & Lace NR13 $27 Metal & Lace NR18 Up S5 Microcosm CD $42 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Mirage Thunder $39 Monty Pythn Cmplt CD $54 Mortal Kombat $24 Novastorm CD $36 Out of this World WIN $19 Oxyd Magnum $36 Pick'n Pile $19 Pinball Dreams DI Disk $18 Pinball Fantasies $29 Power Rangers CD $25 Prehistorik Raiden $29 Raiden CD $36 Rebel Assault CD Rise of the Robots $45 Rise of the Robots CD $46 Silverball $29 Silverball 2 $19 Sink or Swim $19 Sink or Swim CD Slam City CD $48 Sleepwalker $21 Soccer Kid $19 Soccer Kid CD $25 Space Ace MPEG CD $42 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Pirates CD $39 Street Fighter Cmp CD $22 Street Fighter 2 $23 Street Fight 2 Cmpl CD$22 Supr Arcd Games CD $16 T2:Arcade Game $23 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $19 Tetris $15 Tetris Gold CD $32 Titan $16 Tubular Worlds $36 Welltris $15 Who Shot John Rck CD $34 Wild Streets $16 Wrath of the Demon S21 ADD Collectors Editn 3 $19 Absolute Zero CD 541 Al-Qadim: Genie's Curs $42 Al-Qadim CD $39 Alien Legacy S36 Alien Legacy CD $39 Amberstar $12 Arborea Journy Inr Snt $34 Arena: Elder Scrolls $39 Bard's Tale Constructn $12 Captain Blood $9 Champions of Krynn $12 Character Editors (Specify Game) Each $16 Cobra Mission Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Space CD $38 Cyberjudas CD $48 Cyclones DOS or CD $44 Daemonsgate Daemonsgate CD $19 Dark Sun CD $49 Dark Sun 2: Wk Ravngr $47 Daughter of Serpents $9 Demon Hunter $42 Disciples of Steel $34 Dragon Lore CD $34 Dragons of Flame $9 Dungeon Master $29 Dungeon Master 2 $37 Dungeon Master 2 CD $48 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $16 Eye of the Beholder 1 $14 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of the Beholder 3 $19 Fire King $24 Flames Freedom MWII $19 Gateway Savage Frontr $32 Hell CD $45 Hero's Mght & Magc CDS39 Hexx: Heresy of Wizard $29 Hunters of Ralk CD $54 Ishar 3 CD $33 Kingdoms Far Rchs CD $40 Knght of Xentar PG 13 $44 Knght of Xentr NR 18 Up S5 Lands of Lore $34 Lands of Lore CD $41 Legacy: Realm Of Terrors39 Lord of the Rings Vior2 $15 Lord of Rings 1 or 2 CD $38 Lord of the Rings V 1&2 $19 Lords of Midnight CD $48 Loremaster $9 Magic Candle 3 $9 Matrix Cubed Mega Traveller:Zhodani $6 Mega Traveller 2 $12 Menzoberranzan $47 Menzoberranzan CD $47 Might & Magic 4 $19 Might & Magic 5 Pirates Gold Pool of Radiance Protostar S19 Ravenloft CD $49 Ravenloft: Strahd's Psn $48 Realms of Arkania $25 Red Crystal $21 Return to Ringworld CD 544 Riftwar Legacy CD $23 Rings of Medusa $9 Rings of Medusa Gold $18 Rings Medusa Gold CD $23 Robinsn's Requiem $33 Robinsn's Requiem CD $33 Rome: Pathway to Pwr $29 Secret Silver Blades $15 $19 S25 $15 $36 CGW JAN 2 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. Integer Fax Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10172 U. PO Box 234 Dept 10172 Rochester, VT 05767 ITUUTTILIIT 'FIFTH FLEET Modern naval warfare is putting you in command of a carrier battlegroup in the Persian and Indian Oceans. Your battlegroup can include Nimitz aircraft carriers with a full complement of Tomcat, S-3B Viking, and Hornet aircraft. and other support vessels. S38 \"UNDER A KILLING MOON Transports you to the virtual world of fiesty detective Tex Murphy. New feature allows you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices & sound effects and an amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game stunning. CD $54 'CH FLIGHT STICK PRO' The ultimate battle stick for computer pilots! Features allow you to activate radar and arm and disarm weapons without moving your hand from the stick. Has trigger and 3 fire buttons. SPECIAL OFFER!! WHEN BUNDLED WITH X-WING ONLY $72 MAJOR IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION FREE STRATEGY PLUS! DES SORORITY HOUSE' The most entertaining game on CD. If you suc cessfully collect all the items for your fraternity pledge require-ments, you'll get an unforgettable physical education. But there are three people working against you: housemother, renta-cop, and pool boy. (R) CD $49 Recieve an issue of Strategy Plus magazine FREE with every IBM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Novemver 1st to De cember 31st or while supplies last. \"BUREAU 13' There's a plot to manipulate the government through paranormal phenomenon. You must prevent this. Offers obstacles where your ability to interpret situations will determine your success. CD $39 ME IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM EDUCATION IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS $36 $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 9 9 Shadow Caster CD $44 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD 329 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD $39 Skyrealms of Jorune $39 Skyrealms of Jrune CD $39 SpellJamr:Pirates Spc $16 Star Trail: Rims Arkania 2$41 Star Trail Scenario Disk $21 Star Trk Dp Spac 9 CD $41 Startrek Next Gentn CD $55 Stonekeep CD $46 Stronghold Summoning $16 Suprhero Lg. of Hobokn $34 Suprhro Lg. Hobokn CD $34 Sword of China S42 Syndicate $37 Syndicate Plus CD $40 Tales Magic:Prphc Shdw $9 Terran Envoy $9 Treasures Savag Front 59 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Series Cplt CD $29 Ultima 8 CD w/spch pk $33 Ultima 8: Lost Vale $21 Ultima 8: Pagan $27 Ultima 8: Speech Pack $17 Ultima Uworld 1 & 2 CD $29 Ultima Uwrld 2 Labyrnth $48 Ultima Uwrld Sign Abys $21 Unlimited Adventures S19 War of the Lance $9 Waxworks $14 Witch World $42 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $19 World of Xeen CD $40 Alphabet Blocks CD WIN S5 Annbl's Ancnt Egypt CD $52 Audbns Mmd Mmis CD $26 Begin Reading CD WIN $5 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Daily Number Busters $30 Dyno-Quest Early Math CD WIN $5 EcoQust Srch for Celus $29 EcoQuest VGA $32 *Fatty Bear's Bday Srpr $32 Honorbl Gde to Mth CD $24 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Island of Dr Quandry $26 Kid Writer S29 Kid's Typing CD WIN S5 Last Chnce to See CD $29 Linkword-Spanish $19 Mario is Missing $44 Mitmdia: Vivaldi win CD $24 Orbits: Voyg Solar Sys $24 Oregon Trail WIND CD $39 Print Shop Deluxe S49 Print Shop Dix Bus Grph$26 Prol Zny's Givewys CD $29 Putt P. Gs to Moon CD $44 Putt Ploins Parade CD$32 Putt P. Joins Parade CD$32 Pult Pulls Fun Pak $19 Quarky Quys's Trb Sci $29 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secret Island Dr. Qudry S29 Slater & Charlie CD $12 Software Twrks Rir CD $79 Spelling Blizzard CD WIN$5 Spelling Jungle CD WIN $5 Stickybear Reading $24 Super Solvers Spellbnd $29 SS: Gizmos & Gadgets $26 Wild Blue Yndr Ep 1 CD $38 11th Hour Official Strat $16 A-Train $16 Aces Over Europe Strat S16 Across the Rhine Strat $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Aegis: Guardn of Fleet $16 Aircombat Pacific Stral $16 Al Qadim $12 Alone in the Dark2 $10 Arena $12 Atari Jaguar Off. Secrts $14 Bioforge $12 Blue Force: Next of Kin $12 Castle Wollstn Spr Dest $14 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn S12 Civilization $16 Colonel's Bequest $10 Colonization: Official Str $16 Computer Adv Gm Sert $16 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot $10 Curse of Azure Bonds $12 Cyclones $12 Dark Queen of Krynn $12 Dark Sun $12 Dark Sun 2 $12 Day of the Tentacle $12 Doom 2 Official Strategy 16 Doom Battlebook $14 Dracula Unleashed Strat$16 Dungeon Master $12 Dynamix Great Wr Pins $16 EcoQuest Search Cetus $10 Eye of the Beholder $12 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $12 Fleet Defender Oll. Strt $16 Flights of 13 Mike $16 Fred Pharks Fron Phrm $10 Gabriel Knight $10 Gateway Savge Frontr $12 Global Conqust Bk w/dk $21 Gobliiins $10 Gold Rush $10 Gunship 2000 $16 Hand of Fate $12 Harpoon 2 Stratgy Gde $19 Heart of China $10 Inca 2 $10 Indi Jones 4 Ft Atlantis $12 Indy Jones Grix Adv $12 Inherit the Earth $12 Jagged Alliance $16 Jetfighter 2.0 $16 King's Quest 4 $10 King's Quest 5 King's Quest 6 $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $10 Lemmings /disk Lemmin $18 Loom S12 Lord of the Rings V1 $14 Lord of the Rings V2 $12 Lost Files Sherlck Hims $14 LucasArts Adventr Bk $16 LucasArts Air Cmbt Strt $16 Manhunter San Franc $10 Master of Orion Olf. Str $16 Matrix Cubed $12 Menzoberanzan $12 MS Space Sim Off. Str $16 Might & Magic 1 & 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Might & Magic Cmpdm $16 OH Bk Leisr St Lary 2nd $14 Oll Gd Kng Ost 3rd Ed $16 Off Bk of Ultma, 2nd Ed $16 Olf Gde Wilco's Spc Ad $14 Outpost Strategy Guide $16 Pacific Strike Plytstr Gd $14 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 3 S10 Pool of Radiance $12 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Off Strt S16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger $10 Privateer Playtstr's Gde $14 Protostar $12 Quest For Clues 2 $21 Quest For Clues 3 $21 Quest for Glues 4 $21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 $10 Quest for Glory 4 Quest for Glory Stratgy $19 Questbusters $18 Questbusters 2 $18 Ravenloft Realms of Arkania $16 Rebel Assit Insidrs Gde $16 Return to Zork $10 Return to Zork Adv Gde $16 Rise of the Dragon $10 Rise of Drgn SEGA CD $12 Sam and Max $12 Sea Wolf Strategy Gde $16 Secret Monkey Island $12 Secret Monkoy Island 2 $12 Secret Silver Blades $12 Shadow Caster $14 Shadow of Comet Strat $16 Sherlock Holmes Strat $16 Sim City 2000 Strategy $16 Sim Earth S16 Sim Farm Gde: Almanc $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Simon the Sorcerer Hnt $12 Sky Realms of Jorune $12 Sonic Strategy Guide $16 Space Quest 2 $10 Space Quest 3 $10 Space Quest 4 $10 Star Trail $16 Star Trek 25th Aniv $12 Star Trek Judgemt Rts $12 Strike Commd Olf Book S16 Stunt Island $16 Subwar Official Stratgy $16 Summoning $12 System Shock $12 Tie Fighter Strategy Gd $16 Treasures Savg Frontr $12 Tunnels & Trolls $12 Ultima 6 $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 Pentology $12 Ultima Avatar Advnt BK $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima UW 2 World Lab $12 Under Kiling Mn Off Str $16 $16 Wing Armada Plytst Gd $12 Wings of Glry Plytst Gd $12 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg $12 Wizardry 7 $16 X-Wing Official Strt Gd $16 Yserbius $12 $10 CGW JAN 3 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US 54 per order. Mail to Canada PR HAK APO. FRO S4 per order. Worldwide Birmail S6 per llom Hordling $2 per shipmeni Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges All sales final Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks Money Orders under $2007 same as cash COD 58. Dolectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped Hame day. Shipping timers may vary. Pocelavellability may change. Call for details: FREE GAME OFFER* See details below APPARPOON COMMANDER CLASSIC FORCES New Version 'FLIGHT COMMANDER 2' You are in command of the strike force hunting scud sites during operation Desert Storm, or leading a weasel flight into North Vietnam. A sce. nario generator lets you dictate opponents, level of difficulty, and specify different time periods. $39 HARPOON CLASSIC' The first serious, unclassified computer simulation of how best to conduct a major campaign at sea. Offers the excitement and tension of a simulated battle based on fact. Over 200 scenarios and every add-on product produced for the original. CD $28 \"DARK FORCES Capture the Death Star plans and infiltrate the Empire's secret facility to stop a new army of mechanized, super storm-troopers. Features richly detailed 3D environments, first person perspective, compelling new Star Wars plot and more than a dozen worlds. CD $46 UPOATED AND IMPROVED Cane Camgwy RENOSNI EROES of Might antin *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the spocitiod amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Dec 1st through Jan 30th or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $75 GET 'INTERACTIVE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINENTERTAINMENT MENT CD MAG CU HUM is a monthly CD ROM publication covering the computer gaming in Full Throule preview dustry. Every epiThinsport-Tycoph Preview sode features hun$1Mbier Interview dreds of screen F160 Came: Siege shots and hours of digitized speech describing the hottest upcoming releases. Features interactive video interviews with industry celebrities. Get definitive reviews of the latest releases, along with previews of upcoming games. CD S10 'HEROES OF MIGHT & MAGIC is the newest in fantasy wargaming. Conquer the world through the strategic use of resource management and battle savvy. Features up to three customizable computer warlords, stunning super VGA graphics, and dynamic sound. CD $39 Airborne Ranger 5.25. Boom Box 3.5/5.25. Dr. Dooms Revenge 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25, S.C.Out 3.5/5.25, Tinies 3.5/5.25, Microleague Baseball Managers Challenge 5.25. Microleague Football 2 3.5. Time Out Sports Baseball 3.5, MacArthur's War 5.25, Coffee Break Collection CD A Strategic Quest SPEND $150 GET Railroad Tycoon 3.5. Magic Cande 3525, Mercenaries 5 25, Dragon Force 5.25, Command HO 3.5. F15 SE 23.5, Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5. Heirs to the Throne 3.5. Warlords 5.25 IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS $35 Space Qust Bundle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle $29 Strike Cm Privtr Bdi CD $43 Tsk Fra 1942 WRSR CD $35 The Victory Pack $39 Top 50 Games DOS CD $26 Turning Point Gettysburg, Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $29 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Ulrima 4-6 Wing Cmm 1&2 Dlx CD $32 Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry Trilogy 2 $33 $34 S19 IBM SIMULATIONS 7th Guest Dune Bndl CDS36 Access Super Bundle $34 Amazon and Martian Memorandom Air Combat Classics $22 Their Finest Hour Battle Hawks Secret Weap of Luftwaff All Star Sports Cllct CD $23 Allied Forces $9 M1 Tank Platoon, Gunship Award Bundle S44 Kings Qust 5, Red Baron. Rise of the Dragon Award Winning Wrgms $39 Award Win Wargms CD $39 Dynamix Bundle 1 $24 A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 Heart of China Steller 7 EA Top Ten Pack CD $32 Eye of Beholder Collct $49 Eye of Beholder Tril CD $51 Falcon 3.0 wThrst FCS $99 Five Foot Ten Pack CD $29 Gateway Collection 182836 Intrplay's 10 Yr Anth CD $44 Mindshadow, Tass Time, Bard's Tale, Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Battle Chss, Lord of the Rings, Castles, Star Trek 25th Anniversry. Out of this World King's Quest Anthol CD $54 Land Sea Air 2 $24 Command HQ Red Storm Rising F15 Strike Eagle Lemming's 1 & 2 CD $28 Lost Treasrs Infocm CD $34 Infidel, Lurking Horror. Deadline, Witness, Suspect, Ballyhoo, Hitch Hiker's Guide/Galaxy. Suspended, StarCross, MoonMist, PlanetFall. StationFall, Enchanter, Sorcerer, SpellBreaker, Zork 1-3, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero Lost Treasrs Infcm 2 CD$25 Border Zone, Plundered Hearts, Bureaucracy. Cutthroats, A Mind For Voyaging, Hollywood Hi Jinx, Seastalker, Sherlock Holmes: Riddle of Crown Jewels, Wishbringer, Nord and Bert. Trinity Lucas Classic Adventrs $36 Indiana Jones, Secret Monkey Island 1. Maniac Mansion Maximum Ovrkill W DK $44 Megafortress Mega-Pk $38 Megafortress & MD 1 Megafortress 3-D Editor Merit CD Megapack CD $18 Perfect General Trilogy $34 Perfect General Greatest Battles of 201 C WW2 Battles Power Hits: Battletech $22 Battletech 1, Battletech 2. Mech Warrior Power Hits: Battitch CD $19 SSI's Fantasy Fest CD $39 Space Quest Anthol CD $48 Battlecruiser 3000 $43 Blue Max Aces Grt War $9 Chopper Pack CD $38 Chopper Strike CD $52 Combat Classics 2 $19 Cyber Race CD $32 Cyclemania CD $34 D-Day: Oprtn Ovrird CD $39 Dawn Patrol $41 Delta V $39 Descent $31 Dream Web CD Elite Plus European Racers CD $29 Evasive Action $34 Evolver $38 F117A Stealth Fighter $23 F15 Strike Eagle III $34 F40 Pursuit Simulator $16 Falcon 3.0 $36 Falcon 3 S3 FA 18 Hrnt $32 Falcon 3 S1 Fight Tiger $24 Falcon 3 S2 MIG 29 $32 Falcon AT S16 Falcon Gold CD S50 Fast Attack CD $48 Fighter Duel Pro 2 $33 Fighter Wng DOS or CD$39 Fleet Defndr F14 Tomct S42 Fleet Defender Plus CD $48 Fleet Defender Scen 1 $32 Flight Light DOS or CD $19 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Flight Sm T-kt WW2 CD $19 Flight Sim Toolkit Scn 2 $19 Flight Unlimited CD 548 Fly the Grand Canyon $29 Flying Circus $39 Formation Attack CD $48 ATP 2.0 (blue) $29 A320 Airbus $29 AH-64 B Longbow Aces of the Deep CD $47 Aces of the Pacific CD 538 Aces over Europe CD $38 Across the Rhine CD $47 Air Cot Pacific 1942 CD $48 Air Cut Pac. 1942 Sc 1 $32 Air Cbl Srs: Nvy Firs CD$47 Air Warrior SVGA CD $35 Air Wrrior 2 DOS or CD $34 Armored Fist CD $47 Armour Geddon $32 Army Air Corps: 1942 948 Art of the Kill $24 Assignment Miami $9 B17 Fly Fort w SS2 CD $37 Battle Command $6 Battle of Britain 2 WIN $34 Formula 1 $24 Frontier Elite 2 $36 Grand Canyon Scenery $16 Grand Prix 500 2 $14 Great Naval Batt 2 CD $39 Gunship 2000 VGA $23 H.A.W.C. CD Harrier Assit SVGA CD $44 Heroes of the 357th $12 Indy Car Racing S37 Indy Cr Race Add. 10r2 $22 Inferno DOS or CD $44 Iron Angel DOS or CD $39 Jet Fighter 3 CD $48 Jet Pack CD $39 Jump Jet $39 Kawasaki Super Bikes $24 Lawn Mower Man CD $35 Life and Death 2 $24 Lightspeed $9 Lode Runner CD $38 Lunar Command $19 M1 Tank Platoon 2 $44 M4: Sherman Tank WIN S34 Magic Carpet CD Mantis Expert Fir VGA $29 Maxim Ovrkill Bdi CD $42 Maxim Overkill MD 2 $32 Mech Commndr or CD $42 Mech Fre: Iron Assit CD $39 Mechwrr 2 DOS or CD $46 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on $18 Mega Fortress $12 Megafortress Miss Disk $26 Megarace CD $39 Metal Tech: Battldrome $34 Metaltech: Earth Siege $44 Metaltch 2: Speech Pk $20 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $44 MS Flight Sim 5 Euro 1 $26 MS Fit Sm 5 Euro 1 CD $26 MS Flight Sim 5 Ls Vgs $33 MS FIt Sm 5 Ls Vgs CD $33 MS Flight Sim 5 Paris $29 MS Fit Sim 5 Prtind CD $33 MS Flight Sim 5 DC $29 MS FIt Sm Fit Shp CD $44 MS Space Simulatr 1.0 $44 Mig 29 Fulcrum S29 Mig 29 Gold CD $49 Nascar Racing $39 Nascar Racing CD S47 Navy Strike DOS O CD $40 Operation Combat $12 PT Boat Simulator $16 Pacific Strike $44 Pacific Strike Spch Pk $17 Pheonix Fighter CD $48 Power Boat Simulator 3 $42 Power Politics WIN $12 Privateer DOS or CD S48 Privateer Sp Ops 10r2 $19 Rally Reach for the Skies $19 Real Weather Pilot S24 Red Brn A10 Tnk KlI CDS39 Red Baron wMsn Buildr $29 Renegade CD S 48 Road & Trck Grnd Prix $19 Sailing Simulator 3 $49 Scenry Clit Grt Britain $12 Sea Wolf CD Seal Team Seaworthy CD $18 Sort Weap Ex 3 He 162 S21 Shuttle CD $24 Silent Service 2 S21 Sim City Cisc Grph 182 $14 S29 $44 Circle Reader Service #54 CGW JAN 4 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. Han e are one Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10172 PO Box 234 Dept 10172 Rochester, VT 05767 INC QUARANTINE hay BODY COUNTY OPERATION BODY COUNT Mass chaos erupts when militant terrorists take over the United Nations Towers. Waste all enemies on your mission to save the hostages. Offers modem and network play, 40 floors of intense battles and multiple weapons. CD $29 STAR TREK: NEXT GENERATION' The crew is all here. You are part of an original interactive mystery that will take you from Federation space to shields-up confrontations. Offers voice-overs by the stars, control any of the seven main characters and command of the ship. CD 555 'QUARANTINE You're Drake, a 21st Century cab driver desperate to escape from the Quarantined City You drive anarmed Checker \"hovercab\". Features fast 3D graphics and gigantic play environment. Offers the best of a first person shooter, car race & demolition derby. CD $39 TE TIE PLEXT GENERATION CELELENUE FREE Kyrandia BOOK 3. Micell Revenge INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT! SIEGE INCLUDED! UROTSUKIDA Mit OF THE \"LEGEND OF KYRANDIA 3: MALCOLM'S REVENGE' In the latest installment in the classic Fables and Fiends Series, we'll find out if Malcolm gets his long deserved revenge. Offers outstanding 3D background scenes & animations and a new symphonic score. CD $39 'UROTSUKIDOJI According to legend, the Overfiend is brought to life every 3000 years through the body of a human to destroy the existing world and unite the three dimensions. is there any hope for humanity? Will the Legend of the Overfiend become reality? From the geniuses who created Space Cruiser Yamato, this is the masterpiece that launched a new genre of animation. Not for kids! CD S24 BERGANSGLUTELY NOT FOR OLDEN Request your FREE Interactive Entertainment Episode 7 with any in stock CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Request must be made at time of order. Valid from November 15th to December 31st or while supplies last. Quantities limited. IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $12 $42 $39 Sim Tower $42 Space Clipper $42 Spectre VR CD Speed Racer $19 Star Crusader CD $39 Star Crusader MD/Spch $19 Starlord Strike Commander $26 Strike Commd Sp Ops 1522 Strike Commd Spch Pak$19 Sub Battle Simulator 2 $39 Sub War 2050 Plus CD $40 Subwar Scenario Disk $32 Syndicale S1 Amer Rvlt $20 TFX: Tactical Flr Exper $35 Task Force Admirals Pk $39 Test Drive 3: Passion $19 Test Pilot CD $44 The Big One $29 The Big One CD $26 Theme Park $38 Tie Fighter $45 Tie Fightr Mn Dk 1 or 2 $19 Tornado Tower DOS or CD S42 Train Engineer $29 U-Boat 2 Voice Commander Bdle $18 Wing Commander 2 $26 Wing Commander 3 CD $54 Wing Commd Academy $18 Wing Commder Armada $47 Wings of Glory Enh CD $47 Wolf Pack $20 World Circuit CD $34 X-Wing $39 X-Wing Collector's CD $45 X-Wing Man Disk 1 or 2 $19 Zephyr CD $45 APBA Baseball S24 American Coll Fball '94 $38 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball for Windows $46 Blood Bowl DOS or CD $34 Brett Hull Hockey $42 Empire Soccer '94 $29 FIFA Internatnal Soccer $36 Front Page Football Pro $29 Front Page FB Pro '95 $44 Front Page Sports BB $44 Front Pg Sprt BB Ex Dk $29 Front Pg Spt FB Pro Up $29 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Hardball 3 Players Dsk $16 Hardball 4 DOS or CD $34 Hrdbll 4 MLBPA Add On $14 Ice Hockey CD $28 Jack Nckis Gidn Br Ed $34 Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $39 Jack Nicklaus Signtr Ed $27 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 2 $16 Links Crs 2 Firestone $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro 486 CD $49 Links Pro C1 Mna Kea $19 Links Pro C2 Pinehurst $16 Links Pro C3 Banff Spr $19 Links Pro C4 Belfry $19 Links Pro Crs 5 Innisbrk $19 Links Pro C6 Firestone $20 Links Pro C7 Pbl Bch $24 Links Pro C8 Cst Pines $19 Links Pro C9 Big Horn $19 Live Action Football CD $34 ML Bsball Manage's Ch $12 ML Personal Pro Golf S19 Micro League Fball 2 $12 Microsoft Baseball CD $51 Microsoft Golf WIN $48 Microsoft Golf CD $48 NBA Jam $44 NFL Chall Premium Ed $59 NFL Coaches Club $34 NFL Coachs Clb Ex Dk $19 NFL Coachs Club FB 2 544 NFL Video Football $12 NHL Hockey $43 NHL Hockey 95 CD $40 PGA Tour Golf 486 CD $47 PGA Tour Golf Course 1617 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $19 PGA Tour Golf WIN $26 Planet Soccer $29 Pro Tennis Cup $38 Proleague Baseball '94 $35 Proleague Football '94 $29 QuarterPole Road to Final Four 2 $38 Serious Soccer $18 Tie Break Tennis $9 Time Out Sports Bsball $16 Time Out Sports Bsktbil $39 Tom Landry Football '94916 Tony LRussa Cisc Stad $12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Tony LaRussa BB 2 CD $46 Tony LaRss BB2 92 Tm $14 Tony LaRss BB2 Fn Mn $14 Tony LaRss BB2 Stad $18 Tony LR BB2 V2.0 94 $37 Tony LaRussa NL Stad $15 Tony LR BB2 Tm Dk 93 $16 Troy Aikman Fball CD $49 Ultimate Football CD $46 Unnecesry Roughness S33 Uncsry Roughns '95 CD$34 Wrid Cp GIl Dorado CD $42 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train W Construct Set$36 Advanced Civilization S34 Airbucks 1.2 $26 Archon Ultra Arctic Baron DOS O CD$29 Battle Bugs $37 Battle Isle 2 CD $45 Battle Isle 2200 CD S34 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Battles of Destiny $19 Black Beard $35 Breach 3 $34 Buzz Aldrin Rc Spc CD $39 Caesar $24 Campaign 2 $36 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Carriers at War Cnst Kit S25 Castles 1 or 2 ea. $19 Castles 2 CD $48 Castles Northern Cpgn $12 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil $39 Civilization WIN $48 Clash of Steel $19 Cohort 2 $18 Colonization DOS OrCD $48 Command and Conquer$38 Conquered Kingdoms 2 S36 Conqurd Kingdms Sc 1 $12 Conquest $36 Conquest of Japan $36 Crisis in the Kremlin $29 Darklegions DOS or CD $36 Dead Zone CD $52 Detroit $39 Dominus DOS or CD Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $9 Dune 2 $28 El Fish S34 Empire Deluxe 2 $38 Empire Dlx Mst Edit CD $22 Empire Dlx Scen 1 $21 Empire Deluxe WIN $19 Evn Mre Incrd Mch win $28 Fantasy Empires $39 Fantasy Fiefdom CD $48 Fort Apache S19 Frantic Factory WIN $24 Front Lines $39 Genghis Khan 2 Gettysburg: Turning Pnt $15 Global Domination $34 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fit DOS or CD $32 Great Nav Bat Admrl Pk $19 Hammer of Gods or CD $39 Hannibal $26 Harpoon 2 $39 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Harpoon Challenger Pk $24 Heirs to the Throne S19 High Seas Trader or CD$39 Hollywood Mogul $39 Humans CD S22 Incredible Machine 2 $38 Jagged Alliance CD $46 Jaggd Alliance Spch Pk $22 Jutland CD $44 Kingdoms of France $34 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Kingmaker S34 Koshan Conspiracy CD $19 Lemmings 3 $35 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Liberty or Death $29 Lords of Realm or CD $39 Lost Admiral 2 Lost Vikings Maelstrom Master of Magic Master of Orion $39 Moga Lo Mania $19 $37 Millenium Auction CD $46 Millnm Auctn Cilt Ed CD $25 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $34 Outpost WIN CD $42 Outpst Pint Add On CD $33 Patrician CD $36 Pax Imperia $39 Perfect Genral 2 or CD $35 Perfect Genral S2 20th $23 Perfect Genral S WW2 $16 Pirates Gold WIN $48 Populous 2 S25 Powr House WIN OCD $39 Powermonger $19 Projct USA DOS or CD $29 Protostar CD $19 Rags to Riches S36 Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Railroad Tycoon 2 (Dix) $24 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms Reunion DOS or CD $33 Romance 3 Kingdms 2 $24 Romance 3 Kingdms 3 $39 Rules of Engagemnt 2 $29 Rule Engag 2 Cpgn DK $19 Sabre Team $28 Second Conflict WIN $34 Serf City Life is Feudal $37 Siege $12 Sim Ant $19 Sim Ant CD Sim City 2000 $48 $36 $16 $39 CGW JAN 5 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING In US $4 pot arder Mail to Canada PR, HI AK, APO, FPO 54 per ordo Worldwide airmail S6 per item Handling S2 per shipment Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges: All sales Visa, MC and Discover accepted Checks held 4 weeks Money Orders une same as cash COD $8. Detectives replaced with same product! Most items shipped same day. Shipping times my vy Pilceavalability may change. Call for details FREE GAME OFFER* See details below No Need For Manuals or CodeWheck FRONT PACE SPORTS NO More Questions A CYBERRUNK IHRILLER Defeats. Check T Universal UNIVERSAL NEVERLOCK By pass document checks on more than 500 computer games! Safe and easy to use even for novices. It's menu driven, just point and shoot. Never be locked out of your own software again! Winner of BYTE Magazine's Aug. '94 Pourelle Award $39 HITS THE GRIDIRON Il corses khas tree rise Bishop FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL PRO 95 See bone-crushing hits as players spin flip and dive in 2piont conversion atlempts. You decide play calling logic for over 2,500 play situations. Reserve your 50-yard-line seats to the game that sets the standard for football action. CD $47 'HELL' A Cyberpunk Thriller. Beyond imagination, to the pits of a man's fears, lies a new breed of evil. Its 2095, and you are a fugitive for sins against the state. Unlock the secrets of the underworld to prove your innocence. Offers Lavish high-resolution graphics & full motion video. CD $45 Neven ONNU FOR GAMES *FREE GAME OFFER -20. . . VIRTA VEGAS The First Wonder of the CyberWorld. Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Dec 1st through Jan 30th or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $75 GET VIEW port VIRTUAL VEGAS' The wonder of the CyberWorld! You're a V.I.P. in a playground for grown-ups that's free from laws of time, physics and the mob. You can forget about life for awhile. Features 3D rendered worlds, fullmotion video and voice-recognition.(R) CD S20 Airborne Ranger 5.25, Boom Box 3.5/5.25, Dr. Dooms Re. venge 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25, S.C.Out 3.5/5.25, Tinies 3.5/5.25. Microleague Baseball Managers Challenge 5.25, Microleague Football 2 3.5, Time Out Sports Baseball 3.5, MacArthur's War 5.25, Coffee Break Collection CD SPEND $150 GET The First la Sorbosef Virtual de scope \"SAILING SIMULATOR 3' The ultimate sailing sim! Features 14' Catboat, 19' Catamaran, 31' Sloop, and 44' Ketch. Offers 7 Sails, 6 Crew Places, and 9 skill levels. Has real wind, waves, weather and scenery. S49 Railroad Tycoon 3.5, Magic Candle 35.25. Mercenanes 5.25, Dragon Force 5.25, Command HQ35, F15 SE 23.5, Red Storm Rising 35, Battles of Destiny 35. Heirs to the Throne 3.5, Warlords 5.25 IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET %%%% $47 $9 $9 $9 Sim City 2000 CD $45 Sim City 2000: Disastrs $14 im City 2000 Windows $42 im City WIN $29 im City CD Fim City Classic Win $26 im Earth $19 im Earth CD $40 im Farm WIN S19 Sim Health $25 Sim Life WIN $29 im Town DOS or CD S42 Space Hulk CD $32 pace Miner $36 pace Raiders CD $42 paceward Ho! WIN $36 Star Control 2 $34 Star Legions $12 tarlord CD $39 larship CD $39 larship Troopers $39 ub Version ask Force 1942 $19 egel's Mercenaries $9 erminator 2 Chswr CD $27 The Complete UMS $44 The Rogarn Agenda CD $39 Theatre of War iconderoga $46 Unnatural Selection $29 ictory or Defeat WIN $42 Wikings 2 $36 Valls of Rome $39 Varcraft DOS or CD $39 Varlords 2 $29 Varlords 2 Scen Editor S29 Vorlds at War $19 Vhen Two Worlds War $24 -Com: UFO Defense $39 Beat the House $29 Bobby Fshr Tch Chs CD$34 Bridge 8.0 $32 Bridge Deluxe 2 $29 Bridge Olympiad $29 Caesar's Wrid Gmg CD $37 Casino Master CD $28 Casino WIN $25 Chessmnc 5 Bill & 1 CD $34 Classic Solitaire WIN $16 Clue CD Evn More Incrd Mch CD$39 Gambit, Kasparov's $35 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 948 Hong Kong Mh Jng Pro S32 Hoyle's Bk Gms Classic $29 Incredible Toons CD $39 Jeoprdy Dix WIN W/Alx $34 Lucky's Casino Adventr $38 Mario Game Gallery $25 Origamo $29 Pinball Arcade CD $34 Pinball Dreams $29 Power Poker Windows $39 Prof Zny's Jokes CD $29 Red Shift WIN CD Risk WIN $26 Russian Six Pack WIN $19 Shanghail 2 Windows $24 Solitaires Journey WIN $35 Solitaires Journey $34 Stan Wongs Video Pokr $19 Star Wars Scrn Sv WIN $27 Trivia Madness CD $28 Trivial Pursuit CD $34 Trump Cst 3 DOS OrCD $29 Videogame Solutn 2 CD$23 Virtual Vegas CD WIN $20 Zig-Zag Aegis: Guardn Fleet CD $49 Aide de Camp $52 American Civil War V1 $24 American Civil War V2 $24 American Civil War V3 $24 Banzai Battle of Austerlitz $24 Battle of Leyte Gull S24 Battles of Napoleon $15 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blue & Grey DOS OCD $38 Campaign DOS or CD $35 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War $39 Carriers at War 2 $39 Charge of Light Brigade $12 CincPac: Midway $39 Commnd & Conquer CD548 D-Day: Begin of End $39 Decision at Gettysburg $18 Dreadnoughts $32 Dreadnoughts Bismark $15 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $19 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Fall Gelb $29 Fields of Glory $37 Fifth Fleet DOS or CD $39 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Pacific Wr $19 Gary Grigsby Wr Rssia $19 Gettysburg $19 Gettsbrg: Int Bt win CD $42 Harpoon Classic CD $28 Harpoon Cisc WIN CD $28 High Command $34 Iron Cross $39 Kampgruppe $15 Last Blitzkrieg $40 Line in the Sand $12 MacArthur's War $9 Man of War $36 Napoleonics $34 Operation Crusader $36 Panzer Battles $24 Panzer General or CD $39 Point of Attack $32 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rd Sumter to Appomtty $45 Rommel Battle N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Seventh Fleet $36 Stalingrad $39 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 Tac Ops WIN $40 Task Force 1942 $32 The Great War $39 Tigers on the Prowl $48 To The Rhine $29 Typhoon of Steel $15 UMS 2 Planet Editor $9 Under Fire $12 V Victory Market Gardn $29 V Victory: Gld, Jn, Swrd $34 V Victory: Utah Beach $29 V Victory: Velikye Luki $29 Victory at Sea War in the Falklands $24 Wargm Cnt Set 2: Tnks $39 Wrgm Cnt St 2 2-12 ea $15 Warpoint $36 Waterloo White Death $19 WW2 Battle S. Pacific S21 3D Pinball $12 Acquire Air Force Commander $9 Alphabet Blocks CD WIN $5 Amberstar Armada Villa Crespo $9 Assignment Miami $9 ATP Flight Sim (brown) $9 Aud Cips 2001 Spc Ods $12 Banzai Bard's Tale Constructn $12 Baseball Facts $9 Battle Command Bball Chall 1987 Teams $6 Bball Chall 1988 Teams $6 Bball Chall 1989 Teams S6 Begin Reading CD WIN $5 Blackjack $9 Blue Max Aces Great Wr $9 \"Boom Box $9 Captain Blood $9 Castles North Cmpgns $12 Champions of Krynn $12 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Chess Net WIN $9 Coffee Brk Collction CD$12 Combination Lock $9 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Conqust Robin Hd VGA S12 Covert Action Crime City $12 Cruise for a Corpse S12 Daughter of Serpents $9 Demon Blue S9 Don't Go Alone Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $9 Dr Thorp's Mini Blackjck $9 \"Dragon Force S12 Dragon Lord Dragons of Flame Dyno-Quest Early Math CD WIN Electric Jigsaw EMotion $6 Fighting for Rome $12 Free DC Gamma Force Hearts $12 Heroes of the 357th $12 Hoyle's Bk Games V3 $12 Humans: Insult to Injury S9 International Sports Chll $6 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $3 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 $6 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 $4 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 $4 Jones Fst Lane CD win $12 Kid's Typing CD WIN $5 Killing Cloud $6 Lightspeed Line in the Sand $12 Loremaster Lost Vikings $12 \"MacArthur's War Magic Candle 2 $12 \"Magic Candle 3 $9 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed MegaFortress S12 Mega Traveller:Zhodani $6 Mega Traveller 2 $12 ML 1950s World Series $9 ML 1960s World Series $9 ML 1970s World Series 89 ML Baseball All Stars $9 ML Baseball Pro Tms ea. $9 \"ML BB Manager's Ch $12 $19 $9 S9 $49 89 $6 $19 CGW JAN 6 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. In some sort 2008 Fans Soiree Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10172 PO Box 234 Dept 10172 Rochester, VT 05767 VASAR VASED 'CYBERIA' It's 2027. Global terrorists rule. Mankind lives on the brink of destruction. And the ultimate doomsday device -Cybeniahas just been discovered. Features state-of-the-art 3D graphics, realistic character movement and breathtaking action sequences. CD $46 \"NASCAR RACING' The fuelinjected racing power of the IndyCar series now comes to the stock car circuit. Pick the fuel mix, suspension torque and tire thickness. Offers all the familiar features from the IndyCar series & 3D physics based on actual stock car models. $39 SHADOWS OF CAIRN' The story of a young thief named Quinn, who's too honest to steal anything. Worthless to his guild, his master frames him for the murder of the Duke of Cairn. Offers lifelike rotoscoped animation, 3 difficulty levels & 10 types of opponents. CD $39 DU PONT CYBERIA Experience the future SHADOWS PAPYRUS FREE SHIPPING! Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. 'DOOM 2' The sequel to DOOM DOOM 2 provides more levels, more demons, weapons, excitement and a whole new story line! Stunning graphics, pulse-pounding action and intense gameplay make this the ultimate action game. Up to four players using a LAN. CD $44 SPACE SIRENS' VIRTUAL VIXENS The Saga Continues! From the creators of Virtual Vixens comes the next generation of interactive adventures. As a space privateer you are at the helm of your solo craft in search of rare alien artifacts for well paying galactic collectors. Responding to a distress signal, you are lured to the irresistible song of the Space Sirens emanating from a mysterious space station. CD $49 IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET CDI HARDWARE CDI ADVENTURE CDI ADVENTURE CDI ADVENTURE S42 $2CD-1200 Magnvx Plyr $359 CD-I 220 Philips Playr $399 CD-1 450 Magnvx Plyr $289 CD-1 550 Magnvx Plyr $479 CD-I Infrared Remote $39 CD-I Mouse $46 CD-I Roller Controller $54 CD-1 TouchPad $26 CD-I Trackerball $59 $3E Stellar 7 System Shock $4 Terminator Rampage $45 Terror of the Deep $35 Tuneland $4E Ultimate Domain Under a Killing Moon $5Voyeur Where in the World Dix $5Who Killed Sam Rupert $2 Wing Commd Ultima 6 $25 Wolf: Hunt or Be Huntd $3= Wrath of the Gods WIN $4 Zombie Dino $40 $4 CDI ADVENTURE CDI MOVIE $29 Madden Player Stats '89 S2 Micro League Fball 2 $12 Micro Lg, BB Seattle 13 $9 MicroL 82 BB Season 59 MicroL 83 Bsball Season $9 MicroL 84 Bsball Season $9 MicroL 85 Bsball Season 99 MicroL 86 Bsball Season $9 MicroL. 87 Bsball Season $9 MicroL 88 Bsball Season $9 MicroL 89 FB Season $9 Millenium Never Mind $9 New Facilities Locator $9 NFL Chall Col Almni Tms $6 NFL Chall Pre Season 90$6 NFL Chall 91 Pre Seasn $6 NFL Chall All Star Team S6 NFL Chall Dream Teams S6 On Target $9 Operation Combat $12 Patriot $12 Pictionary S12 Power Politics WIN $12 ProFball Analyst 92 Ed $9 Puzzle Gallery 1 $9 Return to Zork Anth CD $12 Rings of Medusa S9 Rotox $9 Rules of Engagement $9 S.C. Out $12 Scenery Cilt Grt Britain $12 SDI Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Siege $12 Slater & Charlie CD $12 Sorry Space Quest 4 CD Space Vegetables S9 Spelling Blizzard CD win $5 Spelling Blizzard CD win $5 Spelling Jungle CD win $5 Sporting Triangle $3 Star Legions $12 Stellar 7 CD $12 Storm Across Europe $12 Surf Ninjas $5 Taking of Beverly Hills $6 Tales Magic:Prphc Shdw $9 Teenage MN Truls Arcd $12 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Terran Envoy Test Drive 3: Road & Car $6 \"The Tinies $12 Theatre of War Tie Break Tennis $9 Tom Landry Football S12 Tom Landry Fball Dix $12 Tony L Russa Cisc Stad S12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Treasures Savg Frontier $9 Trump Castle 2 DD1 $4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 $4 Turn-n-Burn $9 Turn-n-Burn UMS 2 Planet Editor $9 Under Fire $12 Vaxine $12 Video Poker WIN $12 War in the Gulf $12 War of the Lance $9 Warlords $12 Weavr Tm & Plyr Stat 89 $3 Wheel of Fortune Wheel of Fortune 3 S9 Xiphos $6 Day of the Tentacle Death Gate $34 Digital Dreamware $24 Dinonauts S29 Doom 2: Hell on Earth $44 Dracula Unleashed $39 Dragonsphere $24 Dune $29 Eric The Unready $19 Evolution $29 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki $34 Fred P. Frontier Phrm 2 $44 Freelancer 2120 $41 Full Throttle S42 G-Nome $43 Gabriel Knight $45 Gateway Collectn 1&2 $36 Goblins 3 $19 Guy Spy Hand of Fate (LEGEK) $39 Harvester $44 Hell $45 Hell Cab $42 Horde $45 I Have No Mouth $44 Inca 3 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $42 Inherit the Earth $32 Iron Helix $56 Isle of the Dead $18 Journeyman Project $34 Journeyman Prj Spc Ed $47 King's Quest 6 Upgrade $24 King's Quest 7 WIN 549 King's Ransom $33 Labyrinth of Time 947 Lands of Lore 2 $46 Laura Bow 2 $24 Legend of Kyrandia 3 $39 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $44 Leisure Suit Larry Anth $47 Little Big Adventure $47 Loadstar $49 Lost Eden $39 Lost in Time $19 Lunicus $42 Maelstrom S18 Magic Death $26 Man Enough $34 Mario is Missing $44 Mission Critical $34 Morph Man $29 Mys! $49 Night Trap $48 No World Order $24 Noctropolis $47 Nomad $36 Out of this World 2 $45 Phantasmagoria $49 Police Quest 5 $48 Psychotron $34 Quantum Gate 2 Quarantine $39 Quest for Glry 4 or 5 ea $44 Return To Zork $44 Return of the Phantom $38 Robinson's Requiem $33 Robot City $48 Sam and Max Hit Road $42 Secret Monkey Island $21 Shadow of the Comet $38 Skull Cracker $41 Space Quest 4 $37 Space Ship Brainlock $49 Star Trek 25 Anniversry $54 Star Trek Judgemt Rts $42 Star Trek TNG Collt Ed $79 Star Trk: Str Fit Acdmy $48 $41 11th Hour Limited Ed $56 7th Guest $48 Advt of Willie Beamish $24 Alone in the Dark 3 $48 Beneath a Steel Sky $41 Bioforge S53 Blood Society $34 Bloodnet Blue Force: Next of Kin $19 Buccaneers $48 Bureau 13 $39 Cadillacs & Dinosaurs $49 Castle Wolfstein (6 ep) $42 Chaos Continuum $36 $29 Companions of Xanth $33 Conan $26 Conspiracy $30 Corridor 7 $29 Creature Shock $39 Critical Path WIN $48 Curse of Enchantia $23 Cyberia $46 Daedalus Encounter $46 Dark Forces $46 Dark Seed $39 $46 $39 $22 City 200 $20 A Fish Called Wanda $22 A View to a kill Addams Family Values $2 Apocalypse Now Beverly Hills Cop 3 Black Rain Bull Durham $2 Cone Heads Dances With Wolves Dr. No Fatal Attraction $2 From Russia With Love $22 Goldfinger Hannah and Her Sisters $2 Hunt for Red October $22 Indecent Proposal $22 Lassie $2 MoonRaker Moonstruck Naked Gun 33 1/3 Patriot Games $20 56 $12 CGW JAN 7 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US sa per order, Mait to Canada, PA, HIAR APO FPO 54 per arder. Worldwide airmail s porilem. Handling s2 per shipment. Hardware orders muy require additional shipping charges. All sales final Visa, MO and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD SH. Dotectives replaced with same product Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availabiny may change. Call for details FREE GAME OFFER* See details below BIGHORN EUR ROTTLELLNE METALTECH: BATTLEDROME is a virtual-reality combat arena where strategy & tactics count as much as firepower. Mighty Herc robots fight one-to-one for power. Offers ten Herc chassis, broad weapons arsenal, adrenaline pumping music, and one-on-one modem play. $34 \"LINKS PRO BIGHORN COURSE DISK' Bighorn's 6,888-yard championship golf course is a stunning achievement by renowned architect Arthur Hills The sixth hole, Bighorn's signature hole, is a 505yard par 4 providing a breathtaking view of Coachella Valley. $19 *VOYEUR Peer into your neighbor's sordid lives... Blackmail, murder and intrigue are happen ing at the Hawke mansion. Will you risk everything and step into the drama? Features intriguing storyline and multi-pathed plots that allow the player to control the sequence of events. CD 546 LINKS humors COURSE ILISI *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a freo IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Dec 1st through Jan 30th or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order. Benation SPEND $75 GET 2200 BATTLE ISLE 2200' Guided by a rogue computer, titan-net moves to conquer the Drullian Civilization. You are the strategist, you must take command of the Drullian forces and counteract the offensive. Features futuristic graphics, 3D animations and over 20 battle scenarios. CD $34 COLONIZATION' focuses on the 1500's to 1800's, when the lure of the Americas and the possibility of untold wealth was at its peak. Experience the excitement of discovering and exploring the New World. Features the same addicting game play as Civilization. $48 Airborne Ranger 5.25. Boom Box 3.5/5.25. Dr. Dooms Revenge 5.25. Gunship 5.25. Pirates 5.25. S.C.Out 3.5/5.25. Tinies 3.5/5.25, Microleague Baseball Managers Challenge 5.25. Microleague Football 2 3.5, Time Out Sports Baseball 3.5, MacArthur's War 5.25. Coffee Break Collection CD SPEND $150 GET Railroad Tycoon 3.5, Magic Candle 35.25 Mercenaries 525, Dragon Force 5.25, Command HQ 3.5. F 15 SE 23.5, Red Storm Rising 3.5. Battios of Destiny 3.5. Heirs to the Throne 3,5. Warlords 5.25 || CDI MOVIE CDI MUSIC 3DO 3D0 ADVENTURE NOT FOR KIDS ADVENTURE NOT FOR KIDS Planes, Trains, & Autos $22 Posse $22 Rainman $24 Silence of the Lambs S24 Sliver $22 Star Trek 6:Undiscovrd $22 The Black Stallion $24 The Firm $22 Thelma and Louise $24 Top Gun $22 Trading Places $24 Wayne's World 2 $22 White Christmas $22 X-Men:Night Sentinels $14 You Only Live Twice $33 CDI SHOOTERS Alien Gate $26 Chaos Control $44 Earth Command $44 Mad Dog McCree $52 Mad Dog McCree & Gun$72 Microcosm $44 Mystic Midway 1 $26 Mystic Midway 2 $26 Eric Clapton Video $21 3 DO System $399 Gershwin Collection $213D0 Gun $44 Gifts to Behold:A. Cplnd $19 Flight Stick Pro $99 Golden Oldies Jukebx 519 11th Hour $59 James Brown $19 3D Atlas $69 Jazz Giants $21 3DO Intractv CD Spl $5 Louis Armstorng $19 Aces over Europe Luciano Pavarotti $19 Air Warrior $54 Mozart:Musical Biogrph $19 Alone in the Dark $46 Pete Townshend:Live $21 Battle Chess $39 Peter Gabrl:All Abt Us $21 BrainDead 13 $52 Prelude CDI S 19 Burning Soldier $49 Rembrandt:Art & Music $19 Clayfighter 2 $46 TR-1:No World Order $21 Corpse Killer $52 Three Tenors Video $21 CyberClash $52 You Sing Christms Favs $14 Demolition Man $58 DinoBlaze $56 Doom $56 CDI STRATEGY Dragon Tales Lore $46 Dragons Lair 2:Tm Wrp $52 Axis & Allies $44 Duelin' Firemen $54 Backgammon $30 Escape Monster Manor $52 Battleship $30 FIFA International Scor $52 Caesar's Wrld Gambling$44 Family Feud $39 Connect Four $26 Flashback $49 Defender of the Crown $34 Flying Nightmares $52 Dimo's Quest $32 GEX $52 Jeopardy $36 Guardian War $49 Jigsaw $36 Horde $52 Joker's Wild Jr.! $36 Ishar 3 $52 Joker's Wild! S36 Jammit! $54 Mega Maze Jurassic Park $52 NFL Instant Replay $44 Kingdom:Far Reaches $46 NFL Trivia Chall 94/95 $44 Lemmings $49 NFL Trivia Challenge $44 Lemmings Chronicles $52 Name That Tune $36 Lost Files of Shrick Hlm $52 Pinball $30 Mad Dog McCree 2 $54 Sargon Chess $36 Madden Football $46 Tetris $30 Megarace $44 Microcosm S52 Need for Speed $52 Nova Storm $52 Oceans Below $44 Of World Interceptor $52 Out of this World $46 $54 Pebble Beach Golf $52 Plumbrs Dn't Wear Ties $49 Quarantine $39 Real Pinball $52 Rebel Assault $56 Rise of the Robots $49 Road Rash $56 Robinson's Requiem $52 SHADOW:War Succsn $52 Samurai Showdown $52 Shadow Caster $52 Shock Wave $56 Shuttle $44 Soccer Kid $39 Space Ace $52 Space Pirates $54 Star Control 2 $52 Star Trek Next Genertn $54 Star Wars Chess $54 Station Invasion $54 Stellar 7 $39 Super Street Fighter 2 $59 Supreme Warrior $52 Syndicate $54 Theme Park $52 Total Eclipse $49 Trance Mission $56 Troddlers $49 Vikings $46 Way of the Warrior $52 Who Shot Johnny Rock $52 Wing Commander $49 Alone in the Dark 2 CD 541 Paradise Club CD $69 Come Play With Me CD $36 Penthouse Intract 3 CD $64 Cyber-Peep Intract CD $19 Phantasmagoria CD $49 Dark Tunnels CD $29 Quarantine $35 Desktop Mistress CD $49 Relentless: Twinsn's Ad $47 Desktop Voyeur 1 CD $49 Scisrs N' Stns WIN CD $39 Digital Dancing CD S32 Secrets Interactive CD $35 Doom 2: Hell Earth CD $44 Shadow of Comet CD $29 Doom Episode 1 $9 Sorority House CD (R) 549 Dream Girl CD $28 Space Sirens CD $49 Dream Machine CD $54 Spy Club (R) CD $59 Dreamweb $34 Strip Poker Pro (R) Fantasies Intractive CD $35 Strip Pot MPEG CD $36 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki $34 Surfer Girls CD $39 Fox Pack CD S37 System Shock $47 Gabriel Knight CD $45 Texas Table Dance CD $39 Girlfriend Maria $39 Under Killing Moon CD $54 Girlfriend Speach Pack S19 Vampire's Kiss CD S49 Girlfriend Suzie (R) $44 Velvet Dreams CD $35 Girlfriend Teri (R) $49 Virtual Valerie 2 CD $36 Harvester CD $44 Virtual Vixens CD $39 Innocent Until Caught $34 Virtually Yours CD $49 Intract Adit Spl WIN CD $12 Voyeur CD $46 Intract Seymore Butts 2 $58 Winner Takes All CD Interactive Lovers CD S45 Wolf: Hunt or Be Huntd S39 Interntnal Strip Pokr CD $24 Intimate Journey CD $24 3DO ADVENTURE Iron Helix CD S56 NOT FOR KIDS Isle of the Dead CD $18 Jurassic Park $29 American Blond $32 Ladies Club Pkr Nit CD $34 Blind Spot $32 Leather Goddesses 2 $19 Blond Justice Leisure St Lrry Anth CD $47 Immortal Desire $32 Midnight Stranger CD $45 Intimate Journey $32 Mind Teazzer CD S32 Naked Revenge Mustang Interactive CD $49Plumbrs Dn't Wear Ties $49 Neurodancer CD S39 Steamy Windows $32 Nick Steele P.I. CD $59 Super Models Go Wild $32 Nightwatch Intract 2 CD $39 The Coven $32 $39 CDI MUSIC $30 $32 $32 A Revolution in Color $19 Andrew Lloyd Webber:Premiere $21 Bon Jovi:Keep the Faith $21 Bryan Adams Video S21 Classical Jukebox $21 Cool Oldies Jukebox $21 Earth Rhythms $19 CGW JAN B Circle Reader Service #54 "


"The Wolf And Its Prey Attacking Convoys And Racking Up Tonnage In ACES OF THE DEEP by Kevin Turner I cannot be denied that submariners of any nahunting individual merchant ships in tion are brave and skillful men; and that they shipping lanes. By traveling in convoys, are accustomed to continue to exercise their skill merchant ships were able to achieve two in conditions of acute danger, which is perhaps things. The first was increased stealth: by the bravest thing of all. But what they actually having ships travel together, the odds that do, what constitutes their life work-killing by a U-boat would find them were sizably distealth, without warning and without quarminished. The Atlantic is a big ocean, and ter-is evil as well as skillful; moreover, it is a convoy placed a lot of tonnage in a small predominantly evil, and when we come to our area. The second goal was defense. Consenses, inexcusably so.\". voys invariably traveled with escorts, and From the introduction of \"U-Boat 977.\" by Heinz Schaeffer escorts could more easily defend a convoy Heinz Schaeffer encapsulated the subthan an entire shipping lane. marine credo very nicely in the introducIn ACES OF THE DEEP (AOD), as in tion to his book: kill by stealth and World War II, the convoy is the U-boat without quarter. As a former crew's chief target. In order to fight a consubmariner, I also apvoy, the AOD player must first understand preciated being some important points about the convoy called brave itsell. First, convoys placed all the imporand tant ships toward the center for protection. Second, convoys changed course ofien in order to confound those trying to set up an attack. Third, convoys are relatively casy prey, once a sound tactical doctrine is established. skillful, although I'm a bil uneasy about the evil part. I guess the truth of the statement would depend upon who you asked. German U-boat crews were notoriously effective at their grim task, especially carly on in WWII. The allies developed the concept of multi-ship convoys precisely because the Germans were so skillful at How Wolves Find Prey In order to find, track, and eventually wreak havoc with a convoy, captains must first become familiar with the two chief navigational tools at their disposal. The first is the top-down display, or what I call the \"geo plot.\" This is the close-range navigational tool, and where you will be doing most of your work. The second is the chart, which provides information on the convoy once it is discovered. The chart shows the Atlantic Ocean with symbols to denote the U-boat position, convoy position and heading, bases, and other Uboats when operating within a wolfpack. The geo plot is the best tool for discovering convoys, and is the key to successfully prosecuting a target. The key thing 96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"about the geo plot is that you will be able maneuvering out of sight of the convoy, tered an escort off the Florida Keys which to spot targets on the plot long before you can kick up the compression to 64X, was headed in my direction. I would have your lookouts report them. It also displays but when visibility is low, never exceed 8X run, but the Keys were blocking my esimportant visibility information, crucial compression. Reaction times are critical, cape. I dove to periscope depth and enwhen planning the timing of an attack. and 8X compression is the fastest in which countered a white line on the geo plot, Plan on becoming a geo plot specialist if good reactions can be made. At low visibilwhich usually means high-speed screws. I you want to become an \"ace of the deep.\" ily, an escort can appear at 2500 meters, made my heading directly toward the The chart will display convoy informaand will be lobbing shells at the deck bescrew noise, in case of active sonar. I trantion for as long as contact is steadily mainfore you can even target him. sited for a while at about 90 meters depth tained. A convoy will and at a two-thirds bell. When I reduced appear as a black speed to one third, I was surrounded by square with a white gray lines, which denote merchant screws. line, which indicates U-BOAT SPEED Rising to periscope depth, I found myself the convoy's direction in the center of a large convoy. Two COURSE of travel. Should contankers and a troop ship soon plunged to tact be temporarily DERTA a watery grave. lost in another view, a But convoys won't always steam over quick jaunt over to TARGET you. The best way to locate them is by SPEED the chart will enable watching the edge of the visibility ring of COURSE the player to reestabthe geo plot for ship tracks running closelish contact. RANGE ly together. When at least three merchants 10000 M Convoy hunting is are visible, switch over to the chart, which an art, and an art will indicate the direction the convoy is takes much practice to heading master. New players FAST FORWARD When shadowing a convoy on the \"geo plot,\" 16x time Another important tip is to radio the loshould practice with compression seems to work well, allowing you to analyze the movements cation of the convoy immediately. The \"Convoy Encounters\" of the convoy and the patrol patterns of the escorts. Have your finger on most important information you can gain from the \"Single Mis. the <return> key, though, in case the unexpected happens and you need by doing so is the quality of the escort. sions\" menu. This is a to react in \"real time.\" The radio report will state the quality great place to practice from \"lightly escorted,\" up to \"heavily estechniques that will become commonplace Once an escort is encountered, the convoy corted.\" If the convoy is lightly escorted, once a career is begun. Set up a scenario for will not be far away. A good rule of thumb is success is assured. If \"heavily escorted,\" a medium convoy, lightly escorted. As for to keep the escort at the outer edge of the my compliments on getting close enough realism, I recommend that you start easy red ring on the \"geo plot.\" It is important to to establish contact. and gain experience. remember that you For carrier captains, the hunt for tonwill see the escort in nage begins with an assignment to a the geo plot well beknown shipping lane. Once you've fore the escort spots SPEED reached your assigned patrol area, set up your U-boat. DesigCOURSE a search pattern, and a convoy may wannate the escort as a tarder into the area after a while. (It's odd, get, allowing you to DEPTH but I actually find more convoys transiting evaluate its speed. TARGET to and from patrol areas than anywhere should the escort be SPEED else.) For those less patient, there is no traveling at a speed place like the southwest coast of England; greater than the Uada convoys come and go from there regular boat's top speed, and ly. The problem is that escape routes are is heading directly for limited, and the depth of the water can be the U-boat, you've got highly restrictive should submerged evatwo options: dive, or sion become necessary. run in the opposite di SOMETHING'S SCREWY A U-boat moves in for a submerged attack. The gray While patrolling and transiting, and any rection. If the escort is lines indicate slow speed screw noise from merchant vessels; the black time that time compression is above 16X, I slower than the Usquares are the escorts. highly recommend keeping one finger on boat, go the opposite the <return> key while you watch the geo direction until the escort turns around. If the It is very important to evaluate the esplot. Hitting <return> will take time comescort is faster, dive to periscope depth and cort. With a light escort, there is a good pression to IX, and allow time to react. wait until the escort turns away. chance that it is made up of a fast mover Another word about time compression: (up to 24 knots) and a slow mover (about I recommend shadowing and evaluating When The Wolf Enters 12 knots). As you monitor the escort, dethe convoy at about 16X time compresThe Chicken House termine which side of the convoy the sion. It is easier to evaluate movement pat. There is a trick to sinking ships in a conslow mover is stationed, as well as the terns at that speed than at IX. While voy when all other methods fail. I encoungeneral pattern the escorts follow. The U-BORT Sound M JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 97 "


"STRATEGIES escorts will roam around the convoy, reload. Once this is accomplished, then ously given. I have attacked the convoy besometimes moving away to the flank, consider attacking again. Never wait for a fore the order was given and suffered no other times running ahead. Sometimes reload from inside the convoy. penalty for it. I have also not attacked they seem to spin in donuts, as if trying As day turns to night, reduced visibility when the order was given, waiting for betto make up their minds. should become a factor in your attack ter visibility, and I wasn't penalized strategy. In the Captain's Log, there is a Should visibility not deteriorate to the The Wolfpack notation for sunset and sunrise. While point that I feel comfortable, then I may And The Prey shadowing the convoy, establish how long attack anyway depending on the quality o After the radio report has been made, you it will take before the sun sets. As visibility the escort. Remember, the crew's live: will probably be ordered to shadow the decreases, the time for attack grows nearhinge on the decision. convoy. If this happens, check the chart.er. I heartily recommend attacking when As the time for attack approaches Yellow squares, marking other U-boats, visibility has dropped to the point that the check that the speed is set to flank, tha will be moving in to all tubes are loaded with reloads avail help with the attack. able, and then check the chart. The char Shadowing a conwill show the black square, with the white voy is a simple matter line denoting the convoy's heading of making as many Should the convoy's \"weak spot\" be the VE sightings of the conleft front corner, maneuver so that the voy as possible, and red square (the U-boat), is closing on the then sending these convoy from that aspect. Do not linger SET COURSE reports by radio to on the chart, for as visibility decreases so the wolfpack and do reaction times. An escort may appear RESUME BdU. As you stalk the from nowhere and be within gun range convoy, use this time in seconds. Set up for the attack away to evaluate its defenfrom the convoy and close in. sive screen and deAs you approach the convoy, keep a cide on an approach. careful watch for the escorts. When a tar For example, if a CALLING ALL WOLVES When ordered to trail a convoy, be sure to report the get presents itself, quickly evaluate it with convoy has a four convoy's position. Soon, you'll find that wolves from around the Atlantic the \"T\" key. If the target is a merchant ship escort. I would (yellow squares) will gather to the smell of blood. then the convoy has been located. find the place where the escort seemed to travel through the 2500 meter range ruler is at the bottom of Target Selection least, and note that position. the geo plot, and the visibility ring is not When the convoy is located, it is importan Before we discuss attacks, it is important outside the boundaries of the geo plot. to remember some key ideas. First and fore to consider the realism options you might Pushing the magnify button (\"+\") on the most, find the target that will make this risl choose. Two in particular are critical. upper right hand corner of the geo plot worth taking. It will be in the heart of the These options are \"dud torpedoes\" and closes the range of the geo plot, allowing convoy. The most valuable target will be in \"realistic reloads.\" the visibility ring to move outwards. the heart of the convoy, and it is without a When you're playing with dud torpedoubt a troop ship does, always assume that at least one of These targets, wher the torpedoes you fire in a series will not encountered alone it U-BOAT explode. This is important to remember, SPEED open water, can make as there is nothing worse than finding a up to 26 knots. Wher COURSE valuable target that requires two torpelocated in a convoy does to sink and having one of the torpeDEPTH they become sitting does fail while the escorts are closing. For ducks. As these target TARGET a valuable target, meaning over 10,000 SPEED can displace up to tons, send three weapons. If only two of 14,000 tons, it is easy COURSE the bow tubes are loaded, fire them both to see why they are and maneuver for a stern shot on egress. RANGE 2500 M the best target. In the case of realistic reloads, the only The second mos weapons available for use during attack valuable target is i will be the weapons already in the tubes. tanker. Tankers car Should below decks weapons storage CONVOY INFILTRATION By running silently and using the cover of night, a range from 1,000 space be available, load the weapons from sub has worked its way into the middle of a convoy. From this position it tons to 10,000 tons the deck into these storage spaces. This can carefully choose its victim, but it had better hit fast, hit hard, and Evaluation is more will take a full two hours, but reloads from sneak away before the escorts get their bearings. critical in this case below decks will take only 20 minutes, Should the tanker be compared to the 2 hours required for reThe next step is to wait for the word 5,000 tons or under, keep looking fo loads from the deck. Upon exhausting all from BdU to attack. This will only occur if more valuable targets. available weapons, leave the convoy and the order to shadow the convoy was previAnother trick is to look carefully at the 98 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"STRATEGIES er merchant that lies are times when a convoy presents itself between the target suddenly, and no other option is available. and the boat. Use the When making a submerged attack, keep hot keys (F3 and F5) in mind these key ideas. First, the speed to toggle between the advantage is gone. When speed is used, geo plot and the the advantages of silence and sonar are binoculars, and pay negated. The only time I consider using attention to the situaspeed is when a target is already within tion! range, and a turn must be executed to Siret Wateh other Finally, while atbring the weapon to bear. The other conSUNDERLAND tacking the convoy, sideration is battery life. Should the player keep in mind that select realistic battery consumption, onesome of the convoy third speed can be maintained for long may be armed. Some periods of time, but a flank bell will eat up merchants have guns, the battery very quickly. AS BAD AS GNATS A well planned attack can be ruined by one plane. If you and can wreak havoc The first consideration when making a aren't in a dangerous position, you might man the AA guns, but in most cases, the best advice is to dive, and dive quickly. on the unprepared. submerged attack is to get as close as posShould one of these sible to the convoy before attacking. The ships open fire, open convoy may zig, taking them out of range. geo plot, and notice the size of the target the range with that ship or torpedo it, but Should the convoy zig to either side, the depiction in relation to other targets. This, do not get in a running gun battle. One escorts, which act as flankers and use their barring any other useful data, should be hit of a shell can cause the U-boat to dive, active sonar, may stumble upon the boat the factor weighed most heavily. Do not and this is the last place to be with serious and drop a few depth charges. The chart spend time lingering inside the convoy hull damage. will inform the player of any zigs. Try to looking for the best target. Should an opOnce the attack is over, move quickly time the dive so that position is set right portunity arise, take it. This is especially away and re-evaluate the torpedo room. after the last zig. true if a ship has already been destroyed; Check on the status of reloading, and Set up so that the convoy will run right the escorts will be coming, and they will over the boat. Keep not be pleased. periscope time to an Should an escort arrive while you're still absolute minimum, in the convoy, evaluate its speed, plot a and never look course which will open the range, and take through the scope any available shots, regardless of their while using time quality. Time is of the essence, and better compression. Escorts some tonnage than no tonnage. can spot a periscope, Another key idea is to take out ships and should this ocquickly, with a minimum of maneuvering. Sint Watch oricen cur, you'll need to Evaluate, strike, and move on. Should a marge destroyed get deep and get target of high quality present itself, and away. only one torpedo has hit the target, maOnce the convoy is neuver behind and to one side of the tarpenetrated, keep in get and open fire with the deck gun. mind that the targets While doing so, keep a sharp eye out. This LOOKY-LOO ALERT The most common mistake a novice Captain will make: will, as they pass by, is a risky tactic, but one that is sometimes waiting to watch the torpedoes strike their target. It may be a pretty sight, be moving faster worth the risk. but the escorts that are quickly bearing down on your sub aren't! than it is possible to turn. Use a burst of Firing Considerations bring additional weapons down if necesspeed to bring the boat around. Have When shooting torpedoes, get as close sary. Once all the weapons are reloaded, multiple targets in mind. The idea of a to the target as possible. Six hundred consider attacking the convoy again. submerged attack is to hit a lot of ships meters is my personal maximum for Should this decision be reached, circle very quickly, and then go deep. Don't stick bow tubes. As stern tubes are much around the convoy to the point previously around to find out if the torpedoes hit. more difficult to align, 800-900 meters entered, and do it again. These tips should bring the player adis a maximum. Should a valuable target ditional success, and add to the enjoypresent itself, shoot the weapons in Attacking From Below ment this game will bring. ACES OF THE rapid fire succession. Of course there is another school of DEEP is a complex game, and it is highly When lining up a shot from the bridge thought for U-boat tactics, and that is the addictive. As success with convoys inbinoculars, many captains make a comsubmerged attack. This is difficult, and it creases, more rewards are given in promon mistake, and I am as guilty as anymust be remembered that U-boats were motions, medals, and newer boats. But one: fixating on the target and ignoring designed as torpedo boats that could dive nothing feels as good as coming into everything else. It is very easy to run into a to escape. The best use of the U-boat, in port with a dozen pennants flying from target that has already been hit, or anothmy opinion, is on the surface. But there the mast. @ JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 99 "


"THE RULES ARE SIMPLE. 202 CREATURE SHOCK  Feel the double thrill of flight simulation and space shooter action as you lock on a Starfish Mine Launcher at the speed of light.  High speed video compression runs terrifying 3-D animation at 15 frames per second to keep your pulse racing. Created by Argonaut, who brought you the Special FX chip in Nintendo's topselling Star Fox. "


"EVERYTHING'S OUT TO GET YOU. It's 2023 and the Earth is dying. A survey ship, the CREATURE SS Amazon, takes off to locate an alternative planet and SHOCK disappears. Now, you must discover what hit it. Oh yeah, while you're at it, bring back an alien specimen, find its source and destroy it. Just don't breathe too loudly--it might be tracking you. Something sure is. Man-eating slime pools? Artillery Spiders with twin-barreled lasers? Jellied Suckers that inhale entire ships? Or electric Distortion Rings that fry you to a crisp? Or is it one of those really ugly things that we don't even want to mention? PC CD-ROM   AVAILABLE ON AVAILABLE ON US Virgen ARGONAUT Creature Shock is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. 1994 Argonaut Software, ltd. and Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. All other trademarks recognized, Circle Reader Service #326 "


"Ex Libris Arcanis Wisdom To Dispell An Inimical MASTER OF MAGIC by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. aveat veneficum inimicum!\" read the disintenot discover the full book, so I will focus grating yellow page. «Beware the hostile my attention on MOM's combat system, sorcerer!\" Thus began the tome from one of the least-understood aspects of the which I have translated this arcane sagacity. game. All the tips, strategies, and examAlas, the provenance of its wisdom suggestples below are based on my individual exed that the ritual and calculation required perience with the game. I have tried to to produce its arcane knowledge must have keep things general, but nothing here been during the reign of MASTER OF MAGIC should be taken as holy writ. 1.1 and may not accurately reflect the era There are three main types of battles in of 1.2 or its disciples. Perhaps, I shall be MASTER OF MAGIC: fighting in cities, fightprivileged to find a later tome and translate ing in the wilderness, and fighting in ruthat wisdom at another time. ins/nodes. Each type of battle has different \"Caveat consilium perfectum...\" began objectives and requirements, and each the first page with its advice to beunit at the player's disposal is more or less ware a perfect plan in suited to each type of battle. The successful wizard will allocate his or her armies accordingly. When attacking an enemy or neutral city, the most important attribute for your invaders to have is a decent speed (two or above). Spearmen slogging across the battle board at one space per turn will be cut to ribbons by defending archers before they can get in position to stand and fight. Not all attacking units need to blaze across the map, of course. Your own ranged-attack forces can be slow, since they are likely to stay in their starting positions, and any forces that are missileproof do not need great mobility. If a defending city is lightly held or has no missile troops, then the speed of your attackers becomes irrelevant. Of course, when the tables have turned and those pesky enemy troops are besieging your cities, your ideal combat group is significantly different. City defense is where MASTER OF ranged forces come into their own-cowerMAGIC. ing behind city walls and, unlike their eneThere are no my counterparts struggling across the \"perfect plans\" for battlefield, hard to kill. Unfortunately, bowwinning the game, men and slingers are not usually available no simple strategic rules to your cities until the city has become reawhich will guarantee victory. The sonably developed. For most races, the first game is simply too complex to be exhausunits a city builds will be the ubiquitous tively covered in anything less bulky than spearmen. This is okay. One or two speara full-length book. Unfortunately, I did men units in a city will provide some de102 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"He ruled the auto industry. STRATEGIES fense and will often scare off computer players and rampaging monsters alike. Then, once your city is large enough to support the industries necessary to build missile troops, those original spearmen can be used to guard the city gate while your new archers and slingers cut the enemy to ribbons. Of course, once you have flying troops, it's good to retire those spearmen and let the flyers guard the door. That way, if the enemy has no missile or flying troops, he cannot engage you at all, letting your own missile troops have a field day against their helpless enemies. Guardian Spirit Swooshe, SPELL WAITS Lyon LITFOT FRUTO IPFUEE POONE Bang 1 BLADE FOR THE BUCK As they slice this Guardian Spirit into vaporware, the swordsmen of the wicked Eglonis prove why they offer so much bang for the buck. They're cheap to build, relatively resilient on defense, and get two attacks per tactical phase. When fighting in the open field, missile units are not quite as useful, due to the greater freedom of movement of both sides. Wilderness battles are generally wilder and less predictable than city fights. When badly outmatched (regular army units versus a lone settler, for example), the computer player has a habit of wasting spells before retreating. This can be used to your advantage in the early stages of the game when mana is precious. Chase that enemy settler across the map, watching as the computer player casts stone skin, web, etc. in each battle before withdrawing his troops. Be leery of using magic in the first round of wilderness fights where you suspect the computer player plans to withdraw, since your magic is likely be wasted in such a case. Capturing nodes and ruins, of course, is one of the more interS ibbonsePashery is SPELL WAIT Skill INFO AVTOS Mange 250 FLEE OONE Bang 1x UNIT-WIDE WEB SITE Enemy units decide to stick around until Eglonis' swordsmen can finish off their livelier counterparts. Ranged spells are useful when ranged weapons are limited. Henry Ford Photo: UPI/Bettman JANUARY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 103 "


"PINBALL ARCADE CD-ROM PC MULTI-MEDIA ENEMOUNT ENTER THE PINBALL ARCADE You already know how to play pinball! Just how good are you? Step up to the arcade, make your selection from any one of the eight great tables, set up your game, pull down that plunger and get some glass. This is the award winning technology that made 21st Century first in computer pinball. INCLUDES B GREAT TABLES WITH. Terrifle table designs with all the features of a real table flippers, ramps, passages, tunnels. mushroom bumpers, ball traps, drop targets, roll overs, lights, switches, bonuses and jackpots. CENTURY Totally realistic ball movement 256 color graphics 21st CENTURY ENTERTAINMENT INC. Stunning ray traced animations High scores saved to hard disk A futh hour of music and sound effects . Bonus. Illustrated history of Pinball Cinde Reader Service P.O. BOX 415  WEBSTER, NY 14580 TEL: (716) 872-1200  FAX: 872-1675 "


"He ruled the shipping lanes. RATEGIES esting aspects of MASTER OF MAGIC. Treasure from the pathetic (10 gold pieces) to the tremendous (two Chaos spell books and a champion-level hero) can be acquired. Naturally, treasure is generally proportionate to the risk encountered in getting it, so that single skeleton is not likely to be guarding any major artifacts. Attacking these structures is different than regular combat, though, in that your enemies will not be increasing over time. If you have the patience and the units, you can simply wear down even the toughest ruin over a period of years. This is wasteful, however, and it is better to win the first time. There are several excellent methods of optimizing a group's performance when attacking ruins. An old favorite is to use a large stack of well-enHell Hounds Hosicions SPELL WAITS: UFORUTOT H 70 FLEE TOONE R43 Ix PUPPIES FROM PURGATORY These priests haven't got a prayer against these Hell Dogs. Too bad the wizard hadn't thought about using regenerating units to take this vital tower. chanted regenerating troops (trolls, or for sufficiently advanced Nature wizards, any troops you have cast the Regeneration spell on), along with a hero possessing the Leadership attribute. Such stacks can take on the weaker and medium-powered ruins, and will constantly heal themselves, making casualties irrelevant (so long as you win the battle). Armies raised strictly from flying groups are also powerful, especially when the flyers are missile-armed. A good half to two-thirds of the ruins you encounter will fall automatically to such invulnerable troops. In the later stages of the game, often a good ruin explorer is a single incredibly powerful hero or heroine, massively enchanted with all your protective and enhancing spells, and laden down with artifacts to further boost his or her already godlike powers. This option also has the advantage of being a great deal of fun: wading into nine Death Knights and crushing them all in three rounds of combat is a marvelous experience. \"Carpe commodum!\" or \"Seize the advantage!\" read the title of another page. Obviously, even the ancients felt that the bewildering array of unit types could be somewhat overwhelming. Information was provided in tabular form (Table 1) and summarized each unit which could normally be built. Some of these units are specific to a given race, and most require significant industrial investment in the building city. The first value in the table, Firepower, is a measure of the number of hits the unit can be expected to inflict, on average, in a round of combat (before defenders apply their shields). Units with both melee and missile attacks are considered to combine those factors for purposes of the firepower value, since most such units fire one or two rounds of missiles then close for melee. The Hits to Kill (HTK) column inAristoteles Onassis Photo: UPI/Bettman JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 105 "


"STRATEGIES dicates the number of hits, on average, it takes to kill the unit in a single round. Part of the HTK value derives from the unit's intrinsic hit points, and part of it derives from the unit's ability to defend itself. These values are roughly comparable, but many special attacks cannot be fit into a simple numeric index poison, stoning, paralysis (everything that doesn't cause direct, simple damage) has been left out of these numbers. Thus, manticores look terrible (Firepower of 3) mainly because their strength 6 poison attack has been ignored. The column originally labeled Incendium Pro Pecuniae (\"Bang for the Buck\") reflects the ratio of a unit's firepower to its construction cost, while the \"Blood for the Buck\" (Sanguineus Pro Pecuniae) reflects the ratio of its HTK to construction cost. Another tabulam (Table 2) summarized summoned creatures and monsters found in ruins and nodes; for obvious reasons, there is no Bang for the Buck or Blood for the Buck rating for these creatures. Resistance was not integrated into the tables, since the pages found did not deal with the magic system. The buildable unit with the greatest firepower is the Nightmare; Nightmares also have the highest HTK. Nightmares are generally powerful creatures whose only drawback is that they can be built only by Dark Elves. The unit with the highest Bang for the Buck and Blood for the Buck is the Swordsman (not surprising, considering their incredibly low cost). These values are somewhat misleading, however, since fully developed cities may have enough production to build four or five swordsmen units per turn, but can only build one swordsman per turn due to the nature of the building system, with the rest of the city's production being wasted. 3.6 TABLE 1: COMBAT ANALYSIS OF BUILDABLE UNITS Bang! Blood/ Unit Name Firepower HTK Buck Buck Air Ship 3.9 21.5 0.0200.108 Berserkers 14.4 21.6 0.180 0.270 Bowmen 3.6 7. 8 0 .120 0.260 Cavalry 4.8 14.4 0.120 0.360 Catapult 10.6 0.030 0.106 Centaurs 15.6 0.060 0.156 Doom Drakes 8.4 . 21.8 0.053 0.136 Dragon Turtle 4.5 17.4 0.038 0.145 Elven Lords 10 16.8 0.063 0.105 Engineers 1.8 7.8 0.045 0.195 Galley 1.8 20.9 0.018 0.209 Golem 22.4 0.018 0.112 Griffins S5.4 23 0.027 0.115 Halberdiers 7.2 11.4 0.180 0.285 Hammerhands 14. 4 2 9.4 0.090 0.184 Horsebowmen 7.2 14.4 0.120 0.240 Javelineers 12. 6 1 9.2 0.105 0.160 Longbowmen 9.6 9.6 0.120 0.120 Magicians 8.4 7.6 0.070 0.063 Manticores 3 15.8 0.0190.099 Minotaurs 12 26.4 0.060 0.132 Nightblades 7.2 11.4 0.060 0.095 Nightmares 15.6 44.8 0.098 0.280 Paladins 8.4 23.2 0.042 0.116 Pegasi 6.4 12.4 0.040 0.078 Pikemen 12 15.2 0.150 0.190 Priests 8.8 0.084 0.088 Rangers 8.4 12.8 0.070 0.107 Settlers 1.3 0.000 0.022 Shaman 4.8 7.6 0.096 0.152 Slingers 9.6 17.6 0.096 0.176 Spearmen 2.4 12.8 0.240 1.280 Stag Beetle 6 21.8 0.038 0.136 Steam Cannon 3.6 12.6 0.020 0.070 Swordsmen5.4 9.6 0.270 0.480 Trireme 1.2 10.6 0.0200.177 Warlocks 18 13.2 0.075 0.055 War Mammoths 6 27.6 0.025 0.115 Warship 5.4 31.5 0.034 0.197 War Trolls 9.6 24.8 0.060 0.155 Wolf Riders 7.2 23.6 0.072 0.236 Wyvern Riders 3 23 0.015 0.115 Meet the small, un-silent type. 8.4 What's small, attaches to almost anything, and blasts 103 (minimum) ear-piercing decibels whenever moved? The ELERT portable motion detector from Quorum. Operating simply on batteries, the ELERT is the perfect way to protect your valuables at home or away. Attach it to your skis, your tennis racket, your suitcase, your lawnmower, your personal computer, you name it. Then you can feel confident that none of them will go anywhere without you. Only Quorum products give you Quorum that kind of technology and security. Securing Life\" ELERT Personal Portable Alarm .... Contact your Quorum Independent Distributor ........ VTS MARKETING GLOBAL OPERATIONS P. O. BOX 1020, IOWA CITY, IA 52244-1028 TEL (319) 351-7706 FAX (319) 351-7022 VOICE MAIL 800-314-9841 Circle Reader Service #328 106 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"STRATEGIES He ruled motion pictures. TABLE 2: COMBAT ANALYSIS OF SUMMONED/ENCOUNTERED UNITS 7.5 and moszfon. 38 4.2 9 Unit Name Air Elemental Angel Arch Angel Basilisk Behemoth Chaos Spawn Chimera Cockatrices Colossus Death Knights Demon Demon Lord Djinn Doom Bat Earth Elemental Efreet Fire Elemental Fire Giant Floating Island Gargoyles Ghouls Giant Spiders Gorgons Great Drake Great Wyrm Guardian Spirit Hell Hounds Hydra Magic Spirit Nagas Night Stalker Phantom Beast Phantom Warriors Shadow Demons Skeletons Sky Drake Sprites Stone Giants Storm Giants Unicorns War Bears Werewolves Wraiths Zombies FirepowerH TK 4.5 11.8 16.5 10.2 20.4 4.5 31.2 46.8 0.3 16.5 13.2 36.8 4.8 15.6 12 32.4 14 13.5 22.1 6.9 21.8 3 21.5 7.5 31.2 12.9 3.6 11.2 16.5 45 4.8 25.6 4.8 15.6 2.4 21.8 9.6 43.2 15 31.5 7.5x 46.8 3 11.2 7.2 18.4 29.7 100.8 1.5 11.2 3.2 13.8 10.9 5.4 5.4 10.8 24.8 5.4 13.2 27.1 6.4 o Sa 2.1 20 12 n 22.1 4.2 6.6 8 4.2 9 8.4 5.4 21.2 27.6 17.8 31.8 38 21.6 . Louis B. Mayer Photo: UPI/Bettman JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 107 "


"PENTIUM POWER! BIONY TDI 190 100/11: 100% mho IEALTH WARS nos VA ALL BLACK, STATE-OF-THE-ART COMPONENTS STARTING AT $1,695.00 Zephyr options: 17\" monitor, Logitech Cyber Man, Dual Teac 3.5\" & 5.25\" floppy driv Sony powered speaker systems, HP DeskJet printer (black) with color ink kit, Intel FLASH Ethernet Hayes 14.4 fax/modem, joysticks. Many other upgrades available. Zephyr Vortex 486DX 66 Mhz. -fast! KEY BENEFITS: Intel 486DX 66 Mhz., PCI Local Bus mainboard with 256K cache, Pentium Overdrive Fast multimedia experience with ready ZIF socket, 8 Meg. of RAM, 15\" SVGA NI flat screen monitor, SVGA PCI Local Bus new Teac SuperQuad 4X CD video card with 1 Meg. RAM, your choice of ROM drive! tower or desktop case, cooling fans for case APC PowerManager with lifetime and a CPU fan, 540 Meg. SCSI hard drive warranty with PCI Local Bus controller, 3.5\" floppy, Creative Labs Sound Blaster 16 APC PowerManager, Sound Blaster 16, Teac \" and 17\" SVGA flat screen SuperQuad 4x CD-ROM, mouse. monitors Optimized performance for MS Zephyr Onyx Pentium 90 Mhz.very fast! Windows and multimedia games Intel Pentium 90 Mhz. PCI Local Bus mainboard with 256 cache, 8 Meg. of RAM. All DOOM 1.666 Episode One preother components same as Zephyr Vortex installed on each Zephyr system system. VISA Mastercar 1 800 448 8806 Call for Custom Quotes 214-363-4707 FAX Zephy:  1994 id Software, Inc.  1994 Zephyr Computer Corporation All names and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Pricing and components are subject to verification. SOFTWARE "


"Now it's your turn. TRATEGIES Of the units with higher costs, Berserkers and Halberdiers provide the most Bang for the Buck, while Halberdiers, Cavalry and Nightmares provide the most Blood for the Buck. The clear loser in the efficiency category is the Catapult. There are units with similarly low efficiency ratings (Manticores, Wyvern Riders) but those units have highly useful special powers that are not reflected in the table. Several units have special ability combinations that can be extremely powerful when properly used. Elven Lords, Griffins, and Paladins all combine first strike and armor-piercing attacks, rendering them all but omnipotent against normal units. One Elven Lord unit can easily defeat nine ordinary spearmen or swordsmen due to this effective combination. TRANSPORT MICROPROSE P 1 2 2 A BOHO i ge SPELL WAIT skill INFOT JTRUTOT Mona FLEEFOONE Ronge ZOOO *** HYDRA IN PLAIN SIGHT It takes a large army and lots of magic to take out a hydra or two. MICROPROSE A LADIE DELDTE Other highly useful units are Berserkers (good general lighters and reasonably inexpensive), Horsebowmen (mounted bowmen that are a good value for the production), Slingers inexpensive and very powerful) and War Trolls (good fighters and best of all, regenerating). The fantastic units are somewhat more difficult to quantify, as almost all have special powers and most have more than one. The immunity to magic possessed by Sky Drakes renders them among the most difficult of opponents, since only mundane weapons will have any effect at all. The powerful, life-draining Death Knights can overcome all but the strongest of normal armies, and generally significant magical resources will be required to defeat them. The ability of Demon Lords to summon three other Demons can be devastating against armies not able to eliminate the Demon Lord before he completes his summoning. The teleporting Great Wyrm is capable of killing most units in a single blow, but is helpless against flying armies. The sheer vitality of Hydra make them very annoying to fight, but a strong army can generally defeat them. The last page crumbled in my gnarled hands and I sprinkled the pieces into a potion I had concocted. It had ended with the suggestion that MASTER OF MAGIC rewards combined-arms tactics and that the wizard who will be victorious on the battlefield is the one who will have used the proper unit in the proper role. In other words, I smiled wickedly and drank the newly fortified potion, \"Keep your armor oiled, your sword clean, and never let the computer fight your battles for you.\" Words to conquer by, indeed. MICROPROSE Introducing the Tycoon Series from Microprose. PC games that let you buy, build and control your own empire. M OPROSE Anything is possible. 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles.  1994 MicroProse All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #351 JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 109 "


"Happy New Year 1995 SABRE TEAM Sabre COMPUTER Express THE PAGEMASTER This sensory stimulating animated CDagemaste ROM game is based on the film \"The Pagemaster released this year starring well-known \"Home Alone star Macauley Culkin. The game picks up where the Exciting movie ends, so it's like getting an Instant sequell Features film quality animation, outstanding graphics, and robust movements. This family CD-ROM will fascinate kids and parents alikel Mac CD version available, please call Four hostages are being held at the American Embassy in London's West End. You are in control of the smallest and most secretive fighting unit in the British Army The Sabre Team infiltrate the embassy, rescue the hostages and treat the terrorists with extreme prejus dice. The Sabre Team features 5 challenging missions with multiple difficulty levels. Beautifully crafted isometric game landscapes and digitized speech. IBM 3.5' version also available. 20 Since 1985 TURNER IBM CD #36968 $40 MICROLEAGUE IBM CD #35591 34 IBM RECREATION 39 29 IBM RECREATION 32964 Campaign II 27743 Carrier Strike .. 31523 Carriers at War II ... 34267 Casino Master Gold WINDOW 37163 Casinol WINDOWS 34586 Castle Conquest .. . 26332 Castle of Dr. Brain VGA 28774 Castles II: Slege & Conquest. 34074 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil Eye. 20471 Centerfold Squares. 29216 Challenge of the 5 Realms.. 32522 ChessMaster 4000 Tibo. WINDOWS 35677 Chessnet 3 Single Edition 26806 Civilization 32820 civilization WINDOWS 31328 Clash of Steel: WWII 1939-45 33927 Classics Fun Pack WINDOWS 36251 Classics Pinball.... FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI TILE FORTRESS OF A blackmailer threatens Earth DR. RADIAKI with nuclear destruction unless one billion dollars is deposited into his Swiss chxking account As United Nations Special Agent Mack Banner you must stop this threat. Your one due radio active' waste has been traced to a Pacific Island, owned by Japanese businessman Dr. Radiaki! Are you man enough to infiltrate his fortress and defeat scores of adversaries? This 3-D world is depending on you! IBM 3.5' also available. CALL 34028 D-Day: The Beginning of End 33234 Daemonsgate. 34162 Dark Legions. 28129 Dark Seed. 34765 Dawn Patrol... 30897 Day of the Tentacle: Maniac i 33334 Delta V. 37076 Descent .... 32010 Detroit 36747 Discworld. 34307 Disciples of Steel ... 37643 Dominus ... 33894 Doom 1: Knee-Deep in the Dead 35719 Doom II: Hell on Earth 36791 Doom 11: Hintbook .. 29224 Dragon's Lair lll ... 37094 DragonSphere .... 32967 DreamWeb... CALL 30 35 MERIT IBM CD #35770 IBM RECREATION 37040 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons 36454 5th Fleet... .. 29723 A-10 Tank Killer Enhanced 1.5 29238 ADSD Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 35877 ADOD Dark Sun: Wake Ravager 32924 ADSD Dungeon Hack 37312 ADED Eye of Beholder Ill... 34087 ADID Genle's Curse.. 36068 ADAD Menzoberranzan 34164 ADD Raventoft: Strands Posses 31940 APBA Baseball WINDOWS 33336 Aces of the Deep 28445 Aces over Europe .. 34275 Aces over Korea 35740 Across the Rhine Scenario 34302 Advanced Civilization 37304 Alde De Camp... 32125 Air Combat Classics .. 29855 Air Warrior SVGA 37489 Alien 3... .. 34695 Allen Legacy..******** 35875 Alien Logic: Jorune . 35162 Alliance Fight Commander 2.0 29897 All-Americancollege Football 30188 Alone in the Dark .. 33809 Alone in the Dark II. 36360 American Civil War 35241 Animation Classics II. 32011 Arcade ....... 33384 Arctic Baron ...... 33341 Arena Elder Scrolls 33708 Armored Fist 32546 Art of the Ki 36959 Award Winning War Games 33637 Axis the Gamecheater.. 34025 Barkley Basketball 36027 Battle Buys.. . 28769 Battle Chess 4000.SVGA 28768 Battle Chess 4000 VGA 32977 Battle Chess 4000 WINDOWS 33857 Battle Cruiser 3000AD 36040 Battle Isle 2200 ..... 25445 Battle of Britain 2. WINDOWS 34650 Battledrome ...... 34552 Battles of Destiny ........ 11575 Beyond Squad Leader 24543 Bill Elliott Nascar Challenge 30561 Blackjack 3.0 WINDOWS 36485 Blackbeard 36938 Blackthorne.. 33770 Blake Stone: Episode 1 ... 34762 Blitzkrieg .... **** 36654 Blood Bowl .. 32980 Blood Net........ 31010 Blue Force: The Next of Kin 34419 Body Blows. 32548 Bram Stoker's Dracula 33738 Breach 3 35715 BreakThrul WINDOWS 33941 Brett Hull '95....... 35580 Bridge Baron. WINDOWS 34935 Bridge Olympiad 32599 Brix ... 34239 Brutal Sports Football 31466 Caesar's Palace WINDOWS In celebration of our 10th year anniversary, look next month for details on our new Gamer's Club. SORORITY HOUSE 35 45 19 Sneak into Theta  Lola Theta, the hottest sorority on campus loaded with the most beautiful guls in the world. Your mission collect all the items needed to meet your fraternity pledge requires ments. Do It and you'll get WDER an unforget table pluysical education, Slip up, and you're history! The Wicked Housemother, a crazy security guard and a dangerous pool boy will see to that! Includes over 90 minutes of hilarious, exciting video HAR 34 43 31593 Cobra Mission ... 37445 Collegiate Pennsylvania State WIN 37434 Collegiate UCLA WIN 37435 Collegiate Univ. of Florida.WIN 37439 Collegiate Univ. of Michigan-WIN 37443 Collegiate Univ. of Oregon.WIN 32930 Comanche a Mission Disk 1 ... 30560 Comanche; Mission Disk2... 37301 Combat Classics 3... . 29867 Command HQ Classic ..... 32884 Command Starship... 32129 Companions of Xanth.. 34553 Conquered Kingdoms 31453 Conquered Kingdoms Scenario 29227 Conquest of Japan. 22035 Corridor 7... 31647 Crime City 32369 Cyber Race .. 32966 CyberSpace 37566 Cyberstrike. 36087 Cyclones. 33602 D-Day: Operation Overlord. 26 26 ELECTROMEDIA IBM CD 237025 $34 THRUSTMASTER FORMULA T1 Cet in on the action with the most realistic controls for all of today's driving simula tors! You get a fully functional steering wheel brake and gas pedals, a sturdy shift lever and a game supporting turbo boost gauge, all fashioned from a black powder-coated aluminum and ABS plastic. Get the most out of your driving simulator with Formula TII THE PURE WARGAME Death from Above. Volume 1. The first in a new series, TPW involves eight different airbome operations! Each scenario embodies the actual units, Specific landing sites, and the company or battalion makes up. This tactical level operations COPD of airbome uses mainly Company and Battalion size forces. This is definitely not just another tactical wargame. TPW truly embodies the real feel and challenge of airbome assault, and gives you a whole game experience! CASINO MASTER This powerful new version of Casino Master Includes 9 casino games with full-motion Onscreen video Instruc. tion by noted professional gambler John Patrick, plus a casino travel guide some of the games Included are Blackjack, ARCODROM Craps, Roulette Video Poker, Slots, Keno, and Red Dog Realistic simulations and sharp graphics let you make all bels. Includes a complete manual with rules and strategy for all games. Learn while you play. Mac CD version availahlc, please call W $281 CENTRON SOFTWARE IBM CD #36781 28 30684 Dunell ..... 32978 Dungeon Master 2. 35164 ETO: D-Day WINDOWS 32586 Earth Invasion Arcade 30050 El Fish ... 30119 Empire Deluxe ....... 32082 Empire Deluxe WINDOWS 32219 Empire Deluxe Scenario .... 34605 Empire Soccer ... 36091 Epic Pinball ..... 34593 Evolution .... 35742-117A Classic 28794 F 15 Strike Fagle III. 35288 FIFA International Soccer 26585 Falcon 3.0 34272 Falcon 4.0..... 33664 Falcon FA-18 Hornet 31442 Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary 31690 Falcon: Warthog A-10 3.0 26783 Fields of Glory .. 36832 Fighter Wing 30591 Flashback 34273 Flat Top 32880 Fleet Defender: F-14 35744 Fleet Defender: F-14 Scenario 36589 Flight Commander !! 32632 Flight Light. 36698 Fight Shop 50 37558 Flight Sim: Caribbean Scenery 50 36695 Flight Sim: Europe #1 5.0 37557 Flight Sim: Japan Scenery 5.0 32901 Flight Sim: Las Vegas 5.0.. 31728 Flight Sim: New York Scenery 31657 Flight Sim: Paris Scenery 36593 Flight Sim: Portland 50 31273 Flight Simulator 50 37638 Flight Simulator 5.1 34277 Formula One Grand Prix 2 35772 Fortress of Dr. Radiakl.... 32525 Four Play 30373 Freddy Pharkas... 31402 Freddy Pharkas Hint Book 34611 Freelancer 2120 36247 Front Lines... 34894 Front Page Sports: Baseball 35314 Front Page Sports: Football 95 35313 Front Page Sports: Football Upgrd 95 32972 Frontier Elitell..... 35976 Frontier: 1 st Encounter... 37589 G Nome .... 32130 Gabriel Knight ... 33642 Game Maker 2.0 27746 Games Master .. 31514 Gateway ll ... 33739 Genghis Khan II M SSS THRUSTMASTER IBM #33344 S111 QQP IBM 3,5 #35573 $30 "


"CARTOON HISTORY UNIVERSE HISTORY UNIVERSE 1.300:2237449 ext.345 A brilliant, hip and hilarious adventure takes you from the Big Bang to Alexander the Great. The historically faithful trip is led by the Amazing Professor who'll make you laugh as he lectures, Enter into his Time Machine and be prepared to experience all the weld and wonderful history they never taught you in school. Features 17 Interactive games. For ages 10 to 100, it will enter tain and educate your whole family. Mac CD version available, please call CYBERIA The year is 2027. Global Icrrorists rule. Mankind lives on the brink of destruction. As if that isnt horror enough a device, code named Cyberia has just been discovered beneath the frozen waste CYBERIA land of Northem Asia. But this is experience the Freura no ordinary device. This is the ultimate doomsday device, developed by an ancient civilization. They created it to be the ultimate protector of W a new world order Now, its discovery could mean the end, unless 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 INFO :508-443-6125 5 08-443-5645 METRU by VISA, MAR G old Odds by DHO Op d i e man en monok .. W O HNEN BEWO mai chi chodom Bahawa A ndy Sterkas once HERE un disco de Ayam UNI DISTRIBUTION IBM CD #36627 $30 INTERPLAY IBM CD #36477 $45 IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION 40 GLIDER 4.0 Deceptively simple arcade game that pits you, as the pilot of a paper airplane, against a house full of surprises. Your goal is to fly your plane across each room, without crashing into furniture or encountering other hazards such as tables helicopters electrical outlets and candles. Your only help is to shoot an occasional rubber band at an enemy or capture a battery for a turbo charge Features hundreds of rooms in an eccentric old mansion to keep you busy for hours 35 Glider 4.0 WANSOMS SEN CALL CASADY & GREENE WIN #36461 $30 96 CALI 37302 Metal Marines... 34698 Metaltech: Earth Stege.......... 37023 Metaltech: Earth Siege Speech Pack 37095 Mig-29 Add-on Version 28378 Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen. 31019 Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeen 35813 Mighty Morphin Power Rangers 31816 More Incredible Machines..... 35347 More Incredible Machines WINDOWS 34658 Mortal Kombat / GamePad Bundle 36997 NASCAR Racing SVGA 36996 NBA Jam 33215 NCAA: Road to the Final Four 35937 NFL 95 WINDOWS 31741 NHL Hockey... 37092 Navy Strike 36365 Operation Body Count... 34451 Operation Crusader. WINDOW 33340 Outpost... 33340 Outpost WINDOWS ... 33464 Oxyd Magnum .... 33087 Pacific Air War: 1942 35739 Pacific Air War: 1942 Scenario 32502 Pacific Strike 32503 Pacific Strike Speech Disk 29804 Pacific War... 36480 Panzer General... 33735 Perfect General ll .. 32948 Perfect General Trilogy... 27151 Perfect General WWII Scenario 37096 Pilot's Choice Bundle 25088 Pinball Fantasies 30098 Pirates! Gold 35745 Piratest Gold WINDOWS 37083 Pizza Tycoon. WINDOWS 36057 Planet Soccer 37305 Point of Attack 25783 Police Quest III 32079 Police Quest IV 29618 Populous Il.... 32604 Power Game II 36243 Power House... 27184 Power Monger... 36774 Powerhits: Battletech 36777 Powerhits: SCUF 36778 Powerhits Sports 36779 Powerhits. Strategy 35573 Pure Wargame. 30630 Prince of Persia il 34655 Pro League Baseball 35935 Quarantine 32863 Quest for Glory IV .... 36829 RELENTLESS: Twinsen's Adventure 34596 Raiden 23056 Railroad Tycoon Classic 31428 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe .33329 Rally: The Final Round 35255 Raptor: Call of the Shadows 2 2868 Realms of Arkania.. 36384 Realms of Arkania: Star Trail. 36386 Realms of Arkania: Star Trail Addon 35355 Red Baron 31502 Red Crystal 37700 Renegade jacob's Star... 31061 Return of the Phantom 31630 Return to Zork 36598 Reunion 33938 Rise of the Robots WINDOWS 36936 Rise of the Triad 35236 Robinson's Requiem 33330 Romance Three Kingdoms III 31561 Royal Flush.. 31343 Rules of Engagement li 33206 SSN-21: Se Woll... 35590 Sabre Team .... 32979 Sam & Max Hit the Road 31730 Scenery Collection USA East 5.0 31731 Scenery Collection USA West 50 26704 Strict of Monkey Island Il. 35461 Sensible Soccer 34656 Serf City .... 35316 Serious Soccer 29233 Seven Cities of Gold Commemorative 31817 Shadow of Yserblus.. . 34289 Shadow of the Comet 2... 31510 Shadowcaster... 35287 Shanghaill . WINDOWS 30492 Sid Meiers Thogy 28694 Siena Award Winning Bundle 27283 Sierra Dynamics Bundle VGA 35596 Silver Ball Plus2 Pinball .. 26824 SimAnt Classic... 28868 SimAnt Classic WINDOWS 31457 SimQty 2000 34246 SimCity 2000 WINDOWS 33915 SimCity 2000: Great Disasters 35752 Simcity 2000: Great Disasters WIN 31410 SimCity Classic 31455 SimCity Classic WINDOWS 34798 SimCity Classic Graphics .. 37042 SimClassic Collection....... 37043 SimClassic Collection WINDOWS 24473 SimEarth Classic 26503 SimEarth Classic WINDOWS 31454 SimFarm....... 25115 Similealth 29724 Simlife Classic 30833 SimLife Classic WINDOWS 37593 Sim Tower 32882 Simon the Sorcerer 37591 Sink or Swim 35592 Soccer Kid 36019 Salitate Antics... 22085 Solitaire Antics WINDOWS 37228 Solitaire Deluxe  WINDOWS 30590 Space Hulk. 28440 Space Quest V... 31656 Space Simulator 34764 Space Ward Hol IV 34764 Spaceward Hollll 29854 Spear of Destiny 34294 Spear of Destiny: Mission 2 34295 Spear of Destiny: Mission 3 33342 Spectre VR .... 32189 Speed Racer Challenge Racer X 28899 SpellCasting 301. Spring Break 33296 Spellcasting Party Pak ....... 36947 Sporting News Pro Football 1994 36483 Stalingrad 35723 Stall Cusdet. DOOM 11 CALL IBM RECREATION 34001 Girlfriend Lisa 34436 Guifriend Teri..... 36461 Glider 4.0 WINDOWS 34283 Global Response 28808 Goblins 1... 30465 Gohlilins II 33343 Goblins III 36550 Goblilins IV. 37081 Goldtree Engine .. 28300 Golf WINDOWS.... 34826 Golf Courses: Banff Springs WINDOW 34827 Golf Courses: Mauna Kea WINDOWS 34828 Golf Courses: Pinehurst WINDOWS 36790 Good to Finm.... 33335 Grandest Fleet... 33704 Great Naval Battles Il.. 35743 Gunship 2000 Classic .. 34154 HAW.C... 35444 Hammer of the Gods... 32527 Hand of Fate 32594 Hard Ball III Diamond Collect 32122 Harpoon 11 35767 Harpoon Il Battleset #2 34284 Heavy Hockey 37696 Heretic... 34761 Heroes of Might & Magic 35725 Hexx Heresy of the Wizard 36245 High Seas Trader .. 37466 Ice Hockey ..... 29952 Incal 33325 Incall. 36548 Inca III 33139 Incredible Toons... 35349 Incredible Toons. WINDOWS 26926 Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis 31471 IndyCar Racing 35105 IndyCar: Circuits Expansion Pack 35106 IndyCar Indianapolis Speedway 34449 Inherit the Earth: Oh Quest. 36393Iron Cross.... 37703 Ishar 3: 7 Gates of Infinity ... 32982 Isle of the Dead 27314 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf 28696 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 30628 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 31480 Jagged Alliance 36389 tagged Alliance Addon 34166 lopardy Deluxe 32968 Jeopardy Deluxe WINDOWS 33993 Jeopardy Sports Edition ... 32127 Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck 37203 Jet Fighter III 37710 Soft... 35875 Jorune: Alien Logic 33741 Jurassic Park 30672 Kasparov's Gambit 28004 King's Quest VI. 32076 Kingdoms of Germany 34303 Kingmaker.. 36972 Klik n Play WINDOWS 31595 Knights of Xentar NR13 35210 Knights of Xentar Upgrade NR18 31420 Lands of Lore ...... 28561 Legend of Kyrandia.. 37527 Legions. WINDOWS 25424 Leisure Suit any V 32785 Leisure Suit Lany VI. 36744 Lemmings Holiday 94 25284 Lemmings. 36743 Lemmings 1. WINDOWS 30372 Lemmings !! 27660 Links 386 Pro... 30488 Unks: Banff Springs SVGA 31444 Links: Belfrey Course SVGA 36148 Links: Bighorn Course SVGA 34306 Links: Castle Pines Course SVGA 32478 Links. Firestone Course SVGA 31507 Links Innisbrook Course SVGA 29740 Links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA 32479 Unks: Pebble Beach Course SVGA 30798 Links Pinehurst Country SVGA 35319 Lode Runner 35320 Lode Runner-WINDOWS 34286 Lords of Midnight ...... 34029 Lords of the Realm .... 33736 Los! Admiral II 26904 Lost Treasures of Infocom .. 28005 LOS! Treasures of infocom II 32881 Lucky's Casino Adventure. 33501 M4 Sherman Tank. WINDOWS 35741 Master of Magk... 31433 Master of Orion...... 28153 MechWarrior / BattleTech 1 1 32603 MechWarrior Il... 34156 MechWarrior 11 Add-On 37284 Mega Man X 31594 Metal & Lace. PG13.. 33223 Metal & Lace Upgrade Disk NR 24 20 26 30 36 Sequel to the award-winning DOOM. An awesome virtual reality action game features more levels. more demons, more weapons, more excitement and a whole new story! Stunning graphics, Intense gameplay, and 4 skill levels make this the ultimate action game. Supports up to four players using a LAN. Features 256 color VGA graphics, digitized sound, joystick mouse and gamepad support 9.35 =;:95 *984 40. GT SOFTWARE IBM CD/3.5 #3632044 231 ARRA KING'S QUEST VI Those wacky royals are at it again! King Graham and Queen Valanice think it's high time Princess Rosella got married. During a walk in the woods, the Queen and Princess are thrown into a wild fantasy world, and take turns looking for each other and a harisons mysterious stranger. You must help them reunite and help the Princess get her guy King's Quest VII is fun and complex with some really good puzzles PC Gamer Magazine, November 1994. CITADEL OF THE DEAD What was once a peaceful countryside is now a barren Wasteland. The citizens are now mere posts cowering behind drawn shutters in the remains of their ruined villages. Kraelich once the most of the powerful wizard is now only a captive soul, frozen in another dimension under his fortress. The Citadel of light is now the Citadel of the Dead. You must find Kraelich and restore the Citadel and people to their former glory. Thirteen dungeon levels, 1,000+ TOXONITIS. and 100 evil creatures will make it hard. CRYSTAL CALIBURN PINBALL Pinball with an attitudel The feel of real pinball from the developer of Triston and Eight Ball Deluxe Features expert flipper control spectacular sounds and authentic speech Play multiball or aim for the 3D ramps. It OPINBALL includes an auto battle feature, along with full Nudge and Tit features. \"Crystal Caliburn sets a new standard for realistic pinball on a computer, there's nothing like this game CG Review. CALL for MAC pricing Crystal Calibura 38 SIERRA 1BMCD #35326 $47 MICROLEAGUE MAC #30891 $18 1 STARPLAY WIN #36303 $30 "


"UNDER A KILLING MOON Celebrating 10 years!! COMPUTER Express SPECTRE VR The Cyberworld has never been so real! In this sequel to the best-selling hit you can soar above the action In your advanced transforming cybercraft. There are a whole new group of enemies you must deal with like slicers and smart acid pools. Fortunately, you have smart weapons-like pulse bursts, Spinners, smart missiles, proximity mines, cyberblasts and scattershots! Escape through transporter gates Submerge into cyberspace! This Is Tot just another game-it's another reality! Mac CD version available, picase call VELOCITY IBM CD #34608 Lights, camera action! This movie goes light years beyond any other interactive product You're Tex Murphy Private Investigator, looking for a case to solve on the streets of post-WWIII San Francisco. This Virtual World lets you explore every nook and cany of a room Look up and down for clues, or turn to see if anyone's behind you! Features original music digitized voices and sound cllects, plus the talents of many Hollywood stars. Play through scene's then splice them together to create your own mowie. You're the director ACCESS IBM CD #32937 $541 Since 1985 $38 IBM RECREATION IBM CD-ROM RECREATION CALL 30 J-590 SPEAKERS \"Bigger and badder than your average speaker, the ). 590AV will make your neighbors whimper Cars Computer Game Review. These stylish 2-way powerful speakers are the talk of the town fcaturing a maximum output of 30 watts and a frequency range from 50 to 20,000 Hz Built-in amplifier has a total harmonic distortion of .05% and a rated output of 14 watts per channel. Available for your PC's a 100% compatibles CALL 32510 Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WINDOWS 31643 When Two Worlds War ...... 25792 Willy Beamish VGA .......... 36785 Win Vegas Volume 1. WINDOWS 36786 Win Vegas Volume II. WINDOWS 36787 Win Vegas Volume III WINDOWS 34939 Wing Amada.. 24006 Wing Commander 31509 Wing Commander Academy 27287 Wing Commander I Deluxe 32006 Wing Commander IT Special Operations 25968 Wing Commander Il Speech Disk 32106 Wing Commander il w/Speech ... 34763 Witchworld... 25001 Wizardry 6: Bane of the Cosmic 26417 Wizardry 7: Crusader Dark Savant 26475 Wizardry Thogy 11/11/) 32909 Wizardry Trilogy II IV/VI/VII) 36271 Wolt: Hunt or Be Hunted 34509 Wolfenstein 3-D ......*** 34590 Wolfpack 27709 World Circuit Grand Prix 32477 World War II: Battle South Pacific 35215 X-COM: UFO Defense 28941 X-Wing 32034 X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty 30899 X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit 34699 Zephyr 34181 Zig Zag. WINDOWS 36367 Zoro ..... 41 34 20 23 JAZZ IBM #36500 $63 IBM RECREATION 35940 Star Crusader Mission speech 33245 Star Reach ..... . 26706 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 31772 Star Trek: Judgment Rites. 34170 Star Wars Screen Saver WIN 32808 Star Wars Chess 37309 Stargate 31477 Stonekcep . 30926 Street Fighter ll . 27188 Strike Commander .. 30608 Strike Commander Speech Pack 32114 Strike Commander Tactical #1 35614 Strip Poker Pro #12 Data Disk 31886 Strip Poker Professional 35144 Sub Battle Simulator 35151 Sub Battle Simulator 11 WINDOWS 33331 Subwar 2050 37091 Subwar 2050 Scenario 35362 Super Skill.. . 37282 Super Street Fightertil. 26041 Super Teltis .. 32605 Super VGA Harrier .. 34383 Superhero League of Hoboken 31154 Syndicate 33858 System Shock 34305 TFX: Tactical Fighter 36820 TV Guide Crosswords -WINDOWS 35160 TacOps WINDOWS 31260 Terminator 2 Chess Wars ... 17179 Terminator 2029 31422 Terminator: Rampage.. 23134 Terror of the Deep 28095 Tetris Classic 29356 Tetris Trio 32154 The Dlg. 34291 Theatre of Death 34914 Theme Park 33332 Third Reich 32152 Tie Fighter 29906 Tigers on the Prow 35308 Tony LaRussa Baschallll 2.0 32900 Tower Controller 26142 Train Engineer WINDOWS 37084 Transport Tycoon WINDOWS 37588 True Lies 35776 Tunnel Rat 36452 U Boat WINDOWS 24619 USCF Chess 27431 Ultima Underworld 29869 Ultima VII: Serpent Isle 35873 Ultima VIIL: Lost Vale Addon 32879 Ultima Vill: Pagan.. 33777 Ultima VIII. Pagan Speech Pak 34434 Ultimate Domain .. 29620 Ultrabots *** 36041 Unnecessary Roughness 95 30161 Veil of Darkness 32859 Victory at Sea 33934 WW2 Air Force Commander 35707 WWII Flight Sim Toul Kit 31641 War in Russia .......... 36708 Warcraft: Orcs and Humans 34653 Wargame Construction Set Il: Tanks 31521 Warlords II. 25222 Warlords II Scenario Editor 37093 Welltris IBM CD-ROM RECREATION .40 Soccer Kid CALL 36 52 35 38 SOCCER KID An evil alien spaceship has stolen soccer's Word Cup and scattered it around the world in five pleces! Without it, there will be no World Championships this year! There's hope, because Soccer Kid is on the casel Armed with his trusty soccer ball. Soccer Kid sets out on a worldwide journey to recover the five pieces in time for the Championships. His quest takes him through 5 countries, filled with dangers and pitfalls. Help him face over 30 levels of enemies whose goal is to rid the world of Soccer IBM CD available. MICROLEAGUE IBM 3.5* #3559222 23 33683 10-Year Anthology Classics... 32903 11th Hour.... 36593 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons 34888 5 Foot 10 Pak Volume 36691 5 Foot 10 Pak Volume Il 37686 5 Game Super Pak 29037 7th Guest 32855 ADED Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 35878 ADSD Dark Sun: Wake Ravager. 32925 ADSD Dungeon Hack ...... 34161 ADSD Genie's Curse..... 36958 ADSD Menzoberranzan 34165 ADUD Ravenlott: Strands Posses 36009 Absolute Zero 35254 Aces of the Deep 34717 Aces of the Pacific 34719 Aces over Europe 36729 Across the Rhine: 1944 33011 Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet 36278 Air Combat: US Navy Fighters 36757 Air Havoc Controller ..... 35157 Air Warrior II. 35365 Air Wamor Super... 35806 Allen Legacy 34944 Alien Logic: Jorune. 35720 All-Pro Football 35527 All Star Sports Collection. 32513 Alone in the Dark 37074 Alone in the Dark II. 36006 America's Civil War 36368 Anyone for Cards?.. 37596 Arena Elder Scrolls. 35869 Armored Fist 37039 Award Winning War Games 35311 Babylon 5 36010 Bandits 37199 Battle Chess Compilation 26439 Battle Chess Enhanced 37205 Battle Cruiser 3000AD 36042 Battle Isle 2200 34448 Battledome 32602 Beneath a Steel Sky.. 34422 Betrayal at Kondor 34638 BioForge Interactive Movie 37597 Blake Stone. Planet Strike 35593 Blood Bow... 32981 Blood Net 36939 own Away 31506 Blue Force 37206 Bobbie Fischer Teaches Chess 34486 Brain Drain... 33860 Buzz Aldrin's Rice to Space 37517 Cadillacs & Dinosaurs 37200 Caesar's World of Gambling 32963 Campaign... 34279 Cannon Fodder 35318 Capitol Punishment 34168 Castles ll: Slege & Conquest 35442 Celebrity Poker ....... 36919 Central Intelligence 35005 Championship Pinball 35420 ChessMaster 4000 Turbo 36016 Colonization: Sid Meier's ... : 33497 Comanche a Mission Disk #1 34031 Command Starship 1696 Command and Conquer 37539.Commander Blood .:33909 Companions of Xanth $7357 Complete Basketball MPC 1.0 29767 Conan The Cimmerian.. 35658 Corridor 7 34659 Cowboy Casino 36884 Chature Shock 35100 Crime Patrol.. 35224 Crime Patrol 2 Drug Wan 35768 Cyberjudas 32715 CyberRace... 35736 Cyberspace 36913 Cyber Tarot 36477 Cyberia 36043 Cyclemania 36279 Cyclones 37701 Cyberwar 34973 D-Day: Operation Overlord 33235 Danionsgate..... 29904 Dagger of Amon Ra Laura Bowl 36750 Damnesia 33920 Daring to Fly 36302 Dark Forces... 34163 Dark legions 32713 D.utk Sex 35738 Dawn Patrol 30880 Day of the Tentacle 36044 Deathpite 36453 Deta V 36746 Discworld.... 36628 Digital Dieantware 37644 Dominus 36320 Doom Hel on Earth 36791 Doom 11: Hintsook 31564 Dracula Unleashed 37020 Dragon Lore. Chapter 1 31493 Dragon's Lair 35231 Dragon's Lair It: Time Warp 33540 Dragonsphere 29450 Dune 37702 Dungeon Master 2.... 34781 ESPN Baseball Catching 34779 ESPN Baseball Defensive Play 34778 ESPN Baseball: Hitting 34780 ESPN Baseball Pitching 34786 ESPN Football Defensive Black 34789 ESPN Football: Linemen 34787 ESPN Football: Quarterback 34788 ESPN Football Receiver 34783 ESPN Goll Full Swing & Putting 34782 ESPN Golf: Shot Making 35808 ESPN Let's Play Baseball 35809 ESPN Let's Play Soccer 35812 ESPN Les Play Tennis 36525 Eight Ball Deluxe Pinball 35361 Empire Deluxe Masters Edition 31115 Eric the Unready 31429 F-15 Strike Eagle lll... 36731 FIFA International Soccer 34740 Falcon Gold. 35944 Family Feud.. 36293 Fantasy Fest.. 49 CALL 40 .46 40 GOOD TO FIRM SPORTSTER 14.4 INTERNAL Stafinnin 14400 DATA/FAX MODEM 14,400 with 142 bis Starting out with an empty stable and a million bucks, you set out to make your mark in the world of racing You are a trainer/stable Owner, special tring in flat racing Buy horses at auctions or at selling races, train them and then enter them in races. Select the jockeys wholl ride your nag to the winner's circle or into obscurity, Features some of the biggest laces from the British flat racing season. plus the Classic races of four main tracks! Lises graphis with 3D scrolling for unbeatable realism ARC OF DOOM Earth is on the brink of ecolog ical chaos with earthquakes, tidal waves and volcanoes threatening all lifel Redmond Institute's Alpha Team is sent to the hot spots to investigate, but now they've disappeared! TO find them you must rely on codes, garbled messages and a scientific database. Point and click your way through puzzles, UFO chases, and top secret information Multiple game endings and non-linear game play make this one of the most exciting games of the year! GOOD Internal 14,400 fax/modem version features CCITT V.32bis with V.42bis. Supports 14.400bps Group III fax and transmits data at 14,400 with V42/MNP 2. 4 error control and V.42bs/MNP 5 data compres sion, for up to 57,600bps. Send and receive faxes while running other applications, send group and delayed faxes, and create personalized phonebooks for quicker dialing Compatible with most popular fax and communications software packages. Features a 5-year warranty USROBOTICS IBM #28367 $118 34 WIZARD GAMES IBM 3.5 #36790 $31 SUNSTAR IBM CD #36911 $32 "


"SIM TOWER DRAGON LORE 1:800 2287449.0135 ext.315 Sim Tower is an entertainment simulation which gives you the power to build a high-rise skyscraper. satisfy your tenants needs. and manage it into a profitable Commercial empire. As owner and landlord of the building your objective is to develop a balanced and profitable plece of commercial real estate by leasing out space and opening businesses inside your tower for condos, hotels, offices, restaurants, shops, movie theaters subway stations, parking lots and other amenities Mac version available MAXIS IBM #37593 3 3 Step into the dark terrifying world of Dragon Lore, where dragons roam the Earth and Lords rule the land. The dark Knight Haagen Von Diakonov murdered your father and destroyed your Castle. To avenge your father's death you must become a Dragon Knight! So begins your dangerous journey in Dragon Lore. The first in a trilogy of fully rendered 3-D role playing adventures that look and feel like nothing you've ever played before. It's the ultimate fantasy graphic adventure! 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 $508-443-6125 5 08-443-5645 Oct 02 Satan S M S toldsdoch dom Vocess . A becom e poucoupon corvo po g osto w 1981 report D EMA sardid 25W Jacopertura 2 009 . NON DONT 115 cast We gor i carone E Row Wilson S cott ved p inged W. MINDSCAPE IBM CD #37020 $46 IBM CD-ROM RECREATION IBM CD-ROM RECREATION IBM CD-ROM RECREATION 37 DAWN PATROL 139 CALL 35769 Fighter Wing .... 37458 First Wave Game Pack 34348 Five on 5.. 36918 Hash Traffic 35714 Fleet Defender: F-14 36591 Flight Commander II 36699 Flight Shop 5.0.... 36696 Flight Sim Europe #15.0 36692 Flight Sim: Las Vegas 50 36694 Filght Sim: Portland 5.0 36979 Flight Simulator 5.1 27755 Flight Simulator Toolkit... 36629 Flight Unlimited .... 35770 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki.. 35323 Freddy Pharkas 34613 Freelancer 2120 ... 37320 Front Lines 35312 Front Page Sports Baseball 36552 Front Page Sports Baseball Expans 35315 Front Page Sports: Football 95 35975 Frontier: 1st Encounter 36392 Full Throttle 37590 G-Nome .... 37202 Kingdom of the Far Reaches 35209 Knights of Xentar 32591 latyyrinth of Time 32526 Lands of Lore 33294 Lawnmower Man. 29426 Legend of Kyrandia 35328 Leisure Suit Larry Anthology 32792 Leisure Suit Larry VI 36741 Lemmings Chronicles 37707 Lite Divil 36459 Live Action Football 37291 Leadstar 35322 Lade Runner ...... 31348 Lord of the Rings.. 35711 Lords of Midnight ..... 37327 Lords of the Realm... 35737 Lost Eden 36056 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 2012 Lost Treasures Intocom 31815 Lost in Time 34349 Luncus 33703 MPEG-Dragon's Lal 35363 MPEG Psychotron... 35 Prepare for the deronautical experience of a lifetime! Take the controls of one of 15 periodic aircraft, including the Sopwith Camel and the Red Baron's Fokker Triplane. Features fully image mapped altcraft and landscapes, plus myriad viewing perspectives Create your own characters from Rookie to Flying Ace. Fly in over 150 missions. This is flight simulation at its finest IBM 3.5' version also available. 30 32 34 CALL 40 EMPIRE INTERACTIVE IBM CD #35738 $40|| Last Minute Gilit Ideas 75 37536 Mindscape Sports Pack 36049 Mission Critical '95 32528 Monopoly Deluxe 37156 Monty Python's Complete Waste 34743 More Incredible Machine 35296 Morgan's Trivia Machine 35818 NASCAR Racing 37068 NFL's Greatest Plays 35863 NHL Hockey '95 33097 Naval Pack 37005 Nerves of Steel 35864 No World Order 35722 Noctropolis 34002 Nomad 34317 Omar Sharif on Bridge Deluxe 36364 Operation Body Count.. 34173 Outpost 34864 Outpost Planet Pack. 36280 PGA Tour Colt 486 37087 Pacific Air War: 1942 34911 Pacific Strike Speech Pack 36968 Page Master 36481 Panzer General 34085 Phantasmagoria 36941 Phoenix Fighter 35005 Pinball Arcade 36773 Pitfall 32791 Police Quest IV 36244 Power House 36445 Powerhits Batuletech 36446 Powerhits: Sci/ 35509 Prince Formerly Interactive 35774 Psychotron... 35941 Quarantine... 35332 Quest for Glory IV ... 34609 Raiden 35841 Ratio Gump 36818 Reader's Digest Crosswords 36385 Realms of Atkania: Star Trail 32155 Rebel Assault 34718 Red Baron/A-10 Tank 37024 Renegade: Jacob's Star 31431 Return of the Phantom 35449 Return to Ringworld 36513 Return to Zork + Anthology 36599 Reunion... 36917 Rise of the Robots 36937 Rise of the Triad. 11497 SSN 21: Sea Wolf 35591 Sabre Team 32153 Sam Max Hit the Road.. 34288 Saurus 30708 Scrabble Deluxe... 35150 Seaworthy 28210 Secret Weapons tuftwaffe 28717 Secret of Monkey Island 37460 Secrets of Stargate.. 32515 Shadow of the Comet 36934 Shadows of Cairn IBM CD 33866 Shadowcaster. 31518 Simant Enhanced 31479 SimCity Enhanced 34086 SimEarth Enhanked 35753 Simfarm... 36575 SimTown). 37592 Sink or Swim.. AIR HAVOC CONTROLLER 35 The stunningly realistic Air Traffic Control simulator with true-to-life 3-D computer graphics. The air is thick with tension and planes! Sixteen accidents are waiting to happen Thousands of lives hangin the balance and you're in the control tower! Forget the single radar screen. This is Alt Havoc Controller With 13 different types of aircraft, 25 separate planes, a 3-D interface, and over 30 minutes of 3-D rendered animation's the excitement never goes into a tailspin! ALL 46 35219 Mad Dog McCree II 35773 Maelstrom 36853 Magic Carpet 32595 Man Enough. 34559 Maniac Sports MPC 30082 Mantis Experimental Fighter 3600H Master of Magic 37567 Master of Magic 33865 Mech Commander 34155 Mix Warrior 11 33310 Megan Race. 34865 Metaltech: Earth Slege 33532 Microcosm.. 34010 Microsoft Baseball 31659 Microsoft Golf 34829 Microsoft Golf Courses: Pinehurst 34741 Mig 29 Gold 33217 Might & Magic World of Xeen. 34796 Millennium Auction.... 36856 Millennium Auction Private Collect 37535 Mindscape 10 Pack ... CALL ARE 40 43 31 TRIMARK IBM CD #36757 $30 29 LIVE ACTION FOOTBALL EXPLORER PACK 5 GAME SUPER PAK 35955 GT Cinema Robo Tech: Macross 35962 GT Cinema, Three Stooges 32784 Gabriel Knight.... 34722 Gabriel Knight CD 33328 Gateway Il... 34069 Geekwad Games of the Galaxy 34840 Gettysburg 33138 Goblins!... 31821 Goblins II ... 33720 Goblins III 36551 Goblilins IV .. . 36374 Grand Master Championship Chess 35618 Grandest Ficet 33701 Great Naval Battles Il... 32120 Great Naval Battles Pack 31434 Gunship 2000 w/Scenario 34035 Hacker Chronicles 36463 Hacker Chronicles 11 34149 Hand of Fate 36998 HardBall IV 35696 Harpoon Classic 21557 Harpoon Il... 33905 Harvester 32458 Hell Cab 35946 Hell: A Cyberpunk Thriller 37695 Hereti 36246 High Seas Trader 34421 Horde 37003 Ice Hoxkey 31810 Incal. 33326 Incall. 36549 Inca 111 35346 Incredible Machine 2 35350 Incredible Toons... 31351 Indiana Fate of Atlantis 35721 Infemo.*.. 34759 Inherit the Earth 31162 cm Helix 37465 Isle of the Dead... 37704 Ishar 3:7 Gates of intimity 36047 Jack Nicklaus Sigriture Golf 36388 Jagged Alliance 37204 Jet Fighter III. 32128 Journeyman Project 36297 Journeyman Project: Tutbol 34347 Jump Raven 37594 Jump: David Bowle... 31132 Jutland 36852 Kasparov's Gambit 34702 King's Quest Anthology 25687 Kings Quest V 30892 Kings Quest VI. 32904 King's Quest VI Upgrade .38 CHANT You're an NFL coach in the only game that combines live action video LIVE ACTION Real NFL Pros and thousands of play combi nations! Every decision counts! Includes 52 of the greatest NFL players Original video footage. TV. style interface and seamless play by play Commentary from Al Michaels will have you thinking you are coaching an actual game! Enough pressure? Wait until the artificial intelligence actually lcams your tendencies and adjusts its strategies to stop you! Mac CD version available, please call ACCOLADE IBMCD #36459 $33 Ten full-length CD-ROMS: Tony Quinn's Virtual Galaxy, Sound Library Pro, Explore SuperToons 2: Pack The Legend Continuest; World of Motion CD Film Fest: Comedy Classics Reyond the Wall of Stars: Quest One of the Tarzan Trilogy: Loon Magic: Font Pro 2: Types of Distinction, Mat & Joe's Cool Screen Backgrounds: Photo Pro Select and, The Best of Photo Pro. It's Fun.Cam Art.. Education-all wrapped up in one package! Mac CD verison available, please call Turn your computer into a casino and gel live popular Windows games on One CD all with multimedia sound! Play the 21 best solitaire games ever invented each with three levels of difficulty and animation Or, choose your level of expertise and play chess against the computer or vs. friends via modem, network or Internetl Other games include Video Poker, Blackjack, and the popular new table game, Caribbean Stud Poker! Will you break the bank-or lose your shit? Exciting fast paced entertainment for all ages! MASQUE IBM CD #37686 930 40 WAYZATA IBM CD #37659 $35 Circle Render Service #56 "


"Celebrating 10 years!! DARK FORCES DARK FORCES CD-ROM If you enjoy playing Doom you'll love LucasArts new action gamel AS Rebel Agent Kyla Katar, you'll encounter a wide variety of enemies in over 15 different virtual worlds of the Star Wars Universel Live the adventure with superb graphils. Keep your enemy in your sights, or direct your vision elsewhere while your weapon remains firmly fixed on your target! It doesn't get more virtually real than this! SPACE ACE Evil Commander Borf has now kidnapped Ace's girlfriend Kimberly, and is plotting to enslave Earth using his \"Intanto Ray.a weapon that changes everyone into a helpless baby! Armed with only a laser gun, Ace must find and destroy the Infanto Ray rescue his beloved Kimberly, and save the planet from becoming one Eigantic nursery. Features fullscreen animation and crisp, powerful sound from the original laser disc arcade classic. This is true arcade action at its most addictivel Mac CD version available, READYSOFT IBM CD #35225 Expre Since 1985 LUCAS ARTS 18M CD #36302 $46 $37 IBM CD-ROM RECREATION IBM CD-ROM RECREATION KIDS/FAMILY/HOME HOLLYWOOD MOGUL 29 .21 26 innamon 40 38 .30 40 27097 Wing Commander 1/Ultima VI.. 34276 Wing Commander III . 35405 Wings of Glory 1917-1918 36296 Wolf: Wildlife Survival .. 30408 Wolfpack 35410 Woodstock: 25th Anniversary 33088 World Circuit Grand Prix... 37687 World Series of Poker Deluxe 33917 Wrath of the Gods 34292 X-COM: UFO Defense 36940 X-Wing Collectors CD-ROM. 35439 Zephyr .... 36366 ZOTO MACINTOSH TITLES 32 50 As the proud new owner of a Hollywood studio, you've got some of the biggest movie stars waiting for your call. You're responsible for bringing 25 movies to the \"Silver Screen\" Buy scripts and bestsellers develop ideas, or make sequels Shool on location or on the lot  ur movie's finished, you still need to market i Will the Box Office grosses rotin.or will you bomb? If you've got what it takes to make it in Hollywood. it's gonna take everything you ve gott DEVUONO GAMES 18M 3.5 #27109 $38 30 41 39 36960 Soccer Kid 25688 Space Quest IV. 37287 Spaceship Warlocs 34296 Spear of Destiny Super CD-Pak 34608 Spectre VR ****** 33297 Spellcasting Party Pak.... 35724 Star Crusader .. . 29366 Star Trek 25th Enhanced 34021 Star Trek: Collectibles Guide 34343 Star Trek: DSN The Hunt 37193 Star Trek: Judgment Rites 34278 Star Trek: Star Fleet Academy 34350 Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual 34568 Star Trek: TNG: A Final Unity 32547 Star Wars Chess..... 25686 Stellar 7 36893 Stonekeep 37283 Street Fighet Il Compilation 32109 Strike Commander + Tactical 36290 Strike Commander / Privatcer. 37090 Subwar 2050 Plus 34425 Superhero: League of Hoboken 35872 System Shock .. 33743 TEX Tactical Fighter .. 36819 TV Guide Crosswords 35018 Terminator: Rampage 23148 Terror of the Deep 36012 Test Pilot 33320 Tetris Gold Compilation 34916 Theme Park 35309 Tony LaRussa Baseball 11 2.0 36496 Top Ten Pack .. 36754 Tomado.. 36292 Total Distortion 36697 Tower Controller 37565 Transport Tycoon 36412 Treasure Pack 36885 Trivial Pursuit 30890 Trump Castle lll.. 27564 Ultimal. VI.. 28732 Ultima Underworld/Wing Com. 11 30925 Ultima Underworld i all 15416 Ultima Vill: Pagan w/ Speech 35421 Ultimate Domain. 35712 Ultimate Football.. 37510 Ultimate Robot ... 37562 Unatural Selection .. 36045 Unnecessary Roughness 95 25500 Vegas Games Deluxe 36499 Vid Grid ..... 33989 Videogame Solution 34345 Viper: Assault on the Outfit.. 36875 Virtual Guitar ........ 36707 Voyeur. **** 37708 Vortex . 35708 WWII Flight Sim Tool Kit. 36701 Warcraft: Orcs and Humans 37385 Warplanes Modern Fighting 35400 Warren Miller's Skiing Safari 34202 Who Shot Johnny Rock? 34573 Wild Blue Yonder: Episode One 37085 Wild Blue Yonder: Volume 2.. 29408 Willy Beamish ..... .. . 35874 Wing Commander Armada .... 36291 Wing Cominander / Il Deluxe..... 35281 MS-DOS Upgrade 6.22... ..... 36648 Maglc Bear's Masterpieces CD.. 35549 Magic Theatre CD .......... 37662 Managing Your Money 95 2.0 WIN 36713 Math Blaster Mystery CD...... 36523 Math Workshop CD ......... 34580 Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing CD 33520 Mayo Clinic Family Health CD 349H6 Mayo Clinic Pharmacist CD 36519 Mayo Clinic Sports Health 36808 MusicTime 2.0 CD 3G806 MusicTime 2.0 WIN.. 36663 My Favorite Monster CD. 36890 One World Atlas CD.. 36828 Oregon Trail II CD. 36538 People vs. OJ Simpson CD 33924 Print Artist 36030 Print Shop Deluxe WIN 31527 Publisher 2.0 WIN. 33928 Putt-Putt Fun Pack CD 36843 Quicken 4.0 CD 36840 Quicken 4.0 WIN 36838 Quicken 8.0 DOS 36841 Quicken Deluxe 40 CD 36842 Quicken Deluxe 4 WIN 33063 SAT I Studyware 36017 SAT I Studyware CD... 32960 SAT NEW Personal Trainer 2.0 34308 SAT NEW Personal Trainer CD 36377 Safety Monkey CD ... 36110 Sharks CD 36803 Sports III. Swimsuit CD 35823 Storybook Maker CD 36595 ThiplePlayPlus French CD 36594 TriplePlay Plus Spanish 37416 Vivid 3D Studio 37712 Vivid 3D Pro . . 36379 Welcome to Bodyland CD 36337 What is a Belly Button? CD 21493 WinFax Pro 40 WIN 35647 Windows 95 40 .... 35648 Windows 95 Upgrade 4.0. 30081 Windows Upgrade 3.11.... 36111. Wings Over Europe WWII CD 30497 World's Greatest Speeches SEGA/SNES/3DO 33864 Alone in the Dark 36912 Arc of Doom CD 35716 Break Thrul. 29214 Civilization... 37227 Dungeon Master 2 29932 Eight Ball Deluxe Pinball 36590 Flight Commander !! 26045 Flight Simulator 4.0 34172 Gabriel Knight 25497 Harpoon Il... 30822 Iron Helix CD 36298 Journeyman Project Turbo CD 37022 King's Quest VII CD 30705 Legend of Kyrandia 33398 Leisure Suit Larry VI .... 35257 Links Pro w/ Harbortown Cou 34450 Operation Crusader 33824 PGA Tour Golf II 34174 Police Quest IV 35135 Prince of Persia II 36705 Sensory Overload 32616 SimCity 2000 35755 Sim Town CD 31474 Star Trek: 25th Anniversary 36830 Star Trek: 25th Enhanced CD 37192 Wolfenstein 3-D... KIDS/FAMILY/HOME 33 ARASANAMHR 40 33 IN NASCARI Sie 29 35 ... NASCAR RACING Start your enginest Drive 700 horsepower monsters against top NASCAR drivers, on 9 different xxleled NASCAR tracks Loaded with TV-like 3.D realism-from cars to terrain to track-side billboards. You Can even custom.paint your car Hita wall, and wham sparks shower and parts fly offl From speed to engine set up to track and tire conditions, it's so realistic you'll swear you smell gasoline fumes SVGA 35' verison also available 27 49. 1,39. 26 26 89 35923 After Dark 3.0 WIN 35924 After Dark MPC 3.0 CD.... 36987 Beavis a Butthead Screen Saver CD 33036 Creative Writer WIN. 33549 Design Your Own Landscape WIN 32032 Disney Collection Screen Saver .... 35617 Dr. Ts Sing-A-Long World CD... 17177 Dr. TS Sing Along Kids CD... 36174 EasyKeys CD. **** 36855 Encarta MPC Encyclopedia '95 CD 36895 GED W/Cliff Notes 35749 Gift Maker WIN 36463 Hacker Chronicles II CD 36072 Iets CD 33359 Lenny's Music Toons CD .. 36526 Lights Out Sports Baseball. 36530 Lights Out Sports Football 36528 Lights Out Sports Hockey.. 35615 Lon King Print Studio WIN .. 36138 Lotus 123 50 Upgrade WIN 29 38 30 VIRGIN IBM CD #35818 $47 -32 STAR TREK THE NEXT GENERATION ALL 683 Embark on an adventure beyond your imagination Welcome aboard the USS Enterprise The crew is all here to take you from the outposts of Federation space, through treacherous shields up confrontations,    and beyond to the uncharted \"A Final Unity\" dangers of a massive nebula Features digitized CD-quality music and sound effects with 3-D SVGA graphics. You're in command of the Starship Enterprise and the starfleet is depending on you so don't let them down! SPECTRUM IBM CD #34568 $54 THE LEMMINGS CHRONICLES THE Those lovable, green-haired losers are back CHRONICLES and headed your way in this new Lemmings adventurel Lead three Lemming Tribes-Egyptian Classic and Shadow-as they attempt to ta  homelands You get 90 levels of gamplay, larger Lemmings in Crazy costumes new objectives and for the first time, bad guys! Everyone will have fun trying to solve the puzzles that has made Lemmings among the most popular games in the world. If you liked Lemmings before, wait 'til you see 'em nowi IBM 3.5 version available. SONY IMAGESOFT IBM CD #36741 35 39876 ADED Slayer 300 ..... 37198 Alone in the Dark. 300 37363 Andretti Racing SEGA 37208 Blackthorne .SEGA . 37207 Blackthome SNES... 37102 Breakthrul SEGA 37103 Breakthrul SNES 37467 Civilization SNES 37421 Desert Strike 25550 Dragon'star-3DO... 33073 Escape from Monster Manor-300 33561 Eternal Champions SEGA 34004 Hardball III. SNES ........ 25850 Horde 3D0.. 35352 Incredible Toons SEGA CD 37101 Iron Helix SEGA CD.. 33823 John Madden NFL 94-3DO 32534 Jurassic Park-SEGA.. 37106 Knights of the Sky.SEGA 34598 Kombat Cats .SEGA 35036 Leathal Enforcers SEGA CD 33074 Lemmings 3D0 ... 33832 MLBPA Baseball SNES 33025 Mad Dog McCree-3DO 37424 Michael Jordon: Chaos -SNES 33026 Mortal Kombat SEGA 35034 Mortal Kombat SEGA CD 32574 Mortal Kombat -SNES 36305 Mortal Kombat II SEGA. 36493 Mortal Kombat 11 SNES 31971 NBA Jam SEGA 35062 NBA Jam-SNES 32051 NHL 94 SEGA 33829 Nommys Beach SEGA 33070 Oceans Below 3DO. 26132 Out of this world. 3DO 21531 Pele II SEGA 35397 Road Rash 300 34667 Shadowrun SEGA 37378 Shaq Fu-SEGA 37428 Shaq Fu-SNES 37485 Sonic and Knuckles SNES 33851 Sonic the Hedgehog 3. SEGA .. 25909 Star Control II 3DO 37226 Star Trek Star Heet Academy SNES 35096 Star Trek: TNG Echoes -SEGA 32578 Street Fighter II SEGA 32541 Street Fighter 11 SNES ... 33546 Super NBA Basketball-SEGA 32576 Super Off Road Baja -SNES.. BLOWN AWAY Twisted villain. Twisted logic. Twisted games Totally unlike anything you've ever seen before! Come face to face with an evil genius Face explosives timed to explode al your first misstep Your enemy is always one step ahead of you. You can't outrun victed Tilkin Twisted Logic. Thisted Games him. Only by out thinking and out maneuvering him can you move to the next challenge. Blown Away is two dozen of the most insidious, mind-blowing games ever invented all in one explosive package! IVI PUBLISHING IBMCO #36939 $39 "


"KIDBOARD TV GUIDE/READER'S DIGEST Real MUSUWERIES GERTRUIRE TETESITE 1300228.7449 ext.35 T's a whole new way to introduce children ages 3 and up to the world of computers. This is definitely NOT your run-of-the-mill keyboard Besides its kid friendly colors and design, KidBoard is built extra tough and durable. In fact, even its audible click keys are stronger than conventional keyboard keys! And, as if that weren't enough, it comes complete with three software games that make small fingers fly across the keys! TWO world renowned favorites for a great pricel Each contain 30 specially designed puzzles of varying difficulty. Clues can be colorful pictures, interesting sound bites, or even videosTV GUIDE MULTIMEDIA CROSSWORDS tests your knowledge of the entertainment world. READERS DIGEST MULTIMEDIA CROSSWORDS covers a variety of topics, including historical figures, sports, current events, literature and much much more Mac CD version available Order both for 540 INTERMEDIA IBMCD $22ea. S22ea 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 TF :508-443-6125 508-443-5645 outdoo12 M ETEORIESE ME SENSORI dowe w ubezedb e OBAMASA WEKREMOWI ORTO cos t a SOMS WONOSNO rodowe what de UsWeD orotalo bonnecting ROD RIVE SPORTS BIORE KIDBOARD IBM 837430 $99 CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS ..64 SEGA/SNES/3DO 35521 Super Street Fighter 11 SEGA 35520 Super Street Fighter IISNES 33734 Super Wing Commander 300 35037 Tomcat Alley SEGA CD 35093 Virtua Racing SEGA 37105 Whitesnake SEGA 37104 Whitesnake SNES 32540 X-Men-SEGA... 37113 Yoshi's Cookie SNES. 36602 Zero Tolerance-SEGA SOUND CARDS 186 251 34652 Audio Advantage PCMCIA Sndcard 26433 Audio Magician 16CD..... 33346 Audio Magician Plus 30958 AudioMan......... 30823 Daytona PCMCIA SoundCard 16bit 34224 Digital Sound Pro 16. 28247 Gravis Ultrasound 26292 Gtavis Ultrasound Max 33725 Gravis Ultrasound Midi Adapter 27926 Jazz Soundcard SCSI ..... 33240 Maui Wavetable Synth. Upgrade 36498 Monte Carlo Game Card ....... 34189 Multisound Monterey 16-bit... 36771 Multisound Tahiti 16-bit .. 31059 Port-Able Sound Plus... 34615 ReelMagic Lite ... 32312 Reo Magic Multimedia Playback 35366 Rio Soundcard... 32031 Roland RAP-10 Audio Producer 37007 3DO Blaster 379 35857 4PLEX Quad-speed EXT w/Controller.......617 37038 4PLEX Quad-speed EXT W/SCSI-MAC .. 599 35856 4PLEX Quad-speed EXT Wo/Controller 563 35733 Aztech CDA268-01 AFP INT W/Controller 138 35762 Aztech SoundGalaxy Orion 16 .122 35734 Adtech Voyager INT MultiMedia Kit 35735 Aztech Zeta INT CD-ROM W/Controller 36706 CD Upgrade Kit INT W/6 Microsoft 30615 CDS-535 INT CD-Drive wo/Controller ..213 33706 CDX-535 EXT CD-Drive w/Controller 30602 CDX-535 EXT CD-Drive wo Controller. 309 37031 Digital Schoolhouse INT CDROM 21729 Digital pe 3X INT CDROM .712 30216 Discovery CD 16 INT COROM 238 37030 Edutainment CD 16 EXT CDROM 534 30746 Edutainment CD16 INT CDROM... 427 21560 Game Blaster CD 16 ... .391 36826Legend INT Kit W/6 Titles... 238 36267 Legend Internal Mult, Kit 320ms 302 30996 Monterey Multimedia Upgid Kit 700 32933 MultiSpin 3XE External 195ms 32932 MultiSpin 3XI Internal 195ms. 456 32934 MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms 409 34923 MultiSpin 4X Pro Extemal... 728 37029 Multimedia Office EXT CD-ROM .605 37028 Multimedia Office INT CD-ROM 534 35597 OmniCD 3X INT COROM.. 353 37026 OmniCD 4X4 34320 OmniCD Upgrade Kit External 367 31809 Omni Upgrade Kit Internal 34133 Reelmagle CD-ROM KI 29404 Gravis Analog Pro 28366 Gravis Eliminator Care 27815 Gravis Gamepad -1BRS 32174 Gravis Gamepad MAC 30003 Cavis Mouse Stick II MAC 35133 Gravis Phoenix Control System 37715 JetStick 36886 Joyswitch 36562 Natural Keyboard 35458 PC Golf System.. 35133 Phoenix Flight & Weapons Ctrl  Pro Pedals 30825 Thrustmaster ACM Game Card 35104 Thrustmaster F-16 FLCS 26850 Thrustmaster Flight Control-BM/MAC 33344 Thrustmaster Formula 1 29522 Thrustmaster Pro FCS.... 29863 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals IBM/MAC 33780 Thrustmaster WCS Markl MAC 31258 Thrustmaster WCS Markil 3024 Tristale VS Mark II uf'M IBM 29434 Virtual Pilot Yoke 36656 Wingman Extreme Joystick .. 36655 Wingman Joystick 37037 X-Cable Extensions ...... 33052 Y Cable for 2 Joysticks.... BLIND DATE A humorous CDROMance ate in which the player can experience the angst of a first date. But you must say all the right things to further the date Sandi is the object of your affection and in order to win her over you must choose the right response So when Sandi poses a question, carefully weigh your response. If you do, you may go all the way in this full-motion video challengel Mac CD version available, please call MEMORY IBM CD W36755 TRIMARK $38) 385 36147 1X3 Simms 70ns (4 Sinims) .. 36136 1X9 Simms 70ns (4 Simms) 36149 4X9 Simms 70ns (4 Simms) 36176 72 Pin4MB Module Ons 36177 72 Pin8MB Module 60ns... 36555 72 Pin 16MB Module Guns 36559 72 Pin 64MB Module 60ns. CPU CHIPS CALL .CALL CALL CALL CALL CALL CALL Free Air Shipping FIGHTER WING FIGHTER *certain restrictions apply 366 440 27924 Sensory Starter Upgrade Kit 34225 Sensory System IINT Multimedia Kit JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS 31841 Cyrix 83087-25 FasMathDX Copr.. .CALL 31842 Cyrix 83087-33 FasMathDX Copr..... CALL 31884 Cyrix 83087-40 FasMathDx Copr.. ..CALL 31835 Cyrix 83587-25 FasMathsX Copr... CALL 33455 Cyrix 83587 33 SX CProcessor CALL 31739 Cyrix CX486DRX2-16/32 386DX-16. CALL 31751 CyTix CX4860RX2-20/40 386DX-20 33620 Cyrix CX486DRX2-25/50 386DX25 ... CALL 31738 Cyrix CX486DRX2-33/66 386DX-33 CALL 31836 Cyrix CX4865RX2-20/40 386SX-20. CALL 34409 Cyrix CX4865RX2-25/50 386SX-25 CALL 24196 Math Co Processor 3B7DX. CALL 35501 Math Co-Processor 3875 CALL 24200 Math Co-Processor 387SX CALL 35134 Overdrive 486DX-50 CPU CALL 30884 Overdrive 486DX-50 CPU WO/OD CALL 31505 Overdrive 486DX-66 CPU WO/OD. CALL 35502 Overdrive 486DX-66 FOR SX/DX33 36727 Overdrive 486DX4-100 CPU.. CALL 36728 Overdrive 486DX4-100 CPU WO/OD CALL 36725 Overdrive 486DX4-75 CPU .CALL 36726 Overdrive 486DX4-75 CPU WO/OD...... 35599 Overdrive 4865X2-50 CPU WO/FPU.. .CALL 172 89 35481 Roland SC-7PC Sound Module 36878 Roland SC55MKII Sound Canvas 35480 Roland SCD-10 DB Sound Canvas.. 35628 Roland SCD-15 DB Sound Canvas 32530 Sound Blaster 16 MCD 32533 Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP 32531 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 32532 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 ASP 34807 Sound Blaster 16 Value Editicia, 21735 Sound Blaster AWE320 37033 Sound Blaster AWE NY. 37027 Sound Blaster AWE32walued 34661 Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed. 34660 Sound Blaster Value Edition 30090 SoundMan 1600 33751 SoundMan Wave 36587 Tropez 16-bit Sound Card 36883 Video Blaster FS200 16-Bit 36580 Video Blaster RT300 16-Bit. 30931 WaveBlaster Daughter Board SPEAKERS 89 The ultra-realistic fight combat experience. Within a matter of minutes, you'll be flying the world's top state-of-the-art fighter aircraft. There's no heavy duty training hassle Gameplay can include as few as one, or as many as 16 players on two teams! Three levels of play include Training Missions for beginners, Simple Missions and Complex Missions. Choose the level that suits your skills and get into the action IBM 3.5 version also available. 37035 Aero Mouse 37034 Acto Pen 37036 AeroDual 3D Mouse and Pen 32883 Cyberman 3D Controller 29442 FX2000 Pistol Grip ... 33226 Flight Stand ........ 16439 Flight Stick 31417 Flight Stick Pro IBM 27914 Flight Stick Pro MAC 31148 G-Force Flight Yoke .. 32333 Game Zapper... 24017 GameCard Ill Automatic 24018 GameCard III MCA Automatic 33855 Cameport 2000 Up to 80MHZ 33292 Genovation Parallel Game Port 36 MERIT SOFTWARE IBM CD #35769 $36 304 338 Due to the constant change of memory prices please call for current pricing .178 STONEKEEP SPORTS ILLUSTRATED t 6741 35543 AC5-100.1 Speaker Pair .... 28122 ACS-3001 Speakers w/Subwoofer 30475 AR Partner 570 Speaker System 36212 Creative Labs CT-38 Speakers 36508 Jazz J-306 Speakers 36507 JOTI J-320 Speakers 50 36505 Jazz 1351 Speakers 44 36504 Jazz -511 Speakers 36500 Jazz J-590 Speakers 36501 Jazz )-702 Speakers ... 36503 Jazz )-818 Speakers .. 27392 Koss HD-1 Speakers 27950 Koss HD-4 Speakers.. 36173 KOSS HD-50 Speakers 30730 KOSS HD-6 MPC Speakers 27905 Lahter CS-700 Speakers 31689 Labtec CS-800 Speakers ... 32220 Labtec CS-900 Speakers 32228 Labtec CS-1000 Speakers .... 36331 legend Speaker B-Watt System 36332 Legend Speaker 20 Watt System 36333 Legend Speaker 80-Watt System 30474 Partner 622 Speaker w/Sub 37714 Yamaha Powered Subwoofer... 28425 Roland CS-10A Powered Speakers 33007 Roland C5-30A Powered Speaker . ......43 32101 Roland MA-12CP Powerd Speakers...... 36022 Sony CSS BIOO Speaker System WING COMMANDER III The stakes are WING COMMANDER H high as you fend off the Kilrathi on all fronts! Wing Commander III combines live action with that popular Wing Commander teell As a talented pilot you've won the respect of allincluding your enemies. Now, its up to you to command abard the newly christened TCS Victory Interact with an ensemble cast, including Mark Hamill of Star Wars fame. Thousands of live action video images put you in the middle of this heart-pounding adven. turel ORIGIN IBM CD #34276 $53 Your soul has been taken for safekeeping by a virtuous goddess. Now, your quest to save the universe and regain your life begins! Travel from the perilous cori dors of a ruined fortress through subterranean realms and beyond. Along the way. encounter creatures who challenge your intellect and emotions. Your quest climaxes in your ultimate moment of truth 3-D, full-screen graphics add realism to the terror. IBM 3.5' also available. The world's most beautiful women are coming to a calendar near youl Features more than 70 stunning full color photos on CD-ROM The electronic photo album makes it easy to view and organize all your images Even display the images as computer wallpaper background Package includes 12 fullcolor 8 1/2\" x 11 gorgeous photographs. Create knock em dead calendars for yourself or to give as gifts! ASK FOR YOUR FREE T-SHIRT WHILE SUPPLIES LASTI 190 INTERPLAY IBM CD #36893 $44 SOFTKEY IBM CD #36803 $25 "


"Combined Arms In Chipland Winning Strategies For SSI's PANZER GENERAL by Mark Walker hat is the sum of one plus one, in combined arms warfare? Two, you say? Au contraire; it is much more. Tanks plus infantry, properly employed, equal a devTanks are, of course, the mightiest and astating force, and SSI's PANZER GENERAL most colorful of all your units. Do not, howcan painfully demonstrate this point to ever, be so blinded by their power that you the uninitiated. So, here are some pointuse them for tasks for which they are illers on bashing our silicon or water/prosuited. Use these enormous machines in tein-based opponents. First, as in most open country, and don't be so foolish as to games, we must master (Don't you just think they are capable of city-busting. Keep love the sound of that verb, Herr Generthem moving constantly-mobility is the al?) the variety of units included in the key. When attacking, don't fall back to remix. Then, after touching briefly on the group. Move ahead, bypassing strong units, their capabilities, some employment points, and capture weakly defended towns tips, and some examples of combined behind enemy lines, using them as staging arms combat, we will move on to some areas for reinforcements. Avoid entrenched scenario examples showing how to kick infantry and anti-tank guns like the plague. some heinie. Naturally, since it's important to know what you are fighting before you light it, reconnaissance plays an imWith all due respect to the old Marlene portant role in PANZER GENERAL. ReDietrich song, Artillery is everyone's best member that your recon units, while friend. Infantry always enjoys having the lightly armed, move big guns around, because they soften defaster and see farther fenders' entrenched positions. So, on dethan your other fense, place as many units adjacent to forces. Always keep artillery as is tactically feasible. The guns the recon clewill fire in support of any adjacent unit, ments out front, and three or four well-placed artillery unless you pieces will (regardless of gun caliber) crewant your ate a protective umbrella of fire for any troops to key defensive position. Of course, you blunder might feel differently should you happen into hidto be attacking a position that has artillery den ene support. mies. With As slow as it is when unlimbered, most the recons' artillery moves quite briskly when transtremendous ported by truck. Obviously, artillery sighting should not be tied to the slow-moving inrange, there is fantry when you are on the offense. Let no need to most pieces surge ahead with the mobile risk other units formations, sticking mainly to roads. unnecessarily; a blind Don't forget to keep fighter-interceptors army is like a pig on the way and anti-aircraft nearby, as artillery on the to the wurst factory. move makes for a very inviting target. 116 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"STRATEGIES they told you in tactics school, and you may have to take a city or other fortified position the hard way. Be resigned to the Aircraft excel at fast moving, hard-hitting Now, Herr General, it's time to discover fact that it can and will get bloody. If you operations. Tactical bombers should be how the puzzle pieces fit together. Consider must assault numerous, well-prepared deused as flying artillery, with Ju87s particufirst a generic city assault. If the city is defenders, use the best infantry availablelarly effective in this role. Level bombers fended by a lone, yet well entrenched, inlots of them. Place the infantry two deep, can interdict naval forces and suppress fantry unit, the job is fairly simple. First, get and throw in an assault gun battalion and bomber units for the turn's duration, renyour tanks out of the way! They would be some artillery support. You'll just have to dering them impotent. Additionally, level dead meat in the city streets. Second, call accept the counter-battery casualties. The bombers drain ammo and fuel from enefor air support. In a perfect world, you first wave should attack, then fall back. my units and destroy prestige points when would have air superiority, plenty of air The second wave then moves forward and they bomb enemy victory point areas, support, and would have remembered to assaults. While this approach can be exwhether they do any damage or not. This park a tactical bomber squadron on top of pensive, sometimes it's the only way to terror bombing strategy will slow down the the city. Bomb the position and move on. gain an important hex. rush of enemy reinforcements, but reNext, bring in your level bombers to supmember that it was insufficient to launch press most of the target's remaining strength Seelowe in real life. points. Hopefully, you've placed artillery within range of the city's defenses. Fire it! By How does this work in the grand scheme of now the defenders are getting weak and are a scenario, mein General? For instance, ripe for assault with your adjacent infantry. Husky, the invasion of Italy, is a challenging Fighters are best used to intercept any airSuddenly, a hole appears in the enemy line, defensive scenario when played from the craft attacking adjacent squadrons, so stay the perfect spot for the tanks we pulled back German side. The top priority is to evacuate next to the vulnerable tactical bombers. If into reserve. Led by a recou unit, they will go as many German mechanized units as possicertain units (such as artillery) need cover on a sight-seeing tour as they exploit the enble. Use the Germans already trapped, against enemy bombers, simply park them emy rear areas. Is warfare always this simple? along with the Italian units, to delay the Alover a formation and the bad guys will have If it were, any dumbkopf could be a military lied advance. Move the rest of your forces to to blow the fighters away before the unit can leader. Real defenses very often have delenMessina and across to Reggio. be attacked. If, however, you find yourself sive artillery, which can ruin the best-laid Use the Italian lleet, and combined Axis playing on the short end of the air-superioriplans of any Panzer General. air power, to engage and defeat the Allied ty stick, keep your valuable units in covering The best method of dealing with opposamphibious task force headed for Naples. terrain. Don't end movement under enemy ing artillery is bombing it into submission. This done, turn your attention to the debombers or your opponent can bomb you You can attack with your own artillery, butfense of the tip of the boot. Build lots of twice in the coming turn. Be sure to watch your fuel consumption: it is unlikely that Goering will welcome you back should you lose 10) a squad of ME109s merely because there isn't a friendly airbase open within range. Now is the time for all good herren to don their Admiral hats, since naval units often play a decisive role in PANZER GENERAL. For instance, the side with naval superiority will be able to conduct flanking amphibious maneuvers. The side with the bigger boats will also shell any coastal forON AN EVEN KEEL Level bombers not only reduce enemy fortifications, they also cause the enemy to mations into spatzle. With a range of five, lose prestige points by bombing victory point hexes, as this flight of D0-17s demonstrates. the battleships are particularly effective in attacking what would otherwise be hardunless you have a range advantage, your air defense and anti-aircraft formations. to-reach positions farther inland. units will take some casualties from This is the only way to keep Allied air The side without capital ships (generally counter-battery fire. But what if your oppopower off your back, because any Axis airthe Germans) has little recourse against nent has air superiority, or an anti-aircraft craft which stray into southern Italy will be enemy coastal bombardment, unless he battalion bordering the artillery? Call the eliminated. As a result, you must try to can bomb the vessels from the air, or emNavy (vet another good reason to keep that keep your formations in covering terrain. ploy his submarines against them. In these Admiral's hat around, Herr General). If the This will mitigate the devastating effect of situations, discretion definitely becomes artillery you wish to attack is within range the Allies naval gunfire support. the better part of valor. If possible, keep of your battleships or cruisers, then attack If it rains, it will ground the aircraft and units in covering terrain and away from with impunity. enable you to sortie to the south with the the coast. If a coastal city isn't an objective, Italian fleet, harassing Allied units atthen consider passing it by, rather than tempting to force their way up the Italian draining supplies and reinforcements only peninsula. You should counterattack the to run a gauntlet of naval fire. Sometimes it just doesn't pan out the way initial Allied crossing at Reggio, but tem10 JANUARY 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 117 "


"STRATEGIES per your aggression with proper judgreserves should counterattack Allied sucment. As Allied combat power on the cess stories. The Berlin Panther, Tiger II, peninsula builds, you will have to eventuand Jadg Tiger should head towards ally withdraw. However, if you retreat Simultaneously, launch the attack on Frankfurt to strike the inevitable Amerislowly, conserve your combat power and Trondheim. With luck, the Brits will be can puncture there. If you're lucky, (and get some bad weather, you should retain defeated in both battles. Re-deploy the redoesn't luck favor the bold?) this should the five cities needed for victory. maining troop transports and paratroops net you five cities and keep the Allies from The invasion of Norway has long been for a conclusive attack on Nasmos. This even getting anywhere near Berlin. regarded as one of the models for modern, strategy should give the Germans five joint combined arms warfare. Many genercities and the win. There never seems to als unfortunately find themselves short of be enough time, but victory is possible for needed prestige when at the shores of Nora persevering Panzer General. If you like playing with a loaded deck, leadway. Even though resources are relatively Another interesting variation on the fiveing the Allies in the D-Day scenario is for scarce, you should invest in JU88s, because and-out theme is Berlin West. To emerge you. They have the armed equivalent of a you need them to counter the British fleet. victorious, the Germans must retain five silver spoon: Naval gunfire support, air Start the invasion by taking Oslo and the objectives in addition to Berlin. The future power, and overwhelming ground forces. nearby airfield with the south-eastern task American imported beer kings may alUnfortunately, they're missing St Lo, Caen, force, supporting the attacks with one tempt the classic broad-front-trip-wireand Cherbourg...which happen to be the heavy cruiser. Sail the rest of the fleet withdrawal defense or play a riskier game. objectives needed for victory. Take your northward. Send the motorized units of the In the former defense, the Axis will try to time; with patience you can crush the Gersouth-western task-force up the Oslodefend a continuous line from Amsterdam mans. Divide the Americans in 60/40 fashTrondheim corridor. to Freiburg, using his armored units to ion. The larger contingent advances to St The paratroops, after assisting in the counterattack local penetrations (however Lo, the other to Cherbourg. After the capture of Oslo, should be dropped in the slight). A real commander scoffs at that Yanks are safely ashore, the fleet, from apvicinity of Lillehammer to pave the way type of attitude-after all, what did it gain proximately Bayeux north, should steam to for the mechanized units. Use foot solthe German army in real life? Those with Cherbourg. They can help neutralize the diers to capture the airfield at hex (18,24), fire in their veins will counterattack in the ring of forts surrounding the city. north; the Allied air power can be most lethal; and Panzers will at much to the delight of human-controlled tempt to capAllied commanders, the computer doesn't ture Einhoven know it. That's right, the Nazis sally forth and Aachen. with their meager Fw 190s as if this was Meanwhile, May 1940, and are easy prey for the supeback on the rior numbers of Allied aircraft. After you southern have established your air superiority, use ranch, Gerthe B25/26 and A26 units to soften up man forces will strong points. The fighters should strafe strive to delay units, particularly the guys from the 21st the American Panzer (you know, the armor east of Caen). CHINK IN THE ARMOR This defense looks sound, but once the artillery support is Jugge Be sure to capture French airlields quickly, nullified by air and ground assaults, the infantry will be easy pickings for a timely Here's how: as your squadrons' worst enemy is re-suparmored thrust. the German ply. It takes a long time to go back to Engarmor should land (evidently, silicon pilots spend a then embark and head up the western side step to the north. This will, conceivrealistic amount of R&R time in bars). coast with escorting cruisers/destroyers. ably, give them a significant advantage in Otherwise, the D-Day scenario is pretty The northern fleet should land its units the vicinity of Aachen. Employ an airlift to straightforward. Use the allied treasury of west of Trondheim as soon as possible and join the three Berlin infantry units with prestige points to buy artillery and armor. retreat west. These sailors will fight later. this assault force. Use some precious presBarrage and bombard the cities before Harass the British heavy fleet units with tige points to build a towed 105mm and committing your grunts and don't miss a your submarines, but be careful to avoid Wespe unit and keep the rest to replenish chance to take out weakened enemy units. decisive engagements. You cannot hope to the hurting units. Place them in the vicinity Build some British Fireflies to handle the defeat the entire British fleet before your of Muenster. Concentrate those awesome 21st Panzer and keep an eye on the calenforces concentrate. fly-boys (Me-262 et al) to support this dar. With practice, you should be able to By midgame, the units that landed west northern killer group. Far from a repeat of capture all three objectives by turn eight. of Trondheim and the formations surging history, Hitler's finest will rule the sky. If you have any tactical understanding at north from Oslo should combine to the The rest is simple...in concept. The all, this scenario is a lock. If you lose, it's southeast of Trondheim. The fleet units killer kampfgruppe should advance west time to start over with Poland. PANZER will be grouped west of the tip of the Northen wheel south, capturing Einhoven and GENERAL is only mastered through repeatwegian land mass. Move the fleet east Aachen. In the south, use prestige points ed play—so keep on blitzing until you see along the northern coast, accompanied by to buy the cheap Wehrmacht infantry to the Tower of London (or the ruins of the JU88s, and engage the British fleet. plug holes. Small, hard-hitting armored Berlin) before you. 10 118 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"New Version Microsoft Golf Firestone Country Club-South Course Game Player Action Options Window Help Main View Practice Hole 16 Shot Info Player: Josh Hole: 16 Par. 5 Shots: 3 Lie: Wind Rough To Pin: 29 feet Score: Swing Control 7. Shot Type Clubs Straight Draw Od2 5 9 Chip O Fadel3w6i O pH Putt Custom 2 7 Otw 031 Bil Help O di 20 yards RD Elag Swing IT'S SO REAL YOU CAN STILL BLAME THE CLUBS, THE LIE, BUNKERS WATER. THE TREES, THE ROUGH, AND THE EXCUSES, EXCUSES. IT'S THE GAME OF GOLF. And nothing comes closer to this than new Microsoft Golf 2.0. This is the ultimate golf experience right on your PC.And since you're playing in the Windows operating system, it's as easy as it gets. You're at the famous Firestone Country Club. There's a stiff breeze blowing right to left. Choose your club, set your feet, take a few practice swings, breathe deeply and... whaaack! Drive that ball down the fairway. Even the worst shot looks awesome with photorealistic trees, sparkling water, and luxury homes lining the course. On the green, a birdie brings enthusiastic cheers. Par, and all you'll get is polite applause. (Don't you just hate that). Sure, you could blame the course itself. But with Mauna Kea, Banff Springs, and Pinehurst championship courses also available, you'll have plenty of chances to redeem yourself. So see your retailer today. And please, remove your spikes before entering the store. Microsoft For more information about Microsoft products for your home PC,call (800) 228-6229, Dept. VAT In Canada call (800) 563-9048. 1994 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. 1992-1994 Access Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Microsoft and the Windows logo are registered trademarks and Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Pinehurst is a registered trademark of Resorts of Pinehurst, Inc. Circle Reader Service #352 "


"impressive anew angle on the classic role-playing adventure.. PC Gamer, September 1994 STAR GHRAIL tar Trail offers you everything you've been missing in a true fantasy role-playing experience... a rich and intricate world... detailed characters... an epic quest fraught with danger... The world of Arkania returns with incredible sound, speech and music, spectacular graphics... and an experience you won't forget! Too TEMPTING TO RESIST? . Graphically detailed automap with zoom, move and edit capabilities  Fully editable diary automatically records game events Brilliant graphics, stunning cinematics, incredible sound effects and digital speech  Fully animated, phased-time, isometric 3D combat with improved auto combat system Smooth-scrolling 3D movement Intelligent keyword dialogue system . Print option for diary and character info 2 levels of difficulty provide a challenge for novice and experienced players GRAPHICS & SPEECH ENHANCED ALMS \"3D scrolling animations and massive improvements on both the graphics and sound fronts now complement a game engine which the designers have redesigned in detail, responding to virtually every criticism levied against (Blade of Destiny).\" Strategy Plus, September 1994 \"Fans of Sir-tech's Realms of Arkania series: Rejoice!\" Electronic Entertainment, September 1994 To order visit your local retaller or call 1-800-447-1230 SIR-TECH P.O. Box 245, Ogdensburg, NY 13669 Tel: (315) 393-6633 Fax: (315) 393-1525 SIR-TECH Rocus of Arkonis is a registered trademark of Slr-foch Software, Inc. Roulms af Arkania is manufactured en ambued wodor license by Sic-tech from Attit Entertainment, Fantasy Productions and Schmidt Spiel + Freizell. Circle Reader Service 112 "


"ADVENTURE/RPG Surely You Jest! IT ISN'T OFTEN to the game, a stray lightning bolt hits the statue, MALCOLM THE THAT ADVENTURE returning Malcolm to life and mischief. GAMERS GET TO As it turns out, Malcolm is just a poor, misunplay The Bad derstood jester. While it's true that he did usurp TWISTED JESTER IS Guy. Usually the throne, steal an important magical doodad, they're out bashing and petrify most of Kyrandia's leading citizens \"Foozles\" and righting in the first game, no one seems to bear a grudge BACK IN KYRANDIA 3. all of the wrongs that game against him for these little peccadilloes. designers care to write. In fact, until now there No, everyone is mad at him for killing (or has only been one adventure or role-playing supposedly killing) the king and queen of BUT THIS TIME HE'S game in which we had a chance to explore the Kyrandia. Murder, after all, is serious business. \"evil\" side, WIZARDRY IV: THE RETURN OF WERDMuch too serious for a jester. Of all the nasty NA. In that Sir Tech oldie, we directed the evil things that Malcolm did, this wasn't one of LAUGHING WITH YOU. wizard on his quest to retrieve the stolen amulet. them. Proving that to the citizenry, however, will However, at the end game, Werdna had the opprove difficult for a guy with his track record. portunity to redeem himself. The game proper begins with Malcolm's reNOT AT YOU. This is also the case for Malcom the misfit jester vival in the junkyard. From there he makes his in Westwood Studio's KYRANDIA 3: MALCOLM's way ofl of Kyrandia (not a congenial place at the REVENGE, KYRANDIA 3 picks up where the first moment), adventures on the Isle of Cats, entices game, the LEGEND OF KYRANDIA, left off. Having pirates to help him get revenge (which quickly been turned to stone by the game's hero, Malcolm turns sour), escapes banishment to the Ends of was left petrified, standing alone and forgotten in The Earth, eludes the clutches of the tic-tac-toethe castle junk heap. In the animated introduction crazed Fish Queen of Limbo, pays a brief visit to the fiery down-under, and finally returns to Kyrandia for-we hope-his triumphant vindication. All in There must be some atmospheric interference in the old crystal ball. We're all, quite a lot to do for someone who really wants getting so many mixed images from SSI's upcoming ThunderScape game nothing more than to take a that they just can't possibly fit together. There are some \"steampunk\" elepeaceful nap in his own bed. ments to the fantasy role-playing system which allow for steam-driven ve Game play is very simple; hicles like Thunder Trains and steam-powered flame throwers, but there is this is definitely a \"no frills\" also the more traditional magic system. However, just when you think you interface. The main cursor is have it all figured out, you discover that there is a magical metal that ala small arrow. Clicking that on an object picks it up (if it lows certain wizards to create gigantic metal golems. can be taken), or \"uses\" it The monsters in ThunderScape are all being rendered on SGI machines (pushes a button, moves an and they have very unique looks. Not only that, but although the initial sto item, etc.). Moving the curry is a simple \"Kill Foozle\" romp, there is a rich background about how the sor to the edges of the diabolical evil that pervades the new gaming universe is incredibly foul screen will turn it into a and corrupt. You can definitely expect some dark and intriguing encounlarge arrow, designating an exit from that location (if ters in this game. there is one). Moving the by Scorpia SCRY SIGHT JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 121 "


"cursor elsewhere and clicking causes Maltion, Malcolm to walk to that spot if no obstacles colm's inventoare in the way. ry is usually A drop screen is hidden at the bottom empty. of the display; moving the cursor down to This is not the bottom causes it to appear. This a cause for holds Malcolm's inventory (maximum of alarm. If an 10 items), the game controls (save, reitem is need store, quit), and the mood meter (more ed somewhere on this shortly). else along the Conversations are equally simple: you line, Malcolm just click the cursor on anyone in sight, will keep it and conversation begins automatically. with him. There are no responses to choose; MalOtherwise, colm and everyone else decide for themeverything selves what they will say. How these little necessary for chats go depends on what mood Malcolm OUT WITH THE RUBBISH Poor Malcolm, his petrified form left to rot in the solving the is in at the moment. kingdom's trash heap. But there's hope for our jester: a burst of lightening will puzzles in a The mood meter has three settings: bring him to life and put him on the road to redemption. particular area nice, normal, and lying. In normal will be found mode, Malcolm is mainly honest, but off something good (or bad, depending on in that area. So you don't have to worry somewhat on the sarcastic and cynical your viewpoint). about leaving things behind, or that side (his typical personality). In nice However, Stewart is not gone forever. you'll get to the end game and find you mode, he's, well, nice, or at least preHe makes a stunning reappearance for the missed something important at the betending to be that way. In lying mode, end game, at which point you (not Malginning. warm butter wouldn't melt in his mouth. colm) get to choose which of the two to I played the CD version, which requires Deciding what mode to be in is the keep around-or (if you're really masochisabout 10 meg on the hard drive and has tricky part, as all three are necessary in tic), you can opt to keep them both. full voice support (all dialogue and redifferent sections of the game. Starting This is not mere window dressing marks are spoken). For those who may not a conversation in nice mode may not what you decide here has an effect on want their computers talking to them, or get you anywhere, while talking in lying the rest of the game. As you may have who may not want speech late at night, mode might get you someplace you'd guessed, things will be a little easier if you there is an option to turn off the voice and rather not be. It is usually a good idea have Stewart alone, a little harder if you have text boxes instead. The game also to save the game before starting up a take both, and dillicult should Gunther has internal controls for adjusting the volconversation with someone, just in case. be the sole companion. Choose wisely. ume of music and special effects. Happily Malcolm doesn't for Gravis Ultrasound (and Max) go it alone, either. owners, the Gravis cards are fully For most of the supported. game, he is accomKYRANDIA 3 ran perfectly clean. panied by Gunther, The game never crashed, locked up, his \"bad\" conor exhibited any bizarre happenscience. As a youth, ings. Only one minor bug surfaced Malcolm also had in the game controls, and its not so Stewart, the \"good\" much a bug as an oversight. Malconscience, but colm can walk at either a slow or fast Stewart was lost pace; the default is \"saunter.\" Likesomewhere along wise, there is a «studio audience\" the way, leaving inane laugh track) that can be on or only Gunther to egg off; the default is on. If you change Malcolm on to, either or both of those settings, the ummm, politically Castle DUMP software doesn't remember them incorrect activities. from session to session, and you (There were times BOTH OF ME Freed from imprisonment in stone, Malcolm still bears the burden of have to change them again each when I thought this a bad conscience, personified in the chubby Gunther. time you boot up the game. wasn't such a bad The music, special effects, and thing, after all; Stewart is such a goody Like the second game in the Kyrandia voices are good, but not cleanly recorded. two-shoes I wished I could punch him out series, THE HAND OF FATE, KYRANDIA 3 is a A static hiss was always present to a lesser on several occasions). Gunther pops up linear game. Malcolm progresses from or greater degree throughout the game. every now and then with smart remarks, area to area, each one having its own set of As a test, I booted a couple of other games either snide comments when Malcolm objects and locations. Typically, items don't that support native Gravis sound, and messes up, or kudos when Malcolm pulls travel with him; upon arriving in a new secthey did not have the background noise. 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Within the City Limits, Beyond the Boundaries of Desire. NOCTROPOLIS. It glitters before you, with menace and allure. Does the Succubus bend to you in tenderness or carnal rage? Will you escape the corrupt longings of the surgically sadistic Master Macabre? Can you keep the Sovereign of darkness from the light? Come into the city. And enter a nightmare only consummate 1000 x 1 HONLAYNrolada YUMA D I tu po evil could conceive Handpainted scenes of coric beouly draw you over deeper into a tale of twisted dosire. U The grophics are gorgeous. The characters, devious and debauched. And the story for mature audiences only More than 2 hours of non-linear digitized video with spoken dialog. NOCTROPOLIS LO PC CD-ROM WARNING: The City of Night An Adventure in Depravity CONTAINS MATURE THEMES FLASHPOINT ELECTRONIC ARTS the pollo nuk of Mac h icos, lec The Llection Attskog is around thadowank of Electrom. Arto Nacropolis a donark of Electronk. Aits Circle Reader Service #138 "


"MALCOLM'S Bueller... Bueller... sluice. Unfortunately, you can only grab MANY PATHS one item each visit, again determined So how does MALrandomly, and you don't even know COLM'S REVENGE what it is you're looking for, which does work as an advennot make things any easier. My experiture? There's the ence was, on average, four or five tries rub. Westwood took before the object turned up (it was a lot of heat over much the same if the game was saved the first two games after arriving on the heap and before being, for the most taking anything). part, too simple There are other instances like this, as and obvious. Deterwell. One you could live with, but multimined to do better, ple situations merely drag out the game they swung the while not adding anything to the pleasure pendulum the othof solving a puzzle. er way, and made FOR THE HALIBUT While strolling through Limbo, Malcolm stumbles upon a Still, KYRANDIA 3 has several good much in the game school of fish (apparently, Ferris the Fish took the day off). This puzzle is things going for it. The game is funny, rather obscure. one of the more obscure paths to the nether world. and Malcolm is a refreshingly different They also included character to lead through an adventure. multiple solutions for many of the game's just remark that it's best to explore the enEric Randall, the voice of Malcolm, does puzzles. tire jungle before heading into the ruins. an excellent job, having just the right On the one hand, that's good, as you Another negative aspect is the need for sound and tone of voice. aren't locked into the only one way to do repetitive actions. You find a lot of bones The designers took care that you wouldthings\" syndrome. On the other hand, in the jungle, and it's pretty obvious you n't come to a dead end over missing some matters can rapidly become confusing as give them to the dog. The first time, he necessary item during earlier play. This is solution paths cross each other and you buries a bone and uncovers a gem. After an important consideration, especially in a aren't sure what to do in the first place, that, things become monotonous. You linear game, where there is no going back This is especially true of the opening need more than one gem (six, actually) except via a save position. section. Malcolm's objective is to get off and they are randomly distributed each At a time when most of the industry Kyrandia while avoiding such unpleasant game. So you save the game, drop a bone seems to have \"gone Hollywood,\" with stops as the jail cell, the rock quarry, the in a new location, and see what turns up everyone scrambling to get \"big names\" chain gang, and the slave galley (as I said If there's nothing, restore and try a diffor full motion video and voice-overs, and earlier, Kyrandia isn't a congenial place at pushing the the moment). That's really all you need to edge for whizdo, but there are five or six ways of escapbang graphics ing, and it's easy to become tangled up in and sound efthem, or find a way off and worry about fects, it is nice to all the stuff you left behind unfinished. see at least one Even worse, you might find part of a solucompany is contion, and spend hours wandering around, cerned about trying to come up with a use for a flask of content over cream or a handful of sesame seeds. gloss (not to say The Isle of Cats, next stop on the tour, that the graphhas its own problems. First is the non-logiics aren't pretcal jungle maze. While it's not very large, ty). Westwood the jungle does have to be mapped, which may have erred is tedious business requiring much paa little on the tience, especially since you have to chop obscure side of your way through the underbrush in each AN UNREASONABLE REQUEST? The Voice of Reason, who resides in the town the puzzle-buildhall, has a thing for fish cream sandwiches made of eel cream and sesame scene (the stuff grows back as soon as you ing equation, leave). seeds. Of course, you've got to hunt down the ingredients for his snack. but at least they More serious is the cat altar. To do the were listening to right thing there, it is vital to get into the ferent location (otherwise, you must go the game players, and went for \"loughing Hieroglyphics Room of the ruins at the into the jungle and collect more bones). up\" instead of \"dumbing down.\" Dog Fort. This requires light in the first If a gem pops up, save and keep going. Now if they can find the golden mean room, and there's only one way to get it. Only trial and error works here, as there between the extremes, their next product Some players will likely miss the solution, is no pattern to the positions of the gems. should be really something. In the meanjust by going the \"wrong\" way first from Similarly, in Limbo you need a partictime, MALCOLM'S REVENGE is a refreshing the Dog Fort, letting themselves in for ular item to perform a Royal Seance. It game in many ways, although frustrating much frustration. It is difficult to explain can be obtained only from the junk in many others. Definitely not a game for further without giving things away, so I'll heap, which is reached by riding the the beginning or impatient player. O 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"BATTLE FSA. ACm3's STAR On CD-ROM for IBM & Compatibles SO INTENSE YOU'LL HAVE TO CHANGE YOUR FLIGHT SUIT AFTER EVERY MISSION! This is space combat at its very best — as only CD-ROM can deliver! FASA'S RENEGADE LEGION: INTERCEPTOR game system comes alive with spectacular Super-VGA graphics, cinematics, digitized voices, music and sound effects. Just how hot does it look? The awesome artwork you see here is composed from actual game graphics! Once you dogfight in space Renegade-style, you'll know what it's like to really sweat bullets! SRL  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"GAME HINTS : The Dark Sun Unshrouded SCORDIONS Scorpia Offers Illumination on DARK SUN: WAKE OF THE RAVAGER LISCHII. ELL, HERE WE ARE IN THE HOLhave much scope in this game, Clerics you want all the protection you can get. IDAY SEASON AGAIN. THE aren't as good as Druids, and I didn't That means, at character creation time, CHRISTMAS TREE MONSTER IS find Psionics all that useful. you should max out the stats of everyone back in the corner, swishing Further, there appears to be a bug in in the party. You are going to need every its tinsel and blinking its regard to the Fighter/Psionicist mix. ounce of muscle, every hit point you can lights, and Fred's shrunken head garland They all stopped gaining levels at 13/14, muster up, and every point of AC reducis on the wall. For all that, the mood even though they had the necessary statstion you can manage. around here isn't very festive. It looks in both professions to go higher. All othMy own experience was that a team pretty much like we're in for another diser multi-class and single-class characters composed of a Mul Gladiator, Mul mal gaming Christmas, with many expectgained levels normally and maxed out at F/Druid, and two Half-Elf F/Preservers ed releases pushed back to January 15, so it's just that particular combination was a solid group. Half-Elves are slightly February, or \"sometime in '95.\" Indeed, that is not working right. better than Elves because the half-breeds the prospects seem rather dark at the mohave better constitution and usually get ment, so you may as well take what commore hit points than the pure Ell. Halffort you can from tips on another dark Giants make good gladiators, but their subject, DARK SUN: WAKE OF THE dex is poor. Then again, they have the RAVAGER. most hit points of anyone, and can abIf you have a team saved off from sorb more damage than most. the first Dark Sun game, SHATTERED If you are playing with a transfer LANDS, bring it over. The characters team, or a team composed of transfers will transfer in with some of their and new characters, the default difficulgood stuff intact, such as El's Drinker, ty will be set to \"hideous.\" A team of all Dark Flame, Phrain's Bow, the Living brand new characters has a default of Cloak, Ring of Insight, etc. \"balanced.» Note that even if the team Armor doesn't do quite as well, howis all brand-new, the difficulty will go to ever, and you'll find much (though not \"hideous\" if you bring even one transall) of the better pieces missing. Refer character into the party temporarily gardless, you still come out ahead in during character creation. that department as opposed to starting Difficulty level affects mainly how with a fresh team. In addition, levels many hit points the opponents have. aren't lost in transferring characters, and The easier the level, the easier it is to that's another plus. kill off the monsters. Players who don't One word of warning when transferwant combats to drag on for too long may ring characters: don't touch any of the want to set this to \"easy\" or \"balanced.\" money bags until the game has actually Rabid hack'n'slashers may prefer \"hard\" started at the gates of Tyr! Any money You don't want a single-class Druid or or \"hideous.\" put into the pool before then is apt to be Preserver, because they can't wear armor, Difficulty also affects the situation in lost, and you'll end up with only the deand that makes them extremely vulnerable. the volcano when you're after the fire fault amount of 5000 ceramic pieces. The same is true of the Thri-Kreen; as beruby. The higher the difliculty, the less If you're starting with a brand new fore, there is almost nothing they can wear, time you have to get everything done. So team, you want multi-class characters for and this time around, it isn't worth having before descending, you may want to the most part. I suggest at least two Fightone in the group (my transferred Thrimake some adjustments. er/Preservers, and a Fighter/Druid, with Kreen F/Druid took plenty of damage, I Notaku is back, still looking for rare the fourth perhaps a Gladiator, or maybe can tell you). The opposition in WAKE OF and exotic ingredients. As before, he's an another Fighter/Druid. Thieves don't THE RAVAGER is high-level and hits hard; optional part of the game; you don't have 126 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"S i presents presents cyberwar The Lawnmower ManTM travels into the next dimension 4 CD Product: 3 game CD's (1800 MByte game!) Plus a free, limited edition soundtrack CD. Includes 256 colors, ten different game styles and joypad option. C anon nant 3 San This is no game...... this is the declaration of cyberwar! For further information, call SCi toll-free at 1-800-CYBERWR.  Copyright 1994 SCI (Sales Curve interactive) Ltd. The Lawnmower Man is a trademark of Allied Visior The Big Red Trading Company Circle Reader Service #337 "


"to take any of his quests. However, ac of them +5 and one +4). I preferred to The best way to handle the light is cepting these little errands will net you go after the Hammer first myself; couldn't good preparation beforehand. Just before experience points, money, and goodies; resist that neat armor! You may look at it entering, cast a haste spell on the party, they are also subtle indications of where differently, but it doesn't matter so long as Stoneskin and Improved Invisibility to go next in the game. Notaku is also a you get all the artifacts. should also be cast on everyone. During good person to sell excess equipment to, the fight, get the Flayers first, followed by as he will pay you full price for the items. HAMMER OF PROMERE Intellect Devourers, and leave the slaves Play begins at the gates of Tyr, where Yes, it's in the mines, or actually, below for last. If you have El's Drinker, this is a your party quickly becomes involved with them. You have to talk to the overseer by great weapon to use against the Devourthe Veiled Alliance, an underground the NW gate to get the mine key (a charers, as the sword will leech their hit points group of mages working for the preservaacter with high charisma can beat down even though the hit does one point of tion and restoration of Athas. It is best to his price a bit). damage. Be sure to destroy the Elder stay in the city until after you've returned Not much happens on the entry level; Brain as soon as the fight is over, or more from the pyramid; otherwise, you may your job is to get down to the lower tunFlayers will keep showing up. become caught up in all sorts of side nels as quickly as you can via the elevator. Beyond this room is the cave with the quests and lose track of what's going on. This is where most people have some Hammer (and that neat armor); expect The Alliance has two errands for you in trouble, as they aren't sure what to do to have a couple of fights before you can this section of the game: finding out what down there. It's simple: you have to find take it. You will also need the hammer the Templars are up to, and what the (and kill) the group of possessed miners equipped as a weapon to get out of the Draxans are doing inside the pyramid. before they wipe out everyone else. My Underdark. Neither of these is especially dillicult, as experience is that they don't show up unyou get plenty of direction. It's after til after you have reached Luckout TunLYRE OF THE WINDS you've finished up the pyramid and surnels. Then you go back through the rest This requires some advance work. The vived the attack on Alliance HQ that matof the lower levels and get them before mangled tapestry in the secret room of ters become more vague. Now you have too many people die. Alliance HQ has to be fixed, which can to find three elemental artifacts (the AlIt is only after they're clead that the seonly be done by Utella of the Jann living liance has the fourth), and where to go cret door in the Old Digs opens (there is in the desert. Once repaired, you can put and what to do is left pretty much up to no way to open it yoursell). NOTE: If you it back where you got it from, use a ceryou, and there aren't many signposts. have the early release of RAVAGER, there is a tain item (found nearby) to activate it, and step through to the Silt Sea area. Now you're in the land of the (more or less) friendly Giants, who have some problems of their own. A couple of them will be solved as you go after the Lyre. Look around for the three items you need to fix the skimmer, then use it to visit Keign. He isn't going to help much, so you may as well kill him as soon as possible so you can pass though the tunnel to the mountains. Here you can ignore the Giantess and all that business about the flute. There are switches all over the place that are supposed to turn off the traps; I never Getting the artifacts can be done in bug that will keep you from going through bothered with them. It's much simpler any order; all three sections are stand the secret door, even though it's open. You and faster to make a Preserver the party alone and don't have an impact on each must proceed directly to Old Digs after leader, then have him or her cast Minor other. They are also static; there is no killing the miners; under no circumstances Globe of Invulnerability. After that, just time limit, so you don't need to run off should you go back up to the top level. waltz right up the path to the drakes. and finish them right away. You can take that brings you to the Underdark, Slow down as you near the top, and some time to explore around and do where the Mind Flayers hang out. As you then stop as soon as you hear the click. some of the side quests (because of space probably guessed, they all have to be Don't move. Now shoot an arrow at any limitations, the side quests are not distrashed. Unfortunately, if you have the convenient target, and watch as (for whatcussed in this article). carly release, you're stuck with doing it ever strange reason, all the other drakes So, which item you want to try for first the hard way. gang up on and kill the one you just is up to you. The Fire Ruby quest nets you Cleaning the individual sections poked with an arrow. Keep this up, and some hefty experience points. The Lyre (kitchen, lab, arena) isn't too tough; it's soon there will be only one drake to deal Of The Winds quest gets you some good the big battle in the room with the elder with it is important not to move anyone experience and one (only one) +4 leather brain that's the problem. There's a flask until only the single drake is left). breast plate. The Hammer of Promere of poison gas in the lab that works on The ones down by the nest are smarter provides good experience and the very flayers, but because of a bug in the game, and won't fall for this trick. Multiple lirebest armor in the game (three pieces, two you can't use it. Ouch. balls are better to use here, followed by R9 128 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"ANNONINHOARENTOUT RSS Ghostly guards protect the treasures of Cairn. THODA OD PREVERINA NYOTIMMVNIMUM M MMMMWMMWUMVUMIA When cornered, be prepared to fight. Y hadows of Caim is the story of a young thief named Quinn, who has a serious problem. He's too honest to steal anything. Worthless to his guild, his own master has set him up to take the blame for the murder of the Duke of Cairn. His only hope for survival is to make sure the assassination fails. In order to help Quinn save himself, you'll have to guide him through slimy sewers, a trap filled dungeon, an evil wizard's tower, and a monster filled hedge maze (not to mention guards in the streets and buildings) to save the Duke in his palace at the top of the city. Superior video quality supports all resolutions from 320 x 200 up to 1024 x 768 at 256 colors.  Full CD quality audio Enjoy full CD quality sixteen bit audio tracks, stereo recorded at 44Hz.  Rotoscoped character movement sports live rotoscoped character movements, animated cinematic sequences and a great story line. th | ,21144),  Wizards and assassins plot to kill the Duke -and you've been set-up to take the fall.      , FTSTRAPRIRE The wizard's tower is not a friendly place.   AVALUAMMUMUNAMAMURI MULAI CD ROM Available for Windows & DOS Macintosh & Power Macintosh native mode versions coming soon! Unfortunately, neither is his Thdg aze. B OKENRAMAHAN LUWATU 800-765-4223 303-290-9853 MASQUE tra Pulliali11 anty SOFTWARE  1993-1994 Ant Software. All Rights Reserved.  1993 Masque Publishing IMMOLTERRAVUR Circle Reader Service #269 "


"melee on whatever's left after you run out of spells. Be sure to pick up one drake hide for the blacksmith, and one for Notaku. Then just do the business at the nest and you're done here (and don't forget the Lyre!). FIRE RUBY You get here through the volcano tapestry (there is something in the room that will activate it). After some fights with the Draxans, the Verini will let you into their temple (do remember to save Prosser before entering). Before long, you'll be investigating a murder. This can be tricky, since some clues are dead ends. You certainly want to read Sorval's notes in his room), and examine carefully the statues in the south. Anything you find should be shown to Nortemus. After the temple has been sealed, have a chat with Prosser (if for some reason you didn't save Prosser, look for Winter instead). This will set you on the right track. Ulbin won't cooperate, however much you try to manipulate the conversation. You'll need Silvan's (not Rhone's) help here. Save before you go for the amulet. Once you have it, events will move very quickly, and before you know it, you're leaving you to figure out how to activate down in the volcano core after the ruby. the portal (after you've dealt with his unPlenty of Draxans are down here, too. dead minions). Well, there's an interesting Most of this section is just a matter of sarcophagus on the left, and a room with fighting, although there is the Stones four element-type objects on the right, so Maze you have to figure out. I suggest it shouldn't take you too long. Since saving before you start on that, and makthere's no going back, you may want to ing careful notes as you go along, espesave before stepping through the portal. cially if you're in one of the more Now you're at the Temple of The Cosdifficult modes. Once you have the path mos, where a Pyreen clues you in on worked out, restore and go through it what's been happening there, and what again (remember, there IS a time limit you need to get into the temple. After here, and the volcano will blow if you that, it's the big one, and I do mean BIG. aren't fast enough). You may want to lower the difficulty level a notch or two before entering. Good END GAME luck, you'll need it. In case you haven't figured it out before Whew! That takes care of the tale for now, the entrance to the Lord Warrior's this month. In the meantime, if you need lair is in the house with the two Golems, help with an adventure game, you can right next to Acar. You will of course have reach me in the following ways: to open the door behind the tapestry. EleOn Delphi: Visit the GameSIG-(under mentary, my dear Watson <grin> the Groups and Clubs menu). Kovar (the prisoner) can be helpful, in On Genie: Stop by the Games Roundspite of his arrogance. He can especially Table (type: Scorpia). help you with Jumah, who is in charge of By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, the Templars. It's better to talk to Jumah stamped envelope if you live in the Unitthan kill him. ed States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie When you make it to the Inner SancStation, New York, NY 10028. tum, the Lord Warrior teleports away, Until next time, happy adventuring! No More Hassle. Tired of fumbling with joystick cables behind your computer? Are you spending more time changing joysticks than playing your favorite games? You need a JOYSWITCH hassle-free alternative: the controllers (rudder or gas / brake pedals) to your computer. Maximize your performance by switching to the \"right\" joystick for each game, instead of using whichever MULTIPORTJOYSTICK DATA SWITCH one happens to be connected OFF Joyswitch\". At last you CO can jump from joystick to to your computer. Get greater value from your expensive, specialized controllers. The FOOT CONTROLLEN MAN UOYSTICH Joyswitch works with most joystick, game to game, with the speed and ease of turning a switch. Connect up to four devices (flight sticks, yokes, steering wheels, game pads, etc.) and two sets of foot IBM PC compatible controllers. Joystick extension cable AV . A 0 Suogested included for FREE! Order TODAY! Only $59.95. Retail Price VISA To order call: (714) 362-8698 OR MasterCard Order on Check Six BBS (714) 362-8299 (8-N-1 1200-28.8kb)  1994 Lead Pursuit, Inc, Joyswitch is a trademark of Lead Pursuit, Inc. For more information call or write to Lead Pursuit, Inc., 27068 La Paz Rd. 466, Laguna Niguel, CA 92656 Phone: (714)362-8698 FAX: (714)831-4334 Circle Reader Service #211 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"FORGET READING \"Impressive, a must have for computer gamers\" Steve Wartofsky, Editor Strategy Plus Magazine INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT In Windows Program Manager choose Run from the File menu and enter D:\\INSTALL whero Dis VOULONSO MAG EPISODE 4 JIM CHECK THS OUT IT HAS PLAYABLE DEMOS FULL MOTION REVIEWS TALKING PREVIEWS MULTIMEDIA UNTS VIDEO INTERVIEWS TOR 2 PREVIEW KLEY INTERVIEW EC'S MERCENARIES RONICS SHOW COVERAGE MOREN FIST KASUMI NINA \"IE can showcase product ZER GENERAL ZEPHYR THROTTLE STAR TRAIL features like no printed GUELLA VOBIEX publication can...\" ITS ONLY $995 OH AND A FREE GAME TOO! \"The ideal way for gamers to get an in-depth look at what's new.\" Bob Bates Legend Entertainment AINTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT The #1 Entertainment GD MAG Interactive TV for your CD ROM 12 episodes $59.95 1 episode $9.95 800 283 3542 or 802 767 4622 Source 95013 Visa & Mastercard accepted. Make checks payable to: Interactive Entertainment PO Box 21 Hancock VT 05748. Fax: 802 767 3382  1994 Chips & Bits, Inc. Circle Reader Service #341 "


"REVIEW Moonstruck Access Software's Four CD Extravaganza, UNDER A KILLING MOON seekers out to push their hardware to the limit will go gaga over the visuals before they even leave the main character's office, where the game begins. From your first-person perspective, you can turn in place or just turn your head or move in any direction, either by walking forward or by walking sideways. You can look up, you can look down, you can crouch or crawl on your belly or stand on tiptoe. You can look up or down while crouching or crawling or standing on tiptoe. It's enough to make a player accustomed to the limited control offered by ordinary games delirious. But visuals are just visuals and controls are just controls. Once you've spent the hall hour it takes to learn how to do all the things the game permits you to do and marveling at the luscious presentation that unfolds as a result, you'll want to get to the meat of the game. As a wise philosopher once said, \"Where's the beef?\" Alas, you'd have better luck finding pork in Haifa than beef in this game. KILLING MOON is crammed to the gills with the sort of talent you can buy, but all too obviously deficient in the sort you cannot. Actors can be had for the right price, even actors with marquee value and faby Charles Ardai miliar faces like Margot Kidder or Brian Keith. The price probably isn't even all UCH ANTICIPATED, MUCH DISto which Access has gone to make that high, since Hollywood hasn't exactly CUSSED, EXTRAVAGANTLY TOUTKILLING MOON the game to end all been throwing roles at either of them for ED, AND RICHLY PRESOLD, games, consider this: they hired no less the last few years. Gorgeous 3-D graphics Access Software's big Christthan James Earl Jones as the narrator. engines can be bought, too, and so can mas title, UNDER A KILLING Since KILLING MOON uses one of the nifty user interfaces. Moon, is as much a disappointment as it world's most faWhat's harder to is one of the year's more remarkable mous voices for UNDER A KILLING MOON come by is good achievements. It's a virtuoso performance its incidental nar Price: $99.95, acting, good direcboth deserving of and marred by the deration, it's obvious DOS CD-ROM tion, good writing, signers' pride in their accomplishment. that no facet of System and good game deRequirements: They know how good it is, but they seem the game which sign. These are IBM compatible not to know how good it isn't. could be embroi386-25Mhz, CDwhat KILLING KILLING MOON is served up on four dered, gilded, or ROM, 4MB RAM MOON lacks. To be CDs, because, by God, there's too much otherwise adorned 2 MB hard drive sure, it also has game here to fit on just one or two. In the has been over space, SVGA some technical real world, the only thing that comes on looked. You know graphics, mouse; ACCESS Killingne weaknesses for infour CDs is a Puccini opera; in the world the little clock supports most stance, the matte major sound cards; recommended 486 with of computer games, what comes on four icon that many VESA local bus, 2X CD-ROM, 16MB RAM, work that permits CDs is several hours of animation, audio, games put up on 10MB hard drive space. Access to superimand video, a super-saturated feast for the screen while a Protection: None pose its actors on hungry gamers to gorge themselves on. new scene is being Designers: Chris Jones, Aaron Connors the computer genAlmost every location in the gameloaded from the Publisher: Access Software erated virtual sets is and there are many—is a fully built-out, disk? Here it's a Salt Lake City, UT less seamless than (800) 800-4880 three-dimensional, photorealistic envilovingly rendered, in Origin's WING ronment that the player can explore with inch-high, woodCOMMANDER III complete freedom of movement. Every grain grandfather clock with a gold pen(another four-CD extravaganza), but word of text in the game is spoken out dulum swinging back and forth. these pale before the much more subloud, often by well-known movie actors. It's all terribly opulent, sumptuous alstantial weaknesses in the story the game To give you a clear picture of the lengths most to the point of decadence. Thrilltells and the way it tells it. UNA 132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"FREE CD-ROM HyperBole \"The Art of Digital Storytelling\" (toith purchase) YOU ARE THE MOVIE THE The e RTEX QUANTUM GATE IL WHERE AT 498 DID I GET HELT WHO ARE YOU? THERE ARE AY SI SDSS VHERE ARE 1? HOW DID I GE+ pelea WHO ARE YOU? HYPERBOLE STUDIOS THERE ARE SY FRIENDS A vortex rages around you dangerous. .3 CDs. MPC U CD-ROM deceptive. A frightening vertigo grabs your  16 BIT GRAPHICS AND AUDIO imagination as the vortex pulls you under,  DOZENS OF ENDINGS, HUNDREDS OF PATHWAYS The Vortex takes you deeper into the story of Drew Griffin, a young soldier fighting for his  ORIGINAL SOUNDTRACK BY D'CUCKOO, life on a distant world. You will experience COMPOSED BY CANDICE PACHECO this story through his eyes and mind. As  OVER 6 HOURS OF DIGITAL VIDEO A VirtualCinema Drew, you will discover the truth of the movie by Greg Roach Quantum Gate and your choices will decide  EXPLORABLE 3-D ENVIRONMENTS the fate of two worlds. As Drew, you will try QUANTUNI GATT II For a dealer nearest you call: wea to escape The Vortex. Visual 1-800-My Dealer or 1-800-693 3253 Entertainment The Votre Costituto Gate II. Vitanems and You Are The Movie ase trademarks of Hyper Bule Studies. 1994 Hyper Fole Studios All other trademarks and registered trademarks are those of their respective owners. All rights reserved. Circle Rearler Service 268 "


"Salesier belasty doll Nepobet Ning Cassins Aspector DUOS Londed dert cross Keyframley Heun-filled balloon Points 164 INVENTORY COMBINE levaMINE LOOK GET MOVE OPEN TALK ON/OFF AUXILIARY MNE Ok. I can use this. My nose has started sagging lately makes it hard to breathe. Now, whal kinda Info ya looking for. hmm? THE MEN IN THE MOON since they can only be solved by trial and aren't. They're off-the-rack, by-the-book Tex Murphy, the tough, hard drinking, error. It would take a finer casuist than I stuff. One involves the theft of a bracelet chain smoking private eye who starred in to make the correct choice between diafrom a pawnshop in Tex's neighborhood; this series' first two installments (Access another involves accusaMEAN STREETS and MARTIAN MEMORANtions of infidelity; yet anDUM), returns in KILLING MOON to investiother involves a fake gate and foil an attempt by a lunatic countess who hires Tex religious cult to destroy all life on Earth. to locate a missing statThe cult has built a space station orbiting uette in the shape of a the moon, to which they plan to escape bird. There's nothing prior to loosing a genetically engineered here you haven't seen a virus into the Earth's atmosphere. After a hundred times before on few hundred years on the station, they inthe Late Late Show. tend to return to a newly edenic Earth, As for the bird statJUNT TEXT TRAVER cleansed of the moral and genetic impuriuette, it's not your imagities that make Tex's future San Francisco nation if this bit sounds A Ask about ... resemble the set for Blade Runner. Needeven more familiar than less to say, they've got to be stopped. End conversation the rest. It's a not-veryAlong the way to cracking this big case, subtle tip of the fedora to Tex has to solve a handful of smaller casThe Maltese Falcon. The es, each of which contains anywhere up to THE NOSE KNOWS Nuclear fallout has bred bizarre mutants, game abounds with this a dozen puzzles of the sort you might exincluding Beek Nariz, whose elephantine schnozz is a none-toosort of homage. (Anothsubtle metaphor for his underworld knowledge. pect: getting past barriers, navigating er: Tex's office is on conversations with other characters, even \"Chandler Avenue.\") Unidentifying a criminal using a database in logue options like \"Casually investigative\" fortunately, the main thing references like the manner of a Carmen Sandiego game. and \"Casually inquisitive.\" And I defy any these accomplish is to remind players who (\"He had bright green eyes and a tattoo player, however keen his intuition, to are familiar with the works being referred of an anchor,\" one character tells Tex. solve on his first try either the dialogue to just how much worse KILLING MOON is. Back in his office, Tex turns on his comabout security systems with the electronics It is the simplest thing in the world to puter and chooses \"green\" from a list of store owner or the resuscitation sequence plant references to classic hardboiled possible eye colors and novels in a story; what is hard is writing a \"anchor\" from a list of classic hardboiled story of your own. Aupossible tattoos.) Coit Tower thor's Chris Jones and Aaron Connor's SINDE DIEks office The puzzles tend to be Chandler Roe. Do Golden never rise above the level of making gags neither difficult nor and sly references, though they show clever; they are, for the Defahn Todes Apt. signs of wanting to. With the plot about most part, mechanical the cult and the crusade for genetic puriexercises in doing the ly, they appear to be trying to tell a seriobvious. A good example ous story, with serious threats and grim is the matter of Tex's fax implications. Yet every time the story machine, which is brothreatens to go in an interesting direcken when the game tion, they cut it off at the knees by throwLOOK GET MOVE OPEN TALK ON/OFF starts. Replacing it reing in lame, inappropriate jokes and OSALLINE quires one to find a pencheap slapstick, such as scenes that incil, a stamp, and a volve Tex falling over in his chair or mailbox (all three are walking into walls or getting captured by where you'd expect to villains who do Three Stooges-style eyefind them); fill out and GUMSHOE GUIDE A helpful Travel option, overlaid on an actual poking schtick. mail a form; wait for the satellite photo of San Francisco, lets you quickly select and travel to This undisciplined willingness to sacrireturn mail; and then go pri en previously discovered locales. fice the story in order to stick gags in to an electronics store, where they don't belong is typical of amafind a fax machine, and buy it. Another where Tex has to bring a colleague out of leur writers, and it is deeply unsatisfying. example, this time from the end of the suspended animation. As far as I can tell, Jones and Connors seem to be hoping game: Tex is locked in a room where, if the only way to get through these sethat they can make a single game be both he looks around, he'll find some dry quences is to systematically try every opa serious thriller and a goofy comedy, leaves, a rake, a can of lighter fluid, a tion until you stumble across the both CHINATOWN and DEAD MEN DON'T stone, a piece of flint, and a smoke alarm. combination that works. WEAR PLAID, and it just doesn't work. Can you guess what the solution is? There So the puzzles aren't much fun. What They should have paid more attention to are a few puzzles that are more taxing can you do? At least if the cases themtheir sources: Hammett and Chandler than the above, but what those puzzles tax selves were interesting, it might be possiwere able to make their books extremely is less your creativity than your patience, ble to overlook this shortcoming. But they funny without ever undercutting their Go To GASO 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"STATE-OF-THE-ART JUST BECAME HISTORY... NOW EXPERIENCE THE FUTURE. Rebel Assault** was pretty. The 7th Guest had fun puzzles. But, technology advances. Gamers demand more and more. And the time comes when even the best products are moved aside to make way for the future. I That time has come and the future is Cyberia. Featuring full-screen, full motion video digitized speech, synthetic actors, music and sound effects by Thomas Dolby's Headspace and 11 of the most unbelievable arcade sequences your eyes (and your computer screen) have ever seen... it's so stunning that we're even willing to put our money where our mouth is. If you own Rebel Assault or The 7th Guest, send us the manual cover from either game along with a Cyberia sales receipt and we'll send you $10.00 cash back, If you don't own either of these titles, you've already saved a hundred bucks so stop waiting for a hand out...just go to your local software retailer to buy Cyberia or call1-800-9-9-GAME to order direct. (offer expires 3-1-45) CD-ROM CINEMATIC Circle Reader Service #76 MULTIMEDIA CYBCU Cyberia 01414 Xatrix Entertainment Inc All rights reserved. Published and distributed by Interplay Productions Inc. Rebel Assault is a tradenark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. The 7th Guest is a redesark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment "


"characters or their storylines. If it is too Night Live. James Earl Jones is James inches away from the fiery explosion that much to ask that the designers craft their Earl Jones—how can you go wrong with is about to engulf the space station. Not story as well as the old masters, at least a man who is able to make phonebook only is the graphic of Tex in front of the they could have listened to one of the fireball poorly done, lines they gave James Earl Jones, taken and not only is Chris from a story by Edgar Allan Poe: \"There Jones unable to conare matters of which no jest can be made.\" vey the impression that he is actually running, but the draMOON SHOT matic conception is To go along with the bad writing-in screwy. It's fine to which category 1 include both the uninhave Indiana Jones spired plotting and the embarrassing diarunning away from a logue-KILLING MOON offers an huge boulder, as in abundance of bad acting. I have never Raiders of the Lost Ark, seen a professional production, either on or to have the MillenTV or in a movie or on stage, that nium Falcon highbrought together so many performers tailing it out of the lacking in even the most rudimentary Death Star just ahead command of their craft. of a reactor core exStarting with the lead role of Tex MurDROP-DEAD GORGEOUS One of the more lavishly designed rooms shows plosion, as in Return phy, in which Chris Jones (yes, the game's off KILLING Moon's extraordinarily high, 3-D-rendered graphic luster. of the Jedi, but you designer) had the unmitigated chutzpah can't mix the two. A to cast himself, the acting is on par with guy running away what you would find on public access telecommercials sound sexy?-but he is from a nuclear explosion? No. Uh-uh. vision or in a high school play. Shanon Inwasted on minor bits of narration. It's Back to the drawing board, kids. gman's performance as a Valley Girl like hiring Rembrandt to paint your It's too bad that one more trip to the hooker struck me as particularly awful, house. There is one good actor in the drawing board is not an option, since though singling her out may unfairly sugbunch: Michail Bailey, who plays archvilKILLING MOON has much that would have gest that she is worse been worth salvaging. The game engine than Sandy Jensen, who is terrific; if only there were better things incompetently plays a to see and do, it might well command the crime boss, or Monique player's interest for more than the first Lanier, who can barely half hour. Better actors could have been get her lines out as the hired, or a better director might have fake countess, or Doug been able to coax less horrible perforVandegrifi, who does an mances out of these. A professional script annoying John Lovitz doctor could have worked wonders on impression (which may the dialogue, even with only a week or be redundant) as an untwo of work. derworld snitch, or ReIt would have been worth it. Now it's becca Clay, who, when too late, and UNDER A KILLING Moon is she starts talking, just far less than it might have been. To makes you close your which I can only say this: I hope this eyes and pray for it to be game sticks in people's minds as a monuover soon. YOU AIN'T NO SUPERMAN Margot Kidder's short but intoxicating role ment to arrogant presumption. Heaven What about the pros? as a barmaid teaches Tex the difference between shrewd save us from game designers so blinded Russell Means, who in investigators and private dicks. by their ability to craft spectacular techhappier times played nology that it makes them think they can the title character in THE LAST OF THE lain Lowell Percival, shines like a diawrite and act, too. MOHICANS, here is inert as can be, standmond in a coal bin. Here, at last, is a ing like a lump with his hands at his man who knows how to deliver lines! THE EDITORS SPEAK sides and doing nothing to bring his would that he'd had better lines to deliv UNDER A KILLING MOON character to life. Brian Keith seems to er, but at least you don't feel like turning wish he were Brian Dennehy since he the sound off when he talks. RATING *** does Dennehy's patented gruff and One good actor can't save the game, PROS A revolutionary interface that weary routine, only not nearly as well. however, and within minutes of enjoying puts you inside the game world as no Margot Kidder comes and goes in what Bailey's climactic soliloquy the player adventure game ever has before. amounts to little more than a cameo, givfinds himself at the game's absolute CONS The writing and the acting ing a broad, swaggering performance nadir as Tex runs down a corridor, ratty don't measure up, by a long shot. that plays like an audition for Saturday trenchcoat flapping at his heels, only Newspaper Credit card LIST of bidders Dalsh with hidden chip Noler Puinto 742 INVENTORY COMBINE JAINT TEXT RAVA LOOK GET MOVE OPEN TALKS ON/OFFAUXILIARY MNEL maybe you're one of us and maybe you're just an without it, don't plan on leaving. 136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"TIFERIT THEOD Y SS E Y CONTINUES TM We have seen the future, and it's not very pretty. No matter what you've done. No matter where you've been No matter who you've crushed to get there. Nothing..can prepare you for this. No, not Iragis. Rexxons. Relentless, Al-controlled alien mercenaries with military capabilities far greater than that of ten thousand Third World nations. And all of it—every bit of this deep space hell.— takes place in a brilliant, hyper-realistic 3D universe 500 million miles into the future, Inferno is here. Heed the warning. Superfast 3D graphics. UltraOh, yes, this incredible space simusophisticated virtual worlds... lation is brought to you by the Gameplay so advanced, we're no esame people who dropped you longer sure our programmers are over the Persian Gulf in TFX. from this earth! Bio-intelligence is built right into the amorphous fabric of your ship-from the plasma computer to the complex propulsion and weapons systems! Over 700 scenarios take you through four moons and seven planets, each with its own climate, atmosphere, habitat, geology and defense systems. Ocean of America, Inc. 1870 Little Orchard Street San Jose, CA 95125  1994 Ocean of America. Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited. Designed and developed by Digital Image Design Lid. Circlo Pandor Sanica #305 "


"REVIEW : My Ship And Welcome To I O Paramount Pictures Gain Priveleged Access To The Enterprise In The STAR TREK INTERACTIVE TECHNICAL MANUAL by Allen L. Greenberg OLLOWERS OF THE ORIGINAL STAR made staggering scientific advancements, Here, you can see a wonderful, eyeTREK SERIES MAY REMEMBER THE so that one trade paperback can barely pleasing model of the ship at any angle. 1967 EPISODE \"TOMORROW Is contain it all. Appropriately, the interacWhile you can do so only from a fixed Yesterday\" as the occasion when a tive CD ROM version is filled to its shinydistance, extensive menus and sub20th century U.S. Air Force Pilot silver brim with panoramic scenes, menus allow you to see close-up views of not only stepped aboard the Starship Encomputer animations, photos, schematic certain key features. Schematic diagrams terprise, but was also given a first-class drawings, movies, text and spoken narra are also used to display some compotour of its workings and facilities by Caption. nents that are not easily seen on the tain James T. Kirk and his command The manual is not a game, and game ship's exterior. Like much of the inforcrew. Most Star Trek fanatics would, of players may, at first, feel slightly frustratmation that appears throughout the Star course, gladly slice ed by the proTrek Technical Manuals, it is impossible off their pointed STAR TREK INTERACTIVE TECHNICAL gram's slow pace to tell if each item was lifted from one of ears in order to be MANUAL when compared the many Star Trek episodes, or if it was offered a similar op Price: $69.95, to an action adcomposed specifically for the trivia-hunportunity. Taking Windows CDventure. Your gry minds of inquiring Trekkers who advantage of 20th ROM, Mac CDtrek kicks off with have purchased the manual. However, ROM century computer an 11-minute certain \"behind the scene\" pieces of inSystem technology and mulRequirements: tour through the formation serve to remind us that we are timedia presenta IBM compatible ship, narrated by still talking about a TV show. tion, Simon and 386-33Mhz or Jonathan Frakes The Enterprise's bridge, the captain's Schuster attempts to better, 8MB speaking as first ready room, engineering, the transprovide an interacRAM, VGA Officer William porter room, sickbay, Ten Forward, the live version of that graphics, Windows 3.1, double speed CDT. Riker. Less observation lounge conference area, and ROM. tour in their CD Protection: None than a quarter of the holodeck are all available for detailed ROM, STAR TREK: Publisher: Simon & Schuster Interactive the screen is used study. Using the holodeck, you will be THE NEXT GENERA New York, NY to display actual able to examine the interior of a shuttleTION INTERACTIVE (800) 983-5333 footage of the craft, but most users will be magnetically TECHNICAL MANUAL. Enterprise, while drawn to the living quarters of Captain Star Trek technical manuals have, of the remainder is reserved for technical Picard, Lieutenant Commander Data, course, been available for many years. information and the standard Next GenCounselor Troy and Security Officer Aside from providing convention-goers eration computer-screen graphic display. Worf. Each room is home to several locawith accurate schematics for their fully Riker's tour provides some personal obtions into which you can stick your pryfunctioning costume paraphernalia, they servations by the first officer, and brieflying nose. In Data's room, you can peruse have generally served as reference books touches on each of the main sets available his art work; in Troy's quarters, you can which prove that the pseudo-science and for your inspection. Once Riker disapfree associate while staring at her meditechno-babble featured in every Star Trek pears, you're left alone with the Entertation candle; and in Worf's room, you episode actually enjoys some cohesive prise and your baby-boomer buddy, the can browse his spiritual icons. Each locaand internally consistent structure. As the computer. tion can be slowly panned all the way Next Generation has grown in scope and it is to the exterior hull of the 17010 around, as well as 45 degrees up or complexity, so has its fictional technology that the program will first take you down. You may also zoom in or out, so 138 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JANUARY 1995 "


"PLAY ANYTHING ELSE AND YOU'RE SHAREWARE E DROP STRAIGHT DOWN INTO THE MOST MIND-BENDING, STOMACH-CHURNING ACTION GAME EVER. IN DESCENT YOU'LL ENTER A TRUE 360° 3-D ENVIRONMENT/MOVE UP, MOVE DOWN, MOVE EVERYWHERE AS YOU PLUMMET DOWN NEVER-ENDING TUNNELS BLASTING MECHANICAL HORDES. TOP BECOMES BOTTOM, UP BECOMES DOWN AND YOUR SENSES TURN INSIDE OUT...AND THIS IS JUST THE FIRST 7 LEVELS. EXPERIENCE THE SHAREWARE VERSION OF DESCENT AT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER, OR CALL (800) 969-GAME TO ORDER THE FIRST 7 LEVELS OF THIS INCREDIBLE 30-LEVEL GAME. MODEM OWNERS CAN DOWNLOAD THE SHAREWARE VERSION OF DESCENT FROM THE INTERPLAY BBS AT (714) 252-2822 OR ANY MAJOR BBS, INCLUDING COMPUSERVE AND AMERICA ON-LINE. DESCEND ALONE OR WITH YOUR FRIENDS WITH 8-PLAYER SIMULTANEOUS NETWORK OR 2-PLAYER HEAD-TO-HEAD MODEM SUPPORT. START YOUR DESCENT TODAY, OR BE DOOMED TO A LESS EXCITING FUTURE. Zatbiplay 17922 FITCH AVE., IRVINE, CA 92714.1-800-969-GAME  INTERPLAY PRODUCTIONS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. ALL TRADEMARKS ARE PROPERTY OF INTERPLAY PRODUCTIONS. "


"SHIP EXTERIOR BRIOGE BEADY ROOM MAIN ENGINEERING TRANSPORTER ROOM SIEKBAY OBSERYAUCH LOUNGE CAPTAIN UL. GOMMANDER COUNSELOR that nearly every control panel and ventransformations can be slightly erratic, some of those flat data-screens that the tilation duct, no matter how tiny, can be leaving you to wonder whether some othcrew is always reading and handing inspected with a full-screen. The video is erworldly being might not be testing your around to one another. You may also disgenerally quite good, and there are intelligence, if not your patience. cover what an insignia communicator pin some great sounds to be found, such as Many of the Enterprise's control panlooks like from behind. the business-as-usual bleeps and clicks els can be isolated and enlarged for close The Interactive Technical Manual is heard on the bridge, and the familiar, very sensitive to deep vibration of the massive machinery FUNCTIONAL A349 processor speed. down in engineering. Originally proEach technical area contains its own grammed for the system of menued and sub-menued inApple Macintosh, formation which relate to the ship's sysFREE EJEN FORWARD it uses Apple's tems. The subjects are cross-indexed so QuickTime 2.0 HOLODICK that those systems which relate to more CREW QUARTERS video playback than one area of the ship may be folsoftware in the lowed from one control center to the SECURITY OFFICER Windows version, next. The information is often presentand the new ed as schematic diagrams or as panels QuickTime VR of hyper-text. Highlights from the text for the Mac. AlTOIR INTERRUPT are read aloud by Majel Barrett Rodthough it will run denberry in what has arguably become on a 386 procesthe most recognizable of her many. TOUR MODE sor, owners of 486 faceted Star Trek roles, the voice of the or Pentium-based NCC1701D computer. Often, illustracomputers will tive video clips of the ship in action are STAR TREK ON TOUR Explore the Enterprise on your own, or take a tour certainly be in for hidden amongst the text and drawings. narrated by \"Number One\" himself. Commander Will Riker. a smoother ride. As you might expect, the various living In any case, you quarters contain should be prepared for at least some slow far less technical TACTICAL transitions between screens. data, but the comMore than anything else, this program puter still offers has the feel of a giant, computerized cofdescriptions or exfee-table book. While it is difficult to planations of whatMAIN VIEW imagine that Star Trek followers will be ever personal items BACK UP able to resist the idea of a close-up tour you might find of the Enterprise, some may find that there. the scope of the project was so ambitious The key to fully that no execution could possibly meaenjoying the Intersure up to it. Others may find it a hollow active Technical experience without the characters who Manual is to seek normally populate the beloved starship. out and explore its It is unlikely, however, that any of us will PROTON TORPEDO LAURCHERS \"hot spots.\" These AUTO-DESTAUCT SYSTEMS receive an invitation to stare out from are areas on the Captain Picard's window, or up at the graphic screen star-filled ceiling from Counselor Troy's which, when selectbed. There is certainly quite a bit here ed, will provide an LASER LIGHT SHOW A number of Quicktime video clips illustrate various that we won't ever find in any other Star ity to study tactical systems, including the Phasers and Photon torpedoes. Trek collectible. & that area in more detail, or bring up a list of sub-headings inspection. Because many of these THE EDITORS SPEAK and related topics. Some very special hot screens made only the briefest of cameo STAR TREK INTERACTIVE spots, generally located on one of the Enappearances during The Next Genera TECHNICAL MANUAL terprise's many control panels, react as tion's seven year run, many of the show's RATING **** though you had actually pressed one of followers will enjoy this chance to get to the ship's more important buttons. You know them better. Instruments and PROS Contains a wealth of Star will be able to fire photon torpedloes as equipment in sickbay, while possibly Trek trivia delivered in high quality well as set off a near-disaster down in ensomewhat intimidating, are also particupictures and videos. gineering. These Federation Easter eggs larly fascinating. Many objects, through CONS Moves slowly on most sys. are discovered by slowly moving the some very impressive three dimensional tems, and the interface has its strange mouse-driven cursor over the graphic modeling techniques, may actually be moments. The Enterprise can also be screen until the cursor transforms into a picked up and examined from any angle. a little lonely without its crew. different shape. Unfortunately, these These include hand-held phasers and Ship Exterior Mystems Tactical LATION PHASERS 140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"SPACEKids 06.09 n . MICROPROSE Your Kids Will Discover A Whole New Universe As They Help Space Kids look For Grandpa. Introduce your children to all the wonder and excitement of computers with SpaceKids: Where's Grandpa? Follow lovable Zeedle and Deet as they travel through outer space looking for their Grandpa. The many fun-filled adventures will entertain your children for hours. SpaceKids has richly detailed graphics, fullscreen animation, music and sound effects, making it as fun to watch as it is to play. The challenging interactive cartoon lets children see and hear the outcome of their choices. It's a game they'll want to play again and again. FREE SCREENIE! Every Spacekids package includes a special offer for a free Screenie removable computer screen frame and lots of SpaceKids stickers.  1994 MicroProse All Rights Reserved. MICROPROSE Anything is possible. 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. Circle Reader Service #171 "


"REVIEW Playskool Visions And Psychedelic Dreams Fisher-Price Meets Surrealism in Electronic Arts' RELENTLESS by Charles Ardai OME GAMES ARE GREAT BECAUSE OF THEIR STRENGTHS, OTHERS IN SPITE OF THEIR WEAKNESSES. RELENTLESS is a fine example of the latter. Starting with an inappropriate title, which describes neither the game's storyline nor its gameplay, and a peculiar cly kiddie-book pap and police state sciPutt-Putt to frighten away some gamers surfeit of subtitles (where most games ence-fiction—\"The Spheros, the Rabbiand enough Sing-Sing to scare off the have none, this one has two: \"Twinsen's bunnies, the Quetches and the rest. Even the brave experimenters who Adventure\" and \"Little Big Adventure\"), Grobos...all lived in harmony until a remain may take a look at the odd keyRELENTLESS is a game with which no one tyrant named Dr. Fun Frock reared his board control scheme they have to learn will have difficulty finding fault. The ugly head...\" There are elephants who (<F3> puts you in \"Aggressive\" mode, slanted overhead perspective makes it blast you with tennis balls shot from their <F2> in \"Athletic\") and bail while the hard to maneutrunks and giant bailing is good. ver your characRELENTLESS deer that talk in tipWho's left? Reviewers, who have to see ter around sy Roger Rabbit voicthese things through to the end. It's a obstacles. The Price: $59.95 es, but there are also lucky thing, too, since we're the ones who DOS CD-ROM game lacks a seSystem hooded, sadistic can let you know that in this case first imrious save-game Requirements: bullyboys who back pressions are deceptive: once you familfunction, mean IBM compatible hand you across the iarize yourself with the controls and the ing that you 486-25Mhz face if they catch you milieu, RELENTLESS is a terrific game. have to replay (66Mhz breaking out of recommended), most scenes nuprison and bayonet ALONE IN THE LIGHT 4MB RAM Relentless merous times (8MB rec.), brandishing guards Gamers who have played I-Motion's before reaching SVGA graphics, who will run you ALONE IN THE DARK will probably be an unspecified 11MB hard drive space, CD-ROM (double through if given half among the first to find RELENTLESS familmilestone point. speed rec.); supports Sound Blaster and a chance. iar. On the surface the two games may The music compatible sound cards. It's confusing, all appear to have little in common-ALONE sounds like Protection: None right. The cutesy is a Gothic horror game derived from the Designers: Adeline Software something lifted Publisher: Electronic Arts graphics will make works of H.P. Lovecraft, featuring dyfrom a TV westSan Mateo, CA serious gamers roll namically shifting camera angles and ern. The graph (800) 245-4525 their eyes, while the origami-style graphics constructed out of ics make it look game's nasty streak large polygons, while RELENTLESS is a collike you're wandering around a planet will make cautious parents think twice orful fantasy featuring credibly three-dibuilt by Fisher-Price: rectangular plastic before buying RELENTLESS for little mensional graphics and only a single, blocks, conical plastic trees, stiff-jointed Johnny or Mary Sue. Putt-Putt Goes To over-the-shoulder camera angle. In pracplastic people. Mars is ain't; it's more like Putt-Putt tice, though, starting with the non-trivial The storyline is a bizarre blend of treaGoes To Sing-Sing, with just enough fact that both titles are of European ori142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"The Gets Better! Best... \"Interactive fiction doesn't get any better than this.» New Media «A challenging, take no-prisoners game.\" Computer Gaming World \"The most innovative science fiction game we've seen on any system.\" Dragon Magazine \"It rivals the most exciting movie or the most detailed strategy game.\" Axcess The Journeyman Project Turbo is making history! Now the epic time travel adventure game is more than 300% faster than the original, and requires as little as 4 MB of RAM! So the heart-thumping, hairraising, sweaty-palms speed of travelling through time won't age you a bit. With more than 30 minutes of digital video, an original soundtrack, and a non-linear story, The Journeyman Project Turbo will take you on a chilling ride from the prehistoric past to the distant future, faster than ever before! Also included on the disk is a sneak preview of the sequel \"Buried in Time\" and \"The Journey,\" a digital movie about the making of The Journeyman Project Turbo. Invision Award of Excellence and Gold Medal, Best Animation and Graphics Mac Computing Editor's Choice Award DOTHE LOURILEYMAL PROJET SVM Mac Best Entertainment Title of the Year Available on CD-ROM for MPC and Macintosh. For upgrade info or the name of a dealer near you call: METLE  Presto Studios Inc. All rights reserved. The Journeyman Project is a trademark of Presto Studios Inc, w  Sanctuary Woods Multimedia, Inc. All rights reserved. l-entertainment is a trademark and Sanctuary Woods is a registered trademark of Sanctuary Woods Multimedia Corporation. Circle Reader Service #274 STUDIOO 101011011 00011 "


"gin, they have a number of similarities. ferry that can help Keyboard control is surely one of the him fill in the most significant. You can put away your blanks on his mouse and joystick for this one; the curhologlobe. sor keys are all you'll need, left and Now that we've right to turn your character in place, got Twinsen skulkforward and back to get him walking. ing about in dank Shift activates your inventory while cellars and digging pressing the space bar initiates whatever up artifacts of anaction is appropriate to the situation cient, unholy reliand mode you are in. gions, the There are four of these \"modes» for resemblance to you to choose from, including \"Normal\" ALONE IN THE DARK (in which you can walk quickly and is probably easier to search through things like chests, barsee. To make it still rels, and lockers), \"Athletic\" (in which easier, a trip to the you can make great leaps), \"Aggressive\" \"Advanced Options\" (in which you can lash out at friend and menu allows you to BAR BIZARRE The strange but marvelous graphics are on full display in foe alike with vicious punches and turn down the this local pub. Twinsen must question the patroners about the kicks), and \"Discreet\" (in which you can graphic detail a whereabouts of his sweetie, who's been captured by the authorities. crouch and crawl and creep about over-polished, with that waxy gloss that and generally super-refined computer graphics can make a great unsometimes get. They are also weird: flunoticed spectacle id animation makes up for a lot, but I of yourself). \"Agwas reminded of nothing so much as the gressive\" mode dated stop-motion puppetry of TV specomes in two flacials like \"Santa Claus Is Coming To vors, \"Auto\" and Town\" and \"Rudolph The Red-Nosed \"Manual,\" but Aggressive (Auto) Reindeer.\" On the whole, though, the since it's hard effect is an appealing one: you're enough to get your plopped down in a graphically rich enviD. 34 character, a bobronment, supplemented here and there tailed Quetch 99 13 ou o by full-length animated sequences shownamed Twinsen, ing us the various characters in close-up, lined up on the and the sense of being inside an alien correct angle with world is convincing. his opponents to Sound effects are undertaken with an land a punch, I ATTITUDE ADJUSTMENT Twinsen can take four different attitudes toward his equal measure of vigor but considerably recommend steerworld: Normal, Aggressive, Athletic, and Discreet. less success. Twinsen's footsteps echo ing clear of the \"Manual\" option. notch and voila! Twinsen starts out imprisoned in an there are ALONE'S Asylum on Citadel Island, one of the polygons, only much primary land masses of an alien planet smaller and in called, for the sake of further confugreater abundance. sion, \"Twinsun.\" If Twinsen knocks out That Twinsen, with his guards and scurries up to the sechis flopping ponytail ond level, he can trade his prisoner's and hippity-hop gait, stripes for warder's garb, recover his is made out of the ID card and hologlobe (a nifty mapsame origami ping device that allows you to survey voodoo that brought the entire planet at a keystroke), and us I-Motion's stiff sneak back to the outside world. StowFrench detective and ing away in a load of garbage will get triangular hellTwinsen carried past the trigger-happy hounds is perhaps front gate guards. More sneaking will RELENTLESS's greatest get him to his home, a secret network accomplishment. OH, CRATE, A PUZZLE Twinsen's IQ will be put to the test with puzzles like of interconnected sewers, a buried Indeed, the graphthis one. He must figure out how to push crates through a maze in order treasure linking Twinsen to a forbidics in RELENTLESS to line them up on the \"Xs\". den form of goddess worship, and a are, if anything, 144 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"READY SOFT INCORPORATED & EPICENTER INTERACTIVE PRESENT .DON BLUTH'S SPACE ALE The evil Commander Borf has kidnapped Ace's girlfriend, the beautiful Kimberly, and is plotting to enslave the Earth by means of his dreaded \"Infanto Ray\", a weapon that changes everyone it blasts into a helpless baby. Armed only with a laser gun, Ace must seek out and destroy the Infanto Ray, rescue Kimberly and save the Earth. All in a day's work for a superhero, right? REALmagic INTERACTIVE MPED Featuring full screen animation and crisp, powerful sound from the original laser disc arcade classic, Space Ace plunges you into intense, non-stop action. The fate of Earth is in your hands. PC CD-ROM CDMAEM i NYR Not Yet Rated Available From: CHIPS & BITS P.O. BOX 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call: 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax: 802-767-3382 Source 10172 This official seal is your assurance that this product meets the highest quality standards of Sega\". SEGA Buy games and accessories with this seal to be sure that they are compatible with the Sega Genesis. Sega CDSECAC or Game Geart) System. DUALS 3 DO ReadySoft Incorporated S e Ace is a registered trademark or Bien Croap, Lid. 1984. Character Designs Clit DAB 1994 all , Visual and 3875 14th Ave.Units 7 & 8 fancepl used under the exclusa licensedl Epicenter Interactive Inc. Programming 9194 Radyo Incorporates. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Markham, Ontario Canada-LBR OH2 Ucensed by 3692 Enterprists. Ltd. for play the Sta Curtem. Sts and Sea CD are trademark of Send Enterprises, L. es reserye THE VIDEOGAME RATINO COUNCIL ITS RATING SYSTEM, SYMBOLS AND INDICIA ARE TRADEMARKS OF SECA OF AMERICA, DC, 1903. Se We 905) 475-4801 Fax: (905475-4802 2001 200 lagos, and interactive Multiplayer are trademark of the 300 Company. \"RELLIMAGIGE ademark of Signa bests. We "


"like coconut shells clunked together to others of which are make horse sounds. His grunts and no more than a few groans while engaged in any strenuous yards across, plus activity (such as walking with his fists the snowy Hamalayi raised) sound dyspeptic. His voice fortress and a mercimakes him sound like as much of a fully brief stay amid doped-up Zen surfer dude as his bitchin' the blasted vegeta'do and his Zippy the Pinhead features tion of the White make him look. Meanwhile the other Leaf Desert, and you characters all sound like amateurs trying can save Twinsun to do cartoon voices. from its threatened To build up suspense, the sound effects subjugation and/or man occasionally smashes cymbals in destruction. Fail, your car or plucks a bass string loudly. and...well, you really The technique is, shall we say, somewhat can't fail, since the less successful at setting a mood than game kindly restarts ALONE IN THE DARK's similarly used wolf itself any time you howls and creaking floorboards were. perish or get caught. CAVERN OF MYSTERIES Twinsen's quest will take him into the One nice side to the soundtrack is that The fact that each underground, where an ancient goddess religion is struggling to be if the English voices displease you, you time this happens reborn. can re-install the game so that it speaks you get kicked back French or German instead. Just wait till to an earlier point in you hear the rabbibunnies squeaking at the story and have to fight your way that it won't be the last. There is probayou en Francais. If the game wasn't surreal through scenes you've already beaten bly a good technical reason why designenough before... and really don't want to go through ers design games this way, though this is again is more than mildly annoying, but small comfort when you're banging your THE TWINSUN ALSO RISES less than unbearably so. RELENTLESS is head against the monitor and praying Successfully navigate the game's halfnot the first excellent game to make this that you've gone through the Temple of dozen-or-so islands, some of which conmistake-Broderbund's PRINCE OF PERBu for the last time. Suggestion for RELain large, Ultima-worthy towns and SIA comes to mind—and I don't doubt LENTLESS II: let the player save the game anywhere he wants to, even if it means making sacrifices in other areas. Oh, and ditch the title. A game like this ought not to be saddled with either the Doom-like overtones of \"Relentless\" or the thumb-sucking sweetness of \"Twinsen's Adventure.\" RELENTLESS is neither sweet nor relentless. It's tough and tricky, expansive and intriguing, confusing and infuriating, not to mention addictive as all get-out. Electronic Arts could choose one of those adjectives, or all of them if they prefer-it's worth it, if it helps snag players' curiosity long enough for them to realize that they are playing one of the most enjoyable games of the season. Fritz... THE EDITORS SPEAK RELENTLESS RATING  PROS Though it's surreal as can be, the world looks great and feels real, and you end up caring about your poor little Quetch. CONS There's only so much surrealism a person can stomach-and more user-friendly gameplay might have been nice. he's a real live wire Circle Reader Service #360 146 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"YOUR ticket to an Earth shattering adventure.. Windows PE OF + Mac of Advice  t evErYoNe is who they seem to be Read the secret dossiers carefully and never leave without your Raycom SUNSTAR Order Now! (800) 660-4480 ORL see your local retailer Fax:203/785-8001. International: 203/785-8111 01994 Sensuat Publishing 217 Chapel Street. Sute A New Haven, CT 08313 2001/785 3111 Fac 200/785-0001 All trademarks or registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. System Requirements: Wadows MPC compliant CD-ROM drive (150/sec transfer and sound board, DOS 50 or higher, 30 stor faster and 4MB RAM Circle Reader Service #315 "


"REVIEW REVIEW When Men Were Men And Dragons Were Dragons Medieval Fantasy Opulence In The 3D-Studio World Of DRAGON LORE by Peter Olafson IGH ART AND HIGH GAMEPLAY DO games, DRAGON LORE is also something It echoes MASTERS OF ORION (with NOT SUFFER EACH OTHER GLADLY. of an empty suit. It's great girth conwhich DRAGON LORE otherwise has THEY ARE NOT FRIENDS SO MUCH AS tains better than 1.2 gigabytes of data nothing in common in that it keeps acquaintances who share a ride spread across two CDs. Filled with deep your eyes constantly on the end and on to work. Oh, the one may someand affecting beauty, it has a certain orthe Big Picture, rather than simply times spring for the morning coffee. And nate, mystical charm. But it lacks the whatever colorful puzzle is before you. the other may occasionally hand over the detail, and the level of interactivity, for Adventures often aim for an epic sports section without having read it first. complete satisfaction. It's rather like sweep, but wind up existing in fits and But when they get to the office, the cofvisiting a very large historical mansion: starts, and anything that encourages a fee drunk and the paper read, one's the Please follow the yellow line on the world view should be embraced. boss and one's the drone and never the floor, and stay behind the velvet ropes. Essentially, what you're doing in DRAGtwain shall meet (except perhaps after ON LORE, the first in a planned series of hours in Doom). THE RITES OF SUCCESSION games, is making a case for yourself and Mindscape's DRAGON LORE is at once As Werner Von Wallenrod, you become an influencing people by your actions. The a demonstration of the new-found 18-year-old farmer-in-the-making with a knights watch your progress and judge promise of, and the enduring limitagreat shock of red hair, something of an your suitability on a scale ranging from tions to the alDRAGON LORE attitude and an violence (you solve problems at sword liance of game and outfit that appears point) to wisdom (you work through glamour. This Price: $89.95 to have been them inventively using your inventory). System high-gloss fantasy made from a You may view the scale at any time to Requirements: adventure, created IBM compatible tablecloth. Like so judge your progress, and the puzzles by French develop486-33 DX or many heroic build in pleasant fashion. If Werner sucer Cryo and Mind better, 4MB young men in ceeds, he joins this elite fraternity, buys scape's English RAM, doublecomputer games, some proper clothes, and we all get division, couples a speed CD Werner is not around to the business of waiting for richly-appointed mouse: quite what he DRAGON LORE. II. If he fails... well, it's not supports Sound illore environment to a seems: He is in quite clear, but it involves flames and Blaster deceptively simple compatible sound cards. line to become a falling, and it doesn't look like fun. point-and-click adProtection: None Dragon Knight. You'll quickly begin to get a sense of venture. It is a Designers: Cryo This is an excluwhere the balance of knightly opinion good gamePublisher: Mindscape sive club, with lies, for you will occasionally cross paths though not, I Novato, CA only 12 living with other Dragon Knights. They appear (800) 234-3088 think, a great members; and to wander about idly at fixed locations, one—whose basic puzzles and technowhile the prospective knight doesn't rebut evidently are keeping tabs on you logical exoticism should please beginquire a sponsor (Werner's natural father nevertheless. The knights are a varied ners and whose open-endedness may being a Dragon Knight and all), the memlot-ranging from samurai warriors, to a draw in more seasoned gamers. bership will put his admission to a vote. Kate Moss look-alike, to a blue woman And yet, like so many CD-ROM The vote is an especially nice touch. with Grace Jones eyebrows and KISS 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"makeup, to a dragBeauty is not at issue here. DRAGON on rider—but most LORE is gorgeous: a virtual art gallery. seem sociable The flat countryside is ringed in inaccesenough. You can sible gray-green mountains. Mist always speak to them after seems to hang in the middle distance (a a fashion—it's a shrewd move that allows the game to one-way street LIFE MAMA maintain atmosphere without preservand they'll respond ing great depth of field) and the sky alin slow, sonorous ways promises a storm. There is an tones and tell you abundant sense of being in a different something of their world, and a vague yet imminent sense orientation on the WIOLENCE WISDOM of dread hangs over the proceedings. Violence-Wisdom But beauty is, as they say, only skin axis. (Disconcertdeep, and once you get under DRAGON ingly, when they LORE's skin, you'll find it does not give finish speaking, THE MEDIEVAL MISS MANNERS APPROPRIATE BEHAVIOR SCALE With his you much room to simply explore or their lips continue punk hairdo and leather garb, Werner certainly looks tough enough. But much to find when it does. Anything to moverather in the Dragon Knights are always watching, and if our hero plays too rough, you don't strictly need isn't given the the fashion of oldthe game's ending is far less satisfying. time of day here, and hence the scenery fashioned computis to a great extent non-interactive. er-baseball outfielders whose legs drive shivers briefly, the screen tele That may be in some measure a funccontinue to cycle against the wall after a scopes to about two-thirds of its normal tion of the labor-intensive quality of the home run). size and off you go, whipping along to game's graphics—the more elaborate Now, this will seem pleasant but prethe next area in a first-person free the look, the more time it takes to gendictable until you come upon a handful scroll at positively gleeful speed. erate extra material—but it also makes of enjoyable complications. One is that. If the house in THE 7TH GUEST had a DRAGON LORE something of a tease. The along with the rights to the title, you've particularly expansive garden, it might books on the shelves up in that high inherited your father's feuds. (There is be a bit like this. The fly-by is a seamriverside tower? Out of bounds. The one Dragon Knight, Diakonov, that less and utterly beguiling experience, contents of the barrels in that witchy does not love a Von Wallenrod either vii an utterly non-interactive one-and treehouse? Mind your own business. olent or wise.) And if you find the ring may well be what sells DRAGON LORE to Those interesting green beakers and of a dead knight, Fujitomo, you can cast novice gamers. And even an experiartsy furniture in the sprite's woody its accompanying proxy in your favor. enced gamer may take decided pleahome? Not available to you, sir. Finally, as with the puzzles, all is not set sure in being allowed to so travel. If the Sometimes you can't even touch the in stone. Once you learn who's for you whole game was like this, we might beground. Characters have a tendency to and against you, you can effect the vote's gin to wonder who was actually playing look as though they are gliding over outcome by selectively killing off those here-us or the computer-but these surfaces rather than walking on them. likely to oppose you—an ethically-suspect bits are sensibly intercut with playerThis is especially notable in third-perbut nevertheless inspired touch designed controlled movement. Besides, as we'll son perspective when Werner's fleeing a to encourage replays. The designers have see the game is relatively spartan in giant stone ball (oh, please, can somegiven the player some fire-breathing terms of obscure objects of desire, so one please invent a new dungeon trap room in DRAGON LORE, and that's more it's not like you're missing much. for computer games to rip ofl.) or pithan can be said for many of its do-it-thisloting a barge way-or-not-at-all predecessors. across a lake. So, after errands to retrieve a bowl And most of the and cow for your adopted father (and Dragon Knights' familiarizing yourself with the game's abundant history basic mechanisms), you're off into a is in the documenwide 3D Studio world. Movement within tation, rather than a given area is handled in increments, in the game. As rather in the fashion of Myst. This isn't ALONE IN THE click-and-wait; these splendidly renDARK showed, it's dered scenes dash by almost as quickly possible to create as you can click the mouse, and since a fast-moving adyou're within an environment (rather venture and inthan just looking at pictures of an enviclude all sorts of ronment), it's often enjoyable to look extraneous but inaround you before moving on. MY BROWN EYES BLUE As if the dark skies and harsh landscape aren't teresting material. When Werner moves between resurreal enough, your all-blue opponent would make even Grace Jones look At times, the gions (or simply through a portal), tame. Some of the visuals in DRAGON LORE will have you wondering just who was smoking parts of those mushroom trees. you're in for another treat. The hard game seems almost uninhabited. JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 149 "


"THE ROAD NOT TAKEN mouse and a dragDRAGON LORE can also be irritatinglyon-shaped cursor. fussy about where it allows you to walk. If the dragon beckA Croppling Mack You're rarely permitted to take more ons in a particular than one or two steps off the beaten path direction, then you without a clear purpose in sight, and of can turn that way. ten even those two steps lead nowhere. A right click on a Other times, the way before you may apperson starts a pear clear, but you'll often need to detour one-sided chat, anyway to conform to the game's internal while one in the map. This becomes downright confoundupper-left corner ing in places like the sprite village, where opens a graphic inyou can appear to walk through buildventory. One drawings, but sometimes not through apparback: The same ently clear terrain. right-click comI'VE GOT YOU UNDER MY SKIN The interface is non-intrusive and easy to Consider the Stonehenge-like archway mand used to you'll find early in the game. It is strike up a chat is use, with all objects clearly labeled-if incredibly stylized. blocked by a spider's web. In the real also used to strike a world, you'd just walk around it, since it's blow if you have a weapon readied. combat here is scripted (the tactic deout in the middle of nowhere. Well, you Keeping a weapon at the ready is pretty pending where you click on the screen), can't here. The game won't let you, even much SOP for gamers, and more than but there are enough moves that it though there's plenty of space around once I found myself inadvertently redisdoesn't feel limiting. the sides. Evidently, they really, really tributing brains I just wanted to pick. The monsters themselves are a mixed want you to solve this puzzle. But then You can attack anybody-nice guys lot. The dogs look like buffalo. The scorwhy not position the archway at a narrow included-and sometimes, of course, pion resembles a lobster. The Dragon pass, or at least conjure some magical violence is called for. (Il you need an Knights look rather like the mannequins barrier as an excuse for having to use it? item in a monster's inventory, you're that museums often use to display hisDifficulties aside, movement and comgoing to get it only over said monster's torical costumes. But they get better, mands are handled very nicely via the dead body.) Much like movement, and you'll set those opinions aside once you light a raspy, halberd-wielding skeleton that goes down with a wonderful clatter of bones and armor. A giant Venus fly trap comes to horrifying, lunging life when attacked, and so vigorously does it defend itself, that it may take a while to sort out that lighting's not the way to go here. DRAGON LORE is certainly a step forward for CD-ROM adventure games. There really is a game in here, and a lovely-looking game at that. But it's a step taken while following the yellow line on the floor. The velvet ropes are still in place; but now, at least, they're swinging. NEW! Hi! I'm Girlfriend Maria.« May I come live in your computer? THE EDITORS SPEAK DRAGON LORE RATING * * * PROS To go along with the tremendous graphics, the designers have tried to go one step beyond the current state of \"multimedia\" storytelling by creating a richer world with more meaningful game options. CONS Unfortunately, one step is not enough. The world is still a bit too empty and non-interactive. You won't believe your eyes (or ears) when This is the revolutionary artificial intelligence this new Girlfriend takes up residence in your game everyone's talking about, so get your PC! She's cute, she loves talking to you, and copy now! Rated G. so it's safe for the kids, she actually learns! Peek in on her as she goes too! $49.95. Voice output kit $29.95. Add $4 about her daily activities, eating, playing the postage. Other personalities available, too! TM piano, watching TV or reading. And she's For adult titles circle #260! really interactive: no archaic, limited mouse Credit Card Order Line: menus she responds to anything you say! (800) 324-AIVR Corporation 709 Lingco #106, Depr CG501, Richardson, TX 75087 USA (214)235-4999 150 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Circle Reader Service #42 ANUARY 1995 "


"Gilles Ripley's Believe It or Not! THE RIDDLE OF MASTER LU A GRAPHIC ADVENTURE GLE COMING THIS SPRING This article For more information au 1-800-943-3664 ENTERTAINMENT SANCTUARY WOODS The Riddle of Master Luis o trodomark of Sanctuary Woods Multimedia. Bobove it or Noll is a trademark of Riplay Entertainment, Inc "


"REVIEW . Rock 'Em, Sock Em, Robots * METALTECH: EARTH SIEGE Puts The Earth On The Line by Jeff James EARLY A DECADE AGO, FASA CORCEPTION being two of the most notable reEarth from the machines. Astute readPORATION RELEASED BATleases. With the major delay of Activiers will immediately recognize this story TLETECH, A FUTURISTIC PEN AND sion's much-anticipated and oft-delayed as a near carbon-copy of the Terminapaper game based on the megaMECHWARRIOR II, Dynamix' new METALtor films, with giant computer-conmeltdowns to be seen in TECH: EARTHSIEGE emerges as the front trolled fighting machines (Cybrids) Japanime's cyborgian cataclysms and rorunner in a soon to be competitive field. taking the place of human-sized combotic ragnaroks. BATTLETECH immediateputer-controlled lighting machines ly established a loyal and ardent A \"TERMINATED\" PLOT (Terminators). The setting works for following of players. The FASA game pitThe story of EARTHSIEGE takes place a the game, but definitely doesn't win any ted players against each other in small few hundred years in the future, after points for inventiveness or originality, squads of piloted war machines, skirhumanity has perfected computer-conmishing on the wartrolled fightCYBRID-BASHING 101 ravaged battlefields of METALTECH: EARTH SIEGE ing machines: EARTHSIEGE is broken down into two the future for enough Price: $59.95 Cybrids. Due main modes of play: single mission and territory to assure each DOS CD-ROM to the advance career. Obviously, it's a wise idea to get \"house\" of a tentative and 3.5\" floppy of Cybrid plenty of practice playing single missions System peace and sullicient Requirements: technology, a before putting your HERCULAN salvageable parts to IBM compatible new arms race (HERC) fighting machine at risk in the keep their antiquated 386-33Mhz ensues, evendangerous career game. The single misBattle Mechs running. (486 tually resultsion games allow you to practice a wide In the West, the idea recommended), ing in a global variety of mission types, ranging from 4 MB RAM of anthropomorphic nuclear holofast recon missions to bold assaults on (8MB rec.), VGA \"walking tanks\" has caust. Even heavily-defended Cybrid bases. You're graphics, 23 MB hard drive space and MSbeen given credibility DOS 5.0: supports PAS, Sound Blaster, before the ragiven free reign as to what HERCs you by a number of and General MIDI compatible sound cards.; dioactive ash can take on your missions, and you're movies, most notably supports Thrustmaster WCS, FCS, and begins to setalso provided with a wealth of program the huge Imperial rudder pedals. tle, the Cyoptions to tailor the difficulty of single walkers in The Empire Protection: None brids decide mission games to match your skill level. Strikes Back and the Designers: David Selle, Mark Crowe that they'd be in the career mode, you're given comPublisher: Sierra/Dynamix malfunctioning EDBellevue, WA better off mand of a small, four-person squad of 209 robot in the Robo (800) 757-7707 without huHERCs. Consisting of 45 interconnected Cop films. Several mans, so they missions, your ultimate goal in this mode attempts have already been made at turn on their creators and begin systemis to defeat the Cybrids and return contranslating this sub-genre of science ficatically destroying the scattered remtrol of the Earth to the human race. tion into a computer game, with Activinants of the human race. As a member Regardless of whether you choose the sion's MECHWARRIOR and Infocom's of the human resistance, you must career or the single mission play option, BATTLETECH: THE CRESCENT HAWK'S INstruggle to win back control of the all the action begins at your base, with 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"First there was DOOM. Now comes HERETIC! From the Publisher of DOOM I HAERETIC A SWORD & SORCERY BATTLEFEST SO AWESOME. IT'S UNBELIEVABLE! rom the publisher FEATURES I of the shareware Supports up to 4 megahit DOOM players via network, 2 by modem comes a virtual Cooperate with your world of medieval buddies or massacre fantasy. The them in a bloody advanced 3-D deathmatch! graphics are so State-of-the-art real and everything 3-D, 360° smooth moves with such scrolling in real smoothness time for the fastest, deadliest combat! you are there! In HERETIC Walk, run, fly! Look all around, you'll cast even up and down! eldritch spells Choose from 7 from the Tomes weapons and a of Power. host of magical Wield fantastic artifacts to cast weapons such mystical spells. as the Firemace Order HERETIC and Hellstaff. today and become All to destroy a believer: the undead 1-800-ID GAMES and bestial ($40 plus $5 S&H) horrors that On CD-ROM or 3.5\" disks for your slaughtered IBM PC/ Compatible. your race. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY By the spirits of your Elders, the SOFTWARE Heretic must have his vengeance! SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #71 RSAC ADVISORY VIOLENCE BA Hereld and Raven are trademarks of Raven Software, Inc. DOOM and Id are trademarks al id Software, Inc. 1994 id Software, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"BCA360 BISERIE 10 LARODENI COS 80 GTATUS: NA US ACH ILR22 11 TARCC LIBI TH1 SARIO your rotund HERC technilast HERC standing becomes the default D cian prominently in view. At victor. Trying to keep an eye on the tactithe base, you can choose cal situation while keeping your HERC from the different HERC moving, shields up, firing chains in ortypes available. In the single der, and enough evasive action to avoid mission games, you can sudden death at the hands of the Cybrids choose any of the nine avail(who don't have to worry about things able HERCs with which to like hand-eye-coordination) will keep take on your mission. In caeven an expert gamer's hands full. reer mode, only a few light Throw in the added burden of shepherdHERCs are available at the ing your dimwitted compatriots, and outset, with more powerful you're destined to get blasted into a HERC types being added as smoking pile of HERC droppings. Mouse SHH..BE VERY, VERY QUIET Although this mech has maneuvered the game progresses. Some and joystick controls alleviate this to right on top of the enemy, the graphics still offer a great deal HERCs are ideally suited for some extent, but not much. Some gamers of detail fast recon missions (such as may relish the real-time challenge (as I the Roadrunner and the did), while others will be simply overOutlaw), while others excel in defensive friendly HERCs to help achieve each obwhelmed by information overload. (Patriot) and heavy strike (Samson, jective. So, by using a brief list of comColossus) roles. Matching the correct mands, you can order your comrades to PRETTY PICTURES HERCs to your mission goals is an essenpatrol designated waypoints, attack cerEven if you are having trouble staying tial element of success and equipping the tain targets, protect you when you're unalive in the EARTHSIEGE gameworld, the right HERC with the correct weaponry is der fire, etc. stunning graphics and animation will at also vital. Fortunately, a panoply of hiAlthough your fellow HERC-drivers least make you enjoy the scenery during tech armaments are available, ranging will usually follow your orders to the let your brief stay there. Each HERC and from the lowly (but effective) autocannon ter, don't expect any miracles. Most Cybrid vehicle is wrapped in a detailed to the deadly electron flux cannon, which charge blindly into combat regardless of texture-mapped skin, replete with insprays your target with bolts of lightning the pilot's skill level, gleefully marching signia and the patchwork-effect of overinto their doom via a concentrated hail of lapping armor plates. EARTHSIEGE uses ROCK 'EM, SOCK 'EM, ROBOTS enemy fire within the first few minutes of a modified version of the same game Once you've started a mission, your viewa mission. They frequently run between engine employed in ACES OF THE PACIFpoint shifts to the cockpit of your selected you and the Cybrid you're shooting at oric and ACES OVER EUROPE, featuring HERC. Here, a battery of keyboard, expend all their ordnance (missiles and very impressive animation and graphic mouse or joystick commands allows you detail. A variety of terrain to accelerate, arm weapons, track targets, and weather effects are imand view a detailed report on the status plemented with flair, such of your system. Depending on the model as units gradually appearof your HERC, you can have up to nine ing out of thick curtains of weapons available at once. Since your vefog and moon-lit battlehicle has a limited supply of energy in its fields during night-time \"master energy pool,\" you'll have to efmissions. The eerie walkfectively manage your weaponry to maxiing motion of all the mize your chances for success. Crucial to 700 HERCs is a joy to behold, this endeavor is the concept of \"firing 1873 from the ostrich-like gait chains.» Instead of firing all your of the Roadrunner to the weapons at once, thereby depleting your methodical plodding of energy reserves, you can assign certain LASER LIGHT SHOW Although it doesn't pack the greatest punch, the Colossus. Music and weapons to fire together in a sequence. sound effects are used efthe lowly laser can severely damage a slow-moving mech, For example, you could have your missile especially when you pack a laser cannon in each arm. fectively throughout the launchers in one chain for long-clistance game, including a satisfycombat, while your autocannons and ing elephantine stomp lasers are on another chain designed for cannon shells) within the first few minwhen your HERC's heavy footpad slams close-in combat utes of a mission. Needless to say, keepinto the ground. The game worked fine You'll have plenty of opportunities to ing constant tabs on what your cohorts when used with a Sound Blaster 16 try out your tactics, as the Cybrids field are doing is of vital importance. sound card, although I did have some an impressive number of fast and deadly To make matters worse, effectively trouble getting it to work with a Creunits. From flying landskimmers to controlling your own HERC requires an ative Labs AWE32 using general MIDI. ground-pounding Cybrids, they are cerexcessive amount of practice. Even the Dynamix reports that a patch is in the tainly the equal of your own HERCs. fastest HERCs seem a bit on the pokey works which will fix these and other That's one reason you don't operate solo. side, making most battles deteriorate into problems, and should be available as You operate with up to three other toe-to-toe slugging matches where the you read this. PERM 10 B ERS THE ESRAMU 10 ILGS200 IN TARGET BILA ROG IN TRACK 154 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"\"THE PERFECT CONPUTER GAME | TWINDOWS YOU CAN ALWAYS TELL WHO HAS THE CD VERSION. 19T'S CYBERIFICI COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ALDO AVALINE OHROPY FOR MACANDO NO ON NICOOK SPECTRE VRI THE ENHANCED CD-ROM VERSION. NOW ON PC. THE MOST ADDICTIVE VIRTUAL REALITY SHOOTOUT OF ALL TIME NOW HAS NEW, MIND BENDING 3D GRAPHICS: NEW GAME ACTION. NEW ROBOT CHALLENGERS. A FULL HOUR OF ACTION CONCURRENT VIDEO AND YOU CAN JACK IN SOLO OR NETWORK WITH UP TO EIGHT PLAYERS. IF YOU DON'T HAVE A CD DRIVE YET, THIS IS ALL THE REASON YOU NEED TO GET ONE. SPECTA FREE TWO USER VERSION LIMITED DITION AT RETAIL INCLUDE TWO HAYR NETWORK VERSION TO ORDER SEE YOUR LOCAL RETAILER, OR CALL 1-800-VLOCITY.       .  . "


"problems, EARTHSIEGE is saddled with a host of tiny, but irritating, glitches and questionable design decisions. The turning radius and firing arc of most HERC models is appalling, making an already difficult game even more so. During the career game one of your pilots may get killed in action, only to be eventually resurrected, given a minor name change (i.e., «Braxton\" becomes «Braxton 1\") and inserted back into your squad. You're also given the ability to change the HERCs your pilots drive, but you can't change the pilots available for each mission. For example, in a mission involving two HERCs the game selects the other pilot for you, preventing you from choosing him yourself. As is, rookie pilots remain unskilled and expert pilots are more likely to get killed in combat. ELLO 20 HERCULEAN HEADACHES and repair damaged ones) and to comGorgeous graphics aside, EARTHSIEGE plete the paltry few «must-win» missions. sullers from a number of problems. The At worst, players who adopt this strategy single biggest problem is the difficulty of will receive a tongue-lashing by their CO the career missions. Unlike single misand will obtain new HERCs and weapon sions, which offer a host of playability types a mission or two later than normal. and configuration options, the career opThis combination of overly difficult mistion is limited to one difficulty setting: sions and consequence-free mission failhard. About half of the missions are of average diffi9 CARNED culty, while the other half will even give experienced . gamers a chance to experience considerable amounts of frustration. The problem is two-fold. First, some missions are impossible to complete without losing in an ELASTIST! MENCE several HERCs to enemy TREET fire. This leaves the player 100 with an ever-dwindling INTERIOR supply of units to face everWANDERING WINGMAN Unlike many action games, your more difficult missions, recompanions do follow orders-almost to a fault; be careful what sulting in the player you ask of them, as they may not be capable of performing. experiencing yet more failure and frustration. Secondly, the game seems to take little heed ures results in players skipping missions of failed missions. In its current state, in an effort to get an \"easy\" one, bypassgamers can play through the entire 45ing large portions of the career game in mission career game by aborting roughly the process. Any game which rewards two-thirds of the missions. The only time players for not playing has serious playaplayers may need to engage in combat is bility problems. for salvage (in order to build new HERCS In addition to the career playability DLR. TILSSILE ERIT LAUCH CLINE STATO: 100 E 14-lelse BILAZIONE E TC20 100C LOCK ULT TRACK JUDGMENT DAY Despite the aforementioned shortcomings, EARTHSIEGE emerges as the best attempl yet at creating a futuristic simulation of giant armored combat; of course, it's also the only game of its kind to come out in the last few years. The stunning graphics and animation are clearly a large step forward in the genre, and the design team's attempt at making the HERCs as believable as possible is clearly evident. A program patch is in the works, and additional Battlesets will become available, hopefully alleviating the chronic difficulty problems. EARTHSIEGE has the potential to become a great game, a potential unfortunately thwarted by poor career-mode playability and a number of other problems. Die-hard fans of the genre may be able to overlook the design flaws, although less-interested gamers would be well-advised to wait for the arrival of the promised program updates before buying. THE EDITORS SPEAK METALTECH: EARTHSIEGE RATING ** 1/2 M PROS Eye-popping graphics and plenty of hi-tech 'mech hardware make Metaltech: EarthSiege the biggest 'bot on the block. CONS Of course, it's currently the only 'bot on the block. The storyline is not only derivative, but not at all developed in the game. Overly difficult career missions (without difficulty settings) and a host of irritating design details. a face only a mother could love Circle Reader Service #355 156 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"This one you won't want to miss. It's been nearly three years in the making with a budget we won't even talk about. It employed a team of over a hundred people, including programmers, artists, musicians and writers as well as Hollywood make-up and special effects houses (we liked the flames in Backdraft so we hired the movie's special effects house to bring in a little heat). As the creators of Wasteland and The Bard's Tale«, our goal was to produce a game every bit as innovative and unique. We think you'll like the results. Art and Stuff Graphically, the game is state-ofthe-art stunning (we're a little biased but check out the screenshots for yourself). We used a combination of live actors and computer generated creatures with Silicon Graphics environments and magical effects which were painstakingly rendered down to the finest crack, doorway and magical lightning storm. The Box, the Book and Story The packaging is every bit as cool as the game. Shipping in a special tombstone-shaped, hologram box, the package starts you on your quest «through dark corridors, treacherous sewers and subterranean realms of faeries, magick and the living dead.\" (We had to throw a bit of marketing hype in here somewhere.) Along with the skeleton hologram cover, you also get a limited edition, hard-bound Stonekeep novella by Steve Jackson and David Pulver. The Game's the Thing A combination of traditional role playing and interactive storytelling, Stonekeep mixes a detailed storyline and character interaction with puzzle-solving, magic systems, character attributes and combat. It all comes together in a system that allows for quality story telling combined with a powerful, yet easy-to-use control system (intuitive without being watered down). \"By Gamers. For Gamers.\" is Interplay's slogan and Stonekeep is the kind of game we've always wanted to play. It looks cool, sounds great and tells a good story. It's one of those games you'll stay up playing until three in the morning on a work night. Basically, it's just a lot of fun. A CD-ROM, Role-Playing Experience for IBM and Compatibles. STONEKEEP  1994 Interplay Productions. Stonekeep is a trademark of Interplay Productions. All Rights Reserved. The Bord's Tale and Wasteland are trademarks of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #175 "


"REVIEW Metal Kombat Time Warner Takes On Arcade All Comers In RISE OF THE ROBOTS by George Jones C GAMERS WHO ENJOY COINOP FIGHTING GAMES HAVEN'T HAD A WHOLE LOT TO QUENCH THEIR thirst for hand-to-hand violence. The PC conversion of STREET FIGHTER II was pretty rotten, and that of MORTAL KOMBAT was fairly decent, but there hasn't yet been a game this side Ego virus. Her behavof cartridge systems that has landed a solioral programming has id punch and a creative round-house become completely restructured so that kick. she derives a great deal of joy from de were It's no surprise, then, that RISE OF THE stroying things. As a consequence, she rendered ROBOTS has been eagerly awaited by fans has shut down the factory and has begun using 3-D STUDIO, so all of them exist in of the fight. Promising 3-D graphics that to reprogram all the other robot workers a true three-dimensional environment would put most arcade games to shame, with her own Destruction/Joy program. and can be rotated or lit from virtually there was no doubt that this STREET That's the storyline, such as it is. As the any angle. This means that each of the FIGHTER clone would look good, and ECO 35-2, a unique bio-mechanical cysix deadly enemies move smoothly and from preliminary indications, the borg with a human brain, you'll be facing realistically as they try to turn the little promised game play five of The SuCyborg into a tin can. It also means that would be cool too. RISE OF THE ROBOTS pervisor's most computer gamers can use this game to After much hype Price: $49.95, powerful mechaquiet cartridge game devotees, who arand anticipation, DOS CD nized mates. Degue that the PC will never be as good an Time Warner's fu System feat the five of arcade platform because it can't combine turistic side-view Requirements: them, and you'll fast action, large, attractive graphics, and fighter is finally IBM compatible face the Supervientertaining game play. Well...two out of 486DX-33, here. Frankly, I 4MB RAM sor herself in a three ain't bad. couldn't wait to SVGA graphics winner-take-all Action enthusiasts jazzed by the sharp wade into the fray, (512K RAM or RISE showdown. look of RISE OF THE ROBOTS may be dismetal limbs a-flyin'. greater, VESA TANE TRUMENTS appointed once they actually start playIn the setup story compatible), LOOKS ing the game. For some reason, the of RISE OF THE ROCD-ROM: supports Sound Blaster GREAT, LESS designers decided to completely turn compatible sound cards BOTS we find that Protection: None FILLING their backs on the successful formula things are amiss at # of Players: 1-2 (same computer) Breaking with used by legendary games such as MORTAL the completely self Designer: Sean Griffiths tradition, RISE OF KOMBAT, STREET FIGHTER, and even sufficient Electro Publisher: Time Warner Interactive THE ROBOTS' KARATE CHAMP. While you have some of corp manufacturing Milpitas, CA high-resolution the usual range of motions, moving left complex in Metrop(800) 482-7366 graphics and aniand right, jumping, and ducking, fighters olis 4. Somehow the mation look just can't flip over each other, and can perhead robot, known simply as \"The Superas good during game play as during the form only 6 kinds of attacks. So, not only visor,\" has been infected with the wicked cinematic splash screens. The robots must you fight the whole time from one 158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JANUARY 1995 "


" uge0o dn pu not pue spojdx pe  q edqoeq Kaeuq siya J0 sanok pa pue 200 entire room with your cerebellum. You have exactly two hours to find t's not just 00000 00001 90000 And the good news? la game. Gray matter doesn't stain. It's an infection. loaded a particularly repugnant little cyber-virus called \"Burn:Cycle\" into your skull. Philips Media Hun > Your name: Sol Cutter. Occupation: data thief. The bad news is you've just downPHIUPS coming soon MAC & PC CD-ROM OD-i PHILIPS Limited first editions of Burn Cycle corta 1994 Simon Boswell. All rights reserved.  Philips Media. All rights reserved. poeniginalhardcore lave soundtrack CD. Burn Cycle 1994 Trio M isited Philips Interactive Media International Ltd. Circle Bandar Senica #105 "


"le not as powerful as most of your introl upon Youl opponents. The culatilhele is only one attack button is to blaimelhi'. Coll_ols, il t his in RiSE II ) BOTS vill provide you xvili Niliy Comacle\", COLivcirtel biklift, expect a ley losses belole 'ou to learn hovy to beat yyy to bloyolf some quick steam, allittle firustrating in that if you pinch and one butt) or kick. vill blocking accCI]plislilly loving the top. The fishing len is so suall (ille of one Sleen), and lh ten ) bots So big, illitis really laindi) eatialha|s viili long ticles Niliiuly visis a onDut controlled Sati'. l( \\ve , there is illing albut lit tility tole: you vliole lot yette about your handle lhen using the keyboll, it's unfile moments. Each lolotic o0 sounds in gencil levelllole. lity ility()-jlayer mole (ut that, of ( ) I'S, T|iiiiig a field willing to play). (hen you liually l a li Sullicit l'ilitial inble t() [10]]>lh into Vallous sliS, to stunt in the samne Tiing as others in the Ol' fighting strategies, nl tailor ilicit time. There losit still lo lb Special n \\'ts of c lh Tolbo[ ll'e entirely . 05 lot graphics that would \\\\'ll even the heart old Tobot. 5 Limited moves, limited sICe 1vlhich to fight-just plain limited in he other game play ( 9tions incluil will only be impressed with the tel is ilicost fun, since You Can pick | "


"REVIEW Lean Down On Your Steel Knees And Play Accolade's CYCLEMANIA Takes A 160mph Turn Toward Digitized Raceways by Gordon Goble \"Get your motor runnin, tion of motorcycle racing, and while are animated. In the case of head out on the highway, some work better than others, surely the CYCLEMANIA, more storage space is lookin' for adventure highlight of the package must be the usurped by race tracks than is available and whatever cows come my way.\" courses themselves. on a typical hard drive. In a move that is sure to have reperAWG TRIVIA TIME: NAME THE cussions throughout the race sim comMEGA BIKES WRITER OF THAT CLASSIC 60S BIKER munity, Accolade has created in ON MEGABYTES ANTHEM, \"BORN TO BE WILD.\" IF CYCLEMANIA one of the first products of So what does 400 megabytes of digiyou said Mars Bonfire (yes, that's this nature to use real-life background tized roads and scenery do for a game? really his name), you are correct, video footage within the gaming experiWell, it must first be noted that the acand you spend entirely too much time ence. A fast-moving film crew collected tion does not fly by in what is commonreading record covvideo footage ly termed \"high resolution.» That ers. So drop that old CYCLEMANIA from five dismeans a pixelated, mushy look to the vinyl and grab your Price: $59.95, DOS CD-ROM tinctly different road and background; in other words, leathers, because one System areas of Ameridon't expect to find yourself in the great American insti Requirements: can roadwaymiddle of a finely detailed movie. But tution, the computer, IBM compatible from desert to at the same time, the very idea and inhas hopped on that 386DX-33Mhz forest-and clusion of real footage versus an artist's other great American or better, 4MB that footage was rendition is an innovation that lends a RAM, 1.5MB institution, the moused to build CYCLEMANIA hard drive certain sense of credibility, and overall torcycle, in Accospace, 2X or the game. So it feels and looks pretty cool. CYCLEMAlade's CYCLEMANIA. faster CD-ROM, much emphasis NIA does not approach the clarity of, And, yes, cows (hors SVGA graphics; has been placed say, the high-res version of NASCAR, es, too, for that mat supports Pro Audio Spectrum 16. Audio Trix on the actual yet it is the next natural step in the ter) are fair game. Pro, and SoundBlaster compatible sound racing environevolution of vehicle sims and may send cards. While CYCLEMANIA ment that Cya bevy of racing software designers in Protection: None won't let you flash a Designer: Ronnie Yaron CLEMANIA's CD search of the nearest camera crew for digital, one-fingered, Publisher: Accolade, Inc. format became their next project. Dennis Hopper San Jose, CA a necessity, not In actual gameplay, CYCLEMANIA is a salute while perched (800) 245-7744 merely a matter curious mix of racing simulation and cockily aboard your of convenience. arcade-type free-for-all, and stands chopper, it will let you pilot a very fast While each track isn't particularly somewhere in between, not quite sure racing bike against a number of computlengthy, nor are there hundreds from of where to go. Certainly, dodging er opponents over a variety of highway which to choose, they are real, even if assorted hazards such as static cows, courses. There are a bunch of intriguing the motorcycles and obstacles (farm anigalloping horses, and Sunday drivers elements to this CD-based, semi-simulamals, cars, trucks and low-flying aircraft) while traveling in excess of 150 mph is JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 161 "


"SA an amusing and hair00:12:88 es are never initially fatal, raising pastime. Yet while 62 MPH each time you go headoil spills may throw a little over-heels your overall wobble into your day, and health will be adversely inappropriate contact with allected, and too many other obstacles will launch accidents will bring the you viciously from your body bag boys—your day bike to the ground, cows is over. Yet, some bumpdon't explode, cars don't ing is not only condoned, veer tragically off the road, but encouraged. Nudging iniciais cops don't attempt to halt an opponent just hard your progress, and enough to send them flygenerally all that good stuff ing off their trusty steed one might expect from a POSITION: 4 BU will actually score big slam-bang arcade-type SCURE OUT OS S584 bonus OUT OF S884 points. S But affair just aren't there. At prospective Cyclemaniacs the same time, while ride FOLLOWING A FAST CROWD Roaring down a realistic track at 160 mph will raise won't ever feel the ecstasy and bike mechanics are your heart rate, but trailing your own bike governs the excitement. of victory without learnquite good, the wacky ing the quick way to the nature of the program and finish line, and that inlack of serious attention to realism of the half-dozen competitors that show volves deprogramming from traditional squashes any long-term interest for up for each event. Therefore, the entire four-wheeled conveyances. fervent simulation devotees. One can't screen does not tilt from side to side as As any Hell's Angel will tell you, ridhelp but feel that with a little more you wind through hairy left-righting a motorcycle is not the same as driwork in one direction or the other, switchbacks, although your on-screenving a car. Acceleration and CYCLEMANIA could have been either a representation does. Furthermore, this deceleration is instantaneous, carving a superb cross-country, smash-em-up behind-the-racer point of view brings corner involves an entirely different apadventure, or a great full-bore something to CYCLEMANIA that real racproach, and bikes can lit places cars simulation. As it is, CYCLEMANIA blends ers never experience their own image won't. All this translates well to the Cya strong sensation of two-wheeled speed being blocked by trailing riders, and CLEMANIA environment, and an attentive and knee-scraping intensity with the that can be annoying during its rare oc pupil will end up with both an imwacky, joystick jamming action of a currences. proved technique and better times. Top coin-op arcade machine. finishers score more points and win The player's view of the proceedings WHEN THE RUBBER more money, and this permits one to is interesting. Although cockpit controls LEAVES THE ROAD purchase various high-performance mold across the bottom of the screen in As previously mentioned, five tracks equipment such as racing slicks, imauthentic fashion, the view is not firstmake up the CYCLEMANIA world, each proved exhaust systems, and more powperson. The gameplayer's digital perdifferent in its topography and deerful powerplants for use in future sona is seen from behind, merely as one mands. The tighter the track, the races. The more you win, the more stuff tighter the you can get, and the more stull you get, WOLOR CREDIT racing, and the more you can win-and that's imthe tougher it portant in the full CYCLEMANIA season of is to scoot five races. exhaust systems Gas-charged progressive around those Finding victory in the beginner's level slow-moving of CYCLEMANIA is at first difficult, but debutantes in becomes quite commonplace with a littheir VW contle familiarity. Fortunately, the skill levvertible, or el of opponents can be raised, as well as Harry in his the amount of realism injected into moving truck. one's own ride. Racing the fast crowd Too much with a more realistic machine is not a speed through walk in the park (choosing a manual a tight corner, tranny, for instance, not only involves and you'll be constant gear selection but the probafirst skidding bility of overheating). Unfortunately, a Upgraded racing engine. cross-road, season championship, even at extreme Sort compound, nigh Polished and porred then picking levels of difficulty, rates no on-screen cyl. heads EXIT cyclemania yourself off celebration other than a dull standings EVERYBODY NEEDS PERFORMANCE Win enough races and you can head to the the roadside board with a «#1» beside your name, Cyclemania Shop for bolt-on upgrades or a shift-hot engine. marbles. Al and that will undoubtedly be seen by though crashsome as an oversight. into? nigh performance suspension Five.position rebound. damping adjustment Higher rev: capability. traction tires. 162 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"TRUE WAVETABLE SYNTHESIS  16-BIT RECORD & PLAYBACK  3 CD-ROM INTERFACES TRUE WAVITAIL SYNTHESIS  1632 VOICE POLYPHONY/MULTI-TIMBRAL ULTRASOUND Achoureed GRAVIS WITOLOGRAMIMIC SOUND SUPPORTS WIND VS 3.1/MP2. SOUND BLASTER, MT-32 & GENERAL MIDI un LE 15867 aced bravis & forte technologies EXPERIENCE THE POWER Of ADVANCED WAVETABLE SOUND TECHNOLOGY Experience the power of studio quality music and heart-pounding special effects from your PC games and music programs with UltraSound MAX\". The newest wavetable PC sound card from Advanced Gravis, UltraSound MAX comes with over 5.6 megabytes of real instrument recordings to produce 32 voices of incredibly realistic music light years from the tinny sound pumped out by FM cards. Hear the difference right away with DOOM and Epic Pinball (both included). Enjoy sensational wavetable and digital sound with hundreds of popular applications that already support UltraSound. The MAX will also give you great sound with most games and applications written for Sound BlasterTM, MT-32, General MIDI, and Windows. Record or playback in 16-bit stereo at 48kHz (surpassing CD quality). Explore over 15 megabytes of bonus software. Offering you the greatest flexibility, the MAX uses a unique, RAM-based wavetable system. Imagine creating new instruments bounded only by your imagination. With MAX it's for real. UltraSound MAX is the most complete, powerful, and affordable sound card you can buy Advanced For more information, or to find out how to obtain the UltraSound Experience CD-ROM demo, call (800)663-8558, (604)431-5020 or fax (604)431-5155. Circle Reader Service #283 SPEED-COMPENSATING GAME PORT SUPPORTS WINDOWSTM 3.1/MP2 GENERAL MIDL ML. 32. AND SOUND BLASTERIM APPLICATIONS GRAVIS "


"MOL . -100 the player in the particular game. Being CD-based, CY00:37:03 UMPH mood for the upCLEMANIA involves the usual lengthy coming carnage. game loading process (even on the Audio is effective mandatory double-speed drive), yet the both on and off action flowed almost seamlessly on my the track, complete 486-33 testing machine. with funky musical CYCLEMANIA offers a smart depiction score. The sound of the racing bike experience in a semitrack also includes realistic and enjoyable arena. For a sampled motorcyquick thrill, it excels, and certainly the cle roars and inclusion of real video is one giant leap squeeling tires, forward. But depending on the individPOSITION: which lend audio ual, the game play may quickly wear OUT DES SCORE 87983 OUT OF: S realism to the racthin, like Taiwanese brake pads, and Cying. The sound is CLEMANIA may slide off the hard drive WILLIPEOUT! Obstacles like these tires will flip you road-rash over tea definitely a winner. like a fast squid on black ice. kettle. It takes several wipeouts before you're dead meat, so get back in On a losing that race! note, CYCLEMANIA THE EDITORS SPEAK does not permit reANIMATION, CARINAGE plays, and believe me, when you emerge CYCLEMANIA AND OTHER CHROME unscathed from some up close-and-perRATING **** Off the track, CYCLEMANIA excels, with sonal action involving a half dozen beautiful 3-D animations lending supbikes, two trucks, a car, a cow, and a PROS Use of video footage for the port to the otherwise mundane chores frigging tower of tires someone dumped courses is a unique approach. Hot acof track selection, bike selection (a CBR on the roadside, you'll wish you could tion at high speeds for the action fan. 900RR, FZR 1000, or GSXR 1100), see it again and again. Nor does CYCLE CONS Not a simulation and not the parts purchases at the \"Cyclemania MANIA support printing of any kind greatest action game, and so may not Shop,\" and menuing. Accolade has even (there'll be no hard copy gloating here), rev the engines of some gamers. Limthoughtfully included footage of several or head-to-head competition, which ited life on the replay warranty. horrific real-life racing accidents to get would have made a hot option in this SHAREWARE SPECTACULAR FREE CD s Megs snyd 009 Sharewa ewale TOP SHAREWARE GAMES ONLY $1.50 PER DISK Games, Utilities, Fonts, Applications, Gifs Shareware for Windows & Dos Suitable for all family members SOME Inc.  1994  Doom  Multi-Dimensional . Another Planet and Tetris 3D . Duke Nukem 2 Theif Me with No Beer  Flight Simulators  Eternam  Gateworld  Roadwars 2000 Kiloblaster  Halloween Harry  Simulations of Risk, Major Stryker Scrabble, Monopoly,  Executioners  Lemmings Uno poly, Mystery Manor  Stratsys . Kung Fu Louie  Spear of Destiny Hockey  Hugo's Whodonit Jill of the Jungle  Megatron . Wotenstein 3D  Baseball  Redhook's Revenge  Blake Stone  Galactix PLUS Many,  3D Chess  Monster Bash  Bio Menace Many More FREE CATALOG INCLUDING WINDOWS, BUSINESS, UTILITIES, EDUCATION, GRAPHICS Now you Can Have Your Own GIRLFRIEND... ... a sensuous woman living in your computer! GIRLFRIEND is the first VIRTUAL WOMAN. You can watch her, talk to her, ask her questions and relate to her. Over 100 actual VGA photographs allow you to see your girlfriend os you ask her to wear different outfits, and guide her into different attivities. As a true artificial intelligence program GIRLFRIEND starts with a 3000 word vocabulary and actually grows the more you use it. She will remember your name, your birthday, and your likes and dislikes, GIRLFRIEND requires 7.10 MB of free space. We offer the ADULT VERSION containing 2 different girls, LISA and SUZY of a special price of only $69. (reg. price $120.) NEW! Voice Kit $29. Stimulating Games from Europe! Imported exclusively by S Software PATRIS is the sophisticated version of the popular block game. You reveal stimulating pictures and movies while controlling the falling blocks. ORDER SG4 PAPIPE is the sophisticated version of the Windows hit Pipe for Windowsbut you don't need Windows to run it-you attempl to build a pipeline while exposing pictures and movies MANY EXCITING LEVELS. ORDER SGS MOZAIK allows you to reassemble the most exciting women on earth over 45 celebrities in this super jigsaw gomeUse mouse of keyboard. ORDER SGO Price: $35 each or order our SUPER GAME PACK at $89 for all 3 On CD-ROM: NEURODANCERS Interactive movie and game navigate through the Neurolet in search of the NUERODANCERS. ORDER CD 86 On CD-ROM: 3D DREAMGIRLS Seo 3D images of the top glamour models -ZOOM and PAN feature-includes model statistics and contact infomration. ORDER CD 59 On CD-ROM: SCISSORS AND STONES Interactive movie and high stakes gome of chance. ORDER CD 89 CD-ROM PRICES: $59 Each or SUPER BUNDLE: 3 for $149 Our FREE CATALOG includes many more ADULT games, movies and pictures on both DISKS and CD-ROM ADD S4S/H: 3.5 Or FOREIGN ORDERS ADD $2/DISKIN PA ADD TAX MUST STATE AGE OVER 21 YEARS, VISA/MC Orders Only: 800-243-1515 Ext. 600UG / 24 HRS / 7 DAYS FAX (215) 997-2571 Or CK/MO to:SeXXy Software, P.O.Box 220, Dept 600UG, Hatfield, PA 19440 Circle Reader Service #291 100's of games including Doom and over 15 from Apogee (Mystic Towers, Rise of the Triads, Hocus Pocus, Wolfenstein 3D, Raptor, Duke Nukem II, Monster Bash, Blake Stone, etc.) 600+ Megs of the best shareware available on one CD. It's your's FREE. All you pay is $6.95 non refundable shipping & handling. Please mail your request to the address below. Send your Check, Money Order, (payable to SOME Inc.) Visa or Mastercard Number including the Expiry date. Please enclose your signature for credit card orders. Please include a description of your computer hardware. Sorry no phone orders or CODs. Allow 6 8 weeks deliver SOME Inc., Dept. CGW, P.O. Box 1858, Ferndale, WA 98248-1858 Circle Reader Service #357 "


"PO BOX 234 DEPT 10186 ROCHESTER VT 05767 Visa, MC and Discover accopted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD $8. Defectives replaced with samo product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. Call for details. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US S4 per arder. Mail to Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10186 Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges. All sales final. FPO SA per order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment, CHIPS&BITS INC. D ROOKSYS r prordisardine Produkter SHARP ELECTRONIC ORGANIZER YO-620 The smallest electronic organizer DEODO with terminal capabilities. Offers Calendar, Anniversary and Scheduler, customizable Telephone lists, Outline function, Memo function, 10 digit calculator, clip & paste, daily alarms (7), and many other features. You can connect to online services to send or receive E-Mail, check stock prices and make travel arrangements. $279 'SHARP ELECTRONIC ORGANIZER YO-110 This revolutionary electronic organizer has created a whole new category of information management The Sharp YO-110 offers extraordinary value and practicality. Includes Telephone, Calendar, Schedule, Memo and Expense functions keep your business and personal information at your fingertips. The YO-110 is small enough to fit into your shirt pocket $59 *FRANKLIN DIGITAL BOOK SYSTEM DBS-2 The revolutionary new way to access a world of information. Stores up to 2 digital books, each containing up to 20 megabytes of compressed information. S149 Dobag 309 00 BAR 20 000 dictionary 'SHARP WIZARD OZ-9520' is a Pocket Communicator that is lightweight, compact and has built-in fax software. Offers integrated Filing, a Telephone function, a Calendar, a Notebook, a Scrapbook. Designed with a Graphical User Interface with a touch sensitive display, it makes entering and accessing data easy. Features connectivity to E-Mail and printing to a standard PC printer using infrared technology. S439 'SHARP ELECTRONIC ORGANIZER YO-310' is the smallest Sharp Organizer with the capability to link to an IBM PC. So BOWDDD38 compact, it can ODDDDDDDD   slip right into your DDUDUOD shirt pocket. It provides valuable functions like To Do and Expense Tracking. Features Time Management. Data Base Management, and Note Taking. Al lows you to edit and manage your data on a com puter while providing backup for security. $99 \"FRANKLIN LANGUAGE MASTER DICTIONARY LM-2200' Contains over 274.000 definitions. Provides over 496,000 synonyms for 40,000 words. Includes an SAT word list to help practice for the exam. $79 SHARP ELECTRONIC ORGANIZERS SHARP ACCESSORY Sharp Wiz OZ 9500 $339 Sharp Wiz OZ 9520 $439 Shrp W OZ 9520 fx $539 Sharp YO 100 Orgn $49 Sharp YO 110 Orgn $59 Sharp YO 300 Orgn $89 Sharp YO 310 Orgn $99 Sharp YO 600 Orgn $189 Sharp YO 610 Orgn $229 Sharp YO 620 Orgn $279 SHARP COMPUTER LINK VOICE ACTIVATED ORGANIZERS Voice Organiz 5200 $159 Voice Org Ex. 5500 $179 VCR Voice Programr $69 SHARP SOFTWARE CARDS Sharp OZ 701A Time Management Card $99 Sharp OZ 8B01 Spreadsheet Card $169 Sharp OZ 8B02 Fax Modem Card $409 Sharp OZ 8D01A Amer Heritge Dictionry Crd$ 169 Sharp OZ 902 Basic Prgrm Crd (9000 srs)$229 Interface IBMPC $89 Sharp EA 11E AC Adaptor (9600 series) $5 Sharp OZ 899CC Leather Case (8000 series) $29 Sharp OZ A90A1 Leather Case (9000 series) $34 FRANKLINLANGUAGE MASTER FRANKLIN WORDMASTER Franklin Desktop WrdMstr WM-1055 WM-1055 $56 Franklin Nx C Pekt Rgt's Thesaurus NCT-102 $36 Franklin Pckt Language Master LM-2015 S56 Franklin Pocket Wrd Mster WM-1015 $44 FRANKLINLANGUAGE MASTER Dictionary SCR-30 S54 Franklin Parker's Wine Guide WNG-400 $74 Franklin Betty Crocker's Cookbook BCC-400 $64 Franklin Pckt Crossword Puzzle Solver CW-40 S46 Franklin Pocket Horoscopes AST-110 $44 Franklin Pocket Movie Guide FLX-110 S44 Franklin Pocket Word Games WG-15 S36 DIGITAL BOOK SYSTEMS FRANKLIN BIBLE Franklin International Version Bible NIV-30 $94 Franklin King James Version Bible KJ-31 $94 FRANKLIN SPELLING SHARP ACCESSORY Shrp CE 390 PC Lk Sit Cbl (YO300, YO310) $89 Sharp OZ 892 IBM Organizer Link $109 Sharp OZ 895 Macintsh Organizer Link $109 Sharp OZ 990D PC Link Software DOS $74 Sharp OZ 990W PC Link Software WIN $74 Sharp OZ 993 Macintsh Link Software $74 Franklin French Professor FP-650 $109 Franklin Language Master + Math LM-2020 $84 Frankln Lg. LM-2200 $79 Franklin Language Master LM-3500 $119 Franklin Pocket French Professor FP-615 $79 Franklin Pocket Spanish Master DBE-110 $64 Franklin Pocket Spanish Master SM-515 $79 Franklin Spanish Master SM-550 $119 Franklin Speaking French Professor FP-610 $209 Franklin Speak German Professor GP-620 S209 Franklin Speak Language Master LM-4200 $149 Franklin Speak Language Master LM-6000 $229 Franklin Spkng Language Mstr Sp LM-6000SE $499 Franklin Speak Spanish Master SM-1000 $149 DIGITAL BOOK SYSTEMS Franklin King James Ver. Bible DBS IC-119 $56 Franklin Medical Digital Bk System 2 DBS-2-3 S179 Franklin Medical Digital Bk System 3 DBS-2-4 $179 Franklin Medical Digital BK System 4 DBS-2-5 $179 Franklin Medical Digital Bk System DBS-2-2 S199 Franklin Medical Letter Handbook Adverse Drug Intractns DBS IC-104 $99 Franklin Merck Manual DBS IC-118 S129 Franklin Merriam-Webster Advanced Dictionary DBS IC-116 $74 Franklin Merriam-Webster Dictnry+ DBS IC-101 549 Franklin Official Scrbl Plyr Dictnary DBS IC-109 S44 Franklin Wine Buyer's Gd DBS IC-120 $56 Franklin Personal Organizr DBS IC-107 $99 Franklin Speaking French Professr DBS IC-123 $59 Franklin Speak German Professr DBS IC-124 $59 Franklin Speak Spanish Master DBS IC-122 $59 Franklin Video Companion DBS IC-102 $59 Franklin Washington Univ. Man. Medical Therpeutics DBS IC-105 $99 Franklin Elementary Spelling Ace ES-90 $44 Franklin Webstr's Pocket Spell Crrct NCS-101 $29 Franklin Pocket Spelling Ace S-100 Franklin Spelling Ace Plus BP-105 $39 Frnkin Spll Ace SA-98$36 Sharp CE 132T Level Converter $79 Sharp CE 137T Lvi Converter PC/MacLnk/Fax Modem Sharp CE 220T Cable ZQ/ EL Transfer $34 Sharp CE 300L Dubbing Cable $24 Sharp CE 315L Dubbing Cable Organizers $69 Sharp CE 350X Organizer Modem $149 Shrp CE 50P Prntr $129 Shrp CE 76BC Bt Pk $29 Shrp CE IR1 Wriss Print Interface (9000 srs) $119 Sharp CE IR2 Wireless MEMORY CARDS Franklin Digital Book System 2 DBS-2-1 $199 Franklin Digital Book System 2D DBS-2D $169 Franklin Digital Book System DBS-2 S149 Franklin All-Time Baseball Manager DBS IC-110 $29 Franklin Bartender's Guide DBS IC-130 $49 Franklin Big Lg. Baseball Encycl. DBS IC-129 $49 Franklin Columbia Encyclpd DBS IC-114 $74 Franklin Game Gallery DBS IC-115 S29 Franklin Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine DBS IC-113 $99 Franklin Int'l Version Bible DBS IC-121 $56 Shrp OZ 780 M. 32K $54 Sharp OZ 781 Memory Card 64K Sharp OZ 782 Memory Card 128K (8000) $109 Sharp OZ 783 Memory Crd 256K (8600) $139 Sharp OZ 784 Memory Card 512K (9600) $209 FRANKLIN ENTERTAINMENT Franklin Bartender's Guide BTG-400 $64 Franklin Big Leag. Bsball Encyclopedia HR-94 $56 Franklin Crossword Puzzle Solver CW-50 $54 Franklin Scrabble Players Circle Reader Service #340 JAN CGW GAD "


"lay with thousands of gamers on the Information Super Highway and lose yourself in the graphic adventures and traditional games offered on the Multi-Player Games Network. MPG-NET gives you something you just can't find on a floppy disk...another human mind. Whether you like fantasy role-playing, 3D action, war simulation or card games, MPG-NET offers games 24 hours a day, seven days a week with players from all over the globe. PLAY GAMES WORLDWIDE ON THE INFORMATION SUPER HIGHWAY. Operation Market Garden Kingdom of Drakkar Warlords of the Apocalypse ANUS Fief Quest War Room Empire Builder HOST MPG-Net Lobby Menteri 1910 ACCESS THROUGH INTERNET FOR ONLY $200 per hour "


"In December 1994, MPG-NET goes  Download files from our database all graphic! No more text menus. No and read the latest in gaming news, headaches trying to log on. It's never updates and stories from other been easier to be on-line! members. It's as easy as visiting your hometown library! Here's what else you'll find:  The Persona Creation Room-lets you  Electronic Bulletin Boards filled generate a face to match your on-line with the latest adventure reports and personality! discussions by gamers from all over the world!  Conference Rooms-have real-time conversations with people all over the  Electronic Mail-send and receive world and see more than just their messages with all your friends and plan when to meet and play your words, you'll get a chance to see what they look like! favorite game! MPG-Net News  More games than you've ever seen before! MPG-NET can be accessed with a local phone call from over 600 cities in the USA and 40 nations worldwide. All you need is a modem, a phone line and a computer to join the fun! Call our 800 number from 9am to 8pm Eastern time on weekdays to receive our free starter kit. MPG-NET-twenty four hours a day, seven days a week, bringing you games that will take you out of this world! Call now: 1-800-GET-GAME. MPG-NET NEWS Conference Table Electronic Database LIST DEL filer 09 THIS MITSUConference Room BELTELE Electronic Mail Persona Creation Room BREDE RA 2020D0DQ Access Room 1994 MPG-NET, Ino, Multi-player Games Network and MPG-NET are service marks of MPG-NET, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Empire Bullder is a trademark of Mayfair Games, Inc. Operation Market-Garden and Star Cruiser are trademarks of GDW Games, Inc. Flelquest and Warlords of the Apocalypse are trademarks of TANTALUS HIPG-NET Your Multi-Player Games Network 1-800-GET-GAME Dreamers Gulld and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. Circle Reader Service #250 "


"REVIEW JU 05 Fighting For The Prince's Crown Interplay's Swashbuckling BLACKTHORNE Challenges PRINCE OF PERSIA's Rule by Charles Ardai ORDAN MECHNER'S SUPERLATIVE watches, placing every tiny gear just so, fortress, and the castle of the demonic PRINCE OF PERSIA GAMES FROM and then setting everything in motion in Sarlac, but the settings in PRINCE OF PERBRODERBUND HAVE HAD A LOT OF IMIsuch a way that not a movement is wasted SIA were rather odd, too. The opening tators but have never yet been imand not a spring, wire, or screw is out of animation is a bit stiff and the storyline is proved upon. The best of the place. Every screen in PRINCE OF PERSIA overwrought-but so are the opening animitators, such as Disney's ALADDIN or (and even more so in its sequel) is a deviimation and storyline of PRINCE OF SSI'S FLASHBACK, at least offer imaginative ous trap, whose clutches the player must PERSIA. Your character in BLACKTHORNE is settings and top-notch animation; the escape by being as resourceful and ingeeven a prince worst seem to think that merely having a nious as the author. There is no way to The ultimate clincher would seem to character leaping, climbing, and fighting go through PRINCE OF PERSIA \"on autobe the gameplay, which is smooth, fast, his way across a multi-screen playing field matic.\" It is a demanding-and eminentand brutal. Maybe occasionally too bruis enough to make a game a best-seller. ly satisfying--game. talsuch as when you discover that you What both the better and worse preInterplay's BLACKTHORNE is the latest not only can shoot the chained prisoners tenders to the throne overlook is that it is pretender to come along. How satisfying you have come to save but sometimes not the basic game type that makes is this one? How demanding? must do so to get them out of your way— PRINCE OF PERSIA SO Well, on the but seldom offensively so. good-after all, the BLACKTHORNE surface it seems to All in all, a promising beginning format dates back Price: No SRP have a lot of the So how satisfying is BLACKTHORNE? at least to Activi System right elements. How demanding? In a word, not. sion's PITFALL. II on Requirements: The graphics are What makes BLACKTHORNE so clearly, so the Atari VCS-nor IBM compatible a little crude, but obviously, so definitively a lesser game 386SX or higher, even the incredibly that befits the ul than PRINCE OF PERSIA? It has no imagina2MB RAM, VGA fluid and lifelike graphics; tra-modern, ultration. No artistry. No panache. If PRINCE OF animation, though supports Ad Lib violent setting PERSIA is a Porsche on the Autobahn, this has deservedly Gold, Sound Interplay has choBLACKTHORNE is a Tinkertoy car puttwon kudos from Blaster Pro and sen for the story. putting around in somebody's living room. one and all. (In compatibles, The animation is Roland MT-32/SCC-1 and Pro-Audio credibly fluid and just short of \"inTHORNE IN YOUR SIDE Spectrum sound cards lifelike animation Protection: None credibly fluid and BLACKTHORNE is a videogame, plain and was not enough to Designer: Ronald Miller lifelike,\" but it's simple. The first dead giveaway you come save Epyx' IMPOSSI Publisher: Interplay Productions certainly not bad. across is that it contains no way for you to BLE MISSION 2 from Irvine, CA Your character save your games. Instead, you can jump the bargain tables. (800) 969-GAME climbs ladders the to any level you want by entering, at the On the other hand, way a person start of a game, the four-letter password its absence didn't hurt the sales of classics would; he runs with a convincing, loping entrusted to you when you completed the like JUMPMAN and LODERUNNER.) gait; and when he unholsters his gun preceding level. There is nothing inherNo, what really makes PRINCE OF PERand fires it backhanded at foes behind ently terrible about this arrangement, but SIA stand out is that Jordan Mechner is a him he does it as well as Arnie did in T2. when I saw that BLACKTHORNE used it, it diabolically clever puzzle constructor who The settings are a bit odd, with four felt like a slap in the face. This is the sort builds his castles, caverns, and dungeons levels to go through in each of an underof thing you expect to see in a Nintendo the way a master watchmaker makes ground mine, a treetop dwelling, a sand cartridge game, not a PC title from a top 168 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JANUARY 1995 "


"Just when you thought you were over Tetris, Alexey Pajitnov dares you to Alexey Pajitnoy, Creator of Tetris Introduces: Break beru! D Tu au 24 Vuu IFE Breakthru. The Russian master who created Tetris now introduces BreakThru-one of a series of great new puzzle games. Think fast! Constantly cascading bricks keep you on your toes as you tear down wall after wall. Bombs fall your way and huge sections of the wall blow apart. But watch out! Pesky spiders, annoying soda cans and obnoxious boulders are out to make life rough. Knock them out of action so you can break through to the next wall. Race to beat the clock, raising your score as you raze the walls. Test your skill in six cities, each with its own music and scenery. Challenging two-player options prove your prowess against friends. Four different skill levels and time limits mean the entire family can play. BreakThru: so much fun you might not want to stop playingor you may never be able to! spectrum Hot GAME BOY Available on Macintosh, Windows, Super NES, Game Boy, Game Gear & Sega Genesis : 0 GENESIS GAME GEAR BICOKLATTI. Spectrum HoloByte THE PUZZLE PEOPLE 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 Watch for WildSnake, our next new puzzle game! Visit your local retailer or call 24 hours: 1-800-695-GAME (USA and Canada). ISHSacro Moleranc. Breathe trademark of Spectrum Malayhilec. Tetris register of Elery And w e re respect Circle Reader Service #224 "


"firm like Interplay. thereafter, though, you come across difalls. They often hide secret passageThe second dead giveaway is the level of nosauroid slavemasters with long, deadly ways.\" Later, I thought to try re-using a violence in the game. Sure, Doom is bloodwhips who can only be killed by a bomb key for one bridge in another bridge's ier than any title Nintendo will ever allow blast; human assassins who, like you, keyhole; sure enough, before I had the on its platform, but by and large when you have unlimited ammunition and never chance, a helpful prisoner passed me the find a game that asks you to spend more tip that any bridge could than half your time shooting bad guys who be operated by any key. I pop up across the screen and start blasting shot him. away at you, you know you are in a videogame, not a computer game. A MAN FOR PRINCE OF PERSIA, for all its swashbuckNO SEASONS ling battles, permitted and rewarded moI have nothing against ments of quiet contemplation. Mechner hints, you understand, forced you to wrack your brain. BLACKbut for heaven's sake, THORNE, on the other hand, doesn't parthere is such a thing as ticularly require you to have a brain, just subtlety. The designers of a trigger finger and enough common BLACKTHORNE evidently sense to know that when you see a keyHOVER BOMB have so little confidence hole on one screen and a key on the in the abilities of their auA BACK-HANDED SPLAT Prince Blackthorn has got some pretty next, they probably go together. dience that they feel comsmooth moves. Here, he's wasted a bad guy without even looking. That brings us to the third and most pelled to offer the significant of the dead giveaways: the solutions to their puzmaze of interconnected levels in BLACKpause to reload; and other, even deadlier zles—such as they are—on a silver platter. THORNE, linked by all the usual ledges, enemies. In the end, you have to go toeWhat they accomplish, ironically, is to ladders, elevators, chasms, doors, and to-toe with Sarlac, a demon who can not make their game less appealing rather hidden passageways, is hardly a maze at only shoot lightning bolts at you but also than more so, except possibly to novice all. For the first several levels, it is literally teleport from one side of the screen to gamers who want a primer to prepare not a maze: there is only them for the tougher challenges other one path the player can games will offer, or maybe puzzle-shy possibly follow and if he gamers who really just want to splatter survives all the combat some gore across their monitors. I'm not encounters along this even sure about those; the former would path, he wins. But even in end up happier with PRINCE OF PERSIA subsequent levels, where and the excellent hint book available the map of possible paths from Prima Publishing, the latter with diverges somewhat, it is Doom or WOLFENSTEIN 3-D or some othsimple to test out all the er title of that ilk. paths, choose the right So who is BLACKTHORNE going to one, and reach the goal. please? I'd put my money on \"nobody,\" Most importantly, even not because it is unspeakably horrible-it the more complex levels isn't-but because it is weak enough to be don't have any particular ROCKY TOO In the later levels, our hero must deal with hard-core over-looked, particularly when better cleverness to them. The baddies, like this stoned beast with rock for brains. choices are so readily available. paths are just paths, leadOne of these days, I'm sure someone is ing this way and that; there is no evithe other, so that you can neither hit him going to top Mechner at his game...but dence that they were constructed to give nor escape him easily. not this time, not with this game. the player the greatest possible difficulty So, the game is not simple, and there in getting through to the goal. In fact, are plenty of players who will have a hard THE EDITORS SPEAK there is a good deal of evidence to the time making it to the end simply because BLACKTHORNE contrary. their shoot-'em-up skills are rusty, atroThis is not to say that the game is easy, phied, or otherwise inadequate. But the RATING but where it is hard it is hard only begame is also not very mentally challenging. cause of combat. Initially, you have to Even those bits in the game that PROS It's big, it's tough, it's loud, fight a cadre of pig-headed soldiers who briefly look as though they might require it's violent, and it's easy—if that's look like the Gamorrean guards from some cleverness don't. For instance, what you're looking for. Jabba the Hutt's lair in Return of the Jedi. when I saw waterfalls on a couple of the CONS It has the brawn, but it doesThey are relatively easy to take out since mine screens, it occurred to me that one n't have much brains. Might impress they always pause after shooting off a of these might conceal a passageway. Bethose with cartridge game sensibiliround or two, giving you a chance to fore I could test this hypothesis, a helpties, but it will send most PC gamers come out of concealment and plant a ful prisoner I passed whispered on a quest for more interesting chalshotgun blast between their eyes. Soon something like, \"Check out the waterlenges. 170 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"SOME DREAM OF A PERFECT GAME. THE REST OF US JUST BUY IT. MAJOR LELGIE NASTAL PLAYERS SPORT So, you want a perfect game. Get Hardball 4. Get cutting-edge graphics that are incredibly real. We're talking about wake-the-neighbors-and-call-your-friends kind of real. Get stat compilation ACCOULD that would make any sports bureau envious. Get all 28 stadiums with different altitude, field, and wind conditions. Throw in an add-on disk with over 700 major league players. And you've got a masterful gem that compelled Computer Entertainment News to label it One of 1994's Ten Best ow, to get a perfect game you don't have to be in the zone. Just the right software store. Hardball 4 is a trademark of Accrlade, Inc 01994. Accolade is an official licensee of the Major League Baseball Players Association MLBPA MSA The Sport Accolade fogo und Sport Accolade are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. Al rights reserved "


"REVIEW L Fortress Of Sillytude E Battling Goof-Ball Characters (and Game Mechanics) In THE FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI. by Mark Clarkson THLTORTRESS OF HE DATE IS MAY 8, 1963, AND THE most of the procession of Wolfen Doom and soon you'll face mutant rat-men, ninWORLD IS TEETERING ON THE BRINK. 3D clones, DR. RADIAKI promises you a jas, storm troopers, killer tanks, toasterA MANIAC IS THREATENING «NUCREAR few laughs as you hack, bash, and blast headed robots and more-if there's a destluction\" on a global scale unyour way through the game. (Well, okay, theme here, it eludes me. You never less paid $1 billion in cash. The that splatter sound in Doom always know what's going to show up around the ransom notes are anonymous, but all makes me chuckle, but this is different.) next corner. And that's OK. signs point to Dr. DR. RADIAKI Each character has a tagline or two to Nikko Radiaki, THE FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI gets oll to a good throw out when you kill them or they kill household appliance Price: $59.95 start. There's a you: a whiny \"Owwwwww!\" or some famagnate and dab CD-ROM and wacky story, a mous last words (\"Rosebud....\"). Defeated bler in nuclear 3.5\" floppy DR. RADIAKI wacky villain ninjas, lamenting their shame, fall on physics. Radioactive System (horribly detheir own swords. Much of this dialogue Requirements: waste has been deformed as the reis in Spanish, Japanese or Russian. While IBM compatible tected leaking from 386-33Mhz sult of his sloppy this is entirely in character, I'm afraid it his private island. (486-33 or nuclear science), means the jokes, if any, are lost on me. And what about his faster wacky monsters, name: Dr. Radiaki? recommended). and a brave but NO JOY 8 MB RAM, CDRadia-tion. Radia-ki. wacky hero who IN THE FORTRESS TONIGHT ROM, 1 MB hard drive space, VGA Need I say more? lives in a belfry You move through The FORTRESS OF DR. graphics, mouse recommended; supports Unable to come Sound Blaster, AWE 32, Pro Audio and licks himself RADIAKI using either your keyboard or up with the cash in a Spectrum 16, Roland Sound Canvas and clean between your mouse-it doesn't support a joytimely fashion, the other sound cards levels. suick. Keyboard movement uses the arrow U.N. turns to you: Protection: None But a good keys and a few others (the scheme is anSpecial Agent Mack Designer: G.P. Austin, Edwin Herrell, and start isn't enough. noyingly different from the Doom key Joel Manners Banner. You must Publisher: Merit Studios It's relatively easy commands). You don't have sideways infiltrate Dr. Radiaki's Dallas, TX to make people «strafing\" movement, which makes popisland fortress, con (800) 238-4277 laugh for a little ping out from behind walls a bit tricky. front the diabolical while. It's much I often found it impossible to aim a doctor himself, and destroy his worldharder to keep them laughing for a dozen weapon precisely using the keyboard. wrecking machine by any means necesor more levels of play. The increments of movement were just too large; the gun would swing between You turn down the UN Secretary GenTHE CAST OF CHARACTERS five degrees too far left and live degrees eral's offer of a captured alien spacecraft Most of Dr. RADIAKI's humor comes too far right. to deliver you to the island, opting infrom its characters. In keeping with the DR. RADIAKI also offers a unique mouse stead to be greased up and shot naked times, the first foes you encounter aren't interface. To move, you hold down a from the torpedo tube of a submarine, Nazis or space aliens, they're cigar mouse button and push the mouse a little armed with only a corked baseball bat. smoking, fatigue-clad, pistol-firing Casways in the direction you want to travel. And your wits. tro-ites who cry \"-Ay! -Mi cabeza!\" (Ow! You will continue moving in the same diYou are ready to enter THE FORTRESS My head!) as you bludgeon them to rection, at the same speed, without any OF DR. RADIAKI, the new first person death with your bat. further mouse movement. To stop, let up shooter from Merit Software. Unlike Make your way through the Cubans, on the mouse button. You can run down sary. 172 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"MERCY is a human trait. MIRAGE TECHNOLOGIES PRESENTS RISE OF THE ROBOT. Where nothing is human, mercy is a foreign concept. At Electrocorp, the largest manufacturer of military and industrial robots, there are no humans. And when an evil virus infects, the robots begin their grisly uprising. There is only one way to end the rampant evil: send in an eliminator. You are selected. You are the Cyborg. You must destroy six robots, each equipped with more superior battle skills than the next. When the robots rise, there can be no mercy. 22 Ultimate in 3-D graphics and animation First game with film-quality, controllable graphics TIME WARNER CD ROM INTERACTIVE RRAD 08P1 Visit your local retailer, or call 800-482-3766 to order. 1994 Time Wamer Interactive "


"ally set foot. When The levels seem laid out to capitalize you look at the on the automap's failings. The two work map later, you'll in concert to make finding your way have forgotten around as frustrating and difficult as poswhether that door sible. I can hear the design meeting now: leads to a small, «How can we make the game more chalempty room or a lenging without a lot of additional prohuge, unexplored gramming?\" \"I know. Let's give them a area. The mazes in map they can't use.\" DR. RADIAKI are I found it maddening. filled with wrong turns, dead ends THE VERDICT and little nooks The monsters in DR. RADIAKI are nicely and alcoves that rendered, although some look better contain nothing than others. But those who've gotten SEEING STARS Agent Mack Banner squares off with one of Dr. Radiaki's and go nowhere. used to 3D environments with elevators, eclectic disciples: a star chucking ninja. The rooms have stairs, and pits to leap into will find RADInarrow, oddly. AKI's 2D layout a little dull. a long hallway without running off the shaped corners. But leave any spot unThe FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI was a end of your mouse pad. trodden and you'll eventually feel great idea, but one that was not followed The mouse interface also provides a compelled to return and make sure you through. There's too little wackiness, and much finer degree of control than does haven't missed something important. too much time spent trudging through the keyboard interface. I could always The only cure is to meticulously pace out mazes, wishing for a map that worked. aim my weapons where I wanted to, and And as RADIAKI could almost manage to move sideways. doesn't offer anyI would have used the mouse exclusivething original aside ly, but couldn't get it to fire the from that wackiweapons properly. ness, I'd pass on it, The levels of DR. RADIAKI's fortress are unless you're a strewn with useful items for you to pick DOOM-a-like-aholic up: ammunition, keys, and drug-lilled sylooking to collect a ringes the size of your leg to help ease complete set. the pain of your wounds. You'll also find Mitsumi CDan array of weapons ranging from SamuROM owners rai swords to machine guns and grenade beware: THE launchers. Some weapons, such as the FORTRESS OF DR. machine gun and the flame thrower, RADIAKI would not hold a limited amount of ammo. When run from my CD it's used up, you've got to slap in another LIZARD X-ING Mack Banner didn't slow down for a lizard pedestrian, and drive, a Mitsumi clip, or screw on another canister of jel now he's got to pay the price. double-spin. Merlied gasoline. This is a nice touch; it adds it's technical supa bit of fumbling and confusion as you every dead end, every alcove, and the inport told me that the problems between run backwards at full speed, dodging terior of every room in the entire level. DR. RADIAKI and Mitsumi double-spin swords and bullets. To make matters worse, the map is drives are common but limited to those always centered on your current locamodels and, in fact, the game ran fine A MAP TO NOWHERE tion and zoomed in far enough that it on a number of non-Mitsumi drives.to The automap in THE FORTRESS OF DR. shows less than a quarter of the level at RADIAKI is almost, but not quite, coma given time. You cannot zoom out to pletely useless. I could write an entire resee the entire explored area, nor can THE EDITORS SPEAK view detailing how much I didn't like it. you scroll the map around. If you want The automap's uselessness hinges on to consult the map for a different part THE FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI two cunningly designed and seemingly of the maze, your only recourse is to RATING *** innocent devices: One, the map records walk there first, then look at the map. not what you've seen, but where you've And, given RADIAKI's maze-like layout, PROS Glossy graphics and some stood; and two, the zoom is fixed, and the route to that different area is often funny tidbits. the map is always centered on you. long and convoluted. It may leave the CONS Other than the rampant silliImagine that you step briefly into a visible portion of the map at one point ness, Dr. RADIAKI adds very little to room, see that it is empty, and step back and re-enter it at another. As you move, the 3-D action game pack. The out. When you look at the map you will your destination may disappear off automap is useless, and the level desee, not the entire room, but only that screen, leaving you unsure of which signs are uninteresting. tiny space near the door where you actuturns to take. 174 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"THE CHRONICLES BIGGER, BETTER, BOLDERU CHRONICLES Take a walk on the Lemmings side the all-new Lemmings Chronides The best-selling computer game of all-time just got better More hilarious family fun from those lovable goofballs! Bigger, holder characters. 90 Brand new puzzling adventures. Easier than ever to play with lock on Lemming control Special replay modes lets &   the action anywhere in D ONOWN 13 the gome, cel Bold 147 892069 Chronicles mat a store near you now SSS PARTITS Psygnosis Limited 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 Phone: (617) 497-7794 Fax: (617) 497-6759 @1994 Psygnosis, Limited. The Lemmings Chronicles and all other related trademarks, likenesses, and art are trademarks of Psygnosis, Limited. All Rights Reserved. Circle Randar Service "


"REVIEW OU For Sail By Owner A Spuriky Little Flyer Catches Another Thermal In GLIDER PRO by Eden Maxwell O E'VE ALL MADE PAPER mailboxes (bewitching portals to AIRPLANES, AND WE ALL strange places), fly over meadows and DAYDREAM, BUT JOHN rooftops, and even venture to lairs Calhoun seems to have deep underground. Catching upfixated on the two. Caldrafts from a variety of clever outhoun released a charming little sharedoor sources such as a barbecue ware program named GLIDER in 1987 is one way to stay aloft. In addition which, you could say, has been catching to making it through the entire house thermals ever since. Players controlled (hah!), the objective is to collect six elua little paper airplane that had to catch sive stars, possess the Magic Star Wand, gliders can thermal-surf heat thermals and bursts of air to stay then experience the surprise endingacross rooms. Other means of glider aloft and navigate through a small, your spouse leaves you on grounds of support include hot air from candles spare house. Few would have predicted neglect. (don't get too close!) and energy batterit, but the game evolved into a cult B efore gliding off to glory, newcomies found along the way that provide phenomenon with tips, tricks, and cusers would do well to visit the small stand-by turbo power. There's often tomized maze-like houses posted on Demo House, which serves as a selfmore than one way to soar through a line by loyal fans. running demo explaining the objecroom, and only a few rooms require Eager to improve upon the game tives, and a learning tool for the speed of battery power. and release a commercial version, understanding the principles of play. Gliders, in either standard mode or Calhoun developed an all-new GLIDunder battery assist, can move forER 4.0 for both Macintosh and WinTHE SOUND ward and backward. But power isn't dows. This time players pointed their OF ONE WING FLAPPING everything. A subtle reverse stall is paper drones through an eerie old The game begins with a fleet of three often critical in reaching a battery, or mansion that had about 60 rooms of gliders; the first hovers over a floor obtaining a jar of rubber bandsan increasingly diabolical, non-viovent in the entrance foyer, which you ammo for shooting down enemy glidlent nature. There were staircases must traverse to get to the next room. ers, balloons, and swirling 'copters. leading up and down, dank basement Since paper planes don't have engines, Your path is full of obstacles as you chambers, and secret passageways caovercoming gravG D progress. Benign pable of warping the glider to unex ity and maneuhousehold obPrice: $49.95, pected locations. By catching vering your craft jects suddenly beMac 3.5\" updrafts the glider could stay aloft, from one location come a threat to System pick up bonus points or extra gliders, to another is the Requirements: the pilot of a paand try to avoid flying obstacles or Zen-like balanc Mac Plus or per airplane. electrical sources that could shred it ing act that greater, 256 Shelves, tables, into confetti. makes the action color or 16 Glider the floor or Building on this successful blueprint, insidiously addicshades of grey: ground, even System 7.0 or GLIDER PRO takes up residence in tive without being personal computgreater; Slumberland, a townhouse complex of manic. supports ers can cause 270-plus rooms interconnected by Fortunately, System 7.5, and Power Mac native mode. your craft's unopen spaces, blue skies, and courtSlumberland has Protection: None timely demise. yards, some still dripping with laundry extensive duct Designer: John Calhoun Avoid contact hung out to dry. And so the spunky litwork for central Publisher: Casady & Greene, Inc. with deadly elecSalinas, CA tle flyer with an attitude continues its air-conditioning (408) 484-9228 tric wall sockets, aerodynamic saga with enhanced flying and heating-the flying toast, paenvironments, a powerful new Room bill for which should pay for the conper shredders, jumping fish, and othEditor, and a two-player game mode. tractor's kids college education. By er dangers too humorously gruesome GLIDER PRO aces can now escape out catching rising air and gaining altitude to mention. Explore everything, even of windows, pop out of chimneys and from strategically placed floor vents, areas that appear to be dead ends; 599126 176 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"«30 levels of excitement using the Wolfenstein 3-D engine give you as much action & exploration as you can handle.» -Computer Game Review Technology licensed from ID SOFTWARE, creators of WOLFENSTEINT 3D \"The bottom line? This game is a heck of a lot of fun to play...Corridor 7 is a well-produced compelling game.» -Bill Kunkel, Electronic Games CORRIDOR TM Alien Invasion With Modem & Network Play Capstone THE PINNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Available on IBM CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks. To order call: (305) 373-7700  (800) 468-7226 . BBS (305) 374-6872 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Wolfenstein is a trademark of ID Software. All Rights Reserved. Corridor 7: Alien Invasion and Capstone are trademarks of IntraCorp, Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #51 "


"Game Options Glider Synchronici 1 * 4500 0 you may find bonus points, an extra ics of flight, you are free glider, or an invisible transporter to concentrate on selectthat zaps you to another part of the ing which objects-obstasurrealistic estate. cles, enemies, and Cocky pilots can use rubber bands to prizes—you want to intip over grease bottles (whose slippery clude in each of the purpose will become clear to you) or rooms. The type of envitrip electric switches from a distance. If ronment you create is you see a box of aluminum foil lying limited only by your crearound, grab it; this new bonus armaativity. ment sheaths your glider in a thin skin The Room Editor conthat protects it from crumpling tains a Tools Window mishaps for a limited number of close with a pop-up menu of encounters. object types such as To remain airborne, players must prizes, clutter, blowers, develop a knack for graceful control, BOUNCING BOGIES Flying the glider is a careful trapeze act of furniture, switches, lightprecise timing, and going with the air maintaining lift from sources like floor vents, avoiding obstacles ing, enemies, transport, flow, which becomes increasingly comlike these basketballs, and then sailing to the next room, in this and appliances-a complicated as gamers reach more difficult case through the ceiling vent. prehensive list to satisfy rooms. Judging just how close you can the most demanding intecome to an object is critical in sideglider movement is achieved by keyrior decorator. stepping possible disaster, earning board control keys. More precise direcA single house can contain no more bonus points for making the top ten all, tional handling is possible using a than 8,192 rooms with a maximum of time high score, or picking up defense Gravis Game Pad. 24 objects per room, which will keep mechanisms. you busy for years. Besides rooms, a Electric switches are often linked to GO EDIT YOUR ROOM house file contains information about powering up floor or ceiling vents that GLIDER PRo includes a comprehensive the high score for that will get you across a room, or whisk you Room Editor that allows players to dehouse and the off to another part of the house. Some sign a house full of rooms of their own. saved switches must be activated with a deft The editor deserves a review in its own game, if touch of the glider to engage a blower right, but we'll touch on a few high any. In vent, or turning on a light in a dark lights to get you going. Creating a this way, room before a glider is lost to the floor, house is simple, but creating a \"great\" high or some other doomsday household house requires an artisan's touch. scores for item. Using your wits is always imporSince constructing a new house from your own house tant. For example, finesse may be the scratch may seem daunting for the be design have nothing ace up your sleeve for getting past a ginner, users will find a file called to do with the scores dreaded paper shredder without foil Empty House. This house was specially for Slumberland. When protection or shutting off that pesky designed with all the air vents and quitting in the middle of electric switch. Or, you may fly into an blowers positioned to propel your glidSlumberland, the state of invisible transporter and magically end er across each room. By eliminating the game is saved automatiup in a tree house. the need to figure out the aerodynamcally. GLIDER PRO saves only one game per house, so if you had preSYNCHRONIZED viously quit Slumberland and resumed, GLIDER TEAMS you overwrite that saved game. Glider Yes, But The Extra Glider? GLIDER PRO supports twoplayer games, which reCONSTRUCTION TIPS quire players to form a Sure, you can go crazy and drop all two-glider team, flying sorts of things in rooms. It's easy to side-by-side through make a hard room, and it's even easier Slumberland. Designated to make a room that's impossible to get keys at opposite ends of across. My tip for the budding custom the keyboard allow simulhouse builder: create a house that taneous flights. Keep in starts out easy and gets progressively mind, however, one playmore difficult with more than one path er cannot go upstairs through it; rooms should have more while one goes downthan one solution, and the house stairs-players must should look ordered and not too chaotGLIDER GREASE Gliders are destroyed on landing, unless the agree on which room to ic. Creating a balanced series of glidersurface has been greased. The folded paper is an extra glider explore next. defying rooms exposes the genius bonus, but don't hit the switch, or you'll be blown away. Regardless of mode, behind this unique, whimsical game. Game Options 2 4400 178 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING. $50 worth of FREE services during the first month! and we'll give you Join GEnie now, this one wants to rip your lungs out. If you think you're good at games, then let's have some be a mercenary who's looking for a few good friends. real fun. When you're online with GEnie Multi-Player o With GEnie, the possibilities are endless, the people Games, you're playing real people, in real time. Some are terrific, and even the prices are competitive. So put of the best players around the some new life into your joystick, Call 1-800-638-9636 world. Splash a bandit in Air and sign on. We'll see just how Warrior, and you've just taken TDD 1-800-238-9172 good you are. To sign up online, out eight other guys, who'll be back gunning for you. turn your modem on and dial 1-800-638-8369 or in Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer Battle Tech, and Canada 1-800-387-8330. Enter JOINGENIE at the who knows? Could be that jerk from the coast. Could prompt. When asked for the special offer enter AAA423. 10. DOD GEnie BEST GAMES AROUND! multi-player games 1.1. AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR KESMAL corporation Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmai Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BartleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation Circle Reader Service #228 "


"Gome Options Goder king lines one actually lives there Online. America Online members can which is what transforms also check under the New Game SceCalhoun's programming nario section for custom houses (GLIDcode into magic. This old ER and GLIDER PRO) created by fans, house, many parts still plus a template file called \"Glider Foldunder construction, has ing Instruction 2,\" courtesy of Calall the elements of lifehoun, for making a flying model of leaking water, plus other GLIDER. well done mood-altering Computers were supposed to elimisound effects that connate society's glut of wasted paper. Irontribute to the game's ecically, GLIDER PRO is about a piece of centric spirit, including a artfully folded, computer-generated patelephone ringing someper that continues to maintain its perwhere in the house. Who manent crease as one of the most could be calling? original, non-violent action games yet THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS Some rooms have normal mirrors, Larger monitors allow conceived for the personal computer. players to see more than this one does not. Fly in front of it and the room reverses, leaving THE EDITORS SPEAK all your controls s-d-r-a-w-k-c-a-b. one room at a time, or view upstairs and down GLIDER PRO stairs simultaneously; the The graphic details are attractive, eswide three-room letterbox panorama RATING  pecially in 256 colors. Each screen is so option works extremely well. Look for PROS A unique flight of gaming nicely rendered that players may feel scanned photos of Calhoun and the fancy that mixes the need for reflexes they're inside a fine illustration come other house builders who helped raise with the need for reflection. The custo life. For example, the shadow of the Slumberland. tom \"house\" builder allows for endglider along its flight path and the Incidentally, the house builders credless experimentation and replay. glider rellected in mirrors add a sense ited for helping create Slumberland CONS None, except that the game's of three-dimensional realism. More imcame from three GLIDER fans who im style might not be every gamer's cup portantly, the ambiance of the house pressed Calhoun with the creative of tea. gives the distinct impression that somedwellings they uploaded to America VERTRONIX INC. presents the best values in ENTERTAINMENT! 230 Plaza Professional Bldg., El Cerrito CA 94530,9-6 M-Sat. 1-800-478-0217(orders only) Visa, MC.checks, MO's (510) 527-4699 (questions?) (510) 527-4690 (ax orders) Hardware GAMES (CD, 3.5) LCS-7260 2X S125 5 10 voll S32 Dragon Lore....S37 Hand of Fate S41.41 Perl. Gen. 2 S 35 Theme Park S41.39 Mitsumi 2x S129 5ft 10 vol 2 S32 Arena: Elder Sc $ 39 Hardball 4 $38.38 PGA 486 S49 Third Reich S 36 Sony CDU 55E 2X 8135 Alien Leg S 36 Dragsphere... $40.40 Harpoon 11.....$ 44 Phantasmag S48 Ultima 8 S42.42 Panasonic 2X S149 Armored Fist $45.45 Empire Del... $27,27 Harrier JJ $ 38 Ravenloft . S56.56 Ultima FB S46 NEC 510 3X Int. $295 Battle Isle 2200 $33 E vasive Act, $ 38 King MakerS 34 Sam & Max $43.43 Under Killing Mn $59 Plextor 4X Int. S460 Battledrome S 40 F-14 Fleet S50.50 Knights Xent S44.44 Shanghai 2' S 26 Un Roughness 95 S38.38 16 bit Sd/MS Bnth Steel Sky S44 Falcon Gd.. $57 Lab of Time S46 SM Coloniz S48.48 US Navy Fighters $48 comp. SD cd. S 83 BioForge S49 FIFA Soccor $39,39 Lode Runner S37.41 Sim City 2k S 45,45 WC Armada S46.46 16 bit SB/PAS Bloodnet $49.49 Freddy P......$30.30 Lords of MidS48 SpQuest An S48 WC III S53 W/AT bus Cdint. S109 Body Count. $40.40 Front Lines.... S 57 Mast of Mag. S42,40 SSNSeawolfS44.44 Wings of Glory S45 5 watt speakers S15 Cap. Punishment 838,35 FPS Baseb $48.48 Metal & Lace S 33 Star Trek TNG S58 Wolf S38.38 24 watt deluxe S 39 Caesar's Palace S 25 FPS Foot95 $48.48 Metaltech:E S46.46 Stonekeep S 47 WollPack $30.26 Corridor 7 38.29 Gab Knight $42.39 Myst S48 Subwar 2050 $48.37 WWII Pack S45 Crystal Caliburns 35 Geekwad... S23.23 NHL hock95. S38 SHL Hoboken $37.37 Wrath of Gods S43 Dark Legions S37.37 Gobllins 2....S21.21 Noctropolist S46 Syst Shock S49.49 Xcom $44.39 Delta-V $42.42 Gobllins 93 $21.21 Op. Crusad.... $ 39 TFX......... . 553 Zorro $38,38 Desert Strike S47 Grand. Fleet $38.38 Outpost....... $44.44 The 11th hr S55 ADULT CDS (must be over 18) Sexual Obsession S31 Busty Babes 2 S36 Dungeon....... $32 LA Lust 828 Penthouse Int. $94 The Maxx S20 Adult Movie Alm. 859 CA Beauties S41 Endangered... S29 Main St. USA. $29 Sex S28 CD Brothel S28 All Beauties S27 CA Daydreamer S29 FAO 1.2. or 3... $26 Married Woman S29 Sinfully Yours 529 Vision S30 Amateur Mod 2 S29 Camp DD S29 Girls of Double D $30 Massive Melons. $33 Sizzle S29 Weekend at Ern. S29 Arctic Babes S17 Centerfolds S24 Girls, Girls, Girls $29 Nasty Nurses... $32 Southern Beauties S32 Wicked Whispers S41 Bare Truth S27 Digital Seduction S29 Grad. from FU $29 Nasty Amateurs S32 Strip Poker S22 Women on Wheels S34 Best of Dig XTC 829 Dirty Adult Cart. S30 Group Therapy S29 Night Trips ....S24 Superstars of Porn S24 Big Town $30 Dirty Laundry S30 Hot Pics S24 Nova 2 or 3 541 Surfer Girls S29 Bodacious Beauts $34 Doors of Passion S32 Indiscretions S29 Orient XXXpress S28 Sweet Dreams S34 FREE SHIPPING! on all orders over $100 (contin. US) Overnight 2 day, or other shipping-call! CA residents add sales tax 1. Not responsible for typographical errors 2. Returns not accepted w/o prior approval 3. Price and availability subj. to change w/o notice Reader Service #324 180 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"MAJOR IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION! SIRRIT HOUSE An Interactive Game of Hide and pack CD-ROM FOR IBM PC COMPATIBLE \"Without a doubt, the funniest CD-ROM on the market» -GO! Digital Magazine AH . LILIA OHO HHH Your Mission: Infiltrate the hottest sorority on campus, but don't get caught! Elmfield Circle Reader Service #240 Distributed by ELECTROMEDIA: 1-800-57-CDROM "


"REVIEW Photo by David Canon, Allsport USA of Tee 0 A Desktop Putter Takes A Threesome To The Greens by Peter Scisco T'S ONE WEEK FROM THANKSGIVING AS I ly, blending a token amount of strategy graphic quality that you get in this verWRITE THIS. HERE IN NORTH CAROLIwith only the most rudimentary reflex mosion from the boys and girls in RedNA, A BRIGHT BLUE SKY IS PAINTED tions. There's no hard thinking involved. mond, WA. Originally, MICROSOFT GOLF faintly with wisps of high clouds. The Sure, you have to avoid dropping an egg lagged behind LINKS 386 PRO, the DOS temperature hovers near 60 degrees. into the beach. You'd like to keep the ball game from Access Software. MICROSOFT I just need to think of a way to sneak out in the short stuff and bring in high on the GOLF 1.0 put the original Links inside of the house before my wife asks me to green. But face it—it's not rocket science. Windows, but couldn't touch the visual rake the three tons of leaves I've let fall You don't have to mount, man, focus, and quality in the LINKS 386 Pro game. With for the last month. And I have to avoid direct a team of instant relay cameras to its push-buttons, radio buttons, pop-up answering the phone so I don't get catch every stroke. No 3-D heads-up disand drop-down menus, LINKS 386 PRO, caught by one of those CGW editors play. No draft. No trades. No chalklooked better than anything running unlooking for the article I promised. Il boards. No three-on-three with der Windows. Still does. can just make it down to the market, I color-changing sneakers. No backdoor. Playing catch up is never pretty, but can call one of my pals from there and No outside corners. after a great gnashing of teeth Microsoft maybe get in nine holes before anybody Instead, there's a kind of exactness. has for the moment drawn even with its notices I'm gone. You peer into the virtual panorama cast DOS inspiration. (If Access recovers The best plans, of course, are quickly upon your computer screen, aim your from publishing UNDER A KILLING laid to rest. But not all is lost. On my PC shot, and then tap, tap, tap the mouse MOON, we could see a 486CD version I've got a trio of golf games, the latest in button (or the spacebar). Sure, you need runs better on a Pentium-by fall.) So if a long line of lunch time entertainment to keep an eye on the wind gauge. You you want a Windows golf game, this is for around the office or evening while need to take enough club to fly the the best game in town. aways at home. bunkers. You need to read the slope. But MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0 puts you on the Computer golf games are the perfect in the end it's tap, tap, tap. tee at Firestone Country Club, built 60 arcade tonic for twitch-resistant gamers With this exactness comes a frustrayears ago by Harvey Firestone for his settling comfortably into their gaming tion unique to golf. The best player can employees. The South Course, which is golden years. They're simple games, realshank one into the woods or blow a the course played in this game, was retwo-foot putt. The lucky player can MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0 sink a 30-yard chip. From those ex PGA TOUR GOLF 486 Price: $49.95 tremes, you have to approach the next Price: $59.95 3.5\" Floppy shot as if it's the only shot in the game. DOS CD-ROM PGA TOUR System New Because there are no teams to manage, System Requirements: and little action, golf games do best Requirements: IBM EPSON when they can successfully imitate this IBM compatible compatible concentrated experience. For half an 386 or better, 386-40Mhz or SVGA graphics, hour, you should feel the frustration better, 8MB 10MB hard and occasional joy (or at least approxiRAM, SVGA disk space, mate the memory of it) you feel during graphics, Windows 3.1; a round of 18 holes. So let's tee these 13MB hard supports Sound Blaster compatible sound three up and see how far they drive. disk space, CD-ROM drive; supports cards. Sound Blaster compatible sound cards. # of Players: 1-4 # of Players: 1-4 SOMETHING BORROWED, Protection: None Protection: None Designer: Access Software NOTHING NEW Designer: Steve Cartwright Publisher: Microsoft If you've played LINKS 386 Pro, then Publisher: Electronic Arts Redmond, WA you've played MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0. Or, San Mateo, CA (800) 583-0040 to be more exact, you've seen the same (415) 571-7171 Versios 182 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Microsoft Gall Firestone Country Clob-South Coo Game Player Action Options Window Help lo Player: Pelet Scico Hole: 2 Par 5 Shots: 2 Shot Type Straight DC Chip Flag Putt Help Draw Fade Custom Mubs d2 59. 3 G pw 2 7 w 3CBC 4 275 yards d Fairway To Pu 277 yards Score 1 designed in 1959 by 486DX/2 50 with SMB of RAM-and Robert Trent Jones. His wished for something much bigger and influence turned an faster. I found the swing meter and anieasygoing duffers daymation somewhat erratic, which makes it dream into a first-class hard to be exact. And that made it hard PGA challenge course. to keep my score down. The most famous hole, I can hardly imagine why someone number 16, is a 5-par, would want to play this version of the 625-yard undulating game rather than its DOS cousin. Comgreen monster that will puter newcomers who have adopted Winsuck up more shots than dows as a preferred interface will a driving range scooper. welcome the improved graphics and the And it plays just as long familiar Windows controls, but I miss the Swing on the computer. detail and performance that define To its credit, and with LINKS386 PRO. a leg up on the other two SPLIT SCREEN MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0, the Windows version of LINKS 386 games reviewed here, MICROSOFT GOLF MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0 will PRO, misses some of the detail in the layout. RATING also use any of the Links386 Pro Super VGA Champion 12:00 mark and a straight hit at the 6:00 Courses (the ones in the white boxes) mark. Go over the 12:00 mark, and you that Access releases about four times a had better nail the bottom line, or you ON THE TOUR year. The game also comes with a concan count on picking your ball out of the I have always enjoyed PGA TOUR GOLF on verter for the older Links386 Pro courstrees or fishing it out of the water. the Sega Genesis (I will now duck as old es. Neither of the other two games \"The display, as mentioned previously, golf balls are hurled in my general direcplayed for this article come close to adopts the LINKS386 PRO graphics to the tion), but never found it as fun to play on matching the number of courses avail. Windows environment. But, unlike the the PC as LINKS or even Accolade's JACK able for MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0. DOS version, you don't get much control NICKLAUS series. But I take it all back. So how does it play? A lot like Miover the layout of your display. Links386 This latest edition-PGA TOUR GOLF CROSOFT GOLF 1.0, to tell the truth. The Pro version allowed for more clarity than 486-gets rid of the cartoon characters player's perspective puts you about 30 feet its Windows offspring, even on 14-inch and coloring-book look, and replaces behind the animated golfer. You can aim and 15-inch monitors. them with realistic graphics that equal the shot using the mouse to move a red Statistics for each course, and cumulaStatistics for each course, and cumul anything the competition has to offer. and white pole along the fairway. The tive stats for each player, are recorded for But it's not just the representation of pole is mostly a directional marker, even printing, browsing, or hiding. You can trees, greens, and sky that makes PGA though it also provides distance informaalso record your performance and save it TOUR GOLF 486 look so good. The game tion. You can use those measurements to as a file to send to a friend, who can then has also been redesigned from the playavoid obstacles and to help you choose the load your player on his or her machine er's perspective. The hokey sliding bar right club—just in case you don't trust and play against your performance. Likeused to govern the swing action in previyour caddie wizard (and you shouldn't). wise, you can replay and save those great, ous versions, for example, is replaced by Shots are governed by a circular swing and not so great shots to watch over and a graceful arc that encircles the golfer meter, with 100-percent power at the over again. like the halo of Saint Mulligan himself. PICTURE PERFECT GOLF All of this is very familiar, and MiAiming your shot means adjusting a CROSOFT GOLF 2.0 brings nothing new to graceful golden trajectory that ends in a Price: $79.95, the table except the fact PERSECT GOLE DOS CD-ROM that it plays within WinPlayer statistics System dows. If you're trying to Cumulative Totale Individual Clutus Requirements: IBM get in a round in becompatible tween the hours you're 386-40Mhz or supposed to be crunch741003 better, 8MB ing numbers for the RAM, SVGA fourth-quarter earnings graphics, 13MB hard report, that's useful. But you better make sure you disk space, CD-ROM drive; supports 100% Sound Blaster compatible audio devices. have plenty of RAM # of Players: 1-4 socketed into your mothProtection: None erboard. The manual Designers: Tom Farrell, Randy Hujar, Gary says it will run in 4MB of Skiba Publisher: Lyriq International RAM, but you can forget STATISTICALLY SPEAKING One of the best features of MICROSOFT GOLF Cheshire, CT that noise. I played it on 2.0 is the comprehensive stats for player and courses. (800) 433-4464 my regular machine-a JANUARY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 183 Playa Namo Peter Scirco Avg Hit Holed Dist Sale Out Club O 218 5020 Playert Patar Scisco Number of Holes Ployed Number of Rounds Played Average Score Per Round od Holes in One 256 Longa Drive In Fairway) 247 Average Drive in Fairwayl Total Durves In Falway 57% Drives In Fairway U Total Greens In Regulation Oz X Grcent In Hegulation Average Putt: Per Round 2.80 Avg Putt/Hole (All Goons) Avg Putts/Hole (Greens In Ren O Total Number of Chip-Int Avg Chap-ins Per Round 3 Par Distance To Pin Average Digps Per Round Average Rehits Per Round Average Mulliganis Per Round Average Strokerakon 56 on Part's JL. Don Par 5's DEDOC DOC DOC DO 543 1161002 51 100Z 81100X0 Print Copy Help "


"CELEBRATE THE TRADITION POLSATS FOOTBALL TM  True Modem Play with chat mode Season replay option New 1994/95 Rosters & Rules Create your own teams or edit existing NFL teams Choose from 198 preset plays or design your own All NFL teams from 1961-1998 Create your own leagues or use preset NFL Leagues available Draft either pro or college players creating dream teams -Largest Football Fields ever created. Coming soon this Fall Complete Stats Compiling and Print Outs All-American Instant replay College Football! Enhanced Graphics & Animation MICRO SPORTS S eaported Serzens may vary  REDSKITTS a3 INFL Salaadse LICENSE Visit your local software retailer or contact Micro Sports directly at 1-800-937-7737 Micro Sports, Incorporated One Northgate Park, Suite 103 Team/ The game chosen by \"USA Today\" for the past eight Chattanooga, TN 37415 TM years to determine their Super Bowl winner. NFL VOOTIN PLAYERS Circle Dandar Sanica 1212 "


"GET ON TOPOF THEACTION! ALL-AMERICAN COLLEGE FOOTBALL STT KE Photo by Bill Shipley TAVOU SESTREMI PA *True modem play with Chat Mode *Licensed by over 80 college universities, in their official jerseys **Create your own league or use preset leagues from all major conferences *Largest football fields ever created with university logos *Play by yourself or with friends *Season replays in less than one hour *League leaders maintained for each conference *Multiple formations with substitutions and injuries *Complete statistical printout capabilities *Simulated National Championship at the end of the season MICRO SPORTS INCORPORATED MICRO SPORTS INC. BID LICENSED Visit your local software retailer or contact Micro Sports directly at 1-800-937-7737 Micro Sports, Incorporated COLLEGIATE One Northgate Park, Suite 103 LICENSED Pro version used by \"USA Today\" to pick its Super Bowl PRODUCT Chattanooga, TN 37415 TM winner for last eight years. Circle Reader Service #304 AACF POTE "


"definite arrow. Move the can in MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0. Also like its mouse forward, back, Hotel Windows counterpart, PGA Tour keeps left, or right and both the Par 4 track of your stats, including your handarrow and the swing me429 yds icap. But it goes one better than Miter adjusts for distance CROSOFT GOLF 2.0 in allowing match and direction. and skins play in addition to the tournaLike MICROSOFT GOLF ment mode. 2.0, you can also adjust Playing on the Pro level here can be a each of your shots for humiliating experience. The swing meter those tough situations, moves with lightning speed, and you But instead of filling out have to be on your toes to get the snap a dialog box and making SETTINGS just right. Less skilled levels—Novice and adjustments in a window, Amateur-are more forgiving and offer PGA TOUR 486 lets you P SCISCO (+4) the beginner an introduction to the CALM To plne 304 yds 2.11 belos use the mouse to control game. You can practice any hole on any how you hit the ball. IS THAT WAYNE NEWTON Hope you like the clothes and the of the three courses, but there isn't a sepHold the right mouse gender-they're the only choice you get in PGA TOUR GOLF 486. arate driving range or putting green. button and move forward The first several times I played the or back to put topspin or game, I was annoyed at the length of backspin on the ball; or, move the mouse Hartford Open); and TPC at Sawgrass, the time it took for the screen redraws. to the right or left to spin the ball for a Florida course that's the site of The Players from a tee shot to a second shot from fade or draw. Despite the fact that I was Championship. Each of the courses is lushthe fairway, measured from swing to using a mouse, I found this design to be ly detailed in its on-screen display. There's swing, it took almost 30 seconds to set closer to the experience of a real game, plenty of depth and perspective, which enup. Measured from the point immediand a little easier than when I'm standing hances the experience. ately following your shot, when you on the fairway. One of the features I have always press \"Continue,\" the count came to You don't have as many add-on courses liked about PGA TOUR GOLF is the about 8 seconds. You can speed up to choose from in this game, but the main Tournament mode, in which you and up these times by turning off the Snap program does include three championship to four other players can compete with Around view, which is a reverse view courses: TPC at Summerlin (host to the nine actual professionals. If you're not that takes over after you hit the ball. Las Vegas Invitational); TPC at River up to that, you can shoot 18 holes, or Since there's no way to see a reverse Highlands (home of the Canon Greater play the front or back nine, just as you view at the same time you see the main Our new Casino game's so lifelike about the only thing you won't experience are the free drinks from Bunny here. "


"bre. GENESALERS LARRY URINKERS MIRE. HULBERT ANDREAS SAGRE 17 DAVE RUMMELIS ROBERT LOHR STENINE view (unlike MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0) some players may want to keep it on-but be prepared to pay in terms of time. There are other prices to pay for what could have been the finest golf game ever. The most blatant is the lack of a female golfer. There's no reason why a player shouldn't be able to stick with his or her gender when teeing up a golf game. Beyond that extreme missing piece, there isn't much in the way of customizing your player, either. You'll be a brown-headed guy in a pink Polo shirt and a pair of white Dockers. It's not an outfit you'll ever find me wearing, but then again you'll never see me playing the TPC courses that I get in this game. This version, updated with photo-realistic graphics, better controls, and an appealing visual design, put new life back into the PGA TOUR title. I'd tee this one up any time. position. From my expeLAS VEGAS LAS VEGAS LAS VEGAS rience, it seems accurate enough. All possible lies are accounted for-even LROUND 1 those you wish you'd nevT1 BRAD VAXON er found. STAY WILLY WAYNE GRADY The photography, even if it gives an accurate and totally realistic TED SCHULZ portrait of the course, has one disadvantage over CONTINUE the digitized courses used 144 P SCISCO in MICROSOFT GOLF 2.0 and PGA TOUR GOLF 486: the perspective is flattened. The illusion of NOT MY BEST DAY At least I wasn't in the cellar during early play of depth is lost, so that it the first round. looks like your ball is traveling across a phototized video footage-to supply a view graph. For some players, this may detract of the Nicklaus-designed (with Pete from the game's realism. Personally, I Dye as architect) Harbour Town Golf don't think it affects play, even though I Links. The course is a true links, a seado believe that many of the photographs side course that, unlike others that the lack enough contrast to maintain the long-ball-hitting Nicklaus designed, golfing illusion. stresses accuracy and the approach Another visual difference that should over the big drive. be noted is the player's perspective. PicThe use of photographs not only gives TURE PERFECT GOLF doesn't use animatthe game a different look, but it also ed golfers. In fact, you can't see the ball speeds play. Your computer doesn't have at all when you address it. Your position to redraw screens; it merely takes your lie is at the lie; when you swing, the ball and dumps in the photograph from that emerges from your feet to fly, if you've PGA TOUR GOLF 486 RATING RATING PRETTY AS A PICTURE Here's a different looking bit of green altogether. PICTURE PERFECT GOLF uses thousands of photographs-not digiWe're working on it. It has more games, more features, and more authentic action than any other Casino simulation around. New Casino Tournament of Champions. In The Next MoveTM Series. It will definitely quench your thirst for excitement, if nothing else. Available on IBM CD-ROM. To order call (305)373-7700 : (800)468-7226. BBS(305) 374-6872 Capstn Casino Tournament of Champions, The Next Movo Series and Capstone are trademarks of IntraCorp. Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged. aosa "


"OPEN: 6AM 11PM PST EVERYDAY SPECTRUM P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 93912-6295 1-800-983-4321 OVERNIGHT SHIPPING NOW ONLY CTRONICS ALL PRODUCTS LISTED ARE NEW SATISFACTION GUARANTEED !!! CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES AND PRODUCTS 3 IBM in Guest.) 10 Year Heplayco 101 Orly the Best Games 11th Hour 00. 1942 Pacific A W100/3.5) 51/10 PAK Vd 1100 5f 10 PAK Vd 200 5TH Flech00/35 Alan w/Cons. 13.5 Aces de the Deep 0,35 ces d te Pacha Aces over Europe CD Across the Ring ADIDA QadmCD/3.5 M835 MORE 33es 22594 OGGESTE Ecstacao 44/19 3479  RODEO Bedro? Atbare Behoder 300/35 contration on tunnunciation fastbad35 14 50/47 A ADD Mezoberanzan00/3.5) HOUD Pods of Darkness35) ADXD Podks Radixce35 ADXDR 00/35 inted 1.05 Aegis: Gurdan dl flectio) Ade De Camp 3.5) Carbat US Navy Fetters.COM Alen Breed51 Alen Legacy005 Al Sz Sports Cdection Alone in the Dark 10/35) Alone in te Dark 20D/35 AmazonMatan Men 3.5 Adion U1835) Arena Daggertal 0035) Amored Fist 35 Award Win Wargame C 3.5 Babe Bugs 00/35) Botle Isle 2200.00! Botecnise 3000 /3.5) Bereana Sted Sky Best of Microprosell Betaal avanderi/3.5 s iness SGOTSESS Star Resch35 3.5 e W..Couds d Betesd Necdeon 7 Bertes Nedeon MS Fight Struato 50 MS Space Simulator 1.0 Wyst Outpost Strategy Gite Pacte Srke Hateste Price Quest 13. a 4 Powerage Priced fysa 142 Private Playtester's Prophecy of the Shadow Prophecy Questo Ques 23.04 Questo Ques 5 0 6 Quest fo Gory!4Prime Questo Gary 13, 4 R Akaa Blade Destry Rebin to Zak Sam & Max Saage Empre Secret of Monkey Island! Secret of Morte Island Shadow d te Comet Shadow of Yetus Shadow Sorcerer Shadowcaster Sd & Ashcredible Tons Sm@ly 2000 Sifarm Soace Quest 1.4. a 5 Star Trek 251 Star Trek Judgement Rates Stke Commander Stie Carmendra SSY21 Sezwa Smaning System Shock Te Fighter Utma 3 Uma 4 Uma 5 Uma 6 Uma 7 Back Gate Lima 7. Sepertise Uma 8 Uima&timal Uma Underworld 102 Veld Dsness Way Beartisti Wrig Commander Amada Wings of Gory Wizardry 6 Bre Csic free Wizardy 7. Crusades DR Woensten 30.Spex Destiny X.COM XWG 3DO 200 Sistem 300 Contde 11TH HOU ADID Sayor Amren the Dark CPU. Bach Gesture Shock Demolition Man Escape tom Monster Mana Graders Horde bin Madden Focal Lost Files Serlock Holmes aace Out of this World Pataark Rise d te Robots 45/35 lang Fafer 225) siapa 2 Plus CALI Doom Comparian (D) Lemmings 1 8200) Pose of the Robots.CD) Wol 3D Cake Stone Draal Unleashed LETTLES 300 /3.5) Pose of the Tried CD/3.51 Wof 30Spear of Destry.00) Dragon's Lar 100 Uks 38 035 Robinson's Reguem CD 3.5 Woensten 3D wilt Bod: 13.5 Dragon's Lar 2008 tiks 486 Po Rorance 3 Kredans 335) Wotenstein Missons la 23.5 Draon's Larec Urks 386 Corse Disks Pues d'Ereszenat 23.5 Wdback  5 Draanschere CD 3.5 Live Action Football Sobre Team 0/3.5) Word Car:00) Dream Web00/35 Loadstar 100) SEAL Team 3.5 Waand the Godson Dune/CD) Lode Runner /3.5) Secret of Monkeys 100 X-Corn 00/3.5) Dune 23.5 Lord d te Rngsco Secret de Markeys 235) Wing CD 35 47/39 Dungeon Master 200/35 LOTR & Two Towes (35) Scaet Weapons Luthwateo XWrg ! imperial Persut 3.5) EA Top 10 Packco! Lad d Mondt.00 Sat: 3.9 XWrg 2Bling351 Lords d te Realm:00/351 7 Ctes d Gold Enhanced3.5 ZOD Etore Devel3.5 Lost on Shadowse/35) SSI CLASSICS Enpre Dx Master Ed. Lost Fis Sirioms/00/3.5) 33/70 Sladow of the Cornet Evasie Actor(35) Lost Whings(35) Sodowd Ysertus 3.5 B24 F-14 Fleet Defender(00/3.5 Lucas Ats Adr. Pack(35) Shareware 2 the Manico) Batted Anteten F-15 15.251 Lucky's Casino Advetre(35) Sharks! Battesdi Napoleon Facon 3035 Luny Command35 Smilty.co Confict Mode East Facon 30 Tanado ) would Sman 200000/3.5 Gettysburg Tuning Point Falcon God) Mad Dog McCree 1 200) SC 2000 Great Disaster 3.5 Felds d Go 35) Max Capeton SimCity 2000W 35) FFA Soccer CD/3.5) Manic Mansion 2000 Sirpsins Screen Sou(35 Rebel Charge at Chickamauga figtiter Wine CD Mariac Spati Synslonne AL.100/35) Redligting Flash Trafici Master of Maec/3.5) Sazce Ae! Second Front Master of Ona 351 Scace HM0D 35) Sich Gant's Tral Figt Smalta Todi :00 Masters de War 3.5 Space Frates o Sonsdlberty fatess Dr. Radel035) Mech Farceton Assario. Souce Quest 150 Sa Command Freddy Phukas 0085 MechWarrior 2:00/35 Special laces355.25) Star Crusade Freelancer 212000(3.5 MegaDoon.COM Safatasy Festo StormAcross Europe Front Page BB10D/35 MEGA GAMES 100 SSN 21: Seawol 00/3.5) Wargame Constructan Set Front Page Formel Pd35 MEGA GAWES 2.00 Saingad35) Warship Front Page FB 950039 RaceCT Star Cand! Western Front Franter. Erte 20D/357 Nh HITE35) Star Cand 2 Frortines CD/35) Metal & Lace:3.5) Sta Crusader 00/3.5) 40/36 SCENARIO DISKS Gabriel Krig tcp 3.5 Matatech Battledon (CD 3.5 Star Crusady Missions(3.5) Garne Master 100 Metatach Earta Segoc/3.5 Battles of Napoleon 16 Gateway 200/3.5) Star Trek DS9 The Hunt Centres 25 M .Dakside of Xeen 5 Star Trek Tech Manual ) Gengis Khan 5 25 www.World Xeen 10 ST. ldeament les CD/3.5) Wagane Crs. Set 2: Taks 122 Gengis Khan 235 Mierrim Auctor ST. I Files Move Sard35 falfa romerrodsk! GGA Games Mission Orca Star Trek INGO Gobal Darington 3.5 Mata Karbat3.5 Sx Trek 251001 BOOKS Gobins 10 2001 MS Acade35 Star Wars Chess Food) Gobins 3.00 3.5) MS Flet Sm. 5.100/3.5) Star Wars Screen S 35 1942 Pacific Ar War Gobins 4.00) MS Space Smulator 1035) 7th Guest Gold d te mercas35) Mumeda Value Pad 11h for Gandest Feed:00 3.5) Aces O Europe Great Neral Bits 20035 Stw 205000/35 Across the Rime Great Wy 191419163.5 Ney Strike 5 Smmer/Winter Orange CD DD.Champions Kiyon NBA lyn35 Susmmomg3.5 ADD. Orse Azure Bands Gunship 200000/3.5 NCAA Hood Fnal 413.5) Super Hero LeagueiCD .5 AD&D Genie's Curse Harmed the Gods.CD Neries of Steel 35 Super Street Figter 235 ADID Dark Sun lor? Hardal 43.5 NHL Hode, 3.5 Sirocatel ADUD Eye Beddy 1 of 2 Harpoon 100 NL Hode 95.000 Sncate Fusco ADID Eye of the Beholder 3 Hapoan 23.5) Nigt om 13.00 System Soo 35 ADN Gateway Sue Frater Harpoon 2. WestosBatdeset l'octropolis CD! Task Face 194225 AD&D Mencerranean Hapoan Cassic 001 Nomad.00/35) Termnata 2029 DICO ADXD Pods of Darkness Harveste CD NoraStomico Imnate Raas) ADXD Pods of Radiace Het to the Thrane(35) Operator: Crusader 3.5) IFXCD29 ADUD Raverlot Hello od tis Word35 Theme Park 0/35 ADD Secret Silver Blades He Cabio) OUDOST00/3.5 Thed Rod35 ADUD Treasure Savage Fronter Heroes Mgt & Magic Outpost Planet Pad.co Tie Fitte Aegis Gerdand the Fleet Pacic Syke3.5) Te Fiter Missions 3,5 Alden the Dark High Command (0) Pachc War (35) Tigus on the Prom(3.5 None n the DarkPima) le Seas Trader CD/3.5) Panzer Battles 3.5 Tomada Operation Desert Stormco) 25 Bards Tale 1, 2, 3 Fred Guns 35) Panzer General CD/3.59 Tower Corder 3.5 Betrayal at Kiando Horde 10025 Pax Imperia35 Using 16.00 Buck Rogers.Cartdown Humans (0/35 PC Games 2te Map 100 Uma 635 Buck Rogers Mark Obed rica 100/35 Pulect General Bunde35) Uma 7 Completely Chizat rica 2D/3.51 Perfect General 200/35 Uma 7 Sapert 3 Darge d Amana hca 3,00) PGA Tor CCD) Uma &Pag13.5 Darkseed hdy Car Rache(3.5 Puntasmagoria/ Uma & Speech3.5) Doon 1 Prbal ca-CD) Una 8 Pagan speech Doom 2 hoy Car Crouts35 Prates 63.5) Uma Underworld I & 2001 Dracula Unleashed ndana Iones: Adarts.com Ponto Atad 3.9 Umate Danan 3.5 Ecobuest 12 hemoCO Poice Quest 400/35 Umate footako F-14 Teet Defender Therd the Earty /35) Polos 235 Uhrabots:35) Falcon 3.0 Combat Ion Cross13.5 Power 3.5 Uncharted Waters:35) Falcon 3.0 Strategy Iron Heb. Helistoria,00 Under a King Moon Freddy Markus Isle of the Dead(3.5) Prince of Persa 23.5 Umara Sdécon CDI Gabrid Kright Journeman Riget Tubolti Privateer /3.5) Veld Dakes 13.5 Gotins 1.2.03 Jump Raven Private Speed 35) Var Victory:Vakie 35) Harpoon 2 Irassic ParkC/3.5 Private/Stke Com Vetary at Se: 3.5 Judando Polean Baseball35) Wd Gro nca la 2 Kawasaki Supertkes/CD 3.5 Adosla CD/3.5) Voyer CD Indiana Imes:Atlantis Kingdom Fa Reaches100) Psydoton WINCD) Wals of Rome 3.5 hdiana Jones.Last Crusade Kngdoms of German 3.5 Pure Wzgame 35) Wat n Russie: 3.5 Therit the Earth Krena (35) Quartum Gate.CoM War Room D Kings Quest 5 a 6 Kngs Quest 1600) QuartneD/3.5) Wacratic/39 Knes Quest 7 Kngs Quest 500 Quest for Gor 400/35) Wargate Const Set 2.TAKS Lands d lae /3.9 Warlords 23.5 Legend of Kyanda! Kngs Quest 71001 Railroad Tycon D.2.5 Warlords 2 Scenario B43.5 Legenda Kiranda 2 Krigts Xertar CD/3.5 Reach for the Stars3.5) When Two Words W4635 Legends of Valor L'empereur (35) R. Maria Baded Destr 3.5 Whg Commander 106 CD Leisure Suit Larry 5. 6 (26d Time R Akari Star TracD/3.5 W. Commander 142 Chic! rms Comin Land Sea A 235) Rebel Assau CDI Wing Comanda 300) Lad de Rngs Lands d Lae (D/3.51 Relerdessiirsen's hdv. W. Carmendy Kadany35 Lost Fles S. Homes Lanmower Manco) Red Byron (0) Wing Car Amad: 00/39 Lost in me Legend of Kyanda 100/3.5) 20/25 Renegade Jacobs Sanica) 47 Wings of Gaye Magic Cande 3 Legend of Kyanda 300) Retrnd the Panton (0/3.5) 37/15 Weardry 4 Rem Werdra3.5 Maria Marsion 2 Legends of Valor 3.5 Reem to Ringwald CD Wizard Triog 235) Martan Dreams Lesure Sur Larry 16.00) Redam to Zax.00/3.50 Wok 00/3.59 Master of Orian Leisure Surt Larry 600/35 29/39 RingworldC0/3.5 Wat 30 Mariato Matt & Maac Carpenom PRICES SCBJECT TO CHANGE. DEFECTIVE ITEMS REPLACEDY WITH SAME PRODUCT 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS SE 58ORNO Bu 4038 399CAL Mazom Heal Back Beard35) Flake Store Mesd God 35 Bike Soreftsake00/3.5 Eind Date Boothet0/35 Bue and the Gra/CD/3.5 Bue Force (0/35 Body Bows5 Body Cont> Breach 335) Brett Hd Hode 351 Bureau 1300/35 Cadilacs & Dinosaurs.00 Camon Food 00/3.5) Carrier Suket 5 Carriers & W E Camers Wx Cons. K:3.5) Camers War 235) Casties 20D/35 Central Intelzunce Chalengedte 5 Reamis(3.5) Orizabon3. Dizator TycD.COM Cash Sted35 [doub/35) Comanche Missions CD) (mat C D .5) mad H35) Campaign (0/35 # 8 Tarot oced35 =R Star Canud? Super Wing Commanda Theme Park Total Edose Wayd the Ware ATARI Irmata = goer Soace ! Oberlidosco yolellana CD Odmes|C0/35) DDay Begyngd the End DaerniansgatetD/3.5 Dok Facesico Dark Legaso .5 Daun ParolC0/35 Deatrigate(CD Descent35 Data VDD 3.5) Detot 5 Discpies d Sted/3.5 Doorn 13.5) Doom 1140 New Levels 13.5  par System bazuar Cartoler Alien vs Predator Brutal Sports Focal Doan Kasun Nya Raden Tempest 2000 Wafensten 30 WE ALSO SELL: WROMS Hadbies Modems, Video and Sand Cards MHC SAES and SEGAgames and accessories WE ALSO CARRY DATIES AT GUARANTEED LON PROCES! Doom 52/20 New Latest 20/25 Doom 1440 New Leves 3.5 Doon 2100/35 VISA MusterCard PAYMENT: MONEY ORDERS.CHECKS(ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS),VISA.MASTERCARD OVERNIGHT SHIPPING NOW ONLY $4 SHIPPING: $4OVERNIGHT FOR SOFTWARECALL FOR HARDWARE). COD ADD $4 PER ORDER. HANDILING $2 PER ORDER. MOST ORDERS PLACED BY 3PM PST SHIP SAME DAY. ORDERS PLACED BY TAM PST ON SATURDAY WILL SHIP SATURDAY. SHIPPING TIMES NOT GUARANTEED. WE SELL OVER 5.000 COMPUTER & VIDEO GAME PRODUCTS SO IF YOU DON'T SEE WHAT YOUR LOOKING FOR PLEASE CALL US AT 1-800-983.4321 OR 1.408-751-6075 !! Fax W1-408-737-5565 "


"02201 done your job corin requiring the player to choose the rectly, toward the number of Mulligans he or she will be pin. This first-perallowed in the game. son perspective With only one course, PICTURE PERworks well with an FECT GOLF lacks the depth and chaloptional infrared lenge of the other two games discussed golf club accessory here. The publisher plans to release a (available from new course CD-ROM every three-toSports Sciences four months. and available from the publisher), a PICTURE PERFECT GOLF OOO half-club that feeds RATING your swing information to the computer for those electronic duffers THE 19TH HOLE who don't want to All three of these games share similar play with the UNRETOUCHED PHOTOS Get a look at the real Harbour Town Golf Links with features, which makes it articult to disum mouse or key. the photographic layout in Picture PERFECT GOLF. guish the advantages of one over anothboard. er. None of them has a course designer, The swing meter for example, which throws some computin this game is exactly like that in Migreen are available for practice sessions. er golfers into spasms of agony. All of CROSOFT GOLF 2.0, a circle with 12:00 Wind and break (on the green) are, them allow you to practice, although representing 100-percent power and like the other two games reviewed here, PGA Tour GOLF 486 doesn't have a dri6:00 representing perfect snap. Preset represented by a dial on the game dashving range or putting green. All of them swings for straight, draw, fade, and board. Also standard is the shot inforkeep stats, oller replay, and provide an punch shots add to your arsenal, but you mation-distance to pin, player's name afternoon of non-serious entertainment. don't have as fine a control over your and score, and the hole's par rating. All But for my money, PGA Tour GOLF 486 shot as you do in the other two games rethree games allow Gimmies and Mullitakes the day. G viewed here. A driving range and putting gans, but PICTURE PERFECT GOLF differs Download a free games preview, Be one of the first to preview Capstone's Next MoveTM games including Casino Tournament of Champions, Ultimate Backgammon and Anyone For Cards? It's free through America On-Line, keyword \"Capstone\", Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud. (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics  (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K; or simply call our BBS at (305)374-6872. or get The Next MoveTM preview CD for $1.95, May we suggest you take a test drive before you purchase gaming-simulation software. Visit your local software retailer while supplies last. Included with the IBM CD is a coupon good for $10 off the price of Capstone's Casino Tournament of Champions. and get a chance to win a free trip to Las Vegas. Sweepstakes.\"You could win a trip to Las Vegas, See store Don't forget to enter Capstone's \"Make The Next Move display for details. Capstn Anyone For Cards? Bridge Master mpionship Edition Ultimate Backgammon Casino Tournament of Champions Grandmaster Championship Chess All cities. The Next Move Series and Capstone are trademarks of intraCorp. Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged. To enter send a 3\" X 5' card with your name and address to: Capstone's \"Make The Next Move Sweepstakes.\" P.O. Box 4058. Marblehead. MA 01947. All entries must be postmarked by March 31. 1995. No purchase necessary. Void where prohibited by law. Circle Reader Sepica 207 "


"CUTTING EDGE F-16 FLCS. \"I can't shake him!\" Cries your wing man as the MiG matches his every move. Fearlessly, you push the Thrustmaster. F-16 TQS. throttle forward and your Falcon roars to the rescue. The force of acceleration slams you into the ejection seat as you tear through the sky. Your skilled fingers dance over the fully programmable switches as your thumb works the TQS trackball. Your other hand tightens around the ThrustMaster. F-16 FLCS stick as you maneuver behind your enemy. Suddenly, the MiG falls into the funnel of your HUD. Squeezing the trigger, a lethal hail of cannon fire rips through his ship sending him down in flames. F-16 TQS Unlimited Programmability Unparalleled Performance Uncompromising Reality THRUSTMASTER THE REALITY SPECIALISTS 10150 SW NIMBUS AVENUE PORTLAND, OR. 97223-4337 PHONE (503)639-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #161 "


"SIMULATION Smokin'SIGS ROGEYE WITHOUT QUESAcross the nation, groups of players come to10OKING FOR A TION, FLIGIIT gether to form \"electronic fighter squadrons,\" SIMULATIONS ARE providing training and partners for network the most complex and modem play. Almost every on-line service pieces of conhas some sort of flight simulation forum or bulsumer software letin board. Several groups have started newsletBAR & GRIL around. Not only ters and mini-magazines catering to their A FLIGHT SIM are they difficult charter. Other groups connect via Internet eto create, with their sophisticated Ilight modelmail and newsgroups. There are dozens, maybe ing and graphic magic, but they're dillicult to hundreds of these organizations out there. This ere. This MENTOR? CHECK use. Products such as FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 and month I'm going to give you the Bogey's dope FALCON 3.0 require many hours of simulated on a few of my favorites. By no means is this Night time to fully appreciate their depth coverage exhaustive; I'm simply going to discuss OUT THESE Fortunately, it seems that simulation flyers, a handful of groups that I find to be the most eflike nature, abhor a vacuum-in this case, a vacficient, informative and useful. uum of knowledge. In on-line forums and in SPECIAL INTEREST special interest publications, sim jocks have MICROWINGS banded together to share in their ignorance and First, for the non-combat flight sim fan we have swap battle-tested wisdom. These special interThe International Association for Aerospace GROUPS (SIGS) est groups (SIGs) provide training, information, Simulations. More commonly known as Microand resources, and bring people together to Wings after the name of their magazine, memshare in their common obsession. bership in this group offers 1) a free copy of FOR SIM FANS. Flight Sim SIGs take on many different forms. Microsoft's AIRCRAFT AND SCENERY DESIGNER or Mallard's FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 SCENERY UPGRADE for the Mac to the first 2,000 members; 2) a free CompuServe CGW informants indicate that Domark's CONFIRMED KILL (formerly Dog sign-up kit; 3) discounts on FIGHT) has been confirmed dead. The project has been canceled. Thrustmaster, BAO, and However, Domark has announced a new title, FLYING NIGHTMARES Sublogic products; 4) a member database to help locate 2000, a sequel to their popular Power Mac title, FLYING NIGHTMARES. Unmodem-play partners in your like the original, FLYING NIGHTMARES 2000 will be available on DOS macity, area code, or around the chines, and much like Domark's AV-8B HARRIER ASSAULT, the action will world; 5) a subscription to focus on a combined arms invasion of a small region, most likely an their black-and-white, biisland in the Caribbean famous for its dictatorial government. Players monthly, 42-page magazine, will lead Harriers, Cobra helicopters, and LAV-25 personnel carriers MicroWings. Each month Miin the invasion, jumping from vehicle to vehicle in real time. The sim croWings offers lessons and instructions written by will support four, possibly six, players on an IPX network, and two experienced pilots on everyplayers on a 28.8 modem connection. It has been Domark's style to thing from crosswind landings support cutting-edge graphic accelerator cards (they supported the S3 to IFR navigation. Memberchip in previous releases), and we wouldn't be surprised if they con ship is a bit pricey at $50 per tinue that trend with newer graphic acceleration technology. year, but provides excellent instructional information for by Tom \"KC» Basham ON THE RADAR JANUARY 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 191 "


"FREE CATALOG FREE SHIPPING EDGE SHAREWARE GAME NEWSLETTER general aviation fans. Combat vets be3.0 utilities to military pilots (including ware: MicroWings caters only to non-comseveral WWII veterans) to certified flight bat simulations, such as FS 4.0, FS 5.0, instructors. FSFORUM's libraries contain and AIR TRANSPORT PILOT. For more inover 2,000 files including help files, patchformation, contact MicroWings, Inc. at es, game hacks, and custom-built aircraft with every order (214) 324-1406. and scenery files for MICROSOFT FLIGHT SIMULATOR. INTERCEPT Second up, we have intercept, a journal INTERNET ENGAGEMENTS dedicated to combat flight simulation. If you have Internet e-mail access, there Published bi-monthly by SIMCAP (as in, are numerous \"mailing lists\" you might Simulation Combat Air Patrol), each isfind interesting. While there is a countsue focuses on a single, newly released less number of Internet mailing lists, on any two in-stock games combat flight sim. However, the bithere are three stand-outs for flight simmonthly schedule bends as software deulation fans. and on backordered games livery slides. If the focus product misses 1) The FALCON 3.0 mailing list. Subits release by a month or two, the correscribe by sending e-mail to majordosponding Intercept issue slides also. As a mo@onion.rain.com with the following result, subscriptions are for a set number text: subscribe falcon3 of issues rather than a time period. Six The FALCON 3.0 list is dedicated to FALissues of this 32-page, black-and-white CON 3.0, MiG-29, and HORNET. Discusmagazine costs $20, with each issue shipsions vary widely, but include how to ping as a major new combat flight simusolve various hardware/software conflicts, lator ships. The magazine includes tactics, bug reports, how things work in with every order tactics and strategy columns applicable real life, and other related topics. to the featured product, briefings on the 2) The Hitech-Sim mailing list is simiaircraft and weapons modeled in the lar to the FALCON 3.0 list, but widens the product, news, and \"readers forums\" focus. All graphics-based, \"first person\" where readers share tips, tactics and stosimulations are fair game for discussion ries. Intercept may be best known for its on this list. Subscribe by sending email to head-to-head tournaments. Seventy-two majordomo@onion.rain.com with the simulation pilots recently flew FALCON following text: subscribe hitech-sim 3.0, MIG-29, and HORNET in tourna3) For SVGA AIR WARRIOR fans there's ments across North America. Serious the 666th-etal mailing list. This list is popprizes were awarded to finalists, culmiulated with veteran, novice, and in-benating with the grand prize: a day at the tween Air WARRIOR pilots discussing every US Fighter Squadron in St. Paul, Minaspect of on-line and off-line AIR WARRIOR One W. Seminary St., Brandon, VT 05733 nesota, donated by Spectrum Holo Byte.play. Information on patches and revisions 8am-Midnight Eastern Time, Mon.-Sat. US Fighter Squadron, in the fine tradican be found here, as well as a thorough 1-800-247-5447 tion of Sky Warriors and Air Combat ftp site filled with Air WARRIOR-related USA, lets you fly real dogfights in real files, patches, maps, etc. Additionally, this THE BIG NEWS aircraft under the watchful eye of mililist serves as the basis for an Air WARRIOR tary safety pilots! Intercept's competitions ladder competition played through InterGAMES are held fairly regularly and are open to net links instead of the Genic arena or disubscribers only. For more information, rect phone calls. Join by sending e-mail to contact SIMCAP at (918) 338-3520. listproc@rex.pfc.mit.edu with the following text: subscribe 666th-etal. A FORUM FOR FLYERS Be warned, this list has heavy traffic For CompuServe members, I highly recand will fill your mailbox daily! The list is ommend the Flight Simulation Forum onavailable in \"digest\" format, but even so, line (CO FSFORUM). Although not a the traffic is heavy enough that I typically Send me your current newsletter. Here's $2. Send me your catalog, S2 off I newsletter or \"club\" per se, FSFORUM of receive three or four digests per day. coupon and newsletter. fers a wide variety of services and informaThese leads barely scratch the surface tion. The forum is divided into sections on of the resources available out there. If you scenery design, air trallic control, general know of other user groups, electronic aviation, historical air combat, modern air flight squadrons, BBSs, or Internet Address combat, hardware, and space combat, just groups that provide accurate information City City to name a few. Each section is stocked with and helpful services, feel free to drop a experts always willing to help other users note to my CompuServe account State, Zip through difficult times. Experts range [73760,1251] or write the magazine  1994 Titan Games -----from programmers pumping out FALCON ATTN: Bogey's Bar & Grill. Circle Reader Service #117 192 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 GAMES Take control Name "


"Actual screen shots used For BM.PC and PC Companbles with CD-ROM For more information call (617)441-6333 This is it. Real planes Real manuevers. Real scenery. Real flight. suren FLY! 1994 Looking Glass Technologies, Inc Cambridge MA Flight Unlimited Looking Glass and the distinctive logos are trademarks of looking Glass Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved UNLIMITED Coming Soon Circle Reader Service #246 INTERACTIVE entertainment Distributed by Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc "


"REVIEW Pulling Punches CEARMORED Fist Packs A Mean Graphic Jab, But A Weak Realism Hook by Patrick C. Miller E 3.5\" HE TURBINE ENGINE IN YOUR T-80 HAVE GUN, WILL TRAVEL brought down to earth. Still, even STRAINS AS THE TANK GRINDS ITS The Cold War is over, but thanks to ARthough ARMORED FIST might not be WAY TO THE TOP OF A RIDGE LINE MORED FIST you can climb into the comeverything expected, within its limited littered with the smoking hulks mander's seat of four different armored scope, it can provide interesting, chalof American tanks you destroyed fighting vehicles to wage war in various lenging and, yes, even enjoyable game minutes ago. Just as your tank crests the hot spots around the world. You can opplay, provided you can tolerate the ridge, a panicked shout from your Russerate the American-made M-1A2 Abrams blocky graphics, stick with it long ian gunner rings in your headphones. main battle tank (MBT) and the M-3 enough to become accustomed to some \"Meessle! Meessle! Meessle!\" The gunBradley infantry lighting vehicle (IFV) or of its irritating features, and think of it as ner quickly swings the turret to the the Russian-made T-80 MBT and the more of a game than a simulation. right, spotting an American infantry BMP-2 IFV. NovaLogic's reputation for Although NovaLogic has sacrificed refighting vehicle barely visible in a rocky creating realistic 3-D worlds with its Voxalism for playability. ARMORED FIST is crag below. The TOW anti-tank missile el Space graphics, the game's unique box more than a shoot-'em-up action game. it launched two secdesign (shaped Players must devise sound strategies and ARMORED FIST onds ago is too like a tank hull), use proper tactics to have any hope of close. Just as your Price: $69.95, and the superb success. Those familiar with the vehicles finger squeezes the DOS CD and graphic animaportrayed and modern armor tactics will firing trigger, a tion, music and adapt more easily to the game. For the System thunderous exploRequirements: sound during the novice, however, the manual is of little sion rocks your IBM compatible game's introduchelp. While it does an adequate job of tank and a red blur 386 or better, tion make you explaining the mechanics of game play, is the last thing you 4MB RAM, VGA itch to begin it places more emphasis on grand stratesee as you slump in graphics, mouse; combat. NovaLgy rather than providing useful informasupports Sound your seat. ogic does such a tion on weapon characteristics and Blaster Life, as they say, is compatible cards for speech/sound effects. good job of battlefield tactics. short, then you die. Roland, Adlib, Sound Blaster for music building expectaThe game comes in both floppy disk Nowhere is this Protection: None tions for ARand CD-ROM versions. The CD version more true than in Designers: David Seelholzer, John Garcia, MORED FIST that can be installed using between 2 and 6 ARMORED FIST, a sim Stewart Kosoy what you anticimegabytes of hard drive space and inulation from NovaLPublisher: NovaLogic pate seems a far cludes sensational animated combat seCalabasas, CA ogic that captures (818) 878-0325 cry from what quences at the conclusion of each the lethal intensity of you get mission. (Mere eye candy, to be sure, armored combat in Armor afibut oh, how sweet it is!) The CD also inthe 90s. In ARMORED FIST, as in real arcionados hoping for a more up-to-date cludes an additional set of voice audio mored combat, if it can be seen, it can be replacement for M-1 TANK PLATOON (refiles providing higher quality sound. hit. If it can be hit, it can be killed. ARleased by MicroProse back in 1989) will Because NovaLogic tried to design ARMORED FIST exposes you to the threats that be disappointed by ARMORED FIST's lack MORED FIST to be more user friendly predominate on today's battlefields: attack of realism in certain areas. Others hopthan COMANCHE, it's less likely that helicopters bristling with guns, missilesing to feast upon ARMORED FIST's visual you'll need to modify system files or and rockets, murderous salvoes from muldelights will be disappointed to find that create a boot disk to run the game. On tiple-launch rocket artillery, tank-cripthe Voxel Space graphics which providthe 486DX2/66 system on which the pling mine fields, precision-guided cd breathtaking scenery in COMANCHE, a game was reviewed, it installed easily, long-range anti-tank weapons and deadly helicopter simulator, don't produce the exhibited no strange behavior, and high-velocity tank gun rounds. same spectacular results when they're played very smoothly. 194 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"THIS CAT LOVES TO DCGFIGHT DESIGNED BY THE BEST: The awardwinning creators of Chuck Yeager's Air Combat TOTAL IMMERSION: Full texture-mapping, digitized explosions, video briefings, and hyper-realistic 4-track stereo sound effects and wingman audio. 4 WAYS TO PLAY: 50 Single Missions, Campaign with carrier wing command, Quick Mission Builder, and Pro Mission Builder with extreme detail. When it comes to defending its share of 24,000 jeet, the F-148 Tomcat will tangle with anything. LOCK ON: Bandits use team tactics, But Bo Will any of the fighters you can fly in the most sophisticated flight Simulation chaff, flares, and the design strengths of vertical maneuvers, jinking high G turns, y on the market. Advanced simulation technologies and a custom graphics/audio their aircraft. package create the most riveting, in-the-cockpit experience available for the PC CD. The on e you can be in the eastern Hope Strenght Actual Sercens May Vary US N o t The Air Canthet Series ADD Chuck Yoges Cubat acorder of Boctrul Anu The auctronic Arts 2013 registered R al Electronic Arts. Thrustmaster stered trademark ! ThrustMasters TURINTMENTER catho FIGHTERS OPTIMIZE IT: Multiple graphics options and selectable resolution modes for MAX performance. ELECTRONIC ARTS ARCOMBAT SERIES Circle Raider Service #55 "


"TREET GURES REMAINING 1 TITTSVITA LONOING NHTHB REGU MISSION IMPROBABLE both your units and those of the enemy. while a nearby enemy tank is blazing Game play is straightforward, giving you You'll frequently find it advantageous to away at you, forcing you to first destroy the option of selecting individual, cammove to a different vehicle on another the dish and then pray that you're still paign or player-created missions. When part of the battlefield, where your divine alive by the time you can return fire. The selecting either a mission or a campaign, intervention can turn the tide. only way around this is to avoid using you can choose between Eastern (former auto-targeting, a solution that leaves you Soviet) or Western (American) equipTANKS FOR THE MEMORIES with World War II style gunnery, hardly ment. The campaign mode shows a map The real fun comes when you take conideal when your opponents are using of the world area where you're fighting trol of a tank or IFV, assuming the duties modern fire control systems. and the specific locations of the camof commander, driver and gunner. ForDon't be fooled by the presence of paign's seven battles. Campaigns includtunately, you get quite a bit of help from IFVs because infantry is completely abed are India versus Pakistan, Iran versus your virtual crew, who spot and identify sent on this battlefield (as are buildings Saudi Arabia, a civil war on Cyprus, Syria enemy units, lock on to targets, automatiand roads). In addition to their auto cancally reload your nons and anti-tank missiles, Bradleys weapons, and keep and BMPs carry Stinger and Gremlin you verbally insurface-to-air missiles—the best defense formed of gunnery against enemy helicopters. In an odd deresults and other cision intended to reflect the older deevents on the batsign of the BMP, NovaLogic excluded tlefield. In ARthe overhead map display from this vehiMORED FIST, it's REST USER CONTEOL cle (as if BMP commanders don't carry easy to suspend remaps), making it difficult to navigate or IX 3803 ality when you're command from this IFV. tearing along a Air and artillery support are crucial to dusty desert floor minimizing losses and winning consisin an M-1, careentently. Air support is usually less effective ing past charred, than artillery because gunships can be smoking wrecks shot down or will return to base when THE MARGINS OF REALISM The viewport on this M-1A2 portrays units so with your sights they're taking fire. Helicopters fly crudely that only the Tactical Map (lower left) can identify them without locked on a T-80 as \"kamikaze\" missions straight to their asincreased magnification. its turret swivels to signed targets to pummel them from engage you. Your point-blank range, which does little to versus Turkey, Armenia versus Azerbaimain gun thunders, a near miss kicks up improve their survivability. jan and the Ukraine versus Byelarus. The a geyser of dirt next to the T-80, and you Hits on vehicles cause a variety of basic premise is that a \"Multi Lateral begin counting the seconds until another damage, ranging from insignificant to Force\" using Western equipment has round is loaded, all the while trying to igcatastrophic. Usually the first thing to been deployed to each of these conflicts. nore the roar of artillery exploding go is the vehicle's night vision, a real After selecting a mission, you receive around you, the crash of rounds impactbummer during missions after dark. your orders and go into battle, which can ing on your armor, and a crew member's Tracks can be blown off by mines or ensometimes begin with the alarming sudfrenzied shouts of \"Hind! Hind! Hind!\" emy hits, and engines can be knocked denness of enemy rounds impacting on In modern tank combat, he who fires out. As unrealistic as it may seem, if a your vehicle. A wise move immediately affirst usually wins, and ARMORED FIST advehicle can survive long enough, track ter the mission loads is to press the Esmirably reflects this cape key followed by F1. This takes you fact. Using the to the Command and Control Vehicle auto-targeting fea(CCV) screen and pauses the game, alture, you can lowing you to view a detailed map of the quickly lock onto battlefield where you can inspect the new targets and get units under your command, see how and off that critical first 0408 where they're deployed, and determine shot. The disadWEEE COMTE.CL La RBD. LORDING Len what their movement orders are. Plungvantage of this is 18 2: 32 058 ing directly into battle without first rethat there's no easy ERS viewing this information can lead to a way to break the quick, humiliating defeat. lock or switch to a Often you'll find that while you're kickmore threatening ing butt and taking names on one part of target. Occasionally the battlefield in your personal vehicle, you'll find yourself the rest of your force is off licking its own in the awkward poSAY GOODNIGHT, GORKY Using laser-assisted targeting, the M-1A2 reaches wounds, leaving you alone against oversition of having out and crushes someone with a depleted uranium Armor Piercing Sabot whelming odds. Periodically switching to your gun locked on round. the CCV map helps you keep tabs on a satellite dishGURLS FEMINING: lb TSREGN IRENE UTUS SONG IBS 196 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"NEW FROM L PRODUCTS Com PRED Fly higher with VIRTUAL PILOT PROTM! Taking the best features of the award-winning VIRTUAL PILOT plus added viewing capabilities and fire buttons, it is ideal for advanced flight simulation and driving games. For those who take their game playing seriously! For IBM PC-compatible computers. PRO PEDALS are the only rudders which feature both forward and back rudder motion for flying and a pivot movement accelerator and brake control for driving games. Compatible with CH Products' entire IBM PC-compatible line. TRACKBALL PRO Jump into the cockpit and experience your most intense flight ever with FLIGHTSTICK PRO for 3DOTM, the first 3D0 analog joystick. A thrill to use with 3D0 software from companies like Crystal Dynamics, Domark, and Dynamix! TRACKBALL PROM is a great alternative to the traditional mouse. It also serves as a professional pointing device for desktop publishing. CAD/CAM, and games. Available for both IBM PC-compatible and Macintosh computers. Take total control of your aircraft without ever removing your hand from the stick! features a FLIGHTSTICK PRO for Macintosh programmable trigger, three fire buttons, and a programmable eight-way switch. It attaches to the ADB port found on Mac SE or later models and requires 6.0.7 software or higher. he best! DUCIS ark Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619 598-2518 . FAX: 619-598-2524 Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. 3D is a trademark of The 3DO Company, Circle Reader Service #190 "


"GORLE RENRENING USER CONTROL DEHDY 309050 C UGAN WHERE EBEE G800 A HA record. In camtactical simulation for which grognards paign mode, some grudgingly reserve their respect or the missions must be graphically stunning action game adcompleted before mired by those who prefer that genre. others can be That's too bad, because within its limited played. Other scope, ARMORED FIST is capable of creatmo. EZERSLUN than that, the outing an exciting sensory experience as well comes of your bat as presenting players with challenging tles have no effect tactical problems. If you're not too hung on your overall up on realism or graphics, you're in the campaign or the market for a game that's relatively easy to subsequent perforlearn and quick to play, and if the sights mance of your and sounds of modern armored combat units. appeal to you, ARMORED FIST could be ARMORED FIST's your front-row ticket to the fight. TOW TO TOE A TOW missile fired from this Bradley sends a Soviet BMP 2 mission editor is crew in search of a different party. THE EDITORS SPEAK one of its strongest points, giving you ARMORED FIST and engine damage can be repaired the ability to modify existing missions or RATING  during the battle. create new ones. Unfortunately, you're limited to the terrain maps that come PROS Great graphics in general, TARGET DESTROYED with the game, only four vehicle types, a with realistic terrain, visual effects, Missions end abruptly when time exmaximum of 16 vehicles per side, and a and animated sequences. The scenarpires, you destroy a preset number of small number of terrain elements. As a ios and mission editor will yield much targets, or your force is destroyed. You result, efforts to reconstruct historical batshort, fast, and explosive gameplay. then review your battle statistics, receive tles from such conflicts as Desert Storm CONS The game is limited in scope a performance rating, collect experiend up looking and playing like typical and lacking in realism. Definitely not ence points (the manual gives no clue as ARMORED FIST missions. a game for those who worship at the to how these are awarded or what they When all is said and done, ARMORED altar of Simulation. mean), and examine your won-lost Fist falls short of being either the kind of THUNDERSEA \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES Feedback System Used in RealF6 Simulators NOW Avaliable to the Public \"VIRTUAL UTOPIA!» Marc Dultz, STRATEGY PLUS HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the Thunder Seat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1.800. 8-THUNDER Whether its the whine of your Formula 1 Rare bar theag of Sword against Sword, or Home our Jet Engines at full al hunderSeat lets you take Oh of realism! Compatible wife che, is and CD-ROM'S ThunderSeat Technologies 6330 Arizona Circle  Los Angeles, CA 90045 310 410-0022 FAX: 310  410-1569 Circle Reader Service #185 198 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"YOU ARE HERE YOUR TEETH ARE HERE You get 600 real NHLPA stars, real 1994 stats and real play-by-play from Al Michaels everything but \\BHURI the dull ache in your jaw when the novocaine wears off. For PC, Sega Genesis\" and SNS systems. ACCOLADE BRETT HUL NHLA ANY MORE REALISTIC AND YOU WOULDN'T WANT TO PLAY IT. Brett Hull Hockey 95 is a trademark of Accolade, Inc Al Michaels' name is used under license by Accolade. Inc. Accolade is an official licensee of Brett Hull and the National Hockey League Players Association ONALPA 1994 The Sport Accolade Logo and name are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. Licensed by Sega Enterprises. Lid for play on the Segal Genesis M system. Sega and Genesis are trademarks of Sega Enterprises, Lid Super Nintendo Entertainment System is a registered trademark of Nintendo ol America, Inc 01991 Nintendo of America, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #33 "


"REVIEW The Fleet Sails Into New Theaters FLEET DEFENDER GOLD CD Boasts Two New Theaters, A Mission Builder, And Multimedia Glitz by Tom \"KC\" Basham OU'VE PROBABLY HEARD THIS BE EXPANDING THE FORE: AS SOFTWARE GROWS IN SIZE, SQUADRONS CD-ROMS BECOME INCREASINGLY Multimedia gloss aside, FLEET more attractive to game publishDEFENDER forms the core of ers as a distribution media over this product. The CD-ROM floppy disks. No exception to the rule, includes the latest version of MicroProse has not only adopted CDs, the F-14 Tomcat simulation they've made good use of the 600 including a mission builder megabytes on FLEET DEFENDER GOLD's and two new theaters of ac(GOLD) disc. GOLD consists of three comtion. Each new theater, Indiponents: 1) The latest update of FLEET an Ocean and the Korean DEFENDER including two additional thePeninsula, contains three new aters (Indian Ocean and Korean Penincampaigns. Except for the sula), 2) a multimedia introduction to the mission builder and new thegame including an animated tutorial, aters, the basic game operates identiand 3) a multi-media presentation on cally to the disk-based versions of the naval aviation. No prior version of FLEET software. The new theaters, generally examDEFENDER is required; GOLD contains all referred to as \"Pacific Theaters\" com p le, when adding objects to a scenario components necessary to install and run pared to the earlier \"Atlantic Theaters,\" you must page through a long list conthe simulation. are appropriately staffed by F-14 taining all available aircraft and ship squadrons assigned to the Pacific fleet. types. The menu lists a handful of items FLEET DEFENDER GOLD F-14s bear appropriate West Coast to choose from and a \"more\" button. Price: $57.95; FIFET markings and are assigned to approYou can move forward in the list by lower price priate Pacific-based aircraft carriers. pressing the \"more\" button, but you canavailable for DEFENDER Unfortunately, other aircraft, such as not move backwards. If you accidentally owners of the A-6s and F/A-18s bear Atlantic pass the desired object, you must either original FLEET DEFENDER squadron markings regardless of exit and re-enter the menu or cycle System which theater you're flying in. through the rest of the list back to the Requirements: While the new theaters add new chalstarting point. Despite a less-than-perIBM compatible lenges, the mission builder provides fect interface, the mission builder is quite 386-33 (486  5 MICROPROSE potentially limitless adventures. Users powerful, allowing you to create missions recommended). may create missions in any of the three on par with the most complex ones in4MB RAM, SVGA graphics, CD-ROM, Windows 3.1, mouse, joystick; supports Ad Atlantic theaters and two Pacific the cluded in the various campaigns. The 36 Lib, Roland, Sound Blaster sound cards aters, with the only constraints being a waypoint commands include \"crash this Protection: None maximum of 70 objects (such as ships object at the specified waypoint\" (useful Publisher: MicroProse and aircraft) and 60 ground targets. Alfor missiles), \"jam communications\" Hunt Valley, MD though very flexible, the mission (causing enemies to jam E-2 to F-14 (800) 879-PLAY builder's interface is rather clumsy. For datalinks), and \"drop paratroopers.\" CD-ROM MULTIMEDIA 200 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"0 Collion Lamp : \" ESCORT BERTO NARRATED COCKPIT TOUR F-14s operating over international FI4 Cockpit Tour Gold includes a fairly lengthy, two-part, waters in the Gulf of Sidra. The Fmultimedia tutorial which runs under 14s engaged and subsequently Windows 3.1. The first part, the cockpit splashed both MiGs. The majority tour, audibly describes every switch, indiof the recording from the cockpit cator, and display in the cockpit, includvoice recorders are included on ing indicators not described in the GOLD along with a written transcript documentation. When you click on a parand glossary to help listeners unticular object, the narrator explains what derstand what is being said. Gun the object does and when you might need and HUD camera footage from the to use it. For example, click on the \"Collilast few moments of flight (showing sion Indicator\" located beneath the HUD the hit on one of the MiG-23s) apand the narrator tells you the purpose of pear as the engagement nears conthis light: it illuminates when your airclusion. Military aviation buffs will craft is on a collision intercept course definitely find this part of the pack \"THE CANOPY IS AJAR\" The narrated cockpit tour with a radar-locked target. If you can't age interesting. I did notice some describes controls and displays, including the find what a particular indicator does, just intermittent bugs with the text dismysterious Collision lamp. fire up the cockpit tour! play. A bar moves along the text The second half of the tutorial teaches display highlighting the text being spoations and interesting interviews with piactual flight operations including armken. Sometimes, the text display would lots, a landing systems officer (LSO), and ing weapons, take offs, searching for Flight Deck Clips to $:45 an air boss. Anyone who enjoys targets, defensive tactics, radar \"Wings\" on the Discovery Chanlocking and engaging targets, nel will thoroughly enjoy this basic fighter maneuvers, and video. carrier landings. Most of Additionally, as an advertising the sections, especially campaign, the CD-ROM includes the landings section, the introduction from six other are reasonably detailed Aviation Week videos. Although but definitely geared THEMESLEK the clips last only a couple of toward the novice user. minutes each and are clearly The basic fighter maUD meant to pique your curiosity, neuver section is very each still contains some great brief and gives only a footage ranging from SR-71 opAVIATION WEEKS CATALOG cursory description of FLIGHT DECK erations to Gulf War actions. MiChers break turns, merges croProse's tactic of attaching (called \"early turns»), the CLIPPED 'WINGS' The \"Flight Deck\" video gives insight into advertising to their software has split-S, scissoring, the Immel naval aviation with excellent footage of carrier operations always annoyed me, but in this mann, and the loop. and interviews with pilots. case I find the advertisements very enjoyable to watch. MULTIMEDIA become garbled and multiple pages Whether you already own FLEET DEPRESENTATIONS would overlap, making it difficult to read. FENDER or are just now taking the plunge, The rest of the CD-ROM contains various The voice, however, performed flawlessly. FLEET DEFENDER GOLD is an enjoyable multimedia presentations. In 1984, two Finally, Gold includes most of the Aviapackage for any fan of naval aviation. If Libyan MiG-23s challenged two US Navy tion Week & Space Technology video tape: you didn't like the original, floppy-based \"Flight Deck.\" This excelFLEET DEFENDER, however, you will find lent video explores every little of interest in GOLD except the video aspect of modern carrier clips (which can be purchased on VHS aviation spanning the tape separately). makeup of carrier air wings, hand signals, color THE EDITORS SPEAK codes for flight deck work FLEET DEFENDER GOLD ers' uniforms, landings, RATING  and adverse weather operations. The latter tells a PROS Mission builder and new sceparticularly harrowing tale narios breathe new, extended life into of a landing made in ex a good sim. Cockpit walkthru is great tremely bad weather. The for new pilots, while the video addiMED SEA PATROLS Missions can be created in the Atlantic or CD-ROM includes most, tions will be enjoyed by all. Pacific theaters with up to 70 objects (such as ships and aircraft) but not all, of the video. CONS Mission builder interface is and 60 ground targets. The video contains excel crude. lent footage of carrier operD COCOK AMINO COQUIT TOUR MAN QUIT mission Into Paths u10 PS N/85 Act, 2018 Djects ny Mission JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 201 "


"REVIEW Visions At Dawn 5 E L E Empire's DAWN PATROL Challenges RED BARON For Control Of WWI Skies by Michael Rymaszewski OR MANY YEARS NOW, THE WORLD a smorgasbord of single missions and piThe game comes beautifully packaged, WAR I FLIGHT SIM SKIES HAVE BEEN lot careers, it presents the history of aeriand the box contains not only the manual, RULED BY ONE GAME: RED BARON al war in WWI in the form of an disks, and technical supplement, but also a FROM DYNAMIX. A DESIGN AND interactive book whose pages literally classy book about the First War's infamous programming masterpiece, RED come alive. I'm avoiding the term \"multi ace, Manfred von Richtofen. It's a nice BARON was powered by a realistic flight media\" intentionally; it's been so prostitwist on the tendency to stuff abbreviated model that helped propel it all the way tuted that, like a stained blanket, it covers histories into manuals. All in all, you get into the CGW Hall of Fame. The one too wide a variety of things. the feel of a meticulously finished product. gripe shared by many BARON aficionaInstallation involves choosing between dos was that the graphics could have STILL LIFE WITH TRIPES the VGA version, the SVGA version, or been better. AND PURPLE ALBATROSSES installing both; this last option allows you Now a new conThe second out to view the book in SVGA while flying DAWN PATROL tender has broken standing feature and fighting in VGA. The game's techniout of the clouds, Price: $69.95 of DAWN PATROL cal supplement states you'll need a one that could ace DOS CD or 3.5\" is its graphics. DX2/66 or a Pentium 66 to get a good System out the BARON at its Never in your life frame rate while flying in SVGA. If you Requirements: own game. Named IBM compatible have you seen do have the good fortune to own one of DAWN PATROL, after 386-25Mhz or such beautiful those, and your video card is not featured the movie, it has better, 3 MB planes. Every in the setup options, you might still have been developed by RAM, VGA or plane and bit of problems. You'll have to create a boot Rowan, the British SVGA (1 MB landscape is imdisk with custom CONFIG.SYS and AUcompany that precard) graphics, emple age-mapped, and TOEXEC.BAT files, and this can be 20 MB hard viously gave us drive space (floppy), 2 MB hard drive space it shows. Al tricky; a computer whiz friend of mine REACH FOR THE (CD), CD-ROM: supports Sound Blaster though there are could not get the game to run for three SKIES. compatible sound cards; supports no individual hours, even though he had run other DAWN PATROL is a Thrustmaster rudder pedals. clouds and no games in SVGA without any problems on game that stands Protection: None glare effect, DAWN the same system. Designers: Rowan Software out in two respects. PATROL is one of That sounds like bad news for the maPublisher: Empire Software One is the concept Germantown, MD the nicest-looking jority of gamers, so let me add quickly behind the game. (800) 216-9706 historical flight that the VGA version is pretty good, too, Instead of offering sims ever done. and should work smoothly on practically 202 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"every 486. The wily Brits have devised a at the aircraft from various angles, mouth lot is switched on-a damaged Einway to avoid choppy frames once things slightly open. dekker will climb at an angle approachget very busy on the screen: an optional ing the vertical at a steady 46 mph. feature maintains frame rate by automatiIS IT A SOPWITH The cockpit interior is nicely rencally adjusting the width of the window. OR A SPITFIRE? dered, devoid of any instruments apart The combination of the WWI looks DAWN PATROL's pursuit of visual perfecfrom two dials giving airspeed and enstruts and wires all over the place, gaudytion comes at a cost: its flight model is gine revs. Altitude is displayed elseGerman paint scheme—with the beautirelentlessly optimistic. There is the opwhere, on the information bar across ful graphics is entrancing. It's always grattion of setting your airplane's engine to the top of the window, so the cockpit is ifying to shoot at a nice target, but \"normal\" and \"super.\" It's unnecessary, pumping bullets into a purple-winged Albecause even at the \"normal,» or supRight where the inclinometer should be, batros with a flecked fuselage is especially posedly authentic setting, a Spad 7 feels it features two mysterious silver switchcaptivating. The ground is quite well more or less like a Mustang in ACES es: one switch indicates whether the done, too, although ground targets from OVER EUROPE-except it has a little magic autopilot is on, and the other close up leave a little to be desired. This more power, and doesn't spin out. I've confirms it will actually fire the guns for is where all the frustrated aesthetes you. As silly as it among the RED BARON veterans will really 593761 Video 0142700 Gun Rounds 14. Fuel sgully sounds, it makes get off, and this could be one reason why sense because of DAWN PATROL could become the most the graphics: many popular WWI flight sim among newcomplayers will enjoy ers to the genre. missions flown exclusively on auVIRTUAL COCKPIT A L'ANGLAISE topilot while DAWN PATROL also features a British take flipping through on the virtual cockpit concept, which W the various views. made its debut earlier in MicroProse's A REN 64139 In addition to 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR. You hit the apengine settings, propriate button to padlock the view on adjustable options your target, and then attempt to bring include joystick your guns into the picture, too. sensitivity. Therein As in 1942, this entails certain visual CURSE OF THE ALBATROS A Sopwith Camel closes within firing range of the lies a warning: all sacrifices. The parts of your own plane garish Albatros 03. The beautiful cockpit is mostly for looks, since flight the 13 planes you that come into view will remind you of information is displayed at top. can fly are curiousthose good old days when you played ly devoid of perBLUE MAX on a sonalities. Yes, a Fokker DVII is faster 286. A press release and more powerful than a Tripe, a states that the guys Camel can turn while standing still, the at Rowan use this fast Albatross turns poorly but climbs mode exclusively to well, and so on. However, all of them are fly and fight. Being ridiculously easy to fly, and react to conboth an aesthete trols pretty much as you indicated you'd and a homicidal like them to on the options screen. maniac who likes to shoot down as THE SOUND OF GUNS many planes as Finally, there is the issue of what you possible, I did not hear while you're doing all this flying. use it much. Apart from magnificent-sounding maThe emphasis on chine guns, sound effects are rather the visual aspects of poor-at least on AdLib and Sound the game is under. LUFBERY FURBALL A German EinDekker squadron jumps the English in a Blaster cards. Hits, whether scored by scored by a multidroning, banking, slow-speed samba, with a Nieuport in the foreground. you or on your are indicated by arcadetude of commands style noises, and the same slight silliness giving you different views of different airspent 20 minutes trying to tip a Camel is present in most other sounds. The craft. Many of those commands are twointo an uncontrolled spin with no sucengine was almost totally silent on both key combinations, and using them in a cess. This feature will cause lips to curl AdLib and Sound Blaster, while ack-ack fluid sequence calls for a monkey-like with contempt among the serious sim pifire made me jump in my seat. For dexterity which I, for one, do not possess. lots, but I suspect that it will prove imsome historical background, here's a I can see, however, the rationale behind mensely popular with many others, quote from Billy Bishop's memoirs in developing such an elaborate system of particularly those who are relative newWinged Warfare: different views-anyone running DAWN comers to the genre. The engines also \"The German shrapnel shells are PATROL in SVGA will spend hours staring turn miraculously powerful when autopinearly always mixed with high explosive. AL 30033riN eo0042200 Gun Hounds 100 Fuel Bgal ir Pote Neulur Next HP Hugue Pos Info Dne O TRO Locked 2 Heading 16 5 76 lip it 30038 TO 929 Rango5 Miles 7998 r. Rol ng 29 Page 5 M110cni ort Near LRT Range Nilus alate Free COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 203 "


"Alt 7036rt. Video 0042700 Gun Rounds 100 Fuelsgalls Tandil a dolgok ang tinig range Uideo 00/2700 Oun Hounds 100 Fuel 89olls 199201 E Pilot RC Spad 2 Next. HP Navigule Por Info Hone teaching 1149 Speed Rel De 49 Ronge Relea 49 Rong Near Lnny Range 229 Hp Hle 2 Miles 7993 Peter Lukk Next: HE Navigate Posta Hone Die Inne Outside Hanno 73 Spent 108 t Roi Du 191 Range 6 Hits Rol vs 350 mg 33 M1100 Lekker 1 Penge0 Miles il 1992 et Alt. 1999 A Suate I NE te led THIS SPAD'S HAD IT The incredible smoking finale to a Spad 7's short career. As you can see, the bit-mapped aircraft detail is phenomenal. WATCH WHERE YOU'RE GOING, DUMBKOPF! Nervy pilots playing chicken might lose their wings in more ways than one. EC They are very noisy, but most of the time missions. Having a marked preference sum up the experience. The effect is your engine is making such clatter the for fighting in the career mode, I was not only feeble and repetitive, but explosive efforts to wing you in flight go rather suspicious of this. To my pleasant sometimes ludicrous. On one occasion, entirely unnoticed.\" surprise, DAWN PATROL has proved to be fighting as the great Guyenemer, I I think that is one factor that was simvery replayable. found myself very badly damaged. I ply overlooked, given the game's serious This is possible thanks to the fact that landed quickly in a nearby field (landapproach to historical accuracy. you can modify the number and types of ing is always a snap in DAWN PATROL, aircraft involved in almost every mission. even with no engine) and waited anxDOGMEAT SANDWICHES Nearly every mission can be flown for eiiously for the Fokker's bullets to start While flying a plane in DAWN PATROL is ther the Germans or the Allies, and on thudding into my Nieuport. The easy, fighting isn't. The Al is really well many «repeat\" missions (I told you, the Fokker circled and flew away, and I done, and even veteran pilots will be Al is good) you'll find the enemy appearfound myself reading that the great truly tested. The enemy planes work in ing from a different direction than they Guyenemer, seeing that his opponent's teams; for instance, if you're alone, did previously, sometimes lower, some guns had jammed, gallantly spared his they'll sandwich you from above and betimes higher. There's always a factor of life, waved and flew away. low, and make firing passes from oppounpredictability thrown in, and the posThe copy on DAWN PATROL's box sleeve site directions. You'll see some startling sibility that a mission you thought you'd promises the aeronautical experience of things happen, too. DAWN PATROL is the mastered will master you instead. a lifetime.\" It also asks you to forget all first sim in which I witnessed a phenomChanging the number of planes or other flight sims, because DAWN PATROL enon often described by real veterans: a their types makes a big difference: you'll tests your flying skills to the full. I would plane following another following anfind yourself replaying the same mission not agree with either of the above. DAWN other following another, all locked in a over and over again, seeing how three PATROL is the visual experience of a lifechain of death, each firing at the one in Spads would stack up against four Albatime, not an aeronautical one; and it tests front. Other details include balloons trosses, then five Fokkers, and so on. Of not your flying, but your dogfighting hurriedly winched down when attacked, course, the key enjoyment is seeing all skills-an entirely different ability, and opponents who sometimes dive out those different, beautiful airplanes. though of course related. of the fight and run for home, as they The game does contain an attempt to All in all, DAWN PATROL offers a lot of often did, without contesting you to the mirror the pilot career option present flying time for the money in a very bitter end. in most sims. Since DAWN PATROL's forunique format. As they say about movies, While aerial gunnery is childishly easy mat is that of an interactive book, it this one has to be seen. (except when flying the Nieuport with its quite logically asks you to write eight THE EDITORS SPEAK overwing gun), shooting down some new pilot biographies, where each page DAWN PATROL thing isn't because you have to hit it would describe how a mission was many, many times. Damaged aircraft fought. The challenge supposedly is to RATING  1/2 stream white smoke and limp visibly; create the most engaging and fascinatupon achieving a kill, you are often reing biography possible in the course of PROS Sumptuous graphics, good warded with spectacular sights--wings eight missions. dogfighting AI, and a novel approach coming apart, etc.—accompanied by tellI'm afraid this is one novel concept to its structure. DAWN PATROL will detale black smoke. that didn't quite work. There are only liver many hours of fun, unless... As mentioned, DAWN PATROL takes a eight missions for each pilot, and you CONS ...you require a realistic flight bold step away from the format adopted fly the same missions over and over model from your sims, in which case by most historical flight sims, and preagain. Depending on the outcome, you you might think twice about your buy. sents what in effect is a set of 150 single see a page fill with text that attempts to Circle Reader Service #361 204 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"HOW DOES IT FEEL TO DRIVE THE FASTEST STOCK CARS ON EARTH? VA COU PONT plastika'e 116 . TAKE A TEST DRIVE! For a free demo, see below* EWOOG (MILA NASCAR IT FEELS LIKE THIS. TILL NASCAR O No wonder Nascar is the world's OU PON PAPYRUS 9491 It's pure No wonder NASCAR is the world's brute force. #1 motorsport. *700 horse And now Papyrus introduces power monsters that can blast you past NASCAR RACING. A simulation so 200 MPH in a couple of heartbeats. Or put you real, you'll think you need a roll cage. against the wall in a careless instant. The officially licensed NASCAR simulation. You'll race on 9 different NASCAR-sanctioned tracks. Drive the world's hottest stock cars-against top NASCAR drivers. They may blow you off the track at first. But practice, practice, practice. You'll start moving up. Watkins Glen International 1/ 2 Fuel Tires Spoilers Suspension Gears Options Done SMOKREM L OKOKO \"Knock-down gorgeous» The real look. Papyrus' excluThe real feel. We've duplicated Realistic danger. Hit a wall on CD-ROM. That's what PC sive 3-D Super Texture technology real-car behavior everything from and you'll know it. Sparks shower, Samer said about our crisp, clear gives you TV-like realism — on speed to engine setup, tire condition, parts fly off, wham! You may be SVGA graphics. (Sept. '94) Looks everything from cars to terrain to fuel load, and more. able to go on, or it may mean back 50 real you can almost smell track-side billboards. Even the paint Plus, you control spoiler angles, to the garage. By the way, It's one burning rubber jobs and decals are authentic tire types, camber, gear ratios, thing running solo but racing plus, you can custom-paint your suspension stiffness, you name it. in a crowded field, you need eyes For a free demo disk: car your way. The combinations are endless. on the front, sides and back of Call 1-800-836-1802 ($5.95 for shipping And so is the fascination. your head. and handling). Or, download a demo from Papyrus' BBS (617-576-7472). from CompuServe (GO PAPYRUS). or from Internet (ftp.std.com). Available in stores in November just in time for Christmas! Visit your local retailer. Or call 1-800-836-1802 PAPYRUS System Requirements: CD-ROM Version: Disk Version Doublo-spin CD-ROM drive VGA: 386 33MHz or greater, 4MB RAM, MS-DOS 5.0 or Distributed 386 33MHz or greater, 4MB RAM, MS-DOS later, VGA hard drive with 8MB free. 5.0 or later, VGA, hard drive with 15MB free. exclusively worldwide SVGA: 486 66MHz or greater. BMB RAM, MS-DOS 5.0 ** Most major sound cards supported by Virgin Interactive or later, VGA hard drive with BMB free. Entertainment, Inc. BM PC screen shown Artual scrumis may vary NASCAR is a registered trademark of the National Association for Stock Car Auto INTERACTIVE 18061 Fitch Avenue facing Int. NASCAR Racing social licensed by NASCAR Papyrus is a registered trademark of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. nent Irvine, CA 92714 Circle Reader Service #153 From the perfectionists who brought you IndyCar Racing. Papyrus' phenomenal\" IndyCar Racing has won almost every major award in the business. Guess what will win this year. "


"PURE Choice of armament and explosives for air strikes, including armor piercing, high explosives, and the deadly incendiary Historical accuracy rivaled by no Ouer Corman, Axis or Allied forces unhan di Battalion insignias Unin erupteu multimedia offers continuous and dynamic game play. POW's, killed, and wounded will also Dessounted for and against each played The Pure Wargame. Derom Above Wold is the first in a new series from OOR with each volume offering a differens me je. TPW involves eight different a operations. Each istorical scenario embodies the actual units, specific landing sites, and cuman battalione makeUPPW centers on tactical level operations of airborne warfare using mainly.ramparsands Barn size forces. Theight scenarios include Arnhem, Maleme, Saint Marie-Bus e liaklion, Syracuse, and the what il scenario Folkestone, the airborne portional Operabot sa LION Germany's plan to invade England). Each scenario is succinctly described in the cold the code name, date, and a map of the operation. Warfare is tumultuous and gredictables TPW embodies the real feel and challenge of airborne arsault. TPW was designed to be a \"Whole gaming experience\" as opposed to just a Tactical Wargame. 11908-788-2799 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. QQ: 205 Highway 02 IBM is a trademark of International Flemington NJ 08822 Business Machines. Sta QQP Quantum Quality Productions, Inc "


"STRATEGY/WARGAMES | And A Happy New Year IN SPITE OF THE EXPECTED FLACK BROADSIDES MOOing. By MOO, of course, I A WARGAMER SITS I'VE TAKEN OVER LAST MONTH'S mean MASTER OF ORION, the space \"WINDOWS FOR WARGAMING\" strategy game from MicroProse column, I'm still smiling. With the that has earned plenty of kudos BACK. CRACKS smell of pine still wafting through from gamers. So popular is this the house, the fire burning in the game that Micro Prose has signed fireplace, my life's mate smiling at SOME CHESTNUTS me from over her monitor, and a GRIP OF ORION DELUXE (MOOD) sequel shelf full of great computer and for 1995. It's going to be a major board wargames, how could I not revamp from stem to stern (see the AND RELIVES be a happy man? The fact is, 1994 has been a great C2 file for more info) and will be one to watch year for strategy and wargames. Sure, game comfor the coming year. panies have been bought and sold; sure, \"New I had a lot of fun with QQP's MERCHANT PRINCE THE YEAR IN Hollywood\" is looming over computer gaming this year, as did our Editor-in-Chief, Johnny Wiland, sure, on-line services and communities are son. The back stabbing and political intrigue regrowing and changing faster than my 9-year old quired in that game ensured that my diplomacy WARGAMING son. However uncertain the \"big picture of gamvs. computer opponents stayed sharp in 1994. ing may be, the grass looks pretty green (under all However, if I see one more fluctuation in the price that snow) in our niche of the gaming market. of silk, I'm liquidating. There is just something Looking back on 1994, I recall a crazed bit of nice about games that can keep you discovering maps and engaging in commerce until all hours of the morning. The recently released TRANSPORT TYCOON from MicroProse promises to uphold this time-honored genre of eco* Arsenal Publishing has got a line on two new Civil War games. nomic empire building, so aOne features operational level coverage of the Gettysburg campaign, building I will go Avalon Hill forged a couple while the other is (brace yourself) a first-person action game that puts of fine additions to my gaming you right in the middle of a Civil War battle. Don't look for these in shelf for 1994. The boardgame 1995, but preliminary work has already begun on filling the Civil War cum computer game of KINGgap. MAKER kept me distracted for * Civil War historians/gamers are awaiting the re-release of some time. I even dusted off Adanac's ROAD FROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX (RFSTA). Chief programmer, my boardgame version and pushed the pieces around. I cook, and bottle washer Frank Hunter is about finished with this major still wish that this fine multi2.0 release. Of particular note to computer wargamers is the news player boardgame had apthat Frank and Scott Hamilton of HPS Simulations are forming a co-op peared as a multi-player to market and distribute their respective lines of computer wargames. computer game. There is even a rumor that the brothers Lapkoff of Incredible SimulaOPERATION CRUSADER, tions (DEFEND THE ALAMO!) will soon be joining this union. It's nice to see Atomic's blast, raised the level of what a computer game with small wargame companies working together to increase their clout a boardgame feel can be. Best (continued on page 210) of all, CRUSADER landed well by Alan Emrich JANUARY 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 207 "


"with both Macintosh and IBM versions QQP's PERFECT GENERAL. II, that can be played by e-mail, which I think THE PURE WARGAME and will be a bright star in our hobby's future. BATTLES IN TIME. It looks I was pretty enamored of SSG's WARlike the East Coast elves will LORDS II, but I nearly jumped for joy be kept busy for our war when the WARLORDS II CONSTRUCTION and strategy gaming pleaKit arrived. As a staunch power-to-thesure. players partisan, I was delighted to see while others raved over the many creative scenarios developed by X-Com and Doom II, I was gamers on the various on-line networks. I checking out TANKS! and was particularly lucky to play some sceTIGERS ON THE PROWL. I'm narios based upon the Tolkien liction bepleased to see tactical arMalane Suda Bay, Crete 20 May 1941 fore the networks pulled them for mored enthusiasts (they call THE PURE WARGAME Like the airborne troops it features, this one possible infringements on the estate's themselves \"metal heads» in should be dropping in on us in the near future. rights. Next year promises an increase in my gaming group) get whatuser power tools, when White Wolf Prothey wanted this year, especially with the in Windows, while the former will have a ductions unveils their next iteration of entry of TACOPs to the field. Were expectsequel published in 1995). Also, FLIGHT EMPIRE (whatever they decide to call it). ing the Windows version of this Macintosh COMMANDER stormed onto my Mac and Any strategy gamer with a designing itch release in the spring of this year. While 1 hooked me quickly. I'm glad that Avalon is likely to have a lot of fun creating liked these armored warfare games, I really Hill will have a Windows version of wargames with its tools. got a severe case of game lock over SSI's FLIGHT COMMANDER 2.0, with its tactical We're all pleased when good things PANZER GENERAL. I got so involved that I air battles, to help keep my IBM warm happen to good people, and so it was for bugged the author of the upcoming strate this winter. me this year when I saw my friend and cogy guide, Ed Dille, into allowing me to CoWhile I entered 1994 MOOing, I'm editor Terry Coleman get game-lock over author his book and contribute all of my leaving it MOMing, if you will. MicroROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS III ideas. So much for how I spent my SumProse's MASTER OF MAGIC has been keepfrom Koei. He even orders Mongolian mer vacation.... Kudos to SSI for adding a ing my hard drive light blinking beef al our favorite Chinese restaurant play-by-email feature. I'll be looking to considerably of late. While the initial renow. My wish for 1995 is that Koei keep take on challengers among this column's lease had an egregious number of bugs their fingers on the keyin it, I couldn't stop playing it. Fortunateboards of the IBM gaming ly, the patches came fairly quickly. It remarket and not go comminded me of the initial release of pletely cartridge. Terry also HARPOON or FALCON 3.0 in that regardgot into SSG's CARRIERS AT a great game worth waiting for. WAR II and loved those NES. Good things appear to be in the stars GOU 1930s scenarios. It's always a NSE for 1995. I'll probably be playing SSG's good sign when a fellow ED THE LAST BLITZKRIEG these cold winter gamer hoots and hollers as GESUNDE eves. It always amazes me how Roger events unfold while playing Keating and company find new ways to a game; you know he's being outdo themselves. Let the good times pulled in and having fun. (and the panzers) roll, I say. Electronic Arts surprised One thing that pleases me in particume this year. Not with their lar, though, is the ever strengthening update of NHL HOCKEY, bridge between board gaming and comone of my favorite action EMPIRE IN PROGRESS White Wolf's next EMPIRE game will have a puter gaming. With 1994's darling collecgames, but with POWERPOKhost of scenario creation tools. Note that the graphics are table card game MAGIC: THE GATHERING ER. Truthfully, I'm afraid to being improved for the final release. off to computer land at MicroProse, and install it on my computer at SIMCriy off to collectable card game land home. The siren call of those rattling readers via Ziff-Davis' new Interchange at Mayfair Games, I know that these are chips would kill my productivity there. network in 1995 (my address there is just the thin end of the wedge. Even though the Al isn't quite in my AlanEmrich, by the way). What I'm looking forward to most of playing league, POWERPOKER is so well Big splashes were made at sea with the all is AIDE DE CAMP V2.0. Between all of done I can't help but play it with a quick likes of QQP's THE GRANDEST FLEET and the new features and having every game ALT-TAB in Windows. Three-Sixty's HARPOON II. Both games in the new GameFix boardgame magaAlthough I was disappointed with Imhave developed strong followings, and zine to freely use in ADC format, I'm pression's DETROIT, their D-DAY and sequel products for both games are likely looking forward to a lot of PBEM gamLORDS OF THE REALM were more to my likto follow in 1995. Games that made a ing next year. Yes, I'm really pleased ing. Their line up for next year looks smaller splash in sales (because they were with how 1994 shaped up, and 1995 even better. Impressions' FRONT LINES is Macintosh releases) but a big splash with looks very promising indeed. Unfurl the another power-to-the-player wargame me in 1994 included Deadly Games' Umaps, people. We've got a lot of camthat I'm greatly anticipating, as I am BOAT and M4 (the latter is now available paigning to do. ED oth Gordana 208 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"BREAKING AWAY FROM THE FLEET JTrader Ever wanted to sail into the sunset? Visit ports of call known only to grizzled 18th century sea captains? Then let our unique first-person perspective and stunning 3-D graphics put the wind in your sails! Swashbuckle away as you trade goods, vanquish enemy ships and create routes to riches. Take time to gossip in local taverns, repair cannonball damage, and stoke up your crew's morale. (A little rum, perhaps?) Chart your progress with our authentic navigational aids, and revel in a world long gone: Where fortunes are fiercely defended, and only skill stands between you and the deep blue sea! Features: Variety of goods to trade and passengers to carry. Command a crew of soldiers, sailors and apprentices. Defend against pirates and enemy men-o'-war Buy and enhance ships from several models. Highly intuitive interface. Dynamic pricing and political models. Strong replayability. ans DXN A itort 1 2SE Travel the world in search of riches Visit exotic ports on many continenta Engage enemy ships in realistic sea combat Impressions IBM PC Screenshots may vary Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Cambridge, MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #7 "


"O 3 DO OEU G2 (continued from page207) continues, MOOD is shaping up to be a new game will feature multi-player play by game in its own right, borrowing some of email (although scenarios for modemand make their products more accessible to the successful aspects of MOO, but taking playable, real time battles is still a possius all. Okay, Frank, hurry up with RFSTA SO them a good deal beyond what a mere \"enbility). The bottom line is, this game is that you can start down THE ROAD FROM hanced version\" might offer. going to be very grand in scope. MARENGO TO WATERLOO. * Galactic overlords will note that * Game designer Andrew Visscher * Speaking of HPS Simulations, Scott Changeling Software's PAX IMPERIA for MSphoned in and mentioned that THE PERFECT Hamilton is in \"deep research mode\" findDOS should be out by the time you read this. GENERAL 2 will be using the AWE 32 sound ing the throw weights and degrees of ar The long delay in releasing the IBM version card in new and exciting ways. Also, momor sloping for equipment used on the was due to the addition of features from the dem play is currently being tested, although Western Front during WWII. His still unlatest Macintosh version. play-by-email has been ruled out. A scenamed companion game to TIGERS ON THE * The 'mech game from New World nario builder is not likely to be released PROWL will feature evolutionary improve Computing (via SimTex) is coming along with the final version of the game, but might ments and should be out during the first nicely. Each player is an aspiring leader be made available in a follow-up disk. quarter of 1995. * New life for Maxis' SIMCITY is * Not to be topped by HPS, Jim in the cards. Mayfair Games is doDeGoey of Arsenal is firing back with ing a collectable trading card PANZERS East. It will use a slightly game based on the simulation of larger scale for tactical warfare city building and management. It (more akin to the Avalon Hill will play both solitaire and multiboardgame PANZERBLITZ) and can be player, both cooperative and cutthought of as a WWII version of throat. In competitive multi-player TACOPs. Rev up the engines, boys, play, one player can be the Mayor we'll be taking a fateful steppe! while all players can control votes * AIDE DE CAMP modules from supon the city council. You want to porting board game companies conplay a card to rezone an area? It tinue to be announced. Command has to go to a vote in council. You magazine (805-546-9596) has andon't like the way a vote went, nounced that four of their games play a disaster card on one of (LION OF ETHIOPIA, CORTES, ANTIETAM, and your opponents. Look for this in CZECH '38) are now available for ADC. game stores during the first quarAll are on a single disk for $10. ADC ter of 1995. version 2.0 is already under devel* When H.G. Wells wrote the opment and new features are being first set of miniatures rules for his slowly added and tested, with the retoy soldiers and cannons, he entileased version probably available in VIVA L'EMPERESS! You'll meet the most interesting opponents in tled it \"Little Wars.\" Now, Jeff Jothe second quarter of 1995. LITTLE Wars, like Napoloien, the commander who looks like Grace hannigman of Starjammer Studios * If you would like to sample the ones with a Napolean complex. (his latest venture) has taken that latest wares of RAW Entertainment, title and applied it to what he despecifically their RISE OF THE West and BRAVO, of a \"house\" (a la DUNE), trying to secure scribes as \"SIMCITY with toy soldiers.\" Play ROMEO, DELTA games don't look at your local their position in their house and The Counis similar to SYNDICATE in that there are 40 software store. RAW Entertainment's games cil in order to eventually ascend the sections of the world to conquer and eight are only available directly from the compagalactic throne. Designer Steve Barcia computer opponents to challenge, such as ny. Call them at (713) 286-2386. says he was greatly influenced by the paNapoloien (shown at left). Each opponent * News abounds at SimTex software, per games SPACE OPERA and SPACE Master. has a very distinct personality and style of which spent a lot of time fixing bugs in their There will be 3-D, real time, strategic bat game play in this post-apocalyptic game. premature release of MASTER OF MAGIC. With tles on planets where 'mechs invade, but Steve Beeman (SAVAGE EMPIRE and WING MOM safely to bed, the details are starting the emphasis will be on the individual COMMANDER II for Origin) is the lead proto take shape for MASTER OF ORION DELUXE 'mech pilots. Like knights of old, killing grammer and promises to deliver a FAST (MOOD). Its slated to be SVGA and CD-ROM them off reduces the overall security of Windows product for us all to enjoy. Mionly, with multi-player capabilities (netthe empire that all players belong to, so croProse should be releasing LITTLE WARS work, modem and email). As development care must be taken with their lives. This sometime in the second half of 1995. 210 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"For All You Wargamers Out There... You Asked For It. We Did It. It's your game on your terms. Hex-based. tactical, detailed. Sounds good. Looks even better. You know the rules. Time to play. The Future of Combat is Now. Features  Tactical, turn-based hex wargame  Superb 256 color SVGA graphics  Full scenario builder & unit editor  18 types of near-future military hardware  Modem play 1 hex 1 km (range)  1 turn 5 minutes  Fully animated movement & combat Impressions 0 1994 Impressions Software Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234 Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142 IBM PC SUGA Screenshots may vary PRSNT LINISK UNIT PIA TAPTIVE LES ARTUR that dimmary This the land of the Andy G ramento tad armastato Armer as the speed of the Light Un att Artery very Class Artiary manuale Dama 25-302 Ariy ar Defend 13 Kiticiency 5 valul for the quick fing audity and Quality 30 Morale 18 At they are many to move They are Die tavouret for the event Range Height 1 Iruret vir Cost 00 Full scenario editor and builder Pull up information on any class of units Combat! Animated units defend HQ "


"PREVIEW The Train OfGain Avalon Hill Celebrates The Machine Of Capitalism In 1830 by Johnny L. Wilson U on SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development highRANK NORRIS, AUTHOR OF SUCII rounds where you feel like Matthias Baldthracite coal carrier which actually MUCKRAKING CLASSICS AS THE OCwin, founder of the famous Baldwin Locoran the first steam engine in the TOPUS AND THE PIT, EITHER WOULD motive Works. After being unpaid for a U.S., the Stourbridge Lion, in 1829, HAVE BEEN delighted with or horristeam engine he had constructed called but not for long); the Mohawk & fied by 1830, Avalon Hill's faithful Old Ironsides, he vowed in 1832 that Old Hudson (which commissioned a translation of the popular boardgame on Tronsides would be his last locomotive. Il obsteam engine from John B. Jervis the history of U.S. railroads. 1830 nei viously wasn't, and no matter how badly named Experiment, later known as ther celebrates the role of railroads in you are trounced by the very capable robBrother Jonathan, in 1832); the settling the American frontier nor recogber barons, who serve as artificial oppoSchuylkill Valley (a small Pennsylvanizes the railroad companies' impact nents, you'll find yourself coming back for nia line in the coal country); and the upon urban planning, (The North, more. 1830 not only captures the adrenaChamplain & St. Lawrence (which was South, East, West grid structure in many line rush of trying to outwit your oppochartered in 1835 to run between Midwestern and Western cities is credited nents with technological advancement Laprairie and St. John, Quebec; its first to railroad expansion and real estate brotimed to hurt them the most and the fretrain ran on July 21, 1836). kerage by rail companies.) Nor does netic thrill of dumping their rail compaPlayers bid for the ownership of these 1830 emphasize the impact of rail service ny's stock onto the market, but it vividly foundational lines which have revenue on the overall economy. Rather, 1830 captures the excess of an potential and special advantages proporcelebrates the ruthless busiera of amoral ethic and tional to their initial asking price. For exness practices of the raileconomic excess in a ample, owners of the C&SL and D&H roads and relishes the manner that is both enmay run track independent of their maeconomic manipulation tertaining and enlightjor lines' operations; the M&H owner can that once made railroad ening. Gamers will feel glean 10% of the NYC when it goes stocks and bonds the highlike they control \"that public; the C&A operator gets 10% of flying equivalents of today's great monster, iron-hearted, rethe Pennsylvania Railroad when it telecommunications sector (i.e. that lentless, infinitely powerful.\" opens; and the B&O founder gets the which makes you get rich or go broke President's Certificate to the B&O quickly). THE AUCTION without having to pay any additionBecause your success or failure depends The game begins, as does the history of al fees. Be aware, though, that the aras much on how you juggle the game's U.S. railroading, with the small private tificial Fisks and Vanderbilts are volatile stock market as on the structure of companies on the east coast. The game's extremely ellicient at melding your rail system, you may have many title, 1830, comes from the fact that the these private companies into Baltimore & Ohio was the major lines. chartered in 1829 and first Of course, the real accarried revenue trallic on tion begins when January 7, 1830. Although the original route was only COULD 13 miles (from Baltimore to Elli-cott's Mills, the modern Ellicott City), it set the pace for the expansion of North American rails. Other private comHUNTHICTONI SCOTT VRIDERBILT WESTINGHOUSE panies included at the CUSTO CANDEL start are the: Camden & Amboy (which began runJ.P. MORGAN, WHERE HAVE YOU GONE? The silicon robber barons ning a Planet-style locoare such bloodthirsty competitors that you may wish for an motive called John Bull in arbiter-a nice change from the mediocre Al in many recent 1831); the Delaware & strategy games. Hudson (the intended anANTES DREW FISK 22EE PEE DIFFICULTY Rver og OPPONENTS 212 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"kuo Such activity is vaguely reminiscent of the late-19th centu\"...THE GALLOPING TERROR OF STEAM AND STEEL, WITH ITS SINGLE ry practice of building parallel lines and undercutting fares. EYE, CYCLOPEAN, RED, SHOOTING FROM HORIZON TO HORIZON, In 1885, for example, the Pennsylvania Railroad apparSYMBOL OF A VAST POWER, HUGE AND TERRIBLE; THE LEVIATHAN WITH ently established the West Shore Railroad parallel to exTENTACLES OF STEEL, TO OPPOSE WHICH MEANT TO BE GROUND TO isting New York Central trackage. The Pennsylvania used it as a loss-leader to unINSTANT DESTRUCTION BENEATH THE CLASHING WHEELS.\" dercut the NYC until J. Pierpont Morgan, the famous banker, became an arbiter of — FRANK NORRIS, THE OCTOPUS the dispute and hammered out an armistice. The bad news is that there is no J.P. Morgan to protect players bestock with the railroad's treasury, so they you from the artificial opponents in gin to creoften get away with it. 1830. The good news is that the computate public er will run your trains for you at the most corporations. OPERATIONS optimal level, once you establish the conHere's where Once the initial stock purchasing phase is figuration of your lines and the types of you'll first discovcompleted, the game follows the rolling stock available. Considering all er how diabolical boardgame's rhythm of one-to-three operthe possibilities for running your trains, the artificial oppoating phases, followed by a stock market this game makes things a lot easier than nents actually are. phase. Animated sequences announce the board game. Even better news is that They are extremely changes in the ground good at gaining control rules due to new engines YOUR HOLDINGS INITIAL OFFERING BATIK of other companies while causing obsolescence of PRR BEBOEE PER dumping just enough of older locomotives and the your stock to depress the game progresses until one 0001911 2 MYC price. Unfortunately, they player goes bankrupt or LEEEEEEE 2 SATA usually dump this the bank is emptier than a TELEE DE 2.0 stock just when failing bank in 1929 or a SEPEDES you get 60% poorly run savings and 11111111 CRIC control of a loan in the 1980s. 111111112 X company and Purchasing 50% of a can't buy back company's stock automatiEEEEEEEEEE223 any of the dilutcally makes you the presiFUNDS: BELIMUT: NEWROW PABS SURE ed stock. You dent. For those companies can't fight back in which you serve as pres. SO MANY CHOICES, SO LITTLE MONEY It isn't exactly the Home by buying ident, you have full conShopping Railroad Network, but much of the strategy in 1830 B&O back trol of the corporation for comes from wheeling and dealing on the stock market, and purposes of laying track deciding which initial offerings to bid highly for. (the computer indicates which hexes are eligible for new track those who consider this default procepieces, a great simplifidure to be \"cheating\" can toggle it off cation over what is usuand figure it out for themselves. ally the longest part of Once you operate the trains, you are the move in the confronted with a choice: does the corpoboardgame version); ration keep all of the revenue or pay it all purchasing trains and out in dividends? Obviously, the game placing stations. As in poses a more clear-cut choice than a real the boardgame, station corporation, since it is an all or nothing placement can be critichoice. Fortunately, however, there are cal, since one railroad multiple operating rounds as the game can stiff-arm another progresses. By mid-game, you can pay out of solid revenue by out dividends on one round, keep all the using station tiles to money on another round, and pay out block profitable routes. dividends on another. This will add to oooo JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 213 "


"own pocket than in that of the railroad's treasury), selling off all of his holdings could hit you for three negative moves (30% to reach parity with the last turn's price and 30% worth of negative hits). GRME the corporation's treasure, while also do decide to oflload some of their holdprofiting shareholders and causing the ings, you can weather a 10-30% sell-off, asstock price to increase. suming you have paid dividends during one-to-three of the operating rounds held THE STOCK MARKET prior to the stock market opening. Since the game is won by INFO HISTORY STOCK T RAIRES having the most wealth (money in hand plus the aggregate value of your shareholdings) when either one player goes bankrupt or the bank busts, it is important to be able to protect your stock value at all times. When players sell stock certificates, the stock is affected adversely COLLEGE for every 10% of the corporation sold. So, you want GO WEST, YOUNG MAN As rail lines spread in often bewildering to give your opponents as patterns around the map, the program helps speed play little reason as possible to immensely by indicating areas where new track may be laid. sell stocks in which you have major holdings. Paying dividends has a two-fold value. It The big problem occurs when you are a increases the money in your pocket, minority stockholder in a corporation and makes your opponents feel slightly more the majority shareholder decides to dump pleased with their investment, and insures his shares. Although he will most likely pay that the stock will be positively affected out dividends during each operating round prior to the next opening of the stock (after all, if he is dumping his shares, that market. Even if the artificial robber barons money is going to serve him better in his 8 TBH OOOOO THE OCTOPUS If you have too many experiences like that, you may find yourself agreeing with Frank Norris' protagonist in The Octopus: \"They swindle a nation of one hundred million and call it Financiering; they levy a blackmail and call it Commerce; they corrupt a legislature and call it Politics; they bribe a judge and call it Law; they hire blacklegs to carry out their plans and call it Organization; they prostitute the honour of a State and call it Competition. And this is America.\" As I said at the beginning of this article, I don't know if Frank Norris would like 1830 or not, but he would sure feel like they got the historical feel of the bloodthirsty competition right, even at the Easy level of difficulty. I know I like 1830. The computer version of the game plays faster and I don't have to wait to play the game until I attend a game convention where there are other enthusiasts. Now, I can be a robber baron on my own time. HOME BASE TURN YOUR D ACOCKPIT! The UNIVERSAL Game Cheater! CONTROL TE SPECIAL OFFER DEBITOR BINIRIDE NUE Cheat death with $2495 THE Infinity MACHINE Supports THRUSTMASTER CH FLIGHTSTICKS Most flight control-type joysticks ME BASED The Infinity Machine works with virtually ANY game. Our easy to use interface allows you to edit or freeze almost any game feature such as lives, gold, or energy in real time. Our slow-motion mode lets you breeze through the tough spots like no tomorrow! What are you waiting for? Start living today! FROM $4 u Its patented pivoting tray keeps your joystick from sliding and allows you to adjust its angle for maximum comfort. With your flight controls positioned low and close, you'll be able to rest back comfortably into your seat for a TRUE COCKPIT FEEL. The PCS turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily access the keys without having to take your eyes off the action. Clamps to any desk or tabletop. VISA ORDER TOLL FREE Or send check or money order for $24.95 + $5.00 ($6.00 CAN for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. outside the US coll (5037686-1809 Eugene, OR 97405 .s. VISA REM Software U.S. 1359 FRANK DRIVE  MONROE, MICHIGAN 48161 TO ORDER, CALL 800-457-1161 1-800-686-2523 HOME BASE PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #119 214 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 Circle Reader Service #242 "


"The Ultimate Flight Experience Introducing the total Flight Simulator adventures from BAO BAO Publishing, developers of Microsoft Flight SimulatorTM presents the ultimate flight simulation experience with BAO's Europe 1, Las Vegas Scenery, Flight Simulator Flight Shop and Tower, the most realistic ATC simulation available. Feel the tension mount and the sweat start) as you direct heavy traffic from the tower at Chicago's O'Hare airport; take a chance and play the odds in Vegas as you complete a fly-by of the casinos and surrounding desert; proudly step back and admire your latest plane design with custom colors and graphics all ready for her maiden customized flight adventure or fly the Alps and discover Europe from the air. All this and more is possible with BAO. File your flight plan today and start your adventure. \"A sure bet for computer pilots who demand realistic scenery\" -Greg Harris, Editor of Full Throttle LAS VEGAS EUROPED Challenge your skills with a fly-by of Hoover Dam and other famous Las Vegas landmarks. IBAO Europe I includes over 100 airports with taxiways, moving objects, unique buildings and approach lights. Las Vegas Scenery offers you startling, realistic, 3D-level detail of Las Vegas and the surrounding desert. The scenery combines actual satellite images with special aerial and ground-base photography to faithfully recreate more than 4,000 square miles of the Nevada landscape. Tour scenic Lake Mead, the famous Vegas \"Strip\" or catch a stunning view of Hoover Dam, one of the man-made wonders of the world. You set the itinerary. Europe / lets you explore from the air the scenic countries of Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the Netherlands. You'll discover beautiful cities like Berlin, Munich, Vienna, Geneva and Amsterdam. All major roads, waterways, lakes, cities, the Alps and landmarks are realistically recreated including all IFR/VFR airports. Experience Europe from your own cockpit. \"Best of Show at C.E.S. Awarded by Game Bytes Magazine FLIGHT SHOP TOWER An easy-to-use (windows-based) aircraft factory lets you design your own plane, You'll calmly choreograph the movement of incoming and outgoing air traffic high above Chicago's O'Hare airport. BAO Flight Simulator Flight Shop puts the tools in your hands. You build, customize and paint LBAO your own planes and a flight dynamics editor allows you to specify the flying characteristics. Share your designs with other flight enthusiasts through BBS's such as CompuServe. Create your own flight plan and send it to the built-in Flight Service Station (FSS) and then hop in your flight simulator airplane for an ATC controlled flight. With Tower the responsibility is all yours! As a tower controller, thousands of passengers will rely on your ability to make split-second decisions. You'll handle realistic aircraft takeoffs, landings and ground movements through a 360 degree panable window view. Based on FAA and Transport Canada's professional training simulation software, Tower puts you in the middle of all the action. See your local retailer or call: (217) 356-0188 for more information Developers of Microsoft S tore 1994 Bruice Artwick Organization, L. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Flight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce Artwick. Europe I was designed for BAO by Alting Software under license, and produced by the Bruce Artwick Organization, Lid. Tower is a trademark of Aviation Simulations, hk., a joint venture of Wessen International, Inc. and Bruce Artwick Organization, Lid. CompuServe is a registered trademark of CompuServe, Inc. BAO is a trademark of Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. "


"REVIEW Der Reich Stuff ES SSI's PANZER GENERAL Blitzes Through Wargame Boundaries by Terry Lee Coleman T HAS BEEN A SURPRISINGLY FERTILE point), the average life span of a human for those who must get their panzer-pushYEAR FOR GOOD WARGAMES. FROM THE being does not permit more than a few ing in quickly. Kursk has lots of tanks, and FLUIDITY OF OPERATION CRUSADER TO games of Gary Grigsby's magnum opus. the desert battles in North Africa will the playability and depth of LORDS OF keep any gamer happy for quite some THE REALM to the sheer addictive HEXGRIDS, LIES time. But forgoing the campaigns would qualities of X-COM (yes, I know that techAND VIDEOTAPE be a huge mistake, because they are such nically it's a strategy game, but why be I own a lot of books on WWII, and like fun that even non-wargamers are likely to picky?), several recent designs have been most wargamers, know a lot more about find themselves hooked. both clever and entertaining. the various commanders than I do about Campaigns may be started in 1941 (in Now PANZER GENERAL shows up to the politicians currently in Washington. either the eastern or western theatre), in crash the wargaming party, swaggering Still, when I visualize Erwin Rommel (al1943 (east or west), or in 1939 with the through the door though I have invasion of Poland. As you prepare for a with a bit of an atti Panzer General numerous phocampaign, you are briefed by a member tude. Despite its fatographs of of the German general staff. His digitized Price: $64.95 miliar WWII (3.5\" floppy him), for some voice is obviously American, but the GerEuropean theatre and CD-ROM) reason, it's man accent doesn't sound hokey at all, setting, it is in many System James Mason's and adds immensely to the feeling that ways an atypical SSI Requirements: face that apyou really might be the next Rommel or wargame. Proudly it IBM compatible pears, his voice Guderian. The real secret of PANZER GEN386-33Mhz stands, with no deemerging from ERAL's success lies in its role-playing as(486-33 tailed orders of batrecommended), WWII films seen pects, as it allows you to carve out a tle, complicated 4 MB RAM in my youth. Silcareer in the Wehrmacht while simultasupply rules, or ar 1 MB SVGA video card, CD-ROM ly? Perhaps, but neously helping to conquer the world. cane combat routines uncompressed hard drive; supports Sound it is these images And conquer you must-and quickly, anywhere evident. Blaster, Waveblaster and compatible sound that PANZER for the general staff has set a demanding cards. While the various GENERAL evokes. timetable for you. If you fail to meet the Protection: None combat arms do in# of Players: 1-2 (e-mail and \"hotseat\") The opening required deadlines, disaster could strike teract, they do so Designers: SSI Special Projects Group, screen draws you your career, not to mention your nation. without cumbersome including Joel Billings and Chuck Kroegel in with blackIf Poland is not conquered quickly, then mechanics or multi Publisher: Strategic Simulations, Inc. and-white videos England and France will have time to ple phases in the seSunnyvale, CA of archival WWII garner sufficient force to invade Gerquence of play. In (408) 737-6800 footage, supermany; and upon your cars will fall the fact, the game is so imposed over a most ill-fated message for any would-be easy to play that you could almost figure gorgeous SVGA backdrop of Europe. Panzer General: \"Your services are no it out without ever consulting the docuMartial music resounds with just the right longer required.\" mentation. For wargamers who lack time, mixture of style and bombast (you'll nevmost of the scenarios can be finished in er again question how much you spent PRESTIGE, an evening's play versus the computer, on your wavetable sound card), and the PROMOTION AND POLITICS and the game works very well via e-mail cligitized explosions of combat echo Should you win, you will be asked to perfor two players. All of which is a good strong and true. Sure it's corny, but it's form more miraculous military eats for thing, because as much as I enjoy playing darned ellective in setting the tone. the Fatherland. After Poland, you must PACIFIC WAR (my favorite SSI game to this The 38 scenarios may be played singly, subjugate Norway, then France and the 216 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"IT'S JUST A MATTER OF TIME..  THE JOIRNEYMAN PROJECT 2 BURIED IT TIME COMING SOON ON CD-ROM FOR MAC AND PC FOR MORE INFORMATION CALL 1-800-943-3664 The Journeyman Project and Buried in Tima are undemarks of Presto Studios loc. SLS:nctuary Woodsastiegisterechand tramvarainmenterademarked by STUDIO Cindle Reader Service #363 "


"12 a 15 a 0W 300 perceived as political and to the type of unit. Where individual military realities. Rather units differ is in their experience level. than allowing the player Each time a unit engages in combat, its the benefit of historical experience increases, which makes it fra hindsight, PANZER GENERAL more effective in combat. Appropriately 12] makes you view the world for WWII combat, units that fire first har from the uncertain pergenerally do more damage to the oppospective of 1939. nent, within the boundaries of what 12] Central to the play of that unit could do in real life. The basic PANZER GENERAL is a most initiative of each unit type is augment12 12) 12 clever mechanic, prestige ed by the experience level, and then 121 points, which you expend the computer adds a randomizer (rolls for a variety of useful a die). Whichever unit has the highest 12 things. If you want extra air total goes first, with simultaneous fire in power, for instance, the top a tie situation. Normally, units have a A PANZER FREAK'S DREAM Tank aficionados could hardly be brass back home have to maximum value of 10, which can be indisappointed with the variety of high-powered weaponry, as shown believe you're doing a good creased with elite replacements or lowhere by an armored column advancing on Kursk. enough job to merit the alered according to the firepower of the location of such precious opposing unit. Low Countries in 1940. If you finish resources. A squadron of Me-109s costs Once losses occur, the only way to reahead of schedule, then you will have a 328 prestige. When you consider that conplace units is to use up those precious chance to invade England and avoid a quering Poland only nets you some 750 bits of hard-earned prestige. Similarly, if draining two-front war. The more normal prestige points, it forces you to decide a unit runs out of ammo or fuel...you path takes you on a whirlwind tour of Euwhether the bargain-basement Wehrmaguessed it. There's no wartime Credit rope, through the Balkans and into Ruscht infantry (only 60 prestige) might be Union on the Eastern front, so the only sia, or perhaps the North African Desert. more beneficial to you in the long run. way to rack up more prestige is to imThe surprising thing is that the campaign Every unit has ratings for movement, press the big guys back home. Much of timetables are more than passingly historattack and defense versus soft or hard the game finds your forces frantically alical. Germany's lightning campaigns targets, range, ammunition carried, tempting to capture cities and kill enemy through Europe were based on what they and so forth, all of which are endemic units, the more the merrier. Without a THE SPACE RACE WIL MAC VERSION AVAILABLE NOW. AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS SOON. TO ORDER SPACEWARD Ho! IV. CALL 1-800-325-8898 (24 HRS. A DAY) Cele Redler Service 217 "


"09th UF1096 30th ICE-OXI UNIT HEHU a EILLE lot of complex rules, vehicle is a lumbering bePANZER GENERAL thus fills hemoth of frightening the player with a sense of firepower—which is fine urgency lacking in a lot of for 1944, but not the bewargames. ginning of the war. Most As one might expect, people are unaware that rapid conquest is much the French and British more difficult than it fielded superior tanks to sounds-one of the reathose of the Germans in sons why PANZER GENERAL the early period of the is such a good game. Enwar. In PANZER GENERAL, emy units are hidden the designers thankfully from view until you move didn't stress fun so much within sighting range of that they left out the histothem, which makes recon ry. Panzer I and II tanks units with their ability to are basically WWI tanks see four hexes rather with a tad more spunk, valuable. Engineers are a more useful against enemust to effect river cross38th LCF-bexi cos my infantry than tanks. ings, and woe be the tank Artillery on both sides commander in the RussAIR SUPERIORITY 101 One of the best lessons taught by Panzer General is that any moves painstakingly slowian steppes without successful blitzkrieg requires control of the air. ly and has limited range, enough anti-tank guns. which increases as the war The AI is quite effective, even on the least they aren't blatant. goes on. Bombers are notoriously ineffecmedium setting, and is surprisingly While most players will be fascinated at tive until they earn experience, and so adept at wiping out your damaged units first with the more high-tech (and expenforth. Newer and more efficient unit with aggressive play. And while computsive) specialized units, PANZER GENERAL types become available for purchase durer opponent \"cheats\" are common these has a number of interesting rules for the ing the period that they were historically days, I can attest after many hours of mainstays of the WWII battlefield, tanks. available. Thus, a beginning Panzer Genplay that if there are any Al cheats, at The popular image of the WWII armored eral will soon find that those silly-looking jana Talia la DA! BF 109 29th BIO (10) Experience! LAT LCF-DXXI ODIO EU NEVER E THE SAME SPACEWARD HO! A GAME OF STELLAR CONQUEST NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC 61994 New World Computing Inc. Spaceward has a trademark of Delta Tao. Ing under license to New World Computing. New World Computing is a registered trademark of New World Computing, Inc. DELTA TAO "


"mm / The maa 91d 39 Hehr In (10) PR 34th Ic Infantry3> Eserience Polish cavalry are not quite as out of whatever suits your fancy. more detailed concerning weather efplace as they seein, which is a tribute to Considering its lighter approach, fects and the like. While I understand the focus of the design. some gamers might worry about the acthe decision to have enemy units setting Another clever design element is that curacy of the orders of battle. Actually, I up the same way every time you play a new units, when built, are added to the have less problem with PANZER particular scenario, there's a part of me core element, and move with you from GENERAL's order of battle than most that wishes for more randomness. Even scenario to scenario in the campaign. wargames. After the first scenario, it is though I found the game to be remarkCertain units, such as infantry, may be essentially simulating \"what-if\" scenarably bug-free, there is still a small perbuilt with transportation (trucks or halfios, as everything that happens stems centage of users who have experienced tracks), so that they trouble with their sound move faster than a warm cards. Still, all of these slug; but if you pass up quibbles pale next to the the chance to buy transtremendous amount of portation, your men will play value in the design. be foot-sloggers forever. In the end, PANZER GENUnits which air transERAL may only give a nod port from one airfield to to history, but it's a reveranother must leave their ent nod. Anyone who ground transport behind plays the game will come as well, a remarkable away with a basic undertouch of realism for such standing of why each scea simple game. A lot of nario turned out as it did the strategy in PANZER (or as it may have), with GENERAL comes from sethe implication that, allecting which of the most without realizing it, dizzying numbers of they have learned someunits will be your \"go-to\" thing about WWII as well. guys as you move from Unfortunately, there scenario to scenario. will be those who dismiss Imagine what a system PANZER GENERAL as being SEIZE THE INITIATIVE! These French defenders (lower right) discover to their dismay like this could do for a suitable only for novice that a fortified position avails them little versus the more experienced Wehrmacht Civil War game, where wargamers, due to its lack infantry, who get to fire first. you would have to of complexity and only choose between augpassing historicity. Well, menting the Stonewall Jackson brigade, from your actions in previous engageit's their loss. Sure, the design falls or buying those newfangled rifled canments. Does this invalidate the historiheavily on the side of playability, but it non. cal lessons that PANZER GENERAL does so with such style and balance that teaches? Not really, because the game even the most cynical of gamers will EXCUSE ME, BUT THERE'S design models the effect of actions on a find themselves swept away. If playing SAND ON YOUR NARVIK campaign level, rather than setting out this game means I have to surrender The campaign rewards players in severto slavishly recreate the conditions of a my official grognard license and go to al ways. First, there is the obvious satisparticular battle. In a very broad sense, wargaming purgatory, I will gladly gofaction of winning a particular scenario. it shows the difficulty of staging WWII as long as I can take my copy of PANZER If you narrowly lose a battle farther on campaigns, and rewards those players GENERAL with me. Maybe then I'd have in the campaign, the \"plot\" of the game who can both think on their feet and time to get through that Seelowe scebranches a la WING COMMANDER, and engage in long-range planning. No one nario.... & your career is still alive because of past who has attempted to take Norway by THE EDITORS SPEAK glories. As units gain experience, they amphibious assault, or bring about the PANZER GENERAL are awarded with battle honors, and you Fall of France with inferior German armay even increase their combat mor, will be anything but impressed RATING  strength points above the usual limit of with how the real-life panzer generals 10, if their morale is high enough. The pulled it oll. PROS Great scenarios with a unique individuality of each unit is accentuated Those armchair strategists who live and compelling campaign device (not by the fact that you can name the units for a challenge will find a joy which just a wargame, but an adventure). Eleyourself. This is fortunate since, in an comes with only a few select games. gant combined arms, logistics, and exattempt to make the game more marClever, fresh and innovative, PANZER perience rules are easy to learn, and ketable, SSI left out SS units. With the GENERAL is probably the most addictive will play until the panzers come home. naming facility, sticklers for accuracy game since CIVILIZATION. Of course, like CONS Those requiring great historcan put those units back in, at least in anything these days, PANZER GENERAL ical insights from their wargames may name if not in power. Or you can have isn't perfect. It's a bit irritating that the find it lacking—but they'll have fun \"Kelly's Heroes,\" or \"Val's Vikings\" or documentation, while adequate, isn't while they complain! 220 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"POR TARGETIOS SENSORS WEAPONS LASSES USA EI ILOENDE TRANSMISSION SYSTEM STATUS CUBARUSU MAIN COMPUTER POSITION ANALYZER DASAR THERAPA PEWDEOCAME SATELLITE URIr O OLO Mua ng Vicaroruch is tradidalosolotely tie Innadie video carne aven, Truly revolutionary fedfures make this new come alally spectacular interactive experience. Over: 1200 fotimation's more than in ny other came on the market today allows the user to explore an everchanging baekarop or intriguing callions. A unique pler Wilh many challenging myster s and the brilliant use of hurtdreds of audio effects, including original music compositions brings each moment of play to life. Mutated creatures, evil aliens and a myriad of captivating video clips are just some of the reasons Maabus is sure to be one of the most exciting games you'll ever play ROD ON THIS 3-CD-ROM GAME. Microforum EL TO FILES VENDOS Call 1-800-465-CDCD today ind the name of your nearest dealer or to order direct! DISTRIBUTOR/DEALER INQUIRIES WELCOME! 1 Woodborough Ave., Toronto, CANADA MOM 5A1 Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax:(416)656-6368  Microforum Inc. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #89 "


"REVIEW Are Alien Beaches Made Of Green Cheese? Science Fiction Wargaming With Accolade's BATTLE ISLE 2200 WEBESUO by Martin E. Cirulis DE E WHILE BACK I WROTE SOMETHING CPA, if your clothes and hair are any events. It seems that even shouting \"GloABOUT THE BLANDNESS OF SCIENCE clue-and whisking you to their embat ry to the ROOM!\" at the end of every ofFICTION WARGAMES, ESPECIALLY tled world Chromos. It seems, in addition ficial communiqué isn't enough for some when it comes to the scenarios. to the blight of a terrible name, their of the citizens of Drulla, and there is inFor some reason, game designers world is in the grip of a desperate war betrigue aplenty as you discover all is not generally feel the need to present future tween the forces of a fascist Al called Tiwhat it seems...and how hard it is to adwars as utterly balanced affairs, in which tan-Net and the valiant, outnumbered vance and watch your back at the same both sides start equally on an even playforces of fascist giant brains called the time. ing field; too bad reality has so rarely reROOM, who rule the Island empire of llected this situation. Wars are usually Drulla. You are hailed as the master THE ARTICLES OF WAR desperate struggles for strategist desDespite the back-of-the-box hype, BATone side, mainly be BATTLE ISLE 2200 tined to save TLE ISLE 2200 is a fairly standard cause you have to be their way of wargame in its mechanics. The view is Price: $59.95 somewhat psychotic to DOS CD-ROM life, such as it top down, but scale is pretty much left to pick a fight with some System is; they give imagination. Key facilities are representbody you think has a Requirements: you complete ed by single buildings amidst the wilderfair chance of knocking IBM compatible control of ness, though port facilities usually 386-33 Mhz or you silly. After all, Hitler their military provide enough asphalt for some highbetter, 4 MB started with CzechosloThat'll teach casualty combats. You point and click RAM, 6 MB vakia and Poland, not hard drive you to fill out your way through movement and attacks. France and Britain. space, CDthose reader's Your units leave little tracks on the terWhile SF action games ROM: supports surveys in the rain, but with square edges they would like WING COMMANDER Sound Blaster compatible sound cards. back of Stratemake fine counters in a board game. have acknowledged the Players: 1-5 (e-mail, modem and network) gy & Tactics. Each unit represents a group of vehicles, drama of real life, SF Protection: None Fortunately usually ten, that are gradually destroyed Designers: Blue Byte wargames seem to be Publisher: Accolade for your deliduring combat, reducing firepower but afraid of giving the San Jose, CA cately-develgaining experience. When the last vehicle player a hard time. For (800) 245-7744 oped world is destroyed, the icon is gone forever, so tunately, Accolade has sensibilities, wise commanders will withdraw heavily imported from Europe one of the few exwar on Chromos is fought only by robotic damaged units to facilities capable of receptions, a sequel called BATTLE ISLE units who don't bleed, run away or replacing lost machines. The downside of 2200. While this game has its flaws, stultiquire telegrams home. this is that a point of unit experience is fying fairness is not one of them. If this premise were only so much lost for every new vehicle. chrome on Chromos, it would be worth a Combat is resolved in a single exALIENS NEVER ASK FIRST short laugh and then forgotten. But BATchange of simultaneous fire between atThe premise for BATTLE ISLE 2200 inTLE ISLE 2200 is played out through a setacker and target, modified by the volves some desperate aliens (who hapries of linked campaigns in which a kind traditional aspects of firepower, armor, pen to look just like you and me—Star of behind-the-scenes storyline develops terrain and experience. The chrome here Trek xenobiology rearing its mundane through your communication device, and is that after you indicate your target and head yet again) kidnapping you from various persons of note on Chromos call weapon of choice (most units carry multiyour comfortable job-probably as a to pass along tips, threats and current ple weapon systems), you are presented 222 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"he most popular computer naval simulation ever JUST GOT BETTER! TARPLIN =CLASSIC= OVER $300 VALUE ARLONA CLASSICS Available on-CD-ROM for DOS, Macintosh and a NEW Windows Version MSRP $49.99 OVER 3800 VALUE Harpoon CLASSIC CD is ready to give you hundreds of hours of naval warfare enjoyment. Alliance Interactive Software has updated and combined all the original HARPOON products, added cool new features such as, air-to-air refueling, forty-eight new scenarios, and an enhanced user interface, all to bring you the best of the best. You now have over 200 scenarios, all 4 BattleSets, 3 Designers Series and the Harpoon Scenario Editor on ONE CD-ROM (and yes it runs from the CD-ROM*). Over $300 worth of great naval simulation software, all for only $49.95 (MSRP). User friendly interface allows you to View the big picture and individual unit Infomallon at the same time. NEW VERSION 1.5 All Battle Sets Includes over 200 Scenarios Harpoon Scenario Editor Harpoon Designer Series 16 Comprehensive database contains detalled information of sensors, weapon systems and platform capabilities Cow Hig NEW FEATURES AWARD WINNING INCLUDES 48 New Scenarios * \"Top 40 Best Games of All * GIUK: Battleset #1 (over 200 total) Time\" PC Gamers 1994 * NACV: Battleset #2 Enhanced User Interface \"Hall of Fame\" Computer * IOPG: Battleset #3 New Digitized Sound Drivers Gaming World 1992 * MEDC: Battleset #4 (PC) \"WARGAME of the Year\" Computer Gaming World * Harpoon Designer Series #1 Air-to-Air Refueling 1990 * Harpoon Designer Series #2 Upgraded to Version 1.5 \"Best PC WARGAME\" Game Harpoon Designer Series #3 Players 1990 NEW! ox, 2MB free on your hard drive required. For upgrade information call Alliance Interactive Software at 1-305-423-4289. boon is a Registered Trademark of Game Designer Workshop. Harpoon Audio Visual copyright  1988 by Applied Harpoon Senario Editor puting Services, Inc. Harpoon Computer code portions copyright  1990-1993 by Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc. Harpoon puter code portions copyright  1994 by Alliance Interactive Software, Inc. and Applied Computing Services, Inc. 800x600 graphics for Macintosh and Windows railable at your local retailer or call Alliance Interactive Software, Inc. 1859 N. Pine Island Rd. #103  Plantation, FL 33322 800.87n-ndan. 19051 402 4000. Env. 190404 ONEA Circle Bandar Service #209 "


"  e with a panoramic view of the combat renis very primitive dered in filled-polygon graphics. Each and disappointing. individual fighting machine is representThe implementaed in a little square formation, firing its tion places network little guns and either surviving or explodgames out of reach ing into satisfying small chunks. It's an for the casual playeffect that is more cute than awe-inspirer; the software reing, but it does liven up a process that is quires a dedicated essentially a roll of the dice and a look at Novell or LANtasa results table. tic server in order The campaign is represented by a seto run. Though ries of battles, each getting progressively multi-computer harder, which must be won in order to households are beadvance, a la POPULOUS. Unfortunately, coming more comthis may wear a little thin to wargamers mon, it is doubtful who are used to some other result of failthat most people ure than simple repetition. Victory condiCHOPPER STRIKE! These filled-polygon 'copters may look blocky, but they have enough comtions almost always involve taking one or pack quite a punch, with mobility to boot. puters in their more towns, factories or enemy headhouse to have one quarters. Once you get farther into the est is kept alive over a very long time, just dedicated to shuttling info packets game, you begin to realize that there is even when judged by the tough stanaround. It would have been nice to see a usually a \"trick\" to achieving your ends. dards of wargamers. little more work put into the network sysYour opponent is usually far stronger tem, as the huge variety of weapons and than you in numbers. So time must be A TOUGH ROOM tactics available make human opponents spent exploring the mapboard (revealed Unfortunately, the biggest problem with real nail-biters to play against via your units' scanning ranges) looking BATTLE ISLE 2200 can be summed up in This is not to say the computer is a for a hidden opportunity, which will one word: Frustration. To begin with, the push-over, though. While it is no more a hopefully deliver a quick victory while the software is pretty finicky, and unless you brain-surgeon than any other wargame foe is occupied elsewhere with your few are running the very latest in DOS (6.22), AI, the computer has read your victory heavy units. Since only three unit types CD-ROM drivers, and memory manconditions well and is an expert at deare capable of capturing a structure, care agers, you better save every other turn. stroying your ability to achieve themmust be taken to keep these key units safe One must follow the setup modifications sometimes before you know them while blasting a path to your objective to the letter or the crashes occur too of yourself. It is not atypical to spend two Your computer opponent is highly skilled ten to actually play the game. These kind hours fighting over a map, only to discovin going after the specific units you need of boot-disk gymnastics will turn offer the last building to be captured lies to satisfy your victoover a river that can only be crossed by ry conditions. the hovercraft that the computer obliterThe real meat of ated in the second turn. Other computer the game is in the talents lie in the realm of the cheap shot, huge array of unit specifically in sneaking a unit behind your types. Over 50 diflines to capture a structure full of your ferent types of units under repair. Since anything in a units are available, structure becomes the property of the a few of them incapturing player, this can mean an exploknown even to the sion of enemy units in your backfield, documentation, units that used to be your tactical reserve. and you must learn As I pointed out earlier, most scenarios how best to use have a trick of some kind: a building full them on the fly. of new weapons to be captured, an unde There are even a fended backway to the victory condition, handful of nonetc. The frustrating part is that each scecombat units dediWHERE'S THE CHECKERED FLAG? It seems that these recon buggies are nario can take up to four hours to comcated to transportlined up for the Indy 500, but your opponent won't be laughing when those plete and usually you don't get the idea or the construction surface-to-surface missiles find their targets. until halfway through, at best. While the of roads, rails and game is enjoyable, slogging through anfortifications. Learning how to exploit many players, especially when the payoff other two-hour repeat of the action just the strengths and weaknesses of all these is not a visual smorgasbord or a non-stop to do things right is not an inspiring vehicles will test the mettle of even expeaction pulse-pounder. idea. Most gamers might be tempted to rienced wargamers. And since new kinds Although the play by e-mail and molet the game sit for a day or so, until they of units are introduced gradually from dem link systems give good results for have built up the enthusiasm to try again. one scenario to another, a player's intermulti-player games, the networking suite Many players will find themselves saving Y BUGGY 224 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"DOM ITUS THIS GAME AGAN THE NEW STRATEGY GAME THAT'S DFFERENT EVERY TIME YOU PLAY. Dominus is a new genre of strategic war game. A real time simulation that blends the best elements of fantasy role playing and hand to hand combat, Dominus allows you to stand back and run the war from above, or grab a weapon and join the fray. So you can light the way you want. And with 7 difficulty levels, Dominus is fun for first-time players and war game veterans alike. Defend your domain from invading clans by deploying monsters, casting spells, setting traps, capturing your enemies and interrogating them in the dungeon. Then combine your helpless prisoners with your hideous monsters to create your own more powerful hybrids. Each of your decisions causes different strategies and reactions in your enemies, So every game | DOM IS is unique. Grab your sword and leap into Dominus TORTA DOMINUS It's a cut above, a step beyond, and a world apart. Are you ready for Dominus? Available for JBM POSLObey Ringana am PC CD ROM 1994 U.S. Gold Inc and Visual Concepts Ent Dominus is a trademark of Visual Concepte Entorinimo All catete Circle Reader Service #323 "


"Q.Q.P's Quoting the Quotes multiple versions of a scenario, as if they were playing a roleplaying game where every misstep has to be re-taken. Now, to be fair, you can still ring out a victory the hard way, but even should you have the military skill to defeat your opponent head-on, a built-in time limit makes this unlikely and even more frustrating. Nothing is worse than spending an evening crushing the computer, only to have the time limit go ofl' when you are literally a move away from victory. And since failure means repetition, one's enthusiasm wanes quickly. **** THE GRANDEST FLEET**** \"The Grandest Fleet is a fun game, and one that should live a good long life on many gamer's hard drives.\" -M. Evan Brooks, Computer Gaming World \"This game is infinitely playable\" -Paul Hyman, Computer Shopper \"...it's relatively easy to get into, thanks to a well-designed interface. And once you are into it, you'll have a hard time stopping.\". -William R. Trotter, PC Gamer Meteorological Section: Heavy cloud today and tomorrow. Fresh snowfall can be expected in low lying areas. \"This is what great gaming is all about.\" -M. Evan Brooks, Computer Gaming World TODAY LOOKS LIKE SUNSHINE AND COLORFUL EXPLOSIONS Weather reports, delivered by a fetching female Drullan meteorologist, help you decide whether it's time to go picnicking in enemy territory. \"The Grandest Fleet is a fascinating little world of its own, and one definitely worth exploring.\" Dennis Lynch, Chicago Tribune ****BRIDGE OLYPIAD**** \"QQP's reputation for producing topnotch strategy games gets another boost with Bridge Olympiad another winner\" Joe Novicki, PC Gamer While the linked scenarios and nested storyline are a very nice touch for a wargame, the adoption of this POPULOUS-inspired \"try, try again\" system really defeats any sense of perceived realism. Anything involving a storyline must be branched for success and failure, or the player begins to ignore what is happening in the game because, obviously, his actions have no ellect on the outcome of things-and a nice touch becomes a slide show. It's not like the Allies got to reset Dieppe until they got it right. **SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY** \"If I were stranded on a desert island with a laptop and a crate of NiCad batteries and were allowed only one game, Solitaire's Journey would be my pick.\" -Carol Hartman, PCM \"It is impossible to count the hours that will be spent on such a quick, clean, playable diversion as Solitaire's Journey.\" -Alan Emrich, CGW A THREE-HOUR TOUR BATTLE ISLE 2200 is an odd duck of a wargame. While it is intuitive and simple enough to be enjoyed by the casual combatant, it has enough variety and subtlety to keep most grognards happy and snarling. Conversely, the subject matter and strategic elements are probably a little fluffy for the serious wargamer, but the battles themselves require a commitment of time and concentration that will daunt the weekend warrior. This may not be the definitive SF wargame, but it is a step in the right direction. If you THE EDITORS SPEAK like variety, a pretty tough fight from a BATTLE ISLE 2200 computer opponent, RATING 1/2 nice pictures of exploding polygons PROS Challenging play and a wide and are lucky enough variety of weapons. to have the perfect CONS Frustrating design elements: CONFIG.SYS, then \"tricks\" to scenario \"solutions,\" time you might consider a limits, and a linear campaign system trip to Chroma for a that forces you to win each scenario long tour of duty. before you can proceed. Quantum Quality Productions 495 Highway 202, Flemington, N.J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 Circle Reader Service #179 226 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Now on CD-ROM! For IBM PC CPERATION DEUROPE PATH TO VICTORY 1939-45 TIT: Crnos ARTHERE! F PATTON, ROMMEL, MONTGOMERY AND ZHUCOV! It was hardened master-minds like these that devised the strategies and led the forces in the fight for Europe during WWII. Now it's your turn to play general, giving orders to your best commanders in KOEI's exciting new video game OPERATION EUROPE. Take charge of the Allies as they prepare to liberate Europe or lead the ruthless Axis in its push for global domination. Victory can be yours in the War in Africa, the famous tank battles at Kursk, Battle of the Bulge, Battle AS COMMANDER, POSITION for Normandy and the Fight for Berlin. YOUR REGIMENTS FOR VICTORY! Along the way, assassinate enemy commanders using Special Forces, have engineers destroy bridges and lay mines, sabotage supply lines and drop ENGAGE YOUR ENEMY paratroop units into occupied cities. INSIDE CITY LIMITS! OPERATION EUROPE FROM KOEI! With this gang, the world will never be the same again! Relive historical WWII battles in six separate scenarios Select your commanding officers from a list of historical REPLENISH YOUR TROOPS figures that include Patton, Rommel and Montgomery TO BOLSTER FIGHTING Sabotage supply lines to enemy cities by bombing bridges POTENTIAL! Eliminate enemy commanders using Special Forces units AVAILABLE FOR PC, SNES & SEGA, One or two player excitement KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEl product you are looking for, call us at 415-348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). Online Support offered on CompuServe GOVIDPUB, Sect. 4 SEGA SUPER NINTENDO KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Hwy., Suite 540, Burlingame, CA 94010 Operation Europe is a trademark of KOEI Corporation, Nintendo Nintendo Entertainment System, Sega. Sega Genesis and the official seals are trademarks of Nintendo of America and Sega of America. GENESIS GENESIS KOEI BEEBITELEZEE PETER "


"REVIEW . War Crime In Real Time + E An Age-Old Hatred Lives On In Blizzard's WARCRAFT: ORCS & HUMANS by Chris Lombardi BOSCEU LLLLLS Where have all the humans gone? What we have in Blizzard Entertaindeep. As in DUNE 2, the scenarios are conGone to Orc meat everyone. ment's WARCRAFT: ORCS & HUMANS, is exstructed linearly: you must complete one Where have all the humans gone? actly that a pretty good game set in the before going to the next, and the difficul— 6th Century folksong Tolkienesque mythos. This slick, realty crescendos with each passing scenario. time strategy game recounts a war beAt the beginning of a scenario you've givTILL IT EVER END, THIS BLOOD tween a human kingdom and an orcish en an objective, usually to lay waste to the FEUD BETWEEN ORCS AND HUinvasion force in an area called the Boropponent's town. Starting with the barest MANS? EVER SINCE THE GREAT cherlands. The game tries its hardest to makings of a town (usually a town hall historical chronicler, J.R.R. avoid partisanship in its retelling of the and a few farms), you must build up your Tolkien, stepped through a tale, and so the game gives each side in plot of land into a well-oiled war machine fantasy wormhole into the land of Middle the conflict equal time. The single player capable of out-producing and out-reEarth and recorded the horrendous wars game is played through 20 or so scenarsearching the opponent. From an overthat rocked that land, ios, half of head perspective, you build roads, place we've heard nothing WARCRAFT: ORCS & HUMANS which can be buildings, and muster new units, all fibut more reports of Price: $45-50 fought from nanced by peasants who must seek out cruelty and bloodshed. (CD-ROM). WARCRAFT the human timber from forests and gold from mines. Is there nothing we $40-45 (3.5\" side, half from If you've played DUNE 2, you could probacan do? Il only we floppy) the orc. Even bly get halliway through the game without could get the U.N. inSystem the manual looking at the game manual. It's a good Requirements: volved, perhaps they IBM compatible shares this thing for Blizzard that there's no prececould negotiate a 386-20Mhz, clean division, cent for \"look and feel\" lawsuits in comcease-fire. Better yet, if 4MB RAM, VGA with the huputer entertainment. we could send Jimmy graphics, 13 man account All of these tasks must be done now, Carter on a diplomatic hard drive on one side of which is the thrilling part of real time mission through space space (average), CD-ROM, mouse; supports a split-format games. While you're moving each unit to most major sound cards. and time, he might rebook, and the explore the blackened unknown of the Protection: None turn with the assurance # of Players: 1-2 (modem, network) ore on the flip map, you should also be creating peasants that all would be well. Publisher: Blizzard Entertainment side. and putting them to their wood or gold Alas, all of these Irvine, CA If Blizzard harvesting tasks. Of course, to support measures would be (800) 953-SNOW borrowed gennew peasants, you've got to have farms, stopped dead by the erously from which must be built by the same peasants barrier between our world and the other. the accounts of Tolkien for its story and you just ordered to the mines. Meanwhile, As meticulous a reporter as Mr. Tolkien setting, they performed a perfect bit of your exploring soldiers have probably run was, he was negligent in detailing the creative larceny when it came down to across a small group of enemy troops, so means by which he accessed that alterthe game mechanics and play. Replace you must quickly scroll over to the light nate world. Are we left to despair? the overhead graphics of orcs and huand make sure your troops are properly Perhaps not. If, by a refocusing of the mans with Aureides and Harkonnen, subdealing with the threat (they don't do very eye, we change our view of the matter, we stitute WARCRAFT's resources (timber and well on their own). If your troops have a might be able to find good in an ugly sitgold) with Spice, and rename the various poor showing, you may have a few ugly inuation. One benefit, and the one closest buildings that you must construct in a vaders pouring into your town attacking to our hearts, is that the wars between simplified Sim Cry style, and you have your buildings and killing off your peasOrcs and Humans have given us many a Westwood Studio's DUNE 2. ants. More troops are required, so bargood computer game. The similarities are more than skin racks must be built, which requires more 228 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"TIGERS ON THE HPS Simulation the WARGAMER'S Computer Company, and designer Scott Hamiltony bring you the ULTIMATE WWII tactical comtat cimulation Hovering the ENTIRE Eastern Front from 1939-45, Tigers On The Prowl includes a detailed database of hundreds of fighting vehicles, weapons, and force structures for the Axis, Allied and Soviet forces. Likewise, combat is resolved by precise calculations of armor thickness and round penetration at the instant of impact. It also features morale, hidden movement, communications, airstrikes, night fighting, forest fires, and much more. Designed for all levels of wargamers, Tigers On The Prowl includes 5 scenarios, a flexible scenario builder, and three levels of complexity. Orders are given to platoons or sections, with a maximum of a supported combat brigade on VISA/MC: CALL each side. Can be played solitaire against the computer, or by two players either (408) 554-8381 face to face or by mail/e-mail. Tigers Dealer Inquiries On The Prowl can use maps and Requires VGA. symbols created with Aide De Welcome Camp. Tigers On The Prowl 570KB free RAM is as real as you can get and 2 MB hard disk space. Mouse optional. HPS Simulations without being there. For IBM and compatibles. P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 "


"KUUPSEER 600 GOUD 300 LUMBER: 1450 GOLO: 1300 RAIDER CATAPULT OM OS MENU MENUS CHARGE OF THE ORC BRIGADE As this orc scenario opens, a frontier town is under attack by vile human troops. The orcs must save the town and launch a counter-attack. CORRIDOR OF DEATH The humans have set up a formidable defense at a strategic choke-point. With their piecemeal attack style, the orcs don't stand a chance. w peasants, more trees, more gold, more men, for instance), others are great. The much less the capability for \"misdirectime-of which there's never enough. two races have a completely different settion.\" So, with a nod of acknowledgment The panicked pace rarely leaves room of spells. While the human cleric can heal to the fact that programming a good Al is for a dull moment. WARCRAFT is a game injured warriors and make units invisible, extremely difficult, especially in a game as of split-second decisions, a mad-dash jugthe orc necrolyte can raise the dead and free-flowing as WARCRAFT, it must be said gling of resources and demands, that rebestow unholy armor on its compatriots; that WARCRAFTS Al is predictable at best, quires you to be both long-term planner and while the human conjurer can call and very gullible at worst. and octopedal micro-manager with a down a nasty rain of fire on his enemies, On the predictable end, the Al's overall quick but steady mouse hand. If you like the orc warlock can call up a cloud of poistrategic approach seems to be the same for to calmly contemplate your next move son that drifts through the human's cach scenario. The computer has a group and carefully add up combat factors belands, injuring peasants and damaging of units that it uses to attack at the beginfore launching your next attack, or if you their abodes. Both conjurers and warning of a scenario, giving the player some can't manage the carpal calisthenics to locks can summon creatures from other early headaches. From that point on, it right and left mouse click in rapid succesplanes, but the warlock's demon has sends a steady stream of small groups, ususion, you can forget about WARCRAFT, slightly more strength than the conjurer's ally just enough to weaken the human playIf you can handle the pace, WARCRAFT water elemental, but the water clemental er's defensive line, but rarely enough to will show you a good time. The scenarios has greater range with its attack. A cause serious trouble. Meanwhile, it keeps a are structured such that the game slowly Between the real time play and the insmall defensive cluster at its town. The hudoles out new buildings that produce new teresting mixture (but basic balance of the man player's strategy, then, is to weather unit types that have new abilities, so opposing units, it seems we've got a great the initial attack, set up a defense for the there's always a \"carrot of coolness\" congame here-a game designed for an steady stream of small threats, and then stantly dangling before your nose. While ebbing and flowing contest of tactical and amass enough troops to take out the comyou start with basic grunts and archers, strategic wits. There's room in this game puter's relatively small home defense. For and a handful of basic buildings, you'll for tricky feints, LUMBER: 9058 4 GOLO: 14958 soon find that the human can build stables misdirection, and (kennels for the orcs) that produce mountdevious combineded knights (or wolf-riding raiders). A timarms tactics. Unforber mill and a blacksmith will allow you to tunately, build catapults, in addition to improving WARCRAFT's artificial the quality of your basic weapons. Then intelligence (AI) come churches/temples that produce doesn't quite live up clerics/necrolytes that can cast a variety of to the design. Comhelpful spells, and towers that produce puter Als in generconjurers/warlocks who weave a death al, and WARCRAFT'S dealing web of offensive magic. in particular, don't 40 There is a fundamental parity between do \"ebb and flow\" the units and buildings of the orcs and very well, and certhe humans, but there are some differtainly very few, if ences that make for interesting play. any, can be said to PEE ON THE PEONS Human knights race to save a group of gold-bearing While some of these differences are subhave much \"wits.\" peasants that are under attack. Peasants are a favorite target for tle (the human archers have a slightly It's tough enough to both sides. greater missile range than the orc speargive AI direction, FRCHER MENU 230 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"15 16 15 AVE OVE 2.000 MILES 14 11 13 TE! 15 12 10 10 25 6 10 USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE: WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX. DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 15 FALCON 3.0 SCEN 3 HORNET FALCON AT FIELDS OF GLORY FIFA INTERNAT'L SOCCER FIGHTING FOR ROME FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLEET DEFENDER FLIGHT SIM 4.0 FLIGHT SIM 4 AIRCRAFT FLIGHT SIM 4 JAPAN FLIGHT SIM 4: SOUND FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 FORMULA ONE FOUNTAIN OF DREAMS FOUR CRYSTALS OF TRAZERE FREDDY PHARKAS FRONTIER FREE DC FRONT PAGE BASEBALL FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL PRO FRONTIER ELITE 2 FULL METAL PLANET FUTURE WARS GABRIEL KNIGHT GAMES WINTER CHALLENGE GATEWAY 2: HOMEWORLD GATEWAY SAVAGE FRONTIER GENGHIS KHAN 2 GLOBAL CONQUEST GOBLINS 1 VGA GOBLINS 2 GOOS GRANDEST FLEET 7 17 KNOWLEDGE ADVENTURE XOSHAN CONSPIRACY KRISTAL LAFFER UTILITIES LANDS OF LORE LEATHER GODDESSES 2 LEGACY: REALM OF TERROR LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEISURE SUIT LARRY 3 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 LEMMINGS LINKS 386 PRO LINKS DISK HYATT LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LORDS OF THE REALM LOST ADMIRAL LOST FILES OF SHERLOCK H LOST IN LA LOST IN TIME LOST VIKINGS LUCAS ARTS AIR COMBAT LUNAR COMMAND M-1 TANK PLATOON MADDEN FOOTBALL: MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 MAGNETIC SCROLLS BUNDLE MANTIS EXP FIGHTER MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM POLICE QUEST : POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS MOVIES POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER PRIVATEER SPEECH PACK PRIVATEER: RIGHTEOUS FIRE PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PRO TENNIS TOUR PROTOSTAR QUEST FOR GLORY 1 EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1 VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 3 VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 4 SHADOW RAGS TO RICHES RAILROAD TYCOON DELUXE REALMS REALMS OF ARKANINA RED CRYSTAL RED LIGHTNING RENEGADE LEGION INTERC RETURN OF THE PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REX NEBULAR COSMIC GEN RINGWORLO RISE OF THE DRAGON RISK ROAD & TRACK GRAND PRIX ROCKETECH ROMANCE 3 OF KINGDOMS 3 ROME: PATHWAY TO POWER SAM & MAX: HIT THE ROAD 19 27 24 32 12 34 CD ULTIMATE FOOTBALL CD VEGAS GAMES DELUXE CD WOLFPACK CDX-COM UFO DEFENSE CD-QUARANTINE CHALLENGE OF 5 REALMS CHAMBER SCI MUTANT PREIS CHESS MANIAC 5 BILLION CIVILIZATION CLASH OF STEEL COASTER CODE NAME: ICEMAN COHORT 2 COLONEL'S BEQUEST COLONIZATION COMPANION OF XANTH CONAN CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUEST OF JAPAN CORRIDOR 7 COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION 19 15 15 & NS 16 15 12 18 8 16 12 11 12 12 11 31 17 25 29 11 WE'RE BUYING! GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES  | 5 30 14 DEALER INQUIRIES WELCOME IBM GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Coll, lax, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment Gomes will not be accepted without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S GOLD. Save your authorization no. We can't answer questions about your shipment without your number! STAR FLEET 1 STAR FLEET 2 STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIVERS STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT STAR WARS CHESS STARSHIPCOMMAND ADV STELLAR 7 STORMOVIK STREET FIGHTER 2 STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE SQUAD STRONGHOLD STUNT ISLAND SUBWAR 2050 SUMMONING SUPER SLOTS SYNDICATE SYNDICATE: AMERICAN REV TAKE-A-BREAK PINBALL TANKS CONST SET 2 TASK FORCE 1942 TENNIS CUP TERMINATOR 2: ARCADE TERMINATOR 2029 TERMINATOR RAMPAGE TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 TEX THE PROPHECY THEIR FINEST HOUR THEME PARK THEXDEA 1 THEXDER 2 THUNDER HAWK TIE FIGHTER TIME OUEST TONY LARUSSA 1 NILST TONY LARUSSA 293 PLAYER TONY LARUSSA 2 FANT TONY LARUSSA BASEBALL TONY LARUSSAULT BE TONY LARUUSA 2 '92 PLAYER TONY LARUUSA 2 ALINL TORNADO: LIMITED EDITION ULTIMA 5 WARRIORS OF DES ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPHET ULTIMA 7. BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 7: COMPLETE ULTIMA 8: PAGAN ULTIMA 8: SPEECH PACK ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS SANCTION EART UNNATURAL SELECTION UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS UTOPIA V FOR VICTORY: UTAH BEACH V FOR VICTORY, VICTORY PAK VEIL OF DARKNESS WALLS OF ROME WAR IN RUSSIA WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WAXWORKS WAYNE GRETZKY HOCKEY WAYNE GRETZKY HOCKEY 3 WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR WHERE IN AMERICA'S PAST WHERE IN WORLD CARMEN WING COM 2 SPEC OPS WING COM 2 SPEECH PACK WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 1 DELUXE WING COMMANDER 2 WING COMMANDER 2 OLX WING COMMANDER ACADEMY WING COMMANDER ARMADA WIZARDRY 6 COSMIC FORGE WIZARORY 7 CRUSADERS WIZARDRY TRILOGY Z WOLFENSTEIN 3D WOLFPACK WORLD CIRCUIT WORLD TOUR TENNIS WORLD WAR 2. BATTLES WW2 AIR FORCE COMMAND X.COM X-WING X-WING B-WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURSUIT YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-331-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 WE SELL USED GAMES All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility WE ACCEPT ONLY VISA/MasterCard/Discover Money Orders/Cashiers Check 2 'Call for title avetibility before sending M.O. Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/S9 2nd Day Air call for information on Canadian shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 18 Game Title Price 1942 PACIFIC AIR WAR 688 ATTACH SUB A-TRAIN A10 TANK KILLER 15 12 A320 AIR BUS-EUROPEAN ACES OF PACIFIC MISSION ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACES OVER EUROPE AD&D COLL: HEROESURAG ADV OF WILLIE BEAMISH AIR WARRIOR SVGA AIRBORNE RANGER ALIEN LEGACY ALONE IN THE DARK ALONE IN THE DARK Z ALTERED DESTINY AMBUSH AT SORINOR ANCIENT ART OF WAR APBA BASEBALL APBA BASEBALL-WIN ARCHON ULTRA ATAC AWARD WINNING WAR GAMES BALANCE OF POWER BARD'S TALE CONST SET BATTLE BUGS BATTLE CHESS BATTLES OF DESTINY BEAT THE HOUSE BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BIG BUSINESS BIRDS OF PREY BLAKE STONE: ALIENS BLOODSTONE BLUE & GRAY BLUE FORCE: NEXT OF KIN BODY BLOWS BRIX BUZZ ALDRIN HACE SPACE CAESAR CAMPAIGN CAMPAIGN 2 CAR & DRIVER CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CARRIERS AT WAR 2 CASTLE OF DA BRAIN CASTLES CASTLES 2 CD TAON HELIX CO 7TH GUEST CO-ADV OF WILLIE BEAMISH CO AEGIS GUARDIAN FLEET CD AL-OADIM GENIE CURSE CD-ALONE IN THE DARK CD) CASTLES 2 CD-CORRIDOR 7 CO-CRITICAL PATH CD-DARK LEGIONS CD DARKSEED CD-DAY OF THE TENTACLE CD DRACULA UNLEASHED CO-DRAGONSHPERE CD-DUNE CD-DUNGEON HACK CO-EMPIRE DELUXE MASTER 36 CO ERIC THE UNREADY CO. FRONT PAGE BASEBALL CIGATEWAY 2 CU GEEKWAD CO GETTYSBURG INTERACT CD GOBLINS QUEST 3 CO GRANDEST FLEET CO.GREAT NAVAL BATTLES CO HELL CAB CD. HORDE CO INCA CD INCA 2 CD-JONES IN THE FAST LANE 14 CD-JOURNEYMAN PROJECT CD-JURASSIC PARK CD-JUTLAND CD-KING'S QUEST 5 CD KING'S QUEST 6 CD-LABRYINTH OF TIME CD MAD DOG 2 CD-MIGHT & MAGIC WORLD 36 CD MILLENNIUM ALICTION CD MYST CD. NOMAD CO-OUTPOST CD POLICE QUEST 4 CD-QUANTUM GATE WIN CD. RAVENLOFT CD-REBEL ASSAULT CD RED BARON CD-RETURN TO ZORK CD SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD 34 CD-SHADOW CASTER CD STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV 34 t) IPY CO.ULTIMA & PAGAN 14 32 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a wish list of titles you are interested in 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games. Some 'wish list\" gome credits moy toke slightly longer to fill Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Games must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. 36 31 16 29 CRIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CROSSWIRE CYBER EMPIRES CYBER RACE D-DAY BEGINNING OF END D-GENERATION DAEMONSGATE DAGGER OF AMON RA DARK CENTURY DAAK HEART OF UUKAUL DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN DARKSEED DARKSPYRE DAVID WOLP SECRET AGENT DAY OF THE VIPER DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN DELTA V DETROIT DISCIPLES OF STEEL DISCOVER STEPS COLUBUS DOOM DOOM 2 DRACULA-BRAM STOKE DRAGON STRIKE DRAGONS OF FLAME DRAKKHEN DUNE 2 DUNGEON HACK EARTH INVASION WIN EIGHT BALL DELUXE EL FISH ELITE PLUS ELVIRA 2 EMPIRE DELUXE EMPIRE DELUXE.WIN ERIC THE UNREADY EVASIVE ACTION EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 2 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 3 F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 3 FALCON 30 FALCON 3 O SCEN 1 FGHT TIG FALCON 3 0 SCEN 2 MI GREAT NAVAL BAT ADMIRAL GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NAVAL BATTLES 2 GREENS GUNSHIP 2000 VGA HAND OF FATE HARD NOVA HARDBALL 3 HARDBALL 3: DIAMOND COLL HARE RAISING HAVOG HARPOON HARPOON 2 HARPOON CHALLGR PACK HARRIER ASSAULT HARRIER SUPER-VGA HEAVEN & EARTH HEIRS TO THE THRONE HEXX HIGH COMMAND HORDE HOVER FORCE HOYLES BOOK OF GAMES HUMANS INCA INCA 2 INDY CAR RACING INDY JONES LAST CRUSADE IRON CROSS ISLE OF THE DEAD JACK NICKLAUS CD 1 JACK NICKLAUS GREATEST 18 JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATURE JAMES BOND STEALTH JEOPARDY JET FIGHTER 2.0 JIMMY CONNORS PRO TEN JUMP JET KGB KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 2. EGA KING'S QUEST 3 EGA KING'S QUEST 4-EGA KING'S QUEST 5 VGA KING'S QUEST G-VGA KINGMAKER KNIGHTS OF THE SKY MASTER OF ORION MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL MEDIEVAL LORDS MEGAFORTRESS MEGATRAVELLER MICROSOFT GOLF-WIN MIG 29 (SPECTRUM HOL) MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAGIC: MIGHT & MAGIC 5 MIKE DITKA ML FOOTBALL ML FOOTBALL 2 MONKEY ISLAND 1 MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONOPOLY MOONRASE MORTAL KOMBAT NFL 94 NFL COACHES' CLUB NEL PRO LEAGUE FB 91 NFL VIDEO FOOTBALL NHL HOCKEY 94 NIGHT SHIFT NOVA 9 VGA NUCLEAR WAR OBITUS OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD OVERLORD PACIFIC STRIKE PACIFIC STRIKE SPEECH PACK PACIFIC WAR PATRIOT PATTON STRIKES BACK PEPPER'S ADVENTURE IN TM PGA TOUR GOLF PGA TOUR GOLF.WIN PIRATES PIRATES GOLD \"PLANES, TRAINS, & AUTO PLANET SOCCER PLANET'S EDGE POLICE QUEST 2 POLICE QUEST 3 SAVAGE EMPIRE SEA ROGUE SEA WOLF SEAL TEAM SEARCH FOR THE KING SECRET WEAPONS EXPP SECRET WEAPONS OF LUFT SENTINEL WORLDS SERF CITY SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOWLANDS SHUTTLE SIEGE SIEGE & SWORD SIERRA AWARD WINNERS SILPNEED SIM CITY SIM CITY WIN SIM CITY 2000 SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET SIM CITY TERRAIN EDITOR SIM LIFE SIMFARM SIMON THE SORCERER SORCERIAN SPACE 1889 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST2-EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4 SPACE QUEST 5 SPACE ROGUE SPACEWRECKED SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPEEDBALL 2 SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCRAFT ASPECT OF VAL SPELLJAMMER: PIRATES STAR CONTROL 2 16 32 6 Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listed-we've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. System compatibility is not guaranteed. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. 19 9 19 25 10 12 15 35 19 21 wBuy SELL "


"LULJEEF: ISSO A GOLD: 509 9 ARCHER u sao group of peasants being held start with a group of units some distance in a compound. Since you from the town, and you must race over, rearen't given any other peaslieve the siege, and then use the buildings ants or money at the beginthat you save as a platform upon which to ning of the scenario, you must build your war machine. On the other rescue the peasants before you hand, once you've figured out the trick to a can generate money and build scenario, the challenge is gone. So, WARmore troops. Once you find CRAFT is not a game that you would play the compound and the \"corover and over again. rect\" path to the compound, These criticisms crumble into so much then you must figure out how moot dust once you get another human on many troops it will take to the other end of a network or modem. MENU spring the prisoners and get WARCRAFT has a remarkably clean and easy PURPLE PAIN An orc warlock has snuck up to a human town and them back safely, while deinterface for both two-player network and cast several poison cloud spells. The clouds have a nasty habit fending your home town modem play, and a number of customizing of killing peasants and ruining paint jobs. against the huge orc army that options allowing you to choose the map is programmed to attack imand starting unit mix of both players. In the human with any sort of natural intellimediately after you've breached the prison less than a minute after installing the game gence (NI), most of the scenarios are a walk walls. This whole affair is a trial and error on the CGW network, my orc hordes were in the park, especially if the NI can master process requiring you restart the scenario a thrusting their scythe of death through a few tricks to take advantage of the Al's half dozen times before you figure it out. wave after wave of humans controlled by a tactical weaknesses. On the one hand, I like this device befellow editor. Here is where WARCRAFT reTo deal with the Al's inability to match cause it in part makes up for the AI's weakally comes alive! Fast-paced, fun, and flexithe NI wit-for-wit in an even fight, the deness, and the designers use it to tell a story, ble enough to support a wide variety of signers have used a device about which I and tell it well. Each scenario is a chapter tactics, WARCRAFT ranks up there with such have mixed feelings: they've designed in the story of the war introduced with classic two-player slug-fests as COMMAND \"puzzles\" into the scenarios. Each scenario voice-over speech and a cool animation HQ and GLOBAL CONQUEST. seems to have a \"trick\" that you must figure where a 3D landscape morphs out of a 2D When the final body count is tallied, out, and there's usually only one basic apmap), and the scenarios are designed to reand the streets have been scrubbed clean proach to the solution. For example, in one flect the story. In one ore scenario, for exof orc and human blood, the recommenof the human scenarios you must rescue a ample, an orc town is under siege. You dation is this: if you enjoy frantic, real time games, and if you don't mind a linear structure in your strategic challenges, WARCRAFT is a good buy. While the Al is no Einstein and the \"puzzle-based» structure of the scenarios won't make for much replay, you'll still get a good 30+ hours of moderately demanding play. In the meantime, start a campaign to convince a natural intelligence (a gaming buddy) either to buy a modem or stay after work and play WARCRAFT head to head. For while the history of the Orc and Humans is one of tremendous bloodshed and cruelty, nothing in this world or any other can match the ferocity and unrelenting bitterness (all in fun, of course) of two humans locked in mortal gaming combat. 6 Fritz... THE EDITORS SPEAK WARCRAFT: ORCS AND HUMANS RATING *** PROS Exciting real-time game play and a terrific suite of two-player options. CONS The Al is dull and the \"puzzle based» scenarios do not encourage single-player replay. ke; a p  "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. PO BOX 234 DEPT 10175 ROCHESTER VT 05767 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD S8. Dolectives replaced with same product. MOS! items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. Can for details, OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US S4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR. HI. AK, APO, FPO S4 per order Worldwide armall $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment, Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'! 802-767-3033 Source 10175 Wewe People CIVILIZATION History World \"CIVILIZATION' A game for 2 to 7 players that traces the history of man. Not considered a \"war game\", milltary conquest plays a secondary role to the develop ment of one's civilization from within. Trade and the discovery and use of such skills as metal working, pottery, and religion are essential to advancing civilization. $29 \"WE THE PEOPLE' American Minutemen have just fired the shot heard 'round the world. Join the war for independence with this historical game that lets you lead the fledgling forces of the Continental Army. $29 \"HISTORY OF THE WORLD' traces the progress of mankind from the dawn of civilization to the threshold of the modem era. Each player commands 7 empires, vies with armies & build monuments to their glory. $27 WARHAMMER WARHAMMER 4 Civil War Battle Game VECTOR IN THE GRINDARDESS OF THE FM PUTUJETE IS ONLY THE GAME OF FANTASY RATTLES WARHAMMER 40,000' It's an entire hobby supported with a huge range of supplements, boxed sets and blister packs of plastic and pewter miniatures. Includes hundreds of different models. $49 'GETTYSBURG' The most studied, talked about, and debated American Civil War battle ever! You determine which generals were good, which made controversial moves & who were simply bad tacticians. $15 'WARHAMMER'Enter the world of Warhammer, the tabletop fantasy battlegame in which you and your opponent control mighty armies. You maneuver and attack with massed ranks of troops. $49 BOARDGAMES ANCIENT BOARDGAMES ECONOMIC BOARDGAMES MEDIEVAL BOARDGAMES RAILROAD $18 Global Survival Stock Market Stocks & Bonds $34 $19 $19 Age of Chivalry for ea $27 Black Prince $25 Henry V Ironsides $28 The Crusades II $28 $28 lexander at Tyre lexander's Generals $33 ncients $25 attles of Alexander $33 aesar $38 ireat Btt Julius Caesar $34 nperator $21 nperium Romanum II $29 eloponnesian War $29 POR: Bit Roman Rpbl $33 iege of Jerusalem $27 I Against Rome $27 BOARDGAMES FANTASY 1830: Alrds & Rbr Brns $20 1870 $38 Australian Rails $21 British Rails $21 Empire Builder $25 Eurorails Express (Card Game) $11 Nippon Rails $21 North American Rails $21 Rail Baron $19 $25 BOARDGAMES MODERN BOARDGAMES WORLD WAR 2 Luftwaffe $23 Midway $19 Naval War (Card Bsd) $12 Operation Crusader $29 Run Silent, Run Deep $28 Salvo 2 $23 Sink the Bismarck $23 Spitfire $23 Squad Leader $23 SL Module each $19-528 Third Reich Turning Pnt Stalingrad $19 Up Front (Card Game) $19 Up Front Module (Card) $12 Victory in Normandy $13 WestFront: War in Euro $49 BOARDGAMES STRATEGY Advanced Civilization $23 Blackbeard $27 Britannia $19 Civilization $29 C Mod./Western Ex. Kt $8 Deluxe Diplomacy $42 Diplomacy Enemy in Sight $12 Feudal $18 Guerilla (Card Based) History of the World S27 Kingmaker $19 Maharaja Pax Britannica $18 Republic of Rome $29 Supremcy Mega-Manl $25 Supremacy Mega-Map $25 Supr Resource Deck 2 $13 Supr Revisd Rules (5/92)$4 Suprmcy Splml ea. $17-$25 Supremacy, 3rd Ed. $42 Viceroys $25 We the People $29 BOARDGAMES SCIENCE FICTION Advanced Heroquest $42 Battle Masters $42 Dragon Quest $19 Dragon Strike $33 Dungeon $16 Hero Quest $29 HQ Pk 1/Kellar's Keep $10 HQ Pk 2/Rtm Witch Lrd $10 Iron Dragon $25 Magic Realm $23 Sindbad Titan $23 Xanth $21 BOARDGAMES AMERICAN REVOL. 776 ive Me Liberty lar of 1812 2nd-7th Fleet each$23-$27 Attack Sub (Card Bsd) $19 Back to Iraq $18 Central America $23 Firepower $23 Flashpoint: Golan $29 Flight Leader $21 Gulf Strike $29 Harpoon $25 HExp./Sth Atlantic War $10 Harpoon, Naval Review $14 IDF (Israeli Defnce Fre) $29 Modrn Nav Btt 2 or 3ea $19 Nato $15 Tac Air $19 $22 $25 $33 $22 BOARDGAMES CIVIL WAR BOARDGAMES LEISURE/FAMILY Alpha Omega $19 Blood Berets $29 Cosmic Encounter $29 CE Exp./More Cosmic $29 Federation & Empire $38 FE Exp./Carrier War S17 FE Exp./Special Oprtns $9 Space Marine (Epc Scl) $49 SMArmies of Imprium $25 SM/Battles $21 SMRenegades $25 Star Fleet Batt Advncd $25 Star Fleet Battles $25 SFB Cadet Trng Manual $7 SFB Capt. Log 8-15 ea $9 SFB Module each $5-$15 Starfrce Terra (Crd Gm) $19 Stellar Conquest BOARDGAMES VIETNAM/KOREA Crisis in Korea $29 Frozen Chosin $25 Platoon $15 Silver Bayonette The Korean War Vietnam $18 BOARDGAMES WORLD WAR 2 $17 $18 BOARDGAMES NAPOLEONIC $19 BOARDGAMES WORLD WAR 1 $11 $27 S19 362: Civil War Qud Gm$23 363:American Civil War$28 House Divided $20 cross Five Aprils $23 obby Lee: Civil War $37 rother Against Brother $33 ampaigns of Civil War $21 hancellorsville: Victry $34 ivil War Classics $23 mbrace Angry Wind $24 ettysburg uns of Cedar Creek $32 allowed Ground $42 ere Come the Rebels $23 e Takes Command $22 De Vs. Grant ongstreet's Assault $25 ississipi Fortress $22 oads to Gettysburg $24 lonewall Jcksn's Way $27 he War for the Union $32 hunder at Crossroads $27 Acquire $19 Alibi $12 Assassin $15 By Hook or Crook Candidate $19 Circus Maximus Class Struggle $19 Dinosaurs of Lost Wrid $15 Gangsters $23 Hexagony $11 Image $10 Legends of Robin Hd S11 Moonstar Quest for Ideal Mate $15 Shark $25 Spices of the World $18 T.V. Wars $12 Tycoon $15 Tyranno Ex $23 Uncle Hppy's Train Gm $13 Word Power $15 Aces High $24 Aces High Amer Aces $24 Knights of the Air $19 Landships $27 Lawrnce Arabia, 2nd EdS20 Richtofen's War $19 BOARDGAMES SPORTS 1944: The Second Frnt $32 A Line in the Sand $25 Advancd Squad Leader $38 Afrika $21 Air Force AF Mod./Dauntless $15 Allied Commdr of WW2 S12 Ambush (Card Based) $27 Axis & Allies $29 A & A Plastic Minies $25 A & A WW 2 Exp. 2 $21 A & A: Wrld at War Dix $15 Breakout: Normandy S23 Campaign to Stalingrad S29 D-Day $16 France 1944 $12 G.D. 40: Bit for Stonne $30 Hitler's War Austerlitz $30 Battles of Waterloo $33 Empires in Arms La Bataille d'aurstaedt $30 LB de Mnt St. Jean Dix $62 La Bataille de Wavre $25 Napoleon at Austerlitz $20 Napoleon on Danube $19 Napoleon's Battles $23 NB Exp. Kit 1 or 2 each $12 Napoln's Leipzig Cpgn $25 Napoln/Watrloo Cpgn $30 Napolns Later Battles $25 War & Peace $23 War to the Death $21 Wollington's Victory $16 Wooden Shps & Imn Mn $19 $12 $16 Bowl Bound $15 Football Strategy $12 Pay Dirt S19 Regatta $19 Statis Pro Basketball $24 Statis Pro Tms Bsball $19 Title Bout $19 World Cup FB (Soccer) $38 Wrasslin $15 BOARDGAMES WAR GENERAL Battle of Alma $28 Cpgns Frederick Great $24 Kolin:Fredrick's Frst Dft $34 Lion of the North $29 Sands of War $29 $15 Circle Reader Service #342 JAN CGW BG "


"Since 1982 CGW 1/95 ComputAbility 7800-896-1336 All credit approved orders in the 48 contiguous states, under 15lbs, are automatically upgraded to Airborne Express 2 day delivery. Next day overnight express available for a small extra charge. liRBORINE EXPRESS Consumer Electronics Exclusive CD ROM BUNDLES Pick the Bundke that fits your needs! BUNDLE RAMA 3 fonBuy Buy 3 for $57*or 75 for $95* \"With the purchase of ANY CD-ROM Drive or Upgrade Kit from ComputAbility buy 3 for $57 or 5 for $95 *Offer good time of purchase only! 4000 Icons Dark Sun: Shattered Lands Mad Dog McCree 500 True Type Fonts Dictionary & Language Mario is Missing Deluxe DOS 7000 Clp An Images Dinosaur MM Encyc Mavis for Kids 7th Guest Eco Quest Mayo Clinic for Windows Alon Logic Encyclopedia of Sound Mega Race Animals! San Diego 200 Eye of the Beholder Trilogy Menzoberranzan (AD&D) Arthur's Teacher Trouble Family Doctors Merriam Webster Dict. for Kids Audubon Birds Fantasy Fost Mixed up Mother Goose Beethoven's 5th Great Cities of the World V.1 & 2 Monkey Island Carmen World Deluxe Guinness Bk of Records '94 MPC National Geographic Manals CD Game Pak Il Jets and Props Oceans Below MPC CD ROM Challenge Pk (games) Just Grandma & Me Peter and the Woll Clipart Warehouse Kings Quest 5 Picture Atlas of the World Complete Refernce Library Kings Quest 6 Prehistoria Cyclones Kodak Photo CD Access Return to Zork Solar System Sound Effects Library Space & Astronomy Space Shuttle MPC Star Wars Chess MPC Ultimate Domain US Atlas MM MPC 5.0 US History US Presidents USA Wars Desert Storm Wake of the Ravager Wargame Bundle Winter Sports Woltenstein 3D/Alens of Gold World Atlas MM MPC Prices good with the Purchase of any CD ROM Drive or Upgrade Kit (at time of purchase only) Please Note: All drives are new and carry a full Manufacturer's Warranty CHINON PLEXTOR 535 Internal alone.................... $215 3028i Internal alone........... .... $259 with 16 bit SCSI 2/ CD only.... $310 / $281 with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.... $354 / S325 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP.. $406 / $436 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2/ASP.. $443/$480 535 External alonc ............... ...$359 5028e External alone.............. .5355 with 16 bit SCSI 2/CD only.... $461 / 9425 with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.....$457 / 9421 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP..5563/8593 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP..$5597 $589 525 Internal alone.................... $155 4 Plex IMB Internal alone.............$405 with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only....$250 / S214 with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.... $500 / $471 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP.. $346 / $376 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP.. $596/5626 4 Plex IMB External alonc ............. SS15 NEC with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.... $617/5581 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2/ASP.. $719 / $749 2V1 Internal alone (with IDE interface Microsoft Encarta '94 MM Encyclopedia & coupon for 4 Plex 256K Internal alons ............. $359 FREE upgrade to Encatta 95)......$175 with 16 bir SCSI 2 / CD only.... 5454/5425 4Xi Internal alone..................... $369 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2/ ASP.. 5550/5580 4 Plex 256K External alone.............. 5469 with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.... $464/5428 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP.. $5537 $583 with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.... 5571/5535 4Xc External alonc ........ .......... $459 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP.5673/5703 with 16 bit SCSI 27CD only.... $554/5518 with Sound Blaster SCSI 27 ASP. 566375693 CDU-55S Internal alone. TOSHIBA with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.... $284 / $255 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2 / ASP.. $350 / $110 3501 Quad Speed Internal alone......... $319 CDU-SSE01 Internal with IDE interface... $159 with 16 bit SCSI 2 / CD only.... $41475388 with Turtle Beach Tropce... ... $373 with Sound Blaster SCSI 2/ASP.. $51078540 TEAC MITSUMI Super Quad 4x Internal alone.........5329 FXOOTD Internal alone................$139 with Sound Blaster 16 MCD/ASP.. $464/5498 with Sound Blaster 16 MCD / ASP . $274 / $308 with Ensoni Soundscape...... with Ensoniq Soundscape............. $333 with Sound Blaster AWE 32...........3594 SOUND CARDS CREATIVE .......$69.95 SONY S65 Sound Blaster 16 Basic Value............ 599 Sound Blaster Deluxo Valuo.... Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe Value $85 Sound Blaster 16 Multi CD $135 with adv. signal processing.... $169 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2 $169 with adv. signal processing............ $199 Sound Blaster AWE32/Value Edition... $265 / $219 TURTLE BEACH MultiSound Monterey Maui Wavetable Synthesizer Upgrade .... ...... $123 Wave for Windows 20... (with the purcahse of any sound card) Audio Advantago PCMCIA. FREE DEL .. .... $135 QUAD Studio ...... Monte Carlo / Tropez ........... .......$89/S199 OTHER ADS AUDIO ROCK-IT/16/Pro CD.........$65 / $79 Advanced Gravis UltraSound / UltraSound Max .......... $129/S189 DSP DigiSpeech Portable Sound + ...........$145 Logitech SoundMan 16 / SoundMan Wave $77/$182 MS Sound System 2.0 with Board ........$139 Roland SC-7 Sound Canvas Module ... S205 SCD-10 Sound Canvas Daughter Board... $159 SCD-15 Sound Canvas Daughter Board........$209 RAP-10 Sound Producer. . ........ $249 Orchid Game wave 32 / Soundwave 32, 4 $145 / $210 Ensoniq Soundscape.... $179 Ensonic Soundscape DB Daughter Board $95 M . . $508 Pro Audio Studio 16 Premium 3D SCSI-2 Premium 3D SCSI-2 MCD. ...... $205 $119 $145 $145 $265 Add only $79 to a purchase above and get these 9 titles! CardShollus MEDIAMAGIC |  ISP-16 Audio Board .......... Telemetry 32..... MAVIS BEAR UN TERTINO WWW ABA IN CERSAIRASIER Word Allas MODEMS IMAGINATION\" 5 HOURS FREE NETWORK with the purchase of any modoml ZOOM NEW LOWER PRICES! Windows Toolwork's Multimedia Encyclopedia. Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing 3.0 MPC, Animals MC MepRace. CardShop Plus CD, Ultimate Domain, Chessmaster 4000 Tuito US Atlas 4.0 MPC World Atlas 4.0 MPC ... $179 ass 28.8 Int. / Ext SUPER BUNDLES! VIDEO BOARDS > DIAMOND Speedstar Pro, 1MB ISA / VLB .......... $115/5115 Stealth 24 ISA/VLB... ... $155/S155 Stealth 32 ISA/VLB 2MB $239 / $239 Stealth 64 2MB PCI/VLB $325 / $325 Stealth 64 4MB PCI/VLB 465/S465 Viper VLB 2MB / PCI 2MB $329 / $349 Video Star / Video Star Pro $325/5499 MATROX Matrox MGA 2MB: ISA/VLB / PCI..8509/8419/5365 Ai hough Perfect gir Graphics Pro Turbo 4MB ISA or VLB or PCI .........$569 LAS T EN ATI Graphics Wonder Mach ISA or VLB .... .... $115 ATI Ultra Pro 2 MB ISA O VLB................ S259 ATI Ultra Pro EISA 2MB.... ATI Ultra Pro Turbo 2MB ISA OF VLB or PCI.....355 Win Turbo 2MB PCI or VLB or ISA.......... $289 ea Graphics Expression 2MB: ISA/VLB/PCI.... $215 ea GRAPHICS PRO TURBO A. ESL Prescriptions for Learning Bundle BodyWorks 3.0 Dinosaur Museum PharmAssist $49 SIERRA Flying Ace Aces Over Europe Aces Over the Pacific A10 Tank Killer Red Baron $39 14.4 for DOS or Win Int / Ext............ $99 / $119 with Voice Int/Ext. ... ...... S119 / $139 Zoom 14.4 PKTEX V.Fast Class 28.8 Int. / Ext............. $115 / $165 Zoom 14.4 w/ RPI ZOXMMOULMA PC Int. / EX Ext..... $75/S109 14.4 PCMCIA Call-ready. FREE DELIVERY... $195 V.34 Fax Modem Int./Ext........ $185 / $215 LS Supra Corporation SupraFaxModern Internal 24/96 .... ... ....$53 Supra 2400 External SupraFaxModem 144LC. Class 1 only, Ext DOS/Win. $125 SupraFaxModem V.32 bis, with FaxSoftware DOS/Windows Internal / External....... $109 / $172 SupraFaxModem 2881 Int. / 288 Ext....... $205 / $235 Supra Express 144 with API... Supra Express 144 Plus Int/Ext..........589/599 USRobotics Sportster 14.4 with Fax Int. Ext....... $95 / $115 Sportster 28.8 Int./Ext...... .... $205 / $219 Sportster V.34 28.8 Int/Ext............. 5219 / $235 Sportster 14.4 PCMCIA, Free Delivery... S185 Sportster V 34 PCMCIA, Free Delivery $355 WorldPort Fax/Dat 14.4 PCMCIA, Free Del... $199 Courier V.32 Terbo with Fax Int / Ext...... $329 / $349 Courier V.34 Ready S/R Int/Ext ......... $375 / $419 Courier V.34 Dual Standard Int/Ext....... 5515 / $549 SIERRA Role Playing Adventure Gabriel Knight Leisure Suit Larry 6 Police Quest 4 \"Not appropriate S49 ... $289 CD ROM DRIVES & KITS... fr Bere Drives see Grid M TURTLE BEACH Monterey Upgrade Kit ........... 5619 MV 1100 Deluxe Multimedia Kit...... ... $215 CREATIVE MV0400 Reno Drive Internal $305 MV 2100 Family Deluxe .... $299 Game Blaster CD 16 Upgrade Kit.....$365 MV 3100 Super Deluxe... $389 Digital Edge 3x Upgrade Kit........$675 MV 4100 Premium Deluxe $499 Omni 3X / Omni 4X NEW!... $349 / $399 MEDIAMAGIC Omni External...................... $199 Discovery 16 Internal ...............$239 ISP-16 Light .. $199 Sound Blaster MM Office Intext.... $519/$599 ISP-16 Sound System... .... . $295 Datals Digital School House . NEW! .......$269 Edutainment CD 16 Int / Ext NEW! $399/$515 NEC FREE Card Shop Plus Enhanced 2V Deluxe 2Vi internal dbl spd drive with IDE interface, Creative Labs sound card, speakers. Yon CD ROM Version with the purchase Microsoft Encarta MM Encyclopedia, Mys! of any Creative Labs Upgrade Kit and Sim City....... Oher good thru 131.95. good at time of purchase only 9GXE, 1280 x 1024 NI, SVGA: LVL 10, 1MB ISA/VLB LVL 11.2MB ISA/VLB. LVL 12,3 MB ISA/VLB LVL 14, 4MB ISA/VLB GXE64 PCI IMB / 2MB GXE64 VLB 1MB/2MB. GXE64 Pro PCI $239 / $249 ..$349 / $349 $429 / $425 $629/$625 $175 / $249 $175 / $249 (A) MOTOROLA Power 14.4 PCMCIA Cellular Modem, FD.......$235 Lifestyle 14.4 PCMCIA Data Fax Modem, FD.... $195 Lifestyle Cellular Upgrade...... CELLect 14.4 Portable Cellular Modem.. ...$285 FasTalk II 1.4 kbps Int/Ext..............$115 / $135 . ... $89 Dideologic 928MOVIE 1MB/ with Sound ... $179' /$299 928MOVIE 2MB / with Sound..........$29975409 PCIMOVIE 2MB with Sound NEW $39 * Please specify ISA or VLB $285 K=491 K-401 Please reference this code when ordering by phone or fax. Hrs (CST): M-F 8am 8pm, Sat. 9am 5pm. Tech Info 1pm 5pm (414) 357-8181 Fax (414) 357-787 "


"Ura es CGW 1/95 PU PN Best Software Supplier in '94! NOTE: We do not sell xxx-rated CD ROMs so please don't call for them. CsKQUST 888 King's Quest VII The best-selling adventure scrics of all time returns with the most Evolution Lost in Time......... .. Fighter Fighter.. Fith Fleet... ... Flight Commander 2... Football Pro '95. Funny CD Gabriel Knight.... Global Explorer... Great Naval Battles II. Harvester Hell A Cybre Plunk Thriller... Hell Cab Hi Tech Aircraft ...... Incredible Machine 2 Incredible Sports Machine... Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis ... Insatiable Horde ... . .. Iron Assault. Iron Helix. Journeyman Project.... Journeyman Project Special Edition..... spectacular N EW! A 1th Hout. 7th Guest AT.P. with USA Aces Over Europe... REGIS: Guardian of the Fleet 41 Quadim: The Genie's Curse laddin and His Wonderful Lamp.. Alone in the Dark.............. . Armored Fist ** Back Roads Racers........... Battle Chess MPC Enhanced.. Beauty & the Beast.......... Beneath a Steel Sky Beyond Planet Earth.. Blood Bowl ... Buzz Aldons Race into Space... Castles II.... CD Speedway.... Chaos Continuum. Chess Master 4000 Turbo MPC. Colonization Commanche M.O.K. w/Expanded Mission Command and Conquer ... Corridor 7.... . Creature Shock Crime Patrol 2: Drug Wars..... Critical Path... Cyber Judas ... Cyber Race Daring to Fly .. Dark Legions......... Dark Sun Shattered Lands... Deal A Meal Delta 5 Dinosaur Adventure 3.0... Doom 2..... Dracula Unleashed CD Dragon's Lair... Dragonsphere............ Dungeon Hack. Eagle Eye Mysteries: London. Earth Siege... Ecoquest: The Search for Cetus ESPN Baseball ESPN Golf Tom Kite Even More Incredible Machines.. =$5$$BFB Star Wars Chess Star Wars Trilogy Stonekeep..... . . Terminator Chess ........ Tetris Gold ... Theme Park Tony LaRussa Baseballll.... Ultima 1.VI ... Ultima Underworld I & II........ Ultima VII Complete... Ultima VIII with Speach Pack.. Under a Killing Moon.......... Undersea Adventure.... US Navy Fighters USA Wars: Desert Storm w/Coalition Command War Planes: Modern Fighting Aircraft for Win.. Where In World Carmen Sandiego Deluxe.. . Who Shot Johnny Rock Wing Commander 2 Deluxe w/speech and 182 Wing Commander 3........ Wing Commander Armada ..... Wing Commander l/Ultima VI.. Wing's Over Europe .. Wolf Pack...... World Circuit.... World Cup Interactive Wrath of the Gods........ Wrath of the Gods........... episode yct. Told through breathtaking, cinema-quality animation and accompanied by a dynamically beautiful score, King's Quest VII establishes a new standard for animated adventure games. In King's Quest VII, Roberta williams spins an enchanting tale of mother and daughter caught in a world of fairies, trolls, and magical lands. This Holiday Season, share the laughter and excitement of this charming adventure game with your entire family 53 Doom II Sequel to the awardwinning DOOM. DOOM II provides more levels. more nastier, deadlier demons to battle, more weapons, excitement and a whole new story line! Stunning graphics, pulse-pounding ac tion and intense gameplay make this the ultimate action game Rated #Iby all the critics! For one player, two players using a modem and up to four players on a LAN (1PX protocol). CD $45 pc $44.95 886 33% INPUT DEVICES LOGITECH Dexxa Serial Mouse Mouseman Cordless II. Trackman II Combo.... Trackman Voyager ...... KENSINGTON Expert Mouse MICROSOFT MS Serial Mouse 2.0............ MS Home Mouse........... MS Natural Keyboard CH PRODUCTS Virtual Pilot CH-Flight Stick Pro... THRUSTMASTER Thrustmaster Pro Flight Control Stick. ... ... $119 Flight Control Stick $75 Rudder Pedals...... S119 9% Wing Commander III in this technologically astounding sequel. ou're 1 Squadron commander aboard the TCS ictory. By interactively affecting the plot and the war, you can end the Terran-Kilrathi con lict with a final showdown on one of the omeworlds. Which will it be Earth or Kilrah? Only a true WING COMMANDER THE Commander an write the nding to the atest install. aient of this accessful MS Dangerous Creatures MS Flight Simulator 5.1...... MS Golf Championship Pinehurst MS Office 4.2 Standard NT for Win. MS Ultimate Robot ......... MYST Nascar Racing Normandy.... Oceans Below......... Oregon Trail ..... Out Post .... Pacific Strike with Speech Pack Patrician ........ PGA Tour Goll 486 Phantasmagoria. PlayRoom for Win.... Police Quest 4....... ... Prehistoria Psychotron.. . Quantur Gate. Quantum Gate 2. Vortex Windows Quest for Glory 4. Quest for Glory 6 Raiden .. Ravenloft.......... . Rebel Assault Red Shift for Windows.... Renaissance Master II..... Return to Ringworld.......... Relum to Zork. Rise of the Robots..... Ruff's Bone. Sam & Max Hit the Road..... Shadow Caster. Shadow of the Comet .... SIM City Skyrealms of Jorune: Alien Logic. Slater & Charlie Go Camping Space Adventure..... Space Hulk.... Space Quest 4.... Space Shuttle SSI's Fantasy Fest .... SSN-21 Seawolf... Star Crusader Take 2..... Star Trek 25th Anniversary Jump Raven ................... Jurassic Park 2.0 for Win. Jutland Kings Quest 5. Kings Quest 6... Kings Quest 7 Knights to Xentar. Labyrinth of Time... Lands of Lore ..... Lawn Mower Man Legend of Oz. Leisure Suit Larry 6.... Leisure Suit Larry Collection Lil Divil. Lode Runner... Lord of the Rings... Lost Eden .......... . Lost In Time Lost Treasures of Infocom... Maddog Mcree Il.. Maniac Mansion 2 (Day of the Tentacle). Maniac Sports ... Mario is Missing Deluxe.... Mechamander Mechwarrior II .. Microcosm... Might & Magic World of Xeen Millennium Auction... Monkey Island..... . =HT Ving 789ww Since 1982 ComputAbility Consumer Electronics P.O. Box 17862 Milwaukee, WI 53217  Airborne: All credit approved orders in the 45 contigo atce under 15, utomatically upgraded to Airborne Fapteu ? day delivery Net drevernight preu sailable for a l tra charge One of Wiscontin' Top 10 Women Cesed Buttesi . Corporate Government & School , Welcome Erics. $53 VISA Mastercard DUNE TOP 30 DISK BASED GAMES ces Over Europo.. ..39.95 attle Bugs. . 39.95 civilization for Win & DOS ......... 49.95 Colonization 49.95 rystal Calibum for Win... 29.95 oom 2.... 44.95 arth Siege .....* 44.95 ven More Incredible Machines for Win 29.95 alcon 3.0 .... . .....47.95 47.95 cootball Pro '95 .. 44.95 Gabriel Knight.................... Harpoon II...................... Heroes of Might & Magic......... Leisure Suit Larry 6... Links 386 Pro..... Lords of the Realm for DOS.. Metal Tech: EarthSiege.... MS Flight Simulator 5.0 NBA Jam Pacific Strike...... 39.95 42.95 39.95 39.95 39.95 38.95 44.95 43.95 41.95 46.95 Printshop Deluxe 2.0 DOS 45.95 Sim Cily 2000 for DOS 39.95 Sim City 2000 for Win.. 39.95 Strip Poker Pro SVGA. 29.95 Super Street Fighter 2 .... 39.95 Tony LaRussa Baseball Il. 36.95 Ultima VIII Pagan 25.95 Where in the World is Carmen San Diego X Wing...... 39.95 X-Wing, B-Wing Tour of Duty ............ 19.95 No Seurge on Credit Cards . Most Order Shipped within 48 hrs. Software Shipping only $6 pet order, not pertide. llardware: 5.55. Min 36 COD) orden welcome with only a 5600 charge. No Airborse CON  We Ship latest version of Software Available All Products Sold Carry Manufacturers Full Wisaties & Ilocumentation  APO, FINO HLAK Porto Rico & Canadunordens welcome 65-Min. $6. All orders utside contiguous 48 United States are shipped lot Clan MailImurder private carrier 15%. Min 515. If deney con cerdaculated amount, you'll be Wedditional . Call for Free Catalog & Nelisse Fenonal & company checks may be delayed. Prices Pochute beyond ou concul & mar dupe for better of work. We do not guarantee    .     Return Authorization numba, Calleat 1.8004 to obtain a Return Authention of th e surped Shipping & handling are no refundable Alula a final. All tant a chica reading fee. Not spille for typographical co. Products offered with Free Delivery applies only to the contiguous 48 states! for all your yaning needs. op 800-896-1336 rs (CST): M-F 8am 8pm, Sat. 9am-5pm  Tech Info 1pm 5pm (414) 357-8181 Fax (414) 357-7814 when ordering by phone or fax.N K=491 4 U "


"baud. Mention CGW when you call. PERAMENTE Prowler's Palace BBS at (916) 788-1624 is looking for new members. 240028800 bps, 2+ gigabytes of on-line games, CD-ROM online. Now running WWIV net. SYSop Fred Williamson. Local opponent wanted for play by modem of WORLD CIRCUIT, FPS FOOTBALL, Op. ERATION CRUSADER, Doom and Doom II, or any other game by modem! Contact Jason at (514) 487-3229, EST, Montreal, Canada. Feel free to leave a message. Looking for managers to compete in our PURSUE THE PENNANT play-by-mail baseball league. Call Bill H. at (516) 825-0057 before 8 PM EST, or write PBF Coordinator, P.O. Box 260171, Bellerose, NY 11426. Byte to Excellence is a Redding, CA BBS looking for new members. Enjoy access to Internet, VirtualNet. UseNet and Excellent Net, along with a number of games such as TRADEWARS, LOD, and BRE. There is also an on-line CD with many more games to choose from. Speeds up to 14.4, just call (916) 223-4900 for a barrel of fun! Looking for a Patton to play against your Rommel? Need some fresh meat for network Doom-fests? On the hunt for a gamer's bulletin board system in your arca? Well, you might find what you need on CGW's White Page. If you'd like to place your own ad, send us a postcard, CGW Poll card, letter, FAX 1714-283-3444] or email (Prodigy [EXIT40B), CompuServe [76703,622), The Sierra Network at [Box 1048], GEnie or America On-Line at [CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each month you want your name listed. The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples to write your own. However,  Provide at least one telephone number. Do not forget the area code and mention whether the number is Home, Work or Modem.  Include your city and state so that people who call you will know what time zone you are in and recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. I am the best Doom player on earth; face me if you dare! Phoenix AZ, (602) 935-9714 OPPONENTS WANTED BY AREA CODE I am looking for people in the Madison, WI area to play FALCON 3.0, WACKY WHEELS and SEAWOLF against. I would be glad to play people from farther away if you make the call. Scott Finley, (608) 2226319. Prodigy: JCNB42C. Internet: scottwarzone.com I am looking for opponents in the Seattle/Bellevue, WA area for modem play of FAL CON 3.0, SEAWOLF and other games. Call Patrick at (206) 451-8206. Computer Gaming World magazine also appears as its own Forum on CompuServe's ZiffNet. To access our editors and writers on-line, just GO GAME WORLD. Topics include: Hey Editor!, Opponents Wanted, The Hardware Zone, Online Gaming and many more. Join us, won't you? NET I'm interested in playing FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL Pro with anyone in the Dal las area. If interested, please contact Chris al (214) 418-7197. Opponents wanted for (707) area code games of Doom, Doom II. FALCON, MIG, or HORNET. Justin Landskron, Santa Rosa, CA, (707) 8248956, 2400, 9600 or 14.4 baud. BULLETIN BOARDS \"MegaCredits\" to each new on-line user. meets for Doom, FALCON. ARMADA, etc., with many on. going gaming ladders posted. The Crossroads BBS in Redmond, Va is looking for players to play games like EMPIRE DELUXE, SPECTRE VR and 4-Player Doom! Our system works as a hub, allowing network games to be played against other lay. ers while online. We also have UseNet news and a huge file area, running ma. jor BBS with 5 lines. Call (206) 882-3542 24 hours a day. modem gamers and gamers in general: together for the thrill of victory. Our On-Line Modem Database is continually updated with gamers seeking head-to-head oppo: nents for SEAWOLF, LEXI CROSS, Doom and others. We also feature tournaments. contests and prize give aways. So if you're looking to reach out and crush\" someone, or just looking for a BBS where you have a say and everyone is a winner. then call us in Philadel. phia-We have 2 nodes and speeds up to 14.4 The Main Street BBS (515) 628-3101-Multinode BBS (3 lines) offering Trade Wars 2002. Legend of the Red Dragon, Real-Time Chess, space Quest 2112 Xeno-Quest. Planets TEOS and many others. Also shareware game releases withover 50,000 files. Located in Fairfax Station VA. 8th Wonder BBS--node 1: (703) 569-6414. 50 online doors, world message exchange and SkyNet International (10,000 messages updated daily). Over one gigabyte of files available for download. Running TriBBS 5.1, 24 hours/ 7days, supporting 2400-14400 baud callers. Seeking fans of the games MONKEY ISLAND 2, POLICE QUEST: OPEN SEASON, and Disney's COASTER to share hints, scores and thoughts on the game. Please write David Landers at 3780 North Sunnyfield Drive, Copley, OH 44321, or call at (216) 666-4766. Seeking opponents in the PA (717) area code. Contact Aaron in Chambersburg at (717) 263-8467 or through the Internet: ThirdBro@aol.com. I am interested in Doom or Doom 11 deathmatch or cooperative games via 14.4 or 9600 baud. Local Doom or Doom Il victims wanted for Deathmatch 2.0. I am the best Doom marine. Karl Kindt, Webster Groves. MO. (314) 9684005 Wanted: Doom Deathmatch opponent in the Jack sonville, FL area. Call after 5 PM, (904) 388-7408 Ask for Tom S. Check out New Zalem at (713) 360-1794. It's got tons of files and some on. line doors like Legend of the Red Dragon, TW2002, SRE, and BRE and it needs callers like you to play them. Those interested in purchasing VGA PLANETS should contact designer Tim Wise. man at P.O. Box 204, North Fork, CA 93643, or call his BBS at (209) 877-4921. The cost of a registered ver sion of the game is $15. Game Palace BBS is the largest DOOM BBS around! Over 1300 WADS and 260+ megs of Doom files on-line, with 30 different Doom file areas and 9 DOOM confer. ences. Mirror of popular ftp site. Offical id Software distribution site and official site to many popular WADS, including ALIENS-TC, TRINITY, FOREST and more. Several CDs offer shareware files at 14,400 24 hours/7days, (305) 587-4258. Alaska Image Scanning at (907) 338-0451 is a new BBS in Anchorage, AK offering info on having photographs scanned. We also have a large Doom file area (100 mega and growing!) as well as other games and files. carrying Software Creations Net with conferences for Apogee and id Software! Full access on the first call, with support up to 28.8. open 24 hours/7 days weekly. Opponents wanted for DOOM II. either Deathmatch or cooperative, on local modems in Alberta, Canada. Call Scott Rodger at (403) 4645468 for more info. Seeking a modem opponent for the McAlaster, OK area. Please call Kevin before 2 PM at (918) 423-5637. I have a 2400 baud modem, and I play any type of game. THE NETWORKS 28,800 bps madness! Join the Modem Gladiators Forum on Maverick's Quodte. gitur BBS, On-line games include TRADEWARS 2002, RED DRAGON, MINES OF GORR 3D. SARATOGA RACEWAY and more. Huge selection of Doom files, game editors, and add-ons, plus flight sim patches, cheats hints and editors for hundreds of other games. RIP comptible VGA online menus-FREE access 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Fresno, CA (209) 233-7835. The Modem CONNECTion BBS at (404) 591-9762, flies at 28800bps and serves as the comm center for Atlanta's 404th CyberSpace Fighter Wing. Flight line. Any and all Serial/modem/network games are played and provided for by utility files and international messages. Monthly local network MegaComm BBS at (703) 829-BIG1, has been open since 4/94 and is the fastest growing BBS in central VA! We sponsor the Phoenix Wargamers' Guild and the Adventurer's Guild & Archeological Society gaming clubs; have RPGA on-line events, WARHAMMER FANTASY BATTLES scenarios. and PBM board games. We have a wide selection of games in both solo and multi-player mode for members and visitors alike, including MERCHANT PRINCE, VGA PLANETS, DIPLOMACY, MACHI AVELLI, EMPIRE DELUXE and DOOM among many others. The only on-line BBS that is a game, we give free on-line The Underground BBS is the ultimate plac3e for players to meet and have fun! Over 50 online games including BARREN ELITE, TW 2002, LEGEND OF THE RED DRAGON and more, with a USURPER tourney for either new or advanced players! Our very large file base has a number of Doom external levels, and our message base allows you to talk to other gamers around the world. Call us in Diamond Bar. CA at (909) 861-5901, up to 28.8k The following are voice contact numbers for the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Novalink (formally Digital Dreams) Network: (800) 274-2814 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 The ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 x556 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 The Gamers Proving Ground BBS-(215) 248-2319-is dedicated to connecting 236 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"THE FIRST WONDEOF THECYBERWORLD. VIRTUAL VEGAS INC. CD-ROM WELCOMES YOU TO THE able on ( Availak FUTURE OF CASINO THE FOR MORE INFO CALL VIRTUAL VEGAS HOTLINE 800-95-VEGAS OC & MAC GAMING ENTERTAINMENT. COME TO VIRTUAL VEGAS AND TM WANDER THROUGH A STUNNING CYBERCASINO WHILE BEAUTIFUL BLACKJACK DEALERS BECKON YOU TO THE TABLES. YOUR VOLUMENE GOAL: WIN BIG. HER GOAL: STEAL YOUR HEART AND EMPTY YOUR WALLET! THE MORE YOU PLAY THE MORE PLAYFUL IT GETS! WRITTEN BY THE EDITORS OF NATIONAL LAMPOON MAGAZINE AND PACKED WITH 600 MEGS OF STUNNING 3DRENDERED GRAPHICS, QUICKTIME\" VIDEO AND VOICE RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY, VIRTUAL VEGAS IS THE FUTURE OF CASINO GAMING, AND THE FUTURE OF ENTERTAINMENT.  VIRTUAL VEGAS INC. DISTRIBUTED BY ELECTROMEDIA INC: (310) 315-3606 $29.95 AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR CALL: COMPUTER EXPRESS (800) 228-7449 MISSION CONTROL (800) 999-7995 Circle Reader Service #227 RETAIL "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Lite Games From Miller: All The Flavor, Half The 'Splat' by Chuck Miller RAVEN KATANA JUST FINISHED WATCHING CYBERMAHollywood production. MUST FALL: 2097 (OMF) from Epic NIA '94 LIVE ON TBS, WHICH DIDN'T Alright, I've spoken my peace, and MegaGames. OMF, as you have surQUITE LIVE UP TO ITS BILLING AS this isn't supposed to be a forum for airmised by this point, is a one-on-one \"The Ultimate Gamers Awards.\" ing grievances, so let's turn to the nomicombat cocktail with a sci-fi twist. The I'm sure many hard-core gamers nees for this issue's shareware winners. game warps you to the future as the \"piwere disappointed by what they This month we duke it out with Epic lot\" of a 90-foot-tall robot which, oddly saw. At the very least, this gala MegaGames' ONE MUST FALL: 2097 and enough, can jump, punch and kick like event may have confirmed a Ninja. The round's over suspicions that Hollywood's when you or your oppoinvolvement with interac CRYSTAL nent winds up sitting tive gaming would reduce it 124,200 amidst a scrap heap. to its lowest common deThere are, however, sevnominator. Don't get me eral key features and a dewrong; the event was prosign philosophy that sets fessionally handled and feathis offering apart from tured some prominent the \"blood baths\" of the personalities from both the video game alternatives. acting and gaming commuRendered in an art nities. However, it did not style similar to Japanese showcase our industry in anime, OMF'S \"non-viothe best light. The emphalent\" action is more akin sis was definitely on the to World Championship video game scene; award Wrestling than down-andcategories were a mixed lot dirty street fighting. The ROBOT BRAWN Huge robots battle it out with Ninja-style attacks in ONE MUST FALL. at best (SUPER STREET combatants are shiny, anFIGHTER and RETURN TO The great graphics are also gore-free. imated robots capable of ZORK in the same category, traditional fighting for example); and much of the best in take a spin in Apogee's WACKY WHEELS. moves, which makes the game look like computer gaming never made it on Both of these games deserve a moment a low resolution RISE OF THE ROBOTS (a screen (with the notable exceptions of in the spotlight whether Hollywood ever high-res CD-ROM game reviewed in Doom, Myst, 7th Guest, and a few othacknowledges them or not, and both of this issue). The tone between opponents er key titles). fer excellent gaming without blood, is more that of friendly jibes than So, what does Cybermania '94 have to body parts and gratuitous violence. bloody threats, and is further softened do with shareware gaming? Well, in all by the animated graphic style. honesty, I have seen a lot of shareware ROCK 'EM SOCK 'EM ROBOTS Players choose from among ten pilots games with greater play value and more If games like STREET FIGHTER II and and eleven different 'bots to battle it out entertainment than some of the \"games\" MORTAL COMBAT taste great to you but in five arenas. There is even a tournathat were nominated for awards in this you want less gore, try a taste of ONE ment mode with predetermined combi238 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. PO BOX 234 DEPT 10174 ROCHESTER VT 05767 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD 58. Dotectives replaced with same product. Most Items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. Call for details. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI. AK, APO, FPO S4 por order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment Hardware orders may require adeltional shipping charges. All sales final. Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10174 GEN HARDWARE GEN ROLE PLAYING SEGA MARS 32X SNES ROLE PLAYING TURBO GRAFX ALLE WATAN $62 $59 $59 $59 S66 $62 $56 4 Way Play Adaptor $29 6 Bin Arcad Pwr Stk $39 6 Button Control Pd $19 F-16 Wirtss Cntrl Pd $39 Fighter Stick $29 Gamo Gun CD $36 Genesis Activator $59 GEN CD Bkup RAM $49 GEN CD Sys 2 CD $229 GEN COX Sys $399 GEN Systm 2 core $99 GEN Systm Sonic 25129 GEN Sys/Lion King $139 Genesis Team Player $19 Remote Arcade Pad S19 SG Pro Pad 2 $19 Battletech GA S 54 Dark Ward CD MA13 543 Dungeon Master CD $44 Exile Eye of Beholder CD $46 Lord of the Rings $59 Lunar 2 CD $52 Might & Magic 3 $59 Now Honzons GA $62 Phantasy Star 4 $82 Reyngr of Vngna CD $44 Shadow Run MA-13 $49 Shining Force 2 GA $66 Vay CD MA-13 $48 'ALIEN VS. PREDATOR' Choose your weapon in a 64-bit combat challenge with the stars of these feature films. Battle through miles of texture-mapped corridors with digitized character recreations. Lightningfast speed provides the ultimate in chase sequences. Exceptional colors and light shading throw you in the middle of all the limb-severing action. JAGUAR $59 Genesis 32X Systm $159 Alien Tlogy C2-Judgment Clay $59 College Basketball $62 College Football $59 Corpse Kiiter $59 Cosmic Camage $59 CyberBrawl $59 Doom $59 Fahrenheit CD $52 Golf Mg 36 Git Holes $62 Metal Head $59 Midnight Raiders CD $56 Mortal Kombat 2 569 Motocross Champ $52 NBA Jam Tourn Edit $62 Night Trap Star Wars Arcade $52 Stellar Assault $59 Super Space Harrier $59 Surgical Strike CD $52  $59 Tomcat Alloy CD $59 Virtua Racing Deluxe $59 Wirehead CD $52 Battletoch Brain Lord Breath of Fire Draon Warrior 5 DragonView Final Fantasy 3 First Queen Illusion of Gaia Lord of the Rings Lutia Might & Magic 3 New Horizons Runes of Virtue Seventh Saga Ultima 6 Wizardry 5 $12 $12 Turbo Booster $9 Turbo Car Adaptor $12 Turbo Duo Adaptor $9 Turbo Duo Pad S12 Turbo Exprs Lnk Col $12 Turbo Extensn Cable $9 Addams Family $12 Bravoman Cratermazo Ghost Manor $12 Impossamole $12 Jack Nicklaus Golf $12 Jackie Action kg Fu $12 JB Harold $12 Monster Lair CD $12 Somer Assault $54 $54 $59 S62 $59 $56 $56 $39 $12 GENESIS SHOOTERS GEN ADVENTURE TAGHAR SNES KICK & PUNCH JAGUAR Battle Frenzy CD 544 Contra Hard Corps $49 Crime Patrol CD $49 Exo Squad $52 Keio Fly Squum CD $46 Lethal Enforcrs 2 CD $44 Lihl Entre wign MA17$66 Mad Dg McCre 2 CD $49 Rebel Assault 3D CD $39 Skoloton Krow $49 Soul Star CD $44 Star Striko 2000 CD $56 Surgical Striko CD $52 Total Carnage CD $52 Urban Strike MA-13 $52 View Point GA Zero Tolerance $52 Jaguar System S249 Jaguar CD System S199 Alien Vs Predator $59 Battle Zone 2000 $52 Brutal Sports Fball $58 Castlo Wolfnstain 3D $54 Checkered Flag 2 $59 Evolutn:Dino Dudes $44 RayMan Tempest 2000 $52 SNES HARDWARE $58 MIDNIGHT RAMERS NEO GEO ANO CAN SEGA CD 32X Ballz $52 C2:Judgment Clay $58 Double Dragon 5 $56 Dragon:Bruce Lee $58 Fatal Fury Special S62 Justice League 564 Kung Fu:Legend Cnt $59 Mortal Kombat 2 $66 Power Instinct $58 Power M $29 Ranma 1/22 $59 Samurai Showdown $59 Shaq-Fu $59 Streetfight 2 Trb Ed $39 Super Street Fight 2 $60 Survival Arts Tuff Enutt WCW Super Brawl $52 Wolvrine:Admnt Rg 562 World Heroes 2 S56 MIDNIGHT RAIDERS' Get ready for the ride of your life in an AH-64 Apache Attack helicopter Your mission is to fly under the cover of night and rescue a kidnapped government official. You'll need all the luck you can get. Combines aerial combat and adventure gaming. Engage in urban warfare and try to reach the terrorist compound. SEGA MARS 32X S56 Gamo Gonio $36 Power Plug Pro Action Replay $59 Pro Pad Programmbi $19 Super MTap & Bmbr $59 Super Multitap $32 Super Nintendo Sys $149 SNES NO Software $109 Wireless Contol Pad $42 GEN SIMULATIONS Noo Goo Gold Sys $569 Neo Geo CD Sys $569 Agressrs Drk Kombt$199 Fatal Fury Special $199 Karnov's Revenge $199 Super Sideks Sor 2 $199 Top Hunter $169 Windjammers $199 World Heroes 2 Jet $199 SNES ADVENTURE SNES SIMULATIONS $59 3DO Al Unser Jr Racing $46 Battle Crp CD MA13 $44 Daytona USA $79 ESPN SpeedWorld $58 Frmula 1 GP CD GA $46 Mario Andri Racing $49 Megarace CD $44 Midnight Raiders CD $52 Monster Truck Wars $52 Outrunners GA $56 SoaQuest DSV $56 Skitchin' MA-13 $29 Speed Racer $49 Tmct Alley CD MA13 $49 Virtua Racing GA $69 Wing Commander 2 $56 UVODHO S.GION! 3 Ninjas Kick Ok CD $52 AX 101 CD $44 Addrn Family Values $56 Aero the Acrobt 2 GAS52 Akira or CD $56 Aladdin GA $46 Alien Trilogy CD $52 Aura Interactor $79 Baby Boom Beavis & Butt-Head $54 BlackThorne $49 Boogerman MA-13 $49 Bubsy 2 GA $49 Cadillc & Dinosrs CD $49 Chuck Rock 2 $29 Corpse Killer CD $52 Dark Seed CD MA13 $52 Death of Superman $52 Demolition Man CD $54 Dracula Unleashd CDS39 Dragons Lair CD $49 Dragons Lair 2 CD $52 Dynamite Headdy $49 EarthWorm Jim GA $66 Ecco Dolphin CD $52 Flashback CD $46 Franknstn/Dracla CD $52 Grt Crc Myst w/Mcky $58 Home Improvement $54 Hurricanes $52 Incredible Hulk $54 Incredible Toons CD $49 tchy & Scratchy $43 Aron Helix CD GA $49 Jungle Book GA 556 Jurassic Prk Rpg Ed $54 Kamen Rider Zo CD $44 Lawnmower Man CD 544 Lion King GA 564 Londstar CD $49 wanan Hidn Sis CD $49 Mickey Mania or CD $58 Out this World CD $49 Pitfall GA $61 Power Rangers GA $52 Rise Drgn CD MA17 $46 Scooby Doo $52 Shadow of Atints CD $52 Shadow of Bst 2 CD $56 Skuljaggers Revenge $52 Sonic the Hedghog 4 $59 Space Ace CD S 52 Sparkster $44 Spidy: Max Carnago $56 Star Trk Nxt Gen CD $64 Star Trk:Dp Space 9 $56 Sylvester & Twty GA $54 The Punisher The Tick $54 Tinhead GA $52 Vikings 2 $46 Who Sht Jon Rck CD$49 Young Indy Jns CD 546 Aero Fighters $52 Air Cavalry $52 Air Strike Patrol $56 Al Unser Jr Racing $52 Carrier Aces $52 ESPN SpeedWorld $58 Freeway Fly Boys $52 Full Throttle Racing $56 Miko Andrti Indy Car $59 Monster Truck Wars S59 Nigel Mnsil Indy Car $59 Speed Racer $52 Star Trek Strit Acad S52 Street Racer $56 Top Gear 3000 $56 UniRacers $48 Wild Trax (Sint Race) $52 World Champ Rally $52 3DO System $399 11th Hour $59 Aces over Europe $54 Alone in the Dark $46 Doom FIFA Int'l Soccer GEX $52 Samurai Showdown $52 Star Trek Next Gen $54 Way of the Warrior $52 $56 $52 GENESIS STRATEGY GAME GEAR SEGA CD $58 Aero Biz Supersonic $59 Animaniacs GA $46 Caesars Palace $49 Clue CD $39 Columns 3 GA $46 Dune CD GA $49 General Chaos $29 Jeopardy CD $49 Liberty or Death GA $59 Nobunga Ambitn GA $39 Operation Europo $59 Pac Man 2 $52 Powrmngr CD MA13 $43 Shanghail 2 GA $39 Warrior Rome 3 CD $54 Wheel of Fortune CD $52 Wirohead CD $52 'CORPSE KILLER You're stranded on an uncharted island of death, you're dy. ing of voodoo poison, a mad genius is on your trail, hundreds of rotting dead are coming to chew your guts...and your buddies have been turned into vicious cannibals. Features shooting at hundreds of video zombies, plot your survival strategy, and nonstop live-action video. CD $52 Ad Batman & Robin $59 Akira Aladdin $49 Beavis & Butt-Head $54 Black Thorne $52 Capt Amer & Avnges $19 Captain Commando $59 Crazy Chase $49 Death of Superman $59 Donkey Kng Country $64 Dracula $29 EarthWorm Jim S 66 Gr Crc Myst w/Mcky S62 Ignition Factor $54 Indiana Jones Grt Ad $62 Itchy & Scratchy $52 Jurassic Park 2 $56 Knights of Rnd Table $56 Lion King $64 Mega Man X2 559 Michael Jord:Chaos 554 Ogre Battle Pitfall $61 Power Rangers S62 Ron & Stimpy Shw 2 $56 Run Saber $29 SeaQuest DSV $59 Shion's Revengo $54 Spoody Gonzales $52 Spidy:Max Carnago $64 Star Trek:Dp Space 9556 Steven Seagal $54 Super Advnt Island 2 S58 Super Return of Jedi $63 Super Turrican $36 T2:Judgement Day $29 Thunder in Paradise $54 Timo Slip $29 Virtual Bart Wolf Child $46 X MEN $59 X-Kalibor Yogi Bear Young Merlin Zombios Ate Neighbr $46 SNES STRATEGY Beavis & Butt-Head $34 Caesars Palace S29 GG Sys Lion King $129 Mortal Kmbt 2 MA13 $39 NBA Bball Robinson $29 Psychic World $14 Sonic Triple Table GA$38 Star Trek Movie $34 Super Golf $14 KLER ACME Animatn Fatry S64 Animaniacs $54 Civilization Lemmings 2. Tribes $56 Lord of Darkness $59 Nobunaga's Ambition $49 Operation Europe $62 Pac Man 2 Pachi Slot $52 Pinball Dreams $49 Risk $52 Romnco 3 Kngdms 3 $59 Super Bomberman 2 $52 Super Pinball The Brainios $54 Wario's Woods $48 Wild Snake $46 GENESIS SPORTS $49 $56 ORTHWORMS $29 GEN KICK & PUNCH $52 $56 SNES SPORTS Art of Fighting MA13 $52 Claylighter Dragon:Bruce Lee $58 Eternal Chmp MA13 $29 Fatal Fury Spec CD $48 Final Fight CD $42 King of Monsters 2 $54 Mortal Kbt CD MA17 $24 Mortal Kmbt 2 MA17 562 Ninja Warriors CD $49 Power Instinct $54 Rise of Robots CD $46 Samurai Showdown $58 Shaq-Fu Streets of Rage 3 $56 Supr Strt Fir 2 MA13 966 TMNT Tourn Fighters $39 World Heroes 2 $56 SNES SHOOTERS Bass Mastrs Classic $49 Bill Walsh Coll FB 95 954 College Fball 94 GA $52 ESPN Bsball CD GA $56 FIFA Interntnl Scr 95 554 Golf Mag 36 Hola CD$52 Hardball 94 GA $52 Joe Montana FB CD $29 Links Pro Golf CD S56 Maddon Fball 94 GA $39 NBA Bball NBA Acin $39 NBA Jam Sessn CD $52 NBA Live 95 $56 NFL Sprtstalk FB 95 954 NHL Hockey 95 GA $54 PGA Tour 95 $54 Rugby World Cup 95 $52 Tecmo Baseball GA 956 Tecmo Hockey GA $54 Tiny Toon:ACME Strs $44 Tony LRs Uitm BB 95554 Unnocosry Roughns $56 Vitale Basketball GA 954 WCW Super Brawl $49 WWF:Raw $59 O GENESIS 'EARTHWORM JIM' Armed with a laser cannon that at its most powerful can make the screen look like an explosion in a fireworks factory and clad in an indestructable robo-suit, EWJ is out to rescue Princess What's-HerName while staying one step ahead of his arch-nemesis Psy-Crow. Other bad guys include Doc Duodenum, Major Mucus, Evil the Cat, Bob and#4. $66 *FREE GAME OFFER Buy 3 from the list below, Get 1 of lesser value FREE from the list below. All 4 games must be in stock at the time of purchase Offer good from 10/15/94 to 1/31/95 or while supplies last. Genesis: Valls $14 General Chaos $29, F16 Wireless CP $39. Joo Montana CD $29, NBA Action $39, Sonic Hedgehog 3 $49, Mortal Kombat CD $29, Genesis Activator $59. SNES: Barkley Basketball $49, T2: Judgement Day $29, Captain America $29. Run Saber $29, B Walsh Coll Fball $44. Tutl Enuff $29, Street Fighter 2 Turbo $39. Power Moves $29, Dracula $29. Gamo Gear: Super Golf $14, Psychic World $14, Terminator $18, Smash TV $14, Pro Pouch $16, Game Gear AC Adaptor $15 Bal Walsh Coll Fball $39 Brott Hull Hockey 95 $52 Cannondale Cup $56 FIFA Interntnl Soccr $52 GUTS $54 Hammer Lock Wrestl $56 Looney Tunes B-Ball $59 Maddon Football 95 $56 NBA Jam Session $54 NBA Live 95 A LIVE 95 $59 NFL Quartorbk Club $66 NHL Hockey 95 $54 Street Hockoy $58 Super Punch Out S55 TNN Bass Tournamt $56 Tecmo Baseball $59 Tiny Toon:Wcky Sprt $52 WWF Raw $66 Exo Squad $52 Fire Striker Fire Team Rogue S56 Galactic Dofendors $56 Lithi Entre wion MA17$64 Operation Thundibit $54 Super Metroid $56 Super R-Type 3 $56 Supr Sonic Bistmn 2 $56 Super Turrican 2 $52 View Point $54 Vortex $56 Wild Guns $54 Yoshi's Safari $29 Circle Reader Service #200 JAN CGW VID "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE nations of bots and jockeys. Players modes, single-player or two-player hicles occasionally causes spinouts. pick from one of four tournaments shoot-outs, Wacky Duck Shoot (like a There is some ammunition available provided, each one offering different shooting gallery on wheels) and on the track: hedgehogs can be tossed fighting styles and attacks. Game Comm-bat mode for modemor seriat your opponents to slow them down. speed, fight mode, hazards, number of al-based competition. There are opBombs, oil cans and matches can also rounds and difficulty level are all selections galore to adjust the music be collected, but they can't be used to table, making OMF extremely cusvolume, sound effects and engine impede the other drivers. Fortunately, tomizable. When enemy 'bots bite the noises; toggle the clock speedometer there are no fatalities in WACKY dust, players earn extra bucks to build and overhead map displays on or off; WHEELS, making this an ideal game for bigger, badder 'bots. and raise or lower the screen detail those concerned about the mayhem But one of OMF's most unique feadepending on your processor and and destruction in most action titles. tures is the two-player, head-to-head graphics display speed. The designers didn't seem to leave mode. Using two Gravis PC GAMEPADS And speaking of speed, you don't out many options, with the possible (my favorite action controller) and a Y. have to be stuck in a go cart with a exception of being able to print out adapter, the game becomes a rock-em, weed whacker engine. There is a top scores or an award certificate for sock-em arcade-style strong finishes (kids slugfest on the PC. The x3 x08 love this kind of thing). combat action is depicted Although the 256-color with 120 frames of 3D anlow-resolution VGA imated artwork for each IMGARIS graphics are decent, I robot, which heightens would like to see a the game's visual interest. high-res version of the In addition, multi-changame. Perhaps WACKY nel sound effects and a WHEELS will prove succatchy stereo soundtrack 01:29:9 cessful enough to allow mean you can bop to the Apogee to make one beat while the 'bots take a available as a future beating. upgrade. As it stands, The shareware version LIT 5 though, WACKY WHEELS of ONE MUST FALL: 2097 turns in good times on comes with four 'bots, the course of enjoyone arena, five pilots and ANIMALS AGAINST ROADKILL Cute critters in go-karts might make fast friends with able, non-violent acone tournament mode. young racers in WACKY WHEELS. tion games, The full registered verThe shareware version, described above, is available for choice of 6hp or 12hp vehicles, alsion of WACKY WHEELS includes 10 $39, or $49 with a full-color strategy though beginners should probably race tracks, four shoot-out tracks, guide poster, plus $4 shipping and stick with the smaller engine. Racers four race animals, and four Duck handling (an advanced CD-ROM vercan opt for 6, 8 or 10 lap races, and of Shoot zones. The registered version sion is scheduled for 1995). To order, course difficulty level is also adjustable. brings the total to 15 tracks, six contact: Epic MegaGames Inc., 3204 In addition, time trials are available, shoot-out zones, eight race animals Tower Oaks Boulevard, Suite 410, which give drivers the chance to set and six Duck Shoot zones. It also Rockville MD 20852 or call (800) 972records and compete for the fastest adds more background songs (which 7434. You will need a 386 or better elapsed time. There's even an option are great, by the way), special ammo system, VGA graphics and 4MB RAM for younger players, Kid Mode, that alcodes and a full-color game manual. to be a hot 'bot jock. lows children with coordination diffiAn upgrade option is also available culty to navigate the track by just that brings the total number of tracks IT'S A MAD, MAD, steering the vehicle at a pre-set speed. to 30, with 12 shoot-out zones. To WACKY WORLD Another cute feature is the Giggle Keys drive your own WACKY WHEELS home, WACKY WHEELS is so incredibly cute that allow you to communicate with or place a factory order with: Apogee and captivating that you don't miss the annoy your opponent (in two-player Software, P.O. Box 196389, Garland fact that no one gets hurt (unless, of games) by sending him or her visual TX 75049 or call (800) 426-3123. course, you count pride). Picture messages, like a cute, devilish creature The registered version is a modest stuffed animals in go carts and you'll holding a «Learn to Drivel\" sign. $24.95, plus $5 shipping and hanhave a good idea what this racing Traditional racing strategies comedling, and an additional $10 gets you game from Apogee looks like. into play as the players accelerate the Upgrade Edition. Designed for one or two players, through the tracks. Drivers who don't Chuck Miller, CGW columnist and WACKY WHEELS offers the chance to slow down going into corners will crash editor of InterActive Gaming, is available take on the computer or a friend in a into a wall, while obstacles like water on CompuServe at 72241,2122 comical race to the finish. There are holes pose their own problems. Bumpand through the Internet at single-player and two-player racing ing into or being bumped by other ve72241.2122@compuserve.com. IMPH 240 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"o        . Technology licensed from Id Software, creators of WolfensteinTM 3D. Modem & Network Play Mass chaos erupts when militant terrorists take over the United Nations Towers. You are a member of the nation's Elite Force. Waste away all enemies, from scum-sucking, sewer rats to steroid-pumped assassins, OH your never-say-die mission to save the hostages. TRE Enhanced Wolfenstein TM 3D Engine. Modem & Network Play. -Gomputer-Controlled Allies Switch between them or give out simple commands, Textured Floors & Ceilings. 40 Floors of Intense Battles. Multiple Weapons with Simultaneous Use Fire away with the flame-thrower or waste a wall with the rocket gun. Enemies with Ambushing Tactics. Cinematic Introduction & Cut Scenes, E mme mathul AVAILABLE ON IBM CD ROMANDO IBM 3-5 DISKS 3) REQUIRES NBM 386 PC or comparble, 486 recommended: 4 MB RAM, 1 MB hardve, Ms. DOS 5.0, CD-ROM driver/ (double speed recommended) & 'sotware. GRAPHIES! VGA. INPUT: Keyboard, mouse, joystick.SOUND Sound / Blaster family, Adlib, PC Speaker. See your software dealer or call: 1-800-468-7226 FL Res.: (305) 373-7700 for MCNisa/AmEx ORDERS Capstone WHEPINNACLEO ERTAINMENT SOF Program 1994 Intracom, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Wolfenstein is a trademark of ll Sofware, Inc. All Riglus Reserved. Capstone is a trademark of intruCorp, Inc. All other trademarks and copyrights acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #237 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL How Programming Wizards Turn Cryptic Code Into Alternate Universes by Paul C. Schuytema Get With The Program! O Gut 2 w time Miten NCE UPON A TIME, COMPUTER GAMES WERE SOLD IN ZIP-LOCK BAGS AND CAME ON A SINGLE DISK. Once upon a time, these games were love labors of only a single individual, working in anonymity in a dark basement somewhere, cranking out 6502 assembly code until the wee hours of the morning. In those bygone years, \"C\" was one of two things: the letter that followed \"B\" as assembly language. and the cryptic semi-language muttered data query from one Since assembly language communicates between Unix gurus in research centers of the \"wizards\" in MICROSOFT ACCESS, with the CPU at its own level, the lanand universities. you are programming, even though you guage is \"platform specific.\" An assembly Things have changed quite a bit since are only clicking and dragging your routine written for a 486 PC will be simthen. Today, C is a highly developed and mouse. You are also programming if you ply meaningless gibberish on a Macinwidely used programming language. A are hammering out assembler mnemonics tosh, though the same general concepts computer game can have a budget in the to create an interrupt branch to the draw in programming still apply. millions of dollars, created by a team of routine of your latest first person shootAn assembly language program is esspecialized professionals, all using stateem-up. sentially four columns of text: the of-the-art tools such as 3D STUDIO, moA programming language is, in func mnemonic, argument one, argument two tion trackers, scanners, etc. The programs tion, very similar to a human language; and the comment (not part of the prothemselves have increased in size by sevit is a specific means of communication. gram, but a means for humans to describe eral orders of magnitude since 1979. Yet In this case, it is a means for a human to what is happening in this cryptic code). still there is something which has recommunicate with a computer and tell it This text file is then led to an assembler mained constant: somewhere in the genewhat to do. Computer languages exist in program, which converts this information sis of the game, there is at least one code a hierarchy of complexity. At its very into the raw binary data which constitutes guru, still laboring into the dusky orange core, the CPU chip in a computer has a a program. of the dawn. finite \"vocabulary\" of commands, all Assembly language is termed a \"low levJust what is code? And for that matter, which refer to the most primal of its opel\" language, meaning that assembly lanwhat is a programming language? Most of erations. There are commands for guage programmers communicate with you already have an intuitive or even ex-adding, subtracting, shifting (since a the CPU in a manner which, as close as is pert sense of what a program is: it's the computer's \"native tongue\" is the binary possible, represents the way in which the bundle of files and commands that make number system, shifting is a process of CPU actually performs. Each instruction in your games run, creating the illusion of ansimply moving a series of Os and is one assembly language represents one and other world on your PC. In fact, as a game direction or another in memory, thereby only one CPU instruction. Because of this, player, you've undoubtedly done some multiplying or dividing the value by an assembly language code is extremely fast. programming yourself as you've attempted exponential factor of 2), and moving Often, programmers will write the majority to get your favorite game up and running. data from one place to the next. of the program code in a language such as The ubiquitous CONFIG.SYS and AUC and use assembly language to write the TOEXEC.BAT files are essentially computTHANKS small routines which require the most er programs. They are, in essence, a series FOR THE MNEMONICS speed, such as routines to draw pixels to of commands which tell your computer to When a manufacturer designs a CPU the screen or blank the screen before anperform one or more tasks. That, in the chip, a specific value is given to each comother image is drawn. most sweepingly general of terms, is what a mand, as well as a mnemonic. A program is: commands which tell your mnemonic is a several character symbol FROM HIGH-BROW computer to do something. for a specific command, such as ADD for TO LOW-BROW Today, programming comes in differthe add command or MOV for the move Computer languages such as Pascal, Modent forms, from the transparent to the command. These mnemonics and their ula-2 and Lisp are \"high level\" languages, downright indecipherable. If you create a associated arguments are what is known meaning that they are more geared to the 242 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Hey! you've got two bi-directional alien-finders attached to your head and you didn't even know it! Now you can use 'em to play your favorite games in 3D sound that zigs when they zig and zags when they zag! The Command 3D Sound Engine* can transform your favorite computer game into an in-your-face, lookout-behind-you, multi-sensory experience. Unlike other 3D sound processors, the Sound Engine surrounds you with a 270° soundfield that responds to the movements of your joystick So when you zap that Zorgon on your left, the KABOOM! will come from the left. When you nail that Ninja on the right, the WHACK! will come from the right. Imagine: a previously unheard level of realism for about one zillionth the cost of a virtual reality helmet! The Command 3D Sound Engine works with any game software, stereo or mono. All you need are an analog joystick, any sound card with a line-out jack and two externally-amplified speakers. Sorry, bi-directional alien-finders are not included. But, hey, you probably have a pair of them already! For more information, call 1-800-379-8558 MULTIWAVE INNOVATION, INC., 747 Camden Avenue, Campbell, CA 95008 Tel: 408-379-2900 Fax: 408-379-3292 Command 3D Sound Engine is a registered trademark of Multiwave Innovation Pte Ltd. Circle Reader Senice #270 Patent Pending "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL way in which a human thinks. An instruction in a high level lan SPINNING THE PAGAN LOOM guage might translate into one, Here is a small chunk of code from Origin's ULTIMA 8: PAGAN that is used to animate a loom two or several hundred machine when a player clicks on it. The program is written in \"Unk,\" the proprietary scripting language instructions. When a programmer developed by Origin programmers. writes code in a high-level language, it must first be run process TypeLoom: :look() { //The look method is called whenever a player single clicks on an item through a compiler, which is a bark (loom metiér  tisser lg Webstuhl); program which takes the instruc //bark is a process which displays text over an item for a given amount of time. tions the programmer has written / /The f and I are toggles for the French and German language responses. and translates them into machine process TypeLoom::use() instructions. //The use process is called whenever a player double-clicks on an item. A compiler can translate code num::Number: very effectively, but still not as efspawn playSFX (LOOM_WHIRR) -> spawn playsex (CLICKING_SOUND) -> lectively as a truly talented proreturn; grammer, which is why assembly //This code spawns two separate sound effect processes. The \"->\" in effect //means \"and then\", which means that the first sound should be completed language is still utilized for spe//before the second sound is begun. cific routines which require blazif get Frame() = 0 ing speed. for num = 0 to 7 Beyond being easier to undersetFrame (num); 1 setFrame is a C routine which changes the active stand and program in, high level //frame of art and notes that this item needs to be redrawn languages have the theoretical 7/during the next screen refresh. benefit of being able to be run on wait (5): //This is a process to wait for five game turns before different computers. A Pascal //moving on to the next frame of animation. Since there program which calculates the or//is no spawn in front of the process, it does not need bital periods of Jupiter's moons, //to complete for the program to continue running. This //wait is transferred to the multi-tasking kernel of unk for example, would run exactly //and the rest of the game is still running while the loom the same on a Macintosh, VAX //is waiting to move on to the next frame of animation. mainframe or IBM PC. All that is //The player could, for example, smash the loom with an //ax in the middle of the process. This type of interaction needed is a platform-specific 1/significantly complicates the programming of compiler to generate \"native\" in//Origin's Ultimas. structions for each machine. All of this falls apart, of course, else { when designing games. So much nium = getFrame(); of the program code for PC while num >= 0 { setFrame (num): games deals with the graphics wait (5); and the nitty-gritty details of num -= 1; making the visual and audio por tion of the game perform. All of those tasks are very \"machine specific.\" The commands for drawing a sand lines long and totally out of control the language is so flexible. A programline on a PC screen are very different If I needed a new routine, I'd simplymer can create elaborate decision makfrom those on a Macintosh. GOTO a line number several hundred ing and data structures as in Pascal, but C is what some might call a «mid-level\" numbers higher. The result was an indecihe or she can also manipulate the bits language. It contains the advanced conpherable mess of bad programming and bytes necessary to make pixels trol structures of high level languages, which was impossible to debug or even dance on your screen. such as \"if-then» statements and looping read (but the program did run!). The programmers at id have chosen procedures. Yet C is a language which Structured languages, on the other pure ANSI C to code their next project deals with the computer at its very core, hand, require much more forethought entitled QUAKE. They work with PCs set often manipulating individual bytes of on the part of the programmer. There up with the NextStep operating system data, addresses, pointers and even the are no line numbers. Flow goes from top (from the folks who gave us the now dedata registers within the CPU itsell. to bottom and the program code calls funct Next computer). \"NextStep is basiC, as well as the high level languages, functions or procedures with predefined cally the best development environment are called \"structured\" languages. Recalling formats. This forces the code to in the world,\" says John Romero, who is member the old days of BASIC interbe logically organized, with smaller tasks in charge of all tools programming, as preters? If you wanted to move to another doled out to independent procedures. It well as game design and areas of game location in the flow of the program, you makes the code far easier to read, deprogramming in QUAKE. \"QUAKE won't used the GOTO or GOSUB commands. I bug, and most importantly, share with even run under DOS for many months remember writing the ultimate\" dunco-workers. to come. It is totally NextStep based.\" geon adventure game in BASIC on my Nearly all of today's games are written old TRS-80, and the code was a few thouwith some form or another of C, since 244 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"MITSUMI $125! Double Speed FX001D Multimedia Specialists The 250ms, 350KB/sec Mitsumi double-speed blows away other CD-ROM drives costing twice as much! The Mitsumi comes complete with a 16-bit interface card, installation software and cables to connect! 1-800-233-0010 Tech Support: (608) 836-8001 P.O. Box 55164 Madison, WI 53705-8964 CHINON N E C CDS535 Double Speed CDROM drive Visa/M.C., AMEX welcomed! Hours: M-F 9am 6pm Sat. 9am -1pm CST MultiSpin 4Xi CREATIVE PLEXTOR 4PLEX Quad Speed CREATIVE LABS, INC. Game Blaster CD 16 With an access time of 250ms. and a double speed data transfer rate of 300KB/sec and a 256KB buffer, the CDS-535 is one of the fastest double-speeds around! The 4Xi drive features a 600KB/see transfer rate, 220ms access time, and a 256KB continuous flow cache. Features a backlit LCD display, double dust door, automatic lens cleaning and complete audio controls! Plextor's new 4PLEX quad speed CD-ROM brings a stunning new level of multimedia performance to your computer. The drive features a 600KB/sec transfer rate, 150ms seek time (220ms access). and a l megabyte buffer! Includes a 2-year manufacturer's warranty The Game Blaster CD 16 multimedia upgrade kit features a Sound Blaster 16, a double speed CD-ROM drive, pair of speakers, high performance joystick, and an incredible software bundle including Rebel Assault, Return to Zork, Iron Helix, Sim City 2000, Civilization, New Grolier's Multimedia Encyclopedia. Lemmings. Indianapolis, The Simulation, Silent Service II, FUTA Stealth Fighter, Railroad Tycoon and more! New Low Price! $214 Quad Speed! $374 Quad Speed! $435 Best Price! $365 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE MM UPGRADE KITS CD-ROM DRIVES NEC 4Xe ext. w/kit Plextor DM3028 internal Game Blaster CD 16 365 Aztech CDA268-01A W/kit 129 Plextor DM3028 int w/kit Edutainment CD 16 395 Chinon CDS 535 internal 214 Plextor QUAD Speed Digital Schoolhouse 269 Chinon CDS 535 int. w/kit 249 Plextor QUAD W/16-bit kit Digital Edge 3X 655 Chinon Quad spd. Call TEAC SuperQuad Creative Omni CD int. 178 Creative Omni CD int. 175 Toshiba 3401B internal Creative Omni CD 3X 349 Creative Omni CD 3X Toshiba 3501B QUAD spd. Media Vision Reno 275 Mitsumi FXOO1D dbl spd W/kit 125 Sony CDU-33A w/kil MV 2000 Family kit 329 NEC Multispin 3Xi internal 405 Sony CDU-55 int MV 3000 Super kit 389 NEC Multispin 3Xe external 439 MV 4000 Premium kit 495 NEC Multispin 3Xp portable 379 MV 5000 Pro kit 685 NEC 4Xi internal Quad spd. 374 SOUND CARDS Multimedia Office 509 NEC 4Xi int. Quad w/kit 459 Gravis Ultrasound Sony Media Magic 135 NEX 4Xe external Quad spd. 464 Gravis Ultrasound MAX 169 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCDIASP 159 76 Sound Blaster SCSI-2 179 Sound Blaster SCSI-2/ASP Call Sound Blaster AWE-32 259 Sound Blaster AWE-32 Value 139 ASP upgrade chip 557 Ensonia Soundscape 255 Logitech Soundman 319 Logitech Soundman Wave 435 MV Deluxe MultiCD 509 MV Pro 3-D Korg 339 MV Premium 3-D SCSI-2 319 MV Premium 3-D MultiCD MV Pro Wavetable Upgd 135 Roland RAP-10 189 Roland SCD-10 Roland SCD-15 Sound Blaster Value Sound Blaster Pro Value Sound Blaster 16 Value 159 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD 134 Wave Blaster 2.0 241 VIDEO CAPTURE/OUTPUT 163 ADS Gamne Zapper 209 Video Spigot for Windows 55 Pro Movie Spectrum 79 Sigma Designs RealMagic RealMagic Lite 135 Call for speakers, SCSI controllers, more! 538893 We only sell CD-ROM! 19 SARDOR 46 39 31 CD-ROM TITLES 1942: Pacific Air War FOR BUNDLING CD Deluxe 4 Pack 18 Jones in Fast Lane 13 Myst Stronghold 5ft 10 Pack Vol. 1 WITH HARDWARE Compton's Enc. 95 28 Just Grandma & Me 18 Playing w/ Lang Ser. Subwar 2050 5ft 10 Pack Vol. 2 Day of Tentacle 19 Jutland 19 Rebel Assault Superhero: lge Hob 5th Fleet 7th Guest Dracula Unleashed 19 Kings Quest VI 15 Return to Zork Syndicate Pius 7th Guest Aegis Guardian Fit 12 Dune 19 Links Collect. Series Sim City 2000 T2 Chesswars 7th Guest 2:11th Hour Animals, San Diego 19 F15 Strike Eagle I 18 Living Books 5-Pack 45 Stellar 1 Terminator Ramp Absolute Zero Arthurs Teach Troub 17 Family Doctor 3rd 16 Mad Dog!! 19 Theme Park Test Pilot Across the Rhine Audubon's Birds Groliers Enc. V6.5 29 Mad Dog McCree 19 Ultimate Domain Tetris Gold Aces of the Deep Audubon's Mammals 16 Gunship 2000 26 Mayo Clinic Fam Hith 18 Who Killed Brett Pen. 19 TFX Aces of the Pacific C.H.A.O.S. Contin. 19 Iron Helix 18 Megarace 19 World Circuit Theme Park Aces over Europe Tony LaRuss BB 2 Aegis: Guardian of Fleet 46 Dark Forces 47 Guiness Disc of Recds 33 Lords of Midnight 43 Privateer Top Gun MPEG Al-Qadim 38 Dark Legion 35 Harpoon 11 Call Lost Treas Infocom 35 Privateer/Strike Comm 42 Total Distortion Alone in the Dark 2 39 Dark Seed 37 Harrier Assault SVGA 14 Lost Treas Infocom II Psychotron Ultima I-VI Armored Fist 44 Darksun 47 Harvester 46 Lunicus 39 Quantum Gate 44 Ultima Under 1&2 Babylon 5 Call Day of the Tentacle 37 Hell Cab 46 Mad Dog II 33 Raiden Call Ultima VII Complete Battle Isle 2200 39 Dead Zone 51 Hell: Cyberpunk Thrill 44 Mad Dog McCree 28 Ravenloft 46 Ultimate Football Beneath a Steel Sky 39 Doom II 44 Heroes of Might & Mag 44 Man Enough 34 Rebel Assault 42 Under a Killing Moon Betrayal at Krondor 23 Dragons Lair 33 Horde, The 21 Master of Magic Renegade Video Cube: Space Bloforge Call Dragons Lair MPEG 39 Humans. The 23 Mech Commander Return to Zork 42 Video Cube: Sports Blake Stone: Plt Stk 26 Dragons Lair 11 Call Hunters of Ralk 53 Mech Warrior il 45 Rise of the Robots Vid Cube: Spc MPEG Bloodnet 41 Dragonsphere 24 Inca 2 24 Megarace 32 Rise of the Triad 39 Video Game Soln 2.0 Buzz Aldrin Race Space 42 Dream Web 47 Indy Jones Fate Atlant 42 Megaracell Robinson's Requiem Vortex C.H.A.O.S. Continuum 40 Dungeon Hack 37 Inherit the Earth 32 Menzaberranzan 37 Sabre Team 35 War Craft C.LTY. 2000 31 Empire Dix: Masters 26 Iron Helix 54 Metalltech Earth Siege 45 Sam & Max Hit Road Who Shot Johnny Rock Capitol Punishment 39 ESPN Soccer 33 Jagged Alliance 47 Microcosm 45 Seawolf Wild Blue Yonder Castles il 46 ESPN Sun. Nite FB 39 Jet Pack 41 Mighty Mrph P. Rngr Shadowcaster 42 Wing 1 / Wing II Dix Cat Came Back, The 32 Evasive Action Call Joe Montana Football 54 Millenium Auction 46 Shadows of Cairn 39 Wing Comm Armada CD-ROMIX! Freex 14 F15 Strike Eagle 3 46 Jones in the Fast Lane 36 MPC Wizard 3.0 Sinn Town Call Wing Comm II/Uit UW CD-ROMIX! Hardcase 14 Falcon Gold 48 Journeyman Proj. The 42 MPC Wiz 2.0 MPEG 32 SimCity Enhanced 45 Wing Commander ill CD-ROMIX! Prime 14 Fantasy Empires 36 Jump Raven 41 Myst MPC 45 Skyrealms of Jorune 41 Wing Comm/Ultima VI Central Intelligence Call Fantasy Fiefdom 48 Jurassic Park 35 Naked Gun 2.5 MPEG 21 Sliver MPEG 19 Wings Glry 1917-1918 Colonization 46 Fast Attack 47 Jutland 44 Nascar Racing 45 Sorority House 35 WallPack Comanche w/Mis. 48 Firm, The MPEG 19 King's Quest Comp. 53 Nat. Geo Pic. Atlas 56 Space Ace MPEG 39 World Circuit Companions of Xanth 33 Flash Traffic 37 King's Quest VI 39 New Kid on the Bick 35 Space Pirates World Cup 1930-94 Conspiracy 41 Fleet Defender Gold 47 King's Quest VI Upgd 22 NHL Hockey 95 38 Spear of Destiny 39 World of Xeen Corridor 7 29 Flight Sim Toolkit Kings Quest VII Noctropolis Spectre VR 39 World War II Cowboy Casino 34 Fortress of Dr. Rad. Lands of Lore Operation Bodycount 33 Sporting News MPEG Call Worldview Creature Shock 47 Front Page Baseball Laura Bow 2 Out of the Sun 47 Star Crusader 47 Wrath of the Gods Crime Patrol 40 Front Page FB '95 Lawnmower Man 37 Outpost 39 Star Trail X COM Crime Patrol 2 40 Frontier Elite II 34 Leg of Kyrandia BKI 33 Pacific Strike 48 Star Trek 25th Anniv 51 X-COM 11 Critical Path 44 Full Throttle 38 Leg of Kyrandia Bk II 36 Pagemaster Call Star Trek Deep Spc 9 41 Zephyr Curse of Enchantia 21 Gabriel Knight 43 Leg of Kyrandia Bk III 39 Panzer General Star Trek Next Gen Zillion Sounds Cyber Judas 42 Gettysburg 39 Leisure Suit Larry 6 39 PGA Tour Golf 46 Star Trek Str Fit Acad Zorro Cyberia 45 Goblins Quest III 19 Leisure Suit Larry Anth 45 Phantasmagoria 48 Star Trek VI MPEG CyberRace 36 Grandest Fleet 35 Links Pro 486 Call Phoenix Fighter 47 Star Trek: Jdgmnt Rte 34 CALL FOR A Cyclones 47 Great Naval Battles! 49 Lode Star 37 Photo CD Workshop 22 Starship Rogarian FREE CATALOG! Daemonsgate 32 Great Naval Battles II 39 Lode Runner 39 Police Quest 4 43 Stonekeep No surcharge on credit cards. CODs accepted with $o charge. Software shipping $5/order, Canada $8/order hardware shipping is 5%, Canada is 6%. Personal and company checks allow 14 days. Returns must have an RMA#, call. Software sales final unless defective. Returns subject to 15% restocking fee. Pricing and availability subject to change. 43 19 BARBORA Rendelsrarguesas esse WASANDS&RE SARAWDONNA 42 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL MY KINGDOM Programming today's games requires a grass are all scripted events that can occur FOR AN OBJECT team of talented code-crunchers, which concurrently via Unk's scripts. Another development in recent years is creates some logistical problems. How do Cand C++ are what is known as that of object oriented\" programming. you create a single, unified program when \"functional model\" languages, meaning This is an overused buzz phrase in comyou have a handful of programmers each that the code proceeds from function to puterdom, much like \"virtual reality.\" working on different modules? function, and can't go any further until The truth is, object oriented programJohn Carmack, who is handling the suthe last function is completed. Unk, on ming can define a myriad of programperstructure programming for QUAKE, is the other hand, is a \"process model\" lanming techniques, from Windows-based in charge of the master code directory. guage that can execute more than one Object Linking and Embedding to C++, Romero and Dave Taylor, id's sound proprocess at a time, and therefore can perthe object-oriented version of C. grammer, each have their own code diform true mulu-tasking functions. First evolving out of the highly strucrectories. They work on their modules, Unk is based on a paradigm of C++ in tured programming languages such as compiling them independently and workthe way that it utilizes various objects in Pascal, object oriented programming is a ing through the debugging process. the code modules. For example, there means to break a programming task into When a chunk of code gets the thumbs might be a code module (sometimes a cluster of tightly defined units, each of up, it's then copied over to Carmack's called a \"class\") which defines all of the which can be created and tested indepenmaster directory where the game will betraits for a non-player character (NPC) in dently. Nickalus Wirth, one of the great gin to take shape. the game. A more important class of \"linguists\" in computer language develmodule would be Lord British, which inopment, created one of the first object RUMINATIONS AT ORIGIN cludes the NPC module, but can also oriented approaches to programming in At Origin Systems, where pushing techoverride some of its rules (such as the fact his language Modula-2, which was essennology to the limit is a daily affair, the that Lord British can't die, while an NPC tially a refinement of Pascal. Xerox, in its programmers rely on C, C++ and assemcan; this is handled by having the Lord Palo Alto research center (where such bly language to code and build their British module check the hit points of the milestones as the graphical user interface games. Origin, though, makes extensive subservient NPC module; should the valand the mouse first saw the light of day), use of in-house programming languages ue reach zero, instead of dying, the value created an object-oriented language to handle the game flow of their various is reset to maximum). called SmallTalk. products. WING COMMANDER III, for ex\"The most difficult part of an Ultima C++ is the same language, essentially, ample, uses an interpretive language to game is that it is so completely interacas C, but with the characteristics of object handle the game's \"meta\" decision-maktive,\" said Simpson. \"It's not trivially simoriented programming blended into the ing processes. An interpretive language, ple to do the kind of interactivity that we language's lexicon. As in SmallTalk and or an interpreter, is a language like the need.\" In ULTIMA VIII, Unk was finalized Modula 2, an object oriented program in old version of BASIC; it is compiled and as a development language, but there C++ is essentially a cluster of small proexecuted on the fly. For BASIC programs, were still only a few programmers lluent grams, all working together to create a sinthis meant that the programs were very in its syntax. For ULTIMA IX, the key will gle application. Objects are very similar to slow, but for WING COMMANDER III, the be to train the programmers to use the their in-code cousin's subroutines (or pro language is \"built-in\" to the game code, Unk language more effectively. cedures), but they are far more indepenso there is really no loss in speed. Zach \"People complain all the time about the dent. Picture a well-armored sphere, with Simpson, Origin's Director of Technology time it takes for Origin to put out a only a plug for input and output. You can't Service, describes the proprietary langame,\" reflected Simpson, as an aside. get into the stuff inside, nor do you need guage as a quick and dirty way to make «But, in reality, it takes just as long as it to. You simply plug in the right input to some of the game decisions.\" should take, which is a completely unget back the anticipated output. On the other end of the technology known amount of time.\" Object-oriented programming allows scale, Origin has developed a language To crunch code, you need to be a binagame designers to develop core code modcalled Unk (named after a grunting ry polyglot, able to speak at least a small ules once and reuse them as often as they sound made by Simpson's roommate). handful of language dialects, understand need to. No longer does a programmer (or The language rivals full-blown C++ in data structures and logical procedures a team of programmers) need to write a complexity, it is object oriented, and it is and, of course, be extremely creative. joystick routine more than once. That prodesigned to be a true multi-tasking lanThat kind of smarts doesn't come from a gram \"object\" is simply filed in the compaguage. The language grew out of an earlipigskin diploma. In fact, at Origin, over ny's library for use by whomever might er language called AGIL (A Goofy hall the programmers don't have college need it. Far more complicated tasks can Interpretive Language) which was used in degrees, and quite a number of their also be created only once. You can imagine the development of ULTIMA VII. Unk was more gifted code-crunchers, including writing the code to control the flight of a perfected in ULTIMA VIII, but its usefulSimpson, never graduated from high missile and packaging it as an object. To ness will really shine through in the next school. What they did do was to spend use the object, you might simply send it Ultima project. Unk is a scripting lancountless hours in the trenches, crunchthe parameters of what sort of missile guage used to describe the multitude of ing code, debugging it and learning how (SCUD or Kilrathi heat-seeker), top speed concurrent events within the world of Ulto use programming languages on the and any other variables, and the object tima. Actions such as a wizard casting a tabula rasa of their computers to make would then calculate the missile's position spell, Lord British sitting down in a the magic happen. within the game world each program cycle. throne, and a horse munching on some 246 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"presents MEDIA NUNT CDSOM FOR MACIN & WINDOWS Mercilessly sent to the outer reaches of cyber space, your quest is to return to reality In order to return; you must find the key that wilfunkel Whedo his veesist high-tech decadence. Amazing 3-D rendered environments coupled with tantalize ingly beautiful women could very Vell make you want o stay for eternity. AVAILABLE FROM: HIPS&BITSINC. X 234 DEPT 10172 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 800-699-4263 Int'l: 802-767-3033 802-767-3382 Source: 10172 DISTRIBUTED BY Circle Reader Service #209 HYBRID CD18 ain production Indides Mature Audiences NATIA TECILILLED "


"UNDER THE HOOD The Gamer's Toolkit CGW's Gamesmith Reviews The Tools Of The Trade by Mike Weksler z HORRAKY s PC computer game players, ers may poo-poo such magic, but apprenparts. Whereas these common files would we have to deal with hardware tices take note: all you have to do is install normally take up approximately 85K of and software problems that this program, type a single command to conventional memory, the cloaked drivers are, for the most part, left unrun it, and you're done. QEMM 7.5 can only take up 9K. And believe me, 76K can touched in many computer sciusually liberate up to 634K of lower RAM mean the difference between whacking ence curricula. While the on the first try, even in situations where orcs in your favorite role-playing game and Macintosh owner enjoys a cool DOS 6.X's MEMMAKER doesn't make a whacking your computer with a mallet. and clean operating environment, Inteldent. Additionally, QEMM 7.5 has a nifty Helix Software Co. 47-09 30th Street, based gamers enjoy the best games, and \"quick boot\" utility that will reboot your L.I.C., NY 11101 (718) 392-3100. Price: with them, legions of configuration, instalmachine in the fraction of the time it $39.95. lation, and maintenance hassles. Low would boot normally (worth the price for memory problems and I/O port conflicts those of you with older BIOS chips). The REMOVE IT are the crosses that we bear for our hobby. \"Optimize\" command will analyze your Next to the CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXHere at CGW, we run more games in a configuration files (yes, even multiple conEC.BAT files, nothing is so baffling than month than most of you run in a year. figurations for your DOS 6.X boot menu). the general funkiness that permeates WinAnd who do the whiney editors call when QEMM 7.5 also comes with several utili-dows. Anyone who is playing Windows they can't get a game running? Yeah, you ties for managing Windows better than games on an old installation of Windows is guessed it. I've seen problems that you with previous versions. Additionally, its skating on mighty thin ice. The reason is wouldn't even want to imagine-really \"Manifest» diagnostic utility will show you that Windows has no means of tracking ugly stuff like computers spontaneously what memory is used where and tell you files that are dumped into it during instalrebooting, important files teleported to all about your system. Whether you've just lation. When your hard drive fills up, you Mars, and bizarre game glitches that keep installed a CD-ROM and can't run your can remove your old games by deleting my sanity in question. To help me deal games, or you don't know which type of their directories, but the various .INI files with these problems, I've got a box of memory to use (XMS or EMS?) when runand Windows directories will still contain handy tools appropriate for each task. ning a particular game, QEMM 7.5 is the cryptic entries and files of unknown origin. This month, I'd like to open up my toolright tool for the job. REMOVE IT is a complete suite of utilities box and give you a look inside. Quarterdeck Office Systems, Inc. 150 designed to let you instantly kill programs Pico Blvd. Santa Monica, CA 90405. (310) from your machine, once and for all. Once QEMM 7.5 392-9851. Price: $99.95. installed, it can analyze programs and find When you're having trouble getting a the web of drivers, INI entries, icons, DLL game to run, there are two names that you MULTIMEDIA CLOAKING files and groups which it belongs to and must keep in mind: CONFIG.SYS and Although QEMM can solve most of your remove them, or back them up in a comAUTOEXEC.BAT. These are the two con configuration problems, sometimes there pressed file to install at a later date. The figuration files which tell DOS how to set are configuration scenarios so intense, \"Log It\" feature will track future installaup your machine. I like to think of configeven QEMM will choke on them, and your tions for foolproof removal or archival uration files as spells which you can use to conventional memory will still be lower storage. This is great for those times when invoke different states of being in your than required for running many games. you mistakenly install that 18 meg Wincomputer. Indeed, like a spell, invoking The installation of a new SCSI hostdows game to your root directory. In this the commands therein can boost your maadapter, a sound card with lots of features, case, you'd simply backup the installed chine's performance or, if done improperor certain software can place a ton of comprogram to a compressed file and re-inly, grind everything down to a slow crawl. mands into your CONFIG.SYS and AUstall to a new directory with a few mouse QEMM 7.5 is the tool to use to ensure TOEXEC.BAT files, eating up valuable clicks. REMOVE IT also helps you remove that these «spells\" are crafted to produce lower memory. MULTIMEDIA CLOAKING hardware drivers so you can install a new the desired results. It is considered a gives you some of that memory back by rehardware item without completely re-in\"memory manager,\" but just think of it as placing common drivers-a hard drive stalling Windows. Additional features ina memory wizard that can go in, analyze cache (SMARTDRV.EXE), a mouse driverclude \"Watch It,\" a IK TSR for your system, and eke out the most memo(MOUSE.COM), and a CD-ROM driver monitoring file usage, \"Find It,\" for findry for your games. Seasoned DOS sorcer(MSCDEX.EXE)—with \"cloaked\" countering and removing duplicate or infrequent248 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Accelera Faster Games. Great Value. Available in USA, VLB or PC versions, it works with all IBM-compatible Systems. Kit for tthrilling games and hot graphi Diamond Multiricdia's S edStar GarTics Accelerator Kit comes with a top sellin SpeedStar Pro/SE graphics accelerator and 15 best-selling game ies for only $199 (MSP). You'll get Myst. Rebel Assault SEEV StarTrek%25th Anniversary plus 12 more exciting tiles. Eduitainment is more realistic. It is simple to inelerator you'll instantly notice smoother, free refresh rates of up to 72 Hz. accelerated flight simulator : 3 hot games-tomark Flight Sim palkit\"Rebel Aault IROGER |FU| UEPT ELE (TEK "


"UNDER THE HOOD 1 MOSHENCHALABERDEE N WRITERVIEW Tere Yong M y Very Whely In D Coroa da da to 99 ly used files, and \"Report It,\" a rich tool more power than the folks at Microsoft terrupts) in your machine. This feature that allows you to see links between INI ever wanted you to have in one place! Bealone is worth the price of the software. files, DLL files and application files. For sides such needed options as «Create DiFinally, for the hackmeisters out there, the frequent Windows user, it's superb! rectory\" and \"Rename File,\" you can zip \"Diskedit\" is a killer hex editing utility for The emergency disk feature is compreand unzip files right from the \"File Open\" dissecting your favorite save games. hensive, copying your configuration files dialog box! You can even view graphics There's even a handy search function and and their attendant files onto a bootable files from your word processor-somehex calculator to help you in your dark emergency disk. Ideally, REMOVE IT would thing that's mighty handy for those times endeavors. If you want to grow up to be a be the first software package you'd install when you have to use your computer for its techweenie, or just become a bigger one, after a clean Windows installation. One work potential. Finally, XTREE GOLD FOR check out THE NORTON UTILITIES 8.0. warning: I enjoyed this software so much WINDOWS even comes with its own uninstall Symantec, 10201 Torre Avenue, CuI was installing Windows games just so I routine, but I'd still use REMOVE IT (see pertino, CA 95014 (800) 441-7234. Price: could use REMOVE IT to wipe them out! above) to make sure you get all the roots.\" $179.00 Verisoft Systems, Inc. 153-B Grace DriCentral Point, PO Box 10849, Eugene, ve, Easley, SC 29640 (803) 295-5875. OR 97440-9722 (503) 690-8090. Price: PC 911 Price: $39.95 $99.95 This mighty utility is my hardware hacking mainstay. PC 911 is a DOS utility that XTREE GOLD FOR WINDOWS THE NORTON UTILITIES 8.0 makes backup files and emergency disks When I think of all the utilities I have Like XTREE, it's hard to imagine one of for your configuration files. I think they used over the last decade of computing, my PCs running without a copy of the should have called this PC 411 because its nothing has been so useful as XTREE NORTON UTILITIES. This full featured suite best feature is that it can give me the vital GOLD. Mike Weksler's XTREE is like Zorof programs has almost everything I need information on my hardware devices. This ro's sword, Popeye's spinach, and Sampto keep my machines running in tip top baby can tell me not only what device is usson's hair-absolutely indispensable. shape. The \"Speeddisk\" hard drive optiing a particular IRQ and ROM address, XTREE GOLD is a powerful Gle managemizing utility is like the Mibut it can also give me the I/O port ment program that allows you to rename, crosoft DEFRAG program (for address of the device it's using as sort, move, delete, undelete, zip, unzip, or defragmenting the files on well! Microsoft MSD (diagnostic otherwise manipulate your program), NORTON UTILITIES' NDIfiles. If you own a smaller AGS, and Quarterdeck's MANIFEST hard drive, file managecan do everything except this. What's ment can be a game unto the big deal? OK, check out this sceitself, as you try to make stan sam nario. Let's say you drop in an room for the latest gamAdaptec AHA-1522 SCSI adapter into ing addiction without your bus. You like that new SCSI CD-ROM deleting some of your oldyou've slung off of it. Nice, huh? Yeah, exer favorites. Once the bacept what happened to your General MIDI sic key commands are music? A quick foray into PC 911 will show committed to memory, you that both devices are trying to use the even neophytes can round I/O port address of 330, which is a default up their files with the best for MIDI devices (fortunately, the Adaptec of the data wranglers. can be jumpered to 140 to alleviate this). For you Windows users, You can set the program up to detect netthere is now XTREE GOLD work cards, sound cards, fax/modem deFOR WINDOWS, and it's fulvices, mice, and SCSI devices. The WINDOWS TREASURE TROVE XTREE GOLD For Windows displays ly key-compatible with the program will tell you the vital information compressed files as sub-directories, includes customizable icons, DOS version. The Winon what device is present, the IRQ, the and has many invaluable utilities. A hint of Windows 95, perhaps? dows version has some DMA, the 1/0 address, and any important powerful new features. It RAM and ROM addresses. You also get a has excellent file finding and file viewing your hard drive) except that you can doulist of free IRQs with which to test your utilities, and its undelete functions are terble click on a cluster of data and see what hardware. This is great info to have printrific for those unhappy times when you acfiles are in there. THE NORTON UTILITIES ed out prior to doing any hardware upcidentally delete an entire directory. It has 8.0 has a great suite of Windows progrades. PC911 is simply a must-have, built-in compatibility with PKZIP 2.04G, grams (which mirror their DOS counter quick-'n-dirty utility for the computer treats a zipped file as a subdirectory, and parts) for INI tracking, file finding, and gamer. you can work with the zipped files without undeleting files. Besides \"Speeddisk,\" Cyber Media, 1800 Century Park East, ever using PKUNZIP in DOS. Its best feayour interest will probably be in the area Suite 1145, Century City, CA 90067 (800) ture, however, is a little program called of «Sysinfo,\" the system information utili529-2373. Price $29.95 \"File Companions\" which installs a tiny ty, and \"Ndiags\" the Norton Diagnostic button in the upper left corner of the \"File tool. The latter is one powerful DOS proMORE PC TOOLS Open\" dialog box in all of your Windows gram, capable of identifying what devices This is really the SYSTEM INFO utility from programs. This little menu will give you are using the various IRQ (hardware inTHE NORTON UTILITIES 8.0 on steroids, Telemach Cold NG Outlet BO Wo D Duter OD D 2016 Duter O ER TODO 250 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"AZVIZI ZNZNLINE NANAN ADVANCED WAVE TABLE BY SOUND BLASTER. ACCEPT NO IMITATIONS. The New Sound Blaster AWE32.\" Introducing the wave of the future: the new Sound | Blaster AWE32. It combines advanced wave table Sound BLASTER synthesis, a powerful digital signal processor, and the hottest audio effects all on the same sound card. That's why it's the next generation PC sound standard. The Sound Blaster AWE32 puts the world's purest music synthesis technology (from E-mu Systems) inside your PC. It also includes effects like chorus and reverb for increased depth and richness. And QSound so you can position sounds in 3D. It even comes with downloadable SoundFont technology, so you can add to the library of sampled sound effects and instruments. And the latest speech technology, so you can navigate through all the major Windows applications using voice commands. Of course, it's a Sound Blaster. So it makes all your favorite games and software sound more outrageous than you ever imagined. All this sound technology could cost you thousands. But the new Sound Blaster AWE32 is only $399.. No other sound card comes close. Sound interesting? Visit your local Creative Labs dealer. Or call 1-800-998-5227. Sound BLASTER AWE32 SOUND BLASTER AWE32 INCLUDES: SOUND BLASTER AWE32 GENERAL MIDI INTERFACE HSC INTERACTIVE SE TRUE 16-BIT CD SOUND THREE CD-ROM INTERFACES CREATIVE WAVESTUDIO 2.0 ADVANCED WAVEFFECTS MICROPHONE OSOUND CONTROL PANEL SYNTHESIS SOFTWARE INCLUDES: CREATIVE ENSEMBLE 32-VOICE POLYPHONY CAKEWALK APPRENTICE CREATIVE SOUNDO'LE SAMPLING SUBSYSTEM FOR WINDOWS CREATIVE MOSAIC CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. WAKE UP THE REST OF YOUR BRAIN.\" \"Suggested retail price. 1994 Creative Technology Ltd Sound Blaster. Sound Blaster AWE32, Advanced WavEffects. Creative Voice Assist, Creative TextAssist, Creative Ensemble, Creative Wave Studio, Creative Soundo'LE and the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. U.S. inquiries: Creative Labs 1-800-998-5227 or 08-428-6600. International inquities: Creative Technology Ltd.. Singapore, TEL. 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. Circle Reader Service #53 "


"UNDER THE HOOD bundled with more utilities. After running at 640x480 resolution for playing your when several applications are running at a one-time DOS program, you run the SysWindows games, 16.7 million colors at once. As the name indicates, users who TEM INFORMATION PRO utility in Windows 800x600 resolution for doing graphics aren't \"professionals» should note that and get the complete dirt on almost everywork, and 16 colors to do boring word messing with Windows graphics can be thing in your machine. I found PC 911 to processing. ANY VIEW PROFESSIONAL with tricky, especially if you configure your way do this right off the bat without any fuss, \"TrueSwitch» color changing installs a into a situation where Windows will no but SYSTEM INFORMATION PRO allows you to little toolbar in your Windows environlonger start (something I did more than go the extra step and test hardware de ment which allows you to change pixel once). Make sure your video card' is supvices. Like PC 911, you get to see I/O port depth and resolution without having to ported by the product before you spend addresses for each device in the machine. restart Windows (great for those of you the dough. Additional features include \"Crashguard,\" with complex Windows installations that Binar Graphics, Inc., 30 Mitchell Blvd. a utility which shows you remaining retake forever to restart). Additionally, you San Rafael, CA 94903-2034 (415) 491sources like memory and hard drive space can assign a pixel depth and resolution 4182. Price $49.00 so you can shut down before Windows for each application on your desktop. The hassles we deal with in our hobby shuts you down by crashing. It also recov You can set EXCEL to start at 800x860 relate to configuration, installation, and ers data when you do crash. There's also with 256 colors, while CIVILIZATION FOR maintenance of our ugly beige boxes, no \"DriveSpeed,\" an IDE drive accelerator WINDOWS can be set to start at 640x480 two of which are actually configured the which seems to speed things up a bit (espewith 256 colors. When you run EXCEL, same. Let's hope that after using these cially when re-launching applications), and the resolution and pixel depth changes utilities to get your machine running «Backtrack,\" a configuration and INI file and then reverts back to whatever it was smoothly, you'll have some time left over backup program. Overall, I found MORE before you ran it. Likewise, CIVILIZATION to play your games. At the very least, I PC TOOLS to be a solid enhancement to FOR WINDOWS will run at its set resolution hope that this article will assist you in seTHE NORTON UTILITIES 8.0 and to my tooland pixel depth and will revert back to lecting the right tool for the job. the previous resolution once you've conUnder the Hood is both a column on techCentral Point, PO Box 10849, Eugene, quered the Mongols. nology and a Q&A technical support forum. OR 97440-9722 (503) 690-8090. Price ANY VIEW PROFESSIONAL also has a few Please send technical questions, comments, $69.95 more useful utilities, including \"Catalyst,\" and solutions to Under The Hood, c/o Comwhich accelerates graphics in Windows up puter Gaming World, 130 Chaparral Cl. ANY VIEW PROFESSIONAL to 25 percent, and «Optimem\" which alloSuite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808, or at The scenario: You like using 256 colors cates Windows memory more efficiently any of our e-mail addresses. » box. SIDELINE SOFTWARE ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY  & G . GAMES We Buy & Sell Used Game Software. Call for a quote on your used games. CALL 1-800-525-GAME Get CASH for your games or get an additional 10% in credit, good for future game purchases at great prices like these YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Arcade Pool Sports Simulation Cannon Fodder 2 Arcade Simulation Chaos Engine Action Arcade Desert Strike Arcade Action Dragon's Lore Adventure Heimdall 2 Role Playing Game Inferno Space Simulation Jungle Strike Arcade Action Klik and Play Game Creator Micro Machines Racing Arcade Power Driver Racing Simulation Project X Arcade Retribution Strategy Rise of the Robots Fighting Game Transport Tycoon Simulator Universe Adventure Zepellin Strategy PC MAGAZINES Get the latest news on the best PC otes from the U.S. & Europe! These high ploss, full color magazines also feature demo-pucked PLAYABLE cover DISKS OR CO ROUS with each issue! Titles include: PC Formal, PC Rariew, PC 20ne. PC Plur. PC Power, PC Homo, Multimedia Now. CD ROM Usar, and PC Gamar! Your choice! Only $10 each!  3GOO Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 9.95 Jet Fighter 2 Bundle Pack 16.95 Joe and Mac Caveman Nina 9.95 King's Quest 6 21.95 Legacy (Microprose) 24.95 Legend of Kyrandia 21.95 Lemmings 2 28.95 Lil' Devil 24.95 Mantis 24.95 Mike Dika Football 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Out of This World 21.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Pacific Strike 29,95 Patriot 24.95 Pirate's Gold 24.95 Populous & Data Disk 24.95 Power Monger 19.95 Premier Manager 2 21.95 Pushover 18.95 Quarterpole Horse Racing 16.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 Sargon 5 9.95 SEAL Team 24.95 Secret of Monkey Island 2 21.95 Secret Weapons of me Luftwaffe 24.95 Seven Cities of Gold New Ed. 24.95 Shadowcaster 26.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sim Ant 21.95 Sim Earth 21.95 Som Lite 18.95 Sleepwalker 18.95 Space Crusade 18.95 Special Forces 21.95 Spoils of War (RAW) 18.95 Star Legions 21.95 Strat-O-Matic Baseball 21.95 Super Tetris 14.95 Task Force 1942 (Microprose) 24.95 Team Yankee 21.95 Terminator 2 Chess 18.95 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Admiral 14.95 Tornado w/Desert Storm CD ROM 26.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 TV Sports Boring 21.95 Twilight 2000 16.95 Ultima 6 21.95 Ultimi 7 24.95 Ultima 8 27.95 Utopia 18.95 V For Victory (Luki) 21.95 W.W.F. 2 Wrestling 18.95 Waxworks 14.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Wing Commander Academy 24.95 Winter Olympic '94 Lihammer 21.95 Wizkid 18.95 W.W. 2 Flight Sim.Tool Kit 18.95 Wrath of the Demon 16.95 Zool 21.95 THREE GAME COMBO PACKS ALL FOR Test Drive Star Control Howarforce $21.95 Corporation F-14 Tomcat Supremacy $21.951 $26 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.O. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day at available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges Oelective products exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 NW. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Ultima UnderWorld II Under a Killing Moon X-Com MechWarrior II Arena Elder Scrolls AD&D Genie's Curse $42 $30 $35 Doom II $33 Tie Fighter $34 Lands of Lore $20 Alien Legacy $26 Betrayal at Krondor $27 Ravenloft $33 $30 $33 Call for the game you are looking for! DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! A-320 Airbus 24.95 Creepers (Psygnosis) 18.95 4.0 Sports Boxing 18.95 Cyber Race 24.95 A-Train 26.95 Dave Ledbetter Golf (Greens) 26.95 Ancient Art of War in Skies 24.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95 Armageddon 18.95 Dracula 21.95 Arctic Barons 21.95 Dune 18.95 ATAC (Microprose) 24.95 Dynamo Football Pro 24.95 9-17 Bomber (Microprose) 24.95 Epic 21.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 Eternam (Drakhan 2) 18.95 BAT2 21.95 Evasive Action 18.95 Battle Tech 2 18.95 Falcon 3.0 / Thrustmaster Joystick 49.95 Birds of Prey 21,95 Flashback 24.95 Brutal Sports Football 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Carmen USA Deluxe 21.95 Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Carriers at War 2 26.95 Global Conquest (Micrapose) 21.95 Campaign 2 21,95 Hardball 3 21.95 Castles 16.95 Harpoon & Baffle Set 2 18.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 Hero Quest 18.95 Command HO 18.95 Ishar, Legend of the Fortress 18.95 Contraptions 18.95 It Came From the Desert 14.95 All games will be scanned and must be virus free. All games must be in orginal box with all instructional materials and original disks. NO COPIES accepted. All games must be sent with account number in order for your check or credit to be processed. Any unacceptable games will be returned at your expense. Any defective games will be replaced with the same title. Most game orders can be filled in 2 weeks. Due to high demand of certain tites some orders may take longer. Circle Reader Service #307 252 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 Circle Reader Service #107 "


"..... Play to win and save yourself some money. Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER DAM RIMACA EXCLUSIVE COVERAGE! DOOM I SAVE UP TO Feature Reviews Pagan Uluma yol Dragonsphery Great Naval Battles II AEGIS In-Deuth Strategies F-14 Fleet Defender Aces Over Europe Merchant Prince Sneak Previews Aces of the Deep Secrets of the Computer Game Developers Make the ultimate move MI for serious gamers who know the score when it comes to buying computer gaming magazines. Subscribe to Computer Gaming World now and save up to 47%! Score points and cosmic savings now with Computer Gaming World. We're worlds apart from any other computer game magazine.  One year/12 issues $27.94. YOU SAVE 41%! . Two years/24 issues — $49.97. YOU SAVE 47%! Savings based on annual cover price of $47.40. Every monthly issue brings you exclusive first looks at the hottest, newest games... the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive environments. Plus winning strategies, master clues, in-depth reviews all the help you need to pump up your system and play out your fantasies on this planet and beyond. CALL NOW TO SAVE UP TO 47% 1-800-827-4450 To ensure savings, mention this code to the operator who answers your call: 4295. "


"NOW PLAYING These Just In Here are our quick takes on games that arrived just before press time. You can expect a full review of the more prominent titles in the next issue. 314 a ARYA VAIV video, made possible by the latest in Return with us to simpler times, when compression technology. Even though goils were goils and men were men, when the visuals (some taken from the film, all a real gamer needed was an industrial others filmed especially for the game) strength joystick with one button to fire, are sometimes grainy, the depth-ofand the \"plot\" of a game could fit on a 3x3 field graphics nicely enhance the accard taped above a coin slot. ARYA VAIV is a tion, stunts, and special effects. The throw-back to those classic shooters of acting is reasonably good, and the tenyore, most resembling the old coin-op sion is at times equal to a typical susXYVIOUS. You man a lone craft (with 5 largest land campaign in history, from pense flick-especially when you're lives) battling against wave after wave of the detailed-oriented eye of Gary Grigsdefusing a bomb. Unlike many interacgood geometry gone bad. As you duck and by. CARRIER STRIKE has only 16-colortive movies,\" you do actually affect the juke the spinning shuriken of death and graphics and a passable AI, but still ofplot, and the game can be replayed the bullets of defensive turrets (navigating fers the best operational-level campaign since the solutions to the puzzles through dangerous laser gates all the game of any wargame on the market. change with every play. DOS, $59.00. while), you must collect \"power ups\" to PACIFIC WAR is Grigsby's magnum opus, Circle Reader Service # 3 turn your pea-shooter into a bullet-spew simply the most comprehensive strategic T VI PUBLISHING, INC., 7500 FLYING ing volcano of death, and speed ups\" to game ever created for the computer, CLOUD DRIVE, EDEN PRARIE, MN 55344, and a past winner of CGW's wargame of (800) 754-1725 the year. When you throw in CLASH OF STEEL, Martin Scholz' elegant and enjoyECSTATICA able European-theater WWII game (winWhile the box art conjures images of ner of CGW's best wargame for 1993), European arcade games from days gone the deal SSI is offering seems more than by, we realized there was much more to enough reason to dive back into the this game once we installed 18 to 70 trenches. DOS CD, $54.99. Circle Readmegabytes to our hard drive. What you er Service # 2 SCORE Gataan SHIPS 3 STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC., 675 ALMANOR AVE., SUITE 201, SUNNYVALE, CA make your initially slothful ship really 94086-2901, (408) 737-6800 dance the hi-score watusi. If you're itching for some twitching in a style that we BLOWN AWAY haven't seen since the 80s, spill some quarReleased simultaneously with the ters in Dongleware's direction. Amiga, MGM/UA movie, this movie/game puts DOS, $19.00. Circle Reader Service # 1 bomb squad expert Gaerity on the trail DONGLEWARE PUBLISHING, INC., PO Box of yet another dastardly pyromaniac. As 391 826, 35 HOWARD ST., CAMBRIDGE, MA, you solve over 20 devious puzzles, you 02139, (617) 497-1130 get to view a lot of full-screen digitized gain from this space sacrifice is smoothly animated characters in a detailed AWARD WINNING graphic world. Both the look and gameWAR GAMES play are very similar to ALONE IN THE Alternatively, this wargame collection DARK, but the ellipsoid technology used could be called The Grigsby Files Plus results in much more fluid and life-like One, since it includes three of Gary character movement. While this is unGrigsby's epic WWII designs. The scope doubtedly more realistic, it also means is staggering; nearly every theater of war that until you get the keyboard controls is covered, from Africa to Europe to the down, your alter-ego will walk into a lot Pacific. WAR IN RUSSIA offers a second of walls. The plot? Well, you're a lost look at Operation Barbarossa, the traveler who wanders into a deserted vil254 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"GamEd PC The Home Computer/Multimedia System NOVEDIN LOVE CK NICKLAUS ALONE MI-DARK MATURE MARIO ALICHES PLAY TRAY ACCOLADE SUPER VGA GRAPHICS! TEACHINYPINGA $ 18 Gamed PC UNNECESSARY I AL MICHAFES ANNOUNCES WITH SUMMER Handbalem HALLENGE TTLE CHEANS BUBE 22 The GamEd PC is a fully IBM PC/AT compatible 486 computer system, with a Game cartridge slot, VGA to TV converter and ADLIB/SoundBlaster compatible sound. GAME CASSETTE LAR PHONE MIC JOYSTICK Standard system configuration: TV 80486SLC-33MHZ processor VGA. MONITOR 1.44 High density FDD PRINTER 2MB RAM expandable to 16MB 512k SVGA Video RAM ADLIB/SoundBlaster compatible sound 2 internal speakers External Audio outputs VGA to TV converter 120MB 2.5\" Notebook hard drive with Bundled software titles Game cartridge slot 2serial,2 game and I printer ports Microphone input Headphone output Optional accessories 84 key keyboard ** VGA monitor ** Mouse ** CD-ROM docking satation with ** Headphones ** Game cartridges CD-ROM dirve and 2 expansion slots ** Printer ** Joystick/gamepad **80387SX-33 Math Co-processor Distributors / Retailers wanted. ** External speakers ** Microphone NEWAY Electronics, Inc. U.S.A. Ph: (818) 991-4330 Fax: (818) 991-4331 NEWAY Circle Reader Service #292 NEWAY Electronics, S.L. Europe Ph: (341) 561-8361 Fax: (341) 562-4294 ALI. BRAND NAMES ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF THEIR RESPECTIVE OWNERS. ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE The software shown above is not bundled with this system, but is compatible with the GamEd PC. "


"NOW PLAYING put chen CHSS1 lage, where nothing is quite what it STRONGHOLD), this game more resembles very much that of a cinematic thriller, seems. There are lots of things that go a medieval version of SimCity than anyexcept that the player is required to bump in the night, hide behind doorthing else, with its focus on building a make choices constantly to advance the ways, and otherwise try to ruin your Eucastle and running a kingdom. Likewise, plot, making this more of a truly «interropean vacation. But then, whoever said active movie\" than what the genre has life was easy for adventurers in the 9th seen so far. While the video quality isn't century: DOS CD, $59.95. Circle Readyet TV standard, at times the letterer Service # 4 boxed view draws you into the story betPSYGNOSIS, LTD., 675 MASSACHUSETTS ter than the average movie found at the AVE., CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139, (617) video store. FLASH TRAFFIC isn't the first 497-5457 interactive techno-thriller, but it stakes its claim on being the first with some deEXPERT CHESS gree of focus. DOS CD, $39.95. Circle Chess is a game eminently suitable for Reader Service #7 Windows, as this modest program TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE GROUP, 2210 demonstrates. The 2D boards are from FANTASY EMPIRES is an out-and-out stratOLIVE AVE, BURBANK, CA 91506, (800) the SARGON II days, but the 3D boards egy game, despite the magical beings 482-3766 offer some interesting chess battlewhich populate its lands. The quests grounds. While they're nowhere near sometimes lack depth, but generally this FRONT PAGE SPORTS the visual splendor of the pieces in game is fun to play, especially the comFOOTBALL '95 CHIESSMASTER 4000, the alien set has an bat sequences. Those wishing for a bit The most recent incarnation of the appropriate glow-in-the-dark look, and more adventure may be entranced by award-winning football game features UNLIMITED ADVENTURES, which allows improved stock game profiles and coachile goun Option layers Window Help DOL2600 you to build role-playing adventures us ing plans, with 10,000 different plays ing the time-worn \"Gold Box\" RPG sysavailable on the CD version. Seasons tem. Lest hack-11-slashers feel left out, DUNGEON HACK offers endless randomized dungeons with a wide range of monsters for those times when all you want is to mindlessly slay beasts and demons. Who needs a plot anyway, when you have such a wide range of fantasy trips to choose from? DOS CD, $49.99. Circle Reader Service # 6 there are also cowboys & indians, meSTRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC., 675 AI. dieval warriors, and glass chess sets. The MANOR AVE., SUITE 201, SUNNYVALE, CA with tons of stats may be simulated more teaching mode is pretty good for the 94086-2901, (408)-737-6800 quickly than in previous versions, and novice, but the rating feature scems erleagues are now a breeze to set up with ratic. All the usual bells and whistles, inFLASH TRAFFIC the drafi profiles included. Pro Bowl cluding replay \"VCR\" functions, board When an FBI agent receives a \"Flash teams may even be selected from userrotation, chess clocks, move lists and trallic\" message, it means that terrorists generated parameters. The '94 season sound effects are here in an easy-to-use have a nuclear device ready to unleash NFL rules are implemented, and players format. The chess engine lacks the in the U.S. This full-motion adventure is going for a two-point conversion will be depth of its more well-known rivals live-action from beginning to end, takable to dive over the pile into texture(strong players won't have to wait longing up three CDs in the process. Producmapped end zones with authentic team before printing out a \"you beat the comer/writer Chuck Pfarrer is familiar with logos. The increased variety of VCR puter\" certificate), but beginning-to-inthe action/adventure genre, having functions and camera angles is nice, but termediate chess-meisters might worked on such films as Navy SEALS the real scene-stealer is the new rotoconsider adding this budget offering to and Hard Targel. Thus, the timing is scoped player animation, which would their opening repertoire. Windows, hardly look out of place on Monday $14.95. Circle Reader Service # 5 Night Football. DOS 3.5\" $54.95, CD EXPERT SOFTWARE, P.O. BOX 144506, $59.95. Circle Reader Service # 8 CORAL GABLES, FL 33114-4506, (305) SIERRA ON-LINE, INC., P.O. Box 485, 567-9990 COARSEGOLI, CA 93614, (800) 757-7707 FANTASY FEST Rather than the role-playing smorgasbord one would expect from an SSI fantasy collection, this bundle of four games is comprised of more strategic lore. Although the D&D logo rides proud above GAMER'S CHOICE, SMASH HITS, BLOCKBUSTERS EDITIONS The shareware universe is a lot like a Blockbuster Video store. There are tons of titles, but only a select few that you play 256 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"No More Questions Page 83: 5th Paragraph; 1st and 2nd letters of last 4 Words backwards. Copyware Inc Special Phone Offer .00 Tagazine Pournelle Award Aug. '94 only$38.9 U.S. Answer: 1 when you mention this ad 1-905-830-1961 No Need For Manuals or Code Wheels! By-passes document checks on more than 500 computer games. (IBM-PC) No More Questions Safe and easy to use even for novices, Page 83: 5th Paragraph; 1st and 2nd letters of last 4 words backwards. Inser fararlad Menu driven. Just point and shoot. Never be locked out of your own software! Defeats Document Checks! Universa Trowy SHIPPING AVAILABLE FROM CHIPS&BITSINC. FOR GAMES PO BOX 234 DEPT 10172 ROCHESTER VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source 10172 svetlack bypasses document checks on more than 500 computer games. (IBM/PC) Soprogramming requited, andreen. just point and shoot Safe and easy to use, even for novices. Never be locked out of your own software! electronics boutique Waldensoftware Universal Neverlock defeats documents checks on a variety of software products. Universal Neverlock is intended solely for the use of legitimate owners or licencees of these products and is specifically NOT intended for any use that deprives any software publisher of their rightful Incomo. Universal Neverlock is Copyright  1991-1995 by Copyware Inc. All Rights Reserved Circle Reader Service #343 "


"NOW PLAYING Th11 Saxophone Rallet 63 '94 Strikebusters disk (available separately for $9.95), allowing fans to play out the major league baseball season as it might have been. DOS, $9.95 each. Circle Reader Service # 10 MICROLEAGUE INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE, UNIVERSITY OFFICE PLAZA, BELLEVUE BLDG., SUITE 201, 262 CHAPMAN ROAD, NEWARK, DE 19702, (800) 334-6572 PROP MUSIC GAMC BIOTORTOPP Wie Gies Program Manager Stern for Ichhikers Tue Options Window Help MODIGY Netwerk SIGN-ON10 Ta anump Page Contenta Goodies telp America Online The Longo Ma Members Window Help SERVICE AMERICA BEGIN.AMR O GEnit for Windows dil Online Geards Mail Ubrarles Window again and again. Fun N' Games has tried HITCHHIKING ON THE to make some sense of the confusion by INFORMATION HIGHWAY placing a number of notable shareware This innovative Windows CD-ROM where the b-llat key is on a MIDI keygames onto three separate CD-ROM tiproduct will have you one click away board, you are treated to comments by tles. There are some real gems here, infrom Cyberspace. It combines interface jazz giant Oscar Peterson. If you need a cluding Doom, VGA PLANETS, CAPTURE software for COMPUSERVE, GENIE, AMERIbreak from game play, you may listen to THE FLAG and RAPTOR. Of the three packCA ONLINE, PRODIGY and NETCOM (an Inbrief concerts by Peterson, guitarist Liages, our favorite was the Windows-based ona Boyd, or the always-energetic CanaBLOCKBUSTERS EDITION, which had a nice dian Brass. Audio that was synched combination of arcade games, card better with the video might have helped games, board games, and war games. this product, as well as questions about Keep in mind, however, that these games GECU0DBRANE the musical greats involved, so that kids are shareware. If you plan on keeping a (of all ages) might know that Peterson's game on your hard drive, you are ethicalclassic composition \"Cupcake\" is more ly obligated to pay the developer a registhan just something you eat. Windows tration fee, from $5 to $25. DOS CD, CD. Circle Reader Service #12 $24.95. Circle Reader Service #9 MICROFORUM, 1 WOODBOROUGH AVE., FUN N' GAMES INC., 8575 Willows Ro. MODO TORONTO, ONTARIO, MOM 5A1, (416) CHIC NE, REDMOND), VA 98052, (206) 556-9600 656-6368 ternet access provider'). Also included is GENERAL ADMISSION SOFTERM, a full-blown telecommunicaJOURNEYMAN BASEBALL/FOOTBALL tions program, which offers RIP graphPROJECT TURBO MicroLeague has added small winics, SLIP TCP/IP support, and a Although there's nothing new in terms dows of digitized film footage to spice up database of 20,000 BBS and on-line of gameplay here, Sanctuary Woods their animated football and baseball provider listings. While the entire pack\"Turbo\" update speeds up this sci-fi time games, but the emphasis is still on statisage may be a bit overwhelming to the travel title considerably over the original beginner, the slide show demos, videos, version. You'll think you're Everard voice-over narration, and the well-writManse from Poul Anderson's Time Patrol ten hypertext database help to guide series as you safeguard history from the you along. Those who know just enough perils of illicit time travel. Adventurers about the on-line world to be dangerous should find their on-line hitchhiking to be far less intimidating with this useful package. Windows CD, $99.95. Circle Reader Service # 11 MOON VALLEY SOFTIVARE. 141 SUBURBAN RD. SUITE AI, SAN LUIS OBISPO, CA 93401, tical accuracy. The graphic look, despite (805) 781-3890 the enhancements, is a bit dated when compared to other games in the genre. INTERACTIVE MUSIC GAME Nonetheless, sports gamers looking Basically, this is Music 101, crossed more for realistic season replay than with a parlor game and brought to a pretty playing fields will be able to manfriendly Windows screen. Sixty-four have complete range of motion and a age their favorite teams at a bargain spaces, arranged like musical keys non-linear plot, although the game still price. GENERAL ADMISSION BASEBALL was around a square game board, must be has a jerky feel to it because of the nodeformerly known as MICROLEAGUE BASEtraversed to win. To move to a particubased movement. Along with the cineBALL 4, and is the most polished of the lar key-space requires answering a musimatic elements, this CD-ROM only game game line, although the FOOTBALL vercal trivia question, and there are \"music has a surprising amount of detail and atsion offers quick stat-based fun in a solid chance\" spaces which can add to moves, mosphere, and even includes some (for\"thinking man's\" style. Other than the give extra turns and so on. As you learn gettable) arcade action. Despite the price, the biggest selling point is the new about the number of lines in a staff, or technological achievements, many PAYOFPIDLICE 258 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"Friendly to your hand. Deadly to your enemy. If only you had knocked Now you can dogfight longer, with out one more target. less combat and flight fatigue. Plus, If only... there are dual fire controls, switchNo more alibis! Geta able fire buttons, throttle control, new grip on excitement and more. Try FX2000. with FX2000. The advanced ergo So good, you nomic design improves pilot won't believe comfort and response-whether its real. right or left-handed. FOR IBM & COMPATIBLE PCs. Suncom TECHNOLOGIES The Hardware Advantage for Entertainment Software 6400 W. Gross Point Rd., Niles. IL 60714 708/647-4040 Falcon AT artwork by Spectrum Halobyte Circle Reader Service #182 "


"NOW PLAYING gamers may still feel like an outsider to NOVASTORM both the plot line and the game's enviPsygnosis really took us by surprise ronment, largely because JOURNEYMAN with this great-looking trench-running fails to convey a sense of urgency. Those shooter, even though they're known for needing a sci-fi fix will appreciate the games with exceptional graphics. Noacting, which is much more natural than VASTORM's Silicon Graphics-rendered in most multimedia affairs. DOS or Mac environs are better than those in LuCD, $49.95. Circle Reader Service # 13 casArts' REBEL ASSAULT, and the gameSANCTUARY Woods, 1875 SOUTH GRANT play is at least comparable. Though the Sr., SAN MATEO, CA 94402, (415) 578-6340 game's \"computers v. mankind\" conceit is recycled, it is largely irrelevant. PilotNATIONAL LAMPOON'S ing a star fighter confronted by waves BLIND DATE of enemy ships, you watch the action the common aircraft depicted in simuThe reality of blind dates is that they from behind your ship, firing at badlations of this period (P-51, Zero, usually aren't as great as you'd hoped or dies, collecting bonuses, frantically BF109), OUT OF THE SUN includes rare as lousy as you'd braced yourself for, avoiding walls and dodging fire. Alter a Russian aircraft including the IL-2 Storwhich makes BLIND DATE rather true to number of skirmishes through imagimovik and the Yakovlev YAK-3. The life. The game features 22 characters flight modeling comes in four flavors, shown in \"live action video that, in a 0005195 from «arcade» to \"veteran,\" with the latsmall, choppy Quicktime window, looks ter offering high detail in aircraft hanneither live nor video-quality. Your date dling characteristics. We recommend is Sandi, a lovely brunette in a little flying OUT OF THE SUN with a CH black dress, who can play Beavis much FLIGHTSTICK PRO or comparable joybetter than pool. Although quite engagstick. All in all, OUT OF THE SUN is pering (she even loves the Three Stooges), haps the richest WWII air combat sim to she tends to lay a number of little traps date for the Mac. MAC 3.5\" or CD. for you to fall into. The dialogue is $47.95 Circle Reader Service # 16 amusing and some of your potential DOMARK SOFTWARE, 1900 NORFOLK replies are hilarious. If you survive the native, fantastic scenes, you'll reach a STREET, SUITE 110, SAN MATEO, CA bar, and have enough money to buy her fortified \"Guardian\" of ferocious dispo94403(800) 695-4263 drinks and take her home, you may getsition and power, more than able to relucky.\" But not that lucky. Except for a pulse your repeated attacks. There are SHADOWS OF CAIRN little strip-tease (with the emphasis on double-shot rounds, smart bombs, What can you do with an honest wingmen and other special attacks you thiel? How about framing him in the ascan use, which makes the going a little sassination of a kindly Duke? That's the easier, and adds welcome variety. The nasty situation Quinn, the thief too MOODRING only obvious black mark is that you good for his own good, finds himself in can't save the game, even after you've as he begins the action/adventure tale taken out those big bad boss shipsof SHADOWS OF CAIRN. You control one Euro-shooter legacy we could have Quinn from a side-on perspective as he easily lived without. Still, anyone itchjumps, kicks, and punches his way SAVE GAME ing for furious PC arcade action would through several levels of guards and have trouble finding a wilder ride than ruffians. The smooth, rotoscoped moNOVASTORM. DOS CD, $59.99. Circle tions of Quinn will be instantly familiar Reader Service # 15 to players of Jordan Mechner's KARATEPSYGNOSIS LIMITED, 675 MASSACHUSETTS KA and PRINCE OF PERSIA games. But \"tease\"), you won't see much (unless you I see much unless you AVE AVE., CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139 (617) CAMBRIDGE. MA 02139 (617) while SHADOWS OF CAIRN has more adfind the Easter eggs). In fact, one of the 197-5457 venture type puzzles and cinematic oddest things about this game is that scenes than Mechner's games, it has deyou'll be kissed by Sandi's large, frightOUT OF THE SUN ening roommate for giving her $20, but OUT OF THE SUN is a WWII air combat not once will Sandi so much as peck you simulation built to take advantage of on the cheek. Much like a real blind the horsepower of the Power Macindate, BLIND DATE will only interest you tosli. Supporting resolutions up to for one night, which may leave you won1024x768, it offers a tremendous field dering whether it was worth it after all. of view, with significant ground details Windows CD, $49.95. Circle Reader Ser: (the Pacific atolls are particularly well vice # 14 done). Mac pilots can fight in the MidTRIMARK INTERACTIVE, 2644 30TH ST., way, D-Day and the Battle of Kursk theSANTA MONICA, CA 90405-3009, (800) atres, as well as enter the Arena for 247-5447. custom designed dogfights. Along with $19 CASH LEFT HINTS BOSS Yeah. sooner or later The strategy is always to think one step ahead. whacked with a pointy stici 260 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JANUARY 1995 "


"MISSON I Make Us Z 5 Your First Choice! CONTRO) OVERNIGHT SHIPPING VIA AIRBORNE ONLY $7.00 (most areas) Wind COMANDA MERCY New Machine Rules! DREAM MACHINE RIS! NOOTROPOLIS The Most Popular Stop On The Information = Super Highway WING COMMANDER $54 CYBERIA CD $50 NOCTROPOLIS CD $47 RISE OF ROBOTS CD $33 The most innovative CD ever! * ONIRI Navigate through a 3D world where your ultimate fantasies come alive. The only (D that adapts to your choices. As seen on Donahue, Joan Rivers and CNN. (D$49 WATER NOW DOES IT FELL TO OUME DHE TASTEST STOCUS ON LANDA UST. COUPON Featuring 3D. OTETTO rendered virtual worlds, full-motion video, and voicerecognition IT FEELS LIKE THIS. 589 NASCAR CD $50 SORORITY HOUSE CD $32 F-16 FLCS $119 HARVESTER CD $59 UROTSUKIDOJI Is there any hope for humanity? Will the Legend of the Overfiend become reality? From the animation geniuses who created Space Cruiser Yamato, this is the astounding and controversial theatrical masterpiece which singlehandedly launched a whole new genre of Japanese animation. Definitely not for children. SALE! CD $39 Death Gato Oress.blum ve technology CD only $16 PIXIS INTERACTIVE V2: SPACE SIRENS CD ROM HEADQUARTERS 47 45 BONGO SEDAN 98889909 HELL CD $44 DEATH GATE CD $34 KNIGHTS XENTAR $43 WARCRAFT CD $44 As a space privateer you are at the Raiden 33 IBM DISKS helm of your solo craft in search of Raptor rare alien artifacts. Responding to a Rise of the Triad distress signal, you are lured by the th Fleet cross the Rhine Sim Tower 7th Guest 2 11 Hour 69 Lunicus irresistible song of the Space Sirens 42 Star Reach D&D Menzoberranzan 5 Foot 10 Pack Ver 2 27 Magic Carpet emanating from a mysterious space Strip Poker Professional ien Legacy 7th Guest 11th Hour 69 Master Of Magic station. You venture into the domain of the alluring and kania 2 Star Trail System Shock Aces of the Deep 52 beautiful Space Sirens only to realize that you've been MetalTech EarthSiege 50 mored Fist Theatre of Death AD&D Menzob. 50 Nerves of Steel entrapped in VR chamber to fulfill their every desire. attle Bugs Theme Park Arkania 2 Star Trail 44 NHL Hockey '95 Engage in a search and fulfill mission in an exotic interacThird Reich Armored Fist Forge 50 tive odyssey. Contains 3D animation and graphics, original NovaStorm reach 3 Traffic Dept. 2192 CALL Battle Isle 2200 34 music, 4868 mg required. CD $54 Pacific Strike reakThru Victory at Sea Blind Date Panzer General Wing Command Armada aannon Fodder VIRTUAL VIXENS PART1 $44 Celebrity Poker 27 PGA Tour Golf 486 ber GO Wings of Glory Colonization 49 Phantasmagoria Clones X Com Complete Ultima VII 30 Quantum Gate 2 Journey into a realm where beauti 9. 1 STONES ark Forces Zephyr Creature Shock 38 Quarantine ful women are available to chalawn Patrol Crime Patrol 38 Raiden lenge you in a game of chance. A eep Space 9: The Hunt JOYSTICKS Critical Path Relentless Twinsen's high tech adaptation of the ancient ominus Cyber Judas Renegade game of scissors-rock-paper. ACM Game Card oom II: Hell On Earth CyClones Reunion F-16 Flight Control TeamWeb Featuring live action video comDark Forces Rise of the Triad Flight Control Pro bined with 3D animation and ungeon Master 2 Dawn Patrol 40 Spectre 27 Flight Control System graphics. (D SALE $29 ghter Wing Deep Space 9 Hunt Star Crusader ight Commander 2 Flight Stick Dominus Strife CALL ight Light Flight Stick Pro 62 Doom Il Hell On Earth Strike Com/Privateer 50 125 Formula T1 ortress Dr Radiaki Dragon Lore 44 SuperHero Hoboken WOULD YOU LIKE TO 38 eroes Might & Magic Phoenix Flight and WCS 115 Falcon Gold 59 Theme Park Rudder Pedals 115 Flash Traffic 27 Top Ten Pack RECEIVE OUR COLOR Virtual Pilot on Cross 69 Flight Commander 2 44 Total Distortion Drune Alien Logic Weapons Control Mk 2 95 32 PAGE ADULT CD Fortress DrRadiaki 38 Ultima Under. 1&2 nights of Xentar Full Throttle 42 Under a Killing Moon Ends of Lore 2 CATALOG? SOUNDCARDS Gadget US Navy Fighters 50 ords of the Realm Hammer of the Gods 44 Voyeur Simply Circle Reader lechWarrior 2 Audio Rock-It 16 Harvester Wing Com Armada letalTech: BattleDrome Sound Blaster 16 Value 119 Service #96 & We'll Rush Heretic CALL Wings of Glory ascar Racing Sound Blaster 16 MCD 149 Inca 2 29 WolfPack One Out To You! UltraSound erves of Steel 129 Jorune Alien Logic 40 X-Wing Collector's Wave Blaster Sign card stating you are over 21 erfect General 2 Litil Divil Zephyr Circle Reader Service #93 Phone (201) 783-3600  Fax (201) 783-3686 Call Our FAXBACK Line From Your Fax Machine (201) 783-3374 SCISSORS N STONES 2928 ABBAS 44 39 38 exx BOS SBBARONS 69 59 189 800-999-7995 end Orders To: Mission Control  7 Oak Place  CGW0195  Montclair, NJ 07042. MC, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Checks bu dowa Dlossinaldo Dhana Shinninn OVERNIGHT/mast areas Inty Shinning S25 E.Mail 700071324acomnmcerve com "


"NOW PLAYING Paper29 158100 56000C ELACK MACH PAYS 3 TO 2 cidedly less quality in the art and oversquare puzzle pieces around the screen.mark's BLIND DATE. As one of two difall feel. It does have some great music Finish a level of VIDGRID video puzzles, ferent dealers lips the cards, she'll going for it, and you can hear the music and things get even more difficult as make comments about how \"intriguin \"high resolution\" (44Khz), but you'll puzzle pieces are turned upside down need a Pentium to run the tunes at that and inverted. Popular videos by groups level. DOS, Windows, $49.95. Circle like Aerosmith, Guns N' Roses, Jimi Reader Service # 18 Hendrix, and Van Halen, will keep MASQUE PUBLISHING, PO Box 5223, ENMTV mavens rockin'. Our only comGLEWOOD, CO, 80115, (303) 290-9853 plaint is that there are only nine videos in all, which meant that after we'd VIDGRID played through one level, we'd seen Bet $100 Billed as \"the rock video moving 'em all. Still, the addictive level of the puzzle game\" and developed in conplay is high, and you'd never believe junction with Geffen Records, VIDGrid Jimi Hendrix could look so good on a Credits 5100 wowed us with its addictive puzzles, computer screen. DOS CD, $34.95. great sounds, and live action music Circle Reader Service # 19 ing\" you are or how \"arousing your videos. As each of the nine music JASMINE MULTIMEDIA, 6746 VALJEAN AVE., card play is. In some cases, you'll get to videos plays in almost crystal clear digiSUITE 100, Van Nuys, CA 91406, (818) respond to a comment with one of tized video, puzzlers have to unscram780-3344 three remarks. Some of the writing is ble the mixed-up scene by dragging witty, most of it is sophomoric, and all VIRTUAL VEGAS of it leads nowhere: there's no strip Go Wa KOL \"I love a man with a big wad,\" quips blackjack here-just some slightly saucy STTEN Poter Game: Glodusumer Potor G the sassy blackjack dealer dressed like a talk. Future additions to VIRTUAL VEGAS refugee from Logan's Run. This, and will include a Craps module, a virtual many more thinly-veiled references to shopping mall (for spending your virthe male anatomy can be yours in the tual winnings), and a Ms. Metaverse world of VIRTUAL VEGAS. The first in a contest where you judge the talents of planned series of games, VIRTUAL VEmore virtual women with sharp GAS combines a rather ordinary version tongues. Mac or Windows, $29.95. Cirof video blackjack with the type of cle Reader Service # 20 male-female verbal swordplay you'd VIRTUAL VEGAS, INC., PO Box 25123, Los find in Tsunami's MAN ENOUGH or TriANGELES, CA 90025, (800) 57-CDROM 10 02:22 29 G EE THIS E Boor 2055 FOTO Great Holiday Gift! STRANE Rather be Golfing? With Picture Perfect Golf Now You Virtually Can Be... Picture Perfect Golf, from LYRIQ is the only golf software that fully leverages both CD-ROM technology and virtual reality techniques to bring players the thrill of playing some of the world's finest courses-at home! Picture Perfect Golf gives you thousands of real photographs of each course and puts you-not an animated figure-on the green. Real to life club trajectories and golf shot rolls and bounces further the excitement. Play using the keyboard or mouse, or add an optional infrared golf club to simulate the experience of playing golf using your own swing and results. An experience that costs about $25 an hour at indoor golf centers is now available for your PC. So go golfing virtually anytime. Call Toll-Free Now BELCT GOU? 1-800-433-4464 For the Dealer Nearest You! LYRIQ "


"THE MARKETPL ames Are Bac For Only $15 Battle of Antietam Battles of Napoleon Middle East Storim Across Europe Wargare Construction Set Sons of Liberty Scenario Disks for SSI's Battles of Napoleon for $10 Scenario Disks for SSL's Wargame Construction Sct II: Tanks! for $15 ur hours are 8:00 am to 5:00 pm PST M-F We accept Visa, M/C, Checks, Money Orders To order or request a free catalog contact: Novastar Game Co. * PO Box 1813  Rockin. CA 95677 (916) 624-7  SeICe Call: cruit PIRE DELUXE Ya111achi, at | 283-3000 x37 11tti07 01 0 can adve1rtise Sometimes you just need 1 or gaitle, b1roduct tbtco101111cd int to learn Get the CMX CBE seies. Speed Pover for the ultimate and Machine. YBER comes equippe with DX2-66 with 256K ache M FD, 425 Me 8 Meg Ram LB Video with 1 Meg erp to 2 I VLB IDE with high speed ports CD-Ron drive (QUAD EED!) X 14.28 DP SVGA NI Monitor 16 Bit Sound Card & Sp Mouse and 101 Keyboard FlihtMan Josick ots of software and CD-Rom IPPING! taplexity, ligt rplay' value A feature article on this pames subjcct als MIGA C64 p-ind classics plus all the latest Call or write for fr catalog (specify compute or the cost of 52,450.00 (US only) to: aus at 1300-44 ades are availa Garme Pitblications Grily 8795 1. Rivera Di, Suite 182 "


"ADVERTISER sompany ana Phone Index FREE FREE 35 27 89 22 83 93 45 13 159 296 25 21 127 INFO. # COMPANY PHONE PAGE 21st Century Entertainment (716) 872-1200 104 256, 221, Accolade (800) 245-7744 19, 47, 171, 288, 33, Accolade (800) 245-7744 1 99, 82, 289 Accolade (800) 245-7744 283. 114 Advanced Gravis (800) 663-8558 163, Cover 3 42, 260 AIVR Corporation (800) 324AIVR 150 299 Alliance Interactive Software (800) 870-0920 223 294, 44, Avalon Hill Game Company (800) 999-3222 12, 13, 295, 234 51, 75 293 BAO (217) 356-0188 215 Bare Bones Software (800) 638-1123 263 40 Bethesda Softworks (800) 677-0700 77 51, 207, Capstone Software (800) 468-7226177, 189, 241 237. 207 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 186, 187 190 CH Products (619) 5982518 197 341, 262, Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 131, 145, 340, 342, 200, 167, 33, 239 209, 343,54 247, 257, 88-95 263 ComputAbility (800) 896-1336 234 235 56 Computer Express (800) 2287449 110 115 Computer Mechanics (800) 4481436 263 53, 280 Creative Labs (800) 998-5227 251, 55, 57, Creative Labs (800) 9985227 5 9, 61 229 Diamond Multimedia Sys. (800) 4. MULTIMEDIA 249 344 Digital Pictures (415) 345-0445 62, 63 240, 227 Electromedia Productions (800) 57CDROM 181,237 138, 55, Electronic Arts (800) 2454525 123, 195 334 Electronic Arts (800) 2454525 263 136 Empire Interactive (800) 216-9706 266 Epic MegaGames (800) 972-7434 4,5 Falcon Northwest (800) 258-6778 57. 143 FormGen, Inc. (800) 2632390 29, Cover 2 G.E. Information Services (800) 638-9636 179 67 Game Publications Group (916) 362-0875 241 Gamer's Gold (800) 377-8578 231 302 Gremlin Graphics Software 303 GTE Interactive Media 30, 31 242 Home Base Products (800) 686-2523 214 HPS Simulations (408) 544-8381 229 268 Hyperbole Studios (800) MY-DEALER 133 71 id Software (800) ID-GAMES 153 77.7. Impressions Software, Inc. (617) 225-0848 1, 209 78 Impressions Software, Inc. (617) 225-0848 211 346 Internews 800-443-4294 50 123, 335 Interplay Productions, Inc. (800) 969GAME 71, 87 76 Interplay Productions, Inc. (800) 969GAME 135 174, 175 interplay Productions, Inc. (800) 969-GAME 139, 157 IVI Publishing (800) 4321332 49, 67 347 Kinetic Cyber Systems (310) 407-1325 263 KOEI (415) 348-0500 211 Lead Pursuit, Inc. (714) 362-8698 130 Logitech 80, 81 246 Looking Glass Technologies (617) 863-5810 193 LucasArts Entertainment Co. (800) STAWARS 79 348 LYRIQ International Corp (800) 433-4464 269 Masque Publishing (800) 7654223 129 INFO. # COMPANY PHONE PAGE 86 Megatech (800) 258MEGA 212, 304 Micro Sports, Inc. (800) 937-7737 184, 185 Microforum (800) 465CDCD 150, 349 MicroProse (800) 972-7434 103, 10 350, 361, 171 (800) 879PLAY107, 109, 14 352 Microsoft (800) 563-9048 11 353 Mindscape (800) 866-5967 22, 23 Mission Control (800) 9997995 26 250 MPG -NET (800) GET-GAME 166, 16 94 Multimedia Specialists (800) 233-0010 24 270 Multiwave Innovation (408) 3792900 243 152, 217 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 21, 218, 219 292 Neway Electronics (818) 9914330 25 218 NovaLogic, Inc. (818) 774-0812 219 Novastar Game Company (916) 624-7113 26 305 Ocean of America (408) 2891411 99 Origin Systems (800) 2454525 Cover 153 Papyrus (800) 836-1802 203 195 Philips CD-1 177 Psygnosis (617) 497-7794 17 354, 179 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 206, 22 307 R&G (800) 525GAME 355, 360, ReadySoft, Inc. (905) 475-4801 145, 15 361 ReadySoft, Inc. (905) 475-4801 20119 REM Software (313) 4571161 291 S Software (800) 243-1515 16 337 Sales Curve Interactive (800) CYBERWR 274, 356 Sanctuary Woods (800) 9433664 143, 15 362, 309 Sanctuary Woods (800) 9433664 217, 10,1 107 Sideline Software (800) 888-9273 25 98 Sierra On-Line, Inc. (800) 757-7707 128 Sigma Design (800) 845-8086 Sir Tech (800) 447-1230 12 Some, Inc. 311 Sony Imagesoft 115 Spectrum Electronics (800) 983-4321 Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. (800) 695GAME 169 STAC Electronics (619) 794-4333 225 StarPlay Productions, Inc. (800) 477-9562 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 2454525 Sun Star Publishing (800) 660-4480 182 Suncom Technologies (708) 647-4040 259 161 ThrustMaster, Inc. (503) 6393200 190 185 Thunder Seat Technologies (800) 8THUNDER 198 281, 282 Time Warner Interactive (800) 482-3766 85, 173 117 Titan Games (800) 247-5447 226 TRIMARK Interactive (310) 3143046 323 U.S. Gold, Inc. 22 277 Velocity Development (800) VLOCITY 15 324 Vertronix (800) 4780217 180 358 Viacom New Media (800) 469-2539 Virgin Games, Inc. (714) 8331999 100, 10 327 Virgin Games, Inc. 42,45 106 VTS Global Operations (800) 314-9841 359 Yamaha Corp. Of America (800) 3334442 8 331 Zephyr Computer Corp. (800) 4488806 108 * Please see advertisement for contact information 141 17 2, 3 228 112 263 357 188 224 313 ************* 125 14 315 192 3 81 227 82 326 32 262 264 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JANUARY 1995 "


"Game and Product Index REE FREE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE 51 179 295 228 44 224 Avalon Hill Game Company G.E. Information Services Avalon Hill Game Company Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. Creative Labs 289 77 89 53 251 304 315 218 293 331 1830 1994 Games 5TH Fleet BreakThru! Advanced Wave Table By Sound Blaster All American College Football Arc Of Doom Armored Fist BAO Line of Products Black Tower Pentium Computers Blackthorne Blown Away Board Games Brett Hull Hockey '95 Buried In Time Burn Cycle Casino Tournament of Champions Casino Tournament of Champions CD Range Cheap Thrills 123 241 358 342 33 362 195 166, 167 250 153 190 212 138 237 Micro Sports, Inc. Sun Star Publishing Novalogic, Inc. BAO Zephyr Computer Corp Interplay Productions, Inc. IVI Publishing Chips & Bits Accolade Sanctuary Woods Philips CD159 Capstone Software 189 Capstone Software 186, 187 Origin Systems Cover 4 Diamond Multimedia 249 Systems, Inc. Computer Mechanics 263 Multiwave Innovation Kinetic Cyber Systems Capstone Software Virgin Games, Inc. 100, 101 StarPlay Productions, Inc. Interplay Productions, Inc. Sales Curve Interactive Accolade LucasArts Entertainment Co. empire Interactive Entertainment 266 Interplay Productions, Inc. U.S. Gold, Inc. Mindscape IVI Publishing Logitech TRIMARK Interactive VTS Marketing Global Operations Sony Imagesoft 22 114 262 177 348 242 35 135 57 359 45 354 179 139 225 302 356 282 143 269 344 8 Live Action Football Accolade 82. 83 Lords of the Realm CD Impressions Software, Inc. Maabus Microforum 221 Magic Carpet Electronic Arts 263 Mail Order Products Chips & Bits 88-95 Mail Order Products ComputAbility 234-235 Mail Order Products Computer Express 110-115 Mail Order Products Mission Control 261 Mail Order Products Multimedia Specialists Mail Order Products Sideline Software Mail Order Products Spectrum Electronics Mail Order Software Gamer's Gold Mail Order Software S Software MTV, Club Dead Viacom New Media Multimedia? Right I'm Excited Sigma Design Multi-Player Games Network MPG -NET NASCAR RACING Papyrus New From CH CH Products NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports, Inc. Noctropolis Electronic Arts One Must Fall 2087 Epic MegaGames Operation Body Count Capstone Software 241 Operation Europe CD-ROM KOEI 227 Phoenix Advanced Gravis Cover 3 Picture Perfect Golf LYRIQ International Corp Pilot Control Stand Home Base Products 214 Pinball Arcade CD-ROM 21st Century Entertainment, Inc. 104 Planet Strike FormGen, Inc. Powered Speakers For The Power Hungry Yamaha Corp. Of America Pre-owned Software Bare Bones Software Pure Wargame Quantum Quality Products Quoting The Quotes Quantum Quality Products Renegade Strategic Simulations, Inc. Retribution Gremlin Graphics Sw. LTD Ripley's Believe It Or Not Sanctuary Woods 151 Rise of the Robots Time Warner Interactive Grp. 173 Rise of Triad: Dark War FormGen, Inc. Cover 2 Shadows of Cairn Masque Publishing 129 Slam City Digital Pictures 62, 63 Some Of This Some, Inc. 164 Sorority House Electromedia Productions, Inc. 181 SoundBlaster Compatibility Creative Labs 55, 57, 59, 61 Space Ace Chips & Bits 145 Space Kids MicroProse 141 SpaceWard Ho! New World Computing 218, 219 Spectre Velocity Development Stacker Man STAC Electronics Stalingrad Avalon Hill Game Company Star Trail Sir Tech Stonekeep CD-ROM Interplay Productions, Inc. TES:ARENA Bethesda Softworks The Infinity Machine REM Software The Journeyman Project Turbo Sanctuary Woods The Vortex: Quantum Gate II Hyperbole Studios ThunderSeat Technologies ThunderSeat Technologies Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations Tycoon Series MicroProse Tycoon Series MicroProse Tycoon Series MicroProse Tycoon Series MicroProse U.S. Navy Fighter Electronic Arts Ultrasound Max Advanced Gravis Universal NeverLock Chips & Bits Unnecessary Roughness Accolade Used Game Software R&G Vertronix, Inc. Vertronix Video Games Chips & Bits Virtual Vegas Electromedia Productions, Inc. Voyeur Interplay Productions, Inc. 87 Wanderlust Chips & Bits 247 Wargames Novastar Game Company 263 Wolf Sanctuary Woods * Please see advertisement for contact information 357 83 240 280 262 171 217 CMX Dragon 270 Command 3D Sound Engine 347 Computer Bulletin Board Systems Corridor 7 326 Creature Shock 225 Crystal Caliburn Pinball Cyberia CD-ROM 337 Cyberwar 256 Cyclemania Darker Than The Dark Side 136 Dawn Patrol 174 Descent 323 Dominus Dragon Lore ECO-East Africa Ejector Seat Emperor's New Clothes 328 Alert Portable Motion Detector 311 ESPN Baseball Tonight Versus The Competition 161 F16 141 Falcon MACH V 281 Flash Traffic 294 Flight Commander 11 246 Flight Unlimited Friendly to Your Hand/ FX2000 Fritz Fritz Fritz Front Lines 340 Gadgets 292 Gamed PC 67 GameFix 117 Games For Less 42,260 Girlfriend 352 Golf 2.0 288 Hardball '94 299 Harpoon Classic Heretic 152 Heroes of Might and Magic High Seas Trader 305 Inferno Interactive Entertainment 346 Internews 303 Jammit Jazz Jackrabbit 211 Joyswitch 98 King's Quest 86 Knights of Xentar 327 Kyrandia 3 177 Lemming's Chronicles 277 313 360 234 355 361 112 175 119 274 268 185 ThrustMaster, Inc. Falcon Northwest Time Warner Interactive Grp. Avalon Hill Game Company Looking Glass Technologies Suncom Technologies ReadySoft, Inc. ReadySoft, Inc. ReadySoft, Inc. Impressions Software, Inc. Chips & Bits Neway Electronics Game Publications Group Titan Games AIVR Corporation Microsoft Accolade Alliance Interactive Software id Software New World Computing Impressions Software, Inc. Ocean of America Chips & Bits Internews GTE Interactive Media Epic MegaGames Lead Pursuit, Inc. Sierra On-Line, Inc. Megatech Virgin Games, Inc. Psygnosis SEES 150 349 350 351 55 283 343 341 30, 31 130 2,3 271 42, 43 221 307 324 200 227 335 209 219 309 175 10, 11 JANUARY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 265 "


"AVAILABLE FOR IBM PC & COMPATIBLES and PC CD-ROM PAHRO The First Air War Dawn Patrol is a true flight simulation with the emphasis firmly on pilot control and 'seat of the pants' skill. Climb into the cockpit and prepare for the aeronautical experience of a lifetime. Take the controls of one of 15 period aircraft including the Sopwith Camel, SPAD 7, and the Red Baron's Fokker Triplane. 4 Leading Edge Technology provides fully Image Mapped aircraft and landscapes. 640x400 SVGA mode gives 4 times the resolution of standard VGA light sims. JL A myriad of viewing perspectives (View Matrix) including interior WAR cockpit, multiple external and unique ordnance view. Over 150 missions to accomplish ranging from traditional dogfighting to balloon busting, each with full mission briefing and embedded hypertext. 64 pilot biographies allow you to create your own characters n from Rookie to Flying Ace. Experience a complete account of the 1914-18 'War of the Skies' and battle for either side of the conflict. Over 30 original anecdotes, speeches and wise words from Commanders and pilots of the era. A The 1914-18 team spirit amongst the airmen is further emphasised through a number of authentic wartime ditties. U A full range of realistic sound effects accompanied by Tchaikovsky's BAG \"Capriccio Italien\" add the final touch of authenticity. ant: 312) EL Forget all other flight sims, Dawn Patrol tests your flying skills to the full against the real pioneer Aces of air combat. Dogfighting will never be the same again! *CD-ROM VERSION ONLY Artwork by Frank Wooton 1004 The Grouch Workshop C1994 Rowan Software THE GREENWRH empire IN T ER A CTIVE EMPIRE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT, 13220 WISTERIA DRIVE, BAY N-2, GERMANTOWN, MD 20874 VOICE: (301) 916 9302 FAX: (301( 916 0437 "


"THE SCORE Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. H.O.F. HIGHLIGHTS HALL OF FAME F-15 F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER MICROPROSE, 1988 While its gloss is somewhat faded now when compared to more recent Gouraud-shaded simulators, STEALTH FIGHTER F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER still offers one hell of a fun ride. Published before the government's real-life announcement of the F-117 A, F19 STEALTH FIGHTER provided challenges unique to flight simulaMICROPROSE tions of the day. The missions involved sneaking around through a variety of enemy defenses, surprisingly similar to actual Desert Storm sorties years later. Although the F-19 was adequately armed, the electronic profile and stealth elements were so well done that it was often more fun to avoid a dogfight than to engage in one. THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) CIVILIZATION (MicroProse, 1991) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL Software, 1987) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) GUNSHIP (MicroProse, 1989) HARPOON (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) KING'S QUEST V (Sierra On-Line, 1990) LEMMINGS (Psygnosis, 1991) M-1 TANK PLATOON (MicroProse, 1989) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) PIRATES (MicroProse, 1987) RAILROAD TYCOON (MicroProse, 1990) RED BARON (Dynamix, 1990) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (LucasArts, 1990) THEIR FINEST HOUR (LucasArts, 1989) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) ULTIMA VI (Origin Systems, 1990) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) WING COMMANDER I & II (Origin Systems, 1990-91) WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC., 1986 In the eight years since GETTYSBURG first appeared, no other game has GENSBURG managed to capture the feel of the THE US POINT Civil War's most famous battle quite so well. One of the first computer games that seriously challenged board wargames in terms of realism, Chuck Krogel and David Landrey's design placed an emphasis on leadership and the difficulties of command control on the 19th-century battlefield. The rules for melee, double-time marches, and visibility added to the fun, and also showed a good understanding of Civil War tactics. Replayability was helped by random \"what-if\" set-ups and a reasonably challenging Al. Still worth a look, if you can get past the dated CGA graphics. JANUARY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 267 "


"SCOREE TOP 100 GAMES READER POLL #124 SCORE 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES GAME COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom Gabriel Knight Sierra Sam & Max Hit The Road LucasArts Star Control II Accolade The Seventh Guest Virgin Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts SCORE 9.92 9.83 9.72 9.56 9.55 9.42 9.30 9.30 9.25 9.20 B1 *2 3 *4 5 *6 7 8 *9 10 11 COMPANY MicroProse LucasArts Id Software Access MicroProse Origin SSG QQP LucasArts LucasArts id Software Virgin LucasArts sesta 10.37 10.36 10.24 10.23 10.21 10.12 9.98 9.97 9.92 9.83 9.82 9.82 9.72 9.68 9.65 9.64 9.60 GAME Ultima, Origin Underworld CHES 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ROLE PLAYING GAMES COPPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.12 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.50 Ultima Underworld II 9.42 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.39 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 Ultima VII Origin Lands of Lore Virgin 9.25 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 8.97 9.25 13 *14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 * 24 9.58 AD,RP 9.56 9.55 9.53 SAME X-COM TIE Fighter Doom Links 386 Pro Master of Orion Ultima Underworld Warlords II Solitaire's Journey Day of the Tentacle Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge Doom II Dune II Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Carriers at War Construction Kit Sim City 2000 Front Page Sports Football Pro X-Wing V for Victory: Market Garden Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CDI Conquered Kingdoms V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Falcon 3.0 Betrayal at Krondor NHLPA Hockey War in Russia Indy Car Racing Ultima Underworld II Gabriel Knight Might & Magic III Aces of the Pacific Wolfenstein 3-D Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen World Circuit Pacific War Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen Eye of the Beholder II Chessmaster 3000 Star Control II Sam & Max Hit The Road The Grandest Fleet Comanche: Maximum Overkill Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Fleet Defender Front Page Sports Baseball V for Victory: Utah Beach Lands of Lore The Seventh Guest Ultima VII V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword 9.52 Maxis Dynamix LucasArts Three-Sixty Pacific Sierra Viacom QQP Three-Sixty Pacific Spectrum HoloByte Dynamix Electronic Arts SSI Virgin/Papyrus Origin Sierra New World Computing Dynamix Id Software New World Computing MicroProse SSI New World Computing 26 27 28 1 2 3 TOP SIMULATION GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus 9.43 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 9.38 World Circuit MicroProse 9.36 Fleet Defender MicroProse 9.27 Comanche: Maximum Overkill Nova Logic 9.27 Stunt Island Disney 9.00 Hornet Spectrum HoloByte 8.96 Aces over Europe Dynamix 8.66 F-15 Strike Eagle III MicroProse 8.65 33B3%%%% FALCON 30 31 5 6 7 8 9 10 9.52 9.52 9.50 9.50 9.44 9.43 9.42 9.42 9.39 9.38 9.38 9.37 9.36 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.32 9.30 9.30 9.28 9.27 9.27 9.27 9.26 33 34 35 pere SS 38 39 1 SCORE 10.37 10.21 41 42 SB nautas TOP STRATEGY GAMES GANE COMPANY X-COM MicroProse Master of Orion MicroProse Warlords II SSG Solitaire's Journey QQP Dune II Virgin Sim City 2000 Maxis Conquered Kingdoms QQP Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks The Grandest Fleet QQP Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts Software Toolworks Accolade LucasArts QQP Novalogic Accolade MicroProse Dynamix Three-Sixty Pacific Virgin Virgin Origin Three-Sixty Pacific 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 UFO DE 45 9.98 9.97 9.82 9.65 9.53 9.32 9.28 9.13 9.26 47 MICROPROSE 9.25 9.25 9.25 9.24 50 "


"SSI BE223432433833 Esta aaaaaaa TOP WARGAMES 51 Last Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 9.20 52 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 9.17 CAME COMPANY SCORE 53 Privateer Origin 9.16 1 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 9.68 Hardball III Accolade 9.16 CARDOR AT WAR 2 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 9.58 55 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 9.14 3 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 9.52 56 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts 9.13 4 War in Russia 9.44 57 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 9.11 5 Pacific War SSI 9.34 58 Tanks SSI 9.10 6 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 9.26 59 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra 9.09 7 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 9.24 60 Merchant Prince QOP 9.08 B Tanks SSI 9.10 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin RP 9.08 9 Clash of Steel SSI 8.98 62 Syndicate Electronic Arts 9.07 10 Carriers At War SSG 8.97 63 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 9.06 64 Quest for Glory I (VGA) Sierra AD, RP 9.05 65 Eric the Unready Legend 9.04 TOP ACTION GAMES Conquests of the Longbow Sierra 9.04 GAME COMPANY SCORE 67 Stunt Island Disney 9.00 1 TIE Fighter LucasArts 10.36 Battles of Destiny QQP 9.00 2 DOOM Id Software 10.24 VGA Planets Tim Wisseman AGHTER 9.00 3 Id Software DOOM II 9.82 70 Serf City SSI 8.98 4 X-Wing LucasArts 9.60 Lords of the Realm Impressions 8.98 5 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 9.38 Clash of Steel SSI 8.98 6 Privateer Origin 9.16 73 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 8.97 7 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 9.14 Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations 8.97 8 Star Crusader Take 2 8.66 Carriers At War SSGE 8.97 9 Out of this World Interplay 8.57 76 Hornet Spectrum Holobyte 8.96 10 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 8.50 Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Sierra 8.96 78 Alone in the Dark 1-Motion 8.95 79 The Incredible Machine Dynamix 8.92 TOP SPORTS GAMES 80 The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra 8.91 COMPANT SCORE CAME 81 Dynamix Incredible Toons 8.86 1 Links 386 Pro Access 10.23 82 Empire Deluxe New World Computing 8.82 2 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 9.64 Carriers at War II SSG 3 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 9.50 84 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.81 4 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 9.27 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend 8.81 5 Front Page Sports Baseball Dynamix 86 Rex Nebular MicroProse 8.80 6 Hardball 111 Accolade 9.16 87 Myst Broderbund 8.79 1 Tony La Russa Baseball II SSI 8.78 88 Harpoon 11 Three-Sixty 8.78 8 Wayne Gretzky Hockey III Bethesda 8.30 Tony La Russa Baseball Il SSI 8.78 9 MicroLeague Baseball 4 MicroLeague 8.23 Populous II Electronic Arts 8.78 10 Ultimate Football MicroProse 8.01 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Sierra 8.78 92 Genghis Khan II Koei 8.74 Veil of Darkness SSI 8.74 Dracula Unleashed Viacom 8.74 95 Gateway Legend 8.72 You've read our take on the latest games, now here's a chance to see what your fellow 96 Loderunner 8.68 Dynamix 97 Aces over Europe Dynamix 8.66 gamers think. The CGW Top 100 is a monthly tally of game ratings provided by our Star Crusader Take 2 8.66 readers via the CGW Poll ballot found in each issue. Approximately 50 games are rat 99 F-15 Strike Eagle III MicroProse SI 8.65 ed each month, and the results are added to the aggregate results from past months. 100 MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte SI 8.64 This historical database serves as a terrific reference for what you, the gamers, feel are Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. * = Top game of type. Dark Teal = New Game. the best plays in gaming. AD = Adventure, RP = Role Playing, SI = Simulation, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports The Computer Gaming World POT A MONTHLY SURVEY OF THE READERS OF COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 8.82 9.26 Vote! "


"T TIE 5CORE PATCHES Aces of the Deep V1.1: Updates floppy version of Dynamix's sub sim. Fixes reported problems, including random lockups, faulty time decompression, and others. 10/27/94 problem of captured Alien leaders dying enroute to XCom base. This patch is only for UFO import version, not the American X-COM release. 9/15/94 Blake Stone V3.0 Patch: Updates V2.1 to V3.0. Users must have Blake Stone 2.1 currently installed. Works with registered version only. 11/8/94 Computer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for buggy programs have become a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. These patches can usually be downloaded from the major onZENET line networks (CompuServe, Genie, ZiffNet), but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. Red indicates new files. Ultimale Football V1.31 Update: Replaces previous update V1.3. Adds crowd noise, fixes reported problems. 11/8/94 Colonization V 1.1 Update The newest version of Sid Meier's latest strategy creation. 11/13/94 Under a Killing Moon V1.04: For use with the Cyrix microprocessor. 11/8/94 play and fixes some bugs. 10/13/94 ported bugs and uses less memory. Missiles launch against bases correctly. Works with all previous versions. 11/4/94 Cyber Race V1.22P CD-ROM upgrade: Includes all previous fixes plus Pentium/PCI fix. 11/8/94 Under a Killing Moon Update: Works with Gravis UltraSound and Gravis UltraSound Max. 11/8/94 Pacific War V1.1 Update: The official update from SSI, this will not work with the Gary Grigsby \"X\" versions avaliable on-line. 8/10/94 Hornet V1.02: Upgrades floppy owners, equivalent to Hornet included with Falcon Gold CD. 9/24/94 Dark Legions V1.1 Update: Adds native sound support for UltraSound/UltraSound Max, AWE-32, ESS488/688 Chipset, and Ensoniq SoundScape. CD and floppy versions available. 10/13/94 Legend of Kyrandia, Book 2, 1.04 Update: Fixes lockup problems on faster machines. 8/29/94 Quarantine V3.5 Update: Latest update for all previous versions of Quarantine, floppy and CD-ROM versions available. 11/1/94 Dark Sun II: Wake of the Ravager Update: Fixes reported problems. Works with CD-ROM version only. 10/26/94 Lode Runner Windows Upgrade V1.02: Corrects problems listed in the Readme file of the initial release. For Windows versions only, not DOS. 10/7/94 Quarantine DOS4GW.EXE update: Simply an updated DOS4GW.EXE for commercial version owners. 10/21/94 Detroit Patch 2.1: Upgrades this Impressions game to latest version. Make sure to consult the text file for info on saved game transfer to new version. 8/11/94 Lords of the Realm V1.01: Update to latest version, allows for modem play, CDROM and floppy versions available. 11/1/94 Rebel Assault Macintosh Patch: Corrects \"no CD in drive errors\", and improves game speed when playing full screen. Also features direct Power PC support. 10/19/94 Publisher BBS NumbersMany of these patches are available direct from the publishers' bulletin board systems. Call with your modem parity settings at N-8-1. Accolade CA (408) 296-8800 Apogee MA (508) 368-7036 Bethesda Software MD (301) 990-7552 Broderbund CA (415) 8835889 Capstone FL (305) 374-6872 Creative Labs OK (405) 7426660 Impressions Software MA (617) 225-2042 InterPlay Productions CA (714) 252-2822 LucasArts CA (415) 257-3070 Maxis CA (510) 254-3869 MicroProse MD (410) 7851841 Microsoft WA (206) 936-6735 Origin TX (512) 328-8402 Sierra Online CA (209) 6834463 Spectrum Holobyte CA (510) 522-6480 SOI CA (408) 739-6137 Virgin Interactive CA (714) 833-3305. Falcon 3.0 V3.05: New Upgrade for floppy users of Falcon equivalent to the new Falcon CD release. (See also MiG-29 and Hornet upgrades below.) 9/29/94 SimCity 2000 for DOS V1.1: Fixes problems reported, including crashes, also includes some minor cosmetic fixes. 10/28/94 Master of Magic V1.2: Lalest upgrade to MicroProse strategy/magic game with numerous fixes, new features, and major Al enhancements. 12/1/94 FLCS C&CC Update New software for FLCS COMMAND AND CONTROL CENTER from Thrustmaster. 11/11/94 MiG-29 V1.04: Upgrades floppy owners, equivalent to MiG-29 version included with Falcon Gold CD release. 9/24/94 Tigers on the Prowl V 1.15: Replaces all prior versions, including V.1.14 update. Adds a number of new features, including improved AI, and an improved interface. TOP users who want to play the campaign scenarios must have V1.15. 10/28/94 Global Domination Update: Fixes modem play bugs and replaces Bismarck with Hitler, for those politically incorrect wargamers. 8/24/94 Outpost V1.1: Fixes for many of the problems of Sierra's science-fiction title. 10/3/94 U-Boat V1.5 Update: Latest version of Deadly Games submarine game-Mac only. 8/11/94 Harpoon Classic V1.54: CD-ROM update corrects re1942 Pacific Air War Modem Patch: Provides modem UFO V1.3 Update: Fixes 270 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"NR 13 WARNING! NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13 For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Two young knights, separated at birth and raised by mortals, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. Never knowing their true relation or their own dark destiny they are fated to meet and duel each other to the death. As Desmond, the Knight of Xentar, you will be striving with many a winsome enchantress to overcome menacing foes and perhaps in victory, become the ruler of all. MEPOTA System uirements BM-PO386-SX compatible 0786 recommendad), VGA raphics, no extended memory quired, Sound BlasterTMland Prostudio SpectruotTM scompatible. CD-ROM or diskette version available So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, humorous script and thrilling plots. But be warned — with its romance and intense action, Knights of Xentar is not for kids nor the faint hearted. Available at finer software dealers everywhere or call 1 800_258 MEGA. Visa/Mastercard accepted. Download the FREE demo by calling our 24 hour BBS 310 539 7739 (8 data bits, no parity, 1 stop bit, filename kxdemo.exe) or send $5 for the demo on diskette to Megatech, PO Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. ENSFASTHE ENTER THE WORLD OF DEMONS ECSTASY OR EXTINCTION AWAITS ased on the AKAZAO apanese hit he Roc movie and e best in with the be 1 game, Playing Game th Dragon in Japanese Anime will thrill you with night III KNIGHTSF XENTAR Circle Reader Service #86 "


"The Rumor Bag Dances With Elvii by Colonel Presley hirty miles away from the glitterly stood and dusted ourselves off. Navy. Then I had to explain that SILENT palaces in Las Vegas, the empty I fervently hoped that he wasn't going HUNTER is a simulation that looks like desert surrounded me with to launch into a rendition of \"Love Me the Pacific Theater equivalent of Aces scrub and dun-colored hills. I Tender\" when he spoke in a mumbling OF THE DEEP. I had seen the photo-realbegan to imagine the desert as sing-song. \"Uh, huh, uh!\" went the openistic ship graphics and the distinctive a battlefield for mechanized ing mantra. \"Have yoo ever heard o' Rayharbors from the periscope view, and I units, when I realized that Gary mon' Feiss?\" Of course, I'd read the was very impressed. The 3-D, lightGrigsby is working on STEEL PANTHERS Riftwar Saga. \"And you know what he's sourced graphics make everything look for SSI. Although related to Grigsby's gone and done, man?\" Of course, almost appropriate for various times of the day. brilliant PANZER STRIKE series, PANTHERS any role-player knows about BETRAYAL AT Fat Elvis told me that he was a big SSI has many new features, including individKRONDOR. \"And ya know what eylse?\" I fan, and asked if I knew anything about ual pillboxes, smoke drifting via a wind didn't, but I soon found out that 7th LevGREAT NAVAL BATTLES 3. I told him it model, built-in maps, and a el is going to be producing the sequel to would have around two dozen fixed scescenario/weapons editor. A radical roleBETRAYAL AT KRONDOR, as well as other narios (from the latter part of the playing element lets you name leaders products with the successful author. My Solomon's Campaign, Midway, Coral Sea and watch their skills increase with expeguest finished his song and handed me a and more) and about the same number of rience through a full-scale campaign. scarf with both the company's logo and new ships in the mix. It will also have new I had been waiting for two hours in the Raymond E. Feist's name on it. planes and a built-in scenario editor. In desert for an unknown informant to show The pitch delivered, we got into my car keeping with our previous discussion, I up. Finally I began to hear the drone of to make the trek back to Vegas. I rememeven explained that you could establish choppers, and for a moment I thought it ber thinking that my informant looked so sub zones in the new game and have subs might be a promotion for NovaLogic's much like the real thing I half expected patrol those zones without extra intervennew high-tech WEREWOLF. Since WERE him to pop open a pack of diet pills and tion on your part. WOLF is supposed to connect with ARoffer me some. As we talked, I soon discovHe seemed happy as he stood up and MORED FIST and allow several players to ered that he wasn't headed for Vegas just said, \"One for the money, two for the fly and drive cooperative missions, I got to perform. He was upset because he had show, ...\" and passed out onto the floor. excited over the possibilities. bet on the Mighty Ducks to take the StanBefore I knew it, the casino manager was Suddenly a shadow loomed over me, ley Cup. To ease his frustration over the chastising me for letting him eat at the and I heard the patter and flap of a parahockey strike, I suggested he play some quick-set buffet and demanding that I chute in the strong wind. Focusing on the computer hockey games, and told him that take his place on stage. \"But I can't sing 'chutist, my eyes were dazzled with the Time Warner had just signed Wayne Gretin Fat Elvis' key,\" I protested. glare of rhinestones, and I laughed out zky to endorse a new hockey game for '95. Somehow he got me onstage, and I loud at the realization that my contact was When we arrived at the casino where made the audience feel like the latest a member of the Flying Elvis team. His he performed his act, he gave me a multimedia product without any real inchute sported a colorful version of the 7th complimentary pass to that hotel's teractivity. When I came offstage, the Level corporate logo, and it was descendquick-set concrete lunch buffet and manager said I got fewer boos than the ing rapidly. Unfortunately, the more I joined me for lunch. I remarked that \"real\" Fat Elvis, and to think of myself as tried to move out of the way, the more he the food sank faster than the WWII subs \"repurposed\" content. Amused, I hoped seemed headed right for me. Finally, the in SSI'S SILENT HUNTER after they'd multimedia producers would figure out inevitable collision occurred and we quickbeen depth-charged by the Imperial the problem faster than he did. Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff Davis Publishing Co., One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $28.00 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Second-class postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. 272 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JANUARY 1995 "


"PHOENIX FLIGHT & WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM Take control of your elevators, ailerons, throttle, rudder, and flight and weapon commands with this unique two-handed joystick the Phoenix Flight & Weapons Control System. Each of the 24 buttons can be programmed using a graphical interface, designed for simplicity. The Phoenix is compatible with all games and flight simulators that support a standard w joystick and keyboard controls. No special support is required. Advanced GRAVIS vailable now for IBM PCs & compatibles acintosh model available Spring 95. Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. 1790 Midway Lane, Bellingham, WA 98226 For information call: 1-800-663-8558, 604-431-5020 or fax 604-431-5155 Circle Reader Service #114 "


"Wind ...L et's face it putting a truly great game COAna on a floppy disk is like trying to play professHING COMMANDER III ional football in a bathtub: you really need more room. That's why the designers at ORIGIN are excited  Ultima about creating CD-ROM games. Finally, we ULTIMA VITO can roll up our sleeves and weave magic. You want impossibly awesome graphics? Watch our fully detailed CD-ROM art blow you away. Hunt down the meanest WINGS OF GLORY ORIGIN OTHER GAMES aliens in dozens of different galaxies — without having to guess ARE FLOPPIES at what they really look like. You're wired for sound, aren't you? Then you should expect all your adventures to have it! We have dynamic, orchestral sound-tracks so phenomenal you'll wonder where we've SYSTEM SHOCH hidden the conductor.  Of course, for everything you gain, you've got to lose something. With a CD-ROM game, what you lose is the hassle. Forget about corrupt disks, too SYSTEM SHOCH little hard drive space or making back-up RAMBOR copies. It's ancient history. Finally you can pop in a game worthy AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE RETAILER NEAR YOU. OR of the system you bought for it. ORIGIN creates worlds to take CALL 1-800-245-4525 HADIGIN on the multi-media challenge. FOR MORE INFORMATION ITEIT We create worlda: Now it's up to you to conquer them. An Electronic Arts Company ORIGIN NOW CREATES WORLDS ON CD Orion, Ultima. We create worlds and Wire Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. PARA System Shock Armada and Wings of Glory are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #99 "

