March 1990

Features

Do You Have A "Clue"?

Sneak Preview: "Ultima VI: The False Prophet" 14
Lord British Leads A Witch Hunt

"Battle of Britain" Contest Rules

Number 69

"Knights of Legend" Hints
19

44

"Risk", "Monopoly", "Scrabble" and "Clue" / M. Evan Brooks

50

The Book of Legendary Prowess / Scorpia

Win A Trip to Visit The Brits

Origin's/CGW's "Omega" Tournament Results 19

Departments

Report On The January Tournament

Harpoon" Strategy

22

A Strategic Note From The Design Team

"F-16 Combat Pilot"

24

CGW "Locks On" To A European Import / Dale Archibald

"Windwalker"

27

Greg Malone's "Zen"ful Confessions / Dennis Owens

"Star Trek V: The Final Frontier"

28

An "Enterprising" Search for "God" / Charles Ardai

"Where In Time Is Carmen Sandiego?"

30

A Backwards Leap In Crime / Roy Wagner

"The Colonel's Bequest" Hints

36

Scorpia Visits The Bayou Country

More New Games At C.E.S.
More Reports from the Front Lines

38

Taking A Peek
Editorial
Contest Results
Over There (European Games)
Rumor Bag
Inside The Industry
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Contest Results
Letters
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device

6
8
8
10
12
18
32
46
58
64
64

Taking a Peek

Activision
P.O. Box 3048
Menlo Park, CA 940225
DIE HARD: The player becomes Bruce
Willis' character in this movie based game. The
nifty 3-D graphics of the high-rise building put
this game a cut above the other run-through-the-maze-and-shoot-the-bad-guys genre game.
It plays fairly faithfully to the movie, with a
good balance of strategy, eye-hand coordination and race-the-clock elements to recommend it. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #1.

MECHWARRIOR: As previewed in Computer Gaming World #66 (December, 1989),
this Battletech combat simulator is ready to go
on your IBM model computers ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #2.
A-Squared Distributions, Inc.
6114 La Salle Avenue #326
Oakland, CA 94611
THE ART OF GO: It would be difficult to
overly praise this software. If you have
any interest in the game of Go at all, it is a
must. Fine graphics combined with instructional guidance will have you playing and understanding the game in no time. Best of all, the

computer explains the strategy it uses as each
move occurs. Oh, would that every game tell
you how it does things and strive to help you
improve your own play! Remember The Art of
Go, as in "Go get it". Amiga.
Circle Reader Service #3.

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
CENTAURI ALLIANCE: Michael Cranford,
the designer of The Bard's Tale, has produced
another mega role-playing environment. Set in
2247, in the midst of an intergalactic war, the
player leads a band of characters on a special
patrol investigating rumors that the Fractyr
Fist, the most powerful weapon in history, has
emerged on the black market. The game
sports a complete magic system (renamed as
Psionics to fit the sci-fi setting), an auto-mapping feature, and a unique 3-D battle system.
Apple II ($ no price).
Circle Reader Service #4.

California Dreams
780 Montague Expwy. #403
San Jose, CA 95131
STREET ROD: Beyond game, beyond
simulation, Street Rod is way of life. Superb
graphics show your rod (any of 25 choices
from '32 Deuce Coup to '63 Corvette) which
you must customize and race in order to become THE KING by the end of Summer. Time
is of the essence as you cruise Bob's Diner to
challenge locals to drag and road races. The
right blend of graphics, strategy and arcade action makes Street Rod a good game. The
scenario of 50's cruising combined with the
designer's clear love affair with classic cars puts
this game a step ahead of the rest. Now, all
you need to do put your arm around your best
girl for a stroll down memory lane... IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
TUNNELS OF ARMAGEDDON: Check
your brain at the door and get ready for the
best in-home thrill ride since your honeymoon.
Continued on page 56

Editorial
letters) to print the credit lines
on the game packages.

Johnny Wilson's

EDITORIAL
in

Russell Sipe's

COMPUTER

GAMING WORLD

The State of the Industry: In Douglas
Adams' Long Dark Tea Time of the Soul,
the protagonist takes a moment to reflect
on certain names which seemed destined
to be emblazoned on paperback book
covers, often in raised, embossed letters.
He suggests something subliminal about
the perfect fit of the author's first name
over a shorter second name and the
customer's tendency to purchase the
book. Then, he goes on to suggest that
people purchase the books on impulse
and rarely read them.

I had to chuckle when I read that portion of the book. With me, it's often just
the opposite. Once I find an author I like
to read, I just keep buying the books
until I have all of his books. Sometimes,
the mere conversational gambit of dropping an author's name will provide a litmus test in determining another person's
interest or disinterest in a subject
or genre.
Then, it struck me that this isn't often
the case with computer games. For one
thing, you certainly cannot accuse the
marketing departments of entertainment
software publishers of developing subliminal purchase responses around the
appearance of a designer's name. Even
designers who have a track record of successes which would give them "star
quality" in any other entertainment field
are virtually unrecognized. There is no
such thing as a designer's name which is
"destined" to adorn the cover of a computer game package. This is largely because their names are not an important
part of the marketing formula.
Why is this true? First, the publishers
seem to be afraid of creating a "star
class" of designer and creating a wageprice spiral (as with athletes and motion
picture stars) where even mediocre personnel would be paid more because of
the megabucks to be "earned" by stars.

In other entertainment media (film,
recording, television, etc.), the "artists"
are touted by the publishers/studios because the "star quality" adds interest and
consumer demand. Entertainment
software publishers should consider the
fact that creating designer "stars" would
add some new marketing dimensions
that have been ignored to this point.
Second, the designers aren't acting like
"stars." They have not made themselves
as accessible to their public as they
could. Many will not allow the media to
get advance looks at their products so
that significant coverage can be planned
and heaven forbid that any of them
should speak at a user group media or attend a gaming convention.
Third, the press has tended to focus so
much on software products that their
coverage has tended to overshadow the
personalities behind the products. Even
though Computer Gaming World leads
the way in publicizing the names of designers and attempting to cover their viewpoints, there needs to be more emphasis
on the "electronic artists" that fuel the
entertainment software industry.
Fourth, the general public, with very few
exceptions, doesn't pay any attention to
who designs what games. This means
that they are probably missing out on
some potentially excellent designs, more
than likely buying some designs that they
would have otherwise avoided and certainly missed knowing some of the most fascinating personalities in any industry.
What, then, can be done? First, CGW
calls on all entertainment software publishers to add a section to their standard
artist/designer/developer contracts to
cover the designer credit. This would
determine, at contract signing, who the
creative personality/personalities behind
the game will be and how prominent the
credit line would be. We further urge the
publishers to use a larger text size (bigger

Second, CGW calls on game designers
and members of design teams to be
more accessible to both the press and
the public. Speak at users' groups and
schools, as well as attend
game conventions.
Third, CGW will strive to increase the attention we give to designers. We will try
to mention the designers more often in
the text of articles and attempt to include
more strategy and design notes from the
designers (maybe even publish occasional pictures).
Fourth, we urge our readers to pay attention to the names of designers and let
the publishers know when you like what
a particular designer is doing (and why).
That will encourage them to publish future products that their customers
really want.

"Who's that group that's got
your magazine? M.A.I.M.!"
(Sung to the tune of "Mame!")
The State of the Magazine: For a
small number of our subscribers (about
2%) the state of the magazine in January
and February was: missing. For some
time we have fought the battle of protecting subscriber's copies of CGW from the
evil forces of the U.S. Postal Service's
Mechanical and Anthropoidal Interstate
Mulching Division (LISPS MAIM Division).
Most copies get to their destination just
fine. Unfortunately some copies of each
issue are routed through MAIM. To combat the effects of MAIM we tried polybagging the magazines. Although polybagging offered great protection it was quite
expensive. No problem, we thought,
since we can sell insert advertising in the
polybags to pay for the expense. Great
idea! But, true to form, the USPS
changed the regulations for advertising in
polybagging two issues later. The changes meant that magazines which mailed
at second class rates were locked out of
running ad inserts to defray the costs of
polybagging. Third class publications
could still put ads in polybags, but third
class mail travels at continental drift rate
(something our readers would never
stand for).
OK, we thought, let's go back to the
old protective cover scheme (not as good
as polybagging, but not bad). Not bad if
the protective covers stayed on the
magazines. Some didn't. Why? The particular paper we used for the protective
covers turned out to be a collector's item
over at MAIM. So we are trying a new
paper this issue (which our printer tells us
has been treated with an anti-MAIM repellant). If you are a subscriber and got this
issue, our new plan is working. If you did
not get this issue, we're wasting our
breath telling you this.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
War In Four Dimensions
by Paul Rigby

B

efore I delve into this month's collection of games, I have some
news for those of you who may
have been intrigued by the information
on F-29 Retaliator. First, why is it called
F-29 Retaliator? True to form, this is the
result of the vivid imaginations of the "Ad
Men". The game actually simulates the X29, in a combat configuration, and the
forthcoming ATF (Advanced Tactical
Fighter as per Lockheed's proposal). The
team at Ocean Software wanted the
game to be known simply as Retaliator,
but once the pinstripe brigade got hold
of it . . .
The programmers behind F-29
Retaliator have an excellent pedigree.
Having worked on Spectrum
Holobyte's Flight of the Intruder (based
on the Stephen Coonts' best seller and
expected to be available in both Europe
and the U.S. prior to the movie's release
in the Fall) and Falcon, in addition to
Avalon Hill's Spitfire 40 and
Mindscape's Strike Force Harrier. The
gameplay resembles a cross between
Flight of the Intruder, Falcon and
Medalist's Carrier Command as players
fly their aircraft in particular scenarios (or
wars). One undertakes missions which
are directly correlated to how one's "side"
is doing. In the meantime, there will be
battles going on all around, independent
of, but correlated to the player's ex-

perience. Scenarios are varied and interesting (including an encounter with the
new Soviet aircraft carrier) with a variety
of new and "on-the-drawing-board"
weapons (such as the "Back-Winder" rear.
ward firing Sidewinder). Release will, initially, be on Amiga and ST in the first
quarter of 1990.
The Legend of Djel is a typical French
game. It has an exceedingly complicated
plot, excellent graphics and eccentric
gameplay. "Legend" is a graphic adventure that places the player in the role of
Djel the Magician. As Djel, one must
eliminate a variety of disasters which have
settled upon the villagers, as well as solve
a difficult kidnapping case and heal an in
dividual from a curious illness which is be
coming an epidemic. The gameplay
centers around a variety of graphics, representing individual worlds. Using
point-and-click techniques, players can search
for objects and communicate with other
characters. Two action-oriented logic puzzles act as "combat" (Amiga & ST,
avail able now).
Based on the French comic book, Les
Tuniques Bleues, Infogrames' North
and South (to be distributed by Data
East in the U. S.) depicts the American
Civil War in, of course, comic-book style.
One can take either side with a choice of
three levels of difficulty. Infogrames has
appeared to introduce as much humor
into the game as possible by using a
variety of animated sequences and sound
effects. How much this affects the actual
strategy elements of the game can only
be surmised at the time of writing. However, there are a variety of modifiers such
as storms, outside groups (in this case, Indians and Mexicans) which take offence
at the military presence (hence, interfering with the conduct of the war), etc. The
ST version should be available now, with
Amiga & PC coming in the first quarter
of 1990.
Novagen, based in the UK, has had
Damocles under development and "hanging over their heads" for an eternity, but
it is about to appear on the Amiga, Atari
ST & IBM. Those who have played or
seen Starglider 2 will have an idea what
Damocles will look like. However,
Damocles takes things a stage further.
Using solid-filled 3-D graphics, the game
features nine planets and 19 moons (all
of which can be landed upon and explored), as well as a comet on a collision
course with Earth. The player's job is to
stop it. A variety of object-oriented puzzles appear in the game. The speed and
realism of the graphics support
Novagen's claim to having "the best
space simulation ever". However, it is the
Continued on page 48

Industry News

The
Rumor
Bag
by Orson Foster Kane

(continued from

CGW #68)

s I awoke from the gray divide
which separates the conscious
mind from the unconscious, I had
this vague recollection of being "interrogated" in the Museum of Flight at the
Santa Monica Airport. Now, I was behind
a desk in an unfamiliar office with an old
Underwood typewriter in front of me, instead of my computer. My boss, dressed
in anachronistic attire, was looking down
at me and asking, "Is this any way to
write a rumor column?"
I answered, "I don't know how to write a
column. I just try everything I can think
of." I told him that Maxis Software
seems to do that, too, since they are
working on three very distinctive
programs. I reminded him about their
"Gaia" simulation (possibly called SimEarth) which should be on the market by
June. Then, I told him about their linear
accelerator (cyclotron) simulation. Expected to be the first entry in a "Fractured Physics" series, the "game" is a construction set (with 50 pre-designed levels)
where players can "run" particles through
the cyclotron, collide them with each
other and end up with matter and antimatter. Like SimCity, the "game" will be
released on the Mac in late spring and
should appear on the IBM
during early summer.
Then, I told him about their product
that is closest to completion, RoboSport.
Inspired by the early Apple hit, Robotwars (from now defunct Muse
Software), this game of futuristic arena
combat uses a "point and click" command structure rather than requiring
even the pseudo-programming of
Origin's Omega (which would be the
most similar product now available). It
seems to be a departure for Maxis.
The old-fashioned phone on the desk
rang. It was one of our reviewers. He said
he was tired of writing prose poems to

describe action/adventure
games. He
wondered when
someone would
publish a new
wargame. Fortunately, I had
good news for
him. "You provide the prose
poems, we'll provide the war," I
answered.
Tevex has purchased the
license to convert Games
Designers'
Workshop's A
House Divided
into a computer
game. Steve
Estvanik, who
did Sniper! for
Compuserve
and Incunabula for Avalon Hill has
agreed to create the computer game. Unlike his recent The Civil War for Avalon
Hill, the game will feature boardgamestyle graphics.
He asked me if I had heard that Park
Place Productions, the developers who
programmed ABC Monday Night Football for Data East, were working on a
new basketball product (to appear on the
C-64 and IBM) which would feature
cooperation with and promotion by
several NBA stars. I suggested that it was
probably Data East's new basketball
license, expected to be announced at the
Summer Consumer Electronics Show in
Chicago. I told him we probably couldn't
use the story, however, because my
editor once told me, "It is not our function to cover the gossip of housewives."
If, however, he could give me a hot tip
on how to win at Batman, the new
Amiga and C-64 games based on the
movie, we might work it in, though. He
told me that, on the Amiga, players can
access the "Cheat Mode" by typing "JAMMMMM" and waiting until the title screen
flips. Then, one simply hits "F-10" and sequences through the levels until the right
one appears.
As my boss watched over my shoulder, I
hung up the phone and typed in the
details I had discovered about Paragon's
upcoming Megatraveller since January. I
had been particularly interested in discovering how they plan to handle encounters with non-player characters. It
turns out that they will be using new reaction tables based on social status rather
than the standard reaction rolls in
Megatraveller. Unlike the Megatraveller
pen and paper game, however, there will
be no race reactions in this first release in
the series. The five major races aren't
that important in the first game, because
the player can only create human charac-

ters. The designers wanted to enable
players to choose alien races, but in
order to get the first release out, they had
to limit their scope.
I turned to my boss and apologized for
not having any blockbuster rumors to
print this issue. He said that was nonsense and stated, "If the headline is big
enough, it makes the news big enough."
So, here goes:

First Confirmed Product On
New Amiga
My lovely assistant brought in a
telegram from the outer office. "Mr. Kane!
Mr. Kane!" she shouted, "We have the
name of a game due to be marketed for
that new Amiga!" Even though we don't
have the details on the new Amiga, Commodore claims that it will be "more power
ful than any PC on the market today" and
will involve 16-bit development that will
"give the computer back to the family."
The confirmed product is tentatively
called Tiles, a puzzle-oriented game that
is due to "take advantage of all the
Amiga's new technologies." Of course,
our anonymous source couldn't talk
about those technologies, but it's nice to
know that something is in the works for
the new Amiga.
Just as I was nearing completion of this
column, I noticed my assistant carrying a
bud vase with one flower in it into Editor
Wilson's office. I followed her to find out
what it was all about. "Congratulations,"
she said and planted a kiss on his cheek,
"I just heard about your book contract
with Osborne McGraw-Hill. I hope The
Sim City Planning Commission Handbook sells a million copies."
"Me, too!" I said, stepping in long
enough to inhale the flower's fragrance. I
choked briefly as I started to lose consciousness, able only to manage the brief
whisper, "Rosebud" before I blacked out.
(To be continued)

Review

The
Search
for the
False
Prophet
A Sneak Preview
of "Ultima VI"

he late 19th Century American lawyerpolitician, Thomas B. Reed, is reputed to
have said, "One, with God, is always a
majority, but many a martyr has been burned
at the stake while the votes were being
counted." Such an acerbic warning against
the assumption that having a conception of
Virtue and Right is equivalent to a mandate to
search out and destroy other ideas seems to
be a vital part of what the second Ultima
trilogy is about.

T

Philosophically, we have seen the game system grow from the exploration of Virtue in Ultima IV: The Quest for the Avatar through the
consideration that Right may be somewhat
twisted when it is used as Might in Ultima V:
Warriors of Destiny. By the time the player
has dealt with the problems encountered in Ultima VI: The False Prophet, he may well understand the profound principle once elicited
by an English historian: "History is not a web
woven with innocent hands. Among all the
causes which degrade and demoralize men,
power is the most constant and the most active." (Lord Acton, Essays on
Freedom and Power).

First Person Singular
The story opens with a tremendous
cinematic sequence (utilizing VGA graphics) in which the camera
angle focuses upon a contemporary male character, sitting in his
lounge chair and mindlessly flipping through the television channels on an animated television screen that offers delightful
parodies of everything from music videos to television evangelists.
Then, the on-screen character's attention is turned to the famous
Ultima circle of stones. An ominous bolt of lightning provides a
portent of what is to come as it strikes in the center of the circle.
It is obvious from the text that the on-screen character is sup-

posed to represent the player himself/herself. Experienced Ultima players
will be ready for what comes next. Venturing out toward the circle of stones,
one knows that the "summoning" is
about to occur. This time there are two
major differences in the "summoning".
Never before has the player experienced
this introductory sequence from an
animated full-screen, first person
perspective and never before has the
player's character experienced a red portal rather than the standard blue portal
of the earlier games. Does this mean
that Lord British is not the one who has
summoned the player's avatar? Does
this mean that the avatar will start the
game in mortal danger? Does this mean
that the story is designed to be faster
and stronger than ever before? The
answer is "Yes" on all counts.

A Matter of Character
Should a player have missed the earlier
games in the second Ultima trilogy, it is
still possible to play Ultima VI: The
False Prophet without playing the previous releases. Even though the
storyline draws important elements from
the previous stories, the latest adventure
is accessible enough that anyone can
play. One simply begins by creating an
avatar character. Where Ultima IV established this by having the player's character
visit a card-reading gypsy fortuneteller and
answer several ethical questions in order to
gain an idea of the hero-to-be's character, Ultima VI has the character visit a potionmixing gypsy fortuneteller to accomplish the
same thing. In fact, the questions appear
to be identical.
In Ultima VI, however, the player will be
greeted by a character portrait of not only
his/her character, but of every character to
be encountered in the game. There is also a
cleverly laid-out inventory screen which allows the player to note at a glance exactly
what objects each character is carrying and
where those objects are on the
character's person.
In addition to these changes, the nonplayer characters who have adorned the
player's party since the first trilogy (Dupre',
Shamino, and lolo) still travel with the avatar,
but there is a difference. In earlier games,
these characters were little more than an extension of the player's personality and were
largely directed by the player. In Ultima VI,
however, the supporting cast has become
more realistic. Dupre' will act consistently
with the bravado one would expect from a
swashbuckling fighter, while Shamino offers
warnings and prods gently in the sense of a "Ranger" character in
Tolkien's trilogy. lob is still the player's friend and is ready to offer
consolation whenever it is necessary.
Finally, Ultima veterans may be pleasantly surprised by the constant scale aspect of Ultima VI. After the introductory sequence,
all action is portrayed from a top-down perspective and all locaContinued on page 16

Review
Continued from page 14

tions are depicted in the same scale. On the positive side, this
means that players no longer have to wait for the scale to change
whenever the party enters a town or dungeon. On the negative
side, it means that the dungeons themselves may be harder to
map than those in earlier games and the game offers no "macroscopic" view (no big picture) of the party's locations.

Reality, What A Concept
Perhaps, the most important changes in Ultima VI reflect a new
philosophy in modeling the universe where the fantasy takes
place. All objects are "real" in the sense of having weight, substance, characteristics and uses. Walls, doors, and special locations have hit points
so that there is more
than one way to deal
with a puzzle or challenge. "Wheat" found
in one of Ultima Ws
fields, for example, can
be ground into "Flour"
at one of the game's
mills. "Flour" can, in
turn, be baked into
"Bread" at one of the
game's bakeries,
which can, in turn, be
eaten as "Food". The
same can be done
with shearing "Wool",
spinning it into
"Thread" and taking it
to a tailor to make
"Clothing". Players can
even set up their own
businesses using these
chains of
activity if they wish.
Concerns for realism
also mitigated against
the use of random
monster encounters.
There are no random
monster encounters in
Ultima VI. There are
some established bounds for determining when one shall encounter them, but the illogical randomality is none.
Finally, the most realistic aspect of the game is how it is won.
Just as victory is not always clear-cut in "real life", even so, it is actually possible to lose at Ultima VI by seemingly winning. A word
to the avatar may or may not be sufficient.

Long Time Passing
Lord British indicates that there are not as many specific
geographical locations in Ultima VI as there were in previous Ultimas, but he insists that what is in the game is deeper in the
sense that one can do more with the environment than ever
before and interact more with the supporting cast than in earlier
games. It is estimated that it will not take more than 100 hours to
complete the final quest in the second trilogy. One thing is certain, the players, as well as their on-screen characters, should win
by completing their quest for "The False Prophet".

Industry News

Inside

the

Industry

News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry

Electronic Arts
Reaffirms
Commitment to
Disk-Based
Software
Trip Hawkins, Chief Executive Officer of Electronic
Arts unhesitantly denied a
rumor that EA was phasing
out disk-based software
development and plunging
wholly into ROM-based
game development. "We
have dozens of floppy disk
products in development
right now that are scheduled
to come out over the next
couple of years,"
protested Hawkins.
Declaring the rumor to be
patently absurd, Hawkins
went on to say that he did
not think it was possible for
the cartridge-based market
to completely displace the
disk-based market. He cited
lower launch and development costs for disk-based
games as opposed to the expensive implementation of
ROM cartridges and the inability to develop certain
kinds of products which are
a vital part of EA's mix (like
construction sets, role playing games and customizable games) as a
cartridge game, as factors
which would mitigate against
such a move. He also cited
Electronic Arts' long-term
strength as a distribution network in the disk-based
market as a factor making

such a move rather absurd.
"We think that we can continue to grow that business
[the Affiliated Labels program] and believe it is
having a major impact in
having as many floppy-disk
products as there are
on the market."
Hawkins noted that currently, although the company
has licensed 11 different titles to cartridge-based game
companies, 100% of the
company's product mix is
currently manufactured and
sold on floppy disk formats.
He noted that the mix is
going to change to include
ROM cartridge and CDbased products in the future,
but declined to state the
exact platforms or announce
a precise date. He did
forecast that Electronic
Arts would be shipping
ROM-based products before
the end of the company's
next fiscal year (March,
1991). He insisted, however,
that this would not impact
disk-based product development negatively. He suggested that the company
would simply take the most
successful disk-based titles
and put them on the
popular formats.
CGW suggests that the
rumor may have due to a
misreading of the prospectus for EA's initial public offering which set aside a portion of new capital for video

game development combined with a general pessimism with regard to diskbased sales (down 10% overall). Hawkins pointed out,
however, that EA's profits for
the first three quarters were
up over those for the same
period of the last fiscal year
(and those, in turn, were up
during a period when the
entertainment software industry as a whole
were down).

"Star Saga" On
Auction Block
The publishing venture
which brought new meaning
to multi-player computer
gaming with Star Saga One:
Beyond The Boundary and
Star Saga Two: The
Clathran Menace is up for
sale. According to Andrew
Greenberg, President and
CEO of Masterplay, "Faced
with holding our breath and
taking a chance a little while
longer (and maybe, facing
bankruptcy), the board of
directors made the decision
to sell. The deepest cut of all
and perhaps, most unwise
decision we made was the
decision to support the
Apple II." Greenberg stated
that the inability of the Apple
II to handle both the huge
storyline and support the

kind of "visual heat" the current market demands turned
out to be more devastating
than anyone could have expected. "We followed the
'Apple II Forever' hype into
oblivion," eulogized the personable game designer.
Asked if it was possible that
another publisher might add
graphics and successfully
market Star Saga III (the
bulk of the design work is
complete), Greenberg expressed doubt. "You
wouldn't want a lot of visual
heat in the Star Saga
design," he observed, "because you want to get
people away from the
machine while staying in the
game. We're not against putting graphics in the game.
It's just that there is a technical problem involved in adding beautiful screens and
keeping the game moving. If
people are staying at the
screen to look at the pictures, the multi-player aspect
will bog down."

Aftershock
Licenses
Development
Engine
Aftershock Entertainment (in Oxnard, CA) is
licensing their Aftershock
Development System, including the Tedit Tile Editor and
Sequencer. According to
John Reego, president of
the firm, the software
enables the hardware to
move the screen up, down,
left and right. "It's like turbocharging your PC for an arcade engine." The sequencing program enables
programmers to "run sequences" rather than continually editing sprites.
Developers using these tools
will allegedly have the advantage of allowing the artist
to render the graphics and
enable the programmer to
concentrate on setting the
sequences. VGA graphics
are required to maximize use
of these development tools.

Origin/CGW
Omega
Tournament
Report
AUSTIN (CGW) -- The final monthly
Origin/CGW OMEGA Tournament has
been completed. An incredible 183 tanks
were entered in the January Tournament. The tournament winner is Robin
Kim of Naperville, IL. Robin's Omega
Level design, TALON-C, was produced
on the Amiga. Other top finishers in the
January tournament were: RADICAL2
(Peter Schmidt, Des Moines, IA); PANTHER1 (John Gossman, Bellingham,
WA); MR.KHAN (Cassidy Caid, Granada,
Hills, CA); MR.TOXIC (Steve Mayo,
Chesapeake, VA); and SHARK2 (Doug
Hogg, Los Angeles, CA). By the way,

Doug Hogg's DRAGON was the co-champion of CGW's last Robotwar tournament held back in 1984.

Comments From OSI Officials
The January Tournament was an inspiring conclusion to our series of monthly
qualifying tournaments. As the battles
progressed, it was evident that the "engineers" had invested many hours
programming, testing, and debugging
their tank designs. Some
battles were completed
within moments (in a
flash of plasma fire), other
battles showcased carefully crafted stealth and acquisition routines.

OSI personnel to the battle screens.

Stuart Marks, Director of the OMEGA
Project, has declared that all OMEGA
project engineers are to be applauded for
their outstanding achievement in cybernetic engineering, and he has allocated
merit raises for them in the OSI budget.
A full report on the Tournament Finals
will appear in the April issue of CGW.

All in all, the sophistication of these cybernetic
warriors and the diligence
of their creators pushed
the level of competition
to an intensity that riveted

Win A Free Trip To Britain!
In search of the best air combat simulation
player among CGW readers, Lucasfilm
Games and Computer Gaming World announce Their Finest Hour: The Battle of
Britain Competition.
Grand prize is an all-expense paid trip to
England with game designer Lawrence Holland and computer Gaming World
Editor-in-Chief Russell Sipe concurrent with the 50th
Anniversary of the Battle of Britain. Departing
September 1990, the highlight of the twoweek tour is Battle of Britain Day, September 15, 1990 and the 50th Anniversary
ceremony in London. Led by Valor Tours'
Bob Reynolds, Secretary of the Royal Air
Force Association, the trip includes the
Farnborough Air Show, numerous visits to
U.S. WW II air bases in East Anglia, extensive
museum and airfield tours, and even a
Cambridge pub notorious for its RAF patrons;
all to recreate this monumental event 50
years later.
The competition is three-tiered with players
first submitting a qualifying pilot record by
March 15, 1990. If chosen to compete at
Level Two, players submit required campaign
play records and original missions they have
created using the "Mission Builder" feature,
due by May 15, 1990. The five finalists
chosen for Level Three then play each others
original missions on or before June 15, 1990.
Top scorer is then off to England in time for
the 50th Anniversary!

COMPETITION RULES
LEVEL ONE
1. Submit a pilot record saved to disk with
the required qualifying score--a minimum of
1000 points.
• First create a pilot from the roster screen
during flight briefing. Any pilot type is acceptable. Consult page 81 of Their Finest Hour

manual for more information. All types of
pilots are eligible.
• After your qualifying pilot has reached the
minimum requirements of 1000 points, copy
your pilot file onto a 5 1/4" or 3 1/2" floppy
disk.

Note: As a pilot is named, the program
creates a DOS file name using one of the following extensions, based on type of pilot.
This file name should be used in copying.
PLANE

EXTENSION NAME

Spitfire/Hurricane

.RAF

BF 109

.109

BF 110

.110

Stuka

.J87

Ju88/He111/Do17

.BMB

Example: For a Spitfire pilot named Joe
the file name is JOE.RAF.
2. 100 disks will be chose randomly from
those received and reviewed for qualifying requirements.
3. The qualifying pilot disk must have name,

address, and phone clearly labeled on the outside and must contain only one pilot record
file. Disks with more than one file or whose
identifying label is illegible will be disqualified.
Only one entry per person.
4. Send disk to address below. Entry must
be postmarked by March 15, 1990. All disks
received during all three competition levels become property of Lucasfilm Games and cannot be returned.
Battle of Britain COMPETITION
LUCASFILM GAMES
P.O. Box 10307
San Rafael, CA 94912
5. The 100 qualifiers chosen will be notified
by mail and will receive full instructions and requirements for Level Two play at that time.
Employees, contractors, or freelancers of
Lucasfilm Ltd., Electronic Arts, or Golden Empire Publications, are not eligible to enter.
Void where prohibited.

Game Hints

Pre-emptive Attacks

Computer
Harpoon"
Tactics

This is the key element of naval warfare. If a
commander can manage to attack effectively
before his enemy can, in return, launch an attack against him, the original commander will
generally win. However, be advised that attacking first is not enough. One must put enough
firepower on the enemy targets during the initial stages of the engagement to destroy their
offensive capacity, as well!

Attacking Bearing-Only Targets
When one launches missiles against a bearing-only detected target, the weapons seeking
sensor will normally activate at the minimum
distance that the target could possibly be. If the
seeking sensor is a radar or sonar, then the target will probably detect the weapon and have a
better chance of shooting it down or deploying
counter-measures against it. Weapons
launched against targets upon which one has
an exact detection will activate very close to the
target and are much more likely to score hits.

The "Short" Course

by Gordon Walton

Avoiding Incoming Torpedoes

Gordon Walton is project leader on the computer version of Harpoon"'. In this article, he
offers some basic suggestions for players to
implement in maximizing their chances
for success.

n

Captain Wayne P. Hughes' excellent
book, Fleet Tactics (Naval Institute
Press), the essence of naval warfare is
distilled. This book is extremely useful to
anyone with an interest in naval warfare
and Harpoon — players, as well.

I

Know The Technology
Commanders who do not know the technological capabilities of their platforms,
weapons and sensors cannot fight effectively.
Tactics are so tightly linked with the technology
in naval warfare that ignorance can be fatal.
Further, it is just as important to know the
capabilities of the enemy's technology. In the
computer version of Harpoon", players can access the Platform Display prior to the start of a
scenario to review the capabilities of their own
platforms, weaponry and sensors. Then, when
an enemy is detected, players can review the
same capabilities for the enemy platforms
which they are able to identify.

Scouting
To effectively fight an enemy, it is obvious
that one must know where the enemy is. To
know where the enemy is and what forces he
has committed, you must use scouts. In playing Harpoon" on the computer, players will do
most of their scouting with aircraft in order to
search more area faster than with any other
platform. One uses the Launch Aircraft order to
send out patrols to search the areas where the

enemy could be located. Players need to be certain that they leave enough aircraft in the picket zone among their own formations to be able
to detect incoming threats. Until one is certain
about the enemy's position and strength, it is
difficult to make a plan to defeat them.
If no aircraft are available within a given
scenario, one can split off small and fast surface or submarine units in order to scout
ahead of the main force. Once these scouts
detect the enemy, one can decide how to
engage them effectively with the main force.

If a player is controlling a surface ship, the
only chance of avoiding a detected torpedo is
to go to full speed and set a course directly
away from it. When controlling a submarine,
one must change depth to take the vessel
either above or below the thermocline (also
called the thermal layer and, in the Harpoon"
system, located between the Shallow and Intermediate depths). At the same time, one must
change the vessel's course by, at least, fortyfive (45) degrees and adjust the vessel's speed.
Together, all of these factors will greatly increase the chances of breaking the contact of
the torpedo's homing sensor. If the torpedo is
detected more than a few miles away and one
has a submarine with a top speed of over 30
knots, the best thing to do may be to turn
away from the torpedo, dive deep and run
away at full speed. Most torpedoes have a very
limited range and, if one has a few miles head
start, will probably run out of fuel before they
can catch up.

Concentration of Force
Once a commanding officer knows the disposition of the enemy, enough force must be
brought to bear to destroy that enemy in a
coordinated and cohesive attack. In the larger
scenarios, he may want to ferry the attack
aircraft and/or load them out to do the maximum damage to the enemy threat. Both surface and submarine forces must be
maneuvered to converge on the enemy threat
in such a way that they can all attack simultaneously. In this way, the chances of delivering
maximum firepower to the enemy are
greatly improved.

Counterforce
One must also consider the matter of how
well one's own force is prepared to defend
themselves against enemy fire and the amount
of damage those forces can take before becom
ing ineffective in combat. To determine this
capacity, one should look at the Damage
Points under the Display or Unit Full Report
commands. The optimal situation is never to
have this ability tested under fire. Rather, find
and kill the enemy before they get the chance
to open fire at one's own forces.

Using Aircraft Effectively
AEW: "Airborne Early Warning" aircraft can
be used both to get detections on enemy airborne and surface targets and to warn the
player of incoming airborne threats early
enough to take effective counter measures.
One should use the Formation Editor or
Launch Aircraft/Repeatable Patrol orders to put
these aircraft where they can detect incoming
threats. Avoid placing these aircraft too far forward without an Air-to-Air escort, as the enemy
will want to shoot these valuable aircraft down!
ASW: Anti-Submarine Warfare aircraft are
the best offensive weapons available against
submarine threats. Keep, at least, one ASW
aircraft airborne at all times, so that any submerged threat can be instantly responded to,
even if it is outside the range of the ship's ASW
weapons. Having ASW aircraft patrol ahead of
the fleet's planned route is a useful method if
sufficient aircraft are available.

Coming Soon
Watch for M. Evan Brooks' upcoming feature
article on Harpoon" strategy in a future Computer Gaming World.

Review

y career as a
software reviewer
began in 1980
when, desperately seeking a
wifeproof excuse for spending $29.95 for the Apple
cassette tape version of
SubLogic's AFS2
simulator, I blustered that I
would write a review to pay
for the software and, amazingly enough, managed to
do so. I've specialized in the
subject ever since. With
today's more powerful computers, of course, flight
simulations are a quantum
leap ahead of the wireframe cockpits, runways,
mountains and landscapes
of the AFS/2 world.

M

Falcon Vs. Falcon
Electronic Arts' "F-16 Combat Pilot"
by Dale Archibald

In "Gladiator",
both players begin
on their home runways. Therefore,
the first problem to
be encountered is
starting distance.
One conflict in
preparation for this
review began at initial starting points
160 miles apart!
Even at 750 miles
per hour, it seems
to take forever to
get within range.
Then, since humanpiloted aircraft (unlike the sturdy ships
in the solo game)
can be downed
with just one rocket, a duel can be
over in one pass.

F-16 Combat Pilot attracted me because it could
be played over a telephone
modem, and I wanted to
compare it to GEnie's online game, Air Warrior (see
COW #67).

Mission Control
Missions available are:
"Scramble", "Air-to-Air Interception", "Watchtower" (a
reconnaissance flight),
"Tankbuster" (close air support), "Hammerblow" (
Air-to-Ground attack on an airfield, military base or antiaircraft site), and
"Deepstrike" (Air-to-Ground
attack against a fuel depot,
power station, factory,
and/or bridge). In each of
the missions, an Electronic Strategic Display (ESD) displays various locations on a
map of the operative region. Clicking the
mouse on ESD buttons will provide more
complete information (i.e. mission objectives, available targets, and an intelligence update on weather, flight plan,
and weaponry.

Any of the missions can be flown as a
training mission, along with "Free Flight"
and "Landing Practice" (tutorials). Once a
player has successfully flown all of the
above missions for "real" (i.e. not as painless training), one is ready to take command in "Operation Conquest", the campaign game. Players function as an operational commander in assigning aircraft
and tank battalions to their missions.
Then, once the actual campaign begins,
the player gets into the action as a
squadron pilot. If that particular pilot is
killed, the player is "reincarnated" as
another pilot. This process continues
until either the campaign is over or the
player runs out of aircraft.

dial through a 1200
baud modem (or
faster). Once pilots
are connected, they
gain full access to
the entire command structure in
the "Gladiator" mission and enter a
two-player dogfight.

TITLE:
F-16 Combat Pilot
SYSTEMS:
Atari ST, IBM (512K)
REVIEWED ON: IBM
1-2
# PLAYERS:
(with modem play)
PRICE:
$49.95
Digital Integration
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Flying Off The Handle
It's in the cockpit, of course, that one
finds the bulk of the fun. One nice touch
of realism is that when one goes into too
steep a dive, the G forces increase on the
pilot's body and the screen display itself is
modified to reflect the lightheadedness a
pilot would normally experience.

Players may want
to limit their initial
manned flights to
machine guns.
That will allow
damage to build in
increments and
player skill to improve before putting it all on the
line in such lightning fast rocket duels. (Note: The designers of GEnie's Air Warrior chose WW1
and II aircraft rather than modem
designs, because, with the latter types,
scorehappy players could take off, fire
rockets at a 30 mile range, land and
then, wait for the "kills".)

It's A Dog-Fight-Dog World

On-line, F-16 keypad keys need to be
held a bit longer and reaction times tend
to be slower and much jerkier than when
one is simply playing solo (perhaps because of information "packet" transfer on
the modem). In addition, there is no way
to communicate with each other while online, whether in the air or back at the
crew room. This is a feature which is
generally standard in on-line games like
Modem Wars, Air Warrior and Sniper,
(among others) and one is surprised not
to see the "Radio" feature present in this
game. It would also be nice to have a little variety in the on-line arena. Perhaps
some area or drones to protect or attack?

So, how does it work as an on-line or
direct-connect program? Quite well, actually. Once loaded, it is very simple to

Overall, though, this is a good game for
solo or on-line use and can potentially
keep garners at the controls for hours.

The realistic and smooth graphics are
not only functional for the front view, but
also provide views out both the sides and
the rear, as well. The graphics work quite
rapidly on an AT or clone, but the program offers acceptable speed on even a
4.77 Mhz "dime-store" PC clone with
simulated CGA graphics on a
monochrome monitor. Color is such an
integral part of the program, however,
that it makes matters simpler if one has
the larger palette.

Review

well-animated with sound effects which
are spectacularly expressive and funny.

"Peace,
Young
One . . ."

Character attributes are represented onscreen by rows of abacus beads, one each
for body, spirit, karma and honor. The latter is significant as it represents the number
of times a character can mess up and still
manage to come back to life. Note that although there is no creepy 'Death' like
there was in the earlier game, Windwalker
does offer the 'taunting demons of the Mirror of Truth" and they do laugh outrageous
ly each time a character is tried
and found wanting.

Origin's
"Windwalker"

The fourth attribute, honor, is both impor
tant and ephemeral. As Moebius says, "The
honor from your actions goes forth ... as
the smoke from (an) urn.' Without honor,
or with seriously weakened honor, a character's attempts to gain enlightenment
(much less save the emperor and Khantun)
will be doomed. Villagers will shun the
character and the priests will make him a
pariah. Honor should be valued above all
else by the disciple of Moebius.

by Dennis Owens

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Windwalker
Amiga, Apple II
C-64, and IBM
$39.95
Greg Malone
Origin Systems
Austin, TX

You are drifting through bliss—the
ethereal state of meditative consciousness.
Weightless . . . Silent . . . Aware .. .
Ahead, in the distant mist of your mind's
eye, you see a light, a presence,
a voice . . . .
So begins Windwalker, the sequel to
Origin's (and Greg Malone's) Moebius, the
role-playing quest for wisdom and enlightenment set in the Orient. Much like its
predecessor, Windwalker combines the
search for peace of spirit and understanding with a healthy dose of ninja-bashing, thief-konking and guard-whomping.
Along the way toward restoring Chao Ti,
Khantun's rightful emperor, to his throne,
and overcoming the ambitious Zhurong,
each player's character will learn much
about the mysteries of Shamanism and
Khisanism, as well as his own
strengths and weaknesses.
Windwalker shares or improves upon almost all of the strengths of Moebius and
does away with its weaknesses. Gone is
the divination sequence during training, extensive learning curve for combat sequences and all of the different commands for
interaction. In their places, one finds a combat sequence that has been much retooled
(both for ease of use and enjoyment), a
simplified interface, and sound/graphics
capabilities that are ... ahem, head and
shoulders above those of the earlier game.
No longer does one's character either
have to get slaughtered or suffer embarrassing blots on his honor when he faces an
opponent more skillful or stronger than he.
Now, in the game's most significant and
welcome change, he can pace himself

through his battle sequences—either
through stop-action concentration mode or
real-time intuition mode. Combat in concentration mode is much easier, but exciting nonetheless. Then, once the player becomes comfortable with the battle commands, intuition mode is but a keypress
away. In fact, no longer does starvation
and thirst set in every time the player turns

around. The game has a decidedly better
play balance than its predecessor had.
The menus are easily accessible, but one
command which the manual does not mention and which did not seem immediately
evident to this reviewer should be mentioned. Whenever the player's character
needs to disembark from a ship, one must
go to the inventory menu
and choose "anchor".
Graphics are similar to those in Moebius,
but both clearer and more inventive than
those utilized in the earlier game. Character icons are still represented by huge
heads and shoulders. The landscape still exudes that Oriental atmosphere, but now,
the oceans broil; the sky darkens;
and lightning cracks.
Combat sequences are smooth, large and

As an aside: perhaps, the most refreshing
characteristic of Windwalker is its emphasis
on honor. If one's character attacks
without provocation, steals or performs
various other dishonorable acts during the
game, the quest becomes more difficult.
Origin's writers should be praised for their
attempts to instill codes of conduct in their
games. As one of the extremely few companies who do so, their attempts—as in
the Ultima series—are generally quite successful artistically and satisfying to game
players. We know there's more to life than
hack 'n slash.
Game-saving is readily accessible. However, there is no way to quit without
saving (whenever the player makes a mistake) without having the game tell the
player something irritating about the 'light
of knowledge' and zapping his player's
karma for one of his lives. The wise (or
cautious) game player will learn to back up
(at least, on the IBM) their "Savegame.dat"
and "Roster.dat" files after each play. Then,
as this writer 'dishonorably" chose to do, it
can be a simple matter to flee from a battle, press "Recall game" and keep going.
The IBM version supports a hard-drive;
offers options for mouse or keyboard interface; features drivers for AdLib, CMS and
several other soundboards; provides
graphics options from CGW to VGA and
Tandy color; and requires, at least, 384K
and one disk drive. Reports from Apple
users suggest a lot of disk access, but the
PC version is not bad.
Windwalker is an excellent game for fans
of Moebius and for anyone looking for a
combination action/role-playing game with
an Oriental flair and a gentleness of spirit.

Review

T

here

are times when it is difficult to be a game reviewer.
Now, for instance. On the
desk in front of me is a copy of
Star Trek V: The Final Frontier,
Mindscape's adaptation of last
summer's film of the same name.
This is, in many ways, the best
Star Trek computer game yet. It
reproduces the visuals, the sound,
and the "feel" of Star Trek with
wonderful authenticity. It offers
several diverse game sequences,
with a nice balance between arcade action, strategy, and storytelling. It is technically superb and
there is a great deal of thought evident in the intricate game design.

KLINGONS,
GO HOME!
Mindscape's Star Trek V:
The Final Frontier
By Charles Ardai

Yet, somehow the game is unsatisfying. If I were just a guy on
the street, I could get away with
saying, "I can't put my finger on it,
but for some reason this game
doesn't work for me. I should enjoy
it, but I don't." As a reviewer, I
can't get off the hook that easily. I
have to "put my finger on it." The
danger is that, as I build up my explanation, negative comments will
pile up; and as negative comments
pile up, readers will start to think
that the game must be awful to
merit so much criticism. In this
case, at least, that would be the
wrong conclusion to draw.

several action sequences, each dealing with one leg of the adventure. Sequences are lifted from Star Trek:
The Motion Picture (going through a
hyperspace wormhole), Star Trek III
(hand-to-hand combat between Kirk
and a Klingon captain on an alien
planet, space combat between a
debilitated Enterprise and a Klingon
Bird of Prey), Star Trek II (the
spaceship combat is really just a mission simulator), and the designers' imagination (a Klingon "gravitic
minefield")—in short, anything to
avoid having to deal with the source
material under license.
Players have control of all the
Enterprise's functioning systems
directly as well as through commands
to the bridge crew. Each crew member has a playing-card-sized digitized
portrait and a menu of personal commands which can be called up at the
push of a function key; other controls
access navigation, weapons, damage
control, and so forth. This means that
players can either call up Chekhov's
menu and have him fire the ship's
phasers or they can fire them by
hand, for instance.

Damage control is a major feature
of the game, and it is here that
strategic elements come into play.
Whatever else is going on in a given
sequence, some part of the
Star Trek V: The Final Frontier is
Enterprise always needs fixing (includa fine game. It is even an entertaining the crew, in which case it's Dr.
ing game. Unfortunately, like the
McCoy's problem). On the series, Kirk
movie that spawned it, Star Trek V
could leave such matters to his
TITLE:
Star Trek V:The Final Frontier
leaves one wishing that it
SYSTEMS:
IBM
officers' discretion; here, the player
PRICE:
$49.95
had been better.
has to juggle his crew from one damaged area to
DESIGNER:
Level Systems Inc.
another, estimating where a certain officer's exPUBLISHER:
Mindscape Inc.
Report On A Broken Bridge
pertise will do the most good and making quick
decisions under fire.
First things first. For those readers fortunate
This is a well-conceived device which adds depth to what would
enough to have missed the film, here's a synopsis of the plot:
otherwise be a rather superficial series of arcade-game contests.
Kirk and company are called back ahead of schedule from a wellHaving to rush about from one damage screen to another and
deserved shore leave when a Vulcan mystic takes the leaders of a
balance one's resources enables one to forget that the
backwater planet called Nimbus III hostage. The crew returns to
foreground action has been essentially "cribbed" from any numan Enterprise that is half-functional (at best) and heads off to resber of Golden Oldies.
cue the Nimbusians. Since one of the captive leaders is a Klingon, the Klingons also send a ship to check things out—but, as
The wormhole sequence (which opens the game if one doesn't
it turns out, the Klingon captain is more interested in hanging
count the "Mission Briefing") is seems tremendously reminiscent
Kirk's head over his mantel than in rescuing anybody.
of the air-tunnel sequence in Activision's Master of the Lamps,
Meanwhile, the Vulcan, who turns out to be Spock's halfonly without that game's jazzy soundtrack. The object is to fly the
brother (don't ask), captures the Enterprise through a {sarcasm
Enterprise through a tunnel without touching the walls or runalert} clever bit of subterfuge. His glassy-eyed mission is to find
ning into the improbably numerous asteroids that whiz by.
God on the legendary planet, Sha Ka Ree, at the center of the
In true arcade fashion, there are bonus points to be had, too,
Galaxy. Kirk has no choice but to go along with this mad plan—
one imagines this is how Paramount Studios felt when Bill Shathere in the form of dilithium crystals to be collected for extra energy. (Dilithium crystals just floating in a wormhole?
ner came up with this story—and sets course for the "Eden
Typical arcade game logic.)
Planet." The Klingon warship follows.
Eventually they all reach Sha Ka Ree, encounter a strange
alien, and run up and down making very little sense. Then (I am
not making this up), there's a cocktail party scene featuring the
crews of the Enterprise and the Klingon vessel enjoying what appears to be the film's wrap party. End of story.
Mindscape wisely avoids the film's worst parts—the first sixty
minutes and the last twenty—by setting their Star Trek V mainly
along the voyage to Sha Ka Ree. The game is divided into

Next on the agenda is the Klingon gravitic minefield, a clever
conceit which almost cloaks the fact that the sequence is virtually
Super Breakout-in-the-Round. See, the Enterprise is in the center
of these concentric rings of mines—the rings rotate in opposite
directions and slowly collapse inwards (attracted by the
Enterprise's gravity, the rulebook tells us)—and the player's job is
to blast a hole through the rings and time a run through
the opening just so . . .

No, it isn't a figment of the imagination.
We have seen all this before. After that excitement, the Enterprise reaches Sha Ka
Ree. Here, Kirk has to duke it out with
Commander Klaa in the style of Karateka.
Several different attacks and defensive
stances are at Kirk's disposal, though hardly the impressive array offered by some
recent hand-to-hand combat games(no
head butts, shoulder throws or
kicks to the groin).
Finally, if Kirk survives the fight, he gets
to go at it again on the grand scale. It's
the Enterprise vs. the Bird of Prey (or a
whole flock, if one is playing the advanced difficulty levels) in a
simulated starship duel to the death. Why simulated? I have no
idea. Why, if it's simulated, is the Enterprise not simulated at full
capacity instead of its actual level of disrepair? I have no idea.
Give or take a few narrative connecting screens (mainly text,
with some graphics), that's the whole game.

What's Wrong With This (Motion) Picture?
There's an old joke which goes something like this: life is nothing but problems, misery, worry, sorrow and, worst of all, it's too
short! In a peculiar way, that's my feeling about Star Trek V.
The game's action sequences are highly derivative and only mar
ginally entertaining, but worst of all, there are only four of them!
Star Trek V was, at least from this reviewer's perspective, a disappointing movie, a chore to sit through, and best forgotten, but
this game has too little of the movie in it!
It may be, in fact, that Star Trek V should never have been
turned into a game. Nevertheless, once the deal was signed, the
designers shouldn't have held back.
There are some respects in which the designers didn't hold
back: in terms of graphics the game is perfect, with memorable
digitized images and nicely rendered animation; in terms of
authenticity it is remarkable, with its unmistakably Trekkian sensor panels, main viewscreen, sound effects, and so forth. Even
though the theme music sounds slightly sluggish (and, incidentally, it's the theme to Star Trek: The Next Generation, not the
movies!), it's effective. Finally, please believe that I'm not scraping
for something to compliment when I say that the inclusion of a
full-screen Paramount Pictures logo is a nice touch. All of these
nice touches inspire confidence, none more than the credited
design participation of several Star Trek. The Next Generation
cast and crew members. Indeed, players are never let down on a
technical level. This is certainly more than can be said for Star
Trek V: The Final Frontier as a movie.
However, players are let down on some levels. Those who expect originality of gameplay will find precious little here. Others
will not feel like they received their money's worth because of this
game's short length (especially relative to previous Star Trek
games which may not have been great adventure games, but
were never too short.
Perhaps, worst of all, the game is disappointing on an aesthetic
level. For all the laudable attention to graphic detail and accuracy
there is almost no attention given to constructing a comprehensible story. The game only pays lip service to the film's plot with
the perfunctory run-down of events at the start. After that, the
player has no sense that his ship has been taken over by a usurper or that his crew is under the telepathic influence
of a mad messiah.
In fact, almost all of the movie's quasi-religious plot has been extracted from the game. This might seem, at first, glance to be an
improvement, but it isn't. In fact, it is a sort of auto-evisceration,
the first instance I know of computer game hara kiri. Having a

weak plot is bad enough, but remove
the core of that plot and all that's left is
a vacuum.
Nor is this the full extent of the
damage done. Having robbed the
storyline of its central plot elements, the
designers chose to substitute generic
Star Trek events for actual incidents in
the film. Writer Chris Erhardt could have
built a game around such film sequences as the shuttlecraft reentry, the brig
escape, the jet-boot flight, the Nimbus III
invasion—even Uhura's fan dance, for
crying out loud. Instead, he bleached
out every resemblance to the film he
could, thereby creating a self-negating product that announces
its low self-image at every turn. Star Trek V is the Jay Gatsby of
computer games: visually opulent, yet empty
and self-denying at its soul.
Does this mean that the game should be burned at the stake?
No. Does this mean that no one should buy the game? No. This
is just the closest I can come to explaining why I find Star Trek V
so painfully unsatisfying.
No Star Trek fan should pass up a chance to play this game,
just for the feel of it. For what it's worth, this is the first Star Trek
action game since the Vectrex cartridge of 1982. If nothing else,
it will surely be a collectible one day.
It could have been so much more, though, than ten minutes of
excitement followed by twenty years in a display case. That it
isn't, especially with so much going for it, is a true pity.

Review

WHERE IN TIME IS
CARMEN SANDIEGO?
Broderbund's Success Story Continues
by Roy Wagner
or those not familiar with Carmen
Sandiego, a brief step back in time
(gamewise that is) would be
worthwhile. She has been responsible (in
the context of the games) for some of the
greatest robberies in the world. Her escapades started many years ago. Over
the years the title questions asked have
been, "Where in the (World, U.S.A.,
Europe) is Carmen Sandiego?"

F

Those that have answered the title ques.
tions have found this to be one of best
educational games on the market. It is a
game that does not teach overtly, but offers a deductive challenge that is so enter
taining that learning inevitably comes
with the play. The idea is to use the clues
provided to figure out who committed the
crime. To do so, players follow the
suspect as he travels from one place to
another. When the player gleans enough
clues, he or she must issue a warrant
and then, catch the suspect in order to
make the arrest.
Well, Carmen and her new gang are at
it again. And now they are robbing all
time for what's it worth. Fortunately, the
Acme Detective Agency has the player on
their staff. With the player's assistance,
Carmen and her V.I.L.E gang should easily be sent to prison.
Each game comes with a useful reference guide. With this game, players
receive The New American Desk Encyclopedia, a large paperback volume
with 1,374 pages of very helpful information to help the player discern exactly
when and where the thief has gone in
terms of time and space.
The game starts in the San Francisco
offices of the Acme Detective Agency.
Play is initiated in the lobby, in front of
the elevator. One presses the button and
"checks in" in order to start a new case.
There are employees to help and, behind
some closed doors, are some very
humorous animations with a
variety of punchlines.
The equipment in the detective's 325i
Chronoskimmer is checked and the chief
assigns him/her to the next case. The entire screen is one large display panel. On
the left half, is a window that displays
one's present location within the game.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

These graphic images are outstanding.
On the right side of the screen, are the
basic control buttons and display information. These include the current date in
game time, how much time is remaining
for the case to be solved, and buttons to
select operating modes for travel, searching, analyzing data, and
aborting a mission.
Game play is most easily directed by
mouse or joystick, but the keyboard can
be also be used. Each game begins with
the chief reporting the theft of some
great historical item and "sending" the
detective to that time period. Once there,
by way of some well-done animation and
sounds, one can use the search button
to get clues from a witness, an informant

Where In Time Is Carmen Sandiego?'
IBM
$44.95
Gene Portwood & Lauren Elliott.
Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA

or from a scan of the area. This should
provide enough information to determine
where, in time, the suspect has gone
next by offering the name of a person
and event. It is up to the player to determine "when". One might also obtain a
clue to the identity of the suspect. These
are related to hair and eye color, as well
as their favorite author and artist. It is
necessary to learn about the works of
four famous authors and artists to make
use of these clues.
When enough evidence is gathered, the
player selects the data (analysis) button
to enter the evidence. The "crime computer" will decide if there are enough
Continued on page 35

Computer Gaming World 's
See Reader Input Device on page 72

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

Carmen Sandiego
Continued from page 30

clues to issue a warrant. If not, it will identify those remaining suspects. Most Carmen fans learn to prepare a clue matrix
for each suspect. It usually takes three
clues to narrow matters down
to a single suspect.
Once the warrant is in place, players
simply keep jumping around in time,
using the least amount of clues possible.
This is where the "Desk Encyclopedia"
comes in handy and provides you with
much newly learned historical information. As in the earlier "Carmen" adventures, players will always know that they
are in the correct time period because of
some humorous animated encounters
with the V.I.L.E henchmen. If one can
get through around seven time periods
within the reasonably allotted time, the
suspect will usually be brought to justice.
After solving a certain number of cases,
the player's game ranking will increase
from the bottom level of "Time Cadet"

through that glorious height as "Super
Time Sleuth" to that final induction into
the Hall of Fame. Before being retired,
however, a player must successfully solve
eighty cases. After "travelling" to 17
countries and "experiencing" 1,500 years
of history, while tracing more than 1,200
clues, one cannot help but ingest a great
deal of historical fact. Those who read all
the screens and look up the clues will
learn plenty. If history is not the main
goal, one can also use geography and
the names of persons to track
down the suspects.
This game is challenging and fun, as
well as educational. Besides individual
play, it is great for the classroom or for
gathering the entire family around the
home computer. And where will Carmen
go next? Since she has pretty much
covered the Earth, she may venture to
the planets and stars as her next venture.
I hope so, because I'll be ready to track
her down again.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tale
The Colonel's Bequest
As Told By Scorpia

Warning:
'lthough "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable tavern of the
mind with a nice cozy fire of
vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating hints about games. If the
gentle reader eschews hints,
let him beware!

A

This is your basic exploratory
phase. All the clock advancements come from activity in the
house, so now is a good time
to wander around outdoors and
see where the other buildings
and such are in relation to the
mansion. While a map comes
with the game, you might want
to make your own for reference
later on.

Speaking of heir(s) brings up
the matter of The Colonel's Bequest. While it's a mystery, there
is hardly any puzzle-solving in it
at all. Mostly, you spend your
time spying on people to learn
all their dirty little secrets; collecting a bunch of miscellaneous
objects; and, later on, finding
the bodies of unfortunate
murder victims.

Also, when the game is over, you get
the chance to look at Laura's notes and
see what you may have missed learning
about. This is nice, but being able to
read these notes during play would have
been more helpful; replaying part or most
of the game after it's over is rather dull,
especially if what you missed has nothing
to do with the solution. [Ed: Since this

Continuing in the King's
Quest IV tradition, your character is again a female, this time a
college student in the Roaring
'20's, Laura Bow. Laura is invited by her friend Lillian Prune
to spend the weekend at
Lillian's uncle's gloomy, rundown mansion in the bayous of
Louisiana. In short, just the sort
of place where you might expect a body or three to turn up,
especially as the Dijon-Prune
clan is composed of a number
of unpleasant people to begin
with: the shady lawyer, the
quack doctor, the alcoholic
aunt, the playboy nephew, the
starlet niece, the sexy French
maid, and, of course, the suspicious butler, among others.
At dinner, Uncle Henri announces that he is leaving his
money to all (except Laura, of
course) in equal shares and, of
course, fewer heirs means
larger shares. The game actually starts just after dinner, with
Laura and Lillian in the room
they share for the weekend. Lillian leaves to freshen up, and
Laura is now on her own to explore (or, more properly, snoop)
around the mansion and
grounds. The clock strike
seven, and the first act begins.

Well, spring is peeking around
the corner again (winter never
lasts as long as it should), but
the nights are still chilly enough
to spend around a roaring fire,
with a warming beverage in
hand. So, settle into your
favorite chair and we'll talk
about peeking (maybe even a little poking, too, hehe). There's a
lot of that going around these
days. Must be something
in the heir.

Spying on people is the
preferred method. Most folks
don't want to talk about intimate
subjects with an outsider
present. Aside from picking up
possible motives for murder this
way, what you learn increases your detective rating at the end of the game.

ing to a previous position may
not put everything (especially
the corpses) back where they
were the last time.

was a design decision to replace the old
on-line hints and scoring systems, this
opinion is open to debate. See last
month's feature article on The Colonel's
Bequest for Roberta Williams' perspective on this issue.]
While the game can be saved at almost
any point (and following the advice in the
manual to have at least one save in each
act is recommended), you have to be
careful with those restores because restor-

Inside the house, it is necessary to visit every room and see
who's there. Actually, you can
do better by spying rather than
visiting. All it takes is discovering the secret rooms that allow
you to do this. That shouldn't
be hard at all. Especially, if you
look at all those portraits.
You will find that asking people about
others often yields little information, although there are a few who are willing to
talk to you. Of course, opinions should a
ways be taken with a grain of salt and
you'll notice that most of these folks
don't have very high opinions
of each other.
The body count begins in Act II with

Gertrude, and mounts up from there.
However, there's little point in trying to
tell anyone about the corpses you find.
Most people will think you're seeing
things, and the murderer will remove the
body anyway after you've discovered it.
Since the bodies are removed, it is absolutely necessary to search each one as
soon as you find it. Some corpses have
nothing, but others will have
items you need.
After the first act, if you see that the
clock is not advancing, try moving
around outdoors; some scenes take
place there that you have to see. Remember, it is mostly seeing people do something that moves the clock. Finding
bodies or other objects doesn't affect it.
From time to time, going back to
various locations is also important. Some
places that were not accessible to you at
earlier points will be open in a later act.
Basically, any locked area should be
visited at least once per act as a check.
The main puzzle-solving in the game relates to the secret passage in the outdoors. Its location is practically waved

under your nose (it was painfully obvious
the first time I went there); the trick is getting it open. This requires collecting
several items from different places and
figuring out what to do with them.
None of this is especially difficult, by the
way. The few puzzles look obvious, and
they are obvious. There is no need to
hunt for anything tricky or abstruse in the
solutions. It is only necessary to find all
the right objects you need and use them
correctly. The best time to visit this secret
passage, by the way, is in Act VII, although you can do it earlier.
Actually, there is one time finding a
body does advance the clock, and that is
in Act VIII. This signals the finale, and is
the one and only time where Laura can
actually take some action to save a
person's life (about time, too). After finding it (outdoors), you should return to the
house immediately. There is only a little
left to do, but time becomes a critical factor here. Save the game before unlocking any doors. You have to make a
choice and you might be wrong
the first time.

You might be dismayed at the number
of bodies you find, but alas, there isn't
much you can do about it. I couldn't find
a way to save anyone (except at the very
end), and so you're going to end up with
most of the characters dead by the time
the game is over. It may reduce the
suspect list, but is also unsatisfying, as
you feel helpless and frustrated over the
murders you can't prevent.
Well, that's about it for this time.
Remember if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail: (If you live in the United States, you
must enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to receive a reply): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Winter C.E.S. Report

The Entertainment
Software Capital of the
World
More Computer Games from the Winter
Consumer Electronics Show

should be produced regularly. Another
title coming to computer screens in 1990
is Megatraveller: The Zhodani Conspiracy. Set in Games Designers'
Workshop's "Spinward Marches", the
game looks like it will faithfully recreate
the role-playing experiences of the space
opera-style role-playing game
(Paragon, IBM).
SSI's Champions of Krynn, the first
Dragonlance role-playing game, is ready
to ship. The company has published action/adventures based on these novels in
the past, but the designers have brought
the style of Pool of Radiance and Curse
of the Azure Bonds to a brand new series
Another licensed title is Bill and Ted's
Excellent Adventure. Intracorp plans to
market it as a graphic adventure in the
third quarter of 1990, hoping that all
those history dudes out there will find it a
totally triumphant adventure in which
everyone learns to be excellent to one
another (Amiga, C-64/128, IBM). Intracorp is also developing Tom Clancy's
Cardinal of the Kremlin as an action/adventure and Paragon is attempting the
same feat with Marvel Comics' The
Punisher, complete with
"Battle Van" simulator.

L

as Vegas!—One can hardly think of

this desert mecca of materialism
without thinking of bright lights, extravagant stage productions, famous personalities and incessant activity. Yet, for
one week each winter, the so-called
"Entertainment Capitol of the World" becomes the "Entertainment Software
Capitol of the World." Software publishers
unveil their works in progress and await
the critical reactions of buyers and journalists as eagerly as Broadway casts await
the first notices on opening night. Last
issue (CGW #68), our dedicated editorial
team recounted trends to watch for
within the demesne of entertainment
software. This issue, our editors concentrate on adventure/role-playing games
and action/arcade games.

The Role of Adventure
Adventure gamers will be interested in
the games discussed last issue under
"The Screen Says It All" section of the
Winter Consumer Electronics Show
report, but they will also be interested in
two adventure games based on Arthurian
legend. Conquests of Camelot from Sierra shows Christy Marx's masterful research into grail legends and her ability
to inculcate an ethical perspective via
Merlin's urgings and the player's choices.
Mark Siebert's soundtrack emulates Celtic music effectively and Peter Ledger's
graphic style displays a "Prince Valiant"
feel. Spirit of Excalibur from Melbourne

House is in the style of and employs an
interface similar to War In Middle Earth,
but the Arthurian game offers six different
quests, allows non-player characters to
join the party, and features
hand-drawn graphics.
Adventure gamers who want to become
modern heroes in a near-future setting
may choose Code Name: Iceman, the
latest adventure by retired law enforcement officer Jim Walls. Along with the
traditional Sierra graphic adventure formulae, "Iceman" allows players to pilot an
attack submarine (the controls are customized to facilitate game play, but it
operates authentically) and the game will
also teach the adventurer something
about CPR and naval etiquette. Those
who want an interactive movie approach
in a more futuristic setting may opt for
Dynamix Blade Hunter, due in Fall or
Winter of this year.
Role-players should be able to opt for
licensed titles of popular pen and paper
games by the end of 1990. New World
Computing has transformed Tunnels &
Trolls, Ken St. Andre's pencil and paper
RPG (built on the idea that Dungeons
and Dragons was too complex) into a
CRPG. The first release, Crusaders of
Khazan, is built around 10-12 of the
original "T & T" solo adventures. Miles
Computing has licensed Champions
from Hero Games. Intended as a complete line of computer role-playing
games, the first product will be based on
the superhero rules. The characters will
be customizable and support products

In addition to the standard fare,
UbiSoft's B.A.T ("Bureau of Astral
Troubleshooters") is based on a wild
premise. In this real-time game-time adventure (Amiga, Atari ST, C-64 and IBM),
players find the mad scientist and save
the metropolis through visiting 1,200
locations and programming B.O.B., the
bio-computer located in the player's arm.
In addition to this time-travel adventure,
Millennium Warriors from Intracorp (C64 only) is an action/adventure in which
players become pirates, Arabian warriors,
knights and cavemen. Interplay has
entered the "Timewars" arena with Future
Wars: Adventures in Time. Some might
call it "Cinemaware" meets "Sierra" in a
story which offers overtones of The Terminatorin what is, more or less, a battle
in the past for the future.
Interplay is also actively working on The
Lord of the Rings (a licensed role-playing
game set in Middle Earth, due out in the
Summer on the C-64 and IBM). Brian
Fargo, President of Interplay Productions
was highly influenced by the famous trilogy during his early days of computer
gaming and is reputed to have handwritten notes on game ideas written on the
inside cover of one of Tolkien's novels.
The game will feature mouse/joystick support and top-down graphics in this game
which features mini-quests, ten mappable
areas and occasional gentle direction
from the computerized game master.

Snow Go! (Action Games)
Action games with multiple venues are
Continued on pace 41

Winter C.E.S. Report
Continued from page 38
still popular. Ski or Die, Electronic Arts
latest offering which pits garners against
the sinister Lester, offers several events:
snowboarding, acro aerial ski jumping, innertube thrashing, a hilarious snowball
fight and more.
In addition to the multiple venue
games, however, even some traditional
action-style games are adding elements
of strategy. Chris Erhart, producer of Battletech: The Crescent Hawk's Inception
for Infocom and writer of Star Trek V:
The Final Frontier for Mindscape, has
added attribute sliders and his own slightly "bent" sense of humor to create Rollergames, an action/strategy game based
on the latest television reincarnation of
"Roller Derby". This is the second title in
ShareData's new premium
line, Monarch Software.
Conversions of popular coin-op titles
are continuing to appear. Data East was

putting the finishing touches on Vigilante
for the C-64 and Karnov for the Macintosh II. The latter features color graphics,
but unexpectedly features keyboarddriven, not mouse-driven, game controls.
In addition, Virgin Mastertronic is near-

version on the more powerful machines.
Activision's adaptation of Powerdrift, the
popular coin-op racing game, will ship
toward the end of March (IBM and C-64).
The disk-based version will include six different scenarios and VGA
graphics on the IBM.
Meanwhile, Taito is preparing February
releases (on the C-64 and Amiga, with
IBM conversions to follow) of their Chase
H.Q. and Operation Thunderbolt coin-op
successes. Chase H.Q. features seven
missions with distinctive landscapes and
vehicles for each mission. The unique
aspect is that it is not a "shoot-'em-up".
Instead, the player must use his/her
vehicle to force the bad guys off the road
while avoiding innocent motorists. Operation Thunderbolt was developed by U.K.based Ocean software as a sequel to
Operation Wolf. This game features twoplayer simultaneous action with forward
scrolling in addition
to horizontal scrolling.

ing shipment on Double Dragon II on
the Amiga, ST, IBM and C-64. They
should all support simultaneous play,
with graphics much closer to the arcade

For another type of conversion,
Konami has put their recent emphasis
on creating "attractive" versions of their
Nintendo hits. Earlier NES rollovers from
Konami tended to feature disappointing

Winter C.E.S. Report

graphics and sound, as well as unwelcome compatibility problems. Now, the
products due in the first half of 1990 feature EGA graphics on the IBM and improved quality control. Blades of Steel,
features hockey action with digitized
sound to add to the atmosphere (Amiga,
C-64, and IBM). Other titles include:
Castlevania, Double Dribble, Metal Gear,
Super C and Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtles (all on Amiga, C-64 and IBM). Arcade fans can expect to hear about
Konami doing some non-NES titles in
the next couple of years, as well. One
company source indicates that Konami's
deal with Distinctive Software Inc.
(developers of Test Drive and Test Drive
II for Accolade) will impact on "more
than a couple" of original disk-based
production the future.
In action games, as well as adventure
games, licenses can be important for the
success of a given product. Ocean successfully marketed Batman: The Caped
Crusader through Data East (the IBM
conversion shipped at the end of
January). Now, a new Batman (also
produced by Ocean, but based on the
mega-hit film) is being marketed by Data
East. This one has all the standard arcade sequences (two platform sequences, car and plane chases), but they are
crafted very carefully in the dark, shadowy
film noir style of the movie. The "Batmobile", "Batwing", and "Batcave computer" are all in the product. Data East is
also marketing Ocean's The Untouchables. The game follows the movie's plot
with a newspaper-style "results screen" following each arcade sequence. The scene
with the baby carriage in Chicago's Union
Station is extremely well-handled.
Chris Gray, whose Gray Matter development group designed Infiltrator, Road
Raider and Fiendish Freddy's Big Top 0'
Fun, has designed a Superbike
Simulator for Mindscape (Amiga, Atari
ST, and IBM). Players choose from six different Japanese imports and compete on
a combination of twelve different courses
(six street courses and six racetracks). Although the players cannot design their
own tracks, the program does allow them
to customize each track using difficulty
levels, weather, number of hazards,
length of race, and numbers of curves,
hills and laps.
Electronic Arts is publishing Kellyn
Beeck's Caesar, an action/role-playing
game where players race chariots or fight
gladiators to build up their personal
treasuries; command Roman
legions/cohorts in battle; and attempt to
maneuver their way to emperor. The battle sequences look very similar to
Microprose's Sword of the Samurai, but
the overall treatment is
somewhat different.
Another intriguing action/role-playing
combination comes from Kellyn's old
alma mater, Cinemaware. Wings is an

action game which chronicles the diary of
an actual World War I pilot, Mick Mannock. The game features a behind-thepilot perspective in the dogfight sequences and the game's "story" is built from
500 entries in the WWI
pilot's journal. In the
game, players create a
pilot by selecting from
various characteristics
and attempt to improve
with success while interfacing with other pilots
of different levels in
comradely badinage.
Intracorp's Security
Alert (C-64 only) offers
something completely
different. Players take
on the role of a cat
burglar in a game
which offers different
perspectives, tools, etc.
for each burglary.

Variety Headline
If there must be one
headline to herald the
approach of so many
fascinating computer
games and game systems, it would have to
affirm the limitless imaginations of game
designers. Just when
garners may have
thought there were no
new subjects and no in
teresting innovations,
along comes one of
the semi-annual Consumer Electronics
Shows to prove just the

opposite. The consumer becomes, in the
parlance of the "Entertainment Capitol", a
"lucky winner".

Review

CLASSIC
CONVERSIONS
Review by M. Evan Brooks

Take A Chide On The Reading
(Documentation)
The documentation in all of these
programs is adequate. Game mechanics
are explained in detail, for the rare gamer
unfamiliar with the products. Scrabble
and Monopoly are standard, while Clue
offers the newer version of the board
game (Master Detective) with additional
rooms and suspects, and Risk offers the
most options—both American and British
versions with additional options available
by toggle switch.
How to play is delineated, but how to
play well is left to the player. Monopoly
has been the subject of numerous
treatises. The Monopoly Book by Maxine
Brady (1974) does an excellent job of
analyzing optimal play and investment
rates of return. The other games have
not yet engendered their own Midrash,
but careful play will yield successful
strategies.
An interesting sidelight concerning

Risk—this reviewer remembers combat
as a series of successive die rolls. The offense rolled, and then the defender (assuming he had at least two armies) could
decide whether or not to risk one or two
die/armies. Thus, a 6-1-1 attack would obviously suggest a 2-die roll response,
since ties go to the defender and his
second roll would beat the attacker's "1".
In the computer version, combat rolls are
simultaneous.

V

TITLE:
Scrabble
SYSTEM:
Many
REVIEWED ON: IBM
# PLAYERS:
1-4
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER:
Virgin MasterTronic
Irvine, CA

TITLE:
Monopoly
SYSTEM:
IBM/C-64
REVIEWED ON: IBM
# PLAYERS:
1-8
PRICE:
$39.95/529.95
Virgin MasterTronic
PUBLISHER:
Irvine, CA

TITLE:
Risk
SYSTEMS:
IBM/Apple WC-64
REVIEWED ON: IBM
# PLAYERS:
1-6
PRICE:
$39.95/$39.95/$29.95
PUBLISHER:
Virgin MasterTronic
Irvine, CA

TITLE:
Clue: Master Detective
SYSTEMS:
IBM/Apple II/Atari ST
REVIEWED ON: IBM
# PLAYERS:
1-10
PRICE:
539.95/539.95/539.95
PUBLISHER:
Virgin MasterTronic
Irvine, CA

irgin MasterTronic has now converted several classic boardgames
to computer formats. The four
games covered in this review need no introduction. They have aged gracefully
from the late Depression to the era of the
Baby Boomers and beyond. Any game
player is familiar with these games: Scrabble, the classic (pre-Vanna White) word

game; Monopoly, the classic (pre-Donald
Trump) Atlantic City real estate development game; Risk, the classic (pre-Ronald
Reagan) strategic wargame; Clue, the
classic (pre-Columbo) game of deductive
reasoning. The question remains, has the
transition to the electronic medium
been successful?

This reviewer was somewhat dismayed,
especially when he discovered that this is
also the rule in the current edition of the
board game. So, a quick call to Parker
Brothers, which was kind enough to
send out copies of each Risk edition
(1959, 1963, 1975, and 1980). In every
rulebook, combat was simultaneous.
Thus, the computer faithfully reproduces
the board version, thereby raising the
question—where did this "Home Rule" of
defender initiative develop? Numerous
Risk players from various areas of the
country remember this "rule" that does
not appear in the official rules—another
childhood myth shattered, along with the
bonanza to be gleaned on Monopoly's
"Free Parking" space!

Advance From Board Plots
(Graphics)
Graphics vary. For example, Scrabble offers a CGA-like low-res depiction of the
board and tiles which must be considered
marginal at best. The more recent game
conversions are much-improved and offer
crisp graphics of the standard boards and
playing pieces.

Risk's global perspective is well-done,
but does have a shortcoming in that continents are not separately color-coded or
otherwise delineated (except in the
manual) and occasional questions of

propinquity may arise. For the experienced player, this may not prove a
problem, but occasionally, one may forget whether or not a territory is contiguous to another.
" . . . As You Pass Go"

(Game Play)
These games are classics. When they
can preserve the value of their board antecedents, they offer reasonable value
and have the added bonus of offering a
computer opponent.
Scrabble is the least successful due to
its drab graphics, lack of mouse interface,
and overall user unfriendliness. A major
part of game play involves manipulating
one's tiles in order to determine if a word
is present or possible. Sadly, computer
Scrabble does not allow one to manipulate his tiles; instead, one may only juggle
the rack at random. Only the 8-bit Apple
II version allows the player to reorder a
rack in his own preference. The program
does allow one to get a "hint" word; but
one cannot add to the included "dictionary" base. If challenged, the player must
make up his or her mind (which could
well yield the multi-valued word such as
"qxzdmp"—defined as "loss of human integrity in playing a machine").
Monopoly is a faithful rendition, but the
computer is incredibly slow. Again, no
mouse utilization is possible, and the
computer opponents are not MBA-types.
In fact, the computer opponents can occasionally be enticed into deals which
may charitably be termed "stupid", such
as surrendering a monopoly to the
human player in exchange for a second
green property. There seems no rhyme
or reason to the computer's idiocy; just
be aware that it exists. However, the most
aggravating aspect in Monopoly is the
computer opponent's reiteration of a
refused deal. Turn it down once, and
each and every turn ad nauseam, the
computer will retry the deal. ARRRGGGH!
Risk—the marijuana of wargaming (i.e.
just about every grognard started with
this one). The mouse interface has been
used and it is appreciated.
The use of the optional British rules as
well as allowing unlimited free moves,
commanders and other options offer a
new look at this classic. But once again,
the computer opponent is barely adequate—all too often expanding in territory count, but without any reserve or
potential to hold onto its gains. Even
more interesting, the computer likes to
split up its forces as evenly as possible
(e.g. a 10-unit force attacking from
Western United States to Eastern United
States may well end up as a 5-5 force).
This type of play is defensive at best.
Hard-core Risk players generally aggregate forces in a single Schwerpunkt
(main thrust). Also, the computer rarely

contests the human player's initial grab
for the Australian continent (which is the
least vulnerable to counter-attack on the
board). Even with the mediocre calibre of
opposition ("good" computer opposition
is only slightly more aggressive than the
standard), Risk is still enjoyable.
Clue: Master Detective is an obvious
choice for those seeking computer opponents. The game rewards deductive
reasoning and the computer can obviously manipulate seemingly unrelated facts
as well (or better) than a human. The
only real chance a human has is the
ability to play a hunch and short-cut
some of the computer's electronic trail.
The program allows the computer opponent to vary in skill, but the best opponents are indeed difficult to beat. A
mouse interface has been offered, and is,
in fact, mandatory. Although keyboard
and joystick input is also "offered", the
first release on the IBM only worked with
the mouse. Virgin Mastertronic will
cheerfully replace the original disks. While
the computer does allow one to take
notes, these are insufficient for the Clue
connoisseur. One should retain pencil
and paper, and note who asks what of
whom and what the responses are. In
this fashion, one may quickly develop a
matrix which reveals the holdings of the
other opponents. Then, victory is merely
a matter of luck in getting the proper die

roll and getting to the proper
location first.

CONCLUSIONS
Each of these products is a faithful
translation of its boardgame ancestor. Virgin MasterTronic has improved with
each new release. However, since these
products generally sell for under $20.00
in their boardgame incarnations, the
question remains, "Does having the computer version with its potential in-house
opponents provide sufficient justification
for doubling the cost? That is, of course,
a personal decision the consumer will
have to make on his own.
In this reviewer's opinion, Scrabble is
the weakest product (given cumbersome
play and graphics), while Risk and Clue:
Master Detective are the strongest.
Monopoly has been released in
numerous shareware and public domain
versions which thereby weaken its standing. Assuming one has sufficient human
opponents, the boardgame versions still
offer better play value. However, the computer versions can supply a modicum of
opposition (and you don't have to share
your potato chips!).

"Design Your Own Game" Contest
In the December 1989 issue of CGW (#66) we asked you to submit your ideas for new computer games. The criteria for evaluating
each game idea was 1) originality and 2) feasibility. There were many interesting submissions.

The winner is . . . Perestroika!. Chuck Moss not only described the game in terms of marketability and playability, but by building on an
existing game system and describing in his entry the machine specifications that would be required to implement this game, managed to
convey the feasibility of producing the game, as well. Congratulations to the winner and the runners-up portrayed here.

Perestroika!
by
Chuck Moss
(Birmingham, MI)

Athletic Director
SUGGESTED PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc.
SUGGESTED DESIGNER:

Norman C. Koger, Jr.

David L. Winfrey
(Statesboro, GA)
SUGGESTED PUBLISHER: SportTime
SUGGESTED DESIGNER:
Ed Ringler

Norm's games are always exhaustively
detailed and challenging. Since this game is
a detailed variant of an
existing system, Stellar
Crusade, the author of
that system is the logical choice to develop it.

Five Star General

Riverboat Captain

by
James W. Berg, Sr.
(Lawrenceville, GA)

Ed's design team is
used to dealing with
large, dynamic statistical bases and implementing them in
games with graphics
that are colorful
enough to lend
some heat to the
games, themselves.
In this stat-based strategy game, the
player chooses the football coach, attempts to build a successful 10-year program without scheduling too many tough
teams, funds stadium expansion, selects
the right conference to join, and (at higher
difficulty levels) fends off NCAA investigations, accepts or rejects bowl bids, and attempts to insure the financial success of
the program. The program has three levels
of difficulty: College I - AA, University I-A
(Conference), and University I-A (Independent) and success is measured in
terms of the crowd that fills the stands
from one lonely wino (for an unsuccessful
program) to an SRO stadium (for a
successful program).

Perestroika' would take the basic
structure of Norm Koger's Stellar
Crusade and re-orient the goal toward
building an economic structure
capable of satisfying consumer needs,
while still satisfying demands of the
military, the Party and the various national components of the U.S.S.R. The
political dimension would be simulated
by each important constituency (the
army, the Party, Siberian miners, Ukraine, Baltics, etc.) having a "Satisfaction" index. If Politburo dissatisfaction
should rise, the player might have to
backtrack from his reform program or
be deposed a la Kruschev.

SUGGESTED PUBLISHER: Spinnaker Software
Jim Gasperini
SUGGESTED DESIGNER:

In this game, the player would take the
perspective of a commanding officer with
much, but not final, authority for a given
war effort. The game would mix a roleplaying/management simulation like Hidden Agenda with a strategic level wargame that would be affected by the command decisions in the role-playing segment. The player would have to handle
officers with varied backgrounds,
prejudices, strengths and weaknesses,
but still try to please the man in the
White House. The player would decide
when to promote and reprimand his subordinates, but would have to be ready to
face a performance review by the
computer. as well.

Jim's TransFiction
design team has already been experimenting with the role-playing aspects of this
game in their Hidden
Agenda game and
their political game of
eastern European
politics (undoubtedly
in transition at this
point). Add the wargame elements along
with some of the great
VGA color which Spinnaker is developing
and this could be a
big winner.

I

by
Dr. S. Ivey (Dover, DE)

SUGGESTED PUBLISHER:

I SUGGESTED DESIGNER:

Dynamix
Damon Slye

I

Such a simulation/role-playing
game would require
the delicate mix of 3Space simulation and
interactive action that
Dynamix is extremely
capable of developing.

Although Dr. Ivey suggested a simulation of the perils faced by a modem riverboat captain on the muddy Mississippi
River, this game would be a natural in
the era of Mark Twain's Life On The Mississippi. Imagine plying the thousand
miles of water between Baton Rouge and
Cairo with its countless shifting sandbars,
dikes, eddies and other hazards. Add to
this the seasonal risks: high water and
fast currents in the spring, low water in
the summer and ice floes. Then, imagine
the ability to decide when to "bet the
farm" on an impromptu riverboat race,
choosing and handling cargo to insure a
profitable voyage, and "sitting in" on an
exciting hand of poker with a
riverboat gambler.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
Continued from page 10
depth of the adventure element which
might just turn this game into a classic.
German-based Rainbow Arts is about
to release, on Amiga and ST, East us.
West: Berlin 1948. It incorporates a novel
scenario that seems eons away. At the
game's start, the "Berlin Airlift" is about to
commence after the Soviets closed the
doors to all traffic. Billed as a "complex
and realistic adventure", the player's character is an American agent in Berlin with
the task of locating an atomic bomb
which has disappeared from a British airbase. The character must question
suspects in an effort to locate it in time
to prevent the Soviets from taking possession of it. The game will incorporate an
audio cassette which provides information and historical background.
From another German software house,
Dragonware, comes Ooze. I wish I'd
thought of that one. The protagonist is
Ham Burger (I'll just pause for the
groans), a character who has recently in-

herited a rather large house, Carfax
Abbey. There are always strange stories
surrounding large, old houses and Carfax
has them aplenty. Trouble is most of
them are true. Even the rocking chair is a
man-eater. Players must solve the
mystery of the house and its occupants.
Featuring some wonderful graphics and
digitized sound effects, Ooze is available
now on Amiga, PC and ST. Unfortunately, the IBM versions do not appear to
have sound support.
About to appear on the Amiga and ST
(IBM and C-64 versions expected in
June, 1990), is Xenomorph from U.K.
software house, Pandora. Interestingly,
the game resembles a hybrid between
Dungeon Master and the film, Alien.
Each player's character wanders a
deserted mining colony on Atargatis, an
area infested with aliens known as
Xenomorphs, in an attempt to find components to repair his ship, find
provisions, fuel and re-program his ship's
computer and get the (bleep) out. Of
course, one will need to determine the
fate of the 200 workers who originally occupied the colony and where all of these
slimy things came from? There are no
"level" promotions, but characters im-

prove their attributes by using
them successfully.
An award-winning, a Sierra-style
French adventure game is next on the
list. Entitled Future Wars, this offering
from Delphine (via Infogrames in
France, Palace in the U.K. and Interplay Productions in the US.) contains a
story which is a mixture of humans and
aliens brought together in search for
bombs which, if found, can save the
world. The Aliens wish to colonize Earth,
but we humans have fended them off (for
once!). The Aliens have tried another
method, though. They have planted
bombs in time (medieval, prehistoric and
future). The game uses the mouse to a
greater extent than Sierra's products,
but the game progresses in a similar way
as one moves his/her character around
the screen. Commands can be accessed
via a menu (Examine, Take, Speak, etc).
The game features excellent graphics
and some "deep" gameplay and is
reputed to be pretty tough to solve.
Speaking about time—it's time for me to
go (Sorry, it was the best segueway available on short notice.).
See you next month!

Game Hints

The Book of
Legendary
Prowess
Hints and Tips for
"Knights of Legend"
As Told By Scorpia

y

our party: You can do nicely
with two Barbarians, a Htron
pirate, a Dwarf, a Kelden,
and an Elf, especially an Usip Elf,
who begins with a skill in Elf Bow
at 25. Make sure the Barbarians
have an intellect of at least 66; roll
until you get it. Everyone else
should be in the mid-high 70's, except the Elf, who will probably
have 90 or better in intellect.

Weapons: Train the Barbarians up in
Greatsword first, then work on Halberd,
since that can go higher. Train your
pirate in Halberd. After a certain quest,
you will receive a magic ingot that forges
into a very nice, low-weight, high-damage
halberd. Let him use this weapon and

The major problem in many combats is missile-use by monsters, but
there is a way of dealing with that.
If you are caught between two
groups, you're probably better off
running away. However, if they are
all massed on one side, you can do
something tricky.
First, retreat the party as fast as
you can until they are out of sight
of the missile-throwers. Everyone,
that is, except your Kelden. Him . .
. you fly around and around at top
speed, as a diversion. Wearing noth
ing, and unwounded, a Kelden can
run or fly at maximum speed
forever without tiring. He flies too
fast (most of the time) for the
monsters to hit him. So, they shoot
and use up all their arrows (or
boulders, or whatever).

As far as strength, the Barbarians
are likely to have 90+ and they
will be your heavy hitters. The
pirate will check in around 70, as
will the Dwarf (I took a Trollbane);
the Kelden (Far Seeker) around
80, and the Elf probably in the 4550 range. Since the Elf is primarily
a bow-user, strength here is not a
critical factor. Whatever your actual party, you want numbers in
these ranges for intellect and
strength for best results.

Armor: My group was lightly armored through the entire game.
Aside from the Kelden, who wore
none, and the Dwarf, who wore
chainmail, everyone went around
in Cuirbolli leather and barbut
(platemail) helms. Since combats
take so long, you have to be careful about fatigue, and heavy armor
wears characters out very quickly,
especially during the high-fatigue
exertions of combat. Having
protection is fine, but you have to
be able to kill the opposition, too. Actually, though, Ringmail is a trifle better; it
has slightly more protection, while weighing the same as Cuirbolli.

casions when you will want to run
instead of fight, especially when
you come up against monsters
who are too powerful or too
numerous to take on. If your
weapons are sheathed, you can't
drop them (and you will certainly
drop them if they are in hand when
you flee). This does not, however,
apply to bows. I never lost a
longbow or Elf bow when running
away, so those can be kept readied.
Remember to re-sheathe everything
after the combat.

Meanwhile, the rest of your party
sets up out of range and takes on
all the non-missile-using critters
(who have been following you).
Now, you only have to fight in
small doses, so to speak, and
without worrying about monsters in
the back peppering everyone with
arrows. Once all the monster missiles have been used up, your Kelden can go into action with his
own bow (he can shoot while airborne) or spells (of course, he
should be on the ground when
casting spells).
Magic: The most important rule

in regard to magic is this: always
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Knights of Legend
Apple II, C-64, IBM
$49.95
Tod Mitchell Porter
Origin System
Austin, TX

dump his wimpy scimitar. He will be
much more useful in combat. The Dwarf
should train up in Great Axe. The Kelden
has to work on Greatsword, but for certain reasons mentioned below, his
progress will be slow for some time. The
Elf should, of course, concentrate on Elf
Bow first. Beyond this, what you want to
train in is pretty much open.
Combat: First, always travel with your
weapons sheathed. There are many oc-

Continued on page 52

Continued from page 50

buy your spells in groups of four. Did you
know you could do that? Probably not, as
the manual does not mention, does not
even hint, that this can be done. Yet, this
single fact is crucial to effectively learning
and using magic. Anyone can buy a spell
"off the rack", but only a member of the
order can modify a spell, which is why
everyone needs to belong to a magical
order. If you buy and modify spells one at
a time, you'll be at it forever, due to the
cost in adventure points and gold.

To buy the second set of Legendary or
Giant class, you need 2460 adventure
points, and the final set of Giant spells
will be around 6250 adventure points.
Even so, this represents far less time (and
money) than buying a spell at a time and
fiddling with it.
For this reason, you should concentrate
on getting spells first. Your Barbarians
should join the Human/Elf and Dwarf/Kel
den orders (which have the lowest intellect requirements). The Elf should join
the Legendary monster order, and the
Kelden should join the Giant class order.
The other two can be split between the
remaining party members as you like.

However, you can buy one spell, and
alter it to affect up to four different
monsters, at maximum damage, for a
surprisingly low cost. Here is an actual example from Giant Class spells (which also
applies to Legendary, Elemental,
and Undead).
You buy the basic "hurt Goblin" spell for
540 gold. Now you go in to modify it.
Notice that under "Goblin" are three
empty slots. These you fill in with Orc,
Hobgoblin, and Great Orc (following the
order in the manual on p. 73). Now you
move over to damage and pump it up to
the max (8-96). Finally, give your spell a

new name instead of the bogus
Elven gibberish.
Do you think this costs a lot? Nope!
You now have one spell that will hit any
of four different monsters for serious
damage, and it requires only 1170 adventure points and 1670 gold.

Note that once you have bought the
basic "package" in Undead and Elemental, you don't need any more, and those
mages can concentrate on weapon skills.
You may want Fatigue spells as well as
body for the Dwarf/Kelden and
Human/Elf groups, although I managed
to get along without Fatigue.
Continued on page 60

Taking a Peek
Continued from page 6
The dynamite graphics and pulse racing sound
and music hurl you through a race against
time to save Earth from alien destruction. As
you whiz through the Tunnels of Armageddon
at break neck (and break ship) speed, zapping
all the way, others will notice that your body
leans with every turn, and gets thrown back
into your chair with every crash. You will love
becoming one with your computer, as you
share a video joy ride out of the best Science
Fiction traditions. Apple IIGS ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #6.

Capstone
14160 S.W. 139 Court
Miami, FL 33186-5521
MIAMI VICE: Think of Crockett and Tubbs
as the Mario Brothers with guns. If this style of
arcade action is for you, including car and boat
chases, than your vice isn't in Miami - it's on
your computer. Atari ST, IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.
WALL $TREET RAIDER: Senator Jack S.
Dogbreath says the economy is heading for a
depression at the beginning of this fast-moving
economic simulation. Up to four human
players or any combination of two to four computer and human opponents can invest in the
same marketplace. The goal is to gain voting
control of an ailing company and turn it around
with sound management principles. IBM
($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.

Electronic Arts
P.O. Box 7578
San Mateo, CA 94403
CARTOONERS: Look out Warner Brothers,
Hanna-Barbara and R. K. Maroon! The stage is
set for you to be your own producer/director
with EA's Cartooners. Imaginative adults will
enjoy this as much as their kids, and teaching
them the few ins and outs of the menu driven
program will give you a great parent/child sharing experience. (Of course, your senses of
humor may differ . ). You may soon find
that your child likes MAKING cartoons even
more then watching them! IBM ($49.95), Apple
IIGS ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #9.
STARFLIGHT 2: As previewed in Computer
Gaming World #66 (December, 1989), this
epic space adventure game goes well beyond
the original StarFlight. Fire up your IBM, Tandy
and compatibles and blast off ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #10.

Cosmi
431 North Figueroa Street
Wilmington, CA 90744
WAR EAGLES: This budget-priced World
War One flight simulator is a solid basic entry
into the market. The action is quick enough to
get into, the controls easy enough to understand, and the action relentless enough to keep
your blood pressure up. Players can assume
either side and choose from five different mis-

sions. The graphics of a pilot's history and
medals won is a cute end-of-game feature as
well. IBM ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.

General Quarters Software
P.O. Box 1429
Torrance, CA 90505
BATTLESHIP BISMARCK: (Exercise Rhine,
May 1941): While clearly not a slick, high gloss
production computer wargame, "Battleship Bismarck" offers some solid features for naval wargamers. With both a strategic and a tactical
game, as well as features which allow you to
alter the computer's strategy, this game will
remain challenging even with repeat playings.
The historical research seems fairly well
thought out, and the commands are easy
enough to enter, so one can start playing the
game without grinding through too many rules.
Apple II, IBM ($35.00). Circle Reader Service
#12.

Laurence Productions, Inc.
1800 South 35th Street
Galesburg, MI 49053-9687
McGEE: Aptly described as "lapware",
"McGee" is a program for your 2-4 year old to
share with you. Simply place your tiny tot on
your lap, saddle up to the computer, place your
child's hand on the mouse and let the clicking
begin. With no printed words involved, McGee,
the hero of our story, goes from room to room,
item to item, discovering things in the
household as he goes along. With fine quality
graphics and digitized words and sounds, your
child will share his or her own experiences with
you even as McGee experiences them on
screen. What a time to share with your kid
(and suddenly you have SO MUCH to talk
about!). Thanks, McGee ... Apple IIGS
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #13.
Continued on page 62

Letters

Hi, ho, CD! The "ROM" Ranger
Please refer to your December editorial regarding CD-ROM gaming systems (Ed: Actually, November's editorial]. . I firmly believe that it is essential that the gaming/simulation hobby orient itself towards dedicated
gaming systems [in order] to grow. The new simulations released push the
286 machines to their limits and beyond. If one wants state of the art
graphic and playability in various simulations, a fast 286 or 386 machine is
required. The cost to upgrade existing computers runs into the hundreds,
if not thousands, of dollars. To convert EGA to VGA costs $200 to $350, a
sound board costs $100 to $500 and upgrading an 8080 or a 286 to a
386 machine costs thousands of dollars.
Few people can afford to upgrade personal computers as new developments occur. Low cost mass-produced gaming/simulation machines can
offer new technology at a much lower cost. The cost to upgrade these
machines or replace them as technology improves will be substantially less
than upgrading business computers.
This CD-ROM gaming/simulation systems will have a broad market appeal. It will not be dedicated to one type of gamer but to people that play
arcade, action, simulation and strategy games. It will have a constant following of users and therefore, constant business investment. As you stated
in your article, Lucasfilm, Electronic Arts and Spectrum-Holobyte are
investigating CD-ROM. Then, you can bet Microprose, SSI, Sierra and
the rest will, too.
I am getting bored by looking at a small 16 color screen with artificial
sounds. I will gladly invest several hundred dollars to be able to dogfight or
hash it out tank to tank on a 27" or larger color screen and have sound effects in full digital stereo. And, when fiber optic TV is in the home, interactive gaming/simulations will be played on levels never imagined. I think
other computer gamers will invest in this system, too, and therefore, see
the ultimate demise of computer gaming as we know it today.
D.F.
Oceanside, NY
Whoa, there! We didn't mean for the doom and gloom to get out of
hand. The "ultimate demise of computer gaming as we know it today"
isn't a very pretty picture. The editorial was trying to convey the fact
that personal computer owners could not afford to ignore the dedicated
game machine market. We did not mean to imply that either of the
game systems mentioned had cornered the market nor captured the
spirits of gamers throughout the country. (For a related discussion, see
the lead story in this issue's "Inside The Industry" (p. 18)).

Time To Buy?
With regard to Time to Die by Virgin Mastertronic, isn't this the same
game as Borrowed Time, put out by Activision in 1985? How can a different company put out the same game with a different name? No big
deal, since any careful buyer will no doubt note the similarity, but what if
someone buys it as a gift where the difference in names could result in the
gift receiver getting a new copy of Borrowed Time, only under a
different name?
Don Ryerson
San Pedro, CA
You are absolutely right. For those of you who missed the fine print on
the back of the box, "Licensed from Interplay Productions—Previously
published under the title 'Borrowed Time', here's a word to the wise.
Many of the titles in Mastertronic's budget line are reprints of out of print
favorites. Those who have been purchasing computer games for several
years should examine the back of the box before they buy. Of course,
we think the note should have been on the box cover, too.

Game Hints

Knights of Legend

Most of the quests are pretty straightforward, but there are some you need to be
warned about.

Continued from page 52

Great Orcs: Your party will be split on
entry, with half at the north entrance and
half at the east entrance.
Quests: Your single most important factor is your Kelden. Unless you really want
to take the time to kill all the monsters,
why bother fighting your way through narrow tunnels and bridges? It's pointless
and takes hours. Most of the time, the
item you're after is positioned as far from
the entry as possible. The simplest thing
to do is send your Kelden flying in from
behind and have him pick up the item
while everyone waits at the entry point.
This is the reason to give him Giant
spells. 11 of the quests involve Giantclass monsters (only Hill Giants are not
met in quests). Sometimes the object will
be heavily-guarded, and the spells will
remove those obstacles. Other times, he
will be able to lure the monsters away
from the immediate area and then be
able to double-back and pick it up.

Skeletons: You will absolutely need
someone who can fly to complete
this one.
Mist Giants: You will also need a flyer
to complete this one.

Underground, it is usually best to send
in whoever has the relevant class of
spells. Just be sure to remove that
person's armor and give it to the rest of
the party to hold. Removing the armor
helps in regaining fatigue loss
from spell casting.

Sylphs: Your party will appear on a
small island, surround by water and other
islands with Sylphs on them (sylphs,
being water elementals, have no
problems moving through water). Fighting is unavoidable, so try to kill them off
and get your weapons sheathed before
the Kelden exits with the quest item (Yes,
you need a flyer here, too).
Minotaurs: Your party is split four ways
after entering the quest, with 1 and 5
west, 2 and 6 east, 3 south, and 4 north.
You may want to make some rearrange-

Game Hints

Cyclops: This is the one time in the
game when you absolutely must kill off
all the monsters, so send in the whole
team and blow the critters away. Watch
out for missiles.
Finally, there are some other things to
keep in mind when doing quests. First,
never use the "flee" option to exit after
picking up the quest item. It will be
dropped in that case and you will have to
get it all over again. The character with
the quest item should head for the area
boundary at top speed and keep moving
until the "do you want to flee?"
message appears.

ments in your regular party order before
doing this one.
Sledges: This is the nastiest quest in
the game. The party is split up completely with each character alone in a maze of
tunnels. It will take some work and a lot
of luck to get them together again. This
is the one time when you want some
armor on your Kelden.

Second, all party members should have
their weapons sheathed before the "flee"
message appears, or they will
drop their weapons.
Third, try to keep anyone from falling in
combat. Otherwise, when you leave, that
character will be missing things, including armor, weapons, and items from
the backpack.
The above points do not apply, how

ever, if you actually kill off all the
monsters, as you get the usual victory
screen and the chance to pick up any
thing that may have been dropped
during combat.
Last, but not least, as soon as you're
out of the quest area (however you got
out), put that quest item in your backpack so it won't be lost if you have to run
from combat on your way back with it.

Taking a Peek
Continued from page 56

Micode Developments
P.O. Box 1621
Herndon, VA 22070-1621
CADDIEHACK: A nice, garden variety golf
game is made much better with the inclusion
of the Course Architect Program. Certainly
enough of a challenge to keep any computer
golfer above par through several playings. IBM
($20.00) Circle Reader Service #14.
Mindscape
HARLEY-DAVIDSON: THE ROAD TO
STURGIS: This game let's players explore a
rather unique bit of Americana. Players take the
role of a Wanna-Be biker heading to the annual
biker rally in Sturgis, S.D. Players have ten
days to complete a trip from Maine to South
Dakota while trying to raise their biker rating to
a respectable level. The rather average action
sequences include such biker rituals as the
slow-ride contests, drag races, hill climbs, and
the poker and weenie runs. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #15.

Monarch Software
655 Montgomery Street #540
San Francisco, CA 94109
A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET: This
real time maze game has all the trappings of
the "hurry, find it, pick it up and zap it if it
fights you" genre. For Freddy fans, however,
there is enough Nightmare flavor on Elm Street
to justify the story line. A bit of thought and
problem solving is involved, adding pressure to
Freddy's already relentless pursuit. You must
rescue your four friends before it's too late. The
graphics have little to recommend them, and
once you've "cracked" this game, its replay
value is about the same as the gum stuck on
the bottom of your chair. IBM ($34.99), C-64
($29.99). Circle Reader Service #16.

New World Computing
P.O. Box 2068
Van Nuys, CA 91404
NUCLEAR WAR: If you've never played
Flying Buffalo/Blade's silly Nuclear War Card
Game, you've missed a treat. This computerized version is all aficionados of that game
could hope for, and more! Set in a darkly
humorous world, with tongue planted firmly in
cheek, Nuclear War pits you against four other
maniacal world leaders (all of whom are
parodies of today's world leaders, each with
their own warmongering strategy). Fun, frustrating, and ALWAYS silly, the graphics and interaction get you playing quick and playing it over
and over. This game goes off the scale of our
GeigerCounter! Amiga.
Circle Reader Service #17.

Paragon Software
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
X-MEN: MADNESS IN MURDERWORLD:
In the early days of the Marvel Comic Universe,

Professor Xavier (a wheelchair bound
pedagogue with powerful telepathic abilities)
gathered together several teenagers with astounding abilities acquired due to genetic mutations. He formed an amazing team of superheroes from these adolescent mutants that
came to be known as the "X-Men" (because of
the eXtra powers they had to learn to control).
In this action-adventure game which, thankfully, requires more thought than its pure action
predecessor (Doctor Doom's Revenge), Professor X has been kidnapped by the X-Men's archenemy, Magneto. The player controls six of the
most popular X-Men ever to appear in the Marvel Comic's series: Cyclops, Storm, Wolverine,
Dazzler, Storm, Colossus and Nightcrawler.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #18.

Software Toolworks
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
BRUCE LEE LIVES: This kung fu adven-

ture intersperses beautiful graphic screens with
martial arts action sequences. Set in Bruce
Lee's Hong Kong, the player battles the evil
Master Po and his henchmen for control of the
city. The program implements a special macro
function that allows players to program Bruce
with a series of moves to use with a single key.
Special artificial intelligence routines enable
Bruce's opponents to learn and adjust to his
moves, forcing the player to constantly refine
and adjust their fighting style. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #19.

Starbyte Software
Nordring 71
4630 Bochum 1
West Germany
TABLE TENNIS SIMULATION: This one
or two player game has a set of rules which
come in four languages, but in plain English
the game leaves a bit to be desired. The dark

Taking a Peek

screen graphics and inexplicable turtles are one
thing, but figuring out how to serve the ball
shouldn't leave you wanting to paddle your
monitor. The practice routine and different
types of ball control are nice enough to warrant
a look, but overall this game doesn't clear the
net. Amiga.
Circle Reader Service #20.

tlefront far more visually appealing than its ancestors. IBM, C-64 and Apple II ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #22.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
675 Almanor Avenue
Sunnyvale, CA 94086

TRUE Sports, Inc.
407 3rd Street West\
Madison, WV 25130

CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN: If you liked Pool
of Radiance and Curse of the Azure Bonds,
then you'll be very pleased to boot up Champions of Krynn. Taking this system for the first
time into the DragonLance world with many of
its characters (Tanis, Tasselhoff, etc.), this
game adds some new features such as moons
with phases and gods that add special abilities
to your cleric characters. The scope of this
game is no less legendary than its aforementioned predecessors. If this is your genre, call in
where you work and tell them that you've got
another one of those 5-day fevers... You'll want
to finish this one right away, too. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #21.

TRUE HOCKEY: Quite simply, TRUE Hockey is only for TRUE Hockey fans. Devoid of
graphics, this intense statistics based game is
for the absolute devotee of the game. Designed
for league play, one assumes the role of owner
/ manager. A good deal of strategy takes place
before the puck hits the ice as team rosters are
made and players are arranged in squads
which best underscore their abilities in attack
and defense. For the thinking hockey player
and not the joystick jockey, TRUE Hockey is
best shared with others in the form of league
competition. IBM ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #23.

Strategic Studies Group
P.O. Box 261
Drummoyne, 2047 AUSTRALIA
PANZER BATTLES: This, the latest in the
Battlefront series of wargames, is so generic
that the first large, boldface print word you see
inside the rules booklet is "Battlefront" (only the
cover has been changed so you'll know which
game these rules belong to). Fortunately, for all
you IBM'ers, the EGA graphics are a real step
up and the play is much quicker than previous
Battlefront games. Six scenarios with lots of
armor should keep enthusiasts of this sturdy
war horse of a system enthralled yet again. The
evolutions of the icons used in the game since
the early days makes this latest edition of Bat-

Virgin Mastertronic, Inc.
18001 Cowan, Suites A and B
Irvine, CA 92714
CLUE: MASTER DETECTIVE: Better than
even hoped for, Clue :Master Detective really
delivers all the goods of the classic Parker
Brothers boardgame and also adds extras that
take it far ahead in its own right. The pleasant
graphics lead you around a board with many
additional rooms (such as the Gazebo, the
Courtyard, the Carriage House, etc.). More
weapons (including the Horseshoe and Poison)
and additional characters (Madame Rose, Sergeant Gray, etc.) make for a fine, challenging
game of Clue. This game "done it", and done it
well! IBM, Apple II, Atari ST ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #24.

Conversions Received
Artura

(Arcadia)

Amiga

Batman

(Data East)

Amiga, C64, IBM

Block Out

(California Dreams)

IBM

Breach 2

(Omnitrend)

Atari ST

FaceOff!

(Gamestar)

C64

Ferrari Formula One

(EA)

IBM

Grand Prix Circuit

(Accolade)

IIGS

Monday Night Football

(Data East)

C64

Omni-play Basketball

(SportTime)

Omni-play Horse Racing Stable Owners Module ...(SportTime)

IBM
Amiga

Omni-play Horse Racing Track 2 Support Disk ...(SportTime)

Amiga

Planet of Lust

(Free Spirit)

IBM

QIX

(Taito)

IBM

Search for the Titanic

(Capstone)

C64

Starflight

(EA)

Amiga, Mac

Super Hang-On

(Data East)

IBM

The Ultimate Casino Gambling Simulation

(Ca pstone)

Amiga, AO, C64

Vigilante

(Data East)

C64

