\

From the Editor.. .
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD,
with the publication of this issue, has
completed it's first year of covering
the computer gaming field. In this
past year we have seen a tremendous
growth in the hobby. Think back to
what products were available to the
computer gamer a year ago, then
look at what is available today. There
is quite a difference isn't there? What
is exciting is that next year should
produce even greater advancements.
This does not mean, however, that
1983 will see the large increase of
software houses that characterized
1981 and 1982. Given increased competition in the computer gaming industry and the state of the economy,
it is increasingly more difficult to
start a software house. This coupled
with natural attrition in the business world means that we will see
fewer companies in the next couple of
years. However those companies that
are around in two years will be
stronger and better able to meet the
demands of the marketplace.
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
has come a long way in the past year
as well. Each issue has added new
features and will continue to do so.
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD has,
in the year of it's existence become
something of a voice for the hobby.
Through reviews, columns such as
Silicon Cerebrum, Atari Arcade, and
Real World Gaming we have tried to
provide you with enjoyable and informative information about the
hobby. From your comments we know
we are succeeding. Our Reader Input
Device has become one of our most
popular features. Through R.I.D. your
voice can be heard by the hobby and
industry.
CGW adds two new columns in
this issue, INSIDE THE INDUSTRY,
by Dana Lombardy (Associate Publisher of Game Merchandising
magazine) and ROUTE-80 THE
ROAD TO ADVENTURE, a new
TRS-80 column by Richard McGrath.
Although not appearing in this issue
Silicon Cerebrum will be back in
November — December.

VOL. 2 NO. 5
SEPT. — OCT. 1982
Features
LABYRINTHINE
Computer Fiction
SOFTWARE PIRACY
The Slaying of A Hydra
MISSION 5 — COMPLETE
A Review of STARBLAZER
STARWARS MEETS GALACTIC GLADIATORS
A Scenario for SSI's New Game
HEROIC FANTASY
An Interactive Role-Playing Game
ATARI: EXPLOITING THE HUMAN CONNECTION
The Human Element in Computer Gaming
GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN
Review & Notes
GALACTIC GLADIATORS
Individual Combat in the 28th Century
ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT
The Second Annual Robotwar Tournament
THE ROAD TO GETTYSBURG
A Review of SSI's Game
GET ON THE BANDWAGON
Computer Gaming by Cable
CYTRON MASTERS
The View From A Play Tester
STARSHIP COMMANDER
Designer's Notes
NEW SCENARIOS FOR INVASION ORION
Scenarios For Epyx's Space Combat Game
READER COMMENTS
Comments on the R.I.D. Cards

6
10
11
12
13
14
16
20
21
22
25
30
33
37
43

Departments
Inside the Industry
Initial Comments
Hobby & Industry News
Route 80-The Road to Adventure
Real World Gaming
Micro Reviews
R.I.D.

2
3
5
28
35
40
47

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy,
Associate Publisher Game Merchandising

For the first feature in this new
column for CGW, we conducted a
survey of 150 computer software
manufacturers to find out what their
best selling titles are.
Those who shared their sales
figures with us appear on the chart
on this page. It turned out that
there's no relationship between the
number of new releases and how
many sales the publisher's top
game will do. For example, Adventure International, which has
sold primarily by mail order, introduced 55 new games in 1981 and
their best-seller is REAR GUARD
(December, 1981) with 3,400 copies
sold. On the other hand, Arcade
Plus made only one game in 1981 GHOST HUNTER (November, 1981)
- and they've sold over 23,000
copies, almost all through stores.
Obviously, selling through stores
means more games sold - more of
you have a chance to see a game and
try it. If it's good, the repeat sales
push it up to the top of the chart. But
many of the mail order companies
have good games as well. The
numbers on the chart hint at the
way a company sells their software:
through stores or by mail. Numbers
alone cannot tell you how good a
game is.
One more note about the chart of
best sellers: a clue to "hot" titles is
their release date. CHOPLIFTER

by Broderbund (May, 1982) and
CANYON CLIMBER by Datasoft
(June, 1982) are two examples of
recent releases that could jump into
the 20,000-plus category before the
end of the year based on what they
sold in just one month.
Some firms that don't release
their sales figures still gave us
interesting data. Atari's best-selling
program through APX is EASTERN
FRONT, a wargame - and the
winner of "Best Adventure Game
for Home Computer, 1981" from the
Academy of Adventure Gaming
Arts and Design. Avalon Hill's
Microcomputer division's bestselling title is EMPIRE OF THE
OVERMIND, an adventure game.
Even though action/arcade games
like K-RAZY Shoot-Out (K-Byte)
and RASTER BLASTER (BudgeCo)
make up the majority of game
software programs available, they
don't totally dominate the market.
The fact that Atari's and Avalon
Hill's best-sellers are non-arcade
types, and others on the top sellers
chart - ZORK I (Infocom),
TEMPLE OF APSHAI (Automated
Simulations), WIZARD & THE
PRINCESS (Sierra On-Line), WIZARDRY (Sir-tech), CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN (Muse), APVENTURE
TO ATLANTIS (Synergistic) are
adventure games, points to how
significant role-playing and wargame subjects are.

But no matter what types of
games you prefer, the numerous
software manufacturers are going
to continue producing a variety of
titles that will keep this a vital,
growing, and always interesting
hobby.
List of Top Sellers
(as of 30 June 1982)
35,000 K -HAZY Shoot-Out (K-Byte,
Jan. 1982)
.
32,000 Zork I (Infocom, Feb. 1981)
30,000 Temple of Apshai (Auto
mated Simulations,
Aug. 1979)
30,000 Flight Simulator (Sublogic
Communications, Dec. 1979)
25,000 Raster Blaster (BudgeCo.,
April 1981)
25,000 Wizard & the Princess (Sierra
On-Line, Aug. 1980)
25,000 Snack Attack (Datamost, Oct.
1981)
24,000 Wizardry (Sir-tech Software,
Sept. 1981)
23,000 Ghost Hunter (Arcade Plus,
Nov. 1981)
23,000 Gorgon (Sirius Software,
June 1981)
20,000 Ultima (California Pacific
Computer Co., June 1981)
20,000 Super Invader (Creative
Computing Software,
Nov. 1979)
20,000 Castle Wolfenstein (Muse,
Sept. 1981)
15,000 Apple Panic (Broderbund
Software, July 1981)
15,000 Scarfman (The Cornsoft
Group, Aug. 1981)
15,000 Pool 1.5 (Innovative Design
Software, April 1981)
10,000 Galactic Chase (Spectrum
Computers, Sept. 1981)
9,000 Choplifter (Broderbund Soft
ware, May 1982)
8,300 Canyon Climber (Datasoft,
June 1982)
8,000 The Warp Factor (Strategic
Simulations, Feb. 1981)
6,000 Photar (Softape, Feb. 1982)
5,000 Pac Attack (Computerware,
Sept. 1981)
5,000 Horizon V (Gebelli Software,
Feb. 1982)
5,000 Dragonquest (The Program
mer's Guild., Jan. 1981)
5,000 Asylum (Med Systems,
Feb. 1981)
4,500 International Gran Prix
(Riverbank Software,
Aug. 1981)
3,600 Tax-Man (H.A.L. Labs,
Oct. 1981)
3,500 Rocket Raiders (Artworx
Software, Dec. 1981)
3,500 Apventure to Atlantis
(Synergistic Software,
March 1982)
3,400 Rear Guard (Adventure
International, Dec. 1981)
3,000 Voyage of the Valkyrie
(Advanced Operating
Systems, Aug. 1981)
2,000 The Game Show (ComputerAdvanced Ideas, Oct. 1981)
2,000 Stone's Reversal (Powersoft, Nov. 1981)
1,000 Swordthrust #1 (CE Software, May 1981)
1,000 Hi-Res Computer Golf
(Avant-Garde Creations,
Nov. 1981)
1,000 ZX81 Classics (Lamo-Lem
Laboratories, Jan. 1982)
1,000 Super Stellar Trek (Rainbow
Computing, Aug. 1981)

INITIAL
COMMENTS
BEZ
4790 Irvine Blvd., Box 19633
Irvine, CA 92714
BEZ-OFF: An arcade game in
which the player moves throughout his house and the yard killing
spiders, ants, and flying insects.
The player controls a boot to
stomp ants, uses scissors to cut
spider webs or the spiders themselves, and uses a can of insecticide to spray flying insects
in the yard. Each segment requires a different type of handeye coordination. Apple II, $32.95.

***

DataMost
9748 Cozycroft Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311

themselves for passes and scoring
opportunities. "Smart" defensive
players attempt to counter the
offensive moves. $29.95.

COMPUTER GIN RUMMY: A
well done version of Gin Rummy
in which you play against the
computer. The program also
includes two other rummy games;
Knock and One-Meld. Apple II,
$29.95.

Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901

PIG PEN: A maze - chase game
in which from 1 to 8 pigs (you pick
the number) attempt to slaughter
you with their tusks. Instead of
eating dots, your figure leaves
dots behind, which help the pigs
find you. The more pigs you
choose to oppose, the higher your
potential score. Apple II and IBM
PC, $29.95.

SERPENTINE: A maze - chase
game in which you try to eat "evil
serpents" while keeping your
own giant serpent, which you
ride, from being eaten. SERPENTINE is an interestingly different
kind of maze - chase game. Apple
II, $34.95.

Avant-Garde Creations
P.O. Box 30160
Eugene, OR 97403
HI-RES COMPUTER GOLF:
A detailed golf simulation in
which the player(s) must not only
use good strategy (e.g. where to
hit the ball) but must also develop
a good swing (guiding the stroke
path with the keyboard). To play
the game well you must learn to
"read" the greens, "play" the
wind, and make difficult shots
out of traps and rough. A very
challenging game. Apple II,
$29.95.

Rainbow Computing Inc.
9719 Reseda Blvd.
Northridge, CA 91324

Gamma Software
P.O. Box 25625
Los Angeles, CA 90025
SOCCER: A high-speed, video
game for the Atari 400/800. The
action is similar to their Hockey
game with appropriate changes
for the game of soccer. There are
two four-man teams per side. One
player is controlled by the joystick, the other three are "smart"
players acting on their own.
Offensive "smart" players run
patterns attempting to position

RAINBOW GRAPHICS: A
graphics package for the Apple II
using a joystick with two pushbuttons. The package has everything needed to create "quality"
pictures in freehand, but also
allows design of modular style
drawings.
THE POOR MAN'S GRAPHICS TABLET: An assembly language graphics editor based on
the Applesoft Internal hi-res
subroutines. Shape table editing
features are included. Black and
white pictures prepared

by the editor can be colored by a
color editor featuring an almost
unlimited number of hi-res colors.
Most commands require only a
single keystroke. Through the
use of a keyboard hi-res cursor
the monitor can be used as a sort
of graphics tablet.

of a VisiCalc System; Commands;
Labels, Numbers, and Formulas;
you will find less predictable but
more unique chapters on Recognizing, Preventing, and Correcting Errors; Creating Templates;
and What Our Client, Secretary,
or Supervisor Needs to Know:
How Others Use our Templates
Successfully. Hardback and
Paperback.
Hayden Book Co.
50 Essex St.
Rochelle Park, NJ 07662
ALIBI: A detective game in
which the player trays to determine
who the murderer is, and where
the murder was committed (the
body was moved you see). You
can question suspects, compile a
notebook, and cross reference
"stories" to reach your conclusion.

Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
VC: A simulation of political/
military warfare between guerilla
forces (commanded by the
computer), and pacification forces
controlled by the player. The
player controls ten ARVN units,
a U.S. Airmobile Infantry Battalion, and a U.S. Artillery
Battalion. The computer controls
NVA and Viet Cong units. Both
sides try to win the loyalty of
neutral civilian population
groups. The game runs on TRS-80
and Apple II computers.

MATHEMATICAL RECREATIONS FOR THE PROGRAMMABLE CALCULATOR: A
322 page book containing a
collection of recreational problems for programmable handheld calculators. The problems
are grouped in three chapters.
Chapter One is devoted to technique, developing methods useful
in solving problems and building
programming skills. Chapter
Two explains numerical recreations and Chapter Three deals
with mathematical games. $14.95.

Zeta Systems Inc.
1725 Adelaide Blvd.
Akron, OH 44305
TRAILBLAZER: The authorized
computer version of Metagaming's
Trailblazer board game. A multiplayer game of economic speculation in space.
United Microwave Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 7336
Van Nuys, CA 91409
RENAISSANCE: UMI's version
of the popular board game Othello
(Gabriel Industries). Though the
game can be played with one
player against another, it is
designed as a one player game
against the computer. There are
eight skill levels and a number of
useful utilities. For example, a
player can change sides in the
middle of a game. He can take
back a move, or set up special
situations. The current position
of the game, which runs on the
VIC-20, can be saved on tape.
AMOK: Similar to the popular
coin-op game Bezerk. Runs on the
VIC-20 (cartridge).

Piccadilly Software Inc.
89 Summit Ave.
Summit, NJ 07901
FALCONS: An arcade game
similar to the coin-op game
Phoenix. Players must eliminate
five types of enemy forces. Direct
hits will destroy an enemy unit. A
"wing" hit will only cause them
to regenerate. The object is to
break through to the Mother Ship
and destroy the alien commander.
Apple II.

Reston Publishing Company
Reston, Virginia
MISSING NAME

THE VISICALC BOOK (Apple
Edition):
THE VISICALC BOOK (Atari
Edition): Two good looking
introductions to VisiCalc. Along
with predictable chapters on
subjects such as the Capabilities

Our last issue contained a letter
under the heading "More Strategy
for Eastern Front". The letter
was written by David Myers of
Austin, Texas.
Sorry for the error David.

HOBBY &
INDUSTRY NEWS
Infocom will be releasing a new
sci-fi adventure game by Dave
Lebling sometime in October or
November. The game will be called
STARCROSS. ZORK III is scheduled for a late September release.

appear at three month intervals.
They are: RDF (Rapid Deployment
Force); NORWAY 1985; and BALTIC 1985. Joel Billings of SSI describes the games as "similar to
Southern Command but better".

Game Designer's Workshop (P.O.
Box 1646, Bloomington, IL 61701)
has announced the formation of
GameSoft, their new computer
game division. The initial releases
will include a computer version of
their popular sci-fi role-playing system, TRAVELLER; computer versions of existing GDW games; and
new games designed specifically for
computers. First releases will run on
the Apple II with later versions for
the Atari and other computers.

AVANT-GARDE CREATIONS
has appointed Robert M. Tappan as
their Sales and Marketing Director
and Steven D. Hanson as their
National Sales Manager.

SSI's COSMIC BALANCE is
now out for the Apple II and the
Atari version should be out by the
end of September. Look for Atari
versions of CYTRON MASTERS
and GALACTIC GLADIATORS
in October and November respectively. An Atari version of their
popular COMPUTER BASEBALL
may be out by Christmas.
BATTLE OF NORMANDY, a
new division/regiment level game
by SSI will be out in September.
BON, by the authors of TIGERS
IN THE SNOW and BATTLE OF
SHILOH, will have scrolling graphics in the Atari and Apple versions. There will also be a TRS-80
version out about the same time.
SSI is presently play-testing Gary
Grigsby's new game MALTA which
is based on his outstanding GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN system. The game may be released in
November. Gary's third game will
be NORTH ATLANTIC MODERN SEA COMBAT, a combined
land, sea, and air game based on a
fictional Russian overrun of the
European Continent and
Scandinavia.
Roger Keating (SOUTHERN
COMMAND) is working on a new
series of games for SSI entitled
When Super Powers Collide. The
first title will be GERMANY 1985.
Other games in the series will

Avant-Garde Creations (P.O. Box
30160 Eugene, OR 97403) has announced a number of new utility
programs. HI-RES SECRETS
GRAPHICS APPLICATIONS
SYSTEM ($75.00) by Don Fudge
can be used alone or in connection
with two other releases, HI-RES
ELECTRONIC DESIGN ($29.95)
and HI-RES ARCHITECTURAL
DESIGN ($29.95). They have also
released a program entitled SUPER
QUALITY EPSON HI-RES
DUMP ($25.00). All run on the
Apple.

Edu-Ware has announced the
release of PRISONER 2, a new
"state-of-the-art" version of their
earlier PRISONER game. The
game features hi-res graphics, animation, and sound effects (Apple,
$32.95).
Sentient Software (1280 Ute Ave.,
Aspen, CO 81611) has announced a
September release for the IBM PC
version of their CYBORG sci-fi text
adventure.
EPYX/AUTOMATED SIMULATIONS has moved to a new
location, 1043 Kiel Court, Sunnyvale, CA 94086.
Computerware (Box 668, Manchester Ave., Suite 102, Encinitas,
CA 92024) has released EL DIABLERO for the Radio Shack Color
Computer and the TDP System 100.
The adventure game is available on
cassette ($19.95) or Disk ($29.95).

Broderbund Software has a new
game designing utility program on
the market entitle THE ARCADE
MACHINE. TAM guides the user
step by step though the process of
designing his own computer arcade
game (Apple, $59.95).
Hayden Software has added two
new games to their list of Apple II
games: STAR TRADERS ($19.95)
and KING CRIBBAGE ($24.95).
Star Traders is a game of intergalactic trade and King Cribbage is
a computerized version of the old
English card game.
Alpine Software (2120 Academy
Circle, Suite E; Colorado Springs,
CO 80909) has introduced LOVERS OR STRANGERS, a game
that is also a compatibility evaluator. The game/evaluator tells two
people how "right" they are for each
other, and how likely they are to
have a successful relationship
(Apple, $29.95). [Ed. Note - what do
you do if you play the game with
your spouse and the program tells
you that you are not "right" for each
other?'

SILICON CEREBRUM
ON VACATION
Silicon Cerebrum, Bruce
Webster's popular column on
artificial intelligence, is taking a
brief vacation during this issue.
SC will be back on it's regular
schedule with our November —
December issue.

LABYRINTHINE

Mark sat at his computer in a daze, half-asleep and
illshaven, having been in the offices most of the night.
His stomach growled loudly as he reached into the bag
by his chair for another donut. The thought that he was
beginning to go to fat; that he hadn't been out of his
chair for several hours, tickled his brain then slipped
silently away, leaving not a ripple of echo.
He enjoyed his work: programming was the first job
he'd actually been able to stick with. He supposed he
was most attracted by the raw power of the small
machine; the complexity, the incredible number of
different operations it could perform. As if the machine
were the most interesting human being to which he
could possibly talk. All at his fingertips! Pressing the
keys allowed him to communicate with all that power.
Actually, it sometimes seemed his computer was the
only thing with which he could really communicate.
He stared at the screen. Something strange seemed to
be happening...lines forming where they had no right to
be. He rubbed his eyes. This sort of thing often
happened, he knew, after a long stretch before the
monitor. The eyesight started to go. He really should try
those eye exercises Ellen had recommended. He just
hadn't yet been able to get around to it.
He'd been working on this particular section of the
project fourteen hours straight. He really should get
across town and visit his parents...really should. But he
hadn't the time. Anyway, it wasn't safe out on the
streets. It seemed that everytime Mark went out, he was

Steve Rasnic Tern

struck by something different: the streets full of broken
pavements and potholes, the kids on the corners with
their blaring radios and faces full of hatred, the barred
store-front windows, the bottles and rocks flying past
people's cars, and, a few weeks ago, being lost
downtown because he'd been thinking about his project
at work and, as if sleep-walking, had gotten off at the
wrong stop...those two kids chasing him for blocks until
he'd jumped onto another bus. They'd beaten on the bus
doors and screamed with narrow, twisted mouths. He'd
never seen anything like it.
"You have to be on your toes, Mark," Ellen was
always warning him. She had this way of looking out
for him. "The city will get to you if you aren't."
He tried to follow her advice, tried to concentrate on
his surroundings when he was out there in the streets,
but he was always lapsing into inattention. He had too
much on his mind...he had the project on his
mind...always.
The lines on his monitor thickened. Mark rubbed his
eyes once again. They crossed, forming boxes, lanes.
Impossible. Impossible...
"Ellen, could you come over here a second?" Mark
looked plaintively up from his computer monitor.
Ellen walked over and glanced across his shoulder.
She frowned. "How'd you get that?"
"I don't know. I was loading the text of the financial
report's introduction for editing and I got this garbage."

A regular arrangement of horizontal and vertical
gray bars of varying lengths broke up a yellow
background. Ellen hummed softly in thought. "Well, it's
not exactly garbage, but it shouldn't be there. Looks like
part of a game." She chuckled and patted his arm.
"Mark, are you sure that you loaded the piece, and didn't
type something else?"
"Positive...and there's no game on this disk."
"Maybe you got the wrong disk out of the files. Let's
see if we can't get a catalog." Ellen reached over the
keyboard and tried punching keys, but the labyrinth
stayed up on the screen. "I can't get it back to the menu,"
she said.
Mark gazed intently at the monitor. His eyes burned.
He couldn't remember ever feeling quite so exhausted.
But then, the small business financial package had kept
him working overtime for weeks, and he hadn't gotten
much sleep because he'd wake up every few hours and
feel compelled to write down something. He had been
outside the office or his home for all that time. He had
hardly been aware of the changing seasons until the
day before when the first snow fell. Ellen was always
warning him he would ruin his health that way. He
wasn't even sure why he didn't listen to her. He tapped
several keys with luck similar to Ellen's, then said,
"What if we turn the machine off and reboot?"
Ellen flipped the switch at the back of the machine.
The screen went dead. Then she flipped it back on. The
gray labyrinth blossomed into life, but more complicated
this time, and a small dot seemed to be moving down one
of the corridors.
Mark tapped the side of the monitor with his palm.
The labyrinth jiggled; the small dot ran straight into a
wall and disappeared. The screen suddenly went a
bright red.
ONE MOMENT PLEASE!!! flashed across the
screen.
Ellen stared at the screen, her lips pursed. "What the
hell..."
The menu appeared on the screen, with its normal list
of choices. Ellen reached over excitedly and typed out
the command for a catalog.
"Only the normal utility programs..."Mark said,
leaning closer into the screen. He thought about taking
a walk; he hadn't just strolled for relaxation in some
time. He knew that he was out of touch with the city, and
the realization made him suddenly nervous. What
would happen if he went out now, so out of practice?
Perhaps the city would eat him alive.

The labyrinth reappeared several times during the
following days, within many different programs, even
on different disks. The only constant seemed to be
Mark and his computer. It would not appear on
another computer, even with Mark as operator, and it
wouldn't appear on Mark's computer unless he was at
the keyboard.
The firm brought in several specialists; the computer
was taken apart and rebuilt piece by piece, but no one
was able to find anything wrong with the machine. The
final consensus was "Freakish Interference."

Mark got his computer back, and continued working
on the financial analysis package he'd been hired to do.
But he noticed that each time his concentration lagged,
or he lapsed into the slightest daydream, the labyrinth
was back, more convoluted with each new appearance.
"You know, it looks like a city to me, Ellen," Mark
commented one day.
"How so. . ." she replied distractedly.
"The labyrinth. It looks a lot like the aerial view of
some city. And that's a person moving around down
there."
Ellen turned to him with a tired expression. "It's just
a bug in the system, Mark. A weird one, I admit. But
don't make too much of it. I. . .well, you've been
putting a lot of time into that financial package. Don't
take this the wrong way, but maybe you need to break
for awhile." She reached over and stroked his hair. "I
get worried about you. You know I enjoy this work, and
sometimes I can get pretty obsessed with my job—
enough that it's a little scary sometimes. But you're
taking all this to a really unhealthy level."
Mark nodded his head slowly, hearing Ellen's
words, though actually hardly aware of her presence.
He'd wanted a vacation for some time now, but had
never bothered to ask. Now he wasn't even sure he
could let himself ask. He was too wrapped up in his
work.
Mark stared back at the screen. He pressed closer,
trying to make out any detail on the dot moving
through the maze. He blinked his eyes, which made it
look as if the dot had moving appendages.

When he reached home that evening Mark pinned
the print-out to the wall facing his bed. Once again he
neglected to do his dishes, or clean house; the garbage
was stacking up in the kitchen, his clothes and
magazines and scattered papers were everywhere.
There was a message from Ellen on his answering
machine, asking him over for a home-cooked meal, but
he discovered he could hardly follow her voice, or
understand the words, so intensely were his thoughts
fixed on the labyrinth. He stared at the print-out for
hours, occasionally getting up to examine a small
section more closely. He was almost able to make out a
little detail on some of the buildings.
But what puzzled him most was that within the
immensity of that great city, there was still the lone dot
moving aimlessly and lost. And now he was sure the
dot had arms and legs.

During the next week the labyrinth — although
Mark was thinking of it as "The City" now — appeared
several times in his financial reports, and once even
printed itself out with the Cash Flow report. He took
one look at the artful arrangement of interlocking
mazes on the roll of perforated paper and realized that
the print-out had allowed the city to grow outside the limited
boundaries of his monitor. He folded up the printed
diagram carefully, surveying his surroundings with
some guilt. Then, when no one appeared to be looking,
he slipped it into his briefcase to take home.

Mark was increasingly aware that the others in his
office were watching him now; observing him closely.
Waiting to see what was going to come up on his screen
next. And Ellen didn't seem to be speaking to him at all
right now. He couldn't imagine what she was so angry
about.
He was now so painfully aware of the immensity and
complexity of the labyrinth that he was afraid to print
it out again — horrified by the image of that strange
city spewing out of the printer in reams, filling up the
office, wrapping around the towering office building,
and eventually trawling the streets of that greater city,
clogging the traffic lanes and enveloping pedestrians
in its garland-like embrace.
Apparently stymied by Mark's refusal to allow it
outside the computer, the labyrinthine city began
showing its monstrousness in other ways. Soon it was
displaying a montage of close-up perspectives of itself,
still shots taking tortured and distorted views of some
of the thoroughfares and back alleys of the labyrinth.
Peering at the twists and turns on his monitor gave
Mark blinding headaches, but he felt compelled to
watch them; compulsively glued to his computer so
that he might not miss a single view.
He could see the moving dot, caught in stop-motion,
and the detail a little more focused each time.
"Mark, I don't want to give you a hard time about it,
but it really seems to me that your work is slipping."
Ellen looked appropriately concerned, but Mark didn't
have the time to deal with her troubles anymore; he
was too busy examining the labyrinthine city. The
views came rapidly now — approximately one per
minute — and the moving figure seemed just a bit
clearer each time.
"Everybody's noticed it, Mark," she said, with a
little more emphasis. Mark found he could only nod his
head slowly; he didn't have it in him to do more.
Ellen stalked away in frustration. The figure seemed
to be dancing now, dancing down the narrow lanes
with thick walls to either side. "Dancing in the
streets. . ." Mark whispered dreamily.

That evening, Mark was so absorbed in his study of
the labyrinthine city that he didn't go home. He stayed
at the office all night. The views flashed by with a
speed threatening to burn out the computer, as if the
city were driving the machine to its own purposes. The
diagrams, the mazes flashed by Mark's eyes until they
blurred together, forming one vast and infinitely
complex city in his imagination, a city that he might
explore forever, much as the small figure seemed to be
doing.
It occurred to Mark finally that the complexity of the
city must in some way mirror the complex, labyrinthine
nature of his own mind. Certainly Mark had developed
a unique, intimate relationship with his computer. It
was, in a way, his best friend.
As the figure moved frantically back and forth,
down this street and up still another, seemingly
desperate to explore every inch of the maze, Mark
became convinced his theory was correct. He felt
suddenly desperate to see the entire city, and the small
figure's present position in it.
He went to the printer and turned it on. With a loud
buzzing like some great bestial sigh of relief, the
computer unloaded its contents into the printer.

The office appeared quiet and empty when Ellen
arrived at work that next morning. Despite herself, she
made an audible noise in her throat when she entered
the computer section. Reams of print-out covered the
aisles and looped up on the desks across consoles. She
gathered some of it in her arms and examined it. It
looked like Mark's labyrinth.
She pushed large piles of the paper out of her way as
she crossed to Mark's computer. The machine was still
on, but she couldn't find Mark anywhere.
When she went back to his computer she saw that his
labyrinth was displayed once again on the screen.
She slumped down into his chair, trying not to laugh,
but unable to help herself. It wasn't really funny
though, she thought; they'd surely fire him for this.
She looked up at the monitor.
There was a small dot moving through the maze. She
leaned forward and examined it more closely.
Now a second dot joined it, or rather, appeared to be
following it; chasing it through the labyrinth. The
second dot stopped, suddenly, right before her nose. It
seemed to be moving up and down, jumping on the
screen. She could barely make out just a hint of an
appendage. It seemed to be beckoning...

SOFTWARE PIRACY:
THE SLAYING OF A HYDRA

MISSION 5-COMPLETE
STAR BLAZER REVIEW
by Barry Gittleman

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Star Blazer
Arcade
48K Apple II Integer
Disk
1
Tony Suzuki
$31.95
Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth Street
San Rafael. CA 94901
(415) 456-6424

"There is evil on the loose, and
men and women of good will are on
the run. The galaxy is in the grip of
the repressive Bungeling Empire,
and the people have little hope.
What hope they do have is based on
the old legends. These legends tell of
a time when there were nuclear
families, not nuclear wars; a time
when you didn't need to register
microcomputers with the government; a time when a brave warrior
went into hiding from the growing
dark clouds of the Bungeling expansion. The legends tell of one they
called STAR BLAZER.
You remember now don't you, all
those years ago? You've hidden your
identity from your friends and
family, just like you are hiding the
unregistered micro which you are
about to put this disk into. This is
our last chance, Star Blazer. If you
fail us we will probably all end up in
the gumbelum mines.
Your mission is not an easy one.
You've hidden away that vintage
WW III jet of yours which you'll
need to clear away radar stations,
avoid supersonic tanks, find and
destroy ICBM installations, and
escape heat-seeking missiles and
explosive sky-mines as you make
your final bomb run on the Bungeling Empire Headquarters." (quoted
from material published with the
game)
STAR BLAZER is another excellent, two-dimensional, space game
by Tony Suzuki. You, as the Star
Blazer, are the galaxy's last hope to

destroy the Bungeling Empire. You
have been given five missions: 1)
Bomb the Radar; 2) Attack the
Tank; 3) Bomb the ICBM; 4) Attack
the Tank; and 5) Bomb the Headquarters. You are given three ships,
each with a fuel capacity of 3,000
gallons, and a bomb load of 30
bombs. Supplies may be replenished
by catching your supply package,
which is dropped off periodically by
a supply ship. Additionally, you
have a pulse cannon to supplement
your bomb load.
The game can be played with
either the keyboard or a joystick,
although it is much more difficult
with the keyboard. Pause and sound
on/off options are available. There
is only one fire button, therefore,
whether you fire bombs or pulse
cannons is determined by your
altitude. If you are flying low (below
the height of the towers), you drop
bombs by pressing the fire button. If
you are flying above this height, you
fire pulse cannons, which drastically
diminish your fuel supply.
There are several obstacles in
each mission which become increasingly difficult as you go. In your first
mission, there is little to avoid. This
mission can be used to practice
flying if you are new to the game.
The only difficulty is dodging the
towers which protrude into the sky.
These towers often surround radar
installations, and you must find a
way to get bombs in between the
towers around the installation
without crashing into them. The
towers may not be shot with pulse
cannons. You also must avoid
dropping bombs on the trees in this
mission. For some reason (perhaps
Tony Suzuki loves trees), trees do
not explode when hit by bombs, and
you loose 20 points.
The second mission is very difficult
for beginners, but when the secret is
learned, it can be completed in a few
seconds. You are to drop a bomb on a
supersonic tank that is faster than
you are, while avoiding kamikaze
planes. The planes are quite easy to
avoid, for there is a limit as to how
low they may fly, and you can fly

below that. The tank, however, is
quite difficult to sneak up on. You
must fly past it above your lowest
altitude, and drop your bomb on the
way down.

The third mission, in which you
bomb the ICBM, is one of the
easiest, but you must watch your
fuel supply constantly. The major
obstacles here are the explosive sky
mines left by the planes. Most of
your time in this mission will be
spent shooting down mines and
planes with pulse cannons. If you do
not, a large number of planes will
accumulate, leaving a great number
of mines to avoid. The answer is
simple—shoot'em. But remember,
firing pulse cannons is like pouring
out fuel. It is wise to limit firing
when fuel load is below 1500 gallons,
and to stop firing when fuel load is
under 800. One difficulty which has
been the death of many in this
mission is the duck. That's right—the
duck. There is a small blue duck
that, from time to time, flies by and
tries to steal your supplies. He can't
be shot. You just have to get to your
supplies before he does, which is
difficult when dodging planes. In
mission four, "Attack the Tank",
you have your first encounter with
heat-seeking missiles. This tank is
just as fast as the first one (use the
same trick on him), but he fires
missiles that follow you everywhere,
until they run out of fuel. The
missiles are faster than you, but
they can't turn as quickly. Remember that. There is little advice that
will aid poor Star Blazers in this
one. Stay low to avoid the planes,
shoot the missiles when they are in
front of you, and pray.

Mission five is the ultimate. Large
blue planes cover the sky and leave
sky mines across the screen. Small,
ground missile stations fire heatseeking missiles constantly. Towers
make bomb runs difficult, and the
headquarters area has increased
defenses. It looks like a white airtraffic controller tower, almost

Continued on pg. 44

The basic number of combatants
on a team should be four. The fifth
member can be added to balance one
side or the other. The computer
opponent in GG is not that great. If
you play against the computer you
may find it necessary to change the
play mode and command the computer's team for a turn or two to get it
out of trouble (a nice feature). for
example, if the computer plays the
imperial team in this scenario, the
warrior with the heat ray gun will
change weapons on the first turn
rather than blasting the door.

One of the best features a strategy
oriented computer game can have is
the ability to create your own
scenarios. GALACTIC GLADIATORS (GG) from SSI is but one of
several games that has a scenario
building feature. (See the INVASION
ORION article for another).
GG is a game of space age combat
between groups of individual warriors. Fourteen different species can
fight against each other in a variety
of terrain settings. The scenarios
provided with the game serve to
introduce the various races, weapons,
and terrain types. After learning the
game mechanics, the gamer will
want to begin designing his own
scenarios.
We offer a scenario for GG based
on the movie STAR WARS (copyright Lucasfilm Ltd., 1982). Remember the opening scene of Star
Wars? The Imperial ship fired back
to some object behind the audience
and we saw laser fire coming in from
above the screen. We were overwhelmed when we saw the immense
imperial battleship pass over us and
fill the screen. The rebel ship is
disabled and a boarding party
begins to burn through the hatch as
the rebel warriors prepare for the
onslaught. — As the outer hatch is
blasted away, our scenario begins.

"SECURING A REBEL
SHIP"
The map in figure 1 provides the
setting for the scenario. One of the
weaknesses of GG is the fact that
you only have limited control as to
where units start. The large open
area to the left of the rebel ship is
necessary to prevent the computer
randomly placing imperial troops
within the rebel ship at the start.
When the player selects the "choose
initial placement" option, the computer will randomly place your units
on your side of the board and you
can then move them. Unfortunately,

because of terrain features, the
placement may be problematic as in
our scenario. Another limitation on
the set-up procedure is the fact that
you can only set up units a limited
number of squares towards the
center of the battlefield. The rebel
units in this scenario can be no
further forward than the doorway
nearest the bulkhead. The problem
is more acute in scenarios in which
one team chases another team.
There are several scenario possibilities from Star Wars which are
limited by this problem.
Team #1 should be made up of 4 or
5 rebels. The rebels must defend the
target hex in the upper right hand
corner. The 4 or 5 imperial stormtroopers start on the left (outside the
rebel vessel). The troopers must
blast a hole into the ship (probably
through the 1 square thick hatch
area). Then, troopers dressed in
their light armor, make their way
down the hallway, firing, loading,
and blasting. The rebels lack the
armor but have the advantage of
firing from behind the partial block
corners as well as not having to
move.

Victory conditions are as per the
game's built-in scoring system. The
average number of turns to resolution
is twenty. You might want to play
with a "rush" variation. The imperial
team must get to the target square
by the 15th turn or face the wrath of
Darth Vader (you were too slow).
When warriors have the same
speed rating, the computer will
choose the order of movement
randomly. This can be a problem
when you are in tight quarters such
as a spaceship corridor. It is most
frustrating to order four warriors to
move and watch the two behind try
to move first and waste their move
bumping into the leaders. The best
you can do is try to stagger the
warriors in such a way that each
has a clear path of movement (I
know; it's impossible).
The weaknesses already mentioned aside, GALACTIC GLADIATORS is a noteworthy game.
Using a game system which is
similar to ones that many board
gamers have played, GG brings to
the world of the Apple computer a
playable and fast moving combat
game system. The flexible nature of
GG (team types, weaponry, terrain)
along with the scenario designing
routines should combine to keep GG
interseting long after other games
are gathering dust on the shelf.
Send in those scenarios, folks.

HEROIC FANTASY: An Interactive Role-Playing Game
or "How Revenge is Going to Be Sweet"
by Graham Masters Jr.
Although the name FLYING
BUFFALO (FB) may be new to
many computer garners, it will
instantly be recognized by most
traditional board garners and roleplayers. FB, located in Arizona, has
been involved for a number of years
in board, fantasy, and play-by-mail
(PBM) games.
COMPUTER MODERATED
PLAY-BY-MAIL GAMES
FB's PBM games are, for the most
part, moderated by computers.
STARWEB (SW), their most popular
PBM is run on a Raytheon 704. One
of their newest entries into the PBM
gaming field, HEROIC FANTASY
(HF), is run on a North Star Horizon.
These PBM games allow people
from all over the country, and the
world, to play against and with one
another as they seek to conquer the
universe or gain untold wealth and
experience in fantasy dungeons.
SW, which presently is being played
by more than 1800 people in over 130
games, utilizes as one of it's character types "The Berzerker" (based
on Fred Saberhagen's popular
Berzerker novels). In turn Saberhagen has written a sci-fi novel
based upon SW. Entitled Octagon
(Ace Books, 1981), the book deals
with a series of murders which are
somehow related to the playing of a
SW game. Mysteriously, various
people in one particular SW game
begin to be murdered. If you are a
gamer and/or sci-fi fan, you will
find Octagon entertaining reading.
A newer PBM game is HEROIC
FANTASY. Starting with their
popular Tunnels and Trolls roleplaying system, FB developed a
fantasy role-playing game that
could be moderated by computer.
The result, HF, is an interactive
fantasy game in which several
players are thrust into the same
dungeon, each initially unaware of
the presence of others. Playing the
game involves each player sending
in orders for his party (which was
formed prior to the adventure — the
characters coming from traditional
fantasy races such as Elf, Dwarf,
Human, Ogre, etc.). In the course of
the adventure players will stumble
upon one another. Actions at this
point tend to take one of two
directions: 1) talk first and hope the
other side is friendly; 2) Attack
without warning. This writer learned

the hard way that option one can be
a big mistake when the other player
chooses option two. More on that
later.
PLAYING THE GAMES OVER
THE SOURCE
FB has both HEROIC FANTASY
and STARWEB set up so that users
of The Source telecommunications
network can play the game over the
network. This writer recently took a
party of six brave adventures into a
HF game seeking fame and fortune.
Playing two turns per week (other
HF games are set up for one turn
every week and one turn every two
weeks) I used The Source to enter my
orders and to receive turn results.

Playing over The Source makes the
game a little more expensive but as a
computerist, I find the game more
interesting when played in this
manner. Turn fees are normally
$2.00. Using The Source adds 50
cents per turn.
SOME GAME MECHANICS
My party entered an on-going
game on turn 29. My first few turns
were not very eventful. This gave me
some time to figure how the game
mechanics worked. The game system
allows each character (there were
six in my group) to enter one minor

Continued on pg. 44

(LEVEL 1) CHARACTERS = 2 PARTY VALUE=38
(YOU MAY ENTER A RESCUE PARTY: CHARACTERS=13 POINTS=62)
#########################################################################
BRIGHT ROOM
DOORS: (NORTH 2), EAST 25, SOUTH 5,
CHARACTERS WHO LEFT HERE:
* (C44) BRONWYNN: FEMALE HUMAN FIGHTER, MOVES (3) NORTH.
* (C105) ADMON FAYE: MALE OGRE FIGHTER. MOVES (3) NORTH.
- (C190) BASEL: MALE HUMAN, ARRIVED FROM SOUTH, MOVES NORTH.

•

#########################################################################
WHITE ROOM (DEAD BODY)
DOORS: NORTH 7, EAST 2, (SOUTH 2),
MONSTER: BROWN BEAR. ASLEEP
P40: POTION P132: POTION
*

(C44) BRONWYNN: FEMALE HUMAN FIGHTER, ARRIVED FROM SOUTH.
STR=15 CON=30 EXP=240 PRIZES=1
"OH NO, NOT OUR BELOVED LEADER! DEATH TO THE METERS."
PS: HEALING POTION (USE ME)=100

-

(C40) THERMO METER: MALE GOBLIN, TAKES POTION. USES POTION. ATTACKS
ROSHA (C50).

-

(C50) ROSHA: **DEAD** MALE OGRE FIGHTER, TAKES 40 HITS, TRIES TO USE
STRENGTH POTION, ATTACKS (35) ODO METER (C86).
STR=35 EXP=120
"IS THIS HOW YOU TREAT OVERTURES OF PEACE? DEATH TO THE METERS."

-

(C51) SERPHIMERA: **DEAD** FEMALE HUMAN MAGIC-USER. TAKES 34 HITS, TRIES TO
SLEEP SPEEDO METER (C67).
STR=10 EXP=45 (SPIED) "DEATH TO THE TREACHEROUS METERS!!"

-

(C67) SPEEDO METER: MALE OGRE, TAKES POTION, USES POTION, ATTACKS
SERPHIMERA (C51).

(C74) MILI METER: FEMALE ELF MAGIC-USER, TAKES (0) SILVER RING. SPIES (0)
SERPHIMERA (C51), ATTACKS (18) PEZI (C107).
STR=20 CON=S (25) EXP=111 (SPIED) PRIZES=1
SILVER RING=100
- (C86) ODO METER: MALE OGRE, TAKES 34 HITS, TAKES POTION, USES POTION,
ATTACKS ROSHA (C50).

-

*

(C105) ADMON FAYE: MALE OGRE FIGHTER, ARRIVED FROM SOUTH.
STR=35 CON=40 EXP=295 PRIZES=1 "ARRGGHH!! DEATH TO THE METERS."
P115: STRENGTH POTION (USE ME)=100

-

(C107) PEZI: **DEAD** MALE LEPRECHAUN MAGIC-USER. TAKES 17 HITS, SPIES (2)
MILI METER (C74).
STR=3 EXP=45
"THOUSANDS WILL HEAR OF YOUR TREACHERY! DEATH TO THE METERS!!"

-

(C190) BASEL: MALE HUMAN, ARRIVED FROM SOUTH.
"WHEW! THAT ROOM IS CROWDED!"

by David Myers
Every computer gamer has a favorite game. And I'll bet that every
computer gamer also has, somewhere in the back of his mind, an
' ideal game. Maybe this game is
some weird combination of the three
popular W's: Wizardry, Wolfenstein,
and Warp Factor. Or perhaps (for us
Atari fanatics) its an advanced
version of Eastern Front — one
where you look out the turrets of
your panzers and actually see those
determined Ruskies coming at you
over the hill.. .
Whenever I load in a brand new
game, I get visions of my ideal
game. I get a rush, thinking that
maybe this is the one, maybe this
one is going to be really good, really
fun.
But it doesn't happen.
Or else it does happen — for the
first couple of playings — and then
that elusive "fun" factor slowly
fades away.
Many of you have shelves full of
computer games — few of which are
replayed with any regularity. And
many of you may, like me, feel that
even while you're playing your
favorite computer game, something
is missing. If you're like me, then
your favorite game and your ideal
game are still far apart.
Why?
I don't believe that it's because of
the lack of appropriate hardware on
which to design games. My ideal
Atari is not my current 800, but the
game-player interface is improving
all the time — and already it's user-

friendly enough for me. Nor do I
think it's because of any lack of skill
or intelligence on the part of the best
game designers. Their creations are
clever, make good use of machine
capabilities, and can be both fun
and informative.
But there is a problem. And I
believe the problem lies in a lack of
vision, a lack of clear-cut direction
on the part of the game designers.
Sure, the computer game industry is
moving fast — so fast that few can
keep up with it — but I often wonder
if it's going anywhere in particular,
not to mention getting anywhere in
particular.
Let me explain myself. Game
designers have always been influenced by games, not by gamers
—and this confuses an effect for a
cause. The proof is in your local
game store. There's Pacman, Scarfman, Ghost Hunter, Jawbreaker,
and nauseam — some better, some
worse, all similar. The first computer
game of renown, Pong, was a
derivative of hockey/tennis. Now
we have much better derivatives —
tennis balls that casts shadows on
the court, and hockey games with
stickhandling and passing — but we
still have derivatives.
Even Eastern Front — my favorite
computer game — is (I almost hate
to admit it) a board game derivative.
So what's the answer? The answer
is more consumer research into the
psychology of gaming, and more
attention paid to the growing community of garners by the game
designing industry. And here, by

the way, is where a magazine like
Computer Gaming World can be
truly useful — in providing a forum
for gaming interests, and helping to
shape the future development of the
industry through the ideas and
opinions of the people who matter
most — you and me, pal: the gamers.
Fortunately, Atari seems to be
taking this tack. Their marketing
approach is strongly oriented toward
the general public and can only help
to humanize the field. Much has
been made of computer games
which use all the capabilities of
their host machines. Equally important are games which make use
of all their players' capabilities. In
fact, in this instance, the aim is
much more important than the
arrow.
The ideal game will not overly
concern itself with new and unique
hardware characteristics of home
computers; rather it will concentrate
on the old and unique human
characteristics each gamer brings
to the game.
Computer gaming is often a
substitute for playing games with
another person. And it's a great
substitute. You don't have to serve
your home computer milk and
cookies and you don't have to listen
to it chatter, or make excuses, or
gloat when it wins. But it's still a
substitute. The human connection
in gaming should remain primary.
After spending a lot of time in a local
computer store, it becomes obvious
to me that the games most frequently
played (and replayed) are those
offering the possibility of player

INTERACTION
TYPE

Interaction
outside of
game play

interaction
within
game play

quantitative
interaction

Pacman,
Star Raiders,
Eastern Front, etc.

Cartels & Cutthroats,
Galaxy,
Computer Acquire, etc.

Wizardry

???

qualitative
interaction*

*A gamer can derive a quality and "qualitative" experience from any
game. It is human nature to try and do so with all games. The point here is
that some games actively promote this sort of experience through design;
others achieve it only through the imagination of their players.

interaction — and, specifically,
multiple player interaction. Ultimately the computer and the game
are communication devices, so it
seems reasonable to assure that the
ideal computer game will be that
game which most effectively increases communication links and
decreases communication barriers
within the very human context of
the game-world.
For quick examples of how present
game offerings measure up to this
ideal:
1.Arcade games. In arcade games —
let Pacman be our example here —
the player interaction is minimal
and usually revolves around comparing each other's final score.
2. Role-playing games. In roleplaying games — I must reference
Wizardry, despite its unavailability
to Atari owners — player interaction
remains restricted due to the solitaire
nature of play. But, outside of game
play, it is dramatic experiences
which are interchanged among
players. The human connection is
much stronger in this case, as each
player edits and revises the game
experience until it exists as much in
his/her individual imagination as
on the video screen.
3. Multiple player games. Increasingly, multiple player games are
making their way into the marketplace. A current favorite in Austin is
SSI's Cartels & Cutthroats. (Galaxy
by Avalon Hill is another, similar
example.) This type of game allows
player interaction during game play
— a significant achievement. But
this interaction is presently only of
the arcade variety: direct com-

petition between players and the
post-mortem comparison of quantitative game achievements.
4. ???. My fourth example doesn't
exist. Not quite — not yet. It's going
to take a few more RS-232's, a little
more commitment to networking,
and a little more vision and dramaturgy on the part of game
designers. But there are hints.
There's Starmaster and Starweb.
There's Decwars and SpaceWars on
The Source. And there's that vague
ideal game that a lot of us are
carrying around in our heads.
The true value of any game
to Yar's Revenge —AplePanic
—comesfromsharingthe xperince
with other, real-life players, exchanging
strategies and tactics, and gaining
insights into both games and
garners. Mathematics is an international language, so is chess, so
are computer games. The only
difference is that computer games
have the potential to be a much
deeper language, with more intimate
connections to the human psyche
and the power to tap into the inner
human drama. One of the few places
we can all come together without
social barriers or prejudices or
handicaps is in the ideal — in our
imagination, in our play.
And that's where I want to go.

ATARI READERS
In place of Atari Arcade, CGW
features an article by David
Myers entitled Atari: The Human
Connection. We would encourage
our Atari readers to begin a
dialog with David on Atari gaming. Here is a message from
David:
Hey Atari gamers! Where do
you want to go? Since computer
games aren't presently providing
us with a gamer group consciousness, we're going to have to do
it on our own, the old, mechanical
way, through physical effort and
paper and pencil. Write me with
your opinions: things you like
about the current Atari game
crop and (just as importantly)
things you don't like.
Here's a topic to get you started:
EASTERN FRONT has some
great features: the graphics and
the AI being two outstanding
ones. But it also has some clunkers. Chris Crawford has already
mentioned his regret at including
the loud buzzing raspberry that
occurs whenever an EF player
accidently inputs a diagonal
move — a very easy thing to do
using the Atari joystick. But this
can be alleviated by turning
down the volume. More annoying
to me is the game's complete
shutdown after the final move.
Suddenly, after two hours of
intense combat, I can no longer
find out the names of my units!
My men disappear and I'm left
with anonymous white rectangles
scattered over the Russian
countryside — hardly conducive
to a post-game victory celebration.
What's the worst element of
your favorite game?
I'll be looking forward to hearing
from you.
David Myers
5106 N. Lamar #123
Austin, TX 78756
The more response we get from
Atari writers/readers, the more
Atari coverage we will be able to
put in CGW.

Guadalcanal Campaign: Review & Notes
by Richard Charles Karr
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS

AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Guadalcanal Campaign
Wargame
Apple II 48K Applesoft
Disk

1 or 2
Gary Grigsby
$59.95
Strategic Simulations
465 Fairchild Dr.,
Suite 108
Mountainview. CA
94043

GENERAL DESCRIPTION
SSI's recent release, GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN, has begun
the move from arcade-style gaming
to the "monster games" of the hardcore wargamers. While limited to
one strategic area and one map, it
attempts to present the central
aspects of the Solomons Campaign
of WW II in an interface of land, sea,
and air combat. Ships are listed
individually (down to destroyers,
seaplane tenders, and destroyer
transports). The game is offered
with three short scenarios (Coral
Sea, Eastern Solomons, and Santa
Cruz) of four to 10 turns in length
each. In addition, two campaign
games are offered: a shortened campaign game (Oct. 1 through Dec. 31,
1942); and the entire campaign
(Aug. 7 through Dec. 31). One or twoplayer games (as is common with
SSI titles) are possible. Difficulty
levels are numbered one to four,
with four being the easiest and one
being the hardest. Increased difficulty levels enable Japanese attacks
to have greater chances of success.
There was a misprint in the early
copies of the rulebook. Difficulty
level three should be regarded as the
historical level of difficulty for the
Japanese, instead of (as printed) difficulty level four.
Guadalcanal Campaign may be
called "user-friendly", in that information access and checks for the
player exist on potentially false
moves or errors. The sequence of
play is as follows: American task
force adjustments; American movement; Japanese task force adjustments; Japanese movement; Japanese air operations; American air
operations; combat resolution; rein-

forcements, replacements, and repair/refits; and the save game
phase.
Task force adjustments allow
formation, combination, and
division of task forces, as well as
loading of cargo, training of carrier
pilots, checking for reinforcements,
an air group display, a map display,
a list of sunk ships (and their victory
point totals), and a Guadalcanal
troop status check. Movement on
the map or screen is based on a
division of a task force's speed by 2
1/2 knots for every movement point
with a minimum movement of 3.
Movement north, south, east or west
costs two per square, and movement
northeast, northwest, southeast,
and southwest costs three per square.
Air operations allow for combat
air patrol (directly over the launching
task force or base), distant combat
air patrol (a sliding percentage of
available CAP depending on distance), search for enemy ships,
search for enemy submarines, the
launching of air attacks, the preparation of a counterstrike for
carriers, or aircraft transfers. Naval
vessels of cruiser size or larger have
a built-in search capability (one or
two float planes each).
Combat resolution takes 20 seconds (when nothing is happening)
to 3-4 minutes (when everything is
happening). In general Japanese
gunnery is superior (using the
historical options) to American
gunnery, Japanese torpedo fire is
often devastating (while American
torpedo fire is abysmal), torpedo
planes are fairly inept on both sides,
and dive bombers are reasonably
effective on both sides, although
rather little damage is done individually. A word on increasing the
Japanese difficulty levels though:
At level four (below the historical
level) the Japanese are as inept as
the Americans with most everything, missing torpedo shots,
attacking destroyers instead of
aircraft carriers in a task force, and
doing the usual American boobery
with naval and air combat. At level
three the Japanese are significantly
superior in naval combat, with a
surface group (in the daytime) of one
combat BB, four or five CA's, two or
three CL's, and six to nine DD's
being the full equal of any American
surface group that is realistically

available. At level two the Japanese
pull off naval blitzkriegs at the
wrong moments: transport groups
in air range of Rabaul usually have
one ship sunk and/or two to three
heavily damaged by Bettys. At level
one an American player feels very
much the helpless victim, as the
Japanese player (or computer)
attacks with supernatural effectiveness. Bettys from Rabaul WILL
blitz anything within range, and
this includes strong carrier groups
with lots of CAP.
Reinforcements, replacements,
and repair/refit is an automatic
bookkeeping phase that takes about
20-30 seconds for the computer to
calculate. The save game option
simply allows players the chance to
live useful lives during a campaign
(i.e., the player and computer are not
tied up for 294 campaign turns).
You've got to go to work sometime.
The physical graphics are typical
SSI: slick hard box; 16-page rules
booklet; two maps; and disk. The
rules booklet is well organized and
should present no problem for either
wargamers or computer game players.

THE GAME AS GAME
After the rules are mastered, play
is rapid and fairly closely linked to
the historical campaign. To understand and master the system of the
rules, several short scenarios should
be attempted. A number of problems
that this writer encountered during
the early stages of learning the
game system included the formation (while in port) of the appropriate
types of task forces (loading of cargo
should take place before transport
task forces are formed); separation
of cripples from task forces so that
the main body of a task force is not
drastically slowed; retention of

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE
p. 48

enough dive-bombers for proper
anti-sub work when things get slow
down in the slot; the complete
reorganization of the fleet so that all
of the BB's, CA's, and CL's are
together for the bi-monthly trashing
of the Japanese (or if you prefer,
American) fleet; and keeping CV's
mixed with all of the available
CLAA's and enough DD's to do the
job.
After the above difficulties are
mastered (about 3-8 hours of normal
play), play moves at the rate of
about 7-12 minutes for the oneplayer games and 10-25 minutes for
the two-player games. In all cases
the shorter scenarios should be
attempted first, to avoid the frustration of living with your mistakes
and the boredom of waiting for the
carriers to come out and play with
the Japanese surface fleet.

THE GAME AS HISTORY
A comparison between GUADALACANAL CAMPAIGN and board
wargames covering this same theater
and period reveal that SSI is making
a serious attempt to come near
"state of the art" levels of design
and historicity in this simulation.
The general pulse of the campaign is
felt: marginal American air superiority in the day and a powerful
Japanese naval superiority at night.
On general reflection, the ships
involved are historical (this writer is
fuzzy on some of the British/Australian destroyers), although aircraft
types are limited in all scenarios
except for Coral Sea to U.S. SBD3's
and 4's (Dauntless), TBD's (Devastator), TBF2's (Avenger), F4F's
(Wildcat), and B-17D's (Flying
Fortress); and Japanese Mitsubishi
A6M3 (Zeke), Mitsubishi G4M1
(Betty), Aichi D3A1 (Val), and
Nakajima B5N (Kate). PBY's (Catalina), B25's (Mitchell), P40's, and
Japanese naval floatplanes (Jake)
are not included in the game (although they were peripheral to the
main action of the campaign, with
the exception of the P40). The
simplification of the search results
(number of planes being used for
search and range being determinants) is adequate for imprecise
reporting of enemy task forces. A
solution to the problem of Japanese
tactical surface naval superiority
(especially at night) is evident in the
accuracy and damage of Japanese
gunnery and torpedoes in the game.
Two problems emerge as unsolved
in the design by Gary Grisby: naval
pilots becoming purely land-based
pilots when transferred from a

carrier to a land base (naval pilots
must be retrained to land on CV's
after having been transferred to a
land base for even a short time); and
the inability of task forces to move
other than a stated speed (10 for
cruising/patrol speed and 12 for fast
speed (for example), so as to conserve
fuel. Obviously, programming problems would be difficult at best if the
game system had to keep track of
which individual aircraft were
naval and which were land-based
(partially trained), in addition to the
information that must be currently
accessed. The problem of changing
speeds of task forces and fuel
consumption includes the problem
of vessel bunkers (ship fuel) capacity, and the time it takes for ships of
varying displacements to bunker.
Gary Grisby leaves the above two
problems well enough alone and has
concentrated his efforts on the
primary aspects of the Solomons
Campaign.
In general, Guadalcanal Campaign emerges as an honest attempt
(with decent research) to have a
historical simulation that is also fun
to play.

NOTES ON PLAY
The following notes on play are
part of the experience of the writer
after 80+ hours of gaming time with
this program, in the one player long
campaign game (twice). They should
not be considered definitive: rather
they offer suggestions of what could
be considered possible.
In the one-player long campaign
game, the first task facing the
American player (the computer can
only play the Japanese side) is to
re-group the task forces around
Guadalcanal into decent combat
groups. As there is a limit of seven
total task forces possible within the
game, the division re-combination,
and organization of task forces is
occasionally tricky. Don't even
bother with a "B" (bombardment)
mission task force, merge it into a
"C" (combat) task force, and divide
the new task force into a CV/CLAA/
DD group and a BB/CA/CL/DD
group. The only time that CA's and
CL's are useful in a "T" (transport)
mission task force is when the
Continued on pg. 19

Bettys from Rabaul are looking for
something to hit. Keep the CV group
just outside of Betty bombing range
(one square SE of Malaita is good),
and keep all of the CV fighters on
distant CAP (to wear down the
Betty attack abilities). After the
August 7 night turn (game turn 2),
stick around Henderson with transports only during the day turns only
(night time is no time to be in this
neighborhood). Yes, this slows
down the discharge of cargoes from
the transports considerably, and
allows the possible loss of those slow
transports to Bettys (this is what the
CV's are for), but I assure you from
painful experience that "the Slot"
(Henderson) is no place to stick
around after the sun goes down.
After the transports slowly and
painfully discharge their cargoes,
get them back to Espiritu Santo
(Brisbane will turn them around
faster, but the net savings in time
will be one game turn, and the net
cost will be the perpetual use of one
of the task force units that you'll
need elsewhere). When possible,
damaged or crippled ships should go
to Brisbane for repairs (with the
possible exception of the slow
transports or destroyers, as the time
saved will be minimal when compared with the use of the task force
unit). Repairs in Brisbane are made
more quickly.
Carriers should be sent to Brisbane
when they start running thin on
endurance points whenever possible
(you'll get them back a week faster).
As the carriers are heading back to
Brisbane (frequently with less than
four endurance points left), aircraft
should be transferred to Henderson
or Espiritu Santo or other carriers
from damaged CV's. The damaged
CV's will take a long time to repair
(even in Brisbane), and the aircraft
still on them when they dock will be
out of the game until the CV in
question is fully repaired. It often
happens after September that a
refitted or repaired carrier in Brisbane will have no aircraft (or few
aircraft) left on it. In that case, have
the unused carrier train Brisbane
pilots to be naval aviators, so that
the otherwise unusable Brisbane
aircraft can get into the game.
Another option when there aren't
many Brisbane aircraft around (or
you're feeling frisky) is to have
banged-up or worn out carriers
coming into Brisbane transfer their
aircraft to the empty unused carrier
in that port, moving that CV one or
two turns out to sea to intercept their
transfer.

Carriers start with an endurance
of 60 turns; 2 turns per day an endurance of less than 50 when the CV
docks means that the carrier(s) in
question will remain out of the game
for a while. It is quite possible to
take a fresh group out of Brisbane to
Espiritu Santo by moving along the
shortest and straightest route,
where they will immediately refit
and be ready the next turn. It is in
the nature of this game system to
have cyclical periods of activity:
during one common cycle the Japanese will be in the Slot dropping off
troops and supplies, and on the
other alternate nights they will
have an average of one BB, two
CA's, and five DD's pounding on
Henderson. After the first week of
the long campaign game this is as
routine as it is inevitable. You (as
the American player) can't stop
them, all you can do is sink them
now and again. Do not allow yourself
to be tempted into a position of
nickel-diming the U.S. fleet; there
just isn't enough of it to spare. U.S.
CA's will be lost if you're not careful,
and even if you are careful, they still
will be lost. If the cyclical period
arises when two or more U.S.

carriers are active, you should have
the surface element (all available
BB's, CA's, CL's, and DD's) along
for the ride from the turn they leave
Espiritu Santo. The carriers should
wait off of Henderson (again, one
square SE of Malaita is great) with
their fighters on distant CAP,
pounding on Bettys until they are
reduced to fewer than ten returning
back to Rabaul, and then the U.S.
should seek battle. Surface actions
should be fought in the Shortlands
(two squares S of Choiseul is the best
place) in the day. With the presence
of one or more BB's, six or more
CA's, one or two CL's, and all of the
DD's you can spare, it should be
uneven (and vindictively fun). Hopefully during these periods of U.S.
naval activity, the "Tokyo Express"
of night raids on Henderson can
cease for two nights, long enough to
hopefully resupply your starving
marines. Four days of cheerfully
romping from New Georgia to
Rabaul with a powerful U.S. carrier
group supported by a powerful
surface group pounding on cripples
will absolutely make your game

Continued on pg. 46

GALACTIC GLADIATORS
Individual Combat in the 28th Century
David Long
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
Publisher:

Galactic Gladiators
Strategy
Apple and Atari
Disk
1 or 2
Toni Reamy
$39.95
Strategic Simulations
465 Fairchild Dr.,
Suite 108
Mountain View, CA
94043

GALACTIC GLADIATORS (GG)
is SSI's new game of alien combat in
the 28th Century. You and your
opponent, human or computer,
choose teams from the races of
many far flung stars to then battle
— usually to the death! — with the
deadly weaponry of the distant
future. Each player chooses his
moves, then the computer carries
out all orders. Phasors fire green
and red bolts, of energy, Gemstones
flash across the screen and explode,
Gladiators move, all in excellent hires graphics.

THE GLADIATORS
The seven "regular species" are
divided into the Lightweights,
Middleweights, and Heavyweights.
The Lightweights, the Koraci and
the Cygnians, are fast and agile,
(speed determines who moves first;
agility who attacks first), but not too
strong, and are relatively quick to
"gas out" (when strength reaches 0
the gladiator is dead; when endurance reaches 0, the gladiator
must rest).
At the other end of the spectrum
are the Heavyweights, the Troglodytes, Dulbians, and the Zorcons.
These three species are slower and
less agile, but they make up for this
"clumsiness" with greater strength
and endurance.
We Humans, with our genetic offshoots, the Wodianties comprise the
third group, the Middleweights. As
might be expected, speed, agility,
strength and endurance are all in
the mid-range for these two species.
Each species has been designed to
compete equally with the others,
and there are an infinite variety of
teams which you can create, with

from one to ten Gladiators of any
species per team.

may be used repeatedly without
reloading, but are effective only
when adjacent to the defender.

When you begin to get the hang of
the game and learn which species
are better at which types of fighting,
you can begin to incorporate the
eight "special species" into your
battles.
These include the Gorsai, a race of
super warriors originally bred from
human stock; Robots; Banshees;
Mutants (unarmed, but with a
radioactive "death touch"); Slime
Devils; Night Stalkers, and Oranguphins. The last of the special
species are the Monsters, which you
create in any form and with whichever characteristics you desire.
The rules tell you that Banshees
can only travel in pairs, Monsters
travel alone, and that neither of
these two species (the toughest two
species in the galaxy) can join other
teams. Don't believe it! Banshees
can travel singly. And both species
can be combined with other species.
By using the 'merge' option when
viewing an existing team you can
combine both Banshees and Monsters with any other team. When you
develop strong and experienced
teams and need 'quality' opponents,
try "cloning" your toughest team
(change the names) and merging
them with a couple of Banshees and
a Monster or two . . . Good Luck and
Good Shooting!!

In the early stages of your training,
you will find that your marksmanship is generally pretty lousy. All
Phasor weapons have an unlimited
range, but, if, as a beginning
gladiator you can consistently hit
your target from a range of more
than four or five, then "you're a
better man than I am, Gunga Dinh." Don't worry though, because as
your experience and weapon skills
increase, you marksmanship will
improve. My "Dead-eye" Drak,
Experience 345/Phasor Skill 20.
rarely misses.

THE WEAPONS
Each combatant can choose from
an assortment of twelve different
weapons and two types of armor, as
long as he or she has the strength to
carry that particular item. Weapons
fall into three basic categories,
Hand-to-Hand combat weapons
(such as Laser Swords, Stun Wands,
and Disrupters), Ranged weapons,
(Hand Phasors and Phasor Rifles),
and Guided weapons (Gapers and
Gemstones). Both Ranged weapons
and Guided weapons may attack
from a distance, with effectiveness
dependent on the skill level of both
attacker and defender as well as the
range. Both Gapers and Gemstones
are one time shots - once used they
are gone - and all Phasor weapons
must be reloaded after firing. All
Hand-to-Hand combat weapons

THE BATTLEGROUNDS
Unlike many wargames where
there is a single unchanging battlefield, GG contains many battlefields.
But when these become "old hat"
you can opt for a random selection of
terrain on either a small, medium or
large battlefield. You can further
specify whether you want it Open,
Semi-Open, Normal, Semi-Crowded,
or Crowded. Now that is variety!
And if that's still not enough, you
can create your own arena, placing
terrain features on any size battlefield, indoor or outdoor, and then
you can save your creations on disc
for future use. The result is that you
need never use the same battlefield
twice!

THE SCENARIOS
Eleven different scenarios are
presented for your combative enjoyment, starting with the introductory
"Brawl At Cosmic Mike's Place,"
which will have you playing the
game within five minutes after
opening the box. There is also the
"Create a Game" option, which
allows you to do just about anything
you want. Games consist of combat
between two teams of from one to
ten gladiators each, and may be
either a fight to the death, or for control of a particular square, whichever you choose.
For those with a grain or two of
imagination you can string together

Continued on pg. 45

Announcing The Second Annual
Computer Gaming World
Robotwar Tournament

Yes, its the event you've been
waiting for! COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD proudly announces the
SECOND ANNUAL ROBOTWAR
TOURNAMENT. Enter your robot(s) against other robots from
around the nation.
Our first Robotwar tournament,
announced in our charter issue
(Nov.-Dec. 1981) invited readers to
pit their best robot against submissions from across the U.S. The
tournament was won by NORDEN+,
designed by Richard Fowell.
NORDEN+'s source code was given
in our March — April 1982 issue
(2.2).
There will be a trophy and
ROBOTWAR T-shirt for the winner.
Other finalists will also receive a
ROBOTWAR T-shirt.
Use the following guidelines in
making submissions to the tournament:

RobtwarTunme".

1) Send your robot program
(source and object codes) on a
diskette to COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD, 1919 E. Sycamore #203,
Anaheim, CA, 92805. Mark your
package "Attention
2) Include a brief description of
the robot. What is it designed to do?
3) More than one entry per designer will be accepted, however we
can only guarantee one opening per
designer. If you submit more than
one robot, designate a primary
contestant. Your other robots will be
entered as space allows. If secondary entries are determined by the
staff of CGW to be merely a variant
of the primary entry, the secondary
entry will not be allowed.
4) Include your name, address
and phone number with your submission(s). If you wish your diskette
returned also include return postage.
5) CGW reserves the right to print
the source code of the winning robot.

6) CGW reserves the right to
reproduce entries in disk form (with
credits) for possible sale through the
magazine. This right will be waived
for a submission if so requested by
the designer in writing.

be used to determine the winner.
Each entry will fight in at least 20
battles. A effort will be made to
separate multiple entires by a single
designer in competition. NORDEN+
is eligible to be entered again.

6) Include T-shirt size (S,M,L,XL)
in case you are a winner.
6) Entries must be received by
December 10, 1982.
7) Winners will be announced in
our March — April 1983 issue. A
round robin style tournament will

ERROR CORRECTION: The listing
of NORDEN+ in CGW 2.2 has a
minor error. The first two statements
of the actual program (1 TO
SPEEDY; 256 TO U TO V) should
each be indented one space.

THE ROAD TO GETTYSBURG
by Bob Proctor
BASIC INFORMATION
The Road To Gettysburg
NAME:
Strategy
TYPE
Apple II or Apple II+
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
Diskette (DOS 3.31
# PLAYERS: or 2
Paul Murray
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
$59.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations Inc.
465 Fairchild Dr.,
Suite 108
Mountain View, CA 94043

,

,

GET ON THE BANDWAGON
Computer Games by Cable

In this age of electronic entertainment, two
entertainment forms are becoming increasingly
popular—cable television and computer games.
The cable television field is best known for its
movie, sports, and news channels. The computer
gaming field is best known for handheld, coin-op,
home video, and personal computer games. The
inevitable marriage of these two entities is now a
reality. The GAMES NETWORK TM , based in
Los Angeles, is putting together what looks to be a
winner — a cable computer gaming network.
Cable systems will soon have available a natural
companion to all those movies, sport and news
programs; and the computer gaming field will
soon be finding a new media in which to grow.

BACKGROUND
THE GAMES NETWORK (TGN) is the brainchild of Larry Dunlap and Thom Keith. Dunlap

combines a strong background in the entertainment industry with a longstanding interest in
the gaming hobby. As founder of the nation's first
cable television station, CATV in Laguna Hills,
California, Keith has been called the "Father of
Cable Television Programming". Dunlap and
Keith have formed International Cablecasting
Companies, Inc. and are working not only on the
implementation of THE GAMES NETWORK, but
are also working towards the creation of THE
FANTASY CHANNEL and THE I.Q. CHANNEL.
The GAMES NETWORK, however, is not the
first cable gaming network to come into being. In
1980 a computer gaming network called PLAYCABLE TM was introduced. The system uses the
Mattel Intellivision game system. Jim Summers,
Director of Program Acquisitions at TGN, does not
feel that PLAYCABLE is a serious competitor for

TGN's audience. Summers says that TGN has
definite advantages over the PLAYCABLE
system. The initial outlay by the end user of
PLAYCABLE is more than $200 (the price of an
Intellivision set) whereas the initial outlay for
TGN will be a $50 installation fee. The hardware
installed by TGN will be a 6502 processor unit
supporting 64K of memory. Obviously, the TGN
hardware can handle more sophisticated programs than the Intellivision. PLAYCABLE
allows you to download any of the Intellivision
games (which number a little over 30) for play on
your television. TGN will draw from the wider
field of personal computer games and coin-op
games to provide the local user with 20 games each
month. Each month five new games will be
available as five others rotate off the list. Over the
period of a year the subscriber will be able to play
80 different computer games. A preliminary
advertisement for TGN shows people playing,
among other games, SWASHBUCKLER by Datamost and CONGO by Sentient Software. Software
houses that have, to date, granted licensing
agreements for their games to TGN are:
Avant-Garde, Adventure International, Broderbund,
Cavalier, CPU Inc., Datamost, Edu-Tek, Hayden,
Micro-Lab, Microsoft, Sierra On-Line, Phoenix
Software, Piccadilly, Sentient, and Innovative.
The most exciting aspect of this entire system is
that THE GAMES NETWORK is two-way
interactive. TGN has the capability to allow two or
more computer gamers in different locations to
play against one another via the network. This,
however, is tempered by the fact that many cable
stations do not yet support two-way interactive
channels. In this sense, TGN is ahead of the
technology which presently exists in most cable
systems. It is hoped that interest in TGN will help
cause local cable systems to make the inevitable
switch to a two-way interactive system at a much
earlier date than might otherwise be so.

WANTED: GAMES
THE GAMES NETWORK is currently in the
playtest stage in homes of a Southern California
community. The playtest is being conducted by
TGN in association with GROUP W CABLE.
TGN is shooting for an early 1983 date for going
"on-line" to cable subscribers. In the mean time
TGN is accepting game submissions. With the
current cable market at 25 million subscribers,
TGN could conceivably pay as much as $80,000 in
royalties per month per game that they offer. This
is based on TGN reaching 10% of the cable marketplace and the game in question being a monthly
selection by all the local cable systems which
make up that 10%. While it is not likely that any
game will actually draw that kind of income, and

getting 10% of the cable markets to sign up for
TGN is not a certainty, it can be seen that the
potential income through licensing the cable
rights to your computer game are large; much
larger than what game designers are making now.
If you have a game on the market, you may want
to ask your software house to look into licensing
the game to TGN. "Don't give the cable rights to
your game away . . . There is a lot of money to be
made in the cable gaming industry by licensing
those rights" says Summers. TGN is accepting
game submissions. Although you may find it
easier to deal through a software house, TGN
encourages submissions from ALL 6502 game
designers.
Summers emphasizes "playability" as the most
important element in games that will be selected
for TGN. Although TGN is two-way interactive,
many cable systems are not. Thus games that
require only one "down load" with little or no disk
access during play will have a better chance of
being licensed by TGN than games that utilize a
lot of disk access. As cable companies become
more uniformly two-way interactive, TGN will become more interested in two-way interactive
games and games that require a larger degree of
disk access. Game submissions should be made to
Jim Summers, The Games Network, Box 36E19,
Los Angeles, CA 90036; 213-932-1950.

ROUTE 80 - THE ROAD TO ADVENTURE
by Dick McGrath
In the beginning there was Parker
Brothers. And they created "Monopoly". And everyone played and saw
that it was good. And they said,
"Never will there be a game better
than Monopoly". And then came
Avalon Hill and they created "Tactics II". And everyone played and
saw that it was even better than
Monopoly. And they said, "Never
will there be a game better than Tactics II". And then came "Blitzkrieg:
And everyone played and they
said. . . well, you know what they
said.
And so it went. From the beginning of time, man has simulated his
environment, practiced his skills,
trained his young, and entertained
himself through the challenge of
games. Throughout history, every
generation has created more realistic, more sophisticated, and more
complex games to satisfy the competitive spirit. . .each generation of
game designers building on the
experiences of the past. The earliest
games were probably simple reenactments of the chase, the hunt, combat, and other facets of daily life.
Gradually, they were refined into
microcosms of reality, utilizing
twigs, stones and bones, with playing areas outlined in the dirt. By the
time the Parker Brothers finally did
make their appearance, we had
accumulated thousands of years of
gaming experience, playing such
ancient and sophisticated pastimes
as chess, checkers and backgammon.
Today, we are just getting our first
clear look over the brink of a new
horizon. . .with a view of gaming
sophistication that was not even
imagined just ten years ago. Reallife simulations, fantasy, role playing, electronic arcades, and above
all, the world of computer gaming.
As gaming enthusiasts, we are the
Walter Mittys of the world. We live
out our fantasies over the game
board and the video display. They
provide our means of escape to
another dimension. . .a world of illusion in which we can satisfy our
thirst for challenge and excitement!
I want to join you on this road to
adventure, through the columns of
this new COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD department, devoted ex-

clusively to that most endangered of
species—the TRS-80 computer garner.
For those of you who are still with
me, that rustling you just heard was
the Apple and Atari owners turning
the page. If you are still reading, I'm
going to assume that you're a TRS80 owner and, therefore, you have
some of the same interests that I
have. Mainly, what games are
available for my machine, where
can I get them, how do I play them
and who has a solution for my most
recent problem, whatever it may be.
I don't know about you, but my
ego needs a boost. I'm tired of
sneaking into Apple dealer showrooms, gazing down the rows of
Apple software and whispering to
the salesman, "Do you carry anything for TRS-80"? A primary goal
of this column will be to provide a
rallying point and information
exchange for TRS-80 owners. But I
need your help! I don't even know
how many of you are out there. So
how about letting me know! Just
drop me a note at 2008 Calle Miranda,
Fullerton, CA 92633, or call (714)
525-4969. Tell me what computer
games you play: Fantasy? . . .
Arcade? . . . Real life simulations?
. . . D & D type adventures?.. .
What model TRS-80 do you have?
How much memory? Disk or cassette? What are your computer reading interests? . . . Game reviews? . . .
Playing aids? . . . Technical articles
on software? . . . on hardware? . . . of
new products? . . . Feature articles?
. . . Interviews with game authors?
. . . Strategy and playing hints?
. . . Previews Exchange of practical
ideas with other TRS-80 garners?
Whatever you want, we'll try to
provide it.
In the meantime, here are some
short items to get the column
rolling.

MODEL I INTERFACE
DISCONTINUED
The latest word from Radio Shack
headquarters in Fort Worth is that
production for the Model I Interface
has been discontinued. Those of you
who are using a 16K Model I with a
cassette drive and still intend to
upgrade sometime in the future, the
future is here! There are still some
interfaces in stock, but if you plan to
add disk drives or memory to your

economy grade model, you'd better
do it now, while the interfaces are
still available!

PROGRAMS BY
SUBSCRIPTION
If you live in an area where computer software retailers are a rarity,
you might consider obtaining your
software by mail on a regular basis
from one of several subscription
services. It's like looking forward to
a surprise Christmas present every
month! One of the best is CLOAD,
published by Cload Magazine, P.O.
Box 1448, Santa Barbara, CA 93102.
Their monthly cassette tape costs
$50.00 a year or $30.00 for 6 months,
and is worth every penny! You'll
generally receive eight programs
each month, of which, about half
will be games. The others will
include utilities, business and
finance programs, tutorials, instructional programs, and whatever else
the editor, Dave Lagerquist, can
come up with. Each month, Dave
includes a brief newsletter with program documentation, bits of downhome philosophy, and helpful
comments on TRS-80 computing in
general. His style is friendly and
personal. You get to know everyone
in the company by first names,
including the dog, Jed, and Robin
and Mike's new baby, Morgan. No, I
never met any of them in person, but
I plan to visit some day soon and
include an interview with Dave in a
later column. Next month, I'll put
you on to another subscription
service.
I also hope to include some side by
side comparisons of similar programs published by rent companies,
hints on converting programs from
tape to disk, and continuous review
of TRS-80 games. I have over 600
TRS-80 programs, accumulated
over a 4 year period, so there's sufficient background material to get
started, but I need your ideas and
assistance to make this column a
success.
WAIT JUST A MINUTE! Don't
turn the page till you have scribbled
out a letter or postcard with a question, a complaint, or just a suggestion of what you'd like to see in
future columns.
Remember, this is your column!
TRS-80 GAMERS, UNITE!

I

Cytron Masters: The View From a Play Tester
MARK BOTNER
BASIC INFORMATION
Name:
Type:
System:
Format:
# Players:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Cytron Masters
Strategy
Apple II
148K, paddles required)
Disk
I or 2
Dan Bunten
$39.95
Strategic
Simulations Inc.
456 Fairchild Dr.
Suite 108
Mountain View.
CA 94043

CYTRON MASTERS is one of a
new breed of games combining the
action and graphics of arcade-type
games with the authenticity of simulations. After the last few months of
testing it, I find myself repeatedly
drawn to playing it. This is quite a
departure from arcade games which
are initially fun to play, but the "fun"
wears off quickly. Unlike so many
other strategy games, it is possible to
simply sit down and start playing
Cytron Masters without reading
lengthy instructions. However, most
people will want to read the action
packed, automatic introduction included on the disk with the game.
Instructions of this type are sure to
become a standard format for game
information.
Because I watched Cytron Masters
grow from an idea to a small program,
then to a complete game, I had a
experience in it's development. As a
game tester for the author, Dan
Bunten, I was able to help him not
only with bugs in the program, but
with ideas and suggestions which he
readily accepted. Although a war
game, like many other SSI games,
CYTRON MASTERS is still an original idea. One feature that makes

CYTRON MASTERS different from
other war games consisting of player
#1's turn, player #2's turn etc., is the
continuous unique action and animation
of the Cytrons. This enables two
people to play simultaneously. One
might think that since this is a war
game, Cytrons are completely in your
control. Not so—the players or managers, as they should be called, do just
that, manage the Cytrons. These
Cytrons carry out not only your
instructions but built-in ones as well.
For example: Shooters scan & shoot at
Cytrons within their pre-determined
range. Cytrons carry out their own
instructions very much like men in a
real war.
A Cytron is a CYbernetic elecTRONic device, or in plain English a
robot. Armies of Cytrons are used in
an arena for combat. The Intergalactic
Commisssion has ruled that in global
disputes the parties involved will
make settlement by participating in
this futuristic match. These matches
eliminate unnecessary human warfare
in the future. Spectators gather to
watch the event and cheer for the
victor! There are six types of Cytrons:
1) MINES are heavily armored
bombs which explode upon
contact with enemy Cytrons.
(Costs 1 units of power)
2) BUNKERS are defensive
shields for all other Cytrons.
These are able to withstand
10 "hits" from Shooters or 2
contacts with mines. (Costs 2
units of power)
3) SHOOTERS are attack
units armed with laser
cannons. (Costs 4 units of
power)
4) COMMANDERS are used to
relay messages to all other
Cytrons within their range.
(Costs 4 units of power)

5) MISSILES have powerful
offensive/defensive uses.
(Costs 8 units of power) Need
practice on Missile/Anti missile control? Then just run the
practice session included on
diskette.
6) ANTI-MISSILES are the
only defense against missiles.
(These are FREE)
The battlefield consists of an arena
18 units (Cytron size) high by 38 units
long. On the left and right edges of the
field are the Command Centers. Closer
to the center of the screen are the
randomly placed Power Centers,
which can be positioned by the
managers prior to the beginning of the
game. New Cytrons emerge from the
preLOCATEd Beam Point.
The option to either play a normal
game or customize one's own version
exists in the two-player game. Many of
the strategic variables (costs of for
example) can be altered to drastically
change the play. Altering the variables
Cytrons allows for individual tastes
(this can be interesting to tamper
with). The default values, however, are
well thought out.
You have four options during play
which allow you to manage the game.
1) MAKE allows the managers
to produce any of the five
Cytrons provided there is
enough available energy.
You have three possible locations to place the new unit: At
the present Beam Point, above
it or below it. No more than a
total of 50 Cytrons per player
may be present on the battlefield at any one time. However, you may still MAKE a
missile at any time which will
emerge from the Command
Center.

Continued on pg. 45

DESIGNER'S NOTES
After playing some STAR TREK
programs, I found myself wanting
more. I was tired of playing against
enemy ships which, in their moves,
displayed little or no strategy. I was
tired of destroying ships with only a
few shots. The elements of total
control and realism were missing in
these games. Commanding a Starship should be like commanding a
naval vessel. Crew factors must be
considered. Each ship type should
have a certain physical characteristics, a certain feel. You should be
able to push the ship and the crew to
their limits and beyond -- for a price.
What was needed was not a game
but a simulation.
It took over six months to write
STARSHIP COMMANDER. It was
written with an eye towards detail and
believability. To accomplish this,
the program was broken down into
several modules: each module being
a program in itself. When completed,
the STARSHIP COMMANDER program was over 120K long, contained
over forty major commands, hundreds of minor commands, and over
thirty high resolution dynamic
screens. The player was given the
ability to control power, fire weapons, direct crew members by name,
allocate repair droids, communicate
with and scan the enemy vessel(s),
navigate, and use on board computer
systems to assist in the implementation of command decisions.
When playing the program, you

never touch the keyboard as all the
commands are displayed in a console
like format and are entered via
paddle. The screens were all done in
color and graphic representations of
data are displayed whenever possible.

is performing (maximum potential
is 100% efficiency). The higher the
rank, the higher the overall efficiency
of a particular team. Rank, in and of
itself, has no effect on individual
crew member efficiency rating.
Some Recommended Team Compositions

PLAYING TIPS
The following are suggestions which
should help you when playing STARSHIP COMMANDER. You should
use these with the manual that is
included with each game.
BOOTING
PROBLEMS AND ERRORS:
Booting the program can be a
problem if your disk drives are out of
time or if the heads are not aligned
properly. If you are having problems, please try the alternate booting
instructions (these are on a small
addendum sheet which is inserted in
the rule book). Other problems and
error messages that may occur
during playing time are the direct
result of disk problems. Version 1.1
(if you do not see a version number
during the introduction, you have
version 1.0) is more forgiving to disk
problems.

(1)
(I)
(1)
(7)

Lt. Commander
Lieutenant
Ensign
Crewpersons
OrLieutnas (2)

(2)
(6)

Ensigns
Crewpersons
or-

((1)
(2)
(7)

Commander
Ensigns
Crewpersons

THE CREW FACTOR:

The overall efficiency of all duty
teams for weapons, engines, navigation, and defense directly affect the
performance of the USS Ranger. The
higher efficiency of the weapons team,
for example, the higher the probability
of hitting enemy targets and higher
the damage levels. In addition, higher
efficiency levels lower the probability
of mis-fires or non-firing (crew members can forget). Sometimes the
weapons team and the engineering
team can get an extra torpedo or an
extra weapon bank charged.

The crew factor is probably one of
the most unique features of STARSHIP COMMANDER. Each crew
member has an efficiency rating
and a rank. The efficiency is a
measure of how well the crewmember

High efficiency levels in the engineering team leads to faster transfers
of power to all systems (power will
reach allocated amounts quicker), and
higher performance combined with
lower energy use in engines.

The Navigation efficiency level
affects the turning radius, evasive
maneuvering, acceleration and deceleration levels as well as maximum
and minimum speed levels.
The Defense efficiency level affects
the damage levels, shield power maintenance and placement. If the defense
team cannot do their job, the longer
the medical injury lists will be.
In order to maintain higher efficiency levels in both the crewmembers and duty teams, you should:
1) Keep the most efficient teams on
duty.
2) Keep the most efficient member
on the duty team.
3) Make sure your team has
enough officers (the higher the
rank, the higher the overall
team performance).
4) Make sure there is at least as
much power being allocated to
each station as there is being
consumed.
5) Rotate your teams
(Crewmembers need their sleep!)
6) Remember that changing duty
teams will take five units and
changing rosters takes ten and
these units come from life
support systems. Make sure you
have enough power to rotate
your crew without affecting
point 4.
7) Change the roster only when all
three teams in a station are
functioning below par (about
70).
ENERGY:
The energy system is the life's blood
of the Starship Ranger. Energy
management is done primarily through
the Engineer Station. Energy data is
displayed in two forms: allocated and
actual. Allocated power level is the
power level to which the system is
trying to bring itself. Actual is the
amount that is currently in the system.
Some power (between 5 and 20 units)
is regenerated in batteries each turn.
The amount of regeneration depends
on the engineering duty team's efficiency, the efficiency in the light
engines and the speed that your ship is
traveling. Energy consumption varies
in your systems depending on the
system (hardware) efficiency and crew
efficiency.
DEFENSE SYSTEMS:
The USS Ranger is protected by four
shields (Shield 1 — Forward, Shield 2
Port, Shield 3 — Star-board, Shield 4
Aft). High shield power and a highly

efficient defense team will reduce damages and casualties.
High power in shields also reduces
the striking force of the Ranger and
decreases shield hardware efficiency. A good amount to maintain in
shields is between 500-750 units of
energy. Remember, shield power is
the slowest in coming up to allocated
amounts. You should distribute
enough power to last two turns.
You should try to rotate the shield
that faces the enemy vessels to allow
a shield to bring itself up to allocated
amounts. A good tactic to use is a
continuous rotation of the vessel's
shields by rotating the ship with
manual pilot) when a shield's power
is low (under 400). This will allow
time for the droids to repair damaged
shields without having the vulnerable
shield fired on by an enemy ship. It
takes five units of power from
general operations to repair every
unit of damage.
Using auto shields is good for
beginners fighting one ship as the
computer does a reasonable job of
allocating power to your shields.
But, the system is too slow in reacting
to a multi-vessel attack.
Semi-Auto may be used if the
enemy vessels are not rotating
around your ship and your ship is
travelling at speeds less than light
6. This will maintain the allocated
percentages of power in your shields.
Never place zero percent of power in
shields using semi-auto distribution
in Defense Station. This could prove
disastrous. Especially in older versions. I personally prefer the use of
manual operation to allocate shield
power from engineering. While this
allows greater control, power levels
must be examined and maintain
every turn.
ATTACKING STRATEGIES:
It is best to concentrate attacks on
one ship at a time. You should fire
your torpedoes in salvos of three or
six at a time with a spread factor of
one. Higher spreads increase the
probability of hitting with at least
one torpedo, but decreases the
number of possible hits. If possible,
lock all tubes. This take an additional 20 units of power per torpedo, but increases the probability
of hitting by 20%. Remember, tubes
must be loaded within the last three
turns in order to fire. Try to load all
empty tubes every turn. Along with
torpedoes, fire all the positrons
possible. These being the ship's high
energy weapons. By keeping the

target ship on the forward shield,
you are able to fire three banks at
once (Positron 1 at full power, 2 and
3 at half). The estimated damage
that can be inflicted on the enemy
vessel using this strategy is usually
between 250-400 units.
Try to keep attacking one particular shield of an enemy vessel
turn after turn. This will prevent the
enemy from bringing the shield up
to its allocated amount.
The damage inflicted on an
enemy vessel can be seen by going to
the science station and examining
the crew count and shield levels of
the vessel. You will notice that the
enemy's shields will decrease in
power as it sustains damage.
NAVIGATION:
The distance in megameters that
a ship travels is the speed cubed.
Some recommended speeds are:
DISTANCE FROM
ENEMY SHIP

RECOMMENDED
SPEEDS

over 2000 megameters

light 8 — 9
6—8
4—7
under 6.5

1200 — 1500
500 — 1200
under 500

Be careful not to go too fast at
close range as your ship will usually
overshoot the target vessel, leaving
your rear facing it. The rear positron
bank only fires at half power.

These recommended speeds are
different from the suggested attack
(SA) speeds. You should only use the
SA speed if you want to go on an all
out assault and if you feel that your
shields can withstand a heavy
attack. The most effective speed is
between .5 and 1 of a light speed less
than the SA speed.
The Auto pilot system allows you
to select the distance which you
wish to maintain from the enemy
vessels. It allows you to lock on
either the vessel current position or
future position. It is recommended
that Auto Pilot be used only at closer
ranges (under 2000 megameters), as
if tends to make you travel faster
than necessary, using up greater
amounts of power and reducing
maneuverability.
Semi-Auto and manual systems
allow increasingly greater control.
Again, these facilities can be used
by an experienced player to take
advantage of the ship's maneuverability.
Continued on pg. 46

wish for more. I want something
that tickles my cerebellum as well as
my optic receivers. (I need a little
meat with all those potatoes!) A
game that combines strategic elements which stimulate the mind
and brilliant action graphics which
satisfy the senses is just what is
needed. But, alas, no such product
exists. . . .yet. My own efforts in
three programs (Computer Quarterback, Cartels & Cutthroats
and Cytron Masters - reviewed in
this issue) have only scratched the
surface. My abilities do not satisfy
my imagination.
In the real world there are numerous examples of activities that are
exciting as well as challenging. We
have probably all wondered at times
what it would be like to be a stunt
pilot, a historic leader, a business
tycoon or a great athlete. Why not
have games that let us experience
these things?

REAL WORLD GAMING
By Dan Bunten

Game System Definition
The scene opens with an
evangelist behind a pulpit
gesturing wildly. He shouts,
"We must stop the spread of
the demon spawned arcade
games that are destroying the
minds of our people. Repeat
after me—I believe in Strategy
Games. . . ."

Both my formal education and
professional career have been in a
field called Operations Research.
This field is devoted to finding ways
to use mathematics and statistics to
solve difficult real world problems.
Practitioners of Operations Research
attempt to create mathematical
models of complex real situations so
they can examine them better. For
instance, since the first "energy
crisis", numerous federal agencies
have been working on energy consumption models to determine the
effects of changes in resource availability. The people involved have
been attempting to reduce this
complex problem to a group of
mathematical equations that form a
model. Using this model they could
try out various actions and strategies
that would be too dangerous or
costly to try in true life. Many of the
techniques used in these important
applications can be scaled down for
use in simulation games to give
them more of the feel of the real
world.

In the last installment of this
column I described with great zeal
the potential of "real world" games.
There is a chance that some readers
may have mistaken my enthusiasm
for extremism. (I am not the evangelist in the opening scene!). I assure
you that I do not hate arcade games.
I indulge in contests of hand/eye
coordination, sometimes for hours.
However there is a limit to the
pleasure I derive from games where
the question is not "will I lose" but
"when will I lose!"

The goal of the next several installments of this column will be to share
information about how simulation
games are constructed. Hopefully,
this information will be useful not
only to game developers (and potential developers) but to anyone
interested in the game world that
extends beyond arcades. I am sure
you will be surprised at how little
formal math training is needed to
understand most of the techniques
used in simulation.

So even if I respond to colorful
graphics and animated action, I

Where do you start if you want to
make a simulation game? The first

step is to define what's called the
"system". A system is a group of
related elements and processes that
function together. For instance, the
digestive system in your body is
made up of the organs that are
involved in digesting the food you
eat. However, you cannot describe a
system by simply naming the objects
included in it. You must also define
their functions and relationships. In
addition, to really understand your
digestive system, you also need to
know how it relates to your whole
body and the outside world.
Thus, the first step in designing a
game is like the first step in designing anything — describe your area
of interest. In the case of a simulation game this "area of interest" is
called the system and your eventual
objective is to create a model of the
field selected. The model should
work much like the real world
situation. The creation of this type
of game will normally follow these
phases:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)

System definition
Data Collection
Model Development
Programming
Play Testing

These phases would also apply to
almost any complex game even if
the setting was a fantasy rather
than reality (for example, Dungeons
and Dragons type games).
The System Definition Phase can
be further divided into:
a) define the boundary of the
system and its objective
b) list the internal system
elements
c) list the relationships between the elements
d) list the outside influences
on the system
The System Definition Phase is
like making an outline of your
subject for a speech or an article.
Much of this process is purely
mental. You are simply organizing
your thoughts about how the system
works by committing your ideas to
paper. Defining the system boundary
is a particularly abstract problem
since real systems are not isolated
but gradually flow into one another.
The boundaries between systems
are in how we look at them. The
actual world has no boundaries.
However, the difficulty of this step is
considerably reduced by the fact
that there is no wrong way to divide
a system from the rest of the world.
Any way that makes an enjoyable
game is correct (and there is no

formula for enjoyment).
For instance, in a war game the
boundaries could be drawn broad
enough to include all the political,
financial and logistical problems
involved in waging an entire war.
In the other extreme the boundaries
of the system definition could be set
to include only those things that
take place on a single battlefield
within a certain space and time
zone. There in no right system
boundary. A successful game can
be created out of any system definition whether broad or narrow.
The only difference is the data that
will be collected to create the model.
A very broad system definition will
not allow a great deal of depth in
any aspect. This type of game must
concentrate only on the most "significant" elements and relationships
of the system. An example of this
kind of wargame is the board game
Diplomacy which covers the whole
military/political situation of World
War I. A "narrow" type of system
definition can simulate a field to a
greater depth by sacrificing breadth.
Various football simulation games
take this view of the sport. They
concentrate only on the interaction
of offensive and defensive play
selection on the gridiron. These
games ignore all things outside
their system boundaries. They
disregard such things as player
salaries, recruiting, training,
creation of new plays and coaching
in their simulation of football.
There is absolutely nothing wrong
with ignoring things outside your
chosen system boundaries. Every
boundary includes some things
while excluding others. You need
only concern yourself with the
interactions that are important to
the system as you define it.
Having decided on the boundaries
of your system, you should define
the objective of the system. In
many cases this may be obvious.
For instance, the objective of a
football system is scoring points to
win the game. The objective of a
wargame is winning the battle by
meeting certain conditions of
victory. Even if the goal of your
system is obvious, it is still helpful
to spell it out. This is because the
objective determines what elements
of the system are important to the
outcome of your game. If you are
doing a business game you may
define the objective to be accumulating profit. Then, only things
that affect profit will be important
in your game.

This leads to the next step in the
System Definition Phase in which
you list the elements of the system.
For example, in designing a business game to simulate a production
environment, the element list of the
system might be as follows:
Raw materials
Production plant
(buildings and equipment)
Work force
Finished product
Money spent in advertising
Amount of product sold etc.
There is a natural tendency of
people when making lists to attempt
to include only parallel items.
However, the element list will
normally consist of elements that
are derived from other elements.
They will be from different "levels".
In addition, some things will be
more tangible than others. You do
not want to reduce your list to the
lowest common denominator. (A list
of the proteins that make up the
digestive system organs is worthless
as an element list for that system).
Your list just helps you find the
main pieces of your system, regardless of their level or type.
Once you have a reasonable list of
the elements of your system, you can
begin to map out the relationships
between those elements. These
relationships lead eventually to
influence the system objective.
Initially your understanding of the
relationships will be very crude.
But, you should at least be able to
say what things affect others even if
you can't say how. Using the list in
the business example above we can
state some of the relationships as
follows:
Finished product =
Raw material ? Labor ? Plant
Units sold =
Finished goods ? Advertising
Profit =
Units sold * Price — Costs
We use the question mark (?)
above because we do not know the
type of relationship between certain
elements (whether +, *, etc.). All we
can say about Finished product is
that it is affected by Raw material,
Labor and the Production plant.
Also, Finished product along with
Advertising affects the number of
units that are sold. (Only in the last
example given above is the mathematics of the relationship of the
elements really known.) However,
this simple process of determining
who does what to whom, helps

refine our idea of the system. For
instance, in the above list we
identified two new items that need
to be added to our element list: Price
and Costs.
Also, notice the objective of the
system, Profit, is included in the
relationship list. In fact, only
relationships and elements that are
linked directly or indirectly to the
objective should remain in the lists.
The process of refining the element
and relationship lists should continue until all your elements are
linked in some way to other elements
and the objective. Any "dead ends"
that don't link should be thrown out.
(An element that doesn't affect any
other element is as useless as the
appendix in the digestive system.)
The last step in the System Definition Phase is to list the external
influences on your system. Since the
system boundary you chose was
arbitrary, some way is needed to
show how your system interacts
with the rest of the world. For
instance, using our business game
example again, the outside influences
might include:
the rate of growth in the
economy
the inflation rate
the cost of taxes
and government
regulations etc.
The criterion for considering
something an inside element or an
outside influence is whether that
thing can be changed by the system.
If the system can change it, then it is
really inside the system. If the
system is affected by it but cannot
alter it (in a significant way), then it
is an outside influence.
Although these steps in the System
Definition phase were listed in a
logical order, it is often difficult to
complete them sequentially. In fact,
you should expect to loop back
through the steps as much as needed
until you have a fairly complete
picture of the system you want to
simulate. Two notes of caution are
appropriate here. First, don't censor
your thinking. It's important to let
your mind run free - at least at first.
Later you can separate the wheat
from the chaff. Second, make your
lists as complete as possible. It is
easier to make a realistic game
playable (by eliminating elements
later) than it is to make a simple
game realistic.
In the next issue of this column we
will look at how to collect the data to
create your model.

NEW SCENARIOS FOR INVASION ORION
by Floyd Mathews

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Invasion Orion
Strategy
Apple. Atari. TRS-80
Disk or Tape
1
$24.95
Epyx
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale. CA 94086

If you have experimented with
Automated Simulations 'INVASION
ORION, you have probably learned
how to beat the computer easily in
the ten original scenarios. When
building new scenarios you may be
giving the computer's side more
value points than yourself for
balance. This is not always necessary because, even with equal value
points the villainous Klaatu can be
a tough opponent if they have
suitable ships and if the new scenario is properly designed. If you try
these new ships against your own
favorite designs, I would be interested in reading about your
results in future issues of CGW.
The player has several natural
advantages over the computer. Let's
deal with the major advantage first.
If the player knows the capabilities
of the computer's ships, he can
easily win. It is easy to eliminate
this advantage. Simply get a friend
to assist you in designing the
scenario. You can agree on the
number of value points for each side
and certain limitations discussed
below. You secretly design your own
fleet and your friend secretly designs
the Klaatu fleet similar to one of the
model fleets in Figure 1. You can
likewise assist your friend in preparing a new scenario for him to
play against an unknown and
mysterious Klaatu fleet.
You will find that this step, by
itself, creates a much more challenging scenario. The computer's ships
are more unpredictable, and potentially more dangerous, if you do not
know their capabilities.
The player has several other advantages over the computer. He can
"perceive" the overall situation and
coordinate the actions of his ships.
The computer basically issues orders
to its ships as individual units. The

player fires more offensive torpedoes
and missiles and can aim them
more intelligently. Most players fire
defensive missiles to protect their
large ships from torpedoes, but the
computer sometimes leaves its ships
exposed. The player has the option
of using tractor-pressor beams, but
the computer doesn't. Finally, most
players tend to fully energize shields
when close to large enemy beamships, but the computer merely
allocates whatever energy remains
after movement and fire.
Despite these disabilities, the
Klaatu can be deadly if you give
them special ships designed to
minimize their inferiorities and
maximize their strengths. Before
looking at these special ships, let's
first examine how the computer
plans its move.
The computer first predicts the
player's move and then moves its
ships in the general direction of the
closest human ship. Some of its
ships will move in a random
direction, but gradually the Klaatu
will close with the human fleet. The
Klaatu will fire beams if possible,
but at usually less than full power. If
they opt to fire torpedoes, they will
not fire any missiles except, possibly,
defensive missiles. And, if they opt
to fire offensive missiles instead of
torpedoes, the missiles will usually
be aimed at the beam target.
What ship designs are best suited
for the Klaatu? None of the designs
in the battle manual are good
because they are multi-purpose
ships which require human "perception" for optimal use in different
situations. instead, it is better to
create new special purpose designs
in order to limit the chances of the
computer making a stupid move.
The computer should have one
large beamship because this is the
weapon it uses most often, and it
will become more effective as the
computer gradually shortens the
range. The beamship should be
initially deployed behind a screen of
tiny missileboats in the hope that
they will protect it from torpedoes
for at least the first few turns. The
beamship should have speed of
about four. Just fast enough to make
it a difficult target, maximum but
not to risk its racing in front of the
screen. it should have a small
number of missiles in hope that it

might use one defensively if it is
exposed to torpedoes.
The beam itself should be disproportionately large, as much as a
quarter of the Klaatu value points. A
disproportionately large beam is
needed because the Klaatu frequently
use less than full beam power. The
energy level should be slightly
above the beam value as damage
points will most often be subtracted
from the energy level, and because,
at point blank range, the Klaatu
often shut down other systems to
fully energize a savage beam attack.
A beam quality of five is adequate,
any more is too expensive.
The computer is ineffective in
using shields, so don't give any
(except possibly a small shield on
beamships of over 50 points). Instead, put the maximum of three
inches of armor on the beamship.
Shields are a bad investment for two
other reasons. They are useless if no
surplus energy remains to operate
them. Shields are less efficient than
armor, because the armor value is
subtracted from each individual
attack on a ship, while the shield
value is only subtracted once from
the aggregate attack value. Indeed,
armor is so efficient that I recommend a maximum thickness of three
inches in designing new ships for
both sides. Otherwise, both sides
could build literally indestructible
ships with several feet of armor and
nothing else. Three inches is the
maximum used in any of the designs
in the manual, and I find this ceiling
provides fast, exciting scenarios
with fewer stalemates.
Don't build more than one beamship. Extra ones will just duplicate
your costs for armor and launch
tubes, and increase the risk of the
Klaatu a decisive torpedo or missile
hit.
The screening missileboats should
be small so that they will be hard
targets for beams, and cheap as they
will probably be the first struck by
torpedo attacks. Dispersion of force
is the main idea in designing screening boats. The more you have, the
more likely it is that one of them will
stop a torpedo from crippling the
valuable beamship. But you can't
afford to waste a lot of value points
on them. Three or four missileboats
are enough for the screen. Each boat
should have no more than two tubes,

eight missiles, and no armor (they
are an expendable force).
The Klaatu fleet should have no
torpedoes because, if the computer
decides to fire them, it will fire fewer
missiles on that turn which may
expose the beamship to the player's
torpedoes. Most veteran players will
always carefully protect their capital
ships from torpedoes in any case.
The screen will hopefully allow the
beamship to close to effective range
before it is blown to smithereens by
the player's torpedoes. There is
further a chance that the Klaatu
missileboats will score several
missile hits on the human fleet and,
while their main function is to stop
torpedoes, this is a nice dividend.
The initial placement of the
Klaatu fleet is very important. If the
player knows where they will be
before he places his own ships, he
may be able to arrange a nasty little
ambush. I recommend that you
always set up the Klaatu at the top
within three spaces of the edge, and
the player can deploy his ships
anywhere within three spaces of the
bottom. The exact positions should
of course be secret until the game
begins.
Fleet A in Figure 1 is an example
of proposed Klaatu fleet of fifty
value points. Some of the missileboats may be slightly weakened for
variety, with corresponding increases in the size of the beamship.
Fleet B is an example with one
hundred value points. I recommend
a maximum of fifty points for each
side for a fast game, and also
because the player's superior intelligence gives him a better chance for
winning if he has more material
with which to work. Any game with
Fleet B will last longer than a game
with Fleet A, so I have given Fleet
B's beamship more missiles and
tubes for greater endurance. But,
notice that the screen for fleet B is
actually cheaper than the one for
Fleet A. Each missileboat in Fleet B
is minimal, and I don't recommend
building anything smaller. Additionally, the B beamship has so
much wasted energy when it doesn't
fully energize its beam, I gave it a
small shield hoping to provide
protection against any near misses
by missiles. Fleet E contains screening boats with torpedoes. This
configuration is effective against
players who neglect to use defensive
missiles.
If your friends have read this
article, or if they begin to adapt their
tactics and designs with fleets like A

and B, you should occasionally give
the Klaatu a different force. The
player has a big edge if he can
anticipate the composition of the
Klaatu fleet. Fortunately, there are
two other types of fleets which the
computer handles well.
Large numbers of tiny torpedoboats or missileboats can be effective.
You can mix both weapons in the
same fleet only if each boat has both
weapons, as the computer won't
utilize the single weapon ships on
certain turns. Fleet C is an example
of a torpedoboat squadron of fifty
points. This design can be devastating to a player who is not
expecting it. In playtesting for this
article, this design sometimes destroyed the entire player fleet on the
first turn. They initially must be
spread out across the top of the
playing area, not bunched together,
in order to get good torpedo angles.
Fleet D is an example of a missileboat squadron of fifty points. They
should be initially placed close
together in the hope that they will

combine their attacks against one
human ship.
I have several miscellaneous
suggestions for improving the
Klaatu's chances. First, and most
obvious, let the computer use the
expert skill level. Against a very
experienced player, you should give
the computer 10% to 20% more points
than the human player. The types of
missiles and torpedoes agreed upon
for both sides can affect play
balance, so you should agree upon
this before designing your fleets.
Lastly, if the player uses the effective
but boring, torpedo defense of
sitting in a corner behind a few
missiles, I suggest you give him a
special victory condition which will
draw him out — such as requiring
him to occupy by turn five, and hold,
a central region of the playing area.
One of the strengths of a game like
Invasion Orion is it's ability to
create new scenarios. I hope the
scenarios offered here will stimulate
renewed interest in this fine game.

MICRO REVIEWS
FIREBUG

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Firebug
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT:
Disk
# OF PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Silas Warner
PRICE:
$24.95
PUBLISHER: The Muse Company
347 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, Maryland
21201
Yes. I made an "ash out of myself." In spite of negative publicity
arising from the initial ad campaign
(will you make an "ash" out of
yourself?) and its "ash-umed" proarson viewpoint, FIREBUG really
does no more to promote the "ashpirations" of would-be arsonists
than "Pac-Man" does to promote
over-eating.
FIREBUG is essentially a mazechase game. The game consists of
five mazes, which represent five
floors of a building. The FIREBUG
runs through the floor, picking up
gas cans and dropping them where
they will cause the most damage.
Since the score is based upon the
destruction of each floor and the
game has a "Great Scores" capability, the greater the conflagration,
the bigger the gamer's reputation
becomes. Instead of having the
FIREBUG chased by other characters, However, the danger comes
from the FIREBUG's own flame.
The flame following along the fuse
is dangerous. If it catches the
FIREBUG, the game is over and the
computer informs the player that
"You made an ash out of yourself."
There are four basic options that the

gamer will appreciate about this
game.
First of all, FIREBUG offers a
choice between either a keyboard
configuration or joystick set-up to
control the FIREBUG (the cursor
which represents the character).
The keyboard arrangement, using
A, W, S, D, and X is familiar to the
typical arcade "addict" and seems
to be more responsive than the
Apple (ex-TKC) joystick used for
this review. The joystick potentiometers do not always read the stick
position properly (a problem that
exists in the Apple joystick, not the
software).
Second, instead of seeking
"boosters" or "power pills" that
appear randomly after certain scores
are reached or time is expired, the
gamer is allowed to immediately see
the number of gas cans available on
each floor. Because of this, the
player has a better opportunity to
plan out his strategy accordingly.
The gas cans may be picked up by
maneuvering the FIREBUG character directly over the gas cans and
pressing the "return" key. The cans
may be dropped in strategic places
by pressing the "space bar".
Third, instead of being at the
mercy of the mazes, the gamer has a
real chance to do something about
them. Here is where the frustrated
arcade "addict" can finally wreak
revenge on those infuriating mazes,
since the gamer gets to burn down
the mazes themselves. Just imagine,
a game where the boundaries (symbols of authority) are systematically
destroyed for fun and profit (points
for a good score) and the gamer
allows his repressed rage (toward
other maze games?) and submerged
desire for civil disobedience (Molotov
cocktail syndrome?) to have free
reign on a color monitor. Who
knows, perhaps some catharsis may
even take place within the gamer's
psyche.
Fourth and last, the game provides
for a continuing challenge and
longevity of interest by means of its
skill level. The player has the option
of selecting fuse length. Since fuse
length determines how closely the
actual flame will follow the FIREBUG, a long fuse provides for an
easier game than a short fuse. So, a
player can adjust the skill level prior
to any game by adjusting the fuse
length. The shorter the fuse, of
course, the more bonuses available
(as the axiom goes, the bigger the
monster, the richer the treasure).

FIREBUG seems to have the
ingredients necessary for a successful arcade game: interesting graphics,
sufficient challenge, moderate
strategy, and ample flexibility.
Indeed, "ash" far "ash" this reviewer
is able to "ash-certain," this game is
an "ash-set" to an "ash-tute" arcade
lovers "ash-sortment" of games.
Unab-ash-edly,
Johnny L. Wilson

THE DEMON'S FORGE

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

The Demon's Forge
Aventure
Apple
Disk
1
Brian Fargo
$29.95
Saber Software
8 Winged Foot Lane
Newport Beach. CA
92660

THE DEMON'S FORGE is a 48K
graphic adventure similar in appearance to much of the software
produced by Sierra On-Line and
Highlands, though it has been
introduced by a new company,
Saber Software. The similarities
between THE DEMON'S FORGE
and other adventure software end at
this point; in fact, in most areas
DEMON'S FORGE is a step ahead
of conventional computer adventuring.
The packaging is unique in appearance, the cover art having been
painted by a top fantasy artist from
the staff of Heavy Metal. The
documentation within is descriptive
yet functional, giving a background
detailed enough to convey a solid
purpose without laboring in details.
The operating instructions are
clear, though are almost identical in
nature to those of past adventures.
Anyone who has ever sweated out a
graphic adventure before will feel

quite at home with THE DEMON'S
FORGE.
You are a mercenary of amazing
martial skill, your prowess being
legendary in the arenas and battlefields of your land. You have fought
often in the service of your king, a
harsh yet fair monarch with an iron
sense of justice. You are arrested for
a crime punishable by death —
brawling with the king's guards.
Yet, in considering your past services
to him, the king has left your fate in
the hands of the gods — he has
banished you to a dungeon network
of ancient origin known as the
DEMON'S FORGE, so named because its overseer is a demon of
unquestionable power. No one has
ever returned from there alive.
As a prisoner within the demon's
stronghold you must escape the
traps and foes left for you, and wend
your way to Anarakull himself, to a
final combat which will proclaim
your fate and perhaps allow you to
escape and regain your freedom.
The adventure is, in rough similarity, akin to your typical dungeon
fantasy excursion, which to many
might seem like a meaningless
jumble of traps, puzzles, and disconcerted ideas. And yet, when seen
in the light of it all, being a
subterranean stronghold governed
by a supernatural creature who has
laid cryptic traps to catch the
unwary intruder, it gains a cohesion
and purpose which many adventures
lack.
The hi-res graphics are quickly
drawn and admirable. They get
better as one goes farther and
farther into the labyrinth, as if
greater care was put into the later
art.
One unique function of the game
is minor, though perhaps a necessary
addition to future adventures. On
the "restore game" feature, in which
you are allowed to resume one of ten
previously saved games, you are
informed of the last game you saved
to the disk. It is a blessing to the
player who is constantly updating
his game position and might forget
the number of the previous game he
left off at.
If I had to make a serious complaint it might be that THE
DEMON'S FORGE has several
rooms which appear both intriguing
and significant (example: a room
shaped like a hemisphere, entitled
"The Bowl Room") which in fact
have no real purpose in the solution
of the adventure.

While the majority of the traps,
riddles, and poems make sense, they
nonetheless take real consideration
at points before progress can be
made. The adventure is divided into
sections, or levels, and normally
everything must be completed on
one level before a player may move
to another. While completion of
THE DEMON'S FORGE is undeniably a challenge, I would not
say it is difficult to the point of
ridiculousness.
I enjoyed THE DEMON'S FORGE
and, on the whole, would recommend
it to anyone. To those who might
play it and get stuck, I offer these
words of advice:
1. Write down all hints and poems
given to you, and consider their
meaning carefully.
2. Items, or even entrances to
areas of the labyrinth might be
hidden from sight until you somehow eliminate the object blocking
them.
3. Consider the roles of the elements and elementals. .
Michael Cranford

EPOCH
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Epoch
Arcade
Apple II
Disk or Tape
1
Larry Miller
$34.95
Sirius Software Inc.

As you are looking over the stars
through your fighter's windshield,
your fuel gauge reads low. You begin
to accelerate and speed through
space, looking for some sign of help.
All of a sudden, your eyes spot
blinking lights off in the distance.
You rush toward it and, as your fuel
gauge reads less than 20 gallons,
you rush into the docking bay. A
loud "DA-DA" is heard, you fly out
with a full supply of fuel and ammo.
Now, you notice that your time is
running out. Your adventure is
about to end and you need more
time. You begin to fly through space
with your new load of fuel, looking
for an entrance into the fourth
dimension. Up ahead there is a
strange, number-sign (#)-shaped
thing. You head toward it and, as
you go through the center, you hear
rewarding music, and a journey
begins backward through time.

Twisting tunnels lie ahead and,
while you travel through them, time
flows backwards. The ship exits the
tunnel with plenty of time left to
destroy enemies, and continue your
travels, firing off into space, nearly
crashing into enemy ships and their
fragments.
This is the world of EPOCH. The
objective is as simple as most:
destroy as many enemy ships as
possible, for as many points as you
can get. There is the usual limited
amount of ammunition, and fuel,
both of which can be replenished by
a docking with a base. But EPOCH
has an added feature: a time limit. If
time runs out, your adventure is
over; just as if you had run out of fuel
or ammunition. Time is restored just
as easily as either of the other two,
but by entering the fourth dimension. A little more difficult than
docking with a base, for you must
proceed through a tunnel in space
once you have entered.
The game is played with a joystick
(it can be played with paddles but is
much more difficult). You see space
as if you were looking through a
windshield, as stars and various
ships (about 15 kinds) pass by your
fighter. The only way to score points
is by destroying ships, but, as you
play, you will find that more of your
time is spent attempting to extend
your odyssey.
The top of the hi-res screen is
reserved for your control panel
which tells you several things: fuel,
time, ammunition, speed, and score.
The graphics in the game are truly
excellent—as good as any I have
seen. The stars pass by you in
speeds inversely proportional to
their distance from you and, as your
ship turns, they scroll across the
screen smoothly and naturally. The
enemy ships can be spotted well in
the distance and, as they near you,
the enlargement is perfect. With a
ship far in the distance, it may zoom
across the screen at the slightest
turn. But, when they get closer (they
may come inches away) you can
spend ten seconds just traveling
across the ship, if you stop your
forward movement. There really is
that much detail put into them.
The sound effects in EPOCH are
also very well done. There are four
major sounds: the introduction, the
destruction of an enemy, the docking
with your mother ship, and the
entrance to the fourth dimension.
Each of these are different, and each
has its own "spacy" effect. I person-

ally enjoy entering the fourth dimension for the sound alone, and then
work my way through the tunnel of
space.
EPOCH is one game that is very
difficult to tire of, until one has
completely mastered it. This takes
quite a while and, once done, there
are always new ways to approach
the galaxy. You can try many
daring things. I enjoy coming right
into my opponent's face, stopping,
and then blowing him up. You can
also try to go through the small
docking bays at high speeds, and
many other things that will insure
your enjoyment and excitement
with the game.
If you are the type that likes
simple games, like Spacelnvaders,
pinball, etc., you will probably have
a bit of trouble adjusting to EPOCH,
which at times can be a very high
speed game. Most computer garners,
especially space and shoot-em-up
lovers, will enjoy this game. It is
planned out in detail, and well
programmed.
Barry Gittleman

CANNONBALL BLITZ
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Cannonball Blitz
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
48K Apple 11/11+
FORMAT:
Diskette (3.2 or 3.3)
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Olaf Lubek
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: On Line Systems
36575 Mudge Ranch Road
Coarsegold, CA 93614
(209) 683-6858
Donkey Kong for the Apple; at
last! Well — almost, that is. The
familiar gorilla has been replaced
by a rigid soldier, the rolling barrels
are now rolling bombs, and the
beautiful maiden towards which
you strive has been replaced (alas!)
by a flag.
What has remained the same
about this game is it's incredible
challenge. This is not a game for
someone who likes to sit down for
ten minutes and play something
simple and relaxing before going to
bed. CANNONBALL BLITZ is an
addicting, hair-tearing game that
cannot be turned off. After playing a
game or two, you will be convinced
that absolutely no one can play this
thing. Skill, however, does gradually
come; and soon you'll have even
greater challenges to frustrate you.

The first level starts with you at
the bottom of the screen, an enemy
soldier at the top, and several ramps
zig-zagging across the screen from
top to bottom. The soldier then
begins lighting bombs and rolling
them down the ramps toward you.
The mission is to get up the ramps
and capture the enemy's flag without being run over by any of the
bombs. The only way to get from
ramp to ramp is to be thrown up
there by one of the catapults on the
ramps. A bomb falls through one of
the trap doors on the ramp, drops to
the next level, hits the one side of the
catapult and, if you're on the other
side, up you go. There is another
way to go up a level. That is by
catching one of the balloons that
occasionally fly by. I strongly
advise that you ignore these however, as they seem to invariably
deposit you on the next level directly
in front of a rolling bomb. The only
time the balloons are needed is when
you reach the top and you have to
get to the flag. When you finally do
get to the flag, you are ready to go on
to the next level . . . The Cannons.
The Second level begins with you
at the lowest of six floors. There are
2 or 3 ladders going up from each
floor and, on each of the floors, there
are 2 rivets. All one needs to do is to
run over each of these 12 rivets and
the whole structure will come down,
the guard at the top falling to his
death. (This is war, you know). This
would all be quite simple, if it
weren't for one little thing: the
cannons. These little critters just
won't leave you alone. They can kill
you by running you over or they can
give you a nice cannonball in the
gut. They can follow you up and
down ladders, but they cannot jump
over the gaps left by the rivets that
are popped. Also, on two of the
floors, there are hammers with
which you can mash the gunpowder
out of the cannons. It should only
take you a few decades of trying
before you manage this feat, and by
then you'll be ready for the next
level.
On the third level you find yourself
on a ledge surrounded by a variety
of ladders, steps, and two large
elevators (one going up, one going
down). The only things that can
stop you from getting to the top and
completing this level are cannons,
bouncing bombs, flying cannonballs
and a big soldier with a very big
cannon. (Really, that's all.)
When (if) you get that third level
flag, you can relax for a minute and

watch the intermission provided for
your entertainment. Then, it's back
to the battlefield and the same
scenario as the first level — only this
time someone must have put shorter
fuses on the bombs, because they
now have the nasty habit of exploding while you are jumping over
them. I'll let you find out about the
next levels for yourself (mostly
because I haven't gotten to them
myself yet).
In the final analysis, CANNONBALL BLITZ is a game every bit as
challenging and fun as the arcade
original. It will give you hours
(days, months, years) of enjoyment.
Ron Brinkmann

BATTLE TREK
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Battle Trek
Strategy/Action
Atari 32K
1
Chris Frazier
$39.95
Voyager Software
P.O. BOX 1126
Burlingame.
California 94010

You are the commander of the
USS Ranger, starship on combat
patrol in this sector. Suddenly your
shields go up and several Mesons hit
Shield 1! There were no reports of
enemy activity in this sector but the
computer quickly provides the unexpected information. Identification:
VEGAN!! Adrenalin pumping, you
hear yourself give the order — "Fire
Positron 1"! You watch as your
positron fire impacts on the Vegans
shields. The Ranger takes evasive
action, only to meet a hail of positron
fire. Damage reports flood the
bridge.
Welcome to BATTLE TREK, the
newest release for the Atari computer from Voyager Software. The
object of the game is destruction of
the Vegan starship. To do this, the
player must fire various weapons to
wear down the enemy's shields until
a well placed shot can destroy the
Vegan ship. All commands are entered via joystick; allowing the
player to fire weapons, launch
probes, pilot the ship, scan space,
and redistribute power. There is no
scoring because the game ends when
one or both ships are destroyed.
Continued on pg. 44

READER COMMENTS
In Reader Input Device #3 we asked "WHAT IS YOUR BIGGEST COMPLAINT ABOUT COMPUTER GAMES
ON THE MARKET TODAY?" Here are some representative answers (Obviously, the views expressed in the quotes are
those of the reader, not necessarily those of CGW.
PRICE.. .
Computer games are overpriced! 15 to 25 dollars is
within reason and competitive with noncomputer
games, and returns a fair profit. $30 to $60 (and up)
is not justified. If there were fewer $40 games,
there might be less piracy. Avalon Hill has the
right idea.
Most new games are overpriced. Only a few are
worth the price — such as WIZARDRY, ZORK
I&II and DEADLINE.
There should be a greater variety of games at
lower prices. Some arcade games should sell for
$12.99.
[ Ed. Note — The largest complaint according to

our survey is the question of price. These three
responses are typical of dozens of others we have
received. In our discussions with computer game
manufacturers we are told that the reason for the
current pricing structure is that the volume of
sales is not large enough to price games any lower.
The computer gaming industry is small in
comparison to the board game industry which has
a much larger sales volume. With the smaller
market, a profit must be turned on a smaller
number of units sold, hence the current price
structure. Prices will come down as the market
grows and volume allows a lower unit cost. CGW is
an example of this. Our magazine costs about the
same as the big computer magazines but contains
considerably fewer pages. Our circulation is about
100 times smaller than the big magazines and
therefore our cost per "book" at 40+ pages is about
the same as their cost per "book" at 200+ pages.
Volume is the key in pricing.]

GRAPHICS.. .
Graphics are not good enough. If a programmer is
going to take the time to make a game, he should
take time to make excellent graphics.
Then there is this comment:
Too much emphasis on graphics. HORIZONS
looks good but I would trade it and TUNNEL
TERROR for any of the SWORDTHRUST series
and give change as well.

COPY PROTECTION.. .
My biggest complaint is that most of the software
is copy protected and with two grandkids using
the computer it's important to have a back-up. If
there are companies offering copyable software
I'll buy all my software from them.
Protection schemes hurt the average user. You
cannot back-up; upgrade (to hard disk, etc.); or
make any modifications to the program.

LACK OF IMAGINATION.. .
There is lack of imagination by many designers.
Many writers copy programs that have already
been done.
There is a lack of imagination in creating a truly
great football game for the Atari (especially with
Atari's graphic capabilities). Certainly some of
the intricacies of ALI BABA and the INTELLIVISION FOOTBALL game should give Atari
writers the imagination needed.
Many computer games show little creativity in
game concept.

COMPUTER'S POWER
NOT USED.. .
Computer wargames are not utilizing the full
potential of the computer. The computer's strategy
in player-vs-computer games is so set that after a
lot of playing, you know what the computer will do
every time.
[ Ed. Note— There is no substitute for a live warm-

blooded human opponent with all his/her
idiosyncrasies and mysteries.]
Many computer games don't take advantage of a
particular computer's special features. For
example, there are too many Atari games which
are nothing more than Apple translations which
fail to use the full graphics ability of the Atari.

ARTWORK.. .
Advertisements make a lot of games seem more
interesting than they really are.
Games don't live up to the fantastic artwork
displayed on the cover.

NOT ENOUGH.. .
Other than those by SSI there are not enough
wargames of any quality. EASTERN FRONT is
good, but Avalon Hill's games suffer from using
separate maps.

[Ed. Note - SSI uses separate maps as well. Many
of our readers tell us they like the use of peripheral
maps.]
There are not enough strategy games and too
many poor versions of arcade games.
There are not enough sports simulations with
orientation towards solitaire play (from an Atari
reader).
There are not enough strategic (war or space)
games on the market for the Atari computer.
There is a senseless preference shown for Apples
and Ataris over the TRS-80 graphic junkies.
There is not enough realism in computer games
today.
Software documentation is lacking.

OTHER PROBLEMS.. .
The quality of many games on the market is a
problem. Many games are released too early. More
work and testing would make many games better.
Most games are interesting for only a short period
of time.
High scores are not recorded permanently. More
sound effects are needed.
Poor user friendliness and low realism in strategy
games.
Too many arcade games.
It is very difficult to tell the dogs from the gems.
Reviews in magazines such as CGW help a lot.
Adventure games which use graphics should use
Arcade speed melee.
Too many games are first developed for the Apple
then converted to the Atari. Atari users must then
suffer with sub-par graphics and sound.

We also provided an opportunity for you to make OTHER COMMENTS. Most of you used this section to
comment on CGW. Here are some responses:
The design, print, and paper quality of CGW is
excellent; the best on the market. I appreciate this!
Keep publishing honest and discerning reviews.
On my last issue pages 4 and 37 were missing and
I had an extra page 14 and 17 in their place. I was
disappointed to be unable to finish the "Warp
Factor" article. 1 Ed. — Oh, the perils and pitfalls

of publishing! We apologize and will replace any
magazines that have this problem. If you have a
magazine with missing pages send it back and we
will send you a replacement copy and reimburse
you for the postage.]
Great magazine! Especially the columns on game
development (i.e. Silicon Cerebrum and Real
World Gaming).
Please improve proofreading.
Micro reviews are quite helpful.
Add more pages and I will subscribe. [Ed. —The

old Catch-22 syndrome. See prior comment in
"Price. . ." section. O.K., you win, we have put in
more pages. Now send us your subscription.]
CGW has great promise. The contents are well
rounded. Not all articles will appeal to everyone
but there is something for everyone.
Go monthly and put in some Atari articles. This
past issue had more for the Atari than others. But
Apple users have enough magazines of their own
without giving them 3/4ths of this one also.

Apple games are of interest to most of your
readers. Let's review more!

I Ed. — Balanced? More Atari? More Apple? What
about TRS-80, IBM, Vic-20, etc.? What's a poor
editor to do? The coverage in CGW is determined
by several factors: what we receive in the way of
review copies; what articles our writers submit;
what is new and different in the hobby; what size
of the gaming market owns each of the different
machines. Our present coverage comes close to the
ratio of the various markets. The Apple market
makes up the majority of game titles, gamers, and
CGW readers; Atari is second with TRS-80, IBM,
Vic-20, and a few others following the current "Big
Two". If you have been following CGW at all, you
know that we are expanding our Atari coverage.
What we like to see, of course, are more games that
run on a variety of machines. For example, this
issue contains an article on scenarios for
INVASION ORION. Since I0 runs on both the
Atari and Apple, more readers are
interested in this article than were 0 a single
machine game. Manufactures should know that
many of our readers have asked for games to be
translated. Apple users want EASTERN FRONT
luck) and Atari users want COMPUTER
BASEBALL (see Industry News). Avalon Hill has

from the start tried to put their games on a variety
of machines. This is to their credit. However, the
problem with translations, as mentioned in prior
comments, is that the translated version of a game
often does not make use of the capabilities unique
to that machine. Even if Chris Crawford wanted
to translate EASTERN FRONT to the Apple
(don't count on it) it would be a monumental task
to get the Apple to scroll in the way that the Atari
does (but not impossible, look at Dan Gorlin's
CHOPLIFTER!).)
The Reader Input Device is a great idea.
I want to thank Mark Marlow for his Wizardry
article. Without those clues I would still be stuck
on level 9.

SUBSCRIBE NOW
RATES GO
UP IN
OCTOBER

TREK (from p.42)

MISSION (from p. 11)

HEROIC (from p.13)

The game takes about three
minutes to boot up, drawing an
introduction listing the name of the
game and its authors. By pressing
the joystick button the skill level
mode is drawn on the screen. The
player has fifty skill levels to choose
from. Each level is progressive in
difficulty. At skill levels forty and
above, the player begins with a
damaged ship, making it difficult to
win due to low power supply.
The game uses high resolution
graphics which are excellent. Everything is finely detailed, down to the
portholes on the Vegan ship. Positron and Meson weapon graphics are
very defined and have believable
sounds. The game is well documented, providing a user manual
which covers all aspects of playing
the game.
The game is quite exciting. I was
constantly torn between redistributing power and firing weapons.
The power readings had to be
constantly checked while trying to
maneuver in close enough to the
enemy for a good shot. All this while
desperately trying to squeeze more
power into the weapon systems.
There are, however, two problems
with the game: it constantly accesses
the disk slowing the game down;
and the destruction sequence lacks
flare. The destruct sequence is a
bright flash, no explosion sounds,
with a message on a bright yellow
background stating which ship was
destroyed. Despite these minor
flaws, the strategist will enjoy the
game, but those who like arcade
games might well look somewhere
else.
Hosea Battles, Jr.

always has towers around it, and
always has a missile station nearby.
This mission is very exciting. I have
seen joysticks pulled out over this
one. Once the headquarters is hit,
the game continues briefly before
you read, "Mission 5 - COMPLETE".
I have seen people destroyed in that
brief period after hitting the headquarters, so watch out. When mission
fire is completed you will be congratulated and given bonus points,
from 0 to 16,000. You may then go
back to prior missions and accumulate higher scores.

order, which included many actions
of a non-combative nature and one
major order (generally a combat or
move order). Additionally characters
can do such things as speak. A
speech order would appear on your
next turn's print out. Anyone in the
room where the character spoke
would get the speech on his/her
print out. In this manner players
can communicate with one another.
When my party encountered another
party on turn 34 I made overtures of
peace, hoping to have an exchange
of information about the dungeon.
However I was met with.. .

PIRACY (from p.10)
things just marginally higher than
media cost to keep this from
happening." Mark Pelczarski, of
Penguin Software, is to be applauded
for spearheading this movement.
The majority of people, by far,
respect the integrity of the software's
copyright. Industry watches were
amazed by the following comment
from the August 1982 "Softalk" Top
30 report; "A fourth change in the
marketplace is the unexpected
strength of several unprotected
pieces of software in the Hobby Ten
list. For the second consecutive
month, seven of the top ten entries
are not copy-protected." The winds
of change are blowing gale force
through the industry, and only after
the storm passes, will we know
which companies planned the wisest
for it.

The first thought that occurs to
many, after hitting the headquarters in mission five, is to get on
mission one and stay there forever
building up your score. It does not
work that way. True, it is easy not to
get blown up on mission one. But
there are three problems. 1) While
getting points you must avoid
hitting the radar, not an eas y task.
After passing a few, they appear
more frequently. You'll hit one
eventually. 2) You can be blown up.
It's easy to avoid at first, but after 5
minutes your piloting ability weakens. And 3) The houses, water
towers, etc. on mission one are not
worth as many points as the targets
in the other missions. Other missions
which give bonuses are better in
terms of building your score. I have
found that mission three gives me
the best chance to earn high scores.
The game is finished when you
reach 100,000 points, probably
because the score section only holds
five digits. If you reach this point,
score will read 99,990 and you will
get the note "GREAT PERFORMANCE". Anybody who can do this is
a true Star Blazer.

... TREACHERY!!!
While sending into FB my orders
for turn 35 which included speeches
of peace, the other player was
sending in orders which led to an all
out attack by his characters, the evil
"Meter" clan. My response to this
evil deed, a deed which had caused
the death of my group's leader —fair
Pelmen the Prophet, was immediate:
revenge! However, while my characters swore "Death to the Meters"
they were cut down by the more
experienced player who controlled
the Meters. I learned several things
about combat in that encounter: 1)
Kill first, ask questions later; 2) Try
to take your opponent's potions
from him during the fracas. These
potions (strength and healing)
can be drunk during combat to
increase strength or restore constitution. Increased strength helps
you to mound a devastating attack.
My more experienced opponent
ordered his characters to drink a
potion in hand, take others from my
characters (to be used on the next or
later turns) and then unleash a
crushing potion-enhanced attack —
all in the same turn.

The only "flaw" I have discovered
in the program occurs when you
catch your supplies at the exact
moment that you run out of fuel.
This results in all obstacles disappearing from the screen. Your ship
also disappears, but the exhaust fire
moves across the screen at the
constant altitude where you were
destroyed. From here, the keyboard
and joystick have no effect, and the
game must be re-booted.

HF allows a player whose group
has been severely weakened through
the death of several characters to
send in a "rescue" party. The player
can create new characters to enter
the dungeon and "rescue" the other
group. On turn 36 I was given the
option of sending in such a "revenge", uh, I mean "rescue" group.
Watch out Meters, I know how to
play the game now!

The game is enjoyable for almost
all gaming types. The only disappointment is the sudden ending
after that terrific build-up. STARBLAZER must be seen to be truly
appreciated.

Flying Buffalo's address is:
Flying Buffalo Inc., Box 1467 —
Dept. CG, Scottsdale, AZ. 85252.
Both Heroic Fantasy and Starweb
can be played over The Source or
through the mail.

GLADIATORS (from p 201

become confused if the terrain is
crowded.

a series of combats into a 'quest'.
Since both experience and weapon
skills increase as you hit more
opponents and survive more combats, you can experience an almost
paternal/maternal pride in watching your gladiators improve and
progress (if they survive!) My
strongest team, led by the human,
"Dead-eye" Drak, and the Robot,
Ap1-2, had difficulty with five
fledgling CYGNIANS at first, but
can now take on a team of experienced robots reinforced by Banshees
and Monsters with a good chance of
survival.

The computer opponent in GG is
not as challenging as in other SSI
games. After your first few battles,
you'll have to give it a handicap to
keep things interesting. The Designer Notes included in the rule
book suggests an extra two gladiators for the computer as a guideline,
which generally gave a pretty good
game. The game system's ability to
switch sides in the middle of the
game will need to be used occasionally to extract the computer's
units from illogical positions.

UTILITIES

HINTS ON TACTICS

SSI has always been good with
their utilities (COMPUTER BASEBALL, COMPUTER QUARTERBACK, etc) but they're getting even
better. Naturally, you can save a
game in progress at any time, and
automatically return to the same to
continue playing, but you can
change from a two-player version to
the computer as an opponent version
in mid-game! This is great for when
a friend drops over and wants to join
in, as well as when he/she has to
leave in mid-game. You can create
your own monsters, your own teams,
and your own battlefields, saving
them all for future use if you wish.
For any team you can add or drop
gladiators, change their weapons,
armor, or names, and even merge
one team with another.

Combined Arms tactics work just
as well in the 28th Century as they
do today. A team with four good
Phasors, a pair of strong melee
fighters with perhaps an Oranguphin for its gemstones seems to
work well. The Phasor users can be
divided into two teams. Concentrate
your fire with one two-member team
on the most vulnerable enemy.
Hopefully the first shot will stun
your opponent, and the second shot
will kill or wound (either result
eliminates the target). If not, then
your melee attacking gladiator will
be facing a stunned opponent who
will be easily butchered. In addition,
the second of your Phasor teams will
be able to fire on the next turn, while
the first team is reloading. This can
save you from the embarrassment of
having all your phasor teams reloading while the enemy comes
charging out of the trees at you!

There wasn't anything that I
wanted to do that the system
wouldn't allow, except to scan the
contents of a particular team without being in the preparatory stages
of a game. After a while the disc has
so many different teams that it's
hard to remember which is which.
This problem can be reduced by
making up two letter codes (to be
included in the file name) which
describe the nature of the stored
team.

GENERAL SUGGESTIONS
I found the medium range battlefield to be the most enjoyable, since
it was large enough to allow maneuvering, while still showing both
weapon and armor silhouettes on the
map display. (The limitations of the
Apple II's graphic capabilities
wouldn't allow these symbols to
show on the long range map.) The
random map generation option with
a crowded terrain seemed to produce
the most cerebral two player games,
although the computer tends to

In the developmental stages build
your skills with one weapon at a
time, don't change weapons after
each combat. It is definitely better to
be a master with one weapon rather
than mediocre with three or four. By
the way, when preparing for a
battle, remember to rearm any
gaper or gemstone users. Otherwise
they'll end up with nothing but their
hands to fight with! Finally, know
the combat formulae and the capabilities of your fighters in order to
formulate the best possible strategy
for a given team on a given
battlefield.

CONCLUSIONS
Easy to learn and fast to play, GG
is a great starter game for "arcaders"
who've never tried a "wargame"
before. But, much like chess, it will
take a long time to really feel like
you've mastered this game (I sure
haven't!) and the possibilities are
endless.

CYTRON (from p. 30)
2) DIRECT gives Cytrons individual movement instructions. But, this is time consuming and can be
avoided by using a Commander.
3) ORDER permits a manager
to relay instructions to a
group of Cytrons through a
Commander-type Cytron.
4) LOCATE positions the
Beam Point anywhere on
your side of the play field.
Victory is achieved through the destruction of your opponent's Command Center. Maneuvering a mine
into your opponent's Command Center
is the only way to accomplish
this. Each player begins the game
with four Power Centers which supply
him with the needed materials
and energy for producing Cytrons. If a
player is careless, his opponent will
take control of his centers—stopping
him dead in his tracks! Although it is
not necessary to capture the Power
Centers to win, this reduction in force
simplifies the task (see Hints Toward
Victory). And what do you do if you
lack another human manager? Well,
just sit down to a bout against the
computer. You may engage the computer at three levels, Beginner, Master
and Grand Master. The level most
suitable to you will quickly become
apparent. Good luck with the Grand
Master; you will need it! On the topic of
scores, you will be doing well to get
20,000 points on the Grand Master
level, 10,000 on the Master and 5,000 on
the Beginner.
If you are assuming an offensive
position, you will find that a close
group of Cytrons is extremely vulnerable to missile attack. Spacing out the
Cytrons will reduce this risk. On the
one-play version, significant advancing threats will be attacked by missile,
so keep your inter-group distance. Of
course, the Commander has to be within
ORDERing distance of the other units.
One useful technique to recapture a
Power Center is to beam a mine into
the middle of it. Since mines are cheap,
you can usually afford to sacrifice one.
Also, in the heat of battle, a Manager
can sometimes slip a lone mine
through enemy lines to defeat his
unsuspecting opponent!
Cytron Masters is an exciting game
offering multiple levels of play with
variations to suit the individual: Play
on all levels guarantees an actionpacked episode of futuristic combat.
By the way, all you Atari owners will
be happy to hear that your version is
well in the works.

GUADALCANAL (from p. 191

enjoyable, and will make up for
those boring (and frustrating) times
when the U.S. fleet is inept, unprepared, and refitting. This writer's
personal favorite for strategic
choices is to jump into the Shortlands during the day with two
previously unscratched surface and
carrier task forces and pick on
anything smaller and weaker
(cruisers, transports, destroyers, it
doesn't really matter as long as they
get sunk). If this tactic is followed,
the Japanese destroyer arm begins
to show signs of strain late in the
campaign, provided of course that
U.S. losses are minimal.
The ground battle on Guadalcanal
goes one of two ways; either you
have obvious superiority or you
don't. If you do not have overwhelming ground superiority, don't
worry about it, just keep those
marines from starving (with a few
points of supply as spares if possible)
and time will be on your side. It's
really amazing what 25,000+
marines that are fully supplied can
do when the game is gearing down
in December. Air reinforcements to
Henderson should be directly tied to
the condition of supplies on Guadalcanal and the position of the U.S.
fleet, as it doesn't do the U.S. player
any good to have precious Henderson
planes obliterated by Japanese
night bombardments. Late in the
game, Henderson makes a wonderful
ASW (anti-submarine warfare) base,
and two Japanese subs potted every
three days is the running average,
when 15+ SBD's are allocated to
attack subs spotted with unemployed
TBD's.
About those otherwise minimally
useful B-17's: they're great for two
things and two things only; bombing
Japanese supplies on Guadalcanal so
that the Japanese can't attack
properly; and finding enemy task
forces. Look at the Japanese arrival
dates for things like carriers and
transports: they are victory points
on the hoof if you can catch them.
American carrier activity should be
timed to intercept Japanese carrier
and transport activity, as well as the
"shortland free-for-all" when you
just want to sink something.
U.S. submarines should be placed
two squares S of Choiseul (a favorite
meeting place of Japanese task
forces). You won't sink very much
on the average but the rewarding
"squish" of sinking some hapless
cripple will absolutely make your
day. The Japanese submarines park
two hexes SE of San Cristobal, so
the best approach to Henderson for
T and FP groups would be well to the
north and east of this position.

STARSHIP (from p. 34)

Watch out for the Japanese CV's
around August 24th though, as they
will approach this area from about
five squares north of Malaita. The
three Japanese CV's prefer to park
in the vicinity of three squares E of
San Cristobal: that's where you
should seek them when your CV's
are ready.
The main points to remember
after the game system is mastered
are to rotate your fleet in the triangle
of Espiritu Santo - Guadalcanal - the
Shortlands -Brisbane - Espiritu
Santo, in keeping with the cyclical
nature of activity for the U.S. fleet;
and to time such activity to meet
threats and possibilities. Victory in
this game is very much an all or
nothing affair, so don't penny-pack
anything except for the "T" and
"FT" missions, which will need 6-10
DD's each for escort.

USING THE BLUFF:
The Vegans can be bluffed into
thinking that you are going to selfdestruct. If they fall for it, they will
back off for two or more turns and
not fire a shot. This comes in handy
when a shield that is facing the
enemy is damaged or if you wish to
break off the attack by putting 6500
megameters between you and the
closest Vegan ship. But, do not fire a
shot, as this will give away that you
are bluffing.
It should be noted that even if they
claim that they are not falling for
the bluff, some of their commanders
will still back off. The only real way
to see if they fall for it is by their
action. The bluff seldom works more
than once.

SUMMARY

PLAYING DEAD:

It is this writer's opinion that
GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN is
the best historical simulation (and
one of their best games) from SSI to
date. The essential aspects of historicity and playability are wellmatched, with easy accessibility of
gaming information, a well-organized set of rules, and good research
combining to provide for a game
that will keep you at your computer
for days at a time.

Playing dead is done by completely
lowering the shields facing the
enemy vessels and not firing a shot.
The probability is 50/50 per vessel,
that any single ship will fire on you.

GETTYSBURG (from p.22)

the Confederates, and both recover
(slowly) during rests.
A final difference is that TRTG
allows you to resolve each battle
outside the computer using rules for
boardgame or miniatures. This
allows the game to be used to
generate plausible scenarios for
some other gaming system.
THE ROAD TO GETTYSBURG
is a typical SSI product; excellent
production and packaging, a welldone (bug-free as near as I can tell)
program, an authentic simulation of
an historical event and a challenging game. Game length is about four
hours and there is a save option.
There is also a shorter scenario that
portrays just the Battle of Gettysburg as it actually developed. As the
game will appeal mostly to wargarners who own Apples, its major
failing — not being easy to learn or
understand — may not be too
serious. If you're new to wargaming,
and are interested in The War
Between The States, I'd suggest you
start with the much simpler
BATTLE OF SHILOH. If you
want the best that's available,
TRTG is it.

GAME DESIGN
STARSHIP COMMANDER is so
complex that most of the possible
tactics that can be employed have
not yet been explored. This is mainly
due to the way the game was
designed. The game was first taken
from a conceptual standpoint. The
scope of the game was first defined
listing all the factors that would be
involved. Next, the game was broken
down into stations; each of which
was designed, programed, and tested
separately.
It wasn't until all the stations and
logic modules were finished that we
were able to see how the game would
play. The interactions of all the
factors created some unexpected
results. The Vegans appear to act
more intelligently than was called
for in the original programming.
Crew, system, and energy management played even more important
roles than were originally designed.
The program had the feel of a true
simulation. Unlike most games where
shooting and firing occupies 90% of
your time, STARSHIP COMMANDER closely reflects the activities of
a complex vessel such as the USS
Ranger.
I hope you enjoy this game as
much as I did when I first played it.
— Good luck.

READER INPUT DEVICE #4
GAMES
Rate the following games using a
scale of 1 (terrible) to 9 (outstanding)
for each of the categories below:
PRESENTATION: Rate overall
presentation of the game. This includes
such factors as graphics, sound,
packaging, documentation. GAME
DESIGN: Rate the game design
itself. Apart from the presentation is
the game well designed, playable,
interesting? Are there problems in
the design which make the game
less than it should be?; LIFE: Does
the game wear well? Does one bore
of the game easily or does it still
command interest after multiple
plays?
Enter "0" in the first box for any
game which you have not played or
have not played enough to have
formed an opinion.

RESULTS OF

R.I.D. #3
There were 118 Reader Input
Devices turned in by press time for
this issue. Apple users continue to
dominate the readership (55%) but
Atari users went up to 35% on this
issue. All but four of the games
offered for review in R.I.D.#3 received
enough responses to be included in
the results. Any game that is not
reviewed by at least 10% of the user
group(s) to which the game belongs
(Apple, Atari, combinations, etc.) will
not have any results listed. The
numbers could not be considered
significant.
The "% Play" column indicates
what percentage of the respondents
which have the appropriate machine
have played the game. For example,
THE WARP FACTOR was played
and evaluated by 60% of the respondents who have an Apple II or an IBM
PC.

ARTICLES
Rate the articles in this issue on a
scale of 1 (terrible) to 9 outstanding).
If the article does not interest you
enter 0. Use "PRS" box.

The games that were not played/
reviewed by at least 10% of the
readers were Wall Street (CE Software), Stocks and Bonds (AH),
Jabbertalky (Automated Simulations), Horse Racing Classic (Tazumi).
Horse Racing Classic was reviewed
by only 8% of our Apple users, but
they gave it a whopping 8.00 composite
score. While the numbers can not be
trusted because of the low number of
responses, it is an interesting score.
We will include Horse Racing Classic
in a future R.I.D.
The top rated game is no surprise.
CHOPLIFTER!, which has only been
out a short time has already been
played by over 50% of our respondents. They like the game and rate it
highest of the games offered for
review in R.I.D.#3. Three other games
follow closely behind Choplifter!.
They are KNIGHT OF DIAMONDS
(7.66), PURSUIT OF THE GRAF
SPEE (7.60), and RENDEZVOUS
(7.53). DEADLINE Leads the list of
games that run on something other
than, or in addition to, the Apple. It
came in 5th with a 6.97 composite.
Voyager Software's STARSHIP
COMMANDER made a good showing
in 8th place. However, like Graf Spee
and CASINO, it has not been played
by a large number of Apple users.
TEMPLE OF APSHAI came in 11th
(6.08) which is commendable for a
game that came out in 1979.
CGW finds it surprising that FIREBUG from Muse Software came in
20th (4.84). We find it an interesting
game that requires some thinking
and dexterity. Evidently low-res
graphics just don't cut it with garners
anymore.
THE WARP FACTOR (60%) just
barely nudged out TEMPLE OF
APSHAI (59%) as the game most
played among RID#3 titles. However,
neither come close to challenging
EASTERN FRONT's 89% rating in
RID#2. CHOPLIFTER's 51% rating
is remarkable considering that the
game has only been out for about four
months.

With this issue we begin the COMPUTER GAMING WORLD TOP 10.
The ten games that make the list will
be the ten highest rated games from
the various RIDs. Beginning with the
next issue a few of the Top 10 games
will be cycled back into a RID for
re-evaluation.

-

