FEATURES
Jinxter

14

Scorpion's Tale Spreads Tips / Scorpia

Space Quest II

18

Sierra's Quest Series Continues / Douglas Seacat

Advanced Dungeons & Dragons

20

Preview of AD&D's First Official Computer Game / Johnny Wilson

Red Storm Rising

22

Tom Clancy & Sid Meier Talk About The Game

Hard Copy!

25

Computer Gaming Books

Infocomics

26

Beyond "Beyond Zork" / Charles Ardai

Lord British Kisses And Tells All

28

The Design of the Ultima Series / Lord British

Stompin' On The Savoy

30

Activision's "Rampage" of Destruction / James V. Trunzo

Quest Test

31

Test Your Knowledge of Adventure Games / Lynn Bethards

Decisive Battles of the Civil War

32

SSG's American Civil War Game / Regan Carey & Mike Salata

Beyond Dark Castle

34

Evaluation & Hints / Alan Roberts

The Creation of A Universe

36

CRPG Design vs. Text Adventure Design / William Leslie

Romance of the Three Kingdoms

39

Sneak Preview of a Japanese Strategy Game / William "Biff" Kritzen

Fire Brigade

40

Debut Offering from Australia's Panther Games / Allyn Vannoy

Video Gaming World

44

Video Game Reviews and News / Katz, Kunkel, and Worley

CD-I / DVI: Who's In Bed With Whom?

49

Interactive Entertainment Is On The Way / Bob Jacob & David Riordan

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Inside The Industry
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall Of Fame
100 Games Rated

4
8
55
55
56

July 1988
Number 49

TAKING A PEEK
Arcadia
c/o Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
AAARGH: Players are invited to
take on the role of either a giant
lizard or a one-horned ogre in this
conversion of the popular coin-op
game. Beyond simply going on a
"Rampage" of people gobbling, creative building demolition, and undergoing the monstrous equivalent of a
"Big Mac Attack," players are expected to gather a hoard of eggs in
preparation for an assault on the
fiery volcano where they will attain

the golden egg. Amiga ($34.99).
Circle Reader Service Card #1.

ROADWARS: Using a weird and
wonderful fiction in which a parapsychological "resonance theory" has
replaced "relativity theory," this action
game usurps the archetypal sci-fi
plotline of intelligent computers
going mad and casts the player in
the hero's role of putting this mod,
mad world right. One player, with the
player's computer as "wing man," or
two players cooperating (at least,
until the bonus stages of the game)
must travel the "space roads" between the moons of radiationblighted Armageddon and neutralize

the threats. Each player pilots a "Battlesphere," a 25th Century interstellar
tank equipped with a protective
shield for defense and powerful laser
cannon for offense. Amiga ($34.99),
C-64/128 ($29.99). Circle Reader Service Card #2.

ROCKFORD: THE ARCADE
GAME: Remember Rockford? He
was the archaeologist hero of "First
Star Software"'s "Boulder Dash" and
"Super Boulder Dash," sort of a cartoon version of "Indiana Jones." Well,
he's back! This time, however, he
isn't satisfied with uncovering the artifacts of one ancient civilization. He
is after five different treasures. In
"The Caverns of Craymar" scenario,
he is collecting the Pharaoh's Death
Masks. "The Kitchens of Kyssandra"
sequence finds him harvesting the

(Continued on page 7)

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 4)
Apples of Eternal Youth in a cartoon
"Shangri La." As "Rockford The Cowboy" in "The Search for El Dorado,"
he tries to stay out of "Boot Hill"
while collecting Indian pennies. As
"Rockford The Spaceman," he collects suns (what a gas?!) and in "Doctor Frankenstein," he collects hearts
for some much needed organ
transplants. Atari ST ($34.99), C64/128 ($29.99). Circle Reader Service Card #3.

Compu-Teach, Inc.
240 Bradley St.
New Haven, CT 06511
SEE THE U.S.A.: It used to be a

chore to memorize the names of the
50 states of the U.S. and their capitals, much less learn anything about
their major products and points of interest. This educational game
motivates young learners by means
of quiz games (with an easily edited
data base), five disks of regional
specific graphics disks, a computer
map for strategically planning simulated trips across the U.S., and a
colorful puzzle map of the U.S. included in the packaging. Apple
($49.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#4.

Epyx
P.O. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA
DEATH SWORD: With a graphics
presentation that is stunning, this action adventure allows the player (as

Prince Gorth of the Northlands) to
swashbuckle his way through a challenging fantasy environment. The
joystick moderated combat has
similar controls to "Championship
Wrestling" and some martial arts
games on the market. It usually takes
twelve blows to kill an opponent in
this game, but something new has
been added—a critical hit. Part of
the "Maxx Out!" series, this British
designed program deserves a serious
look from arcade fans. Apple, Atari
ST, C-64/128, IBM. ($24.95) Circle
Reader Service Card #5.

4 x 4 OFF-ROAD RACING: Action and strategy are combined in
this four scenario endurance racing
game. Players can drive the famous
Baja 1,000, attempt to survive the
(Continued on page 52)

F

ortunes are made and

lost in seconds in the
various "pits" of the
Chicago Board of Trade,
particularly the commodities exchange. To a
novice, the process of
buying and selling "futures"
can seem frightening and
chaotic. The computer
entertainment software
industry is a subset of
another "pit," the extremely volatile consumer electronics industry. The consumer
electronics industry has
had to learn how to
deal with global
economic theories and
strategies in order to
deal with the weaker U.
S. dollar and the invasion of increasingly innovative imports, as
well as learn how to
cooperate in a "global
village" of joint ventures
and cross-marketing
throughout the industry.
Nevertheless, both the industry as a whole and
the recreational
software producers as
our magazine's particular focus are bullish
on the future.

WE'RE
NUMBER ONE,
SORT OF . .
According to Software
Publishers Association
figures, recreational software
made up 36% of the 1987
market (units shipped)
making games the number one
computer product in terms of
units sold. However the lower
price point of games means that
those same units added up to
only 8.8% of the share of dollar
sales.
The good news for the computer entertainment industry,
however, should be that 1988's
first quarter profits in entertainment software were up 30%
over the first quarter of 1987. According to Tom Frisina, CEO of
Three-Sixty Pacific, 1988's
recreational software sales will
go dramatically higher than
1987's 20 million units. He suggests 27 million in '88, 36 million in '89, and 50 million in '90.
Bruce Davis, CEO of
Mediagenic (Ed.: Activision

has changed its name to
Mediagenic because the newer
title is more reflective of the
total corporate personality than
the older title which still causes
potential investors to think of
cartridge games", is even more
optimistic in that he projects a
38% increase in sales of computer entertainment software
over 1988.

current boards." The consensus
of the panel seemed to be that
when the hardware was there
with a sufficient user base, they
would support it.
Sierra moved into this area
with their usual driving force of
setting standards in the MSDOS environment rather than
waiting for them. The company

Winds of Progress
Unleashed in
"Windy City"

hired television and motion picture composer, William
Goldstein, and Bob Siebenberg,
drummer for the rock band "Supertramp," to compose
soundtracks for King's Quest IV
and Space Quest III respectively.
Sierra founder, Ken Williams,
insists, "We see this as critical
to mass consumer acceptance
of our new form of home
entertainment." Noting that
sound is already more important in the Japanese
market (where Sierra is not
only selling their products
successfully, but where they
discovered quality arcade tit
les like Thexder and
Silpheed to license from
Japan) than it has been in
the U. S. to this point,
Roberta Williams stated,
"The Japanese have in
fluenced us a lot. Not just in
music, but in very nice intro
ductions to the games."
Japanese gamers even
buy cassette tape
soundtracks of the music
used in computer games.
For example, the CGW staff
was given a pre-release copy
of Koei's
i Romance of the
Three Kingdoms
soundtrack. We were told
that the Japanese market
was so anxiously awaiting
this soundtrack that the prerelease copy could easily
bring $500 on the Japanese
blackmarket.

Computer Entertainment Software
& The Summer Consumer
Electronics Show
in Chicago
The Sound
of Music
Although software publishers
are aware of the fact that the
home market requires quality
graphics and sound, most are
not ready to deal with the dearth
of sound support on the current
crop of MS-DOS machines.
CGW editor, Russell Sipe, asked
a panel of CEOs whose companies have strong entertainment emphases if they were
doing anything about this. ThreeSixty's Tom Frisina answered, "If
the IBM is to be the home
machine, it needs better sound,
but a sound board must be
priced at a $49-$79 price point
and it must do more than the

which pushed for graphics enhancement with their early support of EGA, VGA, and MCGA
products and which pioneered in
packaging MS-DOS products in
both 5.25" and 3.5" formats is
now pressing the envelope in
sound quality. As John Williams,
Sierra marketing spokesman,
verbally throws down the
gauntlet, "Now that an IBM
graphics standard has been established, we're ready to go into
sound." Sierra products will
soon support three different
music cards. These include the:
AdLib music card, IBM music
feature, and Roland MT-32.
Prices range from a low of $195
for the AdLib card to a high of
$600 for the top-of-the-line
Roland card. In addition to supporting the cards, Sierra has

Now, Sierra's emphasis on
quality music in the MSDOS world combined with
Cinemaware's excellent
soundtracks in the Amiga
world may lead to
soundtrack records, tapes,
and compact discs in the
U.S. In addition, Interplay
Productions' forthcoming
Neuromancer will feature an
original song by DEVO. The
song, Some Things Never
Change, was originally written
for the computer program, but
may well become the hit single
from the group's latest album.
We expect the trend of entertainment crossover between films,
recording, literature, and computer games to continue.

Simulacrum '88
During the computer entertainment panel discussion, each
company spokesperson was
asked to comment on what
categories they perceived as
"hot sellers." The first word out
of almost every mouth was
"simulation." First person view-

point games with a combination
of real-time action, hot graphics
(and sound if the machine is
capable of it), and strategy are
usually associated with
Microprose and subLogic because of their pioneering efforts
in constructing models of flight
and combat. Other companies
are now attempting to duplicate
their landmark work in other
areas, while these two giants are
still offering new types of simulations and enhanced technology.

Mediagenic; a conversion of
DataSoft's Tomahawk for the
IIGS which offers a big advance
in color and sound from the 8bit versions; and Final Assault
from Epyx. Mediagenic's affiliated publisher, Absolute
Entertainment, will be releasing the F-18 simulator on both
the Commodore 64/128 and the
Atari 7800 system. The program
will feature 3-D animation and

Fever Pitch
The interest in sports games
has continued to rise to the
point where most companies
were introducing, at least, one.
Even California Dreams, a
small company which has specialized in simulating gambling
and table games, has an-

subLogic is excited about
their cooperative effort with
Microsoft on Flight Simulator
FSIII offers a significant
graphic leap forward on the IBM
and there were times I thought I
was looking at an Amiga or ST
screen. To enhance their entire
line of flight simulators: Right
Simulators II & Ill, Jet, and
Stealth Mission, they have
recently released the Western
European Scenery Disks. These
offer pilots the only legal means
of flying under the Arc de Triomphe or landing in Red Square
among their other pleasures.
The company's affiliated
publisher, ActionSoft, has just
converted ThunderChopper to
the MS-DOS environment.
Microprose is offering an enhanced version of Project:
Stealth Fighter entitled F-19. It
is an IBM product that has
enough new approaches to
make it worthy of a title which
distinguishes it from the popular
C-64 product. As Sid Meier
noted, 'The classified nature of
Stealth allows us more creative
room."
Accolade is working on a
projected final quarter release of
a tank simulation. Steel Thunder
will enable players to command
a Patton, Bradley, or Abrams in
"hot spots" like Israel, Lebanon,
and Central America. The company researched the tanks from
the inside-out during a government tank exhibition at the
Presidio in San Francisco and
the game will allow players to
play in three modes: Tank
School, Practice and Combat.
Avalon Hill Microcomputer
Games is developing M1. This
simulation approaches the Persian Gulf situation with a four
tank platoon (rather than one
tank in the former), making the
player a platoon commander
and utilizing search and destroy
missions. Both products are to
be initially released on the Commodore 64/128.
Simulations to be released in
the third quarter of 1988 include: F-18 Hornet, Tomcat The F-14 Fighter Simulator,
and U.S.S. Ocean Ranger from

solid graphics in this carrierbased fighter simulation. Absolute is releasing their F-14
product on the Atari 2600 video
game system. Mediagenic's Activision label plans on a July
release for their modern naval
simulation. Multiple theaters of
operations insure that players
must engage in combat with a
variety of enemies as they command the U.S.S. Ocean Ranger
through 16 levels of difficulty.
Final Assault is a mountain
climbing simulation. Epyx expects it to be in stores by the
fall of 1988. Ski slope iconography indicates whether the
route to be chosen to ascend
the mountain is easy (green
circle) or at expert level (black
diamond). Players may choose
the season to make the ascent,
as well as equipment. The game
could easily be described as a
simulation with arcade elements.

nounced Hot Rod, a drag racing
construction set. This ST
product allows players to build,
cruise, and race their own
"American Graffiti" style street
machine.
Of course, the big media event
related to sports programs was
Mediagenic's satellite-fed press
conference with Pete Rose. Last
issue, CGW reported on the
Gamestar product in Inside
The Industry, but more details
will be forthcoming since we
have now had two opportunities
to interview the Cincinnati Reds
manager regarding his contribution to the computer game. The
name of the game is Pete Rose
Pennant Fever and it is expected
to debut in IBM format during
August of 1988 and in C-64/128
format by the fourth quarter. In
addition, the game has been
"licensed" to Mediagenic's Absolute Entertainment affiliate

for conversion to an Atari 2600
game. Other Gamestar
products will include Main
Event, a "professional wrestling"
game for the C-64/128 and
IBM, to be made available this
summer and a conversion of
Star Rank Boxing II for the
Apple II scheduled for the same
time. microillusions will enhance their popular "one to one"
series with the release of the
Amiga version of Turbo, a
racing action game. On the
video game front, Absolute will
offer Super Skaleboardin' on
the Atari 7800, a sequel to their
popular Skateboardin' on the
2600.
Epyx will soon release Sporting News Baseball (as noted in
our WCES report, CGW #45, p.
20), but will also add Street
Sports Football and The
Games: Summer Edition to
their lineup over the summer.
The first will allow players to
design their own plays and utilize a 34 play "playbook." Unlike
most of the series, this will
definitely not be a "joystick
buster." The second is a carefully modelled summer olympics
game. The designers created a
detailed model of a stadium
using Sculpt 3-D on the Amiga.
Then, they compressed the data
down into an impressively scrolling and detailed three-dimensional viewpoint. In addition, the
concern for effectively modelling
was shown by the research
where Epyx' designers went
regularly to Stanford University's
track and field events to make
certain that the animation is
handled correctly and the
viewpoint's correct. Also, other
competitions than the one the
player is involved with are
portrayed as going on simultaneously in the background.
Perhaps, the most unique sports
program demonstrated by Epyx
was Skateball. Originally
designed by French-based UbiSoft, the game is a cross between hockey, soccer, and Rollerball (as in the movie of a
decade ago). A third quarter
release for ST, Amiga, and IBM
(fourth quarter for C-64/128),
the game offers different rinks
with deadly hazards and the option of winning by scoring goals
or gaining victory by attrition
(killing off the other team).
Mindscape's design team
responsible for Superstar Ice
Hockey and Indoor Sports
(DesignStar) has focused on
less serious competitions with
the new Clubhouse Sports.
Beyond a "midway'esque shooting gallery, the game also includes foosball and pinball

games. Cinemaware officially
announced its new sports line
with 7V Sports Football. How
does Cinemaware, noted for its
cinematic approaches to hybrid
arcade/adventure products, approach sports? They are using
television analysis and camera
angles, of course. The Amiga
release is projected for the fall
(to go scrimmage line to scrimmage line against John Madden
Football from Electronic Arts?
(as noted in our WCES coverage
in #45, p. 20)), but the IIGS,
ST, C-64/128, and IBM versions
should trail the play throughout
1989. The crowd, press
coverage, and arcade action
should make this a unique approach to the game. In addition,
the product is designed for full
26 team league play in which
human owners can operate their
teams, while computer owners
operate the remaining teams.
Hence, computer vs. computer
games will go on simultaneously
with human-to-human play and
scores of other "games" will be
"broadcast" throughout the
human-controlled game. In addition, Melbourne House and
Mastertronic are publishing
John Elway's Quarterback, a
combination action-strategy
simulation on Apple, IBM, C-64,
and IIGS. The game provides
data for all 28 NFL teams,
digitized sound effects on IBM
and IIGS, and realistic animation.
Accolade introduced its first
action game by noted designer,
Steve Cartwright. Fast Break is
a three-on-three adaptation of
professional basketball for one
or two players. The popular interface utilized in Hardball and 4th
& Inches has been incorporated
into this design which is more
than a joystick buster. Their new
T.K.O. game may be a real
knockout. For the first time, a
player gets the feeling of a first
person viewpoint from a boxing
game. The screen is divided into
an upper and lower window, as
well as side window for status
graphs. The upper portion of the
screen shows the player's opponent, while the lower portion
of the screen shows the player
character. The status column
shows an overhead view for discerning ring position (very important to boxing strategy) and feedback graphs for strength, endurance, etc. Just as impressive
were the colorful graphics with
bruises and cuts to illustrate
damage taken by both boxers.
The Artech Digital Entertainments design team has created
both a tennis game, Serve &
Volley which places more emphasis on strategy than has previous tennis computer games,

and a billiards game, Rack 'Em,
for Accolade. Both games offer
interesting interfaces and
graphics viewpoints beyond
what is presently available on
these subjects. The demos of
these two products were impressive.

Fantasy Island
Software publishers know a
good thing when they see one

IBM, IIGS, and ST shouldn't
take a great deal longer. Lucasfilm Games will be distributing
Zak McKracken and the Alien
Mindbenders during mid-summer via Mediagenic. This
game, a hilarious blend of super
market tabloid legends and an
improved version of the Maniac
Mansion interface (for example,
the "What is" command is
changed to "Walk to" with a
click instead of click, drag, click,

managing to get themselves kidnapped by aliens and forced to
work for "ScumSoft Software"
and create second-rate arcade
games; and King's Quest IV:
The Perils of Rosella, a beautiful
3-D adventure with advanced
(and magnificent) sound, as
well. The adventure will use
cinema-type approaches and experiments with differing perspectives. In fact, unless it is edited
out, Roberta Williams will make
a cameo appearance in the
product. The game will be the
"biggest" in the series (ten 5.25"
disks and 5 MB in both formats), but it is bigger because
of superior animation and
sound, not storyline.
Manhunter, the alien invasion
mystery adventure described in
the March CES coverage in
CGW (p. 16), should be released
in August for IBM
work-and-play-alikes, IIGS in September, and
Macintosh in October. Gold
Rush will be released on IBM in
September and will feature three
completely different routes to
"Californny" during the famous
rush of '49 (Conestoga wagon,
Isthmus of Panama, around the
horn). Therefore, the game can
certainly be played more than
once by the same player. The
game offers historically accurate
challenges.

Therefore, expect to see a
plethora of adventure games
published in the next six
months. Paragon Software, an
EA affiliated label, has stretched
the envelope by utilizing Prolog
to enhance the interface of their
time-travel adventure, Guardians of Infinity: To Save Kennedy. Graduate students from
Carnegie-Mellon worked with the
company on the project with the
intent of developing a parser
which would allow users to type
in virtually anything.
Cinemaware's long awaited,
Rocket Ranger, will ship this
summer on Amiga. The digitized
voices (which do not sound like
the standard Amiga "Say!"
utility), impressive soundtrack by
Bob Lindstrom, smooth arcade
sequences (the fist fight scenes
are practically animated cartoon
quality), cinematic segueways,
and delightfully improbably plot
line make this one look like a
big seller. The C-64 version
doesn't look far behind and the

and there are more verbs which
are context specific which
change as players need them),
offers a fast-moving, but puzzleintensive approach to an adventure game. Apple, C-64, and
IBM formats should all ship this
summer.
Sierra is releasing both sequels to their popular titles and
new concepts in adventure
games. The sequels include:
Leisure Suit Larry II: Looking
for Love in Several Wrong
Places (IBM in September, IIGS
in October), which takes the
loser from last year's award winning adult adventure to
Southern California; Police
Quest II: The Vengeance (IBM
in October, IIGS in November),
where the Death Angel has escaped and the player must follow his trail and recapture him;
Space Quest III: The Pirates of
Pestulon (IBM in November),
where the designers have written
themselves into the story by

Strategic Simulations, Inc. was
demonstrating its Pool of
Radiance adventure game from
its Advanced Dungeons and
Dragons line (for a sneak
preview, see page 20 of this
issue). As reported in CGW #48
(p. 9), the company has signed
a distribution agreement with
EA distribution. As Trip Hawkins
said, "Both Joel and I have been
in this industry for more than
ten years and in that time have
learned that in some situations
it is much more effective to join
forces and make your advances
as allies." The analogy went on
to suggest that EA, because of
its long term distribution network, is in position to deploy the
troops, while SSI, because of its
imminent release of the AD&D
line, is in position to provide the
troops with ammo. Other EA affiliates were also demonstrating
adventure games. Interstel
places the players in a postholocaust environment. The
game features exploration,
resource management, and
combat. It should also wear very
well, since the adventure can
take place in any one of four million possible worlds. The game
is projected for end of the summer release, but company
spokesperson Dr. Trevor Soren-

(Continued on page 51)

W

11, here we are already, in the middle of
summer. Fred can hardly wait for next
month and the annual Grue convention.
He's been counting off (actually, chewing off) the
days on the calendar. You can hardly blame him,
it's the only chance he gets to see all his relatives.
However, that's next month, and he's still behind
the bar, pouring out a tall, cool one for you. Lucky
you! But, there's all kinds of luck . . . .

This month, the
most famous tavern
in adventuredom
has been decorated
in the style of a
British pub and Scorpia weaves a tale
about "Jinxter."

Jinxter, from Magnetic Scrolls via Rainbird, is
a fun little game, whose fun is unfortunately
marred by a rather unpleasant ending, in which
you end up dead. This is unavoidable, so if you
prefer not to play games with such unhappy endings, you may want to pass this one by. Otherwise, you might like it.
You will also get a fair amount of help with the
adventure from the clues included with the game
in a "newspaper" called The Independent Guardian. Each clue is a set of two-letter pairs that you
must type into the game, which then produces a
hint (or sometimes an outright solution). However,
some clues only give you half a solution to a puzzle, and you must figure out the
rest yourself.
By the way, don't lose that
newspaper. Jinxter (on the Apple at
least), is not copy protected; you
make copies of the two singlesided disks and play from those.
Thus, every time you boot up, you
will be asked to type in a certain
word from a particular page,
column, and line.
So, there you are, riding the bus
(ugh!) on your way home. It's been
a pretty dreary day and you're looking forward to relaxing in your own
snug little domain. The day,
however, becomes even drearier
after you get off at your stop and
notice that you're about to be flattened by another bus coming up
behind you.
Did someone say "bad luck"? Fortunately, your luck is about to
change, at least for a short while. A huge individual in a herringbone overcoat, munching dispiritedly on a processed-cheese sandwich, pulls
you back just in the nick of time.
This person is a Guardian, who sticks a document in your hand without further ado (this document actually comes in the game package, and
you should read it). Mainly, what it tells you is that
you (lucky person that you are) have just been
selected to save the land from the evil witch Jannedor Nasty. All you have to do is find five magic
charms (each with their own special power), the
bracelet they belong to (and put them back, of
course), and then, use the bracelet to get rid of
Jannedor. Simple, what? You should be done by
tea time.
The Guardian vanishes in his typical mysterious
way, and you're on your own. Perhaps nosing

about your house and picking up a few odds and
ends will help. Make sure you look everywhere so
you don't miss anything important (the milk did
not seem important, and I never found a use for
it). Sooner or later you'll get a phone call from
your good friend Xam, who appears to be kidnapped in mid-call, as it were.
That sounds pretty serious, so you might want to
get over there as quickly as possible. The only
question is whether you want to get there past the
bull or the barbed wire. I preferred the barbed wire
(with suitable protection); luck is not a thing to be
squandered in this game (it's wise to check your
score with the "score" command to keep an eye in
this).
Xam's house is about the same size as yours (although oddly, he seems to have no bathroom in
it), and there are a couple of things here and there
that you'll probably want to borrow. Don't overlook
the backyard.
In the middle of all this, the postman will come
and go, leaving behind a parcel notice. You can
get him back pretty easily oust read the note), but
since you aren't Xam, he won't give you the package. Now you'll have to figure out how to open
Xam's mailbox. This isn't too tough, actually, and
the game clues will help you along. Sooner or
later, you'll have your first charm, the walrus (or
oojimy).
I hen there's the mouse in the kitchen, but that
too is pretty simple, and before long you should be
ready for the Boathouse. This is one of the double
puzzles, where the game clues give you only half
the solution. Essentially, what you have to do is
open the boathouse door without making too
much of a racket. Getting what you need is fairly
simple, but keeping it is another matter. If you feel
that things are running away from you, you may
want to look in the back yard again.
Once the door is opened and the mad gardener
has departed, you'll have another charm (hang on
to the sack, you'll need it later). You will also have
another problem, as that otherwise-seaworthy
canoe seems to have a hole in its bottom. Still, I'm
sure that in no time at all you will find something
to stuff in there, and be able to take a little trip on
the lagoon.
The view is a pretty one, but time is passing, so
paddle along south to the Pagoda. Down below, a
large mound of dirt blocks your path and it's a bit
too dense to dig out with your hands. However, in
a short time you'll probably be able to wriggle
through, so to speak, and find your way to the
scuba gear.
Yes, you're going to do some underwater exploring. The only thing you will have to keep an eye
on is your air supply. Just remember to take off
the aqualung whenever there is air around and
you should have no problems at all. The game
clues are sufficient to see you through this part of
the adventure.
Then (back in the canoe again), it's off to town.
This part can be done in most any order. All the
puzzles are stand-alone. Let's visit the baker first.

He's advertising for help, so go ahead and volunteer. Once down in the basement, look all around
and before long, you should have another charm
to add to your collection.
Getting out with it, however, is another matter.
Especially when the baker comes down and sear
ches you (not nice of him!). Just remember, you
don't really want the job. Think of a way to get
fired and remember, Bob's your uncle!
Now, you might want to look in at the post office. Once you've dealt with the postmistress, you
can turn your attention to the safe. This is a little
difficult, since you have to mess around with four
handles, and get all of them facing down. It seems
easy, but you can be sure that one handle is going
to pop up when another turns down. The game
clues will help, but keep in mind that the handles
can be turned two ways. Cheers!
Speaking of cheers, you'll most likely want to
look in at the pub. It is a typical village pub, but
the fireplace certainly brightens it up a bit. You
may want to look at this more closely. Buying a
beer is optional, since it makes little difference in
the game.
Now, you're ready for the carousel. As you may
have noticed, the rides on it (only five) resemble
the five charms. Two in particular deserve your attention. The game clues haven't much to say
about the carousel, but it is very important. You
may want to fool around here (save first!) with your
charms to see what happens.
Then, you can get on with the clock tower. Obtaining entry is fairly simple (game clues again).
You do not want to go into the workshop. The
weather clock itself is another matter, though. Of
course, that girder is pretty high overhead, and
you'll need a means of reaching it. Seen a ladder
anywhere?
Once up on a rather perilous perch (I hope you
brought everything with you), you can examine the
two weathermen (one for sunshine, one for rain) a
bit more closely. Don't leave anything behind if
you can help it. Oh, and you can actually get on
the beam. Think about it.
Before long you should end up with a free ride to
somewhere else. It's possible that a certain item
gets jettisoned. So, since you really need it, you're
going to have to figure out a way of keeping it.
The game clues won't help you here and the solution is not one that may readily come to mind. In a
way, it reminded me of the Bugblatter Beast: if you
can't see it, it isn't there.
When you arrive at the train station, you'll probably want to buy a ticket. There are two ways of
doing this. The easy way is to simply purchase it, if
you have enough money. The hard way (if you
don't have enough) is a bit more physically
demanding and the game clues will take you
through it. Think of it all as an entertaining experience. By the way, there is nothing else special
at the station. All the rest of it is window dressing
and atmosphere.
At this point (before boarding the train) you

should make certain that you have everything you
should (save here as a precaution). Up to now,
you could always go back to pick up something
you missed or overlooked, but once on the train,
there's no going back. The end-game is at hand.
Luckily, the train trip is a short one. However,
when you get off, you'll notice that there doesn't
seem to be anywhere to go, except perhaps down
the chasm, which is not recommended. Then
again, if you did the right thing back at the
carousel, you won't be having any problems in getting across the chasm to (shudder) Jannedor's
castle.
Actually, it isn't a bad castle;
rather typical of castles, if a bit
grandiose and ostentatious. Just
move along until you reach the jail
(or gaol, as they say in Britain; it's
pronounced the same way). In a
short time you will find your friend
Xam in a dungeon cell (standard
issue) manacled to the wall.
Naturally, you want to help the
poor fellow. Unfortunately, the moment you wake him up he sets off
a racket and now, you're locked in!
Tch! But wait, maybe there's hope
for you yet. The cell contains a
wooden hatch, that opens onto a
small space where food is served to
the prisoners.
Now, if you could just get in there
and close the inner hatch behind
you, the other one would open.
Too bad you can't be in two places at once. The
game clues will give you an idea of what to do, but
again, this is a multi-part problem. The trick is time
delay here. You need to set things up so you have
enough time to get into the dumb waiter before
the hatch shuts. Don't forget the manacles and
check over your inventory for something you
haven't used yet.
All right, now you're moving! Into the kitchen
and up the steps you go into the Great Hall. Investigate this carefully, then off to the northeast tower,
to get the bracelet. Well, maybe you won't get to it
all that quickly, as the bracelet is being held under
a magic dome. Underneath, you will notice what is
a sliding block puzzle.
Yup, you're going to have to slide the little numbers (and make sure you say "slide", 'cause "move"
won't work) into a particular arrangement. When
you've done it right, the dome will shatter and the
bracelet will be yours. Game clues will again be
helpful here.
Now, you're just about ready for Jannedor, who
is lurking up in the northwest tower. Luckily, she
won't be in the room when you go in. However, I
wouldn't advise you to linger here, as she might
show up at any time (and when she does, you
have absolutely had it). Grab the crystal ball and
get out.

(Continued on page 47)

As Welcome As
An Insurance
Salesman
"Space Quest II: Vohaul's Revenge"
Reviewed by Douglas Seacat

S

Sure, you're just a janitor. Sure, you've got
your own problems. Sure, you're stuck on
that same stupid base, but your home
planet has serious problems. It seems that Vohaul,
the supreme evil guy of the universe whose plans
you ruined in Space Quest: The Sarien Encounter,
has been genetically engineering insurance salesmen as
part of his plot to bring your
planet to its knees. Somebody
has to do something and
there is no one lower in the
cosmic pecking order to pass
the buck to. Unfortunately,
Vohaul even knows what to do
with you. He will keep you
working for him in a slavelabor camp on his planet. You
find yourself shipped down to
the planet in the shuttle and
end up being sent by air-skimmer, to the labor camp.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Space Quest II
IBM
Solitaire
$49.95
Mark Crowe and
Scott Murphy
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

Fortunately for you (and the
story), Vohaul's thugs forget to
fill up the tank on the air-skimmer, and you crash in the
jungle, fortuitously landing
upon your guards in the
process. Up to this point,
everything has been almost entirely
automatic, but from this point on, the
real story starts.

The jungle is the heart of the game
and it is, of course, where most of the
playing time occurs. There is the jungle
itself, a swamp, a forest, and several
other areas of interest. Most of all, there are many
colorful and diverse ways to die. The save
mechanism should be used extensively in this
area, no matter how innocent the contemplated action. Some of these seemingly innocuous actions
are: taking a pleasant swim in the swamp; navigating the tentacles of a man-eating plant; and escaping from the jail of the friendly local cannibal.
Once the various puzzles in the jungle are completed (no easy task), a shuttle must be stolen in
order for your courageous hero to escape the
dreadful planet and plunge headlong into .. .
(What did you expect?) the arms of Sludge Vohaul.

Yes, Sludge quickly snaps up your ship and brings
you aboard his massive battle-asteroid. Surprisingly, no guards are present at the docking bay when
you leave the ship. What plans does Vohaul have
for you? What demented tortuous scheme is being
set up? For the most part, at least compared to
the jungle, the asteroid is fairly tame. Completing
the end game, however, is not an easy task. Who
said saving the universe would be easy?

Graphic Descriptions
Though the game is similar to the original Space
Quest, the addition of more detailed animation,
more difficult puzzles, an improved parser (hurrah!), and greater scope makes a good game even
better. While the game can be played independently of Space Quest I, many players will appreciate having experience with other Sierra
text/graphics games before using this more difficult
program. The first time one uses this system, it
can be very disorienting, often making the puzzles
seem much harder than they really are. The player
should note that this is not a game where the
graphics are merely additions which help enliven
the text. In Sierra's Quest series, the graphics are
the game.
To this end, the programmers have done a good
job of providing simple but usable graphics. While
the style and quality of the graphics themselves are
not much different from the earlier Quest games,
Space Quest Ii (SQII) has improved and
broadened the animation to a great extent. Naturally, if you are buying the game for use on an IBM,
an EGA board is highly recommended. The four
colors offered on the CGA board just are not
enough to get a feel for everything. It is easy to
miss important objects and clues on a CGA system, simply because they cannot be discerned on
the screen. Occasionally, the text descriptions will
point out these difficult to discover objects, but the
graphics are normally the only real tool for interpreting the game.
The text interaction with the game has also improved in SQII. One of the things which makes the
Quest series of games unique is the fact that they
are constantly trying to unify both text and graphic
forms of computer entertainment. While they are
still far from their ideal, SQII has come closer to
this. The vocabulary has been expanded, including
many verbs which were sorely lacking in the first
game. Now, one can actually describe most actions completely, rather than merely using the ubiquitous verb, "use." The game has a long way to go
before their parser will compare with the better
ones in the industry, but SQII shows some steps in
the right direction.
Another mark of improvement lies in the structure of the puzzles and plot, the heart of any adventure game. The original Space Quest, while enjoyable, was not particularly difficult. Problems arose
only with unfamiliarity with the graphic environment. SQII offers the same graphic challenges,
while also providing some clever puzzles. While the
"grab-it-all" strategy still applies, the uses for most
(Continued on page 46)

Sneak Preview

Reflections on a
"Pool of Radiance"

by Johnny L. Wilson

p

ool of Radiance, Strategic Simulations'
long-awaited first product based on the
famous Advanced Dungeons & Dragons role
playing system is nearing completion. The game is
a computer role playing game which utilizes, as
much as possible, the familiar AD&D rules and is located in TSR's previously published Forbidden
Realms environment. For those who want to move
characters from CRPG to the pen and paper version of the role playing system, TSR Inc. (Tactical
Studies Rules) plans to publish Pool of Radiance as
a module in the Forbidden Realms series.
Prior to press time for this issue CGW obtained an
advanced copy of Pool of Radiance from SSI. Although the product upon which this sneak preview
is based is not complete, it was complete enough
to let us explore the game environment and
mechanics.The first impression we noted was a
sense of deja vu (the experience, not the computer
game by that title). The basic screen looks a lot like
the CRPGs in our "Hall of Fame" and in the top ten
of our game listings. The familiar three dimensional
maze-like view in an upper left window such as one
would find in a Might & Magic or Bard's Tale is
there. The window with a listing of characters such
as one would find in Wasteland is there, as is the
use of an active character to represent the party
that one would find in an Ultima V.

Artisan's Guild
of Clever Sprites
First impressions don't always tell
the entire story, however, and this
case is no exception. First of all, the
window with the three-dimensional
maze-like view is larger than those in
other games. Second, when the party
initially views a potential encounter,
the program utilizes
sprite graphics to
picture the
monsters/NPCs in
the midst of the 3D background.
These graphics are
presented in three
different sizes as
the party moves
toward them in
order to create an
impression of long,
medium, and short range.
Third, this program not only has a
different character portrait for each
Player Character (PC), but it allows
the player to edit the combat icons
for each PC to reflect new armor, a
favorite weapon, or whatever. Further,
if a monster should happen to join
the party, another character portrait
will be added. Fourth, where other
games may have 15 or so different
types of walls to journey through,
Pool of Radiance
has 80 different
wall types. We observed crumbling
walls, moldy walls,
tapestried walls,
brick walls, cave
walls, and more.
Finally, even
though some
recent CRPGs utilize graphics
routines for differences between
night and day, Pool al lows for
subtler changes of sky color
depending on time and/or location.

Smite Them
Hip and Thigh!
As for game play, this design is
closer to SSI's own Wizard's Crown
adventures than to the other games
in the genre. The types of pre-combat
options available in The Eternal Dag-

ger are used, though the names have
been changed to better reflect the
genre and some design refinements.
For example, Talk has become Parlay, but adventurers must also determine how they will approach the encounter. Will they be "Haughty," "Sly,"
"Meek," "Nice," or "Threatening?" In
addition, the Run command from the
earlier game has become Flee and
the earlier Fight
command has become Combat.
More importantly, a
Wait option has
been added. This
gives the party the
opportunity to
make the monsters
or NPCs make the
first move. All of
which moves the
game yet another
increment beyond
the near mandatory
"hack and slash" of
most CRPGs.
Another similarity
to the Wizard's
Crown series is the
option for Quick
Combat. In the earlier games, players
had the choice of
using tactical combat to resolve encounters so that the
player could determine every move
of every PC or
employing a quick
combat which allowed the computer to direct combat for both sides.
This was particularly effective when
the encounter was
a mismatch between the party and the encountered
group and the player did not want to
be bothered with tactical details. In
both of the earlier games, players
were warned that utilizing "Quick
Combat" usually means that not all of
the special (magical) items would be
used in an encounter. In Pool of
Radiance, "Quick Combat" means
that the computer will play as aggressively as possible. Hence, spells or
limited magical items will often be
used up in a hurry.

Finally, the tactical combat screens
utilize almost two thirds of the possible display area in order to portray
the combat encounters. The action
icons are bigger than those in The
Eternal Dagger; all tactical combat is
joystick-driven; and ranged weapons
are animated with missiles flying
across the screen.

Arcane Dribble,
Toil and Trouble
One major departure from most
CRPGs will be Pool of Radiance's handling of magic. The game is as true
to the AD&D approach to magic as is
possible. Most systems handle spells
as nimbly as though one were dealing
with ammunition. In the fictional setting of the AD&D universe, magic is
not that simple to come by and utilize. Therefore,
both magic-users
and clerics must
utilize periods of
encampment to
"Memorize" spells
for later use or
"Scribe" incantations to spell book
or scroll for future
use. These activities are often
overlooked in faceto-face roleplaying, as well as CRPGs,
but are vital in terms of play balance
so that magicians, miracle workers,
sorcerers, and wizards do not completely overshadow the rest of the
party in importance. Some will undoubtedly see the strict enforcement
of these rules as a nuisance, but it
seems to us like a logical extension of
the kind of resource management
which is necessary to any sophisticated strategy game.

Benediction
There will undoubtedly be more distinctive features and improvements
which we will not see until the game
is actually on the market, but Pool of
Radiance looks like it is definitely
going to advance the current state of
CRPG art. As my cleric character,
Johann von Eck, would say, "May
Love's countenance glow radiantly
upon the pool of thy future."

An Interview
with Tom Clancy
[During the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show, CGW Editor
Russell Sipe, and Assistant Editor
Johnny Wilson, met with bestselling author, Tom Clancy, and
best-selling game designer, Sid
Meier, in the penthouse of the
Sahara Hotel in Las Vegas. The
following is an abridged
transcript of that interview about
Microprose Software's
soon-to-be-released "Red Storm Rising" computer game.]

computer game industry changes and
improves.
Clancy: How are you going to improve on something like a compact disc
that breaks music down into "1"s and

"Hunt For Red October" and "Red Storm
Rising".
Clancy: False. Completely untrue!
CGW: That is the same answer Larry
gave, although he did say that in
his early work on the boardgame
"Harpoon," he had to get everything cleared.

Red Storm

CGW: We wanted to ask you
about that. When we asked Larry
how you met, he mentioned that
you were a big fan of his "Harpoon" boardgame.

CGW: We understand that the
"Red Storm Rising" computer
game (RSRCG) covers only the attack submarine portions of the
book.

Clancy: I met Larry after I
bought "Harpoon" in March of
1982. I saw it advertised in
"Proceedings" [of the Naval Institute]. I went up to meet him at
Atlanticon in August of 1982 and
we just hit it off. We got to be
good friends.

Clancy: The U.S.S. Chicago
scenario, essentially.
CGW: We've talked to Larry
Bond [Ed.: Bond assisted Clancy
in writing the novels "Hunt For
Red October" and "Red Storm
Rising"] and are aware of his
sizable role in the design implementation of RSRCG, along
with Sid [Meier]. I wonder what
you can tell us about your role in
the design of the computer game.

CGW: Sid, would you describe
the typical interaction between
yourself and Tom with regard to
the design of RSRCG.

Clancy: Really, advice. I don't
provide any code. I'm a user, not
a hacker. . . . We were going over
the beta version today. We were
just trying to make sure all the
details work out. I look mainly for
accuracy as opposed to
playability, per se, and his [Sid's]
job is to combine the two. Thank
God, I don't have to do that.
This will be the first really accurate look at modern submarine
combat. It's going to be the
benchmark for the next 10 years.
CGW: In terms of nuclear submarine warfare?
Clancy: Yes. As you know, submarine warfare has changed quite a bit
since World War II.
Meier: Submarine games that have
come out up to this point (January
1988) have dealt only with World War II.
CGW: True, however, saying that
RSRCG is going to be the benchmark
for the next 10 years is biting off an awfully big chunk considering how fast the

Clancy: That's because he was
an active duty naval officer at the
time he designed "Harpoon". . . .
Larry is the godfather to one of
my kids. We're pretty good friends.

"0"s? If you get it right the first time, it's
pretty hard to improve. Bu the time
RSRCG is released it will be as perfect as
I know how to make it. [Turning to Sid]
Or as perfect as I don't know how to
make it, I should say.
CGW: Speaking of what you know, we
were chasing down that rumor that you
and Larry Bond were "called on the carpet" by the White House for revealing
sensitive information in your two novels,

Meier: There are things that
Tom knows from the player's
point of view, the captain's point
of view, of how things really work.
Such specific things as the range
is too great, here, or "I should be
able to hear him before he can
hear me." Kind of the captain's
perspective. On the technical side,
we get most of the data from
Larry. Yet, the major difference, I
think, between a computer game
and a boardgame is the look and
feel. In a computer game, you
need to get the "feel" right. The interaction is much more integral to
a computer game as opposed to
a boardgame. In a boardgame,
you don't have that need for a
critical feel for timing and sequence that are critical to a
computer game and Tom helps us
with that in this game. He knows what
happens because he knows and talks to
those people, and has been on board
the submarines as well.
Clancy: Actually, I didn't get on board
a nuclear submarine until after I'd
finished "Hunt for Red October." Since
then, I've been on a bunch.
CGW: So, the look and feel is something you are really comfortable with.

Clancy: The things I left out in "Red
October," I included in "Red Storm." For
example, submarines are always cold, because they have nuclear powered air
conditioning, and they smell like the inside of a can of "3-in-1" oil.
CGW: We understand that Larry Bond
has really been busy, since he's working
on two projects. His work on Three Sixty's
computer version of
"Harpoon" and Microprose's
RSRCG Could you describe
his work on RSRCG?
Meier: He is the guy that's
got the facts. He deals with
the basic facts and I would
talk with him to get those
right. He has a whole group
of guys in Washington that
are submarine fanatics;
some have served on nuclear
submarines. They all have interesting input, so he kind of
covers the technical base.
Then, my job with Tom is to
get those numbers to fit
together into an interesting
game. There is a difference
between a simulation and an
entertainment software experience. People think they
want a simulation and that
they want all the things they
think about that is part of the
real situation to be there, but
it has to be presented in
such a way that they can grasp them
one point at a time.
CGW: Speaking of games,
Tom, were you a
gamer in your
past?
Clancy: I never
have been. It's
sort of a legend
that's grown up
around me. I've
never been a wargamer ... well,
when I was in
grammar school and high school, I
played the Avalon Hill boardgames quite
a bit. Other than that, I simply haven't
bothered. I used "Harpoon" for "Red October" and "Red Storm Rising," simply as
a database. For some reason, everyone
thinks I'm a wargamer because of that,
actually I'm not.

CGW: But you are familiar with the old
classic Avalon Hill boardgames?
Clancy: Ah, the original "Gettysburg." I

was death at that game. I was never
beaten.
CGW: What scenarios from the book
are in the game and how are they linked?
Meier: We use the "set-up" from the
book to indicate the situation, but at the
beginning of the game, you are in a
position to affect the war, even as the
U.S.S. Chicago was in such a position in

Here is a guy, a person that I can identify with as an individual, and he had an
impact on the total situation.
CGW: There isn't going to be anything
on the stealth fighters and land combat
portion of the book?
Meier: Not that you directly affect.
Clancy: What I'm trying to con this
man into, right now, is doing
an "X Ray Alpha" game. X
Ray Alpha, in the book, is the
code name for the ASW commander of the convoy. Of
course, it might take a Cray
to run it.
CGW: Well, how about it
Sid? We had always been
under the impression that
when Microprose licensed the
book, it was your intent to
come out with a series of
games.
Meier: We can't help it.
That's the structure of the
book. There is plot after plot
after plot. We looked at it and
said, "For the first one, here's
what we're going to do."
. . . .

the book. If you are successful in the
first scenario, that affects how the rest of
the game will be. It's interactive in that
regard.
CGW: Do you
have "Operation
Doolittle" in there?
Meier: Yes, we've
got that in there.
Clancy: I'm very
proud of "Operation Doolittle." I set
that one up all by
myself. The editor
of "Submarine Review" called me up and
asked my permission to write an article
about that. Given that this guy was once
one of the best sub drivers in the world,
I was very honored by that.
Meier: Getting back to the scenarios, it
is really rather larger than life in that
whatever you accomplish as a sub commander has an impact on the entire
war. You are really put in the position of
"saving the free world." In reading the
book, that's what appealed to us the
most concerning the sub simulation.

Clancy: Kind of a funny
thing, you know I did a terrible thing in the book to the
U.S.S. Pharris. Had the thing
blown in half, killed the X.O. I've had
four different executive officers of that
ship call me up and say, "Why didn't you
just kill me? Did you have to take my
head off, too?"
I've been made
an honorary
member of the
crew and when I
get home, they
want me to come
aboard. I just
hope they don't
want to keelhaul
me.
CGW: Getting back to how you do the
research model. When you were on the
nuclear subs, did you get the sense of
timing and procedures from observing
the crew in drills or what?
Clancy: Every nuclear submarine I
have ever been on has been securely
tied to the dock.
CGW: Well, then, your perception of
reaction time, is this all from anecdotes
and interviews?
Clancy: It comes from using your

head. Let's say that Event A happens
and Person Q over here has to react to.
How many steps does he have to go
through in order to react. Each step
takes time. You just think your way
through each step and that will determine the total reaction time.
CGW: What's next?
Clancy: My next book will be "The Cardinal of the Kremlin." S.D.I. If nothing
else, in that book you will see overhead
imagery of Soviet S.D.I. test sites.
CGW: "Patriot Games," by the way,
could probably be made into an adven
ture game."
Clancy: If someone makes an adventure game out of it, I hope it's one I can
beat. I have yet to get through "Zork." I
get caught in those twisty maze passages and I can never get out.
CGW: We're glad you mentioned
"Zork" because it gives us a chance to
ask one of our favorite questions. Outside of the ones you are working on,
what's your favorite computer game?

Clancy: "Leather Goddesses of
Phobos." I'd like to meet whoever wrote
that. I just don't know what asylum to
go to. I also like "Stellar 7." I think it's
out of print, now. It's simply a space arcade shoot-'em-up and it is so unforgiving, it is just like life.
It's just perfect to play while I'm exercising. I get on my exercycle, start pedaling, pick up the joystick, and I'm off .. .

Hard Copy!
Mini-Reviews from the
Editorial Staff of CGW
There is a growing list of computer
game related books on the market.
Here are some of the current crop.

Compute! Books Publication
P.O. Box 5406
Greensboro, NC 27403

40 MORE GREAT FLIGHT
SIMULATOR ADVENTURES (Charles
Gulick): Once again, half of the adventures take place in New York and Seattle. This one adds five scenarios out of
World War I Europe along with a

40 GREAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR
ADVENTURES (Charles Gulick): This
book offers 40 scenarios for
Microsoft/subLogic's ;"Flight Simulator"
program. More than half of the adventures take place in the metropolitan New
York and Seattle, Washington areas, but
some of the other scenery disks are utilized, as well. Three of the adventures
take their "pilots" into adventures into
the abstract. One interesting scenario

BASIC conversions and the longest
program is a "mere" 42K. $9.95
FLIGHT SIMULATOR CO-PILOT
(Charles Gulick): This is the book which
introduces "The Flight Simulator CoPilot Series." It might well be named,
"The Flight Simulator Instructor Series,"
because flying these scenarios/missions
with these books beside you is like flying
with an experienced instructor in the
seat beside you. The series has higher
production values than the "Compute!"
series and offers more diagrams to assist
the novice "pilot." Each scenario is
designed to teach something new and
offers some challenge along with each
new bit of information. $9.95.
RUNWAY U.S.A. (Charles Gulick):
This is the second book of "The Flight
Simulator Co-Pilot Series." The emphasis on this book is more on getting
the most out of your scenery disks than
teaching new flight techniques. The
book's flight plan begins in Hudson, TX
and takes the reader/"pilot" on a tour of
the Western United States. Readers can
learn how to do a "Power-off Stall,"
"Power-on Stall," "Loop," and/or "Immelmann" in the chapter entitled, "A Pocketful of Stunts." $9.95.

scenario designed as an avionics
tutorial, a flight puzzle to solve ("Which
Way is Up?"), and an abstract adventure
("Autumn Abstraction"). $9.95.

Microsoft Press
16011 N.E. 36th Way
Box 97017
Redmond, WA 98073-9717

was "Yes or No?" in which the "pilot" is
given the basic settings, speeds, and settings and challenged to determine if
there is sufficient altitude to overfly the
John Hancock building. If the "pilot"
believes there is sufficient clearance, he
"lives" or "dies" with the decision by not
adjusting the controls. This is not a
book to be read at one sitting. It is a
book to accompany one on simulated
tours. $9.95.

BASIC COMPUTER ADVENTURES
(David Ahl): David Ahl is the prolific
former editor of "Creative Computing."
This book is his most recent anthology
of "Type-your-own-programs." The
theme for this book revolves around
travel: "Marco Polo" (1271), "Westward
Ho!" (1847), "The Longest Automobile
Race" (1908), "The Orient Express"
(1923), "Amelia Earhart" (1937), "Tour
de France" (present), "Appalachian Trail"
(present), "Subway Scavenger" (present),
"Hong Kong Hustle" (1997), and
"Voyage to Neptune" (2100). These
programs can be used on most
machines since the appendix covers

Origin Systems, Inc.
136 Harvey Road, Building B
Londonderry, NH 03053
QUEST FOR CLUES (Edited by Shay
Addams): This book is visually stimulating because of its excellent mix of line
art, flow charts, maps, coded clues, and
text. Most of the maps are the typical
(Continued on page 47)

used to get comic books for free
sort of. Years ago, Tru-Tred Shoes
had a racket going which involved
giving gifts to kids who got shoes in
their stores. The idea was that the kids
would then pester their parents to return
to the store to get more
"free" gifts. It worked,
and until my feet could
no longer be crammed
into child-sized shoes, I
built up a sizable collection of whistles, animalshaped erasers and Archie comics.

I

Since then, getting
comics has become
more expensive. The
new issue of Flash
costs seventy-five cents,
the new Joker graphic
novel runs $3.50, and
the Dark Knight graphic
omnibus will set you
back $12.95. I'm not
complaining. You also
get more than you used
to, which usually includes better writing, art
and packaging, and
more adult themes. All
in all, you get what you
pay for—though I'm still
waiting for DC (National Periodicals) to start
giving away free shoes.

more than your average comic book, to
justify the higher price, or they can be allowed a little leeway to be less lasting
and to have less depth than their higherpriced software counterparts. Both
perspectives are crucial to appreciating

BEYOND
BEYOND
ZORK:

characters' paths cross in a story, the
reader can switch from following one
character to following the other. There
are problems with the way this is implemented, since too often the branches
don't offer new paths so much as fill in
backstory, but the idea
is a good one. Once
Infocom's writers have
more experience, they
will surely put it to good
use.

THE INFOCOMICS APPROACH TO
COMPUTER FICTION

Now there are Infocomics, Infocom's
newest and most daring
venture. Where some
had feared that Infocom
would one day start illustrating its stories, few
dreamt that the company that made its
fame with text adventures would ever work
in an almost purely
graphic medium. Nevertheless, this is what Infocom has done. As represented by the first three
stories (Gamma Force #1: "Pit of a
Thousand Screams;" Lane Mastodon
#1: "Lane Mastodon Vs. The Blubbermen;" and Zorkquest #1: "Assault on
Egreth Castle"), Infocomics are an attempt to bring comic books to life. Except for a little space reserved for text
and dialogue, lnfocomics tell their tales
through pictures and animated scenes.
There are even sound effects, though
on the IBM the less that's said about
them, the better.
lnfocomics cost twelve dollars each.
There are two ways of looking at this.
Either they should be asked to deliver

by Charles Ardai

lnfocomics. On one hand, twelve dollars
isn't peanuts; readers deserve something
for their investment. Infocomics deliver
on this obligation with dynamic animation, interesting visual conflicts and fairly
good graphics. The graphics are the
weakest point—it would have been nice
if the line drawings had been slightly
more polished and colorful, especially in
Lane Mastodon's nude scenes—but it is
to their credit that what could have been
bland comes across as exciting and
fresh.
The stories also deliver freshness with
a new Infogimmick. So, when two

Then, there's the other
hand. When you buy an
Infocomic, you are not
shelling out the price of
a ticket to a Broadway
show (with some
software you are!). For
the lower price, players
must be prepared not
to play. lnfocomics are
not games. There is no
challenge. Just boot the
story, sit back and
watch. Except for jumping into different
characters' heads (accomplished with a push
of the Enter key) there
is no interaction. Because of the different
paths, the stories can
be read more than
once without too much
repetition, but you are
not going to labor for
months over a puzzle
in an Infocomic. This is
painless entertainment.
It's called reading.

Not to worry, though.
The reading is a
pleasure. Though there
is much too much
reliance on one of the
oldest saws in the
comic writer's toolchest—the family
reunion (Old man: "I
lost a daughter once,
years ago; I suppose
she's dead now." Young woman: "Can it
be? Daddy!"), which crops up in one
form or another in all three stories, the
stories are great entertainment.
Not surprisingly, Steve Meretzky's Lane
Mastodon is the best of the three. It
doesn't take itself seriously (halfway
through it cuts to a parody of Siskel and
Ebert, complete with theme music), and
it has the best story. Lane, the hero
from the package of Leather Goddesses
of Phobos, must turn off a Jovian Enlarger Ray that is making giants of earth
animals.
(Continued on page 42)

[In this candid article Lord British
shares with CGW readers insights into
his design work on the extremely
popular Ultima series.]
The Ultima series is my life and my
livelihood. For all of my adult life and
even my later teen years, I have been
constantly writing either Ultimas or their
predecessors. Before I can
tell you much about the
design process behind an Ultima game, I feel it is important to relate some of the history of the series. Perhaps, an
understanding of Ultima's
background will help support
my explanation for the design
philosophy behind the games
themselves.
My first real exposure to
computers came in my freshman year of high school, in
1975. At about that same
point in time, I was reading
Tolkien's The Lord of the
Rings trilogy, which was my
introduction to the
swords-and-sorcery fantasy genre. I
was beginning to explore fantasy role-playing games such
as Dungeons and Dragons
and my appetite for the
medieval and fantastic grew
quickly. In retrospect, it's
easy to see the driving forces
that were starting to shape
my life at that time. Back
then, all I knew was that I
was having fun.

the player would be rattled out on the
Teletype with asterisks for walls, X's for
doors, and other letters for "monsters".
After writing one of these games, I
would scrap it all and begin anew with
new fantasy ideas and greater programming knowledge. Each revision became
more complex and more capable. I
repeated this process of "write a game,

(then one of the software industry's
leaders) offered to publish my game, I
was enthusiastic to say the least. I
couldn't leave well enough alone. I knew
that, with what I had learned in my first
stab at 3-D graphics, I could do a much
better job on a game intended from the
start to be for the public's consumption.
So, as was my habit, I scrapped the
whole thing and started an
even more ambitious
program from scratch.

LORD BRITISH
KISSES AND
TELLS ALL

The high school I attended
offered nothing more advanced than a one-semester introductory class in the BASIC computer language. We also had only one computer
terminal—a 110-baud Teletype with a
paper tape punch and modem to tie in
with an unknown mainframe elsewhere
in Houston. In spite of these limitations,
a couple of other students and I were
eager to learn more. To that end, the
school faculty allowed us to have our
own "class" without direct supervision.
The primary class requirement was to
develop an original programming
project which would be graded at the
end of the term. Unsurprisingly, the
project I chose to pursue was to create a
computer fantasy role-playing game!
Even my earliest attempts at game
programming bore a great resemblance
to the current Ultimas. In those first
games, one would move around in a
top-view "dungeon" represented with
text characters. Each time a move was
made, a new 10x10 or so area around

as told by
His Royal
Highness,
High King
of Britannia
(a.k.a.
Richard
Garriott)
learn a lot, scrap it, and start over" 28
times during high school. In that manner, I was able to teach myself programming and game design.
Upon my graduation from high school
in 1979, I went to work for a Computerland store. There, I encountered the
Apple II -- a real computer with a video
display and high-resolution color
graphics! Inspired by a simple maze
game called "Escape," I set out to add 3D perspective graphics to my own fantasy games. A summer's hard work
produced a game I called Akalabeth.
Through the efforts of the Computerland store's owner, who had more confidence in the marketability of my games
than I did, Akalabeth became my first
published work.
Like my previous efforts in high school,
Akalabeth hadn't been written with
publishing in mind. I'd been working for
my own enjoyment and edification, not
my dinner. So, when California Pacific

Thus began the "Ultima"
series.
When I wrote the first Ultima, I knew only the BASIC
programming language and I
relied on my friend and coworker Ken Arnold (who still!
works with me today) for the
concept and machine-language programming of the
now well-known tile graphics.
I had no idea that the game
might become a series, but
the inevitable was happening.
While writing the first Ultima, I
saw that, with assembly language, I could again create a
far better game. Thus was
born Ultima II, which I
published through the company now called Sierra.

Ultima II was, literally, the
first assembly language
program I ever wrote. So, of
course, there was still much
room for improvement. As
you might have guessed, my
next move was to start work
on Ultima III! It was at about
this point in time that I realized I had some difficult decisions to
make. I was entering my third year as an
engineering major at the University of
Texas and the inescapable fact was that
my grade point average was becoming
inversely proportional to my income.
Each new Ultima was outselling its
predecessor by a substantial margin. My
hobby had begun to take on a life of its
own, so to speak, and it was quickly becoming apparent that either games or
school would have to go. Dropping out
of school to write games for a living
wasn't an easy thing to do, but in my
case it definitely turned out to be the
right choice.
Ultima III was released through Origin
Systems, a company started in my
parents' garage by myself, my brother
Robert, and my friend Chuck 'Chuckles'
Bueche. With its success, I finally accepted the fact that I had no idea how
many Ultimas there might be. As long as
I can keep up the cycle of constant

revision and improvement which makes
it fun for me and as long as it remains
enjoyable to the public, I'll be continuing the series. Also, since computer
hardware will continue to advance in
power and features, I have a constantly
improving medium in which to exercise
my skills. All this adds up to the fact that
I may be writing Ultimas for some time!

he is the "bad guy," Blackthorn will actually give you some very personal
reasons to dislike him. Your first meeting
with him will likely result in his taking
one of your main characters (who has
been with you since the first Ultima) and
torturing him or her to death before
your eyes, all while you are utterly helpless to do anything about it. I believe

I started Ultima IV with the
realization that I was writing
an ongoing saga. Finally, my
programming skills were mature enough to allow me to
spend time on nurturing my
storytelling ability. More than
ever, I began to feel challenged by the idea of creating a game which would be a
step above the archetypal
"hack & slash & kill the bigevil-bad-guy" scenarios. Ultima IV is a game about personal virtue, sort of a "Quest
for the Holy Grail"-type exploration of the moral and
ethical principles that are just
as relevant to our modern
lives as they were to the
citizens of the game's
medieval world. To me, Ultima IV brought a new theme
to the second Ultima trilogy.
Where the first three Ultimas
dealt with the vanquishing of
the Triad of Evil (Mondain,
Minax, and Exodus), Ultima
IV began a series dealing with
virtue and ethics.
As Ultima IV explores with
the positive aspects of virtue
and its exercise, Ultima V
brings to life the concept of
what happens when a good
thing is taken too far. "Warriors of Destiny" presents a world
where Lord British has been lost
to the world and the self-serving tyrant
Blackthorn rules an empire based upon
inquisition and intrigue, twisting the virtues of the Avatar to suit his own purposes. Your "calling" in Ultima V is not
to blindly overthrow Blackthorn, but
rather to seek out and restore Lord
British to the throne of Britannia. In
doing so, you must become a Robin
Hood-style outlaw in a world where it's
never too clear who you can, should, or
must trust to aid your quest.
One of my main design goals when
creating Ultima V was to bring the player
into a very real emotional contact with
his or her surroundings in the game. Unlike most FRP games where the "bad
guy" is the "bad guy" and you are aware
of this fact simply because you are told

easily half my time "fleshing out" the
world to act and react in a realistic manner and to constantly have something
new around every corner. Hopefully, this
allows me to create a game environment where the player can not only
derive satisfaction from the solving of
quests, but also spend hours wandering
around just for fun, enjoying the game's
world for its own sake.
The sequence of events in
the creation of an Ultima is
also somewhat peculiar. In
most schools of formal
programming, one is taught
a method of design which embodies concepts like
thorough pre-planning of the
whole project, top-down
design, exhaustive flowcharting of code, and other such
"quiche." Rather than following the rigidly prescribed dogmas that are all but vital to
the design of more structured
projects, Ultimas "evolve." I
begin development with a
handful of basic ideas. These
usually include what major
technical advances I wish to
make and the broader points
of the game's story line. Many
of the details of the story and
program function are not
known at this time.

that it is this type of heartfelt involvement, blended together with complex
moral dilemmas, that helps make Ultima
V the most intriguing fantasy game I've
yet written. This, at long last, brings us
to the main point: exactly how do I go
about writing an Ultima?
To me, Ultima has become more than
just a collection of puzzles to solve, but
an environment, an entire world if you
will, a gateway to a life among the
peoples and cultures of a different time
and place. I spend a great deal of my
development time in pursuit of this end.
When I play a competitor's game, I cannot generally afford the time to solve it,
so instead I play it for as long as the
game continues to present fresh, new
ideas and situations. Once it becomes
mechanically repetitive, I'm through. In
the development of an Ultima, I spend

The first code to be written
is generally the "tile-graphics"
driver, which (like everything
else in the game) has to be
re-written each time. Simultaneously, work on the
game's main subroutine
library is started. In this subroutine library are the most
fundamental parts of the
game's program structure, such as
string handling, text output, and
shape animation.
Once the graphics and text frameworks
are in place, a great deal of time is
spent developing the tile and map
editors. With these tools, I first begin to
shape the world in which the next Ultima
will be played. While I'm laying out the
world, the programming work consists
of establishing the detailed specifications
and memory allocation for the game's
subprograms. At this point, the "I" becomes a "We." The creation of an Ultima
has long since become too big a task
for one person to deal with effectively. A
capable team of programmers is needed
to deal with the sheer enormity of the individual tasks.

(Continued on page 50)

Stompin' On
The Savoy
Activision's "Rampage"
of Destruction
Reviewed by James V. Trunzo
or all you owners of MS-DOS machines who
sneak envious glances at the graphic
screens of Apple and Commodore owners,
this one's for you! Activision has selected your
"business" machine to be the first
one to receive the Bally arcade
game, Rampage, on your home
screen. You won't be disappointed
in either the animation or the
graphics, either, especially if you
are running at greater than 4.77
mhz and using an EGA monitor.

F

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Rampage
IBM with CCA or EGA
1-3
$39.95
J. David Koch
Activision, Inc.
Mountain View, CA 94039

Solo players can select one of
three movie-style monsters (a giant
gorilla, a huge lizard, or a powerful
wolf) and go on a coast to coast,
well - "rampage," destroying everything in sight. Players can smash
buildings, stomp on trolleys and
tanks, fend off attack choppers and
attempt to foil dynamite-hurling soldiers in an attempt to survive .. .
and pile up points. If one really
wants to bring civilization to its
knees, however, it is fun to get a
friend or two and activate all three
monsters at once and terrorize any
of the 157 different cities available in the
game.

While the premise is both simple and
tongue-in-cheek, the game is not
simple. From both a production and a
playing perspective, Rampage is proof
that IBM games can compete with other machines
in running entertainment software. Rampage challenges the player with its fast pace and variety of
play. Each of the creatures excels in a particular
area, be it climbing ability, strength, or speed. This
means that different strategies are required in
order to be successful with each monster.
Monsters must search for food to build their
strength. Therefore, certain munchies like bowls of
fruit or hamburgers appear at random throughout
the game. It takes very quick reaction times for
your creature to be able to "chow down" at the
right time. Of course, one can always find a fleeing
civilian to serve as an appetizer. If the player's
monster eats the wrong thing, however, (like
poison, cacti, or a functioning television) his titanic
bulk is guaranteed a monstrous case of indigestion.
Aiding and abetting the play value of Rampage

are the impressive graphics and smooth animation. The hi-res details of both will make even staid
observers smile. For example, the monsters cover
their mouths and appear to belch after swallowing
something distasteful. Further, scaling skyscrapers
and punching helicopters out of the sky are accomplished with flicker-free movement and without
any interruptions in the graphic flow.
Each monster can be controlled through either
the keyboard or a joystick. With three players involved, however, at least one will be required to
use the keyboard. Gamers who use the keyboard
have the option of using the preset key combinations or devising their own at the start of each
game.
Rampage comes packaged with both a 5.25" and
3.5" diskette and the game can be installed on a
hard drive. Hard drive users should note, however,
that the game uses a key disk system where the
original disk must be placed in the A drive for a
security check before the game will operate. The
game also requires DOS version 2.1 or later (3.10
for Leading Edge Model D owners). Further, although the documentation is adequate for an arcade program, a little more detail on the
mechanics of play would help ease the trial and
error process.
Activision has programmed several other enjoyable features into Rampage. It contains a vanity
board which is capable of tracking high scores; offers the option of resuming play at the last level
completed or from scratch; and provides a simulated computer print out which scrolls onto the
screen after each successful level is completed.
The latter announces which city will be "visited"
next and offers some game hints for the players.
So, if you need a release from databases, spreadsheets or even drawn-out role-playing games, why
not go on a Rampage with Activision's new release?

QUEST
TEST
by Lynn Bethards

3. You are Arthur Dent.
Who is your travelling companion?

10. What popular adventure has the beautiful babes named Eve, Faith, and Fawn?

4. Who is the reigning
monarch of Sosaria in Ultima III and what word was
found written in blood on
the deserted merchant
ship?
5. You just left
Gilgamesh's Tavern and
have entered the castle
maze. What is the name of
the game and the name of
the maze?
6. What is the name of
the faithful little pig in The

Rate Yourself:

Witches and Elves, Mages and Priests -

Black Cauldron?

We know them all, including the beasts!

7. What must I do to enter my spells into
my spellbook in Enchanter?
8. Match these spells from Wishbringer:
1. Glasses
a. Freedom
2. Milk
b. Luck
c. Advice
3. Broom
4. Chocolate
d. Darkness
5. Shell
e. Rain
6. Umbrella
f. Foresight
7. Horseshoe
g. Flight

If you answered all 10 questions correctly,
consider yourself an Adventurer Plenipotentiary like our own Scorpia.

9. What is the currency used in Space
Quest?

3 or less correct answers make you Ogre
Bait.

Test your memory! Give it a go!
You'd be surprised at how much you know.

1. What adventure takes place in Balema,
where King Galt summons you and Gorn to
slay the dragon?
2. Fast Eddie B., Merey Laroc, Nick
Brunch, and Dazzle Annie Nonker are part of
the gang. Who is the ringleader?

If you had 8-9 correct answers, congratulate
yourself on being a Master Adventurer.
If you were correct on 6-7 answers, count
yourself a Journeyman Adventurer.
4-5 correct answers make you an Apprentice
Adventurer.

Decisive Battles of the
American Civil War. Volume 1.

Bull Run to
Chancellorsville
Reviewed by Regan Carey and Mike Salata
"What do you mean, 'you don't know!'? Get in
touch with Taliaferro somehow and find out
what the dickens he's up to!
He's supposed
to be moving
East."

The
Trials of
Command
In the tradition
of their earlier
games,
Strategic
Studies
Group's Roger
Keating and Ian
Trout have continued to portray
the frustrations
and uncertainties of command
in a pre-telecommunications bat-

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

Decisive Battles of the American
Civil War - Volume 1
Apple II, C-64/128
1-2
$40.00
Roger Keating and Ian Trout
Drummoyne, NSW, AUSTRAL IA

tleground with
grim accuracy.
This sometimes
leads to anger
and exasperation
and it can be argued that
this isn't good entertainment, but it is good simulation. Therein lies the seed
of the mixed reviews that
StraegicudsGop
PUBLISHER:
SSG's
games receive. One
man's meat, etc.

So, here we are again. As an Army commander in
Decisive Battles of the American Civil War, you send
out orders to those of your troops that you can contact. You pray that the commanders under you have
sufficient initiative and savvy to react to a changing battle. You bite your nails waiting for night so that you can
gather your staff for a major briefing and you curse
when one of your units reacts to the tactical situation
in a manner that compromises your other plans.

A perusal of the memoirs of Civil War Generals will
show that these feelings are in line with reality. Unfortunately, in a world where many gamers were weaned
on Squad Leader and Napoleon at Waterloo where
players control every friendly piece on the board, the
lack of detailed control can seem unbearably restricting. These folks want to game, not simulate history.
Personally, I prefer a mixture of both where the challenge becomes that of the historical commanders (i.e.
How to pull off a cohesive battle plan despite the communication restrictions).

A Journey into History
Decisive Battles Volume 1 recreates six of the major
battles from the first half of the American Civil War. The
battles selected are the first and second Bull Run,
Shiloh, Antietam, Fredericksburg, and Chancellorsville.
Instructions for the creation of a non-historical variant
of Shiloh are included in the manual. Volume 2 will include the battles from Gettysburg to the war's end.
The opening screen gives the user a short briefing
about the scenario selected and the options currently
in effect. These include scenario title, handicap, who is
controlling which sides (computer/human), and the
name of the commander. All of these parameters are
under player control, with the exception of the title.
Three other options are presented on the game
menu itself. "Expose" allows all units on the map to be
seen; "Enhanced" gives bonuses to the computer controlled side; and "Radio" permits communication with
all your units, instead of just those attached to your
HQ. With the "radio" flag set, command and control
problems (and claims of realism) are reduced substantially.

May I Take Your Order?
(The Game Menus)
Decisive Battles is almost entirely menu driven. For
those who have never played an SSG game before, the
sheer number of menus might be overwhelming at
first, but as play progresses the sequences of menus
will become easier. In Decisive Battles, SSG has
devoted a whole section of the manual to the explanation of the game menus in an effort to speed up this
orientation process. Every menu is covered, providing a
brief summary of what they mean, how to use them,
and, in some cases, what exactly is shown on the
screen. An introductory scenario walk-through is
provided to further help newcomers learn how the
menu system works. As usual, an index for both game
and design menus is included with the game materials.

Sound the Charge,
Mr. Richards (Combat System)
This is a game of command and control. Tactics are
largely left up to the commanders on the spot, although general orders can be given to those units in
communication. Each leader is rated, along with his
staff. The player can even choose a "personal profile"
for his Army commander, ranging from heroic (but foolhardy?) to cautious (and cowardly?). The parenthetic
comments are mine.

A major factor is whether or not a subordinate HQ is
in communication with its commander. Distance, time
of day, weather, and staff quality all go into the determination of communication status. Once a unit loses
communication, it begins to function autonomously.
On the first turn of any day, there is a possibility of access to all corps and division HQs subordinate to the
Army HQ, even if they were previously out of communication. This is used to simulate a nighttime briefing session. However, if the situation is fluid, or if the
Army commander has been gallivanting all around the
battlefield, the chances of a successful gathering of all
commanders is lessened.
Each scenario comes with a beautifully printed hex
map of the battlefield. Onscreen, the graphics are still
primitive, but entirely functional. There are even some
"hidden" terrain features, such as invisible roads
through woods (to simulate trails) that are used to
provide more realistic and unpredictable artificial intelligence responses.
Almost every facet of the game is affected by a collection of factors. Combat effectiveness, order to attack,
order of movement, available movement points--all are
subject to evaluation according to such diverse factors
as the quality of leadership, weather, or plain bad luck.
Units have a "cohesion" rating that indicates their combat effectiveness. Cohesion goes down with battlefield
losses, and recovers (to a point) when units are held behind the front lines, in reserve. A particularly battered,
or poorly led, unit can have its morale shattered, sending it running for the rear. Gamers that like to employ
sacrificial units, destined to fight to the last man, may
find that their troops just won't go along with the idea.
The artificial intelligence provides an interesting opponent (and, sometimes, a frustrating subordinate). It is
capable of giving even an experienced player a surprise
or two.

If I Had A Hammer (Scenario Editor)
With early SSG games, it was a long and boring job
to create a scenario from scratch. Only the icons that
were already designed in could be used. Terrain had to
be entered one square at a time, over and over. A slow
typist could take from several hours to several days to
complete an original scenario. If it wasn't right the first
time, chances are that extensive refinements were ignored simply because of the time and effort overhead
involved in correcting things.
Somebody at SSG must have listened to the pitiful
whimpers of the people who liked to create their own
scenarios, or maybe the boys from SSG got as tired as
everybody else, because the introduction of Warplan
and Warpaint has solved this difficulty. [Ed.: Actually,
these features were introduced with "Halls of Montezuma."]
Warplan is used to create maps, units, objectives,
entry points and everything else needed to design or
adapt a scenario. Battles can be varied to show what
might have happened if other forces had arrived or
others did not. The game manual gives one variant for
Shiloh to help the user understand how to make use of
design menus incorporates into Warplan.

The routine is similar to the earlier scenario design
techniques of SSG game systems, but now they are
more refined and easier to use. For example, a time
saving feature in Warplan is the "Set" command. This
sets the cursor to automatically change any terrain that
it moves over to a set type. By moving the cursor, the
terrain is copied anywhere the cursor goes, instead of
the laborious task of entering a terrain number for
each square on the map. Large repetitive terrain features like woods or lakes become a snap to enter.
Warpaint is a graphic editor
used to modify terrain symbols and game icons. If a
player wants to use standard
military symbols instead of
Rebel and Union flags, he or
she just goes in and edits the
icons. If they want to indicate
a switching yard for a railroad
by showing a train engine
they simply import the icon
from the library included on
the disk. Any special terrain
feature that is desired takes
just a few minutes and a little
practice. This is a powerful
feature of this system, yet it is
reasonably easy to use.
These two design features
make it, not only possible,
but downright feasible, to
design an operational
scenario for virtually any battle of the pre-telecommunication era.

The Bottom Line
Few experienced computer
gamers will ever argue with
the claim that SSG's game
systems are impressive in
their scope. Some will comment unfavorably on the Al routines that are used to
determine the actions of computer controlled units.
Most will have war stories--no metaphor intended-about once strong units crumbling under fire and
hopes for victory crumbling with them. Decisive Battles
of the Civil War is a step up the ladder in the evolution
of SSG game systems. Features like Warplan and Warpaint set it apart from most competitors.
Still, SSG simulations are an acquired taste--like
sushi. Instead of raw fish, we get raw history. Subordinates make mistakes or errors in judgement. Reckless
heroism leads a unit to charge into the face of an
entrenched enemy. The sound of guns attracts men
away from their assigned defensive positions, leaving a
hole in the lines. A military historian will tell you just
how tragically accurate this kind of situation is.
This series will provide most gamers with new insights
into the actual battles and the problems that faced historical commanders. That means that sometimes they
can lose, through no real fault of their own, or win because of an opponent's bad luck.

Beyond Dark
Castle
Evaluation and Hints by Alan Roberts
he Black Knight's back, all right, with unexsections of his Dark Castle. As Prince
Duncan, it's your job to fix his wagon (horse
cart?) once and for all, armed only with rocks,
elixirs, bombs and gas cans. Bombs and gas cans,
you say? Well, there have been some changes.

T

We've
Redecorated
The Dungeon
For You
Beyond Dark
Castle borrows heavily from its best-selling
predecessor, Dark
Castle. the keyboard
is used to control
Prince Duncan's
movements, while
the mouse is used to
control rock throwing. Those of us who
are not ambidextrous
might take some
time getting used to
the two-handed approach. Southpaws
rejoice! The movement keys are
redefinable; if you
want to use the
mouse with your left
hand, you can use
keys on the righthand side of the
keyboard.

Title:
System:
Price:
Designers:

Publisher:

Beyond Dark Castle
Macintosh
$49.95

Jonathan Gay - Programming,
Mark Stephen Pierce - Game design and graphics,
Eric Zocher - Realsound , and
Dick Noel - Voice
Silicon Beach Software
San Diego, CA

The game has extensive on-line documentation. Read it before you
play. It tells you how to
move, jump, and fight.

When you start the
game, you find yourself in
the anteroom (see fig 2.).
Note the changes to the
command bar at the bottom of the screen. Keep a
close eye on the "health" bar. Each time you slam
into a wall, get bitten by vermin, or get hit by flying
beer steins, you lose a good chunk of your health.
When it gets down to the bottom 10% you hear an
ominous heartbeat. When the line reaches the very
bottom, you die. It is possible to restore your

health either by leaving the room ("strategic
retreat") or grabbing a basket of high-vitamin fruit.
Finally, to get to the Dark Knight's Chambers behind the portcullis, you must place the five orbs in
their pedestals (see fig. 3 for their locations).

Arcane Arcade Hints & Strategies
(Warning: The following paragraphs offer specific
clues. Readers who would prefer to solve tactical
problems on their own are advised to skip to the
conclusion.) While the four doors can be chosen
in any order, this is the sequence I use: First off,
run into the Black Knight's brewery a few times.
Don't go to the top yet, just snatch up everything
you can and gallop out the way you came in. After
getting well supplied, then play the level for keeps.
In combat, move up to the henchman and hit
the "to duck" key (you could parry with the "action"
key, but this costs health points). When you hear
his attack, click the mouse button without releasing the "to duck" button. Hang up your mace
when you are through. The whip henchman isn't
very tough, but he recovers quickly.
It is helpful to map both east and west labyrinths
in "practice mode." When you play it for points,
grab everything you can because you get points at
the conclusion for unused supplies. Do not visit
the wizard in the east tower before getting the orb.
He'll flash-fry you.
The best way across the sliding stepping stones
in the computer room (and at the west tower wall)
is to use a jump up/jump down combination. You
can duck under the death ray. Check your supplies
when you enter the clock tower. It will take about
fifty units of gas to get across the swamp or forest.
If you are low on gas, grab the two cans on the
left, exit, and reenter. There will be two more cans
waiting for you.
When flying the chopper pack, stay at the top of
the screen. The Big Bird enters from the top of the
screen and he will give you plenty of warning.
Don't slow down or the mutants on the ground
will pick you off.
There is good news and bad news about the
burning eye. The good news is that if you hit him
enough times, he'll crash and burn. The bad news
is that he shoots fireballs off in clumps of five, so
keep your distance. After getting the orb, pick up
the teleportation potion. A quick zap back to the
antechamber beats a long flight home.
At the west tower wall, don't worry too much
about the birds. Even if you are on the higher set
of floating rocks, they will usually miss you. Shoot
them down before going across the sliding stepping stones and again before making the running
jump from merlon to merlon.
When at the top of the west tower, get the shield
first. Wait until the lightning strikes (the cloud
takes a while to recharge). Although the action button will only activate the shield for a short period,
hitting the action button repeatedly will keep your
(Continued on page 48)

about the mission orders, the player
would:
1) select the verb, "Tell," from the verb
list displayed by the program;

U

Universe 3 is, surprisingly enough,
the third in a series of games
which have become increasingly
plot-oriented. With my desire to tell a
story through the medium of computer
gaming, it became necessary to select
particular styles of player input in order
to provide informative and entertaining
output. The following discussion offers
justification for my decisions to choose
either a computer role playing game
(CRPG) or text adventure style format for
each part of the game.

Movement and
Other Inputs
I deliberately chose a CRPG
style of user input for Universe
3. Although text adventures
have the advantage in overall
flexibility because the player
can seemingly type in any sentence, I use a point and click
approach. The advantage of
this type of input is that: a) all
of the options available to the
player are readily apparent; b)
data space is saved because the interface does not allow or have to contend
with non sequiturs; and c) it is relatively
easy to use. With this game, the player
needs to deal with each room, not just
as a whole, but on a square-by-square
basis. The CRPG interface is much superior for selecting individual locations
under these circumstances.
For communication between player
characters and non-player characters
(NPCs), text adventure games have an
advantage. It is quite simple for the
player to express exactly what he or she
wants by simply typing it in. Unfortunately, it is difficult to filter the myriad number of possible responses in a conversation. Since conversations in an adventure game usually involve the player asking or telling an NPC about something,
I created a series of dialog boxes that
allow the player to construct typical text
adventure style sentences without
having to type anything.
To start with, the player selects a verb
from a list of about forty choices. Next,
the computer displays a list of all the
available objects or NPCs that are compatible with the verb. The player
chooses one. For more complex sentences, there is an additional dialog box.
For example, to tell the First Officer

2) select "First Officer" from the
program's display of all of the NPCs in
the room; and
3) select "mission orders" from the
program prompt, "Tell First Officer
about who or what?" by utilizing the list
of all objects, NPCs, and topics provided.

Rooms and Objects
A crucial element of any CRPG is the
environment or world in which the action takes place. The more detail the
game provides the player, the more convincing the story becomes. For descriptions of rooms and objects, I split evenly
between the text adventure and CRPG
formats. CRPGs have a profound visceral impact, because the objects and
characters are visible and hence, appeal

to the strongest of the human senses.
This impact is diminished, however, by
the fact that computer game graphics
are not even up to television quality as
of yet, so anything short of a digitized
image which devours available memory
has a distinct cartoon quality to it. In addition, subtle details, such as buttons on
a machine, scars on a face, dust, and
others, cannot be displayed with the current state of computer graphics. Thus,
detailed text descriptions in conjunction
with computer graphics are necessary in
order to provide the most exciting and
detailed format.

Telling the Story
My final and most important decision
was also a split between text adventure
and CRPGs. The question was "How do
I tell the story?" In an attempt to make
the game more movie-like, I have a
large cast of characters and a lot of background action going on. Although these
"spear carriers" do not directly advance
the plot, they do provide an important
sense of reality. After all, one would imagine that a starship needs more than a
captain and a few people on the bridge
to run it.
Therefore, by creating a set of rules or

algorithms that the NPCs can follow, my
large cast becomes more than static
graphics. If the Captain is attacked, for
example, any armed NPCs in the crew
will return fire on the assailant. These
"extras" should help greatly in setting the
tone of the story.
Frankly, though, I perceive a problem
in using the usual CRPG format in telling the story. This is because CRPGs
lack the dramatic pace of a text adventure. The usual CRPG excursion is filled
with a lot of hack and slash, relieved
here and there with a few bursts of story.
By using the "framework" of a text adventure and allowing the characters some
of the latitude in movement and combat
allotted to those in CRPGs, I have attempted to create a system where the
plot can be advanced at an exciting
pace by almost "dragging" the player
through the story. Ideally, this constant
pace would be like a spice that revives
the player's tastebuds at critical intervals.
By "dragging," I mean that a
text adventure characteristically advances only when the
player has solved a series of
puzzles or plot complications.
A CRPG usually waits for the
player to increase certain attributes or obtain certain
items. With a hybrid product
such as Universe 3, the plot
can continue whether the
player has solved specific short range
goals or not. Since the game is
designed so that a range of attribute
levels can complete it, the player is not
left stalled because of being unable to
solve an obscure puzzle. In this product,
events just happen to a player. The skill
is shown by "riding out" the circumstances. The player who is more adept at
solving puzzles will probably be better
equipped to win, but it is still possible
for anyone to succeed.
In short, the more dynamic I can make
the plot unfold, the more exciting the
plot can be. By keying events off as
many factors as possible, the pace of
the game will be anything but slow.

The Future
My personal feeling is that in just a few
years, the equipment and the computer
game industry will have expanded
enough to rival film and television as a
major storytelling medium. We seem to
be in the equivalent of the nickelodeon
days, but who knows? The computer
game equivalent of "Birth of a Nation"
may be just around the corner. As a
designer, it would be great to be the
one who creates such a classic.

chaotic China in 190 A.D. is the setting for this incredibly
rich simulation of warfare and unification. Based on a historical novel written in the fourteenth century (which was
in turn based on a serious official history from the third century),
Romance of the Three Kingdoms is a best-selling Japanese computer game that is just now reaching the States. The ads for this
game bill it as the "greatest simulation game released in Japan"
and after playing about 50+ hours, I can tell you that both
"simulation" and "game" are beautifully wed in a gorgeous
ceremony of color. There are hosts of enemies (both human
and natural) out to thwart the unification of China and it is a
mammoth undertaking to defeat all elements and ascend the Imperial Throne.
The game has five
scenarios set in five
successive time
periods. From one to
eight can compete.
The computer can
play any number of
players and can be set
to any of ten difficulty
levels, while also maintaining either a "warlike" or "rational"
philosophy. This is no
computer dummy,
folks, it knows when
you're shifting forces
from one province to
another (a perfect
time to attack) and
balances good
diplomacy ("Oh please
accept my daughter's
hand in marriage")
with timely stabs in
the back ("Sorry about
attacking your
province, can I offer
you some gold and
rice?").

generals or peasants, devoting resources to flood prevention,
developing the land, training your troops, searching for gold or
other metal resources, plundering your own provinces, building
castles for defense (this also increases revenue production),
using covert action against
enemy provinces, using
diplomacy on neighbors,
buying rice and weapons, or
(if you can't figure out what to
do) passing your turn.
Trying to run a war and

Sneak Preview

Romance
of the
Three
Kingdoms
by William "Biff" Kritzen

The main screen display shows the map of
China divided into 58
states along with an information display of
the state that is taking
its turn. Each state is
rated for the number
of castles it has, how
many beautiful women and horses live there, how much metal
has been mined, the value of the land, the probability of flooding, the number of people living there, their loyalty to you, the
number of generals occupying the province and the number of
soldiers in their command. A secondary display shows how much
gold and rice is stored in the province, and how expensive rice is
to buy that turn. All this information changes as you cycle
through your provinces and is easy to master after a few turns.
Normally, it would be easy to get informational overload as you
acquire thirty or forty provinces, so you can put the province on
auto-pilot and let the computer run it for you (which it does well).

peace economy (guns or butter?) is a real trick. Beyond
that, "Romance" is really more
than just an economic simulation. The combat game is a
real nail-biter. There are three
types of moves, five types of
combat, supply, reserves,
hostage taking, surrender, different terrain and, once again,
a very "smart" computer!

For every province you choose to control, each turn you have
the options of moving, attacking, sending gold or rice between
provinces, levying special taxes, recruiting generals and soldiers,
viewing other states, giving gifts (including food or gold) to

Romance of the Three Kingdoms would do very nicely as either
an economic simulation or as a wargame. The fact that it is both
makes this an absolutely incredible value that will challenge all
your gaming skills and knowledge for a long, long time to come.

"Fire Brigade":
A 16-bit Eastern Front Game
by Allyn Vannoy
Allyn has previously contributed articles to "Civil
War Times Illustrated" and "Strategy & Tactics"
magazines. Allyn reviewed this game on the basis
of a near final beta version. The reason for his involvement with the simulation was to examine its
potential for use by the United States Department of Defense. In
this article, Allyn
shares his expertise
with CGW.
At the beginning of
November, the enemy
again attacked the northern wing of the Army
Group, Fourth Panzer
Army's Dnieper front,
with strong forces. It was
not clear whether this
was an offensive with farreaching aims or whether
the enemy first intended
to win the necessary assembly space west of the
river. It soon became evident that the formations
of Fourth Panzer Army
would be unable to hold
the Dnieper against the
far stronger Russians,
and by 5th November it
could be seen that Kiev
would be lost . . .
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

Fire Brigade
Macintosh (Apple IIGS,
Amiga, and IBM to follow)
Mac version reviewed
1-2
$40.00
Dave O'Connor
Tony Oliver
and Ben Frasier

In the next few days, the situation of Fourth Panzer Army took
a rapid turn for the worse. Its
eleven infantry divisions, almost
all of which were now down to
regimental strength, were no
PantherGms PUBLISHER:
longer a match for an opponent
Hughes, ACT, AUSTRALIA
who had committed between
seventeen and twenty fully manned rifle divisions,
three or four tank corps and one cavalry corps in the
very first wave of his offensive. Even the two armored
divisions at the army's disposal as a mobile reserve
were too weak to stop the enemy's breakthroughs.

T

he above passage is from German Field Marshal
von Manstein's book, Lost Victories, but could
just as easily be one player's assessment of the
results after playing a few turns of Fire Brigade. Fire
Brigade is the first computer simulation produced by
Panther Games and from the looks of it, it will be a
milestone for computer wargames in terms of sophistication. The player steps into the shoes of the com-

mander of the German Fourth Panzer Army as he
directs infantry and Panzer corps in the battle for the
city of Kiev or takes on the role of the Soviet front commander to free the capital of the Ukraine and break
through the German lines. The player reviews battle
reports, gathers intelligence on enemy forces, assesses
information on friendly units, orders subordinate headquarter formations into action, directs the allocation of
supplies, reinforcements, and combat support assets.
Then, the player "confers" with the computer and issues orders. Using artificial intelligence routines, the
computer executes the orders by carrying out all movement and combat with allowances made for unit commander and staff capabilities, troop quality, armor and
anti-tank strengths, supply, morale, supporting arms,
casualties, fatigue, leadership and combat power. The
battle is followed on strategic and tactical level maps.
The game program executes rapidly with each turn
representing one day of real time. Victory progress is
tracked continuously and compared with the historical
result at any given point. The computer also provides
for limited military intelligence without any operating requirements being placed on the player. Since Fire
Brigade can be played solitaire or as a two player
game, a network capability has been provided so that
two computers may be linked for a two player competition.

The Historical Background:
Setting the Stage
With the defeat of the Germans at Kursk during July,
1943, the ensuing Soviet summer offensive in
southern Russia had driven Army Group South back to
the Dnieper River. Here, Field Marshal von Manstein
had intended to dig in and refit his tired troops.
The Soviet high command ordered both the 1st and
2nd Ukrainian Fronts to push across the Dnieper
before the Germans could establish their lines. General
Vatutin's 1st Ukrainian Front secured bridgeheads
north and south of the Ukrainian capital.
During October, Vatutin's forces failed to break out of
the Bukrin bend south of the city, so he transferred forces to the Lyutesh bridgehead north of Kiev and made
preparations to launch an assault from there. At dawn
on 3 November, General Vatutin loosened the largest
artillery barrage seen to date on the Eastern Front. The
forces charging out of the bridgehead (60th Army, 38th
Army, and 3rd Guards Tank Army) were directed to capture Kiev and then roll west and take Korosten,
Zhitomir, Berdichev, and Fastov. Thus, they would cut
the rail link to Army Group Center and set the
groundwork for the envelopment of Army Group South.
The northern wing of Fourth Panzer Army (59th,
13th, and 7th Korps) collapsed under the weight of the
assault. As the Soviet tanks headed west, Manstein
pleaded with Hitler to commit the 48th Panzer Korps,
the Fire Brigade, which had previously dealt the Soviets
many a defeat along the southern portion of the front.
Despite initial losses, the German Panzer and infantry
divisions were brought back up to reasonable strength
and elite armored formations were marshalled in the
area Belaya-Zerkov for a counter-stroke aimed at cutting off the Russian forces.

The commander of the 48th Panzer Korps, General
Balck, launched three panzer divisions in a drive on
Brussilov, followed by a swing west towards Zhitomir. A
huge tank battle ensued during the latter part of
November as veteran armored forces on both sides attacked and counter-attacked.
A wet-warm break in the weather resulted in mud
bringing a near halt to operations. Both sides suffered
huge losses in tanks, guns, and men. The Germans
had re-captured Zhitomir and Korosten, but failed to
take Kiev or destroy the Soviets west of the Dnieper.
By 5 December, a winter freeze allowed the now refitted Panzer divisions of Balck's Fire Brigade to initiate
maneuvers north of Zhitomir. Taking the Soviets off
guard, the 60th Army was nearly cut off and forced to
pull back from Korosten. A reinforced 13th Korps advanced east towards Radomyschl. The 42nd Korps succeeded in taking Brussilov, while the 7th threatened
Fastov. With the situation growing desperate, the
Soviet high command threw in its reserves, the 1st
Tank Army and the 18th Army. With the commitment
of 18th Army, the Soviets went on the offensive and retook Brussilov.
By late December, both sides were exhausted. The
Soviets had failed in their attempts to envelop Army
Group South, but had liberated Kiev; cracked the
Dnieper line; and inflicted terrible losses on the German forces. For its part, the Fourth Panzer Army had
failed to hold Kiev, but had smashed a sizable portion
of the Soviet formations while maintaining its important
rail links to Army Group Center.
All of this is what Fire Brigade encompasses.

Design Considerations:
Taking the Stage
The game is well conceived in that it considers every
aspect of command, support, and troops in combat.
The designers have made every effort to produce the
highest quality combat simulation. It is one thing to
produce a computer game based on science fiction or
fantasy where the designer has complete latitude, but
the portrayal of a historical even, especially on this
scale, is a challenge few game companies would ever
attempt.
The game graphics, even in black and white, are easily the best to be used in a computer game to date. The
color version on the Amiga is most impressive. The real
power of the game, however, is in its concept—the integration of the elements of combat and the functions
of the chain of command. Game operations are so easily understood by using the palette and drop-down
menus that a player can commence playing it almost
immediately.
The Play Manual not only provides operating instructions, but gives insight into the logic behind the game's
functions. The manual provides the usual tutorial and
reference sections, as well as sections for: a glossary,
designer notes, historical background and bibliography,
scenario hints, and strategy of play.
This is not a game for the kind of player that wants to
control every aspect of a game down to the most
minute detail. If, however, one is truly interested in a

good historic portrayal and wants a game that is realistic, a game that lets an individual get involved to the degree they wish, one that will tax their abilities as a field
general, then this is definitely their game.

Strategy Notes:
Upstaging the Opposition
Although the game operations are quickly learned,
the player should expect to warm up to it slowly, approach it not as if to conquer it, but to learn from it. It
may take weeks (or even months) of playing to learn
the finer points
such as: which
commanders you
can trust to carry
out orders and
do a respectable
job in so doing;
how far you can
push a tried and
battle-weary
group of panzer
grenadiers before
they crack; what
proper mix of
tank corps and
rifle corps make
for a hard hitting
Soviet army; and what to do when bad weather hits.
There seems to be an infinite number of points to
ponder.
Players should be aware that historically, even with the
tremendous number of forces deployed on the Eastern
Front, there was usually no continuous front line, but
rather a series of forward outposts or strong points
backed, when possible, by mobile reserves. So, try to
maintain corps boundaries, but do not be surprised if
the enemy breaks through and roams your rear areas.
Just bring up the reserves, if you have them!
The only real drawback to the game is that there may
be too much information for a player to handle, at
least, initially. It would have helpful if information for all
the units in a corps or army could have been presented
in a spreadsheet type format in order to aid the player
in assessing the data and making the best decisions
possible. Also, the HQ symbols should have been something which appeared less like the division/corps symbols on the tactical map. As they are now, there is a
chance of getting the units confused.

Summary: The Curtain Call
To recap, Fire Brigade is an operational level war
game that may be approached by both the novice
player and the expert. The game assumes no historical
knowledge or experience requirement on the part of
the player. Playing time ranges from three to eight
hours depending on the scenario selected. The game
features four scenarios, three skill levels, save game
and panic routines, plays with either mouse or
keyboard, includes map and scenario order of battle
cards, and player's manual. Fire Brigade is meant for
the thinking man, the sophisticated player who wants
to learn and make the absolute most of his computer
playing time.

Beyond
Beyond
Zork
(Continued from page 26)
Zorkquest and Gamma Force are pretty standard battles against evil, and they
will have most appeal to young readers.
Still, the stories are well told and the action—which includes such cinematic
techniques as pans, zooms and dissolves—will keep all but the most jaded adventurers glued to their monitors. Needless to say, lnfocomics are not above
reproach. There are flaws, among them
the generally awkward introduction of op
portunities to switch characters (although Amy Briggs does this the best,
in Gamma Force, by being more subtle
than "If you want to follow Elana, push
Enter . . . "); the way in which
characters' magic is largely depicted by a
limited format of shooting smoke rings
from their eyes and forming protective
force bubbles; and the "To Be Continued" endings, especially in Gamma
Force. Even more important is the issue
of how appealing lnfocomics will be
once the novelty wears off.
Frankly, the price may have to come
down. lnfocomics won't have to be
given away in shoestores, but twelve dollars is a bit much to pay for each installment in what might well be very long
series. Infocom will also have to buckle
down and devise stories sophisticated
enough to attract the Dark Knight crowd
or, at least, the usual Infocom audience.
I have no doubt that they can do it,
though, and I urge them to get on the
ball. Infocom has a potential goldmine
in its hands and computer garners have
a real treat in store.

Video Gaming World
name on your Legend of
Zelda game pak, you will be
instantly warped to the
second round. Here's
another: "Don't turn your
back on Bigman in Ghosts
'n Goblins and he won't
shoot you." . . . CapCom
signed a licensing agreement with LucasFilm to
create a videogame based
on the movie, Willow.
NESers should find it on
store shelves before
Christmas. . . . Beeshu, Inc.
is keeping the action hot
with a line of high-tech joysticks for videogamers. The
Zinger ($17.95) has two trigger buttons, base buttons
for left or right handed play,
and two auto-fire switches.
The Ultima Superstick is
their top-of-the-line model,
with deal-a-speed controls
for fast or slow-mo auto-fire,
trigger buttons with LEDs,
and a feature that slows the
game. The Sega/Atari/Commodore-compatible model

Video
Gaming
World's
Newswire
Nolan Bushnell is going
home to Atari. In a move
that puts Bushnell back into
the video game business for
the first time in nearly a
decade, videogaming's
foremost pioneer will design
a line of entertainment
software for Atari. Nolan
founded Atari following the
success of his coin-op hit,
Pong, placing the original
emphasis on play-for-pay
machines. Following a
landmark agreement with
Sears which guaranteed national distribution for home
videomachines, Bushnell
started a new division to
market the Atari 2600 Video
Computer System and its
line of sports, driving, tank,
and wall-bashing contests.
This ushered in the First
Great Age of Videogames.. .
. INTV Corp.'s latest model
of Intellivision is the Intellivision Super Pro System.
Compatible with all old Intellivision cartridges, 12 new
games slated for 1988 will
take advantage of the Super
Pro System's 16 bit
microprocessor, which
boasts better sound effects
than ever before, including
musical harmonies in three
voices. The Super Pro sells
for around $60. . . .
Nintendo's Autumn releases
include a couple of sequels
that should capture a huge
bite of the cartridge market.
Super Mario Brothers II and
Zelda II join the 90+ NES
games (including those from
third party licensees) already
on the shelves. This number
should easily pass 100
before the end of 1988. . . .
The new Nintendo Power
Set will be available for the

Holiday Buying Season. For
$179.95, the pack contains
the NES Control Deck, the
light
phaser,
and
Nintendo's
newest
piece of
hardware,
the Power
Pad. This
is an interactive mat
which the
player
stands on to
manipulate
the on-screen action. The
NES Power Set comes with
a game pack that contains
Super Mario Brothers, Duck
Hunt, and Super Team

Games. . . . PAK's FAX calls
itself "The Newsletter for the
Serious Nintendo Owner."
12 issues
are $9.95
or send
them a
SASE for
a free
sample:
Pak's Fax,
1559 E.
Amar Rd.
Suite J289, West
Covina,
CA 91792. It
contains
high scores, contest information, news and reviews, plus
reader tips. Here's a sample:
If you type in the name
"Zelda" instead of your own

retails for $44.95 and the
NES version is $49.95. .
Watch for videogame characters like Super Mario
Brothers, Donkey Kong, and
Zelda to turn up in nongaming contexts. Nintendo
has an agreement which allows Leisure Concepts Inc.
exclusive rights to license
trademarked characters for
use in non-video game
products.

I

t 's a wonder that anyone

in the realms of fantasy
trusts wizards. So many
of them are power-mad villains that one would think
that the entire magical
profession would be in bad
odor. Malkil, the main
menace in this sophisticated
and challenging action adventure, is exactly the sort of
vile necromancer who gives
the magical profession a
black eye. This powerful
mage has kidnapped the

beautiful princess and hidden her somewhere deep
within the dangerous Woods
of Elrond.
The video gamer wields the
Brightsword as Korus, a
brave barbarian fighter who
must fight through Malkil's
numerous minions to rescue
the captive. The player
begins the game with three
lives, with 12 life force units
in each. This energy drains
slowly as
time passes,
but battle
and injuries
use it up
quickly. If
Kuros exhausts all
three lives,
the player
may begin at
TITLE:
the same point
in the game,
minus accumulated points,
with three new
lives or start the entire adventure from scratch.

fers a satisfying, wellrounded gaming experience.
—Arnie Katz

Wow! Even those

garners who played
and were knocked
out by Sega's earlier 3-D effort, 3-D Missile Defense,
are unlikely to be prepared
for Zaxxon 3-D. This game
has to be the most amazing
experience in
depth-of-field
gaming ever
produced for
the mass
market.
Sega's 3-D
system is different from
other such
techniques.
Wizards & Warriors
The SegaScope
3-D Glasses are
wired directly
into the game
system and the
liquid crystal shutters in each
lens periodically flash, causing the dual on-screen imAlthough the control sysages to merge into a single,
tem is not especially difficult
dimensional image. The ilto master, Wizards & Warlusion is faultless and has
riors allows the gamer to do
never been shown to better
a wide variety of actions.
advantage than in this
The player can find and use
revamped version of the armagic, including powerful arcade classic, Zaxxon.
tifacts and special potions, in
the ceaseless battle against
As in the original, the
evil creatures both living and
player pilots the Zaxxon craft
undead.
through a series of trenchlike fortresses build by the
Yet, Wizards & Warriors
sinister Vargans. The wellfeatures plenty of arcadeprotected gauntlets bristle
style combat action. Runwith everything from antining, jumping, and
aircraft batteries, missiles,
swordplay are the main inand fuel depots to Vargan
gredients in this exceptionalDeath Fighters. The object:
ly well-illustrated adventure.
pass successfully through all
The documentation is not
nine levels of the Vargan
quite up to explaining the
Space Fortress.
game. Although Acclaim
provides a 24 page manual,
Unlike 3-D Missile Defense,
there is not enough explanaZaxxon 3-D does not use
tion of the routine of play,
the Sega Light Phaser, but
especially for younger video
opts instead for the regular
adventurers. Still, the playcontroller. This controller is
mechanics are easy enough
both easier and more
to learn in one or two trial
suitable to a game of this
rounds.
type. The contest begins in
outer space with the player's
Wizards and Warriors
Zaxxon craft in the center of
refutes the claim that all
video games are unthe screen, a series of Vargan Death Fighters appear.
restrained target shoots. This
engaging and wellA deep space dogfight ensues, followed by a glimpse
programmed action quest of-

of the first Vargan Fortress
wall.
Each fortress wall contains
a cutaway portion through
which the player can safely
pass (though, as in the
original, it's a good idea to
keep firing, just to make
sure the path ahead is clear).
Once inside the fortress, the
Zaxxon must drop to near
ground level in order to
obliterate the tanks, missiles,
cannon batteries, and
fuel tanks
(which, when
destroyed,
replenish the
player's own
fuel reserves).
Words cannot adequately describe
TITLE:
the sensations one
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
experiences while
PRICE:
playing this game.
PUBLISHER:
Though other arcade games have
tried to duplicate an illusion
of depth, they all comes
short of the mark. Zaxxon 3D serves up the real thing,
in a format familiar to most
garners.
—Bill Kunkel
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Zaxxon 3-D
Sega
1
$39.95
Sega

S

ide Pocket is far and
away the best billiards
simulation ever
published for any system.
Data East even went an
extra nine yards to add the
kind of far-out play elements
not possible in the "real"
world.
Side Pocket offers a quartet of game possibilities, including "Pocket Game"
(straight pool) played in a
tournament format; a "Training" tutorial; "2-Player Pocket
Game"; and "9 Ball" (first
player to sink the 9 ball
wins).
The "Pocket" game begins,
of course, with the break. A
dotted line appears onscreen before each shot is
taken, lining up the cue ball
with the next target ball (this

line also serves as an angle
indicator for bank shots).
The procedure for taking
shots is simple, but satisfying. First, the player selects
"English," if any, by pinpointing the exact location where
the stick will strike the cue
ball. Next, the player presses
the "A" button on the controller to set the "Power Indicator" in motion. The indicator travels back and
forth across
a simple line
gauge representing minimum to maximum force.
A second
press of the
"A" button
selects the
level of force
Side Pocket
and the shot is
Nintendo
taken.
1-2
$39.95
Data East

The graphics
on Side Pocket
are astonishingly
realistic. The bulk of the
screen display consists of an
overhead view of the pool
table, reproduced down to
the smallest detail. The deep
green felt covering, the
slightly worn edging and the
wood inlaid head rail look so
authentic, you can almost
see cigarette smoke curling
through the glare of an overhead lightbulb. Across the
top of the screen are displayed: the score and tournament city, as well as English
and Power controls.
In addition, Side Pocket
goes beyond realism to introduce pinball-type elements
which greatly enhance the
game's play. For example,
on certain shots, a specific
shot is designated as a
"bonus" pocket. There are
also trick shots for extra
points and a "special" ball
which, when struck, cuts friction so that the balls continue bouncing long after
they would normally stop.
Side Pocket has everything
any videogame pool shark
could ask for, as well as
several extras you'd never
dream of requesting. This is
highly recommended.
—Bill Kunkel

Insurance
Salesman
(Continued from page 18)
objects in the game are not obvious. Deductive
reasoning and creativity are necessary in most
situations, along with a little luck.
Finally, while the game is still linear, more
flexibility does exist in SQII. The scope of the game
is greater, so different avenues of pursuit can be
explored within the same general location.

"Disk Cussin"' of Negatives
All said, SQII is well presented. Nevertheless,
there are some negative factors. First, disk access
while restoring games or changing screens takes a
while, so use of a hard drive is recommended.
Second, the tradition of utilizing arcade sequences
which are often non-essential to the plot (and dull,
as well) continues to annoy those who prefer
thought over reflex in their entertainment.
Third, and more important, is the inadequacy of
the text descriptions. Even with an EGA card, there
are several areas in the IBM version where an

object's graphics are unclear. In such situations,
having a complete text description as a back up
would save a lot of trouble. In CGA mode, such
descriptions are more a necessity than a luxury.
Any object which appears on the screen in clear
view to the player should be described in the
description accessed by the "Look" command. The
mailbox located in the jungle is a good example of
where this is lacking. Most players will eventually
figure out what the item is, but it is not immediately obvious from the graphic depiction.
Fourth, some of the puzzles are actually hidden
within the game. In one instance, a light source is
needed in order to continue. Even though a fire existed, it was impossible to get anything that would
burn from it. The answer was a glowing gem that
was hidden in an underground tunnel in the
swamp. There was no indication of this in the
room description and the only way this reviewer
found it was by accidentally swimming over a section of the swamp that was deeper than the rest.
Such a solution to this puzzle seems ridiculously illogical. With a large map to explore, it is doubtful
that most players will have the patience to search
every inch of every screen for hidden clues.

Objects of Perception
Despite these quirks, SQII is still a fine game.
Most of the difficulties can be overcome by a
simple strategy. When playing the game, keep in
mind that this is a text/graphics game with the emphasis on graphics. People who are accustomed
only to text descriptions will have a hard time with
this game and should concentrate on examining
the pictures carefully. Objects in the game are rarely there simply for decoration. Try to pick up anything, and this means anything you come across.
Also, if a player attempts an action that should
work, but finds that it does not, trying it from a different section of the screen. It is not enough in
these games to simply be in a room in order to accomplish something. Players must be near to the
object of the action. Sometimes, the player must
be on a specific side of the object in order to accomplish the action.
At the same time, the text descriptions should
not be ignored. The "Look" command should be
used in every room, as well as examining items
which are picked up. This may sound obvious, but
after getting used to the graphics, it is easy to forget that the text descriptions even exist. Further,
with the improved parser, experimentation should
be encouraged. Even if an action sounds
ridiculous, players should not give up. This is a
humor-oriented game and an appreciation of this
is the key to success.

Regenerated Genre
All in all, SQII is an enjoyable and satisfying
game. The improvements evident in this game
give proof to Sierra's willingness to make the
genre more effective. While the puzzles are still not
incredibly difficult, they do give the game a depth
which was lacking in the original. If further improvements are adopted, I'm sure Space Quest III will be
even more successful.

Hard Copy
(Continued from page 25)
flowcharts used in many clue books, but
the maps from "The Bard's Tale" (I & II),
"Might & Magic," "Moebius," "Phantasie"
(I, II, & Ill), "Shard of Spring," "Wizard's
Crown," and "Wrath of Denethenor" look
like dungeon floor plans; the maps from
"Autoduel" appear as simple square looking roadmaps; and the world map from
"Ultima IV" is presented as a Mercator
projection. The book offers
walkthroughs and maps on 50 adventure games. $24.99.

need not accidentally find solutions
before they need them. The first section
contains maps to 25 games in flow
chart form. The second section contains
a "Master List of Clues" which offers
specific instructions on solving problems
to be found at the numbered circles on
the map. The third section offers a
walkthrough approach to 19 of the
games.

Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632

KEYS TO SOLVING COMPUTER
ADVENTURE GAMES II (M. K.
Simon): The sequel to "Keys To Solving
Computer Adventure Games" covers 23
games from "Arazok's Tomb" to "Uninvited." The book is divided into the same
three sections as the earlier work, but
the "Master Clue List" seems even more
detailed than the previous one.

KEYS TO SOLVING COMPUTER
ADVENTURE GAMES (M. K. Simon):
This book contains helps and hints for
solving 26 different adventure games on
the computer. The book is divided into
three separate sections so that players

Scorpion's
Tale
(Continued from page 15)
This is the last segment of the game and the clues will not
be especially helpful. You're pretty much on your own. The
third clue under "How Do I Kill The Witch" merely says
"That's all you're going to get". If you look in the ball, you will
see a possible future. In fact, you can do this four times,
seeing a slightly different scene with each, After that, the ball
is clear and nothing more will show up. What you have to
keep in mind is that these are only possible futures. Just
seeing one of them in the ball doesn't mean that it will happen. That's what you have to work on here: figuring out how
to make a maybe into a certainty. Bet you'll find the answer a
charming one; you have everything you need now to finish
the game.
And bring yourself back to . . . that nasty bus. Sigh. It really
seems a shame that Magnetic Scrolls felt this was the way the
game should end. It is very depressing, especially in view of
the overall humorous tone of the adventure (typical British
humor, in fact). There you have it, though, and it's up to you

TAB Books
Blue Ridge Summit, PA 17214
JET: 82 Challenging New Adventures (Dave Prochnow): This book is
similar in approach to those by Charles
Gulick (noted above), except it relates to
subLogic's "Jet" instead of "Flight
Simulator." Nevertheless, the book
makes a greater use of photographs,
screen shots, line art, and diagrams than
those previously mentioned. Not only
does the book offer tutorial adventures,
but it attempts to walk the "pilot"
through the historical development of
the jet aircraft. Of course, since
subLogic's program simulates the very
modern General Dynamics' F-16 "Falcon" and McDonnell Douglas F/A-18
"Hornet," one would expect adventures
from World War II and the Korean Conflict to be difficult to simulate. Using
such techniques as: limiting the plane to
one weapon system; firing off all but
100 rounds of ammunition; and keeping speed below Mach .7, reader/"pilots"
get to simulate the flight of a Messerschmitt 262A-1a. Similar adjustments
allow missions for Korea and Vietnam.
$12.95.

to decide whether or not such an ending is for you. Other
than that, Jinxter is a cute game.
Well, I see by the invisible clock on the wall it's that time
again. Remember if you need help with an adventure game,
you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie: stop by the Games Roundtable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On The Source: Send SMail to
ST1030. By US Mail: (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States and want a reply!): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY, 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Beyond Dark Castle
(Continued from page 34)
shield up indefinitely). If you have the shield, you
can use bombs with impunity. After you get the
orb, a rope will be lowered. Now go back for the
potion.

To get to the catacombs, go off the lower righthand corner of the basement screen. Although the
fastest way to get across a screen is a series of running jumps, do not try this on this level. There is a
low ceiling. Once you reach the top of the Black
Knight's chambers, he stops throwing beer mugs
and starts pitching swords. If you hit him on the
head enough times with fireballs, you knock him
out. Head for the tapestry on the left (fig ?). Collect
your experience points and proceed on to the next
level.

In Conclusion
The original Dark Castle was rated excellent, in
this reviewer's opinion, and this one is even better.
Two nice features have been added: a practice
mode and a save option. In practice mode, you
can give yourself as many lives, rocks, etc. as
necessary and learn how to get through a section.
Then you can play for points. To use the save option, you have to get to the computer room. If you
need to save half-way across the swamp, too bad.
If, however, you save after getting each orb, you
can stop the game and fulfill family obligations
without too much trauma. The game allows five different save files per level, so you might even invite
some friends over to give it a try.

There are some very interesting rumblings on the horizon of the computer
gaming world. As part of our commitment to keep our readers abreast of all
aspects of computer gaming we will be
reporting on the ongoing development
of this new phenomenon which has become know as "interactive entertainment."

"base-case" hardware configuration for
CD-I players. Consumers can expect the
first machines to hit these shores in the
second half of 1989. Users should expect to be amazed.
CD-I offers high resolution video (at
the very least it would be equivalent to a
Macintosh II), digital sound, and 560
megabytes of formatted disk storage!

tem! The hope is that, by 1991, the cost
of manufacturing the chips will fall low
enough to get the technology into the
home market. In the meantime, the two
business software leaders, Microsoft
and Lotus, have both endorsed DVI. Expect to see the technology showcased in
military and business training applications for the next couple of years.

During a recent visit to

Cinemaware headquarters, the

CD-I/DVI:
Who's In Bed
With Whom?

CGW editorial staff was impressed with the work the company is doing in anticipation of
these new interactive technologies. Bob Jacob is the President and co-founder of
Cinemaware. Before Cinemaware,
he was one of the first successful
software agents. David Riordan,
Director of
Cinmaware's interactive Entertainment Group, is the
designer of the Laser disk based,
coin-op game Freedom Fighter. A
former Embassy Television staffer, he is
also the co-designer of Ballblazer
(Lucasfilm Games) and the author of
the hit song, "Green-Eyed Lady."

C

ouch potatoes, beware! Tens of
millions of dollars are being
spent to eliminate your kind from
existence. At laboratories scattered
around the world, engineers and
programmers are racing to perfect the interactive entertainment technologies of
the 1990s. The stakes are huge. Some
analysts have predicted that the market
for interactive entertainment hardware
and software will exceed $2 billion by
1995.
Interactive entertainment is a buzzword
that you had better get used to, because
a lot of companies are going to be
throwing that expression around. It basically refers to entertainment delivery systems that, unlike computer games, are
designed to appeal to a mass market.
These systems are based upon two competitive technologies, compact disk and
VCR.

Can't CD-Interactive for DV
Two publicly announced, but non-com
patible, compact disk based systems are
Compact Disk Interactive (CD-I) and Digi
tal Video Interactive (DVI).

CD-I is a superset of the original CD
audio technology developed by Phillips,
the huge Dutch electronics company, in
conjunction with Sony. These two giants
have lined up strong support among
other consumer electronics companies
for the establishment of a standard

by Bob Jacob and David Riordan
Lurking in the background is a 68000
microprocessor and a minimum of one
megabyte of Random Access Memory.
This hardware has shown the ability to
display partial screen, full motion video.
This system will allow game designers to
really let their imaginations loose, unfettered by concerns over precious disk '
space and lack of RAM. The games .. .
'er, excuse us, interactive entertainment,
that will be produced on CD-I should
make all of today's bestsellers look like
Pong.

Veni, Vidi, VCR

Forget what you have already
seen in the "so-called" interactive
VCR games. The current crop offers little, in our opinion, in play
value and is not authentically interactive. Nevertheless, one leading
toy manufacturer has decided that
the VCR, not the CD, is going to
provide the vehicle for sneaking interactive entertainment into the
average American home. The
hardware has not been unveiled,
but rumors about the system's
capabilities have been floating around
the developer community for over a year.
This new system delivers a genuine interactive experience by substituting the
single channel of video normally found
on a standard video cassette with multiple channels. The consumer will purchase a "black box" and specially encoded video cassettes that provide the
ability to jump from one channel to
another. This ability, combined with digital overlays, provides a unique, compelling gaming environment. This is especially interesting because the player is interacting with human characters instead
of computer graphics.

And The Winner Is . . .

The scuttlebutt around the CD-I community is that the first players will go on
sale for approximately $1,000.
DVI, the other compact disk based
technology, is a product of RCA's famed
David Sarnoff Laboratories, located in
Princeton, NJ. Unlike CD-I, which is an
agreed upon technical standard, DVI is,
essentially, a set of custom chips that
decompresses video images on the fly,
allowing up to 72 minutes of full screen,
full motion video, to be stored on a
single CD.
Unfortunately, for consumer-oriented
DVI adherents, the chips are not cheap.
Currently, it would cost, at least, $7,000
to buy the chips for one home DVI sys-

All of these companies are betting that
most Americans will want to partake of
interactive experiences, provided that
they are presented in a compelling manner. To create this new form of entertainment, movie people, record people, and
computer game developers are working
together. Some suggest that this is a
case of strange bedfellows, while others
note that it all falls under the rubric of
entertainment.
Computer game publishers have
reacted to all of this by either jumping
on one or more bandwagons or by
adopting a "wait and see" attitude. Joining the latter group on the sidelines are
the scoffers, who predict that millions
are being wasted on a market that does
not exist.
Let's compare notes in 1993 and see
who was right!

Lord British
Kisses and Tells
(Continued from page 29)
Almost as soon as we have a bootable
game disk, essential functions like entering and exiting towns and castles are installed within the main programs. When
this is done I have a vast, empty world
to explore and refine, which I do while
looking at it through the same 11X11
tile window that the players will have.
Enter the monsters! Early in the
game's development we add monster
generation and intelligence. This is one
of the toughest tasks of the entire
development process, because now the
intricate combat system has to be
designed and implemented. Now, the
world has become a hostile environment. So, we need some weapons! We
add shops to buy provisions, arms, & armour to help one survive in the as-yetuntamed wilds of Britannia. Then, the
dungeons are opened for business. Of
course, what kind of an idiot would ven-

ture into an Ultima dungeon without
magic? .. .
In this fashion, I hope you can see
how the program evolves to meet the
needs of the world from a player's point
of view. In this case, mine!
Very, very late in the development
cycle comes the installment of the plot.
After all the neat bells & whistles are in
and working and after the dungeons
and monsters grace the landscape, the
story line evolves as a vehicle to take the
player all around the globe and to show
off the nifty effects we have placed in
the game. A very good example of this is
the harpsichord in Ultima V. As I have
stated, it is one of my main design goals
in creating the world of an Ultima to
have it act and react as completely and
reasonably as possible. After I added the
harpsichord "tile" for what was originally
a purely visual effect, it seemed to follow
that one should be able to play it. Then,
once it could be "played," it would be
nice to come up with some reason for
playing it! (And lo and behold, there is,
but that would be telling.) Similarly,
someone in the game had better be
there to teach you how to play it. (And

there is!)
Near the very end (except for months
of debugging), the clues to solving the
game are created in the form of the
documentation and the conversations of
the people within the game. For me,
this is one of the hardest aspects of the
game to implement. As far as I'm concerned, the game is already complete.
After all, I didn't need any clues to solve
it! Frankly, to come up with literally
hundreds of people to inhabit a world,
each of whom is ideally a uniquely interesting individual, is a monumental task!
So, during this phase, I often solicit help
from co-workers (and even the general
public) to help come up with personalities to populate the world.
Finally, at long last, after many manyears of work, an Ultima is complete.
Much of my life, my personality, my
time, and the dedication of my coworkers goes into each Ultima. At the
end of one or two long years, my life
(financial, psychological, etc.) rests upon
the acceptance of each work, so for me
each and every one must represent nothing short of the best I can do. I only
hope that it shows.

CES Report
(Continued from page 10)
son left escape routes in case of
unforeseen delays a la Star
Fleet II (which should ship this
summer). Paragon Software's
target date for Wizard Wars, a 3D graphics adventure for the
IBM, is July. In the game,
players assume the role of the
Wizard Temeres, who has been
stripped of the bulk of his
magic. The goal is to restore
these powers, confront the evil
wizard Aldorin, and free the imprisoned White Unicorn.

fers the fastest scrolling we have
seen on the Mac, plus an intriguing 3-D approach to the
graphics, good sound, and a
chance to play "space ranger"
(Mac only, August release date).
Visions of the Aftermath: The
Boomtown is a post-holocaust
game which involves multi-

From other sources, Epyx
entered the adventure game
market with its announcement
of LA. Crackdown in January.
The company has licensed Trials of Honor from UbiSoft as
one of its Masters Collection of
strategy games. This beautifully
illustrated game will be available
for ST and IBM in the third
quarter, as well as C-64 and
Amiga in the fourth quarter. In
the game, the player is a former
heir to the throne who, in a
period after the regicide of the
monarch, must journey across
the realm and prove both his
courage and his right to rule.
Avalon Hill Microcomputer
Games is getting in on adventure games with their forthcoming Police Blotter. The 13th
Precinct in this game sounds as
tough as the famous 57th
Precinct of the mystery novels,
but Apple, IBM, and Mac owners
can attempt to solve seven different homicide cases while reading these mysteries. First Row
Software was busily promoting
its forthcoming Honeymooners
interactive sitcom and recently
released Twilight Zone, but
regular CGW readers already
know about the sequel to the latter game. In addition, Rainbird
will release Black Lamp, a whimsical adventure labeled as a
"medieval melodrama" about a
unique protagonist, Jolly Jack
the Jester.

player option, variable victory
conditions, seven ecological terrains, and four scenarios. Targeted for June on the IBM, the
game should include elements
of role-playing, ethical decisionmaking, and resource management. Just prior to the show,
the company shipped Willow:
The Computer Game based on
the George Lucas film. The corn
pany has made a significant effort to remain true to the film's
story line, but it is possible to
edit the game in order to create
new maps, scenes, and spells.

Mindscape has made an impressive commitment to adventure games. In addition to
Citadel, described in CGW #45
(p.16), the company has a
strong line of science fiction
games. Captain Blood, a late
summer release on the Amiga,
ST, C-64, and IBM, offers challenging arcade sequences over
vector and fractal graphics, an
icon driven language enhanced
by speech synthesis, and a
sense of humor. The game was
designed in France. Colony of-

Interplay Productions is getting close to completion of their
computer game version of William Gibson's cyberpunk novel,
Neuromancer. Similar to Wasteland in that players must increase skills by using them in
order to be successful in the adventure, it is dissimilar to their
recent adventure because there
is no death (only flatlining).
There are 38 bulletin boards
(dataspaces) to investigate by
"jacking in" to cyberspace.
Players attempt to improve their

"hacking" skills in order to infiltrate such infamous
dataspaces as the IRS or FBI.

Action Smash 'Em
With Nintendo's prodigious
presence at the show and profit

in the marketplace, there is a
significant increase in the number of action titles being shown.
Data East is continuing to convert its popular coin-op titles to
home computer formats. Some
have not made the transition
well, but Victory Road on the
IBM offers 15 frames per
second scroll rate (just behind
the 16 per second on the coinop game), loads of animation,
and graphics with the best definition, yet. The August "Video
Gaming World" will talk about
the video games and the June
issue of CGW already talked
about Platoon on the C-64.
Sierra's Silpheed is fast and
smooth-scrolling as one would
expect from the company, but
those who invest in IBM sound
boards will be thrilled with the
sound quality of this game as
well. Mindscape's upcoming
conversion of Road Runner
looks almost as good on the ST
as the coin-op version. The C64 version offers the same
game play, but sacrifices the
graphics. microillusions has

signed a contract to produce
games based on HannaBarbara's popular cartoon
characters. Next year, players
may be able to enter the worlds
of The Flintstones, Scooby-Doo,
or The Jetsons
Epyx is offering sophisticated
action/adventure games in The
Legend of Blacksilver their dungeoneering excursion with joystick interface, and Omnicron
Conspiracy, their space opera in
first person viewpoint. The company also announced two additional U. S. Gold titles: Tower
Toppler, a maze-chase game,
and Sports-A-Roni with comical
pseudo-Italian events like sackracing in Naples, pasta balancing in Pisa, and more.
Microprose is working on
Samurai, an action/adventure
game similar to their popular
Pirates adventure game. In addition, the company is using
something of the Airborne
Ranger approach in their international espionage game, Covert
Action. Don't expect any of
these before the fourth quarter
of 1988. Samurai and Covert Action might even be later.A new
company called Scorpion was
touting its line of predominantly
action-oriented titles during the
show. Super Tanks is a futuristic tank mission for the C-64;
Foundation's Waste offers a
spacecraft on a mad dash for
freedom on the Amiga;
Academy puts the player in
"skimmer" flight school on the
ST; Alien Destruction Set offers
four different space missions on
the C-64; and Mandroid offers
mission-oriented arcade combat
on the C-64.
Rainbird announced
Starglider II, the sequel to the
space arcade simulation. In this
product slated for September
release, the first time a program
from Rainbird has run on both
an Amiga and ST from the
same disk, players will be able
to take the "Starglider" into
planetary atmospheres and rescue space colonies. The company also plans to release Carrier Command for the IBM and
32 bit machines. This action/strategy game is hybrid
enough to be included as a wargame, since the players command a number of fighters and
amphibious assault vehicles in
addition to their ship, but is
heavily dependent on arcade sequences. Enlightenment is an
action-adventure game from
Rainbird which features 15 levels
of difficulty, 32 different spell
types, and control of five different characters. For the Amiga

(Continued on page 53)

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 7)
Death Valley competition, go "bogging" through the Georgia mudflats,
or try to stay on the road during a
Michigan winter. In addition, players
decide how to equip their trucks
from one of four basic frames to the
final product. Will you use standard,
"mudder," or all terrain tires? Will you
carry extra water? How many spare
tires will you keep on board? Does
your budget cover a mechanic on
board? Then, players are ready for a
smooth scrolling race with fast and
colorful animation. The view of your
truck balancing on two wheels or
performing a forward flip is delightful. The soundtrack plays "Taps"
when you crash, though. C-64/128,
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #6.
STREET SPORTS SOCCER:
This new entry in the "Street Sports"
series offers smooth animation, three
difficulty levels, and nine players to
select from in creating your three
man teams. Strategy revolves around
team selection and player positioning and joystick moderated passing,
shooting, and ball handling. The
position of the ball appears to be
more critical and joystick position
less forgiving than in the earlier
games of the series. Apple, C64/128, IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #7.

First Row Software
900 E. 8th Avenue, Ste. 300
King of Prussia, PA 19406
PRIME TIME: Players can create
their own sleazy shows for "Sweeps
Week" in this satirical strategy game
about television programming. One
to three human players can compete
in this "Battle of the Network Czars"
where time slots, demographics, leadins, lunches, and luck can make or
break a player's schedule. If players
don't like the silly shows prefabricated in the game's database (like
"Family Mortician" or "Pat Robin

Hood" (a televangelist who is always
hitting people up for money)),
players can create their own series if
they like. Hmmm. . . how about
"Hitler's Mother" (everywhere she
goes, she raises a fuhrer). The object
of the game is to lead the ratings
and make the most money over the
course of one simulated year. Atari
ST, IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #8.

Intracorp, Inc.
14160 SW 139th Court
Miami, FL 33186
MURDER ON THE ATLANTIC: If
you are planning on buying this
game simply to win the $500,000 advertised on the box, forget it. The
most money that will be awarded in
the contest is $10,000 to the grand
prize winner. After that, the rest of
the $500,000 is going to be given
away in software gift certificates. As
for the game itself, it looks like a
simple mystery game reflective of the
mystery genre dominated by Hercule
Poirot or Lord Peter Wimsey. Players
must explore 600 locations, as well
as locate and interrogate 40
suspects, in order to solve the
mystery of the murder of Rene Vallette aboard the luxury liner, S.S.
Bourgogne. Amiga, Apple (128K
req.), Atari ST, C-64/128, IBM (CGA
or EGA and 256K req.) ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #9.

DigiTek, Inc.
10415 N. Florida Ave.
Ste. 410
Tampa, FL
VAMPIRE'S EMPIRE: "So, vhat
vere you expecting from 'light' entertainment? Velcome to the dark
demesne of Dracula." Players direct
a wizened character named Dr. Van
Helsing through a maze of dark
caverns in an attempt to direct a
single ray of light deep enough into

the caverns to defeat the vile and
virile vampire, himself. Besides utilizing mirrors to direct the ray of light,
other arcade elements include cloves
of garlic to throw at attacking
monsters (lesser vampires, sirens,
etc.) and a magic ball with which to
capture the light ray and release it in
any chosen direction. Amiga
($44.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#10.

MECC
3490 Lexington Ave. North
St. Paul, MN 55126
ZOYON PATROL: Minnesota
Educational Computing Corporation
has produced this simulation game
to teach about problem solving.
Players step into the role of the director of a city agency of the city of
Zaphropolis (on Zaphyr Island) and
find themselves responsible for locating and capturing animals that
wander into the city. The animals are
called "zoyons." They are a rare and
endangered species, but they always
cause trouble when they enter the
city limits. For the animals' safety
and the well-being of the citizenry,
they should be captured and
returned to their natural habitat.
Players must decipher clues from
citizen reports and field investigators
in order to form a pattern of identification and a plan for capture. A
detailed instructor's guide (in threering binder form) is included with the
diskette. Apple II with 128K in 5.25"
format ($55.00), in 3.5" format
($59.00). Circle Reader Service Card
#11.

M-P-Software, Inc.
Route 2, Box 737
Cumming, GA 30130
M-P-S NFL PRO FOOTBALL:
This simulation game allows players
to replay (or predict) NFL games in
manual mode to warp speed (plays a
complete game in 1-3 minutes). The
game allows roster changes, ability
to edit rosters, and use of a predict
mode. IBM. Circle Reader Service
Card #12.

CES Report
(Continued from page 51)
and C-64, the release is slated
for mid-summer.
The Activision label of
Mediagenic will release
Predator in September for the C64/128. The
game,
based on
the Arnold
Schwarzenegger
film, will feature the
player as
the leader of
a military
rescue
team. The
company is
also touting
its IBM,
IIGS, and
Apple II conversions of The Last Ninja, as
well as the Apple II and C-64 versions of Rampage.

Run Silent,
Run Deep
Wargamers will largely have to
focus on the sea. Red Storm
Rising from Microprose and
Harpoon from Three-Sixty are
both nearing completion and
they are both outstanding
products. The former will offer a
more visible strategic aspect
than other recent Microprose
releases and the latter, a different wargaming interface.
Other wargames include the
Japanese games from Koei:
Romance of the Three
Kingdoms and Nobunaga's Ambition (see the Sneak Preview of
Romance of the Three
Kingdoms on p. 39 of this
issue), games about the unification of China and Japan. The
Japanese influence is also evident in a Cinemaware work-inprogress entitled, Lords of the
Rising Sun. The unabashed
goal of the product is to have
the depth of a traditional
strategy game, the artistic
quality of Defender of the
Crown (and then, some), and arcade smoothness of Rocket
Ranger.
Finally, the bad news for historical wargamers is that
hardcore strategy titles are not
"hot" on the market. SSI's game
based on the Napoleonic era
turns out to be a Napoleonic
Construction Set and their
European conquest game on

the ST is expected to be
Colonial Conquest with a World
War II flavor. Neither were
demonstrated at the show, but
the latter is currently undergoing
playtesting. SSG just released
Rommel: Battles for North
Africa which continues the evolution of the Battlefront system.
Another bright spot is that
Mindscape will be marketing
some of SSI's out-of-print titles

like Nam and Geopolitique
1990.
Abstract wargamers may have
some interesting challenges.
Avalon Hill is readying
Combots for the C-64 gamer. This
"robotwar" game has something
of the flavor of the classic RobotWar without the programming.
Further, Electronic Arts should
release Modem Wars (described
in CGW #45's CES coverage as
Sport of War), the Dan Bunten
game which has already
spawned impromptu tournaments over the phone lines between developers and playtesters.

Good News,
Bad News
An hour away from home, the
pilot of our return flight came
over the speakers saying, "I've
got some bad news for you
folks . . . pause ... The Lakers
are down by over 10 points."
Actually, when a pilot comes
on the air and tells you that he's
got bad news, it's a relief to hear
that the Lakers are losing—even
if you are a Laker fan. I would
rather have the Lakers lose than
have my plane crash. He went
on to say that he had good
news. The flight was on
schedule.
We hope that most of the CES
report was good news for you,
but we know the bad news is
that you have to wait for some
of these great products to be
released. At least, we say to ourselves, it doesn't look like the industry is going to crash.

Reader Input Device #49
On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation. Some general interest questions are provided, as
well. For each game you have played or article you have
read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the
appropriate number on the card provided opposite page 4.

The Computer Gaming World Hall of
Fame honors those games that over the
course of time have proven themselves
to be top rated games by the readers of
CGW. Members of the CGW Hall of
Fame are chosen by the staff of COW.
Once inducted into the Hall, the game
will be retired from the current Game
Ratings List. As a consumer you can be
assured that any game in the CGW
Hall of Fame is an all-time favorite.

Game Ratings
Is it simply attrition or have the "Boys of Summer" brought
enough pennant fever to put three baseball products in the
top 10 on the strategy side? "Earl Weaver Baseball" doubled
past "Gettysburg"'s defenses and ended up safe in second
place. This followed the lead-off conquest by "Empire" which
successfully managed its fourth consecutive conquest of first

place on the strategy side.
The adventure side has a new leader. In fact, this one's so
"hot," it's radioactive. "Wasteland," the post-nuclear holocaust
role playing game from Electronic Arts, edged out its mystical
stablemate, "Bard's Tale III," for the number one position.
"Dungeon Master" made a saving roll to remain in third place,
but "Starflight"'s orbit decayed to fifth place as Microprose's
"Pirates" grappled their way into fourth position. Matters
should stay fluid for several issues on the adventure side as
the first "Ultima V" ratings arrive during the next rating period.

