VOL. 2 NO. 6
From the Editor...
This issue marks one year that
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD has
been in existence. On the cover of this
issue we take time to do a little
celebrating and enjoy a piece of
birthday cake. The past year has been
dangerous, tense, and challenging. But
most of all, it has been rewarding. The
response of our readers and the industry
in general are the "power pills - that have
kept us going when the "ghosts" of
problems have attacked us.
Each issue has increased quality and
added features. This issue is no
exception. In addition to new layout
features, we have added another new
column, MICROCOMPUTER MATHEMAGIC By Dr. Michael Ecker. Look for a
regular Atari 400/800 column beginning
in our next issue. Look for the STAR
MAZE contest in this issue.

Nov. - Dec. - 1982
Features
THE HISTORY OF A WARGAME DESIGN
From Idea to Royalties
JAPANESE STRATEGY IN
GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN
How to win with the Japanese
FOUR FOR THE ATARI
Four Games Reviewed
EASTERN FRONT: Scenario Options
Historical modifications you can make
STAR MAZE
Review and CONTEST
LEGIONNAIRE: Review and Analysis
Chris Crawford's New Game
CYTRON MASTERS FOR ATARI
Conversion Versus Upgrade
ANDROMEDA CONQUEST
Strategies and Rules Modifications
BUNGO PETE and the WONDER BEAR
Two New Scenarios For TORPEDO FIRE
BEYOND SARGON II
Scenarios For Chess

11
Gary Grigsby
18
Stephen Van Osdell
20
Allen Doum
22
Ian Chadwick
26
Russell Sipe
27
Bill Willett
31
Dan Bunten
34
Floyd Mathews
36
Bob Proctor
39
Roger J. Cooper

Departments
Inside the Industry
Letters
Taking a peek
Hobby and Industry News
The Silicon Cerebrum
Real World Gaming
Microcomputer Mathemagic
Route 80 (TRS-80)
Micro-Reviews
Writing For CGW
Reader Input Device

2
3
4
10
14
16
23
33
41
46
47

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy,
Associate Publisher Game Merchandising

Last time we looked at the top sellers as reported by 105
game and educational software manufacturers. Part of that
same survey conducted for CGW asked for the total number of
new titles each company introduced in 1981, the first half of
1982, and for which personal computers the programs were
designed.
Nearly 500 new game titles and 150 new educational titles
were introduced in 1981. Statistics we gathered for the first six
months of 1982 show around 375 new game titles and 130
new educational titles have already been released —80
percent of last year's totals in just the first half of this year.
Some of the most prolific game publishers include:

Company
Adventure International
Atari Program Exchange
Instant Software
Dynacomp
Artworx Software
Creative Computing Software**
Sierra On-Line***
(formerly On-Line Inc.)
Commodore International
Orion Software Associates
The Programmer's Guild
Sirius Software**
Spectral Associates
Strategic Simulations*
Broderbund Software**
Automated Simulations***
Continental Software
Avalon Hill
Microcomputer Games
CE Software
California Pacific
Computer Co.**
Acorn Software
Quality Software
Synergistic Solar
Big Five Software
Hayden Book Company
United Software of America
Manhatten Software
Datasoft*
Avant-Garde Creations
Muse**
Texas Instruments
Computerware
Dakin 5/Level 10
The Software Toolworks
Discovery Games
Krell Software
Creative Software
K-Byte***
Gebelli Software
Med Systems
Sublogic Communications***
Datamost***
Synergistic Software
Picadilly Software

6 mos. 1982
1981
New Games New Games
55
36
50
40
17
16
15

38
10
20
80
6
7
6

13
11
11
10
10
10
9
8
8

12
5
5
7
15
2
8
8
0

7
7

12
2

7
7
7
6
6
6
6
6
0
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
2
0
3
3
3
3
2
2

2
1
1
2
2
2
2
0
6
4
4
4
2
2
2
0
0
4
4
8
6
6
4
5
5

It should be noted that this chart does not rate the
companies by their size. It lists them in order only according to
the number of new game titles they introduced in 1981 and so
far in 1982.
What this chart does indicate is that over 50 percent of all
new game titles were published by just 10 companies in both
1981 and 1982. If you take the statistics from the top 30
manufacturers, they are responsible for 81 percent of all new
game releases.
There is also no relationship between the number of
releases and how many sales a firm's top game will do.
*Indicates a company's top seller has moved 8,000 or more
units since introduction. **Is a company whose hottest
product has sold over 15,000 copies. ***Denotes a game with
more than 25,000 sales since release date.
Some companies which only released 1 or 2 titles have
had top sellers with more than 25,000 copies sold (Infocom
and BudgeCo), or 15,000-plus in sales (Innovative Design
Software, Sir-tech Software, Arcade Plus, and The Cornsoft
Group).
Looking at the chart on what game software was designed
for which personal computers there's a discrepancy between
the number of new titles and amount of software published
(500 versus 806 in 1981; 375 versus 732 so far in 1982). This is
due to the fact that one title is often made into two or more
versions for different machines. Also, some firms spent a large
part of their effort converting old game titles to work on
different computers so as a consequence, their new releases
figures are not very impressive for 1981/82.
The following chart on amount of software published
shows how the personal computers divide game software
marketed. The "other" category includes the Commodore Vic,
IBM PC, TI 99/4A, Sinclair ZX81, Xerox 820, and a few other
machines.
It should be emphasized, that the market share in terms of
percent of games made for a computer does not equal how
many computers of that type are being sold; although there
obviously is a relationship with how many consumers have
those machines and the demand for games.
No matter which personal computer you own, the large
number of software manufacturers are going to provide you
with a variety of games for use on your particular machine.
Personal
computer

1981
Game
Releases

first half
1982
Releases

Market Share
by % of
Software

1981/1982
Apple
TRS-80
Atari
Others

231

191

202
175

134

198

229

28.6/26.1
25.1/18.3
21.7/24.3
24.6/31.3

Totals

806

732

100/100

178

Dear Editor:
In "Software Piracy: The Slaying of a
Hydra, - (Sept.-Oct. '82), Roe R. Adams
III exhibits tunnel vision. Neither the
behavior nor the realization of those
who steal programs is unique; everyday
there are other individuals who violate
moral values and rules and make
elaborate excuses.
The " core of the problem - is not the
cost of the software; it is the soft morality
that accompanies the belief that others
are not to be trusted and that moral
codes may be violated if one feels put
upon.
While teaching philosophy in a
community college, I all too often heard
students (and sometimes colleagues)
trying to justify unethical acts by the
argument that someone had treated
them unfairly. One "ripped-off" an
employer who demanded too much
work; another cheated in the class of a
teacher whose standards were too high;
a third stole from a corporation whose
policies were abhorrent, and on and on.
If the software publishers ask too high
a price, there is a proper (decent,
honest, ethical) response: don't buy the
item. Publishers will then lower the price
if they can or stop making the product if
they can't.
There are too many unanticipated
consequences of the reasoning Adams
and others present. Apologists for
software theft ( " piracy" like "rippingoff is a euphemism intended to evade
facing what that act really is) are
teaching youngsters growing up with
computers that moral codes are
irrelevant to the good life. That will come
back to haunt us all, not just the
computer-using community. We would
all do well to recall Aristotle's words in
the Nichomachean Ethics of the 4th
century B.C.:
" States of character arise out of like
activities. . . It makes no small difference,
then, whether we form habits of one
kind or another from our very youth; it
makes a very great difference, or rather
it makes ALL the difference.Leona Billings
Palo Alto, CA
ED. — Thank you for your refreshing
letter. Refreshing in that discussions
about the pros and cons of software
piracy rarely produce such eloquent

statements of the larger truth. The soft
morality which you refer to is the
outgrowth of the fact that so many
computerists grew up in the age of
situational ethics. Perhaps software
pirates should stop and take note of
the fact that ultimately moral and
ethical codes should be based or
transcendental realities rather than
personal opinion.

Dear Editor,
Enclosed is a check for back issues of
CGW. The problem with your magazine
is that it is TOO good! I loaned out issues
2.2 and 2.3 and never got them back.
From now on I'll give the guys
subscription forms.
I hope your magazine is doing well. I
had the fortune (?) to be managing
editor of a small magazine for over a
year, and I know some of the problems
you're running into. Keep up the good
work!
I think you would do well to
analyse/review the new SSI game
" Battle For Normandy". Although I had
to send my copy back due to a disk
malfunction (it would not put up the
correct characters after accessing the
disk) everything else is magnificent.
First, you can play against the
computer or another person and save
the game at any time (typical SSI stuff).
Much more interesting are the 'what
ifs?' You can set different parameters
up for different strengths (supply, air
power, sea power, etc.). This provides
an almost unlimited method of handicapping a player. Playing a first time
wargamer? Cut way back on your
supplies and tactical air. It makes the
game a challenge for both of you.
Another major improvement is that
the displays of unit strengths, etc., can
be adjusted to show up for a period of
1-9 seconds. This is a major advance in
the field of computer gaming. It means
that an experienced player does not
have to suffer through. . .[a long display
when a short peek is all that is
needed]. . . to pick out the important
part(s).
SSI is indeed making major advances
in computer wargaming. They should
be congratulated for putting these

program enhancements in a 48K game.
Keep up the quality of CGW. I
thoroughly enjoy each issue cover to
cover.
Bruce M. Johnson
Buckeye, Arizona
Ed. — I'm glad to hear CGW is so
popular in Buckeye. If a few more of
your issues are "borrowed", we may
have to start paying you a commission
for subscriptions from Arizona.
Yes, CGW is doing well. It is growing
so fast we sometimes have trouble
keeping up. Our move to larger
quarters and an increase in the staff
will help us make CGW even better. We
are a year old now and look forward to
another great year of covering one of
the fastest growing hobbies in the
world.
The character set problem you
mention in your comments on Battle
For Normandy is related to the 10K
ROM operating system in the Atari
computer (I thus assume you are an
Atari gamer). Early Atari computers
that have the Revision A operating
System Cartridge will not be able to
run SSI's Battle For Normandy until
they are upgraded with a Revision B
Operating System. If you have no
immediate plans to upgrade, you can
return your old disk or cassette to SSI
and they will replace it with a program
that will run on Rev. A Operating
Systems.
Although I would not classify the
adjustable display in Battle For
Normandy as a "major advance in the
field of computer gaming", I agree
with you that any attempt by any
computer game manufacturer to
make their games more "user friendly"
is an advancement for the hobby.

Computer Gaming
World
is moving!
(see p.10)

In addition to games mentioned elsewhere
in this issue, the following products have been
received by CGW. Some of these products will
receive more detailed attention in future
issues. Readers wishing to review any of these
games should contact CGW.

relative skill by newcomers. We liked them
both. Both run on the Apple (keyboard
play) and retail for $29.95.

rear firing bazooka and an oil slick
thrower. The killer cars have forward firing
lasers. This game is somewhat unusual in
that you steer your car by hitting the
paddle buttons (0 for counterclockwise
turns, 1 for clockwise turns). Apple II.
$29.95.

Automated Simulations/Epyx
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
ALIEN GARDEN: A ROM Cartridge
game for the ATARI 400/800 computer.
In AG you guide your "Cosmic Critter" (it
looks like something out of a Dr. Suess
book) around a crystal garden. The
"flowers" can grow, transform. or explode
depending upon how you touch them with
your critter. Although AG looks like an
arcade game, it is actually a game of
strategy. Your goal is to gain points by
creating a multi-generation garden and
eating your creation. Flowers begin the
game in their first-generation form and
can be transformed into 20+ generations.
The more generations, the higher your
score when you eat flowers. Atari
400/800.

FORE!: A hi-res golf game which has
two courses, a driving range, and practice
field. Wind direction and terrain affect
shots. FORE! along with HI-RES COMPUTER GOLF (Avant-Garde) are the two
most popular golf games for the Apple
computer. In comparing them we found
both to be good games (in different ways).
HRCG requires hand-eye coordinated
swings which is much more challenging
than simply hitting a key to make your
stroke. Some garners like this extra
dimension. On the other hand, HRCG can
be frustrating if you do not like the handeye sequence and/or want a relaxing
beer-and-pretzel type game. HRCG is more for
the involved golfer and requires several
rounds of play to "master". FORE! is more
easily "mastered" and can be played with

ESCAPE FROM VULCAN'S ISLE, CRYPT
OF THE UNDEAD and KING ARTHUR'S
HEIR:
Here are three games based on a
common system. Using the Atari joystick
you make your way around finding
treasure, food, and other important items.
All three of these adventure games involve
travel through a variety of regions to
accomplish your task. In ESCAPE Your
task is to escape Vulcan's Isle. In CRYPT
you try to escape from a cemetery. In
KING ARTHUR you must return to
Camelot. As will all Automated Simulation
games, the rule books are well done. The
games themselves will appeal to those
who enjoy adventure games. Atari 400/800.

Avant-Garde Creations
P.O. Box 30160
Eugene. OR 97403
DEATH RACE '82: A hi-res arcade
game in which you attempt to drive your
turbocar through a series of 10 concrete
road mazes. You attempt to outmaneuver
and/or outgun killer robots in Death
Squad cars. Your weaponry includes a

FEDERATION: A "Defender" type
game in which you are to wipe out
defending forces on the enemy planet.
You can fire lasers at enemy ships and
drop bombs on planetary batteries. The
screen scrolls left and right in this game
which is played by keyboard. The
movement of your ship is different than
one might expect from a Defender type
game. It is difficult to describe. Try playing
the game before you buy if possible. Apple
II. $29.95.

ZERO GRAVITY PINBALL: A pinball
game without the effects of gravity. Rather
than the traditional rectangular field in
which the ball enters from the top and you
try to overcome gravity through the use of
flippers, ZGP is played on a square field
and you attempt to keep the ball from
flying out into space. Ten flippers guard
the right and left exits of the playing field.
Continued on pg. 6

Two force fields (keyboard activated)
protect the upper and lower exits. As a
game, ZGP is considerably different than
other Apple pinball games. Apple II.
$29.95.

Cavalier Computer
P.O. Box 2032
Del Mar, CA 92014
TELEPORT: A hi-res arcade game
which can make use of a Votrax speech
synthesizer. Without the synthesizer you
hear music while you are playing. Teleport
is basically a maze-chase game without
the maze. That is, movement is allowed in
the four cardinal directions as you make
your way around trying to stun aliens
without being run into by them. Once you
stun an alien you must transport it through
the infinity door (to its own dimension).
Apple II.

Datamost
9748 Cozycroft Ave.
Chatsworth. CA 9131 1
HOW TO WRITE AN APPLE PROGRAM
HOW TO WRITE AN IBM-PC PROGRAM
HOW TO WRITE A TRS-80 PROGRAM:
Three books that in reality are one. Ed
Faulk, the author, has written an
introductory book on programming and
issued it in three forms, Apple, IBM pc, and
TRS-80. Faulk takes you through
planning, designing, coding, testing, and
documenting your program idea. $14.95
each.
MONEY MUNCHERS: A maze-chase
game by Bob Biship in which you try to
grap money found throughout the maze.
You compete against money munchers
who not only wish to grab the money for

themselves, but also can eliminate you if
they catch you. At higher levels spiders
and snakes also hinder you. Apple II.
$29.95.

Hayden Software
50 Essex St.
Rochelle Park, NJ 07662
KAMIKAZE: An arcade game in which
you use a game paddle to maneuver your
ship back and forth firing at enemy
bombers. From time to time, one of the
planes will attempt to kamikaze onto you.
Mines also appear from time to time and
must be avoided. The best thing that can
be said about Kamikaze is that you can win
up to $5000 playing the game! Details for
the CONTEST can be found in the game
package. Entry deadline is January 15.
1983. Apple II. $34.95.

MARS CARS: In MC you attempt to
make your way through 16 levels to the
center of the planet Mars. Each level
contains treasures which you must collect
while avoiding the Mars Cars. The Mars
Cars look like aliens and you. the actual
alien, look like a car. You can crash
through the barriers as you make your way
through each level. The Mars Cars get
more intelligent on each level as they
guard their treasures and seek to
eliminate you. Apple II. $29.95.

THAROLIAN TUNNELS: This game,
bought by Datamost from The Software
Farm. places the players in the role of an
invading spaceship pilot. The game is
broken up into four distinct parts: Combat
with defenders above the planet;
Maneuvering through tunnels (avoiding
the walls); Combat with enemy ships in a
large underground tunnel; and Navigating
through lasers into a docking compartment. Apple II. $29.95.

KLONDIKE 2000: The Martian Gold
Rush Game. In Klondike 2000, you
attempt to mine gold in the mines of Mars.
(Wouldn't it be funny if a Mars car came
along in the middle of your mining?)
Robots guard the gold but you can win the
robots to your side by feeding them crystal
chips. The player who gains the allegiance
of the most robots will harvest the most
gold and win the game. Solo play is
possible, but the game is really a multiplayer game for up to four players. Apple
II. $24.95.
SHUTTLE INTERCEPT: A Defender
type game in which you pilot a space
shuttle and try to intercept and capture
earth satellites with your space hook. You
are hindered by meteors and a variety of
alien spacecraft. Apple II. $34.95.

FINAL CONFLICT: A game of warfare
between robot armies. Each side programs robots and then sends them out
onto the battlefield. The game can be fast
and tactical or thought-out and strategic.
You can choose from a variety of terrain
maps or semi-design your own battlefield.

Can be played by two players or one player
versus the computer. Designed by Tom
Cleaver (GALAXY, Avalon Hill). Apple II.
$34.95.

KING CRIBBAGE: KC is a computerized
version of the old English Card Game. KC
allows you to play six-card cribbage
against your Apple computer. All rules of
tournament cribbage are followed. There
is a special beginners option which
provides a simpler game. Apple II. $24.95.

Energy Probes to eliminate enemy
vessels. You must avoid contact with the
impenetrable force field while avoiding the
ships. Frazzle looks like an Asteroids type
game when first seen on the screen, but is
much different. The game has a "flavor"
all its own. Apple II.

KNOW YOUR APPLE: This product,
packaged in an Apple II shaped box,
introduces the Apple II to the beginning
computerist. Separate programs (accessed
from the main menu) teach the beginner
basic information about the monitor.
keyboard, disk drive, ROM, RAM, 6502
processor, etc. Although it is too
elementary for someone who has been
working with his Apple for any length of
time, it is a program that can be valuable
to the beginner when he first sets up his
system. It is a nice showcase program as
well. Apple II.

(no kidding!). By manipulating gates and
headstones you seek to destroy monsters
and protect visitors. The first level is very
simple. Other levels increase difficulty
(especially if you use the independent
control option). If possible, play it before
you buy. Apple II. $29.95.

Piccadilly Software
89 Summit Ave.
Summit, NJ 07901
WARP DESTROYER: A well-designed
game of space combat that utilizes a
number of screens and tasks. If you
successfully make it through the hyperspace sequence you are faced with a
series of planetary defenses (mines,
fighters, probots, enemy base). If you
destroy them all you go on to the next
enemy planet and begin again. The screen
scrolls left and right as you look out from
your cockpit. A nice 3-D effect is achieved
with your shots receding in the distance
and enemy shots growing larger as they
approach. Apple II.

STAR TRADERS: A multi-player game
of intergalactic profiteering. You compete
other players to earn the largest profits
from interstellar trading. The game can be
played by from two to four players, each
withonersp.Tgamelow
multiple strategies and would be sure to
make an good evening's gaming for
several friends. Apple II. $19.95.
The Software Farm
3901 So. Elkart
Aurora, CO 80014
MONSTER MASH: An arcade game in
which you attempt to keep monsters in a
graveyard and mash them with headstones

Muse Software
347 North Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21201
FRAllLE: A space arcade game in
which you control a ship that drops

Synapse Software
5327 Jacuzzi St., Suite I
Richmond. CA 94804

PICNIC PARANOIA: An arcade game
for the Atari. A variety of insects attempt to
ruin George's picnic. You control George
as he swats ants,. spiders, and wasps. The
ants attempt to cart off your food. The
wasps attempt to sting you, and the
spiders bite and spin webs. While swatting
insects you will also be attempting to
move food items back onto the tables
(you've killed the ants that were about to
get away with the food). Points are
awarded at the end of each round for food

still left on the table or only slightly moved
(i.e.. on the grass but not out of sight. Atari
16K (disk or tape) $34.95

PROTECTOR II: An improved version
of Synapse's PROTECTOR. A Defender
type game in which you must rescue the
populace (the volcano is about to erupt)
and move to a safe place. Then you can
assault the enemy base. The new version
allows you to pass in front of buildings and
them shoot while carrying people to
safety. Other improvements as well. Atari
32K (disk and tape) $34.95.

Sierra On-Line, Inc.
36575 Mudge Ranch Road
Coarsegold, CA 93614
FROGGER: Sierra On-Line-produces
The Official Frogger by Sega ® . Both are
good reproductions of the coin-op game
in which a frog attempts to cross a busy
highway, a dangerous river, and arrive
safely on the other side. When you
compare the ATARI version and the
APPLE version it is apparent how much
better the Atari computer system is for
sound and graphics. The Atari version is
just like the coin-op game in sight and
sound. The Apple version plays like the
coin-op game, but its graphics and sound
are inferior due to the limitations of the
machine. The Atari version (on disk)
requires 32K. It also comes on tape. The
Apple version requires 48K. $34.95.

CLAIM JUMPER: A nice two-player
interactive game (solo play is possible).
Set in the gold rush days, your task is to
pick-up gold and take it to the Assay office:
collect your money and deposit it in your
bank. Unfortunately your opponent can
and will try to steal your gold, or shoot you,
or both. Atari 16K (disk or tape). $34.95.

Shiloh. Tigers In The Snow) BEN covers
the D-Day invasions. SSI is releasing this
one simultaneously for the Apple, Atari
and TRS-80 (disk and tape versions
available. $39.95.

S.E.U.I.S.: Shoot 'Em Up In Space is
called - A Spacegamer's Toolkit" - You
build ships from a choice of six
prototypes. S.E.U.I.S., by John Lyon, bears
some resemblance to John's popular
SHATTERED ALLIANCE game. A strategic
game sequence creates the individual
battles that are fought by your created
squadrons. Actual battles are fought in
arcade type action. Apple II. $39.95.

THE COSMIC BALANCE: A tactical
space combat game by Paul Murray that is
similar but much better than his popular
THE WARP FACTOR. TAB allows you to
construct your own ships. A strategic-level
version of TCB will be released at a later
date. Using both games, you will be able to
set up complex campaign games with two
or more players. Apple II. $39.95.

Dynacomp. Inc.
1427 Monroe Ave.
Rochester. NY 14618

Strategic Simulations
465 Fairchild Dr., Suite 108
Mountain View, CA 94043
BATTLE FOR NORMANDY: Designed
by Tactical Design Group (Battle of

VALLEY OF THE KINGS: A graphic
adventure game for the Atari. Actually
three adventures in one: you must
successfully complete each of three
different passages to win. Along the way
you seek treasures, keys, weapons, etc.
Atari 48K. $29.95.

WE ARE MOVING!
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD has a new
address! Our new mailing address which should be
used for all correspondence except United Parcel
Service and common carrier deliveries is now:
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
P.O. BOX 4566
ANAHEIM, CA 928034566
Our business offices and shipping address will be:
1337 North Merona St.
Anaheim. CA 92805

The Cornsoft Group (6008 N. Keystone Ave., Indianapolis,
IN 46220). in association with SEGA Enterprises and Sierra
On-Line, has produced the official FROGGER for the TRS-80
Model I and III. According to Cornsoft, the actual Frogger
music and sound effects have been incorporated into the
TRS-80 version.
Hayden Publishing Company has announced the
formation of the HAYDEN SOFTWARE COMPANY. The
president of the new company is Oscar Ray Rodriguez. Mr.
Rodriguez was previously the president of American Business
Systems.
Hayden Software Company (600 Suffolk St. Lowell, MA
01853) is sponsoring a contest based on HSC's first arcade
release. KAMIKAZE. Finalists will be flown to San Francisco for
the finals. The winner will take home $5,000. Details are
included in the Apple II game which sells for $34.95.

BOMB ALLEY, Gary Grigsby's game on Malta and the
Mediterranean, will be out at the beginning of December. It will
be an Apple game. Gary will begin work soon on a game for the
ATARI 400/800 based on WWII carrier combat. Don't be too
anxious, it will be months before we see it. He will also be
working on his NORTH ATLANTIC SEA MODERN NAVAL
game.
SSI will be flooding the ATARI 400/800 market in the
next weeks with several titles, CYTRON MASTERS (disk and
cassette). GALACTIC GLADIATORS (48K disk), and THE
COSMIC BALANCE (48K disk). The Atari version of
COMPUTER BASEBALL is up in the air. Don't expect to see it
for a while. The IBM PC version of THE WARP FACTOR has
been delayed and will now be out by Christmas, "hopefully".
On the other hand, the PC version of TIGERS IN THE SNOW
should be out by December 1. It will require the color graphics
card. 64K. and cost $39.95.
The updated COMPUTER AMBUSH for the Apple is back
in the production cycle — "could be out in January" says SSI
President Joel Billings.
Two other game projects at SSI are GALACTIC
ADVENTURES and EPIDEMIC. GA will be a two disk
adventure game based on the universe found in GALACTIC
GLADIATORS. In EPIDEMIC (48K APPLE and 64K IBM PC)
falling meteorites spread epidemics throughout the earth.
Your job is to stop the epidemics. Look for both games in
December.
The Grand Stand Company (4231 Bluebell Ave.. Studio
City, CA 91607) has released a furniture quality JOYSTICK
FLOOR STAND. The stand is designed to eliminate wrist and
elbow fatigue as well as improve finger dexterity. It can be
adapted to any popular joystick. The basic wood version sells
for $34.95.

Edu-Ware Services has released the second game in their
EMPIRE Gaming Trilogy: EMPIRE II: INTERSTELLAR
SHARKS. The trilogy will be completed by EMPIRE III:
ARMAGEDDON which is scheduled for a February 1983
release. All three games run on the Apple II. Interstellar Sharks
sells for $32.95.
Broderbund Software of San Rafael. CA announces THE
ARCADE MACHINE CONTEST. Purchasers of The Arcade
Machine, a do-it-yourself arcade design package, can win
prizes up to $1.500. Starting January 31. 1983 and every
month thereafter through June 30, 1983. Broderbund will
select a game designed using their TAM program as a finalist.
The finalists will be eligible for the Grand Prize of $1,500 worth
of software or hardware. The runner up will get $500 worth of
prizes. Details are in The Arcade Machine documentation or
may be obtained by writing or calling Broderbund Software,
1938 Fourth St., San Rafael, CA 94901. (415) 456-6424.
Broderbund has released two of its Apple games for the
Atari 400/800. DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC pinball game (see
issue 2.2) requires 48K (disk). GENETIC DRIFT (see issue 2.1)
requires 32K for the disk version and 16K for the tape version.
DMM sells for $34.95. GD sells for $29.95.

CORRECTION
In referring to the game RENAISSANCE and
AMOK (Vic-20) on page four of our September —
October issue, we incorrectly referred to the
manufacturer as United Microwave Industries. The
correct name is UNITED MICROWARE INDUSTRIES
(3503—C Temple Ave., Pomona, CA 91768.) We said
that RENAISSANCE, while basically a one-player game,
can be played by two players. The game itself does not
have a two player mode. However, through the use of a
game utility, you can play the game between two
humans. It simply requires that you request a "change of
sides". In this manner the computer will relinquish each
turn to the human players.

The intimidating length of GC (294 turns) made
playability the number one design priority. The program tells
the players what to do and when to do it so that they can
concern themselves with strategy instead of mechanics. The
ease of play allows even non-fanatical players to finish the full
game in one or two weeks without being burned out.
GC has some obvious faults or "trade-offs" which should
be explained. The low resolution graphics were a first for SSI
and were accepted with considerable reluctance. A hi-res
screen requires 8K of program memory and, with the
mountainous data files and programming involved, there
simply wasn't 8K to spare. To accommodate a hi-res screen,
the larger programs would have had to have been broken into
many smaller programs and tied together with a tedious
chaining system. The increased chaining would have meant a
considerable increase in player waiting time (one minute of
chaining per turn equals five hours of chaining per campaign).
Another "trade-off' was the language used to program the
game. In the words of one programmer/author, "No great
paintings were done with crayons — no great programs are
written in BASIC. - Alas, my keyboard is crayon stained; GC was
written in BASIC. However, it was not the author's objective to
design a "great" computer program. It was the author's
objective to design a "great" wargame using a well-organized
and functional computer program.

HISTORY OF THE GAME
The idea for GC came from a board wargame. A friend
and myself had struggled through several weeks of SPI's
SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN. I hated the confusing rules and
tedious bookkeeping but the concept of a campaign level
game with interaction of land, air, ship and sub units was
fascinating. It was clear that the computer could allow much
greater detail in describing the ships and planes involved, while
solving all of the rules and bookkeeping hassles.
In computer programming there is a large amount of work
between the initial idea and the finished product. The
psychological momentum required to just get started can be
the greatest problem. For six months I kept GC in my head;
occasionally tinkering with the lists of variables and
subprograms which would be required for the game. Finally, in
December of 1981. these vague ideas jelled into a firm plan of
action. It was time to take the plunge.
Completing the first version of GC required a month of
total immersion in the project. It took roughly a week to write
the program out on paper, a week to exhaustively research the
forces involved. a week to punch the programs and data into
the computer and a week to make it all (sort of) work.

Guadalcanal Campaign by SSI has in the few weeks that
it has been out proven to be a most popular program. The
author of the game tells us in this article the history of his
design from conception to royalty checks.
In board wargames the classic "trade-off" was always
detail and realism vs. playability. In computer wargames the
trade-off has changed; detail and realism vs. programmability.
GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN (GC) includes as much detail
and realism as programmability would allow. Detail conscious
gamers can and will site numerous examples of how realism
was sacrificed in some areas. I am sure, however, that most
gamers will agree that GC is the most detailed (by sheer
volume) computer wargame on the market.

Much of the credit for researching the game must go to
Mr. Allyn Nevitt. Allyn, a close friend, is quite an authority on the
Japanese Navy. He allowed me free use of his personal
reference library which contained the information needed to
rate the game's 293 ships. He also compiled a list (using
Japanese language sources) of each Japanese destroyer that
participated in the campaign and included their date of arrival.
In the early weeks of January I weeded out the last of the
"bit bugs" in the program and started to have fun with my new
toy. The newly completed program consisted of one BASIC
program (109 sectors long) and one data file (52 sectors long).
As the month progressed, I added mini-games for the battles:
Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz and Guadalcanal. The
additional programming required to control the mini-games
also produced the games first OUT OF MEMORY error.
Condensing the program solved the immediate problem but
the memory limit brought further development of the game to
a screeching halt.

Briefly, I turned my back on GC itself but not on the GC
game system. In about two weeks of research and
reprogramming I was able to adapt the Guadalcanal System to
the Mediterranean theater of operations in a game I called
MALTA CONVOY. At last my enthusiasm for programming
was exhausted: after two months of living and breathing naval
history I was ready to return to the real world.

FINDING A PUBLISHER
I bought my first computer in May 1979 with the specific
intention of designing wargames. Since that time I have
designed several computer wargames and as my
programming confidence grew, so did the desire to share my
games with the world (or even cash-in on them). Unfortunately,
I had no idea who would be interested in buying or marketing
such a product. I knew that SSI and Avalon Hill were doing
similar work: but they were faceless corporations in faraway
lands.
In February of 1982 SSI got a lot closer.
On the 9th, I took time off work for a dental appointment.
Upon arriving at his office, I was relieved to learn that the dentist
was out sick for the day. I spent the remaining hours of my sick
leave browsing the local computer merchant where I splurged
my dental money on SSI's TORPEDO FIRE game. (Spending
$60.00 for a game hurt almost as much as my root canal). That
night I enjoyed several rousing submarine battles but was
totally frustrated by an apparent malfunction in the save-gm
routine. When one pays $60.00 for a game, one expects near
perfection. The next day I called SSI to complain of my
misfortune. Joel Billings, calmly and patiently explained what I
was probably doing wrong. When that problem was solved I
changed the subject and asked: . by the way, I design
computer games, would you be interested. .
In the brief conversation that followed I learned that SSI
obtained over 75% of their games from independent designers
and that they would be glad to look at any of the games I cared
to submit (business had been slow despite my $60.00
infusion). In the course of the conversation Joel mentioned:
"We're using a customized disk operating system (RDOS) that
uses 4K less memory (Great!) and chains three times faster"
(Chains?)
At the time. I really didn't know what chaining was, but I
could tell from the way Joel talked about it that it must be
important. I found the answer on page 171 of the Apple DOS
Manual "To run a series of Applesoft programs without
erasing earlier values of variables and arrays use the following
procedure. . ." Chaining allowed me to break out of the 48K
straight jacket that had cramped the development of my
computer games. I could now write 100K or even 200K games.
For two weeks I exchanged legal documents with SSI. At
the same time I sent SSI a list describing four of my wargames.
Having a strong feeling that GC would attract the greatest
interest, I wasted no time in polishing the game for its first
"showing". By the time Joel called to give GC the green light. I
was certain that GC was a finished product — Silly me!

FURTHER DEVELOPMENT
Joel's first response after receiving the game was that it
had lots of potential. I could tell from our discussion that he was
enthusiastic about GC, but a couple of his suggested changes
were real bomb shells. First, he said that I would probably have
to switch over to hi-res graphics. Second, all SSI games must
have "solitaire capability"
From the start I had a bias against hi-res graphics.
Functional lo-res graphics fit neatly into my program and were
fairly easy for players to read and understand. Hi-res graphics
would require breaking the large programs into many little

programs with significantly increased chaining. I realized that if
properly done, the hi-res map would look much nicer.
However, as the graphics played a relatively small role in the
game, I really hated to butcher the program. Luckily, after
much analysis, SSI came to share my conclusion.
My only previous experience at programming artificial
intelligence into a wargame was for a modern tactical
submarine game. For this the logic was simple: point the sub at
the target and fire the torpedo. With homing torpedoes, I didn't
even have to worry much about geometry (angles of intercept).
For solitaire GC, the computer would have to: (1) decide how
and when to form Task Forces (which ships to use & what
mission to assign); (2) how and where to move each TF to best
accomplish its mission; (3) which planes should be used for
CAP or Search and which should be held back for air-strikes;
(4) assign target priority to sighted enemy TFs and; (5) know
when to launch non-suicidal land attacks.
The artificial intelligence for GC was easily the most
fascinating challenge of my programming career.
Returning to my - total immersion " style of programming,
I spent four sleepless nights and one lost weekend feverishly
molding my new creation. In less than a week, GC was
transformed from a fancy bookkeeping program into a living
creature. Upon completing the artificial intelligence program
GUADABRAIN, I no longer had any doubt that GC could be
successfully marketed.
Writing the rules to GC was two weeks of sheer drudgery
and the undisputed low point of the whole project. It is much
easier to tell a computer how to do something than it is to tell a
human how you told a computer how to do something.
Describing the human requirements for playing the game
would have needed only two pages. Describing what the
computer was doing when the human player was just watching
required an extra 18 pages.
With the completion of the rules, the game was shipped
out to the independent playtesters. A few weeks later I started
receiving the first playtester comments in the mail. These
letters would inevitably start out:
" I think your game is great. but. . .", and proceed to list
four or five pages of suggested changes. Since I had been
convinced the game was perfect the volume of criticism put a
strain on my ego (especially since most of them were valid). In
all, about 60% of the suggestions resulted in some change in
program. Another 20% were valid criticisms that could not be
answered due to programmability problems. The playtesters
were, as a whole, extremely knowledgeable and their
suggestions contributed much towards polishing the game for
which I thank them.
The last major change came when Joel suggested that I
add a "short' campaign scenario to the game (Oct. 1-Dec. 31.
1942). This would not have required any major effort, were it
not for the fact that the disk was already full. The solution was a
major reorganization of the data files which would allow
Campaign I, Eastern Solomons. Santa Cruz and
Guadalcanal to all share the same data. These changes came
after the major playtest effort and, as a result, one minor bug
survived after the game went on sale (CA-Quincy was sunk in
the battle of Savo Island on 9 August 1942. however her ghost
can be seen prowling the harbor at Espiritu Santo in the Santa
Cruz scenario).
After several other frantic last minute changes. GC was
finally declared to be completed just in time for its debut at
Origins 82 (held in Baltimore last July). GUADALCANAL
CAMPAIGN had been the center of my life for over eight
months: and I was now ready for some R&R (Royalties and
Reviews).
❑

to get back to these unfinished matters.

A DECISION
MAKING METHOD
A few years ago. while working on a
master's degree at the University of
Houston/CLC, I took a course on pattern
classification — a major topic in artificial
intelligence. The very first topic covered
was Bayes Decision Theory (BDT).
Simply put, BDT helps you to make a
decision based on your current information. It does this using probabilities, risks,
and benefits, while seeking to minimize
the risk and maximize the benefits. BDT
works with the following assumptions:
(1) There are N things — w(1)
through w(N) — to recognize. What
these "things" are depends upon the
application: they could be objects,
"evnts.situations, formations, etc. I'll call these

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
by Bruce Webster

APOLOGIES
Before getting into this column's
topic, I need to issue a number of
apologies. First, I want to apologize for
not having a column last issue. Second.
to apologize for not covering in this
column what I said would be last time.
And most of all, I want to apologize to all
of you who took me up on my rash offer
and wrote for program listings of the
algorithm. I really do plan to reply to all of
you and to write the promised column.
During the last three months, I have
changed jobs. changed houses, and
have been working under a number of
deadlines which have left me little time
for doing this column (or many other
things). Most of the pressure should be
off within a few weeks, so I should be able

(2) There are P actions — a(1)
through a(P) — which we can take.
Again, what those actions are depends
upon our situation.
(3) There is a set of NT loss
values —L(1,1 ) through L(P,N)— which
represent the loss incurred by taking a
given action when a particular event
exists. For example, L(j,k) represents
the danger of taking action a(j) if the
event is w(k). The loss values are greater
than or equal to zero, with a value of zero
indicating no danger at all. We'll call this
the loss table.
Given just this much, we can quickly
work out a scheme for choosing an
action:
(1) Identify the event, which we'll
call w(k);
(2) Look at L(i.k), i= 1 to P. and find
the lowest value. which we'll call
L(j,k);
(3) Perform action a(j).
All we're doing here is finding the least
dangerous action given a certain event. If
two or more actions have the lowest loss
values, then we can use some method to
pick one: random selection, priority, or
another decision function. If we wish, we
can build the priority into the loss table.
As we have to precompute the entire
table, it can be made certain that, for
each event. no two actions have the
same loss value.
There are some variations on this

method. most of which involve substituting some other function for the loss
table. For example. we might define a
gain table (g(P.N))where 0 = no gain and
larger values mean more desirable outcomes. We would then search for the
highest value, instead of the lowest. This
really isn't that much different from a
loss table, but you may prefer the optimistic approach. A more sophisticated
method would be to substitute an
evaluation function, eval (j.k). which
uses the current game situation rather
than a precomputed table to determine
the gain/loss of choosing a particular
action given a certain event.

BAYES DECISION RULE
All of this is very simple if you always
know what the current event, w(k), is. Ah,
but do we always know? It is one thing for
our program to recognize that it is facing
a given type of opponent and direct its
actions appropriately. It is quite another
to recognize a course of action, strategic
formation, or some other hard-to-define
event. That's where the tricky stuff. namely
probability. is needed. A few more terms
must now be defined.
(1) We will lump all of the variables,
etc., that might help us to
identify the event into the
collective term, X. Xis known
as a feature vector.
(2) We will use the expression
P(a) to represent the probability
of A, where 0.0 < = P(A)
< = 1.0. A probability of
zero means that A can never
happen, while a probability of
1.0 means that A always
happens.
(3) We will use the expression
P(A:B) to represent the probability of A given that B
exists/has occurred/etc. This is
called conditional probability.
Our goal, given X, is to identify the
events with which we are dealing. The
Bayes decision rule tells us to pick the
event, w(k), with the highest probability.
given X. In other words, we want to pick
w(k) such that
P(w(k):X) > P(w(i):X), i,k= 1 to N. i < > k.

(As before, we may need a tie-breaking
method in case there are some identical
maximum probabilities.)
The problem, of course, is coming up
with a value for P(w(i):X). We are not
entirely without help. The Bayes rule tells
us that
P(w(i):X) = P(X:w(i)) * P(w(i)) / P(X).
At first glance, this appears to be even
more of a mess, for we now have to
come up with three sets of values instead
of one. But this is where the "intelligence in our method is required. The value
P(w(i)) is based on observation of the
game. Let's, for example, suppose that
w(i) represents a type of ship that we
might face, and that there are three types
of ships (1\1=3). If there is an equal
number of each type of ship. then

We're defining what percentage of a
given ship type falls into each size
category. so the values must account for
all ships and each column add up to 1.
The third value, P(X), can be computed, but we don't need to bother with it.
Why? Well, what we are trying to find is
the maximum value of
P(w(i):X) for i = 1 to N. P(X),
however, is the same for all values of i,
so it has an equal influence on all of the
values and is therefore unimportant.
However, if you really want to calculate
P(X), use the expression
P(X) = sum[P(X:w(i))*P(w(i)), 1=1 to N] .

If, however, there are five ships of type I.
three of type 2, and one of type 3, then

When you put this all together. what
you are actually doing is finding the
action, a(j). with the lowest associated
risk, RU), given X. The method described
above doesn't involve directly computing
RU), but if you did want to compute it,
here's the expression:

P(w(1)) = 0.5. P(w(2)) = 0.3. and P(w(3)) = 0.2

R(j) = sum[L(j.i )"P(w(i):X), i =1 to N].

P(w(1)) = P(w(2)) = P(w(3)) =

0.333.

There are two important rules to
remember in assigning these probabilities. First, the set w(1 ) through w(N)
must define all cases. Second, all the
probabilities must add up to 1.0, or
sum[P(w(i)), i= 1 to N ] = 1.0.

The second value, P(X:w(i)). is based
on analysis and (possibly) test cases. A
very simple example should help to
illustrate. Let's suppose again that we are
trying to recognize one of three ship
types, and that Xis just a single variable
that represents the size of the ship. The
ship types may have the following sizes:
Ship type (w)

Sizes (X)

I

1.2,3
2,3
3,4

2

3

AN EXAMPLE
To see how this all fits together, let's
continue with our example of the three
types of ships. When a ship is encountered, we have to choose from three
actions: fight, negotiate, or flee. Our
goal is to destroy as many ships as
possible before ours is destroyed. Our
ship is of type 2:type I is weaker and type
3 is stronger. Here are our attack odds:

2
3

4

0.0
0.333
0.5
0.167

0.0
0.0
0.167
0.833

Both
dest.

Us
dest.

2

0.666
0.333
0.0

0.333
0.333
0.333

0.0
0.333
0.666

If we choose to negotiate, there is a 50%
chance that the enemy ship will not
attack. Let's build an ad hoc loss table:
Ship
type

2

Sizes (X) P(X:w(1)) P(X:w(2)) P(X:w(3))
0.5
0.333
0.167
0.0

Enemy
dest.

3

Let's suppose that observation/game
design/whatever leads us to believe that
the ships are divided among the different
sizes as follows:

1

Ship
type

3

Attack Negotiate
4
5
6

6
5
6

Flee
5
5
5

this is set up, we will always attack a
type I ship and always flee a type 3 ship.
We will use some sort of decision function
As

for deciding what to do with a type 2 ship;
for now, we'll just randomly choose
between attack, negotiate, and flee.
A side comment: you may wonder
why "flee" has a loss value. the reason is
simple. Our goal is to destroy ships. If we
assigned "flee" a loss value of 0 for each
ship type, then we would always flee and,
therefore, would never destroy anything.
If, on the other hand, we assigned "attack a loss value of 0 for each ship type. we
would always attack. This means, of
course, that the way our ship acts during
the game can be changed just by
modifyngthevalus obe.Gting
any ideas?
We'll assume that X has the values
defined above and that
P(w( I)) = 0.5, P(w(2)) = 0.3. and P(w(3)) = 0.2.

then build a table of what we will
do for each value of X.
We can

X

1
2
3
4

P(w( 1 ):X P(w(2):X) P(w(3)A nine action
I.0
0.0
0.0
I
0.625
0.375
0.0
I
0.313
0.562
0.125
2
0.232
0.768
0.0
3

attack
attack
select
flee

(Incidentally, the values above do use
P(X). I did this so that the probabilities
going across would add up to 1. Had I
not used P(X), then each row would have
added up to P(X).)

CONCLUSIONS
When you think about it. BDT is really
based on common sense. To identify the
event, you pick the most likely candidate,
(w(k)) given the pertinent information
(X). Once you know (or have guessed at)
the event, you pick the action (a(j)) that
results in the smallest loss (L(j.k)). The
challenge with BDT is to come up with
useful values for P(w(i)) and P(X:w(i)).
For microcomputers. there are the
additional challenges of execution speed,
data storage, and program size. But
that's why programmers get paid (they
do get paid, don't they?).
Next issue, I hope to have the weighted
map diagrams I promised two issues
ago, along with a few example listings of
the weighting algorithm. And, I hope to
finally have my backlog of letters cleared
out.

REAL
WORLD
GAMING
Dan Bunten

We covered the System Definition
Phase last time. This phase being mainly
the mental exercise of organizing your
thoughts about the proposed game. So,
having rummaged around in your head
for a while, it's now time to get some
other parts of your anatomy involved.
Let's get your hands dirty and your feet
wet by beginning the Data Collection

Phase.
Depending on your outlook. data collection can be either the most boring or
the most interesting aspect of simulation
game design. People who enjoy taking
the slippery and fuzzy elements of life
and "pinning them down" with decimal
points will love data collection. But,
those who would rather appreciate
nature than name it. will hate data collection. For the second group. describing
the world in numeric terms destroys its
magic. Those of us in the first group,
however. appreciate the power of math
to capture the abstractions of life in
predictive equations. It's exhilarating to
take the working essence of a vague
process and capture it in a computer.
In order to have decided on a certain
theme for your simulation game you've
already done some informal data
collection. This form of data collection
would be more properly described as
"observation". Studying and observing
your field of interest is so implicit to
deciding to develop a game that it is
often overlooked. This is because it is
highly unlikely that you would even
consider writing a football game, for
instance, if you weren't already a football
fan. Nonetheless. it is probably worth
stating the obvious at this point.
" Observation" must precede data
collection. Reading about your field of
interest. watching it being performed, or
even participating in it are all forms of
observation. Also. don't neglect to study
all previous games of the type in which
you are interested. Your intent is not to
" steal ideas - from other games. but to
understand how other authors have
handled the subject—what things they
thought were important. (Writers spend
a good deal of time reading just as game
developers must spend time playing.)

In the previous installment of this
column, I listed the main phases in the
development of a game which simulates
a "real world" field of interest. They are:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)

System Definition
Data Collection
Model Development
Programming
Play Testing

Let's assume you're reasonably
familiar with your game's "system" and
you are now ready to begin data
collection in earnest. The objective of
data collection is to quantify the
relationships that you listed in the
System Definition Phase. Thus. what
things you collect are determined by
what you are simulating. For instance, in
a wargame the central issue is the
resolution of combat. Who wins and who
loses in a particular encounter will be
determined by the relationships and
elements you have classed as important

to the outcome. In a "tactical" battle
game you might decide that terrain at
the defender's location is an important
factor. Now you have to decide how
important it is. To do that, you need
information about the performance of
defending troops in various types of
terrain. The problem then becomes —
where do you find that type of data? In a
historical wargame there are numerous
sources of battle narratives but little
" hard data". So very often you will end
up looking at what other wargames have
done, particularly board-games. Two
notes of caution are appropriate here.
First, the numbers used in a particular
game are a result of the author's
decision as to what was important in the
system being simulated. If you copy his
numbers. then you must also copy his
system definition and finally you have
nothing but a computer version of his
board-game (plagiarism?). Secondly,
and perhaps more importantly, boardgames were developed to use sixoutcome random number generators
known as dice. This required hopelessly
arbitrary discrete probability outcomes.
Discrete in a statistical sense requires
that outcomes take specific known
values. In flipping a coin, two discrete
outcomes are possible. a head or a tail. In
rolling a single die. six-outcomes are
possible. Thus. board-game developers
were forced to reduce all outcomes to
one of six possibilities.
However, the computer makes this
unnecessary. It can deal with probabilities
in almost any fashion. But. the state of
the art in even computer games is still
oriented to discrete probabilities. An
example from the field of football
simulations will demonstrate the
limitation of "discrete" outcomes. Many
board-game football simulations and
some computer games have used
discrete probabilities to determine the
number of yards gained for a particular
offense against a given defense. For
instance, they might have a 40% chance
of gaining three yards. a 25% chance of
gaining five yards. a 20% chance of no
gain, a 10% chance of a seven yard loss
and a 5% chance of a twenty-three yard
gain if the offensive is running a sweep
and the defense is blitzing. You can
readily see the limitation of this type of
design. In the real world, yards gained on
football plays just don't fall into one of
five categories based on percentages.
The number of yards gained (or lost) can
take any value over a continuous range
with some outcomes more likely. As
opposed to the "discrete" probabilities
mentioned above. the real world usually
has "continuous" probabilities. While in
board-games it was almost impossible to
generate continuous outcomes, the
computer is perfectly suited to the job.

Continued on pg. 45

usually prefer to be at Guadalcanal
during the night so as not to be
subjected to attack by Bettys. It would, of
course, be wise to mix in a few combat
missions that arrive on a day turn, so
that the American won't start relying on
your always being there during night
turns only. A TF of at least the minimum
make-up mentioned above will be able
to handle just about any American TF
that it encounters. The Japanese player
should be looking to catch those
American TFs that contain APD'S,
DMSs, and TRs, (i.e. cargo carrying
destroyers and transports) especially
the TRs. With most of his TRs damaged
or sunk, the Americans will not be able
to win!
I should mention, that if the American
ships are on any kind of combat
mission, then they will always fire first.
Fire is not simultaneous. Ships which
are damaged in the first round of fire will
have reduced capabilities when they fire
back. However, with the deadliness of
the Japanese torpedoes, the American
ships can get their first shot and still be
seriously damaged or sunk by the
Japanese return fire. You should note,
however, that ships do not sink until the
combat round is over. If a ship has
sustained enough damage to be sunk, it
will continue to fire with what guns it has
left and then sink when combat is over.
Also, if you send in a bombardment (B)
mission, the Americans can slip in with a
transport (T) mission at the same time
and unload their supply after you have
carried out your bombardment thus
avoiding a surface action. It is therefore
a good policy to leave any fast
bombardment (FB) mission TF at
Guadalcanal for one turn after it has
bombarded. These TFs automatically
convert to fast combat (FC) missions
after the bombardment and can hang
around the extra turn to engage in a
surface action and still have the
endurance to make it back to Rabaul.
The key thing to remember is not to do
the same thing with such consistency as
to allow the American player to be able
to predict your actions! Also, remember
that a TF with an endurance of 7 or less
will not initiate combat, so don't hang
around with it past that point.
There will usually be two or three
squares where the American will stop
his ships at the end of the move just
before they make it into Guadalcanal.
Look for these patterns during your
searches, and when you feel the time is
right, slip into one of these with a good
combat mission and surprise him. He
will usually do this with his TRs so that he
can move them in and out of Guadalcanal
when he needs supply. These squares
will often be the ones north and east of
San Christobal. These are also excellent
locations for your subs.

In the area of land combat, good
advice is not to start attacking the
Marines until you have at least 1215,000 troops. This will usually take you
until mid-October to build up. Past this
point, be sure to attack the Marines if
you are fairly certain (due to the empty
craters on a recent bombardment
mission) that they are out of supply. In
this case their losses will be doubled.
Your early attacks should be made at
levels 1, 2 and maybe 3. Do not start
attacking at levels 4 or 5 until late in the
game (middle to late November) when
you are sure that you outnumber the
Marines by odds of at least 2 to 1.
As for the effective use of your battleships, it is strongly recommended that
you not get trigger happy and send them
in on combat missions. You will be
disappointed with the long range
results. These should be reserved
exclusively for bombardment missions
or possibly as escorts for your carriers.
The Japanese CAs, Cls (light cruisers)
and DDs are entirely capable of severely
damaging any American TF, even if it
has one or two battleships in it.
Concerning the Japanese carriers,
you should never send them out
separately, unless it is to perhaps finish
off a crippled American carrier. One
possible tactic is to send out the two
large carriers along with one of the
CVLs. Use all the fighters from the CVL
as CAP (combat air patrol) and send the
fighters as escorts. The American
carriers can put up a very powerful CAP,
and you will be hard pressed to get
through with enough bombers to count.
The best advice I can give is to avoid
prolonged engagements with two or
more American carriers. Hit them once,
hope for a little damage, and get the
heck away. This will lower their endurance and put them back in the repair
and refit pipeline for awhile. Since the
biggest drawback of your carriers is
their shortage of planes, you might
consider keeping the Ryujo dedicated to
continuously training carrier pilots.
Following are some short suggestions
and points that should lead to better
Japanese play and should be obvious
enough so as not to need further
explanation. Only attack Henderson
field with Bettys When there are no
American TFs within range. Don't be
too afraid of getting attacked by aircraft
from Henderson field. Do try to be
careful with your slow BBs when they
are going in to bombard. Since they
can't avoid getting in and out without
being within air range, try to plan these
missions when you feel there are few
planes and little supply at Henderson. If
your BBs get any kind of damage, take
the little extra time to get them back to
Truk. The time saved in repair will be

worth it. If they are undamaged, always
get them back to Rabaul before they
reach 50 endurance. You might transfer
some of your Bettys to Truk occasionally.
This will give you the chance of getting
more Bettys at Rabaul as reinforcements.
After you are reinforced, transfer the
ones at Truk back to Rabaul. You can
build up some pretty powerful Betty
forces this way. Never worry about B 17s
attacking your TFs. I've yet to see one
score a hit, and they don't decrease your
endurance unless you're within seven
squares of Espiritu Santo. Make it a
habit to send some Bettys out on sub
search about every other day turn. You
will usually spot an American sub just
southeast of the Shortlands.
Guadalcanal is a great game, however
I must offer a few minor criticisms. The
American player should have been
allowed to transfer planes from
Brisbane to Espiritu Santo. This was
done historically via Noumea in New
Caledonia. I feel the accuracy of B17
bombing was historically more accurate
than portrayed in the game. This is
based on first hand accounts from
several former B17 pilots I know. I also
feel that air attacks from Bettys and
B1 7s alike should have reduced
endurance by some percentage rather
than knocking it all the way down to 10
in one swoop as the Bettys do. As to
whether American torpedoes were
really as bad as they are in the game. I
don't know. But it is hard to see how they
could have been that bad. There should
have been some provision for distinguishing carrier qualified planes from
ground planes. If you transfer carrier
planes off to the land, then they are
mixed with the others and have to be
retrained. I would like to have seen the
ability to carry over odd movement
points to the next turn. It would also have
been nice if the player had to specify
which direction his search planes were
being sent out in so you could
concentrate search out in the direction
where you figured the enemy was.
Searching, as it is, seems to be a little
too accurate. Except for when the
weather is bad, it is very hard to surprise
anyone, especially it seems, for the
American.

In closing, if you're any kind of
wargamer or armchair strategist then by
all means, this game is a must for you. It
is the game that I, for one, have waited
long to see. I hope that it will receive the
support it deserves so that more
programmers and software companies
will be motivated to produce games of a
similar nature and level of complexity.
To an avid boardgamer, this game alone
can justify the purchase of a computer
system.

four for the Atari
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Attack at EP-CYG-4
TYPE:
Space Arcade
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 24K
FORMAT:
Diskette
# PLAYERS:1 or 2
PRICE:
$32.95
PUBLISHER: Bram Inc.
18779 Kenlake Place NE
Seattle, WA 98155
12061 644-3425

alien doum

BASIC INFORMATION
Hockey and Soccer
NAME:
Sports Games
TYPE:
Atari 400/800 16K
SYSTEM:
Diskette
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:2 or 4
$29.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Gamma Software
P.O. Box 25625
Los Angeles, CA 90025

ATTACK AT EP-CYG-4 is a two-player arcade game where
the two players act as a team. One player is the pilot and the
other the gunner of a flying saucer trying to destroy the cities of
an alien world. The pilot uses his joystick to control flight. The
ship moves up and down in direct response, but horizontal
movement is based on momentum. The pilot's action button
activates the defensive shields. The gunner's joystick moves an
aiming cursor relative to the ship's position, and his action
button fires the weapon. The weapon will not fire when the
shields are up, however. There is a one player mode that
combines all functions on one joystick, but that doesn't work
as well as the two-player mode. This pilot/gunner concept
seems perfect for a parent/child team, with the adult as pilot
responsible for the ship's safety, while the child earns the
points by destroying the cities. The play of the game has two
small problems. Enemy interceptors appear at the edge of the
screen with no warning, the same edge the player's ship must
exit to get to the next screen. This leads to some occasional
'surprise' collisions that steal a life. The other problem is that
both friendly and enemy weapons ignore and may fire through
terrain. Some screens portray mountainous areas, and it is
disappointing that mountains do not block shots.
The graphics of the ship and enemy interceptors are
unexceptional. The target cities are nicely detailed, although
the smallest buildings are too small and players might miss
seeing them. The 'sweep' effect when the ship goes to the next
screen is nice, but a scrolling screen would have solved the
problem of edge collisions.
EP-CYG-4 is a good game overall, and I have a feeling that
the pilot/gunner concept will be around for a while. The game
also comes with a four-color poster.
HOCKEY and SOCCER are similar to the Atari VCS
games on the same subject. The two games by Gamma
Software are so similar that we will consider them together.
HOCKEY/SOCCER are arcade style sports games for 2 to 4
persons. Each team has three players on the (rink/field) and a
(goalie/goalkeeper). The entire (rink/field) is displayed,
without perspective, on the screen along with the score and the
time remaining. The games may last 3, 5, or 8 minutes.

While the (puck/ball) is in possession of one of the
players, the joysticks control only that player or one defender;
the other players are moved by the program and will
(skate/run) to either block or receive a pass. While the
(puck/ball) is free, the joysticks control all three players. The
(goalie/goalkeeper) must stay in the (nets/goal area), moving
up or down under control of the same joystick when one

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Shamus
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 16K
FORMAT:
Disk or Tape
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
William Mataga
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Synapse Software
5327 Jauzz St. Suite I
Richmond, CA 94804

person controls a team. When two people are in control, the
second player controls only the (goalie/goalkeper). There are
additional routines for (face-offs/kickoffs) and kickins (in the
Soccer game). The graphics are of the kind that leave George
Plimpton flat. For those who like the arcade style sports games,
these games fall short of what the computer is capable of.
However, as two-player sports games, they can be exciting.
SHAMUS is an arcade game reminiscent of BERZERK,
with some interesting twists and vastly superior graphics.

The on-screen player, the Shamus himself, wanders
through a maze of rooms and corridors throwing knives (called
ION-SHIVS) at enemy guards. There are four types of guards,
and each behaves differently. Killing guards is not the object of
the game, however. This game's version of "evil Otto" is the
Shadow, who can be stunned but not killed when he appears to
chase the Shamus out of a room. The object of the game is to
kill the Shadow, and that can only be done in one place at the
end of the maze.
Complicating the maze are several dead-end rooms that
the Shamus may only get through after first finding a Key that
matches the keyhole in the room. Other objects that may be
found are vials that are good for extra lives, and Question
marks which may also be good for extra lives, but may
summon the Shadow to the room more quickly.
As the Shamus goes further into the maze the guards
become more numerous, well over 20 in some rooms. (I've
never had the time to count them. There might be as high as
40.) The maze has four levels, the action speeding up when the
level changes. You can also increase the speed of the game
before you begin for a greater challenge.
What sets SHAMUS apart from other games on this
theme is the animation. The guards are all moving smoothly
around the screen, and most of them have internal animation
as well.
While the action is fast, it still takes over half an hour to get
through the over 100 rooms. The game's largest flaw is that
there is not pause control and no place to rest for more than a
few seconds. A second flaw is that the routine that controls the
game's speed has a bug that can set the game speed
incorrectly if you change the speed after having played a game.
Despite these flaws, SHAMUS is easily the most addictive
of the games reviewed here, ranking among the best arcade
games for the ATARI.

Eastern Front: Scenario Options
Ian Chadwick

WELCOME to Micro-Magic! In this
column, during the forthcoming months,
I would like to share with you some
interesting recreational mathematics
and computer applications which have
been sadly neglected in our schools. I
hope that this column will not only
amuse and entertain you. but also
stimulate you to think about the whys,
hows and even the what-ifs. It is also
almost certain to have the bonus effect
of improving programming know-how
— at least it has for me. I hope to hear
directly from readers who have some of
their own micro-magic which they might
allow me to share, as well as superior
programs or any other feedback you
wish.

DIGIT PREDICTION:
One of the most popular types of
parlor tricks is the "prediction" type. In
this amusement, the computer asks you
to pick any whole number, which is not
revealed or INPUTted. Let's say you pick
1234. You are next asked to add up the
digits to your number. In this case,
1+2+3+4=10. Now subtract this last
result from your original number
(either mentally, or if you must, on a
hand calculator). We now have
1234-10=1224.
This is where the computer "does its
stuff". It now asks you to think of any digit
(other than 0) in the last answer (1224 in
the above). You then enter the number
that is left over after you remove the digit
that you've picked. If you picked "4-,
enter 122 when requested. The computer will tell you the digit you picked (in
this case, 4)!
Though the digit prediction program
(program number one) was produced
on a TRS-80 model 3, it is easily
modifiable. Make appropriate modifications for your computer such as the
'clear screen' command (CLS for
TRS-80.HOMEforAple,tc)CHR$(23
produces double width letters for the
TRS-80.

THE REMARKABLE
NUMBER 153
Take any whole number which is a
multiple of 3 (3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, etc.).
Suppose you picked 345. Take the cube
of each digit and add the cubes:
3*3*3=27. 4*4*4=64. 5*5*5=125.
27+64+125=216.

Now repeat this with the number 216.
You should get 225. Repeating gives
141. then 66: then 432; 99: 1458; 702;
then 351 and next 153. Once it hits 153
you will find that you keep getting 153
because 1*1*1 + 5*5*5 + 3*3*3 = 1+
125 + 27 =153 again!
The remarkable fact is that no matter
what multiple of 3 with which you begin,
you must eventually hit the number 153.
Program two will take any input and test
to verify that you have used a multiple of
3. If so, it will then calculate and display
the numbers obtained in this process.
Readers who are curious as to what
happens if the original whole number is
not a multiple of 3 are encouraged to
modify the program to skip the initial
test. In any case, the program terminates
when the next number obtained is the
same as the previous one. In the case of
starting with a multiple of 3, it turns out
that 153 is the only multiple of 3 which is
the sum of the cubes of its digits, and so

the unmodified program should always
terminate with 153.
Readers who wish to correspond are
encouraged to write me directly. Useful
suggestions will be acknowledged, and
very original and especially useful ideas
may sometimes result in several months
subscription extensions courtesy of our
generous editor. My address is:
Dr. Michael W. Ecker
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
Luzerne 8
Viewmont Village
Scranton, PA 18508

Dr. Michael W Ecker is Assistant
Professor of Mathematics at the
Pennsylvania State University's Worthington Scranton Campus in the
Scranton, PA area. He is known for his
interest in problem solving and
recreational math, as well as his newfound addiction for home computing
— especially computer gaming.

STAR MAZE CONTEST
Get to the 16th level of STAR
MAZE and you can win big! Sirtech Software. in conjunction with
Computer Gaming World, is offering prizes to three lucky people
who can reach the 16th level of
their new space arcade game,
STAR MAZE. The first place prize
is $100.00 worth of Sir-tech
products. Second prize and third
prize are $75.00 and $50.00
respectively in Sir-tech products.

CONTEST RULES
1. Each contestant will submit a
map of the 16th level of Sir-tech's
STAR MAZE game. The map should
be of sufficient detail so it is clear to the
judges that the contestant has indeed
gotten to and mapped the 16th level.
2. Tie-breaker: Some shapes
closely associated with the two authors
appear on a certain level or levels.
What are the shapes and on what
level(s) do they appear?
3. Each entry should include your
name, address, and phone number.
4. Entries must be postmarked no
later than December 31, 1982.
5. First, second and third prizes will
be determined by random selection
from among the correct entries (i.e.,
correct map and correct answers to
tie-breaker). If less than three correct
entries are received. places will be
determined on the basis of closeness
to fulfillment of the contest's requirements.
6. All correct entries will receive a
one year subscription to Computer
Gaming World. To this end, please
indicate if you are a current subscriber
or not.
7. Winners will be announced in the
January-February 1983 issue of CGW.

Once chosen, all the infantry or cavalry
within that army will be identical (as
contrasted to the Roman army where
each legion is different). Your infantry
opponents begin with the nearly
defenseless Aedui to the "most feared
infantry in barbarian Europe", the
Helvetii. Similarly, the cavalry range
from the helpless Auscii to the Huns.
The Huns are nearly indestructible and
can only be defeated with a liberal
application of luck. The Huns were
added to the game to give even the
heartiest and most skilled game player a
monumental challenge. In fact, the Huns
did not even exist at the time of Caesar,
as the manual explains, and had to be
borrowed from Caesar's future in order
to get a powerful enough opponent.
Once you have the armies chosen, the
computer prompts you to press the start
key on the console in order to begin the
game. Doing this will start the Barbarian
attack and will intensely rivet you to your
computer for the next half hour. You can,
however, break away from the game, as
there is a pause function which is
toggled on and off by pressing the select
key. But, before beginning the game,
you should look over the entire map to
locate Caesar and the enemy, and create
your battle plan. The map board, which
remains the same from game to game, is
actually much larger than the screen and
can only be seen by scrolling over it. This
is done with the joystick. You move the
cursor, a rectangle the size of one legion,
over the screen in the direction that you
push the joystick. When the cursor
reaches a side of the screen the entire
map scrolls across the screen to reveal
other sections of the map.
What you will see is a topographical or
contour map with three colors of
contours. These are connected lines
which define an area and indicate the
elevation of the ground contained within
it. There are four elevations, ground level
and the three heights denoted by the
green, blue, and pink contours. You can
read or picture the hill structure with
these. This is vital in order to take
advantage of height-related attack
effects and slope-related speed and
exertion effects. Moving across a
contour line represents either moving
uphill or downhill. You will also see
groups of trees on the map. These
represent dense forests that are
impassable to all pieces in the game.
The Roman legions, in pink, are
represented by an eagle for Caesar, a
horse's head for cavalry, and a sword for
infantry. All pieces of similar type are
represented by the same symbol on the
map. The Barbarians, in blue, are also
represented by horse heads and swords.
The armies are placed on the map

randomly different in each game. The
Romans form one cluster and the
Barbarian infantry and cavalry form two
other clusters, not necessarily together.
This represents all the information
available before the start button is
pressed and the game begins. Once the
game is under way, the player can
inspect each of his units and the enemy
units by positioning the cursor over one
of them and pressing the fire button.
What you will see is;
Caesar Men 4000 Swords 3290
First is the name of the unit, then the
actual number of men in the unit. The
number of men decreases throughout
the game due to battle attrition. The last
number, swords, denotes the power of
the piece. Swords will equal the number
of men when a piece is fully rested,
however, it will be reduced if the piece is
tired from marching or weary from
battle. Swords tells you the actual
fighting ability of the piece at any time.
When you press the start button you
will immediately hear the sound of
marching men. This, and the other three
distinct sounds are not only for effect,
they also convey vital information. There
is a low-pitch beep which signals the start
of a time period. In LEGIONNAIRE, all
actions take certain amounts of time.
These are measured in time periods. For
example, a particular cavalry unit may
take five time periods to move up a hill,
or an infantry might take twentyfive time
periods to move across flat land. In this
way, all pieces move at different speeds.
The marching sound that you hear is
actually a sound accompanying each
piece's attempt to move. That is, each
time period that the infantry tries to
move would cause one 'foot stomp'
sound. The effect is that ten or twenty
pieces all 'foot stomping' between each
time period beep sounds like marching
armies. With each 'foot stomp' comes
what the manual calls 'animating'. Once
during each time period, when you hear
the stomp, you can see the marching
piece be replaced by an arrow pointing in
the direction it is trying to move. This
arrow is quite important because it can
tell you which of two pieces is going to
move first. You do this by listening for the
time period beep and then looking to see
which piece 'animates' first. If a piece
should attempt to move into an enemy
piece, a battle ensues. The third distinct
sound in the game is the sound of battle.
simulated by a clashing swords sound.
This is a terrible sound to hear when you
are busy at one part of the map and the
Barbarians have caught up to one of
your pieces somewhere else. Of course,
the last sound, the squeal of a dying
legion, is by far the most heartstopping
in the game.

Your first order of business is to give
your legions their orders. This is done by
positioning the cursor over them and
pressing the fire button on the joystick.
You can then enter up to eight
movement instructions with the joystick.
You will see an arrow move along the
path that you have directed ending in a
ghost of that piece. Releasing the fire
button gives that piece those instructions which it will now attempt to
follow. You may change the orders of a
piece by again holding down the button
and then pressing the space bar on the
console. This will erase the last
movement given. The piece will now
make the moves you have directed and,
if you inspect it again, it will show, with
the arrows, the remaining commands
which you can change or add to. In this
way you keep all your legions working
towards the goals of your battle plan.
The Barbarians are relentless and
keep pursuing the nearest group of
Romans. Eventually the two armies
begin to clash. A battle is indicated by
the clashing swords sound and a
flashing of the defending piece. Both the
attacker and the defender are affected by
the attack with a reduction in men due to
losses and a reduction in swords due to
exertion in battle. The losses are in
proportion to the swords of each side.
This is affected, however, by a number of
things. First, slope effect gives the piece
on higher ground the advantage since
he has better visibility and range, and
can more easily push the defender
downhill than the defender can attack
uphill. Also, the attacker is given a bonus
just for being on the attack. An attacker
has a large advantage if the defender is
moving. This makes a flank or rear
attack devastating. Shock effects can
cause a piece to retreat. That is, if a piece
is losing badly in a battle or is attacked by
an ominously larger enemy, he may
break and run from the battle. Once a
piece breaks, as Sabinus did in the story
at the beginning of this article, he is very
vulnerable to the rear attack as he
scurries from the attacker.
Usually your first directive to the
legions is to take the high ground.
Getting your troops there in time can be
difficult. The speed that they move is
determined by two things. First, the
characteristics of the piece. Cavalry
pieces and Caesar move at about the
same speed, around four time periods
per move. The infantry vary but will
generally take about twenty time periods
to move. The Barbarians vary widely on
their speeds, the stronger units tending
to be faster. The second affect to
movement is the terrain. Moving uphill
Continued on pg. 30

slows a piece, downhill speeds it up. One
obvious effect is that if two identical
pieces are given orders to attack each
other at the same time, the one moving
downhill will attack first. A typical speed
change for a move that normally takes
four time periods might be, uphill
becomes nine time periods and downhill
becomes two time periods. Obviously,
the skilled player of LEGIONNAIRE
must learn to take full advantage of the
slopes.
Along with getting your legions to the
high ground comes getting them there
in enough time to rest up for the battle.
Each piece has a different rate of
recovery that varies from Caesar's nearly
immediate to the slow recuperation of
Plancus. At the beginning of a game a
typical piece may have men and swords
equal to 2600. After a long trek over a hill
or two his swords may be down to 1200.
The piece must rest for perhaps forty
time periods for his swords to gradually
come back to full power. You will notice
that the Barbarian infantry will travel
exhausting distances to reach you but
will stop short of actual battle and wait to
regain most of their strength. You too
must do this unless you are still powerful
enough after travel to attack successfully.
Movement will never lower a piece's
swords to the point of destruction, but it
will make it so weak that one attack will
destroy it. To destroy a piece you need
only bring his swords down to zero, not
his number of men. It is assumed that
when his effectiveness is zero the
remaining demoralized men scatter into
the countryside.
Of course, your overall goal is to
destroy all the Barbarian pieces before
they destroy Caesar. The player can quit
anytime by pressing the option key on
the console. Accidental quitting is
protected against by an inquiry from the
computer asking if you would like to
continue the game. But winning isn't
everything. You receive a score once you
have completed the game, whether
Caesar died or not. The score is based
on the losses each side took. This score
can be negative, very bad, to positive, fair
or good. The scoring scheme seems to
offer scores proportional to the number
of men you take and to the power of the
Barbarians that you engage. In order to
have a quantitative value for any
combination of number of Legions and
difficulty of Barbarians I did the
following. First, I assigned to each
Barbarian tribe the number of their
location in the list in the manual, one for
the weakest up to eight for the toughest. I
then always picked the same number for
Barbarian infantry and cavalry. Next, I
multiplied my score times the Barbarian

number times the number of legions I
had chosen. For a game in which ten
legions fought against the Eburones and
Obi and the game score was fifty, the
quantitative score would be (10 legions)
X (2nd set of Barbarians) X (50
score)=1000. In a 44 game stretch
where I recorded my scores for each
game, my high scores averaged about
400. My best so far is 1050 while
commanding ten legions against the
third set of Barbarians.
But how do you get high scores?
Some of the tactical hints given in the
manual are useful. Make the enemy fight
from the lower position. Make him tired
by marching to reach you. Plan your
moves to give your legions maximum
rest. Keep your better legions up front
and use your weaker ones for clean up.
Try to eliminate all of the infantry or
cavalry before the other group gets to
you. Use the cavalry for chasing down
weak retreating units. Use cavalry to
counterattack downhill against an
enemy who is himself attacking one of
your legions downhill. Try to surround an
enemy with forest and your pieces. Avoid
frontal attacks, concentrate on rear
attacks. The manual also suggests two
overall strategies. One is to assemble on
top of a hill and wait for the enemy to
come to you. The disadvantages are that
this may give the two Barbarian groups
time to join together before they reach
you; also, you may not be close enough
to a hill to assemble there before they
reach you. The other suggestion is to use
the forests to funnel the enemy through
to you one or two at a time.
When I heard about people using the
number of units they had left after
annihilating the Germans as criteria for
how much better than 255 their score
was in EASTERN FRONT, I started to
doubt my abilities as a wargamer. None
the less, I'm going to present the strategy
I used to earn my 1050 composite score
in Legionnaire. I was playing against the
Suevii infantry, a large and strong group
that fight well but become disorganized
easily. This meant that I had to force the
attack and stay out of their way when
they attacked. My cavalry opponents
were the Menapii, a large and speedy
group. They weren't going to be easy to
defeat, but with my strong pieces at the
top of a hill I should have little chance of
being thrown off. I was fortunate to be
very near a large high hill with a group of
trees at the base between me and their
cavalry. The infantry were far off and
would pose no danger for quite some
time. I sent my weaker cavalry,
Labienus, to lure these infantry from my
hill when they finally got in range.
Crassus, my main cavalry, charged
straight toward the oncoming enemy
cavalry with the hope of breaking this

huge mass into something I could
handle. I had long ago found that the
weaker infantry, Plancus and Sabinus,
were useless in battle so I sent them over
my hill well out of danger of attack. I then
set up my remaining infantry on the hill
with Caesar in the middle of a line along
the ridge that was nearest to the forest
below. Cicero and Galba, my next two
strongest infantry, flanked Caesar. They
were themselves flanked by Fabius and
Roscius. My plan was to get the
oncoming cavalry to chase Crassus
around the forest below while I lured one
or two of the horde up the hill to their
death. Due to the game's tendency to
keep all of a Barbarian group together
and marching towards the nearest
Roman legion, the cavalry dutifully
marched after Crassus as he constantly
circled the forest. Due to traffic
problems, only about one half the enemy
group would actually get around the
forest. I'd then send Caesar temptingly
close to one of their cavalry and lure him
up the hill where Caesaror Cicero could
make short work of him. I took about
nine trips around the forest to finally
finish off the cavalry. Because of my
high-ground advantage, I'd suffered only
minor losses. Meanwhile, Labienus had
started leading the infantry horde toward
my forest trap. These poor soldiers were
nearly dead from their constant chase of
Labienus. With the long rest afforded
my troops on the hill as the slow infantry
approached, I had good strong troops to
attack with. I broke the infantry into two
groups using my two cavalry to get one
half o f them to go off chasing Crassus. I
finished up the game by finishing off first
one, and then the other, tired infantry
group. I didn't lose one legion, although I
lost quite a few men while destroying the
infantry. My score of only 35 hurt, but I
was proud that my plan worked.
One of the more enjoyable battles I
had was with only Caesar and Crassus
against the two strongest Barbarians. My
average score after six games was minus
nine. But out of that there was one score
of plus eight. The Huns are very, very
tough. The only way to beat them was to
start Caesar attacking down the hill
before they even got to him so that I got
the first strike in. Even then. I would have
to have the height advantage and be
clear of the second cavalry piece or risk
destruction. I found that five Roman
legions provided the most pleasurable
game for me. This provides an army of
two infantry, two cavalry, and Caesar
against the two groups of five Barbarians
each. Of course, the Eastern Front
aficionados will be bragging about clean
sweeps against the Huns in a few
months, but I'll give a few of my scores
for future reference and the amusement
of the professional wargamers out there.
Continued on pg. 45

CYTRON MASTERS FOR THE ATARI - CONVERSION versus UPGRADE
Dan Bunten
Cytron Masters is a "half-breed - game.
It's either a strategy game with action or
an action game with strategic elements.
Whichever it is, I (and my compatriots)
initially wrote it for the Apple. As the
game is entirely in machine language,
and I had an Atari 800 collecting dust, I
decided to "convert" Cytrons to the
Atari. Sounded easy enough to me (and
the other lunatics in my company)! After
all, both machines have - high resolution
color graphics " , both can do sound
effects, both have standard game input
devices (paddles and joysticks), and
both use a 6502 processor. But what a
difference a "generation" makes!

to fifty separate Cytrons (robots) on a
battlefield which includes a number of
capturable features. In addition there are
animated fire-fights, fragment explosions and sound effects. I hope you can
imagine the difficulty in writing a
computer program that handles a
hundred " intelligent" robots while
processing "simultaneous" input from
two players. As anyone who has
attempted even a simple flash explosion
with simultaneous sound can tell you,
the Apple can't do two things without a
lot of effort (you have to time your clicks
of the speaker with your graphic draw
routine so that they take turns). It was a

tough program to write.
The Atari is the next generation
computer (as compared to Apple) and it
has all the features to prove it. I have
been writing software for the Apple since
1978 and am just now getting to where I
know how to make it sing. However, I
found that sophisticated effects that
require a lot of work on an Apple can be
done with ease on an Atari.
Anyway, back to my story about " converting" Cytron Masters. This game is
the result of almost eight months of
development on the Apple and is an
attempt to bring the - real-time challenge of arcades to a strategic battle
game. In the two-player version (solo is
also available), each opponent can
constantly create and order armies of up

After spending a great deal of time on
the Apple version, I expected to just
" duplicate" the same things on the Atari.
(This being the tack that many Apple
programmers have taken.) The Atari
owners I spoke to, however, said. "It's a
neat game but where's the color?"
(Apparently Atari folks think you have to
use five or six colors on a screen to
qualify for "color graphic" - !) Also, they
wanted to know "What are those little
noises?" — referring to the difficult to
achieve explosion sounds. (Atari
explosions are deep and resonating with
a definite force behind them!) Finally,
they didn't like the "goofy little knobs that Apple calls game paddles. (Atari
owners love their joysticks.)

Needless to say, I decided that if the
program was to do well as an Atari
version, it would have to use a FEW of
the features of that machine. But, during
the conversion, I discovered that ALL the
sophisticated hardware features of the
Atari are useful! Cytron Masters uses the
separate sound processor and fourvoices to make truly impressive sound
effects (at least as compared to the
Apple); it uses the Display List and
Display List Interrupts to change colors
on the fly. and have character graphics,
four-color text as well as hi-res graphics
on one screen; it uses Player/Missile
Graphics for additional colors and fast
animation; and most useful of all, it uses
Vertical Blank Interrupts to allow two
programs to (apparently) run at once!
All in all, the Atari is a fantastic game
machine! It does have its bad points,
such as an overblown ( I OK) and horribly
slow operating system, a BASIC that's
more like Apple Integer than Applesoft,
and a disk drive that's reminiscent to
Apple's cassette in speed and reliability.
But, for a game program in machine
language that uses its own operating
system (as Cytrons does) you can't beat
the Atari.
The Atari version of Cytron Masters
was definitely an - upgrade " rather than a
"conversion"!
❑

ROUTE 80
THE ROAD TO TRS-80 GAMING
Dick McGrath
Welcome back on the Road! For those
of you who are just joining us, ROUTE 80
is your main highway to TRS-80
computer gaming! Sometimes we'll
follow the high road directly to main line
articles and reviews of games for the
TRS-80. At other times, we'll wander
down some of the little-used alleys and
pathways branching off the main
thoroughfare, exploring such out-of-theway hamlets as peeks and pokes, bits
and bytes, and puts and gets. But, always
will we remain true to our main compass
course. To provide you with more
enjoyment from your TRS-80.
First, let's take a look at a road map of
where we're going in the future of
computer gaming.
It is, after all, the time of year for
soothsayers to try their hands at
predicting the future of our favorite
pastime. Practically every new issue of
the popular computing magazines
carries someone's version of what we
can expect during the next year or the
next decade in the world of computer
games. For what they're worth, let's take
a look at some of their forecasts.
Everyone agrees that computer
games are just hitting their stride, with
greater sophistication and complexity
evolving with every new generation of
software. This continual evolution is a
necessity. Computer gamers are a
restless lot. who are never satisfied with
the status quo. In a constant search for
better products, their expectations rise
with every new purchase.
Most of these expectations center
around technical innovations. Sound
effects and voice synthesis are already
part of state-of-the-art programming.
Future hardware will undoubtedly
produce refinements and higher fidelity
in sound production. Greater flexibility in
player input can also be expected. First
there were keyboards, then joysticks,
and in the future. . . authentic input
devices, including steering wheels, foot
pedals, aircraft control columns, and
even voice-actuated command systems.
As hardware capabilities improve, we
can anticipate more realistic graphics,
including cartoon-like screen animation
and video-disk random-access projected
visuals. The catch-phrase that pulls all of
this together in the far-distant future is
total immersion. The player will be
completely isolated from his surroundings; totally projected into a fantasy
world of three-dimensional wrap-around
animation. unimpeachable audio reproduction. and total interaction with the
game environment.

The more philosophical (and perhaps
more realistic) of our crystal gazers
reject the role of technological development as the guiding force of the future.
They believe that the continued
popularity of computer gaming does not
depend as much on new technology as
on new and imaginative uses of current
technology. Computer gaming is here to
stay, but just as in music, movies, and
other art forms, public taste in computer
games undergoes continual change.
The successful software producer will be
the one who anticipates each fluctuation
in the cycle and provides imaginative
programs to satisfy each new gaming
fad.
This is where the greatest disagreement exists among the experts. Where
do we stand right now? Have
shot-emup,facinrdestylgam
peaked as some believe they have? What
about the text-oriented fantasy adventures
that they replaced? Are they due for a
comeback, or are they hopelessly out of
date? Several major software companies
are staking their bankrolls on opposite
sides of this question. What is my
prediction? Well, the next wave of
consumer enthusiasm will be lavished
on a marriage of the two. . . Realistic
simulation adventures requiring careful
strategic planning but which also
provide real-time interaction and visual
display. Such games could re-create
detective mysteries, cops and robbers
action, fantasy adventures, tactical
military scenarios, westerns, international
political intrigue, or even gothic
romances!

PROGRAMS BY
SUBSCRIPTION
In the last issue, I described one of the
subscription program services (Cload
Magazine), and promised others in the
future. Here are two more from one
company. SoftSide Magazine has been
providing quality programs since at least
1980. They conveniently divide their
publication into three segments; one
each for the Atari, Apple and TRS-80
computers. They also provide cassette
and disk versions of the program listings
printed in the magazine. They specialize
in rather lengthy adventure-type games,
business, utility and specialty programs.
Each issue contains three to five
programs for each computer. The
cassette version is $75.00 a year and disk
is $125.00. It is available from SoftSide,
100 Pine Street. Holmes, PA 19043.
The same company also produces
Adventure of the Month. a subscription

33

service which provides a high quality
text-oriented adventure every month. A
six month subscription is $29.00 on
cassette or $49.00 on disk. This service
is available from Adventure of the Month,
6 South St., Milford, NH 03055.
I'll look at another subscription service
next time!

PEEKS AND POKES
PARKWAY
Let's turn off the main highway for a
few moments and examine one of the
side streets on our journey. The street
sign says - Peeks and Pokes Parkway".
The buildings here look modern and
very utilitarian, but little used.
Peeks and Pokes give you direct
access to computer memory locations.
A peek allows you to look at the value
stored in a location, while a poke lets you
change the value. Peeks are passive little
things, but pokes can be dangerous! A
poke in the wrong location can set off a
chain reaction of undesirable consequences. Fortunately, everything can
be set aright by simply rebooting the
system. This, unfortunately, will also
destroy any programs currently in
memory. So, be careful about poking
around in places that are unfamiliar!
Peeks and Pokes vary from simple
examination of a single stored value to
complex subroutines providing fast
action full-screen graphics and other
esoteric manipulations. We'll occasionally wander this way and pick up some
usable programming techniques. Here
are a couple of simple things:
Peeks do not work alone. They must be
part of a command as PRINT
PEEK (15360) or A = PEEK(15360). To
examine a sample of memory peeks,
type in this program:
10 INPUT "WHAT MEMORY ADDRESS
DO YOU WANT TO PEEK"; X
20 A=PEEK (X): PRINT A
30 GOTO 10

Then input these peek addresses;
293 - A value of 73 indicates a Model 111
machine, otherwise Model I.
14312 - A value of 63 indicates that a
printer is ready, anything over
127 indicates a printer is not
attached or not ready.
14317 - A value of 255 indicates a tape
machine, all else indicates
disk.

Continued on pg. 44

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Andromeda Conquest
Strategy
Many
Disk or Tape
2 to 4
518.00 to 524.00
Avalon Hill
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore. MD 21214

ANDROMEDA
CONQUEST
STRATEGIES AND RULES MODIFICATIONS
Floyd Mathews
suggest you draw straws to determine
the order of play. Under the original
victory objective or under the modified
objectives discussed above, it is possible
that more than one player could win on
the same turn, which does give more
incentive for forming alliances.
Strategic planning is fairly simple in
AC. The direction of your exploration is
largely determined by which star clusters
are nearest to your home world. On your
first turn you should first identify the
eight nearest stars and estimate the
distance to each of them. Using all of
your resource points, build one Echo
ship and send it out unescorted on the
first turn. There is a small risk that it may
be destroyed before escorts can catch
up with it, but it is important to get an
early start in the race for colonies. You
can only establish one colony per turn,
so it is important to plan routes for future
Echo ships so that you can reach all
eight of the nearest stars as quickly as
possible. If you are lucky enough to have
eight systems nearby, and no other
player's home system nearby. you may
be able to win easily without ever fighting
another player. In general, you should try
to explore toward the corners and edges
of the map if at all possible, not toward
the center where you are more likely to
encounter competition from other
players in the later stages of the game.
If the nearest star is only two spaces
away. you should build a Rama fleet on
turn two and begin attacking its system
defenses. With luck, you should be able
to establish your first colony on turn two
or three. If no alien fleets were spotted o
the tactical map during turn one. you
might risk gambling again on turn two by
sending out a second unescorted Echo
ship. By turn three, you should begin
building Rama ships. Most of them
should be accumulated in one or two
large fleets advancing before the Echo
ships to scout for the easiest systems to
colonize, to attack system defenses, and
o intercept and destroy any alien fleets
;before they get within striking range of
the valuable Echo ships. A small number
of Rama ships should be sent out singly
or in pairs on long-range reconnaissance
in order to probe any approaching alien
fleets as far away as possible, and to
possibly initiate negotiations, even if only
for the purpose of gathering information
about the other players intentions and
strengths.

t

If you are unlucky and your home
system is not located near eight other

systems, you will not be able to win early
in the game simply by sending out Echo
ships. Instead you must use the more
difficult long-term strategy of attacking
the "early starters" and hopefully
forming alliances with other "late
starters". On the first turn you should
send out one Echo ship toward the
nearest cluster of systems. Then build
Rama ships on subsequent turns and
accumulate them in one large fleet. They
should have a few single Rama ships in
front of them to scout for good targets
such as unescorted or weakly escorted
Echo ships, or to initiate negotiations
with other "late starters". If you can
develop any strong hunches about the
location of another home system, you
should consider trying to win by the
alternate victory objective. Although this
is the more difficult way to win, it may be
your only hope. Your scouts can usually
identify a home system. as it has
resources of ten, the same life form as
most of the surrounding systems. eleven
or more system defenses, and appears
to be centered among and equidistant
from numerous alien fleets. As soon as
possible, build one Nova ship and send it
to join your main battle fleet. When you
attack the system defenses of the
suspected home planet, you must do it
with overwhelming superiority in order
,to destroy it in one turn. For, if you fail to
destroy it on your first attack, the enemy
will reinforce that system- on his next
turn, and you may never be strong
enough to take it. On your first attack you
must have odds of four-to-one in order to
have a fifty-fifty chance of destroying the
system in one turn. I recommend odds
of at least six-to-one. which will: give you a
66% probability of destroying the system
in one turn. Obviously, if you have any
loyal ally whose order of movement is
either just before or just after yours. you
might invite him to coordinate his own
attack with yours in order to increase the
chance that one of you will succeed in
destroying the system. If the enemy
reinforces the suspected home planet so
you cannot get good odds. change your
plan and hit one of the weakly-defended
nearby systems of the same life form. He
cannot afford to strongly defend all of his
colonies and, if you continue destroying
his colonies, you may be able to prevent
him from getting eight.

win by getting eight colonies, you really
don't need allies to help you. The only
thing they could offer you would be
peaceful coexistence and a pledge to
stay away from your area of planned
expansion. But, if possible, you should
not risk telling them where you plan to
expand. I recommend that you promptly
destroy any small scouting forces that
intrude into your territory. This will
hopefully discourage any further
intrusions. If a very powerful fleet enters
your domain, you should try to initiate
negotiations via the scouting force
which first detects it. If he does negotiate,
you might suggest that he expand
toward another nearby cluster, and offer
him your pledge of mutual nonaggression and respect for his territory. Do not
reveal any more information than is
necessary and, of course, never reveal
the location of your home planet. Even if
the negotiations are not promising, you
may be able to pick up valuable
information from him or delay any
further advance so you can bring up
reinforcements and prepare your
defenses.

Your negotiations with other players
are the heart and soul of this game.
There are only two ways to win in this
game, and you, negotiating strategy will
depend on which victory objective you
choose to pursue. If you choose to try to

Whether you play straight or slightly
slanted, ANDROMEDA CONQUEST
can give you hours of gaming enjoyment
with your friends.

35

If your home planet is in a remote
location and you choose to try to win by
destroying another home planet, you will
need loyal allies to have a good chance
of winning. You should send out many
long-range reconnaissance parties and
try to initiate as many negotiations as
possible with alien fleets. If you
encounter another player who is also in a
remote location, it is obviously in your
mutual interest to exchange some
information and hopefully develop a
long range plan for a strong allied attack
against a suspected home planet of an
"early starter". These negotiations will
require a great deal of mutual trust. I
therefore recommend that, short of
revealing the location of your home
planet, you show much more candor
than in other negotiations.
It is of course permissible to tell huge
lies in this game and later stab your ally
in the back. but I do not recommend it.
Even a veteran "poker face will have a
rough time maintaining a lie throughout
the numerous negotiations in this long
game. If, during a negotiation, the other
player raises a subject that you do not
wish to discuss, I recommend that you
simply refuse to discuss the subject at all
rather than lie.

0

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Torpedo Fire
TYPE:
Strategy
SYSTEM:
Apple II or Apple II+
FORMAT:
Diskette (DOS 3.3)
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
John Lyon
PRICE:
$59.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations Inc.
465 Fairchild Dr..
Suite 108
Mountain View. CA 94043

Tired of attacking the same old
convoy? Here's a couple of unusual
scenarios that you can use to spice
things up. Both award victory points for
getting off the map, which makes the
game more "cat-and-mouse" than when
points are given only for damage to the
enemy. This results in trading some
action for more suspense.
I assume that you know how to use the
Shipyard program to create your own
scenarios or can figure it out from the
shipyard Data Card. Don't hurry this process! Make sure that you get the data
entered correctly as it's very discouraging to play for half an hour before you
discover a mistake — your sub can't dive
deeper than 100 feet or your opponent
has a maximum speed of 180 knots.
SCENARIO ONE — Bungo Pete
Bungo Suido is the name of the strait
between the Japanese islands of Kyushu
and Shikoku and is the southern
entrance to Japan's Inland Sea. The antisubmarine patrol here gained a reputation among the skippers of ComSubPac
as one of the most tenacious anywhere
in the Pacific. With a sort of grudging

respect, they humanized this unknown
enemy with a name, "Bungo Suido Pete"
or just "Bungo Pete" for short.
In the scenario from early 1945, a US
sub tries to penetrate the Inland Sea. The
US player wins if he can exit the map to
the north, which means Y coordinate of
10,000 or greater (you can make it
anything up to 20,000 if you want a
longer game). Bungo Pete wins by
sinking the US sub; any other outcome is
a draw. This game is best with two
players but it can be played solitaire. Of
course, the computer will not attempt to
exit the sub off the north edge. Even so,
you may find it a good opportunity to
develop your tactics with several escorts.
After choosing the Shipyard program,
select period 3 (1944-1945) with 3
Japanese escorts and 1 American sub.
Set them up as follows:
Ship-ID

Class
(class #1

X

Y

El AKITSUKI
(11
0 1000
E2 KAMIKAZE (31 -1000 1000
E3 MATSU
(41 1000 1000
S1 TENCH (31 0 -5000 J00

Course
180
1E0
80

This scenario is intended to be a daytime game. It is much easier for the sub
player if played at night and this could be
done if that person was much less
experienced than the escort captain.

GRENADIER to take up stations off the
entrances to the Inland Sea, but these
areas were heavily patrolled and subs
there were forced to stay under. This
made it unlikely that either would spot
Wounded Bear and neither did

SCENARIO TWO
The Hunt For Wounded Bear

One US sub did see her, though, and
was the only sub that had a chance of
stopping her. USS TRITON was on
patrol off Okinawa and her skipper,
Charles C. Kirkpatrick (at this time the
youngest sub commander in the
Pacific), had been listening to all the
radio reports. On his own initiative,
Kirkpatrick estimated SHOKAKU's track
and ran at high speed on the surface to
place himself in her path. At 3:20 PM on
May 16, he spotted SHOKAKU and a
single destroyer heading north at 18
knots. TRITON only had 1 torpedo left in
her forward tubes, so Kirkpatrick tried to
bring the stern tubes to bear. But
SHOKAKU was moving too fast; even
after giving chase on the surface,
Kirkpatrick could not catch up.

On 8 May 1942, the Japanese aircraft
carrier SHOKAKU was heavily damaged
in the Battle of the Coral Sea. When US
codebreakers learned that this vulnerable
and important target would return to
Japan by way of Truk, ComSubPac
quickly set in motion a plan to ambush
her. The damaged SHOKAKU was
codenamed - Wounded Bear.The first phase was to send four
submarines to Truk. However, Intelligence
overestimated the damage and therefore
underestimated her speed; Wounded
Bear was safely inside Truk lagoon when
the four arrived and was never seen by
any of them. When intercepted radio
reports indicated that SHOKAKU was on
the move again, Pearl warned the USS
CUTTLEFISH, then on patrol in the
Marianas. But, the Bear didn't put in at
either Guam or Saipan and CUTTLEFISH
never saw her.
At this point, it began to look hopeless.
Pearl ordered subs DRUM and

And so Wounded Bear arrived safely
in Japan. She was repaired, remanned
and returned to the South Pacific. Here's
a chance to replay the meeting that
might have prevented this. As there are
no carriers in Torpedo Fire, you must
represent SHOKAKU with a tanker. The
speed and victory points can be
modified to reflect the proper value of a
carrier. As for the wounded part, our
tanker will only have ten damage points
left. This too reflects the absence of a full
crew and damage control parties, more
than the actual damage to the ship. The
TRITON gets full torpedo tubes since
there is no way to start with some empty.
Admittedly, TRITON has had some
things changed to her benefit. To offset
this, the Japanese player will be
expecting an attack.
The object of this scenario is for the
Japanese commander to get SHOKAKU
safely off the north edge of the map. In
game terms, this means a Y coordinate
of 15,000 or more. This is worth twenty
points. In other words, the IJN can lose
the escort (worth only twelve points, not
fifteen as indicated on the data card) and
still win the game while the US player
must sink SHOKAKU to win.
This scenario makes an excellent
solitaire game. Trying to escort
SHOKAKU safely out of harm's way can
cause nervous exhaustion. Since the
computer may put the submarine
anywhere, you'll never know whether it is
ahead of, or behind you. About 25% of
the time, a hard run north will get you off
the board without any trace of the
enemy. On the other hand, if TRITON is
laying in wait, running straight north may
result in an easy shot. If you dash north
with your Destroyer, TRITON may slip in

from the side. The longer you take to
move north, the more time TRITON has
to get into position. Add to this the very
real worry that TRITON may put a fish
into you just to get you out of the way and
you can see why escort captains turned
grey early. Played with two people,
TRITON will always get a chance to
attack.
Here's how to use the shipyard
program to create this scenario. Choose
period 2 with two Japanese ships on the
surface and one US sub. For El, the
Japanese escort, choose number 2 — a
HATSUHARU class DD. Give this ship a
starting location of X=50 and Y=3500.
Finally, modify its current speed to 18
knots and its course to 350 degrees.
SHOKAKU will be ship T1. Give a
location of X=100 and Y=4200. Now
modify all of the following fields in the
ship data:
Victory points
Maximum speed
Current speed
Course
Maximum damage
Current damage
Surface guns
Armor class

= 50
= 18
= 18
= 350
= 10
= 10
= 20
=5

If you're wondering why the maximum
sustainable damage for a carrier should
only be 10, here's the answer. If it were
higher (and therefore different than the
current damage) the game would award
points as if the damage had all been
done in the current scenario. Since we
don't want to give TRITON points for
damage inflicted by YORKTOWN and
LEXINGTON pilots, we must set max
damage equal to the current sustainable
damage.
The US sub should be a GATO class,
number 2 on the list. It should be
assigned starting coordinates of X=200
and Y=500. The only data field that
needs changing is course=090.
Again, this is a daytime scenario.
Happy Hunting!
BIBLIOGRAPHY
These two books are highly recommended for anyone who wants to create
Torpedo Fire scenarios for the Pacific
theater:
SILENT VICTORY. by Clay Blair, Jr.;
Bantam Books, New York, 1975.
HISTORY OF UNITED STATES NAVAL
OPERATIONS IN WWII, by S.E. Morison;
Little, Brown and Co., Boston, 1949 (last
printing 1975).
There are 15 volumes; for this article,
Volume IV, CORAL SEA, MIDWAY AND
SUBMARINE ACTIONS was particularly
helpful.

BEYOND SARGON II
Scenarios For Chess
Roger J. Cooper

The title of this article might seem
absurd for after all, how can there be
scenarios in chess.
Actually there are many interesting
ways to play chess that are not in
accordance with the rules of the United
States Chess Federation. The setups
may be varied, new pieces introduced or
even the basic objectives of the game
altered.
This article contains chess variants
which I have used with Sargon // (by Dan
& Kathe Spracken, Hayden Software).
All these variants involve new set-ups as
adding pieces with new powers is
impossible without changing the
program.

POSITION — The most straightforward option is to take a position from a
chess book or column. In choosing a
position, consider that Sargon is
strongest in the middle game and
weakest in the end game. You should
also keep in mind that positions which
are unbalanced in material (e.g. 2 R's for
a Q) are often the most exciting.
END-GAME PLACEMENT — Take a
small number of pieces (the same for
each side). Sargon takes White. Place
the pieces randomly on the first 4 ranks
of each side. If a piece starts in a
threatened square (or if K's adjacent)
choose a new location. have used a
K+2P and K+R+P.

I

16 PAWN — Remove White's Queen.
In compensation, he receives extra
Pawns at B3, C3, C4, D4, E4 F4, F3, G3.
Though by the standard count of
material, Black is up " 1 pawn" — this
position favors White. The extra pawns
are played as pieces that have already
moved.

PEASANT REVOLT — White starts
with his K at E1 and his eight P's. but no
other pieces. Black has his K at E8. a Pat
E7 and N's at B8. C8. F8, and G8. As with
previous variant, Black's advantage in
the count masks White's strong
positional advantage.
THREE PAWN (or Szen's Problem) —
White has his K at E1 and P's at F2, G2
and H2. Black has his K at D8 and pawns
at A7, B7 and C7.
RANDOMIZED — Set up each
player's back rank at random. If the B's
start on squares of the same color, one is
switched with an adjacent piece.
B&N REVERSED — Switch your B's
and your N's starting locations. (This
was actually done in a tournament in
1880!)
BATTLE CHESS — Set up each side's
pieces according to the following rules:
1) All men must be set up on the
first three ranks.
2) Pawns may not start on the back
rank. If they start on the third, place as
having moved.
3) Bishops must be on squares of
opposite color.
Choose the computer's side randomly

after setup. (Better yet come up with list

TWIN CHESS — White starts with his
N's at A3 and H3; as at D1 and E1 and
K's at Cl and F1 (deploy K's as having
moved). Black starts symmetrically. Either
K may be checkmated. If both K's are
checked simultaneously, they must both
be put out of check or they are
ODS considered checkmated.

-

If you are consistently better
(or worse ) than the program, you might
want to give (or receive) odds. This is
done by removing and moving pieces at
the start as follows:
1. The odds-giver receives Black
and removes his P at F7:
2. The odds-giver receives Black,
removes his P at F7 and forfeits his first
move;
3. The odds-giver receives White
and removes his N at B1 ;
4. The odds-giver receives White
and removes his R at A1 (but has his Pat
A2 displaced at A3);
5. The odds-giver receives Black,
removes his Rat A8, his P at F7:
6. The odds-giver receives White
and removes any two of his B's or N's;
7. The odds-giver receives White
and removes his R at Al, and N at BI
(displacing his Pat A2 to A3);
8. The odds-giver removes his Q at
Dl.

of starting positions and choose two at
random.) White's first move may not be
a capture! If Sargon trys it, put the piece
back and you make the first move (which
may not be a capture).

REBELLIOUS ROYALTY — Place
White's K at E8 and his Q at D8. Place
black's K at E1 and his queen at DII. All
other pieces start in their normal
locations.

As one of the classic games of all time,
chess has entertained and challenged us
for many years. hope these computer
chess scenarios add to your enjoyment
of the game. 0

I

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
CRAZY MAZEY
TYPE:
Arcade
Apple II
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Ronald Meadows
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Data Most
9748 Cozycrott Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
(213) 709-1202

CRAZY MAZEY is a car-chase game in
which you drive a ". . .highly maneuverable mean-machine" through a series of
mazes collecting money and avoiding
collisions with killer cars. The killer cars
will attempt to crash into you as you
make your way around the maze.
Sometimes they will parallel your
movement, other times they will dash
towards you. The patterns are fairly easy
to figure out and knowledge of them will
come in handy. To collect all the money
(represented by '$' signs) on a level and
then exit that level, you will need to
neutralize the killer cars. There are two
ways to accomplish this: 1) Run them
into a dead end; or 2) Cause them to
crash into one another. The major
challenge of the game involves carrying
out these two tasks.
A killer car will tend to parallel your
movement. You can use this fact to
cause the car to run into dead ends. As
long as you do not move to the
"unblocked" side of a dead-ended killer
car, it will remain there. Causing killer
cars to collide with one another involves
making use of their other tendency,
which is to move toward you when you
are on a straight line with them and not
moving parallel to their most recent
path. There are many ways to use this
technique. With one car following you
and another heading straight for you,
you can wait until the last second before
you turn out of the way. Many times the
two cars will crash head-on. You can also
use the layout of the maze to force cars
to crash into each other.

There are nineteen levels in the game.
Each level has the same number of cars
as the level number. Level nineteen has

nineteen cars to avoid! Even at slow
speed the higher levels are very difficult.
The game can be played at a variety of
speeds from '1' (very fast) to '7' (very
slow). If you like HEAD-ON you will find
CRAZY MAZEY even more enjoyable.
Daniel Hockman

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
LAZERMAZE
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Apple II 48K
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
James D. Spain
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Avant-Garde Creations
P.O. Box 30160
Eugene, OR 97403
(503) 345-3043

The information printed on the game
jacket bills LAZERMAZE (LM) as a
"unique arcade action game " and in this
case, the advertising is true. There is no
other game on the market like this game.
The game is based on the fiction of
futuristic 'champion combat'. As in the
ancient days of the Greeks and in the
biblical story of David and Goliath, LM
postulates two warriors competing in
one-to-one combat, each representing
one of the opposing parties.
The game jacket also claims that LM is
a game for sharp eyes and quick wits.
This is a fair statement since LM involves
rapidly surveying a maze of mirrors on
the screen, figuring out the path of a
lazer beam through that maze, determining the exit point of the beam, and
entering the location into the computer.
The more quickly the job is accomplished.
the more points you get. The alien is
placed at the exit point you select and will
be vaporized by your exiting lazer beam if
you have correctly called the exit point. If
you place the alien at the wrong point
and the beam misses him, he will lob a
bomb over the maze of mirrors, destroying you. The only real effect of this is that
you get zero points for that particular
shot.
The rules are stored on disk and are
handled nicely. Rather than the usual

printed rules or text version of the rules
on the computer screen found in most
games, the instructions for LAZERMAZE,
as well as other Avant-Garde games, are
in the form of a tutorial in which the
gamer is actually walked through part of
a game.
Good eyesight and quick thinking are
rewarded. The field of mirrors is fairly
easy to " read" on a 13" monitor but is
somewhat more difficult on a smaller
screen such is often used with personal
computers. However, the difficulty is not
prohibitive. The faster your eyes can
trace the path of the beam, the better
your score will be. After the completion
of a round you may, if your score is high
enough, go to another round with more
mirrors. More mirrors means more
difficult paths. The highest level.
Master's, places 70 mirrors on the field.
Some of the pathways at the Master's
level remind me of my old days in
college registration lines — bounce
here, there, and everywhere, hopefully
coming out at the correct exit. '

There are not many strategies in the
game that will help increase your score.
The game is dominated by quick
thinking and reflexes, rather than
strategies. However, there are a couple
of points to keep in mind when playing.
First, hit the numbers quickly but avoid
the problem of striking the keys too
quickly in succession. The second
stroke may not register if it follows the
first keystroke too closely. The result is
that your first key is entered and the
computer buzzes you letting you know it
is waiting for the second lost keystroke.
Second, when you get down to the last
couple of shots of a round. the pathways
are filled to the point that it is obvious
what path a beam will take. You can save
a second or two in these final shots by
noticing the pathway gaps as well as the
exit points of those gaps. Then you can
hit the appropriate keys when your figure
pops up and the computer requests the
next correct pathway.
LM is a different kind of game and for
that reason alone is worth looking at. It is
a worthy addition to the arcade game
field.
Stanley Greenlaw

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
SEAFOX
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM: Atari 400/800 and
Apple II (both 48K)
Joystick required
for Atari
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Ed Hobbs
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901
(415) 456-6424

SEAFOX is a shooting gallery game
with additions. You are in your sub trying
to sink enemy ships as they sail back and
forth overhead. The upper row is
composed of merchant ships. These are
your prime targets. The middle row is
made up of hospital ships which you
want to avoid hitting, and the lower row
(which does not appear in level one) is
made up of destroyers that can be fired
upon but can drop depth charges on
you. Your sub can move back-and-forth
as well as up-and-down. Horizontal
movement allows you to line up your
shots on surface ships while avoiding
depth charges. Vertical movement
allows you to avoid, as well as fire at,
enemy submarines.
You can fire torpedoes upward
(toward the surface ships) or outward
(toward enemy subs and other denizens
of the deep). If you hit a hospital ship
your torpedo will reverse itself and begin
diving toward you. It is easy to avoid
these returning torpedoes but, since
only one vertical and one horizontal
torpedo can be in play at a time, the
returning torpedo keeps you from firing
for a number of seconds. Enemy subs
react to you in a limited sense. If you are
above them they climb, if you are below
them they dive, all the while traveling
across the screen. You can use this fact
to your advantage when you are firing a
horizontal torpedo at a sub (lead him into
the shot).
You have limited fuel and torpedo
supplies; therefore, you are dependent

upon a trained dolphin who will bring
you more supplies. There are two
problems with getting supplies. First, the
dolphin follows a fairly well-established
path. If you are not in position, you will
miss your supplies (the dolphin is too
fast to chase). If you miss a supply
dolphin, one more will pass before you
run out of fuel. The first dolphin will
come when your fuel is in the 500-700
range. The second dolphin will come
when your fuel is around 100. The
supply dolphin is preceded by a green
sub that travels across the bottom of the
screen. When the green sub appears.
place yourself about in the center of the
underwater zone. From there you should
be able to pick off the supplies as the
dolphin swims by. The second problem
with getting resupplied is the giant clam.
Most of the time a giant fast clam (fast
clam?) will appear at the same time as
the dolphin. It will attempt to eat the
supplies. You must get to the supplies
first. The clam is also worth points if shot.
Higher levels of the game bring on
torpedoes from the enemy subs as well
as magnetic mines. The graphics are
nice but there are better games in the
Broderbund line.
Luther Shaw

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Computer
Foreign Exchange
Business
TRS-80 models I & Ill, level

FORMAT:
Cassette
# PLAYERS: 2 to 4
PRICE:
$20.00
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill Microcomputer
Games
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore. MD 21214
COMPUTER FOREIGN EXCHANGE
(CFE) is a computer version of the
Avalon Hill board game of the same
name. The rules are the same and it
relieves the players of all the bookkeeping required in that version. The game is
unusual in two ways: it is available only
for the TRS-80 and it does not allow you
to play against the computer. You can
play solitaire only if you play more than
one "hand".
Each player represents an American
business with international assets.
Everything in the game is measured in
dollars and the winner is the first player
to amass a pre-determined amount.
Exactly how great an amount is set at the
start of the game and is also a way of

controlling the length of the game. Every
firm will be making money, so the way to
get ahead here is through currency
exchange. Say you buy 1000 pesos for
$100 on Monday. Friday you sell them
back and only get $50. Congratulations,
you've just halved your money! Of
course, had you done it the other way
'round you could have doubled it. If
you're a gambler, you put all you can in a
currency you think will go up. If you're
conservative, you spread it around so
that losses and gains balance out.
The "world" in Computer Foreign
Exchange consists of twenty-four cities
in nine foreign countries. All cities are
assigned to one of the players at random, so. with three players, each would
begin with eight cities containing a sales
office. The trading of cities is allowed
and collecting all two or three cities in a
given country means a player can buy a
manufacturing firm in that country
which will increase your income. Those
who are familiar with the board game will
be glad to know that Computer Foreign
Exchange allows every option, including
borrowing.
As a teaching tool, Computer Foreign
Exchange is a first class way to learn
about exchange rates, exposure, and
hedging. It is a realistic simulation that
will provide plenty of examples. Unfortunately, the documentation is a bare minimum both in telling you how to play and
teaching you about foreign exchange.
Once you learn, the game dulls a little for
the same reason most Stock Market
games do: the "market" is fluctuating
randomly. In real life, the people who get
rich at currency exchange don't guess.
Still and all, this is a decent game and
a good program provided you have
someone to play with. The price is right
and it only takes 16K!
Bob Proctor

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE
P. 47

EASTERN FRONT (from p. 22)

52 Panzer Corps
72
44 Infantry Corps 122
55 Infantry Corps
77
6 Finn lnf Corps 101

33 ($21)
38 ($26)
39 ($27)
48 ($30)

You must also change sector 111
( $6F)from 28 to 29 ($1C to $1 D) to avoid
the conflict of having two units in the
same square if you decide to include the
39 Panzer Corps, above.
You may also include this unit by
changing the 255 ($FF) to 2 in sector
118 ($76):
27 Infantry Corps 97

50 ($32)

RUSSIAN REPLACEMENTS
To reduce the Russian replacement
rate from two combat strength points
per turn to one, change sector 105 ($69)
as follows:
BYTE:

CHANGE TO:

121 ($79)
122 ($7A)
123 ($7B)

254 ($FE)
62 ($3E)
85 ($55)

FINNS CAN ATTACK
To enable the offensive capacity of
Finnish units, change sector 101 ($65)
as follows:
BYTE:

CHANGE TO:

22 ($16)
26 ($1A)

255 ($FF)
255 ($FF)

These bytes should originally be 42
and 43 ($2A, $2B), respectively.

TERRAIN
To alter the terrain as described
above, change sector 162 ($A2) as
below. Other terrain changes are
possible; examine the source code
listings for a complete description.
Unit:

Terrain:

Weather: BYTE:

CHANGE TO:

60 ( 3C)

$

08 ($08)

Infantry Mtn/Forest Mud

79 ($4F)

20 ($14)

Infantry City

80 ( 50)

$
89 ( $ 59)
90 ( $ 5A)

25 ($19)

Infantry City

Dry

Mud

Armor Mtn/Forest Mud
Armor

City

Mud

12 ($0C)

To change the defense ratings of
terrain as described above, change
sector 188 ($BC) as follows:

CLEAR
SWAMP

I 11 ($6F)
116 ($74)

ROUTE 80 (from p. 33)

EASTERN FRONT is an excellent
game that lends itself well to the
tinkering of software scenario buffs. I
hope to create a scenario for 1942 one
day when I have time. With luck,
someone will get as enthused about the
game and do it for me! The system lends
itself very well to other wargames; a
Western Front game perhaps. or even a
Yom Kippur War scenario. Obviously,
changes would need to be made to the
core algorithms, but Crawford has
provided us with a vehicle for growth and
expansion should we take him up on it.

EASY STREET - THE PLACE
TO MAKE A BUCK!

STAR MAZE (from p. 26)

search of the jewels. Beyond the obvious
use of thrusters to change direction,
there is the technique of bouncing your
ship off the blocks as in a game of pool.
This conserves fuel. and with a judicious
thrust at appropriate points, you can
intentionally hit or miss certain blocks so
as to change or not change your flight
trajectory. Sometimes it is helpful to get
the ship going at a high rate of speed,
allowing it to bounce randomly around
the maze, looking for jewels. A finger can
be kept poised over the hyperspace key
or the antimatter bomb key. When you
pass a jewel you can either mentally note
its location or stop and pick it up. When
you find yourself hurling at high speed at
an enemy unit you can avoid a shipdestroying collision by either hitting the
hyperspace key (which transports you to
another part of the maze) or you can hit
the antimatter bomb key (which destroys
all enemy units on the screen, ala

CHANGE TO:
1 ($01)
3 ($03)

We'll explore more of Peeks and Pokes
Parkway in the future. You can save that
little program if you want. We'll use it
again.

This is a neighborhood that is strictly
for fun: with occasional prizes as well!
This month we have a contest for fantasy
adventure and simulation buffs. List the
names and authors of the ten programs
containing the following:
Possum Hollow to Knawbone;
Paul Bunyon's Magic Axe;
Guide is Ingtemba Gombu;
Double Eagle II;
Clipper Flying Cloud;
Guido and Fido;
A difficult dumb waiter:
Elder Brother Cooks, The Money
Lender;
9. The Ghost of Backpack Sam:
10. Pirates, a Mongoose and a
Parrot.
Send your list of answers to:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Dick McGrath
2008 Calle Miranda,
Fullerton, CA 92633
The winner will receive a $25.00 gift
certificate from Joe Broderick of The
Software Affair, 10127 E. Rosecrans
Ave., Bellflower, CA 90706.
NOTE: In the event of duplicate correct
answers. a winner will be selected by a
random drawing from among the correct
submissions. All lists must be received by
December 3L 1982.
That's the end of the road for now. I'll
see you again next issue. . .
❑

Defender).
The high scores are saved on disk and
the visual display for the " Highest Score
To Date" and "Great Score" (for a score
in the top six) is pleasing. Unfortunately
SM has been known to erase the high
scores from time to time for no reason.
The disk this review is based on has
erased the high scores three times. CGW
has heard of other SM disks that have
done the same thing.

16 ($10)

DEFENSE VALUES

TERRAIN: BYTE:

You can easily alter the game length to
any time you see fit by changing sector
170 ($AA), byte 51 ($33). It is 40 ($28) in
the original version, I find that 52 ($34)
turns make it more interesting.

SM can be played using a regular
joystick, an Atari joystick (in conjunction
with Sirius Software's joyport), paddles ,
or keyboard. The game is easiest to play
with the Atari joystick, but regular
joysticks are also quite good. Previously
mentioned problems aside, STAR MAZE
is a well-designed game that should
provide you with many hours of
enjoyable game playing.
❑

ROBOTWAR
TOURNAMENT
CGW is sponsoring its Second
Annual Robotwar Tournament
(using Muse Software's ROBOTWAR). Detailed instructions can
be found in our previous issue
(Sept.-Oct. 1982). Deadline for
entries is DECEMBER 10, 1982.
For more information
call or write us:

COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT
P.O. BOX 4566
ANAHEIM, CA 92803-4566

REAL WORLD (from p.16)
Every personal computer on the market
has a random number generator built
into it which can create millions of
outcomes over a continuous range
(usually 0 to 1). So, why are game
developers still thinking in terms of
discrete outcomes and percentage
probabilities? Maybe it's because game
developers come from the ranks of
game players and the "secrets" of
computer simulation have been kept by
scientists and engineers.
One "secret" that can be effectively
used in many simulation games without
any trouble is the "normal distribution-.
This is frequently represented as a " bellshaped curve" Numerous things in life
fit this curve. The classic example is the
height of adult males which ranges from
about four feet to almost eight feet with
the average being five feet eleven inches.
In a normal distribution the average
value will occur most often. Thus, there
are more men 5'11" than any other
height. However, each height within the
total range has a given probability of
occurring. If we really wanted to, we
could derive the "discrete" probability
for each height that can occur. Simply
dealing with one inch increments
between four and eight feet, we would
have 48 outcomes with probabilities for
each. It would be an impossible job to
maintain tables of all possibilities, but a
feature of normal distributions makes
this quite unnecessary. To describe a
true bell-shaped curve, you only need
two numbers: the average and the
standard deviation. With these two
values you can recreate each probability
in the entire range of outcomes. As it
turns out, you can also use a random
number generator to create normally
distributed outcomes. Although it
means jumping ahead a bit in terms of
our phases of game development, here
is a simple routine that will turn a
uniformly distributed random number
(each outcome in the range is equally
likely) into a normally distributed
random number (the average is most
likely and outcomes taper off to either
extreme). This little routine will work in
either Atari or Applesoft BASIC:
A=

0: FOR I = 1 TO 12: A = A

RND( I ): NEXT

I:A

=A-6

This routine will make A a normally
distributed random variable that takes a
value of zero most often and very rarely
reaches as high as +6 or as low as -6. If
you multiply A by the standard deviation
of your collected data and add your
calculated average then you will have an
outcome that fits your observed system.
There are three major advantages to
using normally distributed outcomes in
simulations. First, the calculations

required of your data are easily done
(many calculators have features for
computing averages and standard
deviations built into them). Second, the
variables you need to store in your
program are considerably reduced from
the alternative of using discrete
outcomes. For instance, the simple
discrete yard generator used in the
football example above needed five
elements per combination of offense
and defense. Only two elements are
needed if a normal distribution is used.
Finally. the outcomes that you generate
using a normal distribution will have the
" ring of truth - to them. The average
outcome will happen most often and the
farther away from that point you get. the
less likely the outcomes will be. But
occasionally, as in the real world. a
"really great" (or " horrible - depending
whose side you're on) outcome will
occur. That's as it should be.
Normally distributed outcomes can't
be used everywhere. For example. the
decision as to whether a pass is
complete or not in football is a discrete
probability. There are, in addition. a
number of other types of distributions
that exist in the world. The probability a
warrior will be killed in hand-to-hand
combat based on his fatigue, for
instance. would look entirely different
from a normal curve. If. for each
doubling of fatigue, the chance of death
would then be quadrupled, this would fit
what's called a power curve. There are
numerous other types of distributions
and curves (some of which I will cover in
future issues given enough reader
interest). but the normal one is the
easiest to use and greatly simplifies your
data collection. A normal distribution
should be used in your game any time
the most common outcome is near the
middle of a range and the frequency of
outcomes on either side of the middle
becomes increasingly unlikely.
As for data collection that does not fit a
"known" pattern, just keep your
objective in mind. You want to be able to

reduce your findings down to mathematical relationships. So, if you
discover a nonstandard pattern to the
data that seems to fit fairly well. don't be
afraid to use it. Often you can bypass the
whole data collection process if you use
a few standard "rules of thumb". For
instance, it is someone's principle (I
don't remember his name) that in
business, each time a company doubles
their production, they lower their costs
by 15%. In a business strategy game,
little "gems - like that can save a lot of
wear and tear on the calculator.
Next issue — Model Development.

LEGIONNAIRE (from p.30)
# Legions Barbarian # Score Composite
10
3
35
1050
10
2
50
1000
5
—27
7
5
6
2
60
5
3
31
475
2
8
128
8
1
8
12
96

There is a fine balance between
playability and historical accuracy that is
very difficult to reach in war game
creation. I have two friends who play war
games. One won't touch a game that
doesn't have complete designations on
each cardboard marker. He'll pause in
the middle of a move to reflect on some
historical incident in that game and alter
his strategy accordingly. My other friend
tried LEGIONNAIRE and found the
game fascinating. When I tried to explain
why a piece would all of a sudden
become weak and run away from a battle
with discussions of shock factors and
morale, he ignored me. LEGIONNAIRE
tends toward the latter of my two friends
as a game that anyone can sit down and
play without reading endless instructions
or learning complex strategies. The
historical gamer may be appalled at
finding the Huns fighting Caesar, but
he'll be more than compensated by the
logical and realistic procedures he will
have to adopt to successfully play the
game. The real time action in this game
is my favorite point. When I sit down to
play, I know I'll only be at the computer
for an hour at the most, and that I won't
have to sit through twenty-minute
brainstorming sessions between moves.
I consider LEGIONNAIRE to be as
challenging as EASTERN FRONT and
immensely more playable. The only
other Atari game I have played that is
similar (besides EASTERN FRONT) is
SHATTERED ALLIANCE. There is little
comparison. Chris Crawford has shown
what can be done on the Atari in only
16K. Imagine what will happen when
some programmer undertakes a
machine code, 32K, disk accessing, full
color, full sound. scrolling, multicharacter set, player missile graphic,
sophisticated wargame on the Atari. It's
coming and LEGIONNAIRE and
EASTERN FRONT are breaking ground.
When Avalon Hill merges their knowledge of game design with the Atari's full
capabilities, we should see some very
good headway made towards sophisticated, playable simulations. I have no
complaints about LEGIONNAIRE other
than I'd like to be able to scroll around a
bit faster to rescue my poor distant
legions. I hope Chris takes the
LEGIONNAIRE format, expands the
map, adds random terrain generation,
moves it into the gunpowder era, and
adds a two-player option. I think he
should be able to give us this in a month
or two. Don't you?

WRITING FOR COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
Almost all of the articles in CGW come from active readers of the magazine. We invite your submissions of articles, art, humor, etc. CGW pays two cents
per word for most copy and $30.00 per page for most artwork. Artwork for less than a page will be pro-rated.

REVIEWS

REGULAR DEPARTMENTS

The majority of articles in CGW will be reviews. These will fall into
two categories: 1) micro-reviews of 300 to 600 words; and 2) feature
reviews of about 1000-2500 words. Micro-reviews should contain the
following: 1) The information which goes into the Basic Information
Box (see this issue); 2) General description of the fiction/background
of the game; 3) A more detailed description of the graphics,
documentation, and above all the game design itself. Refer to
READER INPUT DEVICE on pg. 47 to see the kinds of questions a
review should answer; 4) A discussion of the strong and weak points
of the game. Remember that computer garners have wide ranging
tastes and a game which is "poison" to one may be - meat- to another.
The strengths and weaknesses you find should be those of the game,
not the game type; 5) A summary of the game which might suggest
what type of computer gamer will want to buy this game and/or what
type of gamer will want to pass it by; 6) If possible include a good
photograph (color or b/w) of the game ($5.00 is paid if the
photograph is printed). To get rid of monitor screen "phasing" in the
photograph you must not use a shutter speed faster than 1/30th of a
second.
A micro-review cannot cover most games in detail but can: 1)
give an overview of the game to a potential purchaser; and, if
appropriate, 2) suggest some strategies for playing the game well.
Any game released in the last 12 months is acceptable for a
micro-review.

CGW is always looking for other quality additions to our regular
list of departments. If you have a column idea that you would like to
submit to CGW please write or call.
Several of our regular departments are written by authors who
would like to have dialog with our readers. If you have a comment or
idea for their column, drop them a note. Here are those who are
looking for reader input:

A feature review will do everything that a micro-review does but
on an expanded scale. The subject of a feature length review should
be a new game (released in the last 12 months) or one that has
become a - standard - . When appropriate CGW will print reviews of
books, hardware, etc. as they relate to the computer gaming field.

STRATEGY AND TACTICS
While many reviews will contain suggestions on strategy and
tactics, we also welcome articles which are primarily strategy/tactics
oriented. This type of article will go into detail concerning what
techniques provide high scores or help a player better attain the goal
of the game. In general, clues to adventure type games should rarely
be included. Where they are included they should be in slip code (i.e.,
shift the letters of the sentence one letter to the right or the left).

SCENARIOS
Formal and informal scenarios can be designed for some
computer games. A formal scenario is one which uses the scenario
designing routine of the game such as SSI's Torpedo Fire. An
informal scenario is one in which the writer makes up an alternate
goal for a game with success being determined independently of the
game's stated scoring system. An example would be the "Castle
Wolfenstein Dash" in which a point is awarded for each room entered
minus one point for each guard killed. The Operation Apocalypse
Campaign Scenario in 2.2 is another example of an informal
scenario.

SILICON CEREBRUM

— Bruce Webster
6215 Thorn St.,
San Diego, CA 92115
REAL WORLD GAMING — Dan Bunten
108 Broadmoor
Little Rock, AR 72204
ROUTE 80 (TRS-80)
— Richard McGrath
2008 Calle Miranda
Fullerton, CA 92633

MICROCOMPUTER
MATH EMAG I C

— Michael Ecker
Luzerne 8
Viewpoint Village
Scranton, PA 18508

DESIGNER'S NOTES
CGW urges game designers to submit designer's notes articles
on their games. Contact us if you have any questions.

FICTION AND HUMOR
From time to time, CGW will print fiction related to the computer
gaming field. Humor will be included on a regular basis if quality
material is submitted.

FORMAT
Article submissions should be typed. The manuscript should be
at least double-spaced and preferably triple-spaced with a one inch
margin all around. Please try to avoid all-upper-case printing. For the
sake of our editors, please double-check both grammar and
punctuation. Be sure your name, address and phone number are
typed on the first page. Include a SASE for return of unsuitable
material.

RIGHTS
All submissions become the property of Golden Empire
Publications, Inc., rights revert to author upon publication or rejection.
Specifically, our purchase covers first world rights.

OVERVIEW OF R.I.D. #4

COMPUTER GAMING WORLD TOP 10

There were 125 Reader Input Devices turned in by press
time for this issue. The breakdown by machines owned is as
follows: Apple (53%); Atari (34%); TRS-80 (7%); IBM PC (6%).
Of the 22 games offered for evaluation in RID #4, 15 of them
received enough responses to be listed. If a game is not
reviewed by at least 20% of the user group(s) to which it
belongs, we do not believe the statistics gathered can be
considered significant. Please note that this 20% threshold is a
change from the 10% threshold we used for RID #3. Games
that were not evaluated by at least 20% of the appropriate
group were: Computer Gin Rummy; Battletrek; Fore!; and Zero
Gravity Pinball.

Last issue we initiated the CGW TOP 10. The games on
this list will be the ten highest rated games from the various
RIDs. As with the regular RID list, a '% played' rating of at least
20% will be necessary to make a game eligible for the TOP 10.
In our last issue PURSUIT OF THE GRAF SPEE made the TOP
10 with only '12% played'. With our new required level POTGS
is disqualified from the TOP 10. To be fair we will include it in
RID #5.

In an effort to make it easier for you to evaluate the games,
and because most of us tend to only take note of the composite
score of a game, we have decided to do away with rating
multiple aspects on each game. From now on (unless there is a
revolt of semi-gargantuan proportions) we will only ask for and
report a single score for each game — from 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). Therefore, even though we collected detailed
ratings in RID '4, we will only report the composite scores.

Since our hobby is changing so fast and games come and
go more quickly than new T.V. shows, we have decided that
beginning with this issue, the TOP 10 must be re-evaluated
each issue along with the regular offerings for that issue. The
ratings for some of the games in the current TOP 10 were
based on responses from RID # 2 and RID #3.

R.I.D. #5
(use business reply card)
GAMES
The top rated game in RID #4 was SSI'S GUADALCANAL
CAMPAIGN. It showed a relatively high percent played (30%)
considering that it has only been out a few months. In
comparison to the results of prior RIDs. RID #4 had an overall
strong group of games. Even the lowest rated game,
FALCONS. received a respectable 6.03 rating (the same rating
as the 11th game of 20 in RID #3 — The Temple of Apshai).
At 83% the game most played in RID #4 was a runaway
—RASTER BLASTER. This "old timer" was included in order
to compare pinball games (see pg. 48).

Rate the following games using a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). In making your evaluation be sure to consider
the following aspects of the game: PRESENTATION (this
includes such things as graphics, sound. packaging.
documentation); GAME DESIGN (apart from the presentation,
is the game well designed. playable, interesting?): LIFE (does
the game wear well?).

PINBALL GAMES COMPARED

Rate the following selected articles on a scale of
(terrible) to 9 (outstanding). If the article does not interest you
enter "0"

DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC received a 7.24 composite/
43% played rating in RID # 2. We ran some other pinball games
so as to compare. The result? RASTER BLASTER (6.75/83%)
and A2-PB1 PINBALL (6.59/43%) were no match to DMM.
ZERO GRAVITY PINBALL only received a 3.88 composite in
RID # 4 but this score must be considered suspect in light of the
fact that it was only evaluated by 11% of the Apple respondents.

