-

I

November 1991 Number 88

Taking a Peek

Access Software, Inc.
Salt Lake City, UT
LINKS: PINEHURST RESORT AND
COUNTRY CLUB: Truly one of the finest
golf resorts in the world, Pinehurst Number Two (of seven) is represented in this
expansion course disk for Links. The rolling terrain and tree-lined fairways make
this course particularly challenging. The
course disk serves as another fine supplement to those terrific Links graphics.
IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Accolade
San Jose, CA
JACK NICKLAUS' COURSE DESIGNERS CUP ART VOLUME 1: Something
to fill the canvas for golf course designers, plus a complete new course.
Finished objects for course designers include new trees, golf carts, buildings, etc.
The scenery goes with the new landscaping for seaside, parkland and desert courses. Not only can players have a great
time designing courses, but they can also
play a round at the Desert Highlands
Golf course (home of the high-stakes,
high-pressure "Skins" Game). IBM,
Amiga ($24.95). Circle #2.
Britannica Software
San Francisco, CA
THE BERENSTAIN BEARS JUNIOR

JIGSAW: It seems like there are plenty of
computer puzzle programs out for tots —
the trick is "piecing together" which one
has the best features. With The Berenstain Bears, players can have a choice
of 8-, 15-, 40- and 60-piece puzzles to
build with an optional sound toggle to indicate when a piece has been place correctly. Unfortunately, none of the puzzles
were pictured in the documentation, so
kids will have to hunt around and remember file names to find their favorites.
Parents will have to stay close to help
with all of the small-typeface DOS features that have to be dealt with between
puzzles as well. For ages four to ten. IBM
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
Capstone Entertainment Software
Miami, FL
EXOTIC CAR SHOWROOM: The name
says it all. This software package is not a
driving simulator and is not an expansion disk for one. It is, quite simply, a
showroom database of graphics and
statistics for exotic cars. Among the fifteen cars on display are the De Tomaso
Pantera, Acura NSX, Lotus Turbo Esprit

and Gemballa Mirage. One can look
under the hood, check out the interior,
compare two cars side-by-side and otherwise peruse these pricey chariots. IBM
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
EXOTIC CAR SHOWROOM & SUPER
CAR PACK: Everything mentioned
above, plus Electronic Arts' Ferrari Formula One (pictured) and Accolade's
Grand Prix Circuit. Essentially, one can
do more than just look around the showroom with the inclusion of these two
popular driving simulators included in
this trilogy pack. In Ferrari Formula
One, the player designs and fine-tunes
his car before racing it on the test track
and 16 grand prix courses. Grand Prix
Circuit is a straight speed and tight turn
driving simulator among the best of
them. IBM ($59.95). Circle #5.
DigiTek Software
1916 Twisting Lane
Wesley Chapel, Fl 33543
(813) 973-7733
BIG BUSINESS: For everyone tired of
serious business simulators which ex-

Taking a Peek

amine actual markets and the laws of
supply and demand, here's something
really silly. Big Business is accurately
subtitled "a semi-realistic wacky business
simulation" and is full of plenty of
sophomoric humor (something like
Meretzky in Businessland). A player's
marketing head is a sleaze, the R&D
manager is a nerd and the finance officer
(Jane Dough) is... well, best left undescribed. Players choose from a variety
of commodities (from nuclear bombs to
toilets) to produce, while bidding in the
market to buy, sell and manufacture
goods, finance growth, undermine the
competition and generally prove the term
"business ethics" to be oxymoronic.
Comes with a second game included,
Wall Street (a more serious stock
market simulation). IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.
TIE BREAK TENNIS: Strictly for the
purist, this is another of the highly
detailed, heavily arcade-driven tennis
simulators. With a distinctive television
look and sound, the game allows
players to participate in singles or
doubles matches, tournaments or training games. Many combinations of arcade
responses allow players to use a wide
variety of ways to hit the ball (provided,
of course, that one can react that fast).
One particularly interesting feature is that
a player can choose different rackets,
whose weight and tensions will affect
play. Those who like Pro Tennis Tour 2
will want to take a look at Tie Break Tennis. IBM ($39.95). Circle #7.

Inline Design
Sharon, CT
TESSERAE: Cut from the same cloth
as Ishido, Darwin's Dilemma and Shanghai, Tesserae is a game of removing a
board full of tiles by "jumping" them,
checkers-style. The strategy rub is that
some jumps actually remove tiles, while
other jumps combine the shapes and
colors, making them more difficult to
remove. Several different board styles
and starting piece difficulty levels are
provided. The on-line instructions are a
real plus. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.

LightBulb Logic
P.O. Box 815984
Dallas, TX 75381
(214) 241-7033
COMRADE: This is nothing more or
less than a game accessory for the Russian Tris games. With Comrade, players
can use any pointing device (mouse or
trackball) to play Tetris, Welltris and
Faces. Additionally, this software allows

for adjusting the speed of these games.
Comrade is definitely a wrist- and fingerfatigue saver. IBM ($19.95). Circle
Reader Service #9.

Mindcraft
Torrance, CA
RULES OF ENGAGEMENT: Putting the
player in the role of a fleet commander,
Rules of Engagement links up to the tactical game Breach 2 whenever boarding
actions occur, although either game can
be played as a stand-alone product. Like
Breach 2, Rules of Engagement includes a variety of scenarios, including a
complete mission builder. Everything is
"push-button," so no arcade-like reflexes
are required. The busy screens can be
quickly assimilated via a tutorial at the
front of the manual and the game's use
of color and flowchart-like displays. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
GATEWAY TO THE SAVAGE FRONTIER: Expanding the "Gold Box" line of
AD&D games to include new sections of
The Savage Frontier, Gateway to the
Savage Frontier opens this new area
with new characters. For 1st- through 8thlevel characters, Gateway shows much
of the evolution which this series of
games has undergone. From the quickstart rules book to the wonderfully
elaborate and entertaining adventurer's
journal (complete with storyline paragraphs which players look up when encountered, to save disk storage space),
this new beginning to a new series of
Gold Box games is most reminiscent of

the Neverwinter Nights game played on
America Online. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #11.
TONY LA RUSSA'S ULTIMATE
BASEBALL: Here's the behind-the-dugout
scoop: Tony La Russa's Ultimate
Baseball was designed by a member of
the original Earl Weaver Baseball
development team. Players can choose
from a variety of menus allowing for varying degrees of difficulty and computer
play assistance (giving players the
choice of play, managing or both for
either or both teams). A solid utilities program allows for the editing of teams, trading and showing statistics. All in all,
Tony La Russa is a package that
touches all the bases. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #12.

Virgin Games
Irvine, CA
VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBUR: In this
sequel to Spirit of Excalibur, the vile sorceress Morgan le Fay has been defeated,
but the evil she summoned in the form
of a great Lord of Demons is no longer
bound to her and has been very busy.
With the king under enchantment, the
Grail and Excalibur stolen and other
wrongs to be righted, the player must
muster the Knights of the Round Table
for a foray into Spain, where Christians
are busy feuding with Moslems and mercenaries roam the lands. Players must
recruit what help they can through the
myriad of towns and cities, plus pick up
crucial bits of Moorish magic which will
be required in order to defeat the Lord of
Demons. IBM ($49.99). Circle #13.

Industry News

Inside the Industry
Microprose Files for Initial Public Offering

A

ugust 13, 1991 was the

date on which
Microprose Software
filed the papers necessary to
release an initial public offering of two million shares of
common stock. Anticipating a
maximum price of $9.00 per
share, the optimal capitalization of the public offering becomes $18 million. The
prospectus makes clear the
necessity for a cash infusion
of up to $18 million in order
to clear up residual debt related to the poorly received
coin-op venture. Microprose
incurred considerable debt
from the the capital expenditures required to launch the
coin-op division and the current cash infusion should
retire the residual debt, insure
continued cash flow/viability
and spin off the coin-op
division into a separate corporation.
Offering the Microprose
common stock at $9.00 per
share would place the
securities at a price-to earnings ratio (P/E) of 14. This

compares favorably to other
entertainment softwareoriented corporations. Major
retailers Babbages and Egghead trade at a P/E of roughly 16, while Sierra trades at
a P/E of approximately 13,
Electronic Arts had a recent
P/E of 22 and computer
software as a whole was at 23.
Of course, P/E is only one
measurement used by investors and does not reflect the
situations of companies like
Mediagenic, Software Toolworks and Spinnaker that,
while publicly held, do not
have earnings to plug into the
equation. Mediagenic was
"delisted" as a publicly traded
security because NASDAQ
believed it had insufficient
capital to meet obligations;
Spinnaker has been carrying
a 108% debt load and
Software Toolworks is
weathering two quarters of
severe losses.
Astute readers will want to
examine the prospectus
before making any invest-

ment decision based on the
Microprose IPO or the annual report of any of the
other companies listed in this
report, but the good news for
consumers is that
Microprose is making longterm plans to remain a major
player in the entertainment
software industry. The IPO
should warrant enough assurance to put to rest those
questions consumers have
been asking about the surviveability of Microprose.

Radio Shack Sponsors Mission Control Exhibit
Radio Shack has created
an interactive replica of
NASA's Mission Control Center as part of the Soviet
Space exhibit, on display in
Fort Worth, TX until January
1, 1992. Soviet Space is a display of artifacts and models
from the Soviet space program, ranging from a replica
of Sputnik 1 through an actual four-ton telescope and all
the way to a space motor-

cycle and lunar rover. The interactive portion of the display allows visitors to sit at
one of twenty stations in the
control center, each equipped
with a Tandy computer
operating as part of a Novell
network. The "guts" of the interactive exhibit is a Tandy
4025 LX file server.
Those visitors who want to
experience an interactive
"replay" of a space mission
may be somewhat disappointed, however. The exhibit
is designed as a vehicle for allowing visitors to take a trivia
quiz based on the Soviet
Space exhibition which they
would have just viewed.
Radio Shack also provides a
Radio Shack/Soviet Space
certificate as a souvenir for all
visitors who take the quiz.

CGW Apologizes for
Review/Preview Confusion
In the September issue of
CGW (1186), a "Sneak
Preview" comparison of Earl
Weaver Baseball II and Tony
La Russa's Ultimate
Baseball was erroneously
printed as a comparative
review. CGW regrets the confusion, since it is the
magazine's policy to print a
"Sneak Preview" when working from software that is still
in progress and to only label
an article as a review if the
writer is working from final
software. Readers who are interested in either game
should be warned that the article was written while the
author was working with extremely early software (of the
crash, burn and die variety)
and that more definitive judgments on the software will be
printed in the magazine as
the programs hit the market.
Please see the actual review
of Tony La Russa's Ultimate
Baseball in this issue and the
upcoming review of Earl
Weaver Baseball II when the
game actually hits the shelf.
Although the editor keeps appealing to the official scorer
that this was a "tough
chance," we simply must
score this one a big "E."

Industry News

by Tony "Da Snitch" Caravello
(continued from #87)

to make my escape, sose I dive into da
nearest water hazard. Tell ya da truth,
youse truly hasn't seen so much water
since Simulations Canada told me dey
was doing three new naval games:
Pacific Storm: The Midway Campaign
(what is Part 2 of da Solomons Campaign game system), Man of War (what
is dere "Age of Sail" game) and Sea
Power and the State (what is supposed
to be a modern naval game of grand
strategic scale). Fortuitously, da company is going to let some of da so-called
wargame aficionados dry off with MBT:
Middle East (what is dere next modern
armor game complete with a Persian
Gulf database).

S
o,
what were
chasin'
measindese
da guys
last issue
was getting'
closer, youse truly tries to decide
what items of value dis poor rumor guy
can barter for da safety of da aforesaid
personage's skin. As my cab driver tries
to prove dat dere is more dan one way
to fly out of McCarron Field, it comes to
my remembrance dat I had mentioned
da sequel to Avalon Hill's Legends of
the Lost Realm, but had managed to
maintain enough subterfuge to preclude
my readers knowing dat da story will
take place in da wilderness and dat
many of da adventure's activities will involve survival (hunting, finding streams
to fill canteens, trapping animals to trade
furs or make clothing, and more). Dis, of
course, means dat da aforesaid readers
are unlikely to be in possession of da
knowledge what characters can "walk"
freely between da sequel and da original
adventure, as well as keep all da items
what dey had glommed in da previous adventure.
Maybe dese guys would like to be advised of da latest dope on da Ad Lib
Gold Card's "daughterboards" (No,
youse truly has not sat on a pile of circuitboards!). It seems dat da Ad Lib engineers have one-upped dere august personages by developing a series of options what plug into the sound card itself—dese options being a SCSI interface

(da way dat is pronounced sounded almost like a reference to youse truly) for
da connection of CD-ROM drives, hard
disks or tape back-ups; a Surround
Sound card which fitss at da top of da
card and a PC-based telephone answering system what is only about da size of
a "two-bit" piece (quarter) and allows
one to connect a standard telephone to
da computer. Each of dese particular options cost in da neighborhood of 80
bucks.
I told my cabbie to circle around da
Dunes Casino and I would show him a lit
tle detour by da golf course what Phil
Adam of Interplay had told me about.
When we came to da dead end, I rolled
down my window to ask da proverbial innocent passerby where da exit might be
and dis reminded me, at da most inconvenient time, dat Maxis' SimEarth for
Windows will come out in November of
1992 and SimCity for Windows in
December of 1992 (both with no copy
protection).
Sose I ask da poor soul where da exit is
and da guy says dere is no exit. Da other
guys are making something of a grandiose entrance at da other end of da park
ing lot and my cabbie opts to take me
for a fantastic voyage through da fence
and across da fairways of da Dunes
Country Club. It wasn't exactly Isaac
Asimov, but den again, youse truly is not
exactly Centaur Software (da guys
what are releasing Fantastic Voyage on
da Amiga).
I happen to spot da optimal opportunity

Not quite so fortuitously for youse truly,
da gangsters what was hired by RAW
Entertainment were not to be fooled as
easily as da computer Japanese opponents in Silent Service II. Dey stopped
dere gangster-mobile right next to youse
truly and dropped a package on da
ground. Den dey immediately made dere
exit, leaving divots with dere tires. Being
of a foolish persuasion and curious
demeanor, I could not help but examine
the contents of the package, even if this
should precipitate da demise of said
rumor guy. Da box turned out to contain
da European version of Napoleon I (see
last ish's "Over There" for da particulars)
and a note what said RAW was going to
publish da game over here.
I pulled myself out of da water hazard
and began to trudge slowly toward da
parking lot when a certain software exec
pulled up in his golf cart. He asked me if
I had heard about Legend Entertainment moving to Accolade's affiliated
label program. I told da august personage dat I had not yet derived said information and was most graciously
obliged to his kind recitation. I did know,
however, dat dose guys were getting
ready to spring a big surprise on all of us
in 1992, because dey had signed dere
first major licensing deal. Dey are going
to be publishing a graphic adventure
based on Gateway, da Frederick Pohl
science fiction universe. Sose, da
software exec grabs his cellular phone,
yells at his creative director because dey
didn't get dat license and runs over
youse truly with da golf cart. I tell ya',
some mornings it don't pay to get out of
da water hazard.

History

A

History of Computer Gams

and, before anyone realized what had happened, Spacewar! was a fixture on college
mainframes all over the country.
In fact, Spacewar! had become such a fix ture by the mid-'60s that Nolan Bushnell,
the founding father of Atari Corporation, became addicted to the game while he was attending the University of Utah. By 1970,
Bushnell had built his own machine (using
185 integrated circuits) to connect to a
television set and perform one function.
That one function was to play Computer
Space, a coin-op variant of Spacewar! in
which a rocket fought flying saucers instead
of another rocket ship.
But Spacewar! wasn't the only predecessor of commercialized computer games to
appear on college mainframes. Some
anonymous hacker started playing around
with a Star Trek game in the '60s. No one
knows who hacked the first such game
(and he would probably be sued if anyone
did), but the games were in college computers nationwide by 1969.
The game itself was not very elaborate. It
had grid maps to allow starships to travel
from point to point, used ASCII letters to
identify the ships, provided shield information in numerical percentages and allowed
for both faster-than-light and sub-lightspeed
travel. The Klingons were fast and
numerous and the Romulans had cloaking
devices.

n a very real sense, it all began with a

model railroad set. Students at M.I.T.
were fascinated with all the ways various
switches could be integrated into their
master layout in order to enhance the
quality of operations. Later, when they finally got their chance to interface directly with
the TX-0 and DEC PDP-1 computers, their
previous work in binary (model railroad
switching) put them in good stead to make
maximum use of the computers.

ment. Each ship had an inventory of 31 torpedoes. So, as they flew across the computerized sector, a player could fire a dot
from his rocket's nose in the direction of
the other ship. If the dot managed to actually intersect the shape of the other ship, the
program ruled that the torpedo had successfully hit its target and the other ship "exploded." Actually, the other ship disappeared from the screen and was replaced
by a mad scramble of dots which represented the debris of the destroyed ship.

If the game sounds familiar, that is because almost every home computer system
had some type of Trek game available for it
by the mid-'70s and there was an IBM
game based on this program in the early
'80s. The IBM game was called Star Fleet I.
It was published by Interstel (originally Cygnus) and featured Krellans in place of Klingons and Zaldrons in place of Romulans.
The game was basically the same, though.

Steve "Slug" Russell was one of the members of M.I.T.'s "Hi-Tech Model Railroad
Club." A wizard at LISP programming, he
was working in the summer of 1961 at
Harvard's Littauer Statistical Laboratory
when he and some friends hit upon an idea
for bringing E.E. "Doc" Smith's pulp
science fiction novels (The Lensman
novels and Skylark) to the computer. In
1962, Steve developed the program on the
PDP-1 (the very console that rests in
Boston's Computer Museum at the present
day) at M.I.T.

Naturally, the community of hackers
could not be satisfied with the status-quo of
any program, no matter how entertaining or
functional. So, changes were inevitable.
One friend, Peter Samson, was not satisfied
with the random dot starmap which Russell
had originally placed in the game. He took
a celestial atlas and managed to program
our actual galaxy, all the way down to fifth
magnitude stars. Another student added a
gravity option and another added a hyperspace escape option, complete with a nifty
stress signature to show where the ship left
the system.

Also around the turn of the decade
(1970), a mathematician named John Horton Conway began to experiment with a
game wherein the player would design rules
for how cell structures could be put
together. Then, they would allow the program to run and watch all the permutations
that their life-forms went through, based on
following their rules sets. The game was
known as Life. It was a crude version of
what we now call cellular automata and
might have been the first "software toy" (in
the sense of a SimCity or SimEarth, where
playing is more important than winning).
The program received considerable attention in Scientific American and spawned
considerable discussion about the possibility of coding artificial life.

In Spacewar (as the program came to be
known), two "B" movie-style computerized
rocket ships (one shaped like a fat cigar
and the other as a long slender tube) could
fly across a computer-generated section of
space. Players could flick toggle switches in
order to make the ships change direction,
in much the same way coin-op and Atari
game machine players were later to control
the ships in Asteroids' zero-gravity environ-

Even Slug made some changes. Knowing
that real torpedoes do not have a 100% success rate, Slug decided to give the space
torpedoes a certain failure rate and to add
randomality to their respective trajectories
and time of detonation. His friends hated
the new version because they wanted the
same kind of dependability they were getting from their experiences at computer
programming. Slug changed things back

About the same time, a Stanford hacker
named Donald Woods was nosing about
the Xerox research computer and found a
prototype computer game. This game's parser used two-word commands to communicate with the game and featured a
Tolkienesque milieu. The name of the
game was Adventure and the name of its
designer was Will Crowther. Not only did
Adventure introduce a number of people to

B.C.G.W.

History

the genre of computer adventure games,
but it became a commercial game in its
own right. It not only became the packaged
game Colossal Cave, but it inspired some
classic adventure series.
One such inspirational event was when
Ken Williams brought home a terminal
which only printed hardcopy. Roberta Williams played the original Adventure on that
terminal, anxiously waiting for the
mainframe to print out the results of her
last command, and credits the playing experience as providing part of the inspiration
for her games. In addition, a group of M.I.T.
hackers (including Marc Blanc, Joel Berez
and others) began to create a text adventure called Zork which owed its original inspiration to Adventure and went its mentor
one better by creating a parser that could
understand complete sentences. Zork was
not actually available on a home computer
until 1981 when the hackers' new company, Infocom, released the game for the
Apple II.

By the mid-seventies, garners were popping up nearly anywhere there were computers. In 1975, boardgame publisher SPI
used their in-house business computer to
test the economic model for their upcoming
monster game, War in the East. War in
the East was not a computer game, but it
anticipated the origin of computer wargames on home computers by functioning
as something of a computer assistance program. Indeed, by 1979, SPI was advertising
for independent submissions of such computer assistance programs to help players
handle the prodigious bookkeeping necessary to play the company's massive and
complex boardgames.
At CalTech in 1976, Walter Bright started
using FORTRAN-10 to write the original Empire, a relatively simple wargame dealing
with conquering the surface territory of entire planets. Later, Mark Baldwin updated
the program (writing it in C) and added
some features like destroyer escorts and a
mouse-driven interface. Then it was published by Interstel as a best-selling game for
personal computers.
During the same period, Chris Crawford
was teaching physics at a small community
college in Nebraska. In 1976, he took some
maps from Avalon Hill's Panzer Leader,
some lead miniatures of armored vehicles
and some of his own FORTRAN code and
created a tank game for the school's IBM
1130. With typical Crawford humor, he
called the game Wargy and unveiled it at a
wargame convention during the winter
months. That program also spawned a commercial version, Avalon Hill's Tanktics — a
computer-assisted boardgame.

So, by 1979 and 1980, a revolution was

about to begin. Jon Freeman and
Automated Simulations (eventually to become Epyx) published Starship: Orion in
'79 and began work on The Temple of Apshai, a role-playing game in the tradition of
the Dungeons & Dragons pen-and-paper
game. The same year saw Richard Garriott
(soon to become Lord British) sell zip-lock
packages of Akalabeth, a predecessor to
the Ultima series and Scott Adams unleash
a torrent of text adventures on the market.
In fact, Akalabeth sold so well that Garriott
started writing the initial Ultima in the fall
of 1979, while still a freshman at the University of Texas.
Other companies, like now-defunct
Quality Software, produced games like
Beneath Apple Manor, a low-resolution
maze game in which players looked for a
golden apple hidden in the basement of an
old mansion, and Joel Billings, founder of
Strategic Simulations, Inc., tried to sell the
idea for a computer wargame to both
Avalon Hill and newly-founded Automated
Simulations.
Ironically, Billings was to found his own
company, publish Computer Bismarck and
become involved with Avalon Hill in a legal
dispute over how close Computer Bismarck actually was to Avalon Hill's own Bismarck boardgame. Nevertheless, Billings'
venture must have struck a nerve, since
Avalon Hill was publishing a full line of computer games by 1980.
Another interesting fact about Computer
Bismarck is that Joel borrowed a Northstar
computer from Amdahl Corporation (where
he worked) and expected that he and John
Lyon would program the game on the
Northstar. At that time, Trip Hawkins (who
was then a marketing executive at Apple)
convinced Joel and John that the Apple II
had better graphics potential and would
reach more customers than the Northstar
could. The irony is that Trip Hawkins is
now the chairman of the board of
Electronic Arts and Electronic Arts both
owns interest in and distributes the
products of SSI.

By 1980, when Billings and Lyon were
developing Computer Bismarck, Ken and
Roberta Williams laid the foundations for a
new genre, the graphic adventure game.
The first hi-res adventure was Mystery
House. Roberta was inspired by Agatha
Christie's Ten Little Indians (as well as the
game Clue) and decided to bring the experience to the computer. Ken had purchased a graphics tablet that allowed Roberta to draw images on the pad and save
them as graphic files. Then, after Roberta

drew the pictures, Ken figured out how to
pack seventy images per diskette (using a
draw-and-fill technique). The game sold well
enough that Ken and Roberta parlayed the
profits into three more successful games:
The Wizard and the Princess, Mission:
Asteroid and Time Zone.
While On-Line Systems (Sierra's original
name) was just beginning to take off,
another major player was establishing itself.
Attorney Doug Carlston had become
burned out on practicing law and was becoming enamored with his TRS-80 computer. He designed a space opera-style
game called Galactic Saga in which many
of the locations had African names
(Afrikaans, Swahili, etc.). There was a
group of merchants in the game known as
the "Broederbond," Afrikaans for "association of brothers." When Doug's brother
Gary started successfully hawking the
game from computer store to computer
store, they immediately thought of emphasizing the family aspect of the business.

That's when Broderbund got its start. However, since Doug had spent some time in
South Africa (in fact, was once ousted because he dared to teach at an integrated
school in Botswana); there was actually a
group known in South Africa as the
"broederbond" (who were not especially

History

good guys) and Doug and Gary felt that
using the Afrikaans spelling would have implied support for the repressive South
African regime, they adopted the variant
spelling "Broderbund," which is still in use.
By the summer of 1980, a familiar name
in wargaming circles had entered the
microcomputer arena. It was at the Origins
National Game Convention held in Chester,
Pennsylvania that the Avalon Hill Game
Company (publishers of boardgame-style
wargames since 1958) unveiled its initial
five titles: B-1 Nuclear Bomber, Midway
Campaign, North Atlantic Convoy
Raiders, Nukewar and Planet Miners.
Although Zork did not arrive on the Apple
II until 1981, its birth was more properly
part of the '70s. In the mid-1970s,
Infocom's eventual braintrust (Marc Blank,
Joel Berez and Dave Lebling) met at
M.I.T.'s Laboratory of Computer Science. Inspired by the original Adventure, Blank
and Lebling designed a mainframe adventure game.
It wasn't just any adventure game, however. The goal of the game's designers was
to allow the computer to understand more
typical English sentences than the simplistic and often infuriating two-word parser of
previous adventure games. So, Marc Blank
applied his artificial intelligence work and
created ZIL (Zork Interactive Language), a
"parser" which allowed the program to find
associations between sentences and, hence,
better understand what the player wanted
to do.
Students at M.I.T. responded so favorably
to the mainframe version of Zork that a
professor at the institute, Al Vezza, encouraged the group to form a corporation.
On June 22, 1979, the professor and his
star pupils (Berez, Blank and Lebling)
formed Infocom for the express purpose of
developing Zork for the personal computer
market. Its success was followed by
Starcross (a science fiction adventure
which came packaged in its own flying
saucer) and two Zork sequels (Zork II and
Zork Ill).
At first, the company seemed very
focused on producing quality interactive fiction and designers like Stu Galley, Steve
Meretzky and Brian Moriarty were added to
the cast. Games like Deadline, Planetfall,
Suspended and Witness followed (1983).
Yet, Blank, Berez and Vezza had a hidden
agenda that was already beginning to
foreshadow changes at the company. Their
goal was to move from games to productivity tools.
Actually, many people do not realize that
the founders of Infocom were not entirely interested in computer games. Most did not
even like personal computers. Instead, they
were business-oriented and hoped to "make
it big" like their friends and classmates who
founded Lotus Development. The idea of
producing a business-oriented database became an obsession, as did the later move
to luxury accommodations in Cambridge.
Vezza was determined to out-Lotus Lotus.

What this obsession did to Infocom in the
latter part of the '80s can be read later in
this article.

In 1981, another entertainment software
company appeared, almost by magic.
When Robert Woodhead was hired fresh
out of Cornell by a New York- and
Canadian-based concrete business, he was
not hired to write computer games. He was
hired to computerize the accounting system
of Fred Sirotek's construction company. He
proved himself to be such a hot programmer that he was able to convince Fred to
underwrite the publication of a fantasy roleplaying game to be designed by himself
and his friend, Andrew Greenberg. In 1981,
Sir-Tech Software (a pun on the Sirotek
family name, the medieval era that their
flagship products are based in and an abbreviation for technology) published
Wizardry: Proving Grounds of the Mad
Overlord. The publication was a tremendous success and the Wizardry series
remains, along with the Ultima series, one
of the benchmarks of computer role-playing. (Both series are ready to birth their
seventh installments at the time of this writing.)

A.C.G.W.
By the Winter of 1981, computer gaming
had become a full-fledged hobby when no
less than three magazines were launched in
order to provide information for the burgeoning industry: Softline magazine (associated with both Softalk magazine and
On-Line Systems—now Sierra—and partially
funded with Margot Tommervik's winnings
from an appearance on the Password
television show), Electronic Games and
Computer Entertainment (published by
Reese Publications out of New York City)
and Computer Gaming World (founded by
Russell Sipe and funded by a closely held
group of visionary shareholders). Eventually, Softline was to die along with its parent
magazine Softalk and Electronic Games
(which emphasized the action games associated with video cartridge systems as
much as it emphasized computer games)
was to suffer from the cartridge industry's
decline. Computer Gaming World is now
the world's oldest computer game
magazine and has managed to weather the
video game market crash (when Atari VCS
owners became bored with the capabilities
of their machines because all the games
had become the same) because Sipe took
a more conservative approach that combined a focus on the floppy disk-based computer game market with its more adult (and
stable) consumer base and cautious distribution aimed at strategic outlets. Steven Levy
(author of the best-selling Hackers) once
described CGW as a "staid publication" that
"eschews flash for substance." Indeed, it is
probably this serious approach to a hobby
that many would deem frivolous that accounts for Computer Gaming World's sur-

vival when more "colorful" publications
were dying.
Speaking of colorful, unbeknownst to
CGW staffers, a significant encounter took
place in the summer of 1982 that was to
cause considerable waves in the entertainment software industry. Neither "Wild Bill"
Stealey, a strategic planner for a major Baltimore corporation, nor Sid Meier, a computer systems analyst for the same firm,
knew of each other. However, during a
break in a company meeting at the (then)
MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas, the two
met over a coin-op game called "Red
Baron" (no relation to the game of the
same name from Sierra/Dynamix).
The coin-op game used wire-framed
graphics to depict World War I aircraft and
the player sat in a console cabinet as he
tried to shoot down the enemy planes with
his unlimited ammunition supply. As a
former fighter pilot, "Wild Bill" was challenging all comers.
Imagine Major Bill's (now, Lt. Col. Bill's)
chagrin when a mere programmer came
along and beat the fighter veteran's high
scores. Imagine his interest when Sid Meier,
said programmer, began to explain the
game's rudimentary programming and
showed how to predict the simple moves
used regularly by the game's enemy pilots.
Then Sid boldly said that he could design a
better game in one week on his home computer.
Anyone who knows Bill Stealey knows
that he is not the kind of person to let a
challenge go unanswered. So Bill said he
could sell the game if Sid could write it. As
it turns out, it took two months for Sid to
come up with a game he was happy with,
but by the time Bill completed his first
sales call, Hellcat Ace was a success. The
first store Bill stopped at purchased 50
copies. Becoming a full-Fledged publisher
was inevitable.
When the company started, toward the
end of 1982, it was not originally slated to
be named MicroProse. One idea was to call
it "Smugger's Software," in deference to Sid
as an oblique reference to a S.M.U.G. (Sid
Meier's Users Group). They finally agreed
on MicroProse with the intent of making a
double pun. The company was to publish
the work of micro-professionals and their
art was to be comparable to excellent prose.
In 1987, MicroProse agreed to change its
name to avoid legal difficulties with MicroPro International, the publisher of
Wordstar. They were given two years to
change the name and, just before the name
change was required, MicroPro identified
themselves more closely with their flagship
product, changing their name to Wordstar
International. By the turn of the decade,
MicroProse would claim two other labels:
Microplay and Medalist.
The 1982 encounter between Sid Meier
and Bill Stealey spawned MicroProse, but
the 1982 San Francisco Applefest was to
birth an even larger West Coast publisher.
Originally slated to be "Amazing Software,"

History

this company took on the more appropriate
appellation Electronic Arts. Electronic Arts
didn't even have a booth at the 1982 Applefest, but they put on the best "show." A
special bus took industry professionals to
the Stanford Court Hotel where "The Woz"
(then an EA board member) was holding
court as the main speaker, a rock band
was thundering forth with dance music and
coin-op arcade machines had been rigged
for unlimited play.
Russell Sipe, as both editor and publisher
of CGW, and Al and Margot Tommervik,
founders of Softalk and Softline, shared a
taxi to the party (talk about friendly competition) and originally thought that the social event was bigger than it was. It seems
the brain trust of computer game journalism had to circumvent a Nob Hill
rally/parade which was staged in preparation for the Cal-Stanford game to be held
on the following afternoon. Regardless, the
party created an image that was consistent
with the vision which was to drive
Electronic Arts: success, entertainment and
technology.
Trip Hawkins, former Director of Marketing for Apple's LISA, had a vision of gathering artists together and following a new
paradigm in developing entertainment
software. Originally, the paradigm seemed
more based on the recording industry (even
the album-jacketed products offered this
subliminal suggestion) where artists worked
on their own creative agendas, signed contracts for specific products and received
technological and marketing assistance
from the "studio." The vision was underscored in one of the company's earliest advertisements. The banner headline was "We
See Farther." The first line of copy was
"Software Artists?" In one image-making advertisement, Trip Hawkins molded his
vision around computer game designers as
performing artists.

The Electronic Arts mystique convinced
many of the early professionals: Dan Bunten (M.U.L.E. and Seven Cities of Gold),
Bill Budge (Pinball Construction Set), Jon
Freeman, Anne Westfall and Paul Reiche III
(Archon and Murder on the Zinderneuf)
and Chris Crawford (Patton vs. Rommel),
as well as many of the early developers
who became successful publishers in their
own rights (Dynamix, Interplay and Lucasfilm).
Later, Trip Hawkins unveiled the
metaphor that underscores the studio era
which has pervaded not only Electronic
Arts, but the entire entertainment software
industry to the present day. Hawkins
believed (and believes) that the entertainment software industry is "The New Hollywood." Even as film studios become

enamored with technology (special effects,
new sound techniques and film sizes), targets (positioning, packaging and distributing), talent (box office recognition), trends
(fads and topicality) and themes (story),
software publishers must be concerned with
hardware trends and capability, marketing,
artistic growth, consumer interest and
playability/credibility. The tensions between
art and commercial success are just as
prevalent in the computer game industry as
they are in film, recording or broadcast
media.
Today, the software publishers that are
having the most impact on the market are
those publishers that understand themselves as entertainment studios and perceive
the various talents they have assembled
around projects as part of a creative team.
As of this writing, "The New Hollywood" is
almost as literal as it is figurative in that
many talents in screenwriting, animation,
musical composition and even acting have
moved into the computer game industry.

Crash Go the Carts
In 1983, there were 25 million videogame
machines in the United States (mostly Atari
VCS). In early 1983, the coin-op arcade
market experienced an inexplicable slump.
In three short months, the "coin eaters"
went on a consumer-enforced diet that cut
the market by almost 90%. By 1984, even
the home videogame market was dead.
Before the crash, however, Atari made a
grant that was to have significant impact on
computer game history. At the height of
Atari's power, the company underwrote the
founding of Lucasfilm Games. Although
the grant was presented in 1982, it took
two years of development for the new company to bring its first two products, Rescue
on Fractalus and Ballblazer, to the point
of release.
Peter Langston was very well known in
the computer division of Lucasfilm as their
UNIX guru and he instantly became head of
the games group. He was the logical choice
to head the new games division, since he
believed in the future of computer entertain) ment, but he was not the kind of marketdriven executive that was likely to hurry the
products to market. In fact, the entire
division was more technologically oriented
than game-oriented because they saw all
the game work as being primarily research
and development. By 1984, however,
profitability had become a primary concern
and the company hired Steve Arnold, then
an Atari V.P., to help the company learn to
pull its own weight.
Unfortunately, just as Ballblazer and Rescue on Fractalus were nearing release as
cartridge games, Sam Tramiel purchased
Atari. Since Atari had planned to publish
the games, these events put Lucasfilm's
marketing plans on hold. Home cartridge
systems and cartridge games were in the
bargain bins for next to nothing, so there
did not seem to be any compelling reason
to publish the games.

Indeed, the computer game industry was
caught in the confusion of the cartridge
crash. As a smaller industry, though, it did
not have as far to fall as Colecovision, Intellivision and Atari VCS manufacturers
and publishers. The major disk-based
software publishers managed to survive,
but many smaller players who simply published computer versions of cartridge
games disappeared.
Lucasfilm Games managed to translate
Ballblazer and Rescue on Fractalus to the
Atari 400/800 for 1985 release from Epyx.
This gave programmers like David Fox the
time to accomplish some of the most intricate finishing touches ever in a computer
game. He videotaped transition screens
from Fractalus in order to correct a flicker
he had detected in the game by viewing it
frame-by-frame.
Today, Lucasfilm Games is one of the
legacies of the early era of home cartridge
games. In 1984, a group of ex-cartridge
designers decided to form another, Accolade. Bob Whitehead and Alan Miller
were unhappy with the direction Activision
had been going since it went public on
June 14, 1983. Alan and Bob were quickly
tiring of the corporate games and decided
to form their own company, a company
founded by programmers for programmers.

When the company was officially formed
in December of 1984, Al Miller wanted to
make sure that the name of the new company would come before Activision whenever the two companies were listed in alphabetical order. So he searched the dictionary to find a name which would precede Activision. They became enamored with Accolade because the idea of applause and
approval appealed to their artistic natures.
The truth was, neither Whitehead nor Miller
wanted to be president of the company. So
they began a search for a suitable president
with high-tech experience.
They initially offered the presidency to
Tom Lopez, an Activision veteran who eventually founded the Microsoft CD-ROM
division and, after he declined the position,
to Allen Epstein, an ex-Activision
employee who was working in venture capital. Epstein is the current president and
CEO, but he originally passed on taking the
position, as well. So Accolade's first president came from one of Nolan Bushnell's
Catalyst companies.
Tom Frisina stepped directly from his
responsibilities at a company developing
robots for consumers to the management
of Accolade's business affairs. It seemed
like a natural for a robotics president to run
a company founded by the author of
Activision's Robot Tank cartridge, but differences in management style between the
conservative founders of the company and
an executive linked with Bushnell's "U.S.
Government" approach to problem-solving

History

throw money at the problem—seemed inevitable.
Actual operations began in February of
1985 with the C-64 as the company's target
machine. The original strategy was to form
an internal product development team,
based on the work of Bob, Al and Mike
Lorenzen (another Activision veteran who
decided to leave the corporate rat race).
Miller decided to do Law of the West, a
point-of-view horse opera in which the
player was the lawman described in the
title; Whitehead elected to program
Hardball, the action-oriented baseball game
that became a mega-hit and eventually became a movie star (the game was the first
image seen in The Princess Bride); and
Lorenzen determined to develop Psi-5 Trading Company, a space trading game.
Frisina did not believe that internal
development alone could generate the kind
of revenue a new, fledgling company would
need to survive, however. So, he began a
search for outside developers. Through Sydney Development Company, a Canadian
developer of mainframe products, he not
only discovered two game designers based
in Ottawa, Rick Banks and Michael Bate,
but he was also introduced to an
18-year-old prodigy (no relation to IBM or Sears)
from British Columbia named Don Mattrick.
Banks and Bate had programmed B.C.'s
Quest for Tires for another company and
wanted to do their own titles. As Artech, a
development company sub-contracted to
Accolade, they produced Dambusters,
Fight Night and Desert Fox during
Accolade's first year. The first two did well,
but Desert Fox was not released until the
company formed the Vantage bargain line
of software during a period of retail shelf
wars. Mattrick was initially hired to program
the Apple conversions of Dambusters and
Fight Night.
Interestingly enough, both Artech and
Mattrick's company Distinctive Software
have gone on to exclusive relationships
with other publishers. Artech develops solely for Three-Sixty Pacific and Distinctive
Software was recently purchased by
Electronic Arts, with Mattrick becoming
EA's youngest vice-president. Before the
out-of-house developers left, however, each
was to contribute significant hits to
Accolade's line: Artech's Ace of Aces and
Distinctive's Test Drive. The latter was
conceived after Mattrick purchased his first
Lotus Esprit and decided that "everyone"
would like to drive a hot car.
In 1985, Accolade had revenue totaling
$1.5 million, but this expanded to $5 million in 1986 as hits like Ace of Aces, Mean
18 and Test Drive pointed the way to a successful future. 1985 also brought a new
player on the scene from the other side of
the arcade crash, the coin-op connection.
Data East had been functioning as a coinop company since 1979. In 1985, the company formed its consumer division to convert the coin-op hits into cartridge and
home-computer games.
"Cartridge games?" the weary reader

asks. "I thought they were dead in 1984."
Conventional wisdom certainly would have
said as much, but conventional wisdom is
rarely true wisdom. When Nintendo
showed up on the scene at the January
CES in 1985, Roger Buoy of Mindscape is
reputed to have said, "Hasn't anyone told
them that the videogame industry is dead?"
Nevertheless, Nintendo was to prove that a
gigantic phoenix can rise from industrial
ashes if it controls the vertical (production)
and the horizontal (marketing). So Data
East was one of the early licensees to see
the opportunity in video games and exploit
that opportunity. The company hedged
their bet, however, with floppy-based
products.

Infocomplications
1986 also brought the red ink of
Cornerstone, the only Infocom product
without a plot. Cornerstone was a database
that rocked the corporate structure of Infocom rather than bringing the desired
stability. Instead, it brought trouble.
Of course, it didn't look like trouble, at
first. It looked (as it does in many corporate
acquisitions) like a "White Knight" riding to
the rescue. James Levy, (then) CEO of
(then) Activision, was a true fan of Infocom games. He perceived the corporate
weakness brought about by Cornerstone as
an opportunity to acquire a software jewel
and began putting the deal in motion that
was finalized on Feb. 19, 1986.
Activision purchased Infocom for $7.5 million (although much of the settlement price
was in Activision common stock and may
have had a different value by the final payment on June 13, 1986). This meant that
Marc Blanc lost his bet with Cornerstone coauthor Brian "Spike" Berkowitz that Infocom stock would top $20.00 per share by
'87 or Blanc would buy Spike dinner in
Paris. Infocom sold for much less than $20
per share and the last CGW heard, the bet
had still not been paid off and Blanc was
trying to change the venue to Tokyo.
The acquisition was not received well at Infocom. The company newsletter, once
known as the New Zork Times but soon to
be known as The Status Line, joked about
graphics in interactive fiction stories and better parsers in Little Computer People (one
of Activision's big hits of the era), but
printed one phrase that, in retrospect, offers
a melancholic ring: "We'll still be the Infocom you know and love." At first, it
looked like this might be true. From 1985's
low of three interactive fiction titles, 1986
saw five new titles.
The humor at Infocom never really
stopped until the latter days. When the
New York Times complained about their
newsletter's original name (New Zork
Times), they ran a contest to rename the
publication and first prize was a subscription to the New York Times. Their in-house
(great underground?) paper InfoDope
joked that Levy wanted them to do simulations, cynically suggesting titles like Tug-

boat Simulator and Empire State Elevator
Operator. Less-than-kind remarks accused
Activision superstar Steve Cartwright (designer of Alien and Ghostbusters) of being
able to turn out action games in an afternoon.
Yet harmless jokes about Levy turned to
cynical anger at Levy's successor, Bruce
Davis. Insiders claim Activision's new CEO
had been against the Infocom buy-out from
the start and that he immediately raised the
ante on some anticipated losses that were
to have been indemnified by Infocom
shareholders from $300,000 to $900,000
with no accounting. The shareholders filed
a preemptive suit and managed to stave off
the "required" payment.
Morale began to deteriorate, with Infocom
personnel feeling like Davis was foisting off
all the programs which should have been
still-born in development onto Infocom.
They detested lnfocomics, the Tom
Snyder Productions attempt to use the
computer as an interactive comic book (the
idea was to produce $12 products in a continuing series that would appeal to the comics crowd), never believing in the concept
but noting that all the development costs
were being charged against their budget. A
brutal (underground) memo urged Infocommies to join the "Bruce Youth" movement,
casting the CEO in a classic bad guy role
as he requested Infocom personnel to "turn
in" their fellow employees whenever said Infocommies would murmur "a discouraging
word."
Activision gradually dismantled Infocom.
First, sales and manufacturing were absorbed. This seemed logical, but by the
time the great lnfocomics experiment failed
in 1988, public relations and customer support were also absorbed. In 1989, development was moved to the West Coast, but
those who built the Great Underground Empire elected not to move or were not invited
to do so. As Arthur, BattleTech, Journey
and Shogun reached the market, Infocom
was no longer a distinctive publisher, it was
only a label.
At approximately the same time as Infocom was fading into the woodwork,
Spectrum HoloByte was ready to spring
upon an unsuspecting Sphere. That is, the
existing company called Spectrum HoloByte merged with Nexa Corporation to
create Sphere. The latter, in turn, was purchased by a division of Robert Maxwell's
multi-national publishing empire. Sphere's
publication of Tetris not only captured the
imagination of the ordinary computer consumer, but ensnared the attention of the
general media, as well.

Commitment to the Amiga?
By the mid-1980s, Electronic Arts had already staked out territory as one of the
most prolific domestic publishers of Commodore Amiga software. As Vice-President
Bing Gordon once observed, the company
"likes neat stuff" and can be "seduced by

History

stage for future acquisitions such as that of
action game publisher Mindscape (approved by both boards of directors in
March of 1990).
The Japanese "invaded" with the establishment of Koei Corporation's U.S. operations and eleven Japanese software companies attempted a now-aborted joint venture with Broderbund. Perhaps even bigger
news was the initial public offering of Sierra stock in August of 1988, netting close to
$10 million.

new hardware." EA called their Amiga line
a "Commitment to the Amiga."
Early on, Electronic Arts even bundled a
cute little digitized program called Kaleidoscope and a slide show, depicting their
product line, with the Amiga systems disks
for the Amiga 1000. The company originally envisioned the Amiga as a Macintosh
killer. The reason was simple. Amigas were
available at a much more affordable price
than the steep entry price for Macs. As it
worked out, however, Macs ended up in
businesses while Amigas ended up in
homes and graphics houses.
As late as June of 1987, Bing Gordon was
touting EA's goal as the publication of at
least one Amiga product per month and
"...hoping it will be the premier home computer." Before such an event could occur,
however, the price wars on MS-DOS
machines drove the IBM compatible to its
current apex as the dominant home computer.

Years of Movement and
Litigation
1981 was also a year of significant corporate and legal events. Broderbund was
particularly active on these fronts. First, the
company announced, then withdrew their initial public offering after observing
Activision's weak profits and stock performance. In addition, Origin moved from
Electronic Arts Distribution to Broderbund as their distributor. At the same time,
Broderbund settled a "look and feel" suit
with Kyocera Unison over similarities between the former's Print Shop and the
latter's PrintMaster when Kyocera made a
substantial payment to Broderbund.
Data East won a U.S. District Court judgment against Epyx over similarities between the former's Karate Champ game
and the latter's World Karate Championship. The 1987 ruling was overturned by an
appeals court on November 30, 1988. SSI
filed a breach of contract suit against the
Questron development team for producing
Legacy of the Ancients for Electronic

Arts prior to fulfilling their agreement to
produce Questron 11 for SSI. This dispute
was settled out of court.
At the same time as the previous litigations were underway, MicroProse was settling their famous name imbroglio with
MicroPro International and appealing the
placement of F-15 Strike Eagle, Gunship
and Silent Service on (then) West
Germany's Youth Dangerous Publications
List. After a vigorous appeal, the West German National Examination Board allowed
the products to be sold and modified their
initial finding that the products were
"...morally corruptive and coarsening for
the young user."
1988 was also an important year of movement in the computer game industry. Interplay and Lucasfilm left the fold as EA
developers in order to become "Affiliated
Publishers" at Activision. Dynamix became predominantly an Activision
developer and later (actually in 1989), became an affiliated publisher, as well. After
then vice-president of Activision Dick
Lehrberg had added New World Computing and Microillusions to a seeming amazing line-up of affiliates, the company inexplicably softened on the idea and eventually
lost all of them. It was the first of many
mind changes by Activision management.
They changed their minds on Hypercard
products, Apple IIGS products and even
their own name (changing the name to
Mediagenic in order to capture some hightech sizzle among investors who remembered Activision all too well from the days
of the cartridge crash).
Origin announced that it had adopted a
brand new logo and corporate strategy by
the latter portion of the summer. By June
of 1988, EA was back on track by signing
Strategic Simulations, Inc. as their
newest "Affiliated Label." Indeed, it was not
to be long (1989) before Lucasfilm elected
to return to EA Distribution and New
World was to join the EA team for the first
time. Another EA affiliate, Software Toolworks, began a round of expansions by acquiring Intellicreations and setting the

In 1989, Origin announced that it had
"graduated" from Broderbund at Summer
CES and Broderbund simultaneously announced an agreement with Distinctive
Software (now wholly owned by
Electronic Arts) to publish entertainment
products which would enhance their line.
1989 was also the year that Electronic
Arts shook the entertainment software
world by simultaneously announcing its initial public offering and determination to
develop video game software. Perhaps the
biggest story of 1989, however, was the
massive layoff of more than half the work
force of Epyx that preceded by a matter of
weeks the Chapter 11 bankruptcy that signalled the end of the Epyx era. (Epyx still
develops a minimal number of titles for the
Atari Lynx and recently released an IBM
version of California Games II.)

March of 1990 was an incredibly eventful
month for entertainment software companies. In addition to the Mindscape acquisition (already mentioned), Sierra purchased Dynamix on March 27th and NEC
purchased a minority stake in
Cinemaware on the 14th of the same
month. Such business arrangements underscored the cash-hungry nature of an industry in consolidation phase.
The increased amount of litigation continued to mount in the entertainment
software industry. Microsoft and designer
Bruce Artwick both filed suit against SubLogic over the technology used in Flight
Simulator while Beyond Software filed
a $20 million dollar libel suit against
Cinemaware over alleged delays and contractual breaches in TV Sports: Baseball.

1991 and Beyond
There are several worthy computer game
publishers who, for one reason or another,
did not fit into the limited scheme used to
develop this history. For those omissions,
we apologize, but suggest that we had to
keep something in reserve for that inevitable 20th Anniversary Issue when we
present Part II of The History of Computer
Games.

Review

r several months now,

Wing Commander has
reigned as the number-one
game, as rated by this magazine's
readers. Clearly, there must be a
lot "right" with this game. Even
though Wing Commander is, at
by Alan Emrich
least at its most basic level, something of a glorified arcade game,
were evolving to improve gameplay and the charTITLES:
Wing Commander II: Vengeance of the Kilrathi
there is also something that sets
acters were evolving and expanding in number
and Wing Commander II Speech Accessory Pack
it apart. Perhaps it is the inclusion
toward what would eventually become...
SYSTEM:
IBM (640k, 12MHz minimum)
of a believable, evolving
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
$79.95 + $19.95 for the Speech Pack
storyline, full of sympathetic comWing Commander II
DESIGNER:
Chris Roberts
rade characters and vain, vile vilPUBLISHER:
Origin Systems
Subtitled "Vengeance of the Kilrathi," the story
Austin, TX
lains that bring a certain je ne
takes place ten years after "The Tiger's Claw Incisais pas. Perhaps it is simply the
dent." Ten years ago, while the Tiger's Claw was
techno-rush of being able to use all of the horsepower one has
launching an attack on the Kilrathi starbase at K'Tithrak Mang, it
paid for in that souped-up IBM and showing it off to friends. Cerwas destroyed by a new Kilrathi secret weapon: stealth fighters.
tainly, it is a combination of all these attributes and more which
While our hero was dealing with this new threat, the Tiger's Claw
landed Wing Commander at CGWs Game Ratings pinnacle.
was ambushed and destroyed. Our intrepid protagonist was acWhat could Origin possibly do for an encore?
cused of being a traitor who made possible its destruction. Since
his flight disk had disappeared, no evidence of the stealth
The Secret Missions
fighters exists and, consequently, no one believes our hero
Even the folks at Origin must have been surprised at the
(either about his innocence or about the Kilrathi stealth fighters).
runaway success of Wing Commander. This must have been unSince treason could not be proved, a hostile Admiral Tolwyn
derscored with the equally successful Secret Missions supplethrows what's left of the book at our hero, flaying him with
ments to the game. Somewhere between the first and second
negligence charges, busting him to captain and packing him off
supplement, it became clear that the game's intelligence routines
to the armpit of space (a system called Gwynedd), and assigning
him to the most boring duty imaginable, service in the Security
Forces. Fortunately for our hero, fate takes a hand and brings Kilrathi patrol ships to Gwynedd, along with the Terran carrier Concordia. Before long, he is temporarily assigned to the carrier and
must return to exhilarating hazardous duty once again.

Reviewing the World of Wing Commander II

Plot Full of Plots
The storyline element of Wing Commander II is mesmerizing.
With elements of new camaraderie, friction, dissension, conspiracy and suspense, an excellent mix of human angst is
provided. Interestingly, players are allowed to look into the
throne room (and the power behind it) of Kilrath. The repartee
between the Kilrathi Emperor and the Prince Regent (his
grandson) says much about the Empire. One gets a glimpse of
Imperial politics and sees the Empire rife with opportunity for the
ambitious. (No doubt the beginnings of this subplot will be extended in the Wing Commander II: The Special Operations expansion disks being planned.)
Worse yet, there is a traitor aboard the Concordia and the crew
is very edgy. Naturally, suspicion lands squarely on the
shoulders of our intrepid pilot, who is, of course, completely innocent. This reviewer was intrigued at the havoc caused by the
Concordia's saboteur, and was relieved to find out who it was
toward the conclusion of the game. While who the traitor was
seemed to make sense, why that person turned on the Confederation in the first place seemed weak. It can be conceded
that, while the traitor's motive does stand up, it is thin — particularly when compared to all of the other potential traitors on
board and their possible unique motivations. At least one gains
some satisfaction in how the traitor is ultimately dealt with.
Conspiracies aside, there are plenty of new friends to meet and
some relaxing social interaction to fill in those lonely hours between missions. The classic "bar" transition scene has been completely expunged and characters "hang out" in several different
locales: the Rec Room, Flight Deck and Crew Quarters (where

Review

because having a tiger by the tail now means getting one's face
shot off!

Brains and Good Looks
One feature touted in the Wing Commander II packaging is
"dynamic intelligence." This means that as the player flies better,
so do the enemy. In other words, ace Wing Commander
veterans who have built a better mousetrap with their skills and
tactics will find the Kilrathi to be smarter mice (er, cats). Perhaps, the best way to put this is on a personal, statistical basis.
In the 31 missions it took this reviewer to complete the campaign, about half were "holed in one" (successful the first time
they were attempted), a third required one or two replayings (the
new asteroid belts seems a bit more dense, and not one
minefield was encountered!), while the remainder required
several replayings (and one mission took this reviewer eleven
tries). The challenge of the mission scenarios has increased, as
has the demand made on a player to innovate new tactics to use
and combat new weapons. All in all, Wing Commander II's new
"brains" will provide a stimulating challenge to players.
crew members gather to play poker). Some crew members still
look askance at our beleaguered hero, while others openly accuse him of treacherously allowing the Tiger's Claw to be
destroyed. Still, many old friends are more understanding and a
love interest even evolves(!). In summary, the storyline has
enough of the right elements (an examination of the human condition plus some philosophical perspective on the complexities of
good and evil via characterizations that ring true-to-life) to begin
bridging the chasm from "genre pulp fiction" to something that
could be more accurately regarded as "art."

What's New, Pussycats?
Since Wing Commander II takes place ten years after "the incident," much has changed on the technology front. The "new, experimental prototype" Rapier fighters from the original Wing
Commander are now the "old standbys" and still make an appearance in the game. Every other ship is completely new. For
the Terran player, the Ferret patrol fighter is where one starts,
but before the 31 missions required to reach the campaign's end
are completed, the Epee light attack fighter, Sabre heavy attack
fighter and Broadsword heavy bomber will all be subject to
player shakedowns.
The greatest change over the past ten years has been the advent of "phase shields," which render capital ships invulnerable
to gun and cannon fire. Now, players must launch special torpedos to finish enemy behemoths off. With a slow lock-on time,
launching a torpedo in combat with flak bursting all around and
enemy fighters on one's tail is much like the famous "flight
through the trench" scene at the end of Star Wars. It can get
quite "hairy," indeed.
Other techno-changes include the invention of the particle cannon (which combines the long range of the laser cannon with the
hitting power of neutron guns), turrets (which players jump into
by hitting the F1-F4 view keys) armed with swivel-mounted twin
neutron rapid-fire guns and tractor beams (which are occasionally useful for hauling in an ejected wingman or data pod). The big
defensive tech advance is the advent of chaff pods to attract
enemy missiles away from one's ship. Using them properly will
require some practice in timing, but the lesson is well worth learning.
Of course, the Kilrathi haven't been idle either. Among their
four new fighter types are two with turrets. Players will have to
develop a whole new school of tactics to deal with these kitties,

One other important note, here. Should a player inadvertently
hit a wingman in combat, they'll ask you to be more careful (and
not always politely). Hit them repeatedly, and, suddenly, our hero
confirms everyone's suspicions that he is the traitor. This means
the computer will hurl a never-ending stream of Terran fighters
until the protagonist is transformed into space dust. No more
playing space cowboy, pilgrim!
Not only are the "brains" of the game new, but so is the "look."
Aside from varying the transition scenes to different settings (including debriefings from the cockpit while in flight), characters
communicate from more cinematic angles. Sure, some of the motion is still a little jerky while the characters are communicating
(depending on the computer's speed; at 60 Mhz, though, it is as
smooth as glass), but the different "camera" angles at which
they are rendered is a very noticeable and pleasant addition.
Uniforms, facial expressions and background scenery have all
been upgraded, giving the graphic background more of the
"look" required to help one suspend his disbelief and become
fully immersed in the story.

Speech! Speech!
Wing Commander II isn't exactly to computer games what The
Jazz Singer was to the movies (the first "talkie"), but it will cer-

Review

was destroyed ten years ago, but the substitute of a cheaper-looking play manual and Joan's Fighting Spacecraft supplement
really stand out as cheap when included in such a classy package. The aforementioned plot weakness to the traitor's motive
notwithstanding, this reviewer certainly hoped to hear more
about all the survivors of the Claw. The one quick mention of
the fate of Maniac was simply not enough.
Players will also be disappointed in the lack of fanfare. Our
hero is "busted," remember, so there is no glory of winning
medals, no hope for promotion from the hostile Admiral, no
chalkboard where one can revel in the victory total (that number
is only shown when the game is actually saved). Sic transit
gloria. Finally, it seems that every Kilrathi "fighter jock" wears an
eyepatch. Either this should be explained somewhere, or more
than one "generic fighter pilot" should be in the graphics package.

The Next Encore?

tainly make a big splash in the market for more voice features
as the standard for a "state-of-the-art" computer game. The
digitized voices available in the Speech Accessory Pack are only
for the Sound Blaster (or 100% compatible) cards, so Roland and
AdLib owners won't enjoy the "freedom of speech" that Wing
Commander II provides.
As far as speech goes, there are two dramatic transition scenes
that are fully speech-supported. The first is the opening of the
storyline (a long sequence of three major scenes and the feature
of the game's popular demo disk), and the other comes after the
12th mission of the game. All the other elements of speech are
the communications responses one receives while in flight. Jazz
will coo, "You got it, Maestro." Spirit will exclaim, "Hei, Captain!"
Even Doomsday will moan out, "We're in trouble now!" These
voice responses become amusing when listening to the taunts of
the Kilrathi pilots, and they are useful when a wingman notifies
the player of trouble. Whether it's a request for the player's assistance, notification of ejecting or an early departure for home, it
really helps to hear a wingman's pleas rather than risk missing
them as something to be read on the HUD during the heat of battle.

Getting Technical
Wing Commander II is a big program. Really big. Starting with
requiring a minimum of 583K of free RAM (more for those using
EGA-level graphics) just to get the game to run, one must add
another half a meg of expanded memory to get in all the "optional" goodies like the speech buffer (64K), VCR replay buffer
(64K), cockpit animations, etc. Of course, the copious "free
space" on one's hard disk is the next target. Without the speech
module and keeping all the files compressed, there goes 10MB
of disk space. Uncompress the files to save time during game
play, and there goes 15MB of disk space. The voice module?
Add another 6MB of disk space! Thus, when "maxxed out," say
good-bye to about 21MB of the hard drive! No wonder a special
blue sheet is included in the game box with a note from Robert
Garriott beseeching players to invest in CD-ROM!

Hairline Fractures
For what is clearly an "A" product, Origin has opted to cut
some odd corners on the game's production. Okay, so there is
no nifty Wing Commander II hat offer.... There is also no Claw
Marks magazine inside, either. That makes sense since that ship

Certainly, all the advances in product quality from Wing Commander to Wing Commander ll are not technical leaps. Much of
the improvement came from Origin listening to consumer
demands. A more engrossing storyline, better plot segues, more
diverse ship types, communication hot-keys, etc. are all some
things the legions of avid Wing Commander fans have been expressing their desire for. Please indulge this Wing Commander
fan while he offers two suggestions for what must inevitably become Wing Commander III: The Next Iteration.
A player's success or failure in battle has always determined
the storyline's overall development. This is the heart of the Wing
Commander game system, but could it be suggested that a
player's interpersonal successes also have a bearing on the plot
line? For example, suppose that our hero was speaking to
another character but was presented a few options for his
response (i.e., snub this person, play along or politely decline
their offer)? Standard adventure game stuff, to be sure, but it
would add a whole new dimension to the Wing Commander
universe! What kind of interpersonal conflicts might arise? How
would our hero find a path through a moral, rather than a
military dilemma? What loves and betrayals might ensue? This
won't be an easy task for Origin's excellent script writers, but
they certainly seem able to overcome any challenges considering
the Worlds of Ultima line they produce.
While the previous suggestion might bring a touch of adventure

Review

gaming to Wing Commander, this suggestion will have some appeal to the strategy-minded. Since our hero was clearly in a command position, perhaps a scene might precede each mission
briefing in which the player must decide on what missions are to
be flown and by whom. Discovering pilot personalities that
"click," breaking in green recruits, staffing what are clearly "suicide" missions, etc. would all be weighed in the balance. In other
words, the player would have a hand in planning mission rosters.
Now, certainly, the player will need to be prompted with plenty
of advice as to what is going on in a particular sector of the system in which the crew is currently located, thus affording one the
knowledge of what is "out there" that needs to be dealt with (and
keeping the overall game within the defined parameters of the
script). Perhaps something as simple as matching a list of "Missions Required" to a "Pilots Available Roster" would do the trick
via a simple point-and-click interface. This might affect "offscreen" characters' fatigue levels and attrition as the status of previous missions gets reported back at the next such planning session. "Green" characters' skills might increase (although their
chance of survival and/or success would be rather low), veteran
pilots might need R&R or be killed. Suddenly, the efforts of the
entire crew (vis a vis a player's "use" of them by their assignment orders) can also determine the outcome of the war effort.

Champagne All Around
When the dust settles at the end of the Enigma Sector Campaign (assuming the player wins), there is champagne all
around. So it should be at Origin. In a game that took many,
many person-years to produce, the results are clearly excellent.
By constantly redefining the cutting edge, producers of high-end
products like Wing Commander II will continue to garner the
praise and support of the computer gaming community (and
deservedly so). In the end, however, no matter how much gee
whiz is packed into a box, the test of a game is in how it is as a
game. Until Origin surpasses it with Wing Commander III, Wing
Commander ll will be flying at the front of the formation (of
course, for a hundred bucks, one shouldn't expect any less), for
as a game, it flies right and plays not only on one's computer,
but also on one's emotions.

Games of the Year

Computer Gaming World's 1991
capacity for multiple players to gather
around the same computer and experience
invigorating competition. Full Metal Planet
presents a level of game play and graphic
presentation worthy of a respected nominee.
Strategic Studies Group has long held
a considerable amount of mindshare in the
wargamer community. In Warlords, a fantasy-based wargame, the designers took
the risk of breaking out of the historical
boundaries to which they had previously
been limited. As a result, they have created
a game which not only appeals to a
broader audience, but still teaches some of
the basic lessons of warfare. Microplay's
Command HQ is another game which
breaks out of previously imposed limits.
Dan Bunten uses the modem to break out
of the multiple players around a single console model of computer wargaming
without losing the element of human intelligence such multiple player gaming
provides. Command HQ deserves commendation for its contribution to the re-socializing of computer wargames.

And the winner is, actually the winners are:

S

ince 1985, Computer Gaming
World has been honoring the most
outstanding entertainment software
with its prestigious "Game of the Year"
awards. In general, CGW has awarded the
best game in each category, special awards
for artistic achievement and an overall
"Game of the Year." Past winners in the
overall category include: Kampfgruppe
(1985), Ultima IV (1986), Earl Weaver
Baseball (1987), Empire (1988), SimCity
(1989) and Railroad Tycoon (1990).
A major distinction between CGWs award
year and other industry awards is the fact
that they are based on the "software year"
from one Summer Consumer Electronics
Show (where the traditionally strong
Christmas releases are unveiled) to another
SCES. In this way, the awards represent a
full cycle of the industry's "production
year." Another distinction is the fact that
the awards are not strictly the total of
reader votes, industry votes or editorial
votes. The editorial staff examines the
releases in each category and weighs
reader ratings, artistic achievement and industry impact in making the final decision.
So, as part of Computer Gaming World's
10th Anniversary Celebration, we welcome
you, the readers, to the 1991 CGW Game
of the Year Awards.

Wargame of the Year
Though 1992 may signal something of a
resurrection in the traditional wargame
genre, 1991 required military strategy
games to offer something a little bit different. Nominees for 1991 Wargame of the
Year follow. In BattleTech: The Crescent
Hawk's Revenge, Infocom moved farther
from the pure role-playing of its initial
BattleTech release and closer to the
game's roots in miniatures wargaming in
this real-time game of tactical combat. The
VGA graphics, variety of scenarios, smoothflowing action and attention to the details of
the BattleTech universe make this a worthy
contender. Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s
Interceptor: Renegade Legion is a game
of tactical space combat which shows that
satisfying game play can make a product
successful whether it has heavy-duty
"chrome" in terms of graphics and sound
or not. The release of Interceptor spawned
enough impromptu ship design competitions and ship-to-ship challenges that we
believe it deserves serious consideration for
the award. Data East released Full Metal
Planet as part of a strategic partnership
with a French software firm. This exceptional translation of a French boardgame featuring tactical combat and economic management on an alien planetary surface is
noteworthy because of impressively detailed
graphics and sound effects, as well as the

Warlords from Strategic Studies Group
(Steve Fawkner, Roger Keating, Stephen
Hart and Gregor Whiley, designers) and
Command HQ from Microplay (Dan Bunten, designer). Both games received consis-

amesofthYrAwGd

Games of the Year

tently high ratings from the readers over
the award year and co-winners seem particularly appropriate in a year in which the
computer wargame genre seems to be winning back some of its audience.

Strategy Game of the Year
Strategy games also seemed to need an
innovative hook in order to garner the attention of gamers during the award year.
Nominees for 1991's Strategy Game of the
Year run the gamut from abstract strategy
to political and economic strategy.
Nominees for 1991 Strategy Game of the
Year follow. Virgin Mastertronic introduced Spot, a challenging and addictive
game building off play mechanics similar to
Reversi and Go. In its IBM incarnation,
Spot is not only colorful and customizable,
but features challenging artificial opponents, as well. Koei introduced a new version of its all-time most popular game
(Nobunaga's Ambition). Nobunaga's Ambition II not only features graphic enhancements, but also an improved interface and
the most ruthless computer opponents yet.
In Powermonger, Electronic Arts' realtime strategy game from the developers of
Populous (Bullfrog), players not only experienced more lavish graphics and an enlarged game world, but were forced to
make economic decisions affecting
human/natural resources, political decisions
with regard to diplomatic posture toward
other tribes and military decisions regarding
when and where to attack. Interplay
Productions pulled several strategy games
together when they released Lexicross,
Peter Oliphant's futuristic "television" game
show parody. Lexicross blends elements of
Battleship, Concentration and Wheel of
Fortune into a clever entertainment package. Strategic Simulations, Inc. released
Medieval Lords at the end of the software
cycle. The game uses archaic graphics and
a limited interface, but is worthy of the
nomination because it is, quite simply, a
"player's game." It is addictive, educational
and entertaining.
And the winner is:
Powermonger from Electronic Arts
(Peter Molyneux, Gary Carr, Sean Cooper,
Glenn Corpes, Kevin Donkin, Les Edgar,
Simon Hunter and Andy Tidy, designers).
Powermonger is an exciting example of
how a successful concept can evolve into

an even richer game. It both rates highest,
among the nominees, with our readers and
represents a phenomenal achievement in
programming a "world" system.

Simulation of the Year
Where 1990's top nominees in this
category were land-based vehicle simulations, 1991's nominees reflect the roots of
the simulation genre, flight simulators. F-29
Retaliator from Ocean proves that it is possible to have a smooth-flowing frame rate,
solid flight model in terms of both damage
and handling characteristics and realistic
buildings to fly around, as opposed to the
pyramids and rectangles of many polygonfilled simulations. Add to these strengths
the capacity to fly head-on in
modem-to-modem competition and one should have
an idea of the quality engineered into this
"Advanced Tactical Fighter" simulation.
Microprose's Silent Service 2 is a followup on an all-time classic. Opinions on the
game from CGW readers were as varied as
the machines they played the game on, but
the addition of new submarine types, use of
digitized target images, provision for combat patrols (as well as a campaign game)
and introduction of new scenarios make
Silent Service 2 an outstanding product.
Perhaps the most attention in the simulation category was focused on the World
War I air combat simulations. Of these, two
titles emerged as outstanding products,
Microprose's Knights of the Sky (which
features modem-to-modem play and incredible action from the allied perspective)
and Sierra/Dynamix's Red Baron (which
features advanced graphics and the ability
to fly a campaign from either side of the
trenches). Both games are worthy products
and both games have their adherents. One
CGW reviewer likes Knights of the Sky better and CGW's contributing editor on wargames uses Red Baron as his current
benchmark for flight simulators. Readers
who respond to CGWs on-going poll show
a definite preference toward Red Baron.
So, without further ado, the winner of
1991's Simulation of the Year is:
Red Baron from Sierra/Dynamix
(Damon Slye, designer). Red Baron stakes
out new ground in advanced graphic techniques, flight dynamics, campaign versatility
and entertainment value. Whether one
focuses on the look, sound or play of the

game, one experiences a vibrant, exciting
encounter with history and emotion.

Role-Playing Game of the
Year
The 1991 Role-Playing Game of the Year
nominees present almost a photo-finish in
quality. Interplay Productions' Lord of
the Rings not only challenges other
products to match its advances in interface
and full-screen graphics, but it attempts
more character-oriented activities and encounters in its very game design than most
CRPG efforts. Sir-Tech Software's Bane
of the Cosmic Forge takes the Wizardry
series in new role-playing directions. Particularly salutary are the game's multiple endings, role-playing mechanisms for skill improvement and near-transparent interface.
Origin's Savage Empire proves that a
solid technological foundation can be used
to tell more than one type of story. The
game was not only improved by George
Sanger's emotive soundtrack, but it advanced over the Ultima VI game engine by
using Origin's software-driven "tensionmeter" to determine how that soundtrack
should be communicated to the reader.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Eye of the
Beholder introduces a new engine to SSI's
flagship line-up. The role-playing aspects
are solid, largely due to George
MacDonald's supervision, and the first-person perspective of the graphics offers the
flashiest show this side of the Atari ST Dungeon Master. Horrorsoft, the European
developer chosen by Accolade to develop
the Elvira license, accomplished a similar
feat with its horizontal Amiga and IBM
release of Elvira. Not only are the graphics
effective (and, at times, gory), but the interface is intuitive and the story blends just
the right amount of camp, horror and puzzle-solving into the brew.
And the vampire...er...winner is:
Elvira from Accolade (Mike Woodroffe,
Alan Bridgman, Keith Wadhams and Simon
Woodroffe, designers). Both Scorpia and
CGW readers rate Elvira as a tough and
satisfying game with just the right blend of
combat and cerebral stimulation.

Adventure Game of the Year
Nominees for the 1991 Adventure Game
of the Year include some of the most
(Continued on page 58)

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Searching for the Ancients with Paragon's MegaTraveller II

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.
egaTraveller ll opens on the
planet Rhylanor in the Spinward
arches. Rhylanor has its
problems: a creeping tide of slime
threatens to engulf the entire world. So
far, nothing has been able to stop it, or
even slow it down. As a last act of
desperation, the government offers 500
million credits to anyone who can stop or
destroy the slime before the planet is
covered by it. For that kind of money,
you and your buddies figure it's worth a
shot, whatever the risks.
The slime is pouring out from an "Ancient" site. The Ancients were a powerful
and somewhat mysterious race that lived
centuries ago. Throughout the galaxy,
the remains of this race have been found
from time to time, although in most
cases, the purposes of the various sites
have never been determined.
Since the slime is apparently an Ancient creation, the one hope is to find
hitherto-unknown sites, which might possibly contain artifacts useful against the
slime. This search forms the basis of the
game.

Essentially, your team has to find out
about and track down the locations of Ancient sites that aren't generally known.
(Of course, some people do know about
them, or you'd never be able to find
them!) This requires a good deal of
travelling around, talking to people, consulting archives and a little combat: someone out there doesn't like what you're
doing and, occasionally, your team
comes under sudden attack. Finding out
who this enemy is, and putting an end to
him, is the main subplot.
To accomplish these missions, you create a team of five characters, of either
the human or Vargr (canine) races. Creation generally follows the rules of the
paper-and-pencil MegaTraveller game, although the computer version allows for
more control by the player and it's advisable that you control as much as possible.
While a full range of skills is available
(based on profession), more than half
aren't used in the game. These are clearly noted in the manual, so keep it at
hand when creating characters. You
don't want to waste precious points on
worthless skills.
Skills come to a character as he or she
progresses through a career. Each term
of four years provides a variable number

of points: as few as one or two, or as
many as five or six. There's no way to
control what you get, so you just have to
hope for the best and put what points
there are where they will do the most
good.
An annoying feature is the possibility
that a character may be kicked out of a
career prematurely. This can happen if
the service decides it doesn't need that
person anymore or the character should
happen to be injured during duty, forcing
a mustering-out. This situation can occur
as early as the second term, leaving you
with a relatively unskilled character. At
that point, it is usually best to dump the
character and start over again.
Age is another factor. The longer a character pursues a career, the greater the
chance that one or more attributes will
decline. This starts at age 33 (the fourth
term). You'll have to decide for yourself if
the trade-off in skill increase is worth the
loss in stats. Personally, I sent all my
characters through three terms and
stopped there.
In terms of necessary skills, here is
what you need: Laser Weapon for
everybody. One person with high (4+)
medical skill. One or more with high
stealth. One with high interrogation. One
with pilot skill. Beyond these, anything
else is pretty much optional.

OPINION
ATV skill is not at all necessary; my
team was able to operate ATVs just fine
even though no one had the skill at all.
Several members had Gray Vehicle at 0
level, and we never had any trouble
using gra y vehicles, either.
If you plan on getting into a lot of
space combat, Engineer Skill and Turret
Weapons are helpful. My preference was
to vamoose at the first sign of trouble.
Space combat is pretty boring, for one
thing: the ships just sit there and trade
shots at each other. For another, if you
lose your weapons, it costs a fair amount
of cash to have them replaced. (Your engineer can't repair them.)
Navigation is another unnecessary skill,
which is pretty odd, however you look at
it. Scout ships are the only ones that
come with a position for navigator; you
can't even assign anyone to that post in
any other ship type.
Gambling is another one to pass by.
While many cities have casinos, gambling skill isn't used for playing the
games. You have to depend on your own
ability and luck to win any money.

Training halls in the game are worthless. They offer only pilot, vacc suit and
ship's boat. None of the ones I checked
(and I checked many) had any other
skills available. So if you want a character with particular skills, make sure they
are taken during career terms.
To get around in the game, you need
either a lot of money (for buying passage on liners) or a ship of your own.
Ships are expensive, so it's best to try for
one as a mustering-out benefit when a
character retires from a career. Scout
ships are not worth going for. They are
only Jump-1 ships, meaning they can
travel only to a planet that is "next door."
Anything further away can't be reached
except with a lot of planet-hopping, and
often not even then.
A Far Trader, which has a Jump-2
drive, is the better choice. Although the
manual states that a Far Trader will show
up on the benefits table for a merchant,
this is not so. No merchant I mustered
out ever had a ship appear on the table.
I did manage to obtain one, however, by
creating a Noble and getting lucky on
the benefits table.

The best vessel of all in the game is the
Ancient ship at Ylaven. This has a jump4 drive, and never needs refueling. It is
practically indestructible, and has some
hefty firepower of its own (the ship also
looks like something out of Cthulhu).
You will, however, need a special item in
order to get into the ship and make it
work. That's going to take awhile, so
don't go rushing off to Ylaven just yet.
The game has the "PAL" system, in
which members with appropriate skills
volunteer to perform certain actions. On
board ship, for instance, the one with
medical skill takes over Sick Bay, the
one with Engineer skill goes to Engineering, and so on. Sounds nice, but the system has its limits.
When my team was still using a Scout
ship, the only character with Navigation
decided to take over the weapons, while
the ex-cop, who had no ship skills at all,
decided he was going to be navigator.
Fortunately, you can override this and reassign people where you want them.
Just keep an eye out when people volunteer to make sure they're the right ones
for the job at hand.

OPINION
One member of the party should be an
ex-Scout, and another should be exNavy. Many worlds have restrictions on
the weapons you can carry around with
you; these will be confiscated when you
go through Customs, and returned when
you leave. However, if there is a Navy or
Scout base on the planet, the party can
sneak out the back door of the
base without going through Customs at all. Just make sure that
the party leader is of the appropriate service when you do
this.
Some worlds have no service
bases at all. For those, you need
someone with high (4 or better)
Stealth. Stealth is what allows
characters to smuggle illegal
weapons past Customs. Number
of items is not a factor here. I
had only one person (Riley) with
Stealth skill, and he usually had
no problems in smuggling
through all the weapons for the
party. Riley might be carrying
two Gauss rifles and three laser
pistols (plus ammo) and he'd

get it all past the Customs officials. The
only weapons he had a hard time with
were the plasma guns.
Be careful not to start any fights if you
have items confiscated by Customs: you
won't get them back. It's okay to kill
anyone who shoots at you first, but if
you start the shooting you're in trouble.

This is a good reason to get everyone
into armor as soon as possible.
Vacc suits are the best you can buy on
the open market, and it's a good idea to
buy a suit for everyone in the party.
Later, you'll find some combat armor,
but vacc suits are good for most situations.
r or all this talk of weapons,
armor and smuggling stuff
through Customs, there isn't
much combat in the game.
Aside from the enemies who
shoot at you from time to time,
and criminals you might want to
kill for the bounty money, there's
really no fighting to speak of.
However, since you never know
when you might be fired on or
run into a wanted criminal, it's
best to go armed and armored
everywhere.
Combat has definitely been improved. Party members can be
placed in "react" status, so they
will fire automatically at anyone
who shoots at the team. No
need to switch around between
characters and give commands.
There is also a "reserve" status for those
who you want to stay out of combat;
when the shooting starts, they head for
the hills.
All cities, regardless of tech level, have
pretty much the same layout. All the
standard stores (weapons, vehicle rental,
universities, police stations, etc.) are always in the same locations, when such
things exist on a particular world. This
makes special buildings stand out and
easier to find as you walk around town.
(Often, people you want to talk to are in
such buildings.)
On the streets, people with anything to
say show as little green dots. They move
around, so first you have to get close
enough to use the "hail" command to
stop them. Then you face the person and
start a conversation. You may want to
look at them first, in case you just
stopped a wanted criminal wearing battle
armor and toting a plasma gun. This is a
good time to back away without starting
a conversation (you're safe as along as
you haven't actually talked to them).
Getting through this game can be difficult. There are so many worlds to visit,
so many people you can talk to, and so
many sideline plots, that you can become overwhelmed by the detail and
lose the main threads. A lot of these
sideline plots are ways of making money,

I
but this is not always evident. You may
end up going halfway across the Marches only to find what you're doing is a
money-making enterprise and has nothing to do with your main goals.
This is a real problem, as time is critical
in the game. You have only 2700 days to
save Rhylanor. That sounds like a lot
until you remember that every time you
travel to another world, a week passes.
(This is standard, regardless of distance
traveled.) Time also passes quickly when
you're exploring the wilderness, looking
for Ancient sites. (Always choose gray
vehicles when available; they're fast.)
In general, it's best to restrict moneymaking to selling pictures of new sites
and killing wanted criminals for the bounty money. After you've saved Rhylanor,
you'll have plenty of time for following
up on the extraneous stuff.
The Ancient sites are a disappointment.
You get a very nice description when you
first enter one. After that, they're mostly
the same inside: you just walk around
looking for loot bags (all sites have one,
and several have two), pick them up,
and hurry back to Rhylanor to try out an

OPINION
artifact on the slime. That's all there is to
the sites.
None of the artifacts has any lasting effect on the slime, either. At best they
only slow or stop it for a short time. After
using one, check in at the government office to see if you get a reward for your efforts, then go sell the artifact and picture
to Trow Backett.

On the plus side, the interface is simple
and easy to operate. Combat is generally
de-emphasized, and no longer the
nightmare it was in the previous game.
The setup is basically non-linear, allowing
you to go where you want, visiting the
sites in any order, taking time out to follow some other thread, and so on. The
use of archives (checking library files for
information) is a nice touch.

On the down side, the game is a boring
implementation of an interesting story,
complicated by too many side threads
that have nothing to do with the main
plot. Once the novelty wears off, there's
no sense of exploration or being in new
places; wherever you go, every place
seems like every other place you've
been, in spite of differences in graphic
representation. The long list of character
skills is mainly useless, except for creating characters for the pencil-and-paper
version of MegaTraveller. (For this, it's a
very good utility.)
Overall, while MegaTraveller II is an improvement over the previous game, it
hasn't improved quite enough. Skills
have to be more fully integrated into the
game. More attention needs to be paid to
fleshing out major storylines, and less on
side plots unrelated to the main goals.
More variety in different locations is a
necessity. Until these are accomplished,
the MegaTraveller series will be, at best,
of only marginal interest to fans of
science-fiction CRPGs.

Behind the Screens

The "Human Cost" in State-of-theArt Computer Game Development

T

here are plenty of fuzzy terms in the entertainment software

industry and one of the fuzziest is the phrase "man-year."
When a software company says, "...a millennium of man
years in the making" or some other marketing phrase, it is very
likely that the average consumer has no real concept of what
that phrase means. "It must be good," reasons the computer
gamer, "because it means it would take 1,000 years for one
programmer/designer to make the game." On the other hand,
the average computer gamer has no clue as to what could possibly take so long.
Judging from the CGW mailbag, most computer gamers seem
to think that computer games are finished and in the can several
months before the release date. As a result, there seems to be a
tremendous amount of frustration and hostility pent up among
computer gamers. To help ease this negative karma, CGW has
been focusing on "Behind the Screens" articles which explain the
process of developing computer games. This article is designed
to expose even more of the process. It is based on material
gleaned from visits to three companies engaged in "state-of-theart" product development and is a proportional amalgam of the
way work fits together on almost any game.
For purposes of the article, a non-existent game entitled Cyber-

funk X: The Transgression shall be examined. The hierarchy of
Wetware, Inc. has decided to make the quintessential sequel to
their megahit Cyberfunk IX: The Depression. The basic storyline
for Cyberfunk X: The Transgression is written and approved
and it is time for coding to begin.

Library Card
Major releases usually require a certain amount of updating of
the company's basic library of programming routines. These are
usually low-level programs that facilitate virtually everything else
that happens in the game. In the case of Cyberfunk X, the lowlevel programmers spent more than 24 hours creating new font
routines and a font handler in machine language. It only took six
hours to upgrade their print and I/O routines, however. The big
expenditure of time that had to be accomplished prior to any
work by the art department was the development of machine language files to handle flipping images, drawing outlines of shapes
and anticipating shape collisions. The time investment on these
basic files amounted to approximately 190 hours. In short, one
programmer would have to spend six weeks (not counting overtime) to code part of the low-level routines necessary for
programmers of the high-level code to work.

Behind the Screens

Editor-in-Pieces
Once the library is updated, it is time to create the "editor" for
the game's further development. The development team on
Cyberfunk X spent roughly 80 hours to create just the right look
and feel to the map window for the game and ascertain that the
map window scrolled correctly as the player moved the onscreen party along. Developing a routine for loading and saving
the map data cost approximately the same number of hours.
The same team spent nearly 70 hours to create "cache" routines
for shapes and cells, as well as about 100 hours for sorting the
"objects" used in an "object-oriented programming" approach.
At the same time, high-level programmers were investing over
250 hours in revising the user interface so that the menus functioned more efficiently, pull-down menus operated properly, conversational interaction with NPCs could be facilitated and the
"wetware" interface (the fictional equivalent to a spell book interface in fantasy role-playing or tool/equipment interface in other
role-playing) could be accessed. Even something as typical to
every software publisher as creating tools to handle the importing of images from Deluxe Paint took nearly 90 hours to code.
The high-level programmers had to build routines to handle the
timelines and locations for non-player characters, moving items
and the contents of those items about on the screen, special effects at particular locations and terrain characteristics. 18 hours
were invested in creating the look and characteristics of one
vehicle in the game and another 18 hours were spent on making
that vehicle move correctly on the map.

The programmers are also given the task of creating, in 530
hours, an "Install" program that sets up all the attendant subroutines and customizes everything for the individual gamer.

Global Reconstruction
Once the library routines and basic editor functions were in
place, the Cyberfunk X team focused on building the game
world. It cost more than 600 hours to create a fully functional
map. For example, design teams must spend about 200 hours to
draw the basic buildings and floor plans for a role-playing environment. Then it takes an equivalent amount of time to draw,
design and add furnishings for those buildings. "Triggers" for certain events must be designed, drawn and implemented (60
hours), "Set Encounters" must be established at various locations (60 hours), "Items" necessary for the completion of the plot
must be placed (60 hours) and more. In this cyber-adventure, the
artists and programmers spent more than 80 hours in creating
obsolescent portions of the matrix so that those who had played
Cyberfunk I-1X would realize how much time had lapsed between
adventures.
To further enliven this adventure, the design team spent 200
hours to create "scripts" for the actions and schedules of nonplayer characters (in this case, other cyber-cowboys). Developing
the basic statistics for non-integral villains (monsters in fantasy
games, aliens in many sci-fi games) cost nearly 40 hours and
generating weapons stats, softwarez to fight the electronic protection of the matrix, price lists for the 'warez and definitions of useable objects incurred another 80 hours or so. The design team

Behind the Screens

spent about 60 hours to delineate the knowledge available to nonplayer characters and put it in data files.
All of this effort does not even take into account the nearly 200
hours needed to create a main program loop to utilize this data,
the 100 hours needed to develop routines for handling projectiles
nor the 60 hours to write routines to manipulate those non-player
characters' schedules created earlier.

Joining the Right Movement
Indeed, most of us do not even consider how much effort goes
into making the on-screen characters, NPCs, villains, monsters
and vehicles move. In Cyberfunk X, a group of cyber-cowboys
move through the cyberworld of the matrix together. Since these
are presumably intelligent characters, the party has to move
through the matrix "independently," but in concert with the other
"independent" characters. So, the design team developed a
routine so the cyber-cowboys could move through the matrix
without tripping over disadvantageous circuits, traps and alarms,
as well as a routine so that the group did not look as if it were
playing "follow the hacker." It took more than 180 hours to implement these two routines.
Add to these hours the ones mentioned earlier for handling special vehicle movement and about 120 hours for special animations/movement used by distinctive Als which the cyber-cowboys
encounter and one begins to get an idea of the immensity of the
programming task. Then, recognize that the player's on-screen
character gets an even more thorough treatment. The on-screen
hero/heroine costs nearly 1,500 hours in order to be able to get
items, drop items, attack, talk, use, move and interact realistically with the on-screen terrain.

Hack and Slash
Designing and implementing the basic combat algorithms cost
100 hours of programmer time. Adding animation for the "combat" between the cyber-cowboys and the Als cost another nine
hours and animating the projectiles launched by the 'warez cost
another 19 hours or so. Yet, the development team wasn't
anywhere near finished. They spent almost another 500 hours
writing code for when the NPCs engage in "combat." Add 80 different kinds of 'warez (i.e. spells, tools/weapons) that cost about
200 hours to design and implement and one gets an idea of how
long something as relatively simple as combat takes to develop.

Sounds Like Victory
Sound effects (AI noises, cyber-cowboy noises, weapon sounds,
vehicle sound emissions, computer beeps, ambient soundtrack,
etc.) take nearly 500 hours to "compose" and implement and
digitized voices take around 100 hours per character to record,
modulate and link into the game. Since Cyberfunk X has a main
title theme and a matrix theme that are fairly extensive, the
producer budgeted a full week to produce those themes. Incidental themes (combat, escape, imminent danger, etc.) are
budgeted from 6-18 hours depending on the particular length
and complexity of the piece. Then at least two days must be
spent linking the soundtrack pieces into the game.

They Talk Alike
Since Cyberfunk X is a role-playing game, there have to be conversations between the player's character and the non-player
characters. In developing Cyberfunk X, the producer has elected
to divide the NPC conversations among six members of a writing
team. Their task is to write more than 250 complete conversa(Continued on page 110)

Sneak Preview

Motion Picture Entertainment
hen Dave Stevens created The
Rocketeer for Pacific Comics
(1982), it was simultaneously a
tribute to the heroes of the old Saturday
matinee serials and a rich, colorful
celebration of a nostalgic past. That nostalgic past celebrated the innocence,
patriotism and fortitude that the present
seemed to have lost. Stevens' attention
to the detail of the pre-World War II era,
his classic melodramatic sense of
storytelling (complete with visual references to pulp heroes like Doc Savage
and Justice, Inc.) and bold, dramatic
drawings of his hero (as well as the luscious lines used to embellish his sensuous heroine) combined to capture the
imagination of the comics-buying public.

W

When Walt Disney Studios decided to
produce The Rocketeer as a feature film,
comics aficionados in particular and nostalgia buffs in general were thrilled. The
cinema screen seemed the ideal canvas
on which to paint the larger-than-life
story of heroism and honor found in The
Rocketeer. The story had come full
circle. Inspired by the silver screen, it had
returned in Technicolor splendor. It was a
classic motion picture, the tale of an ordinary man who through extraordinary circumstances discovers hidden resources.
Now the story is undergoing yet
another equally appropriate transformation. Walt Disney Software has produced a game based on The Rocketeer
that paints the nostalgic tale of heroism
on a brand new canvas, the computer
screen. There is more than one type of
nostalgia in The Rocketeer computer
game, however. Not only does it present
the same type of detailed renderings of
pre-war memorabilia and technology, but
the game's action sequences are reminiscent of some classic arcade games in
computer game history (Defender,
Karateka, Shooting Gallery and others).
In fact, about the only thing about The
Rocketeer that is not nostalgic is the
new technology being developed by
Novalogic, the developer chosen by
Walt Disney Software to create the
game. Somehow the game seems to be
just the right match of technological
wizardry and old-fashioned game play.

The Race Is On
(Game Description)
The Rocketeer computer game does
not simply retell the script of the film. Instead, it advances the story via comic
page-style splash screens that narrate the
events leading up to an arcade sequence

and the arcade sequences which determine whether the player will progress in
the story or not. In the game, Cliff has to
earn the right to wear and use the rocket
pack rather than simply stumble across
it as he did in the film and comic. This,
of course, leads to an arcade sequence.
In this case, the arcade sequence is a
standard air race in which Cliff must pilot
his choice of three classic planes to victory. The sequence opens cinematically
with a gray-scaled image of the field that
segues into a brightly colored screen.
The arcade sequence uses two of the
three pylons generally found in an air
race. This is because the planes which
players pilot around the pylons during
the race are delightfully bit-mapped (with
bit-mapped shadows linked to the plane
images) and the problems involved in
having the planes fly around a third
pylon (and, consequently, scale down to
a size that would indicate a three-dimen-

sional depth to the race course) were
simply too formidable for the amount of
game play value it would have added. As
it is, players must learn how to use altitude as a speed factor and how to cut
ahead of their competitors in tight turns.
Once the player has mastered the basic
air race, he/she finally gets the opportunity to become the Rocketeer. This
time, the jet pack is strapped on Cliff's
back and the player pilots the Rocketeer
around the same racecourse. The same
basic lessons apply in this race, but the
player has more power to deal with, so
cornering becomes more of a challenge.
The next sequence is somewhat reminiscent of a shooting gallery game. The fifth
column agents recruited by the Nazis try
to steal the jet pack and Cliff must stop
them. The digitized images of the bad
guys pop up from behind the various
props scattered about the hangar and

Sneak Preview

game itself. The finished game art
is developed from those key
frames.
Of course, several garners will
wonder how the images in the
game moved from near fullscreen images to the miniature
characters that cavort around the
digitized sets. According to John
Garcia of Novalogic, the company starts from 24-bit images
and uses their custom sizing
routines to reduce the characters
to the optimal size for use on the
particular platform. In this way,
the company has been able to
make a game that looks as good
on the Super Nintendo system
as it does on an IBM compatible.

the player directs the Cliff Secord figure
to aim and shoot at the traitorous scum.
This is one area of the game where
Novalogic's technology really shines.
The 3-D figures operate in a credible
three-dimensional environment such that
players almost feel like they are directing
a scene out of a film. One senses the villains as "actors" more than one would
normally expect in a computer game.
Naturally, Jenny gets captured by the
Nazis and, as the plot advances, Cliff discovers that the Nazis have their own elite
troops of aerial Aryans. So in a sequence
which functions as a tribute to Defender,
the Rocketeer flies through horizontalscrolling wave after wave of Aryan adversaries until he reaches the zeppelin
where Jenny is being held captive.
The player must also learn to operate
another piece of pulp-era science fiction
technology, the Locust. In order for the
Locust to be available for the climactic
rescue sequence, it has to get by an armored flying tank. Finally, Cliff lands on
the zeppelin and goes through the ritual
horizontal-scrolling boxing sequence prior
to rescuing Jenny. The trick, however, is

managing to duck, punch, move and
climb without falling off the airship.

Tools To Make Howard
Hughes Jealous
Walt Disney Software was not content with simply producing a montage of
arcade sequences loosely joined together
with comic book storyline. So they challenged Novalogic to give the game a different look than arcade games of the
past. Novalogic had been working on a
three-dimensional modeling process for
some time, so it only seemed natural
that they bring some of their technology
to the production "party."
In order to get the action/animation to
flow as smoothly as possible, the
developers videotaped human actors in
costume as they walked, fought and
jumped through the motions of each sequence. This, of course, meant that the
programmers now had a videotape that
presented the action at an impossibly
fast frame rate for the computer to display. So they performed a motion
analysis of the videotape and chose the
key frames of animation to use in the

The final technological twist is
the developer's proprietary threedimensional modeling technology.
As in their upcoming Ultrabots
game (from Data East), the
designers use ray-tracing to generate a three-dimensional model of
a vehicle. Once that model is in
memory, of course, it can be
placed anywhere in the game.
For example, there is an armored
flying tank that appears twice in
the game. The AFT is a computergenerated model, but it appears
from more than one angle in the
game. (The battle with the Locust takes
place from a different direction than the
earlier appearance of the tank.) Not only
are the uses of this technology impressive as they appear in The Rocketeer,
but they bode well for future products as
well.

Sometimes, A Hero's Got To
D o ...
In short, Disney's The Rocketeer does
exactly what one would expect a hightech entertainment company to do with a
property that celebrates nostalgia:
celebrate the past with the innovations of
the present. When CGW first heard about
The Rocketeer project, we had imagined
a role-playing game based on the character. Disney focused on the action
aspects from the outset. They noted that
those of us who identify with old "shellhead" really wish we had the capacity to
fly against and fight with the Nazis, as opposed to out-thinking them. If their concept is correct, Rocketeer fans are going
to be very happy with this innovative
presentation of nostalgia.

Games of the Year

Games of the Year
(Continued from page 40)

prolific and venerable designers in the
genre. Legend Entertainment's Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers Get All The Girls
brings the work of Infocom celebrity Steve
Meretzky back to the computer screen.
Meretzky's creativity and humor combine
with Legend's new graphic adventure system to inject new life in the adventure
game genre. Sierra/Dynamix's Rise of
the Dragon is an excellent example of how
pioneering designer Jeff Tunnell is attempting to push technology to the point where
computer games can really tell stories. Jeff
has never rested on his laurels and Rise of
the Dragon points to even better things to
come. Lucasfilm's Secret of Monkey Island unleashes Ron Gilbert as a game
designer in his own right. Ron not only
developed the original Lucasfilm tools for
building graphic adventures, but he is continually presenting raucous humor, challeng
ing puzzles and subtle social commentary
in his products. Secret of Monkey Island is
a "must play" for every adventure gamer
with a sense of humor.
Sierra has always dominated the adventure game genre. 1991 was no exception as
Corey and Lori Cole reprised their awardwinning game design in Quest for Glory II:
Trial By Fire and Roberta Williams, the
designer who carved out the graphic adventure genre over a decade ago, unveiled a
stunning new game in her best-selling
series, King's Quest V. Quest for Glory II:
Trial By Fire is notable for the way it
blends the role-playing and adventure
gaming experience into a distinctive hybrid.
Everything about the game design seems
well-thought and cleverly presented. King's
Quest V deserves special recognition, however, as an exemplary work in a gold-medal
series. By using digitized paintings, parserless interface, the exceptional musical talent
available at Sierra and her own unique
blend of fairy tale-based puzzles, Roberta
has created perhaps the crowning glory of
her King's Quest series.
And the winner is, appropriately enough
on CGWs 10th Anniversary, King's Quest
V from Sierra (Roberta Williams, designer).
King's Quest V combines technological ad-

vance with an intuitive understanding of her
audience that only a true artist could
achieve. Like the Ultima series in computer
role-playing, the King's Quest experience
continues to climb to new heights.

Special Award for Artistic
Achievement
As warranted, CGW will often present a
special award to games which, in some
fashion or another, blend artistic techniques, technology and entertainment presentation in a way that advances the art of
computer game design. Such a product is
Rise of the Dragon from Sierra/Dynamix.
Everything about the game is beautifully
rendered and consistent with the dark,
brooding nature of the game's cyberpunk
plot. The musical score, digitized presentation of graphic novel-style art, threatening
dialogue and digitized film clips all combine
to present a worthy and formidable entertainment experience.

And the winner of the 1991 Action Game
of the Year is:
Links from Access (Vance Cook, Kevin
Homer and Roger Carver, designers). With
its capacity for user-designed "special
swings" and attention to both audio and
visual excellence, Links is a watershed
product for the action game genre and its
sports subset.

CGWs Game of the Year
Now, however, is the time for the confetti
to fly, the noise makers to blow, the applause to reverberate from every wall and
the champagne corks to pop like artillery at
Waterloo. The winner of 1991's Overall
Game of the Year is:

Action Game of the Year
In 1991, CGW readers were impressed by
the action experiences provided by space
combat, World War I aerial combat and
golf. The nominees for 1991 Action Game
of the Year follow. Cinemaware's Wings
(soon to be an IBM release by Konami) is
a cinematic look at WWI air combat as
though the "campaign" were a classic film.
The arcade action is Cinemaware at its
best and the cinematic touches are just
right. Origin's Wing Commander is Chris
Roberts' magnum opus. The action game
features the most advanced graphics techniques in the genre, a "tension-meter"
soundtrack that perfectly paces the action,
identifiable non-player characters and a
story beyond the fast-paced action. Access'
Links features the most ambitious graphic
look to ever embellish a sports game. In addition, the golf model is challenging and
satisfying so that Links is more than a
showpiece (which it is), it is a game! Jack
Nicklaus Ultimate Golf combines enhanced graphic appeal with the brilliantly
implemented course design disk. Golf
fanatics will appreciate the ability to customize their own courses without having to
sacrifice the quality of play they have come
to expect from Accolade's line of golf
games.

Wing Commander from Origin (Chris
Roberts, designer). CGWs readers have
kept Wing Commander in the top spot
since its inception. It is the number one
game mentioned as a point of comparison
when one travels about the entertainment
software industry (whether among publishers, retailers or designers). It is the
cornerstone of a new and successful line of
products. It has singlehandedly encouraged
more readers to upgrade their current computer systems than any other product we
can remember. So Wing Commander
receives this approbation in recognition of
its place as the game in 1991's software
year which has most impacted the hobby. If
only there were a "tension-meter" with a
wide enough bandwidth to measure the attendant applause around the world which
has been garnered by this milestone
product! Applause! Applause!

Sneak Preview

Networking the Sierra Way

veryone, it seems, is to some degree a student of human nature.
We all notice faces. We like friendly faces. Let it be said that The Sierra
Network can boast some of the
friendliest faces ever to grace an interactive computer network service. There is
the rub, too: Friendly, interactive gaming
with an on-screen smile.

E

Mug Shots
Welcome to The Sierra Network
(TSN). Players begin by taking a quick
game preference survey from among a
list of standard "family favorites," and
then proceed to create a self-portrait.
With the help of a "clip art" style face
generator program, players are soon setting the width of their jowl, the length
and style of their hair, eye color and accessories (such as hats and earrings) as
they design their own "self portraits." In
short, if people can't see their own reflections in the monitor, they can (at least)
create their "fantasy" images of themselves. Up to six family members can be
stored, so constant redrawing can be
avoided (except as one gets older, of
course).

The Computer as Game Parlor
At some point, most people have
broken out the cribbage board or backgammon set and played a game at
home. The same might go for checkers,

hearts, chess and rummy. All of these
games can be played interactively on
TSN, with the best part being the inclusion of a graphics interface which
uses either a mouse or keyboard input
and commands so intuitive that, literally,
no instructions are necessary to get
going.
Players meet by perusing all of the
faces "hanging around" in the lobby area
of TSN. By clicking on a face, that
player's survey information (age, city,
gaming interests and expertise, etc.) appears. Players can then invite another person on-line to a game, or drop in on a
game in progress and "observe" it. All
the while, players (and observers) may
"chat" (type back and forth to each
other). Having spent hundreds of hours
on most of the various game networks,
this reviewer can attest that TSN is
among the most consistently wholesome
and friendly places to meet people and
play games. Nasty bulletin board strings
do not plague TSN as they do some
other networks and, one suspects, it because the focus on TSN is gaming, as
opposed to being primarily an information service.

Quoth the Raven
Perhaps most exciting about the arrival
of The Sierra Network, however, is the
prospect of multi-player gaming such as
has never been possible before. Even
people who do not care for action games

like Stellar 7, for example, are very likely
to get excited about a multi-player Stellar 7 in which up to four Ravens are
scooting about wreaking havoc on the
world at large. The uneasy real-time
diplomacy, the capacity for hurling insults as one bears down upon a "human"
rather than a "computer" victim and the
suspense of trying to outsmart "real" intel
ligence rather than "artificial" intelligence
is absolutely exhilarating. The present
writer doesn't particularly like "arcade"style games, but Stellar 7 on TSN really
got him excited.
With plans for a multi-player Red
Baron and a Leisure Suit Larry environment already in gear, TSN will eventually
have enough unique games to keep any
gamer excited. Many garners will be skeptical about joining a network to play backgammon and cribbage, but anyone who
knows the technological brilliance of Sierra in developing computer games should
not doubt the surprises that await users
of TSN in the future.
The investment firm of Volpe, Welty &
Company estimates that Sierra will invest approximately $2 million dollars in
the network this year. Considering the
type of entertainment that two million
would produce in their traditional
products, one ends up with a tremendous sense of anticipation with regard to
the multi-player environment that Sierra
will be unveiling in incremental stages.

a

Review

"Without civic morality communities perish; without personal
morality their survival has no value."
—Bertrand Russell
W
a good zap-gun,
this community is in trouble. If
ithou
one can accept the notion that morality, economic sensibility and a good trigger-finger are not mutually exclusive in life, then the neighborhood known as Orodrid may
prove an attractive place to settle. Knights of the Crystallion
(KOTC), another British import from U.S. Gold, combines action, strategy and role-playing in this ancient mythical community. The game has some awkward moments, but is generally
an enjoyable experience featuring an interesting story, dazzling
graphics and a remarkable musical score.
Bone-Age Economy (Game Play)

by Allen Greenberg
Knights of the Crystallion
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PRICE:
$59.95
COPY PROTECT: Disk-Based
PUBLISHER:
U.S. Gold
San lose. CA

In KOTCs era, the prevailing real-estate market
is such that a tribe has taken up residence inside
the skeletal frame of a long-dead aquatic serpent
which must have been at least the size of New
Hampshire. Within each of the creature's ribs live
multi-clan populations which work together in a
mutually supportive "bone-age" economy. Part of
the object of KOTC is to survive and prosper as
one of the rib-dwelling families who deal in several
trades. There is some buying and selling of goods
which goes on in this section of the game, along
with occasional opportunities to invest in trade
with the skeletal suburbs. Each family must help
the others survive, particularly when a disaster
such as disease or fire strikes. When this happens,
all families are called upon to contribute to the unfortunate group. The consequences for not doing
so could be disastrous should a similar crisis hit one's own family.
While controlling his finances, most of the player's attention will
be focused on a quest to reach some rare and supernatural crystals hidden deep within the skull of the great beast. There are
four mazes which separate the player from this treasure, populated by murdering insects, lizards and other animated
headaches. Mapping and navigating the mazes is an interesting
task because each section of the maze is both unique and graphically impressive. The various creatures which occupy these subosseous caverns must be blasted by the hero, and this is neatly
done using the mouse. That same device is used to point out the
desired path for the hero to follow. Also within the maze are
other, less important crystals. These crystals must be gathered
and taken back to the surface to be used for a special purpose.
Unfortunately, in order to use these lesser crystals, the player
must submit to the game's most irritating arcade sequence. The
crystals are used to "recharge" the hero's magic armor to make
him less vulnerable to attack by the creatures in the maze. To accomplish this, the player must arrange the crystals in a particular
pattern while avoiding other moving objects. The three-dimensional animation is as superb as the game-play is frustrating.
Things fly, change and crash so rapidly that only the most dedicated arcade fanatic can hope to achieve a desirable result. A
more liberal time-limit or a less frenzied pace in this section
would have improved KOTC immeasurably.
Another, less frustrating, exercise is a game of concentration.
Sixteen cards are displayed face down from which the player
chooses two each turn in order to find a matching pair. This
deck, however, magically shuffles itself increasingly quickly and
with greater frequency as the game progresses. Nevertheless,

Review

there is hope for the player, as he begins to gain some psychic
energy which enables him to read the value of the card from the
reverse side. The backs of the cards, by the way, are nicely
animated. The psychic energy developed in this part of the game
will serve the player well when he returns to the mazes. There, he
will be granted subtle flashes of insight to help guide him on his
way into deeper levels. Other talents are also given to the player
as he accumulates this energy.
An exercise which resembles both Chinese checkers and reversi is the last talent which the player must master in order to complete KOTC. There are unlimited opportunities to learn this interesting game before the player enters the mazes, and the program includes both a tutorial section and an option to allow a
second player to participate in this section only. This user-friendly challenge takes a nasty turn, however, when the player must
deal with it in the maze.
In between each of the four mazes, the player is challenged by
the computer to a round of the checker/reversi game. Should
the player lose after being given several chances, he is booted
back to the surface. As if this were not sufficiently threatening,
KOTCs designers have chosen these same sensitive points in
the game to implement the program's copy protection. The
player is requested, in multiple choice format, to provide some information about a poetry book which accompanies the game's
manual. A swinging metronome passes over the available
choices until the player hits the space bar, indicating the pointer
is over the correct answer. Proper timing is a factor in this, thus
adding an inappropriate arcade aspect to the affair.

HAMming It Up (Graphics and Sound)
KOTC's visual effects are unique among the standard- setting
graphics of other European software publishers such as Psygnosis. The program is one of the few to take advantage of the
Amiga HAM (Hold And Modify) mode which allows the computer
to display 4,096 colors. The result is more ethereal than realistic,
but pleasing nonetheless. In addition, each scene is remarkably
three-dimensional and contains none of the simple left-to-right
movement which characterizes so many European releases.
The program's musical score and sound effects are also deserving of special praise. Ranging from primitive to symphonic and
laced throughout with the whispers of human voices, it embellishes the presentation admirably. An audio tape of the music is
included in the package, but it sounds, unfortunately, as though
it was amateurishly transferred from the computer in someone's
recreation room.
KOTC contains no disk-based copy protection and can be installed on a hard drive. A blank disk is required in order to save
games in progress and a minimum 512K of RAM is required.

Knight Cap (Conclusion)
The diverse yet interlocking segments of Knights of the Crystallion have been well-balanced and orchestrated so that the
result is enjoyable. Certain moments, however, such as the ordeal with the crystals, have led this reviewer to wonder what
European publishers fear to lose should someone (heaven forbid!) actually win one of their games.

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Phantasy Star III:
Generations of Doom
Sega Genesis
$79.95 (Hint book $14.95)
Sega of America
Redwood City, CA

Can Computer Garners
Convert to Cartridges?
by Matt Taylor

Matt Taylor is a syndicated video game columnist.

A

ll right, console garners, it's finally time to come out of the

closet; no need to worry about the CGW staff writing
another obnoxious editorial deriding the so-called "twitch
and flex" cartridges. The three major hardware suppliers in the
dedicated machine market, Nintendo, Sega and NEC, have
bulked up their growing lists of role-playing and sports titles,
games which will more often give players a strategic workout
than thumb blisters.
Actually, many users have been out of the closet for some time
now, happily adventuring through original RPGs like Final Fantasy on the NES and Lands of Ys on the TurboGrafx CD-ROM.
Still others have been experiencing console conversions of the
most popular computer software, including the Wizardry, Bard's
Tale, Ultima and Advanced Dungeons & Dragons series. For
the skeptical (probably the majority of CGW readers), this longtime cartridge connoisseur will attempt to provide an enlighten-

ing perspective on the latest in one of the standard-setting lineups from Sega, Phantasy Star III: Generations of Doom.
Phantasy Star originally appeared on the 8-bit Master System
in 1989, and graduated to the 16-bit Genesis last year (reviewed
in CGW #78). These carts are unique because of the seamless
merger of medieval fantasy and science fiction into one grand
quest. Laser pistols and swords are often purchased in the same
shop. Dragon-like beasts and cyborgs can be encountered in one
combat. The inhabitants of the Phantasy Star world are constantly flirting with technological advancement, which often proves to
be their downfall.
In part two, the Mother Brain, Controller of All That Was Well
and Good in the Universe, went absolutely berserk. A being
known as Dark Force was behind the malfunctions. Phantasy
Star Ill takes place a full millennium after the second episode,
but Dark Force is still wreaking havoc on electronic equipment
throughout the galaxy.
Some will be disappointed to learn that there are few tangible

Review

connections between the two most recent titles other than ol'
Dark Force. The champions of part two are not to be found, not
even in the form of descendants. Still, there is a neat explanation
of how total catastrophe was averted in the last chapter by the inhabitants of Palm (whose planet went up in smoke), and how
they wound up in this third installment.
In the opening sequence, it is explained that the player (Rhys, a
prince) was about to marry a mystery woman named Maia, who
had washed up on the shores of his homeworld with no memory
of her past. Then a winged beast spirited her away to parts unknown. Now, Rhys must rescue her and at the same time uncover one of the oldest secrets of his land — why Orakians and
Layans bitterly hate each other enough to constantly send
cyborgs to battle for supremacy (while abstaining from personal
hand-to-hand melee) and what Dark Force's role in the conflict is.
If those one-dimensional save-the-princess-and-whomp-the-baddies stories in other video game semblances of RPGs have gotten a might tiresome, Phantasy Star III promises even the most
jaded player plenty of plot twists and turns (even though the initial objective of recovering the damsel in distress seems like
every other game in the genre). The player must always portray
a man (videogame designers have yet to come to grips with
"sexist" role-playing), but he may marry one of two wives at the
conclusion of each of three "generations." (Women are not ignored in the game's fictional context, simply relegated to a traditional and subservient role.) The wife chosen will have a direct impact on the next generation's player character, who simply happens to be, of course, the newlyweds' son. The decisions made

with regard to the player character's matrimony will significantly
impact which of four possible game endings will occur and the
personalities of the characters who may join a party of adventurers. Thus, unlike most of its genre, Phantasy Star III lends itself to several replays. Unfortunately, there is one important drawback. While a battery saves one's progress, there are only two
storage files available, so it's tough to negotiate a time-efficient
completion of each possible generation.
Although the whole of PSIII is much too large to cover with a
play-by-play, many of the situations make for interesting journey
and discovery. As mentioned earlier, the people of this world
seem ravaged by the horrors of mechanical failures, berserk
machinery and simple ignorance of the contraptions left to them
by their ancestors. One of the seven worlds, for example, was
frozen due to negligence of a weather-control gadget.
Occasionally, the player must perform the obligatory "find the
key to enter the next dungeon and fight the boss monster," but
usually the tasks given by villagers are more intriguing.
As far as graphic presentation, the Genesis custom processors
worked magic. The towns are portrayed with strikingly realistic
detail, down to the shingles on the roofs of shops and shadows
of the people who reside in them. This time around, when one
enters a building, he can actually walk around inside and ascend
stairs in order to converse with occupants. An angled top-down
view proves once again to give a perfect window into the player's
ramblings through the Phantasy Star universe. The music
provides an adequate atmosphere.
Those who enjoyed the battle sequences in the earlier installments may be disappointed in the latest incarnation. In the first
two games, a first-person perspective displayed the player's party
staring down the barrel at human, half-human and otherwise misshapen creatures, all animated in deadly detail. In Phantasy Star
III, the opponents are just as mean-looking, but one's characters
are no longer represented physically on-screen, so instead of
jumping to the attack (or being the recipient of such hostile action), a wound simply appears in the monster's gut. On the other
hand, an annoying part of the original setup, the lack of a background illustration (before now it was just a featureless grid), has
been rectified.
Probably the best news for fans of this latest adventure in the
land of fantasy mixed liberally with space opera is that it is far
easier to control one's party and administer individual commands.
If all this combat, exploration and rescue sounds too challenging, Sega has published a separate hint book (unlike Phantasy
Star II, where the hint book was included with the game and was
actually a detailed walk-through).
There is no denying that Phantasy Star III relies heavily on
combat and level-advancement to fill most of the hundreds of
hours required to complete just one of the four endings, occasionally to the point of tediousness, but it's fairly rare that the
player will be forced to stop the journey and just build levels.
Another quibble (again extremely minor) is that while the marriage choices and different personalities add a certain spice to
the game, the basic design is still so linear that every objective
must be fulfilled in a pre-set order.
Even given these faults (which, it should be said, are pretty
common amongst all CRPGs), Phantasy Star III: Generations of
Doom is a rewarding epic tale which should be told on every
Genesis system. Rumor: For those who do not keep up with the
video game world, note that a fourth Phantasy Star adventure is
reported to be under development for release coinciding with the
U.S. debut of the Genesis CD-ROM in 1992.

Foreign Correspondence

screens. According to Clark, "There are
some CDTV products that were very
good on the Amiga. If it is already a
good game, one doesn't necessarily have
to take advantage of all of the space on
the disk."

Over There
Compaction, Disk Action, Attraction
by Paul Rigby

One happy circumstance with Spirit of
Excalibur, however, is that while there
were many images that would not fit
onto the available floppy disks for the
original Amiga game, these sequences
and images have been included in the
CDTV version. Now one will find, for the
first time, an uncut version of Spirit of Excalibur.
A major difference in the game is the interface, however. Where one used
keypad buttons to fly quickly to specific
icons in the Amiga version, the CDTV version is more reliant on cursor movement.
Fortunately, commands like 'P' for Pause
can be replaced by the "Pause" button
on the controller.
Another Virgin Mastertronic product
for CDTV is North Polar Expedition.
Based upon a real-life expedition undertaken by Sir Ranulph Fiennes during the
early '80s, it uses actual video footage of
the trek. This 'game' can best be
described as an educational CRPG with
man-management overtones that can be
played for purposes of either enjoyment
or education. The player attempts to insure that the expedition will succeed.
Problems have to be dealt with or the
whole project will fail. The designers used
a lot of images from the film, as well as
the audio track of the film. Most of that
was originated way back in the early '80s
when Sir Ranulph Fiennes had completed his TransGlobe expedition.

he

CDTV version of Virgin
Mastertronic's Spirit of Excalibur
is a derivative of the Amiga computer version. UK executive Steve Clark
commented, "It seemed a particularly
good product to convert because, in
many ways, it is like an interactive film."
Where dialogue was handled via text in
the Amiga version, the CDTV version has
CD-quality music and speech. All of the
dialogue was spoken by actors, who
produced about 55 minutes' worth of actual sound bites for the game. This total
was then cut into snippets and spread
throughout the entire game. The basic
theme, length and graphics of the game
are all the same as the Amiga version. Although the graphics are in the pleasing
32-color mode, there has been no attempt to introduce photo-realistic

T

Virgin Mastertronic actually produced
a Laservision version of North Polar Expedition about three or four years ago
and has recently completed a CD-ROM
version for the PC market.
Barney the Bear is the hero in a new
educational CDTV program from the Multimedia Corporation, an associated
company of the BBC. In his first
animated adventure (specifically aimed
at children 3 to 8 years old), A Bun for
Barney, Barney discovers that the world
is full of bounders ready to rip off the
cherries on his iced bun. Just what is the
world coming to when a chap cannot eat
his bun in peace and quiet? Multimedia
Corporation describes Barney as, "...a
small, cuddly, can't-say-no bear." This
reviewer can't help but agree! Barney
walks through the "pop-up" world which
not only follows the central plot of the
quickly disappearing cherries, but intro-

Foreign Correspondence

duces a number of sidelines to amuse
and interest any participating toddler or
computer journalist. The main game contains a number of word and number
games, hidden nursery rhymes and so
on. All of these are accessed via clicking
on a passing balloon or other suitable
"switch." Once the sub-game has been
triggered, it fills the screen and suspends
the story. One must then solve the
game/puzzle. Digitized voices and animations are used to reward correct answers.
After the sub-game is finished, one can
return to the story and proceed from
whence one left off. Multimedia has
spent a lot of thought, time and money
on the project, perhaps most notably
employing Tom Baker (one of the most
beloved actors to ever play the part of
television's Doctor Who) as a voice
talent. The company even spent considerable resources in searching for the best
"font" for teaching purposes.
Infogrames has recently released the
CDTV version of SimCity. At the time of
writing, the finished version was 'in the
post,' so this news item reflects the impressions experienced from the preproduction copy. This particular version

looked good and fairly whizzed along,
scrolling at turbo rates. Reports popped
up in a flash. The game has been
redesigned and enhanced. For example,
the extra architecture disks (sold
separately for the computer version) are
all on the same CD. In addition, the
reports have been improved and now
take up the entire screen. The interface
has also been enhanced to take advantage of the control pad bundled with
the CDTV. The CDTV version should be
well-received — as long as the awful
pseudo-French heavy-metal music playing in the background is dispensed with.
This music grated on the ol' nerves at
the best of times. It just didn't fit the
cerebral atmosphere of SimCity at all.
Finally, any flight simulation buffs waiting for a mission-based simulation of the
Tornado can now look forward to the
new game from Digital Integration, the
company who produced F-16 Combat
Pilot (all 16-bit formats) for Electronic
Arts. Others who are looking for a Tornado simulation in the flight simulator
mode need look no further than ProFlight from HiSoft (Amiga and ST). We
will offer more details in a future issue.

Incidentally, anyone who would like to
contact Paul Rigby directly can do so on
CompuServe (75300,1503) or by mail
to 20 Malvern Road, Liverpool, England,
L6 6BW [please include and SAE if you
would like a reply].
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS 2DD.
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80,
Fax: 01144-543-466-579.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766, Fax: 01144-268-590076.
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international
operator.

Pictorial

O

Opening Our Picture Album
n

these two pages,
CGW readers will get
an intimate look at
some of the pictures we keep
on file to remind us of
humorous anecdotes, strange
experiences and less complicated days (of old?). Join
with us, now, in exploring
those daze of yesteryear.

The Renewal Campaign
Many readers received this
renewal notice in 1987-1988.
The hyperbolic use of black
humor was designed to particularly appeal to the CGW
reader. As it turned out, the
renewal campaign was so successful that it spawned the following aftermath where (then)
Editor Sipe turned the table
on his tormentors.

Renewal Campaign: The Next Generation
With Publisher Sipe in his mourning clothes and Editor Wilson in his clerical robe,
it only seemed right for Art Defector (Director) DeNardo to show up sans shirt. As
the triumvirate looked into the nearly-departed reader's coffin, the copy read, "The
staff of CGW regrets to inform you that your subscription to Computer Gaming
World is about to expire. However, if you act soon, there is reason to believe that
you can fully recover! Please call: 1-800-827-4450 and tell them: 'I'm not quite dead
yet! Please RENEW my subscription...'"
The renewal campaign that threatened to make our readers "expire" was even
more successful than threatening to "off" our editor-in-chief. Our favorite response
came from Mitch. He wrote, "Just a quick note:
• Really liked the postcard
• I do feel better
• Keep up the good work."

Fantastic Voyages
One interesting part of covering the world
of computer games is visiting the publishers. We don't always arrive at the most
propitious times, however. Witness the visit
to New World Computing where they
hadn't even moved all the furniture into
their new "digs." So, (then) New World
financial whiz Ron Spitzer explained to
(then) CGW assistant editor Johnny Wilson
what their (then) Kafkaesque office space
was going to look like. Murphy's Law
reigned supreme on that day, since New
World game designer Jon van Caneghem
had car trouble on the day CGW visited
and was unable tophoto. No problem—his
creative staff managed to substitute a preEddie Murphy Gumby for the famed designer.
Of course, one never knows what might
be found at a computer game company.
We particularly enjoyed a trip to Virgin
Mastertronic where a door in their complex was declared non-existent: Non cogito
ergo non sum (?).

Pictorial

Conversions Achieved
During a redesign of CGW, the editors
wanted a new piece of art to call the readers'
attention to the "Conversions Received"
column. When one of the editors went to pick
up a conversion and an entire pile of games
fell off the shelf, Vince DeNardo threatened to
"bury" the editor in a pile of conversions. He
ordered Wilson to lie on the floor of the office,
stacked the boxes on top of the humiliated
editor and, as a result, the pathetic physiognomy of the editor has appeared with unfortunate frequency in the pages of the magazine.

Art Defector
That the editorial departments of
magazines and art departments of the same
magazines are known to have widely differentiated perceptions of the same issue is a matter of course. After one such disagreement
at CGW, Editor Sipe found a marvelous ad
that read "Art Director Speak MumboJumbo." Rather than be offended, (then) Art
Director DeNardo dressed up like the witch
doctor in the ad.

Samurai Editor

Horsing Around at CES
The editors always get to see interesting sights at CES. Here, Editor
Wilson inserts his business card in
the slot of a Blaupunkt girl's
larger-than-life "remote control." Accusing
Wilson of trying to win the
Blaupunkt girl in a lottery of
lechery, Publisher Sipe keeps this
photo on file in case Wilson's wife
and family need to know how he behaves at trade shows.
Now-defunct First Row Software
brought the original set of
television's The Honeymooners to
CES. After paying a considerable
amount in insurance costs to
transport the exhibit from its current
location at the Museum of Broadcasting, The Honeymooners computer game failed to earn back its
expenses. Here, Wilson and Sipe try
to out-Gleason and Carney the
original stars.

Of course, all the letters we get
aren't quite so positive (especially
those about the Rumor Guy). So,
one day, the staff acted out the "execution" our editor so richly
deserved. After all, our "thinskinned" editor vacillates between
threatening homicide and "hari-kari"
when he gets these letters and it's
better to lose him than it would be
to lose circulation.

Sneak Preview

Spaced-Out and Jammin'
A Sneak Preview of Sega's Toejam and Earl
by Wyatt Lee

A

s one who has never quite under-

stood the appeal of Nintendo's
"Mario Brothers" and being the
last person to ever consider buying a
Sega Genesis just to get Sega's alleged
Mario-killer, Sonic the Hedgehog, who
would have ever believed that this
videogame-phobe could possibly get
"hooked" on an action game that is in
any way similar to the two games just
mentioned. Yet Greg Johnson insisted
that this sufferer from action-avoidance
syndrome take the time to look at
Toejam and Earl and, since this fugitive
from funk has always admired Greg's brilliant alien races from Starflight, the
refugee from the realm of rad decided to
take Johnson up on his offer. Toejam
and Earl is an action/exploration game
for one or two players, complete with
psychedelic palette and funkadelic
soundtrack.
What one discovers, when a game of
Toejam and Earl is initiated, is that action games do not have to be linear
mazes. Each playing of Toejam and Earl
is different, because Johnson uses the
Genesis' processor to generate random
maps for each level rather than static
screens to be mastered by rote. This
means that players move the title characters over unexplored territory and fill in a
map of each level as they travel. There
are even "hidden" plots of ground that
are exposed as a player's on-screen personae touch the appropriate edges of the
visible terrain.
It is also different because the player's

goal is not simply to rescue someone or
reach the end of the series of levels.
Rather, the player(s) must try to locate
the ten different spaceship pieces from
the characters' damaged spaceship and
assemble them in any order (since one
finds them in a random order) so that
the characters can move on. This means
that the immediate goal is to find the
missing spaceship piece on a given level
(if the game says that a missing piece
happens to be located on that level) or
to find the elevator to the next level
(once the missing ship piece is located,
or as fast as possible when there is no
ship piece, in order to reach a level
where one might be).

Toejam and Earl, Johnson has populated his world with a bogey man (who
scares lives out of the good guys), a
mad doctor (who seems to get as much
joy out of using a hypodermic needle on
the characters as Steve Martin's dentist
character enjoyed drilling his patients in
Little Shop of Horrors), giant hamsters
(who travel about in glass globes and flatten any heroes who manage to get too
close), stupid cupids (who launch their arrows at the good guys and cause them
to respond erratically to the game's controls), little old ladies in shopping carts
(who try to mow down the player characters) and many more. In short, the barriers to player success are hilarious.

What is similar to the worlds of "Mario"
and "Sonic" is the fact that one's character finds hidden surprises on every level
which can assist the player in his/her
quest. In Toejam and Earl, the on-screen
characters open "presents" that allow
them to run faster (super hi-tops), jump
higher (spring shoes) and fly (wings).
Each "present" has a distinctive shape
and packaging, so once the player has
opened that type of package, he/she can
know the best use of such a package in
the future.

Indeed, this writer can testify to the fact
that the game is entertaining, having observed first-hand a wide assortment of
children gathered around his Sega
Genesis while the EPROM for Toejam
and Earl was "residing" at his home.
Two children would be playing the game
and anywhere from three to five others
would be cheering them on and laughing
uproariously as they met up with the
dangerous denizens of Johnson's fecund
imagination.

What is also similar to the worlds of
"Mario" and "Sonic" is the fact that one's
character does not really "attack" any of
the cast of characters which serve to foil
the title character's advancement in the
game. Rather, the basic nature of the
game is to avoid the strange obstacles
placed in a given character's path. In

The truth is, this writer was never interested in the traditional "Mario" or "Sonic"
type of videogame. Now, he finds himself
muscling in on an entire neighborhood of
kids, just to hear Earl say, "Wassup?" To
paraphrase a bath soap commercial of a
decade ago, "Kids like it, aye, but I like
it, too!"

-

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tale
As told by Scorpia

A

h, summer's over, and none too

soon. This last one was pretty hot,
and also pretty dry as far as
games were concerned. Even Fred
started to grumble a bit (something
about "scorpions being underfoot all the
time instead of in front of computer
screens where they belong"). Can't imagine why, although he did sound a bit
savage at times. Speaking of savage...
Gateway to the Savage Frontier is the
first in a new gold box series from SSI.
One need only say "gold box game" to
conjure up an idea of what to expect and
that idea would be pretty accurate.
Gateway is a typical AD&D product. It's
been tweaked a little here and there and
the VGA graphics are a little better, but
overall you've played this before in previous games.
The main thing is that your characters
(the usual mix of races and professions)
start off at level one or two, depending
on whether they are single class or multiclass. This can be tough after years of
playing with more advanced characters.
We tend to forget how difficult it is down
there at the bottom, where the player
characters have trouble hitting the broad
side of a barn in full daylight.
The reverse of that is characters who
are so powerful nothing can stop 'em,
which is why SSI is introducing a new
series. The one that began with Pool of
Radiance and ended with Pools of Darkness brought characters up to such
heights of power that there was nowhere
further for them to go. So, you're starting

over again in Gateway. It does tend to
give you that "deja vu" feeling.

"Paranoia Strikes Deep in
the Heartland"
Anyway, this time around you're out to
stop a massive invasion by Zhentil Keep
and friends. This requires finding four special statuettes and using them at a special place in the abandoned town of Ascore. Much of the game is, thus, a
search-and-gather operation with plenty of
enemies to kill in between.
One nice feature added is being able to
see the special items after you've acquired them. Veteran players will recall
that in Curse of the Azure Bonds, once
you picked up a special item (which
couldn't be used directly by the party),
you never saw it again, even though you
did have it with you. After awhile, you
might forget just what you had or hadn't
picked up, and there was no quick way
to check on it. That's been changed. In
Gateway, every time you camp out, the
camp screen displays items you've obtained to that point. No more guesswork!
As far as your party is concerned,
whatever mix of races and classes
worked for you in previous gold box
games will do the job here. I went with
my standard group of three Elven
Fighter/Magic Users, one Dwarf
Fighter/Thief, a Human Paladin and a
Human Cleric. These last two came in
especially handy for turning undead
(especially in Ascore; watch out for the

mummies there, since they are particularly nasty and should be dispensed with
first!).
Since this is the first of a series, level advancement is somewhat limited, especially for spellcasters. Clerics and mages will
only get up to sixth level. Rangers can
make it to seventh. Paladins, Fighters,
and Thieves rise the most, all the way up
to eighth level. Be sure to check the
charts in the back of the Adventurer's
Journal so you know what to expect.

"I Don't Believe What I
Read in the Papers"
Speaking of the Journal, I can make
the pleasant announcement that at long
last SSI is finally using the "word lookup"
from the front only. No longer will you
have to read the game paragraphs
before their time. In addition, SSI has
added "including the headings" to the
look up instructions so you'll be sure to
count lines correctly.
They also seem to have dropped that
annoying "word lookup" when you save
the game. In previous gold box products,
you'd be prompted for a word at random
times before you could save. Not once
did this show up during the two times I
went through the game. It wasn't missed
(grin).
Another improvement is the ability of
spellcasters to automatically re-memorize
spells while doing the "Fix" command.
This is a great time-saver, and also
makes sense: your cleric only has "Cure

Game Hints

Light Wounds" for healing, so fixing up
the injured party members takes a while.
Why let that time go to waste? Now it
doesn't, as spellcasters regain spells
while the healing goes on.

"I Ain't Worrying and I
Ain't Scurrying"
If no one needs healing, but spells must
be renewed, just "Resting" will do the job
(provided, of course, you aren't interrupted!). Usually the best place for healing and resting is an inn (standard fee of
one platinum for a room). No one ever
bothers you there. In other locations,
there is always the chance that something unfriendly will happen by to make
your situation worse.
Gateway is a little less linear than
many gold box games. Although you
can follow the trail of the statuettes in sequence, it is also possible to come
across them while visiting the various
towns and villages. The one danger is
that you can run up against opponents
who are too strong for you early in the
game (remember, your guys are low
level at the start!). Take your time and
don't go too far afield at the start.
There is a mage (you have to rescue
him first) who will give you instructions
on where to find the statuettes. Visit him
each time you find one and he'll tell you
where the next one is to be obtained.
You may hesitate to trust anyone named
"Amanitas," but he's really a kindly soul
and quite honest!
That can't be said for some of the other
NPCs in the game. As you go along,
there are points where people offer to
join your party. Some of them are
trustworthy, others aren't. It's up to you
to decide whether or not you want them.
Most stay only for a short time, but
Krevish (who you meet very early on)
will hang out with the party up to the
end. He isn't much to look at, and his
stats are less than thrilling, but he does
have more sense than the usual NPC
member. He comes equipped with a
bow, and this is his weapon of choice. As
long as you keep him well-supplied with
arrows, he will happily stay in the rear of
the party, pecking away at the opposition. He even hits them sometimes, too
(heh).
There is something new with these
NPCs: they take their own share of the
treasure before it's divvied up. Before the
treasure screen is displayed, you see a
message that "Krevish takes and hides
his own share." They certainly do hide it;
this money (or possibly money, gems

and jewels) is never shown on the character screen. It's theirs and they make sure
you can't get your greedy little paws on it.
Which means if you want Krevish, for instance, to be trained up levels when the
time comes, you have to fork over the
cash for it. Training isn't free. In fact, it's
downright expensive, being a thousand
gold pieces per level. At the start of the
game, this can be a problem. Money is
hard to come by; most opponents in the
early stages don't carry much with them.
You can easily find yourself with the PCs
needing to be trained up, but without the
necessary cash to do it.
Later, the reverse is true: you have tons
of money, gems and jewels, but the need
for them isn't so great, since you're reaching the upper levels of advancement,
with new levels few and far between.
Unlike many other gold box games,
there's nothing much to be found in the
wilderness beyond what is shown on the
map. All you'll come across on wandering expeditions is wandering monsters.
No secret places or interesting locations,
at least none that I was ever able to find.

Ditto for the taverns: all you can do
there now is fight or leave. You can't
even buy a drink and there's no gossip
to overhear. Rather makes the taverns a
complete waste in the game.

"Exaggerating This and
Exaggerating That"
There is an extensive system of rivers
in this portion of the world and you can
rent boats to reach different towns. Many
can also be visited on foot, but often only
by taking wide detours. The advantage to
renting boats is that, along the way, you
are likely to be bothered only by the occasional Ankheg whereas, on foot, you
might also be accosted by hill giants,
goblins, hobgoblins, wild boars, bugbears
or giant snakes. Expect to find trolls in
the Trollmoors, as well as a possible
basilisk or two. Wyverns could well show
up around the edges of the desert. It's a
dangerous world out there, so be
prepared for it; you can't always run
from these random encounters.
Definitely buy everyone in the party a
silver mirror. There are some Medusae
lurking in certain places, and you know

Game Hints

what that means if you aren't ready for
them. Just remember the mirrors have to
be "equipped" to be useful!
There aren't too many neat items in the
game. About the best armor you'll have
is chainmail+1 (although there is one suit
of plate+1 you can get) and you'll only
find one ring of protection (+2) and a
number of bracers AC 4. The best
shields are +1 and not easy to come
across.
Weaponry is also somewhat limited.
Most of what you come across is of the
+1 variety, mainly broadswords and light
crossbows and a couple of maces. Additionally, there is a regular +2 longsword
and +2 battleaxe. In the ruins of Ascore,
if you're lucky, you might find the
longbow +2, some +2 arrows and the
Elven longsword+2 versus Undead
(which, despite being Elven, is usable
only by Dwarves).
The single best weapon in the game is
hard to come by, but worth the effort. If
you can get a piece of meteorite, the
smith in Neverwinter can forge it into a
very nice longsword+3 of Stonecutting.
This does double damage against stone

critters, such as margoyles (yep, they're
baaaack!). I could only find one piece of
meteorite, so expect to have only one
such sword.
Magical weaponry is very limited. There
is a necklace of fireballs, a wand of ice
storm and a wand of defoliation (handy
for when those shambling mounds
shamble in). Save these for the really important fights, as their charges are
limited, too.
The most difficult part of the game
comes at the end, when you have all the
statuettes and you're ready for Ascore.
To reach the plaza, you have to fight
your way through a maze. This is especially nasty, because it is continuous combat. Once inside, there is no saving, no
resting, no renewal of spells.
When the first combat ends, instead of
being taken to the usual treasure screen,
the party remains in the room. You have
to find an exit and maneuver one member of the party through it (one is
enough). This requires heavy use of the
"Aim" command so you can locate exits
without a lot of moving around.

After leaving the room, you get the
treasure screen. When you're done with
that, the party finds itself in the next combat room. This procedure continues on
until you either find the way out of the
maze, or you get trashed by the
monsters.
The first room has a bunch of goblins,
the second an army of goblins, the third
a single goblin, the fourth some shambling mounds and ettins, the fifth is occupied by a few mages and fighters, and
the last room is the Big Bad Guy himself,
along with some mages, fighters and
quite a few shambling mounds.
It's best to make a crude map as you
go along, so you don't end up travelling
in circles. If you enter a room you've
been in before, you'll have to fight the
same critters that were there before, too,
all over again. So make sure you save
the game before entering the first room,
in case you get into big trouble and find
restoring is necessary.

"I'm Just Havin' a Good
Time"
The big finale (using the statuettes just
as hordes of unfriendly things are approaching from all directions) is actually
rather tame. It's all done for you automatically through text paragraphs and some
pictures; you just sit there and watch it
all. After that, you're brought back automatically to Yartar, the starting town. At
that point, you can stop playing or
wander around to tie up any loose ends.
Rather astonishingly, the Ascore maze
doesn't get turned off after you use the
statuettes. If you go back there later,
you'll find that the game doesn't seem to
know you're done. You can go through
the entire maze exactly as before, including the "big finale" (even though you
don't have the statuettes by now) and
the return to Yartar. That's really deja vu!
And that's about it for now, as I see by
the old invisible clock on the wall.
Remember, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

Stop the Presses!
Davidson's Headline Harry and the Great Paper Race
by Caitlin Ackelson

chance to chase down breaking news stories as an ace
reporter for the fictitious U.S. Daily Star is what players
age 10 to adult have when they boot up Headline Harry
and the Great Paper Race, a new learning adventure game
from Davidson.

A

Headline Harry is a fiercely ethical journalist whose scrupulous
editing of his prestigious national daily newspaper has placed it
firmly in second place in sales behind that tainted yellow scandal
rag, the Diabolical Daily. The player's job is to work his or her
way up through the journalistic ranks from cub reporter to
staff, then senior reporter, all the way up to star reporter.
The more stories filed by the reporter-player, the farther
one advances, not only one's own career, but the success
and stature of the newspaper as well.
The player starts by choosing a geographic region of the
United States (South, Mid-Atlantic, New England,
Northwest, etc.) to report from, then meeting with Headline
Harry in his office and getting an assignment.

Riding the Bus with Rosa Parks
Harry gives the player some introductory information
about a potential story that's brewing and instructs
him/her where to start. Following direction is important
here. For instance, Harry may say something like, "There's
a bus boycott happening in the South and it looks like
something big might happen. Why don't you go to Georgia and check it out?" At this point the player might think,
"Hmm... bus boycott... civil rights... Rosa Parks. That's in
Alabama — I'll go there first." Wrong. The first clues and
bits of information the player needs are in Georgia, and
skipping them to go straight to Alabama (where the
serious action is) will leave one with pieces of the puzzle
missing. So, lesson one: Do what Harry says.

Looking for Hot Tips and Good Leads
In choosing where to go while reporting on a story, the
player must pick out the state of destination on an unmarked map of the U.S. (Ooh, a nasty trick! It's a task
that strained this reviewer's knowledge of geography embarrassingly. Where is Georgia, anyway? It took a couple
of tries to get it right. But then again, this reviewer has to
quietly sing the alphabet song to herself to figure out if "q"
comes before "r.") Once in the desired location, the
reporter-player taps into all the resources of information

TITLE:
Headline Harry and the Great Paper Race
SYSTEM:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNERS:
Mary Cron, Anne Hertz
PUBLISHER:
Davidson
Torrance, CA

Review

Extra, Extra
The documentation for Headline Harry is clear and helpful.
The instruction book is done as a newspaper-style reporter's
manual, complete with sections titled "Feature Story," "Editorial,"
"Dear Gabby" and "Classified." This approach to how-to may bet
ter keep the interest of younger, less experienced players who
might otherwise get bogged down in page after page of dry instructional text before they even get to boot the game.
Sound and graphics are fully up to par to hold the attention
and suspend the disbelief. The full-spectrum 256-color edition of
Headline Harry requires 640K and supports MCGA and VGA displays. Hard disk installation is required, MS/PC DOS 2.1 or
Tandy DOS 2.11.24 or higher, and a minimum of 8 MHz is suggested. The program optionally supports the AdLib, SoundBlaster, Tandy and PS/1 sound devices, as well as a printer and
mouse. No hardware is needed for digitized speech on a
machine with 10 MHz AT or higher. Both 5.25-inch HD (1.2Mb)
and 3.5-inch 720K disks are included in the box. Also available
are a 16-color version and a 16-color, two-program Teacher's Edition with a five-program Lab Pack.
available. One can conduct interviews, clicking on the people in
each scene, thereby "asking" them for information. Some of the
people are eye-witnesses, some have hearsay information about
the events in question. Some of them can be very helpful, some
are quite funny. For more fact-finding fun, one can listen to the
radio or tape recorder or access reference information by clicking on the corresponding menu icons. The player can even use
the phone to call the trusty assistant Lazar, Headline Harry, Dr.
Know (a source of hints, both helpful and not) or Mom. (A good
tip to remember in life as well as in Headline Harry: When all
else fails, call Mom.)
To gather facts, the player records key names, dates and
events (the all-important who, what, where, when and why) in an
on-screen notebook by clicking on the notebook-and-pencil icon.
Once all the leads have been followed up and the crucial facts
have been accumulated, the story is ready to file. If the player
beats his or her smarmy, ruthless competitors to press, then it's
on to the next echelon of reporterdom and the next big story.

From Vietnam to Music Video
The stories available for coverage by a reporter-player in Headline Harry are drawn from historical and cultural events from
1950 to 1990. Such topics as politics, arts and entertainment,
sports and science are touched on and while previous knowledge
of the events can help, it is by no means required. Subjects
range from serious world events (wars, presidents and Supreme
Court decisions) to whimsical cultural trends (Elvis, mood rings
and hit TV shows). While covering a story, the reporter-player
must sort through all of the information, follow the strongest,
most accurate leads and compile the story before the
treacherous, unscrupulous, lying scum at the Diabolical Daily
have a chance to publish their inaccurate, sensationalized version
of the same story.

All the News That's Fit to Learn
The educational material players are exposed to in Headline
Harry and the Great Paper Race is not only broad-ranging
newspaper-style lessons in recent U.S. history, but fact-finding
and problem-solving skills, too. Players must use that most
elusive of qualities, critical thinking, to sift through the facts,
decide what's important and applicable to the story at hand, and
leave the rest. In addition, if players can't find Georgia on a U.S.
map, they'll learn.

The Computer Game of Record
Headline Harry is a newsworthy "scoop" in educational
software. Funny and compelling, it gives kids a reporter's-eye
view of U.S. history. With its treasure-hunt approach to learning
and adventure game format, the game provides an entertaining
approach to U.S. political and cultural history and the fast-paced,
superglamorous world of journalism.

Review

MicroIllusions' Discovery 2.0
by Leah Wesolowski
TITLE:
Discovery 2.0
SYSTEM:
Amiga
# PLAYERS:
1
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
$ 39.95
DEVELOPER:
Sylvan Technical Arts
PUBLISHER: MicroIllusions

resembling octopi, amoebae
and spiders, can be deadly if
the player comes in contact
with one of them. It seems a
frivolous task to bring such
dangerous critters back to wildlife parks, maybe akin to putting a
great white shark in a tank with tropical fish! Nevertheless, one
wonders how a kindergartner can be expected to manipulate characters past such deadly creatures without experiencing undue frustration when experienced gamers have trouble accomplishing this task.

Can You Say ED-U-K-SHUN?
Remember, however, that the educational portion of the game is
for players to answer questions. Hence, the player's character regularly encounters closed doors. To gain access to the room beyond the
door, the player must spell a word correctly or solve a math problem. The computer says, for example, "Spell 'Beneboly'" and, no matter how many times this reviewer has the word repeated, there is no
way of knowing that the required word was 'Inevitably.' So, the computer replies "Not guite, the Kor-reckt spel-ling iz...." This reviewer
now feels as if there really may be a place in this world for Mr.
Rogers. He could spend a few hours teaching Amigas how to talk!
Further, the methods employed to solve the math problems are
preposterous! Take this example of a simple addition problem:
234
+234
If the player simply enters "468," the discordant computer voice
says, "That iz in-Kor-rect..." and goes on to show the player that the
only correct way to solve problems of this nature is to carry the zeros:
magine a game in which the plot of Aliens is reversed. Instead of
seeking the dangerous life-form in order to reduce all of its living
entities into fried interplanetary viscera, the protagonist is frantically trying to round up fuel crystals in order to transport a modern
"Noah's Ark" of dangerous xenoforms to a wildlife refuge. So much
for conservation and so much for the premise underlying Discovery
2.0, an interactive educational space adventure game which boasts
playability levels for children grades K through 12. The game is interactive and it is educational, but its playability is right up there with
solo Tic Tac Toe.

00

I

Frustration 101
Players move their on-screen characters through a space ship in
order to gather fuel crystals and save the alien creatures. Occasionally, the movement of the characters is halted and a question must be
answered or a problem must be solved before further movement is
possible. Unfortunately, character movement within the framework of
the game is clumsy at best. When this reviewer became frustrated at
the bothersome experience of having her characters fall down
hatches, even though they were ostensibly equipped with ladders, a
thirteen-year-old neighbor was brought into the equation. It was
hoped that younger reflexes and video game experience would lend
some assistance in avoiding the unwelcome experience of having to
work one's way back up the levels the character fell past. (At least
characters don't die, no matter how many levels they fall!) Even the
teenager had trouble manipulating the characters.
Once the player locates those fuel crystals, the next problem occurs. The crystals are, more often than not, guarded by the very
aliens the player is trying to save. Unfortunately, these creatures,

234
+234
468
Subtraction is a different matter altogether. When borrowing from a
number, the player must hit the 'B' key, which moves the cursor to
the position left of the column being worked upon. (If that value is
zero, the player must hit the 'B' key twice to get to the proper position.) The new value of the number being borrowed from must be
entered before proceeding to the solution. While this may be good
for large problems it is a hindrance with simple subtraction such as:
20
9
To add insult to injury, there is no way to correct the error if the
player enters an incorrect figure and immediately realizes it. Therefore, the player again has the displeasure of hearing, "Not gu-ite..."

Lessons Learned
Can a child learn something by playing Discovery 2.0?
"Not gu-ite...." As early as the original Discovery, reviewers thought
the concept was good, but the implementation was poor. Nothing
has really changed. With a new digitized voice, the ability to correct
mathematical errors and a movement system in which characters
didn't continually fall down hatches (easier than characters fall down
ladders in Shadow of the Beast), the game might be worthwhile. As
it is, Discovery 2.0 is only likely to make one scream.

Review

Uncovering Passionate Patti in
by J.D.
:

Leisure Suit Larry 5:
Passionate Patti Does a
Little Undercover Work
SYSTEM:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Al Lowe
PUBLISHER:
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

p

atti's eyes were mesmeriz-

ing orbs that pulled Larry
into her gaze as surely as
a planet's moon affects its tide.
Patti performed a perfectly
paced pirouette in that longstanding bathing beauty tradition designed to melt even the
sturdiest stock of manhood and
gracefully fluttered her eyelids
in the feminine analog to a matador passing his cape before
a raging bull (and with the same intent). Larry responded to
that teasing "Come hither" look in the same way that
cavemen have been reduced to kept men for millennia. He
gently grasped her zipper and began the sensuous ritual of
exposing her creamy white shoulders to his worshipful eyes.
Both hands swayed in a serpentine dance toward Patti's...
suddenly, the magic was broken. "Excuse me, sir," queried
the flight attendant, shattering Larry's dream, "is there something wrong with your nuts?" Airline peanuts were the last
thing on Larry's mind as a red sunset of embarrassment
glowed across his face.
As nearly anyone can tell from the scene just described, Al
Lowe is back with the kind of irreverent humor that makes
everyone a victim, from M.C. Hammer to J. Danforth himself.
Alert readers will have noted that the article title describes the cur
rent game as Leisure Suit Larry 5 (LSL5). This may be disconcerting to those who realize that no actual LSL4 was ever publish
ed, but since Al doesn't mind making Larry and Patti feel uncomfortable, he sure isn't going to stop with computer gamers. So,
the last thing computer garners remember about their synthetically clad friend was the fact that he had lost both his memory and
Patti. In fact, if it is possible for Larry to sink even lower, he has
done so in LSL5.
In LSL5, Larry turns up as the Chief VCR Rewinder and
Sterilizer (Beta Division) for PornProdCorp. His latest assignment
is working on the new show America's Sexiest Home Videos, a
program that solicits videos that would best be rated by Floridabased vice squads. Larry's boss, Silas Scruemall, selects Larry to
find the sexiest woman in America to host the show. His mission,
should he decide to accept it, is to go out and audition three of
the best candidates. After all, if Larry can get lucky with any of
these, they must really be passionate and sexy (maybe even
nymphomaniacs looking to start a franchise).

Zip-Look Interface
Sierra's new parserless interface means that players only need
to type words whenever they are saving a game. If Larry or Patti
need to hold a conversation with someone, the player simply
places the conversation balloon icon over the person they wish
to speak with and the program handles the entire conversation. If
there is no useful information to impart, the program informs the
player that Larry or Patti has had a "meaningful conversation"
with the victim of their social intercourse. Veteran Sierra adven-

turers will note that one must still look at everything and try to
pick up/manipulate everything, but it is no longer necessary to
guess what the program calls an item or which verb the program
wants the player to use. Now, one simply places the
CBS...er..."Eye" icon on an object to look at it or examine it. If
one wants to pick it up, one simply places the arrow cursor on
the object and clicks. If one wants to manipulate the object, one
uses the "Hand" icon. The icon that may give players the most
trouble is the "Zipper" icon used to relieve oneself or to initiate
the PG-rated sex scenes to which the game forever alludes.
Some of the puzzles are difficult, but even novice players can
take heart in the knowledge that neither Larry nor Patti can be
killed (computer game immortality?), one cannot leave the
screen if there is a "must do" which has not yet been accomplished and one cannot jump ahead in the game (using the
fast forward button in the VCR interface) if there is an unsolved
puzzle (unless it is possible to come back to the location with the
unsolved puzzle). There is even on-line assistance, in that one
can click on the "Question Mark" and target any item on the
screen in order to receive help. The "Briefcase" icon, of course,
is the inventory, and the "Blank" icon window is reserved for
one's active inventory (i.e. objects which the character is currently using will appear in the "Blank" icon window).

And Away We Go (Warning: Hints Involved)
To get these interviews, Larry is equipped with a miniature
camera, a Rob Lowe model which looks like a pocket protector
and is to be used to get pictures...er...interviews, of the three candidates. Candidate #1 is a wealthy NYC junk bond broker,
Michelle Milken. Candidate #2 is an Atlantic City professional
mud wrestler/casino change girl, Lana Luscious. Candidate #3 is
a Miami dental hygienist and former lambada dancer/gymnast,
ChiChi Lambada.
Larry must travel to all these cities to interview each girl. "It's a
tough job," he says, "but I'm going to do it!" Larry has his own
limousine to travel in, but he must make sure he has all his luggage with him to leave. Before Larry leaves he must locate the
files of the girls, three blank video cassettes, his camera and
charging unit, his hoarding pass, the Aerodork flight schedule
and his plastic money card. "Now where did I put those things?"
he asks. Experienced players will go into all the rooms and
search everything.
Once on the plane, of course, Larry will have the daydream of
Patti described in the introduction to this article and the action

Review

Sierra's Leisure Suit Larry 5
Lambright

will move to Patti as the protagonist. It seems that Patti has just
been stiffed out of two weeks' pay when she is approached by Inspector Desmond of the FBI. They want Patti to go undercover
and "service"...er..."serve" her country by working undercover to
infiltrate the music industry and investigate Mob influence. Patti
agrees and accompanies the inspector to FBI headquarters.
There, she witnesses some of the new inventions, some of which
would do justice to Get Smart in their functional humor. She experiences a gynecological fitting for a secret transmitter, as well
as receiving a new addition to her wardrobe, one which requires
a wrench to adjust. Patti is given several numbers. They are a
phone number, E-Mail number, a password and a code name:
Agent 88. A smart player will write them down! Without them,
one cannot even move in the game. [Note: Interestingly
enough, the code name was supposed to be both a play on
the number of keys on a piano and a reference to Max's old
number on the Get Smart television series. Actually, Max was
Agent 86 and his "Patti" was Agent 99. See, even great game
designers outsmart themselves, sometimes!]
Patti is to investigate a studio engineer named Reverse Biaz,
who specializes in subliminal recordings and a obscene rap
lyricist/disc jockey from KRAP radio, P.C. Hammer. Patti has a
limousine also, complete with fax, telephone, fish tank and
telephone, but like anything else purchased by government requisition, they don't all work. So, how does one get started? Could
be that Desmond might have an idea. As Patti travels, the presentation dissolves back to Larry.
Larry arrives at NYC's Hard Disk Cafe and is so much in awe at
the sight of the memorabilia displayed that he cannot move. Too
bad the loudmouthed fat lady won't shut up and let Larry get
anyone's attention. Maybe Larry ought to show something official
in order to get in. If Larry does get into the club, he meets Michelle and, hopefully, gets lucky. He spends his time with Michelle,
boards a plane for Atlantic City and starts to daydream. Flash!
The game returns to Patti at the Baltimore recording studio.
Patti has been introduced as a keyboardist (88, get it?) and,
after negotiating the foyer, she makes her way to meet Reverse
Biaz. He asks her to play a piece that he is recording, so the
player gets to limber up his/her fingers and go with the rhythm.
Even players who are tone deaf will have no trouble getting
through this scenario. There are four ways to deal with Reverse
Biaz: talk to him, jump him, let things take their course or "put
the zipper" on him. If all goes well, Patti flies for Phillie with a
gold record in her baggage. The game moves back to Larry, now
in Atlantic City.

There are plenty of casinos in Atlantic City, but Larry only has
only plastic money and it takes
those green lettuce leaves to get
past the huge bouncer in the
casino. One certainly needs to
meet the right kind of friend.
Once inside the casino, it is a
sure bet Larry can figure out
some way to increase his
salubrious salad of cash. He will
need plenty of dough to get into
the action and meet Lana Luscious. Once Larry has the pictures (astute players will not forget to turn the camera on in
order to get the film and off in
order to keep from running the
battery down even faster than the "girls" say Larry runs down),
he is off to Miami, his final destination. Naturally, the game
moves back to Patti as she arrives at KRAP.
Well, there's no receptionist here and the door to John
Krapper's office is locked. The phone on the wall looks promising, assuming Patti can remember that phone number which Inspector Desmond gave her by fax. Then, once inside the office,
just before the secretary gets back, she has to find the evidence.
Naturally, the desk looks promising and there is a convenient letter opener on the desk. Of course, there is always the problem of
what to do with the evidence once she finds it. Hope she isn't too
redundant.
Then, it is time to meet with P.C. Hammer. He may not move
like M.C., but he has Patti's kind of moves (wink, wink).
Meanwhile, Larry arrives at the dentist's office where ChiChi
Lambada works. Larry remembers why he hates dentists so
much. Boy, ChiChi Lambada sure has some strange dental equipment, not to mention her equipment. Hope Larry's into pain. So,
after a thorough cleaning and a drilling, Larry heads for home
with the three video cassettes (and some pleasant memories to
boot), while Patti is being debriefed by Inspector Desmond back
at the FBI headquarters.
During the debriefing, Patti learns that she is to be the singer at
a White House dinner. Naturally, that is where the game's denouement occurs.

Debriefing for Leisure Suit Larry 5
LSL5 is a thoroughly enjoyable game. From the opening sequence in the PornProdCorp's office to the final scene, the
humor and thought that went into this game is quite evident. The
game is extensive, requiring 8 MB of hard disk space and uses
enough RAM that most players will have to deactivate all
memory-resident programs in order to play it. The game is currently available in a VGA version with the EGA to be released
soon. It supports the Roland, Sound Blaster and Tandy sound
boards. In fact, there is an "Easter Egg" when one uses the
Sound Blaster card. Every function key has a rude noise contributed by each of the development team members respectively.
Now, if they could only come up with a Virtual Reality version
of Patti. In order to move beyond the great colors and sounds of
this Leisure Suit Larry, that is just about what Al is going to
have to do. Sierra embraces VR! What do you think, Al?

Review

w on
)rugs

material (RAM); vectored thrust (which dramatically increases aircraft maneuverability); new engines which permit
supersonic flight without using afterburners and enhanced
weapon systems.

Fear of Flying

Jim Hoover has spent the last two years working with high
performance fighter jets, pilots and maintenance personnel at
NAS Cecil Field in Florida. NAS Cecil is a Master Jet Base located near Jacksonville, Florida, and is the East Coast home
of the F/A-18 Hornet.

W

ith white knuckles gripping the stick, the rookie concentrates on taking small, even gulps of oxygen as
the tell-tale pounding of his heart beats a Caribbean
rhythm in his chest. With eyes like a bird of prey focusing
out of the cockpit, he makes a visual lock on the postage
stamp-sized landing field ahead, his carrier. Placing his jet
precisely on that flight deck means safety, success and satisfaction, but first, he has to "call the ball."
In Velocity Development's new game, Jetfighter II: Advanced Tactical Fighter, learning how to land on a carrier is critical to success. Jetfighter II is a sequel to the game, Jetfighter:
The Adventure, and tends to be much more challenging than
the original game by the time players undertake the missions in
Sector 3. The new game focuses on the introduction and use of
the new stealth technology embodied in the F23-D Advanced Tactical Fighter (ATF). It joins a stable of three other high-tech jets
which appeared in the original game: the F-14 Tomcat, the F/A18 Hornet and the F-16 Falcon.
The F23-D "Black Widow" ATF has a completely different flight
model from other jets in the simulation and it gives one a distinct
advantage over adversary aircraft. The ATF incorporates the
latest advances in fighter technology, including radar absorbent

For those who do not want to get involved immediately in
the breakneck pace of the ,game's fiction, the simulation allows the player to fly in a "Free Flight" mode (similar to
flying around in Microsoft's Flight Simulator IV with a
Mach 3 jet). It is also the only mode in which the "spectacular time acceleration feature" advertised on the box can
be accessed (use Shift-0). In this mode, prospective jet
jocks and even veteran pilots can practice takeoffs and landings, view the sights of the simulated Southern California
coast and seascapes or practice the critical carrier landings
and catapult launches necessary for victory in the game. A
caveat is certainly due here, however. Many garners are experiencing a "disappearing carrier" glitch when they play the missions in Sector 3. Anyone experiencing this problem needs to
download "JF2FIX1" from CompuServe or check with Velocity
for a $4 upgrade.
The practice mode also allows pilots an opportunity to practice
air combat maneuvering (ACM) and ground attack missions in
order to prepare for the missions found in the "adventure" portion of the program. The "adventure" itself is a campaign of 125
missions which must be flown in order to defeat an enemy army
of radical mercenaries and terrorists from South America. This
"Latin American Revolutionary Army" (LARA) has attacked
Southern California in a suicide invasion and is financed by a
huge drug cartel as a diversion away from the war on drugs.
Their planes and other weapons have been obtained on the Third
World weapons market and they are deadly: MiG-29 Fulcrums,
MiG-31 Foxhounds, Stinger surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) and surface-to-surface missiles comprise their arsenal.
The player climbs into the simulated cockpit as one of the
nation's top jet fighter pilots, assigned to fly one of the game's
four aircraft on either carrier- or land-based missions.
Many times, the player can choose between several potential
missions in attacking key enemy targets. It is a target-rich environment. At other times, however, the computer-controlled
enemy will take the offensive against the good guys and the
player must respond on the defensive. If the player opts to go on

Review

Velocity's Jetfighter II

TITLE:
Jetfighter
SYSTEMS:
IBM with 640K
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
$69.95
DESIGNER:
Bob Dinnerman
PUBLISHER:
Velocity Development
Palatine, IL

the offensive, he is presented (at the click of a mouse) with
digitized images which offer information on each plane's flight
characteristics and each weapon's usefulness. Players who purchased the game during its initial roll-out will note that ordnance
which is not expended during a bombing run often disappears
upon landing. Then, it mysteriously reappears upon take-off. Fortunately, this "Twilight Zone" of ordnance acquisition actually assists rather than hinders one's potential for succeeding in the mission. Once equipped, the mission proper begins. The opening is
dramatic as the screen zooms in from an overhead satellite view,
focuses down to the carrier deck and visually sits the player in
the cockpit of a given aircraft. The throttles are eased forward to
full military power and the catapult virtually propels the player
into the mission.
The plane accelerates from 0 to 180 knots in less than two
seconds and the player is off to beat the bad guys. The program
tracks mission progress and calculates both the United States'
and LARA's effectiveness in the campaign. Points are assigned
based on the importance of the targets chosen and success in accomplishing the mission objectives. Every detail is tracked, including number of flares expended and number of SAMs avoided,
but many gamers are finding that configuration differences in
their machines open them up to receiving "poor" and "fair" performance ratings, even when they have followed the rules of
engagement and completed the mission with a maximum score.
Fortunately, in spite of the ludicrous fiction used to justify the
missions and the occasional unjustified scoring glitches, the missions are challenging,
reasonably well-balanced and open to future
expansion through supplementary mission
disks. Many players feel like the game is too
easy during the initial missions, but almost
everyone agrees that the Sector 3 and Sector 4 missions are very tough.

Pre-Flight Check List
(Mechanics)
The install program detects the
idiosyncrasies of one's system configuration
from the outset (memory, video setting,
sound card, etc.) and prepares the program
for loading. Once installed, the program is
operated via a simple menu system.

The aircraft flight controls for all of the available jets are the
same, although the cockpits differ. Unlike other high-tech jet
simulators, the number of keys to operate the aircraft are minimal and most are mnemonic (for example, "R" for radar mode
and "T" for target).
Jetfighter II offers some spectacular graphics, too. The scrolling is smooth, the bit-mapped explosions are impressive, the
graduated horizon is comparable to that in F-15 Strike Eagle II,
exterior light is handled differently depending on whether a mission takes place at night or during the day and various features
of the landscape are very detailed. Those who want the optimal
graphic touches will have to have VGA, though. The CGA version of the game is, frankly, a waste and even the EGA version
does not adequately present most of the graphic excellence of
the program.

Performance Evaluation
In summary, for those who do not have the privilege of attending the U.S. Navy's flight school in Pensacola, Florida, this will
probably be the closest they will ever get to landing on a carrier
in a high-performance jet. Jetfighter II: Advanced Tactical
Fighter does a great job of simulating both the difficulty and exhilaration a pilot experiences once he finally places his jet on the
carrier deck and comes to a screeching halt after catching the
"three wire."

Bestseller List

I

Review

by Deborah Muldawer

ithin hours, Otto von Slinkenrat's plan will be complete. Rare and wonderful items, intended for the international culture festival, will instead be smuggled
into Otto's Mongolian mansion.
In Bush Buck Charms, Viking Ships and Dodo Eggs, only the
player can stop this evil genius by searching frantically for chocolate eclairs, Tet firecrackers and poda-poda tires. Although the
plot sounds like that of an adventure game, Bush Buck Charms,
Viking Ships and Dodo Eggs is actually an educational program. The player can only beat Otto by participating in a global
scavenger hunt that ranges in difficulty from beginner to advanced.

"The Plane, The Plane" (Game Play)
Initially, the player is introduced to the game by a squeaky version of the Alfred Hitchcock theme. Rather than adding
suspense, this theme adds insanity and forces most players to
try to get past the preliminaries as soon as possible. An audio
card does not even enhance the sound because the driver only
supports the internal speaker.
Then players are assigned a starting country and five items to
retrieve. Using a plane to travel from country to country, one
uses clues and city descriptions to locate the items to scavenge.
The clues are found only in randomly assigned cities, but the city
descriptions appear upon entrance to each new destination.
While these city descriptions are not clues, they may assist one
in obtaining items in some future game.
When the rare items are found, the players must return them to
the assigned starting city. If the items are unharmed, they can be
traded in for points, ranging in value from 500 to 1500. If the
items are injured, due to long travels or foul weather conditions,
the value is reduced. Because of this, it is sometimes better to
take a clear circumspect route, rather than a stormy direct one.
When each item is returned, the player is given ten bonus tickets
and another item to rescue from Otto's greedy clutches. Although the basic premise of the game remains the same, certain
features change on different levels.
At the beginner level, a thermometer icon is used to indicate
whether the player is "cold" or "hot" on the trail of the various
items. At this level, items are automatically loaded onto the
plane whenever a player lands in the correct city.
In the intermediate and advanced levels, the thermometer is
replaced by an "eye." There, one merely selects the "eye" icon in
order to look for an item in a given city. This costs one ticket,
however, so players will learn to use this icon economically. On
the intermediate level, the "eye" will light up if an item is available.
On the advanced level, the player can only make educated
guesses from given clues. First, the player does not have the option of playing alone. If a second human player does not inter-

TITLE:

Bushbuck Charms,
Viking Ships and Dodo Eggs
SYSTEM:
IBM
1-2
# PLAYERS:
PRICE
$49.95
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-Up
PUBLISHER:
P.C. Globe, Inc.
Tempe, AZ

Review

vene, Otto von Slinkenrat himself automatically enters the game.
In all levels, a disproportionate number of clues fall to the computer opponents. However, since the human player can see
these clues, all one loses is a few points. If the clues appear for
one's opponent, it is a good idea to write them down for future
reference.

read the city descriptions hoping for clues, but after the fifth or
sixth description, all locations start to blend together and it is difficult to retain the facts one is supposed to have gleaned from
playing the game. Perhaps, if the game used more pictures and
less text, players would remember what facts belong to which
city.

Help given on the beginner level results in a lower score. Point
values are considerably less than those at the intermediate and
advanced levels. Returning an undamaged item brings only 500
points. A clue is worth five and finding an item adds 50 points to
the score. An unused ticket can be traded for 10 points. However, on the intermediate level, the stakes are doubled. On the advanced, the point value is tripled.

The Plan, The Plan (Conclusions)

"The Plain, The Plain" (Critical Notes)

Overall, this game should appeal to serious students who do
not require special visual and audio effects. The reviewer introduced the game to a twelve-year-old boy who liked the game because of the challenge and increasing difficulty. In addition,
several adults responded to the game because of the intellectual
stimulation it provided. Bush Buck Charms, Viking Ships and
Dodo Eggs would probably work well in a classroom situation,
but due to the two-player restriction, several copies would be
needed.

Bush Buck Charms, Viking Ships and Dodo Eggs is not
designed for technical excellence. The sound is weak and the
text is indistinct. Even on a Super VGA monitor, the text appeared slightly fuzzy. The maps of the world, while accurately
done, do not display any superb graphic planning. Finally, the
only graphics, in addition to the maps themselves, are the mission-assigning envelopes and the computer opponents.
The only good news, with regard to the technical aspects, is
that they are so unexceptional that almost any system will encompass the full potential of the game. The bad news is that
Bush Buck's presentation hinges so completely on the brief list
of facts encountered by players as they enter new cities that any
hope of mnemonic assistance soon fades away. At first, one will

The game, although tentatively geared for mid-school students,
can be played by adults as well. An interest in geography helps,
as it takes three or four games to feel comfortable with the system. Without motivation, quitting is tempting during the initial
frustration of the game.

If one does not have an interest in geography or history, Bush
Buck Charms is probably not a good investment. If one wishes
to learn about the world and improve one's map-reading skills,
however, Bush Buck Charms, Viking Ships, and Dodo Eggs is
a reasonably interesting and painless way to attain these skills.

Review

Great "A's" Baseball
I
by Win Rogers

well. It is strongest in graphics

and arcade support, and offers
a lively, visually appealing playing environment. Players pitch,
swing the bat, slide and leap for
fly balls with convincing energy.
Since a single camera cannot
cover an entire field satisfactorily, multiple camera angles can
be distracting and a small scale
washes out detail, TLUB opts
TITLE:
Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball
for overlapping windows and a
SYSTEMS:
IBM (reviewed),
Commodore-64 (available soon)
behind-the-plate camera that
PRICE:
$49.95
scrolls over an impressively
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-up
detailed playing field. The acDESIGNER:
Beyond Software
tion is in an unnamed stadium;
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale. CA
disks with additional stadiums
are promised from the manufacturer. There is a large closeup window for pitcher-batter matchups
that disappears when the ball is in play, and a small diagram window
for tracking the movements of the runners on the basepaths to aid in
deciding where a fielder should throw the ball.
Complaints about TLUB in this review should be understood as
minor quibbles about a product that delivers a lot of satisfaction. For
example, not everybody will like the somewhat hard-to-read
scoreboard-light grid. [Publisher's note: Personally, I like it.] There
is a mandatory look at the line score at the end of each half-inning
to show the logo of one of the commercial firms who have paid for
this exposure (with promotional consideration). Realism in a baseball
simulation is one thing, but it is annoying to pay for a computer
game and then be forced to watch real commercial messages.
Twenty-six teams are provided, one for each current major-league
franchise. Each is stocked with an all-time all-star roster for that
franchise, with no currently active players (for licensing reasons).
Each player is represented by his stats from an outstanding season.
This makes for enjoyable games once one gets used to Carl Hubbell
playing for San Francisco, Walter Johnson for Minnesota and Jimmie Foxx for Oakland. Of course, the pickings are pretty slim for
Toronto and Seattle, with only fourteen seasons of history and active
players ineligible. Additional player disks — the 1990 season and historic teams — are promised later this fall. Each roster can hold thirty
players, twenty-five active at any one time, plus five on the reserve
list. Players can be moved off the reserve list, such as to replace an
injured player, and when playing a simulated season, the game will
make such changes automatically.

n this era of escalating sports salaries, it seems there is a new alltime record salary contract every few weeks during the off
season. The pressure of competition can stimulate similar developments in software technology. Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball
(TLUB), a new release, is already the best-looking, best-playing
baseball simulation yet, but it is not clear how long it will hold that
title. Loyal Earl Weaver Baseball fans waiting for version II may not
believe it, but TLUB, designed by a member of the original Earl
Weaver Baseball development team, may well prove more satisfying
than the upgraded version from the industry leader.

I

The designer of a computer baseball simulation has a tall order
these days. The perfect game would provide rich visuals, a solid
statistical foundation and the playability to combine graphics, arcade
action and statistics smoothly. It would take advantage of the faster
processing speeds, VGA graphics and sound boards of today's home
computers, but not freeze out those with older, slower machines. It
would work equally well entertaining a couple of kids testing their
reflexes and devoted statistics buffs replaying old pennant races. Current games don't try to meet all these criteria. Hardball II doesn't utilize real player statistics. MicroLeague Baseball: The Manager's
Challenge doesn't support arcade action. Some serious statisticsbased games don't worry about graphics at all.
For players in the EGA/10-MHz league or higher, Tony La Russa's
Ultimate Baseball is an outstanding product that does many things

To enjoy the game requires getting used to the stutter. There is a
hesitation routine built into the game on every pitch that results in a
ball being put in play or a stolen base attempt. After the ball is hit,
the closeup window disappears and the play is restarted from the moment of the pitcher's delivery. This disruption of the flow of action is
very confusing at first, but is easy to get used to.
However, it is a real drawback to have the stutter there when simply managing or watching the computer do so. There is no need for
the closeup window when there is no choosing of pitches or swinging. It slows down the game and also diminishes the illusion of
recreating historic players. The larger and more detailed the animation, the more likely the reaction, "But that's not Sandy Koufax!" The
menus for selecting pitches and managerial strategy are always
there, too, whether the game is being played in a mode that makes
use of them or not.
Hitting, pitching, fielding and baserunning can be under the player's
direct control in All-Star mode, and there are two easier modes to
facilitate learning. The Pro level will handle fielding; the players on
the field will come up with the ball and wait to be told where to throw
it. The Rookie level also handles baserunning and, when playing
against the computer in Rookie mode, the pitcher will serve up better
pitches to hit. The simulation runs at about half real-life speed in all
modes, which is a boon for arcade players but makes manage-only
or computer-managed games drag. There ought to be a way to
speed up the pace of the simulation on faster machines.
In batting it is possible to swing normally, go for the fences or short-

Review

en up to make contact. The manager can
also put on a hit-and-run, steal or bunt play.
Pitchers choose both the type of pitch and
the location. Batting is simple to learn,
though the ball is harder to pick up than in
some other arcade games.
Fielding is difficult, but is aided by a "landing area" circle that appears on the field to
mark where a fielder should be to play the
ball. To throw the ball, one presses a key or
moves the joystick to indicate the base to
throw to and then presses another key or
the joystick button to release the ball.
It is unfortunate not to be able to access a
strategy screen with the full rosters of both
teams, including lineups and bullpen forces
with batting or pitching side specified.
That's what is needed to plan intricate late-inning bullpen strategies.
In TLUB, the information that is there is scattered across a number
of screens. The strategy screens, though limited, are lively and
clever. The bullpen screen, for example, has little animations showing the pitchers who are warming up, the one who is on the mound
and the one recently sent "to the showers." When playing against the
computer, the only way to get a look at the opponent's bench or
bullpen to see what substitutes he or she has available is to exit the
game and momentarily change the opponent to a human manager.
It is not possible to print out rosters to get this information.
The game takes some visual shortcuts. Color of skin is a variable
in the data base, and black and white pitchers and hitters can be dis
tinguished in the closeup window. However, in the smaller-scale
regular screen all players are white, as is any baserunner visible behind the pitcher at second base in the closeup screen. The figures in
the bullpen, on deck or in the showers on the strategy screens are
also all white. It's too bad that this nice touch was not carried out
more completely. Another awkward moment occurs when the
camera scrolls to the outfield on a long fly and the fielder doesn't
start into motion until the camera gets to him, which makes him
look slowfooted and inept.
The game supports EGA, MCGA or VGA graphics, soundboards
and joystick; there is no mouse support. The VGA screens and
animations are stunning, significantly better than EGA. On a Sound
Blaster, the audio was not particularly impressive, but does include
opening theme music, the sounds of umpires' calls, the effects of
balls hitting bat and glove and a brief crowd outburst after a home
run. The program is a memory hog and must be run from a hard
disk, where it takes up 4.7 MB. The program disks contain compressed files that are decompressed during installation. It is available
on 3.5" low-density or 5.25" high-density diskettes. The developer
recommends a processing speed of at least 10 MHz and 640K of
RAM. The game is also promised in a Commodore-64 version which
has not been evaluated by this reviewer, but is said to lack some of
the features of the MS-DOS version.
There are Exhibition games, with no effect on standings or statistics, and League games. TLUB includes many of the playing options
introduced by Earl Weaver Baseball, but some choices have been
made by the designers. There are natural grass and artificial turf play
ing surfaces, but the choice is dictated by which surface the selected
home team uses in the major leagues. It is not possible to experiment with the Designated Hitter in a National League season, since it
is in effect only for Exhibition games or when an American League
team is the home team in League games. Since the Designated Hitter must be in effect in the American League in League games, it is
not possible to simulate pre-1973 American League seasons.
Although it is not obvious from looking at the generic stadium,
fence distances and wind conditions of each team's current ballpark
are factored into the simulation. Disks with the visual characteristics
of specific parks are forthcoming from the manufacturer.
There is good support for playing out an entire simulated season
though, again, many choices have been made by the designers in advance. TLUB will replay an entire season in a matter of hours (or
less, depending on the computer's processing speed) and will keep

track of standings and individual player
statistics. 162-game seasons, 81-game halfseasons, and shorter "round robin" seasons
among the teams in each league are possible, but not a pre-1961 154-game season.
The program will stop and let you play or
watch any "featured game" you wish. A
box score can be printed out at the end of
a featured game. While the season is being
played out, one can watch the standings
changing day by day as the pennant race
heats up and still use the "Escape" key at
the end of any simulated day to select and
play a featured game. Once the simulation
has stopped on a featured game, the designation of which games will be featured in
the future can be determined. Even in the
middle of a game, one can change the
mode and opt to have the computer play it out or take control away
from the computer.
Two simulated seasons had predictable results. The old franchises
did the best — the Yankees, Athletics, Cardinals, Giants and Tigers.
The simulation apparently insures that players' statistics will not be
too far from their real-life world records and that players who had outstanding stats in a few games will not be able to play complete
seasons at that rate and become league leaders. The home run
leaders were Hank Greenberg, Jimmie Foxx, Ralph Kiner and Hack
Wilson; Maury Wills and Ty Cobb were the best base stealers; and
Sandy Koufax, Bob Feller and Herb Score had the best strikeout
records, while Walter Johnson and Christy Mathewson led in ERA.
The lack of printing support is a major weakness of the program.
Printing the box score after a featured game or exhibition game is
the only printing possible. Team rosters, lineups, schedules, standings in simulated leagues, individual player statistics and league
leaders in various categories can be viewed — the league leaders on
a clever screen that lets you sort for the best and worst in a variety
of categories — but not printed out. Hopefully this weakness can be
corrected in a future upgrade or utility disk.
The basic game provides limited support for those who want to create different teams and leagues by adding or trading players. The
promised "Fantasy Manager" disk may remedy the situation. Trying
to create new teams, though theoretically possible, is very frustrating.
The game cannot access teams from different drives or subdirectories. There is no way to create a blank team slot for building a new
team without erasing an existing team. It is possible to trade a player
from one team to another, but not to "clone" a player to build a new
configuration of teams. Pitchers can only be traded for other pitchers
and position players for other position players. When an existing
team has been erased, there is a blank roster for trading or adding
new players. Players can be added by moving them from other
teams or entered from scratch.
The player statistics screens are informative and intelligent — a real
innovation. The statistics are divided between the few that are essential for running the simulation and others that are optional. As one
starts entering statistics, the program automatically provides default
lefty/righty breakdowns if they have not been provided and default
player ratings, all of which can be changed. The game includes a
dutch hitting rating, a likelihood-of-injury rating, a streak rating so
that a player's performance over the course of a season will mimic
real life; it also stores the player's age. According to the developer,
there is a bug in the program when entering your own pitching performance statistics (affecting total at bats against a pitcher) which can
be corrected by a utility disk available on request from the manufacturer.
Apart from the stutter, the scanty print options and the lack of access to information about the opponent's roster, many of the limitations of Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball are likely to be
remedied by the "Fantasy Manager" utility disk. TLUB packs a
tremendous amount into a single box. Most of the tradeoffs it makes
are sensible and the result is a remarkably attractive, enjoyable
simulation.

Computer Flight

From the Cockpit

Flying On-line With CompuServe and GEnie
by Timothy Trimble

t used to be that most armchair pilots
had to fly in their own virtual world,
never to be bothered by other aircraft.
With the latest technology in communications and on-line information services,
however, it is now possible for the
armchair pilot to experience the thrill of
attempting to land at a busy airport or fly
a bombing run while under attack by multiple enemy aircraft.

I

CompuServe Fly-Ins
For those that enjoy the excitement of
flying Microsoft's Flight Simulator,
CompuServe Information Service (CIS)
has a special section dedicated to flight
simulation pilots called FSFORUM. Not
only is it a good place to chat and share
stories about those "hairy" approaches,
but it is also the location of the first
electronic simulated fly-in. A fly-in is kind
of like a party for pilots. Everyone agrees
to meet at a pre-defined airport on a certain date, walk around and look at all the
various aircraft, and have discussions
about flying. The fly-in on CIS is very
similar in that a specific airport is
selected, the date of the Fly-in is announced and the participants all fly in to
the location using Flight Simulator.
Once the date and time for the fly-in is

announced, the armchair pilots prepare
and submit their flight plans. Each pilot
is assigned a time slot for arrival and a
special phone number to call from within
Flight Simulator. This connects the pilot
to a "receiver station" which then issues
Air Traffic Control (ATC) instructions.
Each "receiver station" is manned by a
CIS sysop (operator) that keeps track of
the air traffic approaching the airport and
thus issues instructions to the pilots. The
operator is also on-line to a conference
room on CIS and is able to describe the
approach and landings to others in the
conference room. There is hope that they
will be able to incorporate the use of
Tracon II (the air traffic control simulator
from Wesson International) for future
fly-ins.
From the armchair pilot's perspective,
each pilot is "honor-bound" to fly the entire course from the home airport in real
time to the destination airport. Once the
pilot arrives within the appropriate
airspace in their designated time slot,
they will then establish a connection with
the receiver station and receive instructions from ATC for their final approach
and landing at the airport. After landing,
the pilot can log on to the conference
room and talk with other pilots that have

already landed and the receiver station
operators as they "talk-in" other approaching aircraft.
Response to the CIS fly-ins has been
very exciting, with many participants
remarking about the added realism that
is provided by interfacing with all the
other pilots and operators in a coordinated effort. There is even a "souvenir"
of the event available. The CIS sysops
prepare a group photo (using the GIF
graphic standard for PCs) of all the
aircraft at the airport.
Getting started with a fly-in requires a
copy of Microsoft's Flight Simulator
and a subscription to CompuServe. In
addition, plenty of information and help
is available from the FSFORUM. The flyins are scheduled on a regular basis and
many of the on-line armchair pilots will
be glad to help.

GEnie's Air Warrior
Air Warrior (on GEnie) is the logical
choice for those that are more interested
in a good ol' hairy dogfight than a social
event. Air Warrior is a multi-player air
combat simulation based on WW II
fighters and the attendant WW II theaters
of war.

Computer Flight

Armchair pilots in Air Warrior can
select from a wide range of American,
British, Japanese, Soviet, and German
aircraft and then fly as part of one of
three nationalities. Besides being able to
fly in single-seat fighters, multiple players
(up to seven) can join together to man
the various stations in a heavy bomber.
In addition, tanks and jeeps can be
manned by those that prefer to keep
their feet on the ground.
The environment is made up of both
European and Pacific terrains and include a large assortment of ground targets. (Be careful, since some of the
ground targets shoot back!) Being able
to knock out key strategic targets will
cause problems for the other
nationalities, such as knocking out their
radar, fuel refineries, and aircraft factories
Other features of Air Warrior include
training sessions and a special practice
area for those that are just getting
started. All pilots are able to communicate with each other via public or private
intercom channels. There is also a guncamera mode that allows the play-back
of a flight along with any radio traffic.

One of the big differences between Air
Warrior and other flight combat
simulators is that it requires GEnie in
order to function. Two programs make
up the Air Warrior environment, a host
program that runs on GEnie's host computers and a local program that runs on
the player's home computer. The local
program handles all of the graphics,
sound, and flight calculations. It communicates with the host program to provide the player with information on the
environment and the interaction with
other players.
Besides the free-for-all combat that normally takes place within Air Warrior,
there are also organized squadrons,
weekend historical campaigns, and competitions. Another nice thing about Air
Warrior is that it is constantly undergoing improvements due to feedback from
its many players. The Air Warrior file
library contains a large resource of information on combat tactics, flight characteristics, and training hints and tips. A
large amount of high-quality graphics
have been provided by the players themselves and are available within the library
as well.

Air Warrior will definitely provide a
great thrill to anyone willing to go against
"live" opponents. This pilot's biggest thrill
was while manning the tail gunner position of a heavy bomber with about nine
enemy fighters on our tail, but then,
that's another story.
Getting started with Air Warrior requires a subscription to GEnie and the
Air Warrior starter kit (which can be
downloaded from the Air Warrior
library). Air Warrior supports IBM, Macintosh, Amiga, and the Atari ST.

Where To From Here?
It is a sure bet that, as technology continues to change, we will see more advances in on-line flight simulations and enhancements in realism. In fact, how
about some 3-D goggles, touch-screen instrumentation, wind in the hair, etc.? Oh,
well, maybe just a while longer....
Until the next flight, this is Timothy
Trimble, from the cockpit.
Timothy Trimble can be reached on
CIS at 76306,1115 and on GEnie at
xtx06803.

Behind the Screens

The "Human Cost"
(Continued from page 54)
tions, in all their permutations, in approximately 600-700 hours.
Writing conversations includes the process of advancing the plot,
creating distinctive NPCs and creating mini-quests.

Endgame
Finally, the perceptive reader of this article will note that it has
not yet spoken of either the Introductory sequence (200-plus
hours) or the Endgame sequence (150 hours). Since the former
must be rendered beautifully in order to hook the player into the
game and the latter must be handled carefully in order to adequately reward the player for investing his/her time in playing
the game, most companies take extra time with these sequences. This is not the old "The Splash Screen Sells The Game"
syndrome of the early years of computer games. Rather, it is
part of creating an entire package that holds the player from
start to finish.
It is impossible (and would probably be boring) to duplicate all
the tasks inherent in bringing a Cyberfunk X to market, but it is
to be hoped that the current article will help CGW readers to understand more fully the laborious task of bringing a state of the
art computer game to market. Our hypothetical Cyberfunk
game alone is already at over 7,000 "man-hours" to produce. Indeed, when one considers that many of these tasks run over the
number of hours initially allotted them, one finally grasps the fact
that developing computer games is a risky business.

Conversions Received
Design Your Own Railroad (Abracadata) IBM
Altered States (Accolade) Amiga
Stratego (Accolade) Amiga
The Playroom (Broderbund) Macintosh
Dino Wars with 256 Colors (DigiTek) IBM
3 in Three (Inline Design) Macintosh
Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess (Interplay) Amiga
Bill Elliott's NASCAR Challenge (Konami) Amiga
Classic Board Games (Merit Software) Amiga
Action Stations (RAW Entertainment) Amiga
Blitzkrieg: Battle at the Ardennes
(RAW Entertainment) IBM

White Death (RAW Entertainment) IBM
Worlds at War (RAW Entertainment) IBM
Space Quest 1 with 256 Colors (Sierra) IBM
Conflict: Middle East (SSI) Amiga
Death Knights of Krynn (SSI) Amiga
Secret of the Silver Blades (SSI) Amiga
Decisive Battles of the American Civil War:
Vol. I (SSG) Macintosh

Halls of Montezuma (SSG) Amiga
MacArthur's War (SSG) IBM
Aracnophobia (Walt Disney Software) C-64

Review

The Reviewer's Challenge
MicroLeague Baseball: The Manager's Challenge
by Win Rogers
TITLE:

MicroLeague Baseball:
The Manager's Challenge
IBM (reviewed)
Macintosh, Amiga (soon)
B OF PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$39.95
as upgrade ($29.95)
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-up
DESIGNER:
MicroLeague Sports Assn.
PUBLISHER:
MicroLeague Sports Assn.
Newark, DE
SYSTEM:

T

hough MicroLeague Baseball: The Manager's Challenge

lacks some of the bells and whistles of today's best
animated baseball simulations, it is a good bargain. It offers
no arcade mode and concentrates on "the manager's challenge"
in winning a ball game. It does not demand advanced graphics
capability or fast processing speed and actually performs better
on slower machines. With its large array of supplementary disks,
it promises a complete baseball strategy environment. It arrived
in stores several months before the long-awaited Earl Weaver
Baseball ll and took advantage of its lead with a visible advertising campaign and a companion volume, available in bookstores
as well as software stores, that includes a demo version of the
game.
The entertaining companion volume, the MicroLeague
Baseball Official Field Guide and Disk (Bantam), offers comments on managerial strategy, brief profiles and tips on managing 260 historic baseball teams (ten per franchise stretching
back to the early years of the century) and in-depth analyses of
three dozen more from the 1927 Yankees right up through the
1990 World Series opponents. No matter what baseball simulation one uses for recreating historic teams, this book should be
kept handy for friendly, informative strategy tips and assistance
in making up lineups and evaluating relief pitchers. All the teams
profiled are available on MicroLeague disks, but all may not yet
be available for the new version of the game.

player is able to go full count, choosing pitch location and
having balls and strikes counted.

The IBM-compatible disk packed with the book is a demo version of The Manager's Challenge with six recent World Series
teams. It gives the look and feel of the full game and permits
complete games, pitching changes, pinch hitting and play
against another person, against the computer or with the computer playing both sides. When the computer plays both sides,
however, there is no way to control the speed and, on a fast computer, the action whizzes by at breakneck speed. The book is a
good investment, since it previews the graphic environment of
the full game and has value even independent of The Manager's
Challenge.

The EGA graphics are straightforward and clean. There is a
CGA mode and, while VGA is supported, it is no different from
EGA. The game offers a choice of Yankee Stadium, Dodger
Stadium or Royals Stadium. The single-camera view is from the
stands directly behind home plate, and the camera pans left or
right when the action is in one of the outfield corners. The game
can be played with either menus that open to show offensive and
defensive strategy options or keystrokes. Two players can easily
keep their baserunning and defensive signals secret from each
other. There is an electronic stat book to aid in deciding when to
bunt or where to position fielders. (Players are rated, among
other things, on their baserunning ability and on their tendency
to pull the ball.) The animations can be turned off for a faster
game. There is the option of choosing which pitch to throw when
on defense and of guessing which pitch will be coming when at
bat. This feature, like many options of the game, can be toggled
on and off. In quick-play mode, the computer can complete a
series of simulated games between two teams. There is no way
to pre-program the schedule for an entire season.

Let's leave the demo and boot up the full game, which offers
more strategic choices, more teams, more stadiums and greater
control over rosters and statistics. Twenty-six teams are provided
from the 1927 Yankees to the 1988 Dodgers and Athletics (the
1990 player disk costs extra). All are actual team rosters, not allstar aggregations. The Manager's Challenge is best at supporting two players managing two different teams, though it also supports one player against the computer and computer-versus-computer play. It boils the game down to one pitch to each batter,
eliminating balls and strikes. However, three times during the
game, for added drama when playing in two-player mode, each

MicroLeague Baseball was introduced in 1984 and upgraded
in 1989. This third version adds mouse and hard disk support,
more attractive graphics (especially in the set-up and statistical
display screens), additional statistical categories such as leftyrighty breakdowns of hitters' and pitchers' performances and thirty-man rosters, with five players on the disabled/reserve list.
Since differentiated lefty and righty stats do not exist for teams
prior to 1982, The Manager's Challenge apparently creates imaginary differentials for older players in order to increase
strategic realism when playing with older teams. Another new feature keeps a player with outstanding statistics in very few ap-

Review

throws over to first get the runner (except on bunts or errors),
and all hits go right past immovable infielders to the outfield.
There isn't much flow to the action. If the ball is hit to the
shortshop, the third baseman and second baseman don't move a
muscle. Even worse, the program does not adjust for the
computer's processing speed and there is no way to adjust
speed from within the program. So on a fast computer, the
animation is too fast for the play-by-play test. The runner is
retired and has disappeared from view before the screen window
reads "Here's the throw..."
Further, the computer manager could use more artificial intelligence. In carrying out a series of computer-versus-computer
games between two teams, the computer managers can follow a
pitching rotation, but do not platoon and always use the same
lineup. This reduces the realism of the results over a full 162game schedule. The computer manager's 1965 Dodgers lost a
simulated game against the 1927 Yankees and unfortunately,
when trailing 2-0 in the bottom of the eighth with two outs and
the bases loaded, he did not bother to pinch hit for Sandy
Koufax.
There is an informal, home-brew atmosphere to the MicroLeague game and company that garners may find charming or
annoying. They specialize in sports simulations and are not too
large to be responsive. Registered owners get an occasional
newsletter with information about features and hints from other
players. So garners who find problems should speak up if they
would like to have them corrected. Be warned, however, that
there probably will be problems.

pearances from becoming a league leader: a player "tires" when
he is used in many more games in the simulation than he appeared in during the real-life season.
Rosters can be printed out before the game and a box score
afterwards. Game statistics and standings can be saved after the
separate stat compiler provided has been used to initialize a
league. The stat compiler allows players to be moved on and off
the disabled/reserve list. However, existing players cannot be
moved onto new rosters or traded, and new players cannot be
added. Neither can league-leader lists be generated from simulated seasons without the separate General Manager/Owner's
Disk. The company promises that future disks will offer additional ballparks and the chance to make use of the managerial
strategies of great managers of the past.
Ideally, a simulation will draw as little attention to itself as possible. When there are limitations imposed by the program, they
should be consistent with the limitations of the real-world environment that is being modeled. The Manager's Challenge falls
short of this ideal. If a pitcher is warmed up while his team is in
the field and is not sat down before the end of the half-inning, he
disappears from the roster. A sudden double play that ends a
threat can cost one's ace reliever for the game. With the computer managing both sides, there is no way to stop to check a
lineup or see a player's stats, see who's warming up or even turn
off the sound. The manual says that it is possible to see what
each player has done so far during the game when he steps up
to the plate, but this feature does not work in the reviewer's copy.
The visual environment in The Manager's Challenge provides
a simple functional setting for simulated games, but is lacking in
visual excitement or realism. There is a limited repertoire of
animated sequences. There don't seem to be any infield hits. All

An early review copy has several apparent bugs, and an inquiry
letter yielded a nice note with an updated game disk. The revised
version gives more access to player stats while a game is in
progress. But it still has a team from "Detriot," even though they
said they had corrected this misspelling. The later version adds a
pop-up scoreboard to the computer-versus-computer mode to
give one some idea of what is going on (in the first version,
players had no clue), but the new scoreboard is unreadable —
faint and quick to disappear. Worse, they added the same popup scoreboard to the player-versus-player and player-versus-computer modes, where it duplicates an existing, more readable
scoreboard and covers up some of the play-by-play text.
The company says it offers so many different disks in order
that buyers can pick and choose and don't have to buy more
game than they want. Costs can mount up, though, and one
should be wary of added costs that are obscured by misleading
packaging of the game and accompanying book. The box says
that the game is compatible with original MLB Season, Franchise
History and All-Star disks, but an enhanced stat compiler must
be purchased in order to convert the files or the disks must be
traded in at an additional charge. The companion book promises
a "coupon that will save you money when you upgrade to the
full... store edition," but the coupon does not help until after the
full version has been purchased and one is ordering additional
utility or team disks.
The Manager's Challenge does not offer as many playing options, animated sequences or statistical categories as some other
games, but it provides a straightforward and playable simulation.
The basic game is a bargain if one accepts its limitations, and its
range of supplementary disks is awesome, although it can take a
considerable investment to get all the teams and options that
one might want. The Official Field Guide and Disk by itself is
an enjoyable introduction to The Manager's Challenge and,
more generally, to the pleasures of strategic baseball on the computer.

Review

ny computer game based
on a book by Tom Clancy
automatically presents a
paradox along the lines of Lewis
Carroll that might well be called
"Red King Dreaming." In Alice
Through The Looking Glass, the
Red King was a part of Alice's fantasy at the same moment he was
dreaming of Alice. Likewise, who
is to say that the player, busily
perched at his favorite computer,
is not just another of the hightech super spies who populate
Clancy's stories?

Red

Team Dreaming
TheCardinal of the Kremlin
by Allen L. Greenberg

The Cardinal of the Kremlin,
an action/strategy game, is an intense glimpse of the world of techno-politics and challenges the
player to be as quick-witted as
any of that author's heroes. The
game features a deluge of information to be reacted upon and
enough bar graphs to fill an
average college-level text book.

S.D.I. in the Sky
While Clancy, in his introductory
notes to the game, takes exception to the notion that those days
are behind us, Cardinal is clearly
a cold-war affair. The game simulates the bitter struggle between
the United States and the Soviet
Union to evolve a satellite-based
defense system, commonly
known as the S.D.I. (Strategic
Defense Initiative). Faced with a
job description that defies
categorization, the player is accountable for events which range
in location from the White House to the Kremlin. The person holding this rather high-pressure position is answerable only to the
president of the U.S.
Such a person (i.e. the player) must ensure that testing and
development of the satellite system goes smoothly and is maintained under reasonable security measures. In addition, the CIA
needs instruction as to how to best keep an eye on Russian scientists and Soviet espionage forces. Finally, decisions regarding
foreign relations with both the Russians and rebel fighters in Afghanistan are also the responsibility of this underpaid employee
of the federal government.
These myriad tasks and assignments await the player's attention as he begins his first day on the job. A main menu lists the
general departments in which the player will be working, and this
screen leads into a seemingly limitless maze of sub-menus and
bar-graph information screens. In addition to these, Cardinal features some limited graphics and a smattering of arcade action.
Three separate research areas are required to give birth to the
laser satellite system with the American code name "Tea Clipper." The three departments, covering "Power," "Software" and
"Targeting," must each be assigned a department head and a
priority level. Those with a very high priority level will accomplish
their research more quickly, but only for a short time. An over-

TITLE:
The Cardinal of the Kremlin
SYSTEMS:
IBM, Amiga
REVIEWED:
Amiga
COPY PROTECT: Documentation Look-Up
PRICE:
$49.95
PUBLISHER:
Intracorp., Inc.

worked department head will soon go running into the sunset of
unemployment, suffering from classic American burn-out.
The player is responsible for scheduling several laboratory
tests, without which research will not progress. There are nine of
these, each of which will have to be repeated several times
before the system is completed. Bar graphs give the player an
idea of how urgent the need is to run a particular test, as well as
the need for FBI-generated security, due to foreign interest in that
research area. Annoyingly, a test cannot be scheduled if the
department head is otherwise engaged or away doing R&R. In addition, space shuttle launchings, necessary to put into orbit the
assorted satellites, must also be scheduled throughout the game.

NASA, Not Your Baby
Every bit of scientific information helps the research effort, particularly if it comes from the other side. To this end, the CIA has
nine strategically placed agents in the Soviet Union waiting for instructions and assignments. Once activated in a particular area,
these spies will speed up American research while slowing down
efforts in Russia. Using Cardinal's ubiquitous bar graphs, in this
case a danger-meter, the player must quickly relieve the agent of
his or her assignment before the agent is discovered and arrested. The most highly placed agent is "The Cardinal" who, midway during the game, encounters the same inconvenience as the
character in Clancy's novel. He will come under investigation by
the KGB and consequently become useless to the Americans.

Review

brings the attack to an end. Fortunately, the game designers
have made sure that there is no
shortage of bar graphs on this
highly suicidal mission.
Cardinal's final arcade sequence involves the use of these
satellites to prove that America
has achieved its goal of an effective satellite defense system. This
simple arcade exercise will be difficult or impossible to accomplish
until the supporting technology
has reached the proper level.

Peace Paranoia
Ironically, while the superpowers
struggle for satellite supremacy,
they are also going through the
motions of peace negotiations.
Topics on the table include
mutual reduction of those same
weapons which the two countries
are actually trying so earnestly to
develop. The only purpose of
these talks is to allow a lagging
country an opportunity to cover
its weaknesses.
In this section of the game, the
player must indicate the U.S. position on various issues. Naturally,
the process leaves little room for
doubt as to Clancy's position on
peaceful settlements.
Realizing the extent to which the CIA is going to obtain enemy
information abroad, the FBI anxiously awaits instructions on how
to prepare for similar treatment from enemy spies. Carefully
noting the enemy-interest-meter, the player must judge the appropriate amount of security to post at each research area. With
too little security, information will flow like vodka into thirsty Russian spies and oppressive security measures will slow down
progress at home. Should American scientists be doing too well
in their work, the Soviets will kidnap a department head, and this
leads into one of the game's rather tame arcade sequences.
Seen from above, the player must use his American-built vehicle
to rear-end the Marx-mobile and rescue the scientist. Several bar
graphs are included in this sequence so the player may gauge
his progress and the condition of the various cars involved.

Starlight, Star Bright
Similar arcade action, as well as further espionage, is to be
found in Afghanistan, where a rebel fighter known as "the Archer" waits uneasily for the player's signal to attack the Russian
satellite project known as "Bright Star." Up until that attack, the
U.S. must keep the Archer's bunker well stocked with supplies
and ammunition to maintain both his goodwill and his strength.
When the player decides that the most advantageous time to use
the Archer has arrived, an overhead view of the Russian lab appears. The player must guide the Archer through the complex,
destroying as much equipment as possible before Soviet security

For True Blue Eyes Only
Unfortunately, The Cardinal of the Kremlin makes for a rather
bland appearance, featuring even more bar graphs than this brief
review dares to mention. The occasional graphics are embarrassingly primitive and the sound effects are hardly worth mentioning.
Game options include the ability to save up to three games in
progress, although this reviewer experienced considerable
problems doing so on an Amiga. The player may elect not to
view several animated sequences which depict the satellite system being tested and launched into orbit and sound effects are
also optional. Users of the IBM version may choose between keyboard and mouse control, but Amiga players are generally
restricted to the mouse (the lone exception being the arcade sequences, when the keyboard suddenly becomes active).
The Cardinal of the Kremlin is an unconventional game to
learn. If it is possible to imagine an office overseer examining bar
graphs, studying trends and rapidly making decisions on the fly,
one can easily imagine the flow of game play in Cardinal. Fans
of Tom Clancy's novel will find that the programmers have made
a genuine effort to convert the book to a game, which is by no
means completely marred by the program's less than sterling
presentation. Cardinal is also recommended for those who have
always wanted to rule the world by the power of red tape rather
than pure destruction.

Review

Ti e Terminator:
Robot Rampage in L.A.
by Todd Threadgill

TITLE:

version and a "Full" version.
In the Short version, players
start off the game with a few
of the supplies (including
weapons, etc.) that they will
need during the game. The
Full game finds players possessing nothing more than
clothing. The former puts one
right in the thick of the action
and the latter is more suitable
for players who enjoy
scavenging for goodies in gun
shops, sporting goods stores
and ammo dumps. The designers also (thankfully) included a Practice mode, in
which novice players can
familiarize themselves with
the mechanics of the game,
without worrying about
having to face the opposition.

The Terminator

The game's mechanics appear
overwhelming at first. There are
two basic "modes" of operation
Walking Mode and Driving Mode.
Walking Mode applies to one's
character walking around the
game world which is, in turn,
chock full of buildings, vehicles and other people (who serve as
little more than Uzi fodder or fender magnets during the game).
Of course, when the player steals a car, he or she switches to
Driving Mode. The two modes have slightly different keyboard
commands, and there is even a third "sub-option," used when
the player is piloting a car with a manual transmission. Despite
the myriad controls, the game is actually easy to learn, thanks to
the inclusion of the Practice game.

The Hunt Is On

even back in 1984 The Terminator, the classic all-out actionadventure movie starring Arnold You-Know-Who as a killer
cyborg from the future, seemed like perfect material for a
computer game. One can only wonder why designers waited so
long to produce a game based on The Terminator, but garners
should be thankful that the wait is over. Bethesda Softworks
has created an action game that does an excellent job of capturing the spirit of the original film.

E

The Terminator, for those who haven't seen the film, depicts
the struggle between Kyle Reese, a warrior from the post-nuclear
future, and a "Terminator" model cyborg, programmed to kill
human beings. The Terminator has traveled back in time to assassinate Sarah Connor, a woman who will eventually give birth
to the leader of the ragtag human resistance army that will
defeat the Terminator's robotic creator Skynet, bent on world
domination. Their aim is to destroy the human leader before he
is even born. Reese's job is to make sure, against overwhelming
odds, that the Terminator unit fails.

Back From the Future Revisited
In the computer game, the player may choose to play either
Reese or the Terminator. The action takes place on a somewhat
fictionalized map of Los Angeles, in a bewilderingly huge 3-D
world. There are two further variations on the game—a "Short"

Once the player selects a non-Practice game, the action starts.
Players view the action from a first-person (first- robot?) perspective. The graphics during gameplay are standard 320x200, 16color EGA screens (although the map display, opening menus
and interlude screens—during which the player is apprised of
notable events in the game—are in various graphics modes, including 256-color VGA and high-resolution EGA/VGA). The 3-D
world has a slightly chunky, "flight simulator" look to it, although
the designers made clever use of the limited color palette
through dithering techniques and managed to produce what appears to be a rather wide range of colors and "textures."
The Terminator supports Ad Lib and Sound Blaster sound
cards and this reviewer thought the Ad Lib soundtrack was quite
good. Those without sound cards catch a break in this game,
however, because The Terminator's sound is more than adequate when using the PC's internal speaker. Also, The Terminator has the ability to become a two-player game when two
computers are hooked together with a null modem cable. While
the computer opponent is a formidable challenge—especially at
the tougher levels—garners who are looking for a real challenge
should look into the two-player option.
Completing the game is much easier when the player opts to
play as the Terminator. Both players have tracker displays that
point in the general direction of one's opponent. In addition, the
Terminator sports several features that humans like Reese just
don't come factory-equipped with, such as sector-coordinate and
heading readouts that make getting one's bearings much less difficult. As Reese, the player does not have to find Sarah Connor
(she's standing at arm's reach as the game begins), but one
must devise a way to protect Sarah and destroy the killer cyborg
that could be lurking around any corner. When taking the Ter-

Review

minator role, the game is more of an action contest, while playing Reese provides more of a staggering strategic challenge.

Sector Readouts (Evaluation)
There are a couple of technical quibbles. On this reviewer's
DOS 5.0 machine, The Terminator refused to start until
DOS=HIGH was removed from the CONFIG.SYS file. Once this
was done, however, the game booted without incident. Bethesda
Softworks is aware of this problem; their advice is to use DOS
5.0's LOADFIX command. Also, from time to time in the game,
players will encounter strange floating pieces that simply do not
fit into the current surroundings. They do not detract from
gameplay, but give the game a somewhat unfinished appearance.
Overall, the designers of The Terminator have done a commendable job of capturing the thrilling spirit of the original movie,
while allowing players enough freedom to create their own version of the story. The non-stop action of the movie has been distilled down into a classic chase game that has all the elements
necessary for success.

Man Versus Machine (Strategy Tips)
Strategy depends on the role one plays, just as in real life. As
the Terminator, one can simply make a beeline for his or her target and emerge from nowhere with guns blazing. Alternatively,
Reese must use stealth and speed as the keys to success.
Regardless of the character one chooses to play, reading the
manual is essential for a successful mission. The manual contains vital information that can easily make the difference between winning the game and wasting one's time wandering aimlessly.

Terminator Strategy: Guns and ammo are really all that's
needed, but be sure to grab plenty of ammunition while tracking
Sarah down. When she is finally located, she will be surrounded
not only by Reese, but by police and the military. These allies
can inflict considerable damage. Even without them, however,
Sarah herself is incredibly tough to take down: she can take fifteen to twenty direct hits, and when under attack, she dances
wildly around like a moth near a light bulb. One must keep the
Terminator's energy focused on Sarah. Even though bonus
points are awarded for terminating Reese, he is only a secondary
target. If a choice must be made between the two, Sarah is the
logical one to go after.
A quick cheat for the Terminator player (Warning— this should
not be read by those who don't believe in cheating!): Since the
game map is completely flat (and there is no penalty for driving
over lawns and gardens), it is logical to simply steal some
weapons and ammo (the game offers players the chance to buy
things, but where's the fun in buying something when one is a
killer cyborg?), steal a car and speed toward Sarah for a quick
victory.
Reese Strategy: One should use time wisely by moving quickly and making the most of every second. It is optimal to steal a
car or van and head straight for one of the ammo dumps on the
map. Then one can load up on grenades, rocket launchers, etc.
Guns have little effect on the Terminator, and he can turn up at
the most unexpected times, so victorious heroes must be
prepared. Finally, while Reese can tell Sarah to stay put or run
away, it usually isn't a good idea to be away from her for too
long. If the humans stick close together, there may yet be hope
for the human race.

Review

Unveiling the Secret

S

by M. Evan

ecret Weapons of the Luftwaffe (SWOTL) is Lucasfilm's
follow-on product to the very successful Battlehawks:
1942 (BH) and Their Finest Hour (TFH). Covering the air
war in Germany between 1943 and 1945, it is in fact three
games in one: (1) the flight mission (either historical or playercreated); (2) the tour of duty (patterned after historical tours, in
which the player must survive a certain number of missions) and
(3) the campaign (in which the player's mission successes or
failures affect the course of the war).
Initially scheduled for a Christmas 1990 release, SWOTL was
finally released on 20 August 1991, thereby causing much anguish and teeth-gnashing by a vociferous public. While this
reviewer was not annoyed by the delay (since he was involved in
a different type of "wargaming" experience), the complaints
about the delay do necessitate a delineation of what has been
added in the interim. Much of this differentiation has been taken
from discussions with Lucasfilm and an August press release.
• SWOTL has three campaigns, each with three levels; TFH had
one.
• The tour of duty is new. While the initial release date called for
one to two tours per side, the current release has eight American
and five German tours.
• Visual effects have been enhanced, to include more ground
detail, chain-reaction explosions and new animations (to include
bullet holes, oil leaks, etc.).
• Flight dynamics are "more realistic" and there are two levels
of flight controls (standard and advanced, the latter utilizing rudder/aileron input).
• The viewing system has been expanded, to include eye-level,
45-degree high view and straight up.
• Replay modes have been expanded, and up to two megabytes
may be saved.
• Weapons systems now include rockets and ground strafing.
• The geographical data base covers from England to Czechoslovakia.
• Where TFH covered three months of action, SWOTL covers a
two-year time period.
• Scoring has been overhauled.
• Expanded memory support is now available.
• Artificial intelligence routines for the computer pilots have
been made more sophisticated and, hence, more difficult to
defeat.
Given these changes, was the wait worth it? That will be an individual decision. Many users will not be satisfied simply because
their expectations have risen to an unrealistic level. Much of this
review will compare and contrast SWOTL with the two state-ofthe-art flight simulators currently available on the market
Chuck Yeager's Air Combat (CYAC) and
—ElectroniAs'
Dynamix's Red Baron (RB).
Warning: SWOTL requires a fast machine. While this

Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
IBM
386-20 w/AdLib Board
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
569.95
COPY PROTECT: Code Wheel Look-Up
DESIGNER:
Lawrence Holland
Lucasfilm Games
PUBLISHER:
San Rafael, CA

reviewer's 386-20 was capable of accessing the simulation,
ground detail was suggested at medium level. A 25- to 33-MHz
machine is optimal, and a 10-MHz machine may well be too
slow. These requirements are stated on the box and it means
what it says!

Documentation
As per Lucasfilm standards, the documentation is superb. Over
two hundred pages in length, most of it is an excellent historical
study of the air war over Germany. In fact, the first eighty-three
pages are a historical overview and this monograph is a fine addition to a historian's library. The bibliography (with over forty
entries) and suggested reading list are appreciated.
Actual game instructions are covered in depth in the manual,
but a succinct "Reference Guide" reproduces the actual "hot
keys" in a four-page summary. A detailed "German and U.S.

Review

Weapons of the Luftwaffe
Brooks
as well as to check on a ground site. This may seem a minor
concern, but it did initially confuse this reviewer.

Graphics and Sound
Graphics seem to be a very personal preference. Many users
prefer CYAC's polygon graphics to SWOTL's polygon shadings
and bit-maps; this reviewer preferred the graphics of RB. However, SWOTL's graphics are detailed, colorful and extensive.
They do represent the state of the art in the Lucasfilm mode, and
the campaign maps with their ability to zoom in (a la Spectrum
HoloByte's Tank) and pick out a particular airfield, industrial
site or flak battery are impressive.
The depiction of ground damage is excellent, in that explosions
can engender a chain reaction. This effect is best captured "on
film" and, from different perspectives, one can literally see the ex
plosions, smoke and fire expand and coalesce into a massive
portrait of destruction.
Air damage is carefully depicted and one can observe large
pieces of fuselage and wing breaking off from hapless B-17s. A
word of advice: perusal of damage should be through camera
replay; watching a bomber slowly drift out of formation and
begin a death dive may be artistically satisfying, but it is a quick
way to lose situational awareness and incur massive damage.
Such damage to one's own machine can result in hole-stitching
across one's canopy or wings or, even worse, an oil leak which
gradually obscures one's vision through the canopy.
Still, both RB and CYAC had "red-outs" and "black-outs"
(depending on the situation). SWOTL features neither
phenomenon.
The sounds are quite varied on the AdLib and several other
sound boards are supported. However, the engine noises seem
somewhat muted. This reviewer's personal objection was to the
"Symphony in 50-Calibre." This "symphony" occurs whenever
one's plane incurs damage and seems more reminiscent of a
piano riff than combat damage. Dynamix's RB had much more
effective aural damage and its sound did reflect that of a bullet
striking one's aircraft — a minor point, but one that does lend
credence to the "illusion of reality." The background music is
striking — a jaunty Sousa-esque military march for the
Americans and a Wagnerian-type theme for the Germans.
Aircraft and Weapons" section should be carefully studied by the
serious player. Knowledge of climb rates and maximum speed of
various platforms should prove life-saving. However, there is no
"Tactics" section a la CYAC, in which a visual display of friendly
aircraft and likely opponents is contrasted along with optimal tactics.
Each cockpit is fully illustrated and explained. Since all instruments do have a function, they must be understood and
monitored. The documentation makes such comprehension easy
to accomplish.
Of course, there are some omissions. While the documentation
notes that SWOTL supports keyboard, mouse and joystick, one
will learn that the keyboard must be used for certain purposes. In
particular, using the joystick to access a flight from the briefing
map is impossible. One must use the space bar for this purpose,

Game Mechanics
Flight mechanics may be standard or advanced. The standard
mode automatically coordinates ailerons and rudder, while the advanced mode allows separate rudder control in order to simulate
yaw and pitch maneuvers.
Initial flight is easy to accomplish, but successful combat missions require a long learning curve. Fighter planes have one position, while bombers have a total of nine (pilot/co-pilot, bombardier and eight gunners). Each position may be set to automatic,
although one will have to assume the pilot position in order to
make course changes. Otherwise, one's B-17 will continue flying
on the previous course deeper into enemy territory.
Of course, controls are much easier for fighters, since there are
fewer engines and crew. Nevertheless, the bombers, while less
maneuverable, require familiarity with the crew positions so that

Review

one can quickly switch to a threatened positions and destroy the
incoming aircraft. The automatic gunners do a credible job, but
they tend to waste ammunition. Also, the joystick is very sensitive, perhaps too much so, and must be recalibrated each time
one boots the game. Why didn't Lucasfilm use an automatic
calibration a la RB?
Landings are more difficult than in TFH, especially in the Me163. This aircraft was more akin to a Roman candle than a
fighter aircraft and its volatile fuel was as much a danger to its
pilot as the aircraft was to the Allies. Climbing to maximum
height by using all one's fuel, then gliding back through enemy
bomber formations in an attack and, finally, landing in a "controlled crash," lead one to the conclusion that this was truly a plane
designed in desperation. Landing on a skid requires a delicate
touch, and an uneven landing will result in a massive explosion
with the fuel remnants combining to produce a true Gotterdammerung.
While aircraft capabilities are printed in the manual, it is difficult
to determine the accuracy of the flight mechanics in the simulation. Unlike boardgames (where one can study and determine
the accuracy), a computer simulation requires one to accept
much on faith. Red Baron allowed players to layer on complexity in various levels (e.g. realistic flight, weather, collisions,
etc.). This reviewer would have preferred such treatment herein.

Game Play
As noted earlier, there are three aspects to SWOTL: tactical,
operational and strategic. The tactical aspect involves single mis
sions, and provides the basic structure for the game. Historical
missions are included for each aircraft (German: Bf-109, FW-190
Me-163, Me-262, Go-229; American: P-47, P-51, B-17).
While SWOTL allows one to jump into and fly an aircraft, its
computer opponents do not allow one to survive for long without
a grasp of tactics and situational awareness. These opponents
are smart, and a simple loop or split-S will rarely lose them. In attacking the bomber formations, never never never attack from
the rear. This allows the top turret gunner, tail gunner, and ball
turret gunners an easy target, and the massed bomber formations can provide a veritable "wall of steel." The optimal target
approach is from the front and above; one should engage at maximum distance, and then jink around for another high-speed pass.
Two learning tools should be used in order to gain familiarity:
the camera replay and the end-of-mission status report. The
former will allow one to view from the target's perspective, and
one can observe the actual trajectory and impact of one's shells.
The end-of-mission status report will show what percentage of
hits were achieved. Both devices should be used so that one can
understand and appreciate the optimal range for attacks. Closein assaults generate too much damage, and the idea is to cause
massive bomber damage, not merely a single kill.
Rocket attacks are the horseshoes/grenades of SWOTL (i.e.
"close only counts in horseshoes and hand grenades"). While
aiming is somewhat rudimentary and the rocket must be
"lobbed" over the target (as it was historically), a successful rocket attack is the best thing for breaking up a bomber formation.
Closure rates are very swift, and one must be aware of when to
"jink away" from engaging. Altitude does not have as serious an
effect as one would expect, but each plane has its own strengths
and weaknesses; designer Lawrence Holland prefers the Go-229 —
the "dream plane of the Reich." While its flight parameters may
be interesting, this reviewer prefers those aircraft that did engage
in the historical war. Again, this is a personal preference.

The operational aspect (Tour of Duty) is similar to SSI's Fifty
Mission Crush, B-24 Combat Simulator and First Over Germany, though it, in fact, supersedes them with a graphically intensive and detailed database second to none. A tour of duty can
vary in time (as it did historically), and a maximum of five such
tours can be completed by the same crew/pilot. Historically, an
American would be rotated back to the ZI (Zone of the Interior,
i.e. the United States) for a bond tour or as an instructor, while a
German would have to keep flying until the conclusion of the war
The campaign allows one to change the course of the war. This
option was premiered in MicroProse's Red Storm Rising. In a
hypothetical war, this reviewer has no problem. However, in a
simulation of an actual conflict, the impact of micro-missions affecting the macro-strategic theater is more uncomfortable.
Granted, it can be fun, but is it "real?"
The campaign aspect is reminiscent of SSI's USAAF, but
much less intensive in scale. This reviewer would have preferred
an option to fight the campaign from the Air Marshal's table instead of the cockpit. If one does fly a German campaign, emphasize the FW-190 and the Me-262. The Me-163 and Go-229 are
too industry intensive and yield less bang for the buck.
No matter what level a pilot flies, there are certain steps to
achieve mission success. Beginning with a novice crew accompanied by novice pilots is a step toward a quick death. One
should use the mission generator, and develop several introductory and moderate-level of difficulty missions in order to "blood"
the pilot/crew. Once a degree of aptitude is achieved, such
pilot/crew should be cloned to create a pool of experienced
pilots and crews for accompanying one into combat.
The camera replay should be used often. While it is capable of
filming entire missions, it does not have Red Baron's ability to
reenter a "film" and pick up the action from a certain point. This
reviewer did not realize how difficult such a feature is. After all,
what could be so hard about capturing a scenario and replaying
it? In terms of computer programming, it is difficult, and one
must be careful to prevent the film from replaying a scenario differently than it initially occurred. Lucasfilm will have this feature
in its next release (most likely the Pacific).
Finally, SWOTL has been designed as a basic engine, capable
of expansion. The first expansion disk will cover the P-38 Lightning. Hopefully, others will include the German Ta-152 and the
Dornier-335 as well as the American B-24.

Conclusions
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe is a welcome addition to
Lucasfilm's World War II aerial oeuvre. Graphically rich, stylistically complex and user-accessible, it succeeds on three levels (tactical, operational and strategic).
Yet (there is always a yet), this reviewer would note some personal reservations. SWOTL is primarily a simulation of fighters
and bombers. The pure fighter-versus-fighter scenarios of BH has
receded to lesser importance. One can create these in the
scenario generator, but as a function of history, this simulation
postulates the period when such duels were of lesser importance.
BH and THE were easier to learn and play. SWOTL requires extensive playing in order to learn the best way to attack and
defend the massed bomber formations. In fact, TFH and SWOTL
remind this reviewer of the differences between Sidekick and
Sidekick Plus. The former product was a quick-and-easy add-on.
The latter expanded the parameters of use but at the cost of
added complexity. One must be aware of the trade-offs.

Sneak Preview

by Dave Arneson

T

he dads say, "Strategy

riers, Cruisers, Destroyers, Submarines, Attack Transports, and
Transports and the animation is
limited to observing shells fall on
ships, watching those ships sink
or "burning ship" icons.

Game of the Decade."
"Arrgh and shiver me timbers, we'll see about that," says
I! Interestingly enough, however,
they may actually be right. At
first glance, the game's look and
interface seems amazingly like
that of Empire. So, since Empire is a former "Game of the
Year" winner, the present
reviewer expected the comparison of The Lost Admiral
and Empire to be quickly consummated in a deft nod to the
more venerable game. Even the
concept in Empire seemed
grander and, potentially, more
satisfying, since Empire had
both land and air forces, as well
as naval units and The Lost Admiral (Admiral) deals only with
the naval environment.
Anomalies immediately came to
this reviewer's mind: players
could have such unrealistic situations as those in which both
sides have a major base on a island, yet are unaffected by each
other.

As additional assistance to the
novice player, the documentation is superior to the reference
materials found in many games.
It is short and helpful, containing
a list of all commands (also available on a pop-up screen in the
game) and color copies of all
the standard maps. The maps
are essential for scoping out
one's strategies and the commands are essential for taking
any action, since the game is
menu-driven (except for actual
movement) and fairly straightforward. There are still some rough
spots, however. The submarine
rules are not fully explained and
the material on ship construction
is skimpy, to say the most.
(Maybe they could have used
the space invested in the farfetched fiction behind the "Lost
Admiral.")

On the other hand (and that is
a big "other") Admiral has a
depth and variety to its play that
Empire does not have. In fact, it
is variety with no apparent end. Just
when one thinks the Al is outsmarted, it
manages to come up with something
else. After a week, this writer found himself up to third level with his business associate (not Gary Gygax) creeping into
fifth. This, after a mere fifty games or so!
Considering that there are ten levels of
difficulty with a dozen sub-levels within
each of those, this means there is a significant amount of replayability in this
game. Further, even these sub-levels
have a built-in randomizing factor that
makes each game very different.

Getting Commissioned
The operational interface is generally
quite smooth and the game is easy to
get into without reading the manual, especially since the "Learning" game allows
one to practice tactics without penalty to

Spread Over the Map

the player's potential career as an Admiral. Part of the reason the game is
rather easy to get into is because everything is kept to a functional level. The
graphics offer some color and are adequate to the task. Hence, ship icons are
easily recognizable as Battleships, Car-

Maps vary in size, depending
on the scenario, and there are nine
"standard" maps in addition to a random
map generator. The campaign games
use a mixture of random maps and the
standard ones. In appearance, the tactical map is both functional and colorful.
Use of the tactical map is facilitated by
the delineation of the area being represented by the tactical map on a small
rendering of the strategic map, located in
the upper right hand corner of the
screen. The small rendering also shows
the location of other ports and which side
owns them. By clicking the mouse on
this smaller map, one can quickly
change location and facilitate tactical
movement. There is also a less detailed
map that can be accessed for movement. This map shows a much larger
area in order to expedite long-range
movement, even if the abstract lines

Sneak Preview

used are less pleasing to the eye (though
easy to identify).
In the single scenarios, one can choose
the ships that will make up one's fleet
from a "price list." The price list displays
what ships have already been purchased
and which of these are in the particular
port currently displayed on-screen. One
can go back and change all of this at
any time before actually starting to play
the scenario.

All Hands to Battle Stations
Combat is very straightforward. Only
two ships (maximum) can fight each
other at one time. The player's only tactical option is to determine which target to
shoot. When there is only one possible
target (subs may or may not be targets,
but more on that later), the fire is automatically performed by the program.
The effect of fire on a target is shown
on a pop-up menu and these do not
change. So, a battleship will always score
four hits on another battleship. The only
time the fire will score more hits is when
a carrier is "in support." Then, one additional hit is scored for each ship the
player has targeted at the same enemy
ship.
So if two carriers are supporting a battleship, it will do six points of damage
whenever it is shooting at another battleship. Carriers cannot attack from a distance but can only support other ships
from adjacent squares.

Rats in the Bilge?
(Criticism)
Such factors as this inability of carriers
to perform offensive operations create
some of the oddities about The Lost Admiral that turn it from a military simulation into a strategy game. The authors
are quite open about such apparent oddities and make no pretensions that this
is a "simulation." They are quite open in
the documentation about many of the
decisions that they made and why. There
are some, like carriers, that seem quite
odd.
Another peculiarity that keeps Admiral
firmly in the abstract strategy camp is
the fact that a damaged ship still has full
movement and full offensive capability.
One would have expected the crippled
enemy to be, at least, reduced to half efficiency.
Even casual gamers will also wonder
why it is not possible to repair damaged
shore batteries or, for that matter, why
the player cannot select where to build

them. I suspect the latter is to prevent
the naval equivalent of the Maginot line
from being built across too many of the
narrows.
Garners may also be inclined to wonder
about the lack of shore-based air. As it is,
the enemy seems to have a real knack
for sneaking through one's pitiful defense
without having any CAP to fall back
upon.

Tactical Command Readiness
Almost all the games will revolve
around which ports are controlled. This
makes the set-up and opening move
very important. An admiral without sea
room is going to be in big trouble. If it is
not possible to bring superior firepower
to bear, it is going to be difficult to win
battles. Admirals will also want to have
access to as many cities as possible. It
may seem tempting to start in the middle of everything, but it is more important to control a number of cities than
the number of areas on the map.
Perceptive admirals will also watch the
way their ships are "stacked" in a port.

While only two ships can occupy the
same piece of ocean, any number can
be in a port. However, it is the first two
ships which will perform the combat
operations should an assault be mounted
against one's port. So, it is an exceedingly good idea to make certain that the
best ships (in terms of both firepower
and condition) are the ones which will do
the fighting.

Now, Hear This
In case the reader has not gathered by
now, this reviewer simply cannot stop
playing The Lost Admiral. The after-battle report has to read that this little gem
of the ocean is not only going to be a permanent addition to the writer's hard
drive, but several copies will be purchased as Christmas gifts for valued
friends. What more can be said? The
Lost Admiral is simply a brilliant first effort by a new company. Naval strategists
who are afraid to purchase such a first effort are sunk. Those discriminating
enough to make the acquisition are sure
to find their tours of computer combat
duty being voluntarily extended over the
months to come.

Letters

Promotion Emotion
How about an editorial / article about "pie in
the sky," no-show software? Should companies advertise what is not available months
ahead of time? Flipside: What about the difficulties encountered by companies in projecting release dates?
R. Tor
Yonkers, New York
I must take issue with your response to a letter in issue #86 that "unprofessional nagging"
would not help the development process of
software developers who advertise new
products in your magazine which do not yet
exist. Discussion of the problem could be very
constructive
I think that CGW is too closely associated
with the software industry to view this issue
from the perspective of the consumer. You
have access to certain software prior to publication (playtest versions for review); are in constant contact with the publishers and are wellinformed about the various stages of development and problems that a software project is
undergoing. We, the consumers, on the other
hand, are "flying blind" with little or no information.
When was the last time you browsed in a
software store? The average game buyer gets
his information from store displays and, if he
is smart, reads your magazine for balanced
reviews and industry news. The only problem
is [that] the products advertised in CGW are
often not available in the stores and release
dates given out by the store or the publisher
are extremely unreliable. Some products can
run one to two years behind schedule! (Harpoon, Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe, Falcon 3.0, etc.). For over two months, I have
been staring at an empty cardboard box of
Gunship 2000 in the stores. In addition, I
received an offer in June from Microprose
that if I purchased through the mail I would
have the product in July, two weeks prior to
shipment to the stores. Last month, I called
Microprose and was told release was "end of
August." Today, I am told by a store clerk that
it is "vaporware" and they have been advised
[shipment will] possibly be "end of September." I drive to a software store every week
looking for new software advertised in your
magazine that it turns out is not yet released.
As a consumer, this is very frustrating.
Your points about new technologies and
"new problems in the programming and
production process" and the 3- to 6-month
lead time inherent with publishing the
magazine are well taken. This does not mean
that you should not attempt to assist your
readership to be better informed about the
status of new software titles.
I recommend two ways to improve the accuracy of advertising in CGW:
First of all, when a publisher contracts for advertisements prior to the finished product
being available, a bold disclaimer should be
placed at the bottom of the copy. It should
state: "At press time, this product was still
under development. Consult the publisher

or your local retailer for availability."
Second, CGW should strongly consider a
column devoted to works in progress. SPI's
Strategy & Tactics magazine used to have a
column devoted to telling you what stage of
development a boardgame was in. CGW could

run down "what's in the works" at each major
software house and briefly fill in the readers
about the status of various titles. Even though
your copy may be 90 days old by the time the
magazine hits the racks, software projects can
run 12 to 36 months from inception to completion. I would rather have dated information on
a title I am interested in than be misled by an
advertisement. One of your mail-order advertisers displays the estimated "coming soon"
month of release for hot titles. CGW should be
assisting readers directly with this information.
Finally, if the life of a software development
team has become so complex that a game
that was announced and advertised for sale
one year ago is still not in the consumer's
hands, perhaps we could hear more in CGW
about the technical problems new titles have
to overcome in order to be completed. I would
enjoy reading an article by the designer of a
hit program that focused on the hurdles that
had to be overcome in order to bring the title
to market and what the linear process consists
of [in order] to go from concept to disk. The
recent piece on Rules of Engagement's user
interface was good, but only scratched the surface of this subject.
My own uneducated perception of the problem is that developers create wonderful simulations and games and then spend an inordinate
amount of time de-bugging and making the
package fit inside the memory/speed requirements of the consumer's machines. No doubt
this is far from the truth, but I would love for
CGW to educate me as to why programs take
so long to bring to market.
Simon Smith
West Palm Beach, FL
In an effort to impress upon our readers
the intricacies involved in developing
today's software, we urge readers to look at
the article on "The Human Cost in
State-of-the-Art Game Design" in this issue. It may
clarify some of the development hurdles
which software publishers are facing. As for
modifying the advertisements, that suggestion does not take into consideration either
the lead time in creating the graphic elements, the cost of making extra film or the
capacity for logistical mix-up. Actually,
readers should probably view all advertisements in computer magazines as being subject to the suggested disclaimer. We would
also suggest that people in Simon's predicament use the telephone prior to driving
down to their local software store. For a
slightly different slant on this problem, read
the following letters.

Promotion Devotion
I really enjoy the magazine and esteem it as
"the professional journal" of computer
gaming. I enjoy the review articles and particularly like the articles which discuss the
professional side of gaming. Examples would
include such articles as the coverage of roundtable discussions at conferences and articles
concerned with ethical questions in gaming.
Of course, the technical and "gee whiz" articles are also part of this coverage. Like
others who have recently written you, I would
also like to see more "concept to finished
product" coverage like that with Willy
Beamish. Such coverage could also help ease
frustration by way of explanation when games
miss their release by months (or a year in the
case of SWOTL). Keep up the writing standards! There is no excuse for poor prose or bad
code.
Philip Cockrell
Columbia, South Carolina
One can certainly sympathize with Daniel

Stowell's (Letters: September, 1991) feelings
about the continued slippage of major game
release dates. He is correct when he suggests
that the general computer magazines often
lambast their advertisers for prolonged delays.
However, because of the major differences between the entertainment and productivity
software markets, I feel he has missed the critical difference between business and entertainment software.
Business software users tend to only use one
program of each type. The decision to replace
a product with an new one is a major and,
often, painful decision. The software companies know this and will use press releases
and private demonstrations to create an environment that will preempt firms from switching to a new product. A fictional example of
the effects of such a preemptive strike would
be:
A corporation has standardized on OK-Cale,
the industry leading spreadsheet with 500
users trained to use it. The corporate computer manager tests the latest version of
AmazingCalc and concludes that its new features are so vital to user productivity that the
company will undertake the painful and expensive transition to the new product. (The training costs involved in moving to a new product
usually vastly exceed the cost of the software.)
The next day, he reads a press release in a
computer magazine that has OK Corp announcing that the new, soon-to-be-released versions of OK-Calc will have all the features of
the current release of AmazingCalc plus
several more. The writer, who has seen a
demo of the new product, says it will be shipping next month.
Our corporate manager is thrilled. His problem is solved and AmazingCalc loses 500
sales. Fourteen months later, the new version
of OK-Cale ships, minus some of the
promised features. Our manager fires off a
nasty letter to the offending writer and the
magazine itself, chiding them for their participation in what he sees as a major malfeasance
on their part. Hundreds of other persons in
similar positions do the same thing.
The writers and editors of general circulation
computer magazines are sensitive to the fact
that they are often manipulated by computer
software manufacturers. Their hostile responses to repeated delays are driven by concern
for their readers and a justifiable skepticism of
the often cynical announcements of release
dates and features.
Game vendors have a different situation.
Players purchase games they want according
to their personal budget and product
availability. Lucasfilm knows that advertising
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe too early
will send buyers into stores who will probably
walk out with something else (like Chuck
Yeager's Air Combat). Some of those buyers
will buy Secret Weapons eventually, but in the
meantime, their software budget is going in
directions that will not help Lucasfilm's corporate income.
While pre-release information can stimulate
interest in a new game, it is not in any game
vendor's business interest to mislead the press
or the public. While the game player is waiting
for the fun and excitement of a new game, the
game company is deferring millions of dollars
of potential revenue, losing some of it forever.
I suggest that it is more appropriate for
readers to feel sympathy for vendors with late
products. Companies that miss too many
release dates have a way of becoming "late"
in a more ominous manner.
CGWs editor is correct when he asserts that
bashing software companies will not speed

Letters

release dates or improve products. I suspect
that the editors of computer magazines would
agree. The basic motivation for their skeptical
hostility seems to be best summed up by
Rodger Daltry when he wrote: "We don't get
fooled again!"
John A. Bertoglio
Newberg, OR
P.S. A wise person observed that if computer
programmers and their employers were
capable of realistically estimating the time a
major software project would actually take to
complete, then no projects would ever be undertaken. We should be pleased that crazy
and talented persons and the firms they work
for continue to take an "unreasonable" view of
the time these wonder projects will take!
John has summarized our position on the
debate so well that this will be the last letter we publish on this discussion.

Calling a Wargame a Wargame
I suggest you classify Warlords as a
strategy game, rather than a wargame. The
game is great, but the combat is not realistic.
Chuck Greenwald
Dayton, Ohio
I am a long-time player of computer games
and a long-time reader of your magazine. It is
my opinion that COW is the very best computer gaming magazine and I've all but two issues to prove it. Certainly, I confess, the main
reason I think so stems from the fact that I
rarely disagree with anything I read therein,
but also the news, reviews and information
have much to do with my enthusiasm, as
does an uncanny ability to cover the games I
find interesting.
One of the features I most anticipate each
month is the Top 100 Games (Ed: Now "The
CGW Poll. "1. I look forward to seeing the changes in rankings and ratings, reflecting the
readership's changing opinions.
In recent issues, however, I have noted a
definite "fuzziness" of thinking relating to the
assignment of games to their specific
categories in the categories I care the most
about: Action, Strategy, Simulation and Wargames. In a time when wargames are a genre
fighting for survival and definitely in need of
recognition specifically of their own, the "Top
Wargame" is Warlords, a magnificent game,
but a Strategy game, not a wargame—even by
your own definition (read it!). Why is Red
Baron only a Simulation when Their Finest
Hour is Action/Simulation? Why is Knights of
the Sky only a Simulation, as well as Red
Storm Rising, while M-1 Tank Platoon is a
Simulation/Wargame? [Why is] Warlords a
wargame and Command HQ a Strategy
game? I know categorizing games is sometimes a tough call, but exercise some tradition
and consistency, please!
You may have guessed that I am a wargamer, at heart. I rejoice that the "Gold boxes"
exist so SSI can continue to publish a few wargames a year (I'm kidding!). Actually, I'm writing because I believe my criticism is justified.
Jeff Walter
San Jose, CA
As noted in this issue's article on the
"Game of the Year" awards, 1991 was a
year where it took a little something different to get a computer wargame on the
shelf. Even the designers of Warlords will
admit that the game is essentially a wargame in a fantasy wrapping. They believed
that it took such camouflage in order to convince sufficient customers that wargames
can be fun, too. As we noted in the initial
review, the game teaches the basics of com-

bined arms tactics. Command HQ, co-winner of "Wargame of the Year" with Warlords,
is now recognized as a wargame. Their
Finest Hour is considered an action game
first with simulation elements and M-1 Tank
Platoon is considered a simulation first, but
a wargame because the player has a command perspective. When in doubt, look at
the first category listed.

The CGW Poll, By the Numbers
More games should be rated on this card
each month. Also, add a column to the rating
chart which says if a game is climbing or dropping in rating.
Tim Bernaden
Chicago, Illinois
More games equal less responses. Less
responses equal less useful information.
That is the reason behind the limited number of games rated each issue. Check out
the new formal for "The CGW Poll" in this
issue, though.

Ratings Hysteria
Congratulations for having the best computer gaming magazine. Your sneak peeks, industry news and previews are my favorites.
One change? Maybe the authors of reviews
could clarify their overall opinion by a 0-100
rating? I have been gaming since its birth and
I find your knowledge of its "history" enjoyable.
Shawn Shafai
Highland Park, Illinois
How do you translate our alphabetical rankings into a numerical rating?
Tim Taylor
Bullhead City, Arizona

Each grade has a numerical value which
is calculated on a spreadsheet. We believe
that the ratings of the readers are far superior to the ratings which could be given by
an individual reviewer, even the publisher
(and he's been around how long?).

Political Incorrectness
I generally consider your magazine to be a
responsible one which does not view all computer garners as male. Unfortunately, there are
a number of sexist references in the current
issue [1186. They include:] "interface one's
grandmother could learn," (p62) "the player...
his goal," (p96) "get... a couple of wives...,"
(ad p40). I do appreciate that most of your
reviewers don't assume I'm male and will mention if it's possible to be a female character in
the game.
Victoria Somogyi
New York, New York
With 98% male readership in a maledominated industry, we are bound to revert
to "manly" references on occasion. I think
our regular readers will agree that we make
a concerted effort not to be sexist in most of
our articles. We even have a higher proportion of female writers than we do female
readers, for example.

You Can't Please Everyone
This is a great magazine! I can't think of anything to improve it, except maybe replace
"Taking a Peek" with something more interesting. Keep up the great work!
David Eison
Orlando, FL
I can't stand the format you use in "The
Rumor Bag." Please, just state the facts and

Letters

use the extra space for something else. Anything else!

"Computer Wargaming World," which
premieres in this issue.

Unsigned
Baltimore, MD
"Taking A Peek" and "Rumor Bag" are
two of our most well-read columns. Many
professionals in the Industry tell us that
they turn to the "Rumor Bag," first. We
know readers have a love/hate relationship
with the fiction. We know the fiction is often
contrived. We like it. We're keeping it until
the bag rots off the guy's head.

CD-ROM

Sinews of War
I enjoy running descriptions of battles played
(such as the Command HQ articles several issues back) and would like to see more of that
type.
Also, I would be very interested in seeing articles that talk about game design and implementation. For example: Do game designers use ray-tracing with their graphics? Or
maybe some detailed analysis on typical Al
for wargames, or just some general but littleknown facts or details about game design and
implementation.
Jim Brady
Bowie, MD
CGW is the only publication that gives sufficient coverage to computer wargames. Your
reviews are excellent and written by people
who know not only computer wargames, but
boardgames and miniatures wargaming as
well. Bravo! Keep up the good work.
Unsigned R.I.D. card
Pittsburgh, PA
We think you'll love our new section,

As usual, your magazine was superb. Good
articles, good ads, loads of exciting things to
spend my bucks on but, to be honest, the
editorializing went a little bit (byte) too far.
You guys go to the Spring Comdex and the
CES show and then write these articles that
tell us that "state of the industry."
The future is bright. There is new hardware
on the frontier. The excitement builds. The fanfares sound. Come on, Russ! Come on,
Johnny! These shows are pure hype for the
sole purpose of enticing other retailers and
"marketeers" (cousins of the mouseketeers) to
buy their latest add-on to the PC-world.
Case in point: You guys have been talking
about the glories of CD-ROMs for several issues. While I have seen listings in mail order
houses for CD games, I have yet to see one of
these things on a shelf, let alone walk into fellow gamer's house and hear him praise the
wonders of the CD-ROM. Why all the hype?
CD-ROM has already gone the way of OS-2.
No one really wants the thing, and yet we
keep hearing how wonderful it will be when we
get it. Frankly, I don't believe it.
The new games that I am seeing now do
more than I could ever imagine. Why would I
spend $500 on a CD-ROM player when a)
there is no industry standard; b) nobody has
produced any games that I wish to play or
which I can't play on my PC (most of the
games available are either shareware or old
games that I played years ago) and c) I can't
afford that new box.

CD-ROM games may be the "mega game"
of the future, but I know few people who are
willing to put that much time and effort into
one game. Really now. Imagine playing an Ultima game for a solid year (and I like the Ultima series). Maybe that much of a world
could be packed onto a couple of CDs, but
what kind of person is going to isolate themselves and spend that kind of time on one
game? You expect too much from the attention span of gamers. I don't want length. I
don't want more graphics. And I don't want to
hear digitized footsteps, door creaks or even
belches. I want newer and better plots. Give
me stories that expand my horizon. Make me
think. Don't substitute hardware for the challenge of my creativity.
Publishers should be investing in bright
talent that will tell new stories (or at least tell
the old ones with new curves) and dazzle my
grey cells. Leave the CD-ROMs for the
marketeer and let's play a game.
David C. Hicks
If gamers, Mr. Hicks aside, want better
graphics and sound than the present state
of the art, it will require more storage. If
gamers want a broader market so they can
be sure the computer game market will not
disappear as swiftly as the market for Individual platforms (Apple II, Atari 8-bit, C64/128, Atari ST, Apple IIGS, etc.), there
will have to be a successful platform that
can support these entertainment masterpieces. We are not trying to sell hardware
for anyone. We Just recognize the hurdles
the Industry is going to have to overcome
in order to move beyond the present.

Sneak Preview

By Bob Proctor

n 1979, when personal computers
were new, this reviewer wrote an article proclaiming that computer wargames would become as popular as the
more traditional paper and cardboard
variety. That may or may not be true.
What is true is that computer wargames
are on the march again. So it is with
great excitement that the present writer
can say that Utah Beach from ThreeSixty Pacific is a landmark in computer
wargaming! Any wargamer who finds himself/herself disappointed by what's been
seen on computers to date should take a
look at this one.

I

136
Utah Beach: Preview

138
Wargame Paiktography

148
Bandit Kings of Ancient
China: Strategy

150
Second Conflict: Review

154
Western Front: Review

0

157

Reach Out & Crush Someone: Opponents Wanted

Utah Beach is visually stunning, with
colorful, high-resolution maps and displays. It is like a board game on the
screen in its lavish use of color maps.
The mouse-driven interface is intuitive
and simple: just pick a unit and point
where it should go. The game sets new
heights of realism. At least, it feels right
so far. The complex, interconnected systems for weather, supply, morale, movement, combat and fatigue don't slow
down play because the computer handles the bookkeeping, but one had better
believe that it is all there.
Of course, there is a catch, at least for
most wargamers. If one wants to play
Utah Beach this year, he'll have to have
a Mac. (Do I hear cheering?) It is still too
early in development to say exactly how
big a Mac one will need, but the goal is
to make it possible to run Utah Beach
on a 2MB system with System 6.0.7.
Those who want to run the game under
System 7.0 will have to have more

memory. IBM owners will simply have to
wait for Spring, 1992!

Hit the Beach...
Utah Beach was the western-most of
the five beaches used on D-Day and one
of two assaulted by U.S. forces in particular. The campaign game begins on
the day after the invasion and runs for
about a month. The basic Allied goal is
to capture the Normandy peninsula and
clear it of German units. At four hours
per turn, this makes for a long game.
For those with less time to invest, the
five scenarios are shorter and some can
be completed in less than an hour. They
depict critical moments during this campaign: the breakout from the beachhead,
the link-up with Omaha Beach, the drive
on Cherbourg and the battle for that
fortress city. For more variety, there are
seven "what-ir variants that can be used
in any combination and the player can
also control the amount of bad weather
(three levels) and air superiority (five
levels).
Most of the units represent battalions
and all have ratings for movement, attack, defense, armor (attack), anti-tank
(defense) and morale. The level of
fatigue, disruption and supply will modify
these ratings. Artillery units are also
rated for indirect fire and maximum
range. This attention to detail enables the
game to require that the player function
via a realistic command structure for
each side and hence, handle HQ units
properly.

Sneak Preview

pressed for "point and click" orders. If
one clicks on a "Move" or "Attack" button, it is then possible to go to the map,
click on each desired hex for that unit to
move through and observe the number
of movement factors being updated as
the unit moves. The program even
provides estimates of attack and defense
strengths in combat situations. Why estimates? Because all units move simultaneously during the Execution Phase
and, by the time the attack is launched,
conditions may be different than they appeared during planning!

But Is It Art?
There are several features that would
give Utah Beach consideration as the
best computer wargame yet. The first
one that strikes the player—as soon as
the game begins—is the graphics. The
subtle shading of greens and browns on
the eight terrain types is something one
only expects from a board game map.
German units are, appropriately enough,
gray and U.S. units are olive drab. Special units stand out in contrasting colors,
such as khaki for U.S. airborne and black
(of course!) for the SS. Unit identifications are easy to read and players have a
choice of standard military symbols or
small icons to show unit types. Each
type of terrain also has a distinctive "fill
pattern" for color-blind users and
monochrome systems. If a player should
desire, each hex may be shown in two
shades of its basic color, the lighter
shade showing hexes currently under
player control. If the player elects to
switch sides, the colors switch too.
"Friendly" hexes are always lighter.
The second reason Utah Beach may
be the best yet is its user interface. Playing a game well has never been easier,
because the information one needs to
make effective decisions is available
during movement. During the Planning
Phase, a simple click on a hex will illuminate the supply line in bright green
flashes. All units in the hex are displayed
in a window and clicking on one of them
will not only reveal its current status, but
also display a row of "buttons" to be

Another area where Utah Beach excels
is in the presentation of the results for
each turn. This is the "After Action
Phase." All combat locations are marked
with a brightly colored flag to show who
won. Clicking on one of these locations
elicits a summary of the battle displayed
at the bottom of the screen. Though the
initial summary is in general terms, one
must only click on the "Detail" button to
see exactly what the odds were and what
modifiers were used.
Utah Beach has a very functional overview mode. It does not attempt to show
the entire campaign area but displays
about four times more area than the
"Close View." This turns out to be
enough to see the entire area for several
of the scenarios. The game can be
played equally well in either view mode.
There are "buttons" to scroll in any of
eight directions and for really fast travel,
there is a very small map of the entire
peninsula and clicking anywhere on this
map will center the main view on that
location.
The automated features make the
game a joy to play and can be thought
of as a staff of "intelligent assistants."
Best of all is the "Move Idle Units" command. It tells the computer to generate
orders for any unit that doesn't already
have them. So, one can command in the
critical areas and let the computer do the
rest! For example, there is no need to
spend time bringing new forces up to the
front, since automatic strategic movement and divisional movement are also
useful.
Another assistant allocates the basic
supply tonnage every turn. One need
only deal with the excess, allocating it to
those units that will need the extra combat strength. In addition, one may like to
assign targets for fighter bombers and artillery, but those who do not can simply
"enlist" assistants to do those chores too.
Artillery support is automated by
division, so one division can fire defen-

sively while another is assigned individual
missions, unit by unit!

Grognard Bait
Here are a few more appetizers to entice wargame veterans:
Limited Intelligence can be turned off
completely if one prefers the traditional
boardgame style of knowing everything.
When turned on, the information about
the enemy varies in content, depending
on proximity, and improves with time.
There is also a "Fog of War" option (not
yet implemented on the current beta)
that is supposed to distort the accuracy
of this data. Even the weather forecasts
for the Allies are more accurate than for
the Germans, who had no weather stations in the Atlantic.
Zones of Control are of variable
strength! They are affected by unit type,
terrain, morale, fatigue, weather and
night time. One can move through ZOCs,
but they impose a penalty on movement
proportional to their strength. The calculations are explained in the manual but the
computer handles them all discreetly.
One is left with the uncertainty of not
knowing exactly how far a unit can
move, or when an attack will happen relative to other movement.
Stacking limits (3 battalions per hex)
apply all the time. With simultaneous
movement, overstacking can occur if too
many units try to go through the same
hex. Thus, congestion at a road junction
can mean delays and more uncertainty.
Sound like a modern work-day commute?

The Future
There are a few things that would make
Utah Beach even more complete. A
fuller explanation of the combat algorithms would be nice; maybe the final
manual will include one. An ability to
change ratings of individual units would
please any nit-pickers—for now garners
must live with the designers' choices.
The only important option missing is
head-to-head play between two systems
linked via serial cable, modem or network. This would make it easier to get
that social element back into the game.
Three-Sixty plans to upgrade Utah
Beach next spring (concurrent with the
release of the DOS version) and add this
feature at that time. This writer salutes
the authors (Larry Merkel, Ed Rains and
Keith Zabalaoui) for developing a
wargamer's wargame. Here's hoping it
does as well on the marketing front as it
has on the development front. Great lob!

Survey

Computer Strategy and Wargames:
The 1900-1950 Epoch
Part I (A-L) of an Annotated Paiktography
by M. Evan Brooks

T

his reviewer has written two prior round-

Diplomatic) / Level (Tactical, Operational,
Strategic)

ups of what is available in the
marketplace for the computer wargamer
("World War II" in CGW #37 and "Pre-20th
Century" in CGW #75). However, the computer market changes quickly and what was
state-of-the-art in 1985 may not even be marginally acceptable in today's world. In fact, the
"Hall of Fame" illustrates games that were
breakthroughs and commercial successes; yet
many of them do not "age" well, and it is
doubtful if the computer world will ever
develop its classics like Monopoly is to the
boardgame genre.
Thus, the paiktographies will be updated and
revised on a regular basis, so that the user
may have some indication of both what is and
was available. It should be noted that the
ratings are an individual preference and do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of the publisher or editor of this magazine. Also, please note
the platform availability, since a five-star game
on an Atari 800 that is several years old is not
of the same sophistication as a new product
designed for an IBM 486-33. However, it has
been given its rating for what it originally did
and, to a lesser extent, what it still does. It
may even be slightly higher-rated for the place
it holds in this reviewer's heart and memory.
Of course, the designers look askance at
these ratings and often deluge the magazine
with voluminous complaints. Nevertheless, the
discriminating reader will realize that these
ratings are intrinsically subjective and should
be tempered in terms of this writer's normal
reviews in order to ascertain the inherent
biases. What is also noteworthy is that few
computer games have a shelf life longer than
three years, yet boardgames remain classics
up to ten years or more after their release
(e.g. Napoleon's Last Battles, A House
Divided, Up Front).

In a ten-year span (1981-1991), the gaming
market has gone from a 16K 8-bit computer
to a 1-2 MB 16/32-bit computer with clock
speeds now in excess of 20 MHz. The eight-bit
market is moribund (if not outright deceased),
and the MS-DOS clones hold a commanding
lead in forthcoming titles. The ST has been virtually abandoned in the United States and,
while the Amiga's superior game and graphics
capabilities still hold a loyal following, the MSDOS machines are "where the action is".
Legend: xxx = Data not available.
Line 1: Title

Number of Players (M: modem option)
Tactical: man-to-man up to company level.
Turns represent seconds to hours.
Operational: battalion-level to division-level.
Turns represent hours to weeks.
Strategic: corps-level to theater army or
higher. Turns represent weeks to years.

Line 2: (Machine Format [Atari / Com-

modore / Apple II / TRS-80 / Apple IIGS /
Amiga / Atari ST / Macintosh / IBM]) Issue
of CGW in which that game was mentioned
(bold print refers to major article); Company;
Designer; Date of Publication; Price (O/P: Out
of Print); Rating:
0

= Good use as a magnet holder
= Avoid
= Marginal
**
***
= Average to Good
**** = Very Good
***** = Highly Recommended
= "and a half"
N-R
= Not Rated)

Line 3: Difficulty (Beginner, Intermediate,
Advanced) / Environment (Land, Naval, Air,

Unit Size

# of Men

Fire Team
Squad
Platoon
Company
Battalion
Brigade
Division
Corps
Army

23
912
4050
120150
500- 1,000
3,000- 5,000
10,000- 15,000
20,000- 80,000
up
100,000-

Ace of Aces

(A/C/I; #32;38) Accolade; Michael Bates and
Rich Banks; 1986; $29.95; *+
Beg/Air/Tac
1
An arcade-type flight simulator offering a
somewhat ahistorical rendition of fighter combat during World War II.
Ace—Air Combat Emulator
(C) Spinnaker; Ian Martin; 1986; ?; N-R

Beg/Air/Tac
1-2
A head-to-head flight simulator.
Aces of the Pacific
(I) Dynamix; Damon Slye; 1992?; ?; N-R

Adv/Air/Tac-Op
1
A World War II flight simulator, reminiscent
of Battlehawks (cf. infra), but in Dynamix's
own style. Until Chuck Yeager's Air Combat
(cf. infra), Lucasfilm had claimed World War
II aerial operations as its private domain. The
situation is obviously changing quickly....
Action in the North Atlantic
(Ap/I; #70,74) General Quarters; Owen P.

Hall, Jr.; 1989; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
WWII and the Murmansk run. Sink the
Scharnhorst!
Action Off the River Platte
(AP/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

Survey

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M

Int/Land/Op
0-2
A very flexible game covering corps-level
combat and proper use of the chain of command during World War II. Design-your-own
scenarios open the bulk of the 20th century to
gaming; however, the artificial intelligence of
subordinate commanders is notoriously weak.
The game system will either attract or repel
the player—there is no middle ground.

Pursuit and destruction of the German "pocket battleship" Graf Spee.
Action Stations
(I; #68) RAW; CDR Alan Zimm; 1989; $49.95;

Adv/Nav/Tac-Op
1-2
A very comprehensive simulation of surface
warfare during World War II (actually 192245). Excellent research and complexities are
marred by poor graphics and an awkward
user interface. Still, it is the most detailed
simulation covering this period.

Battleground
(#40) MVP Software; xxx; 1987; xxx; N-R

Int/Land/Tac
2
Tactical squad-level operations on the
Western Front during WWII.

After Pearl

(A; #4.6,37) SuperWare; George Schwenk;
1984; 0/P; ***
Beg/Nav/Op-Str
1-2
A strategic simulation of the War in the
Pacific (1941-1945), this game bears little
resemblance to history. Reminiscent of
Avalon Hill's boardgame Victory in the
Pacific, it is quick and fun to play. A "cotton
candy" game, it may well rot your mind, but
this reviewer still likes it.
Afrika Korps

(Am/ST; #87) Impressions; Ken Wright;
1991; N-R
Int/Land/Op
1
Air Raid Pearl Harbor
(AP/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
Variations on an unplayable theme? Based
upon the title and description, this simulation
of the Japanese assault on Pearl Harbor in
1941 must be for either sadists or masochists
(depending on which side is played).
Air Warrior
(#63;67) GEnie; Kesmai; 1988; $6.00/hour;
***+)
Int/Air/Tac
1-multi; M
An on-line simulation of tactical air combat
from World War I onwards. Continually being
revised and updated, it is interesting, although
it can become an expensive way of life. The
learning curve is lengthy, but often veteran
pilots are available on-line who are willing to
give assistance and tutorials.
Ancient Art of War in the Skies
(I) Broderbund; Dave and Barry Murry; 1992;
?; N-R
Int/Air/Tac-Op
1
A forthcoming action game involving aerial
operations of World War I.
Arnhem—The Market-Garden Operation
(Am/I; #86) CSS; R. T. Smith; 1991; ?; N-R
Int/Land/Op
1-3
At the Gates of Moscow

(A/C/Ap; #25) SGP; David Heath; 1985; 0/P;
N-R
Int/Land/Op
0-multi
A computer game released simultaneously
with the boardgame version, it covers the
1941 Axis drive on Moscow. Neither product
has withstood the test of time.
B-24 Combat Simulator
(C/Ap/I/; #39) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;

John Gray; 1987; 0/P; **+
Int/Air/Tac
A simulation of the World War II Ploesti oil
raids, the player must join his B-24 to the formation, fly to the target and inflict maximum
damage. While accurate, the game suffers
somewhat from a repetitious nature and the
fact that a single bomber in a raid offers little
room for initiative. Superseded by Secret
Weapons of the Luftwaffe (cf. infra).
Banzai

(Ap/I; #85) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall,
Jr.; 1991; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac
0-2: M
The last voyage of the Japanese super-battleship Yamato in a tactical battle simulation
of World War II Pacific action.
Battle Command
(#40;74) Applied Computer Consultants;

Bob Sinclair; 1986; 0/P; N-R
Int/Land/Tac
2; M
Battle Cruiser
(A/C/Ap; #37,38) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1987; 0/P; **

Adv/Nav/Tac
1-2
The sequel to Warship (cf. infra), this simulation covers World War II in the Atlantic and
World War I. Similar to its predecessor, it suffers the same strengths and weaknesses.
Battle for Midway
(C) Firebird; xxx; 1986; 0/P; N-R

Int/Nav-Air/Tac-Op
1
Battlefront
(C/Ap; #32,37) Strategic Studies Group;

Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1987; $39.95;

Battle Group

(C/Ap;l;#27,29) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1986; 0/P; **+
Adv/Land/Tac
1-2
SSI's World War II Western Front sequel to
Kampfgruppe (cf. infra), this simulation offers
tactical scenarios and the ability to design
your own. Not as successful as its antecedent,
it suffers from some, but not all, of the same
problems.
Battle Hawks 1942
(I; #53,63,64) Lucasfilm; Noah Falstein and

Lawrence Holland; 1988; $29.95; ****
Int/Air/Tac
1
A combat simulator of the major carrier battles of World War II from the cockpit perspective. Good graphics, excellent documentation
and quick play keep this product a real player.
Lucasfilm is considering a newer version,
which would bring it up to the state of the art
for the faster machines currently available.
Battle of Britain
(C) Firebird; xxx; 1986; 0/P; N-R

Int/Air/Op
1
Battles of the Atlantic
(Ap/ST/I; #5.2,29) Simulations Canada; L
Howie; 1986; $60.00; N-R

Adv/Nav/Op
1-2
A World War II simulation. An amalgamation
of a board and computer game, it uses map,
counters and computer.
Battle of the Bulge
(I) Ark Royal; Carl Carpenter; 1988; xxx; N-R

Int/Land/Op
1-2
Battleship Bismarck
(Ap/I; #74) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall,

Jr.; 1991; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
World War 11 pursuit of the German battleship by British Naval Forces.
Battleship

(C/ST/A/I) Epyx; xxx; 1988; xxx; N-R
Beg/Nav/?
1-2

Survey

The old Milton Bradley Battleship game with
a couple of new ideas and twists.

(C) Green Valley Publishing; xxx; 1985;
0/P; N-R
Beg/Land/Op
1-2

Battle Stations
(M) TimeLine, Ltd.; M. L Samford and W. P.

Worzel; 1986; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Nav/?
1-2

Real-time "Battle of the Bulge" game which
boasts "no manual required." Player intelligence also appears to be dubiously optional.

Again, the old Milton Bradley Battleship
game with no new ideas and twists found in
either the computer or boardgame versions.

Carrier Force
(A/C/Ap; #4.2,4.6,27,29,37) Strategic
Simulations Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1983; 0/P;

**
Adv/Nav/Op
1-2

Battle Stations
(Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

xxx; $35.00; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
0-2; M
A simulation of the WWII USS Houston, historically a lopsided contest with a few
Americans and Allied forces attempting to
stem the Imperial Japanese fleet at its zenith.
Battle Tank: Barbarossa to Stalingrad
(Am/ST/I; #72) Simulations Canada;

Stephen Newberg and Stephen St. John;
1990; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Land/Op

Blitzkrieg at the Ardennes
(Am/I;#67) RAW; Al and Joseph Benincasa;

1989; $49.95; N-R
Adv/Land/Op
1-2

Tactical armored combat in the East, June
1941-May 1943.

A boardgame analog of "The Battle of the
Bulge" during World War II, in which the computer handles bookkeeping and the computer
opponent offers predictable opposition.

Battle Tank: Kursk to Berlin
(Am/ST/I) Simulations Canada; Stephen

Blue Max
(A) Synapse; xxx; 1983; 0/P; 0

Newberg and Stephen St. John; 1991; $60.00;
N-R
Adv/Land/Op
1-2

Beg/Air/Tac
1

Tactical armored combat in the East, June
1943-May 1945.

An arcade game in every sense of the world
(and marketed as such). However, because it
was one of the first simulations to have a
World War I environment, it is included herein.

Beach-Head
(C) Access; Roger and Bruce Carver; 1983;

Blue Max
(I; #76,77,78,83) Three Sixty Pacific; Rick

0/P; N-R
Int/Land-Air/Tac

Banks and Paul Butler; 1990; $49.95; **
Int/Air/Tac
1-2

1

Arcade game of WWII amphibious landing
operations.
Beach-Head II: The Dictator Strikes Back!
(C) Access; Roger and Bruce Carver; 1985;

0/P; N-R
Int/Land-Air/Tac
1-2
Sequel to Beach-Head allowing for
head-to-head play.
Berlin 1948
(I; #69) Electronic Zoo; xxx; 1990; $49.95;

***
Int/Land/Tac
1

More of a role-playing adventure, set in Cold
War Berlin, the player must interact with the
environment in order to recover a missing
nuclear weapon. (Perhaps an earlier Sum of
All Fears?)
Bismarck: The North Sea Chase
(C/Ap; #42) DataSoft; Anthony Stoddart;

1987; 0/P; *+
Beg/Nav/Tac-Op
1
An arcade-type simulation of the chase for
the Bismarck, this product offers little innovation, insight or play value.

First out of the blocks in the 1990-91 World
War I air simulator competition, and it shows.
More a game than a representation of reality,
it does not really succeed on either level. An
upgrade is available in order to get past the
original release's inaccurate flight model.
Bomb Alley
(Ap; #3.4) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary

Grigsby; 1982; 0/P; N-R
Adv/Air-Nav/Op-Str
1-2
Gary Grigsby's sequel to Guadalcanal Campaign (cf. infra), this treatment of the World
War II Mediterranean Campaign was not a success in its initial release. Time has not revised
this judgment.
Breakthrough in the Ardennes
(A/C/Ap/I; #5.1,33,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; David Landrey and Chuck

Kroegel; 1983; 0/P; **
Adv/Land/Op
1-2
A follow-on to Operation Market-Garden
(cf. infra), this game suffers the same
strengths and weaknesses. Better than Tigers
in the Snow (cf. infra), it is more complex
and still obsolescent.
Bulge—The Battle for Antwerp

A tactical/operational simulation of the
major Pacific carrier battles of World War II, it
is marred by extremely slow execution and historical inaccuracy in some areas. Obviously
dated, it will be superseded by designer Gary
Grigsby's new treatment of the same subject.
Carrier Force II
(I) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby;

1992; ?; N-R
Adv/Nav/Op
1-2
This update of Carrier Force still does not
have a formal title, but when released, it will
update its ancestor to current standards in
computer gaming. It will have a campaign option (up to two years).
Carriers at War

(C/Ap/I; #5.1,5.2,37) Strategic Studies
Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout;
1984/1991; $50.00/?; **** - ?
Int/Nav/Op
1
Similar to coverage to Carrier Force, it excels in its flexibility, options and limited intelligence. It is broader in scope than Carrier
Force, and the forthcoming MS-DOS version
should bring the product up to state of the art.
Highly recommended.
Castle Wolfenstein
(A/C) Muse; Silas Warner; 1983; 0/P; *+

and
Beyond Castle Wolfenstein
(A/C; #5.2) Muse; Silas Warner; 1984; 0/P;

**

Arcade "classics," these products take the
dungeon mentality and transfer it to World
War II. Castle Wolfenstein postulates an escape from a Nazi castle, while Beyond Castle
Wolfenstein offers infiltration of a Nazi fortress
to assassinate Adolf Hitler. As serious as PacMan, its graphics are dated, but it remains in
this reviewer's fond memories.
Chuck Yeager's Air Combat
(I; #85,86) Electronic Arts; Brent Iverson;

1991; $59.95; ****+
Adv/Air/Tac
1

A combat flight simulator offering the ability
to fly scenarios in World War II, Korea or Vietnam, or mix and match them. Good graphics,
good game play and an excellent post-mission
analysis yield a high recommendation.
Clash of Wills
(A/C; #5.4,29,37) DKG; Marc Summerlott;
1985; 0/P; *+

Survey

Int/Land/Su
1-3

Decision in the Desert
(C/Ap/I; #5.5,37) MicroProse; Sid Meier and

A strategic simulation of the war in Europe
(1939-1945), covering both Eastern and
Western Fronts. Primitive graphics and poor
user interface coupled with extremely poor
documentation will deter most players. Yet its
sheer scope does offer some playability and
enjoyment. But for a more current treatment,
cf. Storm Across Europe.

Ed Bever; 1985; 0/P; ****+
Int/Land/Op
1-2
An operational study of the Desert Campaign in World War II, it offers a fascinating
study that will teach appropriate lessons in armored desert warfare. More accurate than
Crusade in Europe (cf. infra), but narrower in
scope. Even with age, this game is still enjoyable.

Close Assault
(A/Ap; #3.3) Avalon Hill; Gary Bedrosian;

1983; $35.00; *
Beg/Land/Tac
1-2
World War II tactical infantry simulation, with
the computer utilized as a boardgame assist.
Utilizing a hex-grid map and counters, it is has
touches of the boardgames Squad Leader
and Panzerblitz. However, it is awkward, clumsy and obsolete.
Combat Leader
(A/C; #37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;
David Hille; 1984; 0/P; **
Beg/Land/Tac
1
A tactical simulation of armored warfare
(squad/platoon) with built-in as well as
design-your-own scenarios; the game offers a myriad
of options. Quick playing, but with primitive
graphics (destroyed armored vehicles
resemble nothing so much as cockroaches).
Command HQ
(I; #74,76,77,79,80) MicroProse; Dan Bunten; 1990; $59.95; ****+
Int/Land-Nav-Air/Str
1-2; M
A product capable of recreating World Wars IIV(?), this is a modified "beer and pretzels"
game. Highly recommended for entertainment,
although not as a historical learning experience.
Computer Air Combat
(Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Charles
Merrow and Jack Avery; 1980; 0/P; N-R
Adv/Air/Tac
1
A computer-clone of Yaquinto's boardgames
Air Force and Dauntless, this covers tactical
air combat during World War II. One of the
first air combat simulations, this sparked the
birth of Computer Gaming World as a forum
for serious reviews.
Computer Ambush
(A/C/Ap/M/ST/I; #3.3,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Ed Williger and Larry Strawser;

1980; 0/P; **+
Adv/Land/Tac
1-2
A tactical man-to-man simulation of patrolling in World War II. The graphics are extremely primitive, but the details make up for this
deficiency to a large extent.
Computer Bismarck
(A) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Joel Bill-

ings; 1980; 0/P; N-R
Int/Nav/Tac
1

Desert Fox
(C; #36) Accolade; Rick Banks and Michael

Bate; 1985/1987; $19.95; *
Beg/Land/Op
1
The game that started SSI, its age and functional obsolescence make this product useful
only to the collector. More of a computer assist to a boardgame than a true computer
game.
Crusade in Europe

(C/Ap/I; #5.3,5.5,26,37) MicroProse; Sid
Meier and Ed Bever; 1985; 0/P; ****+
Int/Land/Op-Str
1-2
An operational/strategic simulation of the
Western Front during World War II, the
scenarios offer real value. The campaign suffers from an incompetent computer opponent,
but this product has aged well. Now, if they
would only offer the hard drive-installable vers ion....
Dam Busters

(C/Ap/I; #26,37) Accolade; Rick Banks and
Michael Bate; 1985; $14.95; *+
Beg/Air/Tac
1
An arcade recreation of the bombing of the
Ruhr Dams a la 633 Squadron. Definitely
dated; too much of a game and not enough of
a simulation.
Das Boot
(I; #74,76,82) Three Sixty Pacific; Paul But-

ler and Rick Banks; 1991; $49.95; **+
Int/Nav/Tac
A World War ll submarine "simulation," it is
not as sophisticated as Silent Service ll (cf.
infra), but it does allow one to play the German side.
Dawn Patrol
(Ap) TSR; xxx; 1983; 0/P; N-R

Beg/Air/Tac
1
An arcade simulation of World War I aerial
operations, featuring the wire-framed graphics
of the era and none of the role-playing
capacity of the pen-and-paper game.
Dawn Patrol
(C) Mark of the Falcon; Scott C. Baggs;

1985; 0/P; N-R
Int/Nav/Tac
1
Real-time WWII submarine simulation.

An operational simulation of the African
Campaign, it attempted to mix both arcade
play and simulation, and ultimately failed on
both levels.
Desert Rats
(I; #54,58) CCS; R.T. Smith; 1989; $39.95; **

Int/Land/Op
1-2
Similar in coverage to Decision In the
Desert, it offers a scenario of the entire campaign (in 672 turns!). Awkward user
mechanics and primitive graphics mar this
product; age has turned it to vinegar, and it's
not even that old.
Desert War
(M; #60) SJP; xxx; 1989; xxx; N-R

?/Land/Tac-Op
2
Features WWII desert action and uses the
computer to handle the bookkeeping. No computer opponent is available, however.
Destroyer

(C/Ap/I/GS; #33) Epyx; xxx; 1986; 0/P; **+
Int/Nav/Tac
1
Graphic emphasis yields an interesting
portrayal of World War II destroyer operations.
However, the documentation and scenarios
are underdeveloped. Again, age has rendered
it obsolescent.
Destroyer Escort
(C; #62) Medalist; Robert Prescott; 1989;

0/P; **+
Beg/Nav/Tac
1
Very similar to Destroyer (cf. infra), but a
newer version.
Diplomacy, Computer
(I; #37,41,75) Avalon Hill; Ron Sutherland;

1984/1992(?); $50.00; ***/?
Int/Dip/Str
1-6
A faithful rendition of the classic boardgame,
its graphics and computer intelligence are not
state-of-the-art. Hopefully, the new edition will
return this product to the consumer's forefront.
Dive Bomber
(I; #55) US Gold; xxx; 1989; $39.95; 0+

Beg/Air/Tac
1

Survey

A "Sink the Bismarck" simulation, marred
by mediocre graphics, documentation and an
overall lack of panache. Similar to Bismarck:
The North Sea Chase (cf.infra).

mand-eye view of the "Battle of Britain" rather
than the "in the air" action depicted in later
releases.

Dnieper River Line
(A/Ap) Avalon Hill; Bruce Ketchledge; 1983;

(I/M; #49,63,64,66) Panther; Dave O'Connor,
Tony
***+ Oliver and Ben Freasier; 1989; $39.95;

Fire Brigade

0/P; N-R
Int/Air/Op
1

Adv/Land/Op
1

An Eastern Front battle during World War II,
this is not so much a computer game as it is
a computer assist to a boardgame (it comes
with map and counters). It ultimately succeeded on neither level.

A simulation of the 1943 battles around Kiev
on the Eastern Front. Good documentation
and excellent packaging have yielded a game
that has withstood the test of time, although
the learning curve is somewhat long.

Dreadnoughts

Firepower
(Am) MicroIllusions; xxx; 1987; $24.95; N-R

(C/Ap/I; #4.5,4.6,26) Avalon Hill; Thomas
Dowell; 1984; $30.00; *+
Int/Navrac
1-2
World War II naval action covering the pursuit of the German battleship Bismarck in
1941. Operational and tactical levels, with the
latter allowing one to modify and create his
own scenarios. However, poor graphics and
game play do little to enhance the game.
Eagles

(A/C/Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;
Robert Raymond; 1983; 0/P; ***
Beg/Air/Tac
1
World War I aerial operations, more akin to
chess than a flight simulator. However, it can
be an enjoyable, albeit unrealistic, experience.
Eagles Nest, Into the
(Ap/C/Am/I; #43) MindScape; xxx; 1987;

$29.95; **+
Beg/Land/Tac
1
A newer clone of Castle Wolfenstein (cf.
infra), this arcade product is fun for a short
time, but rapidly loses its interest appeal.
Eastern Front
(A; #37) APX; Chris Crawford; 1982; 0/P;

*****
Int/Land/Op-Str

An operational-strategic simulation of the German invasion of Russia during World War II,
this game was the first to show what the computer could do in wargaming. Obsolete by contemporary programming standards, it remains
fun to play. The cartridge version offers both
beginner and advanced scenarios.
Empire

(I/ST; #40,41,43,54,60,63,75) Interstel; Walter Bright and Mark Baldwin; 1987; $49.95;
Int/Land-Sea-Air/Op
1-3
A very enhanced version of the public
domain product, this offers an intriguing
simulation of global-type warfare. Emphasizing
aspects of land, sea and air, the simulation is
very interesting, although it does take a long
time to win. Design-your-own options and easy
user interface make this a player. Based upon
the combat units, this appears to be a World
War I general's concept of how the next war

Beg/Land/Tac
1-2; M
would be fought (battleships remain king!).
Designer Mark Baldwin's new The Perfect
General (cf. infra) may well supersede his
former fine effort.
Europe Ablaze

(C/Ap; #27,37) Strategic Studies Group;
Roger Keating, Eric Baker and Ian Trout;
1985; $49.95; ***
Int/Air/Op
1
A simulation re-creating the Battle of Britain
and the bomber offensive over Germany
during World War II. Design-your-own
scenarios and much detail, but Secret
Weapons of the Luftwaffe (cf. infra) has superseded this game to a large degree, although that product is more tactically oriented.
Fall Gelb

(C/l/Ap/ST) Simulations Canada; Les
Howie; 1988; $60.00; N-R
Int/Land/Op
1-2
The fall of France, Spring 1940.
Field of Fire

(C/A/Ap/ST/I; #37) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Roger Damon; 1984; 0/P; **
Int/Land/Tac
1
A tactical approach to squad-level operations
on the Western Front during World War II. History and "lessons learned" take a back seat to
playability, but it is an interesting introduction
to computer wargaming.
Fifty Mission Crush

An arcade tank simulation with direct-connect capability.
First Over Germany
(C; #58,59) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;

John Gray; 1989; 0/P; **+
Int/Air/Tac
1
A tactical simulation of the bomber offensive
against Germany during World War II, it is relatively detailed. However, game play becomes
somewhat tedious. Secret Weapons of the
Luftwaffe (cf. infra) covers a similar subject
but in a more state-of-the-art fashion.
Flak

(A,C,Ap; #4.3) Funsoft; xxx; xxx; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac
1

An arcade simulation.
Fleet Med

(Am/ST/I) Simulations Canada; J. Baker;
1991; $60.00; N-R
Air/Nav/Tac
1-2
A tactical simulation of naval conflict in the
Mediterranean (1939-1943), it includes nine
scenarios and a "design-your-own" feature.
Flight Deck

(C) xxx; xxx; xxx; xxx; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac
1
An arcade simulation.
Flight Simulator II
(A/C/AM/I) SubLogic; Bruce Artwick; xxx;

(C/I/A/Ap; #4.4,35,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; John Gray; 1984; 0/P; **
Beg/Air/Op-Str
1

$49.95; **+
Adv/Air/Tac
1

A tactical re-creation of the bomber offensive
against Germany during World War II. Realistic, but dull; superseded by Secret Weapons
of the Luftwaffe (cf. infra) in terms of
graphics, game play, and historical detail.

The first and classic flight simulator, continuously updated for graphics and gameplay.
More interesting as a civilian flight simulator;
its World War I portion is ahistorical, slow and
ponderous. Red Baron (cf. infra) covers the
period in a far more intriguing fashion.

Fighter Command

(Ap; #3.4,4.4,5.1,5.2,26) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Charlie Merrow and Jack Avery;
1983; 0/P; N-R
Adv/Air/Op-Str
1-2
A classic SSI game which features a corn-

Flying Tigers
(A/Ap; #37) Discovery David Weseley; 1982;

0/P; 0
Beg/Air/Tac
1
A tactical air-to-air simulation of World War II

Survey

in the Pacific. Wire-frame graphics, lack of
realism and limited play value are sufficient to
deter anyone from further play.
Fokker Triplane Simulator
(M; #66) Bullseye; Donald A. Hill, Jr.;

1986/1989; $69.95; N-R
Int/Air/Tac
1
An early World War I flight simulator, it
shows its age.
GATO

(C/Ap/Am/I; #5.2) Spectrum Holobyte; Ed
Dawson and Paul Arlton; 1983; 0/P; *+
Int/Nav/Tac
1
One of the first World War II submarine
simulations, it was adequate in its time, but
not exemplary in any regard. Time has not
been generous to this product.
German Raider Atlantic
(Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.;

xxx; $35.00; 0+
Beg/Nav/Tac
0-2; M
Poor graphics, poor documentation and poor
gameplay characterize this product of surface
naval combat in World War II.
Grand Fleet
(ST/I; #63) Simulations Canada; J. Baker;

1988; $60.00; **+
Int/Nav/Tac-Op
1
A simulation of fleet tactical operations in
World War I (actually covering 1906-1920), totally without graphics. However, it remains one
of the few products covering this period; it includes seven scenarios and a "
design-your-own option."
Gray Storm Rising
(I) ArkRoyal; xxx; xxx; $19.95; N-R

xxx
xxx
Battles in the North Atlantic, World War II.
The Great Escape
(I) Thunder Mountain; xxx; 1986; 0/P; •

Beg/Land/Tac
1
An arcade treatment of the famous Allied
POW escape from Luft Stalag III (based on the
book by Paul Brickhill [1950] and the movie
[1962]). It was well worth its price ($9.95)
when released, but it has not aged gracefully.
Great War 1914
(C/A) DKG; Marc Summerlott; 1986; 0/P; **+

Int/Land/Op-Str
1-2
Primitive graphics and poor user interface
mar this examination of the beginning of
World War I. On the other hand, there are few
simulations covering this period.
Guadalcanal Campaign
(Ap; #2.5,5.4) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;

Gary Grigsby; 1982; 0/P; N-R
Adv/Nav-Land/Op
1-2
Perhaps the first "monster" computer war-

game, this covered the entire Guadalcanal
Campaign, but in a tedious fashion. The subject has been covered in more recent simulations (cf. Gary Grigsby's own forthcoming War
In the Pacific).
Guderian

(A/C//Ap; #38,40) Avalon Hill; Software Associates; 1987; $30.00; •*
Int/Land/Op
1-2
A faithful adaptation of Jim Dunnigan's
famous boardgame, it suffers from being an almost too literal translation. Slow-moving, the
design had potential, but the programming did
not achieve its objective.
Halls of Montezuma

(C/Ap/Am/I; #42,45) Strategic Studies
Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1988;
$39.95; ***
Adv/Land/Op
0-2
The Battlefront system writ once again, this
covers the U.S. Marine Corps from the
Mexican War through Vietnam, with emphasis
on World War II. Battles include Belleau Wood
(World War I), Okinawa and Iwo Jima (World
War II) on brigade/divisional level operations.
Editor Johnny Wilson loved the Halls; this
reviewer is not as easily entertained.
Hellcat Ace
(A/C) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1983; 0/P; •

Beg/Air/Tac
1
Hide and Sink
(I) Mirror Images Software; xxx; 1983; 0/P;

N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac
1
Another Battleship (cf. infra) variation.
In Harm's Way

(C/Ap/Am/ST/I; #52,57) Simulations
Canada; Bill Nichols; 1988; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Nav/Tac
1-2
Tactical naval combat in the Pacific from
1943-1944; nine scenarios and a "
build-your-own" option.
Iwo Jima 1945/Falklands 1982
(C; #34,37) Firebird; John Bethell; 1985;

0/P; •
Beg/Land-Nav/Op
1
Simulation of the amphibious operation in
World War II, it made up in price value what it
lacked in historical accuracy. However, it has
aged poorly and offers little for the contemporary wargamer in either history or play
value.
Jagdstaffel

(A/Ap; #37) Discovery; David Weseley; 1985;
0/P; 0
Beg/Air/Tac
1
A tactical game similar to Flying Tigers (cf.
infra), only occurring in the European Theater.
Just as bad as Flying Tigers.
Kampfgruppe

(C/I/A/Ap/Am; #5.2,5.4,5.5,25,37) Strategic
Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1985;
$59.95; **•+
Adv/Land/Tac
1-2
A tactical simulation of warfare on the Eastern Front, this game was CGWs Game of the
Year in 1985. Multiple options, but marred by
lack of joystick input and stacking (virtually
an entire army can be crammed into a small
geographic location). A classic that should be
reworked in order to bring it up to contemporary standards.
Kampfgruppe Scenario Disk #1
(A/C) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary

Grigsby; 1986; 0/P; •*
Adv/Land/Tac
1-2
Five additional scenarios for Kampfgruppe
(cf. infra). Historical accuracy is subject to
question in some of the scenarios, and the
basic game is capable of designing a player's
own scenarios.
Knights of the Desert
(A/C//Ap/I; #3.4,37) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Tactical Design Group; 1983; 0/P; •+

Int/Land/Op
1-2
An operational simulation of Rommel's
desert campaigns in North Africa during World
War II, it was one of the first games to offer
multiple stacking in the same hex. Slow and
ponderous, its re-creation of the "African
Campaign" does not deliver its potential.
Knights of the Sky
(I; #74,76,79,83) MicroProse; Jeffrey Briggs;

1991; $59.95; ***+
Int/Air/Tac
1-2;M
A World War I flight simulator whose
greatest strength is the modem play option.
While CGW gave it a rating of primus inter
pares, this reviewer found the inability to fly
on the German side, the graphic representation of "cloud cover," and flight
models/damage to be less than optimal. Still a
fine game, which suffers only by comparison
to Red Baron (cf. infra).
Kriegsmarine

(Am/ST/I; #66,67) Simulations Canada;
Steve Newberg and James Baker; 1989;
$60.00; N-R
Adv/Nav/Tac
1-2
Tactical naval combat in the Atlantic between 1939 and 1944, with nine scenarios and
a "build-your-own" option.
Kursk Campaign
(Ap/ST/I; #37) Simulations Canada;

Stephen St. John; 1986; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Land/Op
1-2
A simulation of the largest tank battle of
World War II (Operation Zitadelle, summer
1943).
Lafayette Escadrille
(T; #3.5) Discovery; David Weseley; 1983;

0/P; N-R

Survey

?/Air/Tac
1
A WWI air combat game which provides
ample evidence for why the company no
longer publishes entertainment software.
Long Lance
(C/Ap/Am/ST/I; #43,48) Simulations
Canada; Bill Nichols; 1988; $60.00; N-R
Adv/Nav/Tac
1-2
Tactical naval combat in the Pacific in 1942.
Lost Admiral, The
(I; #86,88) QQP; Bruce W. Zaccagnino and
Thurston Searfoss; $59.95; 1991; ****+
Int/Nav/Tac-Op
1-2
"Empire goes to sea;" quicker than others of
this genre, it offers a plethora of scenarios and
randomization factors. Easy to play, difficult to
master—it has the potential for real long-term
utilization.

Companies
The companies whose products are covered
in this article are listed below. Comments have
been restricted to those companies still in business and with more than one product herein.
Accolade
550 South Winchester Boulevard
San Jose, CA 95128
Known for arcade products, and not overly
serious as a wargame simulation company.
Avalon Hill
4517 Hartford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214

A board wargaming company whose early
forays into the magnetic medium met with
less than sterling success.

P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, NS
Canada, B4V 2X6

General Quarters
P.O. Box 1429
Torrance, CA 90505

Grognard-type military simulations, with an
emphasis on World Wars I and II. Zero
graphics; their products use text and paper
maps.

A company featuring less than state-of-theart games which are usually very playable and
are continually improving incrementally.
Interstel
P.O. Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598
Aside from Empire, their track record is
somewhat uneven.
Kesmai
Modem game production company on the
major on-line networks.
Lucasfilm
P.O. Box 2009
San Rafael, CA 94912
Specializes in cockpit simulations; extensive
graphics coupled with superb gameplay and
ever-deepening complexity yield a classic
product.
Merit
13635 Gamma Road
Dallas, TX 75244
A relatively new player, seeking to combine
mass appeal with traditional subject matter.
MicroProse
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030

Well-known board wargaming company
whose conversions to the computer medium
have yet to live up to their boardgame standards.

Specializes in point-of-view simulations (submarine [Silent Service], tank, airplane
[Knights of the Skies]). Their documentation
is always excellent; gameplay is also strong, although recently their competition has been
gaining ground.

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101

MicroPlay
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030

Good graphics, but little output in the genre.
Dynamix
99 West 10th Street
Suite 337
Eugene, OR 97401
Excellent graphics and game play make this
one of the quality simulation companies.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
Prolific game production company, gathering
numerous subsidiary labels. However, quality
is inconsistent and remains dependent on the
individual subsidiary.
Electronic Zoo
3431-A Benson Avenue
Baltimore, MD 21227
The U.S. company is strictly involved in the
importing and marketing of European titles.
Game Designers Workshop
P.O. Box 1646
Bloomington, IL 61702-1646

A MicroProse label.
Panther
PO Box 8
Hughes ACT 2605 Australia
QQP
1046 River Avenue
Flemington, NJ 08822
A new company whose products appear to
be more game and less simulation; on the
other hand, entertainment and playability are
at a very high level.
RAW
3027 Marina Bay Drive
Suite 110
League City, TX 77573-2772
A new distribution label which has obtained
the rights for several serious and detailed wargaming simulations, whose distribution
heretofore has been somewhat spotty. While
graphics and gameplay may not be as
polished as the industry leaders, their products
are very detailed.
Simulations Canada

Spectrum HoloByte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
One of the leaders in the productions of
detailed and playable simulations.
Spinnaker
1 Kendall Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
A company which has recently de-emphasized its commitment to entertainment
software in favor of education and productivity.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
675 Almanor Avenue
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
The premier wargaming company—Although
their lead products now emphasize the D&D
genre, their wargames are usually well-researched and detailed, such that any serious
wargamer would be well-advised to try some
of their output.
Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Court
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
An Australian wargame design company
whose Battlefront system is utilized for many
historical conflict situations. One of the more
prolific design companies. Their housemagazine Run 5 gives additional scenarios
and design philosophies for most of their
products. Any SSG user should make sure to
read this magazine.
SubLogic
713 Edgebrook Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
The original publisher of flight simulation
software.
Three-Sixty Pacific
2105 South Bascom Avenue
Suite 290
Campbell, CA 95008
Publisher of a broad range of products, their
games run from excellent (Harpoon) to less
than satisfying (Das Boot).
US Gold
Same as Accolade.
Moribund: ActionSoft, ActionWare, ArkRoyal, Bullseye, CCS, Datasoft, Digital Kampf
Gruppe, Discovery, Epyx, Firebird, Microillusions, Mindscape, Muse, Overt Strategic
Simulations, SGP, Superware, Taito, Thunder
Mountain.
If any readers have additions/corrections/modifications (particularly to help fill in
missing data), please send them to me in care
of this magazine or via modem on GEnie (address: M.E. Brooks).
Copyright 1991; All Rights Reserved

Strategy

B

andit Kings of Ancient

different prefecture than the
player's character.

China is Koei's interpretation of a famous
Chinese novel covering a
period of unrest in 12th century
China. The game's goal is to
overthrow a powerful, evil warlord who controls a large part
of the country. This is a different objective from other Koei
games (such as Nobunaga's
Ambition and Romance of the
Three Kingdoms) and it is a
welcome change. Often, the
end game in Koei games can
be tedious because, long after
the outcome is no longer in
doubt, the player must still
mop up every last province to
finish.

The "Johnny Appleseed" Strategy
For the first part of the game,
the player's hero should probably adopt a "Johnny Appleseed"
posture by wandering from
prefecture to prefecture, planting seeds of resistance by
recruiting heroes. Since using
the "Move" command is
preferable to using the 'Flee"
command during this operation, one should settle the
player character as soon as possible and use the "Move" command thereafter.
If the player can help these
recruits to collect enough food
and money to raise their
peasant support to just over 40,
the recruits will be able to collect taxes, but still avoid the
greedy eyes of Gao Qui's hirelings for a while.

A western analogy to the Bandit Kings story is Robin Hood.
In both cases a good ruler has
unwittingly left administration
of his country to a ruthless, unscrupulous minister and the
country is groaning for relief.
Also, in both cases, relief must
come from outside the law —
the cry goes out for a hero. In
Bandit Kings, the player takes
on the role of that hero.

Order of Business
As in other Koei games, one's action
points reside in the people and prefectures (provinces) controlled. Heroes have
body points that are consumed when the
hero attempts actions and are restored
when he or she rests. The heroes do
their deeds in prefectures and each
prefecture can be the site of only one action per month.
The first order of business for successful guerrilla leaders is to recruit heroes
and secure their loyalty. The second is to
settle heroes in prefectures and build the
productivity of a given prefecture. The
third task involves building enough
military forces to combat Gao Qiu's hirelings and, finally, the fourth task involves
assembling the force that will oust Gao
Qiu and end the game.

Matriculation of Merry Men
Outlaws and lower-class heroes, such
as innkeepers and wrestlers, are the best
initial prospects. These people are easily

recruited, while higher-class prospects
will only become receptive after one has
acquired more prefectures and
popularity. For instance, it takes about
six prefectures or sixty popularity points
to interest officer-class heroes.
Once recruitment is completed, the
next task should be familiar to Koei
players: gaining their loyalty. The quick
and dirty way, of course, is to hand out
money. In Bandit Kings, however, the
results are not as straightforward as they
are in other Koei games. That is, sometimes one's "merry men" simply do not
stay bought. The loyalties of one's followers change with time, for better or
worse. Fortunately, there is another way
to build loyalty. One can place a hero in
charge of a prefecture. This usually
brings a steady increase. The final step
in gaining loyalty is to swear brotherhood
with a hero. Once this is done, the hero's
loyalty is fixed at 100 and it is possible
to command that brother (or sister)
directly, even when they are located in a

One should always keep an
eye on the loyalties of the
recruits. The easiest way to do
so is to use the "Give" command in order to check current
status, but to cancel the order if
there isn't anyone with low loyalty listed
in that prefecture. Naturally, one should
apply cash as needed if low loyalties are
spotted.
Once the recruits have established themselves, it is a good idea to make a return
pass with the player's character, collecting new recruits and swearing brotherhood along the way.

Dealing with Greedy Gao
Qiu
Gao Qiu and his cronies are on the
lookout for heroes making a name for
themselves — heroes that have pushed
high their support in an adjacent prefecture. Each turn, they scan prefectural support. When they see one high enough,
they demand a bribe. If the bribe isn't
paid, they sometimes attack.
Rules of thumb: 1) Early in the game, it
is possible to keep prefectural support
near the 40 level in prefectures adjacent
to those of Gao Qui's people and not be

Strategy

by Roger White
bothered. Prefectures which are not adjacent may be pushed up to 100 as soon
as possible. 2) One fully equipped hero
can't fend of the average Gao Qiu attack,
but four can (at least, they can until late
in the game or until they are attacked
from a couple of different prefectures
with no recovery time. Gao Qui's cronies
won't attack empty prefectures. So, if
you need a respite, put some distance between you and them. 3) When Gao Qui's
cronies attack, they throw most of their
armies into the attack itself. This, naturally, leaves the home prefecture relatively
unguarded, with only two to three
hundred men. One can mitigate a lot of
the damage that a Gao Qiu crony does
when he gets "on a roll" by simply taking
away these relatively undefended provinces left behind his offensive effort. The
territories themselves will have lots of
gold and food in them and that can turn
an entire game around.

weak unit, it is time to use the "Flee"
command to send most of the heroes
back to the prefecture that only has one
unit. This will enable the player to cover
the prefecture which was left behind and
still finish off the last unit in the prefecture to be seized. (One must be careful
when using this trick that the cronies
don't decide to flee at the outset without
giving the player a chance to fight!)

Highway Robbery

The Tao of War
When players assault another province,
they are likely to find the cronies fairly inactive. Given a choice, they'll hang
around in castles. It is best to defeat
them in detail: surround each strong
point in turn with as many units as can
possibly fit. Then, before beginning the
series of melee assaults, note that the
crony will often move to attack one of
the player's strong units sitting in an adjacent castle or on a hill. If so, one
should be thankful; this consumes his
men much faster than when the player's
units assault him in the castle itself.
It is also advisable to launch archery attacks initially. In this way, one can leisurely wait, unless there are other pressing
matters, until the bad guy's unit is three
quarters to half of the player's strength
before the melee assaults become necessary.
Wise generals will soon learn to attack
the weak positions first. This is because
the leaders of the stronger units will
sometimes panic and flee as their weaker
partners are ground into the dust. It is
also important to learn to coordinate the
final attacks against a unit so that the
unit's strength drops to zero during the
player's attack round. This allows one to
capture the opposing "hero" rather than
have him or her run off to fight another
day. If necessary, players can have their
archery units — usually still at full

strength — charge in to deliver the coup
de grace in the final round.
When players find one of their units
knee-deep in fire, it will be necessary to
either use the "Extinguish" command or
"Flee" the square. Experienced commanders will learn to "flee" the square,
but stay in the battle, by using the
"Charge" command and charging
sideways.
Players should also realize that they do
not have to win every campaign. It is
sometimes necessary to attack a prefecture in order to soften it up for a subsequent assault. The wise general may
find himself/herself going in; capturing
any weak units; using lots of archery
against non-archery units and retreating
via the "Flee" command. Players will also
face the problem of wanting to attack a
weak prefecture without being forced to
leave a prefecture unguarded from assault by a strong enemy prefecture. In
this case, the player should attack the
weak prefecture with up to all but one of
his/her units. When the contest is nearly
ended and the cronies are down to one

In the middle and end games, the
player will need to garner most of the
available wealth from conquering the
prefectures of Gao Qiu and his cronies.
In addition to badgering the player's character and the other good fellows, Gao
Qiu is always busy building up his prefectures and recruiting heroes at a pace
human players cannot hope to match.
To derail this express train to domination, players will need to take his prefectures and heroes from him. Winning a
prefecture long held by Gao Qiu showers
one's character with food and gold in the
thousands, not to mention all those
heroes which have been captured by
one's clever battlefield tactics (okay, they
were mentioned!). In two months (a turn
to hire men and a turn to visit the
shipyard and smithy) one can convert
these gains into a larger and betterarmed, but still untrained, army. Then
one can continue to expand.
An army of eight heroes can overcome
most Gao Qiu garrisons. This liberation
army can run out of steam for a couple
of reasons. First, Gao Qiu's provinces are
rich, but the player's support starts at
zero. The people won't pay taxes until
some hero takes the time to raise the
support level. Second, if Gao Qiu gets behind the player's army and manages to
retake a prefecture, it will be a poor
prefecture when the player is able to
drive him off. Also, one is likely to have
a shrinking, hungry army instead of a
growing, rich one after a battle to retake
a province. Third, there is the rock of
Gao Qui's home prefecture. Players can't
take it, but he can sally out at any time.

Most Worthy Reward
Players who take the time to master
these strategies will find themselves worthy of the title "Bandit King." They are
most likely to create their own legends of
guerrilla warfare.

Review

THE EMPIRE STRIKES FAST
jSoft's Second Conflict
by Dana L Cadman

Second Conflict
TITLE:
IBM with Windows
SYSTEM:
1-10
8 PLAYERS:
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
549.99
PUBLISHER:
jSOFT
P. 0. Box 2822
Norcross, GA 30091

S

pace may be a big place, but no matter how much space
any given empire may own, it wants more. This self-perpetuating aggrandizement creates a conflict — in the case
of jSoft's new space conquest game, a Second Conflict.
Second Conflict is a strategy game of interstellar conquest
which can accommodate up to ten human and computer
players. The playing map includes up to twenty-six stars with one
to ten habitable planets in orbit around each. Each player starts
with one star and a randomly generated number of ships,
defense systems and factories. The Empire owns the rest of the
universe. From there on it's a struggle against the Empire and
one's neighboring systems.
like most of the games in this genre, each system generates a
certain amount of production points that are spent each turn. At
the novice level, a player can buy warships, transports or more
factories. At higher levels, the player has other options, such as
stealthships. Stealthships cost more to produce than warships,
but they fire before warships in combat and make excellent
scouts.
Defense systems cost the same as warships and don't move,
but they do fire before everything else in combat except missiles.
If purchased in sufficient number, the defense systems will also
act as an early warning system, warning a player of invading
fleets or incoming missiles.
Missiles cost as much as warships. They launch before every

thing else, but are one-use weapons. As a defensive weapon, a
missile can act as an interceptor and knock out incoming missiles.
The player can also choose to vacuum up the rubble in the
solar system and build more planets. Of course, the more
planets already in a system, the less rubble there is, so the
longer the construction will take. Adding planets increases the
number of factories and defense systems that can orbit a star. It
is also one more world to pull troops from.
Troops board transports and travel to other systems, where
they unload and invade planets; they can also be used to defend
planets and run the factories. A player who has decided to invade a neighbor had better take along extra troops to ensure victory. Defeat means not only the loss of troops, but the loss of
production as well.
Unlike many other games of this genre, technology does not
enter into the strategy of the game. There are no research
facilities to build or research points to spend on advanced
weaponry or new stardrives. Second Conflict is a game of placement, movement and numbers. The fastest with the mostest wins.
One of the best differences between Second Conflict and other
games of stellar conquest is that moves are handled simultaneously, not serially. This makes it possible for fleets to pass
each other — a fleet could leave a planet as another group in-

Review

vader or two players could coordinate an attack against a third
player's fleet.
Second Conflict's computer players do not all use the same
tactics. Some can be highly aggressive, while others are defensive. Some are opportunists that will wait for others to do battle
before coming in to clean up the pieces. Another computer personality is quite content with what it owns, but proceeds to
destroy what every one else has, only capturing planets when
they involve no risk.
The personalities are randomly generated at the beginning of
the game and fluctuate as the players move up and down on the
scoreboard. A computer player that is doing well might go into
an aggressive mode, where one lower on the scoreboard may
suddenly become defensive.
The scenario editor is another nice feature. This allows a player,
or a group, to define the context of the game. Stars can be
deleted, moved or added to a maximum of twenty-six stars. The
number of initial planets, ships, missiles, troops and defense systems can also be set. Computer personalities can also be set to
one initial type or frozen so that they retain that personality
throughout the game, regardless of how well or how poorly the
computer opponent may be doing.
In addition, the scenario editor can be used to define the victory
conditions of a game. A game can be as simple as declaring the
player with the most points on turn 150 to be the winner or determining that the first player to reach 5000 points will be the top
admiral. Victory conditions can be set to make multiple winners

possible. In contrast, it might even be possible to have no winners at all. Astrography comes into play if a winner has to have
a certain number of points and a particular star system to win
the game.
Second Conflict is easy to learn, as there are few rules to contend with. In addition, the game runs under Windows 3.0, so it is
very mouse-oriented and easy to use. Moving fleets, attacking
and changing production are all handled through the menus and
icons.
The only drawbacks to the game involve the manual and combat. Whereas the manual does a good job of telling the player
what can be done, it is sadly lacking in examples of how things
are actually done. The manual is only a few pages long, but the
incredibly small print can rapidly induce an eyestrain headache
in those who wear bifocals.
As for handling combat, the major problem is that there is no
retreat in this game. Once a player starts an attack, the only way
to finish it is for one side to be destroyed or captured. Occasionally, a fleet hits a muon cloud, sending said fleet in the wrong direction by, presumably, fouling the star drive. Even so, it seems that
a small fleet will, invariably, end up at a heavily reinforced system and end up as target practice for the Empire.
Second Conflict is a great game for those who abhor complex
rules or enjoy games with short turns. For those who like to
define the arena for a battle by changing the victory conditions
to fit one's mood, Second Conflict is a must. And remember,
there is no such thing as a benevolent Empire.

Review

All's Violent on the
Western Front
TITLE:

Western Front: The Liberation
of Europe, 1944-1945
SYSTEM:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: Document Lookup
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Gary Grigsby
DEVELOPERS:
Joel Billings
and Dave Landrey
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.

A Review of SSI's Most Detailed Wargame
by Alan Emrich

n
o

r than just a sequel to designer Gary Grigsby's illustrious predecessor and sister-game Second Front:
Germany Turns East, Western Front: The Liberation of
Europe, 1944-1945 adds many new features which wargamers
will gladly embrace. This new simulation from faithful wargame
publisher SSI has hit the shelves the way the Allies hit the
beaches, and today is D-Day to examine it.

Back for "Seconds"
like Second Front, Western Front covers a huge area of operations during World War II, this time at roughly half the game
scale (10 miles per hex, instead of 20; 3- or 4-day turns rather
than the "one week" turns of its predecessor). Western Front
retains the same essential feel, to be sure, but there are many
more brigades and battalions filling the "corps" counters which
serve as the units of maneuver in Second Front. Hence, one
gets an impression of the game's new reduced scale just from examining the order of battle. In fact, many of the pieces which
players maneuver around the map are now merely divisions
themselves, which can only receive support sub-units (tanks, artillery, anti-aircraft and others in very small amounts of strength) in
addition to the single division!

"If This is Hex 90,11, it Must be Berlin."
Aside from a single high-density disk, Western Front includes a
greatly enhanced rules book. Much lambasting was done over
the scant and erroneous documentation included with Second
Front. Clearly SSI has learned a lesson here. The new rules
manual is far more complete, and offers many insightful formulae and tons of tables guaranteed to please the wargamer/analyst. While not the most "user friendly" of documentation, its target audience of hard-core wargamers will probably not
only be unruffled while studying, but actually get excited at the
menu-by-menu design of the rules layout (which is designed, appropriately, for reference, rather than study).
Where the package completely falls down, however, is with the
lovely, colored insert card of the game's map which players will
constantly need to refer to during play. Checking one's production and bombing damage each turn is a must and this, added to
the necessity of taking complete overviews of the strategic situation in order to determine avenues for attacks, lines for defense
and pondering landing sites, mandates the importance of the
player reference map. The problem, however, is that no such
map is included in the game! The only way one can find a city is

Review

to scroll around and guess or look up the
x,y coordinates, scroll around and guess.
Without a map insert card to laminate and
take notes on, players will find themselves
rechecking many informational items
during the course of a game of Western
Front, cross-checking that could have been
eliminated with provision of a map. Players
will be putting in plenty of (well-rewarded)
effort just to play Western Front. The missing map seems an unnecessary burden.

Changing Situations
Three scenarios and a campaign game are included in Western
Front: Diadem (covering only the Italian theater of war as the Allies slog their way to and through the Gothic Line); Breakout
(limited to France and covering Patton's famous "Red Ball Express" drive to the Rhine); Bulge (a short scenario on the German counter-attack in the Ardennes which seems a bit strained
as a simulation on this game's scale) and Overlord, the campaign game. The latter is really the heart and soul version of
Western Front and is a satisfying (albeit exhausting) experience
for any grognard to play. However, those who like to play wargames in order to explore historical alternatives might be disappointed. No 1943 scenarios have been provided for (the Allies
were planning on an earlier invasion to help the Russians), nor is
the possibility of ignoring the Italian theater all together and jumping straight into France. Another historical alternative might have
the Germans victorious in Russia and the Allies facing a much
tougher landing. Those situations were not provided for, nor is
there any type of "design kit" included for wargamers with great
ambition (and even greater amounts of time).

New Strategic Elements
In spite of grognards living up to their name (i.e. grumbling)
and complaining about what is not in the game, honest gamers
will admit that Western Front contains many new and exciting
improvements to the Second Front game system. For instance,
Political Points have been added to the game. With the Allies
gaining two per turn and the Germans three (nine after Paris
falls), political points are spent to replace HQ commanding officers (each now has a "political rating," which is the cost to
replace them), transfer "politically sensitive" units (for the Germans), and to have Allied strategic bombers go after more opera
tional-level targets such as airfields and bridges.
The Allies must also worry about "strategic transportation"
limitations. Each turn, amphibious prep points and paradrop
prep points accumulate for the next "big assault." Thus, it will
take the Allied player some "build-up" time before launching a
second invasion (which historically took place in southern
France). Fortunately, landings are made easily by indicating a future landing zone (or drop zone for paratroops) and then waiting
to build up sufficient points to make a "move" (like the kind
used to march troops around behind friendly lines). No complex
procedures are involved, and players can be hitting the beaches
shortly after breaking open the rules book.
The undocumented (but allowed) "bombardment attacks" of
Second Front are included and documented this time, as are the
details of combat results such as "bounce," "retreat" (which
larger units will not do—instead shattering one of their formations
and holding the ground), "shatter" and "surrender."
Off-map events (such as the shattering of German divisions on
the Russian front), automatic disorganization checks for large, un-

wieldy formations, "automatic piloting" of
unassigned Allied air groups (the Al assigns them useful missions for those not inclined to bother) along with Allied Strategic
Bombing and the limitation on which Axis
HQs can be activated all add new challenges for players of Western Front. One interesting (and irreversible) feature involves altering the game scale during play. Presently, the game is half the scale of Eastern
Front and operates on 4-day turns. Players
may alter this to 3-day turns during play.
This reviewer suspects many still undiscovered nuances with this feature and suggests players experiment with its effects.

Menu Sans Cuisine
The best new feature to the Second Front game system is the
inclusion of a mouse interface. For those of a keystroke bent, the
back of the rules book still includes a command summary of all
the keystrokes which can activate the game's features (like every
thing else, this one is more complete than Second Front's).
Nevertheless, the new mouse support built into the game system
almost guarantees that a player's hand never has to touch the
keyboard again.
The mouse support is a good thing for many reasons, but the
most important ones quickly become apparent as one discovers
both the need to constantly scroll along the multiple "front" nature of the playing board and the prudence of continually accessing the many (and many new) informational windows.

"Praise the Lord and Pass the Ammunition"
Industrial output in Western Front is staggering when compared to those oft-played early turns of Second Front. One has
only to call up the "Show USA Factories" menu to be in awe at
how the replacement pools can really get going. Western Front
appears to be very hard on equipment losses, however, so things
tend to even out.
Of special importance to veteran Second Front players is that
there is no direct adding of new unit types to friendly formations.
No longer can players instantly install the finest, newest tanks on
the front at the exact spearpoint of an attack. The computer
manages this now, using its own (and usually more realistic)
logic. Players may still manipulate what is produced, just not
where it is assigned.
Cities also produce a vital new commodity: manpower. During
these latter war years, Russia, Germany and Britain (in particular) felt the effects of a manpower shortage. This is now
reflected in the game, such that losses in personnel are now
more to be dreaded than losses in material. Sadly, manpower
points are one particularly vague point in the documentation and
players are left to wonder what the exact consequences are of a
manpower shortage.

VE Day
Western Front is another milestone achievement in computer
wargaming from the prolific keyboard of long unsung Gary
Grigsby. Because Mr. Grigsby often sets the standards for computer wargames, one seldom sees his games in terms of revolutionary design breakthroughs, but rather as evolutionary advances in computer wargaming's "state of the art." Western Front is
another such advance. For those of us raised on "Grigsby
Games," it is time to advance "once more into the breach."

Review

Reach Out and Crush Someone

Editorial

Changing Our Poll Tack

S

tate of the Magazine: Our tenth
anniversary brings a change in
how we present Computer
Gaming World's Top 100 Games. When
we started our game ratings poll back in
March of 1982, we came up with the
name "Reader Input Device" or RID. RID
was not a very catchy title. It was intended to get us by for a few issues until
we came up with something better. Well,
we got real busy with the magazine. So,
here, nearly 10 years later, we are finally
getting around to changing the name
(thus setting a a new world's record for
procrastination). Since the game ratings
in Computer Gaming World have become an industry fixture and since those
ratings come from polling thousands of
readers each month, we have decided to
call our game ratings "device" the CGW
Poll [Ed. Note: insert trumpet fanfare
here].
The color graphs on the CGW Poll
pages (center of the magazine) depict
the top three games in each of our six
categories. The graphs display the
cumulative CGW Poll (formerly RID)
rating for each game during the four
most recent ratings. For example, the red
bar on Wing Commander represents the
current Poll rating (as printed on the Poll
page). Beginning with the next issue, the
ratings will be based on a "moving

average" which will be more statistically
significant.
In each issue we will ask our readers to
re-rate those games that appear on the
"top three" graphs. However, it will take
a couple of issues before the impact of
this will be visible. Those games in the
graphs that show no change over the
four-month period were not re-rated
during that time. They will be re-rated
now. A game that only has a red bar
(like Yeager Air Combat) is new to the
rating system and "opened" among the
top three.
We feel that the graphic representation
of the top three games will add to the
overall usefulness of the CGW Poll. We
encourage everyone to rate the games
listed (right next to the post card) and
send in the CGW Poll card each month
and let fellow gamers (and the manufacturers!) know which games are winners
and which are losers.
State of the Industry: Looking at the
current state of the computer game industry is a lot like watching a videotape
when the VCR is on "Pause." Most of the
traditional publishers are anxiously watching to see how those extremely important Christmas sales are going to be and
simultaneously nudging their development teams onto new platforms. With
Electronic Arts paving the way into the

true 16-bit videogame world on the Sega
Genesis and much of the rest of the industry banking heavily on the Super
NES launch, gamers should expect to
see plenty of titles they would never have
expected to see on the new videogame
platforms. What this will mean for computer entertainment is as fuzzy as that
still picture with video noise when the
VCR is paused.
Some companies will continue to "bet"
on high-end, technologically advanced
systems. Since there will always be
"techies," early adopters of the latest and
greatest techno-wonders, there will always be something of a market for
games that really showcase the new technologies. Nevertheless, one has to
wonder whether the fast pace of technological advancement will not weed
down the installed base of computer
garners faster than it can grow (i.e. leave
too many potential customers behind).
It is a nervous time for those of us who
are committed to state-of-the-art games
on personal computer platforms. We
have looked to better graphics, optical
storage and faster processors as the
answer, but should publishers back off
from their development plans to chase
the "sure" dollars of videogame entertainment, there may no longer be anyone asking the question of how to recruit more
computer gamers into the market.

