"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine January 1994 ZD Number 114 100 GAMES RATED It's War Out There! Battle Of The New Game Boxes: 3DO, Jaguar, CD32, CD-I, Laser Active 160 Modern Warfare Games Surveyed Galactic Tactics Winning Strategies For Privateer Master of Orion $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 0 1 Target... Seawolf 129074\"12158 "


"Surar of Destiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure 11 11 il II || !! LIL II I MHB TLOOR FLOOR | 8 SCORE LIVES 4400 3 HEALTH ANMO 36% 23 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 172 83-| FLOOR | 9 SCORE 2800 HEALTH AUTO 9 80% 93 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is there' like no game I've ever played...\" \"the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390. (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #63 "


"DETROIT L. IMPRESSIONS Can You Change Automotive History? 0-6072 SEC TON SPERO 120MRM BRAND 70-0 L ET ROAD HOLD 69 G CARGO 15 CUFT 10 R8R19 EASTERN USA BOOK 990 13,000 38.000 TALK NAME: SCOTHODILE COST TO BUILDI 110.000 SESTSTOOTESTI 10.000 THPASSIONS AUTOS JAN 1958 560.000 DONEO SAVE ORANGES IMPRESSIONS AUTOS 550.000 195 PTS MONTH DID Design cars and put them through their paces with a variety of performance tests! Create unique marketing campaigns to blow away the competition! As your auto empire grows, open up new factories and sales offices around the world! Impressions  Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 234. Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #76 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 14 Sneak Preview: Seawolf Kevin Turner Scouts Out The Sub Culture Go Speed Racer Go! Rev Up The Mach 5 For A Rendezvous With Racer X Now What Do I Look Like? Scorpia Gets Origin's Shadowcaster In Her Claw Profiting In Privateer Learning To Make A Living As A Mercenary Trader Software Toolworks' Chessmaster 4000 Terry Lee Coleman Makes His Move Mindcraft's Strike Squad Martin Cirulis Kicks Some K'kistik Mass Get It On-Line! Part Two In Our Intro To Telecomputing Series  Se Battle Of The Game Machines A Look At The Contenders In The New Machine Showdown Seawol pg. 14 Is Quarter Pole A Thoroughbred? Philip Sandler's Tip Sheet For Microleague's Horseracing Simulator son Chuck Yeager Flies Again Air Combat Locks On To The Macintosh 101 Very Mercenary Of You! Douglas Seacat Shoots First In Hired Guns Totally Cubular Revisiting Rubik's Cube In Video Cube Space SHONCIATES CHTENHO AUTOHATID LANCHONG Privateer pg. 30 Dracula Unleashed Chuck Miller Takes A Stab At Viacom's Transylvaniamation  132 Dracula Unleashed Pg. 98 Up And Coming Companies The People Behind The Screens At Papyrus And Event Horizon Studios Gothic Gore Galore Blood-Sucking Horror In Psygnosis' Bram Stoker's Dracula Cache As Cash Can A Comparison Of CD-ROM Caching Programs And Their Benefits Kids & Computers Software Reviews Brain Food For Hungry, Growing Minds New Horizons For Flight Sims SVGA Harrier Takes Off Into Clear Skies en Fantasy Empires Finding The Magic In Megalomania 137 144 154 Look at Able to Look at Open Move Lonsure Biat up Close Use Talk to Remove been live Simon the Sorcerer pg. 112 "


"The Very Best Classic City Simulation HADITH CLEAN R ekistelle degeteleken \"I always wished Sim City had more \"game\" to it; Caesar has that. Caesar goes far beyond its Sim City origins and provides the serious game player with a real lion's feast. Hail Caesar\" Computer Gaming World SERIES \"Caesar has the same sort of feel to it that Sim City did, but the game play is much more streamlined, detailed and enjoyable. There's also a lot more here than in Sim City...Incredible...a true gem of a game\" Computer Game Review L222222 \"Highly recommended...near perfect.\" PC Entertainment CAESAR \"Exciting and addicting not to mention exhausting\" Compute \"It's a Sim City that goes further\" Amiga World RRRR SHORRINDO rer RU Golden Triad Award Computer Game Review Nominated for the CGW Strategy Game of the Year Computer Gaming World Highest Score Ever Awarded To A Game PC Entertainment ROME WASN'T BUILT IN A DAYHOW LONG WILL IT TAKE YOU? Impressions Sim City is a registered trademark of Manis Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234. Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #75 "


"162 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Ace Assistance: Art of the Kill A Multimedia Instructional Package From Spectrum HoloByte 172 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD The Complete Cosmic Conquerer Strategy And Tactics For Master Of Orion Cosmic Conquerer Crutches More M.O.O. Tips To Use Against Alan Emrich And Tom Hughes 183 190 Breakfast Of Backstabbers Alan Emrich Sneak Previews QQP's Merchant Prince  194 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Associate Editor Chris Lombardi Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Chuck Miller Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks From Panmunjong To Apocalypse An Anthology Of Post-WWII Wargames 214 A Too Civil War? M. Evan Brooks Rises Again To Review The Blue & The Gray 220 A Terrible Swfte Sword? Gettysburg Review By Terry \"General\" Lee Coleman VENICE MOTIVA prihom O UWE BARN MODA Jul 2TOER Wohapter 2 lustry Quy Morali OWS TIM a Crep Den of iniquity Here TURNI D ma Attack M Firepoweri 1 Merchant Prince Pg. 190 F AT WE Expo HD COEBE role Hot S . I AM The Blue & The Gray Pg. 214 Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Zitt-Davis Publishing Company, a division of Zill Communications Co., 130 Chaparral C. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., 1994. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322. The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Subscription Dept. 1 (800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (303) 447-9330 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260 Anaheim Hills, CA 02808 (714) 283-3000 x41 10 DEPARTMENTS 8 Editorial (Endangered 168 CWW Editorial (The Empire Early Adopters) Deluxe Tournament Results) READ.ME (News) 226 Taking A Peek 36 Scorpia's View (Return to Zork) 227 Advertisers' Index 108 From The Cockpit (Microsoft 237 Hall of Fame Flight Simulator 5) 238 Top 100 Games 112 The Scorpion's Tale (Simon The Sorcerer) 240 What's Hot? 120 Letters From Paradise 241 Patch File 128 Shareware Reviews 242 The Rumor Bag (More Grist For The Mill) Printed in the U.S.A. "


"SEE JACK RUN. SEE JACK PLAY. SEE JACK WHEEL. SEE A DEAL SEE JACK STEAL. SEE JACK PAY TAXES. OR NEVER SEE JACK AGAIN. unti caught Meet Jack Ladd, a jack of all trades, most of them illegal. Jack's in big trouble. You see this is the future and now the IRS has the right to use deadly force to collect taxes. Guess what Jack, the tax man commeth, and they're looking for the gazillion bucks you owe them. Now you have only 28 days to get them the money, how you do it is up to you. Join Jack as he cons and coerces his way through the backstreets and alleys on the seedy side of the galaxy. Eight-way scrolling, full perspective scaling and Hypertextstyle interaction give this game a colorful and realistic edge. This unusual adventure captures your imagination and thrusts you right into the heart of Jack Ladd's bizarre world. If you can't find this game at your favorite retailer call: (800) 438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today. SPADEPORTER 3 ildi SAN Mo ORP NABE Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Eat Innocent is available on IBM compatible and Amiga formats. Circle Reader Service #112 "


"CDDDORDAL Earl E. Adopter One Upgrade Too Many Died Without A Peany. OS overy DEATH OF THE EARLY ADOPTER Is The Software Industry Driving A Species Of Gamer To Extinction? by Johnny L. Wilson At two recent conferences where the future in order to put both a sound card and modem Then, the industry suddenly ends up with of interactive entertainment was being disinto my computer. As an early adapter, I may a shrinking population of opinion leaders, cussed, I overheard an unfortunate misstatebe willing to experiment with all sorts of just when the opportunity for reaching the ment. At both the Fall Conference of the memory configurations in order to run the mass marker is arriving. Think about it. Some Software Publishers Association and Interlatest and greatest new program. As an early poor soul sces an intriguing game on her tainment '93 (where those working on interadapter, I'll learn about DMAs and CDfriend's monitor. She asks the friend if she active television, location-based entertainROMs. should buy it and the friend says, \"Oh, no! ment and computer games came together), Why? Because as an early adapter, I am Not without a Pentium-based computer, a panelists who intended to speak of \"early THING-oriented. I love to tear down things triple-speed CD-ROM, a 16-bit sound card, adopters\" spoke of \"early adapters.\" Now, at to their gut-level. I love to play with hardware and 12 MB of RAM.\" The poor soul decides first, this didn't seem to make much differconflicts and experience software bugs. It that playing on the friend's computer is good ence. After all, they were still speaking of makes me feel superior to wimpy little co makes me feel superior to wimpy little comenough. Play this scenario often cnough and those brave pioneers who buy the first maputer gamers (like a certain editor who hates the marker shrinks decidedly. chines, try our the next generation of hardtrying out new cards and installing new moware add-ons, and buy the new software as Now, what would I do if I had to put my dems, monitors and mice) who whine about soon as it hits the shelves. Yet, I would conmoney where my word processor is? I would a few inconveniences. tend that the misstatement is as significant as make sure that my development teams were the difference between the term \"volunteer\" So, now I can hear everyone asking, optimizing the capability of established tech\"What's wrong with that? That's the waynology, even as they continued to push the and the word \"victim.\" hings have always been! The problem is that edge on new technology. It is better to woo When a hardware manufacturer or software the early adopters are getting so tired of being early adopters are getting so tired of being an early adopter into an upgrade by showcaspublisher speaks of a potential customer as an treated like carly adapters that they are begining the new technology than it is to arbitrarily carly adopter, they are saying that the cusning to wonder why they have to be penalized force an upgrade because programmers only tomer is the type of pro-active opinion leader for being the pioneer. They buy enough sinwant to work on the latest and greatest mawilling to make a risky purchase in order to gle speed CD-ROM drives to get a reasonable experience or accomplish something new. chines. installed base of CD-ROMs. Sales start to The term implies that the adopter is willing pick up on the early generations of CD-based Such a suggestion is, of course, an oversimto nurture a new technology and help it degames. Then, we start to hear publishers talkplification. If implemented, however, it velop in order to reach a higher plane of ing about whether to require double-speed would go a long way toward assuring the early performance and excitement. It implies that and recommend triple-speed CD-ROM adopters that they are not being taken advanthe early adopter is willing to put up with drives for their next products. tage of because of their adaptability. Rather, some inconvenience in order to advance the Talk about chutzpah! The first generation it would suggest that we are partners in adstate-of-the-art. It is an almost altruistic acof multimedia games hasn't even begun to vancing the art of computer games, nurturing tion in that regard. Almost, that is, because reach its full potential, and the software pubrisk takers on both sides of the fence. I hope there is a certain form of self-interest in being 1: lishers are already trying to figure out how to that we will reach the point where it is no among the first to have something new. get the hardware to solve problems that game longer necessary to use technology in a game Be that as it may, the connotation of an design and software engineering should solve. gn and software engineering should solve. or to require certain hardware plateaus simply early adapter is one of \"survival of the firesc.\" Frankly, if software publishers do not provide because they are there. I look forward to the I ger an almost cartoonish picture of Darwinmore value at each stage of computer technoldays when technology becomes so effective in ian evolution in that designation. The veryogy leaps, I doubt that the numbers of early presenting the gaming experience that it beterm assumes a flexibility on the early adopters will continue to increase. Instead, I comes as transparent as the projector in a adopter's part that may be quite unfair. As an think that they will decrease as more and movie theater. Unfortunately, that will never carly adapter, I may be willing to put up with more hobbyists take on a \"Show me!\" atti happen as long as this industry presumes on the hassle of tracking down an IRQ conflict rude. gamers' adaptability. CGW Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"BUY THE BEST OF 193* And get the best of '91 &'92 FREE *As chosen by Computer Gaming World & PC Games OVER W:ZARDRY. TRILOGY 4.6 MILLION SOLD WIZARDRY V, VI & VII Winner of over 15 International Awards WIZARDRY, the game that pioneered first-person perspective & defined computer role-playing for more than a decade. Now, the award-winning WIZARDRY V, VI & VII are available in 1 complete package, at I incredible price. Three best selling games, with over 500 hours of engaging,replayable adventure, come to you with a savings of 25% off individual suggested retail prices. Wzmeny CRUSADERS DARK SAVANT DAI CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT REDEFINING ROLE-PLAYING FOR AN ENTIRE INDUSTRY 1993 ROLE-PLAYING GAME OF THE YEAR COMPLITER GAMING WORLD 1992 Fantasy Role-Playing Game of the Year PC Games 1992 Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine T'ANNO ELDER 1 W szy. (UKI BANE OF THE COSMIC FORGE PAVING THE WAY FOR THE SYSTEMS OF THE FUTURE 1991 Best Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Best Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Top Role-Playing Game, April 1991 Computer Gaming World JILILO . DE UN CE  and And&rin carts  SOCORDI greater Denon Seper THE LEGACY OF HEART OF THE MAELSTROM BREAKING AWAY FROM THE WIZARDRY SYSTEM OF THE PAST Wzapory. SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, P.O. Box 245 Ogdensburg, NY 13669 (315) 393-6633 THE WIZARDRY TRILOGY FAX# (315) 393-1525 Scenarios I, II & III The original classics that set the trend in Available at a software retailer near you, or call: fantasy role-playing are now available at a new low price! Circle Reader Service #136 (800) 447-1230 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Multimedia Belongs to Compton's New Media In U.S. Patent Decision: Software Publishers Infuriated At Compton's Claim BLOCKBUSTER ENTERTAINMENT ROM On The Run: Blockbuster Now Offers CD-ROMs For Rent ress and attendees at Comdex were aghast at Compton's New Media's announcement that the Tribune-owned subsidiary had been granted a broad patent (U.S. Patent #5,241,671) that, essentially, covers any multimedia product that uses a search and retrieval mechanism. The patent decision specifically stated that the patent was not limited to Compton's products, rather \"...this invention can be used with any information that can be stored in a database.\" Compron's New Media stated that they the only company working on multimedia will allow other multimedia publishers to products or search and retrieval\" functions continue publishing their products if they during the mid-to-late 1980s. Talk of a will choose one of four options: 1) enter class action against Compton's NewMedia into a strategic joint venture relationship immediately began to circulate informally with Compton's; 2) become an affiliated on the Comdex floor with many industry label of Compton's; 3) develop a product observers hoping that Microsoft and other using Compton's industry giants will use SmarTrieve technology their legal muscle to chal(the actual engine on lenge Compton's claims. which they were granted Time Warner the broad-based patent); Interactive Group's Stan or 4) comply with a royCornyn reacted angrily to alty structure (immedithe patent grant. Cornyn ately start paying a 1% was quoted in the Los royalty to Compton's, Angeles Times, saying, eventually to be raised to \"It's like trying to patent 3%). a watermelon.\" Many Compton's industry observers believe New Media executives that the ruling is so indeStanley Frank and fensible it will precipitate Norman Bastin believe changes in the way the that they are the first to conceive of the U.S. Patent Office considers software genre we now know as multimedia. They patents. Most believe that the secrecy surclaim that their initial idea for a multimerounding the patent process meant that the dia encyclopedia came in 1985 and that rest of the industry had no opportunity to research and development began in 1986. bring counter-claims or challenge the asserPrevious CD-ROM products were texttions of the applicant. based products that used simple Boolean If Compton's requirements for complilogic to handle the search function. Frank ance with their patent rights is observed, it and Bastin claim that they were the first to will mean a higher cost to consumers in integrate graphics with the text, as well as a terms of: 1) a Nintendo-esque control of more complex search function for scanning the current market for multimedia prodinterrelated databases. ucts, 2) charge-through at retail for the royReaction among the software industry alries expected by Compton's; and 3) addihas been one of intense disbelief and anger. tional charges and questions pertaining to Developers and publishers alike insist that \"search and retrieval» functions with regard Compton's New Media was by no means to the data highway. eginning November 9, 1993, Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation began renting and selling CD-ROM entertainment software and hardware (computers excluded) at 52 Blockbuster Video stores and five company-owned music stores in the San Francisco area. Plans are to expand these offerings to all company-owned stores by November 1994. Involved in this initial test are Apple Computers, IBM, Panasonic, Philips Electronics and Sega. Apple and IBM will participate on the computer front while the three other companies will cover the console category with Panasonic's 3DO, Philips' CD-I and Sega CD. Blockbuster's CD-ROM categories include games, reference works, educational titles, business applications, music and movies (in VideoCD format). CD software rentals, which begin at $4.00 per title for three evenings, will allow consumers to experience the benefits of CD-ROM technology without the high initial costs associated with it. If Blockbuster is successful, watch for more rental chains to follow suit. Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"Rosetta Translates Into Custom Joystick Controls osetta Technologies has announced Rosetta technology will be able to detect the driver nightmare that exists with today's a new programmable chip set that what joystick is installed, via a protocol, sound cards. would enable all software publishers and download said program s button code The joystick would plug into the analog verick manufacturers to integrate cus to the stick, transparent to the user. TSRS joystick port on the computer, with anothtom controls with standard joysticks. The that waste precious CPU resources or RAM sources or RAM er cable lagi er cable plugging into the keyboard connecRosetta Pilot EZ1000 chip set provides will no longer be required. tor. Programs supporting Rosetta would software publishers with an input device While it all sounds like what not need to poll the joystick for button standard and all necessary APIs (application Thrustmaster has done with their Mark II presses. Polling is where the program awaits programming interWeapons Control a button press to carry out instructions. It faces), including System, the differcan take up a lot of CPU resourses. By havsource code. On the ence is that ing interrupr-driven buttons on the joystick hardware side, they are Thrustmaster is (like a keyboard), there is no need to have providing hardware high-end equipprogram polling while the joystick is in use. manufacturers with a ment, dedicated to Founded by Thomas Taylor, creator of core technology which one manufacturer. M/Sound, the company has excellent creincludes their custom Rosetta technology, dentials. Not only was M/Sound's DSP chip and up to eight according to Gerald technology sold to Sierra Semiconductor buttons per device. (see December's READ.ME), but their Devices can be daisy will be originally APIs were used in Microsoft's Multimedia chained and buttons equipped in many Extentions for Windows. After working can be custom proleading joysticks. In with M/Sound, Taylor wanted to work on grammed via temother words, many something that would make computers easplates and Rosetta's graphical user interface people will be able to afford programmable ier to use. He founded Rosetta program. functionality from low end to high end Technologies, to provide intuitive input What this means to consumers is that products, all supported by one set of APIs. devices using common sense solutions. devices programmability of joysticks will be taken for the game developers, this means that Kraft is one of the first manufacturers from a niche market and provided through they don't have to support each programexpected to have a joystick that takes the range of joystick products. mable joystick device put on the market (at advantage of this technology, for a street Furthermore, programs which support their discretion), thus hopefully avoiding price of about $100. ROSETTA TECHNOLOGIES PILOT EZ1000 Fantasy 5 iefs. AEGE Hard Disk Crashes: Roland/Adaptec Owners Beware Time Warner Software Sorcery's James R. Jones III, president and CEO, expects Time Warner's disPerforms A Little tribution muscle to help get Software Sorcery's games on every CD-ROM platSorcery: Inks New form. These new titles extend TWIG's prodAgreement with uct offerings to include several genres. AEGIS: Guardian of the Fleet is a modern Software Sorcery naval warfare simulation focusing on the AEGIS-class cruiser. Fantasy Fiefdom offers Tn line with the current trend of major the gamer a detailed role-playing experience media acquisitions, partnerships and set in Medieval England and a personal strategic alliances, Time Warner quest for Knighthood. The third title, Dead Interactive Group (TWIG) has announced Zone is an action-packed graphic adventure a publishing agreement with Software set in a space salvage station. As in Software Sorcery (the developers of Jutland) to Sorcery's Jutland: Ships of Steel, Men of round out their CD-ROM game offerings with three new titles: AEGIS: Guardian of will spice up the action. Iron, detailed graphics and digitized audio the Fleet, Fantasy Fiefdom and Dead Zone. GW has been notified that two companies have had problems with installation programs that poll for the Roland card. When computer owners have a CD-ROM drive that uses an Adaptec 1542 SCSI connector, the Roland code will actually cause the root directory to either disappear altogether or create a subdirectory that causes the computer to go into a continuous loop. Most of the problems are repairable through Norton Disk Doctor, but gamers with both Roland sound cards and Adaptec SCSI controllers are urged to beware of programs that poll for the sound card during the installation process. It might save them a lot of grief to install manually. January 1994 Page 11 "


"IF YOU'VE NEVER HADYou're outgunned. On the run. Stalked by a relentless robotic assassin. You're desperately searching every dark corridor on a deserted spaceship for DNA keys that reveal how to destroy this mechanical killer. Because only then can you disarm the ship's weapons and save the universe before it's blasted into oblivion. The critics think this futuristic nightmare is a dream come true. New Media says it's \"more than a great game--it's sci-fi space opera and film noir at its best.\" Wired raves that \"Helix is a stunner.\" And that it has the \"gun-to-your-head urgency of an arcade game.\" So you know it's not another CD-ROM game that crawls. We like to think of Iron Helix as a futuristic hunting game. Only you're what's hunted.  CHASED, 01111 TRON HELIX For Windows and Macintosh on CD-ROM IRON HELIX Exclusively ABO on ROM 00010 Created by Published by I want Available at your favorite retailer or call 1-800-695-GAME "


"NIGHTMARES BEING YOU'RE UT TO. Iron Heline Drew Pictures. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #139 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Assassins Of The Sea Rick Mank/Corel SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development Seawolf Makes A Stir In The Simulation Sub Culture by Kevin Turner Kevin Sumo' Turner (ICI SSIDV) is a former peerless graphics and fantastic sound this aspect of the game, but the design team submariner, former DSRV crewmember, and former wrapped around a game that is hard to walk seems intent on making the multi-player posNavy diver. Afier a decade of naval service, he has away from. sibilities a central feature. almost returned to normal. hough my submariner days are beThe game's introductory sequence flaunts Multi-player Submersion hind me, I sometimes wake up in the irs incredible graphics. The rolling undulaSeawolf is designed for a 386-33MHz comtion of the sea is perfectly simulated, and the 1 middle of the night with a flashlight puter with four megabytes of RAM, and it ships are accurate renderings; the helicopters and a clipboard in my hands, taking readings on my microwave. Submarinfly and missiles launch with outstanding clarity. The designers went as far as ing gets under a person's skin, and although I now glow in the dark and walk making a stormy day complete with lightning, in which you hear the thunwith a hunched back, I still like to get der clap several \"alligators\" after the back to the glory days with a computer simulation. Unfortunately, I have flash! I cannot speak highly enough of the graphics; the attention to detail is found myself in a wasteland of submarine sims. There are flight sims, tank thoroughly impressive. sims, helicopter sims, even ground warAs the opening comes to a halt, you fare sims, but there are very few nuare left with the prospect of fighting any clear-powered submarine sims out number of combat missions or leading there for those of us who crave such a campaign. The version 1 reviewed had STARBOARD VIEW things. I have been a long-term devotee 33 different missions ranging from PACITIVE TABEET VISUALIOSNTHEIGATION of Red Storm Rising, since it is by far the coastal defense to interdiction abroad. The designers went as far as making most accurate depiction I have come the individual missions vary in their across, but there is a new sim on the stormy day complete with starting points so as not to be repetitive; sonar screen, and it promises to satisfy lightning and thunder... the attention the descriptions might be the same the cravings of myself and other hunch(blow up two subs), but the Seawolf backs like me. ve. and the enemy will not be in the same The simulation is Seawolf SSN-21 place every time the game is played. designed by Electronic Arts, the same folks will support both modem and network play. The campaign is based on a civil war in that brought us 688 Attack Sub. The comAh, the possibilities! Imagine stalking the Cuba, in which the Russians use their navy to mon assumption is that Seawolf is a sequel to cold, dark depths of the VGA sea in pursuit keep Fidel Castro supplied, and follows the 688-but this does Seawolf no justice. It is a of another Seawolf skipper across the counimpending escalation of hostilities. The mismodern sim in every sense of the word, with try, or across the hallway. I wasn't able to test sions start off the coast of Cuba and progress horoughly impr Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"HERRE POUGH THE WEARONS LOADMISSILE FLOODIDOISE MK EMPTY DE FIRE DIRECT 1 PREVIOUS HRPN THWK SBROC KTS SFEEDED.D KTS O FT DEFTH 25 FT surface threat before all others, at least two miles long. This will, I hope, and to clear baffles often will result change in the release version to a simple you ECT TORPEDO in a torp up the tailpipe, so to are here\" symbol. The other problem is that plezanje speak. As we say in the submarine the indicator of depth, speed, and course for service, there are only two types of both the Seawolf and the selected targer takes ships: Submarines and targets. up too much of the screen. This indicator Second to graphics, the single panel can be moved around, but I feel that a LD/FLD SAMERAD most impressive feature of the Seamuch smaller indicator is called for. wolf is its sonar suite. This is As for the actual driving of the boat as it where my heart was thoroughly drills holes in the water, the use of waypoints captured. The sonar uses a wateris used to minimize actual time spent maneuELECTED fall display identical to those used vering and allows the tactical mind to be free. in actual submarines. Waterfall This feature is firmly based on reality, as the up the eastern seaboard across the Atlantic. displays give a graphical representation of skipper serves neither as helmsman, planesFrom the North Sea, the Seawolf travels sound, depicting where a sound is in relation man, nor quartermaster. His job is the big through the Mediterrancan to the Indian to the boat and its relative strength compared picture. Headings can be given, but wayOcean, over to the Far East, and then through to other signatures in the water. It provides points are convenient and I thoroughly enthe Pacific via Hawaii to Southern California. both the real-time and historical bearing data joyed telling my quartermaster and Officer of Seawolf certainly gets around needed to identify a target. I spent as much the Deck to \"put me here.\" The disadvantage While on this campaign, you can step into time in the sonar suite as I did in the topto this surfaces in the occasional close quarters the radio room and watch the news, giving down map. It was fun spinning ANHNITT you a perspective on the progression of the around the ocean, dialing in the war. As more missions are completed, you can hydrophones and watching the METALII see how you are contributing to the general underwater world go by. You war effort, and your battles appear in much can even hear whales singing! of the footage used. Submarines have no eyes, so Beyond the graphics, one of the first things sound is the only way of knowto impress me was the nature of the initial ing what else is in the water. missions: intelligence gathering. This is what The \"towed array\" is a long caHEADING: 1879 TIME! 00:14:36 submarines do second best, and do the most, ble that strings out from the BEARING: 3580 and the first missions are an accurate descripback of the sub and enables the tion of what a submarine would be doing sub to listen behind itself. In before the outbreak of hostilities. My realitySeawolf, the towed array is critioriented side enjoyed this mission very much. cal in keeping a good track on all possible threats in the opera Second to graphics, the single Assassins Of The Sea tional arena. Losing the towed most impressive feature of the The design theory behind Seawolf is to array severely limits the SeaSeawolf is its sonar suite. penalize the player for poor judgment and wolf s ability to detect and track reward good tactical decisions. In other long range targets, and adds sigwords, the fewer mistakes made, the better nificantly to its vulnerability. This isn't necfight. Here, using waypoints is cumbersome odds of success. essarily realistic, as the lack of a towed array when compared to ordering the helmsman to Tactically speaking, submarines are the asin no way disables the operation of the sonar apply right full rudder as one lines up a dome, and we got by just fine with that before snapshot. Depth control is given by telling sassins of naval warfare. The height of submarine warfare is not only to send one's the Diving Officer to surface, go up a therthe days of the towed array. opponent to Davey Jone's locker, but to have The target plor is displayed in a top-down. mal, down a thermal, go to test depth, go to attack depth, or go to crush depth. I cringed their last thought be \"where did that come or geo display. Target tracks can be turned on when I first saw this means of controlling fr...?\" Consistent with that thought, keep in and off at will, which is convenient while gizing: you need that historical data to strategizing you need that historical data to mind that the chief enemy of any submarine depth, but it is easy to adapt when you can is another submarine. Failure to honor a subplot a sound attack. As targets are found, dara jump into the sonar room with the ping is collected until target identificajockeys and watch what pops up with a depth tion is made. Fast recognition can change through a thermal. Speeds are set in mcan quite a difference when a fourths, and there are no backing bells. Test boomer is approaching launch co depth is 1400 feet, and crush depth is 1500 ordinates. Based on the geo disfeet. Flank speed is 62.8 knots, which requires play data, it is possible to plan and some suspension of belief. execute an attack that will leave for those of us who are familiar with 688 the Seawolf unscathed. The rep Attack Sub, the three dimensional feature is resentation of the Seawolf in the back, giving a graphical display of who is VICTOB IN CLASS SSN PREVIOUS geo display is confusingly large, where at what depth. This is especially useful and if one uses the scale of the when trying to hide your sub in canyons on maps as a reference, the Seawolf is the ocean floor. I have not gotten used to this A TORBEN HASIREACHEDITS TARGET 3D feature, but it does increase playability, WEAPONS LOADIMISSILE FLOOD INOISE MK LD/FLD ISAMERA EMPTY DIRECT FIRE BELES 11 DEG EAGE 37 MLsE 900:09:26 COURSES 182 DEG GOURSES O DEG 10.9 KTS SFEED 18 2 KTS GERTE 250 FT DEETH 150 FT ACTIVE SONAR SFEED January 1994 Page 15 "


"PREES PREVIOUS STATUS CLOSE LOGBOOK PAUSE BADIO CHATDXT MSG SATEL PRV MSG VOICE ORDERS FIRST PREVIOUS LAST CLOSE DISPLAY SPEED WAVPNT PREVIOUS TARGET MSG REVI DEPTH TRACKS HEADING CLOSE SONAR TOW ARY PREVIOUS RETRIVE CLOSE CUT TOW IDENTIFY PING WATERF WEAPONS LOAD MISSILE FLOOD InO  LD/FLD CAMERA EMPTY DIRECT 1 FIRE PREVIOUS DOS DEFT WEAPONS LOAD MISSILE ELOOD INOISE MK LD/FLDI CAMERA EMPTY DIRECT SIPREVIOUS LEIRE and so I will go along. For those who do not trying to kill it. None of the other ships in the and was disappointed. This is reality, and yes, know what the three dimensional display reparca seemed to mind my using weapons I know, I could be leaning a little heavy on resents, pretend that you are hovering over an either. I thought that perhaps the skipper of this. But cavitation is part of detectability, aquarium looking down. This is the geo disthat ship was just downright incompetent and rule two of the submarine manual clearly play. Now look in the side of the aquarium. and disliked, so I tried the same thing on states thar \"Noise is bad.\" Rule one is \"NumThis is the 3D display. another enemy ship. There was still no reber of dives should equal number of surfaces.\" sponse. Whether using torpedoes or missiles, Stormy Weather Ahead none of the other enemy vessels ever changed How Playable Is Reality? On every parade a little rain must fall, so course. This made my firing point solutions While at Electronic Arts for a brief visit, I here comes the clouds. The weapon spoke with the designers of the game representations are poor at best and do ECHO II CLASS SSGD and discussed the yin and yang of game BEARING 320 DEG no justice to every submariner's favor FATIGE 45 MLS THE00103150 design-reality versus playability. The COURSE 270 DES COURSE O DEG ite toy, the Mk. 48 torpedo. Using a 10.9 KTS SPEED 0.0 KTS reality of a game is based on cold, hard 150 FT DEPTH 150 FT Mk. 48 is an art form, as its proper use MACTIVE SONAR facts supported by available documenwill kill the target while allowing the tation. The playability of a game is a shooter to remain undetected. It is a based upon a designer's knowledge of wire guided weapon with excellent cawhat makes a game fun and engaging. pabilities, and it is the mainstay of the Reality and playability must work tosubmarine fleet. Missiles are all fine gether, sometimes at a detriment to and dandy, bur the big green fish with each other, to benefit the whole. In the the flat, black nose and the long wire case of Seawolf, the designers have, for tail is every submariner's best friend. the most part, made good choices in the In Seawolf, there are long range torpeplayability vs. realism debate. In all fairdoes, short range torpedoes, stasis torBased on the data on the geo ness, I am sometimes overly critical pedoes, and wakehoming torpedoes. when reality is sacrificed for playabilThe long range torpedoes travel long display, it is possible to plan and ity's sake, but I must say that I was very distance, but are painfully slow. The execute an attack that will leave entertained by Seawolf despite my occashort range torpedoes travel fast, but sional upturned eyebrow. you must be in close proximity to the the Seawolf unscathed. I am quite impressed with what I have target. The wakehoming torpedoes scen of Seawolf. The missions are chalact like submerged Sidewinders, and home in easy. The only vessels that posed a real threat lenging and varied. The inter plicity, and the sonar and graphics sell the torpedoes are still a mystery to me. using active sonar for ranging! Using active package. There are many other positives that Weapons also include the Tomahawk. Har sonar is like playing Russian Roulette with an Seawolf has going for it, and I find myself poon and Subroc missiles. You must be care automatic pistol. There may only be one finding more as I play. Seawolf has brought Gul when using the missiles as the firing buller in the gun, but there only has to be one an oasis to the wasteland of submarine simuprocedures are different from those for torpe bullet in the gun. There is a reason that lations, and I am impatiently awaiting for it does. I decided to set up a weapon for launch, submarines are called the \"Silent Service.\" to surface. CGW selected a Tomahawk, and the next thing I Another problem lies in the lack of cavitaknew a weapon was on its merry way to ruin tion and cavitation curves. Cavitation is the someone's day! The missiles are almost too noise and turbulence spinning propellers creeasy to use on surface threats. ate. A full-throttle start from a dead stop Another problem I encountered was in the creates a huge amount of cavitation, and the enemy logic. While shooting a torpedo at an resulting noise would alert the world to a enemy frigate, the enemy ship never turned sub's whereabouts. There should be signifiaround to investigate the source of the cant penalties for traveling at high speeds and weapon, nor did it seem to care that I was shallow depths. I witnessed no such penalties Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"GREAT NAVAL BATTLES\" VOL. II GUADALCANAL 1942-1943 IN This one will blow you away! SUPER VGA! Get ready for the second volume in SSI's hugely successful ADVANCED SIMULATOR SERIES! GREAT NAVAL BATTLES VOLUME II: GUADALCANAL sends you to the South Pacific for the monumental conflict that rocked these remote islands. Five tactical battles, three carrier battles, and one full campaign provide limitless hours of cutting-edge World War II naval combat simulation. All in crisply detailed Super-VGA! Build your forces from 100 ship types and 20 plane types as you engage enemy forces on land, at sea, and in the air. Sophisticated command and control features let the computer 'handle the details while you make the big decisions. Or, micro-manage every detail — right down to the targeting of individual guns! IBM 256-COLOR SVGA DISPLAYS. GREAT NAVAL BATTLES VOL. II: GUADALCANAL THE PREMIUM NAVAL COMBAT SIMULATOR. IBM & COMPATIBLES Available on 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM. 09 : To order. Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa/MC (U.S. and Canada only) ogs: 0600 SIL 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"REVIEW MHe's A DEMON ON Wheels Accolade's Speed Racer: The Winner's Circle Or The Pits? by Paul C. Schuytema n ops, mentor of the Go team, dedicated his life to perfecring the ultimate race car-the powerful Mach 5. Now it's Speed Racer's turn to show the world what the car is capable of, leaping over opponents, mowing over trees with whirling saw blades, kicking in afterburner jets for speed, and somersaulting end-over-end through tough traffic. If only Pops knew how Speed really drives—with the wild and reckless abandon of a teenager with hormones in overdrive, giving little thought to the hours of swear and toil Pops has sunk into the Mach 5. But Speed mure his font ra the fear every race his little brother Spridle and monkey Chim-Chim stowed away in the trunk, as he does everything in his power to cream the robotic Melange team, trying to beat his long-time rival Zoomer Slick as well as his estranged brother, the infamous Racer X. With his girlfriend Trixie following his race in a helicopter, ready to swoop down at the first sign of trouble, Speed, in his calfskin gloves and blue polyester shirt and ascot, races with the sense of immortality that only a gifted teenager in a trolled by keyboard, mouse, or joystick, with quarter-million-dollar race car can. After all, the keyboard controlling the optional equiphe has to prove to the world that he's the best ment\" that you'll never find listed in a blue driver ever, and that Pops, who has labored book. long in anonymity, builds the best race cars the world has ever seen. Accolade's latest licensed venture, Speed Racer in the Challenge of Racer X, brings the world of this japanimation cartoon to life in a driving simulator that models the outrageous courses and demonically inspired driving that made Speed Racer a cult cartoon hit. Speed Racer takes place over six episodes, each with different tracks and races, and multiple Eeeez 2012 levels of difficulty. Speed can race against the villains alone, or in two player mode over a In addition to driving the fabled, fin-back split screen, either on the same computer or Mach 5, you can also drive Racer X's Shootover a modem or null-modem connection. ing Star, the low slung yellow speedster that Since the quest to complete the racing circuit looks like the LeMans cars of the 1960s. Each will take more than one sitting, the games are car has a different arsenal of goodies the saved via passwords. Thankfully, Speed Racer front mounted chopper blades of the Mach 5 saves the last used password as a matter of and the side mounted hydraulic rams on the course, so most of the time you will not have Shooting star-and each car can be outfitted to type it in, but you will have to jot down passwords if you ever want to go back and try with ranged weapons such as rockets or cana previous level. nons. The look and the feel Speed Racer in the Challenge of Racer X of the Mach 5 is admirably done, from the sevenTITLE: Speed Racer in the Challenge of Racer X PRICE: STEED button steering hub that REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 3MB RAM, VGA graphics: controls the multitude of supports Adlib Gold, PAS, Roland options Speed has at his and Sound Blaster sound cards PROTECTION: Documentation look up disposal, to the familiar # OF PLAYERS: 1-2 modem option) DESIGNER. Tom Loughry \"whoosh-whoosh\" of the PUBLISHER: Accolade spring-loaded autoSan Jose, CA (800) 245-7744 jacks. The game is conTERSEN HLEHED EXTAR TURBD cost @ Turbo fuel provides an extra blast of speed. $59.95 IBM SYSTEM: TRACE DACER 20 WIB Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"The strategic element of the game is very simplistic: amass the points awarded for a good race to buy more and better gizmos for the Mach 5. Each race is set in an episodic context, and learning about the opposition and what dirty tricks they have in mind will give you clues as how to best outfit the car. The game also features Pops' test track I can hone driving skills against the Opposition without fear of losing any ground in the more to complete all of the game's in the race to complete all of the game's on Pops'track will earn ou sufficient points to begin to build up the Mach 5's arsenal. Pot Holes While the overall depth and range of options do a decent job of capturing Speed's cartoon racing adventures, the game comes up far short of thrilling in its gameplay and execution. First off, any computer game enthusiast will laugh at the graphics. While the colors are rich and the backgrounds beautifully rendered, the cars themselves are a joke. Instead of driving, the opposition's poorly-scaled cars seem to float aimlessly over the track, moving in a jerky pantomime of driving that recalls some of the old Colecovision driving games, Although the background is adequately rendered, the sides of the track, with gorges, canyons, and sharp drop-offs, are simple fields of mottled colors, looking like they were added as an afterthought. Perhaps the most disappointing aspect of this game is the actual driving experience. The game plays more like a coin-op «swerve and dodge» game than any semblance of a driving simulator-even a comical, cartoonish one. The now outdated coin-op Outrun and original Pole Position would lap Speed Racer in a test of \"driveability.\" race (the only positions that are recorded, and out that I was nowhere near the winner's it is necessary to place in the top three to move circle and had to run the episode again. on to the next level of difficulty). Driving I'm not really sure what age-level this game consists mostly of frantic swerving and jumpis aimed towards. It will be the 20and 30ing as ridiculous cars hop and bob all over the somethings who will remember Speed Racer track. Swerving off the track will only slow (though the newer generation can get their fill Speed down (though if the Mach 5 takes of it on late night MTV), yer the game plays sufficient damage, it will go up in flames and at a level which isn't nearly as sophisticated as Trixie will have to deliver a fresh one via some of the Genesis and Super Nintendo helicopter). While all of the neat-o extras that carts that teens and preteens play. The price the Mach 5 or Shooting Star can be equipped the Mach or Shooting Star can be equi tag and hardware requirements seem to indiwith are nice in theory, the haphazard, epilepcate that this game is to be taken as an «adult tic style needed to drive the courses makes it level\" game, which, if that is the case, makes difficult ro use and enjoy these options. the game even more of an embarrassment for Playing the game is much more an exercise Accolade. in frantic hand-eye coordination with no real need for strategic acumen. The oppositions' cars are too random and too numerous to even allow any real buildup of adrenaline as in the frantic Outrun drives. Providing for fewer, more realistic opponents would have put some spark in the game's playability plugs. The game really shows 58.88 MACH its weaknesses when Speed drives off the road and 22:22 223 5599 over a sloping mountain side. His car just seems to float there, losing speed until he gets it back S peed Racer is a game built on a solid idea, on track. When the road narrows to a twoand I believe that the producers truly wanted lane stretch of twisting highway and the path this one to work, to bring the pounding, just ahead is packed with eight or nine jitterhorn-backed music and racing of the aniing cars, all credence is tossed out the winmated series to life on the computer. I think dow, even for the most forgiving of players. dow, even for the most forgiving of plavers. they made the right choice in focusing enAnother feature of the game, which is an tirely on racing rather than adding any real attempt to make it more challenging, is that role-playing elements, and there were times the roadways are littered with countless (and when I was playing (when the track was clear pointless) obstacles including rocks, oil of annoying floating cars) that I could catadrums, barricades, and other less obvious hazpult the Mach 5 over a train intersection as ards (such as odd colored sticks). There seems the train hurdled by below, and I truly ento be no rhyme or reason for the obstacles, joyed myself and could glimpse what the some of which cause the Mach 5 to swerve or crash, while others seem to have no effect game might have been. Sadly, though, these whatsoever. were fleeting moments set in a sea of awkward graphics and gameplay, and it was very casy Playing the game in two-player mode adds to park this game in the lot of disappointup to more fun, especially when playing on a ments. CGW single computer (the experience is not really worth the phone charges of modem play), since the two player banter adds to the ridiculous excitement of the game. In addition to questionable gameplay, the game has several serious bugs, often locking up when an episode is loaded (though, thankfully, it still remains the password). Other times, I was sure I finished in the top three, received the congratulations from girlfriend Trixie and a new cache of points, only to find 22 Zogner Slick Tine 01:32.24 Assassin Tine 01:33.33 Kabala Tine 81:35.14 TUOOOOOOOK When driving the Mach 5, you can see an abbreviated dashboard running along the bottom of the screen and a rear view of the Mach 5 (as in the coin-ops mentioned above). The dashboard is virtually useless, except as a best-guess meter to see if you've got a shot at finishing in one of the top three places in the January 1994 Page 19 "


"Real Ordinary IM ReelMagic Our add-in board brings the next generation of CD-ROM games to your PC bigger than life. Say adios to wimpy graphics. Herky-jerky movement. Bogus sound. And phony ef There's more to games than a mouth that sort of moves or tinny sound. Now play PC games and feel just like you're sitting in a theater controlling the action with your joystick It's ReelMagic,\" the new MPEG playback adapter from Sigma Designs. ACTIVISION SIERRA Get the full-blown multimedia kit, or spring for just the board if you already have the rest of the gear. COMPTON'S NEWMEDIA There a READYSOFT Iris trilobyte ACCESS entertainment GAMES Discover the new generation of ReelMagic games from these manufacturers, and look for more exciting titles coming soon. "


"Reel Magic 489 luded EHE WIIIIIIII scenarios.ReelMagic 256 VS. 32,768 COLORS Why settle for a mere 256 colors, offered by current PC games, when pumps up the reality ReelMagic gives you theater-quality graphics meter so you can crank with over 32,000? up the fantasy. GRUNTS VS. CD-QUALITY AUDIO Get 16-bit We've also included CD-quality sound that plays Sound Blaster Activision's Return to Zork to and Windows«compatible software. The 8-bit audio you're used to just doesn't compare. experience the excitement 5 FPS VS. 30 FPS ReelMagic-compatible PC Computing of full motion POLICE QUEST 4 games run at 30 frames-per-second, MVP 1 video now. SON TRUE full-motion, so you avoid jerky, It's not real unless blocky images ReelMagic Adapter it's ReelMagic. Call 1/4 VS. FULL SCREEN Now you 1-800-845-8086 ext. 313 for a can get theater-quality video in a full-screen image for a realistic, dealer demo near you. Or you can movie-like experience. stick with real ordinary. Oh joy! SIGMA Only ReelMagic Makes It Real DESIGNS IIIIIII FINALIST 1993 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sgmo Designs logo is a registered trademark ond ReelMagcs trademark of Sgro Doans, Inc. All other brand rares and products are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respecte holders Circle Reader Service #134 "


"REVIEW Me And My Shadows ! rigin's latest release is not the sort of game we've come to expect from them. While the look and interface are similar to the 3D free-scrolling environment of the Ultima Underworld series, this one is certainly different from anything they've put out before. Though some may assume that Shadowcaster is a role-playing game because of its look and its publisher, Origin is advertising it quite accurately as an action game. The story that sets up the game is fairly mundane and serves primarily as a launchpad for the action. Once upon a time the gods and all of the creatures of the various dimensions had a special pact with one another. The gods granted certain members of society the ability to share the bodies of other-dimensional creatures. The People, as these body-swapping morphers were called, were able to use the physical advantages of other creatures to compensate for the limitations of their own bodies. Unfortunately, the gods did not grant this power to all people and so, as any Marxist might have predicted, a class war erupted between the \"haves\" and the \"have-nots\" which nearly wiped everyone out. Only a few of these shapeshifters remain, and Kirt-a morpher whose family was killed by Veste, god of the \"have-nots»-is one of them. His future cannot be foreseen by the gods; it is as though a shadow lies across his fate, hence the title. Kirt's mission is to find and kill Veste before he goes on another rampage. With this explanation complete, Kirt is thrust into the thick of things, and from that point on, the game is a succession of fights with increasingly tougher opponents. There are no role-playing elements here, no people to talk to, no little quests to do for someone or other, and only a handful of trivial puzzles to solve. It is, quite simply, a «hack your way through from start to finish» extravaganza, familiar to all who have donned the combat boots of id Software's B.J. Blukowski. Scorpia Reveals Shadowcaster's Multiple Personalities by Scorpia, Adventure Games Editor Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"Kirt begins as a mere huchanging from a morph with fewer man with the unrealized pooverall points to one with a lot of tential to become other them. What stays the same is the creatures. As he progresses percentage of injury from one form through different areas to another. (which may be comprised of For example, several levels), he gains other the Caun morph forms. This is accomplished starts with 20 hit by first finding a small red points. Suppose pyramid, and then the obelisk on which it Kirt in human belongs. When the obelisk is whole, Kirt form has 100 obrains a new shape. Including the human points. The Caun shape, he will have seven forms in all by the takes 10 points of time he reaches the end of the game. damage, which is half his tofor long periods is the usual method for bringIn a big departure from traditional RPGs, tal. Switching to human, Kirt now has 50 ing the power bar up again. Since you'll likely be using morph abilities fairly heavily in the even the hack-n-slash variety, Kirt has no points—more than the Caun, but still half his visible stats at all. There are no values for total. second half, that means a lot of waiting. strength, dexterity, constitution, etc. ExperiThis gives Shadowence points are awarded, however, and each caster a curious stopmorph accrues experience separately. and-go feel, composed The only attributes you will find here are of frantic fighting folpower and hit points, and these are displayed lowed by long periods in two bar graphs at the top of the screen: a of inactivity while health and power come blue one for power points and a red one for hit points. Clicking on either the red or blue back up again. It bar will show the actual numeric value for stretches out the game that bar. There is also a score bar under the without adding any character portrait. playability or fun to it. Few things are more irThe power points allow Kirt to shift to, and ritating in a supposed maintain, the various morphs, as well as use action product than their special abilities. These points can be hanging around in a restored by resting or by drinking special corner for minutes on end to renew oneself. SE SDIE For some time in the game, healing will be a The good thing is that once monsters are slow process. The podead, they stay that way, and no new critters tions restore only a are generated. So it's entirely possible (and small number of hit usually a good tactic) to rampage through a points, so resting in a section, killing everything there, and then safe place, often for explore it in a more leisurely fashion while hits quite a few minutes, is and power regenerate. Of course, even with necessary. Once the that tactic, resting up from time to time is still Caun morph is obnecessary. tained, healing belling beFighting itself is straightforward, and rather Fiobring itself is straightforward and rath comes much less of a like that in Underworld. The 3D view is much problem. The Caun rethe same, along with the \"left button moves the same generates very quickly and right button fights» controls, so you can and has a special ability go straight at an opponent or try to tango straight ar an to boost healing furpotions found throughout the game. Howaround it. One nice addition, for those who ther by using up some power points. Coupled ever, the \"resting points only come back in had trouble with this fighting style in Underwith the Caun's low number of hits to begin the human form, since it takes power to keep world, is the use of the space bar as an attack with, full restoration is often up any of the morphs. Power is the same for only a matter of several secShadowcaster all morphs; if Kirt has 100 points, that is the onds in most cases. TITLE: Shadowcaster most any of them can have. Unfortunately, the same PRICE: $69.95 Hit points are handled a little differently. cannot be said for power REQUIREMENTS: 386-33MHz or better, 4MB RAM Each morph has its own hit point allotment, VGA graphics, 16MB hard drive space points, and this does become supports Sound Blaster (Pro) and which might be more or less than the human a problem in the later stages Logitech's Cyberman controller form. These hit points do increase as the of the game. As with healing PROTECTION: morph gains experience, and resting will reDESIGNERS: potions, the power potions Raven Software PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts/Origin Systems store them. Switching forms does not do any only renew a handful of San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 healing, but it is possible to \"gain\" points by points, so standing around NOORIC SYSTEM: IBM General MIDI sound cards, and None January 1994 Page 23 "


"command. The mouse can be used just for The Opsis, the floating the small map will change to that view in the movement, while attacks are made by hitting eye, is perhaps the most large display. The map fills in automatically the spacebar with the other hand. Unlike the powerful morph. While it as you move around, but has some limitaUnderworlds, however, there is no \"aiming\" can fly, it feels more like tions. It can only be used for the area (all of physical attacks to a certain height. You floating, and it moves slowly levels) you're currently exploring. Previous simply target the opponent and bash away. compared to the Ssair. To sections can't be brought up again, and being The workings of special abilities—throwcompensate for its snailentirely visual, there is no way to write on it, ing fireballs, lightning bolts, or death blastspace, the Opsis has the death as with an Underworld-style map. are about the same as Underworld. Activare blast. You don't want to be on the wrong end The music was somewhat repetitious, and the power, target the critter, and let loose of this weapon one hit and the opponent is after awhile I turned it off. I might have Positioning is important here. If you're partly dead, just like that. Of course, this uses a lot preferred a cycling of several tunes to its behind a wall or corner, a shot may end up of power; after two or three blasts, it's time to single, looping tune for each location. being blocked, wasting power. As a rule of restore power points. The Opsis can also Rather surpristhumb, if the monster can't hit you with a ingly, only four save fireball (and some of them have that capabilpositions are avail ity), you won't be able to hit it with yours, able. Considering either. how often saving is Each morph has unique powers, but I necessary, and that found myself using only one or two of those the save files themat most during the game. As noted above, the selves will just about Caun is most useful for healing; it isn't much get up to 300K by of a fighter and will die the end game, it is quickly in combat. amazing more posiThe Maorin catman is a tions were not aldandy fighter at the start, lowed. but his special infra-red cat For all the waiting sight seemed useless. I never around, Shadowcasencountered a situation ter is a fairly quickwhere it was needed or useplaying game. It ful. extend the area of the auto-map, which is took me only about three and a half days to The Grost, or stone giant handy for making sure you haven't missed reach the end game segment, and that was form, has the most hit t hit some obscure part of the level. some obscure with splitting my playing time with Simon the points, is the most physically Graphically, the game is very beautiful, berSorcerer (sce my \"Tale\"). Dedicated players powerful, and the hardest to ter in some ways than Underworld. While the may get there even sooner. damage. Against ground opwalls still have a blocky aspect in close-ups, Overall, Shadowcaster's main points of inponents, he is usually the the monsters don't best form to use. However, lose definition as this morph is susceptible to they get nearer. fireballs, and isn't worth Animations are much against critters who can't be injured by very smooth (at melec attack (there are some of those around). least on a 66MHz The Kahpa, or the frogmachine), as is movement. There like creature, is most effective underwater. There is also a megaview, seems to be no limit to the where about twolength of its underwater exthirds of the screen cursions. Of its two special is used for the dunpowers, the sonic blast geon display, givseemed weak; the lightning ing a remarkable attack was much more effecfeeling of \"being tive. The Kahpa also fights fairly well, espethere.\" cially if you have found the trident of might. The underwater terest are the shapeshifting and excellent scenes, when the Kahpa amphibian is active, The Ssair dragon/wyvern graphics. Without those, it would hardly be form is one of two that can are rendered with great skill, and, espec worth thinking about, since the game is othfly, and it can fly very fast, as in megaview, can make you believe you're erwise a pedestrian body-count fest, very well as absorb a large really swimming around. Changes in perspeclightweight in content. Those who prefer the amount of damage. This tive, as when flying or when in the short Caun regular Ultima style of role-playing will probmorph can also dish it out, form, are also handled very well. ably want to skip this one. But players looking by tail attack or fire breath. An auto-map is available, with a large view for pure, no-nonsense hack-n-slash will have The fire breath uses power, of the immediate area and a small line diaa blast. CGW so it can't be used too often. gram of the entire area. Clicking anywhere on Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"Officially Licensed by INDYCAR. From the Creators of Indianapolis 500:The Simulation\"  PAPYRUS Proleta Exierience IndyCarRacing! BOSCH BOSCH REPLAY BJBHSFRONS COMPOUND PRESSURES CHANGE TJRET DONE SUFS 2615 26 . The Official Game of IndyCar Racing The one and only PC simulation officially licensed by IndyCar. Now you can challenge the world's leading racers wheel to wheel. Plus, see the actual drivers, their teams and cars in lifelike detail. Complete Car Setup, Infinite Control You call the shots front and rear wing adjustments, brake bias, anti-roll, turbo boost, gearing, camber, stagger shocks, tire pressure and compound. Choose from 6 different engines and 5 different chassis for the ultimate race machine. Accurate Tracks Experience the IndyCar season as the real drivers do. Every turn, bank, straight and hill is painstakingly accurate. Race the short ovals, super speedways, road courses and city street circuits. This is the Indy Car simulation! Overall Game Play Feel the pressure. Make the same critical decisions the IndyCar teams make every race. Tune your car to the real track, qualify on the pole, develop your pit strategy. fine tune your race plans and more! INDYCAR PAPYRUS PUBLISHING, INC. Circle Reader Service #110 Installment One of the Papyrus Racing Series! Indianapolis 3001 Ihn Simulation to trademark al Llectronic An Inc Undionopolis S00 to regulated trademark of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway IndyCar and lime logs or under exclusive license Championhip Auto Racing Team Ine. Papyrus Rosing Series is a Frodemark of Papyrus Publishing Inc. Papyrus Publishing "


"FREE MORTAL KOMBAT KAP!* CYBORG BLASTING DINO-STOMPING SHADOW-KICKING RAT-BASHING ACTION FOR YOUR PC. HOW TO Mura DONT KRUSTYS * SUPER * WFON HOUSE NOW FOR THE PRE A Dino-Stomping PC Game For the Whole Family: THE ARCADE GAME  KOMBAT FEATURING SIMPSONS! Aclaim Aklalm Aklaim Get ready to blow the lid off your PC. Because every game in Acclaim Entertainment's new line for the PC is a blast. Pick up any two before March 31, 1994, and we'll top you off with a FREE Mortal Kombat Kap!* AKlaim entertainment, in c. Distributed by UltraTech Send in 2 proofs of purchase with package coupon plus $4.00 for shipping and handling. See inside box for details. Offer expires 3/31/94. Please allow 6-8 weeks for delivery. Coming soon to: Electronics Boutique, Software Etc., Babbages, CompUSA, Computer City Superstores and Best Buy. Or call 1-800-447-6543 to order with MC/VISA/AMEX. The Simpsons & Characters &  1993 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. All Rights Reserved. MORTAL KOMBAT & Trogare Trademarks of and Licensed from Midway Manufacturing Company  1992 All Rights Reserved Used by Permission TERMINATORTM 2: JUDGEMENT DAY, TERMINATOR, 12, ENDOSKELETON and Depiction of ENDOSKELETONIM &  1993 Carolco Pictures Inc. All rights reserved. Distributed under license from Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. by UltraTech (212) 941-1224. Circle Reader Service #69 "


"enrebir Koimbat on your PC ience all the action of the arcade sensation right on your PC! ung in m ent, in c. buted by UltraTech sclaim Entertainment. Inc. EvUltraTech (212134):224. "


"SUMO HEAD BUTTS, SONIC BOOMS. WHIRLWIND KICKS, DRAGON PUNCHES, BUTT CRUSHES, FIREBALLS, SPINNING PILEDRIVERS Street Fighter IIM is a registered trademark of Capcom Co., Ltd. "


"WILL YOUR PC SURVIVE? WILL YOU? STREET FIGHIERI TM FOR THE PC CAPCOM Distributed by Hi Tech Expressions Available at your local software retailer or call 1-800-447-6543 to order by MC/VISA/AMEX Circle Reader Service #71 "


"STRATEGY The Private Lakes Of Priva ) How Privateers Stay Profitable And Stay Alive by Jeff \"Seor Jeffe\" James Tnlike its predecessors in the Wing Commander universe, Privateer gives you a chance to exercise your gray matter as well as your hand-eye coordination. In carlier Wing Commander games, success was measured by the number of enemy ships blasted and missions flown. Privateer takes a less quantitative path towards victory. From lugging cargo across the far reaches of the galaxy to battling enigmatic alien vessels, Privateer requires that you juggle the demands of being an interplanetary tradesman as well as a mercenary for hire. How To Get Ahead In Privateering The game begins with your character stuck on a mining asteroid in possession of three things: a hand-me-down space vessel, a mcager allotment of funds, and an avaricious desire to make a small fortune. There are many paths to success in Privateer, but they hey all share a common thread: getting off to a good start. Here's one route that worked well for the dread-privateer, Jeffé. After creating a character and saving the game, your character will find himself at the launch pad of base Achilles, gazing upon his trusty Tarsus space vessel. You should immediately go to the ship dealer and sell the laser cannon, missile launcher (w/missiles) and plasteel armor on your ship. After those items are sold, buy tungsten armor, an afterburner, a torpedo launcher (w/10 torpedoes) and one meson blaster. With the remaining currency, go to the Achilles commodity exchange and buy as much iron and tungsten as possible. Exit the commodity exchange and access the mission computer, located in the center of the base. Try to select a single mission, preferably a \"defend base\" mission at either Achilles or len. After accepting the mission, launch your craft and complete the mission granted by the mission computer. After completing Helen with the load of iron and tungsten. Sell the cargo in the commodity exchange, using the profits to buy as much grain as your ship can carry. Go to the ship dealer and buy another meson blaster, giving you a total of two. With this configuBefore leaving the Troy system, make sure ration you should be able to ferry cargo and your vessel is equipped with the following accept missions within the Troy system. The items: Level 3 engine, Level 2 shields, repair dual meson blasters and torpedo launcher droid, jump drive, Level 3 ECM, complete provide enough firepower to overcome most sector maps and a full complement of weapfoes in this system, while the tungsten armor ons. You might also consider enrolling in provides a measure of protection beyond the both the Mercenary's and Merchant's guilds stock plasteel variety. Finally, the afterburner at this time, will allow you to turn tail and run when the going gets tough, to live and fight another Trolling For Dollars day. for the next dozen or so missions, concenWith the exception of the ploclinc (which trate on ferrying cargo between the three forces you to smuggle illegal drugs and guns planets in the Troy system. The next two in order to complete the game), you have a upgrades to your vessel should be the cargo great deal of freedom in choosing which cargo expansion (giving your Tarsus a 150 unit to carry. Four trade items are considered concargo capacity) and a Level 1 enginc upgrade. traband: the drugs known as «Brilliance\" and Accept missions only from the mission com\"Ultimate,\" tobacco and human slaves. puter for now: the Mercenary and Merchant Smuggling contraband—with routes beGuilds offer more lucrative missions, but they rween any Pirate base and New Detroit being are expensive to join and offer missions outmost profitable—is the best \"get rich quick\" s side the Troy system (which requires the adscheme a player can follow in Privateer: Podition of a jump drive). Keep accepting tential drug traffickers should be aware that in-system missions and ferrying cargo until dealing in any contraband will make them an you can afford to upgrade your Tarsus to an instant enemy of powerful Confederation Orion or Galaxy-class vessel. forces. Skirmishing with Pirates and Retros is one thing, but going head to head with a Confederate destroyer is a sure-fire ticket to permanent retirement. If you do trade in contraband, the best strategy to take when encountering militia and Confederate forces is to run away, using the afterburner to speed between jump points. In these cases, a fast ship with plenty of shielding-like the Orion or Centurion—is the ship of choice. If you destroy too many Confederate ships while   PAYOU BACO HRHOLYCHOATHY OFTHY . smuggling contraband, you'll run the risk of The ship you choose will affect the missions being considered an enemy of the Confederayou should accept. The rrundling Galaxy tion and of being attacked on sight. The only way to convince the Confederation to stop makes a large, slow-moving target for enemy shooting at you is to destroy large numbers of ships, making it a poor choice as a ship for a pirates and Kilrathi. mercenary or bounty hunter. For gamers unwilling to take a walk on the If you'd rather take the gun-for-hire apwild side, trading in conventional goods is a proach, the Orion or the Centurion is the best less dangerous, though less profitable pasoption. The Centurion is arguably the best n. The Centurion is arguably the best time If you time. If you plan to make your living by cralt in the game. While short on cargo space, trading goods, the Galaxy (with a maximum the Centurion is fast, supports six guns, a rear cargo capacity of 225 units) is the best ship turret and two banks of missiles or torpedoes. available. The Tarsus (with a maximum storPage 30 Computer Gaming World "


"PREPARE NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC 1-800-325-8898 Circle Reader Service #102 "


"Qyomt 29. fight, it's a good idea to never fly at the same speed and heading for more than three seconds. Constantly altering your course, speed and heading will give enemy ships a much harder target to hit. This has the added benefit of changing the shield that faces your enemies. Every vessel has four shield faces (front, back and both sides), and by displaying a different facing to an enemy every few seconds, you can spread out any damage over multiple shield facings. If you lose shields on one side of your vessel, point that side away from the enemy. Shields can also be used as an offensive weapon. If you have enough armor and shields, ramming can make short work of most enemy ships. This tactic works especially well on Retros, who tend to dive straight toward your ship, veering off at the last second. Point the nose of your ship at the approaching Retro wait until the last few seconds of his approach, then hit the afterburners. Larger ships with more powerful e with more powerful armor and shields will always win a ramming conreerWell unless it's contest. Well, unless it's a Kilrathi capital Kilrathi canital ship, that is age capacity of 150 units) is the next best ship for merchanteering, although that vessel's limited upgradability precludes it from being a good choice. Using an Orion or Centurion for cargo work is nowhere near as profitable; those vessels are best suited for bounty-hunting and other missions. It's a good idea to always carry a full load of cargo; a half-empty ship is a waste of time. It's also a good idea to double or triple-up on your missions (i.c., accepting three deliveries to New Detroit), resulting in a profitable windfall at the next stop. After exploring the Humboldt sector (the sector which includes Troy), your next sector should be the Potter quadrant (located directly to the right of the Humboldt quadrant). Not only are three of the most important bases located in this area (New Detroit, New Constantinople and Oxford), but most trade routes through this sector are wellstocked with Confederate and Militia vessels. Many of the missions offered in the Merchant's guild involve shipping cargo to either New Constantinople or New Detroit; a base of operations at either of these two locations can be very profitable. Ship Upgrades The afterburner is quite possibly the single most important ship upgrade you can buy. Not only does it grant a large tactical advantage, but it can also save a smuggler's bacon when the chips are down. Hitting the afterburner can boost you quickly between jump points in hostile territory. When fighting a losing battle near a base or planet, a wise pilot will point the nose of his ship towards it and hit the afterburners. Once within 5000m of the base, your ship is automatically pulled into safety. When it comes to weapons, the most effective in the game are undoubtedly the tachyon cannon and the Friend/Foe (FF) missile. The tachyon cannon offers the best combination of damage potential, range and energy drain, while the FF missile can hunt down enemy vessels with uncanny accuracy. Another point to con to consider when upgrading a vessel is to purchase an engine upgrade one grade higher P than the currently installed shields. A ship with a level two shield upgrade and a level three engine upgrade can maintain nearly continuous afterburner power, as well as support a wide range of energy-hungry combat activities (such as ramming enemy ships, continuous weapon firing, etc.). Last but not least, the addition of a repair droid is one of the wisest purchasing decisions a privateer can make. After a particularly damaging dogfight, you can hit the afterburners and race towards a calm area of the system (indicated by the lit \"AUTO\" light on the ship console). Hitting the backspace key will bring the vessel to a dead stop, allowing you to sit tight and the let the repair droid fix things up. Weapons and armor can't be repaired by a repair droid, and scanners can only be repaired by a repair droid or by the software booth in the ship upgrade section on any base. Tech Talk SET TE RUTO MINING BASE: ENTERINC AUTOMATID LANDING ZONE If the going gets too tough during combat, hit ALT-O to access the Privateer options screen. Turn invulnerability on, return to the game, and exit the combat area. You may lose the credits for the mission, but you'll return to base in one piece. (If you're on a plot mission, it may be a better idea to load an earlier saved game. Mission fixers don't take kindly to players who can't complete the task they require.) When returning to collect payment for a plot mission, invulnerability can be turned on without any deleterious effects. For example, the first plot mission in the game requires that you take a load of iron from New Detroit to Liverpool. After the iron has been delivered to Liverpool, you can turn on invulnerability to return to New Detroit and collect your payment. Just remember to turn invulnerability off before accepting any other missions. Fighting Smart Regardless of how careful you are in choosing missions and cargo, Pirates, Retros and an occasional Kilrathi scouting party will make your life as difficult as they can. Most of that conflict, however, is avoidable. Prudent privateers know that missions and cargo take precedence over combat. Combat is always expensive. Armor and weapons usually have to be repaired after combat, missiles and torpedoes must be replaced, and you risk getting your character killed in the process. Unless getting paid to fight (or if the combat mission is part of the Privateer plotline), the prudent course would be to turn tail and run. When forced ro fight, a number of tactics and strategies can help you emerge on the winning end of any conflict. When in a dog As challenging as the storyline in Privateer may be, you may face a greater challenge in Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"TRAVEL TO EXOTIC LANDS, MEET STRANGE CREATURES AND BLOW THEM AWAY! sla If you can't find this game at your favorite retailer call: (800) 438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today. You've always considered yourself a soldier of fortune with a knack for survival and a thirst for green. Your mission? Anything for a price. But this time it's different. The stakes are a little bit greater and the danger is all too real. You and your team are on a desolate moon, surrounded by less than friendlies, with only one goal besides the mission itself; stay alive long enough to enjoy your newfound wealth. Hired Guns is an adventure that can accommodate up to four players simultaneously. It features furious nonstop action, first person 3-D view and auto-mapping of the 1.7 million cubic meters of play area. Choose from 12 different richly developed characters to suit your needs for the mission at hand. Journey through this desolate land, all the while testing your survival skills, And remember; TAKE NO PRISONERS! Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Hired Guns is available on IBM compatible and Amiga formats. Circle Reader Service #114 "


"Load For Bear NOTE: Before making any changes to your existing Autoexec.bat or Config.sys files, back them up to floppy disk for safe-keeping. The following configuration files assume that you have a computer equipped with 4MB (or more) of RAM, MS-DOS 6.0, Microsoft Windows 3.1, and a Microsoft-compatible mouse driver in your C:\\MOUSE directory. If you are using a disk compression utility (DoubleSpace, Stacker, et al.) or a CD-ROM drive, you'll need to add the requisite drivers and programs to the configuration files listed below. For more information, consult your MS-DOS 6.0 instruction manual and the Privateer installation guide. getting the game to work smoothly on your system. Like Origin's Strike Commander, Privateer needs two things above all else: processor speed and RAM. Origin recommends at least a 386-33MHz; hands-on playing experience has convinced me that a 486 machine is almost essential. Privateer requires 4MB of RAM, which is enough to have the program perform acceptably on most 486 computer systems; more RAM translates into fast and smooth game play, especially during bitmapchoked dogfights. Increasing the amount of RAM dedicated for Smart Drive usage (see below) will decrease the amount of time the game spends accessing the hard disk during play. Privateer works best when used with a boot disk, as outlined in the installation guide. Not wanting to juggle more floppy disks than necessary, I discovered that the ability of DOS 6 to support multiple startup configurations worked just as well as a boot disk. See the sidebar \"Load For Bear\" for some useful configuration tips. CONFIG.SYS File: (MENU) MENUITEM=Windows MENUITEM=Privateer [Common) DEVICE-C:\\DOS\\HIMEM. SYS DOS=HIGH BUFFERS=25 FILES=25 PRATE YOUR CLIROUICK [Windows] DEVICE=C:\\DOS \\EMM3 86 .EXE NOEMS RAM I Privateer DEVICE-C:\\DOS\\EMM386.EXE 2592 RAM SHELL=C:\\DOS COMMAND.COM/P AUTOEXEC.BAT File: PSG GOTO $CONFIG : Windows PATH=C:\\DOS;C:\\WINDOWS; LH C:\\MOUSE\\MOUSE.COM C:\\DOS SMARTDRV.EXE GOTO END To Cheat Or Not To Cheat. Is That A Question? One judge of a program's popularity and/or difficulty is the number of utilities, cheats, maps and other playing aids that spring up for it after release. Judging by the number of utilities available for Privateer, the game has either been received well by the gaming public and/or the beginning is a bit too tough. One of the most useful utilities is the shareware utility PREDIT v2.0 (by Wayne Sikes), which allows users to edit the Privateer*.SAV files to give you unlimited ammo, create invincible ships, etc. Another utility called PREASY v1.0 (also by Sikes) allows you to selectively cripple enemy spacecraft by disabling their shields or eliminating their weaponry. A collection of hacked *.SAV files, game maps and other playing aids can also be found in the Origin section on most major on-line services (including GEnie and CompuServe). For the ultimate playing aid, you may want to pick up a copy of the upcoming Privateer Playtester's Guide (Origin, $14.95), a bonanza of maps, detailed ship specifications, suggested tactics and walkthroughs of every plot mission and encounter. And that's it for this round of drinks, buccancers. Buy low, sell high, configure well, and don't go cultivating any strange ideas about honor and courage. The privateer's chivalric code is very simple-live to see tomorrow. When the odds are bad, the best thing to show your enemy is your backside and the glow of your afterburners. Cow : Privateer C:\\MOUSE MOUSE.COM C:\\DOS\\SMARTDRV.EXE 256 REM **** FOR SYSTEMS WITH 4MB RAM, USE: C:\\DOS SMARTDRV.EXE 256 REM **** FOR SYSTEMS WITH 8MB RAM, USE: C:\\DOS SMARTDRV.EXE 2048 REM **** FOR SYSTEMS WITH > 8MB RAM, USE: C:\\DOSASMARTDRV.EXE 4096 SET COMSPEC=C:\\DOS COMMAND.COM C: CD PRIVATER PRIV GOTO END : end No Joy For Joysticks If you have trouble getting your joystick to calibrate correctly, it could be that a required file is missing from the C:\\PRIVATER directory. To correct this problem, a text file entitled JOYB.DAT must be created in that direcrory. Simply use a text editor to create the file, or type the following commands while in the C:\\PRIVATER directory: COPY CON JOYB. DAT [ENTER] XXX [ENTER] *2 (F6 Key] (ENTER) After creating this file, your joystick should calibrate correctly. Cow Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"WHEN THINGS GET UGLY ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE SCREEN... Circle Reader Service #61 BETTER HAVE A FALCON ON YOUR SIDE. ademarks are property of their respecte If you need the fastest performance for your gaming, personal, or business application, you need to fly a Falcon! To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available The Falcon MACH V: The Ultimate Gaming Machine Intel 486 DX-2/66 Processor VESA Local Bus Graphics 40+ VGA Frames Per Second VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Transfer 4 Megabytes of RAM Serious Hardware 1 2 & 1.44 Floppy Drives For 250 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive Serious Players. MPCTM Compliant 350 ms CD ROM Drive SoundBlaster Deluxe TM & Multimedia Speakers CH Flightstick PROTM and High Speed Gameport The MACHV Mini-Tower Case 14\" Super VGA Monitor, 28dp Is Complete 101 Key Keyboard, MS-DOS 6.0TM Mouse Including Shipping Upgrades are available! For Only $2,499 ALCON NORTHWEST OMPUTER SYSTEMS 3 South Bayshore Drive, Coos Bay, Oregon 97420 MACH V with optional 15\" monitor shown "


"Scorpio ZORK Viele How Many Orcs Could Scorpia Zork...? CGW's Adventure Games Editor Turns Her Seer's Gaze On Return to Zork SARI Liel few issues ago (#112, Nov. 93), Char(even Infocom in its glory days) could do an faces, and even the clever Return to Zork les Ardai wrote a preview of Return to all-graphic Zork and pull it off. interface can't get around it entirely. Perhaps 1 Zork that thoroughly covered the My first impression of Activision's game no game can. While there were complaints in game. Charles and I are on the same wavewas that this could easily have been called the old days about text parsers—and some of length on many points, but our conclusions \"Zork: The Movie.\" It is almost entirely visthe early ones were indeed a bit picky-they are not quite the same. I'll take this opportuuallaural, with very little in the way of text. still made you think about what you were nity to expand upon Charles' preview with True, there are a bunch of important files to doing, what you might be able to do with out retreading the ground that he covered. read in the Mayor's office, and you have a item X. Modern interfaces limit the number But first, a bit of history... little notebook that automatically fills in cerof possible options and thus take some of the Zork was one of the first games I played on tain sections as you progress through the imagination out of puzzle-solving my trusty ol' Apple II. I still remember casing game, but sights and sounds are the most The Return to Zork interface also suffers the racks at a computer store (they weren't so important things here. Even note-taking has from inconsistency. For example, you can easy to find back in '81), and walking our been virtually eliminated by the game's light a match while the match box is in your with Wizard & The Princess (Sierra), Pyramid unique camera and tape recorder functions inventory. However, if you want to drink of Doom (Scott Adams), Adventure (Mithat are used to take pictures of locations and from the thermo, you must first take the crosoft) and Zork. Veteran gamers will note record conversations. thermo out of your inventory. Because of that I seemed to have a gift for picking all the this, there may be times when you may think tough ones! an action is impossible since the full range of Sierra's Wizard was the odd man out. Even choices isn't shown, making the game unduly in those days, Sierra was doing graphic advendifficult. It is also irritating to have to open tures. I thought the game was okay, but the the inventory, take out the item, use it, then pictures didn't thrill me. Pyramid of Doom open the inventory to put it back. Objects was a bare-bones, no-frills puzzle showcasebeing used on the player (as opposed to other text was minimal, puzzles were everything. objects) ought to be usable directly from the The last two were different. They were inventory screen. heavily text-oriented, with many long deIn terms of puzzles, the game exhibits a scripcions that evoked detailed mental images wide variation, ranging from trivial to clever of mysterious places. Playing them together. The interface is a little odd, yet probably the (winning the Comedy Club prize) to amazsedlar to best of any so far in an all-graphic game. With ingly obscure (picking the locked door of the Adventure (sometimes also known as Colossal the typical graphic adventure interface, you grocery store). This produces a somewhat much refined pick an item from your inventory and click it uneven game, where you make a little proversion of Adventure, yet it was also its own on something else to see what happens. In something else to see what happens. Ingress, then come to a complete halt, with no grese. then come Il lave Return to Zork, when you click an item on idea of what to do next. a clearer remembrance of Zork than I do something else, a diamond-shaped interface Aggravating the situation is the Guardian Adventure, and it is still one of my all-time opens showing the range of possible actions. (no relation to the Origin-al one). Typically, favorite adventures. Of course, it doesn't take long to figure out adventure players are supposed to grab any So when Activision announced Return to that in most circumstances, it's easy enough item that isn't nailed down, and if it is, you Zork, I regarded it with a high degree of, let to save the game and just run through all the find a hammer to pry it up. That only works us say, reserve. Okay, let's be up front about choices to see if anything important occurs. to a certain extent here. There are some situhere. I was extremely skeptical that anyone This is the big drawback of all graphic interations where, if you pick up something, a Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"BEWARE, THE SOUL OF YOUR MACHINE IS IN MORTAL DANGER! B RAMIS T O KE RS Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 If you can't find this game at your favorite retailer call: (800) 438-7794 (GET PSYG) to order your copy today. Bram Stoker's Dracula is a trademark of Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc. 1992 Columbia Pictures industries Inc. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #113 "


"trade the useless (and mostly boring) Encyclopedia Frobozzica that comes with the game for tighter puzzle construction, consistent design, and a more logical interface, to name just a few points. Considered as a game without the Zork label, however, it's not too bad, although we do have to keep in mind the flaws mentioned above. Graphically, it is very pretty. The use of live actors and actresses throughout is welldone for the most part (although I agree entirely with Charles Ardai that the Troll chieftain's bit was \"embarrassing\"). The use of the camera and tape recorder is an interesting substitute for traditional note-taking. The game ran cleanly throughout. There were no crashes, no freezes, no problems with graphics or sound. Return to Zork supports the Gravis Ultrasound card, which reproduced all the dialogue flawlessly. Unlike Dark Sun, where I had some difficulties with the effects, all sound was on from start to finish with no problems of any kind. message appears that \"the path to victory is which is just northwest of Pugney's barn. blocked,\" after which the Guardian arrives to There is no indication you can go in that take away your entire inventory except for the direction, and if you don't move the cursor camera, tape recorder, and notebook over far enough, you'll never see the move What makes it aggravating is that there is ment arrow curving that way. Other players no www to know ahead of time that the obiect have had problems finding the Waif under is \"untouchable\" (at least for the moment). the bridge for the same reason. For example, on the ground at lugney's farm Return to Zork also departs from tradition is a box. Taking it will invoke the Guardian. with the way it handles points. In this, it is On the other hand, you can help yourself to more like a Sierra game, where performing the statue's shield outside the Temple of Bel certain actions increases your score without Nair, and nothing happens. doing anything to advance the game itself. It Worse by far is the business in the swamp is entirely possible to finish Return to Zork hut of Witch Itah (we're not in Kansas anywithout a perfect score. I have always been more, Toro). She has some bats you need, and mystified as to why such «pointless points\" you're supposed to show her a certain picture would be put in any adventure. The purpose so she'll give them to you (picking them up of a score is to chart your progress through otherwise brings the Guardian). the game, not motivate you to look for silly actions to do, just to get some points. Another jarring note is struck by some of the character portrayals in the game. Given the lavishness of the production, you'd think a little money could have been spent on makeup, so that the Trolls would look like Trolls, the Dwarves like Dwarves, and the Orc (definitely a non-Zork creature) like an Orc. Instead, they all appear distinctly human, which doesn't do a lot for maintaining a fantasy atmosphere. However, on your first visit, showing her So, is Return to Zork anything like Zork? Of the picture does nothing (it's standard praccourse not. The original game was all-text and tice here to show everything to everyone). But set amidst the ruins of the Great Underon your next visit, showing her the photo ground Empire. It evoked the sense of wonevokes the desired response, even if nothing der that comes from wandering through the new has happened between visits. remains of some long-gone and mysterious There are also occasions when using the civilization. It was a place inhabited only by right facial expression at the start of an ena lumbering Troll and a thief who sometimes etimes counter is vital to obtaining information or filched treasures from you. It was a journey of items. Clicking on the correct one while exploration and puzzle-solving, with no help \"talking\" to Pugney allows you to take the besides your own wits. box; using the wrong one gets you nowhere. By comparison, Return to Zork is overEven worse, sometimes just a click or two is populated. People are everywhere, ready (unenough, while at others, you have to use the der the proper stimulus) to offer help, advice. expression continually. and items. There is no true feeling of being This is particularly important when dealing underground or isolated from the world as in with the Troll chieftain. If you show him your the original game. Nor is there really any magic sword, he cringes and whines, but exploration here; it's just a matter of going that's as far as you'll ever get with him; he from one location to another, most of them never hands over the necklace you want. The seeming pretty much alike. The mix of modonly way to get the necklace is to use one ern day and magic doesn't come off too well, particular expression over and over while he's either. blabbering on with threats. Using the expresYou hardly get any sense at all that Return sion a couple of times will likely get you killed to Zork has any links to the previous game. (the expressions show up only at the start of \"There are some off-hand mentions of Zorkthe encounter, and go away quickly if you go away quickly if you related matters, but that certainly isn't suffirelated matters, but that certainly isn't suffi don't use them). cient. Aside from the name, you'd never think These logical inconsistencies do nothing for of this as the Zork universe in the first place. game play, and often leave the player conespecially not when the \"Elvish sword of great fused and uncertain. In addition, you can antiquity\" that hung over the fireplace in the casily miss locations if you aren't careful. I whire house is referred to as a \"Dwarven had a hard time finding the Vulture Pit, sword\" (an amazing gaffe!). I would easily Overall, Activision might have been better off doing this as an adventure in its own right, rather than trying to capitalize on the success of the of the early Infocom productions. With the passing of the original Infocom into history, Sierra took over as top dog in the adventure market, and no one has seriously challenged them since. Activision, with its new approach and graphics, could make some big strides in that direction, but I don't see it happening if they continue trying to recycle the magic of the past. Looking back at the classics might be a good idea for today's game designers, good puzzle construction, logical development, and creative inspiration are in rich supply on those dusty disks. But the old Infocom has had its day (alas), and the new generation, while building on the past, has to set its sights on the the future. A new direction is needed here, and if Activision can find it, they may yet produce adventures worthy of the Infocom label. We'll just have to wait and see if that happens. I certainly hope it does; really good adventures have been rare of late as rare as a grue with a sun tan. CGW Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"...Santa behind schedule... ...unexplained delay. Rudolph frantica nao BRID HOME PORTS Bring a Lemming home for the Holidays! AKTION you can find our great games at your favorite retailer call. 1(800) 438-7794 (CET PSYC) to order your copy today Lemmings products are sold at Radio Shack and other fine software stores. Circle Reader Service #115 Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 "


"SURROUNDED BY ANTI-AIRCRAFT. HUNTED BY SAMS. EVEN MACH 2 ISN'T FAST ENOUGH. IT'S A STORY CAPTAIN DEAN PENNINGTON DIDN'T THINK HE'D LIVE TO TELL. WOULD YOU? FALCON A TRUE STORY capabilities of the F-16 Fighting life. Like real pilots, you'll fly Kuwait, May 23, 1991. Captain Falcon. Nothing, aside from a true with a wingman, allowing you Dean \"D-Dawg.» Pennington dives F-16, captures the \"hair-on-fire\" feelwith Falcon SPECTRUM to engage in to take out an Iraqi 85mm gun ing of flying America's most deadly 3.0, up to sin aerial tactics players can emplacement below. \"Flares, break fighter like Falcon 3.0, Spectrum go mano a like bracket muno. May the left!\" his wingman screams. He HoloByte's computer simulation. best man win. HOLOBYTE maneuvers. wrenches the stick just as a SAM Instead of enemies who fly in explodes 10 feet behind his F-16. OE NODIVA circles, Falcon 3.0 adversaries fly Anti-aircraft batteries now open up according to true fighter doctrine all around, engulfing him. Too low to so they're no pushovers. And avoid the anti-aircraft, too slow to Kuwait looks like Kuwait since evade another SAM, he's faced with real geographic theaters are a hopeless choice and less than a faithfully mapped. quarter of a second to make it. NOT JUST A SIMULATION Lighting afterburners, he rockets to OF A WARPLANE safety before they can lock on again. Spectrum HoloByte A SIMULATION OF WAR THE STANDARD BY Falcon 3.0 lets you fight as part WHICH OTHER FIGHTERS A HIGHER LEVEL OF FLIGHT of an entire campaign. The misARE JUDGED Unlike some sims, which more sions you fly play a crucial role in Captain Pennington survived closely simulate the arcade expeyour side's success. But they're not on skill, nerve and the awesome rience than the flying one, Falcon hard-wired. Each result affects the 3.0 features a depth of play overall war effort-and determines that almost rivals real your next mission. Succeed For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time). "


"1998 Spectrum Holo Byte, Inc. All rights reserved. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners, and go on to hit the enemy in his own backyard. Fail and find the bad guys breathing down your neck. FALCON 3.0 Vs. MiG-29 Go head-to-head over a modem or media guide to air-to-air combat with up to six players over a netcalled Art of the Kill\" to help you work. It's possible because each fly like an ace. It all starts with Electronic Battlefield Series Falcon 3.0. title works with the others, from The simulation for people who MiG-29\" to the upcoming F/A-18 want to fly the not-so-friendly simulation. There's even a multiskies. OLNI MiG-29 VG FALCON Electronic Battlefield Series simulations link up. So you don't just choose your mission, you choose your aircraft. Care to fly for the other side, comrade? Spectrum HoloByte FOLLOW MiG-29 FALCON TIDUIVA ARTV.KILL. THE ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES: THE ULTIMATE CYBER-BATTLEFIELD Choose from multiple aircraft, multiple theaters, even which side of the conflict to fight on. ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES The fight of your life. Circle Reader Service #140 "


"REVIEW The Ultimate Gambit Can Chessmaster 4000 Turbo Past The Competition? * * * * * * * ALMO run by Terry «Pawncrusher Lee\" Coleman CHOSSEIMSIN LIELISMERT SZETI SETER t seems that every few months brings yet amount of respect showed for computer chess another computer chess program, each Al was made apparent by the use of Deep Lone sounding more like a movie sequel. Thought to analyze games from last year's The past year has brought us Sargon V, Baule Kasparov-Karpov title match. Deep Chess 4000, Grandmaster Chess, Kasparov's Thought's next version (DT 4000?!) will reGambit (which should get points for an origiportedly play at a higher rating, 3400, than nal name at least), and now Chessmaster 4000. any human has ever achieved. At various times, these different programs If some computer program is able to defeat have held bragging rights to being the strong any and every human, it will legitimize comest computer program, only to be surpassed puter Al for most observers. Skeptics point to by new technology-certainly nothing unthe immense amount of computing power heard of in the computer gaming industry. needed to be competitive, implying that the The competition remains fierce because Al has really not advanced, it just computes screens and windows more easily manipuchess is, first and foremost, one of the true faster. Part of the argument is a philosophical \"crossover» games. Broader in scope than reflex, as chess is considered as much an art lated than those found in Grandmaster Chess other mainstream games such as checkers, it form as a game. Chessmaster 4000 attempts to or Kasparov's Gambit. One of CM4000's offers a \"safe\" strategy game option for those show that the creative \"spark\" of computer Al greatest \"chrome\" features is its ability to save who find complex wargames anathema (peris available for home computers as well as move lists, commentary and even graph ers as well as move lists, commentary and even graphical ish the thought). The main reason for the mainframes. positions to the Windows clipboard where avalanche of chess programs, however, is that they can be inserted into a word processor or most enticing of Alchemist's Stones, Artificial \"It looks like you got a bunch of text file almost effortlessly. Intelligence.... deadwood on your hands.\" -CM4000 offers more than the customary Howard Staunton?? \"bells & whistles\" in the sound department. \"These mechanical types aren't as The computer games market is extremely The \"plain English» spoken advice is clearer smart as they think. We won 5 out graphics-driven, and CM4000 paints a pretty than in CM3000, and with a MIDI seof 10.\" — David Levy palette indeed. Super VGA is supported, and quencer, background music is available. For It has long been a dream-or a nighteve even those who choose to go for \"old\" 16those who desire a real live opponent, color VGA have a variety of chess sets from mare-that eventually a computer would be a CM4000 supports both modem and network able to beat a human world champion chess which to choose, from the classic Staunton to play, although personally I feel that hooking player. Chess, like any good strategy game, Napoleonic, with even a Battle Chess-like set up two computers to play a face-to-face chess can be approached from a mathematical thrown in. In 256-color Windows mode, texgame between two people in the same room tured boards of \"wood\" and «marble\" are standpoint. Theoretically, the computer is a bit strange, even as we gamers go. added in both 2D and should be able to analyze the millions of 3D mode. While all of The Chessmaster 4000 Turbo potential positions faster and more accurately these features are availthan a human. In practice, strong players have TITLE: able in other computer The Chessmaster 4000 Turbo been able to exploit positional weaknesses in PRICE: $59.95 computer Al, where number-crunching is less chess games, none are SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz or better, 4MB RAM valuable. To compensate, the computer can any easier to use than SVGA/VGA graphics, 11 MB hard rely on the hundreds of years of chess analysis CM4000. Pull-down drive space, Windows 3.1 RECOMMENDED: 386 or 486DX 40MHz, 8MB RAM, stored in its memory. On mainframes, the menus have become Windows video accelerator (for 256-color mode) best computers have been able to bcat very fairly standard in chess PLAYERS: 0-2 (modem and network play good players, even Grandmasters. The foregames for the comsupported) PROTECTION: puter, but CM4000 most of these programs, Deep Thought, rePUBLISHER: cently lost to World Champ Garry Kasparov, once again benefits (415) 883-3000 but even Kasparov admitted that his silicon from the Windows inopponent played a pretty good game. The terface, with its various IBM None Software Toolworks Novato, CA TOTO Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"100 TONS AVERKILE 05 COL COMPAW Introducing a new breed of software. A new extreme. A quantum leap in combat simulators. It doesn't push the envelope. It shreds it. Mechwarrior II: The Clans creates a new reality. A world of sights, sounds and action that can bring you to the brink of sensory overload. Feel what it's like to control 100 tons of pure hostility, with enough firepower to vaporize a squadron of F-15s. A Atop a 31st-century BattleMech four stories high, you're thrust into the most eye-popping missions imaginable. Each mission a frenzied fight for victory, honor and the glory of The Clan. A Mechwarrior II is a guaranteed adrenaline rush. Go one-on-one in real-time via modem. Pick from 16 phenomenal 'Mechs and 40 MECHWARRIOR futuristic weapon systems. Use multiple Third lans POVS. Select from hundreds of missions in every conceivable environment. Choose 00= instant action or a complete career. A Mechwarrior II: The Clans, so POL heavy it crushes the competition. weiten ACTIVISION Mechwarrior II: The Clans is available for IBM and compatible computers. SNES version also available. To order see your local retailer or call (800) 477-3650. BattleTech, BattleMech, 'Mech and Mechwarrior are Registered trademarks of Fasa Corporation Circle Reader Service #34 "


"the computer can search for better moves easier and more quickly. Ironically, the more defensive computer opponents have a better chance now, simply because they can see through\" speculative atracks by their more maniacal brethren. In playing CM3000 vs. CM4000, the Al now has a much better control in more positional games, and CM4000 soundly defeated the CM3000, 5-0 (with one draw) in a 6-game match of identical opponents. The only program of comznost Tiny (6511ASICK china LLEIDEN TOOK ECET tunnaius MANIA Srilancton turneen Thess W ELRY KILL WIDGES UHR Many players shy away from games in Winbeating up patsies), it makes more sense and dows format, as they often run slower, with is more accurate in the long run than the an interface that feels like an add-on appendCM4000 system. age. CM4000 turns out to be a pleasant surWhere CM4000 does have an edge over prise, simple to use even for the Gambit is in the analysis department. Even Windows-phobe. Nine windows surround on lower levels, when you ask CM4000 for the chessboard and provide such information advice, the move given doesn't lose a piece as which pieces have been captured, a list of immediately regardless of what it may result moves and a chess clock. The board can be in the long-term. In Gambit, it is amusing to sized to accommodate the various windows, ndows, be taken to task for an obvious good move, he and the CM4000 program provides a menu where our buddy Garry pops right back to say whereby eight different layouts may be se«I take that back,\" or \"OH! I see your point.\" lected. The option to design a custom layout out CM4000 rarely embarrasses itself, and its CMAO is included and can be saved for future use \"natural\" advice in plain English is a godsend (although some layouts are only available in for those who barely know a pawn from a 256-color format). Should you be so inclined, pawnshop. With a little time, CM4000 can you may even look into the «mind» of the analyze any saved game and will automatcomputer and watch the moves it is considically annotate the moves of any game upon cring, although the move lists go by pretty fast indeed. request. Add to this the comprehensive opening library and editor, and you have a solid After playing with the various windows, sets chess program, easy to use and flexible and boards, should you decide to jump right P right and enough that the \"chess sequels\" can be forgotin, a \"quick level set\" menu provides a ready ten for a while. opponent who can play from abysmal to sublime level. These \"novice\" to \"expert\" oppoGladly, Software Toolworks didn't stop nents lack the colorful names of the here, as those who owned CM3000 might have been rempted to pass CM4000 by, deSACSIMIN spite the improvements. What CM4000 offers that no other chess program can match is a variety of chess \"personalities\" representing SAAAAA great chess masters throughout history. In CM3000, there were a few personalities included, but most of them were silly, like \"pawngrabber\" and \"kamikaze,\" fun to play, but obviously hurting the suspension of disbelief. Even the \"Lasker-style\" and other greats of the past didn't really perform as they would have historically, either stylistically or Selections t the in strength of play. Mostly, this was because opponents in Kasparov's Gambit (\"Einstein\"), adjusting the various \"styles\" consisted but they are just as competent. In comparing mainly of deciding whether a computer opthe two games, it seems that, especially on the ponent would be defensive or attack-orilower levels, CM4000 opponents have a ented, and how much they valued material greater variety of playing styles. During play, versus position. The more aggressive styles the program can be asked for hints and will nearly always won, as the computer AI played gladly allow you to take back moves or switch a much better tactical than strategic game. sides. With CM4000, the improved AI has alFor the more serious chess student, there is lowed a broadening of the parameters in de a fine tutorial system that can even take the termining the styles of the various opponents. rank beginner to a reasonable degree of comWith the improved power of the 386 or 486, petency. For intermediate level players, prob(HESSMASTE lems are provided to «solve for mate,» in increasing difficulty. You can receive a rating of sorts by selecting appropriate moves from \"classic games\"-fans of Grandmaster Larry Evans' \"What's the Best Move\" syndicated column will be right at home here. For teachQ000000 ing purposes, this method is effective and more fun than it sounds. Still, the Kasparov's Gambit rating system uses actual games played to rate your progress, and although Luetudi sl.sista inflated (it is too easy to get a decent rating parable strength I could find was Kasparov s Gambit where the variety of CM4000 opponents gave the Gambit program fits, although the results were virtually even overall. Both programs were strong in \"blitz\" (very fast) mode, but Gambit had a slight edge, 3-2 (with 1 draw). CM4000 tended to play better in longer time controls, whereas Gambit often got into time trouble, CM4000 winning longer games 4-2, with the Kasparov program losing two games on time having elapsed. Most impressive was that both programs went for wins rather than draws. Perhaps they each knew who the opponent was? <eler \"I am the Greatest! I float like a butterfly, sting like a bee and l'IL check and mate you on King Rook 3! Muhammad (Fischer) Ali? If Sring, Dcion Sanders and Alexander Alekhine walked into a room at the same time, the combined mass of egos in such a confined space might spontaneously explode. In fact, our musician above would have made a fine Grandmaster, at least in style. Therefore, any thought of an all-time tournament to determine the \"best of all time\" is a fantasy in more ways than one...but CM4000 cerrainly makes a go of it (see following pages, \"What if they gave a tournament...?\"). How CM4000 defines \"personality» for its all-time star player molds is a fairly simple process. First, pick a player, such as Paul Morphy, the great American player of the 1800s. Unlike most of the wildly attacking players of the cra, Morphy had a solid understanding of positional play, while still preferILHA ALTORS MERTER LANVICE Cous EWTO, LUCE BERGUS Lahele 10 al 10 00/1000 AALTO 1: G 5: 47 BiroulctrStyle 2010 novca in 1 00:10:00 PACIE 5.00 k! Best:05 Se7c6d2b3eGo Depth:5 5 .53 Frevious: t c 2c611-6] Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"Find a well Cast a spell Make a mistake Go to #*%!! CIMON THE CORCERER on his quest. In a wacked-out world filled with beer-swilling trolls, a schizophrenic two-headed clerk, swamplings, werefrogs and more, he must acquire the knowledge of a sorcerer and defeat the evil Wherever you go, expect the unexpected. Because Simon is no ordinary sorcerer. He's an adolescent with an attitude, who wizard Sordid. accidentally stumbles upon a magical Discover a dimension on the very verge of collapse As fate would have it, only Simon can save it from a tyranny of wondrously animated world. Unravel the mysteries of a puzzling plot. And beware that your biggest mistake would be missing all evil. Armed with a sharp wit and a here to logie Openise the fun of lowwne Piel w Lote de Tell to dobar Cice la tongue to match, our reluctant ..Simon The Sorcerer! hero sets INFOCOM... forth An Activision Company Circle Reader Service #35 To order: see your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Simon The Sorcerer is available for IBM and compatible computers. "


"What If They Gave A Tournament And Everybody Came? A Match Up Of Chess Master 4000 ring to take the initiative. Morphy is a \"-25\", meaning that he is slightly more inclined to attack than defend, as a rating of \"zero\" is neutral. As a Grandmaster, Morphy has the maximum Strength rating of 100. Morphy is not rated for randomness of play, as his style already has a great deal of variety. Book Depth for Morphy is 15, on a scale of 0-100, as Paul preferred to use his own creativity, rather than analyzed openings, but was still aware of most of the main lines in his day. All-time Greats The Selective Search for most Grandmasters, including Morphy, is 6 on a scale of 1-8. We urrently, Garry Kasparov is not only Henry Bird: Wonderful eccentric who find under \"Contempt for Draw\" that Mor the champ, but the highest rated never gets enough credit for his original phy is not fond of tie games, but will accept player in history. Conventional wisgames. A good attacker, sometimes handia draw if more than a pawn behind late in a dom is that the most recent champion is the capped by his championing of bizarre varigreatest, through the process of evolution, ations. Sometimes wins through shock value Morphy is a great master, he also possesses the osmosis or whatever. Any sports fan knows alone. ability to think on his opponent's time and to better, of course. Statistical J.H. Blackburne: Cares \"transpose\" from one opening to another sports games will forever be hardly at all for \"book\" without having to re-analyze all the possible popular, as they allow us to pit openings or quiet games. move combinations. Babe Ruth against Sandy KouVery erratic, but one of the fax, or Joe Louis vs. MuhamNext, Morphy's positional style is laid bare most feared players for a sinmad Ali in their prime, with no through, appropriately enough, the \"Posigle game. Despite ferocious hassles about contracts and intional\" command button. Here, we see that attacking skill, not consisjuries. In a similar manner, Morphy is more concerned with positional tent enough to win it all. CM4000 gives players the than material gains, and also knows how to Ewfim Bogolyubov: Even chance to pit their favorite chess more of an attacker than exploit weakened or passed pawns. What repersonalities against each other ally sticks out is that on a scale of 1-200 for Anderssen, but sometimes to see who really» was the Andre Philidor Mobility, Morphy is the absolute maximum overextends in striving for greatest player of all time. Our wins which aren't there. of 200, requiring freedom of movement for format will include 32 past and present stars, Against well prepared players, he sometimes his pieces, especially when attacking. Subtle playing in four qualifying events, similar to loses his nerve. as these adiustments seem to be, they are the how the international chess federation selects Milhail Borvinnik: Classic all-around heart of CM4000's ultimate triumph as a challengers for the reigning champion. The game. Anyone, whether master or rank ama top eight qualifiers meet in head-to-head style, can press or be patient as required. Sort teur, who has played through the games of \"Candidates\" matches, with the final chalof a dark horse, but has a good chance if he Paul Morphy was entranced by the way in survives the early rounds. Huge knowledge of lenger to meet our current title holder, opening theory a plus, but prone to time which he always seemed to place pieces on the Kasparov. most correct squares. No one will make the Our challengers, in alphabetical order: trouble in complicated endgames. remark that a mere computer could be MorAlexander Alekhine: Many consider him Jose Capablanca: Called the most natural phy, but there is a real elegance to the moves player who ever lived. Once he refuted a the greatest of all time. Deep combinations, made by this personality,\" which is very gambit over the board that his opponent had unparalleled opening knowledge and prepasimilar to the fluidity and grace of the real waited 10 years to spring on him! Tends ration. Has an enormous ego, even for a chess Morphy's games. Similarly, the Alekhinetoward accurate play in opening, with midmaster and could be an upset victim. style opponent looks for complicated combidlegame to set up winning endings. Rarely Adolf Anderssen: Player of the \"Immortal\" nations, Nimzovich counter-punches, and gets in time trouble. & \"Evergreen\" games, a suFischer does everything well. Reuben Fine: Retired at perb attacker who also unhis peak during WWII to be For more fine tuning, different player styles derstands positional play. come a psychologist. Great rate pawns and pieces differently. For inTends to play gambits and understanding of openings, stance, Lasker usually exchanged queens early sharp, open games. Pawn as one would expect from and relied on knights in locked-up positions. weaknesses can be exthe editor of Modern Chess All in all, there are 17 different ways to define ploited, however. Openings. Looking forward a player style, enough to keep one busy for Ulf Andersson: A solid to mixing it up with other years and years. Players will \"own\" some comdefensive player and a regreats, and could sneak in if puter opponents, and dread others, according cent challenger for the one of the favorites falters. to their style. In fact, some computer styles world title. Ulf likes to Bobby Fischer: The peowill reject the \"best\" move and play in an build positional advantages ple's champion who never almost \"psychological fashion. Does this sigand win endgames. defended his title after winnify true artificial intelligence? Hardly, but it Doesn't lose much, but not ning in 1972. In his prime, sure is a lot of fun researching the question. many fireworks either. Garry Kasparov CGW Bobby was like a really good Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"IMAGINE A GAMING DEVICE SO INTUITIVE IT'S LIKE NOT HAVING ONE LLI AT ALL. CYBERMAN THE MOST ADVANCED WAY TO MASTER 3-D GAMES. Now moving in a game is as easy as thinking about it. Only CyberMan moves in three directions (x, y, and z) and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll), which cor relate directly to your moves inside a 3-D game; your intuitive movements translate literally to the screen. It's also the only controller with tactile feedback that makes you a physical part of the game. CyberMan is avail able now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928 LOOMTECH The Senseware Company BERM Trademarks belong to their registered owners. Circle Reader Service #87 "


"ning. boxer who still packed a knockwhen down, however, and could Vassily Smyslov: Another of those ageless out punch. No real weaknesses, steal a game or two. ones, still playing championship chess well and possibly the most complete Andre Philidor: From the 1700s, into middle age. Part of Vassily's success is chess player who ever lived. the most ancient of our champions, due to his ability to play any style of chess Anatoly Karpov: Won the tihe believed that pawns were the reasonably well. Smyslov never underestitle from Fischer by default in secret to everything. While Philimates his opponents, and is invariably well1975 and wants to prove he is dor had a point, he will be sorely prepared. no fluke. Ofren accused of playtested to prove it in this august Boris Spassky: Sad that Boris will primarily ing \"old man\" chess, his quiet company. Rather methodical, but be remembered as a loser to Bobby Fischer, moves hide his ability to capitalquite effective, especially with a because at his best, Spassky was a real marvel. ize on the smallest of mistakes, Wilhelm Steinitz passed pawn. Yes, he liked to attack, but so inventive! Boris as shown by his very high search Harry Nelson Pillsbury: A late is mentally rough, bur his openings lack polrating. bloomer who didn't start playing chess until ish, and could be his downfall. Isaac Kashdan: A fine American player his twenties, but made up for it from the pre-WWII years. Isaac has a fond quickly. Although primarily an atness for bishops, which he likes to employ on tacker, Pillsbury is very pragmatic long diagonals, especially in hunts for the and can defend when pressed. Enjoys enemy King. Flashy, but no chance of winsharp lines of play, and is vulnerable in more quiet positions. One of the in more au Paul Keres: Over three decades, consis great forgotten players. tently one of the top players. Slightly favors Sammy Reshevsky: While Sammy attacking chess, even when playing Black, but was still winning into his sixties, he settles for too many draws in unclear posiis best remembered as the top US tions to win here. player of the '40s and '50s. Emanuel Lasker: World Champion for 27 Reshevsky plays a defensive game years, he defended the title when he felt like that is awkward to watch as well as it. Still, Lasker didn't avoid tournaments, play, but he gets results, and at one Capablanca meets Lasker in one of their many finishing third in a strong event when in his time or another, has beaten nearly tournament engagements. sixties! Poor opening knowledge might be a every player in the field. handicap, but Lasker's demanding, compliRicard Reti: Another of the Hypermodern Rudolf Spielmann: Fine talent, but never cated style always takes more out of his opposchool, but with a more balanced style. Tends really had a shot at the title. The proven nents than himself. The longer the event, the to play to the level of his competition, and master of the sacrifice, but in this tournabetter his chances. will definitely make some noise here. ment, he could end up as the sacrificial lamb. Frank Marshall: The epitome of Akiba Rubinstein: When he is Wilhelm Steinitz: Took Morphy's theories attack, he strikes fear into the hearts on, Akiba crafts games of beauty. If and went a step further positionally. He liked of many great masters. If Frank's his opposition cramps his style winning marerial and hanging on, grinding thrusts are parried, he seldom has though Rubinstein ofren loses his out the win. Plays a lot like Karpov, with a enough left for the endgame. Sells the best in the dash of Fischer. Very good chances to win it all. lots of tickets, though.... endgame, regardless. Carl Schlecter: The \"drawing Mikhail Tal: Synonymous with whirlwind, Paul Morphy: Fluid, graceful, at times effortless, his games are master.\" A march berween Schlecas sometimes the game is over before his as sometimes the game is over befor among the most beautiful to play ter and Petrosian is for people with opponent can catch his breath. Penchant for oppon over again and again. Always untoo much time on their hands. Acseir hands Ac sacrifices hides overall talent, especially in sacrifices derestimated is his ability to shut tually, Carl is a good positional endgame. Can beat anyone in the event, but down opponents, depriving them Alexander Alekhine player, especially with quccn-side probably will not win consistently enough. of what they do best. Eager to try openings. He just lacks guts most Siegbert Tarrasch: Oddly enough, plays his hand against more modern masters, espe of the time. more like Morphy than anyone believed. A cially the \"Hypermodern\" school. One of the Yasser Seirawan: Former US champ and chamn and real fighter, but real fighter, but not as balanced as Morphy or clear favorites, despite his being from the one of the best writers on chess. The rumor the other real contenders. 1800s. that Yasser got into this event bcMikhail Tchigorin: The first of Aron Nimzovich: Made the all-time \"best cause of his work on CM4000 is the great Russian players, he had completely unsubstantiated. Seiname\" chess team along with Bogolyubov, no idea what he was starting. Unrawan had a celebrated victory derrated, especially in positional Superb defender, shuns the center of the over Karpov when he was still play, he has an outside chance to board like the plague. Despite great ability, world champion, and is one of the advance. sometimes suffers from \"nerves of Jell-o.\" only US players other than FisTigran Petrosian: The most boring Chamcher to qualify for the Candidates The Preliminary Rounds pion of all time, but he rarely loses in a year, matches. Doubtful he'll do that As expected, Fischer won his much less in a single tournament. Style conwell against this level of competiqualifying round, but lost to sists of eliminating all counterplay, both for tion, however, Seirawan's games Pillsbury, and surprisingly to Ricard Reti his opponent and for himself. Good fighter are always interesting. Reti. Reti employed his famous Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"PILOT THE NAYY'S FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE. FLEET DEFENDER The F-14 Tomcat Simulation! HOC TIT Toer Code Thirai Tot Eng ENEN Actual screens may vary. LEMS It's all up to you! The skies are swarming with bandits. Only you stand between the threat and your carrier battle group. Lock on your radar and launch the Navy's advanced weapons to destroy the most sophisticated enemy targets ever developed for a MicroProse simulation. Roll, turn, climb, and dive to out-maneuver enemy aircraft using an artificial intelligence developed right out of Soviet and Third World military doctrine. A computer-controlled wingman responds to your every command. And, you'll interact with strike packages that include F/A-18 Hornets, A-6 Intruders, A-7 Corsairs and E-2 Hawkeye AWACS. Featuring the latest in 3-D terrain technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geological surveys, you'll pilot your F-14 through actual locations. Fleet Defender from MicroProse. We brought you the F-15 Strike Eagle, now try the F-14 Tomcat featuring the most authentically modeled F-14 systems available anywhere outside of the Navy. MICROPROSE I to get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST i or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software. Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive. Dept. 10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name: Address: City State: Zip: ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #94 -------------AAW! "


"the draw. Tal played brilliantly in some games and made unsound sacrifices in many others. Wins Losses Draws Steinitz 11 2 1 Capablanca Fine Philidor 6 7 1 Petrosian 356 Tal Kashdan 91 Spielmann 2 120 Morphy had a tough time, and at one point was 1-2-2, but rallied with eight wins and a draw in his last nine games. Going into the final round, Alekhine and Reshevsky each had nine wins to Morphy's eight. Sammy drew with Keres, setting the stage for a Morphy-Alekhine showdown. The game started very quietly, the Alekhine launched a tremendous attack on Morphy's castled king. Morphy knew his position was sound, and played quickly, but kept complicating the position. NO knight opening throughout, even after Anderssen crushed his pet variation in round 9. Nimzovich whined about everything—the lighting, food but mostly about Fischer, who behaved impeccably and played Nimzo's own defense against him in the final round to prove a point. Smyslov probably could have qualified for the next round, but pressed too hard and lost two easily won games. Marshall and Rubinstein entertained everybody, while losing the majority of their games. Wins Losses Draws Fischer 10 2 2 Pillsbury 932 7 61 Smyslov 770 Anderssen Nimzovich 581 Marshall 91 Rubinstein 101 Steinitz won more easily than Fischer, as both Tal and Fine missed winning chances against him. Steinitz lost to Capablanca, but earned his revenge in a long game where he won a pawn on the 27th move and compelled Capa's resignation on the 110th! Petrosian was always available when one of the leaders needed a restful draw, although Capablanca should be complimented in winning both of his games from the Armenian. Fine and Steinitz amused themselves by capturing Kashdan's bishops and watching him pine aimlessly through the rest of the games. Philidor showed that he could catch on quickly, winning a \"poisoned pawn» Sicilian game from Fine, and pounding on the lower half of Reti Alekhine had a chance for a draw, and rejected it. Eventually, Morphy managed to trade off most of the pieces, and the players went into the endgame, where Alekhine lost on time. The odd man out was Reshevsky, who whes wished he'd tried Paul Keres harder for a win. This was by far the most competitive of the early rounds, with 6 different players leading at one time or another. When Morphy played Bogolyubov in the penultimate round, Ewfim paced, swore and played nervously in losing, while Morphy looked as though someone should take his pulse. When asked by a spectator why hc showed no more emotion, Morphy replied, \"I should have a fit of apoplexy if I acted as that person did.\" Wins Losses Draws Morphy Alekhine Alekhine 9 3 2 Reshevsky Tarrasch Tarrasch 8 5 1 Keres Keres 4 6 4 Spassky Spassky 4 8 2 Seirawan 4 9 1 Bogolyubov 1 11 0 The last of the prelim rounds was even AWN Mikhail Botvinnik Harry, We Hardly Knew Ye Player Stats For Chess Master 4000 One of the best things about playing CM4000 is the ability to make new opponents, each with a distinctive style of play. The stats below are for player-styles created for the \"all-time tournament.\" All of these player styles have a rating of 100 for strength, as they are all famous (or infamous) grandmasters. All have a random rating = zero, except for Bird, who has a 25 random rating, as he was a bit eccentric. A/D BK SCH DR M/P CEN MB K PP WK Q RKB KTP Pillsbury 55 35 6 1 25 110 130 90 105 1909 5 3.2 3.1 1 Anderssen 60 176 .25 60 80 150 85 120 100 9. 5 5 3.5 3 1 Philidor 58 8 4 .50 -35 120 50 120 175 200 8. 8 5 .1 3.2 3.2 1.3 Schlecter 35 30 6 3 25 100 95 140 150 130 5 8. 5 3 3 1 Boyolyubov -85 25 5 .40 65 75 115 55 125 140 9 5 3.4 3.2 1.2 Blackburne -905 6 3 80 75 165 45 125 759.6 5.1 3.5 3 1 Tchigorin -60 18 6 .60 50 125 155 60 105 45 9 5 .2 3.3 3 1 Keres -18 80 6 .50 -20 150 90 95 110 110 9 5 3 3 1 45 85 7 1 20 105 135 105 125 130 9. 2 5 .1 3 3 1 Steinitz 35 50 6 1 -45 16065 110 150 150 8. 7 5 3 3.3 1.2 Bird -40 14 5 80 55 105 110 75 135 90 9. 2 5 3.3 3 1 A/D = Attack/Defense Style. BK Book Opening Knowledge, SCH Search Rating. DR = Contempt For Draw. M/P = Material/Positional Style. CEN Control Of Center, MB = Mobility K = King Safety, PP Passed Pawns, WK = Exploit Weak Pawns. Q = Queen Value. RK = Rook Value, B = Bishop Value, K = Knight Value, P = Pawn Value VOOOOO Soooo wwww ==== Fine Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"Build An Empire To Stand The Test Of Time for ...With Sid Meier's CIVILIZATION *** Now available for Windows 2099 AD Marina Actual screens may vary. rrrrr Trrrrrrrrrrrrrr! rrrrr 1991  Best Consumer Entertainment Program  Best Strategy program  Critic's Choice Software Publishers Association Game of the Year 1992 Game of the Year Computer Gaming World PC Special Achievement Award Game Players PC Entertainment Game of the Year Byte Best Simulation PCM Strategy Game of the Year PC Games Plus Tilt Game of the Year Byte Rout Ramses... Outwit Alexander... Knockout Napoleon... History is littered with the bones of great men who thought their achievements would live forever. Now you can succeed where they failed as MicroProse brings you Sid Meier's Civilization. Guide a culture from its earliest stages, through agricultural and industrial revolutions, all the way to your own Space Age. Survive and dominate by outmaneuvering mankind's most legendary leaders. Carve your name indelibly in the pages of history. With Sid Meier's Civilization, you really can build a brave new world. MACROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc., 180 Lakefront Drive, Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245. For Macintosh, IBM-PC compatibles, and Commodore Amiga personal computers. To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY, 8:30 am to 5:00 pm EST. Circle Reader Service #93 "


"Lasker emerging the victor by the slimmest of margins. Semifinals stranger. The games were complex enough that while Schlecter and Andersson got their customary draws, they were unable to win when they needed to. Bird, Blackburne and Tchigorin attacked a lot, and did well, with Bird bringing down the house by defeating Karpov. Lasker had a field day, blowing cigar smoke in everyone's face, and dragging obviously drawn games out for hours. By the end of the tournament, Karpov looked like death, and barely held off a charging Botvinnik in the final round. Lasker was not only fresh, he was seen after the event, playing pickup games with Blackburne, waging his best cigars against J.H.'s bottle of 20-year Scotch. Wins Losses Draws Lasker 92 Karpo 4 2 Botvinnik Tchigorin Bird Blackburne Blackburne 5 8 1 Schlecter Anderssen 18 5 WOOD Quarterfinals     Fischer d. Karpov Steinitz d. Alekhine Morphy d. Capablanca Lasker d. Pillsbury Fischer-Karpov Since Fischer refused to defend his title in 1975 against Karpov, this contest took on the atmosphere of a heavyweight title bout, including the inevitable media circus. Bobby started nervously, but Karpov allowed himself to get in time trouble and Fischer won with Black in the first game. Following with white, Fischer gained confidence, easily conquering Karpov's defenses in the second game. Would Karpov, looking pale and in obvious distress, lose in straight games? Anatoly played a long and complicated game without the slightest hint of an error to record his first victory over Fischer. Without looking the least bit concerned, Fischer crushed Karpov's defenses and his spirit with one of Anatoly's favorite openings, the English, in the final game. The Russian Chess federation would only comment that Fischer was a very fine player, and that Karpov was off his game. Perhaps Fischer was the cause? Steinitz-Alekhine Alekhine looked as if he could win with case after the first game, combinations springing effortlessly from his superior position. Steinitz locked everything up in the next game and caused Alekhine to attack prematurely, evening the score. Neither man had any great love for the other, and the fireworks Fischer had no trouble with Steinitz, dismissing him 3-1 as he had Karpov in the prior round. Fischer fought for every pawn much as Steinitz did. Fischer secretly admired Steinitz and was on his best behavior. Given players of similar styles, Bobby's superior opening knowledge made the difference. Morphy did not quite know how to take Paul Morphy Lasker, and lost the opening game. Emanuel attempted to build on his advantage, but off the board, particularly in the press conferMorphy freed his pieces for attack, defusing ences, came close to the chessboard confronall of Lasker's threats. Morphy eventually tations. Alekhine tried the Austrian attack bested Lasker 3-1, as Paul was equal in the test against Steinitz in the third game. Living in of wills. Vienna at the time, Wilhelm was hardly amused, and blunted the attack vigorously, taking the lead in the match. Egotist to the Candidates Finals cnd, Alekhine continued to employ sharp variations in an attempt to even the series. Morphy has been called the \"Fischer of the Steinitz grabbed a pawn here and there, de1800s,\" and he managed to take the first fended accurately, and the rest was history. game by ourmaneuvering Bobby and isolating weak pawns. Fischer caught Morphy in Morphy-Capablanca the next game with a piece sacrifice, and Morphy and Capablanca played beautiful evened the match. Neither player got into positional chess from the very first game. The time trouble, probing relentlessly for weaktwo competitors showed such a degree of nesses. Fischer was caught mumbling about respect for each other that the fans had to the accuracy of Morphy's play. Bobby was suffer through 16 draws. Capablanca scored ultimately able to constrict Morphy's pieces, the first victory over a chagrined Morphy, and forced Paul into speculative attacks to who was playing an opponent as logical as restore his mobility. Fischer won by the final himself. When Capablanca won a complicated endgame in game 20 to lead 2-1, many score of 3-2, every bit as close as it sounds. thought the wily Cuban star was sure to advance. Morphy regained the initiative with For the Title ell-placed rook sacrifice and appeared as if (first to 6 wins, takes the match) he could play for 20 more games if needed. Capablanca was losing his edge, allowing a Kasparov-Fischer was a wild match, with draw in the next game, where many observers Kasparov doing most of the attacking early thought Capa had better chances. Before the on. Fischer lost the first game, but then definal game, Morphy quictly predicted that fended well in the next two games and took \"He shall not win another game of me,\" as a 2-1 lead. The two continued to trade wins, Paul finally broke through with the Budapest until Bobby started playing quieter lines and concentrated on Garry's exposed king. Lasker-Pillsbury Kasparov tried to complicate matters to no Pillsbury and Lasker drew the first game, avail, as Fischer took the crown for all time, with neither of the contestants trying any new 6 wins to 4. Bobby afterwards avoided reportideas. Game 2 was a thunderbolt, as Pillsburyers, while Garry was unsure whether he'd sprung a new variation for the early lead. retire, or perhaps retrain for a rematch. Lasker began to steer the games into ever What does all of this prove? No more than more labyrinthine avenues and finally caused a baseball stat game saying the '27 Yankees enough problems for Pillsbury to even the were the greatest team of all time. Nonethescore at two games all. Lasker was in his less, it does give some basis for comparison, element, saying that the final game \"...has and after all, controversy is what sport is all nothing to do with chess, but with the man.\" While Pillsbury may have had a won position, about. I wonder how Kasparov's style would Harry was unable to find it over the board, fare against Lasker... CGW Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"INTERACTIVE HORROR MOVIE E DC HERE NO ONE RESTS IN PEACE. Over 90 minutes of captivating video and an original gothic soundtrack draws you into the center of the action. Dracula is back, driven by revenge and a hunger for human blood. Follow a trail of vampire brides, corpses, and wolf tracks through the streets of London. You direct the drama, suspense, and passion as you are drawn into a world of evil where every decision and action you make is inextricably tied to the fates of those you love. Over 150 riveting scenes propel you down multiple pathways toward the final confrontation. From the creators of Sherlock Holmes Consulting DetectiveTM 1932. Viacon New Media. All Rights Reserved. Consulting Detective is a licensed trademark of Seth Productions, LTD. Dracula Uniested is a trademarks Vacon New Media Unique interactive experience that you've never encountered before. UN LEA SH EDT VIACOM NEW MEDIA Contact your local retailer or call 1-800-877-4266. Circle Reader Service #156 AVAILABLE ON CD-ROM FOR PC AND MAC "


"REVIEW The Me Mercenany's Reprise A Review Of Mindcraft's Strike Squad by Martin E. Cirulis LOREM T hen is a sequel not a sequel. This \"We rejoin our story...» In a rare divergence from its predecessor, question plagued me as I played Strike Squad does not assign missions in a Strike Squad takes place in a future where my way through Mindcraft's linear string: you are instead presented with a the freedom-loving beings of the galaxy are newest entry into the science fiction war/adseries of conversational encounters akin to under assault by some greenish, insectile venture game genre, Strike Squad. You see, Ultima-style adventure games: Being A menbrutes known as the K'kistik (yes, another the problem is that although Strike Squad Mindcraft product where the alien walks, smells and tastes just like Part Two of bad guys are a bright shade of green, a game called Tegel's Mercenaries (also published by Mindcraft earlier this year), the perhaps an ugly childhood incident involving chlorophyll and a Mindcraft documentation, box and magazine ads make art manager would explain this trend) no mention of this connection whatsoever, and it seems that mercenary soldiers leaving me somewhat confused as to the criare the only kind of competent militiquing etiquette in this situation. Since the tary force around. publisher must have some rationale in downThe story follows directly on the playing the relationship between the two heels of developments and revelations games, would it be gauche to dwell on it? Like pointing out at a dinner party that your host's m eget s. Although your success in the earlier game is assumed, yours is a great-grandparents were first cousins? Pyrrhic victory and mankind is all tions Artifact Bhidden in City Cthat can only but conquered. As in Tegel's, you be found by talking to Being D in Prison take the role of a Merc commander Facility E. Each location is inhabited by vari(I am still not quite sure if you are ous well-armed nasties that must be dealt meant to be the same one, but let's with violently by your squad of four Mercs, DEN assume you are) who's normal Live who are picked for each \"mission» from a and Let Die, cash-driven philosophy pool of 20 or so hardy beings. A mission is a has been radically changed by the vague term in Strike Squad because it's up to destruction of your homeworld by you how long one lasts and how many locales the bug-eyed K'kistik. can be covered. In fact, long multi-purpose Not the kind of galactic commissions are encouraged, as these troops really mando to take this insult lying are mercenaries and demand to get paid every down, you decide that humanity's time they time they return to the mothership, the step Well, since I am rarely mistaken for Miss salvation will not lie in epic which marks the end of a mission Manners, and since I subscribe to the «If it fleet battles, but instead and allows you to pick another Strike Squad walks like a duck...» logic, I will go out on with the actions of a small what appears to be a sturdy limb and proclaim band of trained professionStrike Squad that Strike Squad is indeed the sequel to als. The point is to hunt SITAIKes SYSTEM: Tegel's Mercenaries, completely and directly. I down and exterminate the SQUALE! REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz or better, 2MB RAM, would even hazard to state that Strike Squad K'kistik High Comsupports Ad Lib, Disney Sound Source and Sound Blaster sound cards is not really a descendant of the former promander, thus severing the PROTECTION: Documentation look up gram but more like a sibling, most of the head of this galaxy-devourDESIGNERS: Robert Bonifacio, Dan Burke, Roger Somerville differences being cosmetic rather than develing snake and giving the PUBLISHER: Mindcraft Torrance, CA opmental. If you were a fan of Tegel's, then good guys a fighting chance (310) 320-5214 consider your day made. in the ensuing confusion. L RAME EKARRI DU TARIT Hat EGT 125 STAGES BRID TARAQTIATY ES FLYERLEDED CIALE THANS SHARP HOOTING 10T DOHT EPON STERTH PERSONAL HISTORY BRARK HILLS TIDN THE BROK CLOUD SYSTEM AND IS CURBITEL SIA 1MEER OF THE FEEFLLION -EAK SEAVEN A TRGHE TITLE: PRICE: $59.95 IBM 17MB hard drive space, MOUSE Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"BERICE CYBER DREAMS CYBERRACE A REVOLUTIONARY 30 COMBAT AND RACING SIMULATION DESIGNED BY WORLD-FAMOUS FUTURIST UIDEN URLAMD SYD MEAD, WHOSE DESIGN CREDITS INCLUDE BLADE RUNNER, TAON, 2010, ANO STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE. FUERITIINIT SUITE Available for the IBM PC and Compatibles (August 1993). Commodore Amiga (March 1994) and Apple Macintosh (March 1994). Circle Reader Service #51 For further information please contact: North America (818) 348-3711  Europe (071) 328-3267 (U.K.) Cybe dreams and Cyberface are trademarks of Cyberdreams, ine. 31993 Cyberdreams, Inc. ilustration 1992 Obtagon, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED e Amiga (March 133.3267 (UK) Tun. S RESEDILI Europe (OZIJ B22and Apple Macintosh "


"THEORSALESTATE TES HASTALI SW Mercs who were wounded by support is crucial, as it can mimic mouse enemy fire instead of being control more easily than a hapless typist trykilled outright. ing to fake eight-directional movement with An important thing to four arrow keys. point out to the potential Also, if you are living in the realm of the player is, regardless of packag. 386 be prepared for the game to slow down ing and screen shots, Strike in two-player mode. Running things in turnSquadis far more of an advenby-turn mode would alleviate this, but then ULUTTAFUTATI GUARDS ture game than a traditional, the game takes on a plodding boardgame squad-level wargame. aspect. A fully viable two player mode, by Though tactical skill and either modem or network, could have helped some arcade reflexes certainly to raise this product above the throng, but the are important here, this is a poor implementation makes it feel much TIISTAURANTA 7 story with a definite beginmore like a last minute gimmick. I am fairly group of Mercs that may better serve your ning and end to it and, once finished, the confident that you will not find too many next plan. Without a strict assignment of game play is pretty much spent. Replays of Strike Squad tournament announcements duties, the \"work for pay\" premise becomes a missions result in virtually identical situations crowding out your favorite BBS. little weak and you end up earning money by and results. While shooting up green aliens is finding objects and people, or by just having always fun after struggling home on the freeThe Long And The Short Of It conversations. As in Tegel's, the only way you way, I cannot see too many people playing While Strike Squad does offer a few hours can lose is to run out of money, Mercs, or this game through more than twice. of enjoyment for the non-hard-core advenboth. turer or wargamer, and while the graphics are Double Trouble \"Okay Beings, here's the plan...\" slick and there are enough humorous touches The most potentially interesting difference mixed with the guts and glory to keep a smile Strike Squad is played by moving characters tels in game play berween Strike Squadand Tegel's on your face, Strike Squadas a whole is a game around skewed 3D terrain that is similar in is the fact you can play this new product with that demands a lot from you and your malook and detail to that found in Ulchine but fails to return your intima VI. While you can have as many L:10.HDOLA:40.H:100 DALO.HOO vestment. While the game takes a as four Mercs in a party, only one can half-hour to install on a 386/33 be directly manipulated at a time and many of the locales require a while the others remain inert (except great deal of running around and to fire upon any viable targer thar wansuffering, the game itself is thin on ders into their line of sight) or follow believability and detail. For this the manipulated character like a line kind of effort it would have been at of ducks. Control is by mouse pointlease considerate of the designer to and-click or by keyboard; curiously, throw in a manual reload comthere is no joystick support. The charmand so you wouldn't have to wait acter under your direct control can be for a Merc to empty his revolver ordered to fire at any visible target, set before he remembers to reload his demolition charges, manipulate degrenade launcher. All of the vices, search bodies, give or take items, strengths of its predecessor are inand converse with surviving bystandtwo players, either cooperatively or in headcluded in this un-sequel, but unfortunately ers. Game play is in real-time as a default to-head competition, with one player runmost of the weaknesses also remain. It would mode, but players can switch to a turn-based ning the Mercs while the other manages the have been nice to see a little more developsystem if they find things too hectic. opposition. Unfortunately this option seems ment put into the Tegel engine, rather than All of the weapons and devices present in to be another great idea that suffers from less having it shoved out the door in time to make Tegel's are in Strike Squadin abundance, with than perfect execution. that all important last quarter sales graph.cow a few interesting additions like cloaking belts Players work from a screen split vertically and small vehicles. The variety here is nice but with most of the single screen rendered nearly irrelevant by the unbalanced information being duplicated power of some of the weapons and armor. in a slightly smaller format. There is very little point in having your Mercs The actual play scale remains pack cool pistols when they barely scratch the same, you just have half enemy armor, and the team doesn't suffer any the viewing area around your consequences for smearing the odd civilian playing character. This can across the pavement with a missile blast. The get to be a problem with some flame-based weapons in the game almost of the longer range weapons. completely invalidate the use of medical skills And while one player can still and med-kits because you are either missed or use the mouse, the other is you are dead, there is no other result. In hours forced to the keyboard interof game play I have suffered maybe 20 casuface, and this is not a good alties and have only been able to heal two thing. Here is where joystick GABONEL SRUAWK! EAF 5518 VIIV TRINDOR GO OPPO Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"All Pros. FOOTBALL LEAGUE 230/40 50 40 MAIN MENU Pagla Cura Pey E. yolls : Carstructies Pructa Drs Die to Dog AL FOap, Silt You're down by six and Junior Seau just PLAYERSE sacked you again. Now it's 4th and 18 with only a minute to go. Should you go long to Sterling Sharpe, or dump it in the flat to Thurman Thomas? In Unnecessary Roughness,\" it's your call. But don't worry. You've got all the NFLPA i pros you'd ever need to build your team. Like \"Neon\" Deion Sanders. John Taylor. Or Michael Irvin. And if they're not enough weapons for you, you'll also have a playbook that's thicker than a lineman's head. Unnecessary Roughness also features rotoscoped player graphics. Plus a rotating 3-D game orientation with infinite camera views , the UNNECESSARY that actually put you down on the field. Meanwhile, up in the booth Al Michaels handles the play-by-play, making this football game as real as you can get. Without getting hit, at least. Available for the yours, rush to your IBM PC and 100% compatibles. To score favorite retailer or call 1-800-245-7744. AL MICHAELS CALLS THE SHOTS SROUGHNESS WITH THE res to the National beational Business Machines Aluther d NPA ONIPA 1993 recessary Rocheste o An t ered t o to and 1953 Rock e rties of their respective t y R ssouties S a and registered trad to and is se by the National P Brades Factu and Hitth ACCOL DE GAMES WITH PERSONALITY. Circle Reader Service #32 "


"ON-LINE GAMING LIVE LIVE OOOOOOO MOTHERLOAD INFO SERVICE oooo GLOBAL BEAUTIFUL + BAUDS IBBS) T he Datacomm Council is pleased to bring you the next installment in our 1 Introduction to Telegaming series. In our last meeting (November '93) we talked about the minimum requirements for entry to the world of telecommunication: a modem, a communications program and an available phone line. If you've gathered these goodies and installed them properly, it's time to dip your toes into cyberspace. Where does the novice cyber-explorer go for his/her first taste of on-line life? A short trip to a local bulletin board system (BBS) is an excellent starting place. While it may not have all of the glitz and glamour of a commercial BBS, the local BBS is generally inexpensive, friendly, and can be a great deal of fun. But first, a word of warning: telccomputing has many dangers. While some of these are obvious (the expense) and others are subtle (viruses) we feel that addiction heads the list. BBSs can exert an inexorable force on your soul. It starts slowly, but rapidly builds to an overwhelming need to take another telecomm hit. Hours drift by as you float through the electronic landscape. You forget to call friends, ignore your spouse, even miss the latest episode of Next Generation! Over a period of months you lose all contact with reality. The network becomes the new reality. We know. We've been there ourselves. You can avoid this addiction by strictly regulating the amount of time that you spend jacked-in. Set a limit and stick with it. Put your modem on a timer. Enough said, you've been warned. Jackin (v): to connect to a network or BBS with your modem. Synonyms: log on, sign-on. The New Kid IN CyberTOWN What exactly is a Bulletin Board System? It's merely a computer or group of computers set up with a software program that allows other computers to call up and say «hello.\" The most basic of bulletin board programs allows people to leave messages for other users, both privately through E-mail or publicly in a forum that all users can access. This last by Jerry Golick form of communication is loosely analogous to posting notes on a bulletin board, and hence the name; but bulletin board is really too limited a metaphor for the type of comThe world of telecomputing is big and full of opportunities: munication that goes on in telecomm land. multi-player gaming, group discussions on bulletin board What actually occurs are time-delayed group discussions. One person \"posts\" a question or systems, file transfers and more. Where does the budding comment, and other users will pick up the \"conversation\" and add their own remarks. TeleGamer get his or her start? In this second article of a series \"Strings\" of comments can go on for a long ON On-line gaming, the DATACOMM Council will introduce the time, spanning weeks and covering a broad spectrum of ideas. NEW TeleGamer to the wonders of the local Bulletin Board In addition to its bulletin boards, a BBS will System, and the virtual landscape beyond.... allow users to send and receive software or other packages of information. Most bulletin Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"Stop playing with yourself. For $2.50 an hour, other people will gladly stomp your gts out. No more figuring out in one day how to beat the puny A.I. of a computer game. Oh, no; I'm afraid you're up against something just a-little more difficult this time: the nastiest, meanest, smartest, most cunning opponents in the game world-other humans. With a computer and modem, you can team with-or against-some of the best gamers in the Known World. Take your place as a European vassal lord in The Hundred Years' WarTM and try your Machiavellian mettle in the epic battle for empire and prestige.... Don the hauberk of a warrior and travel dangerous lands in the color graphics roleplaying world of DrakkarTM or the Island of KesmaiTM. Play the latest version of the very first true multi-player game, MUD II: The Quest For ImmortalityTM.. How to register for a NVN subscription: or test your strategy against To register on-line, set your comm software to 1200, 2400 or 9600 bps, N-8-1, and full dunlex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When connected, enter CG93PL and press dozens of other would-be <RETURN>. Then enter name, address and Visa, Discover Card, American Galactic Emperors in Galaxy II: Express, MasterCard number or EFT information. Your Starter Kit will be Expand iresTM mailed right away For more information, call 1-800-336-9096. So stop playing with yourself! Membership is just $8.95 a month and includes 4 hours of non-prime access in standard services. Access rates are as low as $2.50 an hour after 6pm local time and all day weekends. Isn't that a small price to pay to get your butt waxed? Internet mail ASK ABOUT OUR OTHER INTERNET SERVICES NVN-Good stuff. Good price. NVN Subscription fee is $8.95 per month, which includes 4 hours of non-prime time access in standard services. 9600 bps access available al no surcharge. Standard services are $2.50/hour during non-prime (6pm 7am weekdays, and all day weekends): and S7.50/hour during prime-time (7am 6pm. Monday Friday). Premium services carry additional charges. Unused portions of monthly 4 hours provided by subscription may not be carried forward or transferred. Hourly rates and service content are subject to change without notice. NVN is a service mark of National Videotex Network, Com. All others are for identification pumoses only and belong to their respective companies or organizations. Circle Reader Service #101 "


"boards also offer games, both solitaire and may be free. However, doing this is normally complete control over the BBS. He/she will multi-player. Some multi-player games can considered a sign of addiction. Yes, the Datadetermine who can become a user, what bebe played live (in «real-time\") or by turns, comm Council stays up until the wee hours havior will be tolerated and, in general, has allowing players to make their game turns as jacking in. We can always sleep in and miss the power of life and death over the board they jack-in over time. tomorrow. members. In other words, don't get the Your First BBS Assuming you get connecred, a number of SYSOP mad! The SYSOP may also deterthings may happen. First, nothing may hapmine what privileges you will have on the How do you find your first BBS? There are pen. This normally means that the BBS is board (though in some boards this is done by a number of approaches available. Your local waiting for you to hit ENTER or ESCAPE voting of board members). computer store can generally provide you (ESC) so that it can recognize your modem. Since we are all responsible members of the with some numbers. Local computer user Or you may see a great deal of \"garbage\" (i.e.: cyber community we will assume that your groups often maintain a BBS that is free for unrecognizable characters) on your screen. call with the SYSOP has been a success, and members. A number of magazines, such as This means that you do not have the right you have been granted access rights to the On-Line Access and CGW (in the Oppocommunication settings in your program. board. What next? nents Wanted column), will list some of the Verify that your speed, start, stop and parity A BBS will generally have a number of BBSs in your area. Friends who jack-in may settings are correct and try again. sections or services available. In general, these pass some numbers to you. Please note that If everything is working correctly, you will break down into two main areas: posting the last option is only available if your friends see a banner message that will state the name messages and transferring files. Let's deal with are not addicted and can still be reached of the board and give you directions if you are files first. through non-cyber-based circuits. a new user you are). Follow these to gain You will probably have the right to downBBSs are normally dedicated to certain araccess to the BBS. load files from the board. These files may cas of interest. There are gaming boards, adult contain text, images or programs. There is boards, user group boards, hobby/special in cyberspace (n.): a general term generally a listing of the files and a summary terest boards, vendor boards, etc. A nice fea for the world of telecomputing. of what they contain. You select the files you ture of most BBSs is that they will maintain If you've \"jacked-in to cyberwant and transmit them to your machine. a list of all boards in your area. Once you have space\" you've connected to a There are a couple of things to bear in mind reached your first BBS you can download this BBS or larger network. when you are downloading. First is the file (more about downloading later) and amount of time it will take. As a rule of thumb choose the type of board that you would like to investigate. Naturally, those boards will the amount of time to download a file (in There are a couple of things you still have lead you to other boards which will lead you to do to become a participating member in seconds) can be calculated as «size of the file to other...well you get the idea. See what we the tele-community. Many boards will re(in bytes) modem speed x 10.\" For example mean about dangerous? quire some authentication of your identity. if you have a 2400 bit/sec modem and want This is to prevent unwelcome visitors. You to download a file that is 240,000 bytes in download (v): to transfer a file may be required to leave your phone number size, it will take about 1000 seconds or about from a BBS to your computer. and real name so that the SYSOP (system 17 minutes. You will also be asked to select a operator, more about them later) can call you \"transfer protocol.» To make a long story and validare your ID. It is your choice, but short, if your communication program and they will generally not let you visit the board BBS supports ZMODEM use it. If not find upload (v): to transfer a file unless you are validated. You may also be a mutually supported protocol. from your computer to a BBS. asked to select a \"handle\" or \"cyber-id.\" Your File transfer is normally a foreground activhandle is important. ity. Unless you happen to have OS/2 (yeah!) What about the cost? Well, since it is a local Your handle will be used by other board or Windows 3.1 (boo! Is our bias showing a call there will generally be no charge for the participants to send you messages. Your hanbit?) you will not be able to do anything else access line. Many boards are free but often set dle should reflect your personality while prountil the file transfer is complete. Still, it may a limit on user's connection time. Some boards ask for a voluntary contribution to pay tecting your real identity. Cyberspace is truly give you time to get a snack or call a friend. for expenses. Some boards have a monthly an unprejudiced domain. Your age, sex, racial Remember when you had friends? fee. Not to worry. You will be informed if you or ethnic background do not follow you into The last point of downloading is a word of the net. Only your words are important. caution. While most SYSOPs try their best to have to pay Handles allow everyone to be treated as prevent viruses from sneaking in, it is always equals. You will be judged on your behavior, possible. If you are going to download proBurning Up The Lines not on your physical/racial attributes. Of grams, your computer may carch a virus. This OK. you have the BBS number, you've set course, some boards do require that you use is not a problem with text or images, only up your communication program, and you your proper name. Once again, it is your programs. A vaccine program helps, but it are ready to dial out. You hit enter (or double choice if you want to join. may not catch everything. You've been warned. click) and you hear the modem dialing. If you're lucky, you'll hear the remote modem SYSOP (n.): SYStem Operator. The Art Of The Post answering with the familiar warble of two The owner/operator of a BBS. modems getting to know each other. Why The minor deity of a local What about posting messages? As menlucky? Well local boards are generally quite tioned, most BBSs provide a number of pubtelecomputing domain. busy and only maintain a limited number of lic boards for communications between lines. You may have to dial a number of times members. These are normally dedicated to a before connecting. Look for communication So the SYSOP will give you a call. The particular topic, like C++ Programming, The programs that offer a redial feature. Or you SYStem OPerator is the owner, administrator Grateful Dead, or Wing Commander Stratecan stay up until 3:00 AM when the board and local deity for the BBS. The SYSOP has gies. To participate on a board, you should Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THE 1 PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! P Sierra Discovery Series PRE-READING SKILLS INGELAND A-CL:S ALPHABE SPAGE QUEST (We Talk OGBO BE FROSTPAGE SPC The Met TOMORROW ASIERRA Football ROBERTA WILLIAMS SIERRA DON 1-800-877-1995 Choose any Two Sierra Games when you switch to Sprint directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.95 more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! And after enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you'll receive a second Sierra game or one month of free long-distance service.* Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber optic\" clarity that makes both your longdistance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and error free. But unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer... calls each month to whomever they talk to the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide automatic 20 percent discounts on all calls to Sprint's millions of customers, anytime and anywhere. When the most frequently called number in a given month is a Sprint customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM travel card lets you continue to take advantage of clear calling and savings even when you're away from home. Plus the FONCARD is free, with cards available to every member of your family. Sprint \"The Mostsm\" A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called \"The Mostsm\" available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint customers 20 percent.on already low rates on their The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, * Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD only orders. Certain restrictions apply. Free month is up to $25 usage on 4th month invoice. To qualify for a second game or free month of long-distance the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. ** THE MOST discounts apply to intra-state calls only where authorized. "


"read the last 20-30 messages to get a \"feel\" for For instance, crude \"faces» like :) and :(mean what is being talked about and then post your happy and sad. Sometimes angle brackets are message. It is wise to introduce yourself the used to enclose non-verbal communication first time so that other participants get to such as <g> or <grin>. You'll pick it up as you 1 as <g> or <grin>. You'll pick it up as you know you. Variations on this include \"chat go along. Polite and eager new users often lines,\" where you are connected in real time find themselves receiving much guidance to other participants. Remember, anything from other users if they just ask. you post publicly on the board can be read by everyone. You will be judged by what you say. virus (n.): a small, often destrucIf you haven't discovered it before, you will tive computer program that can find that written communication is a much attach itself to other programs, different beast than the spoken variety. In thus spreading like an organic face-to-face communication, much meaning virus. \"Vaccine\" programs are is conveyed through gesture and intonation available that will available that will alert you if a and other subtle communicative cues. These virus has been transmitted to help communicate humor and sarcasm and like things. But these cues are not available to your computer. us in the world of BBSs. Thus, you'll have to be extra careful in how you phrase your posts. What is proper behavior on a BBS? Well, it Often a joke can be read as an insult without varies from board to board. Some boards have the normal face-to-face cues. Many an argurules against swearing, racism, sexism, etc. rules against swearing, racism, sexism. cto ment on-line (called \"Flames\" or \"flame Others have no rules. The only advice we can wars\") have resulted from a well-intentioned give is to learn the board's rules before you post that was misread by its readers. post. Talk to the SYSOP or other members. To prevent this sort of miscommunication, an electronic dialect has evolved to help communicate the subtier aspects of a message and comm Council feels obliged to discuss the to keep messages brief. For example, «BTW» darker side of cyberspace. Hidden from commeans \"by the way,\" and \"In my (humble] mon view, but still accessible, are the underopinion\" is often abbreviated \"IM[H]O.\" ground or cyberpunk boards. Generally these Also, emotions are often expressed by icons. are meeting places for cyber-cowboys who are engaged in dubious activities. These may include pirating software, hacking into high-security systems, distributing unlisted phone numbers, etc. The Council believes in the general cyberpunk credo \"Information wants to be free!\" but cannot condone these activities. These boards are very dangerous places. Enter at your own risk. So there you have it. Your first entry to cyberspace. In time you may want to join larger commercial boards such as GEnie or CompuServe. These can become expensive, but they also provide access to a huge number of other individuals. If you have an Internet ID (or can get one) then the entire world is available. But start small. Support your local BBS. They're fun. Who knows, maybe you'll make some new friends to replace those that you may have lost? If you do make it to GEnie or CompuServe you can drop us a line here at the Council. Our representative on EARTHNET is Jerry Golick. You can find him on GEnie at J.GOLICK or CompuServe at 71175,1011. Say hello, ask a question or ask advice. We don't guarantee an answer but we will give it a shor! Until next time: dial out, log on, hook up! CGW What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? NEW PRODUCT The Mark II WCS (Programmable Throttle; Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS And... FCSTM (Joystick) ThrustMaster Controls RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (503)689-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #145 Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"W CD-ROMIX! TM R Today Hotel Today's Hottest Comic Books On CD-ROM! ART: NORM BREYFOGLE Your favorite comic books from Malibu's best-selling ULTRAVEREE series in dazzling 256-color, high-resolution graphics with dramatic light and color effects! LAHEAR! ART: NORM BREYFOGLE Explosive sound effects and original musical scores in a stateof-the-art digital soundtrack. Real actors provide exciting character voices. 1. The excitement as the adventure unfolds before your very eyes! Stories appear just as they were originally published, complete and unabridged. hier ART: JIM CALLAHAN & NORM BREYFOGLE NO PUT THOSE JUNE 1993 WASHETITA PLUS! A special segment gives you a behind-the-scenes look at the making of CD-ROMIX! WABOOM ST COLLECTOR COITION CD-ROMIX! COLLECT ALL OF THESE EXCITING CD-ROMIX! TITLES!  PRIME #1  HARDCASE #1  FREEX #1 Available for DOS MPC CD-ROM CAMEX Sugg. Fetail Price Available at Babbage's, Best Buy, CompUSA, Computer City, Egghead Software, Electronics Boutique, Software Etc., and other fine retailers. Circle Reader Service #52 Today's Hottest Comic Books On CD-ROM! MALIBU COMICST, ULTRAVERSE and all ULTRAVERSE characters are trademarks of and copyright  1993 Malibu Comics Entertainment Inc. EACH CD-ROMIX!TM 1993 "


"Battle Of The PHILIPS Oorror "


"New Machines bi/ Chuck Miller, H. E. Dille and Johnny L. Wilson vo PIONG Oss rying to determine whether the new wave of living room entertainment devices are a legitimate part of computer gaming is a lot like considering whether or not professional wrestling is really a sport. The fans of «plug and play\" gaming are cheering for a day when they don't have to reconfigure their machines for each new game. On the other side, purist gamers are scoffing and claiming that those who can't handle periodic system conflicts shouldn't be allowed into the computer gaming arena. Now, it's time to step into the ring and referee this match to see just what the flamboyant contenders have to offer. "


"PHILIPS In our position as media referee, we have Second, Philips is actried to focus on those machines which we tively seeking developers have actually seen and touched, rather than in the MS-DOS commuon machines which have been announced, nity. Until recently, most but not formally unveiled. Events are unfoldCD-I development was ing swiftly and we would have loved to have being done on Macintosh had some significant information on Sega's computers and Sun workSaturn (appropriately enough, standing in stations. Now, the MS!! the corner of the ring without having reDOS environment will moved its robe to prepare for battle), Sony's become the dominant denew 32-bit machine, or Nintendo's new mavelopment platform and chine (to be built with Silicon Graphics, this should encourage Inc.). Since even potential developers seem to more cross-over titles bebe having trouble in getting specifics out of tween personal computers those manufacturers, we will settle for the and the CD-I machine. possible. Third, Philips hadn't Full-motion video varmints slap leather in Mad Dog McCree. been concerned about doing any programming that involved sprites. titles which had either just become available Sprites, of course, are those generic little charor were about to be released. Here are our acters on a computer monitor that can be initial impressions. moved against a bit-mapped background A Great Day at the Races: Billed as a without disturbing the background. It is diftutorial rather than a game, A Great Day at ficult to program any kind of fast interactive the Races certainly has some satisfying aspects game without using sprites or polygons, and of a game. The designers have databased 70 very few of Philips' developers were using different races as the centerpieces around either. Philips has recently made a deal for a which to build their tutorial. This features a new development environment called multimedia history of thoroughbreds, interSNASM (published by CrossProducts Ltd. active tutorial on betting, and easy-to-learn in the UK), which is primarily personal comexplanation of the Racing Form. Adding reputer-based with hardware boards that allow alistic graphics, the dulcer tones of Santa developers to download crossassemblers for Anita's own Trevor Denman, and tips from Sega and SNES into those machines. This retired actor and inveterate horse player should open up the style of games considerMickey Rooney makes it an even stronger ably. package. Fourth, the addition of the new digital Caesar's World of Boxing: Anyone familiar I'm Feeling Much Better video cartridge gives more flexibility to the with Data East's ABC Wide World of Sports (Philips CD-I) machine. For an additional $250 over the boxing will be familiar with this title. T'he DV $299-$399 of the base machine, gamers get a cartridge allows you to see fly-bys of the Las Three months ago, we would have seriously chance to play games with full motion video Vegas skyline and to view film clips of beaudoubted the potential recuperative powers of (Microcosm, Mad Dog McCree and, in the tiful ring girls, but the game is basically true Philips Compact Disc-Interactive (CD-I). We second quarter, Rebel thought the machine's capacity was too limAssault). The DV carited (it is a 15 MHz 68070, roughly equivatridge also gives game lent to the 8 MHz 68000—the processor on developers an addithe first Commodore Amigas—but without tional 1.5 MB of a keyboard or storage device) and the software RAM to work with. too uninteresting. Now there are some sigFifth, the new manificant changes occurring within the CD-I world that are cause for another look. chines will have two controller ports, and First of all, Philips is no longer ashamed of one of the primary CD-I as a game machine. Early in the magoals of the game dechine's history, it was being positioned as a velopment blitz is to family entertainment device, and there was create two-player hesitation among older management to even mention games. The former management games. team was afraid that any mention of games Naturally, we would force the platform to compete with wouldn't buy a maREC other game machines. So, the emphasis was chine based on the away from games. Interestingly enough, howmanufacturer's stratever, games turned out to be the best-selling egy change, so we The player is a \"peeping Tom\" with a camcorder titles on the early machine. So, suddenly, looked at several of in the interactive movie Voyeur. games have a respectability on the platform. the more recent CD-I OCD Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"Have You Wat:ered Your Computer Today? Bo//VH] MON O The CD-ROMGame Rooted In Fun! Forever Growing Garden\" keeps growing...even while your computer is oll! * Grow a fantasy world with animated magic plants and their animal friends. Turn spring seeds into wacky flowers! Take baskets full of computer-grown veggies to market. You can even grow WARNING: KIDS MAY GROW | ATTACHED TO THIS GAME. just-for-fun plants that sing or even lly! Check in every day or speed up the growing process. Songs, sound ellects and music sprout from your computer! Sow the seeds of entertainment with the Forever Growing Garden. Fun for kids of all ages. Now ready for planting at a soltware dealer near you. MEDIA VISION Gill HSSlar inform er lederne Mali Vi... Inc. Vision Inc. P er Caminanden is a trademark aynil Parla. Fou F 150) 77 Www.Aletlerin kenarlar h i s Circle Reader Service #162 . s Vision and the Media Vision l aw rulers of Mal W All rights incl. "


"Voyeur: Robert Culp plays this point? No, there are reasons for the disa cameo role in this interacparity in coverage between the two systems. tive experience. The interacTo understand what they are, it is first necestivity is fairly limited, but the sary to know what LaserActive is relative to story is interesting enough the rest of the market. and the acting is well above The basis of the technology is the combinathe norm for the current state tion of the existing 540 MB digital storage of interactive movies. There area of conventional CD-ROMs with a larger is an aliasing problem of analog area on the 12 inch disk. The latter is ENERGY ENERGY rough edges and blurring capable of storing 60 minutes of synchronous along the edges of the actors, audio and video without impacting on digital which is common to most capacity whatsoever. What this means to decomputer games using chrovelopers, who normally must sacrifice large makey or ultramatte (blue chunks of digital storage to graphics and screen or green screen rechsound files, is freedom to create larger applinology). This is distracting in cations. For users, this means more full moplaces, but the performances Caesar's World of Boxing is a comeback tion video programs that are truly interactive. generally make up for it. The for an overlooked contender. interface is as simple as that The second innovation behind LaserActive to the original. Philips intends to build a full of a user-friendly camcorder, and the entire is the de is the development of a quadruplespeed drive. line of sports titles around these live-action game lets you be a \"Peeping Tom\" without To understand the significance of this, we games. worrying about getting arrested. must briefly discuss video compression and Mad Dog McCree: By mid-January, this Conclusion: CD-I is still not the answer for data transfer rate. LaserActive, like 3DO, uses Wild West shoot-'em-up should be in the hardcore gamers. Even the current generation an MPEG-1 video standard, which is capable stores. As on the MPC, 3DO and Sega CD of games, though light years beyond the preof data transfer at 1.5 megabits per second. this game uses live video footage (and some vious generation, are designed for those who Because of the manner in which data is coded very good stunt work on the part of the bad want a gentler, kindler, gaming experience. optically on the disk, however, the limiting guys) to put the gamer in the middle of a Still, the new developer relationships, factor becomes access speed. Conventional horse opera. Everything is «point and shoot\" planned two-person games and DV cartridge CD-ROMs spin at a rate which allows an instead of \"point and click,\" and the emphasis are all indications that CD-I is \"not quite actual data transfer of 150 kilobytes per secis on fast reflexes rather than any coherent dead, yet\" and may yet surprise us all in the ond. The 3DO drive, and other double speed drives, bring this figure to 300 kilobytes per future. strategy or problem-solving. second. LaserActive doubles that so that reMicrocosm: Another translation from the trieval delays are minimal in comparison and MPC and Sega CD world, this first-person applications seem to fly along. perspective roller coaster ride takes gamers The problem is not with the technology, through the circulatory system of a human which is innovative and foresighted. The body. Instead of shooting people, you have to shoot viruses in order to save the life of the problem is with the way Pioneer is trying to position the system in the marketplace. Pioplanetary leader in whose body you have been neer, in conjunction with NEC and SEGA, injected. Real video with animated viruses designed a system that epitomizes the search imposed over it is rather effective. for the golden goose and holy grail of all Seventh Guest: In another conversion from electronics products: the mass market. Laserthe MPC world, Trilobyte's famous puzzle Active wants to be all things to all people. The anthology will be available in '94 on the CD-I main unit, which retails for $970, is a standmachine. Gamers visit various rooms in a ard laser disk player, useful only for the playhaunted house and attempt to solve classic back of laser disk movies and audio CDs. To puzzles from carlier eras in order to discover use the interactive software that is demonthe mystery of The Seventh Guest. strated with the product, purchase of either Space Ace: Remember Dragon's Lair, the one or both of the optional» control packs is famous coin-op laserdisc game where gamers Frontiers of Interactivity required. Ar $600 each, these necessary accessories quickly boost the total investment into directed the medieval knight through a com(Pioneer LaserActive) the red zone for most households. pletely interactive cartoon in order to save Princess Daphne? Its successor was Space Ace. Pioneer's bid for the electronic entertainThe first control pack, developed by NEC, The technology was the same, but the look ment market is the new LaserActive system. is compatible with all existing Duo Soft CDwas pure Saturday Morning Cartoon Science Introduced at the Winter Consumer ElecROM and game card titles. Additionally, it Fiction. Space Ace is now available on the tronics Show in 1993, Pioneer's system arintroduces a new 8 and 12 inch format CD-I and runs more smoothly than we rerived with barely a whisper of media coverage known as LD-ROM2. A bundle of older TTI member the original running. Of course, compared to the fanfare that accompanied titles is included in the purchase price, as well those machines had to be recalibrated reguthe 3DO roll out, cven though it is a better as a new edutainment title called Quiz larly due to rough use. That shouldn't happen product in many ways. Does this mean that Econosaurus, which teaches children ecology in the home, should it? we, the media, have shirked our duties up to and interrelationships in the biosphere by Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"318 Pyramidis a look at Egyptian history years, its appearance solidifies what many and archeology more suited for the Amiga owners have known all along in spite classroom. I Will: The Story of Lonof Commodore's earlier efforts to disguise the don, wants to be a game but ends up fact—the Amiga is a great gaming platform. behaving like a travelogue tourist Based on the Amiga 1200 computer, CD32 promotion. Again, only two other employs a 14 MHz 68EC020 Motorola proctitles have been announced: High essor. 2MB of RAM. custom co-processors, Roller, a video based air combat and a double-speed CD-ROM drive. Outgame (based on the old Amiga HarId Amiga Harputs are provided for NTSC composite color, rier sim) and Space Berserker, a fuS-VHS, standard RF modulator, stereo audio turistic shooter. These will also jacks, and headphones. Thanks to the appear at $120 each. Amiga's AGA chip ser, CD32 can display Finally, given that SEGA fans can 256,000 colors on screen at once. In addition, have a MEGA CD for a third of thc an MPEG-1 full-motion video module will combined LaserActive and control be available as an add-on for about $200 that pack price, Pioneer can make no will allow the CD32 to play VideoCD movies Pyramid Patrol's graphically rich environment shows off claims about the size of the SEGA on compact disc. For a suggested retail of LaserActive's capabilities. library as a selling point. $399, CD32 is the low cost champion of the keeping things light and humorous. A dinoThe final module really is an opnew CD-based gaming platforms. saur is a central character. Only two other tional purchase. The Laser Karaoke pack and Since the Amiga CD32 has not been retitles are slared for release in LD-ROM2 at microphone draw on an existing library of leased in the U.S. as of yet, game titles are the time of this writing: Vajra, a shooting 1500 titles. For $350, owners of this system rather sparse, consisting only of computer game, and Manhattan Requiem, a police myscan sing to their heart's content. conversions (all mentioned here are of Eurotery presented with film footage. Each will Conclusion: History has proven that syspean origin). While these offerings are enretail for about $120. With only three titles tems without software don't survive. Despite hanced over the original titles, none exploit on the horizon, and the doubtful presumpPioneer's efforts to sign licensees, sofrware the potential of CD-ROM or the CD32. By tion that consumers are willing to pay so developers are not rushing to jump onto the its January release, a much larger collection of much for each one, it is unlikely that many bandwagon, which is in stark contrast to the titles, including original releases, should be people will justify the purchase of this control 3DO phenomena. Everyone but Pioneer available for the Amiga CD32 (24 titles origipack. seems to sense the writing on the wall. No nally created for Commodore's CDTV Also, those who don't have a Turbo Duo matter how good the system is, it will not player, including Lemmings, are CD32 comaren't rushing out to buy one because there achieve enough market penetration to be patible). are virtually no new titles in development profitable unless the pricing comes down sig. D/Generation: Little different from the The reason for that is that NEC/TTI failed nificantly. Further, if it doesn't happen very original Amiga and PC versions (released to establish sufficient third party developers soon, the window of opportunity will have back in 1992), D/Generation offers players an for their system, which had a lot of potential passed and something even better will appear isometric puzzle game with a touch of arcade at the time. Remember, the Turbo Grafx 16 action. As with many \"converted\" titles, boasted the first CD-ROM peripheral for the D/Generation provides nothing new for those console marker. Unfortunately, it appears with a CD32 over what was offered in the that Pioneer is making the same mistake as original release (neither the video nor audio NEC. Despite having a technologically adshow signs of enhancement). vanced product, they don't have the software The idea behind D/Generation is a simple support to justify its purchase. one. A biotech research lab has gone amuck, The outlook for SEGA's control pack is leaving most building personnel dead or cqually dismal. As before, it is downwardly trapped within; deadly security systems are compatible with existing SEGA CD and carstill active and keep blasting everything in tridge titles, but it introduces yet another sight. Your goal is to set things right in a race incompatible optical format, MEGA-LD. against time. Those with a penchant for puzThe unit also comes with a bundle of outzles, who don't mind a modest dose of action dated titles and a new game called Pyramid tossed in for good measure, may find D/GenPatrol, from Taito. eration enjoyable and entertaining. However, The latter is a very graphically intense it does little to show off the potential of CD32 shooter centering on the discovery of an anas a platform and CD-ROM as a medium. cient ruin on the planet Mars. The presenta(Mindscape International, Ltd., Priority tion of this product exceeds anything scen on House, Charles Avenue, Maldings Park, Bur3DO or home computers thus far and is The Commodore Reports (CD32) gess Hill, West Sussex RH15 9PO, (44) 0444 effective at demonstrating LaserActive's abil. In September at the World of Commodore 246333) ity to combine analog and digital video. Amiga show in Pasadena, CA, Commodore James Pond 2: Robocod: Originally apUnfortunately, it's also working without a debuted their new Amiga CD32 game conpearing on the Amiga back in 1991, James net. The other two titles currently available sole to the press and public. While a machine Pond 2: Robocod was a highly regarded platare based solely on live footage. The Great of this nature had been rumored for several form game. Enhanced and expanded, this January 1994 Page 69 "


"tury's conversion of Pinoffers a great deal of playability and should be ball Fantasies. While playpart of every CD32 owner's game library. ing pinball on a personal (21st Century Entertainment, PO Box 415, computer is fun, the transWebster, NY 14580, (716) 872-1200) lation to the living room Zool: Ninja of the \"Nth\" Dimension: on a large screen TV really having the distinction of being the \"Sonic\" makes the game come of Amiga games, Zool: Ninja of the \"Nth\" alive. Add in the improved Dimension offers the same level of character graphics and digital stereo identification and rapid scrolling, sprite spinand count on some long ning acrion that Genesis players are familiar hours logged in front of the with. In Europe, Zool has been the number scrolling pinball fields of one smash hit on the Amiga for quite some Pinball FantaIt's about time you got here! I've had Derrida sereaming in my time, a distincear all day, and now this whole place is 90m3 crazy. Toon't sies. tion it has not know what's in that package, but it better de important! Hopefully, been able to duCommodore plicate in the will package States. HowSoftware Toolworks' action/puzzle game translates ever, with this game with to CD32 with no D/Generation. the CD32 when it release of Comversion for the Amiga CD32 offers more of ships (currently under consideramodore's the same multi-directional scrolling action tion), as this would make the CD32, Zool that made the original popular. Over 2,500 initial purchase of the unit more now has the colorful, smoothly scrolling screens provide a valuable. Nonetheless, even if chance of bemassive play area. Additional levels have been Pinball Fantasies doesn't come coming a recogadded, bringing the total to eight; graphics with CD32, you will still want to nized celebrity have been enhanced to make use of the AGA pick up a copy. It would almost on U.S. shores. chip set. Thanks to the extra capacity of the be worth buying CD32 just to Provided CD32 CD, Robocod now offers animated full-moget this game. sells well, that is. tion video (cartoon style) and digital audio So, what does this CD title Quality soundtracks. Like its earlier version, the goal offer? Pinball Fantasies includes graphics and is to defeat Dr. Maybe and his exploding four playing fields: Partyland, a full-screen parPenguins. digital amusement park; Billion allax scrolling If you enjoy scrolling endlessly for hours at Dollar Game Show, a Wheel of help make Zool a time, investigate James Pond 2. It's a capable Fortune-esque style flipper fest; a unique characSpeed Devils, a race track exter, one able to conversion for the action empowered player travaganza; and Stones and run, jump, (Millennium Interactive, Ltd., Quern House, Bones, a haunting table of creaks punch, kick, Mill Court, Great Shelford, Cambridge, CB2 and screams. Each playfield, or shoot, spin and 5LD, UK, (44) 0223 844894). table, is one screen wide and apclimb his way Pinball Fantasies: Without doubt, the proximately three screens high. Pinball Fantasies is a 21st Century through multihighest quality and most fun title available at Frankly, the game plays better on beper crop. ple levels of press time for the Amiga CD32 is 21st Cena large screen TV deadly oppo 519520931. than on a small computer nents with case (depending, of course, on monitor. The scrolling effect is your finger-rwitching expertise). Enhanced not as disorienting. over the original release, Zool: Ninja of the Making this conversion a \"Nth\" Dimension includes an additional level step up from the original is the of play (there were only six in the diskette . use of 256-color graphics and version), an all new soundtrack in CD quality CD quality music and sounds. audio lasting a full 40 minutes, and special Though music can be turned 3D rendered shots (Gremlin Graphics Softoff if desired, it never became ware, Ltd., Carver House, 2-4 Carver Street, annoying, but rather added to Sheffield, SI 4FS, UK, (44) 0742 753423). the enjoyment of play. Graph Conclusion: As Commodore tries to climb ics are colorful, the tables atinto the ring with the other contenders, there tractively illustrated. Pinball are big questions in the minds of present and action and flipper response are former Amiga owners. Is it possible for Comgood, providing realistic game modore to effectively market the machines in play. the United States? The CDTV fiasco cerAlthough, Pinball Fantasies tainly isn't reassuring. Will there be enough From Amiga to Sega and back to the primordial machine does not fully exploit the posU.S. developers to make the investment pond-James Pond: Robocod. sibilities of CD-ROM, it still worthwhile? Commodore is strong enough to CASO CE LE Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"TWO REASONS WHY FLIGHT SIMULATORS WILL NEVER BE THE SAME... Circle Reader Service #55 "


"THE FIRST SUPER-VGA FLIGHT SIMULATOR SUPER-VGA HARRIER HICO ooi ADIATED m Series visual world, where objects are sharper, cleaner and can be seen for miles. Drom the flight fanatics at Domark T comes the first-ever strategic flight simulator designed for full-screen SVGA graphics technology. This is not a typical flight sim. SUPER-VGA HARRIER blows the competition out of the sky with super-fast, silky-smooth screen update at twice the resolution! Now you can experience a much larger \"Harrier receives extremely high marks for graphics which are the best I've ever seen — BETTER THAN FALCON. The explosions and ground detail are really great.\" PC SOURCES MAGAZINE \"After playing Harrier in SVGA, all other flight-sims look like they are being played through a telescope... Not so long ago, a few glimpses at multimillion dollar serious flight simulators produced memories of images not far from those present in Harrier; very simply, it's that good.» -STRATEGY PLUS MAGAZINE WERE 2003: Screens shown: 640x480 256-color SVGA resolution. IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available October 1993 DISTRIBUTED BY Spectrum HoloByte DOMARK Visa/MC orders: call 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (orders only) Super-VGA Harrier 1993 Domark Group Lid. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Ltd. Graphics by the Kremlin. Sound by Martin Walker. Produced by Jim Tripp. Falcon is a trademark of Spectrum HoloByte. 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite, 202, San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #161 "


"FIRST-EVER COMPREHENSIVE FLIGHT MODELING SOFTWARE FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT espai   ADVANCED Sim-SCTies CREATE YOUR OWN PLANES. OBIECTS & BATTLEFIELDS IN SUPER-VGA! Domark set the standard the first 3-D flight modeling with SUPER-VGA HARRIER, the software ever produced for your first-ever SVGA strategic flight PC, is Domark's second offer simulator. Now, we're pushing ing in its ADVANCED SIM-SERIES that standard to new heights! state-of-the-art flight simulaFLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT, tor product line. FST is revolutionary. It's FST is revolutionary. It's powerful, sophisticated, and easy to use. Technophiles will appreciate the attention to detail cockpits include modern instrumentation, such as OBI, DME, and Glidescope as well as the ability to build every detail of their sim world. In a hurry? Not interested in building every last plane, tree, truck, valley or skyscraper? tree, truck, valley or skyscraper? No problem. Just check out the extensive library of clip-art imagery: aircraft, ground targets, landscapes and objects. You'll be streaking through the heavens in no time! FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT. YOUR AIRCRAFT. YOUR LANDSCAPES. YOUR MISSIONS YOUR WORLD. bio DISTRIBUTED BY Visa/MC orders: ! Screens shown: IBM 256-color SVGA displays. IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available November 1993 Requires Windows 3.1 Flight Simulator Toolkit 1993 Domark Group Ltd. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Ltd. Graphics by the Kremlin. Spectrum HoloByte MARK 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (orders only) call 24 hrs a day, 1-800-695-GAME 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite. 202, San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"relations in the past), but it has to prove that its machine is superior — in a hurry! 3DO launched ahead of Atari and is poised for an avalanche of software support to appear in the next 12 months. Atari ventured late into third party software support and it could be the third quarter of 1994 before it has a sufficient number of software titles on the shelf. Also, Atari relied heavily on tried-and-true video game developers as its third party core, rather than reaching into the ranks of computer game developers where more sophisticated designs could rempt the early adopters. In short, it is a great machine in search of a developer/customer base. 50 garner support from European companies, essor unit (with 4K of zero wait-state static but the lack of customer support for the RAM reserved exclusively for graphics), but Amiga and the failure of CDTV to get off the it also has the same 68000 processor as the ground is likely to cause most U.S. publishers early Amigas and Atari STs. The machine to think twice about supporting the machine. boasts 720x576 video resolution and the capacity for moving 850 million pixels per second (compared to Atari's estimate of 3DO's 64 million pixels per second and one million each for SNES and Sega Genesis). The bad news for computer gamers is that the initial releases are pretty much typical video game fare and the CD-ROM unit, the peripheral that may turn the Jaguar into a serious gaming machine, won't be out until the second quarter of 1994. Nonetheless, the price (ca. $200) and power of this console make it a machine that needs to be considered. Trevor McFur Saves the Crescent Galaxy: We didn't get a chance for hands-on play with this title, but we observed three different levels of play on the prototype. Our initial perception is that it is a pretty typical scrollPowerful Predator (Atari Jaguar) ing, shooting action game. The good news is that the \"boss monsters» are done using exAs of press time, the powerful new 64-bit tremely effective 3D rendering. machine had experienced its first major probAlien vs. Predator: This is the product that lem. It was shipping at least one week later gave us the most hope. The first-person perthan intended. Of course, in hardware wars, spective with smooth-scrolling 3-D graphics one week doesn't mean much. It did mean looked as good as many of the personal comthat we did not get the expected evaluation puter games which are using that technology. unit in time for this article. Fortunately, we The interface looked sophisticated enough to had seen the machines at Atari headquarters promise some interesting options and depth earlier and we were impressed with the potential of the machine. The Atari Jaguar is a jewel of a machine. It not only features specialized processors such as the \"Blitter» (a chip that handles bit block transfers of graphics data) which was developed by Atari in 1986, DSP (Digital Signal Processor) chip for sound, a custom object processor for video, and graphics procBuster Bunny Just 3DO It (3DO Multiplayer) Hunting wabbit? Atari's Tiny Toons adventure is in season. of play, but without \"hands on\" experience, we cannot be certain. Conclusion: The Atari Jaguar will have to work hard to overcome the more than 18 month public relations blitz of its nearest competitor, 3DO. Not only does Atari have to overcome the stigma of its name (lack of marketing and customer support, as well as poor developer The 3DO Multiplayer is, according to the President of 3DO (Robert Faber), not a placform. «It's a concept.\" This is because the company does not manufacture the machines, it merely licenses its proprietary technology. The first 3DO machine to hit the market was the Panasonic version of the console, with Sanyo expected to follow with their version during the latter part of the first quarter in 1994. No one knows exactly how fast the 3DO's 32-bit RISC chip CPU is (including third party developers), but we do know that there are plenty of predefined hardware functions within the machine that will help game graphics. For example, 3DO machines have built-in hardware to assist in texturemapping and polygon-handling. This makes 3-D first-person perspective games like Escape from Monster Manor into a piece of cake. The graphics routines also cover light sourcing ability to assign light direction and intensity 3D sets and nasty creatures orbit Trevor McFur as he Saves the Crescent Galaxy Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"on CD ROM Ships Steel, men rom Kullana FOLD 0 0 0 0 og 2 0 0 31 23 O O KROTERANIE MEANINI |au co GUN OOO GUNS CIC GUX Og GUNEA La Created by Commander' James R. Jones and his crew at Software Sorcery ACTUAL SVGA SCREEN IMAGES The 14-inch guns of your dreadnought thunder as you order another devastating The drama, action and excitement of WWI naval combat comes salvo fired at the enemy line. Your ship shudders with the recoll of the guns, and to life with stunning SVGA and VGA graphics, digitized video and you peer through the binoculars as the shells arch toward their target. A few well. sound effects and historically accurate combat. Experience naval placed hits could sink the enemy, but your squadron is still vulnerable to a torpedo combat as the sailors and officers did almost 80 years ago or shell attack that could send your ships to the ocean floor. including night combat, torpedo attacks, salvos of exploding shells and burning ships. When you're ready, test your naval This is World War I naval action like you've never seen beforel Calibrate your combat ability in the awe-inspiring Battle of Jutland! range-finder and stuff your ears with wool as you prepare for the action, sights See your favorite retailer, or call (619) 452-9901 and sounds of Jutland! Command a fearsome dreadnought and fight for control of the North and South Atlantic for the entire German Imperial fleet or the British Royal Navy. Fight a single mission, a battle campaign or the entire war while commanding one ship, a squadron of ships, or the entire fleet. , Software Sorcery. Software Sorcery is a registered trademark of Software Sorcery. Jutland is a trademark of Software Sorcery. Software Sorcery Where Magie is State-of-the-art! Available for the IBM PC and Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #147 "


"to an object and have the program calculare concerning the textureits effect on the rest of the screen's objects), mapping capabilities of transparency (special effects that make solid the machine after playimages become transparent over the backing this game. Our visgrounds, particularly good for magic spells, ceral desire for violence smoke, etc.), anti-aliasing (removing those was also sated by the fanrough edges from the exterior lines of objects castic bit-mapped exploor characters), cel animation (more detailed sions that seemed far and smoother images than sprite animation, superior to the polygondefined earlier in this article) and warping filled pyrotechnics we're (ability to bend or shrink images to give used to seeing. physical effects to movements and collisions). Escape from Monster Add a built-in double-speed CD-ROM Manor: As a 3-D firstdrive, full motion video, Digital Signal Procperson action game, thi essor for sound, and the capacity to daisydaisy was the first game we chain the controllers (to create multiplayer o play played that really games) to all of the special graphic effects and showed off the graphics you end up with a $700 machine that does handling capabilities of EA hopes to send a Shock Wave through what it would take more than a thousand the 3D0 player. The Wing Commander fans. dollars worth of cards to accomplish in your bundled software, Crash betas that we have actually played indicate IBM compatible. If 3DO's licensees can get 'n Burn, seemed like a flat track, no physics that 3DO is coming the closest to reaching return to Atari's old Pole Position. This one enough machines and software out in the its promise. We regret the fact that 3DO has looked, at first, like a Wolfenstein 3-D market, this could very well become the inapparently given up on making the home wannabe. However, the rotoscoped monsters teractive gamer's entry level machine. And, it machine compatible with set-top boxes for and creative use of the transparency techplays regular CDs, Cinepak-based movies on cable television and we would love to see a nique with the ecto-gun's energy streams CDs, CD+G and Kodak Photo-CDs. Berter modem and extra storage arrive sooner than soon made believers out of us. yet, there is some hope for compatibility with later, but we are coming to the conclusion Mad Dog McCree: Yes, it's the same real traditional personal computers, since reliable thar, compared with personal computers, sources indicate money has been budgeted for video shoot-'em-up to be found in the arcades 3DO offers more bang for the buck than we and many other platforms (see the CD-I list). launching 3DO boards for personal computhave previously credited it. If games like Super The full-screen video looked great and ers in 1994. No formal announcement on Wing Commander and Shock Wave (both showed off the machine's capability. Unforthis has been forthcoming from 3DO, howtunately, the console game-style controller is space combat games using 3-D technology) ever. simply not up to the task. This game needs look as good as the demos, this may well be At press time, we had played four games on an optical gun peripheral, joystick or a mouse the ideal plug and play solution for those of the 3DO that offered insights about the macontroller to be playable. us who are tired of playing circuit board chine. roulette with our personal computers. Twisted: The Game Show: If we were Draxon's Revenge: The first thing we notwenty years younger, we might get it. This is Consoling Thoughts ticed about this game was that there was a bizarre parody on television game shows terrific CD-audio coming out of the machine that has only one redeeming feature: it's difIt is definitely too early in the match to instead of the FM synthesized soundtracks ferent. Unfortunately, it isn't very interesting. declare a winner. If we absolutely had to buy we're used to hearing in computer games. It does show that 3DO developers want to a new game console today, it would probably Also, we started to become true believers create multiplayer enbe the CD-I with DV cartridge. The price is tertainment (this time, right and there is more software to support it. trading one controller If we were going to buy a machine in the next back and forth) and few months, it would probably be the 3DO. does show off the fullThe upcoming titles are making the machine motion video when it look very interesting. If we were going to wait pans to the audience. If until the middle of next year, the whole landthis were typical 3DO scape could change. software, however, the One thing is sure. This generation of conmachine would not fare soles is truly a class of computers without very well. keyboards. We don't think that they pose an Conclusion: So far, immediate threat to gaming on the personal 3DO offers the best computer. The personal computer still has med overall package of the plenty of advantages and these have different new game machines. advantages. Still, the development of these We don't know what computers without keyboards has been interSega, Sony and Ninesting to watch and the match isn't over, yet. Draxon's Revenge will satisfy gamer's visceral desire for violence tendo will bring forth, In fact, isn't it about time for the ring girl to with fantastic bit-mapped explosions. but the new releases and show us what round it is? Cow Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"\"Never before has there been a game so movie-like in its construction.\" Computer Gaming World \"Graphics, music and sound effects are all.exceptionally strong.\". Questbusters TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) n. A powerful vision RINGWORLO and a fresh approach to an almost forgotten Revenge of the Part art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: Based on the award wining book series by celebrated author RINGWORLO PROLUSTER LARRY NIVEN LEGES HIVER NOVICE LEVEL FUNSTERSI 141 Actual VGA screens THE INFODISK SAID YOU WERE TO DELIVER A WARNING... It never mentioned an insane Patriarch, Kzinti assassins, or the fact that the only hope for the future of the universe might be found on a world so immense it could hold a million earths. Ringworld holds the answers if only you can find it in time... Circle Reader Service #151 Experience Larry Niven's universe like never before! Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. I U NAM TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. Tsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. "


"REVIEW The Horses Are At The Gate Microleague's Quarterpole Jockeystor Position by Philip Sandler oming around the clubhouse turn, it's Texas Flake by a length as Sawgrass is rated on the inside. Precious Moments is driving hard, coming up on the outside, and the rest of the field is falling back fast. Such is the verbal poetry associated with thoroughbred horse racing. You can almost imagine the familiar cadence to the announcer's call and visualize the wind whipping at the harlequin-colored silks of the jockeys as they exhort thousands of pounds of expensive horseflesh through the backstretch. The dramatic impact of purring your hard-earned bucks on a horse adds to the adrenaline factor and puts extra spin on this popular sport. 83. 833,FARRER. RATE 3 from CGA to EGA graphics in the same bother checking in again later. Looking animated race sequence. Still, all was forgiven around gets old rather quickly. because it was an excellent game. If you're playing the game strictly as a betMicroleague's eagerly awaited Ouarterbole Microleague's eagerly awaited Quarterpole tor, you can buy a program and tip sheet and is an attempt to bring the world of horse move on to the concourse area. Here you will racing to today's computers. The game's feabe able to place bets or move to the grandtures include: the ability to play as a bettor or stand to watch the race and check the odds stable owner, realistic past performance reboard. Stable owners can talk to their trainers cords, a multi-player option (up to 10 comin the stable area, use the computer in the petitors), and a graphic adventure-style jockey's lounge, or visit the track president's interface. Sadly, these options are buried unoffice. Through static conversations with the derneath many problems, not the least of trainer, you can ger information on specific which are the amount of time required to horses, find out how much your daily stable perform basic actions, and the amount of expenses are, hire a jockey, hire a new trainer, time spent waiting for a particular race. or ask your trainer to enter horses in races for Getting Around At you (not recommended). From the lounge computer, you can design your jockey's silks, Blue Rock Downs check race results, and access statistics on The opening menu allows you to choose a jockeys, trainers, individual horses, and your scenario. As a bettor, you may start with as own stable. You can go to the president's little as $80 or as much as $1,000,000. office to enter a horse in a race, scratch a horse Would-be stable owners may start with one from a race, or pick up information on uphorse or a whole stable full of speedy steeds. coming events. Once a choice has been made, you move on This surely sounds like a wonderfully deto the main area, where the following message railed and complex simulation. In certain is displayed: \"Preparing Blue Rock Downs, ways it is. But the fact is that the whole please be patient...\" This message and several minutes of hard drive activity are the player's package just doesn't fit well together; it just first indications of what is to follow. Patience doesn't work. There is too much information that needs to be accessed in too many differis definitely the price of admission. ent ways. You never really feel in charge of Once you enter Blue Rock Downs, the things or aware of all the details required to main display is a graphic representation of manage a winning stable. There is always the other areas you may explore: the stables, the auction tent (if it is Quar an auction day), the lounge, the program booth and the concourse area. Clicking on one of QUARIER POLE Quarterpole the patrons provides a static REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGA graphics, 8MB message such as, \"Hey, mister, hard drive space, DOS 5.0 or higher have you seen my Dad?» from a PROTECTION: None MicroLeague Interactive Software little boy or \"Ow, I'm sore,\" Newark, DE (800334-6572 from a jockey. These messages are always the same, so don't 1 Uirgin Isle 2 Damage Proof 3 Gun Deck 4 Devil Chaser HI With so much action and excitement, horse racing has been a natural subject for computer games from the beginning. The Apple II had its Horse Racing Classic, the C-64 and the Macintosh had Daily Double Horse Racing, and the CGA/EGA era IBM PC had OmniPlay Horse Racing. The latter was a breakthrough game with its computer-controlled opponents, limited statistics, multi-player options, three skill levels, and an unprecedented amount of information available to the handicapper (trifecta payoffs before the race!). The game's only major downfalls were the inordinate amount of time it took to move from the main menu to the race track and vice-versa, as well as the shock of moving TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: $49.95 IBM PUBLISHER: Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) BLUE n. A powerful vision . and a fresh approach to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: RINGWORLO PROTOSTAR CREATED BY: BEST SELLING GAME DESIGNER FUNSTERS! JIM WALLS Actual VGA screens Circle Reader Service #152 YOU'RE JAKE RYAN, rookie motorcycle officer. Ten years have passed since the unsolved murders of your parents, but a twisted trail of evidence still exists. While patrolling your beat, pieces from the past begin to link with the present. You're treading where you're not wanted and someone wants you to know it! BLUE FORCE...Realize your destiny. Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. Tsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. "


"Official Pace Results Computation 23.20 1.20 Dogg fr Exactar -75 75.20 Trifecta 6-7 -3 :20 option of letting your trainer make your entries for you, but this really defeats the central purpose of the game. If you're not making your own decisions, why bother playing? The procedure required to enter a horse in a race is tedious and confusing. You start by clicking on the jockey's lounge. Once inside, you click on the computer, and then on horse history, type in the horse's name, and carefully study his past performance. Assuming you don't have a photographic memory, you will need to write down ideas and pertinent information. (It is wise to reserve at least one notebook page for each horse in your stable THERE IS NO PRINTER OPTION!). This done, you can look in your briefcase for a report on upcoming race conditions. Then, you can try to find just the right race for your horse, between one and three weeks from his last. When you've made this decision, you go back to the main area, click again to get to the concourse, then click on the door to the track president's office. Finally, you click on the president's secretary to make the entry. Sound redious?! crack as their jockeys urge them toward the finish line... At least that's what you want to happen. What really happens is that a little bell goes off, the gate opens, and the horses run silently from start to finish. No sound, indifferent graphics, and a depiction of the race from the inside rail. This two-dimensional perspective does not differentiate between stretches and turns, it does not allow horses to get \"boxed in,\" and it makes the whole field look like it's running backwards. There is a screen shot on the back of the game box that shows an overhead view of the track, but don't be deceived! No such view exists in Quarterpole. The race itself is by far the most disappointing part of the game. If Microleague had made just this one aspect of the game enjoyable, it may have gone a long way toward saving it. letting a trainer manage your stable, make sure to turn him off, because when you buy multiple horses at the auction, he will enter them all in the same race. If all your horses are allowed entry, they will just run against each other. Expect to have trouble deciding who to root for. The Photo Finish Needs A Touch-up Frankly, Quarterpole finishes far out of the money. As much as I tried to like this game (and I really, really tried), I couldn't make it happen. Some aspects of the game did look quite nice when considered separately from the whole package, like the highly detailed performance records, for one. But, all of this wonderful information is just far too inaccessible. I personally think that even the decision to use a graphic-based interface was a curious choice by the game designers. The idea was to portray a first person adventure in horse racing, perhaps in a attempt to draw the player into the game. Yet, all the interface really accomplishes is to provide the ability to click on objects and get messages like \"This water tower is quite tall.» This has no entertainment value whatsoever. A single pull-down menu that listed all the available options would have been faster, easier to use, and would have taken up less precious hard drive space. TERIMETERSCITATA ist roce $4.400 pure, $4,000 claiming Open. furlongs for 4 year old and up on iurf. You enter the grandstand Conditions 2GELE Even after all this clicking around, there is still no guarantee that your horse will run in the race; final entries are decided the day of the race. If you only have one horse in your stable, you may as well sit back with a good book. It takes about ten minutes to simulate a week's worth of racing, FridayApril 1. 1994. Roc 1 number 1 to baxt. Auction Day If you're a bettor who has built up enough cash to finally own your own stable, or if you're a current owner who is thinking of expansion, you can pay a visit to the Auction Tent, open exclusively on the first Tuesday of every April. If you find that you want to visit the auction, and it's mid-December, expect a 45 minute delay for each month you wish to forward time. You can pick up an auction booklet in the president's office and carefully select horses you might want to own. Pay no heed to the trainer's comments or the quality of the horse's breeding. I've had a poorly bred horse described as \"a real loser\" go on to become a multiple race champion, and horses with excellent breeding and descriptions like \"nearly perfect\" that never won me a dime. You shouldn't bother racking your brains for clever names, either. The game does not allow you to name your own horses. If you are The Big Payoff When your horse has finally made it past the entry gate, time has been forwarded to your race, you've got your $500 win ticket in your pocket, and it's post time, then the gate crashes open and the horses come pouring out onto the track. You see your horse in all his splendor, fighting his way through the pack, cutting the corner on the turn, charging down the stretch to the wire! The roar of the crowd rises in a swelling crescendo as the horses thunder past the grandstand, the announcer's voice explodes over the intercom \"And down the stretch they come!\" Your horse inches up on the leader, a length back, now a half-length. The two horses match strides as the rest of the field falls back. Whips I've waited a long time for a rruly comprehensive horse racing simulation. On a certain level, Quarterpole is the closest anyone has come. It casily surpasses Omni-Play Horse Racing in features and realism, if not in playability. But this game doesn't redefine computer horse racing the way many of us anticipated it would. Given the popularity of horse racing, it's only a matter of time before someone comes out with a game that really captures the feel of the race track. One that keeps you on the edge of your scat, waiting for the results of a photo finish. One that really allows you to manage with complete stable reports, statistics, charts and graphs, all easy to access. One that allows you to do your own breeding. Kind of like SimCityat the race track. But Quarterpole doesn't accomplish any of this. It's just a mediocre release with some good ideas that didn't come off. Cow I'd like to be! 100000 dollars on horse uber6 in the 31 race to TACEASYSHOH Hello that ori I do for you? Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"\"I hope there will be a sequel.../ will gladly buy it alter this one!\" Computer Game Review \"...the graphics in PROTOSTAR are incredibile!\" .Computer Gaming World TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) E PROTOSTAR n. A powerful vision and a fresh approach WAR ON THE FRONTIER to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: RINGWORLO PROTOSTAR UPER HIER ADVANCED LEVEL FUNSTERS! i La the perfec Actual VGA screens Circle Reader Service #153 MANKIND IS IRRESISTIBLE PREY.. The Skeetch Empire has viewed Human prosperity as an invitation for conquest. Now they have sealed the borders of Human space. YOU are enlisted to serve as the PROTOSTAR Agent for an operation of grave importance. Your objective is to disrupt Skeetch supply lines along the Galactic Frontier. You must assemble your team and win the support of the critical alien factions. Your War on the Frontier may prove that mankind is more predator than prey! Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. Tsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. "


"REVIEW The General New Playground Photo courtesy of McDonnell Douglas Corporation Gen. Chuck «Ferpow'r!\" Yeager Test-Flies The Mac by Christopher Breen e tot E-4 Phantom MIG-21MF Fishbod CAR IN CAM weer. Charles File Edit Options View Help y guess is that a good number of our destruction; we're the cocksure aces of the people play around with flight air who, when Gen. Charles Yeager pops up V simulations for the same reason I on the screen to exhort us to watch your six,\" do: They hate flying. When I say \"flying, \"I'm boldly tell him to \"can it» as we send our F-4s not talking about the lost-baggage-and-nastyplummering toward earth. Yes, we're the kind little-meals inconvenience of the airline expeof people who play Electronic Arts' Chuck rience. I'm addressing the cooped-up-inYeager's Air Combat for the Macintosh. a-metal-tube-hurtling-through-the-skies-atWait a durn minute, you're probably an-unbelievable-altitude kind of terror faced drawling, Yeager's Air Combat has been out by poltroons like myself. Yes, we gravitate for nearly two years, and didn't CGW cover toward these sims for one reason only: conit ages ago? Score two for your observant self. TO Your Fan Etnemy Flane k trol. With a simulated mission up and runYes, Air Combat has been out for some time on the DOS platform but only me recently—no doubt thanks to the o doubt thanks to the Vietnam. You can choose to fly any of six incessant whining of Apple enaircraft (WWII's P-51 Mustang and Fockethusiasts—has the sim been Wulf 190A, Korea's F-86 Sabre and MiG-15, ported to the Macintosh. and Vietnam's F-4 Phantom and MiG-21) I know, when Mac users hear and pick which side you'll pledge allegiance the words DOS, port, and Macinto. You can also select five modes under tosh in the same sentence, they which to fly: Test Flight, Create Mission, generally turn up their collective Historic Mission, Campaign and Head To noses in a singularly unattractive Head. As a bonus, you determine the skill 50 :2300(92% UST! 03.25 way. But put your nose down for level of the opposing pilots—from Amateur a second and listen: Air Combat to Excellent-in every mode except CamODIE was rewritten from the ground up paign and Head To Head. for the Macintosh by a Macintosh Test Flight mode lets you hop aboard one programmer, Mark Adams. The of the six planes and take it for a spin without 228 | TOO graphics, although maintaining ing the distraction of other pilots attempting to some of the chunky qualities so ning, no longer must we recall our silent familiar to DOS users. w thread a missile up your tailpipe. Test Flight's suffering in coach as our fevered imaginations also designed specifically Chuck Yeager's Air Combat conjure up lurid pictures of the crew passed for the Mac. So, let's put out over the controls with tiny bottles of Old our prejudices aside for a TITLE: Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Crow clattering about the cockpit floor. PRICE: $59.95 moment and take a look. SYSTEM: Thanks to the marvels of this modern age, Macintosh REQUIREMENTS: 68020 or better, System 6.07 or higher, we're the aviator who's passed out, not from The Sim hard drive with 2.8MB free for B&W/4MB free for calor, 2MB RAM for B&W/4MB the excesses of drink, but rather from the Air Combat is a dogfight RAM for color when running System 7 force of too many G's slamming blood into PROTECTION: One time question on instailation sim that mirrors General Original DOS version by Brent Iverson, our brains; we're the heroic warriors who Macintosh version by Mark Adams Yeager's career by including PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts chuckle in the face of angular little reprethree theaters of war: San Mateo, CA sentations of flying machines that are bent on (415) 571-7171 World War II, Korea and 200l ... TH: 1005 Macintosh DESIGNER: Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"MATURE LEVEL (Not await Looks can be deceiving. CDE Blair the Rich Girl Erin the Lawyer Fawn the Sales Rep Quinn the Anchorwoman Kellie the Psychologist An interactive CD-ROM social adventure. Circle Reader Service #150 Available at your local software dealer or order direct 1.800.644.9283 Bina Man Enough is a trademark of Tsunami Medin Inc Tunami Medin. In 1992 "


"file Edit Options View Help 1306 TL 393 PH DOO THE 1003 SOOO .2 $2006 (D 4-26-66 Excellent job. In the actuel mission, pilots Poul Gilmore and Bill Smith downed one MIG with Sidewinders, then it the 'burners, pulled up, and headed for home That night, the officer's Club at Danang had a pretty big party to colobrate the first MIG-21 kull over. Location option places your plane on the runway, on a final approach to the runway, or at an altitude of 10,000 or 40,000 feet, so you can practice such skills as taking off, landing, maneuvering and spinning wildly out of control. When you Create a Mission, up pops a dialog box from which you choose one of the six aircraft at your command and then select from a list of 17 enemy aircraft. Options include three different opposing planes with as many as five of each. You also select your altitude, whether you approach the enemy with a tactical advantage, disadvantage or neutrally, and again, whether the enemy are chumps or champs. The resulting dialog box looks something like this: \"There I was in my P-51 at 20,000 feet, when I jumped five B-29s, three Yak-9s and two MiG 17s. The guys in those planes were mediocre.\" As you can sce, you have the dubious pleasure of being vaporized by aircraft from any of the three time periods. Historic Missions consist of 16 or 17 missions, ranging from easy to difficult, for each of the three cras. Your aircraft is selected for you, as is the enemy's. Missions include everything from escorting bombers to strafc ing a slow moving truck to snatching a MiGFile Edit Options View Help 15 and flying it to the enemy basetion during those times when you have a in order to cash in on a $100,000 tediously long flight home after the heat of reward. battle). With Campaign mode, you reThe Look ally start to get serious. Select an era and a side, and listen up while Air Combat uses the now-traditional the General gives you a rough idea merhod of representing objects outside the of your assignment. After successcockpit as geometric shapes. Grass is green, fully completing cach mission, sky is blue, haze is represented by banded white lines at the horizon, and clouds are your cumulative campaign stats are presented and it's on to the decidedly round and globular objects that next job. Once you've finished all float about obscuring your view. Plastered to the missions, a splash-screen inthe windscreen is the Heads Up Display forms you that the tour of duty is (HUD), a digital readout that displays such at an end, and it's time to go home critical information as altitude, speed, headfor a well-deserved rest. Incidening and vertical speed. Although the HIUD IS tally, flyers eager for a quick ticket back to the a fairly recent innovation, you have the opold homestead should choose to fly for GerCertion to display it in aircraft from all three cras. many and Korea in the first two scenarios. The cockpit design is where the DOS-COLuftwaffe pilots need only fly seven missions Mac port is most apparent. Overall, the look versus the U.S. pilots' ren, and the Koreans get off with two fewer Tile Edit Flu flights than the boys who bleed red, white and blue. Finally, Head To Head mode is time to show that bovine creep -4 FIRST FISHBED KILL over in Human Resources just how tough you can be when you go plano a plano over the network. Simply arrange for the two of you to log on over AppleTalk, EtherTalk or Token Talk, agree via the Chat line on the type of aircraft you will be flying, your altitudes Stots Bone and range, and have at it. The sim keeps a record of your aircraft kills and rating-rookie, veteran or is strictly IBM: fat and cartoonish. Far more ace-based on those kills. disturbing than the aesthetics, the gauges are As if the five flying modes weren't enough, rendered in such a way that you can only get Air Combat contains a number of goodies that the vaguest sense of what they indicate. Pilots enhance your flying experience. Under the desiring an authentic WWII flying experiHelp (read: Cheat) menu you can select opence will find themselves at a disadvantage tions that make your plane invincible to atwhen flying with only the cockpit controls. tack, provide unlimited ammo, ensure a safe Completing the Air Combat package is the landing every time, and disable the disabling landing every tim 192-page manual that, aside from needing a blackand red-ours. You can also clect to fairly stern copy cdit, is chock full of fascinatdisplay help windows that detail ing details. Once the documentation leads D your flight envelope, location, you through the various controls of the difand enemy's position and compeferent planes, you are treated to explorations tence. And for those who desire of a number of topics including flight dynamthe expertise of America's greatest ics, air combat tactics, weapons training, and living wingman, the Yeager winthe history and specifications of the aircraft dow pops up with helpful tips found in the simulation. from a digital representation of the Great One himself. Air ComThe Feel bat also supports multiple moniCurrently, Graphic Simulations' Hellcats tors, several external views and Over The Pacific and the recently introduced magnifications, the ability to save FIA-18 Hornet are the aces of Macintosh and play back your missions as flight simulations. Their smooth movement QuickTime movies, and time and outstanding graphics make them tough compression (speeding up the acto beat. Air Combat, although exhibiting moPilot Status: OK T0073 FT 250:2005 USTI 07:51 200 LOQOT Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"Introducing FLIGHTSTICK PRO Flying The Best... Just Got Better. Look for CH Products' VIRTUAL PILOT, FLIGHTSTICK, GAMECARD 3 AUTOMATIC, and our MACH series where you buy FLIGHTSTICK PRO. Fly The Best! FLIGHTSTICK PRO is the ultimate combat stick for total command of the skies. Made to endure the toughest missions, FLIGHTSTICK PRO gives you the winning edge to take on even the worst enemy. With top gun precision, you can view your surroundings, activate radar, blast missiles, thrust into mach speed . . . all at your fingertips. FLIGHTSTICK PRO includes a four-way switch to control weapons, radar, and viewing for more advanced games plus all the best features of FLIGHTSTICK Great with flight simulation, auto racing, and any game that uses a joystick. For all IBM compatible computers. FLIGHTSTICK PRO. The most intense joystick you'll ever fly. PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619 598-2518 FAX: 619-598-2524 Circle Reader Service #44 "


"rile Edit Options Wiew Reto TIME 00:05.05 C PLAV SPDO r 200M QUICKTIME VICH MODE TORUND O POS(D back on track. Air Combat is more about where you land. If you miss the strip, realistic. If you crank back on the you can land on the nearby turf without stick during take-off, dollars to additional jostling. Heck, if you really blow doughnuts, you'll stall out and find it, you can plow right through hangars and yourself in pieces on the runway. farmhouses without a scratch; excluding the Not only that, but the stall function ground and other planes, mountains are the is tuned differently for each type of only objects that present a danger when colplane. The P-51, for instance, is lided with. fairly tolerant of steep climbs, whereas the FW-190 is extremely The End touchy. Pilots using the Gravis But look, I'm not a pilot. I'm playing Mousestick II should be particularly around with this thing for the simple pleasure careful. A tug on the stick that would of blasting other flying machines out of the « < > >> >> TEXT TARGET send a Hellcat into a gentle climb air and the thrill of commanding a vehicle will cause any plane in Chuck's air tion that is noticeably superior to that of that in real life I wouldn't get within 100 force to find the ground in a hurry. Microsoft's Flight Simulator 4.0, is not up to paces of. Is Air Combat entertaining? You bet! Given this attention to what some might Does it offer a variety of options that guaranthe level of Hellcats or Hornet. Although Air consider a niggling detail, it's hard to imagine tee that I will not soon stick the box on the Combat responds as readily as the Graphic how Air Combats designers could leave outshelf? Without doubt. Do I wish that the Simulations products, the frame rate is slower s slower one of the most important controls on any folks ar Electronic Arts had supplied me with and lacks the competition s seamless fluidity: aircraft: the rudder. You know, that little flap a rudder, a graphic designer who didn't skimp Air Combat's planes are also harder to fly on the tail that allows you to turn to the left on the detail, and motion as smooth as that than those in Hellcat or Hornet, but then, or right. Without a rudder, landing—already found in products made by Graphic Simulathat's not necessarily a bad thing, depending a difficult task-becomes a real chore. Intions? Amen to that! Is the program comon your flight sim needs. Try as you might, stead of drawing a rough bead on the airstrip pletely realistic? I really wouldn't know. you will never, ever, be able to stall in Hellcat. and fine-tuning your approach with the rudWhat I do know is that a sim with the number Oh sure, you can climb and climb and evender, you must bank the aircraft to make adof features, variety and responsiveness of tually start falling back to carth, but the enjustments-a maneuver fraught with danger Chuck Yeager's Air Combat is worth a test gine will never give out, and once you've got at low altitudes. Air Combat ameliorates this flight, especially for we Mac-types who must your nose pointed toward the horizon, you're situation to an extent by not being choosy live on a thin diet of top-flight games. CGW BECOME THE ULTIMATE GAMER CD DRIVE ON THE MARKET A JNIKIVE CON ID-Ft Jouse /PC SPECIAL BUNDLE From REM Software IBM/MPC Chessmaster 3000 Loom Secret of Monkey Island Stellar 7 With the Infinity Machine, you can make virtually any game bow to your every whim! With our easy to use real-time editing technology, you can add lives, edit character specs, and change weapons & abilities all without ever leaving your game. With our Infinity Code system, you can generate your own codes for easier access to game features And when you're in a tough situation, Infinity Machine's slow motion feature gets the action back under your control. With purchase of drive! RCA stereo jacks Front head phone Jack Personal head phone set Two stereo speakers Double enclosure door Automatic lens cleaner Plays audio CDs Fast 200ms access time 330 KB/sec transfer rate Multi-spin technology Photo CD capability MTBF 50,000 hr's TWO CO-Roms o Sal. MasterCard VISA $34.95.. TO ORDER, CALL 313-457-1161 Call for a FREE Co-Rom catalog filled with our complete line of CDs & Multimedia accessories! 1-800-777-3642 Q uality Computers Circle Reader Service #121 Computer Gaming World Circle Reader Service #128 Page 86 "


"EVEN THE BEST FOUIPMENT  . EVEN THE BEST EQUIPMENT NEEDS SOLID SUPPORT. SOUNDMAN FROM LOGITECH. THE BEST SUPPORTED SOUND BOARDS IN THE BUSINESS. SoundMan sound boards from Logitech are endowed with 7 day-a-week technical support, 2-3 year free replacement warranties (call for details), limited lifetime warranties and are guaranteed 100% Sound Blaster and Adlib compatible. Each sound board comes with extra-value soltware and the easiest sound enhanced installation available. From our gaming card to our full 16-bit audio bundle, when you plug in a SoundMan, you're getting more than just great quality sound, you're getting the SoundMiu lo Supermick reliability of one of the world's leading peripherals manufacturers, Pick LOGITECH one up at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2959. TH/@ Trademarks belong to their respective owners. The Senseware Company Circle Reader Service #83 Mantra StandMano "


"REVIEW THE LASER GUN 'S MIGHTIER THAN THE LASER SWORD Psygnosis' Game Of Multi-player Mayhem-Hired Guns ORDER L egs CamCEL by Douglas Seacat ome gamers are ashamed to admit it, During the practice scenarios it's a good require a quick and sure hand on the mouse, but it's fun to lug around an extremely idea to experiment with the characters to get lots of firepower, and are always a race against large gun and blow holes in things. Trap a feel for their strengths and weaknesses. The the clock. Given that Psygnosis has included a normally pacifistic gamer in a room with only two stats are Physique (which deter 17 different short action games, Hired Guns hordes of ruchless aliens, hand him a grenade mines toughness and strength) and Agility can be enjoyed without even playing the full launcher, then sit back and watch the shrap(which helps reduce damage when falling). campaign game. These mini games provide a nel fly. Even better, throw four friends toThe only other important difference between good arena for multi-player action, particugether in the same place, armed to the teeth, mercenaries is their equipment and weaplarly with a group which wants to kill each and things get much more interesting. This is onry, determined by profession. other more than the external foes. Nothing the multi-player fun, violence, and exciterelieves stress like gunning down your ment that Hired Guns brings to the computer FESSURE «Friends» with automatic weapons. My group screen. of testers frequently had to start over and do it for real» since it's so tempting to turn It's A Setup traitor. All in good fun, and who says mercenaries have to be loyal? Rorian Deevergh has assembled a motley team of the most capable and loyal criminals Into the Breach in the Luyten system. These 12 mercenaries Once your reflexes are sufficiently honed, kill for pay, their services open to anyone with it's time to start the real game. You should enough untraceable Rare Earth Elements to choose characters carefully, because once the meet their costs. Now they've taken a job on game begins, you're stuck with what you've Graveyard, a moon where a failed terraformThe five training scenarios are extremely chosen. Even though all 12 mercenaries are ing attempt has left the world harsh and easy, providing a good way to familiarize the at the drop site on Graveyard's surface, only dangerous. The weather is unpredictable, newcomer to all the controls. The game the four characters initially chosen continue floods are common, and the entire planet is screen is divided into four windows, each through to the mission's complction. More regularly bathed in radiation. To make things representing one of the four characters. These limiting, the chosen number of players is worse, the terraforming complex is guarded windows can be toggled between four serunchangeable, making it impossible for one by genetically engineered weapons of war. tings: a 3D perspective view, an inventory player to step out of the game and let the Once on the moon, a team of four must control screen, an auto-mapping display, and others continue penetrate Graveyard's defenses, find the fua list of the character's personal attributes. The full campaign game stretches across 19 sion power rings, and blow the starport into Movement is handled with the mouse by different locations as the team moves toward oblivion. Certain questions are left unanclicking on various spots in the window, althe starport, collecting fusion rings. These swered. Who hired Rorian's team? What is lowing the character to turn or move forward, locations are accessed by a nicely rendered the strategic importance of Graveyard? Why back, or to the side. Clicking in the center of map of the region. Once a location has been destroy half the moon in an enormous fusion the screen fires a weapon or uses an item. \"solved,\" it can be ignored for the rest of the explosion? None of this matters to a team of Weapons are reloaded (given a supply of game, although plavers can re-play the region Hired Guns--they are paid to kill, not ask ammo) by clicking the right button. The if they wish to explore for questions. system is reasonably fluid, although more supplies. Marring the it is easy to accidentally fire a Hired Guns Practicing at the Range weapon by clicking on the wrong TITLE: Hired Guns The game adequately prepares its players spot of the display. Other input dePRICE: $59.99 SYSTEM: vices can be used in the three or four for their stint as mercenaries. Included are Amiga REQUIREMENTS: 1MB RAM, 512K graphics memory for enhanced sound; four manuals covering game play and back person games, such as joystick or supports hard drive installation ground information. Training scenarios and keyboard. One or two players are # OF PLAYERS: PROTECTION: stuck with the mouse. Code look up short action games have been included to let DESIGNERS: DMA Design the players master the game system. All the The «Short Action Games» are PUBLISHER: Psygnosis Cambridge, MA scenarios can be played with one to four very difficult, a marked contrast (617) 497-5457 players. from the training scenarios. They Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS &BITS PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-599-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source Code-10020 'STAR WARS: REBEL ASSAULT Take control of a Star Wars vehicle in challenging pilot ing & combat sce narios. Hone flight & combat skills to defend Tatooine against Imperial at tack, challenge the menacing walkers of planet of Hoth and combat the Empire in intense deep Space battles. CD 544 *THRUSTMASTER'S FORMULA T1' is the most realistic control for all of today's driving simulators. Features fully functional steering wheel, brake and gas pedals and turbo boost gauge used in supporting games. $129 Visa & MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated same as Cash. Compatability guaranteed. Shipping charges non refundable. Shipping times not guaranteed. Most items shipped same day. Price and availability subject to change. MARIO IS MISSING! CD-ROM DELUXE Shipping Charges: Overnight within US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI, AK APO, FPO and Rural Routes $4 per order. Europe and S. America $19 1st item + $6 ea add'I. Africa, Pacific Rim and Middle East $25 1st item + $6 ea addi. COD within US only add $8. HANDLING $2 PER SHIPMENT 'CYBERMAN 3D CONTROLLER This revolutionary input device allows you to move freely in 3D. High resolution and absolute mapping provide maximum precision. Tactile feedback that lets you feel all the action from a bump against a wall to the full impact of being shot or attacked from behind $74 \"MARIO IS MISSING' Join Luigi as he searches for Mario who has been kidnapped by Bowser & his gang of Koopas. Explore exotic cities, master mysterious maps. thwart theiving Koopas, interrogate not so innocent bystanders, endure entertaining examinations and rescue Mario. CD 544 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM ADVENTURE Wing Command Ultima 6 S57 Wing Comm Ultima UW $55 Wolf Pack $42 World Circuit $34 World War 2 Pack $39 World of Xeen $42 Wrath of the Demon $29 $34 $32 Sound Galaxy NXPRO S109 SGalxy NXPRO 16 MM $499 SGlxy NXPRO 16 SCSIS139 SGlxy NXPRO MM Kit S399 Sound Machine 594 Thrustmaster FCS Pro 599 Thrustmaster Flight CS S59 Thrustmast Game Card S27 Thrustmaster Ruddr CS 599 Thrustmast WCS Mark 2 594 Video Blaster S349 Video Spigot S299 Virtual Pilot 361 Voice Blaster $64 IBM ADVENTURE $38 $44 IBM CD ROM S56 S43 Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P42$159 Acoustic Resrch P570 $319 Acoustic Resrch P622 $239 Adlib Sound Card $34 Adlib Gold Sound Card $99 Adlib Programmer's Man $6 Adv Gravis Ultrasound $129 CH Weapons CS 944 Cardinal 16 Pro $146 Champ Joystick $19 Comman Control Pad $17 Fighter Stick $79 Flight Stick $36 Flight Stick Pro $57 Game Card 3 Automatic $25 Labtec CS-150 Speakrs $17 Mach 2 Joystick $21 Mach 3 Joystick $27 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Maxx Control Yoke $54 Maxx Ruddr Pedals FLT $38 Media Concept $59 Pilot Control Stand $22 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $149 Pro Audio Spectrm Plus$129 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sony MDR E414 Headph $9 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Sony SRS9 Speakers $16 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $214 Sound Blaster 16 Basc S129 Sound Blaster Deluxe S82 SBlaster Discov CD 16 S469 SBlaster Discov CD 8 S399 SBlastr Edutain CD 16 $519 SBlastr Edutain CD & $448 SBlastr MIDI Conn Box $45 SBlastr Omni CD Drive $280 SBlastr Speakers $24 SBlaster Pro Deluxe S124 SBlaster Voice Editor S54 Sound Galaxy BX2 $65 Sound Galaxy NX2 $79 7th Guest S48 7th Guest 2:11th Hour S65 Ady of Willie Beamish S39 Aegis: Guardian of Fleet S54 Alone in the Dark S48 Arctic Baron Dinosaurs $42 Dracula $48 Dracula Unleashed $51 Dragon's Lair $36 Dune $54 EcoQuest Search Cetus $42 Eric The Unready $36 European Racers S41 Eye of the Beholder 3 $48 Eye of Beholder Trilogy $52 F15 Strike Eagle 3 $46 Fantasy Empires $45 Fatty Bear Funpack $34 Gateway 2 S36 Geekwad Gmes Glxy $21 Goblins 2 $30 Great Naval Battles $55 Hell Cab Hi-Tech Aircraft Hypnotic Harp S36 Impressionist Sources $49 Inca $39 Inca 2 $42 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $42 Interplay 10th Yr Anthlgy S49 Iron Helix $56 Jet Pack $46 Jungle Book S24 Jutland S48 King's Quest 5 $41 King's Quest 6 King'e $45 King's Quest 6 Upgrade $24 King's Ransom $38 Koshan Conspiracy Labyrinth $48 Lands of Lore $44 Laura Bow 2 $39 Lawn Mower Man $45 Legend of Kyrandia $39 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $46 Loom $39 Lord of the Rings S45 Lost in Time S39 Mad Dog Mcree S32 Magic Death $26 Man Enough $48 Mantis Experim Fighter $46 Mario Teaches Typing S48 Mario is Missing $44 Microcosm $49 Myst $64 NFL Coaches Club FB $32 Omar Sharif Bridge DLX $46 Patrician Police Quest 4 $42 Protostar Rebel Assualt $44 Return To Zork $48 Return of the Phantom $38 Ringworld $38 Scrabble Deluxe $25 Secret Monkey Island $39 Shadow of the Comet $48 Sherlock Holmes 1 $36 Sherlock Holmes 2 $36 Sherlock Holmes 3 $51 Shuttle $29 Sim Ant Sim Ant $48 Sim City Sim City $48 Sim Earth $48 Slaler & Charlie $42 Space Quest 4 $37 Spirit of Excalibur S26 Star Trek 25 Anniversary S55 Star Wars Chess S49 Stellar 7 S42 Stronghold S36 Tsk Frce/Red Strm RisngS35 Team Yankee 2 S29 Terminator 2 Chesswars S27 Terror of the Deep $36 Tetris Gold $32 The Journeyman Projct $48 Tony La Russa BB 2 946 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 $59 Under a Killing Moon $48 Where in the World Dix $59 Who Killed Sam Rupert $21 Gateway $32 Gateway 2:Homeworld S34 Hand of Fate $34 Heart of China Heaven and Earth S32 Heimdall S17 Hook Inca $34 Inca 2 S42 Indy Jones 4 $36 IndyJones Grfx Adv $27 Innocent Until Caught $36 Inspector Gadget $34 Isle of the Dead $38 Jack the Ripper $39 Jagged Alliance $48 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA $36 King's Quest 6 VGA S45 King's Ransom $38 Kronolog: Nazi Paradox S42 Laura Bow 2 $39 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Suit Larry 1 S19 Leisure Suit Larry 5 S24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 S42 Lost Files Sherick HolmsS26 Manhole Merchant Prince $39 Metal Mutant $32 Out of this World $36 Police Quest 1 VGA $19 Police Quest 3 VGA $36 Police Quest 4 $42 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $39 Quest for Glory 1 Return of the Phantom $34 Return to Zork $40 Rex Nebular Master Ed $52 Riftwar Legacy VGA S37 Ringworld $35 Robocop 3 532 Adv Willie Beamish S19 Alone in the Dark S33 Alone in the Dark 2 S36 Altered Destiny S29 Amazon Trail $32 Animation Classics $39 Award Bundle $46 Batman Returns S32 Beverly Hillbillies $30 Bloodnet $42 Blue Force: Next of Kin S39 Castle Wolfstein S37 Companion of Xanth S34 Conquests Robin Hood $36 Cruise for a Corpse $24 Dark Heart of Uukrul Dark Seed $19 Day of the Tentacle $34 Dracula $34 Dragon Knight 3 $49 Dragon's Sphere $42 Dreamweb $36 Earth Invasion WIN $24 East Front WIN $32 S24 Epic S32 Eric the Unready S21 Flashback S32 Floor 13 $15 Fourplay WIN $19 Freddy Pharkas $38 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight S36 S27 Backroad Racers S43 Battle Chess WIN/DOS $44 Bloodnet $45 Blue Force: Next of Kin $39 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Campaign $35 Castles 2 $49 Chaos Continuum Chessmaniac 5 Billion 1 $35 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Chopper Pack $37 Conan $26 Conquests Robin Hood $42 Conspiracy $44 Curse of Enchantia $26 Cyber Race $48 Dark Seed $48 Darksun $55 Day of the Tentacle $45 $42 $18 "


"game's illusion of progress, if a region is «reexplored,\" all the foes and equipment are reset, a throwback to older, less sophisticated dungeon crawls. Each location is reasonably large and thoughtfully designed. The team will need to move carefully and have weapons ready at all times. Although this is a pure combat game (there are no \"good guys\" on Graveyard; everything that moves is deadly and must be killed), the combat is well modulated. Fools blindly rushing forward dic a quick death by overwhelming numbers of tough creatures. Playing tactically and carefully is rewarded, since ammunition must be found and wounds fixed by medical kits and food. Playcrs who establish killing zones and careful sentry points will have the most success. NOTS STRES LEE na TERLE HOMAD 100% SORS FITTESS NYSIS FCILITY CHPERIENCE CRARYING Napalm in the Morning the game requests a code from a huge list. Entering the code once doesn't stop future Hired Guns has a flavor all its own. The requests, which can number in the dozens per designers have done a good job of providing game session. The game sometimes requests an entertaining gaming atmosphere. The four different windows allow for a unique perspeca code when saving, which is frustrating since tive on the 3D environment, and the interthe deadly nature of the game necessitates frequent saves. esting variety of weapons and weapons tactics help immerse players in the game's darkly If played with four human players, two violent mood. people end up on the keyboard. Unfortunately, the designers forgot to include the Sound is handled particularly well, if you ability to slide left and right with the keyhave the necessary expanded memory. The environment is evoked in dripping water, method of movement, allowing a person to ry: the it board layouts. Sliding is a good tactical falling rain, and the ominous sound of footkeep a single direction of vision while movsteps approaching closer. A grenade blast ing. I can see no reason why this feature was starts with a distant thump and roars closer as s neglected for keyboard players. it nears the character, and there is something uniquely reassuring about the crisp click of a Certain sacrifices have been made with magazine of 9mm High Velocity rounds begrap graphics quality to allow for four indeing reloaded into a spent gun. pendent characters. For this reason, the graphics are not as impressive as usual for The game scenarios have been designed to Psygnosis. The most glaring example is the heighten tension. Perhaps the biggest thrill of F fact that items found in the game look nearly the game is the feeling of uncertainty as the identical until they're picked up, requiring overworked mercenaries open a new door or players to pick up every item to see if they take a lift up into the unknown. Tension is need it. achieved by lulls between action. Much of the complex can be explored in relative safety, nervously moving down long corridors, glancing frantically in every corner. Just when the players begin to relax, a troupe of Robodyne 7000 robots will fall upon them, ripping them into bloody birs. The game takes on a new dimension when played with several people. Trying to coordinate a team of four is difficult and entertaining. This opens a broad range of tactical possibilities since different groups of players can be performing independent functions. Manipulating items is generally tedious. InTensions are easily escalated in this situation, ventory handling could be better in several leading to fantastic moments of surprise. A ways. An easy method to exchange items player using a grenade might not realize a between party members would have been teammate is in the blast radius, blowing him nice. Right now, players must drop items and to smithereens. Trigger happy players can shoot down friends reflexively when they step let them be picked up. Worse, only one item in front of them. Inexperienced teams may can be dropped in a location at a time. cluster too close together, leaving no room for the wounded character in front to escape. Shoot to Kill Such situations of frantic panic are rarely Despite the flaws, Hired Guns is a surprisfound in single person games. ingly enjoyable game. There is little plot, and Fire in the Hole most of the game involves killing without being killed, bur still, there aren't many While I was initially overjoyed at the volgames on the market that allow four people ume of documentation, this quickly turned to disappointment. The four manuals are to play simultaneously and independently. thorough, but flawed. The source material is Aside from the copy-protection, game play marred by a lack of quotation marks and is smooth and quick. As a tactical action apostrophes which make them annoying ingame, Hired Guns is viscerally satisfying and stead of interesting to read. provides an interesting and exciting backdrop Hard drive support is unusual for for mercenary violence. Just remember to Psygnosis, and a welcome change. This adkeep assault rifles loaded, the fluoride laser vance is offset by extremely intrusive copy dry, and try to avoid tossing grenades into the protection. At apparently random intervals, back of your partner's head. cow C-LITOOT OUT O UR 3093 JALEC FCL MUTTAR 1002 A certain degree of problem solving has been included in the game. While there are no complex moral dilemmas or plot twists (indeed, once one begins the mission, there is no plot at all), the unthinking player will not ger far. Areas must be explored thoroughly to find the passcards and keys needed to continue. Further, it is often beneficial to divide the team, sending particular members into different areas to cover as much ground as possible. This is particularly true since most regions are partially flooded. Humans in the game (including the cyborg with the human brain) need air to live and will quickly drown if neglected. Even robots who don't breath may carry equipment which rots when exposed to water, forcing a player to pay attention to his inventory. Perhaps most important is proper deployment of the team's weapons. The game boasts a broad spectrum of firepower. There are many different types of guns, rifles, lasers, flamethrowers and explosives. Gun types use different ammunition, so it's a good idea to equip people with different classes of weapons. Proper use of weapons is crucial. A grehas a wide blast radius, which can be dangerous in close quarters. Similarly, while a flamethrower doesn't do much damage, it can go through multiple foes and penetrate force fields. PINSIU AGILITY CIBERICACE CARRYING Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPANIONS OF CHIPS &BITS 'COMPANIONS OF XANTH Explore Piers Anthony's magical world of mystic wonders and become a player in a game where the stakes are the existence of magic itself. Interact with Elves, Ogres, Demons, Centaurs, a serpentine Naga princess and even the deadly Gap Dragon. $34 *HIRED GUNS' Your mission is to travel to Graveyard, a small moon orbiting planet Yalhoth to extract members of an extreme political group being held captive by a rival faction. You battle your way through over 20 theaters of engagement, encountering a variety of adversaries to liberate the hostages. $32 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'I 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source Code-10020 ALEGEND FEMME FATALE PLAYBOY ELECTAONIC THE DIGITAL PUZZLE FOR ADULTS THE PLAYBOY ELECTRONIC DATEBOOK 'FEMME FATALE is a digital jigsaw puzzle for adults. The full screen digitized VGA images may be scrambled into a varying number of pieces. Numerous help features include save & reload, multiple games, audible assistance hints & the ability to import your own PCX images. Includes 16 ravishing girls. $26 MORE THAN 50 OF YOUR FAVORITES FROM THE FIFTIES TO THE NINETIES 'THE PLAYBOY ELECTRONIC DATEBOOK' is where you'll find the calendar girls of your dreams. Blonde & brunette, voluptuous and svelte-you're just a click away from a date with a Playmate or even one of the many celebrities who bared it all. Who says getting organized can't be fun? 542 INCLUDES THE FAMOUS MARILYN MONROE NUDE! \"LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 As a contestant on a dating game show, you have won a 2 week vacation at a posh resort! Surrounded by luxury & girls, you mingle, schmooze & work your way up to a grand encounter in the penthouse suite! S42 IBM ADVENTURE IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION IBM ARCADE IBM ADULT Space Ace 2 $34 Street Fighter 2 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $28 Take-A-Break Pool WIN $29 The Tinies Titan $29 Tristan Pinball $19 Wild Streets $24 Zool $34 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Southern Beauties CD $26 Strip Poker 3 $31 $31 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 ea $19 Strip Poker Professional $29 Strip Pokr Pro DD 1-6ea $16 Wicked QTime Movie CD$42 Women of Venus CD $27 IBM HINT BOOKS IBM ADULT Sam & Max Hit the RoadS38 Secret Monkey Island 2 S21 Secret of 7th Labyrinth S42 Shadow Caster S48 Simon the Sorcerer $32 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA $24 Space Quest 5 VGA $36 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Star Reach $36 Star Trek 25th Annivers $35 Star Trek: Judgmnt Rites$38 Starship S38 Terminator 2029 Term 2029 Oper Scour S19 Terminator Rampage $38 Terror of the Deep $36 The Dig $45 Under a Killing Moon $43 Warriors of Legend S18 Where in Space CSD DX $44 Where in Time CSD $32 Where in World CSD $32 Where in World CSD Dix $52 Yserbius $36 $36 $10 S10 $48 Armoured Fist $42 Art of the Kill $24 B17 Flying Fortress $19 Birds of Prey $32 Car and Driver $26 Cyber Race $42 Delta V $48 F117A Stealth Fighter S42 F15 Strike Eagle 2 S18 F15 Strke Eag 3 Aces PK$52 F15 Strike Eagle III S42 F19 Stealth Fighter S18 F40 Pursuit Simulator S31 Falcon 3.0 Falcon 20 $46 Falcon 3 Scenario 1 $24 Falcon 3 Scenario 2 $33 Falcon 3 Scenario 3 $32 Falcon 4.0 $59 Fire & Forget 2 $30 Flat Top $18 Fleet Defender F14 $48 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Fly the Grand Canyon $39 Grand Canyon Scenery $16 Grandest Fleet $36 GNB America in Atlantic $21 GNB Super Ships Atl $19 Great Naval Battles S44 GNB Scen Build $28 Gunship 2000 VGA $37 Gunship 2000 Scen Disk$24 Harrier Assault Harrier Assault SVGA $48 Indy Car Racing $39 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Jet Fighter 2.0 Miss Disk$19 Jump Jet $39 Jump Jet Aces Pack $50 Knights of the Sky $19 M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Mantis Exp Ft $34 Maximum Overkill S43 Maximum Overkill MD 1 $24 Maximum Overkill MD 2 $28 Tornado S48 Mechwarrior 2 $42 Ultrabots Sanction Earth S39 MegaFortress $12 Voice Comman F117A S18 Megafortress MD 2 $26 Voice Comman F15SE3 $18 MiG 29 $48 WC 2 Operation 1 S22 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 544 WC 2 Operation 2 S22 Micrsit Fit Sim Scen SF $32 WC 2 Speech Mod S13 Micrsit Fit Sim Scen DC $29 WC Secret Mission S20 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32W C Secret Miss Bundle $20 Pacific Strike $52 WC Secret Miss 2 HD $20 Pacific Strike Speech Pk $18 Wing Commander S19 Privateer Privateer $47 Wing Commander 2 S48 Privateer Special Ops $22 Wing Commander Acad S32 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Wolfpack $15 Red Baron World Circuit S35 Red Baron MD Builder $18 X-Wing S38 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 X-Wing MD 1 S18 Scenery Collect Set A $37 X-Wing MD 2 B-Wing S18 Scenery Collect Set B $34 Yeager's Air Combat S21 Sea Woll Seal Team $42 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $34 IBM ARCADE Secret Weapons P80 $21 Secret Weapons He 162 $21 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $32 Secret Weapons DO335 $21 Battle Storm $32 Secret Weapons He162 $21 Dragon Lair $22 Secret Weapons P38 $21 Dragon Lair 2 $34 Shuttle Dragon Lair 3 $34 Silent Service 2 S19 Fire & Forget $24 Speed Racer $34 Galactic Conqueror $31 Strike Commander $41 Galactic Empire $27 Strike Com Spec Ops 1 $20 Goblins VGA $18 Strike Comm Speech Pk $16 Goblins 3 $29 Stunt Island $37 Guy Spy $24 Sub War 2025 $42 Incredible Mach $27 Syndicate $36 Incredible Machine 2 $27 TIE Fighter $48 Incredible Machine 2 WNS30 Task Force Admirals Pk $52 Incredible Toons S25 Team Yankee 2 $24 Microsoft Arcade WIN S29 Test Drive 2 The Collect $19 Nova 9 S21 $29 Paper Boy 2 $27 Test Drive 3 Passion $19 Pick'n Pile $19 Test Drive 3 Road & Car $16 Sliders $29 Thunderhawk S16 Space Ace $32 $26 IBM SIMULATION 101 Sex Positions CD 544 101 Sex Postions 2 CD 344 Adult Reference CD $24 Adv of Brad Stallion CD $39 Animated Fantasies CD $34 Animatd Fantasies 2 CD $34 Busting Out CD $38 Busty Babes CD Centerfold Squares Debby Does Dallas CD Deep Throat CD $42 Ecstacy CD $29 Extreme Delight CD $22 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD 1-6 eas18 Girlfriend Suzie S36 Girlfriend Teri S36 Jigsaw Pinups S19 Kama Sutra CD Legends of Porn 2 CD Lovely Ladies II CD Metal and Lace My Private Collect CD $39 Mystic of Orient CD PC-Pix CD $39 Paradise Club CD $46 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $24 Physical Therapy CD $19 Planet of Lust $19 Playboy Electric Datbk S42 Sex Olympics $19 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Bard's Tale 1 Bard's Tale 2 Bard's Tale 3 $10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization $16 Darklands $14 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dragons of Flame $8 Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Gt War Planes $16 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $10 Elvira Mistress Dark S10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $10 Fred Pharkas S8 Gateway Savage Front $10 Global Conquest w/disk S21 Gunship 2000 S16 Harpoon S16 Heart of China Hero's Quest $10 Immortal $10 Indy Jones 4 King's Quest 1-6 ea $10 Knights of Legend S10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 3 $29 ATP 2.0 $29 ATP Flight Simulator S19 A10 Avenger $46 A320 Airbus S44 AH-64 Helicopter S46 Aces Over Europe S39 Aces Europe Mission 1 $27 Aces Europe Mission 2 $27 Aces of the Deep $42 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacit Mission Disk $19 Air Duel $33 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Armour Geddon $32 S10 $10 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW THIS CUBE IS NOT FOR RUBES Aris Entertainment's Video Cube Space Puts A New Spin On An Old Idea by Gordon Goble Tn the early 1980s, Erno Rubik placed a ing a CD-ROM based product, installation quite compelling, and one gets a real sense of new toy in the fidgeting hands of the is complete in less than a minute and will accomplishment from putting together all six I world. In case you've just fallen off of the usurp less than a MB of valuable hard disk images within the allotted time. As the game turnip truck of pop culture, Rubik's Cube space. An Aris program group and icon are progresses, though, this process becomes very was a 3 x 3 block of small cubes magically held automatically created for future use. difficult indeed, and this fact brings us to our together to make a larger one. The object of Once the program is loaded, and against a this exercise was to twist and turn the blocks Tip O'The Day, once again free of charge to blackened backdrop, the Video Cube apthose who've actually purchased this magaso that each side of the large cube became a pears. Lining the right hand side of the screenin (Those who haven't will suffer prave single color. True masters of Rubik's Cube are several icons permitting Video Cube Spacecould solve the puzzle in less than a minute disasters somewhere deep within the innards cadets to choose a game, save a game, pause, and were forever enshrined on silly television signal for help, select from game options (of of their hard drives). programs. which there are few), and quit when fully When time is truly of the essence, simply spaced out. At the base of the screen is a timer save, then reload that specific game. Voand point counter. That's it-the entire game ila...while credit is still given for completed rests within the cube itself. images, the clock has automatically been reMade up of several smaller squares, the set! While in some circles this may be considVideo Cube sits squarely in the middle of the ered cheating, others have allowed their screen. Just one side of the Cube is visible at general moral decay to corrupt their gaming any time, and in each of its miniature comhabits. We aren't proud, but we finish our ponents is a portion of a digitized photograph. There are a total of six images in each och $ games. of the 18 game levels, and one must \"turn\" Video Cube Space neither requires nor offers each mini-cube so that the appropriate side a manual, and the Windows «Help» file faces forward, until a completed image is should surely suffice. Wrapped in what has to Aris Entertainment has taken Mr. Rubik's visible across the entire large cube. In the be the most expensive packaging that this invention and moved it to a two-dimensional opening levels, each of the six images are quite reviewer has yet to see a cardboard topoo canvas-the home computer screen. Instead distinct (a red Mars, the big blue marble of raphical mystery in itself), Video Cube Space of simply matching colors with one another, Earth, a space shuttle) but naturally, things $3 is light entertainment for those who enjoy Video Cube Space players are required to unify get progressively tougher in the later going. hard-edged rock and roll with their digital small segments of a larger digital image, genAt the first level, the cube is made up of just crally one of the U.S. space program. If the puzzles. The surf meets punk meets funk 16 smaller components (4 x 4), the second daunting task is finished in the allotted time level cube consists of 25 (5 x 5), while those music is great if you've the taste for such, and frame, players will be rewarded with a short, challenging the third level will have to sort the video adds to the excitement, but cerfull-motion video clip, accompanied by varifrom 36 (6 x 6) image bits. The cube nevertamy n a ous w-it-1-0-y cool rock/funk musical scores. swells above this size, but the images themtoo complex. You won't be asked to appear But before you get completely cubular, you selves become visually less distinct from one on That's Incredible if you finish all the puzmust first derermine if your computer system another as time goes on. zles, but then again, you don't have to be an meets the Video Cube Space standards, and Complete a still image of, say, a space-walkidiot savant to solve the thing. Perhaps a bit high standards they are. A 386-33MHz maing astronaut, and (after a brief delay) a quick pricey for the play value it offers, Video Cube chine is mandatory (a 486-25 is recom\"full-motion\" video of his daring deeds will Space might still be a good discounted buy for mended), as is a CD-ROM drive with a spring to life, complete with musical the casual gamer. Cow 150K/second minimum data transfer rate, accompaniment. Unfortunately, Windows 3.1 or better, at least 4MB RAM, even though the 486-33 machine Video Cube Space and an SVGA display with at least 512K of used for testing met with program TITLE: Video Cube Space video RAM. In addition, to enjoy the «shredminimums, both the video and PRICE: $49.95 ding music\" (sic) of Video Cube, an MPC audio were somewhat choppy. RecREQUIREMENTS: 386-33MHz or better, compatible sound board is a must. If your ommended alterations to boot files 4MB RAM, VGA graphics, gaming apparatus makes the grade, read in both DOS and Windows proWindows 3.1. MPC compatible sound card on.... duced improved audio, yet video PROTECTION: None PUBLISHER: Aris Multimedia Entertainment Video Cube Space is installed and accessed remained wanting. Marina Del Rey, CA (800) 228-2747 through the Windows Program Manager. BeVideo Cube Space is nevertheless 02:cali SYSTEM: IBM EAP Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"VENICE INDYCAR CHIPS & BITS RACING Dor!!F10\"! more 'INDYCAR RACING' Experience the thrill of racing the world's fastest race cars against the world's best drivers. No other simulation gives you IndyCar driving this real. Coax your car through an outside pass, drop through the corkscrew at Laguna Seca or slide through the groove at 220 mph. $39 1erdom PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source Code-10020 W Den Of Iniquity are TURN 'THE MERCHANT PRINCE' Explore the world! Can you seek & explore the old world and find new worlds with their own prospering ports of call? Find advantageous trade routes. Historical & random maps. Up to 4 players. Modem play.$39 CREDIT C ARTER. ELECTRONIC LOCALES 112 D11377   , 'EARTH INVASION' For Windows. On patrol in earth orbit you hear the first reports of a giant Cyborg Mothership. Only a few thousand miles from the planet, it has launched an attack on ground defense systems. Total surprise has rendered the planet helpless. You are civilization's only hope. VS912 ISAALT BLE. DISCIPLES OF STEEL' The Ultimate in classical fantasy role-play. ing. Help save a richly detailed land from self-destruction. Unite the people of this ancient land and together you can de feat the evil horde that is gathering... growing... waiting... Features animated and detailed VGA graphics $29 of INVASION MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WINDOWS 3D1 PRODUCTIONS INC. CO CYBER SPACE' Enter the alternative reality of science-fiction role-playing. San Francisco, 2090-One dark corner of an ailing world where Megacorporation repression collides with street warlare. Vector & 3D bit mapped graphics. $37 $24 IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $19 Ultima Uwrld Styg Abyss $19 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $33 Veil of Darkness S37 Vengeance of Excalibur $16 War of the Lance $19 Waxworks $29 Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 Wizardry 7 Wizardry Trilogy 2 $32 3 S39 IBM SPORTS Leisure Suit Larry 1-5 ea$10 Lemmings $18 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Lost Files Sherlock Hims$10 LucasArts Adven Book $16 Lucas Air Combat Strat $16 Magic Candle 2 $10 Magic Candle 3 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhunter San Fran $10 Maniac Mansion $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed $10 Might & Magic 1 & 2 S10 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Off Bk Leisre Suit Lrry 2 $14 Off Bk Ultima 2nd Edit $16 DH Gde Rogr Wilco Adv $14 OH Gde King Ost 3rd Ed $16 off bk of Police Quest $12 Satriot Pepper's Advent Time S8 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Off Strat S16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger Protostar S8 Quest for Clues 2 Quest for Clues 3 $21 Quest for Clues 4 $21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3&4 ea $10 Quest for Glory Strat S19 Questbusters: Bk Clues $18 Railroad Tycoon $12 Realms of Arkania $14 Rex Nblr Cos Gen Ben $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Caster $18 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1-4 ea $10 Spellcasting 101: Offi Bk$14 Spellcasting 201 Bk $10 Star Trek 25th Anniv $9 Strike Command Offc Bk$14 Summoning $16 Time Quest $10 Treasures Savage Front $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4 $10 Ultima 5 $10 Ultima 6 $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 & Underwrld Bk $16 Ultima 7.5 Balanc Scales$16 Ultima Avatar Adven Bk $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima U World Lab BK $12 Warriors of Eternal Sun $14 Wizardry 6 $12 Wizardry 7 Yeager Air Combat $16 Yserbius $10 Zelda 3 $9 Discoveries of the Deep $37 EcoQuest VGA $32 EcoQuest 2 VGA $34 Fatty Bear Bday Srpse $32 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Mavs Beacn Typ 35 $29 Mavs Beacn Typ WIN 35534 Munchers Bundle S29 Peter Pan Story Painting$34 Picture Perfect $32 Play Room $35 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Print Shop Dix Bus Grph S29 Putt Putt Goes Moon S42 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Putts Fun Pak $21 Quarky Quyso Sci VGA $29 Reader Rabbit 1 S37 Reader Rabbit 2 S37 Robot Writer Plus S30 Secret Isl Dr. Quandry S38 Slater & Charlie Camp S29 Sticky Bear Spellgaber $32 Stickybear Opposites S23 Stickybear Parts Speech$32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Read Comp $30 Stickybear Reading Tut $31 Stickybear Shapes $29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tut $32 $14 C eltic Legends $32 Challenge 5 Realms $39 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn Cobra Mission $39 Conan $16 Corporation $19 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Empire $16 Cyber Space $37 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Sun $47 Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp $34 Darklands Darklands Mast Edition $51 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Disciples of Steel $29 Dungeon Hack S42 Dungeon Master S31 Dungeon Master 2 $36 Dusk of the Gods Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $29 Elvira Mistress Dark $22 Eternam $19 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Forgotten Castle $18 Four Crystals of Trazere S26 Gateway Savage Frontr $32 Gods Gryphon Mast of Havlar $38 Heros Quest 1 VGA S19 Interactive Movie 1 $52 Lands of Lore $34 Legacy of Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $39 Legend $31 Legend of Valor $39 Legends of Drakka $38 Lord of the Rings V1 S32 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Loremaster $39 Lost Tribe S29 Magic Candle 1 S24 Magic Candle 2 $19 Magic Candle 3 $19 Martian Dreams $37 Megatraveller S24 Mega Traveller 2 S12 Mega Traveller:Zhodani S19 Might & Magic 3 S36 Might & Magic 4 $39 Might & Magic 5 Pirates $19 Planet's Edge S22 Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness S38 Protostar S39 Quest for Glory 3 S38 Quest for Glory 4 $42 Realms of Arkania $35 Red Crystal $36 Rings of Medusa $12 Rome: Pathway to Pow $29 Savage Empire $34 Space 1889 $21 Spacewrecked $19 SpellJammer:Pirats Rim $16 Spellcraft:Aspect Valor $38 Star Saga 2 S28 Stonekeep $52 Stronghold $36 Summoning $38 Tales Magc:Proph Shad $16 Treasures Savage Frontr$19 Twilight 2000 VGA $32 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar $35 Ultima 5 Warriors Destny$38 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Black Gate $48 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $18 Ultima 7.5 Part 2 S20 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle 548 Ultima 7.5 Serp Isl SpPkS18 Ultima 8: Pagan $52 Ultima 8 Speech Pack $17 Ultima Uworld 2 Labrnth $46 $16 S10 4D Boxing $17 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Baseball Gen Man$29 APBA Baseball Stat 2.0 $29 APBA Basketball $34 APBA Bowling APBA Football APBA Micro Manager $32 ATP Tennis $32 American Gladiators $21 Baseball for Windows $46 David Robinsn NBA Act $44 Front Page Football $39 Front Page Football Pro 542 Greens Hardball 3 $34 Hardball 3 Collection S42 Hardball 3 Players Disk S16 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk S19 Internatl Sports Chall S21 Jack Nickls Crse 1-6 ea $15 Jack Nicklaus Sign Ed $42 Jack Nicklaus SE Crse 1 $9 Joe Montana Football $31 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 LH Boxing Contenders $16 LH Football Utilities $16 LH Pro BBall 91 Team $16 $26 $16 IBM ROLE PLAYING $10 $21 IBM EDUCATIONAL All Character Editors $16 Arborea Journ Innr Sanc $34 Arena: Elder Scrolls Bard's Tale 3 $32 Bard's Tale Construct $27 Black Crypt Bloodstone Bloodwych $15 $32 $27 Castle of Dr Brain EGA $25 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 "


"WC = nisu. Over There eran Jali A Look At Europe's Latest Mol by Robin Matthews More o or so was one), published in terplay. A Plavi terieur will ne of the surprise hits in the last year The scene is thus ser for this promising of the same but better. Alone in the Dark 2: or so was Infogrammes' Alone in the sequel with your hero negotiating puzzles, Santa Claws is Coming to Town should be Dark (Alone), published in the States traps and all manner of nasties, alive and shipping in France on both disk and CD as by I-Motion and distributed by Interplay. A undead, inside the house, outside the house, you read this. The world-wide release, via I stunning 3D horror adventure, Alone reand aboard a spooky pirate ghost ship. Motion and Interplay, should take place very ceived critical acclaim from virtually every early in the new year. corner of the PC world. A sequel, Alone in the Dark 2, subtitled Santa Claws is Coming to Smelting Cyber-Steel Town, will be released shortly. Roll titles, cue actors, lights down and run flashback seVirgin Games, still basking in the not inconsiderable glory of The 7th Guest and quence #1.... The 24th of December, 1721. The high Westwood's Lands of Lore, is preparing to seas around the anarchic island of Haiti. His release its next blockbuster in Beneath a Steel Sky. The second game from RevoluMajesty's ship The Flying Dutchman—a fine tion Software using their Virtual Theatre vessel if ever there was onc—is attacked by game engine, Beneath a Steel Sky develops buccaneers led by the infamous pirate, OneEyed Jack. Blind in one eye, he seems to have the Lure of the Temptress system and adapts Infogrammes' Alone in the Dark 2 it to what Virgin claims is the World's First been compensated for the loss by the gift of Computer-Based Animated Comic Book second sight, especially with regards to the The backgrounds and objects in the game Adventure. Presented as a graphic novel, Bewhereabouts of British merchant ships. The have now been animated, and special attenFlying Dutchman is boarded and her only tion has been maid to making all of the charve now been animated, and special attenneath a Steel Sky is set in a cyberpunk world tion has been paid to making all of the charwhere a handful of vast corporations domitreasure, Elizabeth Jarret, is taken.... acter animation more realistic. The nate and control all aspects of life. Cut flashback #1, cue continuiry and run quirkiness of movement in Alone did give that flashback #2.... product its own feel, and although movement The hero, Robert Foster, has lived all his life has been greatly smoothed out, this sequel in The Gap-the harsh areas of wasteland The 24th of December, 1924. California. very much retains the flavor of Alone. The that lie between the ecologically controlled Prohibition, bootleggers, machine guns and pre-release version has animation four gang law. Ted Sticker has been investigating times as quick as the first game, and Inthe kidnapping of a young girl by the notorifogrammes hopes to improve this further. ous gangster, One-Eyed Jack. Ted has not been heard of for a week, and his close friend Because of several costume changes durand Supernatural Private Eve Edwarding the story, Alone 2 will offer only one Carnaby decides to check things out. Onemale character, instead of the equal comEyed Jack's gangland hideaway is Hell's plement of sexes as in the original. MonKitchen, a dark and forbidding residence set sters are now more intelligent and will track high on a cliff somewhere between L.A. and you. And the multiple camera-angle apSan Francisco. This house overhanging the proach is further refined, resulting in some Pacific ocean is where Edward Carnaby will superb cinematic sequences. So, on the baThe animation in Alone 2 is much faster pick up the threads of two disappearances.... sis of a preview copy, this seems to be more than in the original. Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"Brian Vodnik's WALLS OR CHIPS &BITS Kingdoms REME WALLS OF ROME' From the plains of Carthage to the forests of Britain, from Greece and Persia to Rome herself, experience siege warfare as the ancients knew it. Play extended campaigns of conquest and defense against an unpredictable computer. You give the orders: your troops carry them out. $39 KINGDOMS OF GERMANY' is the second in the King doms series of me dieval conquest games. Kingdoms of Germany follows the addictive, award winning Vikings with improved & refined point & click interface, game. play & computer opponents. Fea. tures huge map that you actually play on. $34 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source Code-10020 Orrmany MINIRAFT ESPEED PACER \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer oppo. nent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the course disks for extra fun. $32 SPEED RACER Fasten your seat belts racing fans, because Speed Racer and his fabulous Mach 5 are back. Join Speed and the GO Team as they race around the world, battling villains like Snake Oiler and the Gang of Assassins. Pilot the Mach 5 through six high torque, high tech adventures. $34 Addre The skipt SKO Prodo estrelgh Chip \"UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS' Suit up and go head-tohead against NFLPA pros in a ferocious battle of outrageous tackles, impossible one-handed catches, brutal head-butts and flying helmets. It will knock you flat on your grass! $34 Profile al scores Drop IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY S29 2858 LH Pro Basketball S36 LH Pro Bsktbil 74-83 S16 LH Pro Bsktbil 89/90 $16 LH Pro Bsktbll Leadr $16 LH Pro Basketball Utilit $16 Lakers vs Celtics $17 Lance Halfner Baseball $36 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Lance Haffner Coll BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football $36 Lance Haffner Hockey $36 Links Course 2 Firestne $17 Links Course 3 Bay Hill $17 Links Course 4 Pinehrst $17 Links Course 5 Dorado $17 Links Course 6 Bartn Ck $9 Links Course 7 Troon No$17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro C1 Mauna Kea$ 19 Links Pro C2 Pinehurst $19 Links Pro C3 Banff Spng$19 Links Pro C4 Belfry $19 Links Pro C5 Innsbrook $19 Links Pro C6 Firestone $20 ML 1950s World Series $17 ML 1960s World Series S17 ML 1970s World Series $17 ML 1980s World Series $17 ML Bbll 4 USAT FanMgr $25 ML Bll 4 USAT Gen Mgr $19 ML Baseb Team Disk ea S20 ML Football 2 S39 ML Personal Pro Golf S28 Madden Football $12 Madden Football 2 $17 Magic Johnson Fast Brk SG Mario Andretti Racing S17 Michael Jordan Flt Sim $21 Microleague Fball Dix $39 Microleage Bball Seattle $12 MLBB Season 82-88 ea $17 Microleage 89 FB Seas $17 Microle Bball 4 USA Tod $31 Microleague Basketball $28 Microleague Football $20 Microsoft Golf for WIN $39 Mike Ditka Power Fball $34 NFL Challen 1985 Teams$15 NFL Challen Prem Ed S59 NFL Coaches Club $36 NFL Football $19 NFL Video Football $39 NHL Hockey $44 Nascar Challenge $29 PGA Tour Golf $21 PGA Tour Golf Course 1 $17 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 PGA Tour Crs 1 WIN $17 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $32 ProFtball Analyst 92 Edt $19 Quarter Pole $30 Road to the Final Four S37 Tom Landry Football $29 Tony L Baseb2 Team $14 Tony L Baseb2 Fan Mgr 3$14 Tony LaRussa Basebll 2 $36 Tony L 2 Baseball Stad $18 Tony LaRussa AL Stad $15 Tony LaRussa Baseball $19 Tony LaRussa Fan Mgr $15 Tony LaRussa NL Stad S15 Tony L Team 1901-68 S15 Unnecessry Roughness $34 Wayne Grtzky Hockey 3 $36 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Weaver Commissr Dk 2 $16 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 Archon Ultra $37 Fields of Glory $34 Arctic Baron Fort Apache Armada S22 Genghis Khan 2 $36 Ashes of Empire $34 Genghis Khan $37 Bandit Kings Anct China $37 Gettysburg $29 B attle Isle $32 Gettysburg:Interact Batt $34 Battle Isle Scen Disk $22 Global Domination $29 Battles of Destiny $36 Goblins 2 Princ Buftoon $24 Big Business $29 Gold of the Americas $24 Breach 2 $24 Grt Nav Batt Admir Pack $48 Breach 2 Scen Disk $15 HUMANS $24 Breach 3 $36 Harpoon 2 $48 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $42 Heirs to the Throne $36 Caesar $36 Humans: Insult to Injury $14 Campaign 2 $36 Kingdoms of France $34 Capitalist Pig WIN S19 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Carriers at War $24 Koshan Conspiracy $32 Carriers at War 2 $39 Kye Deluxe WIN S33 Carriers War Const Kit S29 L'Empereur $37 Castles $18 Laser Squad $16 Castles 2 $36 Lemmings $19 Chessm 4000 Turb WIN S36 Lemmings 2: The Tribes $35 Civilization $44 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Civilization WIN $42 Liberty or Death $37 Clash of Steel S39 Lost Admiral $19 Cohort 2 S18 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Command HQ Classic S18 Lost Admiral Scen Disk $23 Conquer for Windows $39 Lost Vikings $24 Conquered Kingdoms $36 Maelstrom $38 Conquered Kingd Scent $24 Master of Orion $39 Conquest of Japan $36 Mega Lo Mania $31 Crisis in the Kremlin $39 Merchant Colony $17 Dark Star $36 Millenium $12 Detroit $36 Nano Tank WIN $28 Discovery Stp Columbus $34 Napoleonics S34 Dominion One Kings Life$41 New World Order S38 Dominus $39 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Dune S16 Nuclear War $19 Dune 2 S34 Objection Enhanced $42 El Fish $34 Operation Combat $12 Empire Deluxe $36 Outpost $42 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Paladin 2 $34 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Patrician $34 Fantasy Empires $42 Perfect General $36 Ciclo Rondorfeine WC Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect Gen Scen 2 20th$23 Perfect Gen Scen WW2 $21 Populous $17 Populous 2 $32 Populous Promisd Land $14 Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 S40 Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Rampart $17 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms $16 Red Zone $32 Renegade Legion Interc $21 Riders of Rohan Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $36 Rules of Engagement $19 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN 934 Seven Cities Gold 2 $36 ShadowGate WIN $32 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Siege With Exp Disk $24 Sim Ant $32 Sim Ant Windows $34 Sim City 2000 S42 Sim City Classic $27 Sim City Classic Win Sim City $27 Sim City 2000 Windows $42 Sim City Graphic Set 1 $18 Sim City Graphic Set 1 $23 Sim Cily Graphic Set 2 $23 Sim City WIN $34 Sim Earth $34 Sim Earth WIN $29 Sim Farm $41 Sim Life $39 Sim Life WIN $39 Smokin' Gun WIN S28 Space Hulk $36 Spaceward Ho! Special Forces Star Control Star Control 2 Star Legions Strike Squad Sub Version Task Force 1942 $39 Tegel's Mercenaries S24 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 S44 The Victory Pack S48 Theatre of War S16 Theatre of War Set 1 $21 Unnatural Selection $38 Utopia S29 Vikings Fields of Cong $36 Visions of Aftermath $24 Walls of Rome $39 War in the Gulf S34 Warlords 2 S42 Warlords 16 Cir S29 When Two Worlds War $42 Worlds at War $19 IBM WAR GAMES Action North Atlantic $24 Action Stations Scen 1 $6 Action off River Platte $26 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 American Civil War V1 $24 American Civil War V2 $24 American Civil War V3 $24 Banzai $26 Battle Stations $22 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battle of Austerlitz S26 Battle of Leyte Gulf S24 Battle of the Atlantic $36 Battles of Napoleon Battleship Bismark $26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 IBM STRATEGY A Train $34 A Train w/Construct Set $44 Air Force Commander $16 Airbucks 1.2 Ambush at Sorinor S42 Ancient Art of War Sky $34 $24 "


"a CD version (definite) and an Amiga bers, but perhaps this might be applied to the 1200 version (possible) to follow. game as a whole. Ishar 2 is in Europe now, and in its current form is unlikely to appeal A Dip In The Pool Hall to a wider US audience. Also from Virgin is a billiards game based on the Jimmy White's WhirlGuido Antonio Kuragawa And wind Snookerengine. In the European The Ninja Mafiosos? version, Virgin has made an odd tiThe final title this month is, well, different. cling decision, naming the new pool Nippon Safes is a graphic adventure set in game after Whirlwinds designer, Japan and designed in Italy. Within in the Archer Maclean. In the US version, fictional city of Tyoko (hmm...), you control Virgin may find another celebrity\" to three characters in the Gobliins/Day of the Alone 2 uses multiple camera angles to create endorse Archer Maclean's Pool—pera cinematic atmosphere. haps Tom Cruise's Pool or John cities. Existence in The Gap is tough, but life Cleese's Parrot Game? Whatever has been fairly peaceful. All of a sudden secuthey come up with, the game will fearity forces raid The Gap, destroying gap ture three styles, 8-Ball UK, 8-Ball and dwellers, and take Foster to the city. The 9-Ball US, and will sport the slick inadventure now starts in earnest and you, takterface and graphics that made the ing the role of Foster, must find out what lies snooker version the best hustler in behind your abduction. The city is ruled by town. an authoritarian and ruthless council that Does The Title Say It All? stamps out any form of rebellion or dissent, and keeps an iron grip on ever-precious inforSilmarils is about to release Ishar 2mation. Messengers of Doom. The title may well prove to be prophetic. The game's With the help of your robot buddy, Joey, predecessor, ishar 1 and the earlier The future according to Beneath a Steel Sky. you travel throughout the city, meeting Crystals of Arborea, were both pretty friend and foe and trying to win over the trust Tentacle-style—that is, one at a time. of those who can help you. The answer must Their very carefully chosen names are be here, but can you find it? Strong, aggressive Dino Fagioli, Doug Nuts and Donna graphics created by Dave Gibbons (WatchFatale. The arch villain bares the man, Give Me Liberty), a throbbing sound Get out now equally subtle name of Shady Type, before it's too LAJEI track, and a much smoother version of the and you must save the known world Lure of the Temptress engine promise to pull from the machinations of this madyou into the world. Beneath a Steel Sky claims man. Stereotyped oriental characters, over 100 different locations (over four times sushi bars and some very tall buildings the size of Lure), and its non-player characters litter the landscape of this strange react according to your approach. The progame. It has average graphics and is a ducer of Beneath a Steel Sky, Virgin's Dan bit buggy, but it has an over-the-top Marchant, says that \"the combination of sense of humor. And how many Italian Revolutions' Virtual Theatre 2 engine and Virgin Games' Beneath a Steel Sky games set in Japan will you see this Dave Gibbons comic book graphics create an month? grim, and part two doesn't look that much adventure with a completely new style and better. Ishar 2 is a traditional fantasy role The above games and any of the other level of interactivity.\" playing game with average graphics, a dated games mentioned in past columns can be Beneath a Steel Sky should be available as interface, and is very continental in approach. obtained from: you read this on PC and Amiga formats, with Computer Gaming World This means some really quirky fea(not affiliated with CGW magazine) tures such as an in-party voting system 318 Kensington This could be the most. STUPID. to carry out main team functions. For thing I have ever done in my LIFELiverpool, England, L7 OEY. example, you have a series of committee meetings every time you want to Tel: 01144-51-263-6306 join or dismiss a member of the party, Strategic Plus Software and in combat or discussions, some 28 D&E The Courtyard, High Street players may refuse to assist others beHampton Hill, Middlesex. TWI2 cause of some old outstanding grievIPD ances. Tel 01144-81-977-8088 Life with and without computers can Fax 01144-81-977-4822 be stressful at the best of times without all this! One useful option however is CompuServe at 1000014,3466. Beneath a Steel Sky is based on Revolution's Virtual Theatre 2 engine. Robin Matthews can also be contacted on the ability to assassinate\" party memCompuServe at 76004,3456. CGW Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS &BITS THE BATTLE OF BRITA GETTYSBU 'THE BATTLE OF BRITAIN' Historically accurate recreation of history's greatest air battle. Employs the identical plotting map used by RAF Fighter Command to track incoming raids. Your hands will be full tracking radar & ground observer reports & analyzing potential threats of unidentified Aircraft. $34 \"GETTYSBURG: INTERACTIVE BATTLE' recreates the largest military engagement of the western hemi. sphere. Direct the marches, issue or ders, entrench in key positions & bombard strong holds. Play against a simulator that takes into account variables like ter rain, morale, stamina & ammunition! S34 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source Code-10020 The sequel fatha magolt 68 ATTACK SUE RASUNETE ILEAN 'SSN-21 SEA WOLF is the se quel to the smash hit 688 Attack Sub. A crisis has erupted and fighting between the US and Russian's navy has occurred. As the commander of the SSN-21. you are ordered into battle to destroy the fleet. Features over one hundred 16-bit digital true stereo effects. S48 Theme 'MECHWARRIOR 2 Climb into one of 16 Battle Mechs and prepare to set your imagination on fire. You're strapped into a 100ton machine that can annihilate a squadron of F-15s in a heartbeat. And you're about to battle your way across the planetary terrain. From ice to desert to urban land. $42 \"CARRIERS AT WAR 2' offers more tension and excitement. Features eight new scenarios, some hypothetical, others controversial; an improved war room intelligence system: and tougher artificial intelligence, $39 IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM BUNDLES IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL Warship that Chngd Hist S26 Waterloo $19 Western Front $21 White Death $19 WW 2 Battles of So Pac $34 Wing Command 1 Dlx $48 Wing Commnd 1 Dlx CD $48 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Welltris $15 Word Tris $27 World Champ Backgamn$24 World Champ Cribbage $24 IBM TRADITIONAL IBM BUDGET Origamo $12 $24 $14 Blood & Iron S52 Blue and the Grey S42 Borodino Napoln Invad S29 Bravo Romeo Delta S29 Campaign $39 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike S39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak S19 Charge of Light Brigade $18 Civil War No Greatr Glry $21 Conflict: Korea S19 Conflict: Middle East S19 Decision at Gettysburg S18 Dreadnoughts S39 Dreadnoughts Bismark S29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe S89 Dreadnoughts Ironclads S29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fleet Med S27 Gary Grigsby Pac War S46 German Raider Atlantis S26 Gettysburg: Turn Point S36 Golan Front $36 Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma S24 Harpoon $25 Harpoon Battle Set 2 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $24 Harpoon Designer Ser 2 $25 High Command $45 In Harms Way $36 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine Kursk Campaign S36 Line in the Sand 519 Long Lance $39 MacArthur's War $16 Main Batt Tank Germy $39 Main Batt Tank Mid East $36 Main Batt Tank N Germy $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $14 Midway $26 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pac Storm Midwy Cpgn $36 Pac Storm Solmn Camp $36 Panzer Battles $24 Patriot $23 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Patriot Battle Set 2 Patton Strikes Back Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $26 Road Surter Appomtrx $45 Rommel Batt No Africa Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel al Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Squad Leader $48 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 The Great War $36 Third Reich $34 To The Rhine $36 Typhoon of Steel S12 UMS 2 $19 UMS 2 Civil War UMS 2 Desrt Strm Scen $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $16 UMS Original $14 UMS Original $19 V Victory: Gld Juno Swrd$44 V Victory: Mkt Garden $44 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikye Luki $44 Victory at Sea $46 War in the Falklands S26 IBM BUNDLES Anim Wkshp: Hnna Barb $45 Balt Chess 4000 SVGA $36 ADD Collect Edition 2 S46 Ball Chess 4000 VGA $32 ADD Starter Kit $35 Batt Chess $18 Air Combat Classics S45 Battle Chess WIN $18 Allied Forces S12 Bridge 7 $24 Baseball CC $18 Bridgemaster $29 Capstone CD Game Coll$45 Caesars Palace WIN $17 Combat Classics at Classics $24 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Dynamix Bundle 1 $42 Casino Master WIN $25 Eye of Beholder Collect $52 Checkmate $36 Falcon 3.0 w/Thmst FCS$99 Checkmate WIN $36 Game Pak 1 $19 ChessManiac 5 Billn & 1 342 Gateway Collect 1 & 2 S32 Chessmaster 2000 $27 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Land Sea Air 2 $29 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $35 Lost Treas Infocom $39 Classic 5 $32 Lost Treas Infocom CD $39 Classic 5 WIN $30 Lost Treas Infocom 2 $29 Clue Master Detective $19 Lost Treas Infocm 2 CD $29 Dealer's Choice S19 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Doodlemation Windows $19 Marvel Trilogy $12 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Dr Thorp's Blackjack S32 Power Hits: Battletech $32 FS-Pro S21 Power Hits: Kids $9 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Power Hits: Movies $19 Gambit S38 Power Hits: Sci Fi $19 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $49 Power Hits: Sports $19 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Quarterdk Game Bund $62 Go Mast Dix V5 WIN 53 $79 Secr Weap Luftwaffe CD$42 Go Master Ver 4 $34 Space Quest Bundle S36 Go Master Ver 4 WIN $39 Space Quest Bund 1-4 S42 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Spellcasting Bundle $34 Go Mast Ver 5 WIN 53 $39 Spellcasting Bundle CD $32 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $54 Grand Master Chess Dix $37 Ultima Trilogy Grandmaster Chess S19 Ultima Trilogy 2 S48 Hoyle's Book Games V3 S29 Circle Reader Sonira #45 Hoyle Bk Gmes Classic S29 Jeopardy 25th Anivers S15 Jeopardy, Super Talking $16 Lucky's Casino Adven $39 Monopoly Deluxe $29 Monopoly Deluxe WIN S29 Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 Omar Sharif on Bridge $34 $39 Pool Shark S18 Positronic Bridge S30 Positrn Bridge Comp SE S60 Risk S21 Risk WIN $26 Russian Six Pack $39 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $26 Shanghaii 2 S29 Solitaire Royale S19 Solitaire WIN S28 Solitaire's Journey WIN S38 Solitaires Journey $34 Stanfrd Wong Vid Poker $19 Star Wars Chess $38 Super Jeopardy Super Tetris S29 Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Take-A-Brk Crsswd WIN $24 Terminatr 2 Chess Wars $37 Terminator Chess $34 Tesserae WIN $16 Tetris Classic $26 Tetris Classic WIN $26 Tetris Gold Trump Castle 2 $16 Trump Castle 2 DD1 S4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 Trump Castle 3 $34 Vegas Entrtnmt Pak WIN$20 Vegas Games Pak WIN $17 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Wayne's World $26 $27 007 JBond Stealth Affair $12 2400 AD $9 3D Pinball 3 in 1 Players's Pack Acquire All Star Sports Pak $9 Airborne Ranger S9 Airport Facilities Dir S12 Amarillo Slim 7 Crd Stud S12 Amazing Spiderman $12 Arachnaphobia $12 Armda Villa Crespo CB $12 Artura B.AT Back to the Future 3 $12 Bckgmmn By Grge WIN $9 Bar Games Bball Chall 1987 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1988 Teams S9 Bball Chall 1989 Teams 59 Battle Command $12 Bermuda Square S9 Blackjack Blue Max Aces Gt War S9 Bo Jackson Baseball $12 Canyon Capers Captain Blood $9 Cardinal of the Kremlin $9 Carrier Command $9 Casino Craps $12 Castles North Campaign $7 Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus Combination Lock Conflict $12 Conqueror Multi Tank S9 $24 $36 S4 S9 S12 "


"REVIEW Unleashing The Undead Viacom New Media Re-Vamps Their Game Engine For Dracula Unleashed by Chuck «Van Helsing\" Miller Tever had I encountered any late '60s/early '70s TV series. Those who just in order to verify that the possession of a thing that begat such dread and fondly remember Dark Shadows will feel a specific object or a different time of arrival horror. Sleeping by day and touch nostalgic visiting the settings, especially hasn't changed the outcome of the visit. stalking by night, it was a beast: ravaging the some of the London homes ca. 1899, the Multiple pathways are also employed in the earth to quench its thirst through the blood Hades Club and, of course, the cemetery. All game. Actually, it may be more accurate to of the living of Viacom's sets were constructed in tradisay that there are several minor branches off \" the bloof Freed friends tional Hollywood style for the filming of the the main path thar result in a slightly modiQuincey Morris and Jonathan Harker, were game, rather than being computer generated fied series of events and conclusion. For exdrive it back to and composited with live actors by means of ample, the goal is to solve the mystery and its castle in Transylvania, and destroy it there. blue screen techniques (as in Return to Zork). complete the game without losing any of your Yet, one questions whether one can truly kill As such, they look authentic, lending a sense companions. While this is the ideal, it is something that had never been alive.\" of realism to the game world. possible to lose some or even most of your So begins the story as American Alexander allies during the game and still defeat Morris, brother to the late Quincey Morris, Dracula. Careful experimentation can easily arrives in London. His goal, and that of the prevent these losses. player's, is to identify the cause behind his Silicon sleuths who have helped Holmes brother's death and to determine the exact solve his cases in Sherlock Holmes Consulting nature of the events transpiring since. Detective will immediately notice the extra sizzle added to Dracula Unleashed. Most noIs That You, Holmes? ticeable is the move to Super VGA. While a standard VGA interface is available, those From Viacom New Media (formerly with a VESA compatible graphics card will ICOM Simulations), the creators of Sherlock have the pleasure of viewing and playing this Holmes Consulting Detective, comes their I was also reminded of the aged ICOM interactive horror game in its finest form. most compelling interactive adventure yet, adventures Deja Vu I e II, Shadowgate and, Crisper, more detailed graphics grace the user Dracula Unleashed. Based upon a revised version of the game engine used in the three specifically, Uninvited. Having come down interface, with different backdrop \"frames\" Sherlock Holmes CD volumes, Dracula Unthrough the same lineage, Dracula Unleashed provided for each game location. Video comembodies a similar game design, requiring a pression has also been improved to provide leashed, guides the player into what I believe great deal of experimentation, play and recleaner, smoother video playback of a higher is the most effective \"interactive movie\" to date. This horror title builds upon the founplay, in order to arrive at a successful concluquality than in previous efforts. This is espedation laid in the Sherlock games of logic and sion. In Uninvited, for example, you could cially important as most of the game is spent only remain in House Abraxas so long before watching the 90 minutes of video footage deduction, directing the player into a more its evil influence precipitated your death. In packed onto the disc. atmospheric and gripping experience than Viacom's newest title, you must accomplish previously offered. Danger is an ever present Icons And Graven Images certain tasks under preset time limits or succlement in this tale of darkness, with death lurking around every corner and evil hanging cumb to the forces of Also improved are the darkness through one Dracula Unleashed interaction and the VCR game's use of icons for user ominously in the air. Yet for all its advancements, improvements and increased playabilghastly death or anity over previous titles, Dracula Unleashed still other. Both games reDracula Unleashed PRICE: $69.95 has its foibles and failings. Fortunately, noncquire that you repeatSYSTEM: IBM with CD-ROM were so draining as to keep this night stalker edly retrace your steps REQUIREMENTS: 386-20MHz or better, CD-ROM drive Dracular (150K transfer rate and 350ms seek time), from sinking his teeth firmly into the action to arrive at the correct 4MB RAM, VGA graphics, mouse: supports and continuing until the Count had been sequence of events Sound Blaster, Adlib Gold, Sound Master II, Microsoft Sound System and Pro Audio eternally dusted. within the prescribed Spectrum sound cards PROTECTION: Dark Shadows' Barnabas Collins would be time or number of DESIGNERS: Anthony Sherman, David Marsh and Karl Roelofs proud of Viacom's efforts were he still hangmoves. Thus, many PUBLISHER: Viacom New Media ing around our TV screens today. In some scenes will need to be Wheeling. IL (708) 520-4440 ways, Dracula Unleashed reminds me of that viewed multiple times TITLE: None Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS &BITS CASINO ADVENTURE \"LUCKY'S CASINO ADVENTURE' It's vacation time... you can sit at home watching the grass grow or you could enter an exciting three week casino adventure. Play five different pokers, eight different slots, paigow bingo. keno, baccarat, blackjack, casino, craps, roulette, red dog and more. $39 200 DODOS PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source Code-10020 'GAME-MAKER 2.0' lets you create action adventure games as unique as your imagination. Design your own animated characters, monsters, and scenes. Create sounds & import images. No programming. Now with Sound Board support. 949 The Software Toolworks Dreadne ught STAR WARS The must EXCITING SEA BATILES er for CHESS AMAZON' recaptures the fun & excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazom, light 10 foot ants & find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles,flashbacks, pans & lades. Fully digitized voices & sound effects. $29 \"DREADNOUGHTS recreates the great naval battles from the period in maritime history when the steel battleship ruled the oceans. An accurate model of the look, specifications & tactics of the fighting fleets at battles such as Jutland. In the role of Fleet Admiral, you experience the power & frustration of command. $34 'STAR WARS CHESS' A long time ago, in a gal. axy far, far away, a great battle of good and evil was fought and won. Now you can rediscover the courageous char acters from the Star Wars saga. Relive their struggles in one of the world's oldest games, brought to life in brilliant 3-D animation. $38 IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET 3DO MACINTOSH FREE GAME OFFER $9 $12 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from December 1st through January 31st or while supplies last. $29 $19 Out of This World $36 Reach for the Stars $19 Risk $19 Robo Sport $24 Shanghaii 2 $19 Sim Ant $35 Simcity Space Ace 2 $24 Spirit of Excalibur Star Trek 25th Anniver $24 Starflight 1 $29 Super Tetris $24 Test Drive 2 $24 Test Drive 2:Supercars $6 Vette $24 Where In Europe is CSD $24 Where World is CSD $24 Wordtris $24 S12 $6 SPEND $100 S9 S12 $12 $12 $12 $9 NEO GEO Covert Action $12 Crash Course $9 Cybergenic Ranger $9 Dark Half $9 Das Boot Submarine $12 Demon Blue $12 Defender of the Crown $12 Diplomacy $12 Don't Go Alone S6 Double Dragon 3 $12 Dr Doom's Revenge S12 Dr Thorp's min Blackjck S12 DrWong Jacks/Vid Pkr 5 S12 DrWng Jcks/Vid Pkr WINS12 Dragon Force Dragon Lord $9 Dragon Strike Dragons of Flame $9 E-Motion S6 Earthrise East West Berlin 1948 S9 Electric Jigsaw $12 F15 Strike Eagle 1 S7 Face Off S9 Fast Break $6 Fighting for Rome Finale $3 Flintstones $9 Free DC $9 Future Classics Collect Gama Force $6 Games Master WIN $6 Gauntlet 2 $9 Global Effect SB Gunship $12 Hare Raising Havoc $12 Harmony S5 Hearts $12 Heatwave $6 Hole In One Mini Golf $6 Hole In 1 Mini Golf CD $3 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix $12 Home Casino Spectacul $9 Internt Ninja Rabbits $12 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art Jeopardy Jeopardy 2 $9 Jeopardy Junior $9 Jeopardy Sports Edition $7 Joan of Arc $12 John Elway Quarterback $6 Keys to Marimon $12 Kristal $9 Klotski: Polish Puzz WIN $9 L.A. Law $9 Lane Mastadon Larry's Casino Lexicross $12 Lightspeed Ms Pacman $6 MUDS $12 Matrix Cubed $12 Medieval Lords $12 Midwinter $12 Mines of Titan $9 NFL Chal Coll Alumni $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 $9 NFL Challen 1988 Teams $9 NFL Challen 91 Pre Sea $9 NFL Challen AllStar Team $9 NFL Challen AllStar Team $9 NFL Challen Dream Team $9 NFL Proleague Football S12 Never Mind $9 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Ninja Rabbits $12 Obliterator S6 Oil's Well Oligopoly $9 On Target $12 Pac Man Pictionary Playmaker Football $12 Power Drome S9 Predator 2 $12 Punisher S12 Puzzle Gallery 1 Puzzle Master $6 Puzznic 3DO System 3DO S699 RBI 2 $9 Aces over Europe 3DO $19 Rodeo Games Battle Chess 3DO S49 Rotox $12 Crash & Burn 3DO S49 Ruckus Poker $12 Demolition Man 3DO S49 Ruckus Roulette $12 Dragon Tales 3DO $19 SDI $7 Dragon's Lair 3DO $49 Sargon 4 $9 Intelliplay Football 3DO $49 Savage $9 Jurassic Park 3D0 949 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Lemmings 3DO S 49 Shadow Sorcerer Mad Dog McCree 3D0 $49 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Madden Football 3D0 949 Seige Megarace 3DO $44 Sky Chase $9 Microcosm 300 $49 Sorry $12 Oceans Below 3DO $44 Space Vegetables $12 Out of this World 3DO $49 Sporting Triangle $3 PGA Tour 3DO $49 Spot Peter Pan 3DO $49 Street Ball $12 Road Rash 300 $49 Street Fighting Man Shock Wave 300 $49 Taking of Beverly Hills S12 Shuttle 300 $44 Team Yankee S12 Star Trek Next Gen 300 $49 Tengen's Arcade Hits S12 Stellar 7300 $49 Test Drive 2 Mscle Cars S12 Syndicale 300 $49 Test Drive 2 Supercars $12 Total Eclipse 3DO $49 Test Drive 2 Euro Chall $6 Troddlers 3DO $49 Trolls S7 Twisted 3DO $49 Turn-n-Burn $12 Who Shot Jhny Rck 3DOS46 Under Fire $12 Wing Commander 3DO $49 Uninvited $6 WorldBuilders, Inc 3DO $49 Vaxine Video Poker WIN $12 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 MACINTOSH Video Poker by Masque $9 War in Middle Earth $12 Batt Chess Enhanc CD $24 Weavr TeamPlayr Stat 89 $6 Bridge 7 $24 Weird Dreams Dragon's Lair Wheel of Fortune Drag Lair 2: Time Warp $24 Wheel of Fortune 2 $6 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Wheel of Fortune 2 $9 Heaven & Earth S32 Wheel of Fortune 3 $9 Jack Nickls Crse 1-5 ea S6 Wild Wheels $12 Lexicross $19 XMen $9 Monopoly $19 Xiphos $9 Omar Shariff Bridge Dix $36 Circle Reader Cantica #4 Backgammon by George Blackjack Blackjack for Windows Chessnet Covert Action 3.5 Dragons of Flame 5.25 Dragon Force 5.25 Earth Rise 5.25 Free D.C.5.25 John Elway Quartrback 5.25 MacArthur's War 5.25 S.C. Out Trump Castle 2 5.25 Video Poker Windows Video Poker Video Poker Ala Carte CALL FOR THE BEST PRICES $12 JAGUAR S9 $12 SPEND $200 Jaguar System Jaguar CD System Alien Vs Predator Baseball Basketball Battle Zone 2000 Checkered Flag 2 Club Drive Crescent Galaxy Evolution:Dino Dudes Jaguar Controller $249 $299 $54 $54 $54 $54 S54 $44 $44 S44 $24 $12 $9 $12 $6 $54 Acquire 3.5 Amazon 3.5 Breach 2 5.25 Lost Admiral Magic Candle 2 5.25 Megatraveler Zhodani 5.25 Mercenaries 5.25 Playmaker Football Rules of Engagement 5.25 Star Legions 5.25 Warlords 5.25 Kasumi Ninja NFL Football Raiden Tempest 2000 Tiny Toon Adventures $54 $54 $44 $44 $44 S9 "


"controls employed for viewing the video segReadiness is also an important concern. ments. Icons are at your disposal for making Being at the right place at the right time serves entries into a journal, keeping track of time no good if you do not have a necessary item (so as not to be late for an appointed rendezand have it in hand. Simply having an object vous, a critical game element), managing your in your inventory is not enough; if you don't inventory, checking directions and travel have an address in hand when you wish to times, understanding the interface (via a help send a telegram-tough luck. Thinking system hosted by Van Helsing), reading teleahead is crucial, as is frequent saving and grams (often accompanied by an essential experimenting with different objects at each object), sleeping (a necessity to avoid falling location. Here, it is always wise to save before asleep in some alley where one is susceptible entering a location. to all types of misfortune) and controlling The third primary concern in Dracula Unthus far. While not a significant issue, it was game options (loading, saving, music on/off, leashed is that of proper rest. You must return still distracting at times. volume adjustment, etc.). All icon controlled home and sleep each night, or be prepared ro My only other criticism involves saving a functions work smoothly and intuitively. collapse in some alley and wake up sans soul. game. Both save options, Save and Save As, Keeping these concerns in mind will help are nested in the secondary option screen. A insure success and keep your name from Quick Save button (over the previous save popping up on a headstone. file) on the main interface would have been When The Undead Are an extremely handy and time saving feature. Acting Up Though I normally prefer games that are With the recent blending of Hollyless timelevent intensive, Dracula Unleashed wood and the computer gaming industry is engrossing enough that I can live with its in an effort to create new interactive titles design. And, though I would have preferred on CD-ROM, a need has arisen to ema touch more playing time and a larger game ploy human actors in the computer game world to explore, what has been provided is Early endeavors were sufficient to make the playing experience a overwhelmingly disappointing in this revalued investment. Depending on your exVideo playback controls have seen imgard, as professional actors were used sparpertise, most gamers should expect between provement, as well. In addition to VCR-like burrons for replay, play, pause and stop, you ingly. Many developers simply made use of 15 to 20 hours of play to ultimately bring existing staff to fill their need, usually with Dracula to his knees. can also rewind or fast forward through each less than satisfactory results. Fortunately for Access from the CD-ROM is quite good scene by sliding a scroll bar back and forth. all concerned, Dracula Unleashed features a with a double-speed drive and no CD cache Vampire Hunting 101 cast of competent, even memorable, actors running (it is recommended that you NOT and actresses who make the game highly beuse a CD-ROM cache program with this Several elements are especially critical to lievable. game), while a single-speed drive will provide playing Dracula Unleashed and should be explained clearly to the fledgling vampire As much as I liked Dracula Unleashed, I acceptable though less than optimal performhunter. Time is valuable. You must effecmust confess that I found it guilty of some ance. tively manage your time during play, as travlesser sins that detracted from play. While In all, much progress has been made in cling, conversing and sleeping all consume it sound quality was generally good, with clear video compression technology and plavabilin varving degrees. Time must also be moni speech and haunting music, I detected noity since ICOM released their first interactive lored carefully in that events occur even if you ticeable audio feedback during some video movic in 1991. Now, under the Viacom banare not at the scene when they transpire. A segments. A persistent \"hum\" could be heardner, Dracula Unleashed exhibits a more masignificant amount of experimenting is reas many scenes played. Whether this is a ture technology, one that, while still open to quired to know exactly where to be and when characteristic of the recording or a result of improvement, offers a satisfying playing exto be there. To help you in your time manmy sound card/CD-ROM combination, I do perience. With this little jaunt into turn-ofagement, see \"A Vampire Hunter's Guide to not know, though I found the hum on two the-century London, computer and theater Travel Times In London,\" a table that pro similarly configured systems. I do know that have been brought one step closer together. vides travel times in one handy reference. I haven't had trouble with other CD titles CGW A Vampire Hunter's Guide To Travel Times in London Paddington Marble Arch Kensington King's Cross Strand Notting Hill St. Paul's 60 20 30 15 55 55 Westminster 45 40 15 40 20 30 5 15 30 Notting Hill Paddington Marble Arch Kensington King's Cross Strand St. Paul's Westminster on 20 40 40      40 8 A 40 S 5 Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"THE HOTTEST 3-D ACTION SINCE WOLFENSTEIN BLAKE STONE ALIENS OP GOLD Terror has been unleashed! And now...the violence that plagues a distant research colony threatens the planet Earth. As British military agent Blake Stone you're thrust into deadly combat against the malevolence of a mad scientist and the insidious mutant army under his command. Dr. Goldstern, driven by his insanity and bent on the annihilation of mankind, won't rest until he rules the known universe. The forces of heroic good and villainous evil collide in this life-or-death struggle to control Earth's future. Sign up to fight as Agent Blake Stone. The fate of humanity is in your hands! Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 PARENTAL BAPHIC VIOLENCE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence. Heagaglig Adub music; Intense found BlasterTM sound effects 3-D texture mapping virtual reality in 256 colors For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive Episode One, The Star Institute. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are:  (508) 365-2359: 2400 BAUD (508) 368-7036: 9600-14.4K  (508) 368-4137: 14.4-16.8K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number. shown above. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY 1 LES Jake on dozens of vicious opponents in combat PO | 2 o Battle through 60 levels of JAM PRODUCTIONS SOFTWARE heart-pounding terror! P. O. BOX 496389 GARLAND. IX 75049 A POGWA R NING EXCITEMENT Blake Stone: Allens of Gold requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, mouse, Adlib, Sound Blaster or compatible cards are optional. Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #38 A001CGW "


"TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT Roaring Out Of Obscurity The People Behind Papyrus Software And DreamForge by Johnny L. Wilson COMPANY REPORT There is an adage in the old Hollywood that says, \"There is no such thing as an overnight success.\" The same is true for software publishers. Almost cvery software hit and every successful company is full of people who have paid their dues and learned their hard-earned lessons else. where. Even when we consider two of the fastest growing design houses in the business, Papyrus Software Group and Dream Forge Intertainment (formerly Event Horizon), the excitement didn't appear overnight. In this company profile, CGW takes you to the offices of two companies before you have to say, \"Who are these guys?\" and \"Where did they come from?\" ber TSP for the early Sub Mission game many clients of the consulting business per(where gamers who failed more than three ceived Papyrus as a much bigger enterprise times had to send in for new disks and pay an than it really was. Rich Hillemann, now a vice additional fee in order to try again) and Infopresident at Electronic Arts, was the only com's disappointing Infocomics experiment. client to actually visit them in their workspace The year was 1987, so Dave and Omar did when they were working out of their apartwhat any sane-minded programming team ment, would do, they called Electronic Arts. After According to Omar Khudari, the consultall, EA was big enough that they should have ing business is still what pays the bills and has lots of job openings. They talked to Dave the added advantage of building a critical Grady about the possibility. Grady filled their mass of talent around the unglamorous minds with the possibility of an outside artist \"workhorse\" projects that can be borrowed relationship with the successful publishing for the more glamorous thoroughbred\" prohouse, Dave and Omar hopped a plane to thejects on the game side. Papyrus really likes the West Coast, fleshed out an idea on the plane way that their company has grown because and, after presenting ir, got a small advance the near-anonymous consulting business is for a script treatment. Then, much to their repeat business based upon the predictability chagrin, EA rejected the script upon its sub and professionalism of Papyrus' working remission. lationships with their client base. This provides a solid and manageable income stream, in stark contrast to the risky, hit-driven nature of the game business. A Stable For Workhorses Papyrus Software, the company that developed Indy 500: The Simulation for Electronic Arts and is about to spring the revolutionary IndyCar Racing onto store shelves, has offices in a building with a lot of history. Originally, the building was a meat-packing plant that served Boston, and all of the plant's drayage was handled via their state-of-the-art delivery system-horse-powered vehicles. Most of the plant's activity took place downstairs on the main floor and, in an advance that was fairly rare for its time, the horses which pulled the packing plant's wagons were stabled on upper stories constructed of suspended floors. To this day, there are rings inset within the walls where the old drayage horses were tethered. This may seem somewhat appropriate when you understand the history of the company. The company makes most of its money out of the limelight performing programogramming tasks and testing suites that many other developers avoid. That wasn't the intent when Dave Kaemmer and Omar Khudari formed the company, but it seems to have worked out well. Dave and Omar formed Papyrus when they left the prestigious educational publisher, Tom Snyder Productions, after a reorganization. CGW readers are most likely to rememOmar Khudari shows the workhorse heritage of Papyrus's offices, formerly a meat-packing plant where horses were hitched to the walls. Arty-Facts In many ways, Papyrus' name is perfectly appropriate for a state-of-the-art technology company with plans to venture further into game publishing. The reference to the ancient writing medium means that the company is ready to preserve the old techniques that work, while their vision still looks toward new techniques for the future. For example, the partners hired Dan Sherlis to run the publishing portion of the company in 1992. His charter is to turn the company into a full-scale software publisher with all of the cash, creative control and credit (in terms of recognition) that such status has to offer. He expects the company to reach and stabilize (no pun intended) at a point where they can publish five new products per year. Yet, the company still intends to enjoy certain classic developer/publisher relations like their current Sega CD project (they are developing Access' Links product for the console machine) and certain, as yet unannounced 3DO work. Dave was undaunted, but didn't manage to gol get the early design for Indy 500: The Simulation approved until January of 1988. Omar, concerned about paying the bills, immediately began consulting on computer software of all kinds and managed to keep the two partners going. In fact, the consulting business grew so much faster than the game portion of their business, that it still functions as 75% of Papyrus' business to the present day. Both partners chuckle, though, about how Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"ARCTIC BARON The year is 2022 and global warming is threatening the very existence of mankind. Scientists put \"Operation Blind\" into effect to reverse the process, but something goes seriously wrong! The Earth is plunged into a nuclear winter and the sun becomes permanently eclipsed. AOVAJILA STATION SELECT THE HAGON ICH YOU WISH TO DESTROY Centuries after the disaster, a new world order has been established and the Viking Union hold the power. They dominate the rail network and the only source of money coal and aren't going to easily give up their monopoly VI You command a gigantic steam powered train and use it to journey to towns to trade in supplies, slaves and mammoths. Your raw instincts will help you pull your survival plan together from the information you obtain along the way. Your mission is vital: free the planet from perpetual winter and economic slavery. ULT or N TNGS You Becovca . DANS or an THRACITE Your quest for the sun is one of danger and excitement... become the Arctic Baron... free your people! Available for IBM PC and Amiga ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Tel: (905) 731-4175 Fax: (905) 764-8867 Silmarils READYSOFT 1992 Silmarils All rights reserved. Distributed by Ready Soft Incorporated Circle Reader Service #123 "


"As always, Dave Kaemmer focuses 100 perChris and Tom handled the programming philosophically, too. SSI considers itself to be cent of his attention on technology and the while Jim knocked on doors and looked for a a gamers' company, as well. SSI staffers play creation of games. Omar directs the consultpublisher. Indeed, Chris and Tom remember lots of games, but even the executives engage ing group, and Dan tries to move the comthe days when they would have to stop proin monumental after-hours games of Ameripany toward becoming a full-service gramming altogether and move out to the can Civil War battles using miniature figures. publisher. As for future plans, they would still patio so that Jim could make important calls At Event Horizon, the big thing is Illuminati, like to publish the game that EA originally with the illusion of having his own office. the diabolical card game from Steve Jackson rejected, and they are experimenting with The founding triumvirate even used a little Games. Employees gru new ways to use their advanced textureadvanced textureself-deprecating humor during those self-deprecating humor during those early wins all the time, but a casual observer gets y in other genres. Frankly, days to underline their feeling of homelessthe feeling that he gets stabbed\" his share of take long before people ness for the fledgling company posing for a the time. According to Namestka, \"Everyone begin talking about Papyrus \"overnight\" sucpicture where they emulated a trio of homehere plays games because we make games. We cess. less men warming their hands at the fire. don't just boot products out the door. We Later, they were able to find a more permaplay them. Dream Forging Ahead nent home in one of the enterprise zones of In the Spring of 1990, a group of three Jeannette, PA. The old house in which they frustrated and disappointed programmers left are currently located is being gradually rethe (then) safe haven of Pennsylvania's Paramodeled and outfitted on the interior, but gon Software. They didn't care for some of left with a plain urban exterior. the creative directions that Paragon had taken According to the trio, the secret of the in developing both the first Mega Traveller company's success was that they managed to computer game an earlier Apple II program put out products in a six month development from a different company had used the origicycle rather than the more leisurely pace that nal Traveller rules for a text-based game) and orher software houses could afford. By the a series of Marvel Comics licenses. So, Jim time Dark Spyre was completed, they had a Namestka, Tom Holmes and Chris Straka publisher in Electronic Zoo, a company that Cutthroat rounds of Illuminati are a popular formed a company to create computer roleimported titles from Europe and needed ad after-hours pastime for the avid gamers of playing games with more role-playing eleditional product. Electronic Zoo didn't last DreamForge. ments. It was to be more of a gamers' very long, though, and Event Horizon had to Unfortunately, just as the small software company than a programmers' company, and search for a new publisher. Interstel seemed developer was building a solid reputation that is what the software developers have tried interested, based on the critical success of among role-players, they discovered that their to build Dark Spyre, and optioned Dusk of the Gods. corporate name, Event Horizon, was being When Interstel eventually faced the financial confused with a West Coast corporation that difficulty that took them under, Event Horimakes adult software. So, at a time when the zon's crew began to wonder if they were ever company had near-misses at awards with Veil going to have a publisher for longer than a of Darkness and The Summoning, they deone game relationship. cided to change their name. DreamForge Intertainment is the new moniker. As SSI On The Horizon Namesrka explained, «We used the word Enter Strategic Simulations, Inc.! The dream' because that's what we make, 'forge? Summoning was almost complete and, like a because it implies craftsmanship, and 'Interrefrain in a folk song, Jim was hunting for a tainment with an 'T' because it represents the new publisher to take Interstel's place. The next big thing-interactive entertainment.\" deal with SSI proved valuable in numerous If what I've seen of Dungeon Hack and Ravenways. First of all, they didn't have to seek a loft are any indication, DreamForge Internew publisher after The Summoning was retainment is definitely going to play an integral leased. Not only did SSI pick up the option up the option role in that next big thing. on Veilof Darkness, they also exposed the crew to new technology with no ramp-up time or What You See additional costs. Then, they hired Event HoPapyrus and DreamForge are two illustrarizon to do the programming on Dungeon tions of what many casual gamers often miss. Hack (a Dungeons & Dragons game with random dungeons) and Ravenloft (a popular By paying attention to the publisher of the Jim Namestka, Tom Holmes and Chris Straka burn the last of their Paragon business cards to games rather than looking at the designers AD&D series built on vampire lore). Both of keep warm during their \"homeless\" phase. and developers, the casual gamer sometimes the latter games incorporate first-person permisses seeing the companies who are on the Event Horizon's original office space was + Horizon's original office space was spective and required new programming rise. We hope this portrait of two potential on the third floor of Namestka's parents techniques. \"overnight successes\" will help gamers look house. The three partners purchased equipSo, Event Horizon began to expand, gradujust a little closer at those credits in the manjust a little closerar ment with credit cards and lived off plastically, via the additional business generated ual and the fine print on the game boxes. It and savings until they could get their first from SSI. is definitely exciting to watch software comproduct, Dark Spyre, into the marketplace. SSI and Event Horizon were a good fit, panies forging their own future. Cow Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"ONE OF THE GREATEST GAMES EVER IS NOW PLAYABLE BY MODEM! fantasy pieces such as the Unicorn, Banshee, Phoenix, Golem, Dragon and Basilisk (each now with two powers instead of one). Deploy your forces on the animated Archon, one of the all-time best-selling action/strategy games ever, is back...as ARCHON ULTRA complete with the latest, greatest graphics, animation, music and digitized sound effects. Plus all-new game play and feature enhancements, such as the ability to battle opponents on-line using your modem Play the light or dark side to conquer the everchanging Archon board. One or two players take turns moving ARCHON ULTRA three-quarter overhead display. When two opposing pieces attempt to occupy the same square, battle it out in real-time arcade action on one of three new types of battle maps! Or, let the computer resolve combat quickly. Your goal: defeat all the enemy pieces or dominate the five magical Power Points. Beware: ARCHON ULTRA is faster, more exciting, and even more addicting than its legendary predecessor! Available for IBM/compatibles. To order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 with VISA/MC (U.S. and Canada only). SPEL Developed by FREE FALL ASSOCIATES 18M 256-COLOR VGA DISPLAYS 01993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"REVIEW WHERE ONLY GHOULS FEAR TO TREAL Bram Stoker's Dracula Stakes A Claim In 3D Action SI CA FINS Then it comes to figures of gothic Harker's lower arm protrudes upwards from driver causes problems with firing weapons horror, nonc casts a longer the bottom of the screen, clutching the curand selecting objects. Upgrading to the 9.01 shadow than Dracula. Bram rently selected weapon. Pressing the left version of the mouse driver will correct the Stoker's 19th Century novel of a restless, mouse button will cause Harker to fire the problem. immortal creature fond of the taste of human gun or jab with the knife, depending upon Game music is gloomy and dramatic, wellblood has been imitated and retold in countwhich weapon is currently selected. suited for a trip through ancient buildings less novels and films, most notably by Bela Harker has only three weapons at his disstocked with undead. The sound of Harker's Lugosi's 1931 Dracula film and Anne Rice's posal: a knife, a pistol (loaded with up to 99 tromping footfalls are well-done, although series of vampire books. With Bram Stoker's silver bullets), and a collection of holy wafers. Dracula (based on the 1992 F.F. Coppola The knife and pistol (toggled by pressing the 50 CONFIRST film of the same name), Psygnosis leads space bar) are used to go toe to toe with the hacker gamers on a familiar-leaning toward tritemostly deceased and rotting malcontents of journey through a land of gothic, blood-suck the Dracula game world. Most of the enemies ing horror. your character encounters are a motley bunch of casily dispatched corpses and skeletons. Tougher foes will occasionally be encounKERALA SGUT tered, such as the Werewolf (which usually takes four shots to kill) and a vicious batch of ul female vampires that Dracula keeps in his castle. The holy wafers are used to purity the sharp retort of his steps sound out of place monster-generating coffins (resembling in the grass-covered turf of the cemetery. square pits of blood) found on each level. Sound effects and music cannot be selectively Once all the coffins in each stage are detoggled on or off while in the game—sound rico stroyed, the player faces Dracula in one of his and music are either \"Off\" or \"On,\" selected three forms. Once the Count is defeated, you when the game is first loaded. Unfortunately, In Dracula, your task is to guide Jonathan can advance to the next stage. When he has those sound settings aren't written to a conHarker towards his ultimate goal: the debeen defeated the third and final time at the figuration file. As is, the player must re-select struction of The Prince Of Darkness. To do end of the third stage, Harker's vampire-slaythe desired sound card at the start of every so, you must shepherd young Harker through ing duties have been fulfilled. three game stages. The first takes place in the It appears that Psygnosis spent most of the Hard-up fast action fans and vampire-slaycemetery outside of and beneath Dracula's their Dracula budget on acquiring the movie ing aficionados might find Dracula to be a castle. The next consists of six map levels in license, leaving little for game development decent, albeit unambitious, game. Gamers Carfax Abbey, while the third and final stage and packaging. The game play is uninspired takes Harker to the castle itself. and repetitious, and while the graphics have looking for a tale that really delves into the an occasional neat touch, they seem as if they vampire mythos should take a look at SSI's A blurb on the back of the game's box were knocked off in a rush. Driving home the Veil Of Darkness or Viacom New Media's shouts that Dracula features a totally incredslipshod impression is a tiny manual that Dracula Unleashed CD-ROM. Less keenly inible and unique character control system,\" ystem, lacks page numbers, with a section entitled terested gamers would be better off renting a but it is neither incredible nor unique. \"Plaving Tips\" offering nothing but instruccampy Vampire movie, dimming the lights in Dracula uses the same dungeon-crawling tions on how to load, save and quit the game. the computer room, and letting their imagiplaying perspective as Id Software's WolfenPsygnosis states that Dracula requires a nations turn Nazi's into ghouls in Wolfenstein stein 3D and Origin's Ultima Underworld, 20MHz 286 machine to operate, 3D. CGW though not as well. Holding down the left but for fluid screen scrolling, a fast Bram Stoker's Dracula mouse button and moving the cross hair 386 or 486 is ideal. Dracula's memmouse pointer about the screen will move orv and hard drive requirements are Harker in that direction. Moving the mouse TITLE: Bram Stoker's Dracula modest, requiring only one megaPRICE: $59.95 toward the top of the screen increases the byte of RAM and a little under two SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 286-20MHz or better, IMB character's forward speed, while moving it megs of hard disk space. Although RAM, VGA graphics, 2MB towards the bottom of the screen causes the Dracula does require a Microsofthard drive space, mouse PROTECTION: None character to slow down or walk backwards. compatible mouse to function DESIGNERS: Tag and Mike Simpson PUBLISHER: Up to seven items-primarily food and properly, running the game with Psygnosis Cambridge, MA keys-can be picked up and placed in the version 9.0 of Microsoft's mouse (617) 497-7794 inventory slot at the bottom of the screen. game, IBM 13 Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"Connect A Joystick To Your Notebook With The Parallel Game Port. PARALLEL 6AME PORT GENOVADONE Notebook computers are great — except when it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come equipped with a game port. Introducing the Parallel Game Port from Genovation. The PGP software turns your notebook into a gamebook by converting the computer's printer port into a \"virtual game port\". A part of the PGP package is an adapter which lets you can now take control of the game as the PGP allows you to program the joystick's keys and customize them for your specific needs. What's more, the Parallel Game Port eliminates the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. And it's easy to install, so you can be up and running in minutes. The Parallel Game Port is now compatible and comes with interfaces to more than 60 games. Including, most likely, every one of your favorites. And every month we connect a joystick, yoke or rudder pedals add many more games to this list. to any portable or desktop DOS computer: A port doubler cable is also available from Genovation, allowing the connection of two devices to the same adapter. The Parallel Game Port is an indispensable accessory for today's serious gamer. Whether you fly combat, race a car, play football or wing along at 100 knots, the PGP's software features will enhance your play action. You Because we write our own game interfaces, they become available as soon as new games come to market — and may be downloaded free of charge from our own BBS. Look for the Parallel Game Port in the software section of your nearest computer dealer. Or call us at Genovation (800) 8224333 Compatible with ITATE TOTT more than 60 games! HTT1111 HH GENOVATION Circle Reader Service #67 Genovation, Inc., 17741 Mitchell North Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 833-3355 FAX (714) 833-0322 Sales: (800) 822-4333 Copyright 1983 Genovation, Inc. All product names are trademarks of their respective companies "


"FROM MI The Friendly Skies Of Flight Simulator 5 Something Special In The Air From Microsoft COCKPIT by Timothy L. Trimble 9 Options are SIR /LOR S RL earjet Two Eight Seven, you are tor. It should be obvious to any cleared for landing, runway two Flight Simulator fans that this seven left.\" product is not an enhancement \"Ah, roger, Oakland tower. Eight Seven is to the previous version, but out of two thousand, landing two seven left.\" rather a complete redesign and As I approached the airport shrouded by a rewrite. The result is a product blanket of fog, my palms grew damp that is closer to simulating real and sweaty. But I had confidence in my flight than ever before. heads-up instrumentation. The CFPD At first glance, the most notaCool (Command Flight Path Display) was projectble change to Flight Simulator ing the flight path onto the front windshield. (FS) is the graphic environment. As long as I kept the aircraft in the middle of With support for SVGA and 256 the red boxes I would be right on target. A colors, the graphics will stir aviaquick glance at the glide slope indicator contor's spirits like a prop frappes the air. The been expanded upon. For example, Reno has firmed my path to the runway. Reducing the graphics are most impressive when flying durbeen added to the San Francisco area scenery. throttle and lowering the gear, I dove softlying the early morning or early evening, when Some pilots were disappointed with the pink wispy clouds float across a lack of scenery detail in earlier FS versions. dark blue sky. The external FS5 has a lot more than just the old solid view of the aircraft shows the green or brown ground to stare at. The scengradient light shading and ery is now rextured for fields, farms, trees, smooth aerodynamic shapes mountains and much more. And another 09 that are almost photographic in type of scenery is now supported—digitized derail. In fact, with the new scenery. A small sample of this is provided at Flight Photograph feature, a lot Meigs Field in Chicago. Separate add-on of impressive Flight Simulator packages of New York and San Francisco photographs are starting to digitized scenery are also available, which show up on CompuServe and provide a greater level of realism to the expeGEnic, and other flight sim-rerience. lated BBSs. (I'm currently using one as a backdrop for Da Plane! Da Plane! Windows.) The quality of the into the sea of fog. I noticed I was holding my digitized instrument panels is so good that The flight characteristics of the aircraft have breath as the fog cleared and revealed the \"real-world» pilots no longer cringe when also been improved. The code for the flight runway directly ahead, with only 200 feet of sitting down in front of the computer. dynamics is a lot more complex and yields a altitude left! After a smooth touchdown, I flying experience closer to the real thing. kicked in the thrust reversers and quickly Along with the graphics, the scenery has However, I still can't seem to get the Cessna slowed the aircraft for a quiet taxi to the also undergone major reconstruction. With to perform a power-on stall properly. All of terminal under the gloomy skies of the Bay the new longitude and latitude coArea dusk. ordinate system, the entire world Microsoft Flight Simulator 5 is supported. To prove it, just TITLE: zoom our all the way with the map Cleared For Taking Home Microsoft Flight Simulator 5 view and you'll see a nice round REQUIREMENTS: After a long, circling flight in the holding picture of the earth! Detailed scengraphics card, 14MB hard drive pattern of software development, Flightery is provided with the package and flight yoke Simulator 5 is finally a reality. The Bruce for Chicago, New York, Los AnNone Artwick Organization (BAO) and Microsoft geles, San Francisco, Seattle, Paris Bruce Artwick Organization have come through with their promise to and Munich. In addition to the Redmond, WA (206) 882-8080 provide the next generation of Flight Simulanew scenery areas, older areas have no PRICE: SYSTEM: $64.95 IBM 386 or better (486 recommended), 1 /ECA space, mouse; supports joystick PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Microsoft Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"MIDNIGHT GAMES Optiom ewe Horld Nau/orgunaru FINEST IN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT SINCE 1984 Casa TUTTI TAYLAN onana WRACAMY Woh TOP TSWOL LEGENDS A RICHLY DETAILED AND REALISTIC COMPUTER MODERATED PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME SIMULATION COMBINING THE FINEST ELEMENTS OF FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING AND EMPIRE BUILDING! RULES BOOKS $15.00 CAMPAIGN MODULE $15.00 (INCLUDES SET-UP AND MAP) MIDNIGHT GAMES PO BOX 280 DEPT G MEDFORD OR 97501-0019 BBS# 503-857-8537 PHONE# 503-772-7872 FAX# 503-772-0636 COMPUSERVE# 71241,455 the aircraft have been rendered beautifully and have their own instrument panels appropriate to the aircraft. For good or bad, there'll be no more ILS approaches with the sailplane! Depending on the realism levels, the aircraft can be a handful to operate. The Cessna is the most stable, and the Learjer is an enjoyable challenge. However, the Sopwith Camel, although pretty, can be a major chore for even an experienced simulator pilot. The sailplane is graceful, as always, and provides a welcome relief from the stresses of powered flight. To assist with all of the flying, there are over 1,300 VORs and 1,000 NDBs available for navigation—even outside the detailed scencry areas. It is now possible to fly from New York to Chicago via the use of VORs instead of guessing the right direction and waiting for a distant VOR to come within range. Just about all of the VORs and NDBs for the U.S. are included. You won't find information about the location of these VORs in the documentation, but you can find them on any of the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) approved flight sectional charts, which can be purchased at your local General Aviation airport or flying school. Another major feature is the new weather generator. It now supports the creation of multiple weather patterns, each with its own cloud, wind, temperature and pressure settings. It's easy to create a situation with a nice clear sky over the departure point and a thick layer of overcast at the destination (and at low levels to simulate fog). You'll be able to see the weather change as you fly from one area into another. Once you become proficient at flying the aircraft in numerous situations, you can record the flight as proof of your great accomplishments. The video recorder even supports Options Vie Horld Nap/cor SRL GIVE OUR MULTI-LINE BBS A CALL AND CHECK OUT THE LATEST IN WINDOWS AND OS/2 SHAREWARE, OR VISIT OUR GAMING SECTIONI Circle Reader Service #96 DAD STR \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" slow motion for catching that last moment before the crash into the Eiffel Tower. Changing Course With the previous version of Flight Simulator, a lot of third-party products have appeared as a result of the Aircraft and Scenery Designer. Because of all the changes to the new program, the previous versions of the aircraft and scenery design software cannot create scenery objects and textures for FS5. (FS5 will support scenery in FS4 formats.) Bruce Artwick is currently working on a new Aircraft & Scenery Designer for FS, and there has even been some discussion about scenery on CDs for the near future. As with past releases of Flight Simulator, the product was a step ahead of the technology required to make it work smoothly. The same is the case with FS5. When all of the graphics and scenery settings are set to their maximum, a 486 computer running at 66MHz can seem like an old 286 computer. When FS4 came out, we were all running 286s and we complained about the performance then, as well. But I'm probably not alone in my willingness to exchange the slight cost of performance for the realistic graphics. Ar least the product offers a wide range of settings for accommodating the preferences of the user. In summary, Flight Simulator 5 is another leading edge step in flight simulation technology for microcomputers. There are a few minor flaws in the flight dynamics and sensitivities, but BAO is currently working on fixes that should be ready by the time you read this. I continue to be excited 004 about this product, even after playing and testing it for more than a year. I'm sure that you'll be just as impressed. Once again, this is The Timinator, saying, «Strap in tightly and watch out for whiplash when you kick in the thrust reversers!\" C6W Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG,1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada 531.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00 All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign sub. scriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. eaon Circle Reader Service #109 January 1994 Page 109 "


"-HIT the ROAD 13x Rapid City ANDWIN LUABLE PRIZES! --Colorado Sors Sleuth the answers to these six questions about Sam and Max's weird road trip and the win totally cool prizes! den y Hutchiesga mese six questions Durango PE 5 First Prizes: Sam & Max framed lithographs signed by creator Steve Purcell. 20 Second Prizes: All cotton Sam & Max T-Shirts. 50 Third Prizes: Sam & Max floaty pens—the ultimate in kitsch! OKLA 2000000 MPUSVIIL SINGS EL PASO Clues to every question are on these two pages. Correct entries will be entered into a drawing to win prizes. Deadline for entry is January 31, 1994. Send your answers to CGW, Sam & Max contest; P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Don't forget to include your name, address and phone number with your entry. CGW and LucasArts are not responsible for lost or misdirected mail. One entry per person. No purchase necessary to enter. Prizes are not transferable. Illegible or incomplete entries are not eligible. Employees of CGW or LucasArts and their affiliates are ineligible to enter. CGW and LucasArts reserve the right to can. cel this promotion at any time with appropriate notice. Winners names and prize information may be used by CGW or LucasArts for any promotional or advertising purposes without further compensation. "


"Join Freelance Police, Sam (don't call him a cartoon dog) and Max (a hyperkinetic, rabbity thing) as they pursue a runaway carnival Bigfoot across America's quirky underbelly. 2. What carnival game gives Max a big headache? a. Wak-A-Rat b. Skeeball IN Db Skeep 1. Sam & Max bungee jump from what famous landmark MIX . Grand Canyon b. Mount Rushmore c. Eiffel Tower Greon c. Bumper Bass SIOUX FALLS MADISON Rockford CLEVELAND CETIES 3. Sam & Max cruise the U.S. in what kind of car? a. A DeSoto LINCOLN b. A Beamer c. A Beetle 4. Sam & Max meet a famous singer who lives where? a, Graceland as b. Bumpusville c. Dollywood St. Josep CONE geria 6. From what road side attraction do Sam & Max plummet? a. The World's Largest Ball of Twine b. Seattle's Space Needle c. The Empire State Building 2002 OVO Coro 5. What deadly metallic monster do Som & Max encounter a. Frankenstein b. Godzilla c. T-Rex I CAN'T THINK OF ANYTHING MORE RELAXING THAN BEING LOCKED IN A MOVING CAR WITH A DELUSIONAL PSYCHOTIC LIKE YOURSELF, LITTLE PAL! QUOD BADY NEEDS USER Fort Smith DALLAS 33 500 | 22 THAT'S REALLY SWEET, SAM. I MAY WEEP OPENLY. HOUSTON LUCAS Arts AVAILABLE FOR THE IBM PC. COMING SOON FOR THE IBM CD ROM. Sam & Maxit the Foad and 1993 LucasArts Entertament Company Al Rights Reserved. Used under Authentation Sam & Maris a trademark of Steve Purcot LucasArts is a trademark of LucasAns Entertainment Company The LucasArts logo sa rogistered servion mark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. Il a registered trademark of International Business Machines AVAILABLE FOR THE TEMPS AND COMPATIBLES VISIT YOUR BETALER OR CALL 1.0 STARWARS "


"Scorpion's Tale Simple Simon Scorpion's Tale is a warm and comfortable tavern of the mind complete with a cozy fire of vibrant images. Our revered storyteller conjures up illuminating lints about games, so if our Sentle readers eschew hints. let them beware! Scorpia Guides Gamers Through Activision's Simon The Sorceror o here we are, just coming off the holiSo anyway, here's Simon, a typical Earth Right then! Let's talk about Dwarves. Sidays highs, and it's time to settle down kid who gets pulled into another dimension mon wants to get into the Dwarven mine. It to the serious business of gaming. to rescue Calypso the Wizard from the evil helps if he looks like a Dwarf, but that's no What better way to spend those cold winter mage Sordid. Right there, Simon knows it problem if he thinks sharp. The real trick is nights than sweating over a hot game? Keeps isn't going to be a good day. It doesn't get any bribing the guard inside. What to use is obyou warm, engages the mind, and, if the game better when he visits the wizards at the local vious, but how to get it, that's another matter is tough enough, expands your vocabulary of bar; they won't welcome him into their circle entirely. expletives (hch). And make no mistake about until he brings them a magic staff they've This is one of the nasty puzzles, so I'm going it. playing the part of a kid wizard can be very been looking for. For poor Simon, it's going to be a bit more forthcoming about it. If frustrating at times. to be just one thing after another. Simon stands in the bar and you run the Simon The Sorcerer is a British import, The first item on the agenda is to wandercursor across the shelf behind the bartender, hauled over the Atlantic by Activision. This around the village and become familiar with nothing shows up. But, when Simon asks for typically means it has a few quirks, and you all the buildings and, of course, grab everya drink, and the bartender rummages down have to approach it carefully. For instance, thing Simon can get his hot little hands on below for ingredients, the left-hand keg sudnot all the puzzles are fair or logical. Perhaps (sorry to say, nothing can be stolen from the denly \"lights up\" if the cursor touches it, and this is the culture gap, or maybe British adShoppe; items can only be bought there). this is the only time that happens. Simon still venture designers have a cruel streak. can't grab it from there, but he can do Whichever, puzzle solutions will often something else while the bartender is come off the wall, out of woodworks, left distracted. And while you're at it, pay field wherever such odd-ball items are close attention to the (non-working) found. Another annoyance is trying to fruit machine in the corner. find things on the screen. I missed items Our in the woods is a Troll Bridge, more than once because the cursor but the Troll is on strike and won't let didn't go over the precise spot necessary anyone pass (poor thing, you almost to discover an object. So when you play can't blame him). However, this is a this one, remember to scan the entire screen slowly, all over, right to the very Look at mere whistle stop along the way to Walk to Look at Open Move better things. edges, or you're sure to overlook someNext Simon might want to consider thing Consume Piak up Close Use a certain tower in the woods. MemoYou also have an auto-map of sorts. It Talk to Remove Week Cave ries of old fairy tales naturally come to shows major locations as you reach them when that's been taken care of, it's time to mind, and probably the name \"Rapunzel during the game. Once an area is on the map, haul out the graph paper and map the forest. rings a bell here. Of course, this being the you can go there immediately by clicking on This is where it gets really interesting, as world it is, what's waiting at the top may not it. While it won't record every single place, Simon will meet all sorts of, umm, unusual be quite as expected. Keep the floorboards in the major locations are set up so you usually beings during his jaunt through the woods. mind for the future. don't have to go more than a couple of screens This is also where things get a little difficult What a \"repulser\" is good for is not entirely to get where you want to be. And feel free to to talk about. Most of the puzzles require clear. However, if you know anything about save as often as you want. The save files are a multi-step solutions, and some of them overpigs and fungi, this may well open a door to microscopic 3K each (wow!), so you should lap. It isn't like, say, Freddy Pharkas, where some helpful items. have room for plenty of save positions. the action is divided into neat little chapters. The action is divided into neat little chapters. Further on, at the edge of the swamp, is the Further on ar the edge of tl Finally, there's a wise owl, of sorts, in the So I'm going to be a bit discursive here, Swampling. Poor critter, no one comes to see woods. He provides a few clues to some of the jumping around to different points in the him any more. Then again, since he insists on puzzles. Chat with him every now and then. game, in no particular order, rather than try serving visitors a nauscating swamp mud However, he only has abour ren things to say, to give a straight, one path walkthrough of stew, perhaps this is not surprising. I recomso after awhile, you'll be on your own. the game. mend no more than two helpings of this stuff. Puge 112 Computer Gaming World "


"() ima VII AVATAR YOU'RE NOT IN BRITANNIA ANYMORE! Foiled by your defense of Britannia, the evil Guardian transports you to a world already under his dominion. Now you must confront alien realms and powerful new enemies in a battle without allies. But wait! Perhaps more has changed than just the battlefield ... ?  Incredibly smooth and lifelike animation — 400 frames of art per character (1200 frames for the Avatar) and 10 times the art of any previous Ultima! A new, more natural perspective.  Compatibility with EMS, XMS and all other common memory management systems.  Twice as many frames per second, producing a richer, faster story in this luxuriously detailed world! Son ha VOLUNTARILY RATED MP-13 (For Mature Players) GRIGLIAN Actual screens may vary.      Look for the new Pagan Clue Book! An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX Pagan and Avatar are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ultima, Origin, and We create worlds are rogistered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc, Copynight  1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. For IBM PC and 100% compatible systems. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #108 "


"Look at Look at The third is best saved for later, possibly as a staff?). This is where the woodworm are really is another matter. Simon might want to have specimen of some sort. helpful (ber you thought it was the hammer, an extended talk with the demons. Moving right along, there's the woodcutter. huh? So did I, but that's not it); so is a ladder, Sa here he is at the He not so cleverly settled in an area where and a certain loose bandage. now a tourist attraction with no tourists in trees are magically protected, and he can't cut Well now, what with returning the staff, sight, with empty pockets. Hmmmm. Wonthem down. Unless, that is, he has a milrith and paying the exorbitant initiation fee, Sider what that bell on the wall might do? (anagram of mithril) axe. Of course Simon mon has arrived! Yes, a real wizard at last, and There must be a way to find out. Scan the volunteers to help, and receives a metal detecfinally able to face up to the wicked old witch ground carefully here, and don't overlook tor to assist him. The thought of searching (well, if he also helped out the talking tree to those brochures. who knows where for the stuff might leave learn the magic words, that is). Yeah, onward to the pits! And look who's him cold, but possibly a wizard can show the This one is tricky. The words change Simon there, trying to restart the fires that our boy way. into different critters, namely a lion, a monjust snuffed. Yep, that old evil wizard, Sordid goose, a snake and a mouse. In the wizard himself! He's too busy to notice Simon, so duel, Simon has to choose a shape (speak the now's the time to give Sordid a taste of his word) that will \"defeat the form chosen by own medicine. Gee, that was easy. the witch. In other words, it's a variation on Bur those pits still have to be lit up again, scissors-rock-paper. Witchy-poo chooses and magic doesn't seem to be the answer (and her forms randomly, and since both change Simon has none anyway). Let's hope Simon at the same time, a certain amount of luck is didn't miss something back at the souvenir didn't miss something back at the souver needed to win herc. Also, the witch is a poor Kalk to Look at Open More loser, and Simon must make one final transConsume Pick up Close Use formation to get out. Talk to Remove Wear Give Okay, let's talk about the end game. Getting across the chasm and into the castle Unfortunately, finding the stuff isn't shouldn't be a problem. However, the new enough; it needs to be dug up. Shovels being perspective (so to speak) causes Simon to in short supply, another method must be drop all his inventory. Not to worry, though; found. Here is where Tom Sawyer and whitenone of it is needed, and everything Simon washing come to mind, for some reason or does need will be found along the way. other. ale to Look at Open Move Getting across the \"pond\" is the first order Consume Pak up Close Use Somewhere about is a dragon. A real, honof business, and that's not difficult, since Tale to Remove_kear Give est-to-gosh fire-breather...with a bad cold. there's so little to work with (provided, of Not something Simon wants to stand near for course, that you find everything that has to Good! The pits are fiery again, and with the any length of time, even if he does have his be found here). The frog is a bit more diffiwand destroyed, all the petrified people are eyes on the dragon hoard. Sorry Char...err, cult, but examining the water, and being restored. ALL of them. Oooops, that includes Simon, you can't reach the gold from here. tough, will get Simon past the obstacle. Sordid, too. Hmmm, I guess it was just a bit There are other ways, though; try checking too casy. Fear not, Simon is tougher than he out the cave entrance very carefully. And looks! After the first go-around with Sordid, when you get where you're going, well, the our hero should be able to, ahem, wax him answer is attractive but illogical. more permanently the second time. Simon's probably been wondering about Whew! Once again, the world has been those woodworm. Just a bit of mahogany, saved so another evil megalomaniac can try that's all they want. So who's most likely to taking it over in the future. Simon goes back have wood, eh? Right! Haven't seen any lying home, happy to be back where he belongs. around though, have you? Well, cool off Wade to Look at Opex Move Wait, what's that giant hand that just came those overheated brain cells and move. Consume Pick up Close Use out of nowhere? Uh oh, looks like Simon isn't In his wanderings, Simon may have come Talk to Remove Wear Give going to be staying home for awhile yet.... across Golum (or then again, perhaps not; Well, I see by the old invisible clock on the check out the waterfall area from both sides). All right. Simon is himself again and na All right, Simon is himself again, and natuwall, it's that time again. In the meantime, if It's a sad party that has no munchies, but , but rally checks the garden carefully before going rallye you need help with an adventure game, you possibly Simon can provide a little someinside to deal with the chest-monster. That's can reach me in the following ways: the only dangerous thing here. The demons On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under I see I haven't mentioned the goblins yet. on the top level, being somewhat miffed at the Groups & Clubs menu). Nasty types, those. After getting inside their the moment, won't bother him at all. Good On GEnic: Visit the Games Round Table fortress (delivery!), Simon has to rescue the thing, too, since there's an important book up (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). Druid. The means for this are at hand (incihere. In fact, it's Sordid's spell book, containdentally, there is no way past the guard at the ing an incantation to send demons back By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed. stairs), but it's essential to talk to the Druid a where they belong. How convenient! stamped envelope if you live in the US): few times first. Most of the rest is pretty simple, for a Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New Around about now, Simon should be change. Picking up the spell \"ingredients\" York, NY 10028. thinking of that staff (remember the magic presents few problems. Using them, however, Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Look at ching. Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"he Patrician Qut hont you 12 y beloved Patriciam Since 3 saw you lagt, we bear rumours that you inget un darkened backrooms of alehduses frequented by pirates who sell arms. the Papal Edict forbidding trade in arme? Are you mee! Do you linow not of 712y father is so upset he threatens tocancel the wooding: You won't loose just the dowry... the council will not support a man who breaks the laws of Boo, 110 inalter how much aib You have given the church and the poor. I am so vexed I must see you soon. VWith concern A.Dcon ly precious X5 by Weavy windy and piratallacius hoep met longer than planned. ioare not about I know many things about him he will Tathier were left waaid.. ayol The town council shall clect me errian of the from where I shall rise to H whole Hanseatic Weaque ! 16 tiis eller is a picture of a ship does Strecegofully for. Hough of politica an FINI Lineag! alifu il count the days until our marriage, lend your From Tovgorod bearing a gift & fury that you might wrap tiem Slender, smooth young body. With Passion Patrician 17th, Euting 356 Py byloved, Patrician Shave gaine hurriage write with urgoney to hell you to which is stricten with the Dlagu af we might nekindle the heat andy your wadung vou. Slip full of rice, wuland af burek to me of our passion and vn fl . 12ayor, not you! pl Further bad nemue... recently, a certain irblay hag bytun business in the town D and can he wil Q the miserable eur! On your return you Dould be advised to firewaltuge feast for the townsfolk With Love A Scon | | ke ky The Patrician is an epic saga of power and money set in medieval Europe. Trading and strategy are key to taking your rightful place in the Hanseatic League the most poiverfiil group of highly organized traders who transformed international trading in the middle ages. In your pursuit to become a member of this social elite, you begin your climb to the top maneuvering your status from Irumble merchant to elected Mayor and ultimately Alderman. But the road to the top won't come easily, with bribery, blackmail, lavish feasts and financial \"donations\" becoming your tools. 1. C As the Patrician (an ancient roman aristocrat) you'll travel the high seas visiting sixteen scaport toimus, each with different trading potential. Be careful though, your expedition will find you confronting pirates and using the primitive but devastating weapons of the time. Every decision you make has a bearing on what happens later, so you must be a skilled strategist in all aspects of your life, including personal relationships. Complex, involving and addictive, you'll find The Patrician is in a league of its own! ASCON NW Available for IBM PC, Amiga & PC CD-ROM READYSOFT ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Tel: (905) 731-4175 Fax: (905) 764-8867  Ascon Ltd. Distributed by ReadySoft Incorporated Circle Reader Service #124 "


"MAD DOG MCCREE CD MASTER OF ORION Ele McCree COMPUTER Express Real motion picture actioni Arcade smash hit! First interactive shoot ing arcade game with real live motion picture action. Mad Dog and his men have I l fut de cu kidnapped the town's mayor and his daughter. To save the town, you will be challenged by a saloon full of outlaws, a hair raising bank robbery, gunfighters, a slew of old West ambushes, and Mad Dog himself. Features highquality live action images. REQUIRES Sound Blaster or compatible sound card and CD-ROM Drive with 380ms access time or better. Build an empire to spon the galaxy Foscinating game of space exploration, combot, and strategy set in the distant future Truly unique product features strategic use of resources and tech nology, and involves detailed interaction ABCROPROSE with 10 different alien Foces, each with distinct characteristics and idiosyncratic leaders. Battle, trade and negotiate. Build a powerful fleet of space ships. Features music by The Fat Man Studio With its scope and depth of play. it invites comparison to the highly acclaimed Civilization and Global Conquest PUBLISHER: Microprose PART : 31433 DOS 800-228-7449 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE PUBLISHER: 18M EduQuest PART #: 32947 DOS CD $33 $39 POWER GAME II HELL CAB CD BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA MECHWARRIOR II POWER CAME Three action packed PC games in one packagal INDIANAPOUS 500: Go up against your racing heroes on an exact replica of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. Choose from 33 cars or design your own GUNSHIP 2000: Total control of a full multicopter troop of America's most powerful and versatile motor craft. Take charge of five copters on hundreds of combat missions in the Persian Gulf and Central Europe JET FIGHTER: Take your choice of a F-14 Tomcat, F-16 Fighting Folcon, or F/A-18 Hornet Stalo of the art wooponry in realistic aerial combot PUBLISHER: Activision PART A: 32604 DOS The cab ride from hell. An interac live epic adven turo. Journey in the devil's time machine. Hop in Get set for a hell ride through histo ry's most infamous periods. Walk with the dinosaurs, fight to the death with Roman gladiators, even witness infantry attacks in the WWI trenches of Verdun. Dazzling animated sequences, origi nal music, and life-like sound effects. Realistic, first person interaction. \"Incredibly cinematic... hilarious solos Computer Gaming World Maybe you can get out alive with your soul intact. Hahl Maybe... PUBLISHER: Time Warner PART #: 32458 WIN CD PART &: 27866 MAC CD The world's fore most horror Story drives a stake through the heart of your PC with this sequel to the blockbuster movie. Enter one of the most amazing worlds ever creat ed and fight for your life as you play Harker, the only man in the world who can stop Dracula in his plan to take yet another mortal soul. Features a first person 3D perspective, 256 color texture mapped graphics and heart stop ping digital sound effects and musical score. Eerie atmosphere and grotesque monsters, enough to make your skin crawl! PUBUSHER: Psygnosis PART #: 32548 Strap yourself into the cockpit of a NEONHARRIOR 100 ton machine armed with enough firepower to disinte grote a squadron of F15's As a member of six war. ring clans, you'll enter a world in which survival honor, and glory are hard fought vic tories. Master the most sophisticated weaponry of the 31st Century. Create your own combat scenario from hundreds of differ ont missions. Hook up via modem, and face the Terrifying firepower of another MechWarrior in real timo. Maneuver your 100 ton Mech into the most believable battles imagined. The ult. mote confrontation in virtual simulation PUBLISHER: Activision PART 1: 32603 DOS $25 $61 $31 $45 Texel Int. Bore Drive......... Texel Int. Business CD Kit... Texel Int. Education CD Kit Texel Int. Home Bundle Texel Int. Home CD Kit.. Texel int w/PAS16 & Cable .361 666 594 558 . 558 558 ON JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS Cyberman 3D Controller......... Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro... GForce Flight Yoke. GameCard Autoset GameCard Ill Automatic GomeCard III MCA Automatic Notebook Gameport....... .. Thrustmaster ACM Game Card... Thrustmaster Flight Control Thrustmaster Pro Flight Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals.... Thrustringsler Weapon UPROM Thunderstick... CD-ROM TIMES CD-ROM TILES AR Partner 22 Speaker Sys... AR Partner 42 Speaker Sys..... AR Partner 570 Speaker System .......... AR Partner 622 Speaker System. Altec ACS100 Speakers Altec ACS300 Speakers Koss HD 1 Speakers................. Koss HD 4 Speakers.... ... Koss HD6 MPC Speakers.. Labtec CS-1000 Speakers..... . Labtec CS-150 Speckers... Labtec CS-180 Shielded Speaker.... Labtec CS 550 Speakers Labtec CS 800 Speaker labtec CS 909 Labine 551 SS ZU CD Capitol Hill.......................... CD Chessmaster 3000 Windows... CD Cinemania Movie Guide '94 CD Clipart Goliath ... .. CD.Company of Wholes w/Video... CD-Compleat Beatles...... .... CD Complete Bookshop........ CD Complete House...... CD Complon's Encyclopedia Upg CD Conspiracy... CD Cookbook Heaven..... CD Curse of Enchantia... CD CyberRace....... CD Dark Seed ..... . CD Day of the Tentacle.... CD-Deathstar Arcade Battles.. CD Dictionary of Living World....... CD-Dinosaur Adventure ....... CD Dinosaurs! Multimedia Ency CD Dragon's Lair ................. . CD-Dune CD-Eco h for Cetus... SPEAKERS ..30 80 ..82 Epson Action 2250 Printer Epson Action 3250 Printer Epson LQ 570 Printer .................... Epson Stylus 800 InkJet..... 353 FanCard Version IPS 360 GPS Navigation System....... 475 Microsoft Bus Mouse 2.0 Microsoft PS/2 Serial Mouse........ Practical PM14400FXMT EXT F/M...... Pro Movie Studio Sony PIX.100 CD ROM XA Player ..... Sportster 14.4 EXT Fax/Modem... Sportster 14.4 INT Fax/Modem..............178 Siar IS 5 Laser Printer... 672 Star NX-1040 Rainbow 180CPS Star Starjot SJ 48 Ink Jet.... 268 VGA TV Elite. 217 & HARDWARE 857 199 UUU OOSS 157 1991 263 CD CD lands of Lore........ CD Laura Bow II....... CD Legend of Kryandia.. CD Leisure Suit Larry VI.... CD lightning CD loom... .. CD lord of the Rings........ CD Lost Treasures Infocom... CD Lost in Time.... ... ..... CD lyric language French MPC. CD Lyric language Spanish MPC CD MPC Music Mozart... CD MPC Wizard Diagnostic CD MS Beethoven for Windows CD-MS Encarta Multimedia Ency... CD MS Golf Windows MPC, CD Macmillan Kids Dictionary. CD Mon Enough...... ..... CD Mantis Expertimental.... CD Map Expert.ua  CD Motio is Missing Deluxe CD Mayo Clinic Family Health....... CD Microsoft Golf Windows MPC. CD Monopoly Deluxe ..... CD Multimedia Dinosaurs... CD Multimedia Mozart Windows..... CD Multimedia Stravinsky... CD Musical Instruments CD National Lampoons Chess... CD Newswork Interactive #1......... CD Night Before Christmas....... CD Oceans Below... CD Our Solar System CD Oxford English Reference CD-Photo CD Access DOS CD Photo CD Access Windows... CD PhotoEdge Color Windows CD. Pill Book CD Police Quest IV. CD ProPhone 1993. CD Rebol Assault... CD-Return of the Phantom CD Return to Zork...... CD Sam & Max Hit the Road.. CD Scrabble Deluxe.... . CD-Secret Weapons Luftwaffe CD Secret of Monkey Island CD SimAnt Enhanced ... CD SimCity Enhanced ....... CD Sound Sensations CD Space Quest IV ......... CD Space Shuitle MPC ......... CD-Spirit of Excalibur..... . CD Sporting News Pro Football CD Star Trek 25th Enhanced CD-Street Atlas 20 USA... CD Strike Commander/Tactical CD-Technolools..... ..... CD-Tony LaRussa Baseball II....... CD Too Many Typefonts... CD Total Distortion ... CD-Typecase... CDUFO Close Guide Windows... CD USA Today. The 90's Vol. CD-Ultima I. VI..... CD Ultima Underworld I & II CD Vocation Planner Gold. CD.Where in World Deluxe ... CD-WinCD Professional 1.1 CD Wines of the World 134 131 SOUND CARDS 108 CD Arthur's C r adle.............. CDB17 & Silservice II........ Labtec CS1000 Speakers... Labtec CS-150 Speakers Labtec CS-180 Shielded Speaker.. Labtec CS-550 Speakers, Labtec CS 800 Speakers...... Labtec CS 900 Speakers... Labtec SS-100 Stereo Speakers Labtec SS 700 Speakers ................ SOSNO 105 Ad Lib Gold 1000..... AudioMan 134 Gravis Ultrasound Pro Audio 16 Basic...... Pro Audio Studia 16 .... Pro Audio Studio 16XL. Pro AudioSpectrum 16 Reolmagic Multimedia Playback Sound Blaster 16 MCD..... Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP 183 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2............ Sound Blaster 16 SCS-2 ASP .. SoundMan là...aaaaaaaaaa DigitalEdge CD Mult, Kit 683 Discovery Int. Dbl. 16 bit Kit..... 442 Edutainment Exl, Dbl. 16 bit.... 609 Edutainment Int. Obl. 16 bit. 499 Fusion CD lo Internal... Fusion CD 16E External.... Fusion Double CD Infernol Kit Memphis Multimedia Upgratie Kit..... 739 MultiSpin 3XE Ext. 195ms. 605 MultiSpin 3XI Int. 195ms 505 MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms......... 167 OmniCD Upgrade Kit.... 305 PAS-16 Il Multimedia Kit............. 8.40 Sony CDU 31A IL/L Mull. Kit....... 447 Sony CDU-7305 Ext, Mult, Kil.... Texel DM3028 Int. 240ms. Texel DM5028 Ext. 240ms. 475 Toxol Ext. Bare Drive... 450 Texel Ext, Business CD Kit..... Texel Ext. Education CD Kit. 713 Texel Ext. Home CD Kit 654 Texel Ext. w/PAS 16 & Cable .............. .696 463 CD Humans......... CD Deathstar Arcade Battles CD Dictionary of Living World CD-Dinosaur Adventure CD Dinosaurs! Multimedia Ency..... CD-Dragon's Lair CD Dune..... CD Eco Quest Search for Cetus CD Electronic Arts Sampler... CD European Racers ........... CD-F.15 Strike Eagle Ill.... CD Family Doctor MPC Windows CD Fractal Ecstasy... CD Gabriel Knight CD Global Explorer.......... CD Gobliiins .... CD Goblins 2 CD Great Naval Battles Pack. CD Guinness Disk Records '93 CD Gunship 2000 w/Scenorio... CD HAM Radio ................ CD Hi-Tech Aircraft .... CD Humans.... CD-INCA CD Indiana Fate of Atlantis .. CD Iron Holix CD.Journeyman Project... CD Just Grandma & Me..................... CD.Jutland ................. CD-Key Home Designer Windows CD King James Elect. Bible...... CD King's Quest VI CD King's Quest VI Upgrade.... CD-labyrinth of Time..... SES CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS CD-20h Century Video Almanac... CD7th Guest..... CD AD&D Eye Beholder Trilogy ...47 CD AD&D: Dark Sun Sholtered........ CD-AD&D: Dungeon Hack CD Adventures.... ...... ... CD Adventures of Willy Beamish.......... CD Air Warrior............. CD Aladdin and His lamp....... CD Alone in the Dark .. ... CD Animals MPC VERSION...... CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble... CD817 & Silent Service II CD Backroad Racer................. CD Bare Assets. CD Battle Chess MPC & DOS CD Berlitz Japan Alive.... CD Borlitz Think & Talk French CD Better Homes Healthy..... CD Bibles & Religion..... CD Blood Nel. CD Blue Force... CD Campaign... D-ROM TITLES CD-ROM TILES CD-ROM TILES 749 Circle Reader Service #49 "


"WHERE IN SPACE 15 CARMEN SANDIEGO? DELUXE SOUND BLASTER 16 BASIC METAL & LACE POLICE QUEST IV punos Most challenging Carmen yet. Join the ACME Detective Agency, Intergalactic Division, and chose Carmen and 14 alien villains through the solar system and learn about the geography, history and science of space Crack the case using an easy to-use, extensive electronic database (New Featurel Includes dozens of dazzling NASA photographs includ ing sun, planets, moons, galaxies, meteors, asteroids and nebula displayed in high resolu tion graphics. Original music and talking char acters. Recommended for ages 12 to adult. The battle of the Robo Babes. Looking for a game to play? Something fun and exciting, yet sexier than munching dots or pudgy little painters? look no further. The gor geous Robo Babes are expecting you! You can find them on MeCHa Island soaking up the tropical sunshine. They'll give you a welcome you won't soon forget. The Robo Babes even talk! Yeah! Hi-fi stereo cuts Recommended for mature game players only. The highly antici pated fourth chap ter in the best-seller Police Quest seties is here! The nation's most expe rienced cop brings you the most realis lic police simulation everl Features all POLICE GES) new ultro reolistic digital photography taken throughout California, video captured actors, and dig tized crime scenes. State of the art sound effects and music, including rock, rap, and hip hop. You can't get any closer to the crime scene without a badge. Windows compatible for fast, point and click gameplay. Professional CD quality 16 bit stereo sound of a great value offers advanced audio technology to onhance business and recreational applications True 16 bit stereo sound. 16 ba and 8-bit stereo sampling and playback from 4 Hz to 44.1 LH: 20 voice, 4 operator FM music synthesizer CD ROM interface for Creative Labs CD ROM drives Includes a joystick pout, Monologue for Windows, Creative Wave Studio, Creative Soundo\"LE Creative Talking Scheduler and Creative Mosaic PUBLISHER: Creative labs $130 PART 3: 32529 PUBLISHER: Broderbund PART 2: 30545 DOS $45 PUBLISHER: Megatech PART #: 31594 $27 PUBLISHER: Sierra PART #: 32079 DOS/WIN $39 MAC BEST SELLERS HAND OF FATE: KRYANDIA II LEMMINGS HOLIDAY WARLORDS II holm Three MAC games BEST SELLERS in one packagol SUPER TETRIS: The super sequel to the best-selling Tetris Keeps the bosic Tetris object with added explosive new twists. SPEC TRE: Advanced sim ulation technology featuring dozzling fullcolor graphics, breathtaking scenery with multi-participant network play over standard AppleTalk and EtherTalk net works. HELLCATS OVER PACIFIC: Flight simulo lor realism with the excitement of an intenso dog fight. You are the pilot of the FF Hellcot as the scenarios take you to several dangerous Fighter bomber missions in and around the Solomon Islands PUBLISHER: Activision PART #: 32470 MAC Rejoin the adventure in Kyrandia II, the long awaited sec ond title in the Fables and Fiends series. You are the THE LAND Or PAT offbeat, young my tic who must voyage to the center of the world to break the spall. Travel through swaps, farms. coastal towns and previously unchart ed londs of Kyrandio. Enables you and over 50 characters to change your mind, mood and mayhem based on preceding events Hours of fun and awesome graphics. Features far reaching lands infused with mysteries to decipher and puzzles to solve. Extensive sound offects and a musical score. PUBLISHER: Virgin Games PART #: 32527 DOS Those seasonally Spirited Lemmings are on the move! Due to popular demand, Psygnosis delivers 32 levels of your favorite Lemmings holiday gameplay. Bring the Lemmings home safely for the holidays as you guide them through their winter won. derland in an all new series of adventures. The humorous and challenging gameplay and of Lemmings takes a winter vacation with the 32 levels of Santo clod Lemmings climbing. digging, and building through on animated Lemmingland winterscope. PUBLISHER: Psygnosis PART 3: 32545 The sequel to the highly addictive, hugely successful award winning Warlords. Now you have more worlds to conquer, more mighty armies to make, and more enemies to van quish. New magi cal items and abil ties. Hites graphics and bocked by a full sound trock. Features include random worlds for infinite ployability, mysterious hidden mops, exciting and dangerous quests, and exotic army types. Contains 640x480 VGA graphics and sound board support. $39 $35 $13 PUBLISHER: SSG PART #: 31521 $38 es Dune... EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 OUV\"220\"447 327 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 H*0## 0 -4-A * FAX:0011-508-443-5645, XIX.CompuServeID:70007, 15347 U D B Abt Fav.  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS REGREATON RECREATION 24 . CD-Wing 1I/Ultima UnderWld.... CD Wolf Pack.... CD World Atlas 4.0. CD-Space Shuttle MPC...... A 10 Tank Killer Enhanced... A320 Airbus: US Edition... AD&D: Dark Sun Hint Book... AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands...... AD&D Dungeon Hock AD&D: Eye of Beholder Ill. AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy......... APBA Baseball for Windows... Aces of Pacific 1946 WWII Miss...... Aces of the Pocific. VGA Aces over Europe........... Adven, of Willy Beamish ........ Adventure Pack .................. Air Combat Classics...... Air Warrior SVGA... Alone in the Dark Ancient Art of War in Skies. Arborea 2.... Archon Ultra All of the Kill Ashes of Empire..................... B-17 Flying Fortress VGA....... Battle Chess 4000. Super VGA Battle Chess 4000 Windows Battle Chess for Windows... Battles of Destiny .. ..... Beethoven l... Betrayal at Krondor........ Blood Net....... Blue & the Gray Blue Force: The Next of Kin...... Buzz Aldrin's Race into Spoce.. CD San Francisco Scenery... CD Washington DC Scenery Caesar. Caesars Palace Windows..... Campaign ... Carrier Strike.......... Carriers of War II.. Castle of Dr. Brain VGA Castles II: Siego & Conquest .. Challenge of the 5 Realms Chessmaster 4 for Windows .... Civilization. Civilization Hint Book......... Civilization Master Player Ed... Civilization for Windows...... Clash of Steel: WWII 1939-45...... Classic 5 Windows... Coaster Cobra Mission..... . Cognito for Windows Cohort Il................ ........ Comanche & Mission Disk #1 Comanche: Mission Disk #1 Comancho: Mission Disk #2 ... Comanche: Maximum Overkill Combat Classics II. Command HQ Classic............ Command Starship ............. Companions of Xanth Conquered Kingdoms.............. Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Crosswords Deluxe Windows........ Cyber Race CyberSpace................ D&D: Fantasy Empires........ D&D. Stronghold Darklands Hint Book.......... Darklands Day of the Tentacle Hint Book Day of the Tentacle, Maniac II. Dragon Knight III DreamWeb..... . Dune II.... Dungeon Master .... Earth Invasion Arcade Windows Eco Quest ll: Rainforest....... . Eight Boll Deluxe.... El Fish Empire Deluxe.... . Empire Deluxe Scenario..... . Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide Empire Deluxe for Windows..... Elernam. Even More Incredible Machines... F-15 Strike Eagle ll Classic ............. F-15 Strike Eagle Ill.......... F.19 Stealth Fighter Classic Falcon 3.0.... Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary falcon: Operation Fight liget....... FlashBack Fleet Defender ................ Flight Light Flight Sim: Las Vegas Flight Sim: New York Scenery Flight Sim: Paris Scenery. Flight Sim: San Francisco... Flight Sim: Washington DC Flight Simulator 5.0... Forgotton Castle ... .... Four Play Freddy Pharkas... Freddy Pharkas Hint Book... Front Page Sports: Football Pro... Frontier Elite II............. Gabriel Knight Gary Grigsby's War in Russia........ Gateway Il........ .. Geekwad Games of the Galaxy .... Global Dominations .... Gobliiins.... Goblins It: The Prince Buffoon....... Great Naval Battles Pack Great War. Handball HardBall Ill Big League Parks.... HardBall lll Diamond Collect HardBall Player Disk. Harpoon 1!. Heirs to the Throne.............. High Command Hoyles Book of Game Classic Human's Like You've Never Seen... Human's: Insult to Injury.......... INCA... INCA Hint Book..... Incredible Machine..... Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis...... Indy Car Racing Isle of the Dead Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1.... RECREATION RECREATION Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2....... Jeopardy Deluxe for Windows ... leopardy with Alex.... Jet Fighter II...... Jet Pack Jump Jot................ Kasparov's Gambit ...... Kid Pix King's Quest V. VGA King's Quest VI Hint Book.. King's Quest VI VGA FREE CD Kings Ransom..... Kingdoms of Germany Kronolog... Kyo Deluxe Londs of Lore........... Lands of lore Hint Book Laura Bow !! VGA Leather Goddesses of Phobos !! Legacy Realm of Terror... Legend of Kyrandia............. Legend of Kyrandia Hint book Leisure Suit Carry 1 VGA Leisure Suit Larry V-VGA Leisure Suit larry V Hint Book Leisure Suit Larry VI........... Lemmings........ . lemmings Il Links 386 Pro Links: Banff Springs SVGA.... Links: Belfrey Course SVGA Links: Firestone Course SVGA Links: Innsbrook Course SVGA. Links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA Lost Treasures of Infocom I..... Lost Treasures of Infocom II......... Lost Vikings Lost in Time... Lucas Arts Clossic Collection Lucky's Casino Adventure... Lure of the Tomptress......... Merchant Prince...... Michael Jordan Flight...... Microleague Baseball/Football..... Microsoft Arcade for Windows...... Microsoft Space Simulator Might & Magic Clouds of Xeon............ Might & Magic Dark Side of Xeen............38 Mike Ditka Footboll........... Monopoly Deluxe......... More Incredible Machines... More Vegos Games for Windows Mortal Combat. NFL '94... NFL '94 for Windows ............ NFL Cooches Club Football. Operation Combat 2 Pacific Strike Pacific Strike Speech Disk... Pocific War....... Patriot Perfect General Great Battles Perfect General Trilogy.. Perfect General wwil Scenario ... Pinball Dreams Pirates! Gold..... Police Quest lll VGA Pool Shark Populous l... Powermonger... Prince of Persia IL Privateer Privateer Speech Pack.. Prophecy Quartur Pole. Quest for Glory 1. VGA.... Quest for Glory III......... Quest for Glory IV... Quiz Show Windows...... Rags to Riches Railroad Tycoon Classic ........ Railroad Tycoon Deluxe... Railroad Tycoon Master Hint Reach for the Skies Realms of Arkania....... Realms of Atkania Hint Book Red Baron VGA. Red Baron Mission Builder Red Crystal Red Storm Rising Classic.... Return of the Phantom... Return to Zork Rex Nebula. Rex Nebular Clue Book... Road & Track Grand Prix.. Rome: Pathway to Powet....... Rules of Engagement il.. 38 SAS RECREATION RECREATION RECREATION RECREATION Circle Reader Service #49 "


"THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS MARK II GAME BLASTER COMPUTER Express User programma blo throttle and weapons func tions, Compatible with 5 pin key board connectors Program your loy stick for any cur rent or future game. Your gam ing peripherals joystick and WCS) will be instantly compati ble with current or future games. Features: LED lighting system indicates when certain lunc tions are activated, Screwdown connector: Handle moves fore and alt for throule control Sturdy seven foot cables, Allow joystick pro grammability through joystick interface: Digital/Analog mode toggle switch; User pro grammable functions: One year warranty PUBLISHER: Thrustmaster PART #: 31258 Converts the VGA output from your PC to a video signal so you can play all your favorite PC games on any TV set. Display online services like Prodigy. America Online, and CompuServe Includes $ 150 worth of FREE games: Prince of Persia Jetfighter II, and Spectre Chollonger supports 640x480 VGA resolution in 256 colors, outputs NTSC video in RCA composite and S-VHS super video standards. Includes A/C Power Supply, 6 foot RCA cable, 6 foot SVHS cable and a VGA Y cablo. Supports TV Auto Blanking, Toggling between VGA monitor and TV display PUBLISHER: ADS PART #: 32333 800-228-7449 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $90 $99 SPEED RACER IN THE CHALLENGE OF RACER X PEBBLE BEACH GOLF COURSE MOTORMOUSE RED CORVETTE NHL HOCKEY '94 12ACER Take on the mysle SPEED rious Rocer X in a 200MPH (roo-lor all. You'll need everything in the Mach S's arsenal just to stay close... Autojacks to leap clear of danger, chopper blades to cut through obsta cles, even a new on board CRT that allows you to receive messages, Race from the cockpit and fasten your seatbelt. Go it alone or against a friend to see who's the top Formula 1 racer. Features a split screen 2 player mode Cut through the competition in 6 awesome adventures FOR USE WITH LINKS, LINKS 386 Well PRO, or MICROSOFT GOLF Located on the Monterey Peninsula in California. The worsh anly course of its COURSE stature open to pub lic play. Along the shores of Carmel Bay, professional and recreational players alike have experi enced first hand the wonders of this seaside layout, rich with tradition and natural beauty Nine national championships have unfolded at Pebble Beach Super VGA version features real sound with all major sound boards, Enjoy becoming a part of history! A serial mouse stylod as an exact replica of a 1985 Chevrolet Corvelle. A sporty alterno tive to your dull grey \"mouse\". A figh-quality three-button mouse with buttons on the hood. Gives you the same quick access to on screen functions. Simply plug it into your computer's serial port Includes a special Windows driver that turns the cursor into an animated version of the car, including sound support to rev the \"ongine\" and sound the horn. FOR IBM PC AND COMPATIBLES ONLY. Combines hot arcade action with in-depth simulation and stats and a full season mode. NHL und NHLPA Licenses allow inclus sion of player nomes and faces os well as team names and logos (includ ing the Stanley Cupl). Simulate the actual 1993 84 game NHL season. Compile team and player stals throughout the season. Ron Barr's digi. tized voice sets up every game of the souson Digitized rink announcer voice reports goal summaries and penalties. Realistic organ music brings rink to life. Each rink features individual music, over 50 pieces in all Supports Sound Blaster, Ad Liband Roland MT-32 sound. PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts PART #: 31741 DOS PUBLISHER: Accolade PART #: 32189 $33 PUBLISHER: Access Software PART #: 32479 DOS $19 PUBLISHER: Motor Mouse PART #: 32941 $35 $40 RECREATION EDUCATION V for Victory Market Garden... V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory Velikiye luki Vegas Games for Windows Veil of Darkness......... Victory Pak.... .. Victory at Sea Vikings. Fields of Conquest ww2 Bottles of S Pacific WWII Pack...... ... Walls of Rome Warriors of legend Wheel of Fortune Deluxe Win When Two Worlds Wor Wing Commander Academy... Wing Commander ll w/ Speech Wizardry Trilogy II...... Wizardry, Crusader Dark Savant....... World Circuit Grand Prix World War II: Battle S Pacific .... RECREATION GRE w/Cliff Notes.......... Kid Cod for Windows KidDesk....... Mups & Facts Math Blaster In Search of Spot. Mavis Beacon Typing Win 3.0 Millie's Main House ... My First World Atlas...... Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA... Playroom 2.0...... . SAT NEW Personal Trainer Win... Science Adventure 2.0..... Score RX for ACT at Home Score RX for GRE at Home... Score RX for LSAT at Home.... Wing Commander Academy Score RX for SAT at Home .............. TheHouse Slose Encounters Guide... America's Prime PRODUCTIVITY 2 X-Wing .28 398 SVGA Harriet... Sam & Max Hit the Road Seal Team...... Secret of Monkey Island Il..... Seven Cities of Gold Comm.... Shadow Caster.... Sid Meir's Trilogy .... Silent Service Il Classic SimAnt for Windows SimCity Classic DOS.. SimCity Classic Windows.... SimEorth Windows Simfarm.. Simlife for Windows......... Solitaire for Windows Solitaite's Journey Windows Space Hulk..... Space Quest IV. VGA.... Space Quest V.... Space Quest V Hint Book Spear of Destiny ....... Spear of Destiny Hint Book Spectre PC..... SportsWorks. Star Trek: 25th Anniv. Hint Bk Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Star Trek: Judgment Rites Star Trek: The Next Generation.... Star Wars Chess for Windows .... Stonnkeep Street Fighter ll... Strike Commander VGA... Strike Commander Players Guide ...... Strike Commander Speech Pack Strike Commander Tactical #1 Strike Squad ...... Strip Poker Pro #1 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #2 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #3 Duta Disk Strip Poker Pro #4 Dato Disk Strip Poker Pro #5 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #6 Data Disk Strip Poker Professional Summoning........ Super VGA Horrier.. Syndicate 12 The Arcade Game...... Task Force 1942 Terminator 2029 Tesserce for Windows... Test Drive Ill. The Possion.... Tetris Tria....... X-Wing Official Guide. X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty X Wing: Imperial Pursuit Yserbius... A Train/ AI 91 AI Boo Dinote SUNRO pgrade 3.0 ws 3.0.. Ook Win. 2. Upgrade 5.2. Toska.. Animals Auto Racing D Butterflies Fireworks ..... 800 AutoMap Windows Upgrade 3.0... AutoMap for Windows 3.0...... Betty Crocker Cookbook Win. CA Clipper Comp. Upgrade 5.2... CD Photo CD Alaska.. CD Photo CD Animals............. CD Photo CD Auto Racing..... CD Photo CD Butterflies .... CD Photo CD Fireworks .... CD Photo CD Japan CD Photo CD Porsche Racing CD Photo CD Sailboats. CD Photo CD Underwater CD Photo CD WWII Aircraft Calendar Creations Baseball.......... Colendar Creations Dogs & Cats... Calendar Creations Exotic Cars...... Calendar Creations Impressions ....... Calendar Creations Nature Calendar Creations Oceans Coaster Screen Saver Windows Coin Keeper .. Comic Keoper Corel Draw for Windows 4.0.... DusqView 386 2.6........ Disney Collection Screen Saver DoodleMation Windows Draft & Print... FoxPro Comp. Upg. Win 2.5... FoxPro Ver Upg for Win 2.5 FoxPro for Windows 2.5 Holiday Fonts Windows............ Holy Bible King James Version....... Home Survival Toolkit............. Key CAD Completo......... Lotus 123 Window Rel 4 Upgrade lotus 123 Windows Release 4 Lotus Improv for Windows 2.0..... MS-DOS Upgrade 6.2............ MSDOS Upgrade for Dummies 6.2.. Managing Your Money 10....... Micro Wine Componion Windows Morph for Windows Norton Usilities 7.0...... Office Standard Comp Upg Win Office Windows Professional .......... Office Windows Standard 40... Office Windows Std Ver. Upg. Paradox for Windows 4.5 Playboy Electronic DateBook..... Print Shop Deluxe ... .... Print Shop Deluxe Windows.. Procomm Plus for Windows............. Publisher Windows 2.0.. .... Q&A Windows w/Print Shop Dlx. QEMM 386 7,01.... Quattro Pro DOS 5.0.. . Quattro Pro Windows 5.0...... Quicken for DOS 70 Quicken for Windows 3.0 Rosemary West's House Fortune...... Scenes Impressionists Collect...+ Scenes Otor Space Collection Scenes Sierra Club Collection....... Soft Karaoke for Windows.... Stamp Keeper Taxcut Federal Final DOS '93 Taxcut Federal Final Win93 WinFax Pro 3.0 Windows... Windows 3.1....... 28 101 JO Racing GMAT W/CAN GRE w/Clil N Kid Cod for Wiko KidDesk Maps & Facts Math Blaster search of 5 Mavis Beacon Typing Win 3 Millie's Math House.... My First World Atlas Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA.. Playroom 2.0... SAT NEW Personal Tre Science Adventure 2.0 Score RX for ACT at Home Score RX for GRE at Home.... Score RX for ISAT at Home Wing Commander Academy...... Score RX for SAT at Home ..... TreeHouse........ Wizardry Trilogy II....... . Wizardry: Crusader Dark Savant...... World Circuit Grand Prix.. World War II: Batile S Pacific X-Wing X Wing Olficial Guide................. X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty... X-Wing: Imperial Pursu! Yserbius... A Train/Construction Set AJ World of Discovery... Alge Bloster 3 for Windows .... Bailey's Book House........ Body Illustrated............. DinoPor Tycoon....... Discover Space.... ...... GMAT w/CH Notes...... 46 RECREATION sweater Wil Aircraft Calendar Creations Baseball Calendar Creations Dogs & Cats .... Calendar Creations Exotic Cars... Calendar Creations Impressions... Scoto RX for SAT at Home TreeHouse UFO Close Encounters Guide Where in America's Past Carmen?....... Where in Time is Carmen Where in the USA Deluxe? Where in the World Deluxe?.. Word Attack 3 World Atlas for Windows 4.0 PRODUCTIVITY UNN The Games: Winter Challenge...... Tie Fighter Space Combat Tony LaRussa Baseball Tony Larusso II. AL&NL Stadiums Tony LaRussa II: Fantasy Draht Tornado... Towel Ultima Underworld....... Ultima Underworld Il Hint Book.. Ultima Underworld Il Labyrinth Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle Ultima VII Part 2: Silver Seed Ultima VII: Farge Virtue Add On Ultima VII: The Black Gato.... Ultima VII Pogon Ultabats.... Unnecessary Roughness Access Comp Upgrade 1.1.. Access for Windows 1.1 ......... After Dark for DOS ....... After Dark for Windows 2.0... AutoMap 3.0............. AutoMop Europe Windows AutoMap Ski Resorts Windows AutoMap Upgrade 3.0...... Circle Reader Service #49 "


"SIMCITY 2000 KING'S TABLE SIMON THE SORCERER INNOCENT UNTIL CAUGHT CITY 2000 The ultimate city Simulator This morning, you approved a new solar power plant designed an under ground transporta tion system, and jumped five points in the polls. Then you raised foxes, read two local newspapers, builta 200, and pushed your education bill through the city council. It's time for lunchunless, of course, there's a fire, tornado, earthquake or clion invasion. Scenorio challenges include the 1991 Oakland fire, unemployment in Flint, Michigan and more. Import saved cities from SimCity and SimCity Classic PUBLISHER: Maxis PART 3: 31457 DOS PART #: 32616 MAC A unique fantasy board game, set within the legend of Ragnarok the Norse version of the Apocalypse. Be wise in contempla ing your every move, but be pre pared, you must also win that move in a fight to the duath Features twelve different opponents, cach with their own personalbes and styles. Stunning graphics and brilliantly onimated sequences. The opponents are a for midable collection of gods from the legendary Vaihallo. Play against the computer or against a friend, love yourself to this faraway world of challenge, intrique and logic, the board it set... and the gods are waiting PUBLISHER: Gametek PART #: 31571 DOS Wherever you go, xt th ! MON RRE ed, because Simon is no ordinary sorcerer CORGERER He's on adolescent with an attitude, who accidentally stumbles upang magical dimension on the very verge of col lapse. Armed with a sharp wil and o longue to match, Simon sets forth on his quest. In a wocked out world filled with beer willing tralls, a schizophrenic two headed clerk, swamplings, werofrogs and more, he must acquire the knowledge of a sorcerer and defeat the evil wizard Sordid. Discover a wondrously animal ed world. Unravel the mysteries of a puzzling plot PUBLISHER: Activision PART #: 32882 DOS It's March 1, 2168 quocient Jack T. ladd, pro fessional thief was scooped up and face to face with the IRS chief collection weosol. He was given a tax bill totaling more than he could hope to our in several life times, and told that he must pay it with in the next 28 days. Take Jack on an advonture through planets, cities, and bars, in pur suit of financial liquidity and freedom from the tax man, Integrated characters and story line allowing lack to interact with virtually all of the objects and characters in the game. $39 $23 $28 PUBLISHER: Psygnosis PART #: 31563 $38 KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES WALLOBEE JACK CD LANWORDS FOR WINDOWS BEAT THE HOUSE High quality, full color keyboard over lays for fight simula tors will turn any AT 101 keyboard into a 3-D looking control panel Includes all key com mands in a logical layout, and legend boxes for cockpit dis plays. Available for MS FS 5.0, FAL CON 3.0, MIG 29, STRIKE COMMAN DER, ATP, X.WING, COMANCHE, F-15 III, ACES OF PACIFIC, JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS, 17. GUNSHIP, ACES OVER EUROPE TORNA DO and morel Ask about Falcon 3.0's Keyboard & Utility bundesl Quantity Pricing: 2 $21.50.3 $30.00, uny 4 or more only 59.25 each! Publisher: Keyboard Commander Corp. S 13 Dippidy Dingos! The Digital Toons are alive and kicking. Finally, a new approach to CD-ROM enter. tainment. Wallobee Jack and Francesca Felini are ready to take you through becutiful Australia as they search for the Bingi Burru Stone, look out for Dogon (the bad crocodile) as he'll try to get the stone First. Interactive Toon Show with non stop action Original characters and music! Interact with the Toons to change their lives. Cartoon fun will never be the same Fast paced, chal lenging, entertain ment value that's Fun for all ages Seven word game variations, or cre ote your own version. Change the look of your games with a choice of colorful tile patterns. Offers 20 different computer opponents with increasingly sophisticated vocabulury and skill, ranging from beginner to expert levels, containing 160,000 words. On-line help, best plays\", onogram finders, und word finders are also included. If you've got network support, you can receive and Send messages to your opponents via a chat windows screen PUBLISHER: Saber Software PART 3: 32743 WIN Prepare yourself for a casino gam ing experience! Includes the 160 poge study guide \"Beat the House Companion Featuring slot machines, black jack, roulette, video poker and caps. Besign will learn the rules, rituals and termin nology of cosino play Seasoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting techniques as well as profitable belting Strategies One to four people can play against each other. or computer players will fill the empty seats Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to \"Boot The House!\" Publisher: Spirit of Discovery Part #30343 egoin PUBLISHER: Tune 1000 PART 4: 32940 MAC CD $18 $23 $27 309 PRODUCTIVITY Windows NT 3.1..... Windows NT Upgrade 3.1.............. 272 Windows Upgrade 3.1.................. 49 Word Windows 6.0...... .. Word Windows 6.0 Comp. Upg..... 119 Word Windows 6.0 Vers. Upg.. WordPerfect Vers Upg Windows 99 WordPerfect Windows 6.0.............. 282 WordPerfect Windows 6.0 Comp. 116 Wordperfect DOS 6.0..... 286 Wordperfect DOS 6.0 Comp. Upg. 121 Wordperfect DOS 6.0 Vers. Upg............105 800-228-7449 327 FAX:508-443-5645 EXT. VOICE:508-443-61.25 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 *0 .90 1 * FAX:0011-508-443-5645, XIX.CoopuServeID: 70007.15340 W EB Abtn. i tenis 3 OP Etb316L. FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS MACNTOSH STOCKING STUFFERS 3D Pinball....... AHS 10 Headset Sound..................... AM 10 Microphone Sound..... CD Bibles & Religion... CD Caddy.......... CD Clipart Goliath CD Deathstar Arcode Bottles CD Photo CD Access Windows....... CD Shareware Overload. CD Too Many Typefoots! Computer Cleaning & Vacuum Kit..... Datalife 10 Pk HD 3.5\" Disks............. Dr. Wong's Jacks/Poker Windows Drive Cleaning Kit 3.5\" #CK-5 Keyboard Calculator #KCI Labtec AM 22 Microphone ... labree CDR-12 CD Lens Cleaner Mouse Cleaning Kit #MC 1.. Mouse Pad MP-1... Tool Kit 11.Piece TK#1...... 35 No. MACINTOSH Star Trek 25th Anniversary... . Star Trek Screen Saver Stellar 7. Strip Poker Professional ....... Tuxcut Federal Final Moc '93 Thunderstick ADB Treasure Moth Storml......... Tristan MAC LC/MACI!.. Uncharted Woters.... Vlor Victory III: Mt Garden V for Victory Velikiye tuki Valkyrie Victory Pak... Victory of Sec.......... Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna White BUNDLEMANIA VALUES Lucas Arts Classic Collection... MechWarrior/BattleTech 1 & II Micro Kitchen/Betty Bundle DOS Micro Kitchen/Betty Bundlo WIN... Perfect General Trilogy QEMM 386 Game Pack 70. Sierra Dynamics Bundle VGA..... Thrustmaster Flight/Rudder.... . wWil Pack Wing Commander il w/Speech Wizardry Trilogy I. X-Wing/B.Wing Bundle ........ CA Cricket Draw Ill...... ... CACricket Graph III...... CA Cricket Presents 2.1....... CD 7th Guest CD A Hard Days Night: Beatles....... CD Better Homes Health Cooking CD Capitol Hill......... CD Dracula Unleashed.... CD-Iron Helix CD. JourneyMan Project CD-Just Grandma & Me..... CD-Myst. CD Oceans Below MAC CD Photo CD Access Macintosh CD PhotoEdge Color ..... CD-Street Arlos USA........ Caesar .. .... .. Caesars Palace........ Carriers At Wor Castles ll. Check Free MAC......... Chuck Yeager Air Combat Civilization Cogito... Dark Sood.. DinoPark Tycoon....... . Dinosaur Adventure..... Disney Collection Screen Saver Eight Ball Deluxe Pinball.. Falcon MC Flight Simulator Freddy Pharkas Golf Companion Hoyles Classic.. . Indiana Jones fute of Atlantis Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck Key CAD Complete... Kid Pix 1.2... King's Quest VI........ Legend of Kyrandia..... M.Y.O.B. Accounting 3.0 M4 Sherman Tank Mac Attack Mac Full O'Humans........ Mario Teaches Typing...... Micro Kitchen Companion '94 . Monopoly... Morph 2.0... Odell Down Under Pathway into Darkness Pax Imperia... Print Shop Deluxe Print Shop Deluxe Business Print Shop Deluxe Comics..... Print Shop Deluxe Sampler Quicken 4.0... ......... Railroad Tycoon....... Ready, Set, Read Rex Nebular SAT NEW Personal Trainer Score RX for ACT at Home. Score RX for SAT at Home Shoebox Image Manager Sierra Award Winning Bundle SimAnt... SimCity Classic MAC SimEarth... . SimLife... Spectre... Sportster 144 EXT MAC&FAX 898989 BUNDLEMANIA VALLIES SEGA SNES TITLES 4-Way Play Adapter SEGA. Bubsy in Claws SEGA Bubsy in Claws SNES Cool Spot SEGA.......... Dungeon Master SNES Final Fight 2 SNES... John Madden NFL '94 SEGA John Madden NFL '94 SNES.. Jungle Strike SEGA... Jurassic Park SEGA. Megadrive Adaptor SEGA Mortal Combat SNES Mutant League Football SEGA NHL '94 SEGA NHL '94 SNES AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy........ Adventure Park Air Combal Classics...... Berenstain Bears Fun lunchPak CD-Strike Commander/Tactical.... Comanche & Mission Disk #1 Comanche/Mission 1 & 2 Bundle Falcon 3.0/Mig 29 Bundle..... Flight Sim 5/Paris & New York Great Naval Batles Pack HardBall ll Diamond Collect....... Jet Pack 110 500 GIFT GIVING DEAS 463 44 Betty Crocker Cookbook DOS. Betty Crocker Cookbook Windows CD Night Balore Christmas Calendar Creations Baseball............. Calendar Creations Dogs & Cats ....... Colendar Creations Exotic Cars Calendar Creations Impressions...... Colendar Creations Nature, Calendar Creations Oceans Dynopulse 200M Health System....... Edutainment Int 16bit Doll Flicks Front Page Sports: Football Pro....... Fusion CD 16 Internal........ Gift Certificate $100 100 Gilt Certificate 550 Golf Companion for Windows.............. Micro Kitchen Companion DOS Micro Kitchen Companion Windows.. .28 Miracle Piono MAC ... 305 Miracle Piano PC w/FREE Songs 288 News of the Past..............................30 Print Shop Deluxe Windows.......... Pro AudioSpectrum 16 168 Star LS 5 Laser Printer 672 Star NX-1040 Rainbow 180CPS.......... 157 Star Storjet SJ 48 Ink Jet........ 268 Star Trek: The Next Generation... A Train/Construction Set..... American Civil War III..... American Heritage Dictionary Battle of Britain 2 BestBooks... .. Bomber 2 Business Planner ...50 28 MAGNTOSH 800 228-7449 -Orders Only. 508 443-6125. all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday 8AM till 8PM, Saturday 9AM til 5PM All other Business Monday Friday 9AM till 5PM. Most order ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses. International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 per order up to 6 lbs, St per lb. above 6 lbs, UPS Ground $3 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks. Bomoulli's. tape back-ups. printers. Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawni, outside continental U.S., APO FPO call for information Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not available outside the US. Please call for more information Not responsible for errors or omissions. Mastercard, Visa, Discover, prepaid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiors check accepted. Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped. We check for stoten credit card. All returns for credit, repair, or exchange must have a return authorization number. Retumed orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking fee. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manufacturer's warranty, Detective items replace immodately. Educational, govomment and corporato purchase orders welcome. All item numbers represent 3.5\" floppy. except where noted SAR OUCOVER Circle Reader Service #49 "


"Letters from Paradise ESPANA Sound Philosophy derstand that the sound card survey was more, if we reduce the number of voices for I would like to start by saying that I read geared toward gamers, placing emphasis on the music). Thus, instead of hearing only one every issue of CGW that I get from cover to com compatibility and case of use, more effort digital sound effect at a time, which most cover, and I love every page of it. That is, I should have been made to point out the current games are limited to due to the sindid until I read the article in the October issue uniqueness of the UltraSound instead of letgle-DAC nature of most sound cards, the on sound cards. You made the article very, ting it drown in the sea of Sound Blaster GUS allows several digital sound effects to very hard to rip apart (mainly by having let work-alikes and faceless GM synths. overlap. Furthermore, each sound effect can the reader know that the writer was compe I cringe as I see more and more companies be panned between right and left, pitchtent and what they were judging cach card embrace the GM synth and DAC paradigm. shifred, looped, and enveloped in hardware to in), but I still felt that the review you gave on If this trend continues, PC audio will consist add life to the acoustics. And having RAM the Gravis UltraSound was unfair. I know of 128 instruments and single-file digital also allows samples to be downloaded to the that the Sound Blaster emulation kinda' bites sound effects (overlapping digital sound ef. GUS to free up main memory. and that not many game companies support fects will require CPU intensive mixing in the On the other hand, playing multiple overit (at least now, many have promised that they software). The RAM, hardware mixing and lapping sound effects on GM & DAC sound would). I feel that you failed to mention that affordability of the GUS offers an exciting cards requires that the CPU mix the multiple it was also the programmers' card of choice alternative for the masses. digital sounds into one sample stream, a task (Gravis and Forte have released a great deal The GUS is one of the rare waverable which can be very CPU intensive, depending of code, text, and libraries for a programmer), soundcards that offers RAM for storing samon the sampling rate. In the few games that that it is the underground's card of choice ples. It is also the only one that I know of that mix multiple sounds in software, the sam(Future Crew and Renaissance swear by it, allows rapid read and write to the RAM via pling rate is kept very low to keep the CPU not to mention code a huge amount of demos DMA (up to 630 kB/s). This means that the load down, resulting in poor sound quality. and a few games for it), and that it has a very GUS invites the use of custom instruments, But, despite its enormous potential, perlarge worldwide following (just look around unlike most other affordable wavetable cardshaps the best thing about the GUS is that it on Internet). The card itself can be anything which are stuck with the GM instrument set provides all this at a price that is mass affordyou want it for, they purposely leave the in ROM. GM is ill-suited for certain types of able. Even at $130, the GUS has the best standard model a basic unit and sell the addmusic such as dance, techno and ethnic, all of sound quality of all the affordable wavetable ons separate to keep the price down. Given a which can and should be found in games. The sound cards currently available. While other use of custom instruments gives gamers much sound cards in its class are stuck with only 512 big developers I think GUS will take off. I more variety. K, 1 MB or sometimes 2 MB of instrument could go on and on in support of this card, but I'll keep it short to increase the chances The hardware mixing of the GUS, coupled samples, the GUS has over 5 MB of instruwith its RAM, make it one of the most versaments! The 16-bit interpolating sound procof this getting printed so I can get my point essor on the card isn't too shabby either. tile sound cards that I know of. While the to many others. Just to keep the record straight, your magazine is still my favorite. GM synth and DAC architecture of other However, all the possibilities that the GUS sound cards divide audio into 24 voices for offers will amount to nothing if it doesn't get David «The Gonz\"Demski music and one stereo channel for digital supported on a wide scale in its native mode. Parkton, MD sound effects, the GUS offers up to 32 digital If your magazine truly champions the end sample playback voices, any of which can be user, not the game companies, you should I am writing to express my disappointment used for sound effects or music. So, in a game, have taken more care to point out how the at the lack of vision in the October review of we can have 24 voices to carry the music and GUS can revolutionize PC audio instead of the Gravis UltraSound (GUS). While I unup to 8 voices to handle the sound effects (or dismissing it because it doesn't fit neatly into few more months and a little support from use ofrem incremene ivecamere da desire with 5 1 Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"TM THE ULTIMATE GAME OF STRATEGIC CONQUEST. ORBITING TROOP UNIT In a real-time universe, every move could be your last. REMOTE VIELL ESTABLISH T HE ESTABLISH QOBU You are the commander-in-chief on a quest to conquer and colonize a galaxy of alien worlds. But first you must overcome hostile climate conditions, ward off cunning enemies, weigh critical information, calculate the risks, and. make tactical decisions ... all at the speed of . light. Because in this mind-bending, real-time universe, there's a fine line between galactic success and dismal failure. To order Star Reach TM, call 1-800-969-GAME, or see your local retailer. 0000000000 DOK 0000000000 Taplak .: COLONIZATION Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Actual IBM screen shots *PATROL AREA. Circle Reader Service #78  1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. and Techtonigs. All rights reserved. Star Reach is a trademark of Interplay Productions, Inc. "


"The 5th Wave the GM synth and DAC mold cast by the game makers to ease their development tasks. Phat Tran University of Waterloo By Rich Tennant  We received several letters taking us to task about our perfunctory dismissal of the Gravis UltraSound card. Most were kind, but stern, in their remarks concerning the superiority of their sound card of choice. Almost all admitted that the Sound Blaster emulation was sub-standard, but they insisted that the GUS would provide the standard of the future. What many of our correspondents failed to consider is that we were not addressing our survey to multimedia developers and power programmers. The survey was intended to give casual gamers the information necessary to have a sound card that would enhance their gaming experience without plaguing them with the frustrations of incompatibility. The de facto standard in the gaming world is Sound Blaster compatibility. Many of the game publishers have decided to support only those sound cards which are supported by the Miles drivers. They are tired of every hardware manufacturer coming to them with the so-called standard of the future and presenting them with new incompatibility problems which end up costing customer support time on the back end of the product release. Such problems frustrate both \"I SAID I WANTED A NEW MONITOR FOR MY BIRTHDAY! the consumer and the publisher who must pay for the extra support necessary to help casual MONITOR! MONITOR!\" gamers configure their systems. Frankly, the entire debate has a familiar ring. to Terry Lee Coleman's review of my game, games need to exploit the latest in high-resoAtari 8-bit owners used to write us about how Red Sky at Morning lution graphics/stereo sound/full-motion superior their machines were with recard to the First, I need to correct a factual crror. It is video/ad infinitum. In my opinion, the inApple II that received most of our attention. a minor error which I would normally overdustry would do well to examine its preferMore software was being written for the Apple look, except that it occurs in the very first ences for style over substance. A high \"glitz at that time, so it received more attention. Atari sentence of the review. The sentence states, factor means longer development times, ST owners would tell us how superior their \"Back in the Dark Ages of Wargaming, Steve larger hard drive space requirements, and machines were to the Amiga and MS-DOS Newberg and Bill Nichols were makers of (bottom line) higher prices. machines. They would cite technical point afier board wargames.\" Please note that my first In response to the reviewer's comments technical point. Yet, more software was being wargame design was Grey Seas, Grey Skies, for about Red Sky's graphics, a 16 color VGA published for the latter two platforms, so we were the Apple II computer. I have eight more format was selected because it provides suffitccused of bias. Now, Amiga owners call is computer wargames to my credit since then, cient screen resolution (640 by 480 pixels) MS-DOS Gaming World. Yet, we have to adbut no board wargames. (I will let pass with-without going to SVGA (many gamers still vise readers who want a machine that will play out comment the reviewer's presumption only have VGA machines). As Red Skys most of the games to purchase high-end MSthat wargames created B.C. Before Comsituation maps consist exclusively of land arDOS machines. In the same manner, if we want puters—were created during the Dark Ages.) eas (green), ocean (light blue) and ice (white), to advise a gamer how to get the most out of Another piece of SimCan trivia is that Red and the players' forces are either red or dark bis/her money, we believe we have to recommend blue, there was no need to adopt a larger color purchasing the sound card or compatible that is Sky is not, in fact, the first SimCan computer palette. The reviewer's statement that \"...the supported by the most games. Right now, that is game to offer graphics. The IBM and Atari maps are low resolution, with the ships apthe Sound Blaster and its work-alikes. It would versions of Grey Seas, Grey Skies include a pearing as blobs of primary colors\" is just have been unfair to have recommended anygraphic, radar-screen display during air-and plain wrong. The ship icons are similar in size thing else. We certainly could have spent more missile-strike combat. to those of other naval wargames (e.g., Hartime on the virtues of the GUS, but we would I find it ironic that, after a decade of review poon), and are clearly discernable even in the still have printed essentially the same recommeners' harangues over SimCan's text-only forpostage-size screen shor printed with the redation. mat, the Red Sky reviewer writes \"SimCan view. The point is that Red Sky's graphics get would have done just as well without the the job done, and beat SimCan's previous Red Gibes In Warning graphics.\" This appears to reflect a common format (grease pencils and laminated maps) I would like to take this opportunity to add mindset that, to be acceptable, computer by a long shot. Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"Over 200,000 Games Sold America's Favorite Virtual Adventure Game Now Available On CD-ROM*  / Featuring:  3D realtime animation in 256 vivid colors  Up to 9 camera angles in each scene Over 2 hours of spoken narration Original music score in full stereo Over 50 hours of gameplay \"Adventure Game of the Year\" Computer Gaming World \"Golden Triad Award\" Computer Game Review ... the best 3-D adventure we've ever seen.\" PC Review Free Demo Disk Send $2.95 (postage and handling) to: I-Motion Demo Disk Offer, 1341 Ocean Avenue, Box 417, Santa Monica, CA 90401. 'For IBM PCs & Compatibles An Arcade/Adventure Game Inspired by the work of H.P. Lovecraft Circle Reader Service #79 I. MOTION "


"SAM MAX AM W AM W Steve Purcell copy   I COME ON, MAX. NOW THAT WE'VE UNSAVORY EMPIRE, WE CAN TAKE A TOMMELED THE OUTPOST OF THE SWING AT THE DEATH SPHERE? I WANT TO I CAN FIT IN THERE WITH YOU, SAM. THAT'S WHY YOU'RE RIDING UP TOP, LITTLE PAL! YOU'LL BE MY EYES, EARS AND ROLLBAR IN THE HEAT OF COMBAT. AND THIS IS SCIENCE FICTION, MAX. TELEVISION HAS BEEN REPLACED BY SMELLOGRAPHIC DIGITAL HOLO. GRAPHY. AND STILL THERE'S NOTHING WORTH WATCHING! EXCEPT \"RAWHIDE\", OF COURSE HERE, AND I'M HAVING SAMIT 5 COLD OUT TROUBLE BREATAING. YOU'RE AREAL PEST 100AY, MAX. (HEY! WHAT A STROKE OF BRILLIANCE.MAX! YOUR SMOKESCREEN WILL CONCEAL U5 FROM THE ENEMY! IMGOING INOMY BLUE ACADERIES SAM I'M READY TO COME IN NOW! CAUGHTY BEAD'S CAUGHT FIRE.SAM! NOW WHAT? QUIT SCRATCHING YOUR SCAR TISSUE,MAX. YOU'RE MAKING ME SICK. I'M JUST A LITTLE ANXIOUS, SAM. DO YOU THINK I'LL EVER HAVE A POMPADOUR AGAIN? FORETAN After reading the review, I have the impression that the 121LANZLICE writer has focused more on TM X 14 questions of \"style» than on A C LETTERESSY L.LOIS BUHALIS the actual substance» of Red Sky. The result is that the review does not adequately describe how Red Sky differs from other modern naval wargames. In fact, certain of the reviewer's comments seriously misrepresent Red Sky's design objective. Specifically, statements that \"What Red Sky could offer is a simpler alternative to the Harpoon series,\" and \"Red Sky wants so badly to be Harpoon....\" are squarely in left field. The only similarity between Red Sky and Harpoon is that both concern modern naval combat. From that point on, the two games diverge. Harpoon is a tacticalOWNI PONU TRY level game that allows the player to fight a limited number of naval engagements over a simulated timescale of a few hours. Red Sky is a YEE global, strategic-level game HAWWWW encompassing an entire naval war over a timeframe of months. As such, the player AMAYBE I CAN FASHION A GRUESOME must focus on issues of fleet SURE, MAX.IT'S SCIENCE FICTION YOUR logistics and resource manHOLG TO SHOOT MISSILES agement, not on individual ship/aircraft tactics. An important point, not apparent confusion over fog-of-war. Red Sky stance behind Red Sky at Morning will be brought out in the review, is that Red Sky at does allow for incomplete sighting reports, as helpful to your readers. Morning is designed to be as much a simula in other games. But the program also provides Bill Nichols tion as a game, and to my knowledge) is the an extensive set of reports under the \"Staff first commercial wargame to make extensive Designer, Red Sky at Morning Analysis» function. These reports, which use of military operations analysis techniques. have the fog-of-war stripped away, include This is perhaps the source of the reviewer's TS tables and graphic Knowing that SimCan began in the days of tables and graphic plots of force levels, unit bordo misunderstanding over nuclear weapons in boardgame design and that you have been delosses, killer-victim scoreboards, and others. Red Sky. The statement that «Red Sky assumes signing computer games for SimCan for several sionino com The availability of this historical data \"at the that tactical nuclear weapons are a necessity The availability of this historical data at the years, we sloppily allowed the error regarding touch of a key\" does not, however, mean that in the modern naval world» is incorrect. At boardgame design to slide by. We hope you are the player is free to do anything he may wish. the beginning of each Red Sky game, the not offended by being called a boardgame deplayer may choose whether nuclear weapons The fog-of-war still limits the player's options signer. Some of our best friends are boardgame are to be used or not. The \"No Use/Free Use\" in the sense that enemy forces must be found designers. Seriously, we regret the inaccuracy switch enables the player to examine how a before they can be engaged. To paraphrase and appreciate your supplementary design connuclear war at sea might be fought, unencumCaptain Wayne P. Hughes (author of Fleet siderations. As for the graphics issue, we only bered by political restraints. Red Sky does not, Tactics Theory and Practice): the maxim of played the Apple II version of Grey Seas, Grey however, simulate the likely consequence of naval tactics, \"Attack effectively first\", is the Skies and had forgotten that the conversions had such a war (i.e., global thermonuclear war). very essence of success in naval combat. In attempted such a refinement. Players can easily add this feature to the game Red Sky, as in reality, successful search is if they wish (just douse your computer with always the prerequisite for successful attack. Rated X-Wing gasoline and strike a march). In conclusion, I regrer that your reviewer Something I've wondered about every The operations analysis/simulation aspect was disappointed by the lack of «glitz\", and I month on the Top 100 Games List: Why is of Red Sky may also account for the reviewer's hope that this brief look at some of the subX-Wing listed as a simulation game and Wing TS OBOY MANBEREHE 990D THUS A BIG INTO, OTHERWISE THIS COULD TAKE ALL DAY. I THINK I SAW THIS IN AMOVIE ABOUT A MILLION TIMES. AS WE SPANS EVEN unit boarte compile allow Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best for less Legends OF FUTURE TM PAST\" \"...A remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) \"... no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) Now you can play the award-winning multi-player online game Legends of Future Past for as little as $1.80 per hour! Ureate your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting, intrepid and interesting people who populate these everexpanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. New Lower Rates: $9.95 a month includes five (5) hours online time. Additional hours charged at $1.80 hour total via direct dial and Internet, or $3.60 hour total fee via CNS local dialups. No surcharge for connecting at 9600 baud or during daytime hours. If you are on Internet: telnet to novalink.com, or write info@novalink.com.  No special software required.  Toll free number customer service and technical support.  All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older to use NovaLink.  American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. ...and you can try it free! Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. Novalink. Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence. Not only will you interact with people just like yourself — you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come try it for yourself. Circle Reader Service #77 MAKING THE WORLD A BIT SMALLER 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info P.O. Box 11, Shrewsbury, MA 01545 "


"Commander // as an action game? Aren't they in reality, pretty much the same game? Rick Taylor Denver, CO All right. You've got us. Larry Holland sends all of his royalty checks to Chris Roberts. Seriously, they are not the same game. Wing Commander is a shoot-'em-up with no pretense of a physics model underlying it. It is very much an action game with an emphasis on reflexes. Larry Holland tried to build what he considered a challenging flight model for X-Wing, with the emphasis on flying a vehicle as opposed to merely zipping through space and blasting away. We realize that the subject matter is similar for both games and that much of the action seems the same, but we made a judgment call on the basis of the perceived design philosophy. We may have split the hair too finely on the call, but we'll have to live with that one. continues in this publication, I will cancel my games out? Have you done ratings of presubscription. Thank you, 1900 wargames in your magazine like the one V. Fruce you did for 1900-50? Fredericksburg, TX Andrew Krug Dunkirk, MD We regret to inform you that you are incorrect about Ziff-Davis owning a video game magaA game engine is the software structure that zine. There is no such animal and our parent drives the computer game. It is the set of algocompany has not put any pressure on us to cover rithms into which the data is placed to make video games. In the past, we have occasionally things happen on the screen. For example, the reviewed cartridge games which we believed \"Gold Box\"game engine that drove so many SSI were of interest to our readers. In particular, we CRPGs is available as Unlimited Adventures. have a solid core of sports gamers who read our You still have to place maps, monsters. NPC. magazine and don't care on which platform their sports games appear, so long as the game treasure and the like into data files before you have an adventure, but you don't have to redesplay is to their satisfaction. We reviewed Koei's ; ign the game engine (movement, combat, healPTO because we felt that it was enough of a ing, discovery routines, etc.) to create a new wargame to appeal to our wargame readership, game. In a simulation, there are basic physical We do not expect to review every Tom, Dick or Sonic that comes along, but we do expect to laws built into the model for the game engine, continue to review games that we believe appeal and data files on vehicles and maps are read into to our readers, regardless of platform. the engine in order for the game to provide races, dogfights, etc. \"Paik» And Musket We offered a paiktography of pre-20th century Your magazine is tremendous. After several wargames in CGW #107. That should help you Your magazine is tremendous. After several years with a IIGS, I was overwhelmed by the amount of games for the IBM, but your poll American Civil War, as well might this issue's made it casy to make decisions. I do have review of Ed Grabowski's The Blue and The some questions, though. What is a game enGray from Impressions and Swfte's Gettysburg. gine? Also, are there any decent civil war CGW Sonic Bust I am very upset about the inclusion of a Sega t the inclusion of a Sega video game review in this magazine. If I am correct, Ziff-Davis already has at least one magazine devoted to video games, and this is the only quality games (publication devoted only to computers. If video game coverage Baseball heaven» Mike Douglas, online game player Watch me come alive in your computer! MW \"Has no rival\" PC Magazine \"Sparkles with unalloyed brilliance ... truly belongs in a league of its own.\" Game Players PC Entertainment GEB Magazine Girlfriend Teri\" Shown Here The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman! Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. for $69.95 Plus $4 shipping. Add $4 if C.O.D. Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk wy Compete against friends, challenge the computer, or relax in Spectator Mode. WIND Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles  Artificial intelligence, Interactive Conversation  3000+ word vocabulary, synonmys, idioms She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen VGA video of a REAL woman no cartoons!  Runs on any 286,386, 486 112MHz min.)  Requires 640K RAM and 10Mb hard disk No nudity, possible mature situations Also available Girlfriend Lisa! now only $59.95 \"If your dealer dosent carry Girlfriend! show them this ad and they can order it from us!\" \"Breathtaking ... stunning... a landmark product\" Sports Game Review \"True baseball fanatics can slide head-first into baseball fantasy\" New York Times Call now to order 1-800-654-5472 Ext. 10 (Open 24 hours) Share the sense of time and place known only to true baseball fans. Playing the computer game Baseball for Windows is like being on the field. Includes four powerful programs that put you in control -Baseball StatMaster League Manager Advanced Draft AldeaLabs 709 Lingco, Suite #106 Dept. #CGW Richardson, TX 75081 (214) 235-4999 FAX 235-4992 APBA presents BASEBALL FOR WINDOWS Only $69.95 plus shipping. No-Risk 30 day money back guarantee. Miller Associates, 11 Burtis Ave. Suite 200. New Canaan, CT 06840 Circle Reader Service #37 Page 126 Circle Reader Service #97 Computer Gaming World "


"FOR WINDOWS ! Limitocl-time offer Incredible Vailue! HIGH:SPEED 3D ARCADE ACTION FOR WINDOWS ! INVASION B 2DB THREE COMPLETE GAMES IN ONE! :  INCREDIBLE PHOTOREALISTIC 3D GRAPHICS.  STEREO SOUND EFFECTS AND MIDI MUSIC **OVER 30 LEVELS OF PLAY AND 5 DEGREES OF DIFFICULTY . NOW AVAILABLE AT SOFTWARE RESELLERS THROUGHOUT AMERICA .. OR CALL 800-545-7677 or 310-793-0600 TO ORDER FAATH : MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WINDOWS 30PCP:/14 ( 3DI PRODUCTIONS INC. Circle Reader Service #31 "


"BEST BEST The OF THE The Shiny New face Of Shareware New Force REST by Chuck Miller CGW. In addition to Wolfenstein 3D (#98), Last Half of Darkness (#101), Scorched Earth (#110), Ken's Labyrinth (#106) and Galactix (#101), the disc has a healthy complement of chess, pinball, poker, Star Trek, Star Wars and Virtual 3-D games. Though Dr. Fun Pak offers a selection of higher-rated shareware, it still suffers some of the same weaknesses as Dr. Gamesa limited selection of titles and average ease of use. While a slightly better value than its sibling, Dr. Fun Pak (pressed in September, 1993) is still a bit pricy compared to the other titles listed below. Both Dr. Games and Dr. Fun Pak are available directly from Aces Research, Inc., 4480-C Enterprise Street, Fremont CA 94538, (510) 683-8855. Please include the proper amount (indicated above), plus $5 S&H per order and any applicable sales tax. ile Games Search Games V ou know that shareware has become unarchived (uncompressed) form and are more than bathtub gin when a profuplayable directly from the CD-ROM. sion of new titles start to appear on Though the total number of titles in each CD-ROM. Since many of our readers plan to category is not extensive, there is a good purchase a CD-ROM drive soon, the time is representation of games from each genre, inright to take a closer look at this shiny new cluding adventure, arcade, card games, chess, face of shareware. This month we'll look at flight sims, kids, puzzle, simulations, sports, four CD-ROMs that pack hundreds, some strategy, war and games for Windows. thousands, of shareware and freeware proThe user interface is not the most intuitive grams onto their 600+ megabytes of storage or easiest to use of the titles reviewed here; it capacity. Of course, the big question is which performs basic chores satisfactorily, at best. discs offer true shareware gold-the newest Access is provided to each game directory and and hottest games—and which are simply cach program, allowing you to play most collections of «shovelware,\" old and/or weak games from the CD or copy them to a default programs shoveled onto a CD to turn a quick directory on your hard drive. Unfortunately, buck. As we savvy consumers know, higher cost or fancier packaging does not necessarily mean greater value. In fact, the greatest value of the shareware collections looked at here happens to be the least expensive. Also, I've found that, while none of these titles are completely worthless collections of our-of-date junk, there is definitely a difference in value between Giga them. Basically, this difference is the assortment of programs offered and the case with which these programs can be sorted and accessed. Keep in mind that while these collections are available as retail products, the cost is for the packaged CD-ROMs themselves not the shareware included Shareware publishers hope game compilations on CD will get a bigger byte of the market. on them. The buyer of these discs is still responsible for registering the games it is not possible through the provided user played with their respective authors. interface or from the DOS prompt to deterAll Is Not Necessarily mine the age of each program, as the files display the date the disc was compiled rather Fun & Games than their original creation date. Though First in our list of CD-ROM shareware many games in this collection will provide compilations is Dr. Games ($29.95), an MS hours of fun, it appears that, in general, they DOS, BBS-ready collection from Aces Reare a bit dated. search, Inc. Dr. Games was pressed in June Dr. Fun Pak ($35.95), also from Aces Re1993 and offers a fair though limited selection of rites and average ease of use of all search, Inc., differs from the previous offering the discs considered here, it includes the fewin that it provides a more current and distincest games, which can be counted in the huntive collection of games. This \"Gold Collecdreds. One advantage to this limited tion\" included some top-notch games, some assortment is that most titles are provided in which have been featured in past issues of DODOM Grab A Gigabyte Of Games Giga Games from Walnut Creek CDROM ($39.95) offers gamers an enormous mix of serious and fun shareware with its thousands of programs for MS-DOS and Windows. Within its one gigabyte of data, you can find 1000 D&D files, 375 educational programs for children young and old, game editors, a smatrering of graphic and text adventures, puzzles, trivia games, sports titles, simulations, arcade games, cheat and hint files, plus numerous graphic and sound files, animations and demos. This compilation delivers a huge hunk of data for the buck. Published in August 1993, Giga Games of fers a broad selection of games and above average ease of use. The CD interface allows you to select, copy and decompress files with case. Programs are quickly located by directory and name with the provided search engine. File creation dates are also displayed, allowing one to identify at a glance a file s age. In all, this collection is a vast improvement over the above titles in user-friendliness and Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"Fulfill The Ancien Forgotten Castle The Awakening La Your Father, the last king of Alonia, failed his quest to liberate the realm from inhuman tyrants. Now it's your turn. As Tris, the last heir to the throne, it's your destiny to match sword and sorcery against the foul Ruzakian Hord. Seek incredible magicks to augment your power as you delve into the conquered city of Hedburg. A virtual 3-D fantasy world awaits your next command Explore the dangers of the Old City, pit your awesome might against horrible creatures in a dark dungeon. Fight well and you may free the kingdom. Discover the Forgotten Castle and you may learn of your father's fate... Cinematic animation sequences unfold stories of mystery.  Fully digitized musical score and sound effects.  Combat system has adjustable skill levels.  Monsters, characters, magic items and props are rendered with full 3-D effects.  A smooth scrolling virtual world, complete with unparelled realism for die-hard fantasy role playing enthusiasts! Circle Reader Service #154 TWIN DOLPHIN GAMES, INC. 1993. Twin Dolphin Games Inc. Forgotten Castle and Twin Dolphin Games are trademarks of Twin Dolphin Games, Inc. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"Destroyer for Windows Game SUB View Optians Help FOR WINDOWS sheer volume. In addition, many recent puter show in Anaheim, I discovered another The most significant option is that of selectgames are included on it making Giga Games half dozen titles-mostly of questionable able game modes. Standard mode offers the one of the fresher fish in the pond. value.) Though only four titles were selected usual single shot per turn; salvo mode goes For ordering information, contact: Walnut for this survey, I will keep my ever-roving one step further, allowing as many shots per Creek CDROM, 4041 Pike Lane, Suite Dreporter's eye on the lookout for new CD turn as the player has ships remaining. Thus, 659, Concord CA 94520, (800) 786-9907. shareware collections. three ships afloat will allow three shots on that For $39.95 plus $5 S&H, you can own a very turn. Adjustable game speed and shell adjustcomprehensive collection That Sinking Feeling of shareware ment also help make fine-tuning game play games. Not to leave our readers without an actual an easy matter. game review this month, I want to highlight Many Megs Of Shareware Mirth a super little Battleship clone that I recently Stated in very simple terms, Destroyer for Windows is a shareware winner. Some imspotted through my periscope, Destroyer for Mega Games 1 ($29), the first in a series of entertainment CDs from Profit Press, is my Windows from Timberline Software. Standprovements are in order such as enhanced personal favorite of these four compilations. ing ready at Version 2.0, this classic game of 256-color graphics (images from actual phonaval battle by Don E. Krafcheck and tos would be great). The current visuals are While the packaging is unimpressive, the inStephen B. Kinsch offers the desktop admiral good, just a little on the bland side. Also, the terface is the easiest and most comprehensive an historically based and lively animated color for \"misses» (white on a blue, gray and for shareware I have yet seen, and the selection of included programs is very good. This game of hide and seek. According to the white grid) can be hard to make out. Howauthors, historical integrity has been mainever, there is little else to complain about in title, compiled in September 1993, is an extained in all the ships and aircraft represented. cellent addition for those owning a CDthis game. Modem and network support are A Pacific Ocean view re-enacts the naval war ROM drive. Mega Games 1 is also the best planned for future release-just the thing to between American and Japanese forces, while dollar value around in shareware entertainadd some life to game play and allow for an Atlantic Ocean view re-enacts the conflict ment, featuring several thousands of files. interoffice competitions. Also planned is a between British and German forces. All game categories are represented, includnew view depicting the Spanish Armada in a ing special directories dedicated to games high-seas, 15th century battle for European from Apogee Software, Epic Mega Games naval supremacy. Hats off, mates! This WinDESTRDYER. and Software Creations. It also includes all dows diversion comes with the highest of the games mentioned above plus many more recommendations. from these top shareware developers. Though Destroyer for Windows is available from the collection of RPGs is a bit weak, Mega Timberline Software, 12558 W. Aqueduct Games I offers the most select and current Drive, Littleton CO 80127-6225, (303) 932body of shareware games I have located to 7084. Registration is $20. date. In addition, there is also a good representation of graphic images, demos, electronic magazines (Game Bytes, for one) and Let's Get Gaming sound files on disc. The special MegaSearch retrieval program Games reviewed in this column are availDestroyer for Windows able through numerous distributors of sharemakes locating, copying and decompressing Several features ser Destroyer apart from ware and public domain software, as well as files a snap. It even allows the user to create other Battleship rivals: the animated graphics new destination directories from within the on many national and private on-line servand audible enhancements, and the game program as needed-very handy! For those of ices. If you do not have access to these seryyou that run your own BBSs, a companion options, especially support for playing in ices, you can usually write or call the game salvo mode. In addition to the standard ropprogram, MegaDoor, makes access of this developer for an evaluation copy. And recollection on your BBSs a simple matter. BBS down grid view, a unique side view of the member, if you find a shareware program index files and a «Remote User» mousenaval war zone is provided depicting your enjoyable, please register it with the author. friendly, menued interface are included. opponent's ships, but not their placement. Until next time, great gaming! Viewers contained on disc make displaying Upon each shot taken, shell fire is depicted images, running .FLI animations, and playon screen either hitting its mark or plunging Send Us Your Best ing .MOD, .ROL, .WAV and .VOC files a into the ocean. When a hit is registered, the simple matter. ship bursts into flames at the appropriate If you have authored a shareware or public Clearly the finest CD of those represented location. Debilitating damage results in a domain game for MS-DOS compatible, here, Mega Games 1 is available for a special sunken vessel. Accompanying these animaMacintosh or Amiga computers and would dealer-direct price of $29 (SRP is $79), plus tions are the appropriate sounds of planes, like to have it considered for review in this $6 S&H. A free demo CD of miscellaneous shell firc, explosions and even digitized comcolumn, please send two complete copies (on rams, including benchmark and test mentary from ship personnel (provided one 3.5\" disks) with documentation and a cover utilities, is also available for the asking. To has a sound board and the registered version letter to: order this excellent title, contact: Profit Press, of Destroyer, required for sound effects). 824 E. Fort Lowell Road, Tucson AZ 85719, Game options offer the standard choices of Best of the Rest (800) 843-7990. individual or automatic ship placement; mulComputer Gaming World This survey only represents some of the tiple skill levels; and adjustments for game 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 many titles available. (At a recent local commode, first shot, game speed and sound delay. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. CGW CGW SI PRIMERA ERBRBPIERZ PROROGORO ESPOBERAP DPOROROPRIR PERBER PORED PERERER OPERERERPES BIBOR DIPERGEGED BRUCECORDS PRRRRDPROP MOOD BEOGRAD USEPPROPODO RPPOOR POPIEPROP POBODA COPROPRODEO Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"THIS IS YOUR BRAIN. THIS IS YOUR BRAIN NEUROJACKED INTO CYBERNET IN SPECTRE VR? Lives: 3 Damage! Arv: 4 Score: ssa: Pn Level: 22 Bonus : 418 FH FULL MOTION VIDEO FROM CD-ROM: THINK OF IT AS AN INTERMEDIATE STEP BETWEEN CYBERSPACE AND UFE AS YOUVE KNOWN IT SMART WALLS ARE COVERED WITH LIVE ACTION VIDEO, ACID POOLS WILL TRY TO TRAP YOU MAYBE YOUR SCATTER SHOTS CAN HELP UNTRAP YOU ANY QUESTIONS? CO HERO JACK INTO A WHOLE THE WORLD THAT IF YOU THINK YOUR PREADY TO HANDLE MANOSCONO PRESORE ROY SMART WEAPON EGYES THAT LEARN YOUR EVERY MOVE THEN STRIKE FROM ANY DIRECTION | THE CYBERWORLD HAS NEVER BEEN SO FRICHTENINGLY PEAL. BUT THERES HOPE AT LEAST VOULEUEN RENAL THATSUSTAS SYLT AND POWERFUL ASTHAT OF YOUR OPPONENTS THE QUESTION CAN YOUNAIGHTE DHE TEAM AS QUICKLY AS YOUR BRAIN PROCESSES THE STIMULATION ON YOUR SCREEN THE ANSWER: FIND OUT AS YOU HOVER ABOVE THE CYBERARENA, OR SUBMERGE INTO NEGATIVE CYBERSPACE. YOU CAN EVEN ALTER THE LANDSCAPE, YOUR OPPONENTS AND YOUR WEAPONS WITH VRCHITECT A 50. JACK INTO SPECTRE VR WITH ONE PLAYER A NETWORK OF UP TO EIGHT, OR EVEN MODEN PLAY ON THE PC. AND GET READY FOR A WHITE SPECT AALSE FOR YOU BY CHOO.COM HOT ELECTRONIC ADRENALINE RUSH, BUT DE FOREWARNED: REALITY WILL NEVER BE QUITE THE SAME AGAIN. S E cocirr. Circle Reader Service #155 Circle Reader Service #155 HEY, YOU WITH THE CPU: GET A CYBERLIFE. GET SPECTRE VR» For MOST TO ORDER SEE YOUR LOCAL BETALER OR CALL 1.600-VUOCITY "


"REVIEW The Need For CD Speed Will Caching Software Accelerate The Lives Of CD-ROM Owners? by Chuck Miller hough it has taken several years longer offer greater ease of use. CDs employed as a in its ability to access data. Just compare an than anticipated for CD-ROM to distribution medium allow you to install a average access time of 300 milliseconds for a 1 reach the computing mainstream, it program on your hard drive without experidouble-speed CD drive with 15 milliseconds appears that 1994 is the year it will flourish encing the dreaded multiple-floppy-swapfor an average hard drive and you quickly get in the hands of consumers. A recent CGW ping ritual. Just start the installation process the picture. While this is better performance survey revealed that 33 percent of responding and come back when it's done! than offered by earlier single-speed drives readers currently own a CD-ROM drive, and CDs also save you valuable hard drive real (especially since throughput has been notice48 percent plan to take the plunge in the nearestate, as most CD-ROM titles only need estate, as most CD-ROM titles only need roably improved), it still leaves a lot to be defuture. Many factors contribute to growth in store a few files on your hard drive. This sired. Faster CDs are in the works, including this area: the development of speedier CDmakes it easy to keep multiple programs at the tripleand quad-speed devices (NEC has alROM drives, volume drive sales and the reready without consuming your entire hard ready announced their entries), but the price sulting retail price wars, and a growing drive. Games will enjoy longer lives on our on these improved units will remain steep number of quality CD games. The whole computers because we will not need to conuntil the competition picks up and a good emphasis on \"multimedia\" in the education, tinually delete them to make room for the number of these faster drives are sold. entertainment and business arenas has fueled newest byte-gobbling title. In addition, CDs S o, what do we do in the meantime? The the CD fire. Soon, gamers wanting the best make an excellent medium for series compialternative to investing in newer, costlier in interactive entertainment will want to lations. As examples, one shiny little disc on technology is to make the most of what we make the move to CD. my software shelf contains Ultimas VI, have. Primarily, two things can be done to What makes CD-ROM so hot? Well, sevwhile a new release from SSI includes the optimize the performance of your current (or eral advantages cause these silvery discs to complete Eye of the Beholder trilogy. soon to be purchased) CD-ROM drive: add outshine their floppy siblings. Of course, the The Heartbreaks Of caching software and drop in some extra massive storage capacity, approximately RAM. Both work together to improve not 600MB, is a key feature. This allows developCD-ROM Access only CD performance, but overall system ers to create more elaborate products featurYet, in spite of their benefirs, CD-ROMs performance. Though our focus is on softing full-motion video and CD quality have one major disadvantage—they are S-Lware caches, it is also prudent to address audio-creations that could never be distribO-W! Compared to the average hard drive, RAM requirements, at least briefly, as memuted on floppy disks. In addition, CD-ROMs even a double-speed CD-ROM drive is ineptory is the fuel upon which caching software Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"SATISFY YOUR DRIVE. You own a CD-ROM drive because you want to play the next generation of games now like these six SSI games on CD: TONY LA RUSSA BASEBALL II. The greatest baseball game on CD means more digitized playby-play voice. More stunning cinematic replays. Digitized photos of old-time pros. Plus the data from the invaluable STADIUMS and FANTASY DRAFT Expansion Disks. GREAT NAVAL BATTLES! This advanced WWII battleship simulator on CD gives you enhanced sound effects and musical score. Outstanding cinematics of historical World War II footage. And all the data from three GNB Expansion Disks: Super Ships of the Atlantic; America in the Atlantic; and Scenario Builder. FANTASY EMPIRES: Forge your very own D&D\" empire and get more CD-quality voice, sound effects, music score and magic spells. DUNGEON HACK. e Incredible graphics and digitized sound effects bring to life the dungeons of your nightmares. This singlecharacter AD&D fantasy role-playing game comes with a dungeon generator that can create limitless danger-filled adventures! DARK SUN: Shattered Lands. The hottest AD&D roleplaying game is now on CD, enhanced with a mindblowing introductory cinematic sequence. EYE ME BEHOLDER TRILOGY. On one CD — the entire EYE series: Volumes I, II and III! Tony La RusuBASEBALLI SEL TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 with VISA/MC (U.S. and Canada only). hanced Dungeon DUNGEON HACK And Damer Songs DAN SUN NORTH ATUNNO 195143 SHATTERED LANDS SSIACD Duncons & Dragons FANTASY EMPIRES EYE OF BEHOLDER TRILOGY CDs are for IBM PC/Compatibles, AD&D D&D DARK SUN, FANTASY EMPIRES, DUNGEON HACK the TSR logo and all TSR charac ters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSA. In 1993 Stundeple Simulations Inc. 1993 TSA, Inc. All rights reserved "


"TABLE 1 Dune CD Drive Test No Cache Norton Speedrive Data Transfer Rate (in seconds) 313K 313K 341K 341K Data Access Regularity (at 120K/second) 100% 100% Data transfer speed is a little bit irregular. Animations will probably stop from time to time. Cache All 198K 93%* Lightning 313K 96% of up to 23MB is supported and Speedrive automatically adjusts memory usage dynamically for fastest access times. The Norton Speedrive is a solid performer for standalone systems. Cache All Version 1.0 ($129) C&D Programming 1611 Mayfair Circle, Salt Lake City UT 84158 (801) 582-0737 CacheAll, the only software at present that can cache nerwork drives in addition to CDROMs, offers a package that is easy to install and provides good Windows support (though installation is from DOS). Its Windows utility, CUtil, allows you to display and reset statistics, flush memory, display and real world tests to Elle Options cull Version 1.0h Filc Options Help SA ache Vertion Oh SLICE HELLA1912 K DIKTOL Z BERTO 320 Hemor. A 1136 KEDIK A ZKEN AYNIOS feeds. Put simply, there are minimum and measuring data transfer rates and dara access ideal RAM configurations you should be regularity (provided on the Dune CDaware of depending on your gaming requireROM); CDBENCH by Profit Press for testments. If you do your gaming entirely under ing seek, read and relative access times; and DOS, you should have a minimum of 4MB three CD-ROM games for testing performof RAM in your system, with 8MB being ance in a real-world setting. The games scideal. Gamers who also frequent Windows lected are the DOS titles Dracula Unleashed should double that figure, with 8MB of RAM and Return to Zork, and the Windows version as the minimum and 16MB the ideal. Whatof King's Quest VI. All testing was performed ever the case, don't scrimp on the RAM. on a 386-33MHz system with 8MB of RAM and a double-speed CD-ROM drive. SmartDrive Don't Do That The first entrant is The Norton Speedrive \"e As you may know, you already have a cache from Symantec Corporation. Second, from program, SmartDrive, if you own DOS 5.0 or C&D Programming, we have CacheAll, the later or Windows 3.0 or 3.1. Though Smartonly entrant that caches networks. Lightning Drive is a very capable cache program, it will for Windows, our third and final entrant, is not cache CD-ROM drives. We need to look sponsored by Lucid Corporation. All three of elsewhere, then, to find the answer to our lack these cache programs were run through a of cache. (Note: Under the newly released DOS battery of benchmarks and real-world tests to 6.2 upgrade, Smart Drive will now cache CDsee how they performed. Let's take a look at ROM drives. Unfortunately, we were not able the results and see if we have a winner. to include this new version in our tests. -Ed) The Norton Speedrive Version 4.0 ($99) The answer, I believe, lies in caching softSymantec Corporation ware. While not a fix-all solution for the 10201 Torre Avenue, Cupertino, CA heartbreaks of CD-ROM access, caching 95014-2132 software is a small step toward making life (408) 253-9600 with a CD-ROM drive more enjoyable and First on our list of caching software is The productive. However, there are times when a Norton Speedrive Version 4.0 (formerly Speedsoftware-based disc cache can actually deCache+). Claiming to increase performance crease the performance of your CD-ROM by as much as 200 percent on CD-ROM drive. We will discuss this in more detail larer. games, this program with an intelligent readAdditionally, each cache must be tuned to your system's particulars to gain the greatest bencfit. For the purposes of this test, each program was benchmarked in its default state as installed. Granted, this may not offer a comprehensive determination of the maximum benefit from each cache. Nonetheless, ease of use, installation and configuration are important concerns. Few gamers will invest AntWidaci hours fine-tuning their cache software. They ahead cache speeds up information access will install it, possibly tweak it a little, and under both DOS and Windows. Though it then move on to their primary concernoffers little in the way of added extras, Speeplaying games. Thus, the software offering drive exhibited the best performance overall the best default performance» will probably benefit the greatest number of gamers. Beof the three caches tested. To its advantage, it sides, it is difficult to justify spending hours is casy to install and use, automatically conconfiguring a program that will, at best, only figuring itself for optimum performance and save a few minutes of waiting time per gaming loading itself into upper memory when availsession. able. Two included programs for Windows, Speedrive Assist and Disk Performance Tester The Candidates, Please makes accessing and testing Speedrive a snap. Three benchmarks were chosen for this All statistics and parameters may be viewed comparison: the Dune CD Drive Test for and modified quickly and easily. A cache size Road Red SSC (F08H.....356867 (Rood. HK R L 647 modify all parameters, and enable/disable its swap file. Like Speedrive, CacheAll provides little in the way of added extras. However, it is more difficult to configure than Speedrive for the average gamer. In addition, its chief claim to fame-network support (where it can speed up lagging LAN-related work) offers little advantage to the great majority of gamers. Though Cache All performed well in most tests, it did experience some problems in relation to drive access regularity which hurt its performance. Still, the ability to use a hard drive swap file for extra cache space, a la Windows, can provide a real boost to systems that are light on RAM. In general, CacheAll is superior to SmartDrive, and a benefit to those with systems on a network. However, for general gaming it's only an average performer. Asshor Notu Dive Beconfigure Options Help predive Elle rechilo.. RARE 10 Lightning for Windows ($129.95) Lucid Corporation, 101 W. Renner Road Suite 450, Richardson, TX 75082 (214) 994-8100 Though originally released and still available as the DOS program Lightning CD, the newer version Lightning for Windows was selected for this comparison as it offers caching Lightning Control Center Elle Cache Information Help information M anous A Memory Ac burces and Cache fotomon. Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"TABLE 2 CDBENCH Version 2.4 CD-ROM Performance Test (Initial Test Run/Second Test Run) Seek & Read* (in milliseconds) Sustained Long Read** (in bytes per second) Sustained Short Read** (in bytes per second) Relative DOS Access (in seconds) *Lower number is better. **Higher number is better. No Cache 30.2/33.9 979K/1,157K 1,363K/367K 8.8/5.4 Norton Speedrive 25.61.9 979K/4,771K 1,908K/1,908K 5.4/5.2 Cache All 25.6/29.3 1,091K/1,193K 308K/308K 2.7/5.2 Lightning 29.3/27.5 1,157K/1,091K 309K/308K 8.4/9.0 for both environments. Of the three caches Moving on to Table 2 and the CDBENCH gree, if any, the drive employs hardwaretested, Lightning offers the most for the performance test, we see that Speedrive and based caching. Thus, improvement extends money when it comes to included utilities. All CacheAll showed an improvement over no beyond the results indicated. Lightning statistics and parameters are discache on the Seek and Read test, while Light Yet, as indicated by the benchmarks, in played and accessed through the Lightning ning exhibited an insignificant gain. On the most cases the difference in performance of Control Panel. In addition to this handy inSustained Long Read test, Speedrive showed fered by these software caches is only slightly terface, Lightning includes Kazoomer, a screen no initial gain while CacheAll and Lightning better than initial gain while CacheAll and Lighining better than that experienced with no cache. magnification utility; Piranha, a file deleter; both displayed a slight improvement. On the What are the reasons for this lack of signifi and PolyPoly, a screen saver. Installation, unSustained Short Read, only Speedrive showed cant improvement? Actually, several explanalike the previous two programs, is handled any gain. The other two caches actually detions account for these findings. First, tests on through Windows. Since there are more opcreased performance. Results of the Relative CD-ROM drives and CD caching software tions available with Lightning, it is not quite DOS Access test showed Lightning to offer no are not entirely accurate. Most newer drives as easy to use as Speedrive, but is simpler to improvement while Speedrive and Cache All employ built-in hardware caching, offering configure than Cache All. It also uses an inteldisplayed comparable gains. However, note anywhere from 64K to 256K of on-board ligent algorithm that \"learns\" as you work to that when the test was run the second time, cache. Unfortunately, these hardware caches improve its hit rate. Under DOS, Lightning Speedrive exhibited significant gains over the can sometimes conflict with software caches. speeds up text screens and increases the repeat other caches everywhere except in Relative The result-decreased performance! Runspeed of your keyboard. It also comes with a DOS Access. ning a software cache in conjunction with the 30-day, money-back guarantee. As far as performance goes, Lightning wedges itself beThe Game's The Thing hardware cache can actually slow access. tween Speedrive and CacheAll, placing it Another problem is that caches only begin This brings us to the real-world testsmiddle of the road in performance, though to show significant gains as data is repetitively measuring results with actual games. Surprisout front as far as extra goodies are concerned. accessed. Games, like adventures, where you ingly, tests reveal that, in practice, very little access the same screens on a regular basis may gain may be experienced with CD-ROM Please Approach The Bench games when running cache software. Table 3 show acceptable gains, decreasing the waiting Before taking a detailed look at the benchmakes it obvious that we are only talking time for screen transitions and game menus marks, several points should be made conabout saving a few seconds here and a fraction to appear (several seconds can seem intermicerning cache performance in general. To of a second there when it comes to accessing nably long when waiting to access a menu begin, benchmarks can be a sterile measure of CD-ROM game data. As far as the cashing selection). However, games offering a continperformance. That is why real-world tests software goes, all three programs performed ual stream of new data exhibit little improvewith actual CD-ROM games have been incomparatively well with each game. Though ment. Sometimes, new data is transferred at cluded. In addition, comparisons were made CacheAll did not do as well as the closely such a fast rate that the combination of this with no cache installed to clarify the actual marched Speedrive and Lightning caches, the do clarify the actual marched Speedrine and Lightnine caches the data flow and the previously mentioned cache gains attained by using caching software. Fidifferences are really insignificant. In a gamconflicts cause performance lags that result in nally, 2MB of RAM seems to be the most ing session of several hours, we are only talkvideo and/or audio segments stopping or effective cache size for the majority of game ing about a few minutes variance at best. pausing repeatedly. This is why many CDapplications. Improvements when using ROM game manuals suggest turning off any larger RAM caches are minimal. With this in Caching It In caching software before play begins. mind, let's proceed. So, what are we looking at with regards to So, what does all this mean for the gamer? So, what does all th \"The first benchmark used, with results actual improvements, if any? Docs caching Well, I don't think it means that a software posted in Table 1, was the Dune CD Drive software benefit the gamer? Yes, even if only cache is of minimal worth. The value of runTest. In this benchmark, Speedrive exhibited modestly at times. Remember, caching imning cache software is dependent on the conthe highest Data Transfer Rate (DTR) and proves floppy and hard drive access as well as siderations touched upon above-the Data Access Regularity (DAR). Lightning that of CD-ROM drives. Also, the benefit capabilities of your computer system, espeplaced second, followed by CacheAll. Signifigained will vary depending on the performcially the CD-ROM drive. Drives with a large cantly, only Speedrive showed an actual imance level of your computer (386 or 486, SX internal hardware-based cache will exhibit provement over running no cache at all. or DX), how much RAM is available, less performance gains (and possible performLightning maintained the same DTR, but whether you have a singleor double-speed ance impairment) than a CD-ROM drive suffered a decrease in DAR. CacheAll suffered CD-ROM drive (owners of older singlewith a small internal cache or none at all. A a significant loss of DTR, and the test warned speed drives will notice greater improvements noticeable performance difference also exists of potential difficulties due to its DAR rating than those recorded here), and to what debetween singleand double-speed drives January 1994 Page 135 "


"TABLE 3 Real World Game Benchmarks (Initial Access / Repeat Access, Time in Seconds) No Cache Norton Speedrive Cache All Lightning Dracula Unleashed (DOS) Exit Home to Street 2.17/.57 2.13/.65 2.717.53 2.20/.53 Enter Carriage Enter Carriage 3.77/1.72 3.71/1.65 4.79/1.64 3.71/1.66 Return to Zork (DOS) Mt. Pass to Lighthouse 2.97/2.61 2.23/1.43 3.03/1.76 3.04/1.65 Ascend Lighthouse Stairs 13.94/13.22 14.25/12.90 17.38/12.74 14.03/12.78 King's Quest VI (Windows) Load to Option Screen 60.38/60.31 55.24/54.90 58.95/44.52 58.85/56.90 Restore Save Game 4.02/4.00 4.01/3.61 4.13/3.98 3.96/3.72 when running cache software. Thus, some result in you becoming the victim. My aderation. Personally, though, Speedrive is my experimenting is necessary with each CDvice? Just say no! preferred choice. It offers the greatest ease of ROM drive and game to determine if perA second concern is RAM. Simply put, it's use and installation, the best performance, formance gains are realized or not. My an essential. Outfit your system with as much and the least amount of effort to configure. suggestion-run caching software unless you RAM as you can afford, up to the ideal. You Once your cache is installed, run some encounter problems. You will probably expegames. If you experience problems with the will be happier and your computer will be rience some gain, although it won't be dradata transfer of video or audio, try the game happier, too. matic. Of course, every little performance with the cache disabled. As always, read the boost when dealing with CD-ROM's slower To conclude, cache software is a useful documentation carefully for specific informaaccess rates helps. enhancement to overall system performance, tion regarding cache software. But don't be beyond that of your CD-ROM drive alone. afraid to experiment. Some extra RAM, a final recommendations. First, only purchase Just don't expect breathtaking results. In good software cache, plus a little time can go a double-speed drive or better! Yes, there are most cases, benefits will be subtle. Based on a long way toward relieving the CD-ROM some killer deals to be had on single-speed the tests performed, any one of the above access blues. CGW drives, but the purchase of one of these may caches will provide some gain in system opGAMER'S GOLD GAMER'S GOLD USED IBM GAMES Virus Free  Complete 12 6 WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES We want your current used gamesi* 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 WE SELL USED GAMES All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility USED IBM GAMES Virus Free. Complete Amazon 26 Countdown Kings Quest 5 Kings Quest 6 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes Martian Memorandum Meon Streets Rise of Dragon/VGA Space Quest 4/VGA Star Trek 25th Anniversary Night Breed Bards Tale 3 Battletech 2 Challenge of 5 Realms Dark Queen of Krynn Dark Lands Dusk of the Gods Gateway Savage Frontier Legends of Valor Magic Candle 2 Matrix Cubed Mega Traveller 2 Mega Traveller 1 Midwinter Might & Magic 4 Might & Magic 3 Planets Edge Sea Rogue Secret of Silver Blades Sentinel Worlds 1 Storflight 1 Summoning 15 Twilight 2000/VGA Ultima 6 Ultimo Underworld 2 Vengeance of Excalibur 8 Wizadry 6 688 Astock Sub A 10 Tank Killer 1.5 F-117A Stealth Fighter FIS Strike Eagle 2 F19 Stealth Fighter Flight of the Intruder Flight Sim 4.0 18 Jump Jet Knights of the Sky Non LHX Attack Chopper Mantis Exp Fighter/VGA Silent Service Strike Commander Syndicate Test Drive 3 Their Finest Hour WC Secret Mission 1 WC Secret Mission 2 Wing Commander 1 Wolf Pack Yeagers AFT ABC Monday Night Football All American College Football Front Poge Football Hordboll 3 Joe Montana Football Madden Football 1 Mike Ditka Football ML Baseball 4 USAT ML Football Playmaker Football Skate or Die Tom Landry Football Tony LoRusso Ultimate Baseball Weaver Baseball 2 Weaver Commissioners Ancient Art of War at Sea Breach 2 Castles Fighting for Rome Global Conquest Lost Patrol Populous Power Monger Railrood Tycoon Realms Romance of 3 Kingdoms Rules of Engagement Stor Control 2 Utopia Chessmaster 3000 WIN Carriers at War Conflict: Korea UMS 2 15 AMERS urrent title availibility WE ACCEPT VISA, MasterCard/Discover 29 12 19 Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air *Games must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 Page 136 Circle Reader Service #66 Computer Gaming World "


"6 Reviews KIDS COMPUTERS Microsoft Dinosaurs To see the promise of multimedia in education fulfilled, get Microsoft Dinosaurs. Without question, this is the finest dinosaur title yet; it may be the most beautifully crafted educational CDROM title in existence today. The artwork is breathtaking; spectacular paintings of dinosaurs and their surroundings populate the hundreds of panels of information. A series of fullscreen movies deliver five animated informational sequences licensed from PBS and a dramatic movie of a dinosaur hunting in the forest. The movie soundtrack will raise the hair on the back of any young paleontologist's neck as the hunting cries and growls of these mag. nificent creatures come rumbling out of the speakers. The pictures, video clips later. Lessem's charming narration keeps the younger set interested while providing solid scientific information to all. For students who want to concentrate on the multimedia aspects of the program, the Options menu offers a slide show, a picture gallery, screen savers, and a print menu. The picture gallery is the real star here, as each picture can be saved to the Windows clipboard and then copied to a word processor for illustrating reports or for making stories. But even if your kids don't use the gallery to create their own reference works, Microsoft Dinosaurs is a wondrous, captivating experience for dinosaur lovers of any age. Richard O. Mann Richard Scarry's Busytown A TYRANNOSAURUS REX and sound create an atmosphere that will keep any kid or parent enthralled. At the program's core are more than 200 articles, each accompanied by paintings, text and audio buttons that can be used to check pronunciations of dinosaur names. Related articles are just a button press away. The main entry for tyrannosaurus rex, for instance, leads to nine related topics, including an explanation of the theropod's tiny arms, giant Jaws, and killer instinct. One of the challenges of presenting collections of encyclopedia-style information is to provide a logical yet interesting path through the data. Random access through an index or text search is great for looking up specific items, but other approaches are needed to make the product entertaining. Microsoft Dinosaurs' main menu provides four primary paths into the information, along with the index and dinosaur movies. The Atlas shows a world map offering further screens for each continent and a related article button that starts a string of panels explaining the changes in the earth's surface during and since the time dinosaurs walked the planet. The Timeline presents a graphic representation of geologic time from the Precambrian Era through today's Holcene Period, and leads to a study of the material in chronological order. The Families button starts with the different dinosaur families as a point of entrance. This path also includes prehistoric reptiles of the air and sea — contemporaries of the dinosaurs. The most entertaining path is the Guided Tour. Narrated by Don Lessem, the founder of the Dinosaur Society, the program's 16 tours offer a light-hearted but information-packed walk through a series of related information. Lessem doesn't read the screens aloud; rather, the informational screens are displayed as mural exhibits that he explains, leaving time for reading and exploring them than a wideda buona New sharan T T A re Are The K 444 44 4 tware NE donlar vch Parents and educators have long admired the works of children's writer Richard Scarry for the lessons they've taught kids about life and language. Now, Huckle, Lowly Worm, and other engaging Scarry characters are here to teach on the computer screen. The program's action centers around the main screen, which provides a colorful and panoramic view of the town. Kids move the cursor (Lowly Worm's apple copter) to select the playground Microsoft Dinosaurs Price: $79.95 In Brief: A fascinating exploration of the world of dinosaurs. Requirements: IBM compatible (386SX or better) with 4MB RAM; VGA display; hard disk with 2.5MB of free space; CD-ROM drive; mouse; speakers or headphones; Windows 3.1 or higher. Audio Support: MPC-compatible sound devices. Microsoft One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052 (206) 882-8080 Circle Inquiry #165 December 1993 Page 137 "


"KIDSS COMPUTERS PURA 999 they want to visit. There's a deli, a seesaw, a doctor's office, and a ship, to name just a few. Each has its own setting, music, and characters, and targets particular developmental skills. Busytown's playgrounds are divided into easy, intermediate, and advanced levels of difficulty, and can be installed in increments to suit the age and skills of the players. The designers intended this as a way of allowing the program to grow with the child. While it may be effective in that context, it can also prove frustrating, as all of the playgrounds, even those not installed on the computer, are visible on the main Busytown screen. Kids won't understand that some areas are inaccessible when they can see it in front of them. All of the episodes engage kids in behaviors that are productive, cooperative, and challenging. The fire station, for example, provides practice with planning, cause-and-effect relationships, directional skills, and helping others. Aside from all the learning, it's pure, unadulterated fun for kids, who get to load hoses on the fire engine, jump into raincoats, slide down the fire pole and race off to save the occupants of a burning building, blowing the siren all the way. Busytown offers an appealing visual element, in spite of some choppiness in the animation. Richard Scarry's characters are faithfully reproduced, and kids will find the variety of situations and tasks stimulating. The characters communicate with one another throughout the program, and there's a variety of sound effects that kids will enjoy. Technically, the program puts a lot of demands on computer hardware. The manual covers all the basics and includes a chapter that guides the parent through non-computer activities that can enhance the computer-based lessons. Busytown is a must-have if there's a young child in the house. Even with its potentially-daunting technical requirements, this wonderful program should find a place on the home PC hard drive. Dennis McCauley Yobi's Magic Spelling Tricks Price: $49.95 In Brief: Kids learn tricks to spelling difficult words with this entertaining program. Requirements: Macintosh with 4MB RAM, 256-color display; hard disk with 9.5MB free space; System 6.0.7 or higher For Ages: 7 10 Other Versions: Windows ($49.95) Yobi's Magic Spelling Tricks Brightstar/Sierra On-Line P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 326-6654 Circle Inquiry #167 3D This captivating program does a decent job of combining entertainment and spelling drills. But it does an even better job of using phonic clues to teach spelling techniques based on auditory hints. By linking the spoken word to the mouth movements of Yobi, a Yoda look-a-like, young spellers can actually see how different sounds are produced. These visual reinforcements are essential if youngsters are using sound rather than written clues to build their spelling skills. But Yobi's Magic Spelling Tricks isn't just about an intriguing use of speech technology, it's also about solving mazes. As Wali, Yobi's strong armed assistant, you must help Yobi travel 100 miles upriver, negotiating the mazes that block the path at every mile post. Each maze is solved using a similar technique. Kids must touch each letter of a tricky spelling word (like journey or thought) while avoiding alligators, demons, pits and tigers. Figuring out the spelling of the word is sometimes easier than getting through the maze. For kids who find Nintendo games a challenge, the mazes are very appealing. The puzzles are so much fun that they become the reason to play the second half of the game, the Spell-down Challenge. This untimed spelling drill consists of words that Yobi pulls from a list of hundreds. After each maze is completed, kids must do a Spell-down before continuing. The target word is spoken (an auditory hint) and Yobi's mouth moves (visual reinforcement). All spelling must be done based on these clues, a radical change from the mnemonic used in the mazes. To get back to the main game, students must correctly spell from 3 to 10 words on the first try (the number increases as they move upriver). Missed words are spelled correctly by Yobi, then recycled to be tested again and again. The publisher has rated the program for 7-to-10 year olds, but kids up to 14 could use it. Older kids can more easily enjoy the maze challenges without finding them frustrating even good spellers will profit from the enforced practice. If parents were able to modify the word list to emphasize their child's daily or weekly spelling list, Yobi would be perfect. Overall, Yobi offers good educational content, some rather challenging puzzles, and a competitive motif that keeps youngsters interested. Leslie Eiser stomach Richard Scarry's Busytown Price: $59.95 In Brief: The world of Richard Scarry becomes a setting for a variety of developmental activities. Requirements: IBM compatible (386 or higher recommended) with 640K RAM; VGA display, hard disk with 6MB free space. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible For Ages: 3-7 Math Rabbit Paramount Interactive 201 West 103rd St. Indianapolis, IN 46290 (800) 992-0244 Circle Inquiry #166 Hurry! Step right up and test your number skills. Math Rabbit provides four entertaining circus activities that help kids develop proficiency in counting, number recognition, addition, subtraction, and number relationships. Each Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"KIDS COMPUTERS activity contains speech, music and animation that will keep your kids captivated for hours. In the Calliope Game, kids make muFile Options Help MA Games, tickets and levels are automatically saved upon exiting. An Options screen allows you to make the games more challenging to match your child's progress. Customize math operations, problem formats, target numbers, game speed, and more. Beginner's hints and help menus are always available. Math Rabbit is very easy to use, and accommodates different learning styles. It's a fun program kids can really count on. Mark Haverstock Click on o numbered ball to pick on answer Math Rabbit Price: $49.95 In Brief: Circus games develop skills in number recognition, counting, addition, subtraction, and number relationships. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM, EGA or VGA display: hard disk; mouse. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible For Ages: 4-7 Other Versions: Macintosh ($59.95) Fisher-Price Picture Dictionary appear. Children are free to click on any of these words as well, which will whisk them to a separate screen, with the selected word and picture there for learning. The program accounts for homographs (words that are spelled the same but have more than one meaning such as the fall in our example). With all this interactivity built in, it's disappointing that the program lacks any speech or voice technology. If children were able to click on pictures and hear words pronounced (or spelled out loud), the program would provide the kind of auditory reinforcement new readers need. Picture Dictionary does have some sound effects — like cats meowing and telephones ringing. But the quality isn't up to the same level as other educational titles. The program is accompanied by soft, childlike music which kids or parents can switch on or off with the click of a button. Children within the recommended age group display a wide range of reading skills, which can lead to problems in this program. Some of the sentences that accompany the pictures are too complex Tor pre-readers to decipher without adult assistance. On the plus side, kids are not confined to traditional alphabetical constraints and can enjoy exploring picture after picture, word after word. Felicia Donovan The Learning Company 6493 Kaiser Dr. Fremont, CA 94555 (800) 852-2255 Circle Inquiry #168 Parents looking for a picture dictionary that's as easy to use as A-B-C need look no further. The Fisher-Price Picture Dictionary opens onto the world of words with spinning alphabet blocks, sound effects, and memorable illustrations. This program is suitable for very young children, perhaps even younger than the recommended age range. The pictures are colorful and the music is delightful. After kids select a word (fall, for example), the program displays a picture of an autumn scene, accompanied by the selected word. In this example, as a child moves the cursor over the picture, the words tree or leaves will CNN Newsroom Global View able branch is to climb. sic while they practice counting. First, they learn to associate number symbols with their spoken names and relative values. The approach is effective, associating increasingly higher numbers with higher pitches and positions on the chart. When the counting is done, the pipes toot a tune corresponding to the numbers. To improve memory and concentration there's Balloon Match. where kids pop the balloons to pair up hidden sets of objects with their corresponding numbers. A circus wouldn't be a circus without animal acts like the Sea Lion Show. These talented performers balance numbered balls on their noses, assembling addition and subtraction problems to solve. Another game, Tightrope Show, features Hanna Hippo and her target number. The goal is to compare sets of objects or math problems as equal to, greater, or less than the target number. Each time your child completes any game, Math Rabbit performs one of several entertaining routines-from swinging on the tightrope to performing a juggling act. Successful rounds earn prize tickets that can be traded for an assortment of comical, animated prizes. . Fisher-Price Picture Dictionary Price: $39.95 In Brief: A simple, computer-based picture dictionary for the very young. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; EGA or VGA display: hard disk. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible sound devices. For Ages: 3-6 Cable News Network has repeatedly shown its ability to be where news is happening and report that news 24 hours a day. During the Gulf War, world leaders relied on CNN and not their own intelligence services for up-to-date reports on the war's progress. CNN is the undisputed leader in world news coverage. Multimedia technology now brings six of CNN's themes — Small World, Waging Peace, Collapse of Communism, Earth (Environment), Cultures in Conflict, and Famine in Africa to the computer screen. These six issues are timely and important, and CNN courageously covers them, irrespective of ratings and outside influence. Famine in Africa, while being one of the most important issues of our time when this series was broadcast, received Game Tek 2999 NE 191st St., Suite 800 North Miami Beach, FL 33180 (305) 935-3995 Circle Inquiry #169 December 1993 Page 139 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS the worst ratings ever for any news coverage series. In spite of the ratings, CNN continued to cover this important story while the world turned away, unable to look at the unbelievable real-life horror of famine and starvation. ELOBAL VIEW gional database. This extensive source of information is divided into several topic areas: people, politics, economy, military, and resources. Six types of charts can be prepared, comparing multiple years of statistics from 1950 to today for up to 20 countries. It can be an eye-opening experience for students to see how these countries relate to each other, and to compare the vast gulf between cultures and countries. The program's calendar is just tacked on, and adds little value to the overall product. But the main features have interesting and educational uses. CNN Newsroom Global View will certainly satisfy the requirements of any student interested in contemporary history and the stories that have captured the headlines in recent years. Alfred C. Giovetti CNN Newsroom Global View Price: $99.95 In Brief: A multimedia excursion into the files of CNN. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display, hard disk with 1 MB free space, MPC compatible CDROM drive, MPC-compatible audio card Audio Support: Sound Blaster and compatible sound devices Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise Compact Publishing 5141 MacArthur Blvd. Washington, DC 20016 (800) 964-1518 (202) 244-4770 Circle Inquiry #170 Though easily taken as pure entertainment, this delightful program swings into an educational mode without missing a beat. Its child-appropriate activities are more enlightening than parents might expect. Intelligent helpers are quick to lend a hand. Best of all, completing the adventure isn't required — it's really and truly an option. One hundred-twenty video clips with speech, which represent more than one hour of full-motion video coverage, taken from CNN's most compelling coverage of important global issues, are presented within this CD-ROM product. The video clips are presented in IBM photomotion at about one-quarter of full screen size. Combine the CNN Newsroom video clips with a vast collection of maps, articles, tables, and charts, and students have an authoritative, up-todate reference on world affairs and a world atlas. The CNN Newsroom and world atlas is augmented with a Worldclock, which will display the time in any location in the world, showing the distance between locations and time zones on a globe that doubles as a screen saver. The Worldclock shows an amazing diversity as a timekeeper, calendar, mapfinder, chartmaker, and screensaver. One of the program's best features is its chart and table utility, which can be used to construct charts from information gleaned from the country and reThe premise of Fatty Bear remains faithful to its target age group — kids aged 3 to 7. The story revolves around Kayla, Fatty's ponytailed owner, who is celebrating her birthday in the morning. All the toys have decided to surprise her by baking a cake and decorating her room. To play the game, kids must help Fatty assemble all the ingredients to the birthday cake, get Kayla's birthday present (a very frisky puppy) back into his box, and put up the decorations. Like any good adventure game, there are puzzles to solve and ample clues to discover. So what makes Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise educational? There's no reading to do, as all the clues and hints are spoken. There are no hidden drill-andpractice routines. Instead, there are songs to play on the piano, balloons to count, and letter games to enjoy. Baking the cake means following directions. Fixing up Mr. Cabbage Head means learning body parts. But if kids don't want to go through these exercises, as enjoyable as they are, they can simply explore Kayla's house — checking out the treehouse, the garden, the garage, the kitchen, the living room, the bedrooms and the bathroom. All this freedom makes Fatty Bear a wonderful introduction to the computer for beginning users and a delightful game for more experienced youngsters. There's enough educational content to earn a teacher's recommendation. And plenty of adventure and fun to earn enthusiastic reviews from parents and their kids. Leslie Eiser Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise Price: $54.95 In Brief: A delightful alternative to traditional preschool games. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display: hard disk. Audio Support: AdLib, Covox Speech Thing, Disney Sound Source, Sound Blaster, and compatible audio devices. For Ages: 3 to 7 Other Versions: IBM CD-ROM ($54.95) Electronic Arts 1450 Fashion Island Blvd. San Mateo, CA 94404 (415) 571-7171 Circle Inquiry #171 Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Reen Stros, Burbank Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxydo magnum! for PC, Mac, A500 A2000, ST, TT or Falcon Computers. Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now shipping! Mac: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5MB RAM, EGA or VGA monitor, Soundbla. or Adl. optional. 011 L. EXE My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent produd. R. S., Germontown Tenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis This is, without question, the most impressive game! have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. RAIR Michael C. Moore, Columbia Oxyd Credits: Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of Game of the Year programming that I have seen. From my position of Computer & Pedagogik 06/93 having completed about one third of the single-player The variety of play is levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied literally, incredible. with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail Score this game a solid 10 that makes each new one a continuing delight. I espeCurrent Notes 06/93 cially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing A must for your games library. against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances AmigaWorld 06/93 like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm Game of the Month. already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming / MorWe 07/93 keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Harrow Top of the Charts Brain Teaser Category: PC Games German edition. Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. 700 new landscapes I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had New objects and game playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the elements to explore. textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challengOxyd magnum is an antirely new and riveting challonge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. ing but not impossible. At first I thought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through FERTI 97 it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Call 617-497-1130 for the It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia Get a free appetizer for Mac, PC, Amig. or ST: I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratula Send $ 4.00 for shipping & handling for tions on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you ! 10 challenging landscapes of Oxyd to Dongleware Publishing, 35 Howard Street, all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks Cambridge, MA 02139-2909 I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH in the sounds who faces really The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, CT game. It invites The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego OK so we got hooked! Circle Reader Service #56 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS LIFEmap: Animals with Backbones This disc is part of a collection focusing on living things and their evolutionary relationships. Overall, it's a genealogy program of magnificent proportions that promises to illustrate the 3.5-billion-year-old history of life on our planet. The program shows students the relationships between animals with backbones: They may examine each animal, see how related animals differ, and find out what common ancestor two animals share. OUJ them little explanation is given regarding scientific classification (phylum, subphylum, order, class, species). That makes it hard for students to tell if the name given refers to an animal's order or species. But the disc really shines when used as a reference, coupled with a science book or biology class. The graphics and pictures are consistently outstanding. However, the program suffers from a lack of cross-referencing. Students can't export information to other programs. Also, Animals with Backbones is broken down into three programs — mammals, reptiles and early vertebrates — but students can't jump from one section to another without quitting one and loading the other. Performance could be better, and will tax all but the most sophisticated machines. Although the program runs fairly quickly, be ready to go for coffee while it loads (this reviewer timed the loading process at about 3 and a half minutes on a Mac Ilci with a middle-of-the-road CD-ROM drive). Separate discs in the series cover Organic Diversity (bacteria, algae, fungi and plants) and Non-Vertebrate animals (insects, mollusks, sea stars.) The discs are available separately for about $40 each, or as a set for about $100. Kevin Savetz sounds grab their attention. The in-depth activities and intrigue sustain it. Children can chose French or English for screen messages and directions. Animated screens change throughout the program, depending on choices youngsters make. Rows of large action icons line the edge of the screen. These icons provide access to several unique features. For instance, the Help function gives objectives, playing instructions and technical details. The Encyclopedia entries come to life with colorful illustrations. A Camera feature takes a picture of the screen at any time and saves it to a photo album. The Drawing and Writing module lets players edit these saved pictures to create their own stories. A Print function makes it easy to produce copies of the finished work. Kids and their parents should be prepared to learn how to use these features as, except for the Help icon, there is little instruction. There is no manual, only a four-sided sheet printed in French and English with sparse installation directions. Casca program LIFEmap: Animals with Backbones Price: $39.99 In Brief: This multimedia CD-ROM explores the relationships between vertebrates. Requirements: Mac II or better with 3.5MB RAM; 256-color display; CDROM drive. 23293E OCASA Time Warner Interactive Group 2100 W Olive Ave. Burbank CA 91506 (800) 593 6334 Circle Inquiry #172 Ladybug Electronic Calculator Ladybug Electronic Calculator Price: $69.95 In Brief: Not just a simple calculator, this program also teaches science and math concepts. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA or SVGA display: hard disk with 2MB free space; mouse. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible sound devices. For Ages: 4-8 Take, as an example, the three-toed sloth. LIFEmap presents a color picture of a sloth doing what sloths do in this case, hiding in a tree.) From there, one can find out which animals are most like a sloth and why they're similar. These animals share a common ancestor, so one could look up the sloth's great-great grandfather. But if a student searches for an animal that is no more, the screen displays a glaring red Extinct stamp. Nice touch. The CD features decent on-line help, in which a narrator explains how to navigate the program. The liner notes contain a brief explanation of organism genealogy, but a science book is required to fully understand how animal relationships are classified. Although the program always provides scientific names for animals — and even pronounces Don't be fooled by the name. Ladybug Electronic Calculator is more than a simple electronic adding machine for kids. It is a programmed learning package that stresses organizational, decision-making and basic bilingual language skills. It is educational software that greatly enhances the joy of learning. Ladybug exposes children to bilingual communication at an age when they are most receptive to a new language. The program blends this concept into the building blocks of primary education. It doesn't drill. Instead, it stimulates growth in reading, writing, computer literacy, social and natural sciences, and math. Youngsters will be quickly drawn into the story line and should willingly explore the adventures. The sights and DIL International 2115, rue Boivin Quebec, Canada GIV 1N6 (800) 463-6632 Circle Inquiry #173 Part of learning is self discovery. This program will provide plenty of chances for that. But if you and your kids need more direction, another learning program may be more appropriate. Jack Germain CGW Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"\"LET THERE BE PAX!\" Play PAX IMPERIA, the strategic, multi-player simulation of intergalactic empire building. DOS, Mac and network versions available. along with full color posters of this Great Moment From The Future. \"totally engaging throughout\" -Computer Gaming World \"a definite must for Mac gamers\" Dragon Magazine I S THPERIA \"strategically elegant\" Mac Home Journal PAX IMPERIA.. lets you live like a King and play like an Emperor! Available now at your nearest dealer or call 800-769-2768. CompuServe, GO: GAMEPUBC Visa, Mastercard, check or money orders accepted. Thangeling Changeling Software, Inc 596 Elm Street Windsor Locks, CT 06096 Imperial Stardate 2407... Melina Pariknova Lands The Fleet In The Vega System. Circle Reader Service #57 "


"REVIEW The Forecast Calls For... Clear Skies Domark's SVGA Harrier Ushers In The Era Of High-Res Simulators O VGA Harrier from Domark, following closely on the 6-o'clock of Kesmai's SVGA Air Warrior, is one of the first combat flight sims to seek our SVGA skies for its simulated sorties. Together with its Kesmai counterpart, SVGA Harrier is leading the wave of next generation, high resolution sims. Using the gaming engine from their AV-8B Harrier, Domark has refitted the earlier sim with Super VGA, 640x480 resolution, 256color graphics. Though the graphic upgrade by Tom \"KC» Basham helicopter and Harrier flight operations. The Harrier is a very flexible product that both Tarawa is accompanied by several smaller wargamers and flight simulation fans can enamphibious assault ships and protected by a joy. To win the Indonesian campaign, Kidd-class destroyer and three Oliver Hazard though, you must be active in both the straPerry-class frigates. A group of 20 AV-8B tegic and tactical decisions. Harriers, 120 armored vehicles, and an undisclosed number of helicopters and infantry are Flight Qualities carried by the task force. The flight simulator enthusiasts are by now When rebellion strikes Indonesia like a asking the obvious question: How does it fly? sneaky summer monsoon, the Tarawa is the SVGA Harrier has done a great job of conveyonly force in the region. With the consent of ing the feeling of flight, if not conforming to the UN, and under the orthe exacting specifications of the AV-8B ders of the President, you flight model. The basic feel of the aircraft is assume leadership of the enincredibly smooth, about the smoothest of tire task force and are any flight simulator currently on the market, charged with stopping the and it handles quite believably in normal rebels and restoring order flight. Instantaneous and sustained g-loading on the small island of East are appropriately modeled as a function of Timor, north of Australia. speed, so that at 450kts you can pull an Although the politicians instantaneous 9g, but the speed will quickly want only the minimum bleed down to around 200kts leaving you amount of force used, they with a sustained g-capability of 3g. The flight recognize that the task force model has an above average modeling of anis small and outnumbered, gle of atrack (AOA) effects, although stall so you are authorized to use buffet and departures are noticeably absent. any level of force desired. Low speed Might is handled very well, espeYou have total control over cially the feeling of momentum and inertia. the task force; landing and Nose-high descents can be performed, makmaneuvering ground forces, ing for realistic traditional landings, but it's controlling helicopter operations (including the sense of inertia that makes the Harrier feel insertion of special forces), and last but not like a real aircraft. The nose wallows like a least, AV-8B operations are all within your lumbering hog when the speed falls near stall radius of control. You can asspeed (Vs), and Pilot Insume the role of an individual duced Oscillation (PIO) is a AV-8B pilot and leave all the SVGA Harrier strategic details up to the comSVGA Harrier puter; you can lodge yourself SYSTEM: firmly in the Tarawa's command SUPER-VGA chair and handle only the strate HARRIER SVGA (VGA also supported): gic details; or you can play a role somewhere in the middle, setting dual joysticks and updating a strategic plan Jonathan Newth, David Payne while flying individual Harrier sorties. In this aspect, SVGA 0610 0610 OLO TETOOTER bloo gu is the only functional difference between the first Harrier and SVGA Harrier, the step to SVGA is significant enough that, for the purpose of review, we will treat SVGA Harrieras an entirely new product. TITLE: PRICE: REQUIREMENTS: $59.99 IBM 386-25MHz or better (486 recommended), 2MB RAM, an S3, ATI or VESA compliant video card for What's The Sitch? The player assumes leadership of a USMC Expeditionary Brigade (MEP) consisting of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd battalions of the 9th Marine Regiment, and the 1st and 2nd battalions from the 6th Marine regiment. The MEP has been assigned to a small task force lead by the USS Tarawa, a general-purpose amphibious assault ship. The Tarawa is essentially a small aircraft carrier capable of supports Adlib, Sound Blaster and Roland sound cards, and PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: None PUBLISHER: and Chris Tubbs of Simis Domark San Mateo, CA (415) 513-8929 Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"Psychotic Killers. Hand-TO-Hand Combat. High Explosives. Acid Baths. Then it Gets Bad. CRITICAL PATH Kat, chopper pilot-turned survivalist, has only one hope for escape from Generalissimo Minh's maximum security facility... You. Guide Kat along the Critical Path, through scene after scene of killers, mutants, traps and high-explosive surprises. It's a gritty, realistic cinematic experience! \"This isn't a game...they're going to KILL me!\" From your fully-equipped control center, you share Kat's view via a camera mounted on her headset. Action bursts forth on your screen with lifelike 3D motion video, explosive sound effects and music soundtrack! Warn Kat of fast-approaching dangers. But if you slip up... it's \"Game Over\"! Sign up for combat duty at a software dealer near you. MEDIA VISION WINDOWS CD-ROM Call 1-800-845-5870 for information or a dealer near you.  1993 Media Vision, hc, 47300 Bayside Parkway, Fremont, CA 94538. Fax (510) 7709592. Meda Vision, the Meda Vson logo and Critical Path are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. Al other trademarks are those of their respective companies. Al nights reserved Circle Reader Service #88 "


"wings, but to a lesser degree. More than once I found myself single-handIf the Harrier is banked to edly tackling four F-16s. All four F-16s flew the right, viffing 45 degrees flat circles while I maneuvered behind them causes the aircraft to move and downed each with cannon fire, one by laterally to the right and inone. Disappointing, to say the least. creases the rate of turn. Viffing allows the aircraft to Interfacing With The World gain an angular advantage The game's strategic campaign in some during air combat against a ways rivals that of Falcon 3.0, but in other better-turning adversary. ways fails miserably. The general design is Depending on the amount excellent, and the combined control of land, of angular correction sea and air assets is wonderful. The user deneeded, more or less nozzle signs a battle plan, identifies which targets deflection can be used. need to be destroyed or captured, deploys Viffing is not an infallible ground units, and assigns air assets to achieve maneuver, however. Subthose goals until either beaten by the IndoneGURU stantial or sustained nozzle real danger when flying low and slow. SVGA sian rebels or victorious. deflection results in deceleration of the air. The problem with the system is two-fold. Harrier has excellent support for analog concraft. If the aircraft slows below 170kts, the First and foremost, the manual is one of the trols and fully supports analog rudder pedals. aircraft falls like a rock until forward velocity The rudders are well implemented with inerworst I've seen in a long time. While no is recovered. At low altitude, this can be fatal. tial effects, although there is a noticeable lack manual can cover every aspect of a complex The Harrier is not a champion dogfighter like of induced roll from the rudders. simulation, this manual doesn't even try. But typical flight qualities are just the Strike one-there is no index. tip of the iceberg when talking about Two-the manual is poorly written the AV-8B. The engine's thrust is and contains almost no graphics. vented through four exhaust nozzles And strike three-most sections along the aircraft's fuselage, and these state the glaringly obvious without four nozzles can be deflected anywhere providing any details. For example, from 0 degrees (pointed directly aft) to the description of the «Drop 08:00:00 110 degrees (pointed down and Troops» helicopter mission reads: \"This mission will be flown by a slightly forward) to provide many transport helicopter, which will unique flying abilities such as rapid deceleration and vertical or short takeland troops at the selected waypoint.» No mention of how many offs and landings (VSTOL). It's the Harrier's VSTOL ability that allows it troops is given, nor what the troops to operate just about anywhere, includare equipped to do. After these ing the cramped decks of the USS troops are dropped, they never the F-16, but with judicious use of viffing an Tarawa. again appear on the strategic map, although expert Harrier pilot is a force to be reckoned some information boxes state \"Special forces The simulation fully supports both throttle with. active in the area.» Do the troops fight or just and nozzle control. Keys 1 through 0 are The Artificial Opposition perform recon? Do they laser designate assigned throttle control, and pressing SHIFT plus keys 1 through I will deflect the The advantages of viffing are heavily deground targets during air strikes? Can they be nozzle from 0 to 110 degrees in 10-degree bated in the real world, and unfortunately moved? There are no indicators of how many steps. Pilots have control over the nozzles not SVGA Harrier does not provide much chance teams are available-can you run out? All only during takeoffs and landings, but during to settle the issue. Although topics in the manual are discussed in such a normal flight as well. Using nozzle deflection there are plenty of opportufor vertical motion during normal flight is nities for air combat against called Vertical thrust In Forward Flight Indonesian A-45, F-5s and (VIFF). \"Viffing\" is widely hailed as the Hareven F-16s, the skill of the rier's greatest aerodynamic capability, giving computer controlled pilots reasonable dogfighting capabilities to a less is poor at best. The AI pilots maneuverable aircraft. fail to use the vertical, espeViffing 110 degrees provides forward thrust cially with the F-16, often similar to the effect of a thrust reverser, causbleeding speed to 200kts ing the aircraft to rapidly decelerate and move and flying flat 3g circles inupward. This can be used during emergency definitely. By using high yosituations to slow the aircraft, especially to yo maneuvers and an prevent overshooting a bandit during air-tooccasional viff, tackling Fair combat or to force the bandit to overshoot 16s is no problem. Comyou. Viffing lesser angles, such as 30 or 45 puter controlled pilots also degrees force the aircraft «up» relative to the fail to use team tactics. Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"ON TARGET ACTE PACIFIC OF THE COMPUTER GAVING o. WORLD TO YMPUTER ING WORLD GAVI WOR GANO WORLD the ener m e Logos | DATE LINKS 380 Underworld COMPUTER GAMING WORLD TNDIANAJON Special Issue VORLD COMPUTER GAMING WORLD nic Arts Itra Bots' CARD The di Com Akroring Nitra Hot 100 Sodi Interplay's Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Labyrinth OF Worlds FATE of ATLANTIS Na Fred Sad 2 BETTER Don't go unarmed to the software store. For more than 12 years, Computer Gaming World has provided game hunters with the best information in the field. CGW is the magazine for gamers who want more than quick overviews of the latest games. We're loaded with the most complete reviews, new strategies, and the best hints for the discerning hunter. Take aim now with Computer Gaming World and save almost $20 off the newsstand price. Only $28 per year (12 issues). Lock and load with your Visa or MasterCard and call 1-800-827-4450 "


"The Elder Scrolls \"I've played role-playing games since they first appeared on mainframes a decade ago. The Elder Scrolls: Arena is quite simply the most captivating, well-designed, realistic world available on home computers.\" Russ Ceccola, Assaciate Editor, Electronic dames \"The most impressive showing by any company...Bethesda's Fall line-up is one of the best going.\" —Computer Game Review Circle Reader Service #41 BECHESDA SOFTWORKS BON 19 M AR rohts reserveas Bethesda Softwork and The For "


"THE TEMATTOR He's back. He's made a few friends ... ... and they're angry. w2 BECHESDA SOFTWORKS Circle Reader Service #42 1984 Cinema '84. A Greenberg Brothers Partnership. All Rights Reserved Licensed by Hemdale Film Corporation. THE TERMINATORY. TM designates a trademark of Cinema 84. A Greenberg Brothers Putnership oftware copyright  1993 Bethesda Softworks. The Terminator "


"DIKTE FEATURE PRESENTATIONS Combat sorter 10 srat ca TK STEC HATRIE 1989 0 Urts Cred URL conbat Ern its destroyed 000 00 BUBOKO SUAL/44 Fixed back Ord Task Force OCCUPIA (PETCERE! Hatud an Personalize your Microsoft Windows environment with incredible images & digitized sounds of your favorite aircraft. Aircraft Wallpaper B4161 AUTOTE Task Force Um Enew Ground Un landing Crunt Marne Hectecer Over 40 images of vintage and contemporary aircraft use as Windows wallpaper or in an automated slide show. Screen Savers Animated crop dusters, bombers and skydivers all work to entertain you while preventing screen burn-in. Aircraft Fly-Bys UMPURLEDE Aircraft Fly-Bys! This visual, easy-to-use aircraft encyclopedia contains vital statistics on each of the featured aircraft. TARICA AMEMMOUS MAREARE DATA SYSTEM casual manner, including AV-8B flight and weapons operation. Strengths, ranges and capabilities of ground units and weapons are obvious omissions. The manual also included numerous outright errors. Despite what is said, no matter how many times I saved my campaign, my customized settings (such as sound and display preferences) were never saved. The manual instructs users to click on various icons for certain actions (such as a floppy disk to save the campaign), bur the specified icon doesn't cxist (the floppy disk is actually a telephone). The other problem with the game is the user interface of the strategic map. Ground forces can only be directed to preset nodes such as villages, bases, cities or airports, and troops will not move through the jungle, only on roads. In some cases, a particular node identified for assault may be quite distant from the marines, but very near several other enemy nodes. Ideally, the marines would advance near the node, await air strikes, then move in before reinforcements arrive. This can't be done, though. Once the marine units set out, they move all the way to the next node. There were several cases of air strikes eliminating all enemy forces at a particular site, but before the marines could advance, reinforcements arrived. Also, it is difficult to advance ground units. Ground units operate in groups, with each group having no more than three armored vehicles. In some of the more critical assaults, 15 or more groups would be holding position at a given node. To advance to the next node, I had to zoom into the map, select a single unit, zoom out the map, designate the new target, then repeat the procedure for each remaining unit. This process is tedious and unnecessary. The strategic campaign is the highlight of this game and is truly enjoyable, but the frustration level generated by the poor documentation and simplistic user interface may be too much for many players to bear. SVGA Dreams, Simulation Realities When given a chance to daydream, flight sim pilots have no problem conjuring images of complex 3D images on rolling terrain, with individual blades of grass streaking by on their monitor as they cruise 50 feet above the deck at 500kts. Lest the magic acronym «SVGA» lead to such unrealistic expectations, you should know that while SVGA Harrier does make full use of the 640x480, 256 color resolution, it does not pack the screen with high-detail objects. Like SVGA Air Warrior, static displays, such as the cockpit are drawn extremely crisp and clear with the higher resolution, but most of the world looks the same as it did with plain old 320x200 resolution. The bulk of Indonesia is a flat green block, giving no indication whether the CE Air Events Calendar Provides the locations and dates of airshows in your area. SPECTRUM Sample aircraft images:  SR-71  B-17 Flying Fortress  F-14 Tomcat  Fokker Dr 1 Triplane International: (303) 225-1687 (800) 238-5983 Sample aircraft sounds for Windows events:  P-51 Mustang  F-15 Eagle  B-25 Mitchell  F4U Corsair Ask your local retailer for Feature Presentations Flight. or call Colorado Spectrum to place your order. Circle Reader Service #46 Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"SCENERY FOR MICROSOFTFLIGHT SIMULATOR V.5.0 FOR DOS SYSTEMS UNBRANIMO PHOTO REALISTIC SCENERY OF SAN FRANCISCO BAY AND SURROUNDING AREA For more information or to order call 1-800-WEB-FEET 1900 WIBFET M allardo Mallard  1993 Mallard Softwaro, Inc. Circle Reader Service #86 "


"NOTEBOOK GAMEPORT. Finally, a Joystick Connection for Your Notebook! MK-817LGB (HYDRA/3 ACM:SSE E.C.M. FOK) MK-83 MK-83/LCB|HYDRA/12||AIM-9M ||HARM|DEFAULT LAST ||[MK-84/LGB HYDRA/18 ROCKEYE-20|||FLARE CLEAR Weapon weight = 1500 Total weight = 23060 MK-84 Sidewinder AIM-9MR 10.2.kg (22.5.b) HE fragmentation passive IR-homing missile terrain is jungle, sand, rock or grass. Mountains similar to those in Falcon 3.0 stretch across the island. Ground objects are drawn with a nice degree of complexity, but are few and far berween. The gradient horizon is well done, and anyone that has been to the South Pacific islands will appreciate the wonderful hazing effect of the mountains in the distance. In short, the game lives up to the promise of SVGA for the limited graphics available in the game, but probably fails to live up to what most users might first expect when they see \"SVGA» in the title. Transform your high-performance portable into a serious simulation machine with the Notebook Gameport. Connect an IBM-compatible joystick or yoke and rudder pedals. The Notebook Gameport not only maximizes the entertainment potential of your notebook computer, it's also the quickest, easiest joystick connection for your desktop! Ask your local retailer for the Notebook Gameport, or call Colorado Spectrum to place your order LLLLLL GAHEPORT COLORADO SPECT 748 Whalers Way. E-201. Fort Collins, CO 81525 International Telephone: (303)225-1687 (800) 238-5983 9-Pin Connector to Computer's Serial Port Easily connects to all IBM compatible notebook and desktop computers. Pass-through Serial Mouse Port Mouse remains fully operational while gameport is in use. The Bug Hunt Then there is always the inevitable list of bugs. Although SVGA Harrier's implementation can be frustrating at times, it is overall a very enjoyable product. Unfortunately, the bugs give it an unfinished feeling. The most noticeable are the graphics glitches: objects not being properly erased and polygons of the wrong color suddenly appearing (such as large blue splotches over the green terrain when the aircraft is sreeply banked). The strategic map often fails to refresh itself, leaving many destroyed targets visible and strange semi-circles and remnants of menus scattered across the screen until the user manually forces it to refresh. The game was highly unstable under QEMM 6.02, crashing and locking up the machine often. It was much more stable under QEMM 7.01, although the mouse would drop out after a couple of hours, usually after saving the game. Sometimes the game would continue fine after losing the mouse, other times it would crash. Most notably, SVGA Harrier does not clean up after itself and leaves tons of items resident in memory. Restarting the game after losing the mouse always caused a lockup unless the machine was cold booted first. Each time the program is exired it leaves \"SNDTSR\" loaded in memory, using up 29.6K. If the game is entered and exited multiple times without booting in between, multiple copies of SNDTSR (each using 29.6K of memory) will be left behind. Whatever SNDTSR is, Windows doesn't deal with it very well. Return To Base SVGA Harrier has some very nice features including a first-rate flight model and a fine strategic campaign, but suffers from a few bugs, a weak user interface and extremely poor documentation. Because of this, a lot of experimentation is required to learn exactly how it works. Because of the quality of the flight model, flight simulation fans will probably find it a highly enjoyable product, especially for exploring nozzle control and vertical landings on the Tarawa. Wargamers, though, will probably find it inflexible and inaccessible, and not worth the time away from their standard gaming fare. CGW NOTEBOOK GAMEPORT Four-axis Gameport Supports joystick & rudder pedus simultaneously. No calibration, jumpers or manual speed adjustments necessary. Circle Reader Service #106 Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"BLAST COMPUTER GAMES INTO ANOTHER DIMENSION FOR ONLY $169! TILCISTEIT 12 GAME BLASTER BLASTS COMPUTER GAMES FROM PCS TO BIG-SCREEN TVs! ww ws W W GUEST CORPOTER GRATIS NOTAR DDISIONI T RISTE W .U. GAME BLASTER turns your living room into a virtual reality SPECIAL OFFER! FREE GAMES-a $150 valueINSIDE EVERY GAME BLASTER PACKAGE! gameroom by boosting your favorite These sensational computer games are FREE with every package! PC games from your VGA monitor Prince of Persia Jet Fighter II Spectre Challenger\" onto your big-screen TV. GAME BLASTER converts your PC's VGA output to a video signal and supports 640x480 VGA resolution. So take off today with GAME BLASTER -and blast your by Brderbund by Velocity by Velocity computer into the next dimension. Circle Reader Service #36 ADS ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS 20204 State Rd. Cerritos, CA 90701 (310)865-1432 (310809-6144 (Fax) (800)888-5244 Available from leading computer products suppliers, such as: Balulags. Best Buy CompSA . Comptability. Computer City Computer Express E oad Suftware Insight PC Zane Tigr Software USA Flex MEKITH JETFIGHTERE OF PERSIAN WWWWWWWWWWWWWww po puno GAME PLANTER "


"REVIEW Build The Empire Of Your Dreams ing of items is important, but the development of character levels is more so. As the Dungeon Master says, \"He who has the most powerful heroes will rule Mystara.\" The Lands Await Fantasy Empires concerns itself exclusively with the surface world of Mystara, which consists of 98 different countries composed of varied terrain. You begin with a single fief in this broad domain, and you must eventually conquer the entire map to be successful. Four adversaries of comparable skill level may be selected from the extensive list of computer opponents, or generated for use by other human players on the same computer. These foes are scattered on the map, but begin with similar starting resources if they are of an equivalent level to your character. The remainder of the countries begin the game as neutrals. SSI Melds Role Playing And Strategy Whether victorious or not, your efforts will In Fantasy Empires be recorded for all time in the book of the Dungeon Master. Further, a measure of experience will be awarded based on your exploits during the campaign. The increased by Sean Jeffers level that results from this has a long term affecr. First, greater revenue is generated from re you an insatiable conqueror whose be firmly bound by the treaties they form each territory held in subsequent campaigns. vitality withers without virgin territowith other characters. A neutral character is Second, you will be able to challenge more ries to exploit? Does your blood burn more free to seize opportunities as they arise, capable opponents and maintain some hope at the thought of an unworthy invader reapbut must live with less income. of victory. The greater the power of the opYou begin the game as a first level position, the more bountiful the fruits of character with unmodified skills. victory. Because of the structure used for To help in your quest for experiexperience points, however, high level charence, you may be able to gather a acters will take longer to attain each new few trusty compatriots. These increase. Expect to play many, many camcharacters are not controlled like a paigns (at about 20-30 hours each) before you \"party,\" as in other role playing are worthy to challenge the Level 35 comgames, but rather as individuals. puter opponents. They may lead troops in battle or be sent on increasingly difficult Rapid Expansion quests to gain experience and Regardless of starting position, there will be items. several neutral territories accessible from the Some characters never return home fief. Your initial move should be to from these quests, and you are told send all heroes off on quests, then build a ing the bounty of your labor? If so, read on. of their passing via a text box and accompablock of 100 of the cheapest troops possible, SSI's Fantasy Empires can provide a producnying shriek of death. Those that do persegenerally fighters. On the next turn, when tive outler for your tendencies, which I am vere will almost certainly go up an experience these forces become available, they should sure your neighbors will appreciate. level and may or may not return march into one of the adjacent territories. Fantasy Empires is a game that operates on with an item. There are two categomany different levels. In some ways, it is a ries of magical items: those for use Fantasy role-playing game and in others a strategic by the character who found it, such TITLE: Fantasy Empires game of conquest. At the heart of it is your as a Bow +2 (only one such item PRICE: SYSTEM: character, a single noble whose eyes are set on may be held by each character), and REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz minimum, 4MB conquest. Your character can be one of the those that are placed in the Imperial RAM, VGA graphics, 15MB many standard AD&D races and alignments, Vault for your character's use. The Does not support EMS. Documentation look up and these traits can have a significant impact latter are generally rods or staffs that DESIGNERS: Denis Dyack, Rick Goertz, on the course of a game. Lawful characters, increase your ability to govern the PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations Inc. for instance, might earn more revenue from empire, or provide a limited numSunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 the lands they conquer, but they would also ber of magical attacks. The gatherBUILDING HIZARD THE COST 10000 GR $59.95 IBM EMPIRES hard drive space, mouse, PROTECTION: Scoil Collie Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"From Those Wonderful Folks Who Gave You Gridlock, Blackouts and Runaway Taxes, Comes Raw Sewage, Yellow Journalism and the Subway at 3 a.m. "


"player but the intended recipient will see the message, so dubious rulers can use this function to pit opponents against one another, or to enter secret alliances that convey none of the restrictions of conventional treaties. 4,IF 1764 TROP COST: S464 REGOLARS: 858 BUILDINGS ELF. DHR. FICHTER 250 RBALLISTAY CATAPULTY U FICHTER 50 E FICHTER 50 FICHT. OSHU.P94 ,00 DROID TOTAL Though these are unguarded by enemy troops, between 20-80 of your forces will be lost suppressing the local populace every turn until you build a Keep. Keeps cost 7500 gold pieces, and they should be built on EGONS : INCOHE: the turn after each country is taken to preclude unnecessary losses. As RETDES such, their cost will be the limiting FICHTEL 1 factor on the rate of your expansion. Your initial treasury should be sufficient until you have four or five fiefdoms, at which point you will be somewhat self-sustaining if you limit XH further expansion to one country per turn. opponent off your back for a time-long Unfortunately, this relatively simple land enough for you to reinforce that border. If grabbing cannot continue forever. Sooner or resources allow and neutral countries are still later you will encounter one or more of the available on another front, continue expanother despots along a hastily constructed borsion during this period to improve vour der. Chances are, you haven't had the opporpower base. tunity to build any more armories (at 15,000 gold each) by this point because all of your Another approach is to offer aid to enemies money has gone into units for neutral conwho you are unprepared to deal with. This quest. Now is the proper time to explore some carries no guarantee that they won't simply of the diplomatic options in the game. Offer plough that money back into their invasion ough that money back into their invasion a treaty for a number of turns and back it up effort, but it generally improves the way they with some cold hard cash. Most of the time, view your kingdom. For multiple human if you haven't demonstrated a willingness to games, this screen can also be used to type any break such agreements, this can keep that message you want to any other player. No Sound The Alarm Generally sooner than later, you will have to begin hostilities in earnest. Once these battles begin, it is very helpful to have the strong leadership of your heroes in the field. Provided you have not squandered them on quests beyond their capability, you should still have the original group, albeit much more capable Before continuing with an explanation of how heroes are used in battle, you must first understand how to replace those that will be lost. With the exception of Wizards and Clerics, who must have special rowers built for their training, all other heroes may be trained in the armories. They cost the same amount in th as a unit of 20 regular troops of the same type, but they take 2-3 times longer to train. The disparity in training time is more than offset by battlefield performance. Elf heroes reload MIDIAN BECAUSE IT'S NOT JUST A GAME! A service organization developed to integrate technology and creativity to deliver a package of uncompromising high quality. DEPENDABLE, SEASONED PROFESSIONALS WITH THE FLEXIBILITY TO HANDLE ALL OF YOUR NEEDS. VERSATILITY IS OUR BUSINESS! AUDIO PRODUCTION? WE DELIVER EVERYTHING! RESULTS? WHAT DO YOU THINK? Certified developers for: . Composition, Arrangement, & Full Orchestration  Film Scoring . Sound Design MIDI/SMPTE. Voice Over & ADR Service We offer complete audio production for Film, Video, & Multimedia.  Programming. Writing. Game Design/Consulting Services also available. Media Vision CREATIVE eRoland CREATIVE LABS, INC. Extensive list of credits in the Multimedia and Film/Video Industries. For More Information Call (512) 834-8325 12330 Metric Blvd., Ste. 7202  Austin, TX 78758-2524 Circle Reader Service #95 Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"INTRO ENNA SLISTE -0% O SEA BC e RMK 71 ROEL SDmo Now Entering SimCity 2000 Groundworld Beneath the polished facade realer. In it, you get multiple lies a seething cauldron of viewing angles. You get to angry taxpayers, broken water import your old SimCities. You mains and other chalget to terraform your More SimCity flavor-less salt. Take a byte out of crime. The desalinization plant pumps lenges that will take landscape. You get Build SimPrisons—along fresh water into pipes you lay in with Sim Hospitals, SimSchools the new underground level. you uptown, downtotal control of a suband other city SimServices, town, even underground. Now entering terranean web of water pipes and subSimCity 2000—the ultimate city simulator. Stop the presses! 2000 comes ways. And you get it all in gripping, complete with a daily paper that may have you wanting to eye-imploding 3-D. This long-awaited repeat the first amendment. follow-up to our software landSo pack up those old programs and move to SimCity mark, SimCity\" makes simulat2000. Everything that started the SimCity revolued real estate, in a word, tion. In a vivid new evolution. SIM CITY 2000 The Ultimate City Simulator. MAXIS Available for IBM PC & compatibles and Macintosh. 1993 Sim-Business. All rights reserved. SimCity 20XX) is a trademark of Sim-Business. Maxis and SimCity are registered trademarks of Sim-Business. For product or ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 1-800-33-MAXIS, Circle Reader Service #164 "


"SOD CP 1 TURN FICHTEK BATTERING RAM BALLISTA CATAPULT FICHTEK and fire faster than the formations of archers, Fighters get in more attacks per round and do more damage per attack, and Clerics/Wizards cast powerful spells in battle that often turn the tide of events. When combat is initiated by moving into an enemy held territory, the strategic overview map is replaced with a tactical close-up of the contested terrain. All action occurs from an overhead perspective very similar to that used by the old arcade game Gauntlet. Players assign a general order to all their troops, either Barrage, Harass, Assault or Retreat, and then directly control either one hero or troop formation (if no heroes are present) for the ensuing action. Barrage is particularly effective if you have siege engines catapults or ballista-in the battle. The latter are huge mounted crossbows that fire arrows about three meters long. These bolts are capable of killing many troops for every formation they hit. When barrage is selected, these units and all elven archers will fire at any targer in range. Fighters and other point during that battle, you can hit the \"escape\" key to have the results simulated. This will not reset any action that has occurred up to that point; if things were looking bleak when you clected to let the computer finish the battle, they will continue to do so when the final results are posted. The option is basically included for those who either prefer a purely strategic game, or don't wish to invest the time necessary to play each battle out manually. When heroes survive a battle, they gain experience. If your reguground troops will hold their position unless lar troops survive two battles, they an enemy unit comes close to them. become veterans. At the veteran level, a unit Harass is similar to Barrage except it inof 20 troops is roughly equivalent to a Level 3 hero of the same class. If veteran troops volves only archers. Assault is just as it sounds. survive another battle in which 60 or more of All units commit to an all out frontal attack the enemy are killed, they become elite units. on the enemy position. Catapults and ballista Elites fight and defend with the approximate do not advance because they are capable of skill of a Level 7 hero. Finally, troops of hitting anything on the field without moving. higher skill level are capable of killing up to 5 All other troops move forward and, if the to l of their less experienced counterparts on enemy has a castle present, battering ram the field of battle. The only unfortunate units will attempt to breach the gates for the omission in this entire system is the inability other troops. to take surviving heroes with you into the Immediately prior to a battle, or at any next campaign. COMPUTER TURN YOUR DESKTOP INTO A COCKPIT!    As E BASKETBALL PILOT CONTROL IBM  APPLE  C-64 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule 766 total teams included, NFL, WFL, USFL, WLAF & College from 1925 to present. Trade, draft or input teams. Standings and League Lealers! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies 27 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included. Standings and League Leaders! STAND Ch FlightStick Thrustmaster Higit control-type Alast my ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling, For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 ADD MORE REALISM TO YOUR SIMS! Clamps firmly to any desk, supporting the joystick out over your lap to more accurolely reflect the positioning of a real control stick. It also turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily access the keys without taking your eyes off the action. \"IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO FLY! Send check or money order for $28.95 plus $4.00 ICAN $7.00) for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 LANCE HAFFNER GAMES DEALERS CALL FOR DISCOUNT (503) 686-1809 P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #82 Circle Reader Service #72 Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"GET REAL BLASTER Upgrade up to a Sound Blaster» 16, and you've got PC audio as real as it gets. Real CD-quality, 16-bit stereophonic sound. Real built-in upgradability. And best of all, real 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. All of which may just be why we're the 16-bit PC audio standard. And why those other manufacturers spend so much time comparing themselves to Sound Blaster. Sound BLASTER THE 16-BIT SOUND STANDARD. B ut like the man says, Get Real. Because there's only one card that's \"as good as a Sound Blaster 16\" And that's a Sound Blaster 16. For information, call 1-800-998-5227. Sound CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. 11 P02 U.S. Inquiries:Creative Laby, Inc. Tel. 1-800-4994.5227011-409-428f6X International Inquiries: Creative Technology Singapore. Tel: 65.775-0233, Fax: 65-773-0353. Sound Blaster, and the Sound Blaster and Creative loges are trademarks of Creative Technology Ind. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Lid. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #50 "


"That Magic Moment Magic, regardless of whether it originates from clerics or wizards, plays a powerful part in the strategic game as well. You accumulate magical energy in three different orbs located at the top of the screen, red for mages, blue for clerics, green for druids. The orbs are blank in the beginning, then begin to glimmer faintly and finally to glow when fully charged with magical power. The rate at which the orbs fill depends on how many heroes of the appropriate type you control, and what their levels are. When you are ready to conjure, clicking on the appropriate icon will activate a spell book. The types of spells include offensive, defensive and general purpose conjurings. An example of an offensive spell is «Death,\" which causes 40-70 troops in the affected region to die inexplicably. The victim of this spell would not know it's origin exactly, but if it affected one of his border provinces he might have a fairly good guess. A type of defensive spell would be \"Animate Dead,» which raises 30-60 undead troops in the region selected structed. If that happens, you are experiencing a rather major bug that will bias your progress in subsequent battles and also cause a major cash flow problem near the end of the game. SSI has a patch that corrects this. It is available on the major commercial networks, or you may call SSI directly to receive a free copy. Aside from this correctable anomaly, Fantasy Empires excels at all levels. The ability to randomize the properties of the various countries keeps the depending on the level of the caster. The most game fresh through all the camcommonly used general purpose spell is paigns necessary to rise to the highest level. «True Sight,\" which allows you to see the Further, the seamless integration of several troop strength and defenses of an enemy rehumans and computer Al opponents is comgion exactly mendable. The non-obtrusive Dungeon Master acrs to focus your efforts, much as a The Spoils Of War real one would do, and successfully interacts at a level \"outside of the game proper. FiWhen countries are conquered, you do not nally, it's much more satisfying to take a benefit from the Keep the previous owner single character through a series of linked constructed. You must establish your own. adventures than to have to begin anew with You may, however, inherit inordinately large a different alter ego for every campaign. This numbers of siege engines and battering rams game's ability to keep you coming back time that the computer opponents have conand again is not fantasy, it's reality. CGW SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS SIDELINE SOFTWARE D ceremonies ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE A 320 Airbus USA Flight Simulation Alien Breed Arcade Archie McClean's Pool Sports Simulation Battle Isle '93 War Simulation Body Blows Galactica Arcade Daemonsgate Role Playing Game Elite 2 Space Strategy Fields of Glory StrategySimulation Ishar 2 Role Playing Game Jurrassic Park Arcade Strategy Nippon Sales Graphic Adventure One Step Beyond Arcade Strategy Ryder Cup Golf Sports Simulation Simon the Sorcerer Graphic Adventure The Patrician Strategy Adventure World of Legends Role Playing Game YoJoe Arcade Platform DASS PSSG G2GOGOPC EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo-packed playable cover DISKS with each issue! PC Format, PC Review, PC Zone, PC Player, PC Plus, PC Power, PC Action, or PC Games each only $10 Four Crystals of Trazzar 21.95 Right of the Intruder 18.95 GP Unlimited Road & Track 21.95 Greg Norman Goll 18.95 Harpoon 14.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hera Ouest 18.95 Hook 16.95 Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Legend of Kyrandu 21.95 Links 386 29.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Mega Lo Mania 21.95 Micranrose Greens 26.95 Mig 29 Fulcruni 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Ohitus 18.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pt Fighter 18.95 Populous & Promised Lands 24.95 Power Monger 21.95 Prince of Persia 16.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Flex Nebular 24.95 RoboCop 3 19.95 RoboSport 24.95 Rocket Ranger 16 95 Sargon 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sleepwalker 21.95 Sleeping Gods Lip 14.95 Spacewched 16.95 Special Forces 24.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Storm Masters 18.95 Strike Fleel 19.95 Super Off Road 16.95 Super Space lavaders 18.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 Test Drive 2. all datadisks 1895 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Admiral 21.95 The Magic Candle 2 21.95 The Simpsons 16.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 2195 TV Sports Football 14.95 Trang Casing? 8 95 Ulin 6 21.95 Valle 14.95 Wwworks 24.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Wichid 18.95 Wolfpack 18.95 WWF 2 24.95 Zoal 21.95 >>>COMMERCIAL SOFTWARE FOR IBM AT BARGAIN PRICES<<< IBM STEALS, YOUR CHOICE S5 TONS OF IBM HITS...$15 EACH (ROSSIMIW CURIER, TKO EYE OF HORUS.. WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD, ECHELON, GUNBOAT, ARETLACZU, KETROKKEIS. GIOSTS & .. GRAND PRIX CIRCUIT. HOVERFORCE, TEST DRIVE2 SILINS, PRESIDENT IS MISSING, SUPER HUEY 2.. STRATEGIC CRAPS, STREET ROD, FREED.C, POWER BALL GAME IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2. CALIFORNIA POLITICS, TILL STREET BLUES BIG BUSINESS GAMIS SUR ATTELA (RACKIXOWN, WORLD, ARMADA 2525, DUSK OF THIE GODS, MOONSHINE GAMES, WINTERGAMIS, DEATH SWORD, STREET, RACERS, KILLING CLOUD, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE FIGHTING MAN, TURTO CAMPIONS, OUTRUN,.. SPEEDBALL. 2, TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES, SILENT SERVICE, SPITFIRE ACE, SHADOWGATE... VIDEO POKER FOR WINDOWS, CHESSNET FOR FUNCINIRATION, WILL TRIS, STARQUAKE.FACES WINDOWS, BLACKJACK FOR WINDOWS, REVELATION NIGITT HUNIIK, MONTY PYTHON, VEGAS CASINO KNIGHTS OF THE SKY, FI.AMES OF FREEDOM, SPECIAL HARHARIAN, SEYRT OF KINGS, MAGIC JOHNSON FORCES, GREENS UPGRADI. L.IGHTSPEED, COVERT SIA .SAARI TIARRIER, THD RIDGIGAUNILE . RIDGI, GAUNTLET 2 ACTION, F.IS STRIKE EAGLE 2, MEGATRAVELLER I DAYS OF THUNDER, FOUR CRYSTALS OF TRAZERE $10 SPECIALS FOR IBM CASINO CHALLENGE, BAD BLOOD, PUNISHER DONTE ALONE, TEST DRIVE DRAGON WARSMILLENIUM, TROIKA, TWILIGHT 2 , CODENAME VI GAN VIDEONOKER, BEATING THE HOUSE AT \" CEMAN, TEXDER. FIREHAWK, HOYLES BOOK OF III. ANJACK, CRANBAGE, STRATEGIC CRAPS, GAMES 2. ONS WELL. MANHUNTER SAN FRANCISCO CHIAMINSIT POKER REVOLUTION 76, BAT. IPAPERBOY 2. SAROON 4. HIDDEN AGENDA, WARLORDS. NUSITIK, JEOPARDY 25th ANNIVERSARY MACARTHUR'S WAR, SECRET OF THE SILVER BLADES, WIDER OF FORTUNE GOLD, MID WINTER HUCK ROGERS 2 MATRIX CUBED, DARK QUEEN OF DR IXXM'S REVENGE, GUNSHIP, FALCON KRYNN, CONFLICT KOREA, GATEWAY TO THE SAVAGE AMAZING SPIDERMAN, COLONEL'S BEQUEST. FRONTIER TREASURES OF THE SAVAGE FRONTIER INSTAL RESCUE MISSION DEJAVU 2 IIARRIIRI DHATINIGAITS OF KRYNN SUPER SPACE INVADERS, CONTRAT SIMULATOR, CUNQUEST CIF CAMELOT (UMRAT SIMULATOR, CUNQUEST OF CAMELOT, MI GAFORTRESS AMARILLO SLIM'S REAL POKER MANIIUNIIR NEW YORK, ROTOX, ARKANO . VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBUR, COUNTDOWN TO POOLEST , HEROES OF THE LANCE, XXOMSDAY. MAGNI TIC\" SCROLLS KGII CLUE SPIRITS ORA, STAROXYSE WARRIOR DVDDRAGONS OF FAME, MEDIEVAL LORDS, TARPUNT SPECIAL $20 DEALS SCENARIO EDITOR, MONDU'S FIGHT PALACE BARD'S TALE CONSTRUCTION SET, KNOWLEDGE SIERRA SUPER SPECIAL ADVENTURE, SPELLCASTING 101. HIYPERSPEED, LAND $20 each, 3 or more $15 cach SEA A AIR TRILOGY, SILENT SERVICE 2. RED STORM U ORGY 12, KININ UNI I S IACRISING. ALLIED FORCES HUNDLE.F-1W STEALTH FIGHTER! UNII K IN AN TUTKALAIN. HINIRE SUIT PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL, SAVAGE EMPIRE, REALMS. I ANKY /1ITAKI, IRITSIKK AMIS 1.1 LOST ADMIRAL. HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER NIKI SIIN TIL ART CTIINA CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN, PROPHECY OF THE SHADOW PREMIUM $25 BLOWOUTS SHAXW SORCERER, V FOR VICTORY D-DAY or 117A SIFALTII FIGITTER, GUNSHIP 2K. MANTIS RUSSIAN FRONT or MARKET GARDEN DARKLANDS, GREENS, ILTIMA SAVAGE EMPIRE VISAMCORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE 1000's more Items for all different 1-800-676-66 16 computers... Apple, Atarl, Amiga, C64/128, Credit Card Orders Only 111( $25 minimum) MAC, & lots more IBM/MS-DOS !! TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of SS for USA SX for anala, Sl all others Californians must include 725% sales tax To receive our P.O. BOX 5160 P.O. BOX 5160 ratalog with 1000's of closeouts for all computer types, send S2 in cash or SAN LUIS OBISPO postage stamps.. DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOG!!! A catalog is free with any CA 93403 order from this ad. To check for an item not listed here, call (ROS) 544-6616. SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Delective products exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline FAX ORDERS CALL (3052 491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, FL Lauderdale, FL 33309 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! 4-0 Sports Baxing 18.95 Carriers af War 21.95 689 Attack Sub 18.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 A-Train 26.95 Chuck Yeager's Adv. Combat 21.95 Action Stations 18.95 Callassis Bndge4 16.95 Atac Microprose) 24.95 Command HO 18.95 8-17 Bomber croprose) 24.95 Crisis in the Kremlin 21.95 Bard's Tale 3 18 95 Deluxe Sino Poker 16.95 BAT2 21.95 Dalue Strip Poker 2 18.95 Battle Isle 18.95 Drakihan 18.95 Battlechess 18.95 Enic 21.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 F16 Falcon 14.95 Bloodwych 14.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Carner Commund 14.95 First Samurai 18.95 COMPSULT Circle Reader Service #130 Circle Reader Service #48 Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"The World's First Photorealistic Interactive CD Sci-Fi Adventure ENERGY 0.022.Bun 08.03.218S DATE Warning Oxygen supply is critically low. Winner! INVISION 1993 Multimedia Awards Award of Excellence plus Gold-Best Animation/Graphics Bronze -Best Production Design Bronze-Adult Games Da level: 12% Estimated time: 00:02:31 Address Book BioChip Mapping BioChip . Pegatus Oxygen Tank \"...the world of interactive gaming is never going to be the same.\" Mark Rhodes, Multimedia Editor, Micropublishing News Cause FALMO21640 Mapping BinChip 6 June 2318, 0651Z. Attention Temporal Protectorate: Travel through time Intense arcade action A rip has been detected in the fabric of time. Only moments remain until all that mankind has accomplished is laid waste. Your objective-journey through time...from prehistoric lands to the distant future, to prevent any compromise in the established continuum. But before the game is over, aromat you must discover who...or what...is the source of this mayhem, and bring it to a halt.  Photorealistic 3D modeled worlds to explore Over 30 minutes of full motion video  Integrated arcade action and puzzles to  No set order in which the goals must be challenge any player accomplished  Intuitive interface featuring easy-to-use  More than one solution to each probinventory and movement controls lem you encounter  Original soundtrack  Also available on Macintosh CD Take a ride through time on the CD Adventure that will alter history. Available at retailers throughout the continuum or by contacting: Quadra Interactive, Inc., P.O. Box 188033, Carlsbad, CA 92009-9793 Circle Reader Service #120 Multi-level challenges Copyright 1992, 1993 Presto Studios, Inc.; MPCversionby Quadra Interactive, Inc. QUADRA INTERACTIVE STUDIOS "


"REVIEW Killer Education Spectrum HoloByte's Art of the Kill by Tom «KC\" Basham of F-16 I would do Viet fighter will There's a saying in the military commuof F-16 instructor pilot Pete Bonanni. Tozes, the book concludes with a debrief of nity: Ask any two Soviet fighter pilots gether with retired Colonel Phil Handley of Handley and Smallwood's downing of a 1 what they would do in a given tactical the USAF (the only F-4E pilot to down a MiG-19 in Vietnam in an F-4E. The debrief situation, and you'll get one answer back. Ask MiG-19 by cannon fire in Vietnam), includes a transcript of the fight and twoany two U.S. fighter pilots what they'd do in the Bonanni has assembled this \"multimedia\" incolor illustrations of the maneuvers used. It same situation, and you'll get three answersstructional package which includes a 165makes for excellent reading. back. page textbook, a VHS video tape, and a 3.5\" The variations in tactical doctrine between tactical doctrine between Doppy disk containing the original Falcon 30 floppy disk containing the original Falcon 3.0 Bringing Home The Classroom the now defunct Soviet Union and the U.S. demonstration program with a new cirle With the accompanying VHS video tape, were well known. Where Soviet pilots relied screen. Pete Bonanni comes into your home and more heavily on strict rules and ground conlectures to you through the VCR. On the trollers, their counterparts in the West emBack To School tape, Bonanni flows through the textbook phasize tactical flexibility and individual The package works like a typical college discussing the various concepts and tactics. initiative. Bonanni uses a mixture of Falcon 3.0 VCR class. The professor (in this case, Pete Bonanni) lectures to the class (via the VHS and real-world footage to illustrate his points. Pete is armed with two \"airplanes on sticks\" video tape) as the students follow along in the textbook. The text steps through the basics of air combat, beginning with geometry and kepertcirke definitions. Most chapters begin with one of Bonanni's personal flight experiences before moving into technical subjects. Two-color drawings enhance the book and illustrate many maneuvers and tactical points. After laying the ground work in the introductory chapters, the book moves into both offensive and defensive \"Ivl,\" or one versus one, enColonel Handley gives a video tour of the world's finest combat aircraft. gagements. Sameepat diwed healing Unfortunately for simulator pilots, the conNext, the book discusses head-on encounfor describing maneuvers, and he \"writes» ceptual data on basic fighter mechanicsters and how to handle neutral-pass merges. across your TV screen enough to rival John (BFM) required to build tactical creativity has Most Falcon 3.0 head-to-head competitions Madden and his electronic chalkboard. Albeen hard to find. Although most manuals begin with a neutral pass. When the aircraft though one can simply read the textbook, the and after-market books for flight simulators have passed each other, one party calls \"fight's tape gives a lot of additional insight, especially discuss the basics of air combat, there has only on\" and the battle begins. Anyone who flies through animated illustrations. Intermixed been one thorough textbook widely availhead-to-head Falcon 3.0 or Red Baron will between topics, Colonel Handley appears able-Robert Shaw's Fighter Combat: Tactics find the chapter on head-on tactics particuand talks about some of the finest combat larly valuable. The last chapter of the book and Maneuvering. Although an excellent aircraft from WWI to the present day. discusses beyond visual range (BVR) encounbook, Fighter Combat presents only one inters and intercept tactics. After a set of quizAlthough AOK targets a wide audience with structor's viewpoint. If your combat style is its broad discussions of basic air combat, Pete akin to that of the rigid Soviet's then a single Art of the Kill Bonanni approaches the topics from a rechapproach is fine, but the independent Westnical position, using lots of jarern spirit will seek out other voices and pergon. Pere is lecturing to fighter spectives from which to draw their individual PRICE: pilots, not basket weavers, and CONTENTS: VHS video tape, book, style. Falcon 3.0 demo disk (3.5\") speaks accordingly. While the Spectrum HoloByte's Art of the Kill packPUBLISHER: Spectrum HoloByte use of jargon serves to hold the age provides just such an alternate perspec(800) 695-4263 attention of the experienced sim rivera view of combat tactics from the eyes pilot, novices may be overVs Billiard Eighed TITLE: Art of the Kill $29.95 Alameda, CA Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons COMPUTER 20 Edition Dungeons estragons' SOROTON RCALIN FORGONEN REALN DUNGEON HACK explorat HACK YOUR WAY THROUGH THE DUNGEONS OF YOUR NIGHTMARES! here's only one thing better than wielding . This single-character AD&D fantasy role-playing wits and weapons in a danger-filled AD&D\" adventure is easy to use. Generate your character dungeon adventure and that's wielding is from 6 races and 12 character classes (including them in limitless danger-filled dungeon multi-classed), select dungeon difficulty, and off adventures! Which is what you go! Auto-mapping charts your you get in DUNGEON Hack.\" explorations with printable maps. With the randomized Passwords let you re-use dungeon generator, favorite dungeons or let your custom set-ups and friends generate the same over 4 billion possidungeons in their game. ble dungeons, no Want more? Digitwo games need tized sound effects ever be alike! and 256-color VGA graphics make DUNGEON Hack an experience u'll IBM treasure over and over again! CD-ROM AVAILABLE To order, visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with visA/MC (U.S. & Canada only). & COMPATIBLES 1993 TSR, Inc. 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. IBM 256-COLOR VGA DISPLAYS. DUOWUNGEON BACK OUT Dungeon Gencration Durscon Depth Sciome Environment Fosd Consultin Monster culty HK Power Poison Strength D Death Real TEESVEE nown F600 N AV Tusionary Key Frequency Hic Trape Fit Frequency Hinta SNHNIKNI ZOnce NE HRK SELOTERSY SE TO MODERATE SEETHARD STEEL AR 2 vild PVC GEN ENCOUnser Unded RLTORE SETTINGS Counseen S<4. random) 16424524101 147201 CAME ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, DUNGEON HACK, FORGOTTEN REALMS, the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses the rool are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSA, Inc. Circle Reader Service #163 "


"FABLES & FIENDS THE HAND OF FATE IS A TRADEMARK OF WESTWOOD STUDIOS, INC. 1933 WESTWOOD STUDIOS, INC. VIRGIN IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF VIRGIN ENTERPRISES, LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Ts Fiat: 1 LOGIC GOODBYE Kiss CONVENTIONAL "


"N. T ow you see it. Now you don't. The land of Kyrandia is disappearing piece by piece and all the evidence points toward one perilous conclusion: a curse. Thus begins The Hand of Fate, second in the Fables Fiends\" series, where you are the offbeat, young mystic who must voyage to the center of the world to break the spell. Out of sync and out on foot, your aberrant journey reveals nothing is what it seems. Everything is what it isn't. And you can count your friends on one hand Literally. « Conspiring to push the twisted edge of cinemagraphic entertainment, Westwood Studios has designed more puzzles and gameplay in the first few chapters of The Hand of Fate than in all of The most The Legend of Kyrandin. advanced graphics on the market are first pencil tested, then painted on-screen to surrealistic perfection. Breakthrough Trulight technology illuminates each scene more cinematically for a fuller, fourth dimensional picture. The new Shadow Sunlight State of Mind System, along with superior intuitive interfacing, enables you and over 50 characters to change your mind, mood and mayhem based on preceding events. Don't just play with your mind. Change the way your mind plays. Grasp The Hand of Fate and kiss conventional logic goodbye. THE HAND OF FATE Westwood varer Circle Reader Service #158 "


"you're already a Falcon 3.0 player, consider it an extra scratch disk. ConstenlGlines Constant redus lines Tui degrees per second Tuniste Mach number Mach number Tuss Terhed for Tura role 16 degrees 15000 Is AOK For Me? AOK is more than a training tool for Falcon 3.0. AOK addresses air combat from a broad point of view using Falcon 3.0 footage to illustrate points. The tactics and concepts discussed are as valid for Aces Over the Pacific and other combat sims as they are for Falcon 3.0. Anyone interested in air combat will find AOK interesting. For those who have already read Fighter Combat: Tactics and Maneuvering and are wondering \"what more is there to learn?\" the answer is: a lot! Experienced users may already be familiar with the terms and maneuvers discussed, but Bonanni gives his personal insights and preferences as well as technical definitions. Bonanni discusses situations where he prefers to keep a fight horizontal and situations where he prefers to move into the vertical. There are no solid rules of air combat that will always lead to success. Some sim pilots will immediately adopt Bonanni's preferences as their own, others will tend toward different strategies, but all will find his discussions thought provoking. AOK and Fighter Combat complement each other nicely. 02 04 16 18 20 Bonanni describes maneuvers with his jets-on-a-stick. whelmed. It is not totally inaccesible for the novice; it will just require that they put in extra work, occasionally pausing the tape and reading the explanatory sidebar notes that appear on-screen. The video tape is well-made and has a polished look to it. Although the background set was not shoddily done, it does evoke a game show feel, and I almost expected Bob Barker to stroll onto the set and start bidding on an F-16. Overall, though, the tape is a quality production. The 3.5\" floppy included with the package contains only the Falcon 3.0 demo that was originally released in May of 1991. The only discernible difference was the title screen. If 06 08 10 12 14 Moch number In summary, AOK is a very interesting, entertaining and informative package applicable to all flight simulators and air combat enthusiasts out there. Users who are not well versed in the jargon and technical aspects of ACM may find AOK a little intimidating at first, but by replaying the tape and referring to the textbook (which includes a nice glossary), less experienced users should have little trouble following along. CGW KAYBOARD COMMANDER PREMIUM TEMPLATES FALCON & MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES\" ONLY  quacions PER SET!  Exciting new utilities for *Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger \"and the new **MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0\"!! For one low price you get all six: FALCON COMMANDER OR + FALCCALC/MIGCALC 3.5: Superb campaign intelligence gathering tool. MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed info, on every site, ground forces & all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption, Waypoint liming, Strategic/Tactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet' FalcCale even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat!! ONLY $24.95!! F3/MIG REQUISITION 1.5: Puts you in command of Falcon 3.0 squacions. Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status. Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster hy rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! IMPORTANTI: FCU is compatible with Falcon3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger only. **MCU is compatible with Falcon 3.02 and MiG-29: D.A.F. 13 MAPPER 6.0: The famous Red Flag, Instant Action and HUD enstomizing utility! Change letult theaters for Red Flagnl Instant Action Customize and declutter Keyboard Commander Corps keyboard templates end \"Keyboard Confusion and let you concentrate on winning Our high quality, full-color templates turniny AT101 keyboard into a realistic control HUI), Set default view scale. Auto-generates Real Flag missions in any theater New panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve! graphical map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and more! + SHOWT3 2.1: Allows viewing of screenshots from F3's own secret screen .. . Capture program!! New interface makes viewing a stap. New conversion suresives screen Template ADDRES S shots to popular GIF OPCX formats. Includes instructions for F3's hidden captures commands! . $12.95. Special: Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion KCCMENU 1.1: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use cfault menu and increase one's gaming pleasure. -CGW or customize to user's preferences, Sub-menus can be created and linked to add other sims TIITETTIIN and games. Completely unloadis itself from memory while running a menu selection! Falcon 3.0 3.01 MIG-29 Secret Weapons Luftwarte Strike Commander MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut wrenching.ction packel Recl Hag Tornado ATP missions. Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Strike Eagle 111 Jetfighter I & II say \"Mission Accomplisheel' to these volunteer only thrillers! X-Wing B-17 Flying Fortress Gunship 20001&I CY Air Combat Mon-Sat Comanche: Mar. Overkill F117A Stealth DICOVER 8:30-6:30 EST To Order Call: VISA Aces of the Pacific Megalortress CHECK SIX!! BEENUSENE w  1. $12.95, Any 2$21.50 Any 3$30.00. Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 All other inquiries to: keyboard Commander Corp. 4819 SW 148 Ave. 402. Dasie, IL 1310 100262 616 Hak M i lites. * High-Quality. 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * net * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard * Circle Reader Service #80 Computer Gaming World Page 166 "


"M THE Hlavica-Barbera ANIMATION WORKSHOP At last! An animation package that is fun and simple to use. Now everyone can make their own cartoons. I d The Hanna-Barbera Animation Workshop brings the power of animation to your computer in a form that is user friendly. Using a simple yet powerful Icon Animation, System (IAS), anyone can quickly produce impressive animations just like the professionals. o Complete with Hanna-Barbera animations (The Flintstones, Scooby Doo, Yogi Bear & The Jetsons), and clip-art for you to include in your own artwork. Video input capability that allows you to import hand drawn animations and still backgrounds by using a camcorder or video camera and a digitizer. * Contains features that the professional animator couldn't do without such as onion-skinning for careful positioning of frames and an adjustable exposure sheet so that you can get the timing just right! HOTEL ! BOX ISSE  1993 Hanna-Barbera Productions Inc. Licensed by Copyright Promotions Ltd. * Requires camera and Rombo digitizer (not included). Empire Software, 4 Professional Drive, Suite 123. Jaithersburg, MD. 20 879. Voice (301) 216 9706. Fax (301) 216 0117 Empire Software is a registered trademark of Entertainment International (UK) Ltd. empire SOFT WARE Circle Reader Service #59 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD 41 Came, I Played, I Conquered» Empire Deluxe Tournament: A Fight to the Finish by Alan Emrich The results are in. From a field of 64 clever armchair generals who tried to outfox each other on an electronic field of honor, one has emerged the victor. We are pleased to announce that Henry W. Gale of Westwood, MA has won the New World Computing/CGW Empire Deluxe Tournament. Henry, the champion of America's castern region, defeated the pride of the West, Mark R. Conder of Littleton, CO, in a best of five match. The fruits of victory for Henry include a trip to Los Angeles to collect his prize. His sun-drenched Southern California vacation will include visits to Disneyland and Universal Studios, and tours of their neighboring tourist Meccas: the offices of New World Computing and Computer Gaming World. For Mark, the consolation prize, a set of New World Computing games, will keep him busy for a long time to come. Making The Rounds So how did this best of five game series evolve? How do the masters play and what might you learn from them? Read on. Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics The Empire Deluxe Tournament Scorecard WARGAMING WORLD Game 1 Henry Mark Comp Mark Red Green Blue Winner Best 3 of 5 Games Game 2 Game 3 Mark Comp Mark Comp Henry Mark Henry Table 1 Henry Game 4 Henry Comp Mark Henry Game 5 Mark Comp Henry Henry In this issue ... Robert Hayes Shows How to be the Master of Orion ....... 172 Master of Orion Game Aids by Alan Emrich & Tom Hughes .............. 183 Redefining Ruthless: A Merchant Prince Sneak Preview by Alan Emrich. 190 Anthology of Post WWII Wargames by M. Evan Brooks ..... 194 Four Games To The Finals In their first game, Mark had amazingly good fortune and rolled over Henry, who had never played Red before, but who accepted the humiliating defeat with grace. But Henry did gain something from his loss: the knowledge thar Mark was a careful, conservative player. This would serve Henry later. In game two, Mark's capital fell briefly on turn 28 and he lost a vital transport on turn 35, but he managed to sneak into Henry's capital on turn 27. The early game was wild as both sides thrust against and defended the three capitals with vigor. Mark then launched a long flank march with a second transport that Henry knew nothing about. Coming in through Dawg Bottom and Patch, Mark built up his economy enough to wrap up the game by turn 76, defeating Henry's wild blitzkrieg strategy with his conservative play. Henry Gale The score was Mark 2, Henry 0. In the third game, Mark felt that he could be a bit more daring and tried a heavy naval strategy, building cruisers and battleships. Opting for no economic handicaps and a triple combat handicap, Mark built his ships, but Henry's air force kept them monitored and stayed well clear of the trouble they would cause him. Building up his land forces, Henry swept across the main island and on to victory as his combat edge was thrust into the very bowels of Mark's empire. Mark's style was no match for Henry's substance, who remained clinging to life at two games to one. Game four found Mark stunned by his defeat and still a bit shaken. Henry had tasted blood and now knew that Mark was mortal. Both sides had revenge on their minds, and this game took an epic 5 1/2 hours before Henry emerged triumphant. Mark went for the quick strike, but Henry bogged down the attacks against his capital and forced a long game. Although Mark was quick to adopt a long-term strategy, the loss of his transports forced another desperate What's in a Game? The Blue & The Gray Review by M. Evan Brooks ....... 214 A Terrible Swfte Sword? The Gettysburg Game in Review by Terry Lee Coleman .. 220 Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"TM COMANCHE TM COMANCHE MAXIMUM OVERKILL The Ultimate Upgrade For the Ultimate Game Go Over the Edge with 40 New Missions, Haze, Water Reflections, Weather Effects, Troop Combat, Gun Boats & More! Winner of 12 Major Awards including: BEST SIMULATION Video Games & Computer Entertainment ACTION GAME OF THE YEAR PC Games Plus BEST GRAPHICS OF THE YEAR Computer Game Review Over the Edge 40 new missions with breathtaking graphic enhancements Maximum Comanche! Comanche Maximum Overkill now includes Mission Disk #1 at no additional cost! Look for Mission Disk #1 with 30 challenging Comanche missions All Comanche Products Also Available On a Single CD-ROM! NOVA LOGIC MESURE Actual screen images. Circle Reader Service #103 "


"10 20 M + + NOS HOLOW N 40 10 50 thrust at Henry's capital. When it failed, it reduced to fighting a defensive battle in hopes sequently, my cleverly arranged 'unified comwas only a matter of time before Henry could that Henry would make a mistake and leave mand attack with the Green forces did not bring his numbers to bear. The count was me an opening. Indeed, I was even aided by capture Mark's capital. However, this and now tied at 2-2. The final game would decide some good luck as my bombers had continual many subsequent computer player attacks the entire match and tournament. success against his armor, but alas... Henry there managed to keep Mark's capital garristubbornly refused to make a mistake and, son depleted, and his forces there distracted Game 5 when he effortlessly crushed my last gasp him from what would otherwise have been Their Finest (14!) Hours invasion of Sipe's Site by sinking my transtheir mission of expansion. This Toro! Toro! Henry/Blue vs. Mark/Red ports (yet again) with his air force, I knew it cape-waving technique of mine also kept the The final battle was an epic, 14-hour strugwas over. I washed, starched and ironed the computer so focused on his war with Mark gle. Here is an account of this fight in the white flag. I had fought the good fight, and that it didn't expand into the islands very player's words: wanted everything done properly for my formuch. Mark: \"In the final game, we must have mal surrender.\" Game Five City Counts both been thinking alike at the outset, each The Winner Recalls of us trying to avoid an early decisive encounGame Mark Henry ter and, instead, opring to build up our forces Henry: \"In this, the final and deciding Turn (Red) Blue by safely capturing neutral cities. This mutual game, we both became very cautious and caution lead up to what I think may have been played very defensive strategies by guarding one of the deciding events of the game. our capitals carefully and expanding into safe 15 «Henry and I had expanded almost evenly areas. I was able to use one of my favorite up to around turn 50. About then I realized strategies, which I call Toro! Toro! The trick 25 that the Green computer player had not manhere is to goad the computer player into aged to take any of the cities in the Southeast recklessly charging into the forces you wave 31 region of the main continent (Essen, Sunkisin front of it. sed, Stealth, etc.). I further deduced that \"In this game, my Toro! Toro! plan entailed 12 Henry would be headed for them promptly, building an airbase southeast of Nottingham, Table 2 so my plan became to beat him there. From there, I had my fighters continually \"I began Operation Southeast by taking buzz the computer player's units marching \"Our expansion into neutral cities was very Eden Island from the Green player, figuring across toward the vulnerable city Plains. even, as is shown in Table 2. Berween turn 50 that if I could take Tobruk and ship some Once the computer player had captured and 60, however, I was able to capture the last fighters in, I could stop Henry's expansion Plains, I sent infantry units in close enough three large neutral cities of Essen, Bonaparte, into this region and take the remaining cities to be within Plains two-square sighting and Stealth. This gave me a total of 369% there at my leisure. I attacked Tobruk hastily range. Like waving a cape in front of a bull, production, plus a city with a fighter producwith only one infantry and one armor unit. this seems to cause the computer to send lots tion specialty, which I, naturally, crave. Of This attack failed and, on the next turn, sure of units into the area—that is, the area where course, not having the computer in the vicinity of these cities near its own capital made enough a Green transport hiding in Tobruk Mark's capital was located! came out and sunk my transport. Argh! capturing these last bastions all the easier. «Because of my hasty advance, I had no «The major combat during this stage of the backup forces. During the next ten to twenty war was a huge air campaign fought on a front turns, I noticed Henry had gone in and taken that encircled the entire map. Mark and I had the entire Southeast region, just as I thought both devoted almost half of our production he would. Damn! I still had sizable forces, to air units and built extensive networks of air however, and was able to exact my revenge on bases along the coasts closest to the enemy. the computer player by taking his capital on Both of us were trying to sink the other's turn 85. transports that were reinforcing the continent \"Meanwhile, Henry was busy landing or trying to capture the remaining island troops en masse on both the east and west cities. Huge losses were suffered by turn 100, coasts of the main continent, which lead up and over 60 air units had been destroyed in to an interesting sequence of events. On turn air-to-air combat and bombing airfields. We 99, Henry had four units heading towards the \"When the computer player's Green units both knew, rightly, that if the other player Green capital and had his own capital searrived at Plains, they seemed strongly at could gain control of the skies, the game curely ringed with Armor. I had one armor tracted to that famous nearby 150% city would be lost. unit which had managed to slip down the known as the Red Capital. With a quiet \"Mark captured the last neutral island city, river toward his capital. Henry atracked it chortle, I cautiously had my units follow right No Gamers Atoll, on turn 86. However, this with two infantry units and both of them behind the Green invaders that were now cost him yet another transport since I was failed completely in their anti-tank roles. And only interested in Red capital. In fact, when again paying close attention to neutral cities then, for some reason, he didn't attack me I had inadvertently left some units adjacent by constantly checking their production. with his armor. Yes, I could have won if I to the Green forces, they didn't even bother Both Mark and I were reluctant to move our would have been able to blow through a to attack me, so focused were they on the Red large armor away from our capitals (where single armored defender and take the capital. capital. they could counterattack any threat), so we «However, it was not to be. My luck «Mark, for his part, was wisely defending both began chewing up the computer's cities crapped out on me, and after that point I was his Capital with a strong armored force. Conwith our other land forces. Empire Delise tar Windows 116 Fimer , Ord: None Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"DON'T WASTE YOUR SOUND CARD ON INFERIOR SPEAKERS. The Powered Partner 622 \"The computer player lost Eden to Mark losses in the aerial battle of attrition being and Tobruk to me around turn 65. Mark took waged, I turned back two of Mark's amphibiPiece-of-the-Rock on turn 80 and the Green ous invasion forces trying the take Sipe's Site capital itself on 86. Between turns 80 and 100, with heavy losses to my air force and no losses in what may have been (along with the air war) to Mark's transports. Crippled, Mark's transthe deciding attacks, I recaptured Rakowsky ports limped back to their embarkation ports. and Cape Trafalger and took the computer's I was sure that Russell would be proud of my cities of Rangerton and Turk. Next, the Green defense of his namesake. capital and the Eagle's Nest were brought \"Finally, on about rurn 145, I accumulated under my control by committing infantry rewhat I was sure was a large enough horde to serves that had been stationed around my finish this war. I whipped them into a frenzy capital, plus units brought in from Essen and by waving my Empire Deluxe hat in the air Bonapart. With Plains and Riverton later diand sent my swarms of infantry to clear a way vided berween Mark's forces and my local for the armor that would follow them. In the capital defense units, the computer player was process, I captured Skulker on turn 147, but left with only Modemville and East Point. Mark's armor and air units were harvesting «Having thus taken the computer player out my infantry like wheat before the gates of his of the game, this left me facing only Mark on a capital. As my infantry horde kept shrinking, global front with me having 2452% total proI started to wonder if I would lose them all. duction, but with depleted forces, to Mark's Would Mark be able to send an armored 1931% total production and fresh hordes on strike against me with his air force clearing the around turn 110. I was confident that with my way to both the Green and Blue capitals: production advantage, I could send a force up Finally, on turn 152, the last of Mark's deto capture Mark's capital fairly quickly. fenders nobly died while trying to clear the \"Lightning strikes at Mark's capital with squares adjacent to his capital. On my third armor columns were quickly made into attack directly on the capital city itself, it fell. smoking wrecks by Mark's bombers. ComExhausted from our 14 hour ordeal, I claimed bined infantry/armor attacks were crushed by the victory. these same bombers attacking my armor while Mark's armor reserves rolled over my Final Observations attacking infantry. Clearly, these skillfully co Mark: \"In conclusion, I'd like to say that ordinated attacks were not working out in the Henry played a great match. His dramatic teeth of Mark's prepared defense. This left me comeback from being two games down with no alternative but to prepare for the ever should give him a well-earned place in compopular human wave attack puter gaming history. In my humble opinion, «This proved much more difficult than the main difference in this game were the anticipated, and the production drop caused transport losses. I was amazed at how Henry by having too many units on the board forced was able to expand so quickly without ever, me to take many cities off-line. At the same to my knowledge, exposing his transports to time, Mark changed almost all his cities, exthe normal range of my air. As it says in Alan cept Skulker and his capital, to air force proEmrich's Empire Deluxe book, ...sinking enduction. He then used these air units to tryemy transports and protecting your own is a and clear a path for his transports to capture crucial key to victory. Anyway, I wish to the two or three cities he would need to pull thank Henry for an enjoyable match and, even with me in production and bring things especially, his easy-going style (which I think to a firm stalemate. He also sent his planes on is real important in this kind of competition). suicide flights to destroy my transports that Also thanks to Alan, CGW, New World were convoying my foreign hordes of infantry Computing and all the other contestants. I units to the main continent. Although Mark was glad to be a part of the tournament.\" achieved a couple of partial kills on my transporrs, he also had fighters run out of fuel next The Win/Loss Record to my transport twice. Unscathed when it of the Final Four counted, I pressed on to build up an unstop Name Win Loss pable horde that would take Mark's capital Henry Gale and win the game. Mark Conder «The massive air war for control of the sea Ray Matthews lanes had, at one point, reduced me to a mere four air units of my own before new aircraft Mike Kohn production from five additional cities kicked Table 3 in and prevented Mark from sweeping me Congratulations to both of our Empire Defrom the skies. Our combined air force losses luxe Tournament finalists. It's been a great exceeded 130 planes. To compound my year following your exploits. CGW Powered Partners are the perfect complement to your multimedia computer system. They are the only speakers to be named a 1992 Windows Winner by Windows magazine. They were also nominated for a Readers' Choice award by Multimedia Magazine. But the best reason to use Powered Partners is the sound. Listen to the experts: \"They (Powered Partner 622) set the standard for all the other speakers\" (David Ranada-\"Windows\" recommended) and \"If you want the best, look no further... the (Powered Partner) 570s are the Rolls Royce of sound\" (Rich Heimlich). With such high praise, why buy anything else. AZINE (W 1993 MEND Powered Partner 622 Features Sophisticated 3-piece system with separate powered sub-woofer  Fully shielded, even the sub-woofer  Perfect for all computer and video applications  Electronic crossover and 3 power amplifiers 11 For a dealer near you, call 1-800-969-AR4U. In Canada, call Precor at 1-800-268-1172. o Superior Sound Simplified  1993 Acoustic Research, a division of Iji Circle Reader Service #33 January, 1994 Page 171 "


"STRATEGY STRATEGY The Emperor's Guide To The Galaxy Tips, Tables, Tactics For Master of Orion by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. DESIP DESIGN Armar Engine TITATION ICLE HIT Paints A PER Computer HARI ATTRCE LEEL 2 lihield CLASS Sarbs. MISSILE DEF COUNT SMB weapone Gespon 5 HCA LASER Damage and nater SFEED Desc 1 LASER SPRCOI BATTLE SCAOSER DISANS EN SID STATS Special 2 Special SWIR SIEEE SHIP ICONS GAME ROGER VISOYAL SPACE FU WAKABLEACE TOULD aster of Orion (MOO for short), be able to interact diplomatically with your Micro Prose Software's newest new neighbor. TV strategy game, is a vastly complex As soon as contact is made, check the MAP simulation of the dynamics of an interstellar function on the control panel. In addition to empire. Playing against one to five compuryour own colony worlds, you will now see the erized opponents, your chosen race must locations (though not the names, populaachieve mastery of the known galaxy by rions, etc.) of your new neighbor's planets. strength, guile, and technological supremacy. Check the MAP screen frequently as the There is no room for second place in the game progresses; you will be able to observe MOO cosmology, and failure is rewarded your rivals' progress directly in this fashion, with xenocide and exile. watching as they expand and spread their Generally speaking, your empire will have empires. several conflicting goals to pursue at any one time. You will wish to expand the frontiers of your empire, whether through unoccupied space or enemy-held territory; you will need to advance technologically to maintain at least parity with your neighbors; you will need to constantly increase the total production levels of your empire in order to avoid being overwhelmed by an enemy's numerical superiority; and you will need to avoid the problem of someone else winning the game Each race begins the game more or less before you have a chance to neutral towards one another; there are some The latter problem is often one of the most exceptions, but generally you will have to w ling in the game as the diplomatic func appease or irritate a new neighbor to get a tions of MOOare both highly important and strong diplomatic leaning one way or the highly opaque to the player; that is, it is other. In the beginning of the game, appeasedifficult to assess any but the most obvious ment is generally the best strategy; you are It is generally the best strategy; you are successes and failures in the diplomatic arena. probably not ready for a war, and getting into Thus, we'll begin with a discussion of the one will simply drain resources better didiplomatic model used in MOO and how to rected towards technology and planet develexploit it. opment. Your first act with a new neighbor should Diplomats Have Been Recalled be to propose a trade agreement. Offer the smallest agreement allowed on the treaty Each race maintains a numerical index of menu. The reason for this lies in the nature how it feels towards every other race. Since of the trading system. Each new trade treaty from two to six races may be involved in the starts out paying a return of -30%, reflecting game, it quickly becomes difficult to unravel the cost of setting up trade routes, estabthe twine of relationships between races. You lishing customs operations, etc. As time prowill achieve contact with alien races whenever gresses, the trade treaty will increase in value, one of your colony worlds is within starship until after 40 years it will be paying a return movement range of one of their colony of 100% (i.e., a trade treaty of 25 BC will pay worlds. If your closest pair of worlds is four you 25 BC per year in pure profit). New trade parsecs distant, you will not achieve diplotreaties with the same party always start with matic contact with that race until one of your a rare of return that is averaged between the races reaches starship ranges of four on the current rate and the -30% base rate. Thus, by technological sequence. When diplomatic getting a very small trade treaty up to 100%, contact is made, the alien race will dispatch you will lose very little money during those an ambassador to your worlds, and you will first few crucial years, but when you renegociate the treaty (probably in the range of thousands of BCs per year) you will begin making a large profit. In general, always wait until your existing treaty is paying at 100% before upgrading. When diplomatic relations with a neighbor are good, it is possible to propose non-aggression pacts and even alliances. While it may seem that an alliance is a good idea (after all, you can base at an ally's worlds and explore them all withour retribution), be warned of the dangers involved. A computer ally fond of getting into wars will always expect you to join them; unfortunately, their new enemy may be your close friend, and you will be in the position of having to horribly offend one of your two allies and getting involved in a war you don't want. Thus, take General Washington's maxim to heart and beware of entangling alliances with foreign powers. Non-aggression pacts are another matter. Unless you have plans of imminent conquest against a neighbor, take any non-aggressio pact you can get. The pacts will work to boost your popularity with the other player, and can forestall wars berween even natural rivals for a long time. Samarime forrs (or perhaps directly because of them, if forrs (or nech you are a sneaky Machiavellian player) you will end up in a war. How to handle this eventuality will be covered in other sections of this article; here we will discuss how to end a war once it has begun. Generally when a war starts, your new enemy withdraws his or her ambassador and you are left with no means to communicate with them; thus you are going to have to fight for at least a few turns. However, the ambassador will return after a few years, and you can attempt to patch things up. The better you have been doing in the war (with success defined by killing population, destroying ships, capturing colony worlds, and avoiding those things happening to your own empire), the more likely your erstwhile enemy is to accept the olive branch. If he is doing well, it may be necessary to bribe him copiously with technology and money in order to bring him to the peace table; consider this carefully, as giving a computer opponent the wrong piece of vital technology can drasPage 172 Computer Gaming World "


"tically change the balance of power. Once peace does break out, rejoice: you have a guaranteed grace period during which this computer player CANNOT attack you (unless you go and attack him first, of course). This is a lifesaver in many critical early-game situations where a few turns is all that you need to get and keep the upper hand. The exact duration of this \"Pax MOO» is random, but will always be from 8 to 16 turns. Note that an attack on the computer player during the grace period will have grave diplomatic consequences; even though you don't know when the grace period expires, to attack during it is considered the height of infamous and evil behavior. Due to the inertia factor, you may have ships already en route to a computer player's worlds when peace is declared. You may want to consider scrapping the ship class(es) of the offending armada in order to forestall this diplomatic fiasco. (Alternately, simply refrain from going about peace mongering when you have invasion fleets en route). The computer player's fleets will automatically \"bounce» out of your systems during the grace period; it may look like an enormous armada is en route to your home world during the grace period, but rest assured they will return without firing a shot. By and large, the most effective tool you have for influencing the computer player's reaction to you is tribute. Everybody loves to be sucked up to, and the computer emperors of MOO are no exception. Offering financial tribute will improve your relations somewhat, but unless you are extremely wealthy you will have a hard time keeping someone friendly with money alone. Technology transfers are the cost-effective method of enhancing your relations with another race. Unfortunately, giving other races technology can put them on a fast track to success, allowing them to catch up to you or even surpass you in the here is, however, an escape from this problem. The computer player does not care what rechnology you give it as tribute: it is equally happy with Improved Terraforming +10 or Death Ray technology. By using the list of technology owned by the computer player, you can grant him technologies which he has already exceeded (i.e., Terraforming +20 if he has +30 already). This will make him just as happy as if you had given him something useful, and won't assist his material position at all. Spies are useful tools in any empire's bag of tricks; yours should always be busy. It is exceptionally difficult to infiltrare spies into a race with a higher computer technology than your own, so if spying is a major part of your empire's activities, then it is crucial to maintain a strong computer technology lead over your victims. A strong computer technology raform the world first once the appropriate also greatly increases your internal security technology is reached) rather than build the level and can foil enemy spies without your relatively paltry number of factories the world having to spend vital resources on such munwill be able to support at first. danc tasks. Playing one computer player against anSeeking Out New Worlds other is an excellent method of ensuring a In the beginning of the game, it is highly peaceful relationship with both. Be careful important to get ships to every star within not to ally with either power, as you will be your reach. One highly viable strategy is to dragged into their internecinc conflict and leave scour ships orbiting their newly-discovwill have a hard time escaping from the trap. ered worlds; this ensures that computer exOne advantage of attacking a computer plorers will not get data on those worlds until player with a lot of enemies is that your they send an armed force to chase your fleets campaigns against that player will result in away, as the computer player always retreats diplomatic friendliness from their enemies; if its ships are not armed, regardless of sometimes they will even offer you cash or whether your \"garrison\" ships are armed or technology to carry out the war you had been not. Scouts are exceedingly inexpensive, and planning on anyway! a \"scout blanker\" to cover every reachable world can be achieved very early in the game. We're In The Money This maximizes your chances for finding The development of your colony planets is those all-important Artifact worlds, with the one of the most important aspects of MOO; concomitant chance of finding free high-level your production level factors into every other technology; such carly world discoveries can aspect of the game. At the same time, an make an unviable position suddenly almost over-investment in your production can lead overwhelmingly strong. An empire of mine to falling behind in the technology race, with once found Nuclear Engines and Range 5 disastrous results. Although your empire may technology on turns 2 and 3 of the game. be able to build far more ships than your Needless to say, my colonizing efforts were cnemy, his ships will be so far superior to your somewhat more successful than those of my own that your navy will be helpless. neighbors, and I was able to enter the middle game with a commanding lead in planets and production. In later stages of the game, particularly with the development of the Advanced Space Scanner, scouting becomes far less important. The scanner will provide you with data on all stars within 9 parsecs of your colony planets, which is more than enough information to plan your military campaigns or next expansion. When first starting out, industrial production tends to take second place to the need for To War, To War! building colony ships, scouts and the technolThe combat system of MOO is highly comogy to allow your ships to penetrare further plex, with literally thousands of different into the galaxy than the inadequate three weapons and equipment combinations possiparsec range you begin with. Do not elimible. Oftentimes you will find yourself connate industrial production entirely, however; structing starships specifically designed to always try to build at least one or two factories fight the fleet of one particular computer per turn. Once your industry level reaches the enemy. This is a valid tactic, but be careful MAX level (where you can still build factories not to overproduce such specialized ships, lest but don't have the population to man them), your other enemies attack and find your starfleet to be incapable of fighting them effeccut back somewhat and build only enough tively. Some special technology is highly factories to ensure that each turn's population worthwhile: Black Hole Generators, Repulgrowth has enough additional capacity to sor Beams and High Range Focii in particular work with that no production value is lost to are well worth placing on any starship capable inefficiency of using them. Other technology, such as New colonies ordinarily should be allowed Warp Dissipators and Ion Stream Projectors, to develop industry at the maximum rate have marginal uses, but are not really cost-efuntil the MAX level is reached. Sometimes, fective in the long run. however, on rich worlds with small populaAs far as the regular weapons load for a tion bases, it will be more productive to terfighting starship is concerned, Table 1 proSCOUT CONCESSION TURKILVER CISEBAR WITH FIGHTER JOUERELLO TUESE DESTROYER JORDEELTESSILEN ALLE SUS HOLS THIS RESEPI GORDER TODO S DELIKATTUTTIR 13 HELLO KITUO COLOSHIRTSPENELLO OLARACITET HISTLERINAS GUNGOAT TUTO CAST CA MA January 1994 Page 173 "


"THE RED CRYSTAL \"The Seven Secrets of Life\" OOP. Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. { Seek out the seven secrets of life . . . . Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or with a partner. Simply, one fine adventure and role playing endeavor. MODEM PLAY 1 OR 2 PLAYERS WORKING TOGETHER OR IN HEAD TO HEAD COMPETITION BREATHTAKING GRAPHICS FASCINATING ECONOMIC SYSTEM LARGE VARIETY OF MONSTER TYPES OVER 50 DUNGEON LEVELS AUTO-MAPPING FEATURE The \"Red Crystal: Seven Secrets of Life\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"HEIRS TO THE THRONE Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. The King is dead. His brother is returning from the crusades. The barons are vying for power. It is your job to challenge the rogue barons and bring the kingdom together. The others have made their stand. Now you must lead your troops to victory over mountains, swamps, deserts, and through forests. You have the potential ... it's up to you and you alone. SUPERB GRAPHICS UP TO 4 PLAYERS SIMPLE AND INTUITIVE INTERFACE GREAT COMPUTER OPPONENT 30 DIFFERENT OPTIONS FOR EACH GAME (You control it all) UNLIMITED VARIETY OF LAND TO CONQUER MANY TERRAIN TYPES (Effecting Production and Combat) HALL OF FAME Circle Reader Service #17 The \"Heirs to the Throne\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"MERCHANT BRINCE OP Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. the high seas, and crush the competition in Masters of the World EXPLORE THE WORLD!! Your family can rule the high seas, and crush the competition in this all out, global conquest game. You embark from your center of power, Venice, to seek your fortune. Find the hidden treasures in far off lands and establish trade routes. But, this is only the beginning. Your popularity is at stake as you Involve yourself with the church and state. The others in power say you can't do it. ... Do you have the strength?? Delve into the political power struggle, entrench yourself in the ruling establishment. of the church, and trade in exotic commerce to become the master of the world...... Historical and Random World Maps (Billions) Four Players Modem Play Complete Scoring History Strong Artificial Intelligence . Both Land and Naval Trade Routes  Build Your Own Road SystemWorldwide! Manipulate the Local Politicians . Inspire the Church and People The \"Merchant Prince\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: (908) 788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserve. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #118 "


"UCKYTTTT CASINO 03.12 Welcome UUR CITY LIMITS oop. Quanturn Quality Productions, Inc. It is vacation time... you can sit at home watching the grass grow or enter our world ... LUCKY'S CASINO ADVENTURE. This could just be your lucky break. Everyone can \"win\", but only the best can hold out for the full three weeks. Travel between the many casinos, have a bite to eat and rest in the hotels. Nothing has been left out in this state of the art experience of a lifetime. Games Included: 5 Different Pokers, 8 Different Slots (all completely different), Palgow, Bingo, Keno, Baccarat, 3 Different Video Pokers, Money Wheel, Blackjack, Casino, Craps, Red Dog, Roulette, Caribbean Stud (ALL REAL CASINO QUALITY) Supports All Major Sound Cards 256 Spectacular Colors Tournament Play Scoring History  640 x 400 VESA VBE 1.2 Compatible Three Week Adventures to experience, The \"Lucky's Casino Adventure\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circla Radar Souico #110 "


"Frequently Asked Questions From New MOO Players G OCEAN ARTIFACTS LICS. MEATAN SIMUS SCOUT vides useful information regarding the relaflexible, while a specialized feet gives more tive strengths of the various weapon systems bang for the buck, while making the timing that you can build. Where the average damof fleet movements much more problematic. age vs. a given shield class is negative, this It is a decision best left to the playing style of means that usually the weapon will do no the individual emperor. The computer playdamage. If the maximum damage vs. a shield ers tend towards building special-purpose class is also negative, then that weapon can ships, but not overwhelmingly so. NEVER damage a ship equipped with the Note that the computer players are not appropriate screen technology; such weapons entirely dim: if you begin building fleets of specialized ships designed to defeat their current designs, they will alter those designs and surprise you, often with unpleasant results. Vary your own designs from time to time, especially as technological advances allow you to enhance ships' capabilities. Ground combat is an interesting phenomena in MOO; while it costs you population in casualties, you tend to capture large numbers Gume Design Fleet mapil Racesi Planet Tech Haut und of intact enemy factories and can even steal are simply a waste of BCs if your enemy has technology from the conquered world's forachieved (and is using) that level of shield mer owner. It is possible to mathematically tech. Some weapons, notably the Megabolt predict the winner of a ground battle involvCannon, have special \"to-hit\" modifiers that ing forces of equal size. The side with the make them more attractive than the table larger technological advantage ranging from would suggest. It is almost impossible to in+10% to +120%) has a chance of winning a clude all the different mechanisms by which ground combat (with equal numbers) equal weapons function in MOO, and Table 1 to the formula—0.5 + b (b-squared/2)— should be taken as a general guideline, not as where \"b\" is the net technological bonus of gospel truth. The average damage per cost the higher-tech side expressed decimally (i.e., and size columns assume that the weapon is a net +40 bonus means b = 0.4). Thus, the side with a tech advantage of 10% in a given not being entirely or mostly obviated by enfight would have a chance of 0.5 + 0.1 (0.1 emy shielding. x 0.1 2), or 0.595, i.e. at 59.5% chance of Table 2 demonstrates how rapidly weapon winning. It is possible to predict the winner technology miniaturizes. While a weapon at in a contest of unequal size, but the equation Tech 20 may be greatly superior to its Tech is extremely unwieldy and would require far 10 counterpart, the ability to carry twice as more work than the result would warrant; many Tech 10 weapons may make the older after a few games it becomes clear roughly guns worthwhile, especially when fighting how many troops you need to win a given opponents who have a significant technologibattle. cal disadvantage. The proper fleet design and composition Tech Warriors changes drastically as the game goes on and How to direct your technical efforts is posas your war aims change. Generally, at the sibly the most difficult single question to beginning of the game you are more conaddress for the budding MOO conqueror. An cerned with defending your worlds against overemphasis in any one field can yield reenemy attack than you are with carrying the markable dividends, but it can leave your war to the enemy; emphasize small fighters empire vulnerable to being overtaken in other with high computer levels and good maneu areas. In general, I have found a relatively verability. Once you go on the offensive, balanced approach, taking into account the ground attack becomes much more impormuch more imporresearch strengths and weaknesses of the varitant, and bombs begin to have a place in your ous races, ro be the best way of going about fleet arsenal. There are two schools of thought things. This keeps your technology from regarding the use of bombers. Some people growing absurd (i.e., laser-equipped Warp 10 prefer to build fleets of general purpose ships dreadnoughts with Mark XV force fields) and capable of fighting against both enemy ships means that you are generally in the same and missile bases, while others build specialballpark as the computer players, assuming role ships and deploy them together. I have similar investment levels. At times, however, experimented with both techniques and have an all-out research effort in one field for a found that neither method is greatly superior short period of time can boost your fortunes, to the other. General-purpose ships are some especially if you are facing a crushing deficit what less efficient but are significantly more in one important area. The bonuses received ike its spiritual father, Civilization, Master of Orion is a complex game U with many features and play subtleties. As a result of this richness, the new player can be overwhelmed and overlook some of the most basic game options. The following is a quick run-down of the most common oversights and confusing elements that confront new MOO players. Using these as a launch pad, you will be well on your way to exploring the deeper strategic issues discussed in this guide. How do I send my ships to another planet? Select one of your ship icons in orbit around a planet. The right panel will display which ships are in orbit around that world. Use the arrow buttons by each ship type to change the number of ships you will send. Choose a destination planet for your fleet, then select the ACCEPT button. See page 16 of the manual for more information. How do I create a new colony? Send a colony ship there (i.e. a ship equipped with a special colony base device). If the planet is habitable (see pages 17-18 of the manual), you will automatically be asked if you want to land and establish a colony there. Your colony ship is disassembled and its parts used to establish the colony. Once you have set up your colony base, you should immediately transport more colonists to that planet to help it grow more quickly. How do I TRANSport my colonists to another planet? Select the planet you wish to transport your people FROM. Select the TRANS button from the panel on the right, then select the planet you wish to send your people to. After you have chosen the destination planet, you can use the slider bar on the right panel to decide how many people you want to send, up to half the population of your source planet. Note that you cannot send people to a planet that has not yet established a colony base, and you cannot transport to a planet you have not yet explored. If you are sending transports to an enemy colony, use the same procedure. The people you send to an enemy world are automatically armed with the latest technology for ground combat. Note that enPage 178 Computer Gaming World "


"MEIL CAB de wit bloodthirsty glafo survive, you'll have an beat the devil Welcome to the cab ride from Hell. This cabby wants more than your money-he wants your soul! All he has to do is get you to the worst hellholes in history and see you try to survive. Sound fun? This is Hell Cab, an interactive epic adventure in the devil's time machine. Get ready to face ravenous dinosaurs, fight blood-thirsty gladiators and duck for cover in the WWI trenches of Verdun. To survive, you'll have to overcome countless dangers and resist the irresistible. Think you can beat the devil? Climb in! Dazzling animation, music and bone-raffling sound effects Multiple environments, complex strategies Reallife, first-person interaction Visit your local gaming store or call 800-482-3766. Multiple envignments, complex strategies ONE RIDE AND YOU'L KNOW WILLY EVERYONE WALKS IN MY Explore the Empire State Building in all its splen dor. It's virtually yours, courtesy of the devil's technology! Will your last stop be the devil's favorite sun spot... Hell itself WARNING: TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE GROUP SIS R3M1 08P1 2210 ve Avenue Bank, CA 91506 (800) 82-3766 Circle Reader Service #14 K "


"10 for continual research on devices is very significant, however, accounting for as much as a doubling of your effective research points. If you are drastically behind in a field, oftenTable 2 Cost/Size Percentage of Original Tech Levels Cost/Size Above Required 50.00 25.00 30 12.50 40 6.25 3.13 1.56 70 0.78 0.39 0.20 times judicious spying has berter overall effects on the technological picture than a crash research program. 20 80 90 emy ships and missile bases can destroy your emy ships in orbit can destroy transports transports before they can land. This combefore they land, we recommend that you bat happens automatically when your transsend battle fleets to your target planet first, ports arrive at their target world, and you to eliminate any threat to your transports. see only the results. For more information, What does RELOC do? see pages 20 and 60 of the manual. The RELOC button lets you automatWhy can't my colony ships travel as far as my ically send the ships that one planet builds scouts do? to another planet. This is useful to assemble Your scouts are equipped with a special your fleets at one common staging point. To device called \"Reserve Fuel Tanks» that let RELOCate your ships' destination, select them travel to planets 3 parsecs farther away the RELOC button, then select the planet than your other ships can. At the start of the you wish to send your completed ships to. game, your scouts can reach any star within six A blue line will appear, connecting the parsecs of any of your colonies, but your other worlds. To cancel the RELOCation, select ships can only reach planets 3 parsecs away. the RELOC button, then select the same Note that when you are moving ships from source planet as the destination\" (i.e. reloone planet to another, all that matters is how cating your ships to where they started). far the destination star is from the nearest Can I refit my existing ships to use new friendly colony. Your ships do not actually technologies stop at one of your colonies to refuel. No. If you wish to equip ships with new How do I change the destination of my fleets technologies, you have to design a new class in space? of ship to use them. If you already have six Ar the start of the game, once your ships classes in use, you may have to make a tough have left orbit to go to another planet, their choice to scrap some older ship types to destination cannot be changed. If you change make room for the new design. your mind during the same turn you gave What is this Guardian thing that keeps deorders, you can select the ship icon in orbit at stroying my ships? the LEFT of the planet, and direct it to a new Legends hold that the Ancient Ones built planet or back to its original planet. Once you terrible automated war machines to protect develop Hyperspace Communications (34th Orion from invaders. So, if you find a planet level Computer Technology), you can change protected by The Guardian, you have probably the orders of any ships en route to other found Orion. Needless to say, you will need a planets at any time. large fleet with advanced technology before you I just signed a Non-Aggression Pact with can defeat the Guardian, and capture Orion. another race, and he attacked my planet the Why can I research some high level technolvery next turn. What gives? ogy, when I did not get a choice to discover Just like you, the other races cannot lower level advances. For instance, I can rechange the orders of their ships and transsearch \"Deuterium Fuel Cells (Range 5)\" but ports en route. The attacking forces were I never got to choose \"Hydrogen Fuel Cells probably sent to your planet before the pact (Range 4)? was signed, and did not know that you are The technologies that your scientists can now on friendly terms. research are partially based on random I just got the technology for Controlled Bar chance (the muse of scientific inspiration is ren (or Tundra, Inferno, etc.) Landings. Why fickle). If you cannot research a particular can't my colony ships land on those planets device, you may have to acquire it through now? espionage or diplomatic exchange. You can Once you discover the technology for also get new technology by capturing enemy landing on a hostile planet type, you must planets, provided that you have left some of design a new type of colony ship with the their factories intact. The more factories, special base device for landing on that envithe greater chance of finding technology. ronment. However, that new type of colony When does the High Council meet? transport can also land on any less hostile Once two-thirds of the planets in the planet. For instance, a ship equipped to land galaxy have been colonized (not one-half, as on inferno planets can also colonize dead, stated in the manual), the High Council will tundra, barren and standard planet types. have its first meeting. After that, it will meet How do I conquer an enemy's planet? every 25 years, on the years that are even You do not need to send a colony ship. You multiples of 25 (i.e. 2400,2425, 2450, etc.) just transport enough people to that planet to [This information was provided by Microdefeat the populace there and capture their Prose from their Version 1.2 Technical Supcolony. However, since missile bases and enplement.) Putting It All Together Every game of MOO is different. The combinations of racial strengths and weaknesses alone ensure that, even if the map was not infinitely variable as well. Following are some general guidelines that can be followed, but remember that flexibility of planning is possibly the most important attribute of a good MOO strategy. In the beginning of the game, concentrate on expanding your empire as much as possible rather than on atraining a technological lead or beating up on your neighbors. If you lose a world or two to enemy action, don't retool for a major war unless it seems like the computer player is gunning for you on a permanent basis; expand in other directions instead. Once your empire is of a reasonable size, consider a consolidation period in which you make these \"core worlds\" highly productive and strongly defended. This allows you to conduct intensive research and attain the technological edge so important to winning major wars of expansion. When you are ready to expand, pick an enemy (if you don't already have at least one) and commence pounding. If at all possible, pick an enemy who is technically your inferior and/or who already has other player enemies who will like you better for beating up on your chosen victim. Sometimes, especially if the game is in danger of an early win by a computer player, you will have to attack someone stronger than you are instead of absorbing a weak neighbor. In these cases, flexibility of movement and diplomatic agility are the keys to victory rather than superior fleet strength or technological leads. Hit your enemy where he is not; take a few worlds quickly, then ask for peace before his counteroffensive can really take shape. Use your Page 180 Computer Gaming World "


"TM WOLFPACK Now on CD-ROM! Since its release, Wolfpack has set a new standard for submarine simulations. Winner of Tilt Magazine's Tilt D'Or award for best simulation, it has consistently topped the best seller charts, earning raves from the reviewing community: \"Wolfpack can only be classified as a genre buster, one of those rare games that sets a new standard for other releases in the same field to live or die by. Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The graphics for Wolfpack are stunning. Wargamer Now Wolfpack is available on PC CD-ROM. The same compelling game play of the floppy version allows you to command either a WW2 submarine wolf pack or the surface fleet. Historically accurate, your weapons and instruments are precisely keyed to the war year that you choose to play. A full construction set is included to allow you to re-create actual battles. From NovaLogicTM the creators of Comanche Maximum OverkillTM and Ultrabots WolfPack CD-ROM also includes: 24 new missions, 36 total. Over 5 minutes of breathtaking animation sequences. Pick up a copy at your local software store and find out what underwater warfare is all about. LOGIC Actual screen images. Circle Reader Service #104 "


"grace periods to build up and defend the newly-captured worlds as well as to strengthen your starfleet. When ready, renew the offensive and hopefully catch your opponent napping for a second time; repeat as needed. The greatest danger in the higher-level games is not that you will be conquered, but that some smooth-talking computer player will buy or borrow enough votes at the Council to get themselves elected Dictator for Life (with the concomitant war of genocide against your hapless empire); sometimes it is necessary to really pour on the diplomatic juice to keep those other computer players out of the leaders' camp and prolong the game until YOU are the leader. Avoid genocide; it greatly irritares the other players. This goes double for biological warfare. Let your helpless enemy keep his last, een his last forlorn planet; someone else will take him out and take the diplomatic hit) and will solve your problem for you. Choose your allies carefully. Avoid allying with anyone likely to drag you into a pointless war. Use trade and tribute to keep your opponents sparring against each other instead of against you. MOO is a game which has a lot to offer players of widely varying playing styles and preferences; find the style which suits you and work with it. Don't give up just because it seems the game is unbeatable. You will find with practic with practice that situations which once seemed to call for a quick three-fingered salute are child's play once you have a feel for the underlying mechanisms of the game. Anyone interested in discussing MOO should feel free to send e-mail to the author on CompuServe at 70314,2302. Cow Table 1 Weapons Data 8.00 0.08 1.19 Weapon Name Shield 0 Laser 2.50 Heavy Laser 4.00 Gatling Laser 10.00 Neutron Pellet Gun 3.50 Ion Cannon 5.50 Heavy Ion Cannon 9.00 Mass Driver 6.50 Neutron Blaster 7.50 Heavy Blast Cannon 13.50 Graviton Beam 8.00 Hard Beam 10.00 Fusion Beam 10.00 Heavy Fusion Beam 17.00 Megabolt Cannon 11.00 Phasor 12.50 Heavy Phasor 22.50 Auto Blaster 30.00 Tachyon Beam 13.00 Gauss Autocannon 34.00 Particle Beam 15.00 Plasma Cannon 18.00 Disruptor 25.00 Pulse Phasor 37.50 Tri-Focus Plasma 35.00 Stellar Converter 90.00 Mauler Device 60.00 Nuclear Bomb 7.50 Fusion Bomb 12.50 Death Spores 1.00 Antimatter Bomb 25.00 Omega-V Bomb 35.00 Doom Virus 2.00 Neutronium Bomb 55.00 Bio Terminator 3.00 Nuclear Missile 4.00 Hyper-V Rocket 6.00 Hyper-X Rocket 8.00 Scatter V Rocket 30.00 Merculite Missile 10.00 Stinger Missile 15.00 Antimatter Torpedo 30.00 Scatter VII Missile 70.00 Pulson Missile 20.00 Hercular Missile 25.00 Hellfire Torpedo 100.00 Zeon Missile 30.00 Proton Torpedo 60.00 Scatter X Missile 150.00 Plasma Torpedo 150.00 Average Damage Vs. Shield 5 Shield 10 -2.50 -7.50 -1.00 -6.00 -10.00 -30.00 1.00 -1.50 0.50 -4.50 4.00 -1.00 4.00 1.50 2.50 -2.50 8.50 3.50 3.00 -2.00 7.50 5.00 5.00 0.00 12.00 7.00 6.00 1.00 7.50 2.50 17.50 12.50 15.00 0.00 8.00 3.00 24.00 14.00 10.00 5.00 13.00 8.00 20.00 15.00 22.50 7.50 30.00 25.00 70.00 50.00 55.00 50.00 2.50 -2.50 7.50 2.50 1.00 1.00 20.00 15.00 30.00 25.00 2.00 2.00 50.00 45.00 3.00 3.00 -1.00 -6.00 1.00 -4.00 3.00 -2.00 5.00 -20.00 5.00 0.00 10.00 5.00 25.00 20.00 35.00 0.00 15.00 10.00 20.00 15.00 80.00 60.00 25.00 20.00 55.00 50.00 100.00 50.00 145.00 140.00 Maximum Damage Vs. Shield 15 Shield 0 Shield 5 Shield 10 Shield 15 -12.50 1 4.00 -1.00 -6.00 -11.00 -11.00 7.00 2.00 -3.00 -8.00 50.00 116.00 -4.00 -24.00 -44.00 -4.00 5.00 2.50 0.00 -2.50 -9.50 3.00 -2.00 -7.00 -6.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 0.00 -1.00 8.00 5.50 3.00 0.50 -7.50 12.00 7.00 2.00 -3.00 -1.50 24.00 19.00 14.00 9.00 -7.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 0.00 2.50 12.00 9.50 7.00 4.50 -5.00 16.00 11.00 6.00 1.00 2.00 30.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 -4.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 -2.50 20.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 7.50 40.00 35.00 30.00 25.00 -15.00 48.00 33.00 18.00 3.00 -2.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 4.00 40.00 30.00 20.00 10.00 0.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 3.00 30.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 40.00 35.00 30.00 25.00 -7.50 60.00 45.00 30.00 15.00 20.00 50.00 45.00 40.00 35.00 30.00 140.00 120.00 100.00 80.00 45.00 100.00 95.00 90.00 85.00 -7.50 12.00 7.00 2.00 -3.00 -2.50 20.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 10.00 40.00 35.00 30.00 25.00 20.00 50.00 45.00 40.00 35.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 40.00 70.00 65.00 60.00 55.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 -11.00 4.00 -1.00 -6.00 -11.00 -9.00 6.00 1.00 -4.00 -9.00 -7.00 8.00 3.00 -2.00 -7.00 -45.00 30.00 5.00 -20.00 45.00 -5.00 10.00 5.00 0.00 -5.00 0.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 0.00 15.00 30.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 -35.00 70.00 35.00 0.00 -35.00 5.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 10.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 40.00 100.00 80.00 60.00 40.00 15.00 30.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 45.00 60.00 55.00 50.00 45.00 0.00 150.00 100.00 50.00 0.00 135.00 150.00 145.00 140.00 135.00 Average Damage Per Cost Per Size Per Power 0.83 0.25 0.08 0.44 0.13 0.04 1.11 0.50 0.14 1.17 0.23 0.14 1.38 0.37 0.16 0.82 0.20 0.09 0.72 0.12 0.13 1.25 0.38 0.13 0.75 0.23 0.08 1.33 0.27 0.13 0.83 0.20 0.10 1.43 0.50 0.13 0.81 0.28 1.38 0.37 0.17 1.39 0.63 0.14 0.87 0.38 0.08 2.14 1.00 0.40 1.44 0.43 0.16 1.21 0.32 0.32 1.00 0.17 0.20 1.50 0.60 0.16 0.36 0.16 1.50 0.94 0.31 1.40 0.50 0.19 1.80 0.45 0.30 1.09 0.40 0.17 2.50 0.30 NA 3.13 0.83 NA 0.10 0.02 NA 5.00 0.50 4.38 0.47 NA 0.13 0.02 NA 5.50 0.61 0.15 0.02 NA 0.57 0.08 0.20 0.67 0.30 0.08 0.40 1.67 0.26 0.50 0.77 0.10 0.50 0.79 0.10 0.50 1.00 0.40 0.10 2.50 0.30 1.40 1.00 0.13 0.50 0.96 0.11 0.63 2.00 0.67 0.29 1.00 0.12 0.60 1.20 0.60 0.15 5.00 0.60 3.00 1.00 1.00 0.33 Waa27132133333333333333332999999999999998333 NA NA 19 0.09 0.67 Page 182 Computer Gaming World "


"Master of Orion Technology Game Aid by Alan Emrich and Tom Hughes, Jr. This game aid presents the Technology Screen summary descriptions of I everything that can be researched. We've enhanced the descriptions with a few of our own notes and corrected many errors. These descriptions are divided by technological category. The number on the left of each item's name is its base technology level. Computer Technology 1 Battle Scanner: Reveals technical specifications of enemy spacecraft in combat and increases Attack Level by +1 and Initiative by +3. 1 Battle Computer Mark I: Increases weapon accuracy to level 1. 2 ECM Jammer Mark I: Adds 1 level to defense 1 level to defense against enemy missile attacks. 4 Deep Space Scanner: Detects enemy ships up to 5 parsecs away from your colonies and i parsec away from your ships. The cost is free to all friendly colonies. Battle Computer Mark II: Increases weapon accuracy to level 2. 7 ECM Jammer Mark II : Adds 2 levels to defense against enemy missile attacks. 8 Improved Robotic Controls III: Allows up to three factories to be operated per population. The refit cost to upgrade to Robotic Controls III is half of the standard cost of each factory. 10 Battle Computer Mark III: Increases weapon accuracy to level 3. 12 ECM Jammer Mark III: Adds 3 levels to defense against enemy missile attacks. 13 Improved Space Scanner: Derects enemy ships up to 7 parsecs away from your colonics and 2 parsecs away from your ships. Enemy destinations and ETAs can also be accurately determined. The cost is free to all friendly colonies. 15 Battle Computer Mark IV: Increases weapon accuracy to level 4. 17 ECM Jammer Mark IV: Adds 4 levels to defense against enemy missile attacks. 18 Improved Robotic Controls IV: Allows up to four factories to be operated per population. The refit cost to upgrade to Robotic Controls IV is the standard cost of each factory. 20 Battle Computer Mark V: Increases weapon accuracy to level 5. 22 ECM Jammer Mark V: Adds 5 levels to defense against enemy missile attacks. 23 Advanced Space Scanner: Allows exploration of planets from colony bases up to 9 parsecs away and detects enemy ships up to 3 parsecs away from your ships. The cost is free to all friendly colonies. 25 Battle Computer Mark VI: Increases weapon accuracy to level 6. 27 ECM Jammer Mark VI: Adds 6 levels to defense against enemy missile attacks. 28 Improved Robotic Controls V: Allows up to five factories to be operated per population. The refit cost to upgrade to Robotic Controls V is one and a half times the standard cost of each factory. 30 Battle Computer Mark VII: Increases weapon accuracy to level 7. 32 ECM Jammer Mark VII: Adds 7 levels to defense against enemy missile attacks. 34 Hyperspace Communications: Allows you to communicate with ships and transports in hyperspace, and change their destinations while en route. 35 Battle Computer Mark VIII: Increases weapon accuracy to level 8. 37 ECM Jammer Mark VIII: Adds 8 levels to de. fense against enemy missile attacks. 38 Improved Robotic Controls VI: Allows up to six factories to be operated per population. The refit cost to upgrade to Robotic Controls VI is twice the standard cost of each factory. 40 Battle Computer Mark IX: Increases weapon accuracy to level 9. 42 ECM Jammer Mark IX: Adds 9 levels to defense against enemy missile attacks. 45 Battle Computer Mark X: Increases weapon accuracy to level 10. 46 Oracle Interface: Coordinates all beam weapon attacks into one simultaneous burst of concentrated fire, halving the enemy's shield strength. 47 ECM Jammer Mark X: Adds 10 levels to de fense against enemy missile attacks. 48 Improved Robotic Controls VII: Allows up to seven factories to be operated per population. The refit cost to upgrade to Robotic Controls VII is 2.5 times the standard cost of andard cost of cach factory. 49 Technology Nullifier: Scrambles enemy Bartle Computers and ECM, reducing them each, separately, from 2-6 levels (averaging 4) 4) every time the nullifier hits them. This weapon has a range of 4 spaces. S0 Battle Computer Mark XI: Increases weapon accuracy to level 11. 8 Improved Industrial Tech 8: Reduces factory construction costs to 8 BC each. 10 Duralloy Armor: Increases the hit points of ships and transports by 50%. Personal combat armor is also enhanced, adding 5 to all ground attacks. 11 Battle Suits: Armor that not only protects but also boosts strength. Adds 10 to all ground combat rolls. 13 Improved Industrial Tech 7: Reduces factory construction costs to 7 BC cach. 14 Automated Repair System: Damaged ships can repair up to 15% of their total hit points at the end of each turn in battle. 15 Reduced Industrial Waste 60%: Decreases factory pollution levels to 60% of the normal rate. 17 Zortium Armor: Increases the hit points of ships and transports by 100%. Personal combat armor is also enhanced, adding 10 to all ground attacks. 18 Improved Industrial Tech 6: Reduces factory construction costs to 6 BC each. 23 Improved Industrial Tech 5: Reduces factory construction costs to 5 BC each. 24 Armored Exoskeleton: Advanced mobile suits that not only boost power and increase defenses, but also offer limited flight to ground troops. Adds 20 to all ground combat rolls. 25 Reduced Industrial Waste 40%: Decreases factory pollution levels to 40% of the normal rate. 26 Andrium Armor: Increases the hit points of ships and transports by 150%. Personal combat armor is also enhanced, adding 15 to all ground attacks. 28 Improved Industrial Tech 4: Reduces factory construction costs to 4 BC cach. 33 Improved Industrial Tech 3: Reduces factory construction costs to 3 BC cach. 34 Tritanium Armor: Increases the hit points of 34 Tri ships and transports by 200%. Personal combat armor is also enhanced, adding 20 to all ground attacks. 35 Reduced Industrial Waste 20%: Decreases 3 factory pollution levels to 20% of the normal rate. 36 Advanced Damage Control: Damaged ships can repair up to 30% of their total hit points at the end of each turn in battle. 38 Improved Industrial Tech 2: Reduces factory construction costs to 2 BC each. 40 Powered Armor: Combines high mobility, anti-grav flight, and heavy armored plating to form the most advanced armor available for ground troops. Adds 30 to all ground combat rolls. 42 Adamantium Armor: Increases the hit points of ships and transports by 250%. Personal Construction Technology 1 Reserve Fuel Tanks: Extends the range of a ship by an additional 3 parsecs. 3 Improved Industrial Tech 9: Reduces factory construction costs to 9 BC each. 5 Reduced Industrial Waste 80%: Decreases factory pollution levels to 80% of the normal rate. January 1994 Page 183 "


"points of damage from all attacks against planet surfaces and is cumulative with missile base deflector shields. 43 Black Hole Generator: Creates a sub-space field that warps normal space creating an instantaneous black hole, destroying 25%100% of enemy ships or missile bases, less 2% per shield class. 44 Class XIII Deflector Shields: Absorbs 13 points of damage from all attacks. 46 Lightning Shield: An energy field that destroys incoming enemy missiles and torpedoes 100% of the time, less 1% per technology level of the missile. 50 Class XV Deflector Shields: Absorbs 15 points of damage from all attacks. combat armor is also enhanced, adding 25 to all ground attacks. 45 Industrial Waste Elimination: Factories cease to pollute. 50 Neutronium Armor: Provides the best internal protection of any armor and increases the hit points of a ship by 300%. Personal combat armor is also enhanced, adding 30 to all ground attacks. Force Field Technology 1 Class I Deflector Shields: Absorbs 1 point of damage from all attacks. 4 Class II Deflector Shields: Absorbs 2 points of damage from all attacks. 8 Personal Deflector Shield: Protects individual ground troops with a directional force field. Adds +10 to all ground combat battles. 10 Class III Deflector Shields: Absorbs 3 points of damage from all attacks. 12 Class V Planetary Shield: Absorbs 5 points of damage from attacks against planet surfaces and is cumulative with missile base deflector shields. 14 Class IV Deflector Shields: Absorbs 4 points of damage from all attacks. 16 Repulsor Beam: Repels enemy ships back one space away from the defending ship. This special weapon has a range of 1 space. 20 Class V Deflector Shields: Absorbs 5 points of damage from all attacks. 21 Personal Absorption Shield: Absorbs damage from all hand weapons. Adds 20 to all ground combat battles. 22 Class X Planetary Shield: Absorbs 10 points of damage from all attacks against planet surfaces and is cumulative with missile base deflector shields. 24 Class VI Deflector Shields: Absorbs 6 points of damage from all attacks. 27 Cloaking Device: Renders ships nearly invisible until they attack. While cloaked ships receive a +5 bonus to their missile and beam defenses, ships must uncloak to attack (but receive first fire) and will automatically recloak on any subsequent turn in which they don't attack. 30 Class VII Deflector Shields: Absorbs 7 points of damage from all attacks. 31 Zyro Shield: An energy field that destroys incoming missiles and torpedoes 75% of the time, less 1% per technology level of the missilc. 32 Class XV Planetary Shield: Absorbs 15 points of damage from all attacks against planet surfaces and is cumulative with missile base deflector shields. 34 Class IX Deflector Shields: Absorbs 9 points of damage from all attacks. 37 Stasis Field: Freezes one group of enemy ships, up to one space away, for onc turn. Frozen ships cannot attack or be attacked. 38 Personal Barrier Shield: Completely encases the soldier in a nearly impenetrable force field. Adds +30 to all ground combat rolls. 40 Class XI Deflector Shields: Absorbs 11 points of damage from all attacks. 42 Class XX Planetary Shield: Absorbs 20 22 Atmospheric Terraforming: Converts hostile planets to standard minimal environments (including raising its base population size by up to 20 million), normalizing population growth for a one time cost of 200 BC. 24 Advanced Eco Restoration: Eliminates 10 units of industrial waste for a cost of 1 BC. 26 Improved Terraforming +50: Increases the population capacity of planets by 50M for a cost of 3 BC per million. 27 Doom Virus: Dreadful biological weapons capable of reducing planetary populations by 2 million per attack (with political consequences, see Chapter 11). 30 Advanced Soil Enrichment: Converts standard and fertile planets to gaias, doubling the population growth and increasing the planet's base size by +50% for the one time cost of 300 BC. 32 Improved Terraforming +60: Increases the population capacity of planets by GOM for a cost of 3 BC per million. 34 Complete Eco Restoration: Eliminates 20 units of industrial waste for a cost of 1 BC. 36 Universal Antidote: Reduces casualties taken from biological weapons by 2 million per attack. 38 Improved Terraforming +80: Increases the population capacity of planets by 80M for a cost of 2 BC per million. 40 Bio Terminator: Abominable biological weapons capable of reducing planetary populations by 3 million per attack (with political consequences). 42 Advanced Cloning: Allows bio engineered colonists to be grown at a rate of 1M per 5 BC. BC. 44 Improved Terraforming +100: Increases the population capacity of planets by 100M for a cost of 2 BC per million. S0 Complete Terraforming: Increases the population capacity of planets by 120M for a cost of 2 BC per million. Planetology Technology 1 Ecological Restoration: Eliminates 2 units of industrial waste for a cost of 1 BC. 2 Improved Terraforming +10: Increases the population capacity of planets by 10M for a cost of 5 BC per million. 3 Controlled Barren Environment: Permits the colonization of barren and standard planets. 5 Improved Eco Restoration: Eliminates 3 units of industrial waste for a cost of 1 BC. 6 Controlled Tundra Environment: Permits the colonization of tundra, barren and standard planets. 8 Improved Terraforming +20: Increases the population capacity of planets by 20M for a cost of 5 BC per million. 9 Controlled Dead Environment: Permits the colonization of dead, tundra, barren and standard planets. 10 Death Spores: Horrible biological weapons capable of reducing the maximum planetary populations by 1 million per attack (with political consequences, see Chapter 11). 12 Controlled Inferno Environment: Permits the colonization of inferno, dead, tundra, barren and standard planets. 13 Enhanced Eco Restoration: Eliminates 5 units of industrial waste for a cost of 1 BC. 14 Improved Terraforming +30: Increases the population capacity of planets by 30M for a cost of 4 BC per million. 15 Controlled Toxic Environment: Permits the colonization of toxic, inferno, dead, tundra, barren and standard planets. 16 Soil Enrichment: Converts standard planets to fertile environments, increasing population growth by 50% and raising the base planetary size by +25% for a one time cost of 150 BC 17 Bio Toxin Antidote: Reduces casualties taken from biological weapons by 1 million per attack. 18 Controlled Radiated Environment: Permits the colonization of radiated and all other planets. 20 Improved Terraforming +40: Increases the population capacity of planets by 40M for a cost of 4 BC per million. 21 Cloning: Allows bio-engineered colonists to be grown at a rate of 1M per 10 BC (half the cost of the standard rate). con Propulsion Technology 1 Retro Engines (Warp 1): Moves ships at warp one (1 parsecs per turn) and allows a maximum maneuverability of class I in combat. 3 Hydrogen Fuel Cells (Range 4): Fuel reserves allow ships to move up to 4 parsecs away from colony planets. 5 Deuterium Fuel Cells (Range 5): Fuel reserves allow ships to move up to 5 parsecs away from colony planets. 6 Nuclear Engines (Warp 2): Moves ships at warp two (2 parsecs per turn), and allows a maximum maneuverability of class II in combat. 9 Iridium Fuel Cells (Range 6): Fuel reserves allow ships to move up to 6 parsecs away from colony planets. 10 Inertial Stabilizer: Generates a field that reduces the inertia of ships, and adds 2 classes of maneuverability in combat (i.c., +2 defense and + 1 combat speed). 12 Sub-Light Drives (Warp 3): Moves ships at warp three (3 parsecs per turn), and allows a Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"LA2 H TO GO STRIKE SQUAD PERBER READ OBE FLASKET TO PORT INTERSTELLAR TRAVEL DOS MYND 2.0 MOIS BOB RICARD CON WUYAN OT-PACK IYE-OLE WALDE BUYING EQUIPMENT LA OBRADOURO ELLER 1939 TWO-PLAYER PLAY LR120H35 DEAD OR:35 193 UC CE -79 THREE 1 THE SIDEJE EU EAT FIRE, BUG-EYED SCUM! THE CONSORTIUM OF WORLDS HAS BEEN OVERRUN BY THE VILE INSECTOID KKISTIKS. BRUTAL OPPRESSION AND MASS SLAVERY NOW RULE WHERE ONCE THERE WAS PEACE AND HAPPINESS. A DISTRESS CALL FROM THE CONSORTIUM HAS REACHED YOU AND YOUR STRIKE SQUAD—A CREW OF SMUGGLERS, BOUNTY-HUNTERS AND RAPSCALLIONS FROM THE BACKWATERS OF THE UNIVERSE. WITH THE RIGHT SHIP, THE RIGHT TOOLS AND WEAPONS, AND FOR THE RIGHT PAY, THERE'S JUST A CHANCE THAT YOUR STRIKE SQUAD CAN HELP. WILL NOBODY STOP THE KKISTIK SLAVEMASTERS? OR WILL YOU?  MINDCRAFT -THIRTY MERCENARIES OF NINE RACES TO CHOOSE FROM. ALL-NEW HIGHLY INTUITIVE GAME INTERFACE. PULSING SOUNDTRACK AND INSANE DIGITIZED SOUNDS. PLAY ALONE OR WITH A FRIEND-OR AN ENEMY. Circle Reader Service #98 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual BM VGA screen photos "


"bat. maximum maneuverability of class III in device is automatically placed for free in all 16 Anti-Matter Bomb: Bombs that explode for combat. missile bases. 10-40 points of damage against planetary tar14 Dolomite Crystals (Range 7): Fuel reserves al45 Combat Transporters: Transports equipped gets only. low ships to move up to 7 parsecs away from with these devices have a 50% chance of 17 Graviton Beam: Tractor-repulsor beam capacolony planets. beaming down onto enemy surfaces before ble of rending ships to pieces. It strikes for 116 Energy Pulsar: A potent engine modification they can be attacked by enemy ships and mis 15 damage, and the continuous streaming which generates a sudden spherical burst of sile defense bases. effect of the ray allows excess damage to energy striking all adjacent target's armor for 46 Inertial Nullifier: Gencrates a field that ne carry over from one ship to another. up to 5 points of damage plus 1 per two gates the inertia of ships and adds 2 classes of 18 Stinger Missiles: Steady, hyper-accurate misships in the attacking, pulsar-armed group. maneuverability in combat (.e., +4 defense siles that do 15 points of damage, move at a 18 Fusion Drives (Warp 4): Moves ships at and +2 combat speed). speed of 3.5, and are controlled by a sophistiwarp four (4 parsecs per turn), and allows a 48 Hyper Drives (Warp 9): Moves ships at warp cated +3 level targeting computer. maximum maneuverability of class IV in nine (9 parsecs per turn), and allows a maxi 19 Hard Beam: An energy-to-matter beam combat. mum mancuverability of class IX in combat. weapon that halves the effectiveness of en19 Uridium Fuel Cells (Range 8): Fuel reserves 50 Displacement Device: Randomly shifts the emy deflector shields, and inflicts 8-12 allow ships to move up to 8 parsecs away cquipped ship group in and out of normal points of damage. from colony planets. space, allowing it to avoid one third of all 20 Fusion Beam: High intensity beam weapon 20 Warp Dissipator: Specialized weapon that dis non-arca (i.c., non-special weapon) attacks. capable of doing 4-16 points of damage. rupts the warp fields surrounding enemy Heavy fusion beams strike for 4-30 points ships. It has a 50% chance of reducing their Weapon Technology and have a range of 2 spaces. speed by 1 each time the target group is fired upon and can, with enough hirs, leave that 1 Lasers: Direct-fire beam weapon that inflicts 121 lon Stream Projector: Fires an intense ionic blast reducing the armor of every target in 4 points of damage. Heavy lasers have a group \"dead in space\" and unable to warp the opponent's group by 20% plus 1% per out of combat. range of 2 spaces and do 1-7 points of damtwo firing ships, up to a maximum of 50% age. 23 Reajax II Fuel Cells (Range 9): Fuel reserves of its starting hit points in a single attack. allow ships to move up to 9 parsecs away 2 Hand Lasers: Personal lasers that add 5 to your The projector has a range of 2 spaces. from colony planets. ground combat rolls. 22 Omega-V Bomb: High yield bombs that ex24 Impulse Drives (Warp 5): Moves ships at 4 Hyper-V Rockets: Swift missiles that explode plode for 20-50 points of damage against warp five (5 parsecs per turn), and allows a for 6 points of damage and move at a speed planetary targets only. maximum maneuverability of class V in comof 2.5. 23 Anti-Matter Torpedoes: High energy track5 Gatling Laser: An advanced laser that fires up ing torpedoes that deliver 30 points of dam27 Intergalactic Star Gates: Allows your ships to to four times per turn for 1-4 points of damage but may only be fired every other turn. move between any two planets equipped age with each hit. Each torpedo is equipped with a +4 level tarwith star gates in a single turn. Costs 3000 6 Anti-Missile Rockets: Trans-light rockets capageting computer. BC each to build plus 300 BC per turn to ble of destroying incoming enemy missiles 24 Fusion Riflc: Inaccurate but incredibly powermaintain. 40% of the time, less 1% per technology ful beam weapons that add 20 to your 29 Trilithium Crystals (Range 10): Fuel reserves level of the missile. ground combat rolls. allow ships to move up to 10 parsecs away 7 Neutron Pellet Gun: Heavy particle stream 25 Megabolt Cannon: Releases multiple bolts of from colony planets. weapon that halves the effectiveness of enpure energy in a wide field. It has a bonus 30 Ion Drives (Warp 6): Moves ships at warp six emy deflector shields and inflicts 2-5 points +30% chance to hit and strikes for 2-20 (6 parsecs per turn), and allows a maximum of damage. points of damage. maneuverability of class VI in combat. 8 Hyper-X Rockets: Missiles equipped with high 26 Phasor: Phased energy beams capable of in34 High Energy Focus: Increases the firing range energy warheads that explode for 8 points of flicting 5-20 points of damage. Heavy phaof all energy weapons by three. damage, move at a speed of 2.5, and are consors strike for 5-40 points of damage and 36 Anti-Matter Drives (Warp 7): Moves ships at trolled by a +1 level targeting computer. have a range of 2 spaces. warp seven (7 parsecs per turn), and allows a 2 9 Fusion Bomb: Bombs that explode for 5-20 2 7 Scatter Pack VII Missiles: MIRV versions of maximum maneuverability of class VII in points of damage against planetary targets Hyper-X Rockets, splitting into seven sepacombat. only. rate warheads that each explode for 10 38 Sub Space Teleporter: Teleports ships to any 10 Ion Cannon: High intensity beam weapons points of damage, move at a speed of 3, and space on the combat map and gives movecapable of inflicting 3-8 points of damage. are guided by a +2 level targeting computer. ment initiative and first fire to the teleportHeavy ion cannons strike for 3-15 and have 28 Auto Blaster: An advanced neutron blaster ing ship group. Is negated by Sub Space a 2 space range. that fires up to three times per turn for 4-16 Interdictors. 11 Scatter Pack V Rockets: MIRV versions of points of damage with each hit. 40 Ionic Pulsar: A powerful engine modification Hyper-V Rockets, splitting into five separate 29 Pulson Missiles: Powerful missiles equipped capable of generating a spherical burst of warheads that each explode for 6 points of with anti-matter warheads that explode for phased energy striking all adjacent targer's ar damage and move at a speed of 2.5 20 points of damage, move at speed 4, and mor for up to 10 points of damage plus one 12 Ion Rifle: Personal beam weapons that add are controlled by a +4 level targeting comper ship in the attacking, pulsar-armed 10 to your ground attacks. puter. group. 13 Mass Driver: A linear accelerator that halves 30 Tachyon Beam: Fires an intense stream of 41 Thorium Cells (Unlimited Range): Self-re the effectiveness of enemy deflector shields tachyon particles that strike enemy ships for plenishing fuel that allows ships to move any and inflicts 5-8 points of damage. 1-25 hits. The continuous streaming effect distance from colony planets. 14 Merculite Missiles: Hard-hitting, swift misof the ray allows it to carry damage over 42 Inter-Phased Drives (Warp 8): Moves ships siles that explode for 10 points of damage, from one ship to another. at warp eight (8 parsecs per turn), and allows move at a speed of 3, and are controlled by a 31 Hand Phasor: Potent hand held energy weapa maximum maneuverability of class VIII in +2 level targeting computer. ons capable of reducing an opponent to his combat. 15 Neutron Blaster: High powered beam weapcomponent atoms. Adds 25 to your ground 43 Sub Space Interdictor: Creates an intense ons capable of inflicting 3-12 points of dam combat rolls. gravity well surrounding colony planets and age. Heavy neutron blasters strike for 3-24 32 Gauss Autocannon: An advanced linear accelrendering sub space teleporters useless. The points and have a 2 space range. erator capable of firing four explosive rounds Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"WALLS OF RGP Na GIA WARFARE IN CLASSICAL TIMES BURLUR URERS Buy Walls of Rome, Strike Squad or Bloodstone and get a Mindcraft game of your choice FREE! Call for details. LLLLLCL64194149494949494949494949494 1903 OF N1441711117414416769aaaa9447) EUR 2 USE LAS The grandeur that was and modify the Rome is yours to defend or conquer in Mindcraft's troops and maps in Walls of Rome. All the siege techniques of classical antiq myriads of ways. uity are in your hands. Scale the walls with ladders, bombard them with boulders or flaming pitch, or undermine them and watch them collapse. Unpredictable computer strategies make each battle a new challenge. Armies from a multitude of times and places are under K Built-in editor lets you create your own armies, battles your command; fortifications of many types in many and maps. settings are yours to besiege or defend. Stunning graphics, stirring music, Play the ready scenarios, separately or in and lifelike digitized sounds. extended campaigns of conquest and defense, or use the editor to combine 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Circle Reader Service #99 Actual IBA/ VGA screen photos Call To Order 1-800-525-4933 MINDCRAFT GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGT "


"per turn that inflict 7-10 points of damage They may only be fired once every other 48 Mauler Device: Unleashes enormous each. These projectile rounds also halve the turn. amounts of focused energy at enemy targets, effectiveness of enemy shields. 41 Zeon Missiles: Most advanced missile avail inflicting 20-100 points of damage. 33 Particle Beam: High intensity particle accel able. Capable of striking enemy ships for 30 50 Plasma Torpedoes: Pure energy torpedoes erators capable of striking enemy ships up to points of damage and moving at a speed of that deliver 150 points of damage and move one space away for 10-20 points of damage 5. The zeon missile is guided by a +6 level at speed 6, but lose 15 strength per space and halving the effectiveness of their deflec targeting computer. traveled (which is always at least one). The tor shields. 42 Plasma Rifle: The most devastating hand launcher can fire every other turn and has a 34 Hercular Missiles: Highly advanced missile held weapon available. Adds 30 to your +7 level guidance computer. that explodes for 25 points of damage. The ground attacks. The Amoeba Stream: This is the weapon used hercular missile moves at speed 4.5 and is 43 Proton Torpedoes: High yield energy torpeby the Amoeba Space Monster (see Chapter controlled by a +5 level targeting computer. does that deliver 60 points of damage but 14). You'll never get to use it, but you may 35 Plasma Cannon: Fires intense bolts of energy may only be fired every other turn. Each torhave to face it, so be aware that an Amoeba that inflict 6-30 points of damage at a range pedo is equipped with a +6 level targeting Monster packs one of these as its sole armaof 1. ment. An Amoeba Stream does 250-1000 computer. 36 Death Ray: An ancient weapon of unbeliev44 Scatter Pack X Missiles: MIRV versions of damage and has a range of 3. Its continuous ably destructive power that inflicts 200-1000 streaming effect allows it to carry damage Stinger Missiles, splitting into ten separate over from one ship to another, so expect points of damage and has a 1 space range warheads that each explode for 15 points of (not 3). Only available after defeating the large groups of small ships to get whittled damage, move at speed 3.5, and are guided Guardian of Orion (who is armed with it). down fairly quickly when fired upon by this by a +3 level targeting computer. weapon. 37 Disruptor: Unleashes tremendous bolts of 45 Tri-Focus Plasma Cannon: Fires a triad of The Crystal Ray: This weapon is used by the pure energy that can strike enemy targets up high intensity plasma beams capable of into 2 spaces away for 10-40 points of damage. Crystalline Space Monster (among others, flicting 20-50 points of damage. see Chapter 14). Again, you'll never get to 38 Pulse Phasor: An advanced phasor capable of 46 Stellar Converter: Surrounds the target with use one, but you'll find yourself on the busifiring three bursts per turn for 5-20 points of an extremely powerful matter-energy conver ness end of them when combating this creadamage with each hit. sion field, inflicting four 10-35 point attacks. ture. Know that a Crystal Monster packs up 39 Neutronium Bomb: A devastating bomb that It has a range of 3 spaces. to 10 of these babies and each one surrounds explodes for 40-70 points of damage against 47 Neutron Stream Projector: Fires a blast of a target's shields (like a Stellar Converter), planets only. concentrated neutrino rays reducing the arthus making four attacks, each of which does 40 Hellfire Torpedoes: Enveloping energy torpe mor of every target in the opponent's group 100-300 points of damage. The Crystal Ray does that simultaneously strike all shields. by 40% plus 1% per firing ship, up to a has a range of 3. They move at speed 5, are guided by a +6 maximum of 75% of its starting hit points in [This player's aid was excerpted from Prima Publishlevel targeting computer and, if they hit, de a single attack. The projector has a range of ing' forthcoming \"Master of Orion: The Official liver damage equal to four 25 point attacks. 2 spaces. Strategy Guide.\" Cow HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ARE SO UNREAL? THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full PICTURES, mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing THEY FORGOT ABOUT system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit 30 of the RESEARCH, TESTING, & DESIGN. games listed below (including Might and Magic 1-4, Ultima 4-7, all SSI AD&D games, Bard's Tale 1-3, Wizardry 6-7 and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for WE DIDNT . the price of 3 editors, you will be getting 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game, CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each SIMULATIONS CANADA. Might and Magic (1,2,3, 4 or 5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3), Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the NAVAL COMBAT: Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, ***New***RED SKY AT MORNING, Global Naval Strategic Combat In The Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Modern Era. Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, ***New \"TYMAN OF WAR, Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765 1815. Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 7 pt. 2), Savage Empire, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Tunnels and THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central Pacific, 1942. Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2), Countdown to Doomsday, Eye of the Beholder (1. THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN, Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. 2 or 3), Darklands, Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat In The Med, 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterraneon, 1941-1942. 2 or 3), Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2). Twilight 2000, Planets' Edge, KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Combat in the Pacific, 1942. Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or SEVENTH FLEET, Modern Naval Operations in the Pacific Ocean. Crusaders ($12.95))Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations in the Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Corbat. IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS to tell us which computer you own. \"Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116  (313) 229-2453 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Circle Reader Service #135 Circle Reader Service #68 Page 188 Computer Gaming World VSA Mate coro "


"Lao Cao Genghis Khan It took 1400 years, but we finally got them together! CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF 19 D icture this, two of history's most ruthless and J ambitious leaders in the same room. Now, throw in the fact that both are looking towards world domi nation with massive armies following their every command. Sounds interesting, doesn't it. This winter, Koei's bringing Genghis Khan and Cao Cao Romance together to a store near you, and it's going to be of The Three Kingdoins exciting. After all, Genghis Khan is out to lead his DRAGON OF DESTINY. Mongol hordes victoriously across Asia and Europe in GENGHIS KHAN II: CLAN OF THE GRAY Wolf and Cao Cao's devising new ways to reunite China after the collapse of the Second Han Dynasty in ROMANCE OF THE THREE SEAL AN ALLIANCE. DISEASE & DISASTER! KINGDOMS III: DRAGON OF DESTINY. The contest for world domination is about to begin. Are you ready? CONQUER THE WORLD! LET ESIS SEIZE THE BATTLE ADVANTAGE. VGA color Rain Rour went PREPARE FOR Mouse support Sound Blaster & AdLib\" sound support KOEI ALSO AVAILABLE FOR SNES & SEGA. KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415)348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). PC Compatible KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Highway, Suite 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 Genghis Khan I and Romance of the Three Kingdom I are trademarks of KOEI Corporation Circle Reader Service #81 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW FLORINS IN ARABIA SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development cencil is dispbecomes mouchero QQP's Merchant Prince Is A Sure Moneymaker by Alan Emrich T Master of Orion can be called «Civilizaby another, less accurate map with the look nents can be included or excluded from tradtion in space,\" then Merchant Prince is of 14th century cartography. What is known ing there. Most cities seem to be open, and likely to be known as \"Machiavellian of the world is displayed somewhat accuonce a friendly trade unit is inside the city, Civ.\" The sense I got of deja vu and daggers rately, but the map becomes more ripe with the only place of any urban interest is the is very strong, indeed. Set in the glorious canards than calculations the further you drift marketplace. Renaissance Age, this always four-sided confrom the starting city of Florence. The estitest is a calculated power struggle of puremations of coastlines and cities, while generA Fist Full of Florins greed and utter ruthlessness. Social Darwinially helpful, can be wildly inaccurate, and Here, in each city's marketplace, you can ans could site Merchant Prince, in fact, as an there is far more to discover than this cartogexcellent model of the survival of the fittest, rapher's guesstimate\" map suggests. see the price that cities will pay, in Florins, for fastest and foulest in human nature. In other any of the world's 20 different types of merThere can be two types of worlds generated: chandise (including light and heavily armed words, my kind of game. a historical one, where Florence is in Italy and soldiers). Items that a city has in good supply you will be able to figure out the location of Unfurl the Maps are generally the items that the city produces. other cities from your 7th grade geography th grade geography To make money, you must buy cheap in one The most striking and alluring feature of lessons; and the more interesting randomly city, and then haul the stuff to other cities that Merchant Prince is the map of the world and 5 generated worlds. For better or worse, these will pay dearly for it. But money isn't every its undiscovered regions. Players of Empire randomly generated worlds, where true exthing in Merchant Prince—it is merely a Deluxe and Civilization will be used to the ploration skills apply, are \"fixed» when cremeans to an end. Money is but a tool for black tiles that cover unexplored areas, a traated. They will always have the same number purchasing what really matters, which is, as of cities, with the same names, selling the dition in strategy games of exploration that they say on Home Improvement, \"More has evolved little since the dawn of computer same goods (although the prices of imports power!\" gaming. Merchant Prince gives its undiscovand exports do seem to vary). This begin the case, you'll know that you haven't seen everyTo build an economic empire, players may ered map a charming and unique twist. thing until that last city, which you'll know purchase camel and donkey caravans to conWhen the game begins, the map is covered by name, has been discovered and duct over and exploration and establish trade accounted for. routes. Camels are preferred to donkeys in the world's large complement of desert terrain. VENICE Once cities have been discovOnce cities have been discovTo facilitate overland commerce, as in Civiered through standard, square lization, you can build roads, which, by the AT m orem by-square exploration, the game way, even look like the roads in Civ! really begins. Cities are either For long distance traders, there are four open or closed to trade. Closed different sizes of trading vessels that can be different sizes of trading vessels that can cities can be opened by conquerpurchased at ports cities (which is almost all ing armies, which must be hired of them, as even inland cities are often conat considerable expense. If a you nected to the oceans by rivers). Players who conquer a city, you get to decide buy a ship will find that they have varying who that city will trade with, movement allowances per turn and cargo caren of incUZEY Xere TURI which means that certain opporying capacities, offering a budding Onassis marec D Page 190 Computer Gaming World "


"Available in Brian Vodnikes Stores NOW! Kingdoms Bermann DF TM The BEST Medieval Strategy Game Series made. Period. Features New Additions Kingdoms Brian Vodelle's  1-6 Players, 196 Territories  Artificial intelligence (AI) that makes  7 Troop types and catapults extremely tough computer opponents at the  5 Difficulty levels with handicapping higher difficulty levels (even tough enough Control of up to 20 armies and to beat the game designer, Brian Vodnik!) 5 flotillas per kingdom, 5 Castle types Quickmovel and Double QuickmoveTM Toggle each kingdom between human, which greatly speeds up the computer's turn computer, and off  Quick and easy food shortagel Resource management of food, crop increase notification for faster turns wood, stone, iron  Quick siege Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics Dispatch/Gather troops to or from castle Huge 832 X 711 pixel map that you garrisons to adjacent territories actually play on! Immediate/Delayed catapult construction Simple point and click interface to an option intricate and detailed game  End of turn checking for movable armies Actual IBM Screen Shots Germany Available NOW! Brian Vodelle's In ikings Sisiis of conquest !!!!!!!!! @SEX REDUCED!! Call or send $4.00 for a 7-turn playable demo or download it FREE from our BBS @ (708) 545-1410 and get hooked! Save $20 off of the list price of $59.95 and get Kingdoms of Germany\" for only $39.95 + $3.50 S&H Reduced! Get Vikings for only $29.95 + $3.50 S&H. Registered users can upgrade to Vikings Enhanced for $10. Call for Details, Buy Vikings and Kingdoms of Germany\" for $64.95 +3.50 S&H and get the Vikings Enhanced upgrade (a $10.00 value) FREE! Check, Money Order, and Visa/Mastercard accepted. Call Realism Entertainment for more details on all offers at (708) 695-7487, i Beaclism Tentertainment VikingsTM is available for Amiga and IBM. Kindgoms of Germany available for IBM. Coming soon for Color Macintosh, Realism Entertainment 6N522 Pine Street Bensenville, IL 60106 MasterCard (708) 595-7487 VIKINGSTM, Fields of Conquest Kingdoms of Germany and TRUE 32-BITTM, are trademarks of Realism Entertainment 1993 Realism Entertainment All Rights Reserved Worldwide. VISA The video game perfectionists ... details, detalls, details Circle Reader Service #126 "


"A Hoas MAIN MENU DOOOO le 51 ST Cancel Tasactions: a variety of tools with which he can set sail amount of money every turn, cutinto his future of economic empire building. ting into the profits with every Through a fairly intuitive set of screens, it passing year. is easy to load up both land and naval trading units in a city and move them out. Movement 8 Now How Much Would is either donc manually, square-by-square, or You Pay? ES by selecting a destination city and allowing Eventually, you will become WIID the computer to automatically handle move rich. With a steady income to Wala ay ment each turn. When opting for this latter support your ambitions, the time method, the computer generated trade route will soon come for you to look can be set to one of three different risk/speed toward bigger and berrer things. levels. While it might be faster to cut straight In particular, there are two high across the oceans, it is safer to hug the coastoffices to which you can be u D . o nove points left. lines and stay near other cities. The old adages elected: Leader of the Doge make all the behind-the-scenes deals and of «time is money» and «haste makes waste\" (which effectively makes you the \"world come into conflict when deciding upon the ruler») or the Pope (a lesser, but still powerful, public announcements that they want. In games of power politics such as Merchant risk/speed levels for individual trade routes. world ruler). Election to either seat requires the purchase of Doge members Prince, it is easy to imagine the phone lines WOSC ADLESARAN burning with intrigue as spouses stare in won(corrupt politicians who can be a derment at players shouting, \"Make you the considerable financial drain and THN Pope? What's in it for me? How about transit 37 W may not stay loyal) or Cardinals rights through Tunis and 2000 Florins... in (who \"stay bought» and provide advance.\" Yes, the possibilities are there, all ACCUSC a steady income from their conright. senator Sot duorins. tinuing sale of indulgences). Occasionally, these hired votes will When another player gives you trouble, 486)  be assassinated, hanged for treathere is more than one way to intrigue against B12 son, die of old age, or any of a him. To wit, you can always go down to the number of things that will delocal sleazy bistro and hire either an arsonist, Waltprive you of their benefits. When a muck raking slanderer, or quiet assassin to 9 . Exit the excrement hits the rotary air deal with the situation. Murdering the Pope deal with the situation. Murdering the P circulator and it is suddenly time ddenly time or members of the Doge, soiling a player's Trading routes can even be automated, to elect a new leader to one of these exalted good name, and burning down opponents' much like in Railroad Tycoon. Once a profitpositions, every vote counts. villas are all just tools of the trade in Merchant able \"milk run\" is established, you need only Prince. Once ruler of either of these areas, your organize your trading units into groups for power and influence increases tremendously. Personally, I enjoy trading games, and their mutual protection, tell them what to buy and sell, and assign them to routes of up As Pope, for instance, you can set the income loved Civilization. Not surprisingly, my into four destinations cach (just as in Railroad generated from the sale of indulgences (notitial impressions of this QQP game have left Tycoon). As the florins roll in, however, there too high, though, or the church becomes me intrigued and interested to see it in its final unpopular), create more cardinals (they can form. Although I found myself taking a lot of will be more to do with them than just imdie off and need occasional replacement-be notes to keep track of optimal buying and press your banker, but I don't want to get sides the Pope is cut in for a piece of the action selling prices (we anal retentive types really ahead of myself. of all Cardinal sales), excommunicate a city like to optimize our trade routes), I found (which then pays more for any imported playing Merchant Prince no less enjoyable It's a Cruel World, My Child goods) or even call a Crusade (giving the because of this. Solid and with ample play Pope, in effect, a free army to play with). The value, I think Merchant Prince will create The trouble with the world is that it is full leader of the Doge is even more powerful, quite a trade among gamers, particularly of random events. Specifically, these disasters assigning jobs to other players who then conthose seeking a good play-by-email backstabappear in the form of brigands, pirates, trol the corrupt purse strings of the state. bing feast. One final word of advice, though: storms and the machinations other players. Some things never change, it seems. Although the world (and the players) are rich, Brigands attack your caravans, while pirates a good fortune is no substitute for good fortrouble your ships. Both of these troublesome Four Against The World tune. CGW occurrences are carefully targeted toward established trade routes. When defeated, brigThe real beauty of Merchant ands and pirates will dissipate somewhat, but Prince clearly lies within its multiif they find commerce poorly protected and human player element. Each of the casily captured, it is like ringing the dinner four positions in the game can be bell for a school of sharks. The slightest sign managed by a human player, with of weakness will lead to the rapid infestation a specific play-by-email feature inof your routes by those brigands and pirates cluded. Players can send messages who would steal from you. To protect com(full of conniving, weaseling, and merce, you must hire guards, who both take back stabbing treachery, no doubt) up valuable cargo space and consume a fixed in their play-by-email moves and mere Assassin Cancel Page 192 Computer Gaming World "


"How Could We Ever Improve The World's Best Selling Chess Program? CHESSMSTER THE 4000 OPBO Computer chess enthusiasts will tell you that the software \"engine\" is what determines the true power of a chess program. The Chessmaster acts as a mentor and provides a new interactive animated tutorial, ten additional teaching displays and \"rate my plays;\" you predict the correct moves selected from famous games and The Chessmaster will score you. The new \"turbocharged\" 32-bit engine in The Chessmaster Version 4000 is based upon the engine that won the 1992 World Computer Chess Championship in Madrid, Spain. Taking advantage of the 32-bit processing capabilities of 386 and 486 processors, chess for the PC has reached a new level of excellence. NEW! New views including 3-D and rotating boards The Finest Chess Program In The World! The Software Toolworks has long been recognized as the leader in computer chess programs. Now, we're setting a new standard. Truly, The Chessmaster 4000 Turbo is the finest chess program in the world. The Chessmaster 4000 Turbo has a new custom Windows interface for spectacular graphics. Choose between 3-D or 2-D. Rotate the board. Choose from a dozen chess sets or design your own set or board. _THE_ We Gave It A Stronger Engine! BEISPI CHESSMASTER 4000 TURBO The Finest Chess Program in The World! THE SOUTWARE BOXEWORKS MA31067 World Allas U.S. Atlas. To Explore... Available for IBM PC and compatibles, Windows and MPC CD-ROM For dealer info or to order, call toll-free 1-800-234-3088 Copyright 1986-1993 The Software Toolworks Corporation Microsoft and MS-DOS are cere . The Ches demark ter. The software Toolworks and logo are registered trademark of The Nolwe Tools Inc. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines WiscoWB a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Allsheraden und demarks are the property of their respectid holders Circle Reader Service #137 "


"WARGAME SURVEY War In Our Time A Survey Of Wargames From 1950-2000 by M. Evan Brooks R brord ity the contemporary wargame designer. LINE 2: (Machine Format ((A)tari/(C)ommoTank Platoon, Tank). Graphics were adeWith the collapse of the Soviet Union and dore/Apple 11/(T)R80/11(GS)/(Am)iga/(ST)Y quate, but terrain elevation left something to nce of the \"Red Monolithic (Macintosh (1)BM: Issue of CGW in which be desired, and the program only portrayed a Threat,\" wargame designers are as confused as that game was mentioned; bold print refers to single tank while modern doctrine emphasenior cabinet officials in the Clinton adminimajor article. [Company/Designer/Date of Publication/Price (O/P: Out of Print) sizes larger element (company/squadron) emstration. Hypothetical Soviet-NATO confronLINE 3: Difficulty: (Beg)inner/(Int)ermediployment. tations simply lack marketability now, while atel(Ads ate/(Adv)anced; Environment (Land) ACE: AIR COMBAT EMULATOR (N-R) Balkan interventions have the appeal of overripe (Nav)al/(Air)/(Dip)lomatic/(Economic; (C/I; #35,88) Spinnaker/UXB; Ian Martin; compost; and if one can come up with a timely Level (Tac)tical/(p)erational/(St)rategic: 1987; O/P topic (e.g., the economic collapse of the Soviet # of Players (M: modem option). Beg/Air/Tac/1 Union a la Crisis in the Kremlin), actual events A British import and arcade game, offering a can render it obsolete before the code is comtwo-player split screen option. pleted. The \"New World Order\" is characterized by a lack thereof, and until a viable other ACE 2: AIR COMBAT EMULATOR (Nworld military-industrial complex evolves that is truly fearsome, contemporary designs may (C/I) Spinnaker/UXB; Ian Martin; xxx; O/P KILLER well avoid strategic perspectives. Similar to its predecessor, except for the fact that it occurs over an ocean environment and A continuing saga, this survey will cover not land. contemporary wargames, from the Korean War to the near future. Ratings have been A-10 TANK KILLER (***) revised, and earlier releases will often have (Am/I; #62,65,66,68,87) Dynamix; Damon lower ratings, simply because time is particuSlye; 1989; $59.95 larly unkind to electronic entertainment Int/Air/Tac/1 products. A simulation of the Warthog, the best CAS If any readers have additions/correc(close air support) aircraft ever forced on the tions/modifications, please send them to me Air Force. Version 1.5 has Desert Storm sceDyodum in care of this magazine or via modem on narios, and the graphics are well done. MisGEnie (address: M.E. Brooks). The reader sions are varied, but joystick control is very Level Definitions: submitting the most correct additions will sensitive. Maintaining level flight may prove Tactical: man-to-man up to company level receive a one-year subscription/extension to difficult, especially when using the chain gun. (turns represent seconds to hours) his CGW subscription. Operational: battalion-level to division-level AIDE DE CAMP (****) The winner from the 1900-1950 period is (turns represent hours to weeks) (T; #108) HPS; Scott Hamilton; 1993; Robert J. Cohen. A long-time reader, Mr. Strategic: corps-level to theater army or higher $79.95 Cohen remembers reading my initial writings (turns represent weeks to years) Inc/Land-Nav-Air/Tac-Op-Str/1 from a decade ago in Current Notes, an Atari Military Organization: Not a game as much as a gamer's aid, this user group publication. Congratulations! Fire Team utility program will assist you in converting Please note that submissions are to be in the Squad 9-12 any board wargame to computer output, alperiod covered in the article. One confused Platoon 40-50 beit without the Al. Once files are created, though enterprising reader added many Civil Company 120-150 Battalion 500-1,000 games can be played by e-mail. A library of War and Vietnam period omissions to the Brigade 3,000-5,000 conversions by grognard users is already un1900-1950 survey Division 10,000-15,000 der way. LEGEND: XXX = Data not available. Corps 20,000-80,000 AIRBORNE RANGER (**) LINE 1: Title/Rating Army 100,000-up (C/Ap/Am/ST/I; 41,43) MicroProse; Ratings: ABRAMS BATTLE TANK (**) Lawrence Schick; 1987: $29.95 = Good use as a magnet holder (1; #60) Electronic Arts; Damon Slye; 1989; Int/Land/Tac/1 = Avoid $49.95 Contemporary Ranger operations in a semi** Marginal = Average to Good Int/Land/Tactical/1 arcade mode that works. Challenging and fun = Very Good The first serious contemporary tank simulafor both adults and children, Airborne Ranger *** The Highest Recommendation tion for the faster 16-bit machines, this prodis recommended for a diversion from the N-R = Nor Rated uct has been superseded by later releases (M-1 more serious simulations. 2-3 Page 194 Computer Gaming World "


"TM WHERE W. THE JOKER STRIKE NEXT. WHERE WILL STRIKE NEXT? Mindblowing 3D morphs! Stunning hi-res graphics! Electrifying soundtrack! 11 meg of compressed data! Not yet available in stores! Completely non-detrimental! m Save $10.00 by ordering now! Not meant to be used as a virus! Illustration and ad design by M Winterbauer WINTERBAUER Errat Major meltdown. Gone-fishing I. Poweksurge damage Mouse droppings detected Recause you smell, on motherboard! I refuse to computek Fatal R/W error on Drive : Out of memory! Erro 408: Disk Full Self-destruct sequence activated! The JOKER is that powerful tool you diehard pranksters have yearned for! Choose from 60 different virus-like pranks that can be installed on anyone's IBM VGA machine in seconds. In addition, a new function allows you to install a prank routine on your own computer; to deter curious fingers from gaining access to your precious files. Once a prank routine has been planted, keyboard lights will flicker, sound effects will whistle, and awesome 3D morphs will appear to leap off the screen. Best of all, you will have total control over their computer: Yes, please send me The JOKER! Enclosed is my check or money Giving you instant fame in the fun world of Pranksterism! order for the introductory price of only $29.00 plus $3.50 s/h. NAME COUNTRY Get The JOKER before he gets YOU!!! ADDRESS CITY STATE/PROVINCE ZIP/POSTAL CODE Requirements: IBM or clone 286+, VGA, mouse. Sound Blaster supported. IL. residents please add sales tax. Make checks payable to: Pyramid Software: Part of Raymond Lucders Studio (708) 697-9400 Raymond Lueders Studio, Box 755, Streamwood, IL 60107 Circle Reader Service #122 COMPUTE's Adventure Game Player's Handbook is the ultimate hint book for adventurers and role-players alike! Features: vadyetimo 512 pages of hints, clues, and walk-throughs (including programmer's cheat modes)! Players Beautifully illustrated with over 300 game snapshots, digitized images, and vital maps! handbook Complete solutions to 37 popular games like: The 7th Guest, Star Trek, King's Quest, Ultima Underworld, Inca, Kyrandia, Space Quest, Leisure Suit Larry, and many more! Available at software retailers or send $21.95 ($2.50 s/h) to: COMPUTE Books, c/o CCC, 2500 McCellan Ave., Pennsauken, NJ 08109 NEED A LIJNT? compute's remendedera "


"| HARRIER ASSAU AIR DUEL (**) Beg/Land/Tac/1 description, but no one was really excited (Am/I; #85,111) MicroProse UK; Glynn A futuristic tank arcade game resembling the about the parameters of the design. Williams; 1992; $59.95 early coin-op Tank Zone, but with more opAVSB HARRIER ASSAULT (N-R) Int/Air/Tac/1 tions. (Am/I; #106) Domark; Simis; 1993; $59.95 Multi-period air combat a la Chuck Yeager's ARMOR ALLEY (+) Adv/Air/Tac-Op/1 Air Combat. One can actually choose aircraft (M/I; #87) Three Sixty; Arthur Britto II; A detailed simulation of the British Harrier. from World War I through the presentand 1990; $39.95 Unlike most flight simulators, this was more that is the problem. The aircraft simply are Bas/Land-Air/Tac/1-4; M of an operational wargame which offered the clumsy to operate, and do not seem historiAn arcade tank/air support game, this inopportunity to plan and execute an amphibically correct, e.g. would a Fokker Triplane volves eight scenarios of increasing difficulty. ous operation (see Jumpjet for similar treatactually have a chance to down an F-15? Graphics and game play can offer a short ment of the aircraft). Wouldn't the backdraft from a jet be suffientertaining diversion, but little of serious B-1 NUCLEAR BOMBER (0) cient to throw a biplane out of the sky. A great import. An updated version of an early Apple (Ap; #1.1) Avalon Hill; xxx; 1983; O/P idea with mediocre execution. 8-bit game. Beg/Air/Tac/1 AIR FORCE COMMANDER (**) An early game from Avalon Hill, its play (1) Impressions; David Lester; 1992; $29.95 mechanics are embarrassing in the contemInt/Air/Str/1 porary market; in fact, its play mechanics Offering multi-scenario options for strategic were embarrassing when it was initially reair supremacy in the Middle East, the scenarleased. ios themselves are detailed and somewhatesoBALANCE OF POWER (***) teric, e.g. Bahrain vs. Qatar (actually not that (Ap/GS/Am/ST/M/I; #29,34,40,57,64) unrealistic given the political realities). But Mindscape; Chris Crawford; 1985; $49.95 the speed of the game could not be slowed Adv/Dip/Str/1-2 down (eventually a parch was distributed over electronic bulletin boards). Overall, an inter A STRATEGIC FLIGHT SIMULATION With numerous revisions having already appeared, this simulation of modern power esting effort with little potential for enduring politics graduated from a bi-polar world play value. (US/Sovier) in its initial release to a multi-poAIR STRIKE USA (*+) lar world (US/Soviet/Chinese/Third World) (Am/I; #82) Cinema Ware/Spotlight; Rod in its later edition. A newer edition will probSwift; 1990; $39.95 DOMARK ably simulate the newest version of RealpoliBeg/Air/Tac-Op/1 tik, with the collapse of the Soviet Empire ARMOR ASSAULT (+) An arcade game semi-disguised as a flight and the restoration of the instabilities inhersimulator, Air Strike portrays an ATF II (ul(A; #3.1,37) Epyx; John Weber; 1983; O/P ent in Eastern Europe. tra-modern attack fighter) in a multitude of Beg/Land/Tac/1-2 missions world-wide. Documentation is A tactical meeting engagement between US BALTIC 1985 (N-R) and Soviet forces, this game was one of the (Ap/C) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger somewhat spartan, with the world views and flight mechanics of a similar vein. first to offer a \"design-your-own-scenario.\" Keating; 1984; OP option. Units are limited to six vehicles each Int/Nav-Air/Op/1-2 AIR WARRIOR (****) (no other air or ground support); hence its Part of SSI's When Superpowers Collide series, (#63;67,88) GEnie; Kesmai; 1988; $(/hourrealism is very low. Given the contemporary realism is very low. Given the contemporary this simulation covers World War III in the Int/Air/Tac/1-multi; M market, this game is visibly obsolete. Baltic. An on-line simulation of tactical air combat ASHES OF EMPIRE (N-R) BATTALION COMMANDER (**+) from World War I onwards. Continually be(I; #111) Gametek; Mike Singleton; 1993; (A/Ap/C; #37) Strategic Simulations Inc.; ing revised and updated, it is interesting al$59.95 David Hille; 1983; O/P though it can become an expensive way of life. Adv/Land/Op-Str/1 Int/Land/Tac/1 The learning curve is lengthy, but often vetA logistician's dream (nightmare!) of reconA modern simulation of company/battalion eran pilots are available on-line who are will structing a nation-state that has recently dislevel operations, this was an improvement on ing to give assistance and tutorials. integrated into numerous factions (does the Combat Leader, but its age still shows. APACHE STRIKE (N-R) name Boris Yeltsin ring a bell?). BATTLE COMMAND (N-R) (M/I; #48) Electronic Arts/Silicon Beach; ATAC (**) (C; #40,74,88) Applied Computer ConsultJames W. Long and Tom Zerucha; 1988; (Am/I; #105) MicroPlay; Argonaut; 1992; ants; xxx; 1986; O/P O/P $59.95 Beg/Land/Op/2; M Beg/Air/Tac/1 Int/Air/Tac/1 More of an abstract Battle Chess than a modAn arcade version of an AH-64 helicopter Initially titled White Shadow(until many peoern simulation. simulation, all action occurs in an urban enple confused it with an old television show BATTLE FRONT (***) vironment a la Air Wolf. about a white basketball coach in an inner city (C/Ap; #32,37,88) Strategic Studies Group; ARCTIC FOX (N-R) school), this simulation (Advanced Tactical Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1987; $39.95 (C/Ap/ST/Am/I; #28) Electronic Arts; Kevin Air Fighter) portrays the drug wars between Int/Land/Op/0-2 Ryan, Jeff Tunnell, Damon Slye and Richard the US and the Medallin cartel a la the book A very flexible game covering corps-level Hicks; 1986; O/P Clear and Present Danger. Adequate is a fair combat and proper use of the chain of comPage 196 Computer Gaming World "


"At the Summer Consumer Electronics Show, an incredible new game beat all the rest... SALURAN RIA YASHI BES SHOW Take off on the adventure everyone's talking about: Command Adventures: STARSHIP. You'll wage war in space and on planets of every description. Outwit devious pirates and bloodthirsty aliens. And amass wealth, weapons and glory. All while revelling in bone-chilling sound effects, an incredible CD-quality soundtrack, and what PC Entertainment called the tremendous visual appeal of FUTURE A Merit Software \"VISION ray-traced graphics and beautiful cinematic sequences.\" No wonder Computer Game Review said STARSHIP must be seen to be believed!\" It's never the same game twice. And with over 50 worlds to conquer, isn't it time you got started? To order or for the name of your nearest dealer, call today! AZINY 1-800-238-4277 13707 Gamma Road  Dallas, Texas 75244 214-385-2353 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS: 3865X 33 PC or 100% compatible, 2MB RAM with 575K Free Low RAM, Hard Drive, VGA Graphics Adapter with 256K Video Memory Microsoft or 100% Compatible Mouse SOUND SUPPORT PC Internal Speaker Adlib Adlib Gold Sound Blaster Sound Blaster Pro ProAudio Spectruti 10. Roland MT-32 and Roland Sound Canvas 1993 Ment Software  Future Visionary: Inc Future Vision Command Adventures Starship, and Masters of the Imagination are registered trademarks of Future Visionary, Inc ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #92 "


"CONFLICT IN mand during World War II. Design-yourno combat. More than replaced by Chuck COMBAT LEADER (**) own scenarios open the bulk of the 20th Yeager's Air Combat. (A/C; #3.5,37,88) Strategic Simulations Inc.; century to gaming; however, the artificial inCHUCK YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT David Hille; 1983; O/P telligence of subordinate commanders is noInt/Land/Tac-Op/1 (****) toriously weak. The game system will either A simulation of armored tactical operations (I/M; #85,86,88) Electronic Arts; Brent Iverattract or repel the player—there is no middle over a 40-year period. Flexible, albeit with son; 1991; $59.95 ground. primitive graphics. Int/Air/Tac/1 BIRDS OF PREY (**) A flight simulator offering the ability to fly COMMAND HQ (***) (Am/I; #85) Electronic Arts; Argonaut; 1992; scenarios in World War II, Korea or Vietnam, (1/M; #74,76,77,79,80,81,88) MicroProse; $49.95 or mix-and-match them. Adequate graphics Dan Bunten: 1990; $59.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 (although I am not overly fond of polygonInt/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str/1-2; M Modern aerial warfare with over 40 different emphasized graphics), good game play and an A product capable of recreating World Wars craft. Yet, the various aircraft have suspiexcellent post-mission analysis yield a high I-IV), this is a modified \"beer and pretzels\" ciously similar flight characteristics and inrecommendation. Recently released on the game. Highly recommended for entertainstrumentation. Overall, the personality is Macintosh with a few minor improvements. ment, although not as an historical learning bland, bland, bland! experience. BLUE ANGELS (**) COMPUTER CONFLICT (N-R) (C/Am/ST/I; #63,65,67,70) Accolade; Rick (Ap) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger KearBanks and Paul Butler; 1990; $49.95 ing (Rebel Force) and Jim Yarbrough (Red Int/Air/Tac/1 Attack); 1981; O/P What if they didn't give a war but people still Int/Land/Tac/1-2 came? This product simulates formation flyComposed of two games, Red Attack is a ing, and does it rather well. On the other two-player introductory modern scenario, hand, flying a hot interceptor without a viable while Rebel Force is a solitaire game of LIC enemy leads to a certain lassitude. (light intensity conflict) with the player comBOMBER (N-R) manding the conventional forces. (C/Am/ST/I; #66) Activision; Vektor Grafix; CONFLICT (***) xxx, xxx (ST/Am/I; #68,72,73) Virgin Mastertronix; Int/Air/Tac/1 David Eastman; 1990; $14.95 Released in the United States as Strike Aces; Beg/Dip/Str/1 also known as Fighter Bomber. Easy-to-learn game of the contemporary BRIGADE COMMANDER (N-R) Middle East. Quick and fun to play (if not (Am; #85,86) TTR: Argonaut Software; particularly a massive intellectual challenge), 1991; $44.95 but it cannot run on any machine faster than Adv/Land/Tac/1 a 386. COMANCHE: Maximum Overkill (N-R) CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN (*) (I; #104) Electronic Arts; NovaLogic; 1992; (I/Am; #78,88) Capstone; Intracorp; 1990; $69.95 (Am/ST/1: #65) Mirrorsoft; xxx; 1989; O/P $49.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 Int/Land/Op-Str/1 Int/Land/Tac-Op/1 The gunship simulation of 1992! Excellent Similar to NATO Commander. An adaptation of the Tom Clancy novel to graphics and game play were only slightly CONFLICT IN VIETNAM (***+) computer game format, this simulation of marred by the paucity of scenarios. Nor nec(A/Ap/C/; #26) MicroProse; Sid Meier and Cold War politics and SDI research utilized essarily accurate in any historical sense, the Ed Bever; 1986; O/P intensive bar graphs as a replacement for ac entertainment value was present-assuming Int/Land/Op/0-2 tion and entertainment. the program worked correctly. I am still tryThe final product of the Command series, this CARRIER COMMAND (**) ing to figure out how to get my system to simulation of campaigns in Vietnam teaches (Am/ST/M/I; #52,63,69) MicroPlay; Real work with CMO; vanilla boots, separate autovalid lessons in an enjoyable format. Yet, time Games; 1989; $39.95 exec, files, nothing seems to allow my joystick when all is said and done, Vietnam was an Int/Nav-Air/Tac/1 to function—and I simply refuse to play the unattractive war and there is little opportuA futuristic arcade game of carrier-air operaprogram with keyboard input only. Hence, nity for the player to really \"win.\" Without a tions. the lack of a rating. doubt, the best computer simulation ever CHUCK YEAGER'S ADVANCED COMANCHE: Maximum Overkill Misdone on the period. FLIGHT TRAINER (+) sion Disk 1 (N-R) CONFLICT: KOREA (**+) (A/Ap/C/M/I; #44) Electronic Arts; Ned (1; #108) Electronic Arts; NovaLogic; 1993: (Am/l; #98,99) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Learner; 1988; XXX $39.95 Norm Koger; 1992; $59.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 Int/Air/Tac/1 Adv/Land-Air/Tac-Op/1-2 Available in \"classic\" packages (generally Additional graphics, enemies and scenarios. A simulation of the Korean War (1950-51) three older products), this simulation was a However, the fight model remains the same, and a hypothetical invasion (1995), this game flight simulator for a number of aircraft. Note and the end recommendation would be that is detailed and accurate. But while the Korean the word «trainer\" was operative, there was if you enjoyed the original, have at it. War went from massive thrust and counter Page 198 Computer Gaming World "


"ReadySoft Incorporated & Epicenter Interactive Present DRAGONSLAR CTP-ROM actu 000 P60 ore 99 Son You're in for the adventure of your life Dragon's Lair is back and better than ever on CD-ROM! Po This full arcade version is packed with spectacular animation and digitized sound, bringing Dragon's Lair to life like never before! CANCIAL SEGA You control the actions of Dirk the Daring, a valiant knight, on a quest to rescue the fair Princess from the clutches of an evil dragon. Fight your way through the castle of the dark wizard who has enchanted it with treacherous monsters and obstacles. Ruellagie 3DO also available for IBM PC & Macintosh Lead on brave adventurer... your quest awaits! ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Tel: (905) 731-4175 Fax: (905) 764-8867 Licensed by Sega Enterprises Ltd. for play on the Sega CD system, Seca and Sepa CD are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Lid. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 300. the 3D logos, and Interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of the 3D0 Company *REEL MAGIC\" is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. \"Dragon's Lair is a registered trademark of Bluth Group, Ltd. 1993. Character Designs  Don Bluth:  all audio, visual and concept used under the exclusive license of Epicenter interactive Inc. Programming  ReadySoft Incorporated. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED "


"thrust and back again to a static attritional F-14 TOMCAT (N-R) warfare without maneuver, the program only (C/I; #53,58,68) Activision; Dynamix; 1989; covers the initial year. Granted that the later $49.95 years were totally different types of warfare, Beg/Air/Tac/1 the lack of historical completeness had diffiA fighter simulation more akin to an arcade culty engaging my interest. game. CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST (***) F-15 STRIKE EAGLE (**) (Am/I; #86,87,90) Strategic Simulations (A/C/AP/ST/I; #4.6,74) Micro Prose; Sid Inc.; Norm Koger; 1991; $59.95 Meier; 1984; $19.99 Adv/Land-Air/Tac-Op/1-2 Int/Air/Tac/1 A serious simulation of the 1973 Yom Kippur The first \"classic\" fighter simulation, this War and a future Arab-Israeli War, this prod product was well loved in its time. However, uct is very detailed. Mouse implementation is it is extremely dated in today's market. much easier than the designer's last effort (Red F-15 II (***+) Lightning), but it still requires much time and (ST/Am/l; #65,70,86) MicroProse; Sid thought. Recommended for the serious afiMeier & Andy Hollis; 1989; $54.95 cionado. Int/Air/Tac/1 An update of F-15 to state-of-the-art graphCRISIS IN THE KREMLIN (**) ics. A Desert Storm Scenario Disk ($29.95) was (1; #95) Spectrum HoloByte; Larry Barbu; also released. 1992; $59.95 Int/Pol/Str/1 The Slavic version of Hidden Agenda, only done completely with economic analysis. Superb rendition of the problems facing a Soviet TRIKE EAGI Union shortly before dissolution. From the viewpoint ofa certified public accountant, the program is a businessman's holiday; for the rest of us, it is somewhat tedious. A classic case of marketing being on the cutting edge of the news only to have the story break six months too soon. DEFCON 5 (N-R) (C/I; #38, CGF Winter 1987) Cosmi; Paul Norman; 1987: O/P MICROPROSE Beg/Air/Str/1 An SDI simulation. F-15 Strike Eagle III (****) (: #105) MicroProse: Andy Hollis: 1992; DESERT STORM WITH COALITION $79.95 COMMAND (***) Int-Adv/Air/Tac/1 ( ICD; #105) Compton's NewMedia; The latest rendition, combining state-of-theQuanta Press; 1993; $49.95 art graphics and game value; it definitely reBeg/Land/Str/1 quires a fast machine, but the graphics and As a game, there was little substance, and game play justify themselves. On the other virtually nothing to recommend. However, as hand, the new generations just seem to be a source document for the Gulf War, this occurring faster and faster... program shines. Literally, the complete Congressional report coupled with sound bites F-16 COMBAT PILOT (N-R) and photographs. (ST/Am/I; #61,66,69,83) Electronic Arts; Digital Integration; 1990; $49.95 DRAGON FORCE (***) Int/Air/Tac-Str/1-2; M (Am/I; #60,70,77) Interstel; Roger Damon; A somewhat forgettable flight simulator. 1990; $49.95 F-18 HORNET (N-R) Int/Land/Tac/1 (C; #56) Absolute; xxx; XXX; XXX; XXX Known for Operation Whirlwind, Field of Fire, Panzer Grenadier and Wargame Conxxx/xxx struction Set, Roger Damon updates his tactiF-19 (**) cal system to the 16-bit machines. A logical (C/Am/ST/I; #53,55,56,64) MicroProse; Sid descendant of his earlier designs, this simulaMeier & Andy Hollis; 1988; $69.95 tion offers several man-to-man tactical situAdv/Air/Tac/1 ations in the contemporary environment. Simulation of the Stealth Fighter, it is richly textured and complex (see F-117 for a newer version). F-29 RETALIATOR (**) (Am/ST/I; #69,72,85,87) Ocean; Martin Kenwright; 1990; $39.95 Int/Air/Tac/1-2; M An ultra-modern fighter simulation, this product was distinguished by its relatively moderate release cost. However, it is rather generic in nature. F-117A (***) (1; #89) MicroProse; Jeff Briggs: 1991; $69.95 Adv/Air/Tac/1 The third-generation of Stealth simulations, this was even more detailed and graphically rich, but recommended only for those who are experts in the genre. F/A-18 INTERCEPTOR (N-R) (C/Am; #50) Electronic Arts; Robert Dinnerman; 1989; $49.95 Beg/Air/Tac/1 A flight simulator limited to the San Francisco airspace. FALCON 3.0 (N-R) (1: #76,83,92,93,106,108) Spectrum HoloByte; Gilman Louie; 1991; $79.95 Adv/Air/Tac/1-2; M Falcon is not a game system as much as it is a way of life. Possibly the most complex air simulator ever released for the commercial sector, its newest version (3.0) requires DOS 5.0, a 486-33MHz computer and a math co-processor. The manual is consistent with the game and uses a layered level of teaching flight operations. Recommended for the serious power user! Two scenario disks have been released for the AT versions-Operation Counterstrike and Operation Firefight (Amiga and ST only) at $24.95 and $49.95 respectively: Operation Fighting Tiger was released for 3.0 in 1992; it covers operations in Korea, Pakistan/India and the Kurile Islands. MiG29 allows a new aircraft to engage the Falcon. Finally, for those who are unable to determine the \"how-to's, Spectrum HoloByte has released Art of the Kill, a book/videotape tutorial on modern fighter tactics. FALKLANDS '82 (*) (C; #34,37) Firebird; John Bethell; 1985; O/P Bas/Air-Land-Nav/Op/1 Simulation of the Falklands Conflict, it made up in price value what it lacked in historical accuracy. But it has aged poorly and offers little for the contemporary wargamer in either history or play value. FIFTH ESKRADA (N-R) (C/Ap/ST; #4.4,5.2) Simulations Canada; L o re Jes Fighter Herrsin Revolutionary New Air Combes Action Page 200 Computer Gaming World "


"ALLE 1 E AMP LILE OLOR SHETTORE DETAILS Too many board games and not enough time or space to play them? Aide De Camp is for you! B. te MARCH Deaegs23 . Liptore NOT * A-LWN *** OVIMA \"Civil War Brigade Series\" Add-on otto LALITER TOK Tecu «Perryville\" Add-on 12 ide De Camp is a revolutionary game assistance program which enables you to take virtually any HEX OR AREA based game and play it on your PC. The secret to Aide De Camp is in its tremendous built-in power and flexibility. YOU create the terrain and unit symbol graphics. YOU set up and edit the map. YOU determine how movement, combat, and other game functions operate. Aide De Camp also opens up new possibilities for playing by mail. Forget about writing (and erasing and rewriting) all of your moves and unit positions down. With Aide De Camp all you do is send a diskette. No errors, no trouble, and no wasted time. Better yet, you can use a modem to transfer your moves instantly. Aide De Camp features: * Capacity to hold maps of up to 30,000 hexes. * No limit on the quantity of units per game. * Placement up to 7 types of terrain in each hex. * Definition of up to 200 custom terrain types per game. * Unconstrained unit stacking, with the ability to create unique stack symbols. * Multiple user defined zoom levels. * Automatic mapsheet and hex numbering SELF * Save of game set-ups and turns forever. * Opportunity to easily design your own games, or modify your existing ones. * ADD-ON DISKS FOR MANY GAMES ARE BEING MADE AVAILABLE BY THE BOARD GAME PUBLISHERS. Aide De Camp is a playing aid only. It does not include a computer opponent, or the ability to enter the rules or charts for any specific game. You must first own a copy of the board game in order to enter and play it on Aide De Camp. Aide De Camp requires an IBM or compatible computer, with at least 500K free conventional RAM (additional RAM may be required for large games), VGA display, and a hard disk. A mouse is optional. $79.95 Available only by mail. Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. CA residents add state sales tax. Please specify disk spec when ordering. VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Mail checks/money orders to: HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 SIIVIULATIONS Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Bonvich 1992 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved IBM is a registered trademark of International Rusiness Machines Inc SR DEP . E-5 CEIP 1-TAP DET Ede NOTCH TO EVERTO HE PHOTO SELECT T SE ROSE EELES ELE URA VHPS P.O. Box 3245 "


"$60 W.J. Nichols; 1984; by the same designer. HARPOON II (N-R) (1) Three Sixty; Carl Norman; 1993(?); XXX Int/Air-Sea/Op/1-2 GUNSHIP (***) Adv/Naval-Air/Tac-Op/1 (C/ST/Am/I; #34,35,38,CGF Winter 1987) FIREPOWER (N-R) The new adaptation of Harpoon, with a NoMicroProse; Arnold Hendrick; 1986; $54.95 (C/GS/1: #42,88) Activision/Microillusions vember 1993 release date. Since the original Int/Air/Tac/1 Reichart von Wolfshield; 1987; O/P Harpoon has been out for almost a year, one When initially released, this was THE heliBeg/Land/Tac/1-2; M wonders... But a minimum 386-machine copter simulation. Good graphics coupled A modern combat simulation with helicopter with excellent game play made this a classic. configuration is suggested, although to be more realistic, probably a 486-50MHz or support, it is basically an arcade product. GUNSHIP 2000 (****) better would be a better guess. More realistic FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER (***) (1; #89,91) Micro Prose; Jim Day; 1991; sonar and radar operations, weather, upgrade (Am/ST/I; #68,69,74,75,76) Spectrum $69.95 in Al-it should be enough to keep the naval Holo Byte; Rod Hyde; 1990; $59.95 Int/Air/Tac/1 aficionados glued to their computer until Adv/Air/Tac/1 An update of Gunship, it covers several rotaryGroundhog Day. A complex flight simulator of Vietnam air wing aircraft in various theaters. Probably the HARRIER COMBAT SIMULATOR operations. Although relatively detailed and best helicopter simulation currently available (**) accurate, it seemed to garner the same popuon the market, but be sure to get the updated (ST/I; #48) Mindscape; Mirrorsoft; 1988; larity as the Vietnam Conflict. version with its better collective implementaplementaO/P GEOPOLITIQUE 1990 (++) tion. Beg/Air/Tac/1 (Clap; #4.1) Strategic Simulations Inc.; A newer version of High Roller, still marred Bruce Kerchledge; 1983; O/P by a restricted area of operations and clumsy Int/Dip/St/1  WARPLON mechanics. Power politics in the 1980s; graphics and HEAVY METAL (**) reality have definitely rendered it obsolete. (C/I; #53,54,57) Access; Brent Erickson; GERMANY 1985 (N-R) 1989; $39.95 NATO (C/Ap; #3.3,5.1) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Beg/Land/Tac/1 Roger Kearing; 1983; O/P A tank simulation, more akin to an arcade Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 product than a serious simulator. Cold War nightmares rendered obsolescent HIGH ROLLER (*+) by time, computer development and political (I; #33) Mirrorsoft; xxx; 1986; O/P reality. Int/Air/Tac/1 GLOBAL COMMANDER (*) A simulator of the Harrier jump-jet, it is (CIST; #48,51) DataSoft: J. Wilson; 1988; marred by an overly restrictive environment O/P and mediocre graphics. Bas/Dip/Str/1 HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER (+) A global confrontation simulation, it bears (C/Am/ST/I; #30,32,46,48) DataSoft: Oxlittle resemblance to reality and has limited HALLS OF MONTEZUMA (**+) ford Digital Enterprises; 1984; O/P entertainment value. Int/Nav/Tac/1 (Am/M/Ap/C/I; #42,45,75) Strategic StudGOLAN FRONT (N-R) Based on the Tom Clancy novel, this simulaies Group; Roger Keating; 1987; $39.95 (C/Ap; #5.4,5.5) Simulations Canada; W.J. tion sold well in a movie tie-in, bur probably Int/Land/Tac-Op/0-2 Nichols; 1985; $60 A simulation of U.S. Marine operations from did more to turn off purchasers to the warInt/Land/Tac/1-2 the Mexican War to Vietnam based on the game genre than any other product. Slow and GULF STRIKE (**) clumsy mechanics yielded an ultimate failure Battle Front system. (At/Ap/C/I; #4.5,5.1) Avalon Hill; Mark as a gaming experience. HARPOON (***** Herman and Winchell Chung; 1984; O/P JET (*+) (AM/M/I; Int/Air-Land-Nav/Op/1-2 (A/Ap/C/M/Am/1; #5.5,50) SubLogic; #62,65,66,68,69,70,75,82,85,94,96, 109, Based on the more successful boardgame of Charles Guy; 1985; O/P 110) Three Sixty; Gordon Walton (Mike the same name, its play mechanics are clumsy. Adv/Air/Tac/1-2; M Steele, Daniel Dearing and Jesse Spears); However, its graphics are even worse, and the A flight simulator with a mediocre F-16 and 1988: $59.95, Battle Sets $29.95, Challenger F-18 combat option. As interesting as Flight color scheme has to be one of the poorest ever Pak $79.95, Designers' Series $39.95 seen in the computer field. Simulator (the original version). Adv/Naval-Air/Tac-Op/1 GUNBOAT (**) The best simulation of contemporary naval JET COMBAT SIMULATOR (N-R) (Am/I; #68,71,72) Accolade; Tom Loughry; warfare, it is kept current through release of (C; #25) Epyx; Firebird; 1986; O/P 1990; $49.95 new \"battlesers» (to dare, GIUK, North AtlanBeg/Air/Tac/1 Int/Nav/Tac/1 tic, Med, and Gulf), plus 48 new scenarios in An F-15 simulator, with little entertainment A simulation of Vietnam riverine operations, the Designer Series. Detailed and intricate, yet it is more of an arcade game. However, it does easy to learn, it can reach valuable lessons JETFIGHTER: THE ADVENTURE cover a combat aspect never attempted bewhile remaining an entertaining gaming ex(* fore. The graphics are similar to Steel Thunder perience. (I; #58) Broderbund; Bob Dinnerman; 1988; value. Page 202 Computer Gaming World "


"MI O AMORIDAR COMBAT $49.95 it succeeds more than most of its competition. MECH BRIGADE (**) Adv/Air/Tac/1 However, the computer has still not shown (A/C/Ap/I; #5.4,29,33,37,43,48) Strategic Detailed graphics and play value, although itself to be a valid platform for detailed land Simulations Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1985; O/P the basic scenario (occurring in the United graphics in a fast-moving environment. Int/Land/Op/0-2 States) was tenuous at best. The first simulaMACARTHUR'S WAR (***) A successor to Kampfgruppe, it is a CGW Hall tor to require tone acquisition a la Top Gun; of Famer, although I thought that honor to (C/Ap; #53,57,61,63) Strategic Studies still an entertaining product. be unduly awarded. Contemporary warfare, Group; Roger Keating and lan Trout; 1989; JETFIGHTER II (***) but dared (both politically and in terms of $40 (1; #86,87,88) Velocity; Bob Dinnerman; Int/Land/Tac-Op/0-2 state-of-the-art). $69.95; 1991 A simulation of Korean War battles using the MEGAFORTRESS (****) Adv/Air/Tac/1 Battle Front system. Since most gamers are (1; #74,76,81,89,90) Three Sixty; Rick A sequel to Jetfighter, it has contemporary relatively unfamiliar with the War, the scenarBanks and Paul Butler; 1991; $49.95 graphics and play value. ios prove intriguing and challenging, Adv/Air/Tac-Op/1 JUMPJET (***) MAIN BATTLE TANK: CENTRAL GERNormally, I find simulations of tactical (I; #108) MicroProse; Mike Brunton; 1993; MANY (N-R) bomber operations intrinsically dull. After $69.95 (Ap/ST/I; #65,68) Simulations Canada; all, one flies a bus-like lumbering aircraft to a Int-Adv/Air/Tac/1 point, drops a bomb and flies home. HowSteven Newberg and Stephen St. John; 1989; A detailed flight simulator, but missing the $60 ever, Three Sixty has made a difference, and campaign ambiance of AV8B Harrier Assault. Int/Land/Tac/1-2 this simulation is both realistic and entertainSimilar to F-19 in scope, more was expected The classic NATO-Warsaw Pact confrontaing. Excellent graphics and play mechanics than was produced make this a program definitely worth looking tion, planned for decades, occurs across the at. Scenario disks, Operation Sledge Hammer LHX (**) Fulda Gap as V Corps prepares to trade space (I; #68,72) Electronic Arts; Brent Iverson; for time. Per SimCan standard, there are no and Operation Skymaster have been released. 1990; $59.95 graphics. Command level is at the regi& Command level is at the regiMIG ALLEY ACE (**) Int/Air/Tac/1 ment/battalion level. (A/C; #4.2.4.3) MicroProse; Andy Hollis; A simulation of helicopter combat, it enjoyed 1984; O/P more popular success than I thought it deBeg/Air/Tac/1-2 served. An early MicroProse release, it is obsolere other than as an item of curiosity. The first LINE IN THE SAND (**+) flight simulator to use split-screen graphics (I; #101) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Flint for two players. Dille and Lee Chin; 1992; $39.95 Int/Op/Land-Air/1-4 MIG-29 (****) A faithful adaptation of GDW's boardgame, (1) Spectrum HoloByte; Gilman Louie; this simulation is not an accurate repre1993: $59.95 sentation of the Gulf War. The game is akin Adv/Air/Tac-Op/1-2; M to a static line World War I battle, which does Billed as the «Deadly Adversary of Falcon not prevent it from being entertaining, just 3.0,\" this flight simulator requires Falcon 3.0 from being accurate. Actually, the other scein order to run. The plane itself is nowhere narios involving potential flashpoints benear as sophisticated as the Falcon, but tween Israel and the Arab nations are more American and Soviet technologies differ in interesting with their diplomatic and military MICROPRO demand and design. This is a mandatory options. addition to a grognard's collection. For the LOST PATROL (0) MAIN BATTLE TANK: MIDDLE EAST casual weekend flyer, an easier simulation (Am/ST/I; #72,81) Ocean; Ian Harling; (N-R) should be seriously considered. 1989; $49.95 (1; #94,96) Simulations Canada; Steven Mig-29 FULCRUM (**+) Int/Land/Tac/1 Newberg and Stephen St. John; 1992: $60 (1; #81,94) Domark; John Kavanagh; 1991; Attempt to bring your patrol home from a Int/Land/Tac/1-2 $49.95 grueling mission in Vietnam. The underlying An adaptation of the non-graphic battle repAdv/Air/Tac/1 thesis is interesting, but keyboard input is resentation in the Middle East. A good example of pricing differentials, it was awkward and too slow, while joystick inpur is MAIN BATTLE TANK: NORTHERN originally released as a European import at a so poorly done that the entire game is totally GERMANY (N-R) price of $79.95. Billed as the most realistic unplayable. See Seal Team for a more accurate (1: #80) Simulations Canada: Steven Newflight model available of the MiG-29, its and enjoyable simulation. berg and Stephen St. John; 1991; $60 armaments are not realistic and overall, it M-1 TANK PLATOON (****) Int/Land/Tac/1-2 lacks the panache of other releases. (Am/ST/I; #62,65,66,66,71) MicroProse; The British Army of the Rhine attempts to MODEM WARS (N-R) Arnold Hendrick; 1989; $69.95 stem the Warsaw Pact as it crosses the North (1) Electronic Arts; Dan Bunten: 1988; O/P Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1 German plain (see Main Battle Tank: Central Beg/Land/Tac/1-2; M Arguably the best armor simulation available Germany for similar treatment in the adjacent A modem game of armor combat in a quasion the market. Richly textured and complex, theater). football type environment. January 1994 Page 203 "


"VKNG ))) SOFTWARE, INC. SAME DAY SHIPPING UNTIL PM EASTERN TIME! Adventure/Role-Playing Past Present Future Hint Books Hardware December Specials Battletech Powerhits Bloodnet IBM Mac 20. 38 . Civilization/Rome 640K Clouds of Xeen RED CRYSTAL The Seren Sered 19. !!!! IBM Mac AD&D Dragonlance Kit 43. AD&D Starter Kit 31 AD&D Stronghold 38 AD&D Unlimited Adven. 38 38 Betrayal at Krondor 42 Challenge of 5 Realms 40 Darklands Darkside of Xeen Dark Sun Grey Isles Camp Nov Daughter of Serpents 19 Eric the Unready 22 . Eye of Beholder 1 Eye of Beholder 2 19 Eye of Beholder 3 42. Gryphon Master Havlar Nov Inca 43 43 Kings Quest 4 39. Kings Quest 5 42 42 Kings Quest 6 47 Kings Ransom 37. Legacy IBM Mac Alone in the Dark Amazon Blue Force:Next of Kin 42 Carmen San Diego Series Where in Past Where in Europe 34 Where in Space 49 Where in Time Where in USA 34 Where in World Where in World Dlx. 49 Champions Dec Dagger of Amon Ra 42 42 Day of the Tentacle Deja Vu 1 & 2 Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas Indy Jones/Fate Atlants 39 37 Labrinth of Time 49. Leisure Suit Larry 5 42 42 Lost File Shrick Himes 26 Lost Treasures Infcom 33 42 Red Crystal Seek out the seven secrets of life! You forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, ominous castle towers and the savage country side Modem Play. IBM Mac CH-Flightstick Pro 63 CH-Virtual Pilot Gravis Eliminator Card 29. Mitsumi Internal CD Rom Drive w/350 ms Seek 189. PC GamePad 19 Pilot Control Stand 26 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 199 Pro Audio Spctrm Plus 145 Soundblaster ASP 16 140 Soundblaster Pro Delx 119 ThrustMaster Series Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro 102 Game Card Rudder Pedals 109 TSR'S 12eaWeapons Control 69. Weapons Control 2 95 . !!! 66 2000 82990000 IBM Ami AD&D Gold Box Series 19eaB-17 Flying Fortress Command HQ Crisis in the Kremlin 19 Eye of the Beholder 1 Eye of the Beholder 2 Leisure Suit Larry 5 Magic Candle II Paladin 2 Siege & Dogs of War Silent Service 2 Space Quest 4 Spelljammer Star Legions Summoning Wizardry 6 Logitech Cyberman The most advanced way to master 3D games. Cyberman is the revolutionary input device for hardcore gamers. It offers you tactile feedback that lets you feel all the action. IBM $38 !! aos 92 Dure AD&D Gold Box Series All SSI Gold Box titles are now on for $19! Ex.:Pool of Radiance, Gateway to the Savage Frontier, Champions of Krynn, Treasure of the Savage Frontier, and many more! IBM Cyberspace Dominion Dune Dune 2 37 Flashback Gateway Gateway 2:Homeworld Masters of Orion Mechwarrior 2 Out of this World 37 37 Privateer Speech Pack 17 Protostar: War Frontier 42 Ringworld:Revenge Patr37. Space Hulk Star Control 2 Star Trek 25th Anniv 36 . Star Trek:Next Gen. Feb Strike Commander 49. Speech Pack 19Syndicate 38 Terminator/Rampage Ultrabots Wing Commander 2 20 Spec. Ops 1 & 2 15eaSpeech Pack 15 Wing Commdr Acdmy 33 X-Wing 42 Imperial Pursuit 19 B-Wing Darkside of Xeen Eye of Beholder 3 F-15 III Falcon 3.0 Legends of Valor Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 11 Might & Magic Off. Guide 12 Might & Magic 3 or 4 13 ea Quest for Clues Series Book of Orbs Manual of Swords Books 3 or 4 Railroad Tycoon Realms of Arkania Ringworld Run 5 Magazines 1-19 SIMEarth: Strategy Guide 12 SIMLife: Strategy Guide 12 Star Control 2 Strike Commander Ultima: Official Book Ultima 7 Ultima 7 Part 2 Ultima 7/Underworld 1 11 Ultima Underworld 1 or 2 11ea V for Victory: Battle Book 12 Windows Shopper Guide 30 Wing Commander 1 & 2 Bk 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) IBM $19% 42 17 Viking Ratings Betrayal at Krondor A Master of Orion Day of the Tentacle A Privateer Dune II Space Hulk Eight Ball Deluxe Stronghold Labryinth of Time Syndicate Lost Vikings Warlords 2 37 Maniac Mansion 2 37 Police Quest 3 Retum of the Phantom 38 Sam & Max Hit Road 38 Savage Empire Seal Team Street Fighter 2 Uninvited (Windows) Vell of Darkness DISCIPLES . <<mmm 39 39 A 9789 19 CD-ROM TITLES Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Drakka Nova Legends of Valor Lost Vikings 25. Magic Candle 3 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 Clouds 44. Might & Magic 5 Darksid 44 . Pirates! Gold Quest for Glory 3 Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork Secret Monkey Island 1 37 37 Secret Monkey Island 2 39 37 Shadowcaster Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) 38 Summoning, The Ultima 4 Ultima 5 Ultima 6 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue Ultima 7 Part 2 The Silver Seed Ultima Trilogy 1 Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld 1 Ultima Underworld 2 Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy 34 Wizardry 5 27 . Wizardry 6 (Bane) 39 39 Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) 42 42 IBMMac 49 52 IBMMac 35 Dec 49 57 Dec 32 32 7th Guest 12 Rds to Gettusburg Aegis: Guardian Fleet Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Bloodnet Buzz Aldrin Race/Space Challenge 5 Realms Chessmaster 3000 Conquest of Longbow Cyberspace Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Sun Day of the Tentacle IBM Disciples of Steel First person perspective view of dark dungeons and musty towers turn based overhead combat. Original music and sound F/X.Open endded, non-linear play. Over 100 Quests! IBMMac 57  Dracula Unleashed 42 42 Dune Dec F-15 III 47 47 Great Naval Battles 57 Iron Helix 42 It's a Wonderful Life 57 Jet Pack Oct Kings Quest 5 Kings Quest 6 Kings Ransom Oct Legend of Kyrandia 42 Loom Lost Tresurs Infocom 1 42 Lost Tresurs Infocom 2 Mad Dog McCree Myst Prince of Persia Privateer Sherlock Holmes Series Consulting Det. #1 Consulting Det. #2 Consulting Det. #3 Star Trek 25th Annivers Tony Larussa 2 Underworld 1/Wing Co2 Ultima 1-6 Bundle Ultima Underworld 182 Wing Commander 2 Dlx 47 Dec 42 47 47 47 37 37 29 Circle Reader Service #157 "


"Shipping Rates/Hours For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax 1 (404) 840-7925 UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day air. $6.00 2-day air. 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD add: 5.00 Overseas Call Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Call Prices subject to change, so call first! Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-8pm(EST) 7am-5pm(Pacific) 2980 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 3, Norcross GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5. SAME DAY SHIPPING UNTIL 8:00 PM EASTERN TIME! Strategy/Simulations/Sports Pre-WWII World War II Modern Sci-Fi General Sports 38. IBM Mac 94' . 19 . A-10 Warthog A Line in the Sand 37 IBM Mac 32 38 . 25. Armour Geddon Armored Fists ... ...... 26.. 37 22 36 Oct IBM Mac AD&D Stronghold Air Duel Ambush at Sorinor 38 Ancient Art War Skies 37 . Archon Ultra Bloodstone Blue & the Gray 43 Caesar Cohort 2 Castles Northern Camp 19. Castles 2 37 Oct Centurion Civilization 38 38 Civilization Master Edit 45 45 Civilization Windows 75 . Cohort 2 Command H.Q. Classic 22 Conquered Kingdoms 37 Add on Disk #1 Conquest of Japan 38 . D&D Fantasy Empires 38. Victory at Sea Designed by Jim Dunnigan, Victory at Sea will be the pre miere grand strategy Pacific Theater game on the market due to it's game depth and ease of play. . IBM Mac Aces of the Pacific 47. WWII:1946 Aces Over Europe Campaign Dsk #1 Feb Across the Rhine B-17 Flying Fortress Battle of South Pacific Battletank Barbarossa Carriers at War Construction Kit Carrier Strike Expansion Dsk #1 Clash of Steel Fleet Commander Fleet Med Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles Super Ships/Atlantic 19. Scenario Builder 25 America/Atlantic 19 Bundle 51 Grigsby's War in Russia 47. IBM Mac A-Train 42 42 Const. Set 24 24 Air Bucks 37. Battles of Destiny 37 . Battlechess (Windows) 32 Battlechess 4000 VGA 32 Battlechess 4000 SVGA 37 Buzz Aldrin Race Space 42. Civilization 43 43 Civilization Windows 49 49 Civilization MPE 45 45 Command HQ Classic 22 Design Your Own R.R. 38. El-Fish Empire Deluxe Flight Sim 5.0 Global Conquest Gobliiins Grand Slam Bridge 2 34 Grandest Admiral Dec Hong Kong Majong Pro 32 Incredible Machine 32. IBM Mac 4-D Boxing APBA Basball/WIN 44 All Amer Coll Ftbll9237. Andretti's Race Chall 19 Bill Ellliot Nascar Car and Driver Front Page Football Pro 48. Grand Prix Hardball 3 37. MLBPA Players Disk 15 Stadium Disk 18. Hockey League Sim2 29 . John Madden Football 2 31 Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro Banff Springs Belfry Innisbruck Mauna Kea Pinehurst Microleague Baseball 4 33 NCAA Road to Fnal 4 38. 37 IBM $45 19 .... 25 WMSIC ACES PATINO REMI MINCE EUROPE Spelljammer Captain your own Spelljammer ship. Recruit officers and crew to man your magical ship. Soar into the ether and explore the planets of realmspace. Battle Chess 4K (VGA) 32. Battle Chess 4K (SVGA)37 . Battle Cruiser 2400 A.DTBA Bld. Manknd Fut. Space Dec. Cyber Empires Global Effect Global Conquest Lunar Command Maelstrom Mantis Speech Pack Masters of Orion Mechamander Mechwarrior 2 Meglomania Mercenaries Mercenaries 2 Pax Imperia Privateer Speech Pack Reach for the Stars Rules of Engagement 2 43 Spaceward HOR(WIN) 37. Spaceward HON(DOS) 37 Spectre Star Control 2 Aces Over Europe Soar through flackfilled skies in 1 of 15 aircraft. Fly all new ait-to-ground missions and take out enemy bridges, strafe armored vehicles, and dogfight famous WWII aces. IBM $19 IBM $42 44 D&D Stronghold 38 Battles of Civil War Series Vol.1 26 32 Vol.2 26 32 Vol.3 Dominion Gettysburg Gold of Americas Great War, The Buzz Aldms Race/Sace 42. Commnche:Max Ovrkll 43. Expansion Dsk #1 25 Expansion Dsk. #2 25 Conflict Korea Conflict Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin Empire Deluxe Scenario Disk Empire Deluxe (WIN) F-117A Nighthawk F-14 Fleet Defender F-15 2 Classic F-15 III Voice Commander Falcon 3.0 Mig-29 Op. Fighting Tiger Falcon MC  42 Flight Sim 5.0 Grandest Admiral Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk #1 Halls of Montezuma Harpoon Battleset 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Dsgnr Sries 16 32 Harpoon Dsgnr Sries 2 26 26 Harpoon Signature Edit Harpoon 2 Harrier Assault (SVGA) 37 Jet Fighter 2 Jump Jet M1 Tank Platoon MacArthur's War Patriot Perfect General WWII Scenario Great Battis 20th Cen25. Red Sky at Morning 39 . Red Storm Rang Classic 22. Seal Team Incredible Machine 2 32 Lemmings 2 Lost Admiral 38 Sep Lost Admiral Enhanced Dec Perfect General 38 S: Daladali High Command Pacific War Panzer Battles 26 29 Red Sky at Morning 39 Rommel North Africa Secret Wepons Luftwaf DO-335 HE-162 P-38 P-80 Silent Service 2 Classic Task Force 1942 Third Reich V for Victory Series Gold, Juno, Sword Market Garden Utah Beach Velikiye Luki Victory Pack Victory at Sea Western Front 37 WWII:Battles of Pacific 37. Inindo NFL Challenge 56 NFL Coaches Football 33 NFL Video Pro Football 47 Pro League Baseball 37 Stratomatic Baseball 42 Tony Larussa Basball 2 37 92 Stats Disk ALINL Stadium's Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky 3 Hockey Lega Sim 28 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit World Tour Tennis 33 Paladin II The long awaited sequel is no dis counted for the holi days! As an appren tice in the Order of Paladin you must earn the title of Paladin by undertak ing perilous quests.  39 39 43 43 ADD IBM $25. Keyboard Overlays 43 43 Jagged Alliance Oct L'Emperuer Liberty or Death Man of War Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Paladin 2 Pirates! Gold Populous 1 World Editor Populous 2 Powermonger Prelude to Jutland Railroad Tycoon Classic 22 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe 42 Rampart Red Baron Mission Builder Seven Cities of Gold Sid Meir Civil War Siege & Dogs of War Spoils of War Uncharted Waters Vikings Fields Conquest 37 . Warlords Warlords 2 ...  onds Warlords 2 Play the sequel to the highly addictive, award winning. Warlords! Now, Warlords 2 gives you more lands and races to conquer, a random map gen erator, and more! Star Legions 2 38 Strike Commander Speech Pack Tactical Disk #1 20 Strike Squad 38 When Two World's War 38 Wing Commander 1 19 Secr.Mssn 1 & 2 19 Wing Commander 1 Dlx 49 Wing Commander 2 49 Spec. OpsDisk 1 & 219eaSpeech Pack 13 Wing Commander Acad 33 42 Add on Disk B-Wing WWII Disk 22 Great Batt.20th Cen 25. Perfect General EnhancDecQuarterpole R.R. Tycoon Classic R.R. Tycoon Deluxe 38 SIMCity Supreme SIMCity Supreme 2 SIMCity 2000 SIMEarth SIMEarth (Windows) SIMFarm 32 42 SIMLife SIMLife (Windows) Socrates V 3.0 Chess Dec. Solitaires Journey A-10 Tank Killer Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress Chuck Yeager Flight Commanche:Max Ovrk! F-15 Strike Eagle 3 F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.01 Falcon 3.0 Pro Flight Simulator 4.0 Gunship 2000 Secret Weapons Luftwaf X-Wing eeeeeeeeeeee .. X-Wing . IBM $42 Circle Rondor Samui "


" ' SCEEATEST MRCA MACH 2 COMBAT FLIGHT NUCLEAR WAR (***+) SIMULATOR (N-R) (Am/I; #63,65,68,69,75) New World; Eric (A; #35) Firebird; Firebird Licensees, Inc.; L. Hyman; 1990; $49.95 1986; O/P Bas/Dip/Str/1 Beg/Air/Tac/1 A «tongue-in-cheek» game of global destrucAn early F-15 combat flight simulator. tion, it is not intended to be a simulation but rather a mild diversion. As such, it can be fun, NAM (*) although its emphasis on massive casualties (A/C/Ap; #28) Strategic Simulations Inc.; will never win it a \"political correctness\" Roger Damon; 1985; O/P award. Int/Land/Tac/1 A simulation of various Vietnam actions, its OCEAN RANGER (N-R) graphics were mediocre, but its historical les(C; #52,55) Activision; Kevin Patrick; 1988; sons were wrong, wrong, wrong. Mildly en$34.95 tertaining, but very misleading as to the Beg/Nav/Tac/1 effects of fire support and small unit tactics. An arcade-like simulation of a hydrofoil (see PHM Pegasus for a more accurate rendition). NATO COMMANDER (**) (A/Ap/C; #4.1) MicroProse; Sid Meier; OPERATION COM*BAT (N-R) 1983: O/P (Am/M/I; #75,76) Merit; Scott Lamb; 1990; Int/Land-Air/Op-St/1 $49.95 The predecessor to MicroProse's Command to Micro Prose's Command Int/Land/Tac/1-2; M series, this operational simulation of war in An armor-intensive modem capable warmodern Europe (US-Soviet) has become time game. obsolete (both in mechanics and reality). Yet, it was easy to play and enjoyable. GENERAL NAV COM 6: THE PERSIAN GULF DEST BATTLES FENSE (N-R) CENNURV (C/I) Cosmi; Paul Norman and Robert Bonifacio; 1988; O/P Int/Nav/xxx/1 A combat simulator from the viewpoint of the CIC in a Navy cruiser. NAVY SEAL (N-R) (C/1; #61) Cosmi; Paul Norman; 1989; $29.95/$34.95 Beg/Land/Tac/1 -POPAn arcade treatment of SEAL operations. See SEAL Team for a much better and more realistic product. OVERRUN (**) NORTH ATLANTIC 86 (N-R) (C/A/Am/I; #60,61,63) Strategic Simula(Ap/M; #3.6) Strategic Simulations Inc.; tions Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1989; $59.95 Gary Grigsby; 1983; O/P Adv/Land/Tac/1-2 Int/Nav-Air-Land/Op/1-2 A newer version of contemporary conflict An early game of US-Soviet conflict at sea. than Mech Brigade, it is on a smaller scale and requires much time and effort. Lack of a NORTHERN FLEET (***+) strategic map often leaves the player in con(C/Ap/M/ST/I; #62) Simulations Canada; fusion and unable to coordinate his force into Steven Newburg; 1989; $60 a cohesive attack or defense plan. Int/Nav/Op/1-2 US-Soviet fleet confrontations in the «BOD\" PATRIOT (N-R) («Bad Old Days»); no graphics, but an inter(1; #105, 113) Three Sixty; Rick Banks; 1992; $69.95 esting and thought provoking simulation Adv/Land-Nav-Air/Op/1 nevertheless. A simulation of the Gulf War, I have now NORWAY'85 (N-R) done two reviews on Patriot and still refuse to (C/Ap; #29) Strategic Simulations Inc.; give it a rating. The original product, the Roger Keating; 1985; O/P Harvard Graphics of Wargaming, was unplayInt/Land/Op/1-2 able—a dog among dogs, etc., etc. However, US-Soviet confrontation in Norway. Times Three Sixty has issued an upgrade which may change, machines change, RIP. in fact merit another look. There is no question that the product is novel and not easily accessible; the question remains whether or not there is a serious simulation worthy of consideration. Stay tuned. PERFECT GENERAL: Greatest Battles of the 20th Century (**) (1;#108) QQP; Bill Sarubi; 1993; $29.95 (1 Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 A scenario disk to Perfect General, the simulation is easy to learn. The scenarios are enjoyable, but their historical verisimilitude is subject to question. If you liked the original, play on.... PHM PEGASUS (***) (C/Ap/I; #36,39) LucasArts; Noah Falstein; 1986; O/P Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1 A hydrofoil simulation, this game has good graphics and play value, although the scenarios are intrinsically less interesting than one would have hoped. Strike Fleet uses a similar system and is a more interesting product. POINT OF ATTACK (***) (1; #104) HPS Simulations; Scott Hamilton; 1992; $54.95 Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 The most accurate simulation currently available on \"Air Land Battle,\" this simulation portrays small unit actions in the Gulf War. It is detailed and historically correct, but the graphics are marginal and the user interface is not overwhelmingly friendly. PLATOON (N-R) (C/ST/I; #52) DataEast; Ocean; 1986; O/P Beg/Land/Tac/1 See the movie; play the game. Vietnam smallunit tactics in an arcade mode shows another example of tie-ins rarely being successful. POWER POLITICS (**+) (1; #99) Cineplay; Randy Chase; 1993; xxx Int/Pol/Str/1 A Windows game on the Presidency, Power Politics is an interesting and graphically wellexecuted simulation of the 1992 Campaign. Run a historical candidate or a created one (you can be all things to all people, or can you?). While a database includes virtually all candidates from 1960 onwards, they run only in the 1992 milieu-a serious flaw. Quemoy and Matsu do not translate well into contemporary economic issues. PROJECT STEALTH FIGHTER (**) (C; #42) MicroProse; Jim Synoski; 1987; O/P Adv/Air/Tac/1 MicroProse's first release of a Stealth Fighter simulation, this was characterized by good graphics and game play at the time. However, it has been superseded by later releases, e.g. Page 206 Computer Gaming World "


"HAEOLOF STEEL 16ockp ( OF The Ultimate in Classical Fantasy Role-Playing... Help save a richly detailed land from self-destruction. Unite the people of this ancient land and together you can defeat the evil horde that is gathering... growing... waiting... Animated and detailed VGA graphics 3D first person\" view of dark dungeons and musty towers  Turn based overhead tactical combat Original musical compositions and sound effects to get your heart pounding! Open ended non-linear game play .Elght disciples to control and develop  Over a hundred quests to complete  Conquer towns and cities, tax the people and raise vast armies. Available for IBM PC and compatibles (VGA, 80386 or better, 2 MB of Ram or more, sound support for Sound Blaster and compatibles.) WIZVKINS VALOR NIMELE PICKARD MEGASOFT ENTERTAINMENT 137 West Bay Area Webstor, TX 77598 1-713-554-7137 Circle Reader Service #91 R.961HHENSE TERRIRO \"VEUR SEX HIZYKINS VALOR BEHELE PICKARD "


"job. Take comandola 1.5. Navy SEAL Test on the TDLST realistic 3-D battlefield for the PCI F-19 and F-117. ous chore rather than an interesting or endifferent sort of game, it merits serious conRAPCON (***) lightening experience. sideration as a change of pace. (I) Wesson International; Robert Wesson; RED SKY AT MORNING (**) SEAL TEAM (****) XXX; XXX (I; #112) Simulations Canada; Steven New (1;#106,113) Electronic Arts; Andre Gagnon Adv/Air/Tac/1 burg; 1993; $60 and Howard Hays-Eberts: 1993; $49.95 The military version of Tracon, this is a deAdv/Nav/Op-Str/1 Int/Land/Tac/1 tailed simulation, and quite interesting. A simulation of world-wide naval war, inThe most detailed SpecOps game ever done. However, its basic subject matter appeals to a cluding potential nuclear release. One of the One cannot call the game experience necesnarrow market. For those having such interfirst SimCan games with graphics, it is somesarily enjoyable, but the Vietnam Conflict ests, Wesson International does an excellent what awkward, but does show potential for definitely comes alive. Graphically intensive, future products. there are still some problems with resolution RDF 85 (N-R) RED STORM RISING (***+) and joystick input, and the jungle foliage is (Ap/C) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger (C/Am/ST/1; #49,52,53,55,64) MicroProse; much too sparse, but there is still something Keating; 1983 Sid Meier; 1988; $54.95 that calls one back to try another scenario. Int/Land/Op/1 Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1 Campaigns take a SEAL team through a tour Part of the When Superpowers Collide series, A totally enjoyable simulation of contempoof duty, and there are over 80 missions for this NATO-Warsaw Pact confrontation is rary attack submarine operations in the \"Next play value. And it's one, two, three-what obsolete by design and time. War.\" Although some purists decry certain are we fighting for?!\" RED LIGHTNING (**) design decisions (made for playability), I conSEVENTH FLEET (**) (ST/Am/I; #62,63,64) Strategic Simulations mularione sider the game to be one of the best on the sider the game to be one (Ap/C/ST/I; #27,37) Simulations Canada: Inc.; Norman C. Koger, Jr.; 1989: $59.95 market. Bill Nichols; 1985; $60 Adv/Land/Op/1-2 Int/Nav-Air/Op/1-2 Focusing on World War III in Central A naval simulation without graphics using a Europe, this game has some interesting conpaper map and counters, it is an interesting cepts (e.g. forward deployment of subordisimulation of US-Soviet operations in the nate units albeit at a cost of added fatigue), Pacific. but the user-friendliness/clumsiness of inputs SHADOW PRESIDENT (***+) is so awkward as to make the product a tedi(I; #99,108) DC True; Brad Stock, Robin Games Too Expensive? Antonick and Charlie Athanas; 1992; $69.95 Adv/Dip/St/1 Consider Pre-Owned Software Not for the jer jockey or the immediate grati Save big $$$ over new fication player, this simulation is an intricate  Original disks and manuals and detailed simulation of global politics  IBM AMIGA-C64 from the perspective of a national leader.  Hard-to-find classics plus Containing the data from the CIA/KGB all the latest releases Factbooks and scenarios that were factual or  Call or write for free catalog REFORGER 88 (**) easily could have been, it has the dreaded (specify computer) (A/Ap; #5.2,5.3,5.4) Strategic Simulations \"highly educational\" appendage, but that Bare Bones Software Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1984; O/P doesn't mean that it should be passed by. 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 Adv/Land/Op/1-2 1-800-638-1123 A simulation of modern warfare on the Cen-688 ATTACK SUB (**) tral European Front, the paine bas clearly (Am/1;#59,63,64) Electronic Arts; John RatCustomer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 been rendered obsolete both by game design cliff; 1989: $49.95 standards and by historical events. Int/Nav/Tac/1-2; M Clircle Reader Service #39 RETURN TO THE FALKLANDS (N-R) A popular contemporary submarine simulation, although I have never been able to de(Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; The NEW termine the reason for its popularity. Game XXX; $35 CAPE COD CONNECTION play resembles World War II submarine opBas/Nav/Tac-Op/1-2; M erations more than the modern theater. The ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL The British-Argentine War with minimal simulation's emphasis on periscope target acgraphics. Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line quisition is unrealistic. Shopping is available. . Download our complete SEA ROGUE (***+) new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel SKYCHASE (N-R) (1; #96,99) MicroPlay: James R. Jones III; Catalogs, updated daily with new products.  On. 1992; $49.95 (Am/I; #54) Maxis; Ralph Russell; 1990; xxx; Line Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used Int/Nav/Tac/1 xxx software listing available today. Have us sell your This game is not a wargame as much as an xxx/xxx used software on consignment. Robert Berry, Proprietor A split screen jer combat game with a limited economic simulation to find and salvage 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 treasure and wrecks throughout the world. playing environment. Playing enviro BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 The graphics are well done and the research SKYFOX I (*+) 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 is remarkable—more than one could ever (C/ST/Am/I; #4.5) Electronic Arts; Jeff Tunthink of knowing about famous wrecks. A nell; 1984; O/P Clircle Reader Service #43 Page 208 Computer Gaming World "


"YOU THOUGHT YOU LOVED COMPUTER GAMES. BUT.. DOUGD800 224 146 du HOUSMOM ANTE Block # 27 PREV NEXT Create links between worlds.. Draw pictures of characters, monsters, and scenes by creating picture blocks. Bloox 120 toob Honsters Hap position Relative to 13, 215 Monsters Charter T Chew Dloot to Soore bu Character LIVE Cham ro AC VOR Eloke 1.00 << OOO KA33W 0151612 Pause Lentit 40 Current Leg At Spordi CHOTU) CHED Empower Picture Blocks Import Graphics Animate Monsters Plan Movement UNTIL YOU PLAY WITH GAME MAKER, YOU'VE ONLY BEEN PLAYING AROUND. Create action adventure games, as wild and unique as your imagination. With Game Maker's game design tools, you can design 256 color VGA computer games without Available at your local retailer programming  Design unlimited numbers of animated monsters and good guys. or from: Animated characters walk, run, fly, hop, pop from scene to scene. Design PC sounds or use SB compatible sound clips. KD SOFTWARE Play Sound Blaster compatible music.  Characters respond to joystick or keyboard. Great Falls Avenue, Box 448 Full screen scrolling scenes Rochester, NH 03867 Design multi-level professional quality games. Mouse driven and graphics based, GAME.MAKER is VISA/MC Orders: 1-800-533-6772 Computer Aided Game Design at its best. Is a game too Call Toll Free for latest price. easy? Increase the speed. Too boring? Add danger, sounds, and monsters. Too plain? Dress up the graphics, add Information: 603-332-8164 FAX: 603-332-8125 animation. Too short? Add new levels. Call the Frontline BBS 207-967-0618 and download GAME.MAKER includes lots of extras: hundreds of pictures, games created by GameMaker. monsters, objects, good gals and guys, and detailed scenes and worlds. Use or modify these extras in creating your Game Maker requires an IBM AT compatible 386 or better, with a color VGA monitor own games. Plus you'll enjoy the sample games includ and mouse, Joystick optional. GAME.MAKER is designed and produced by Recreational ed with GAME.MAKER. Software Designs. Circle Reader Service #127 "


"Beg/Air/Tac/1 O/P SUPER HUEY II (*+) An arcade flight game. Beg/Land-Air-Nav/Str/1-2 (A/C; #44,46) Cosmi; Paul Norman; 1988; SKYFOX II: THE CYGNUS CONFLICT Risk for the Apple. $12.95 (*+) STRIKE ACES (**) Beg/Air/Tac/1 (C/ST/Am/I; #44,45) Electronic Arts; Jeff (C/Am/T; #68,74,77) Accolade; Andy CraThe sequel to Super Huey I. Tunnell; 1987; O/P ven; 1990; $39.95/$49.95; TANK (***) Beg/Air/Tac/1 Int/Air/Tac/1 (1; 61,62,65,68) Spectrum HoloByte; R. AnThe sequel. A jet flight simulator within a Red Flag trainton Widjaja; 1989; $54.95 SNOW STRIKE (N-R) ing exercise. Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1 (1) XXX; xxx; XXX; XXX; XXX STRIKE FLEET (***+) A modern tank simulation, it is similar to M-1 XXX/XXX (C/Ap/Am/I; #44,46,50,57) LucasArts; Tank Platoon, but it covers certain aspects in A flight combar arcade game using drug inNoah Falstein; 1987; O/P a better fashion, especially larger unit operaterdiction as a framework. see ATAC (infra) Int/Nav-Air/Tacp-Op/1 tions. However, terrain slope remains a sigfor a similar treatment. Modern naval fleet actions with an emphasis sie nificant problem. SOUTHERN COMMAND (N-R) on \"you-are-there\" perspectives. Good graphTANK PLATOON (*) (Ap; #2.2) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger ics and game play do much to overcome (Ap; #3.5) Dataworks; xxx; 1983; O/P Keating; 1981; O/P certain historical inaccuracies (sacrificed for Beg/Land/Tac/2 Int/Land/Op/1 playability), but switching from bridge-toAn early tactical wargame in which each The Yom Kippur War, covering only the bridge to effect changes can be an awkward player has ten units. It is interesting to see just Sinai Front. experience. how primitive and virtually unplayable it looks today. SPECIAL FORCES (N-R) LUCASFILM GAMES PRESENTS (Am/I; #106) MicroProse; Sleepless Knights; TEAM YANKEE (**) 1992; $49.95 STRIKE FLEEL (Am/I/ST;#74) Empire; Steven Green, RichInt/Land/Tac/1 THE NAVAL TASK FORCE SIMULATOR ard Horrocks; $59.95; 1990 A British import, akin to Airborne Ranger. Int/Land/Tac/1 However, actual teams were available instead An arcade-like product trying to pass as a of a single \"Sergeant Rock,\" but the user simulation of modern tactical armored warinterface was not overly friendly. fare. STEALTH (N-R) TEAM YANKEE 2: THE PACIFIC IS(At; #41,48) Brderbund; Tracy Lagrone and LANDS (N-R) Richard E. Sansom; 1984; O/P LUL (Am/I/ST; #92) Empire; xxx; $59.95; 1992 Beg/Land-Air/Tac/1 Int/Land/Tac/1 An abstract simulation. If at first you don't succeed.... STEALTH MISSION (**) TEAM YANKEE 3: WAR IN THE GULF (C; #47,54) SubLogic; Steve Setzler; 1988; (N-R) $39.95 (Am/I; #110) Empire; xxx; 1993; $49.95 Int/Air/Tac-Str/1 Int/Land/Tac/1 SUB VERSION 1.0 (N-R) An early simulation of the \"Stealth\" fighterOK, so somebody likes the system. Just don't (Am/M/I; #105) Point of View; xxx; XXX; bomber, it failed to keep pace with the Mi$59.95 expect realism or accuracy. croProse releases, F-19 and F-117. Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1-2 THEATER EUROPE (**) STEEL THUNDER (**) A \"cat-and-mouse\" game reflecting little of (A/C/Ap; #29,34,39) DataSoft; lan Steels; (C/I; #53,54) Accolade; Tom Loughry; reality. 1986; O/P $29.95; 1988 Int/Land/Str/l SUEZ 73 (N-R) Int/Land/Tac/1 (Am/I; #76) RAW; Al and Joseph Benincasa; A US-Soviet confrontation in Central A tank «simulator,\" it was more akin to an 1991; $49.95 Europe; rendered obsolete by history and arcade game. Still entertaining, although lesAdv/Land/Op/1-2 game play. sons learned have little relation to reality. The Battle of Chinese Farm in the 1973 THEATRE OF WAR (**+) STORMOVIK (**) Arab-Israeli War. This program was initially (I; 97,102) Three Sixty; Bill Banks; 1992; (1; #76,77) Electronic Arts; Paul Grace; 1990; slated for release in 1987, but was delayed $49.95 $49.95 until 1991 when the designers signed with a Int/Land-Air/Op (Abstract)/1-2; M Int/Air/Tac/1 new distribution company. A wargame first-that is, first SVGA release. A flight simulator from the Soviet perspecSUPER HUEYI (*+) This is its biggest claim to fame; takes the tive, it lacks élan. The scenarios are forced, (A/C; #5.5) Cosmi; Paul Norman; xxx; worst aspects of chess and wargaming and and reflect internal dissension (which was $12.95 bundles them into a mediocre product. somewhat prescient), but the missions and Beg/Air/Tac/1 3-D HELICOPTER (N-R) flight characteristics are all rather bland. More of a flight simulator than a combat (1; #44) Sierra; Joe Wofford; 1987; O/P STRATEGIC CONQUEST (N-R) model, it is characterized by clunky graphics Int/Air/Tac/1-2; M (Ap/GS; #33) PBI; John L. Jamison; 1984; and game play. A helicopter simulation whose graphics were Page 210 Computer Gaming World "


"E661 IN CYBER STRIKE, ALL BEGINNERS WILL BE TREATED FAIRLY. The el Computer Game Magazine GAMING WORLD WINNER ON-LINE GAME OF THE YEAR. COMPUTER AND THEN DESTROYED. Beaten all the boxed games? Done the arcades to death? Try CyberStrike, the wild new multi-player game on Genie where you hop into a two-legged CyberPod and battle it out against other real live humans for control of a virtual reality city. The action's fast and furious. But even if you're new in town, you won't get blown to Kingdom Come. Well, not right away at least. In fact, CyberStrike is so easy to learn, you might actually live long enough to waste someone else first. And best of all, it only costs three bucks an hour: So strap yourself inside a Pod and come out shooting. You've got nothing to lose. Except your life. GEnie multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS SIGN UP NOW: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U # = prompt, enter XKY95114,BLAST then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card or your checking account number ready. For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. E \"Here's the fine print. Genie multi-player games and support services are $3.00 an hour in non prime time: 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. local time Mon.-Fri., all day Sat, and Sun and selected holidays. There's also an $8.95 monthly subscription fee. Each month, you'll get credit for up to four hours of nonprime time usage. Any surcharges incurred apply to all hourly usage, including your first four hours. UTRONICS Circle Reader Service #65 "


"$321 Hard Drive Special Seagate 130meg drive $193 Seagate 261meg drive $263 Samsung 252meg drive $236 Seagate 341meg drive $345 Western Digital 340meg Mother Boards 486/33 Vesa 128k Cache $462 486140 DLC $173 386/40 128k Cache $123 System RAM $43 Multimedia Sound Blaster Pro DX $146 SB 16 Ed-U-Tainment Kit $587 Sound Galaxy 46 CD-ROM Kit$443 Video Spigot $398 Complete System 486/33 Vesa Local 128K Cache 255meg Hard drive, 1.2 & 1.44 floppy 1meg VL Video, 4 meg Ram .28 SVGA Monitor, VL Multi 170 Mini Tower Case Keyboard, 3 button Mouse $1789 *Prices Subject to change without Notice Software and other Hardware Large Inventory, Order Toll-Free Computer System Solutions 1-800-666-5590 (619) 343-0335 U.M.S. II (**+) (M/Am/I; #74,75,87) MicroPlay; Ezra Sidran; 1991; $59.95 Int/Air-Land-Nav/Op-Str/O-multi A newer version of U.M.S., with more emphasis on strategic operations. A visual feast and a playability desert. The \"design-yourown\" disk is marketed separately. MicroPlay never really supported the product, and the designer himself stepped in to offer superb customer support. The designer has released a Desert Storm disk, and he has been working on a Yugoslav Intervention scenario as well. UNDER THE ICE (*) (ST/I; #54,59) Lyric; John Almberg; 1989; $39.95 Adv/Nav/Tac/1-2 A contemporary submarine simulation, defeated by clumsy and ill-defined mechanics. VC (N-R) (Ap; #2.5) Avalon Hill; Britt Monk; 1982; O/P Beg/Land/Tac/1 A tactical simulation of Vietnam-almost as enjoyable as the real thing, i.e. nor very. Obsolete and hopefully forgotten. LIMITED EDITION Tor b edret Circle Reader Service #47 slow and clunky when originally released; time has done nothing to improve its flavor. THUD RIDGE (**) (Am/I; #55) Three Sixty; Acme Animations, Inc.; 1988; O/P Int/Air/Tac/1 One of the earlier Vietnam combat air simulations, it appears obsolere in the current marketplace. THUNDER BLADE (N-R) (I; #60) Mindscape; xxx; xxx; XXX; XXX Xxx/xxx An arcade helicopter combat simulator. THUNDER CHOPPER (**) (C/Ap/I; #42,44,60) SubLogic; John B. Rosenow; 1989; O/P Int/Air/Tac/1 Helicopter simulation; of little interest or game play, except it could also use Flight it could also use Flight Simulator scenery disks. THUNDERHAWK (N-R) (Am/I) Virgin; Mark Avory; $39.99; 1992 Int/Air/Tac/1 A helicopter simulation. TOMAHAWK (**) (A/C; #42,44) DataSoft; D.K. Marshall; 1987; O/P Int/Air/Tac/ A helicopter simulation with mediocre graphics and game play. TOP GUN (N-R) (I) Ocean; xxx; 1987; xxx Beg/Air/Tac/1-2 A split screen flight combat simulator. TOP GUN: DANGER ZONE (N-R) (1) Konami; xxx; 1991; $49.95 Beg/Air/Tac/1-2 An arcade flight simulator. TORNADO (****) (T; #111) Spectrum HoloByte; Digital Integration; 1993; $79.95 Adv/Air/Tac-Op/1-2; M A detailed simulation of the British Tornado, it has more details than most users would ever need to know, but for the serious flight jockey, it is recommended. U.M.S. (**) (ST/Am/I; #43,48,51) Firebird; Ezra Sidran; 1987; $49.95 Int/Land/Op/0-2 A wargame design kit, characterized by easy design parameters. However, accuracy is sacrificed for playability, and often playability is sacrificed for graphic display. Maritime operations are ignored, so its universality is not \"complete.\" A Vietnam scenario disk has been released. It will visually impress your friends, although it is clumsy and awkward. DRACULA. TORNADO In London Digital integration BASED ON BRAM STOKER'S ORIGINAL NOVEL For Windows. Excellent graphics, interface, sounds! Count Dracula is somewhere in London. Use your wits to track down the bloodthirsty vampire and put an end to his evil menace. Assume the role of Prof. Van Helsing, the renowned metaphysician or Mina Harker, the alluring young schoolmistress. Learn the secrets of Renfield, the madman. Explore haunted mansions and much more... F RET WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET (N-R) (C/AVI/ST/Am; #34,37,75) Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger Damon; 1986; O/P Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 Basically, the user-modifiable source code of Roger Damon's previous works Operation Whirlwind, Field of Fire, Panzer Grenadier), the game's potential to design-your-own scenarios is limited by the failings of the system's mechanics. It is most applicable to the World War II era. A novice may well find its flexibility interesting, although the graphics are biliru interesting, altho dated. WINGMAN (*+) (A/C) MicroProse; Andy Hollis; 1982; O/P Bas/Air/Tac/1 A very early flight-combat game. Of interest only to the collector. CGW $29 cach. Mail check, cash or World Renowned money order to: Requires: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Windows 3.1 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. VGA graphics St. Louis, MO 63131 386 25 Mhz or faster Supports Sound Blaster (314) 966-5602 (Evenings Only) Easy to Install Not available in stores. Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back. Circle Reader Service #129 Page 212 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S ASK FOR PRICE LIST AND TAKE A LOOK AT OUR SALE ITEM (800) 788-2193 Take Break:Pinball 29.95 Yobi Magic Spell Tricks 29.95 35,95 27.95 HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: CD 16 Kit (Business) 635,00 Discovry 8 CDRom Kit 399.00 Discovry 16 CDRom Kit 469.00 Edutnmnt 8 CDRom Kit 449.00 Edutnmnt 16 CDRom Kit 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro Dlx 119.95 Video Blaster 299.00 Video Spigot 399.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Kit 499.95 PAS 16 Snd Cd 165.95 Pro Aud Studio 16 189.00 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 899.00 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 495.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO: Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 129.00 TelevEyes VGA-TV 199.00 WIN TV 399.95 SPORTS Car & Driver Front Page Sports Ftbl Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro NFL Pro Football 1992 NFL Video Pro Football Sports Adventure Tony LaRussa Bsbl II Trouble Shooting Golf Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit Grnd Prix World Tour Tennis call 41.95 41.95 36.95 39.95 35.95 35.95 47.95 37.95 29.95 35.95 24.95 35.95 31.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto III Game Card 27.00 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach 11 22.00 Mach III+ 27.00 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HiSpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control Mark II 99.95 U-Prom for WCS Mark! 27.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 COLORADO SPECTRUM Mouse Wheel call Sample Listing of Products B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Design Your Railroad 34,95 Veil of Darkness 35.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Discovery:Columbus 35.95 Wing Commander 11 47.95 Campaign 35.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 Wizardary VII:Crsaders 41.95 Comanche:Maximm Ovrkl 43.95 Dune 11 35.95 X-Wing 41.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 El Fish 35.95 X-Wing Misson Dsk 19.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 CD ROM Conquerd Kingdoms Flashback 31.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Freddy Pharkas 41.95 7th Guest 52.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Global Effect 19.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbls 41.95 F-15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Goblins 2 24.95 Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Falcon 3.0/Mig 29 call Heimdall 21.95 Clip Art Haven-jewel 16.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Home Alone 2 Composer's Qst MPC 54.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons Humans 25.95 Compton Interact. Encyc.249.95 Fit Sim Scen USA East 41.95 Inca 34.95 Curse of Enchantia 24.95 Flight Sim 5.0 call Indy Jones 4 35.95 Daggar of Amon Ra 41.95 High Command 41.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Day of Tenacle 41.95 Jetfighter Il bundle 44.95 Kyrandia (Legend) 34.95 Dinosauer Adventures 41.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Legacy:Realm of Terror 36.95 Dune 56.95 Liberty or Death 35.95 Legends Valour 37.95 Eco-Quest 1 41.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Leis Suit Larry 5 41.95 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 Pacific War 47.95 Lemmings 2 35.95 F-15 Strike Eagle III 47.95 Patriot 43.95 Lost Treas Infocom II 29,95 Fontmaster 2 18.95 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Lost Treas. of Rain Forest 29.95 Games 1993-Jewel 21.95 Perfect General 35.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 Global Explrer-Delorme 89.95 Rebel Assault tba Maniac Mansion 14.95 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis 41.95 Secret Weapons Luftwffe 29.95 Mantis 31.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 Special Forces 29.95 Mario Is Missing! 34.95 Iron Helix call Strike Commander 47.95 Mercenaries (Tegel's) 37.95 King's Quest VI 44.95 Task Force 1942 38.95 Might & Magic V 41.95 Jutland 52.95 Theater of War 19.95 Monkey Island 2 25.95 Just Grandma & Me 38.95 Tornado 44.95 Out of This World 36.95 Kodak Photo CD 29.95 V Victory 1, 2, or 3 ea 43.95 Paladin 11 35.95 Legend of Kyrandia 41.95 Pirates! Gold 41.95 Map Expert by Delorme 299.95 ENTERTAINMENT Police Quest 3 39.95 Mayo Clinic (jewel box) 29.95 Prophecy by Sierra A-Train Midi Music Shop-jewl box 22.95 24.95 41.95 Populous 11 MS Cinemania MPC 37.95 ADD Unltd Adventure 54.95 34.95 Prince of Persia 11 41.95 Monarch Notes Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 61.95 Quest for Glory III Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 Adventre 41.95 Starter-Sierra 19.95 Air Bucks Return of the Phanton PC Karoake 35.95 41.95 Ringworld Playing with Language 35.95 Alone in the Dark 29.95 35.95 Romance 3 Kingdoms 39.95 Prophone 1993 Ed 129.95 38.95 Amazons Rome:Pathway to Pwr 29.95 Pub Paradise-Clip Art 22.95 Arcade Hits 24.95 Rules of Engagement II 41.95 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26.95 Armourgeddon 39.95 SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 Rodney's Fun Screen 39.95 Ashes of Empire 34.95 Shadow President RoMaterial:Vis/Snd Effect 19.95 Back to Future 11 41.95 26.95 Shadowlands Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 Shareware Studio V.C 29.95 18.95 Sherlock Holmes 3 Sherlock Hlms:Lst Files 42.95 43.95 Batman Returns 41.95 Space Adventure 2.0 61.95 22.95 Betrayal at Krondor 39.95 Sim Ant Space Quest IV 35.95 41.95 39.95 Blue Force Sim City Ultima Underworld 1&11 29.95 58.95 Caesar 35.95 Sim Earth Carmen SD-Space Dluxe 47.95 Who Killed Sam Rupert 24.95 42.95 Sim Life Castles 11 Willy Beamish 41.95 41.95 35.95 Simpson's Arcade Wing Commander 11 Dix Challenge of 5 Realms 29.95 52.95 39.95 Space Hulk 34.95 WCmdr 1I/Uit Undrwrld Civilization Master Playr 49.95 52.95 Space Quest V Classic Adventure-Lucas 35.95 41.95 World Fact Book '92 59.95 Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Spear of Dstiny:Wifnstn 35.95 Star Control 11 35.95 29.95 WINDOWS Dagger Amon Ra 41.95 Star Trek 25th Anniv. 35.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Dark Hall 34.95 Stunt Island 33.95 Audio: Star Trek V. 34.95 Dark Seed Syndicate 41.95 36.95 Conquered for Windows 44.95 Terminator 2029 Darklands 41.95 41.95 MS Golf 42.95 Daughter of Serpents 32.95 Ultima Underworld II 47.95 Origin FX Screen Svr 24.95 Ultima VII Part 2 Day of Tenacle 34.95 45.95 Star Trek Screen Sur 44.95 Ultrabots 36.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Amazon Trail 34.95 Auto Works 44.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Cuckoo Zoo 31.95 Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Discover Space 37.95 Eagle Eye Mysteries Inspector Gadget Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Kid Cad 3-D 29.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 24:95 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail Dix 35.95 Peter Pan Print Kit Playroom ver 2.0 Putt-Putt Fun Pak Ready for Letters Rock & Bach Scooters Magic Castle Time Treks 29.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What'sMy Angle-Geom 29.95 77.95 Siege MODEMS Prices too Low to Print: Boca, Sportster, Supra, Zoltrix, Zoom and others AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A...TO Z...!  Creepers FLT SIM/ WAR A Line in Sand 26.95 Aces over Europe 44.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Ambush at Sorinor 35.95 Armored Fist 42.95 ATAC 34.95 MANY SALE ITEMS IN OUR FULL PRICE LIST ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 3315 E RUSSELL RD, #H-177 LAS VEGAS, NV 89120 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Any return subject to 20% restocking fee. Shipping: 1st game $5; addi games add $1 each in Continental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #160 "


"REVIEW DOWNWIND FROM GETTYSBURG S tate DUR PR 9 ulary relatih Path . 1,3 Edward Grabowski's The Blue and the Gray by M. Evan Brooks D dward Grabowski's The Blue and the the Civil War, but this historical treatise will tegic system uses music as a background when Gray ( B G), Impressions' simulaprove useful to the novice who is totally undifferent events occur, and the songs are very tion of the American Civil War, is familiar with the period. recognizable: Battle Hymn of the Republic, actually two separate games in one package. Roll, Alabama, Roll, Fall of Charleston and On one level, the strategic level, the game Mine Eyes Have Seen The Glory... Goober Peas. I particularly enjoyed the last, covers the Civil War from Maine to Florida The graphics of BG are well executed. although I have to admit that my generation and from the East Coast to west of the MisThe strategic map is easily recognizable, and associates Goober Peas with Burl Ives (anyone sissippi River in a weekly, turn-based simulaunits (differentiated by infantry, cavalry and over 40 will know what I mean). But I do tion. On another level, the tactical level, artillery, plus train and shipping units) are admit a sense of disappointment in that three individual battles are fought using the famileasy to discern. The map and units are someclassic songs were omitted: Rally Round the iar Impressions Micro-Miniatures system what reminiscent of the classic boardgame Flag, Marching Through Georgia and Dixie. Winning battles and holding cities is the from Game Designers Workshop, A House While Dixie may be considered politically key to victory. Each battle won and cach city Divided. incorrect, it does recall the antebellum and held is a \"victory point,\" while the capital war-time South (though the song was comcities of Washington and Richmond are posed by a Yankee); besides, if certain conworth ten victory points. When the point temporary designs can use the Horst Wessel difference between two players reaches 100, Song (Die Fahne Hoch) for background music the game is over. (and it is much more objectionable), I think that Dixie could have been used here. Johnny Rebel Can Read The documentation consists of four manuMiniature Hordes als: a technical supplement and tutorial, a campaign manual, a micro-miniatures battle In tactical mode, the units are rendered The Tactical System: Units are represented merican Civil larger and are appropriate to the context. by graphic counters. Orders may be issued to War. In addition, a video of the Civil War has Similar to Impressions' prior efforts (Conns prior efforts (Come individuals, groups or armies, and the system been packaged with limited edition versions. quest of Japan, Cohort II, etc.), you will have is reminiscent of miniatures wargaming. As a The documentation is relatively clear, con little difficulty in recognizing your army. As board wargamer with over 25 years of expericise and easy to understand. The technical an added bonus, you may vary the uniforms ence, I never developed an interest in minisupplement contains tutorials for both the of your troops within certain parameters. atures. The Impressions' system does little to campaign and the battle systems, and by folThis is a cosmetic stir my interest. lowing the written word, you can quickly change only, but it does Edward Grabowski's The Blue and the Gray grasp the nuances of the system. This is not reveal the designer's eye NAME: Edward Grabowski's The Blue and the Gray to say that victory is easily grasped. Only for detail. PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: THEBLUE careful planning will ensure victory for either Amiga, IBM the sound support for REQUIREMENTS: IBM: 286 or better, VGA graphics. 2.6MB side, although you will have to continuously BG is superb. Blasts THORAY hard drive space, mouse; supports Adlib (Gold), Aria, Gravis UltraSound, access the manual to clear up derails of the from artillery and cracks Roland, Sound Blaster (Pro) sound cards play mechanics. of musketry ring across PROTECTION: The historical manual is a bonus. It has the battlefields of the DESIGNER: Edward Grabowski PUBLISHER: Impressions nothing to do with the game, since the game tactical system. The straCambridge, MA itself has little to do with the actual course of (617) 225-0848 Emploi BEEB GB MEM Ayol # PLAYERS: 1-2 None Page 214 Computer Gaming World "


"HOLY CHEAT THE WORLD'S FIRST GAME UTILITY 2 s THE GAMECHEATER You're not playing by their rules anymore... Baseline Axis the Gamecheater gives you a few new tricks in your favorite games special powers, enhanced weapons, and extra lives. So now you can get on with the adventure, past that nasty spiked pit, without burning your last life in a bad Super Dave imitation. Or you can loose your vengeance with that outlaw turbo laser cannon you've always wanted. With Axis the Gamecheater, you get the little boost you need to keep the game fun! Superpowers are yours on demand — with just the press of a key! Axis the Gamecheater provides custom cheats for dozens of the most popular games, on PCs or Macs, and we're adding new games all the time. Ask for it at your favorite software source! For more information, call 800-926-9677 PUBLISHING or 901-682-9676, Fax: 901-682-9691 Circle Reader Service #40 Copyright  1993, Baseline Publishing, Inc. All rights foreign and domestic reserved. Axis the Gamecheater and the Baseline logo are trademarks of Baseline Publishing, Inc. All other names are trademarks of their respective holders. Help! I'm being held captive in the fine-print disclaimer! Baseline "


"ITA DOFLC Gut Wars TIM 7000 A -Sil Order WEST VIRGIN MARVIND Furnity correct movement orders will be issued. Luckily, an \"undo\" command is available, although it only undoes the most recent order. Just remember to be careful in scrolling the map and all will be well. Point and click, and units move to their destination. However, ships and railroad units often must be moved hex-by-hex. Interestingly enough, you can take advantage of the system by cutting a corner here and there to save an entire movement point (thereby giving new meaning to getting there \"fustest with the mostest\"). A t significant dates, a screen will appear explaining a historical battle. These interludes are interesting, although rarely will a ill game remotely resemble the history, and it can be somewhat disconcerting to see a description of the Battle of Antieram when you have just concluded the Third Battle of Philadelphia There are no significant \"bugs» in the system; however, an occasional unit will refuse to detrain. This can be worked around by merging the unit into another division. The tactical battles are named after the closest city (more representative of the Confederate style; Union forces named battles after geographic features such as rivers (e.g. Manassas/Bull Run; Sharpsburg/Antieram]), or you have the option to name the battle yourself. Artillery is the \"King of Battle.\" Judiciously placed field artillery (in a semi-Napoleonic grand battery) moving up to create a «kill zone\" and coupled with cavalry flanking maneuvers can be used with great success. The computer rarely takes the offensive until its troops are well-trained, and careful planning will defeat a superior army. This simple straregy works well: Examine the forces and place \" rifles in a position so that they can engage musket-equipped enemy forces without risk. IT Pi Vuwis Oman T ere No matter what size army, the display is limited to 115 units. The size varies based on division size, and obviously weaker units are much more brittle. The system is workable, but clumsy. With over 100 battles to fight, it is all too casy to use the \"Autoplay\" function. While a tactical gamer may often generate a battlefield victory that the \"Autoplay\" would not, the amount of time required to fight each battle of the Civil War can become overwhelming. The Strategic System: The map uses a Windows-like system. Units are accessed via the right mouse button, while movement orders are issued with the left mouse button. It is simple, but it does require some adjustment. In order to scroll the map, you merely hit the scroll bars on the edge and bottom of the map display. While this is easy to say, it is also easy to try to scroll the map by using the mouse pointer. This will often move the currently selected unit, and if you are not careful, inDIVISION DETAI. tot till Cerr. Ante Pot CHANGULANNYA Mur ( Ah 7000 XXX Harry My LYSE Al W.. SPUT U 32 S2 NEXT PREVIOUS LANISHED At The Front The Tactical System: Impressions has included the tactical battle of Bull Run as a \"bonus,\" and additional historical scenarios are promised (as well as a modem option). S 30 The geography of the battle is necessarily artificial, and I rapidly grew disenchanted with the system. The Strategic System: It looks like A House Divided, but it plays like Parcheesi. The missEVEN CONFEDERATE GENERALS TRAINED AT WEST POINT Strategic Considerations For Generals Of Both Armies roop quality is decisive, and the South work for several months, but the North Stuart's historical ride around McClellan's does begin with an advantage (their should take its reinforcements in smaller Army), but the larger unit does have an cavalry is average instead of poor). divisions (e.g. 2,000 man units) and garrison advantage. Divisions should be merged Therefore, you should try to engage in small every city. when they are attritioned to small-size. But lopsided battles to see the elephant\" and The two most decisive regions are the you should take advantage of this; the larger raise the quality of your troops. The South Washington-Richmond corridor and Charunit gives its quality rating to the smaller. cannot afford to delay reinforcements for leston, West Virginia. While the former area Thus, you should split and merge units as to training; it takes three months and the is historically apparent, Charleston assumes maximize the quality of the troops. North's reinforcements will render this loss an importance quite at odds with history. as irretrievable. Thus, it will train on-theOnly the initial combat unit engaged in a job; the North should use its initial reinPoised like a dagger at the Confederacy, it is battle advances. While every other adjacent forcements for garrison troops and then the easiest stepping stone to the heartland. unit may take part in the battle, only the first train up later reinforcements. Both sides And you can raise reinforcements anyunit so engaged can advance. Therefore, may also choose to replenish existing diviwhere—including 50,000 in Charleston! w there is a problem of thrust and countersions as well. The units themselves are of consequence. thrust; if your 70,000 man force defeats a Garrisons are essential for the North. HisWhile they are labeled as «divisions,\" they 30,000 man force, a division of 10,000 may torically, the Confederacy did not assume may range in size from 100 men to 60,000 advance and become ripe for counterattack. the offensive, for both political and military or more. In effect, there is no military orThere are two ways to offset this: 1) mainreasons. B&G imposes no such restrictions; ganization; advanced supply rules will retain a unit of sufficient size to discourage Confederate cavalry should range far and quire the player to form smaller unirs to attack, 2) hold back a division from the wide, seizing as many cities as possible, and establish a supply trail (which may often attack and advance it as part of movement avoiding decisive engagement. This can become the target for flanking raids like to the newly-liberated area. CGW Page 216 Computer Gaming World "


"or greater. One unforgettable battle had 40,000 Union infantry assaulting 1600 Confederate cavalry, resulting in 16,000 Federal and 400 Confederate casualties. It does make one wonder! 24 Cross Ger wer! EpORCE BEBOE re ing elements economics, foreign recognirecognition. Similarly, fast-moving Confedtion and leadership-make any similarities of erate cavalry can often seize Philadelphia, B&G to the American Civil War merely coNew York, Lansing or even Buffalo, all withincidental. out causing any significant consequences. Economics: The Mississippi River was the The fall of Buffalo would have augmented the lifeblood of the Confederacy. When the UnCopperhead movement for peace in the ion forces secured this route, it rendered imNorth. Even with supply rules, an army of potent the economic potential of the South. under 15,000 troops can forage and such a Yet, securing the Mississippi has no meaning unit can range the strategic map, more akin in B&G. In effect, you can safely ignore it and to Confederate panzers than actual cavalry. concentrate on the eastern theater (historiLeadership: You are the leader; you can cally important for political reasons, but move all or none of your troops in any mannever militarily decisive until late in the war). ner you deem advisable. There are no comSimilarly, the North can never achieve an mand restrictions and no command economic strangulation of the Confederacy, advantages. While units are commanded by a since scizure of cities does not affect recruithistorical figure, the army and commander ing. It would be possible to evacuate all of are of cosmetic uses only. A House Divided your cities except for one (Richmond or compelled leadership considerations by only Washington) and wait for the enemy to batter allowing a random number of units to be itself senseless against entrenched forces. Railaccessed per turn (a rule modification comroads may be destroyed, but they are rebuilt posed by CGW's own Alan Emrich); the early in two weeks-possibly accurate for the cavalry invasions were a problem, but they North, but the South simply lacked sufficient could be countered. B&G lacks such restricresources to make good the destruction of its tions and suffers accordingly. Determining rail lines. battle casualties is dependent on troop qualForeign Recognition or Intervention: No matity, but often these quality ratings are historiter how well the South does, there is no cally inappropriate. Most Civil War battles potential for foreign recognition. Historically generated roughly equivalent casualties (with it is debatable, but I believe that the fall of certain obvious exceptions such as Washington would have generated foreign Fredericksburg); B&G exhibits ratios of 3:1 dvanced options include \"fog-of-war\" and supply considerations. These will create a much more challenging game, and the larger units can be cut off and wither. Amphibious invasions, reinforcement and other factors are significantly affected by these options, but overall, the victory conditions militare against any congruence of history and game play. Marching Against Time First impressions» do count, and I initially was very impressed with B&G. It was only after delving into the system that I discovered its shortcomings. It can be fun, but you must first quash all hopes that the game will follow anything like a historical pattern. CGW THE ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer... JUST GOT BETTER! Another five major play-by-mail games have joined our unique offer: Cluster Lords (rules and 10 free turns in this deep space opera), Death and Sorrow (rules and 10 free turns in this introductory fast-moving wargame), Perseus Arm (the 170-page rulebook and 3 turns in a massive new space opera), St Valentine's Day Massacre (rules and five turns in PBM's most challenging crime game), World Conquest (rules and 4 turns in this clean strategic wargame). And now all subscriptions are processed by first class mail, ensuring you get the hottest news in the hobby. Play by mail is America's most exciting form of gaming, pitting you against crack players across the country and abroad. (Call (216) 673-2117 for news of the big national PBM convention.) Our offer gives you the chance to sample it and decide if it's for you. For those who haven't seen our guaranteed offer before, here it is: Take a $20 (4-issue) subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international play-by-mail magazine, and let our reviews, features and player comments help you pick the best of the latest games. We think you'll enjoy our frank, irreverent style. With your first issue we'll send you a $20 coupon for any of the above games and 19 others, with a description of each so you can decide which of these intriguing designs to try. The only condition: that you've not played with the chosen moderator before. But what if you don't like FLAGSHIP? What if you're not intrigued by the game you write for? Haven't you wasted $20? No! Write us within a month of getting your first FLAGSHIP to tell us you were disappointed, and we'll refund you the entire $20. (You can still use the coupon.) So: either you've enhanced your gaming with an exciting new dimension for $20. Or you've explored it and decided it's not for you at a cost of zero! Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07401-0454. [European readers: Send .99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 2PP for the equivalent European offer!) Circle Reader Service #62 "


"MISSION Take Advantage of Our $5.00 Off Coupon! To Order via GENIE Type MC-SOFTWARE On-Line to Visit Our Store! WARLORDS II METALACE METAL & LACE By Megatech In the 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies. But the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money. Action packed, arcade style fun for your PC, But be warned Metal and Lace is for mature audiences only. $34. R Rated $40. X Rated THE BATTLE OF THI ROBO BABES BLAST COMPUTER GAMES INTD ANOTHER DIMENSIONI RED CRYSTAL GAMEBLASTER by ADS Includes $150 worth of FREE games: Prince of Persia. Jet Fighter II. and Spectre. By converting the VGA output from your PC to a video signal Game Blaster lets you play all your favorite DOS PC games on any TV ser. Supports 640x480 VGA resolution in 256 colors. Comes with: Game Blaster, 6-foot RCA cable, 6foot S-VHS cable and more $119. ELORL OFFERIL WEDGW LEDER OF IBM SOFTWARE GAMES Gary Grigsby's War in Russia 47 7 Cities of Gold Com. Ed.... ........35 Gateway 2........... by SSG Aces of Pacific:WW2 1946. ..22 Geekwad Games of the Galaxy25 The sequel to the highly addicTi.. bil ir. Aces of the Deep .... ...43 Gizmos & Gadgets. Aces of the Pacific ..47 Global Domination. Tive, hugely successful. award Aces Over Europe..... ..47 Grand Slam Bridge 2 winning Warlords. Now you AD&D Al Qadim Genie's Curse 45 Great Naval Battles ...............47 have more worlds to conquer. AD&D Dungeon Hack. ........40 Great Naval Admiral's Pack...54 more mighty armies to make, AD&D Fantasy Empire.............40 Hardball 3 ........ and more enemies to vanquish. Adventures of Willie Bemish 2 43 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk Hi-res graphics and backed by a After Dark Screen Saver DOS.35 Hardball III Players Disk full soundtrack. Features Air Dual Flight Simulator ......42 Harpoon 2 ....... Air Warrior ............................37 include random worlds for infi.....37 Harpoon 2 MD #2 WESTPAC....30 Harpoon Z MU2 TCOITA Alone in the Dark...... ...37 Harpoon Designer Series 2...27 nite playability, mysterious hidAnimation Studio Windows ....79 Harpoon Pak SIGNATURE .... den maps, exciting dangerous Arborea II.... ...32 Head Coach Football Wind.....27 quests, and exotic army types. Archon Ultra... .. ...40 Heirs to the Throne......... $43. Armored Fist... .45 High Command ........ Armour Geddon... ..32 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro..........33 Ashes of Empire ... .. ....37 Hoyle's Book of Games 3 ....... Baseball Windows ..43 Hoyle's Book of Games 4 HYDIAL Beat the House .32 Incredible Toons By QQP Betrayal at Krondor .... .43 IndyCar Racing The Seven Secrets Blood Net ..... .43 ... Innocent Until Caught ...... of Life Seek out the Seven Secrets of Bloodstone... .30 Isle of the Dead... Life. Can you forge through Blue Force...... .43 Jagged Alliance.... the evil that lurks in the Bodyworks 3.0..... ... .43 Jeopardy Alex........... depths of the eerie dungeons. Bram Stoker's Dracula ...37 Jeopardy Alex Windows. ominous castle towers and the Brix ....24 Jordan In Flight savage countryside. Includes: Caesar ....37 Jump Jet ........... Carrier Strike .............. ....43 Kasparov's Gambit Over 70 dungeon levels, auto Carriers at War.. .43 Kid Pix ........... mapping systems, complete Carriers at War 2... ..43 King's Quest 6 .. adventure plot. multiple class Center Court Tennis .....15 King's Ransom... es to choose from, seven pow. Chess Maniac 5 PC.. ..45 King's Table ....... crful castles to challenge ChessMaster 4000 Windows...37 Kronolog The Nazi Paradox ....43 Civilization ... ..43 Lands of Lore ... $37. Civilization Windows ..... ....54 Leasure Suit Larry 6.. Clash of Steel ... .43 Legacy Realm of Terror ....... Coaster ... 20 Legend of Kyran 2 Hand Fate..42 Cobra Mission ............ ...47 Leisure Suit Larry 5 ...........27 Comanche Bundle...............45 Links 386 Pro .................... Comanche Maximum Overkill 47 Links Course Pebble Beach ...29 TURBOCH Comanche Mission Disk 1........28 Lost in Time. Comanche Mission Disk2......35 Lucky's Casino.............. Comm Adventures Starship ..43 Lunar Command. Companions of Xanth..... .....37 Masters of Orion Conquer Windows ........ .......43 Matinee Screen Saver ...... Conquered Kingdoms ........37 MechWarrior 2............ Conquered Kingdoms Disk 1....27 Mega Fortress:Flight Old Dog.28 Cuckoo Zoo ........... .... .....33 Metal Lace Upgrade (X rated)..5 Cyber Race........ .... ..43 Microsoft Arcade Windows.....34 Daemonsgate ...... 34 Microsoft Flight Sim.5.0 ........49 TURBO TOUCH 360 by Triax Dark Sun Shattered Lands ...52 MM 2 Day of Tentacle .........40 Delta V... .....43 MM4: Dark Side of Xeen..........45 Triax Turbo Touch 360 controller brings a new dimenDetroit ... ....... .....37 MM4: Clouds of Xeen ..............43 sion of control and comfort to computer game playing. Doom..... ....47 More Incredible Machine.......32 It's a break-through product, offering the benefit of high Dragon Knight 3............ .....43 More Vegas Games Windows..22 er levels and longer play without \"thumb fatigue. Dune 2: Building of a Dynasty 37 Mortal Kombat................ .40 $27. Dyno Quest..... ...27 NanoTank Windows......... Eagle Eye Mysteries ... .....34 New York Scenery Disk... Earth Invasion Windows.........27 NFL Coaches Club Football .....43 Eight Ball Deluxe.. 32 NHL Hockey '94...... Empire Deluxe ....... Out of This World Pacific Strike ......... Empire Dix. Scenario Builder.22 COLLECTION COTLFOTION .....50 Empire Deluxe Windows. Pacific Strike Speech Pack.....22 By ADB Eric the Unready Paris Scenery Disk...... BY ADB The Instant Eternam........................ Perfect General ............ ...37 Thousands of the Software Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle...52 Perfect General Bundle...........37 finest and most Eye of the Beholder 3...... .....37 Peter Pan A Story Adventure.34 Library Falcon 3.0 ...... ............... ....50 recent shareware pro. Pilots Power Tools ........... Falcon 3.0 Mig 29... .37 Pinball Dreams...... grams and resources on CD-ROM Falcon Fighting Tiger 30 Police Quest 4...... available. Over 50 Fatty Bear's Birth. Surprise ..35 Positronic Bridge exciting categories Fatty Bear's Fun Pack........24 Power Game Bundle 2........ including Windows, games, graphics, music, multimedia. Flashback ..............................35 Powerboating Simulator III ....49 productivity, desktop publishing, and much more. Botha Fleet Defender F-14 Tomcat...50 Prince of Persia 2 ....................45 Windows and DOS interface will help you explore the Flight Sim Toolkit..................50 PrintShop Deluxe Windows ....49 43 Freddy Pharkas ....... Privateer ........... vault for applications that interest you! Front Page Sport Foot. Pro ...47 Privateer Mission Disk 1..........25 $34. Gabriel Knight...... ............43 Privateer Speech Pack..........22 Gary Grigsby's Pacific War...47 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon...35 Net AXIS GAMECHEATER by Baseline Software Be Immortal in all of your favorite computer games. AXIS The Gamecheater is the world's first game utility that will allow you to cheat at your favorite games. With AXIS, you can override predefined game functions with assignable hot keys. You can add time, lives, money, extra ammo or fuel, or whatever it takes for you to win. $43. IBM PC THE GAMECHEAT E GOLD Software Gold BRIDGE FOR WINDOWS by Meadowlark Software Great bidding and extensive help available make Bridge for Windows the ideal choice for any bridge player seeking to bid and play better. We have tested Meadowlark Bridge with the 128 hands in Ron Klinger's Guide to Better Bridge. Meadowlark Bridge reached the recommended contract on 104 of the hands Microbridge Companion reached 62 correctly bid hands, Grand Slam Bridge Il correctly bid 57. Can play over thirty conventions with a detailed explanation of each convention. Many, many more features! $52. 90000 Z005 "


"C D R OM CENTRAL 8888888 Hacker 22  .....44 ...39 39 ***..13 888$$$$$$$$88888 -39 * ....59 * * .40 Putt Putt Joins the Parade....33 Putt Putt's Fun Pack ...... Quarterpole. Ouest for Glory 4..................43 Railroad Tycoon Classic ......... 7th Guest Gifs Galore .... Protostar War on Frontier ...43 ADULT CD ROM (21+ TO ORDER) Digital Dancing.......... Railroad Tycoon Deluxe .... AD&D Dungeon Hack...... Global Explorer ...... Putt Putt Goes to the Moon ..47 101 Sexual Postions 10R 2 ......69 Doors of Passion ....... Realms of Arkania ........ AD&D Fantasy Emplres ........45 Golf Gulde: (CA & HI) Edition ...19 Putt Putt Jolns The Parade 39 Adult Palate Vol. 1 or Vol. 2......69 Dream Machine ... Return of the Phantom....... Aegis Guardian of the Fleet....53 Great Naval Battles ........54 Putt Putt's Fun Pack .............39 Adult Sampler ..................14 LA Strippers Return to Zork............ Alladin &his Wonderful lamp -33 Grollers Encylopedia ..... Rebel Assault American Girls ......................... 39 Night Watch ................. Rules of Engagement 2 ...........43 Amanda Storles/MPC ..........39 Gunship 2000. Reference Ubrary............BO Anlmation Fantasles 1 or 2 ......69 Paradise Club ..... Sailing Simulator III VGA ..........49 America's Premier Shareware 2 ..29 Return of the Phantom ............47 Busty Babes 2 .... Busty Babes 2 .... ... -44 Scissors N Stones Sam & Max Hit The Road....... .37 American Bus. Phonebook ....29 Hell Cab.......... Return to Zork............. ..50 Creme De Le Creme.. San Francisco Scenery Disk...32 American Journey ... ........42 45 Sci-Fi Fantasy ..20 Cyborgasm (Voice Only) ... ADULT CD'S (MOVIES) Scenery Enhancement Editor 27 Animals ............. ......... 34 Indlana 4 Fate of Atlantis .......42 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe .29 Digital Dreams After Dark Trilogy Scenery Grand Canyon Arthur's Teacher Trouble .......40 Intro to Wordperfect 5.2 .......37 Shareware 1993 2 ......... ..39 Exotic Girls ... .. Betrayal Scenery Tokyo Japan Astrology Source .............62 Introduction to PC and DOS ....19 Shareware 1993............... Girls In Vivid 2 Busting Out Seal Team ....................... B17 & Silent Service Combo ...39 Iron Helix Shareware Extravaganza ......46 Girls of J. Stephen Hicks Il ......29 Cafe Flesh Shadow of Yserbius ......... Basics Electronic Cookbook ..39 Jutland ................. ....... Sharif on Bridge .... .....47 Girls of Mardi Gras ............... College Girls ..... Shadowcaster.. Battle Chess Enhanced . ..29 KGB/CIA World Factbook ... Sherlock Holmes Detective 2.32 Girls, Girls, Girls, Girls ..........44 Debble Does Dallas Sharif on Bridge ........... Beauty and the Beast .... ...29 King's Quest 8 Upgrade. ..27 Shuttle Flight Simulator.....27 Hawall Girls . ............... Deep Throat Shuttle Space Flight ... Bible Ubrary ......... King's Ransom....................37 Sleeping Beauty ................36 High Volume Nudes ...39 Devil & Miss Jones Siege Walls of Rome Blue Force ... Kings Quest 6 ..... Small Blue Planet ..............58 Hot Plx 2, 3 or 4. .44 Hidden Obsessions Silverball............... Chess Manlac..... Kings Quest V. Kings Quest V .... ..43 Space Quest 4.... .... ......29 Island Girls 3 In 1 ... .39 Insatiable ................... Sim Ant Windows ChessMaster 3000 Labyrinth of Time ..........52 Star Trek Collectibles .. ....47 Kama Sutra ...................... .89 Legends of Porn Il Sim City 2000... Comanche ... Lawnmower Man ..37 Star Trek Next Generation...37 King Dong .......... .59 Moving Fantasies Sim City Classic DOS.. Computer Reference Library.15 Learn Fly Fishing . .37 Star Trek TV Serlos............... Local Girls 2 ... New Wave Hookers il .. Sim City Windows ........ Conan the Cimmerlan ..........19 Legend of Kyrandia ..... .43 Street Atlas USA ........... Local Giris....... Night Trips ............ Sim Earth ................. Consplracy ........ .... ... 48 Library of the Future ............49 Strike Commander ............ Men Who Love Women...... ...44 Princess of Persia Sim Earth Windows Creepy Crawlles. Loom........ .. ........34 The Journeyman Project ......59 Mystique of Orlent Rimflre Pacific Sim Farm Cute & Cuddlles... ...........45 Lord of the Rings .................47 The Tortolse & The Hare ........40 PC Pix Vol. 1, 2 or 3 Secrets Sim Life . .. ..... Dark Sun Shattered Lands .....54 Lost In Time .............................54 The Fighter ....... .... ... 43 Physical Therapy .... Tracl I Love You ... Simon the Sorcerer. DarkSeed ... Lost Treasures of Info 1 or 2 ..47 Tony LaRussa 2.......... Smutware .......... Visual Fantasies Slater & Charlie Go Camping .32 Deluxe Scrabble ........ 37 MacMillan Diction. Children ..29 Total Baseball '93 Ed...... So Much Stareware ...... Wicked ... Smokin' Gun Windows....... Dracula Unleashed Mad Dog McCree.........42 Ultima Underworld 1&2 ......58 Southern Beautles ....... Solitaire's Journey Dune ...................... Mantls: Experimental Fighter 47 Ult. Underworld/Wing Com 2 .60 Storm 1, 2, 3 or 4.. Space Hulk ......... Encyclopedia of Clip Art .....34 Mayo Clinic .......................43 US Atlas & Automap ...57 Super Smutware For the Best in Space Quest 5 ............... Eric the UnreadyMayo Clinic Total Heart........40 Video Cube .................. 43 Swimware 1883 ... Speed Racer Racer X. European Racer ... ......7 Mixed up Mother Goose .......24 Virtual Reality Starter Kit 1 ....42 Tranz .. ..... ADULT CD ROM Spoils of War 5.25 Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle ...54 MM 2 Day of Tentacle .......... Where In USA Carmen Deluxe .52 Tropical Girls ... SSN-21 Seawolf.... Eye of the Beholder 3... Multimedia Grammy Awards 38 Where World Carmen Deluxe ..39 Wild Women... Call Our FaxBack Line Star Trek Judgement Rights...37 F117A Stealth/F15 Eagle 2. ..40 Multimedia Music:Vivaldi ........59 Windowmaster .............2 Women of Venus ................39 (201) 676 7454 Stonekeep .. F15 Strike Eagle 3..... North American Indians......44 Windows 1993 . ......... . 34 Street Fighter II.... Family Doctor .... To Recelve Our Wing Comm & Ultima 8 ........30 Oregon Trall.......... ADULT INTERACTIVE CD'S Strike Commander ................39 Fatty Bear's Birthdy Surprise 45 Our Solar System ..... ...2 Wing Commander 2 Deluxe ....30 Adult Movle Almanac .........99 Complete Listing Strike Command Mission 1.....22 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack ... .30 Phoenix 3.0 ............... Wing Commander Deluxe ......30 Adventures Seymore Butts 69 You Must be 21+ to Strike Comm. Speech Pack ....20 Fractal Ecstacy ... PhoneDisc Residential USA ....58 Wolfpack ...... 45 Cat and Mouse Strike Squad ...... . .....40 Future Wars ... ..... PhoneDisc USA Business. ..59 Condo Cutles Order. Strip Poker Professional.......35 Geekwad Games of the Galaxy 25 PhoneDisc USA Reverse.....199 Strip Poker Pro DD 1-6. Stronghold .......... ...... Super Tetris Windows.............35 Tony Larussa Baseball 2 .......40 Undersea Adventure...........37 Edutainment 16 Internal ......595 SVGA Harrier...... .52 Tony Larussa II AL/NL .........19 Uninvited Windows...... ..40 Pro Audio Spectrum 16...... Syndicate ...... Tony Larussa Il Fantasy Draft 16 Unlimited Adventures.... ....37 Sound Blaster 16.......... Get the facts via FaxBack.. Syndicate American Revolt...25 Tony Larussa II Player Disk ...16 V Victory 4: Gold Juno Sword.43 Sound Blaster 16 ASP ..... Take a Break Pinball Windows 32 Tornado .........52 Victory at Sea.. ... Sound Blaster Deluxe ..........79 Call 201.676.7454 from your fax Terminator 2029 ................43 Tower ...43 Victory Pak. Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe .....122 machine. Receive information on Terminator 2029 Op Scour ....22 U.S. Atlas for Windows ..........54 Walker Sound Blaster Pro MCA........ .256 new releases, Adult CD rom, Terminator Rampage.............43 Ultima Underworld II ..... ..52 Washington Scenery...............34 Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16.........159 The Blue and The Gray .............43 Ultinia VII Serpent Isle. WC 2 & Speech Pak.... specials, and more. 27 Sound Machine Sound Kit... The Elder Scrolls The Arena....43 Ultima VII Silver Seed...... WC 2 Special Ops 1&2... Soundman 16... The Great War 1914-18. ..47 Ultima VIII Pagan........ When Two Worlds War .............37 UltraSound........ 24 HOURS A DAY  7 DAYS A WEEK . Third Reich............................37 Ultima VIII Speech Pack...........22 Where in Space Carmen Dlx. .50 Voice Blaster.. Tom Landry Football Deluxe .32 Ultrabots . ... Where in the World Deluxe .....48 Wave Blaster Winball Windows.....................30 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.39 ACCESSORIES Wing Commander Academy ...35 Art of the Kill.... Wing Commander Deluxe Ed..50 CD Rom Caddie.. Wing Commander II............25 CS 150 Speakers..... Wizardry Trilogy 2... .........37 CyberMan. .83 off your order (over $50) World Crcuit Grand Prix 37 Gameblaster, WW II Battles of South Pacific 37 Koss HD/1 Amplified Speakers22 Simply send in coupon with your order! X Wing MD 2 B Wing. Koss HD/4 Speakers.. X-Wing Notebook Gameport. Not valid for sale items X-Wing Mission Disk 1.... Sound Blaster Speakers...... Offer expires 01/31/94 Supra V32 Int. Fax Modem...169 JOYSTICKS ACM Game Card Analog Plus ........... .... The Panasonic CR562 Flight Control Pro Double Speed CD Rom Drive Methods of Payment Flight Control System ...........69 is on the cutting edge of We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money Flight Control Yoke today's technology. Features: orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to Flight Stick...................... 320 ms access time, 64k Buffer, Flight Stick Pro.............. clear. School, State & City purchase orders 300 kb Transfer Rate, 680 MB FX 2000 Data Capacity, 100% MPC accepted. G Force Yoke .............. ..... Compatible, Multi Session, Shipping Gameport III Automatic Dust Proof Construction, Auto UPS Ground (S5 minimum)/UPS Blue (S7 Mach 1.......... Parallel Game Port............ Eject, 4 audio out pins minimum); APO & FPO ( S7 minimum); PC Command Control Caddyless. $229. Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax PC Gamepad ................... orders) Send money orders or checks to: Rudder Pedals.. Sabre Analog Joystick ..... MISSION CONTROL Virtual Pilot .................... 551 Valley Road, Suite 211 Weapons Control ..............89 Dept. CGWO194 Weapons Controller Mark 2....99 Upper Montclair, NJ 07043 SOUNDCARDS Ad Lib Gold 1000. Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! Digital Edge CD ROM Kit........695 Major League Baseball Discovery CD 16 bit Internal.595 Mouse Mat All 28 Teams $12 Circle Reader Service #100 50 ........99 .....39 SAVE $5 .. .... *.115 Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Order our Color Catalogue filled with New Items, CD Rom, Adult CD Rom. Discount Coupons, Complete Listings and more! FREE with your order, otherwise send $2.00. (Outside of USA and Canada send $5.00) D dorm League Basebalis CON T ROL 01-6722140A 016770mA "


"REVIEW A TERRIBLE SWFTE SWORD A Look at Swfte's Gettysburg for Windows by Terry Coleman Gettysburg Speed Select Mop Overlays Oppiens Help AISHAHOLIC S Ele Play DERREFinitan E Cominando CODE QQQQQRETith Ted Turner's Gettysburg film ACW works. One surprise was the exclusion As it stands, Gettysburg is hardly an exposé hitting the big screen, it was inof Shelby Foote's The Civil War, which on the tactics of Civil War engagements. VV evitable that the computer gamwould seem a natural for anyone remotely Rather, it is an attempt to loosely model the ing hobby would see a Gettysburg release. It interested in Gettysburg, especially since it's battle in a \"cause and effect\" manner, to give is amazing that there are so few American known to the mainstream and readily availthe player a very broad view of what hapCivil War games for the computer, given that able. pened on those fateful three days in July of the boardgaming side of the hobby churns 1863. The overly astute player who reads out at least half a dozen new ACW games Els the background information and tries to a year. This year, computer gamers have implement it in his tactics will not neceshad their ACW appetite only partially satisarily be successful. Gettysburg is definitely ated by such games as The Blue and the 12121 a game, as opposed to an exacting simulaGray, and From Sumter to Appomattox, both orantion, and it is possible to win with quesof which were primarily strategic-level PEPE tionable tactics. The AI, for instance, does -TEE games. From a marketing standpoint, at te TOP XN not always know it is being flanked and can SOFA-L BA least, the time is ripe for a battle-level ACW Sucheinganna thus be exploited by units that are just wargame. Enter then, Swfte and their Getoutside the defending Al's firing radius. tysburg for Windows, a niche game for all More irritating is that human-to-human time. play is not possible. However, as a kind of -EEEEEEE The people at Swfte are \"swift\" enough --G510-2016demo, the player may watch the computer that they understand their company is compete with itself to get an idea of possihardly a household word. Any prospective ble strategies. buyer will probably think this is a Microsoft Hearken back, O Wargamer, to the days In historical mode, reinforcements show up product, as the color Windows logo is rather when games were GAMES, not simulations, at the exact time they did in the real battle, prominent on the box, and \"Swfte\" is visible and we were \"in the shoes\" of our favorite while in \"free deployment\" there is a bit more only on the bottom flap! The front cover commanders, with the fate of nations resting randomness. Historical scenarios find the shows a headless Confederate soldier with the on every roll of the dice.... computer player performing much the same phrase \"An Interactive Battle Simulation» suWindows On The Past perimposed thereon-as if any wargame as its counterparts in the real battle, so that novices may easily match themselves against could exist that would not be interactive Installing Gettysburg is a snap, as you might a pseudo-Lee or Meade. The more advanced (then again, given some of the recent games expect from a game designed from scratch for player (relatively speaking, of course) may we've played...). For those who were unaware the Windows environment. Starting the match wits against the \"free\"-minded oppoof Gettysburg's importance, it is proclaimed game brings a whiff of nostalgia for those of nent, for a much better march up (see the as \"The Turning Point\" on the back of the us who grew up in wargaming's ancient past. following strategic notes). Four scenarios are box, along with a brief explanation of the Gettysburg is nothing so much as an old also included, one for each day of the battle campaign. To be fair, the back of the box also Avalon Hill design from 20-30 years ago. and the grand sweep of all three days of offers a screen shot, showing the \"troops\" in While there was research involved in the decombat. During the campaign you are shown action on a neat antique map of Gettysburg sign of this game, it is hardly earth-shattering a \"victory update after each day of battle. and the surrounding area. or controversial. Number-crunchers may peOld hat? Certainly, but very user-friendly Upon opening the box, it is readily apparruse the order of battle tables ento the novice. The maps add to ent that this game is most definitely aimed at closed to their heart's content withthe general feel by their anGettysburg the novice. Of 61 pages in the manual, out finding any obvious errors. A roughly two-thirds are devoted to backfull five pages are devoted to casuground information on the battle and to Civil alty ratios and their breakdown beGettysburg GETTYSBURG tween killed, wounded and missing, War weapons in general. Fairly interesting to $49.95 tween killed, SYSTEM: IBM with Windows all but the grognard, it resembles the highfor those who are interested in that REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 2MB RAM, lights of a Time-Life book, with the expected sort of thing. Nonetheless, all the Windows 3.1 PROTECTION: hard data included could be found lack of depth of that approach. Hopefully, PUBLISHER: Swite those newcomers to gaming who read the easily in any reasonable book on Rockland, DE (302) 234.1740 enclosed material will use the bibliography Gettysburg and is incidental to the provided to search for more cnlightening game play. TITLE: PRICE: VGA graphics, mouse, None Page 220 Computer Gaming World "


"FutureVision Expanding Educational Frontiers Through Technology NOW APPEARING! We Future Vision, in order to form a more perfect union with our corporate. institutional, reseller and end-user customers do hereby dedicate ourselves to ensuring your right to: 1. Sassle-free service II. A Sedieated coiicational software specialist III. The largest selection of Mas, Windows, D06. and CD-ROM based coucation software iv. The best price. V. Complete satisfaction with your product and service. VI. Receive your order when you cupect it. VII. Be free from automated telephone attendants YOUVE SEEN'EM IN COMPUTER SHOPPER... YOU'VE SEEN'EM IN PC SOURCES! HERE FOR AN EXTENDED ENGAGEMENT IN COMPUTER GAMING WORLE FutureVision STARRING THE EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANTS WITH A CAST OF THOUSANDS OF BLOCKBUSTER SOFTWARE TITLES! ..52.00 RDZO -> O CUTE ADVENTURE AD&D Unlimited Adventure...34.00 Alone in the Dark. ...............35.50 Betrayal at Krondor..............41.50 Cobra Mission ....... ..48.00 Dark Side of Xeen.................41.50 Darklands. 38.50 Day of the Tentacle... ....34.50 Eric the Unready ........ ..36.50 Eye of the Beholder III... ...41.50 Flashback.... ....32.50 Kings Quest VI. .........44.50 Lost Tribe.... ..27.50 Pirates Gold.... ....41.50 Police Quest IV.... .45.50 Prince of Persia 2.. ....44.50 Protostar....... ....41.50 Quest for Glory IV.................38.50 Ringworld. ........... .35.50 Space Quest V..................38.50 Star Control 2.......... .34.50 Ultima Underworld II........46.50 Ultima VII Part I or I..............46.50 SIMULATORS Aces Over Europe ........ .....41.50 ATAC...................... 33,50 B-17 Flying Fortress...........38.50 Car & Driver.... ...37,50 Commanche: Maxim. Overkill..43.50 F-15 Strike Eagle 3..... ....41.50 Iron Helix ....... .....49.00 Road & Track....... .....36.50 Strike Commander ... .47.00 Syndicate... ...47.00 Tomado ... .49.00 Ultrabots... .37.00 X-Wing .. ...39.00 WAR GAMES A-Train..... ...33.50 Caeser. ...35.50 Civilization MPE..................47.00 ...36.00 Conquered Kingdoms..............36.00 Empire Deluxe .... Compre uelue ............... .36.00 High Command..................41.00 Populus ..................... .....38.00 Powermonger.......... .........32.00 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe.........47.00 Rome ...............................31.00 Seven Cities of Gold .............36.00 Sim Life ......... ..39.50 Star Trek 25th .....36.00 Stronghold..... ..39.50 EDUCATION Alge-Blaster 3...................31.00 Dinosaur Adventure........31.00 Eagle Eye Mystery ................31.00 Fatty Bears B-day Fatty Bear's B-day Surprise ....31.00 Foreign Language ................CALL Kid Pix... .....35.00 Kid Works 2..... .............35.00 Metrognome Music.................31.00 Stickybear Preschool........31.00 Supersolvers Midnight Rescue 31.00 Talking Spell-it Plus.............31.00 Think Quick.... ..31.00 Treehouse ...... ....39.00 Writer Rabbit. .31.00 27.00 CD-ROM Jutland ............ King's Quest VI... 49.00 Legend of Kyrandia................49.00 Loom ............... .34.00 Mantis Experimental Fighter...45.00 Mario is Missing .............24.00 Mixed up Mother Goose.......24.00 . Monkey Island I........ .... Peter and the Wolf.... -22.00 Putt Putt Jains the Parade ......39.00 Right College. 27.00 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe .....24.00 Seventh Guest.................55.00 Shakespear .... ..16.00 Sherlock Holmes. 44.00 Space Adventure. ...29.00 Space Quest IV... Stellar 7.... ...20.00 Ultima Bundle (1-6) ............59.00 Where in the World CSD........29.00 Willie Beamish.................27.00 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.21.00 LUMICE OZE lege.................. G ZOU .. .. -55.00 19.00 SPORTS Frontpage Football............39.00 Hardball 3................ .-34.00 Links 386... .....36.00 Michael Jordon in Flight.........38.00 NFL Challenge ..59.00 Tony La Rusa II... ....36.00 World Circuit ..32.00 ARCADE Beat the House Gaming Tutor ..32.00 Goblins II ...25.00 Hoyle's Classic.................31.00 Lemmings II. ...34.00 Take a Break Pinball.............30.00 Take a Break Pool...........30.00 ESS............. CD-ROM Animals. ..24.00 Arthur's Teacher Trouble....36.00 Battle Chess....... ....24.00 Buzz Aldrin's Race-Space ...58.00 Dinosaur Adventure ...........29.00 Interactive Storytime.. ...29.00 ALL PRODUCTS SOLD CARRY MANUFACTURER'S FULL WARRANTIES AND DOCUMENTATION ORDERING SHIPPING PAYMENT  Phone orders accepted M-F from 8:00am 5:00pm PST  Orders received before 2.00PM will be  No surcharge for Visa or MasterCard orders  Fax orders accepted 24 hours a day 7 days a week shipped same day for product in stock.  C.0.D. orders welcome with a $5.00 charge  Ask for a catalog of our complete software selections  $5.00 shipping charge per order.  School, government and corporate purchase orders accepted. CALL YOUR PERSONAL EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANT FAX 1-800-995-4669 1.800.995.4661 INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMERS: Voice-408-370-4650 Fax-408-370.9466 Many other titles available.  Pricos subject to change without notice. FuturoVision 644 N Santa Cruz Ave Suite 12. Los Gatos CA 95030 Circle Reader Service #64 "


"Gettysburg Elle Eny Speed Seed Map Overlays Options Help Engagement Orders Hokpotcontre when leed upon 65ek enemy treng Seek any long lange Inform Commander belore feing OK Cancel Commands VE Fettet DO 0 0 tique look, which is one of the best things about the game. Grognards often forget how intimidating hexgrids and the like can be to the novice, and it comes as little surprise that there are no lines of demarcation anywhere in the game. Gettysburg is reminiscent of watching old \"Cyclorama\" setups at Civil War parks with the lines, highlighted. slowly moving towards their goal. Visually, the game is easier to follow than any of the recent ACW computer game releases, which is very important for the novice. If one tires of the antique look, a terrain overview with colored hills is available, although terrain contours are nicely delineated in both graphic modes. Lale \"auto-entrench» mode is provided. less, infantry can put out a deadly rain of fire, Units will eventually retreat in the face whether on a hill or entrenched. Artillery is of overwhelming odds, but the wise effective at close range and farther out on commander will order them to disentargets in the open, so that headlong charges gage before losing too many troops. are doomed much as they were historically. Players with a \"Pickett's Charge» fixaWhether you choose the Free or Historical tion may order their valiant troops to versions to play, the salient points of the attack against superior numbers, gener battle emerge. There is carly fighting in the ally assuring a short game. town of Gettysburg, followed by desperate Engagements are anything but preactions around Little Round Top and Devil's ordained. Units can be ordered to seek Den. While this can stereotype play a bit, it the enemy at either close or long range is a strength for newcomers to wargames, who on attack. Defending units may hold have instant reference points by which to position, only firing when fired upon, judge their performance. The game plays Finally, units may ask the commander quickly enough that it develops almost like a what to do when the enemy enters firing movie, albeit more like a TV-movie than a range. All of this makes a difference because film classic. units fire perpendicular to the way they face, introducing an almost «arcade\" element into General Lee Enjoyable play. Artillery must be faced via a compass, in play. Artillery must be faced via a compass Ultimately, Gettysburg allows the novice to order to bring its tremendous killing power see how Lee \"wasn't really Lee\" and to see if into play. It is even possible to hit your own he could do better. The victory conditions are units with friendly fire, unheard of in most quite general and can be modified for those Civil War games, which adds a great deal to wishing a greater challenge, say, as Meade, to gameplay. If you happen to neglect a front, annihilate the entire Rebel army. Sound efyou may find that your firepower has been fects of cannon and gunfire, when combined wasted by firing at the wrong angle. Hardly with the period maps, offer enough suspenhistorical, but a lot of fun. sion of disbelief that the gamer looking for merely a good time will not be disappointed. Blow It Out Your Cannon The only way I could recommend Gettysburg The designers obviously value cannon fire, to an experienced wargamer would be as a as they provide for the use of canister, case, laptop-type game when traveling, as it offers shell and solid shot. It's a shame they didn't a pleasant diversion. Hopefully, the next deprovide for the varieties of smoothbore and sign from Swfte will be a bit more ambitious, rifled guns found in the small arms arena, but while retaining the fun clements of Gettysperhaps they felt the added detail was not burg. Cow worth it for this scale of treatment. RegardMarching Orders The scale of Gettysburg is brigades, which is fairly common for games of this battle. Going smaller to, say, regiments makes the game playable only for fanatics because of the number of troops involved. Part of the flexibility of the program is the ability to move units by icon or by unit name via a scrolling list. Both mouse and keyboard are supported. Entire formations may be moved by division or even corps commander, or any group of units in a given vicinity may be moved as a single line via the mouse and space bar in combination. Units may even be ordered to follow winding paths such as creeks. The net effect is that of a boardgame conversion to the computer. If anything, the game gives too much freedom of movement, especially as one can see the whole battlefield-unlike Lee or Meade! Still, control freaks will feel right at home here, and anyone will have fun trying to coordinate assaults on Little Round Top. Orders are given to units through the \"Commands Toolbox\" and consist of Engage, Disengage and Entrench. This is fairly simplistic, but is reasonable given the complexity of the game. Outflanking, refusing the flank, and other maneuvers are left to the player to devise for himself through the movement capabilities of the units. For those players who find entrenching tedious, an THREE DAYS IN THE LIFE OF GETTYSBURG Strategies and Tactics for Gettysburg Scenarios Day One-Union Stop A.P. Hill's advance with Buford, delaying as long as possible. During the first couple of hours, withdraw only if forced. By midday, Ewell will have to be dealt with. Do not attempt to hold everywherethe Chambersburg Pike is the most important. Forget reserves, as they are a luxury you cannot afford. The town of Gettysburg is stronger defensively in the game than historically, so use this to your advantage. Expect to lose over 70% of Buford's force. By the end of the day, make sure unirs are deployed with fields of fire covering the approaches to Cemetery Ridge and Little Round Top. After playing this one a couple of times, don't give yourself a victory unless you win decisively. Keep playing for the rest of the campaign. Day One-Confederate Basically, you are stuck with no real way to outflank against Buford, although you should try in an attempt to stretch the Union lines. Be bold with Ewell, as he has a strong force and can sometimes break through for an easy win. More often than nor, this is a bloody scenario, where the Page 222 Computer Gaming World "


"Est-G 50 YITARS Nantets OF GLOBE. CONTACT Campanari eralds a new generation of War Simulations Campaign ll heralds a new generation of War Simulas with more depth-than over before and fabulous real 3D action orought his knowledge to bear on computer gaming with an end result that tooks and feels Thore realistic than ever before. All aspects involved in the running of an army have been considered, so that now you can place yourself in commerd on either side at any level in the chain of command. Over 130 templates of the most significant enter the battlefield in one of the military forces from 56 different 162 types of military vehicles. nations of the last 50 years APCs and Mobile Artillery. have been included to gain an utilise weapons ranging from insight into real conflicts such as wire-guided missiles, rockets, Korea, Vietnam and Operation homing missiles, and machineDesert Storm guns supported by laser rangefinders to tracer The action takes the form of fast rangefinders nicht vision, and X 3D graphics if you choose to gun stabilizers. The depth to Campaign Il is provided by the all new strategy. Exe Military consultant, Wilf Owen from recent conflicts has JONATHAN GRIFFITHS: WIN DO A Company, Platoon 2: Friendly Mi Abrams Half speed AMPACT YEARS OF GLOBAL CONFLICT AMO empire 10-0101 Ora l'ha energed as the most deprehensiv tion with new improved s t any level in the Chita nda ng closely resembling that of a real mas-on action as our helicopters in ar-to-ground hairair atlik teplou The animated stany during liance battlefield alo Tony una nuoroved 3w en dementis Laturing all the modern weapos systems gu dedi missiles kets, homing munisi kasenangefinders, gumatabilizers and night signis. CAMPAIGN WAS BIG CAMPAIGN WAS GOOD CAMPAIGN II IS BIGGER, BETTER AND QUITE SIMPLY THE MILITARY SIMULATION OT THE YEAR! urnatu \"PageS hangan Dn012 00 20E 9.00 6 c. Meda adlan Mehra IRAQ Empire Software. The Spires, 677 High Road, North Finchley, London N12 ODA. Telephone: 081343 9143 Empire Software is a registered trademark of Entertainment International (UK) Ltd. 1993 Empire Software Jonathan Griffiths Circle Reader Service #60 kung des erste empire SO F T WARE "


"computer does OK, as it defends better than tion, but troops are nearly equal. While itself. The flank maneuver of Day Two still it attacks, especially in the Free Deployment Longstreet's attack around Little Round has a chance, because you can hopefully scenario. If you crush the Union and take the Top is a very good option, it is not the only coordinate better in the game than Lee & high ground, keep going and see if you can one. Attacking simultaneously with Ewell on Co. did historically. Take the best troops, get off the map towards Washington for a the other flank can cause the Union to comsuch as Pickett's, and swing them around the complete victory. In general, this is best mit his reserves too soon, leaving none to left flank, with some artillery along. Don't played as part of the entire three days of stop a breakthrough. If the Confederate waste artillery in the center announcing the battle so that you can see your original battle player is in the Campaign scenario and has attack, but use it on A.P. Hill's flank to try plans carried through to fruition. lost too many troops on day one, it is much and tie down the forces there. If and only if tougher to win here. If the high ground on one of the flanks starts to crumble should Day Two-Union the Union left flank can be taken, move you commit in the center. Players who can If you want a handicap go ahead and decannon over and use canister on the outwin this scenario over 50% of the time are fend forward, just as the Union did in the flanked Union units to roll up their line. worthy of praise from Lee himself. real battle. Otherwise, back up to the high ground and put units on your flanks, espeDay Three-Union Tactical Notes cially Little Round Top. Watch for some The only way this is even a game is if you Don't forget that the best positions for counterattacking possibilities as the Rebels attack as the Union, attempting to crush the defending troops are entrenched and/or atop get strerched thin. In Free Mode the comConfederates. Normally, the Rebels will sit hills. Attacking at anything other than close puter will be very aggressive as the Confedand wait for a Union advance, instead of range is a prelude to disaster. Try to have at erate and can actually beat you if you aren't throwing themselves away as Pickett did hisleast 3-1 odds locally for any attack to have careful. Use your superiority in artillery to torically. The Confederates can be outa possibility to succeed. Don't get into an suppress the Rebel cannon and to hold straflanked, believe it or not, on Longstreet's artillery vs. artillery battle, as cannon are tegic positions. Keep two or three brigades wing, as Pickett is moved to center and the much more useful against infantry assaults. in reserve, as they will be sorely needed late troops left there are exhausted. Should the Finally, pull units out of line before they in the day. Confederate try a flank move himself, use retreat of their own volition, and use the artillery to make him regret it. Play this one \"fight to the last man\" option only as a last Day Two-Confederate when you can't sleep. resort, except those who wish to try for the This is by far the best scenario, as the Pickett Memorial Award... CGW Confederates have a tough job ahead of Day Three-Confederate them. The Union has a good defensive posiAn assault in the center is impossible by THE MOST COMPLETE ADVENTURE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ON THE MARKET TODAY! INTRODUCING... THE TRIAD CAMPAIGN SYSTEM FOR GAMEMASTERS ELECTRONICS $60 USES Windows 3.1* $52 546 R$25 $61 $16 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS IBM/Comp with Windows 3.1' . Min. 2 megs hard drive space for install.4 megs RAM RULES Designed to implement detailed campaign backgrounds and scenarios  Alaptable to multiple campaign backgrounds or worlds MAPS World size to tactical  Markers display key locations, characters and creatures Sizeable display windows Zoom. Applicable sound, graphics and text with map markers SPELLCASTING Adjustable parameters to create different effects System calculates spell characteristics and appropriate level, area and range SYSTEM FEATURES Example adventure. Formula calculator Rules documented in context sensitive help files with cross-references  Encounter generator loads all data, no need to consult charts . Game clock \"Windows and calendar Player's Guide . Gamemaster's Guide Bategister COMBAT Microsoft Corp Damage calculated and subtracted from targel Combat results returned in text form suitable to read to your players Spell effects applied automatically to all creatures in effect area  Set character destinations and targets and let the system perform the movements and attacks CHARACTERS Character creation quick and easy oras detailed as desired Detailed skills, professions, stats and abilities P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 93912-6295 1-800-983-4321 CALL US TODAY!! ask for catalog CD Alone in the Dark Summoning $16 Th Guest 84 Armored Pist $62 The Great Wa 1914-1918 ADSD Dark Sun $56 Clash of Steel $45 Tom Landy F.B Deluxe Ed. X2 ADSD Dungeon Hack Comanche & Mission Disk 31 Ultima VII: Pagin ADSD Eye of the Bahadar Tri 856 Cyber Empires $16 V br Widery Gold June Seard 546 ADSD Fantasy Empires D&D Storghold War in Aussia Draala Urleashed Dominion Wing Commander Academy Dune Dune CD ROM DRVES Great Naval Batles Eye of the Beholder $16 Creative Cmri CD Journeyman Project Eye of the Beholder II Sand Black Dic.com CD Labyrint of Time $60 Eye of the Beholder II 548 16 Medredakt 5479 Leod of Krada 548 Falcon 3.0 Sand Black Editirment CD Roumb Zork Forgotten Caste 16 M emedia Kit 9529 Sherbok Homes Consulting! 539 Front Page F.BPO Texal CD ROM 5439 Sherlock Holmes, Consulting I 939 Harpoon Il WE SELL: Sharock Holmds, Consulting Il 861 High Command Stie Commander 569 w  Tony La Russa Baseball 868 Marktom MAC $89 Powermangur 3DO Uloma Underworld I&II $69 Prince of Persia 2 Wing Commander 2 Desa $40 SEGA Privaler Wing Commander Deluxe Roumbo Zork NINTENDO Wing Commander Whima VT $40 Seal Team ATARI JAGUAR Wolpack 542 7 Cltes al Gold (commem.ed) IBM WE SELL Shadowcase A Line in the Sand $16 Space Huk ALL COMPUTER & VIDEO ADSD Dark Sun $58 SSN 21 Savalt $65 ENTERTAINMENT PRODUCTS ALL SALES FINAL, NO REFUNDS PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, CONTACT PUBLISHERS FOR DEFECTS 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS) MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add $7.25 salos tax SHIPPING: FREE SHIPPING WITH $100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 ADD $5 PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD $7 OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD $5 Circle Reader Service #138 Computer Gaming World IBM OERSEBBET   trademik of ORDER NOW! Mail check or money order for $39.95. Add $4.00 for shipping and handling for shipping and handling GAMEMASTER'S Clip Art and Sound call or write for more information Clips Disks Available $12.00 ea; 510.00 with TCS order. (Specify 8 Bit Mono or (904) 494-3165\"\"\" (904) 494103 8 Bit Stereo for Sound Clips) Additional player's Guides vailable 3 for $10.00 Nawu Triad Institute P.O. Box 11246 Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Circle Reader Service #149 Florida residents add applicable sales tax Page 224 "


"800-448-6658 READER's CHOICE DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE COMPUTER MONTHLY ITEM 2995 39 37\" 1995 4195 394 39° 3756 35 instagood 44 45° 37 39° Lowest delivered prices with greatcustomer service. DISCOVER P .Cord MasterCard VISA NO SURCHARGE SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, NOT PER HOURS: M-F 9 AM8 PM SAT 10 AM3 PM EST PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: 908-396-8880 NEADERI HARDWARE INCLUDEDINI CD ROM Libry of Art:Renaisn 65 SOFTWARE Comanche 42° Great Britian 37 Lord of Rings 2 37 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26 Stronghold 37\" Aesops Fables 33 Loom A Train 39 Mission Disk 25% Hawaii 19 Lost File Sherlock 27% Quarter Pole 29° Studyware for ACT Aircraft Encyclopda 45 Lost Treasure Construction Set 22 Comic Bk Creator 17 Instant Fact Loc. 19 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Quest for Glory 1 22 GMAT,GRE,SAT 30 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 MacMillian Child Dict49 Compan of Xanth 35% Across the Rhine 47 Japan Scenery 19% Lost Treasures 2 29% Quest for Glory 3 Manhole 39 Studyware Biology, 49 Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Aces Over Europe 44% Computer Works 46% New York 29% Lost Tribe 25 Rags to Riches 35 Calc.,Chem.,Econ... Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Maniac Mansion 39% Cohort 2 19% Aces of the Pacific42% Paris 29% Lunar Command 35% Reach for Skies 19% Physics, Statistic 25 Mantis 45% Autodesk Explorer 119 Mission Disk 19% Conquest of Japan 35% Pilots Pwer Tools 24% Lost Vikings Reader Rabbit 35% Studyware LSAT 37 Barney Bear Goes Mario is Missing 475 AD&D Collect 2 Contraption Zak 425 25% 39% Rescue Air 911 17 Maelstom Reader Rabbit 2 35 Syndicate 37\" Mavis Beacon AD&D Starter Kit 429 San Fransisco Crusader Dik Savnt399 29% Magic Candle 3 37% to School Ready for Letter 35% Take a break X-Word 29 Mayo Clinic Cuckoo Zoo AD&D Unlimited 31 37% Scenery St A or B 37 Maniac Mansion 1135% Ready Set Read 29% into Space Mixed Up Moth Gs 37 Pinball Cyber Space Adlbou&Junior #1 3496 34% Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Mantis 39 Battlechess Reading Adv in Oz 36 Task Force 1942 37% Monarch Notes 75 359 Daemonsgate Sound & Graphic 25 Air Bucks Speech Disk 34% 17 Reading Comp Beauty & Beast 32 49 Admiral Edit Monkey Island 39 Air Bus A320 Darklands Tahiti 19 Beethoven Ninth 45% Mario is Missing 35% 59 Ready Set Read 29\" MM Music: Mozart 33 Terminator 2029 3995 Air Duel Darkseed Washington DC 29% 33% Mario Teach Type 25 Healms of Arcadia 35 Berlitz Think & Talk Tesserae 17\" MM Music: Vivaldi 33 Darkside of Xeen 39\" West USA Scnry 39 Master of Orion Air Warrior SVGA 35% 37% French Red Baron . 105 39 Tmnt 2 Cybrchess 35 Our Solar System 29 Dark Sun 47 AJ World Discvry 29 West Europe 19 Math Blaster Plus 29 Mission Disk Spanish 17 Tetris Classic 105 31 Pool Shark Daughter of Serpnt31% AlgeBlaster Plus Freddy Pharkas 30 39% Mystery 29% Return Of Phantm 33\" Bloodnet Time Riders Amer. 35 8495 Prcision Map Deja Vu 1 & 2 37% Alone in The Dark 35% Front Page Pro 45° Search of Spot 35% Blue Force Rex Nebular Protostar 37 Tony LaRussa Base.17 Design your Railrd. 35 Fun School:Fred Frog Math Blaster Wind 36 Ring World Alphabet Blocks 2995 129 Bookshelf 34 Publish it! Tony LaRussa II 37 Amazon Diet Pro DOS/Win25/36 38% Sam Spy, Teddy Br 17 Math Rabbit 29% Britanica Family Cho49 Reference Library 59 Robosports Wind 25 Expansion Disk 19\" Dino Park Amazon Trail 35% 3495 G-Force 199 Mathology Buzz Aldrin Race 29% 59 Return of Phantom 37 Rock & Bach Studo35\" Top Class Series ea 16 Ambush Dino Quest 31% Gateway II 35° Mavis Beacon Carmen World Dixe 65 Rotor/Airball/Time 25 29% Rodney Fun Screen31 Tornado 45% e 28 Mega Lo Mania Ancient Art War Sky 35 Cautious Condor 45 San Diego Zoo 29 Rome 29 Treasure Cove 35 49 Ancient Empires Discovering Amer 35\" Geekwad Games 22% 30 Mental Math Games 37 CD Game Pack Rule Engagment 2 39% 55 Treasur Math Storm 35 Secret Weapons 59 Distant Sun 39% Gobblins 1 or 2* Animal Adventure 47% 22 CD Speedway Michl Jordon Fight 37 57 Science Adventure 42 Treasure Mountain 35 Seventh Guest 59 3795 Dog Fight Grand Slam Bridg 11 32 Chess Maniac Animation Studio Micro Cookbook 4. 31 34% 75 Sherlock Holmes Scooter Magic Cast32 Treehouse 39 Dr Floyd Desktop 199 Great Naval Admrl 48% Arcade for Wind 29\" Microsoft Golf 39 Scrable Delx Christmas Carol 32 Tristan Pinball 33 Sherlock Holmes 2 42 Dr Jam Window 59% 375 Armored Fist CIA World Fact 20% Super Ships Midnight Rescue 35 Seal Team 37\" 39 Turbo Science Sherlock Holmes 3 49 Ashes of Empire 35% 31 Great Works Dr. Quandry Clipart Goliath 30% Might & Magic 4 40 Sort Weapn Luftwf 29 Turtle Tools 30 Sleeping Beauty 37 Dragon Sphere A.T.A.C. Gunship 2000 299 Might & Magc 5 39\" Conan Cimerion Tour of Duty ea. 36 Sound Works 20 Ultima 7 35 Auto Insight 49 Dragon Lair 3 39% Creative Kids Scenario Disk 24 Millies Math House 31 Seven Cities Gold 38 36 Forge of Virtue 17 Space Quest 4 37 Dreadnoughts Automap 40% Hardball 3 35 Mind Castle 35\" Shadow President 39% Silver Seed Curse of Enchantia25% 19% Space Series-Apollo49 Automap Wind Dune 2 59 36 Data Disk (ca.) 17% Mixed-Up Fairy Tal 30 Shadowcaster 47\" Deathstar Arcade 30 Ultima 7 Part 2 47 Space Shultle 2995 Harrier Assault 74 Automap Europe Dungeon Master 299 Dictionaries & Lang 30 34\" Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 Shadowlands 29\" Ultima Trilogy Spirit of Excalibur 37 37\" Dynamix Bundle Autoworks Dune 42 Headline Harry 39% 37 Money/Clocks Wrk 19 Sierra Action Five Stellar 7 25 Ultima Trilogy 2 47% Fortroco B-17 Flying Fortress 19 Eagle Eye Mystery 31% Health & Diet Pro 26 Eagle Education Master Monkey Island 1/2 23 Sierra Award Winner47 Ultima Underworld 47 32 Strange Deadfellow 39 Eco-Quest 1 or 2 29° Bailey's Bookhouse29% High Command 42\" Monopoly Deluxe Electronic Cookbk 75 34 Sierra Family Fun 32 Part 2 Star Trek Enhanced49 47 Eight Ball Delx Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Elect. Home Library 49 35% Hong Kong Mahjong32 More Vegas Game19\" ball Deix Sierra Starter Bndl 39 Ultrabols 37 Street Atlas 99 Ei Fish El Fish Elctm Traveler:Call 33 Batman Returns 39% 35 35 Hoylé Bk Game 1/3 30 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Mutanoid Challenge31 Silent Service 2 19\" Talking Classic Tale75 Uninvited Window 37\" 35° Humans 25 Battlechess 4000 SVGA36 Empire Deluxe 25 Mystery at Museum35 Sim Ant 34% Unnecessry Rough35% Encarta Encyclpd249\" Talkng Jungle Safari75 Scenario Disk 19% 3495 Battle of Destiny Inca NFL Challe 35% NFL Challenge 5 9 Sim Ant French 35 European Monarchs49 Time Table Science 59 U.S. Atlas DOS 31 Beat the House oy F-15 Entrml Pak Win (ea.)28 Incredible Machine 29\" 29 NFL Coaches Club 33 Sim City Classic 25 Utopia Ultimate Shareware 59 4395 Eric the Unready Betrayal of Krondor39% Indiana Jones 4 35% 37 Nigel's World 31 Windows 25\" U S Atlas V for Victory (ea) 42\" 42 Eternam Betty Crocker Cook Call Inspector Gadget 35% No Greater Glory 20 Sim Earth Family Doctor 39 39 US Atlas w/Automap49 Vista Pro Eye of Beholder Black Crypt 20 Island of Dr. Brain 29% Falty Bear Omar Shariff Bridge 37 Sim Life Dos/Wind 39 Vocabulary Devl 32 Eye Beholder 2 Bloodnet 38 Jetfighter 2 3 9 Open Dialog Font Master 44% US Presidents49 Sing a Long Wind 31» Wacky Funsters 19 Eve of Beholder 3 42 Blue & Gray Adv Mission Disk 19 Operation Neptune 35 G Force Snap Dragon 32 War in Gulf USA Wars:Civil War49 EZ Cosmos 42 Blueforce John Madden 2 319 Orbits 29° Gateway 11 Snoopy Game Club 29 War in Russia 35 USA Wars:Korea Gettysburg:MM Hist43 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 49 Body Illustrated 276 47% Ez Language Series Johnny Quest 29% Oregon Trail Delx 34% Solitaire Window 29 Warrior of Legend 19% 42 Gofer Winkles Adv 33 USA Wars: WWII 49 39° Bodyworks Fr, Grill Sp.Jp Rs 31° Origin FX Jump Jet 25 Solitaires Journey 35 Wayne Gretzky 3 35 F14 Fleet Defend 449 MPE Version Bug Bunny WikShp 31 4895 Out of This World Golden Immortal 36 Space Ace 2:Borl 36 Waynes World 28 29 Voyage Planet ea 69 Buzz Aldrin F 15 III 44 Kye Deluxe Great Cities Vol 1 49 Outnumbered Space Adventure 42 What's My Angle 30 Who Killd Sam Rup 25 Master Edition 499 Kid Cad 37\" Caesar Gunship 2000 Pacific Wars Space Hulk 37 Willy Beamish When2Worlds War35 37 Car and Driver F117a Stealth 27% 29% Kid Cuts Paladin 2 35 Guy Spy Space Quest 5 39 Where Crmn San Diego Falcon 3.0 Carrier Strike 45 39 Kid Desk Humans 25 Patriot Spear of Destiny 39% 25 America Past Wing Comm & Miss 45 34 Oper Fight Tiger Expansion Disk 19 25 Kid Pictures PC Study Bible 42 Special Forces Inca 29 Europe Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Carriers at War 2 42% Mig 29 Data Disk 34 Kid Pix Inspector Ga. Aet 37\" Wing Comm 2 Peppers Adventure29\" Spectre Space 57 Family Tree Maker 42 Interactive Old Test52 Cash for Kids Kid Pix Companion 25 31% Perfect General 36 Spellbound Time W 30 2/Ulti. Undrwld 57 Castle 2 Fantasy Empire 355 42% Kid Works 2 35% Interactive Storytime45 World Atlas Pinball Dreams 29 Spellcasting 301 35 USA 42 Intro Games Fr Sp 79 Farm Creativity Kit 18 Castle of Dr. Brain 38% 30 Kids Zoo Pirtate's Gold Spell-it Plus USA Deluxe World War II Pak 37% 449 Its a Wonderful Life 48 Fatty Bear Birthday 31 Center Court Ten. 12 3495 Kings Ransom Playroom 2.0 30% Spelljammer World Deluxe Adults Only-Must be21 44\" Chalinge 5 Realm 399 Jazz:Multimedia Hist69 Animation Fantasy 65 Fields of Glory 33% 45 King's Quest 6 Police Quest 3 39 Sports Adventure 33 Wild Science Arcad35% Flashback Champions 329 35% Land Of Lore Nets & Props 349 Pool Shark 19\" Star Control 2 55 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 35\" Ween:Prophecy 34 65 Chemistry Works Flight Simul ATP 28% 38 Jones in Fast Lane 37 Legacy Prince of Persia 2 39\" Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Wing Comandr 2 47 Porkware 65 Chessmster Flight Simulator 5 43\" 29% Legacy Necromnar 19% Print Shop Deluxe Nust Grandma & Me36 45 Star Trek AudioClip 34\" Wing Com Acadm 31% Private Collection 65 Air Tric Cntrir 34 Legion's of Krella Children Writ & Publ 39 37 Jutland Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 44% Next Generation 38% World Circuit Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 34% Arctt/Scen Dsgn City Streets 28 59% Kings Quest 5 Print Shop, New 42 Lemmings 35 Star Trek Screen Sav37 MPE Edition 44% Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 26% Civilization 37 Aircraft Adv Factry 25 Lemmings 2 35% King Quest 6 Up Graphics (ea) 22 Stickybr Math Tutor 30 World Tour Tennis32\" Land Of Lore Storm 1 or 2 #685 34 65 Civilization Deluxe 45% 17 Lethal Weapon 35% Print Shp Compion 31 Stickybr Pre-School 30 World War II 35% Visual Fantasy Languages of World99 Caddies 7.95éa. 3/$ 19 Clash of Steel 55 65 Civilization Win 41% # 701 25 17 Links Privateer Stickybr Read Tutor 30 X Wing 39 39% Airport Facty Loc Links 386 Pro 17 Learn to Speak Spn59 39 Prophecy 25% Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 Mission Disk 19 California Coaster 37 Leisure Suit Larry Course Disk ea 42 16 Protostar Storybook Weaver299 Yobi Spelling Trick29 Cobra Mission East USA Scen 3995 386 Courses ea 19% Putt Putt Parade 32 Strike Commander 45 Zodiac Signs 39% Sound Cards SB CDROM Intrni 369 MIDI Software CD DRIVES Speech Disk Joysticks Multimedia 17 Zoo Keeper 149 i e SB Portblaster Strip Poker 3 All Siereo Fix Ballade Windows 79 32 Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Toshiba CH Flightstick 1476 SB Video Blaster 349 37\" StereoF/X CD Aitech Data Disk (ea) 17 Ady of Eco Island 22 Band in a Box 69 3041 Internal 489\" CH Game Card 3 31 Audio Show 369 Covox Voice Bistr 640 SB Video Spigot 4199 Cadenza 3041 External 594% CH Mach 3 28° Pro 256 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. Gravis Ultra Sound 129 SB Waveblaster 234 Texcel America CO-ROM Kit 299% Roland RAP-10 4599 CH Virtual Pilot 529 65 Pro Color Plus Cakewalk Win SCC-1 GS 129% 3021 Internal Mestia Vision 349 Eliminator Card TERMS AND CONDITIONS ProVGA TV 26 459 18 SC-7 Cakewalk Pro AUGIO Port 169 3024 Dbl Spd 390 Gravis Analog Pro 39 Pro PC/TV Plus 249 Master Card, Visa, American Express COPC 959 SC-55 3024 Business 679 Gravis Joystick Cakewalk Win Pro 240 32 Pro VGA TV + 659 Discover Accepted. No Surcharge on CDPCXL 1159 MA-12C ea Encore 379 105 3024 Education 604 Gravis PC GamePad21 VideoSurge 659 Credit Cards. By mail: P.O.Box3. Pro Audio 16 1799 SPEAKERS Jammer Pro 125 3024 Home 569 Kidz Mouse 30% VideoSurg SVHS 729 Carteret, N.J. 07008. All Sales Are Pro Audio Studio 2244 CS-150 Shielded 28 Laser Music Proces 79 3024 Multimeda844 Kraft KC3 Joystick 28 Wave Watcher 419 Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective Pro 16 Multimedia CS-550 Shielded 35 Master Tracks Pro 249 5024 Dbl Spd 495 Maxx Flight Yoke 69 TV/GRX TV 269 merchandise with the same item only. No Upgrade Kit 2 935 W/3 band Equilizer 45 MCS Stereo 5024 Business 769 Maxx Pedal 39 exceptions. All Products are now from Pro Movie Audio 339 Midiscan A CS-1000 Skins & Pads 269 8 4\" 5024 Education 729 Quickshot Game Cd14 Logitech Audioport 134 manufacturer. All claims and guarantees Midisoft Studio 159 5024 Multimed 969 Quickshot Warrior 18. 151 are from the manufacturer. Call for Soundman 1324 Altec Lansing 200 219 Music Bytes Vol 1 65 85 ACS 300 Modem & Fax 299 current price and availability. GOVERMENT Suncom Command19 Grounded Wrist Sirp 9 Sound Blaster 79 SB Midi Kit Music Mentor AND SCHOOL P.O.'S WELCOMED. . 59 For your MIDI Interface Keyboard Skins US Robotic Sportster Thrustmaster 15 Music Printer Plus 419 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Midiator 101 Serial 95 2400 Int. protection, we will only ship to the FCS 99% Sttic Pads Sound Blaster Delx 132 PC Midi Card address the credit card company has on 14.4 v.42bs 1625 FCS Pro Large-System 109 15 79 Piano Works SB Pro 16 file, therefore shipping to Ak.. Hi.. 1 84 99 Wrist Pads W/S/R Fax 183 2 Port SE Game Card 149% PR., SB Pro16 ASP P.O. Boxes. APO/FPO extra. 209 Quick Score Deluxe99 Weapons 2 14.4 v.42bis Ext 183\" Stax (Dust Repellent)5 International orders call for shipping SB Discovery 161 459 Hello Music 277% Songwright 5 Rudder Pedal 109 Statx Complete W/S/R Fax 213 charges. N.J. Resident add 6$ sales tax. SB Edulanmn 16 549 The Miracle 325 Trax for Windows 60 UPROM Chip 29\" Cleaning System 15 20% restocking fee for all refused items. F-117A 35% vista profoni (ea) 4 734 43% US History 31 39 3785 Long Wind 3g 19% 35 39% 35% 2995 35% Pala 19\" 35% 350 449 Farm Crea Birthday 31 33% Fatty Bee Glory King's Queste 324 Langacy 34* 39 295 A SOFIX CD 14. SB Videoblaster 234 125 Cakewalk 139 5495 69 29 95 89 Circle Reader Service #53 "


"Taking A PEEK DITIIT: PEBBLE BEACH: Located along the shores of Carmel Bay on California's beautiful Monterey Peninsula, Pebble Beach Golf Links is considered the best public course in America. The creative vision of Samuel F. B. Morse, it was laid out during the first World War and opened in 1919. Pebble Beach today is the only course of its caliber providing public access. It is also the most requested course by Links golfers worldwide. So, by popular demand, Access Software has released Pebble Beach Golf Links, the first in a new series of Links Classic Edition courses. Though Pebble Beach will suit most players to a tee, golfers are asked to keep a few rules in mind: Please repair ball marks on the green, replace divots and rake bunkers when finished. This is your course; take good care of it. Pebble Beach, Access Software's seventh Super VGA championship course and their first Classic Edition course, requires Links, Links 386 Pro or Microsoft Golf. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #3. Earth Invasion TESTOSTEOZNIR TTS Addren Cinta [state con SELING PAGLS 100 Berg Firestone Country Club 3DI Productions, Inc. 1601 N. Sepulveda Blvd. Manhattan Beach, CA 90266-5133 (310) 546-2882 EARTH INVASION: Gamers, raise shields and arm weapons! It's time for a fast, 3D scrolling, smoothly animated, photo-realistic, fully MIDI sound supported action game for Windows. Five difficulty sertings and over 30 levels of game play contribute to the wristwrenching excitement. Comprised of three separate though interwoven games, Earth Invasion is the most advanced action title that we have seen for Windows. Earth Orbit Mission is reminiscent of the arcade favorite Galaxian, Ground Defense Mission offers Defender-style horizontal scrolling action, while Deep Space Mission takes off like Wing Commander. Requirements for this shooter are stringent, demanding a 386SX-25MHz system or better, 4MB RAM, Windows 3.1 and DOS 5.0. An accelerated video card, preferably offering True-Color support, is best, though it is certainly not required. Sound and music are exceptional with a 16bit sound card and MIDI, while 3D graphics rendered in Autodesk 3D Studio visually steal the show. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Cambridge Interactive 222 Third Street, Suite 0234 Cambridge, MA 02142 (617) 225-0848 MY FIRST WORLD ATLAS: This maptime busy bath for reading age youngsters was designed by Impressions Software's own David Lester. An entirely point-and-click interface makes the information in this software easily accessible, though children will need a few minutes to learn the icons. This atlas is truly global, as it extends beyond the Earth to a rudimentary romp through the solar system and a \"you are here\" look at the Milky Way. Although many kids will not be interested in standard atlas information like per capita incomc, much of it is provided, raising its head like vegetables hidden in candy wrappers. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #4. TUI EST LINES Kons Para Top Secret Breg Pebble Beach Golf Links Da 190 Land Types My First World Atlas THE Access Software, Inc. 4910 West Amelia Earhart Dr. Salt Lake City, UT 84116 (800) 800-4880 FIRESTONE COUNTRY CLUB: Sight of the legendary Rubber Bowl, Akron, Ohio (Yea, Buckeyes!) is also the sight of one of the premier stops on the PGA Tour-Firestone Country Club's South Course, presently the home of the NEC World Series of Golf. This also happens to be the subject of one of the latest SVGA championship courses from Access Software for the Links golfer. The brainchild of millionaire industrialist Harvey Firestone, Firestone Country Club has been carefully recreated for the enjoyment of desktop golfers everywhere, featuring the rich colors of October foliage in the Midwest and the challenge of one of the world's most demanding courses. Firestone Country Club, the sixth Super VGA championship course, requires Links, Links 386 Pro or Microsoft Golf IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #2. Capstone Software Airport Corporate Center 7200 Corporate Center Dr., Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 TERMINATOR 2, CHESS WARS: There is both an enormous following of Terminator fans and a popular market for computer chess, but do the two mix? The player controls the human resistance, with an Arnold-ish T-800 as king, Sarah Connor as queen, Miles Dyson as knights, John Connor on a motorcycle as bishops, and freedom fighters as rooks and pawns. An assortment of Terminators and Hunter-Killers serve as Skynet's merciless human harvesters. Using the Grandmaster Chess engine, T2 Chess Wars allows you to set the computer's playing strength at several levels, with a balanced, active or passive playing style. You may also set a time limit on the compurer's thought process and opt whether the computer will \"think\" while it's your turn. A Terminator 2, Chess Wars Page 226 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX RS# ADVERTISER PAGE RS# ADVERTISER PAGE RS# ADVERTISER PAGE 31 127 33 161 125 123 52 44 43 5 193 97 162 233140 3DI Productions 73 Accolade 57 69 Accoustic Research 171 171 70 Activision Entertainment 43 71 Activision Entertainment 45 72 Advanced Digital Sys. 153 75 Aldealabs 126 76 Apogee Software 101 77 Bare Bones Software 208 Baseline Publishing 215 Bethesda Softworks 148 80 Bethesda Softworks 149 81 CD-ROMIX 63 82 CH Products 87 Cape Cod Connection 83 Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits 95 164 Chips & Bits Chips & Bits 9988 Colorado Spectrum 150 89 Colorado Spectrum 152 90 Computer Sys. Solutions 212 Compsult 160 Computer Express 116-119 93 Creative Labs, Inc. 159 94 Cyberdreams Davidson Disk-Count Software 225 99 Domark 72 100 Domark 71 101 Domark 73 149 Dongleware Publishing 141 102 Dongleware Publishing 143 103 Entertainment Internat'l. 167 104 Entertainment Internat'l. 223 105 Falcon Northwest 35 107 Flagship Magazine 217 108 Formgen 2 109 Future Vision 221 110 GE Information System 211 112 Gamer's Gold 136 113 Genovation 107 114 Gosselin Comp. Consult 201 115 HPS Simulations 201 116 QQP 174 High Tech Expressions 24 117 QQP 175 High Tech Expressions 25 118 QQP 176 High Tech Expressions 26-27 119 QQP 177 Homebase Products 158 120 Quadra Interactive Impressions 5 121 Quality Computers 186 Impressions 3 122 Raymond Lueders Studio Inner Circle Technology Readysoft 103 Interplay 121 124 Readysoft 115 Interplay 123 125 Readysoft 199 Keyboard Commander 166 126 Realism 191 Koei 189 128 REM Software Lance Haffner Games 158 129 SDJ Enterprises Logitech 47 130 Sideline Software 160 Logitech 87 133 Sierra On-Line 61 LucasArts 110-111 134 Sigma Designs 20-21 LucasArts 243 135 Simulations Canada 188 Maxis Software 155 136 Sir-Tech Software Maxis Software 157 137 Software Toolworks Mediavision 138 Spectrum Electronics 224 Mediavision 145 139 Spectrum HoloByte 12-13 Mega Tech Spectrum HoloByte 40-41 Mega Tech Strategic Simulations Megasoft Entertainment Strategic Simulations 105 Merit Software 197 . Strategic Simulations Microprose Software Strategic Simulations MicroProse Software 49 145 Thrustmaster Inc. Midian Software 156 146 Time Warner I. Group Mindcraft 185 147 Time Warner I. Group Mindcraft 187 148 Mission Control 218-219 150 Tsunami National Videotext 59 151 Tsunami Nawu Triad Inc. 224 152 Tsunami New World Computing 31 153 Tsunami Nova Logic 169154 Twin Dolphin Games Nova Logic 181 155 Velocity Development 131 Ocean of America 227 156 Viacom Origin Systems 244 157 Viking Software 204-205 Origin Systems 113 158 Virgin Games 164-165 Paper Mayhem 160 Zero's and One's 213 Papyrus Publishing Psygnosis No Reader Service number. Please call advertiser for information. Psygnosis Psygnosis Psygnosis 17 207 133 49 7 63 98 Triax De ERCO G 3 O 53 % av O 68 Jannaary 1994 Page 227 "


"i ett geferujista number of other settings change background scenery, 2D or 3D view, VGA or SVGA mode, and even allow network or modem play. When pieces are captured, an animated scene unfolds showing a Terminator or Hunter-Killer torching a human, or disintegrating into a junk pile from a resistance fighter's laser blast. The animations are not what you'd expect of a high-caliber CDROM program bearing the 12 title, and will soon be turned off by most players, yielding \"just another chess program\" with Terminator-styled playing pieces. IBM with CDROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5. \"But Granny.\" Electronic Arts 1450 Fashion Island Blvd. San Mateo, CA 94404 (800) 245-4525 NHL'94: EA Sport's excellent hockey game only gets better as it enters its sophomore season. Significant additions in this 1994 edition include: 4 Way Play support, allowing 1 to 4 players to play with or against each other; full goalie control; one timer and penalty shots; and a battery back-up that will save your personal stats. New music and organ tunes, new player animations, an NHL and NHLPA license, and lets not forget those Mighty Ducks of Anaheim (oh, and that Dallas team)—it's all here in one of the best cartridge sports games available. SEGA ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #8. The Beverly Hillbillies cross the Htlantic Sun September 10, 1020C ho PilgrimQuest THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES: Wcciii Doggies! Capstone has added yet another license to their stable with the computer rights to Twentieth Century Fox's The Beverly Hillbillies. This new adventure based upon the movie of the same name lets you assume the role of Jed Clampett who, with the help of his kin, must make his way from Bugtussle to Beverly Hills in a puzzling quest involving a humdinger of a crime. For ya' see, no sooner have they arrived in their new mansion home and Granny's kidnapped! So, Jed, Elly Mae and Jethro must go searchin' for clues to her whereabouts and come to her rescue. Only then will they ever get to feelin' at home in Beverly. Incorporating a very simplistic interface, modest VGA graphics, a tolerable audio soundtrack and predominantly simple puz.zles, The Beverly Hillbillies is definitely light adventure fare. Though the neophyte or occasional adventurer may find it his jug of tonic, serious adventurers should look elsewhere for their required draught of questing brew. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service BE Hi Tech Expressions Computer Software 584 Broadway New York, NY 10012 (800) 447-6543 TOM AND JERRY: Here's the sad case of a couple of cartoon character has-beens who need work so badly they'll even do arcade games. Tom, still typecast, plays the big bad cat who has kidnapped Jerry's nephew Tuffy and may soon devour him if he can find a suitable beverage to wash down a mouse. Jerry, pint-sized but nervy as ever, must try a rescue before he finds his cousin's remains lying around in a regurgitated furball. The fun begins when a host of household obstacles conspire to ding, dent and damage poor Jerry, while he pitches weapons like marbles, gum, hammers, ink, meat cleavers and moth balls at them. The graphics are satisfactory, but the game play is decidedly poor. The joystick works to scroll Jerry, but the arrow key action doesn't match the manual's description. Arcaders are advised to stick with Sonic and let Tuffy tough it out by himself. IBM ($29.99). Circle Reader Service #9. NHL '94 #6. ESGOREOOOOOOO Tom And Jerry FTOHTING Decision Development Corporation 2680 Bishop Dr., Suite 122 San Ramon, CA 94583 (800) 800-4332 PILGRIM QUEST: This historical simulation of the Pilgrim settlement at Plymouth by DDC and the National Geographic Society is geared toward the younger set. Unfortunately, the product's association with the National Geographic Society has done little to enhance its value. While it may be accurate from an historical perspective, and while it may afford a certain instructional value, PilgrimQuest has more the feel of an old film strip presentation than a multimedia learning experience. Children will definitely learn about the pilgrims if they stick with the game, but its mediocre interface and graphics, plus a complete lack of audio (except for PC speaker bleeps and bloops) makes PilgrimQuest a turkey as far as effective edutainment products go, especially at the asking price. IBM ($74.95 consumer version; $129.95 school version). Circle Reader Service #7. CONFLICT NOME Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234 Cambridge, MA 02142 (203) 676-9002 GLOBAL DOMINATION: In the not too distant future, five superpowers will compete for world domination. Minor governments will fall under the driving force of these expanding superpowers as the ultimate goal of \"peace\" is sought. This goal will be attained when one superpower stands alone, all others eliminated. As one of these five leaders, you must face some of history's most skilled rulers: Julius Caesar, General Custer, Genghis Khan, Henry V, Adolf Hitler, Abraham Lincoln, Napoleon, Queen Victoria and an unnamed caveman(?). Victory against these cunning opponents is the chief goal and challenge of Impression's multi-player conquest simulation. Competition is against a human player on a single computer or by modem, or against CONFLICT Set 39-4 Global Domination Page 228 Computer Gaming World "


" GARAIS You're finished with training... Had your fun and games. Now TACTICAL FIGHTER EXPERIMENT it's time to face reality in the most sophisticated aerial combat simulation ever created for your PC-TFX: Tactical Fighter Experiment. TEX Equipped with ASRAAMs, Mavericks, M615, laser-guided GBUS...you're fully loaded to tackle more than 200 «realworld\" campaigns, based on today's geopolitical realities. And to keep you sweating bullets, from Somalia to Sarajevo, the skies are swarming with Al-programmed bogeys that'll make you pay for your mistakes...with your life. Log on and engage in TFX. This time, you're not just playing games. Grab the controls of any of three USAF-spec flight models and spread democracy over five million square miles of topographically accurate landscape. OceanoSuhe D Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 TEX  1993 Ocean of America. All rights reserved. Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Soltware Limited, Circle Reader Service #105 WIN the TFX Contest. \"Be A Real Fighter Pilot\" See Package for Details. "


"SCORE computerized opponents. Conquest of our world or specially created worlds is offered; diplomats, spies and activists add depth to play. Tactical battles can occur in real-time if desired, or may be turn-based. Either way, budding conquers have a world of options at their disposal in this far reaching game of world-wide conflict. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #10. LEVEL CIVES Firefall Arcade IL CAO UDE TIET Inline Software, Inc. 308 Main St. Lakeville, CT 06039-1204 (203) 435-4995 FIREFALL ARCADE: In the style of classic, fast-paced video games comes this new title for the Macintosh. A simple game of skill and agility, the choice is simple—kill or be killed. As you try to make your way through Firefall Arcade's nine heart-pounding levels of excitement, ferocious fireworms, slinky sliders, and the perpetual death star\" all stand in the way of success. Fortunately, many weapons are at your disposal including triads, heat seekers, cannons and V12s. It's a good thing, too, as every bit of firepower will be needed to survive. Its 3-D animated effects and cool soundtrack serve up a visual and audible potpourri. Only serious joystick jocks need apply. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #11. Legese de Calle e LA SA BH BUDD Complete S port ACADSS HOE ARAB PICA DERBEUELAH 121 pret ASAL we ATU TEAM Tondo En bsn AME me alr EUL ES us les CO 40 08 09 | |||||||MADE TAG 3 Foto 31 Oman Anas AB APOS Logos Bible Crosswords hawks 1942 allows the player to fly Japanese Zekes, Kates and Vals against American Dauntless, Wildcats and Avengers in four World War II naval air battles. Their Finest Hour, a CGW Hall of Famer, places the airborne gamer in the seat of British Spitfires and Hurricanes or German top aircraft of the period. Number six at present in CGW's Top Simulation category, SWOTL takes the digital pilot into the final years of the second World War in their most advanced WWII flight simulation program. Air combat expertise and leather flight jacket not included. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #13. B-WING: Okay, now the Rebels have really got Darth Vader in a lather. In spite of losing their home base at Yavin and being betrayed in Imperial Pursuit, the Rebellion is still hanging on and has even managed a strike on the Empire's Deep Dock Station. Now, in the latest add-on disk for X-wing, the homeless Rebellion must continue its search for a planet to hang its hat on. Darth Vader has made it his personal quest to bring the Rebellion a world of hurt, but he doesn't know that they are about to introduce their newest Starfighter, the B-wing. Though the craft looks nothing like a «B», it is still one heck of a ship—with three laser cannons, three ion cannons, and a max load-out of 12 proton torpedoes. You'll get to command this heavy-duty firepower in six new historical training missions and 20 new plot missions. As in Imperial Pursuit, the disk includes hints for the missions and a Top Ace pilot that will allow you to play all of the X-wing and Imperial Pursuit missions in any order. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #14. REBEL ASSAULT: May the Force, and a CD-ROM, be with you. In this game of hot n'heavy joystick action, LucasArts uses music and digitized footage from the Star Wars films and 3-D rendered graphics to put on one of the hottest sight-sound shows to be seen from a CD-ROM game. Donning a Rebel flight suit, you will blast your way through 15 different action-oriented sequences: navigating the hairy canyons of Beggar's Canyon, weaving through an asteroid field with TIE Fighters in pursuit, making a suicide attack on a Star Destroyer, and blasting through the Stormtrooper-infested hallways of a Rebel base, among others. In terms of game play, it is very simplistic and is reminiscent of early laser disk coin-ops-but what a show! IBM with CDROM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #15. COME Air Combat Classics Logos Research Systems, Inc. 2117 200th Ave. West Oak Harbor, WA 98277 (800) 87 LOGOS LOGOS BIBLE CROSSWORDS: This is one of the most full featured crossword titles to surface since Sierra released Take-A-Break! Crosswords. The 200 included crosswords are designed to test your Bible knowledge, and, when used with Logos Bible Software (sold separately), it will cross reference the puzzle clues to the appropriate verse in the Bible. Puzzles can be adjusted to your skill level through several difficulty settings, and single or whole-word hints are but a click away. Puzzles may also be saved in progress, colors may be customized, and a special font, Scribbles, is included in both True Type and Adobe Type Manager formats for that penciled-in look. Additional volumes to follow. IBM with Windows ($39.00). Circle Reader Service #12 LucasArts Entertainment Company PO Box 10307 San Rafael, CA 94912 (800) STAR WARS AIR COMBAT CLASSICS: Every now and again nostalgia creeps in and demands a return to a favorite game of days gone by. To assist in fulfilling that need, LucasArts has just taken off with a collection of their historical air combat titles Battlehawks 1942, Their Finest Hour: The Battle of Britain and Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffé (SWOTL), as well as four SWOTL tour of duty add-ons and one mission disk for Their Finest Hour. BattleB-Wing PILOTS UWW SCORE (3001645 Maxis Software 2 Theatre Square, Suite 230 Orinda, CA 94563-3346 (800) 33-MAXIS SIMCITY 2000: An exponentially improved version of one of the most successful computer games ever, SimCity 2000 offers you the power to build a metropolis from the Rebel Assault Page 230 Computer Gaming World "


"MISSION The sexy role-playing adventure game You stumble back to your office after a long, hard day of detective work. You can't wait to get cozy with a bottle of whiskey, but your answering machine has an urgent message. \"This is a life and death emergency. Women are disappearing. Donna's missing, Please, come quickly.\"Donna's rescue is only the beginning of an adventure that indulges your wildest fantasies as it plunges you into fun and danger. While on screen you're dazzled by innovaWANTED: Private Investigator to Rescue Desperate Beauty. tive and original Japanese animation that's taking other countries by storm, and is now available in the U.S. \"Cobra Mission is unique.\" Computer Game Review\" \"...quite an original.\" Strategy Plus\" \"I have to admit I enjoyed it.\" \"Game Bytes\" Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write: Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510 Visa, MasterCard, checks accepted. System requirements: 386 or faster machine with 640K RAM hard disk with min. 11 megabytes of available space required, mouse, recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum and Adlib. Circle Reader Service #90 This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 18. None of the games doveloped by Megatech Software have been rated by the MPAA MEGA TECH "


"BEDAJ offers you the chance to take on 10 different opponents, cach with their own strengths and weaknesses. Though not as well done as the PC version of Street Fighter II, it does offer several more champions to bash it out with. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #18. DE! SimCity 2000 TORTAIP WHEELYHETER ground up, but now you cannot make decisions without considering political and economic implications. Rapid transit requires more consideration of actual logistics (placing transit stations at appropriate sites, deciding when they should be run underground and when they should be elevated). Education (schools and their funding) plays a major role in the long-term future of a city. Highways and freeways can be designed to alleviate the stress of ordinary avenues. You have increased options for clean power plants. In addition, cities no longer must conform to the staid gridiron look. New ways of placing zones and the ability to position roads at a diagonal mean you can even design historical urban areas like Washington and Paris. Macintosh ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Merit Software 13707 Gamma Rd. Dallas, TX 75244 (800) 238-4277 COMMAND ADVENTURES-STARSHIP: Hail the conquering hero! Hail! It's the year 2127 Galactic Standard Time and the galaxy is open for exploration and exploiration. Treacherous enemies are plotting revenge, and bloodthirsty pirates are trafficking the spaceways. Still, there is a vast frontier open to the brave and intrepid would-be hero. All that's required to seek your fortune in this universe is a sturdy ship, a capable crew, and a good blaster at your side. Featuring outstanding audio (with up to eight digital sound effects played simultaneously), first rate VGA graphics and animation, and a rich blend of strategy, action and role-playing elements, Command Adventures: Starship offers the roleplayer an atmospheric and engaging game. Real-time space and ground combat coupled with multi-layered parallax scrolling, random universe generation, and a massive contingent of configuration options will keep galactic commanders busy for cons to come. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #17. MicroLeague Interactive Software University Office Plaza, Bellevue Bldg., Suite 201 262 Chapman Road Newark, DE 19702 (800) 334-6572 BODY BLOWS: It ain't Mortal Kombat. It ain't Street Fighter. But it still let's you gutpunch, strangle-hold, death roll, sword spin, body slam, and head bash your opponenteverything short of ripping out their spine, The game? Body Blows from Team 17 and Micro League. Offering some of the fiercest bone-crushing to ever appear on the PC, this body basher, in the tradition of the video arcades, allows you to try your hand (foot, head and almost every other part of your body) at beating the hooey out of each opponent you face until you can prove to the world that you are the best thug around. Body Blows MicroProse Software Inc. 180 Lakefront Dr. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 (800) 879-PLAY BLOODNET: The Prince of Darkness is back and, of course, he wants your blood. But he wouldn't mind sucking your data, too. Two literary genres, gothic vampire tales and cyberpunk, collide against the dark and surreal backdrop of 21st Century New York in MicroProse's BloodNet. Players of this roleplaying adventure will jack-in to the cyberdeck of Ransom Stark, a down-and-out freelance hack who becomes en meshed in a vampire-lord's plot to control cyberspace and the world. Cyberpunk role-players may fry their werware over the rich character generation system (based on \"ethical dilemmas\" used to determine a player's character), extensive skill system, and broad array of futuretech toys. The graphics, labeled «3-D Hallucinographic art\" and including an odd interpretation of cyberspace, are wonderfully bizarre, while the cyberpunk/gothic fiction has a very hard edge. Pop the nootropics, cowboys, break out the dog-eared Gibson and Sterling, and prepare yourselves for what might be the best simulation of our Dark Future this side of Chiba City. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Command Adventures: Starship DQ0000 CPUUP Body Blows SIRIDAY 02:50 R Bloodnet New World Computing, Inc. 20301 Ventura Blvd., Suite 200 Woodland Hills, CA 91364 (800) 325-8898 JOE & MAC CAVEMAN NINJA: If you're pining for the prehistoric, this captivating game will have you pounding your chest and leaping with delight. With both one or two-player modes supported, the object is to hurl axes, fireballs and stone wheels at your enemies while picking up valuable items like food and bonus points along the way. Having Joc or Mac down chili sauce or eat a hot pepper enables them to cook any attacking barbarian in their path. Remember, though, the times are prehistoric. So watch out for preranodons, electrified fish, poisonous seedspitting plants, and giant dinosaurs. Plus, be ready to club it out with other ill-tempered meanies that inhabir each level in order to win the fur-clad babes and move on. From its \"stone wheel\" packaging and included dinosaur eraser to the comical, attractive graphics and the upbeat Paleolithic music, this game is an entertaining delight sure to spark enthusiasm in the old den or wherever men still cat meat and paint on the walls. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #20. 4000 SHIT00000 Joe & Mac Caveman Ninja Page 232 Computer Gaming World "


"You stumbled back to your office after a long day of detective work. But before you can get cozy with a whiskey bottle, there's a message waiting on the phone machine. Cobra Mission \"This is a life and death emergency!! Young ladies have been disappearing left and right, and now, Donna is missing!! We need your help!! Please come quickly!!! Donna's rescue is only the beginning of this sizzling adventure. There's dozens more tantalizing women held against their will. Free them from the evil clutches of General Kaiser, Cobra's psychotic master criminal you screaming in ecstasy. overlord, and they will thank you in ways that will leave You'll be dazzled by the quality of the full screen emotionally to them! It's AWESOME!! ANIMATION graphics and find yourself reacting physically and BOND WAS HOT STUFF. SO WAS ARNIE NOW IT'S YOUR TURN. To purchase your copy of Cobra Mission, visit your favorite software retailer. Or call 800-258.MEGA CA residents add 8.25% sales tax $79.95 (suggested retail) plus $5.00 shipping and handling and use your VISA or Mastercard. Or send check or money order to MEGATECH, P.O. BOX 11333, TORRANCE, CA 90501 On System BE requirements: 286 or faster machine with 640K RAM; hard disk with min. 8 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster Pro, Adlib Gold CALL 80025 8 MEGA R RATED (This programit voluntarily rated due to the partially violent and adult nature of the graphic imagery) This program is intended for mature audiences only!! Nosales to miner under 18 and where prohibited by law. e viste Reno MEGATECH Circle Reader Service #89 "


"Timer, a utility that allows LAN administrators to set the times in which LANWords can be played. A 160,000 word dictionary is provided, and anagram and word finders assist the player. IBM with Windows ($39.00). Circle Reader Service #23. BiaW9 Psygnosis, Ltd. 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 INNOCENT UNTIL CAUGHT: Civilization has reached the stars, and the net result is that the Interstellar Revenue Decimation Service (IRDS) is now bigger and mcaner than ever. «Master Thief\" Jack Ladd has been busted by the IRDS for back taxes on ill-gotten gains, and he has only a month ro lie, chear and steal his way back to respectable citizenhood. Amiga-drawn graphics help create a richly depraved world with seedy pubs, bums, streetwalkers and love houses on three planets and one cloud city. Controlling Jack and dealing with derelicts is fairly easy with a unique interface that works well. It's an intriguing, well-drawn and well-scripted game that might be worth the adventure gamer's time. IBM ($59.99). Circle Reader Service #21. STATISTI Innocent Until Caught StarPlay Productions, Inc. PO Box 217 Greeley, CO 80632-0217 (800) 203-2503 CRYSTAL CALIBURN: Developed by the same team that produced the award winning pinball games Tristan and Eight Ball Deluxe for the Mac, Crystal Caliburn takes pinball into the fantasy realm of knights and dragons with an Arthurian theme. Special features include realistic 3D ramps, an underground tunnel, bumpers and spot targets, and three ball multiball play. Simple to operate (only four keys are used), Crystal Caliburn will even let you electronically nudge the table. Though this pinball title will take advantage of more powerful Macs and large monitors, 13\" or larger 256-color gray scale monitors are also supported. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #24. BO 09 et 87 Prime Mover WPUU Chuck AXC FORMIN GREM LUME PRIME MOVER: Psygnosis' latest title for the Amiga provides a surprisingly fun dose of cycling excitement to top off your entertainment calendar. Offering a smoothly animated, realistic cycle racing model, Prime Mover allows you to select from one of five powerful bikes and a good number of challenging tracks upon which to race it. Gearbox options permit selection of automatic or manual mode, with the manual gearbox responding much like that of a real cycle. Acceleration, braking, banking right and left, and shifting gears are all handled with the joystick. Though Prime Mover offers no unique features or advanced technology, it is a solid bike racing simulation for the arcade set. In the tradition of arcade racing, Prime Mover offers a challenge that runs a gcar higher than the competition. Amiga ($49.99). Circle Reader Service #22  SS ON PAGE 1 PE APIE LAW 3X3XILIAP 3x WIN Chi LANWords Strategic Simulations, Inc. 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2901 (800) 245-4525 FANTASY EMPIRES: «Lead a Kingdom. Forge an Empire!\" That's the challenge given to players of SSI's new game of adventure and strategy, Fantasy Empires. Transporting you into a world of mystical kingdoms where your goal is to build an empire with the help of a computerized Dungeon Master, Fantasy Kingdoms offers exciting play for those steeped in the D&D tradition. Based upon the Dungeons & Dragons game world, Fantasy Empires uses a unique digital mediator who guides you through all elements of play, making sure you comply with all the official game rules. Provision has been made for up to five \"rulers\" at one time—human or computer controlled. Extensive character interaction employing advanced AI provides for challenging diplomatic encounters, while commanding multiple troop types and interacting with fantastic races is facilitated through an \"emperorfriendly interface. Digital sound effects, atmospheric music, and attractive 256-color graphics complement this playable package. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #25. The Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Ct. Novato, CA 94949 (800) 234-3088 CAPITOL HILL: Welcome to the Hill, Capitol Hill, that is. You're a newly elected politician with an agenda and a big job ahead. As a member of the United States Congress, your goal is to rise through the ranks from freshman to Speaker of the House or Senate FIE Saber Software Corporation 5944 Luther Ln., Suite 1007 Dallas, TX 75225 (800) 338-8754 LANWORDS: Wordaholics unite! This Windows program offers seven variations of a Scrabble-style word game for up to four players. LANWords spells out fun for all in two player mode against the computer (with 20 levels of difficulty), multi-player mode on a single PC with up to four players, or network mode against as many as four players over a LAN. The program has a high degree of customization. Hints are available during play; tiles may be exchanged or shuffled; a \"Panic!\" burron quickly hides LANWords from prying eyes; statistics on remaining tiles may be viewed; a \"best plays\" list of suggested words is available; and you can even chat with other players when in network mode. Also included is the LANWords Rule Builder, a special utility that allows you to modify or create new rules and game boards, and LANWords Corporate Crystal Caliburn BUILDING 4 AVAVAV Fantasy Empires Page 234 Computer Gaming World "


"TURBO TOUCH 360,\" THE STATE OF THE ART PC GAME CONTROLLER! No Need To Pushi ulu TURBO TOUCH 360 M TURBO ON 11111 TRIAX 111 For use with IBM PCs and compatibles D000 111111111 11111111! Gives you better diagonal control Gives you easy circular control Faster movement for higher scores No more blisters or \"numb thumb\" Extensively consumer-tested with game \"thumb fatigue.\" Just pass your thumb or players, software developers and computer index finger over the control sensor-you don't game reviewers, the Triax Turbo Touch 360 have to push down. And, thanks to better controller brings a new dimension of control diagonal and circular (360°) control, the newest and comfort to computer game playing. and most challenging games are easier to It's a breakthrough product, control and more fun to play. offering the benefit of higher The Turbo Touch 360 is the scores and longer play without TECHNOLOGIES right product at the right time. For the name of your nearest Turbo Touch 360 retailer or to place an order, call 1-800-858-7429 \"Patent Pending. IBM PC is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. Turbo Touch 360 and Triax are trademarks of Triax Technologies, 1993. Triax Technologies Circle Reader Service #130 "


"VOTNICE? Majority Leader, while exploring the inner workings of government in the process. Experience the swearing-in ceremony, choose your office staff, get to know your constituency, vote on bills, participate in Congressional debates, and keep your office running smoothly. Capitol Hill puts you in charge of interactive government. Featuring over 45 minutes of video footage, 500 photos, digitized narration and original music, this congressional game lets you explore the political machine from the inside. So, if you're thinking about a career in the political arena, or would just like to get a taste for government office, cast your vote on Capitol Hill. IBM with Windows and CD-ROM, Macintosh with CD-ROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #26. Capitol Hill Oceans Below The Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Ct. Novato, CA 94949 (800) 234-3088 OCEANS BELOW: This innovative product will immerse the armchair scuba diver into a world of exotic dive sites, marine life and mysterious underwater wrecks—without getting wet. Oceans Below allows you to choose an exotic scuba dive site and then plunge into the crystaline VGA waters. The undersea world is explored in 125 still shots and over 200 video segments with full narration. Icons in an underwater motif provide information for a multitude of oceangoing life, shipwrecks, and burried treasure, while hot spots on the screen lead to context-sensitive videos and narration. Additionally, you can get cursory information regarding various pieces of scuba equipment. In the IBM-CD version, the narration is adequate and informative, but the video quality is abysmal. This product would be wonderful with full screen, full motion video. Perhaps the 3DO version will satisfy this need. CD-IBM and CD-Mac ($49.95). Coming soon on MPC and 3DO. Circle Reader Service #27. style shooting game where tossing quarters at annoying solicitors makes them go away. In Earth Last!, the \"geek\" must bag intergalactic garbage in the venue of cigarette butts and nauscous effluent in order to score points. Finally, Captain Major Buzz Armstrong with his six-pack support system monitors Phlegmings, the best rip, err, take-off in this package. Tiny trudging Phlegmings must be whacked with a golf club and a healthy swing before they gum up your apparel. While flicking Phlegmings is somewhat phun, overall Geekwad Games of the Galaxy remains primarily a collection of shareware-quality diversions for the unabashedly imbecilic. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #28. Waite Group Press 200 Tamal Plaza Corte Madera, CA 94925 (800) 368-9369 MAKING MOVIES ON YOUR PC: From the ever prolific Waite Group Press comes yet another book/disk combo (two 5.25\" floppies) focusing on 3D technology and design. This book and its accompanying software-the shareware programs POLYRAY ray tracer, DMORF morphing utility, SP spline path generator, DTA animation assembler, and PLAY viewing program-allow the aspiring Fellini to direct his or her own films in the digital realm. With this resource you'll learn all about color selection, texture, camera placement, morphing, movement, light and shadows, and creating special effects. To assist in the creative process, the book includes all the basics from dreaming up a film to designing and directing it. From the creative to the constructive, Making Movies on Your PC provides a cost effective introduction to one of the hottest areas of computer graphic design. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #29. Walt Disney Computer Software, Inc. 3800 West Alameda Avenue, 20th Floor Burbank, CA 91505 (818) 973-4015 COASTER: Disney's latest is an electronic Tinker Toy set with which you can design, build and ride your own ultimate roller coasters. Sporting an easy to use, mouse driven, track assembly interface, scrolling the 3-D track sections and twisting them around is a snap-which might also be the grisly sound of your passenger's necks breaking if proper attention isn't paid to track safety and physics. The film and replay features in Coaster give it the ability to keep turning your stomach over and over, while a panel of experts stand in line ready to ride your creations and rate them for such things as speed and G-force turns. The physics model might be real, but so is the fun of noodling around with wild roller coaster track designs. And even though the track might be steep, the price for this ride isn't. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #30. CGW Geekwad Games MAKING MOVIES ON YOUR PC Dhion Ubusig, end Da Movie Making Movies On Your PC Tsunami Media, Inc. PO Box 790 Coarsegold, CA 93614-9983 (800) 644-9283 GEEKWAD GAMES: King Wacky has been imprisoned in a jar of jalapeno jelly by the evil Cybergeek, and only a geekwad can save him. Fortunately, if you buy this package, you are just the Geekwad Tsunami is after. Converse with the space spoofs on the Bridge to learn how to beat Cybergeek at the five included arcade games and obtain freedom for your pickled ruler. Carl Raygun introduces Beefender, where flying cattle of the Bovine Liberation Organization (BLO) must be shot out of the sky in two-dimensional space. Instruction in tactics is offered by Isaac Claponclapov for Grogger, a tricky dodge and hop game set in a galactic carhop. A Yoda knock-off provides assistance in a sharewareTRACK ELECTORAT GRID O sta EV Coaster Page 236 Computer Gaming World "


"* COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME. SimCity Maxis, 1987 Many Formats SunCiu The tity Simulator Rejected by a software publisher because there was not enough game to it, SimCity established the genre known as \"software toys.\" In SimCity, Will Wright followed his bliss—creating dynamic urban terrain and transformed that joyful sense of discovery into a product that reflects reality, allows creativity, provides performance evaluation and entertains everyone. The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formars listed are those which CGW has in its possession. The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many Formats Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Many Formats Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh M-1 Tank Platoon (Micro Prose, Inc., 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM, Macintosh M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) Many Formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many Formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1990) Many Formats Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) C64, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many Formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many Formats Starflight Electronic Arts, 1986 Amiga, C64, IBM, Macintosh, Sega STARFLIGHT In addition to the elements of roleplaying, exploration and economic management, Starflight was the first CRPG that required players to use a diplomatic strategy. The game featured some very alien races conceived in the very imaginative mind of Greg Johnson. Such rich NPCs offered additional suspension of disbelief beyond the fractal-generated planets that, themselves, provided a depth of reality to exploring the Starflight universe. January 1994 Page 237 "


"CGT CLE Reader Poll #112 COMPUTER a OUI AWNTop Adventure Games GAME COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts 2 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's LucasArts 3 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM The Seventh Guest Virgin Star Control II Accolade 8 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 9 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 10 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra SCORE 10.24 9.91 9.80 9.56 9.55 9.42 9.36 9.28 9.20 9.14 Top 100 Games GAMING WORLD The 1 Computer Game Magazine Type SP RP OOOO GO Uluma. Underworld vo01 Top Role Playing Games AD WG RP AC ST WG WG AD The SUSI Score 10.41 10.29 10.24 10.17 10.08 10.04 9.97 9.96 9.93 9.91 9.86 9.83 9.80 9.78 ST 4 SI GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.29 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 10.08 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.73 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.55 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.47 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.25 9.77 9 10 LJINS AD SP SI WG RP WG WG,ST WG SI AC WG AD,RP AD RP SP RP WG,ST STAC Top Simulation Games OVO AN GAME X-Wing World Circuit Falcon 3.0 Aces of the Pacific Comanche: Maximum Overkill Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe MiG-29 Red Storm Rising Stunt Island Silent Service II COMPANY LucasArts MicroProse Spectrum HoloByte Dynamix NovaLogic LucasArts Spectrum HoloByte MicroProse Disney MicroProse Game Company 1 Links 386 Pro Access 2 Ultima Underworld Origin Day of the Tentacle LucasArts 4 Warlords II SSG Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 6 Wing Commander II Origin 7 Solitaire's Journey QQP 8 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 9 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 10 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 11 Dune 11 Virgin 12 X-Wing LucasArts 13 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 14 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 15 World Circuit MicroProse 16 The Perfect General QQP 17 Lands of Lore Virgin 18 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 19 Conquered Kingdoms QQP V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 21 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 23 V For Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 24 Quest for Glory III Sierra 25 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing Links Access Ultima Underworld II Origin 29 Warlords SSG Syndicate Electronic Arts 31 The Seventh Guest Virgin Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 33 Might & Magic III New World Computing 34 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 35 War in Russia SSI Hardball III Accolade 37 Star Control II Accolade 38 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing Eye of the Beholder II SSI Ultima VII Origin 42 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 43 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 44 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 45 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 46 Lemmings Psygnosis 47 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 48 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 49 Second Front SSI Clash of Steel SSI SCORE 9.83 9.77 9.59 9.42 9.39 9.19 9.06 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.75 9.73 9.68 9.63 9.63 9.59 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.47 9.47 9.43 9.43 9.42 9.42 9.41 9.39 9.37 9.37 AD 10 SI RP SI WG SP AD, AC WG RP Top Strategy Games SOLITAIRES JOURNEY 9.36 9.34 9.34 RP 9.34 SCORE 9.97 9.86 9.43 VOLAWN GAME Solitaire's Journey Dune 11 Syndicate Chessmaster 3000 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro The Lost Admiral The Incredible Machine Mech Warrior The Island of Dr. Brain Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 COMPANY QOP Virgin Electronic Arts Software Toolworks Electronic Arts QQP Dynamix Activision Sierra Sierra RP ST AD SP RP AC,ST AD SI WG WG 9.13 9.05 8.98 8.94 8.91 8.78 9.34 9.32 9.28 9.27 9.25 9.21 9.20 9.19 9.17 9.17 8 9 10 "


"avastands 2251 AD RP AD WG RP WG Top Wargames GAME Warlords II V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General Carriers at War Construction Kit V for Victory: Utah Beach Conquered Kingdoms V For Victory: Market Garden Warlords 10 War in Russia OVOU AWN COMPANY SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific QOP SSG Three-Sixty Pacific QQP Three-Sixty Pacific SSG SSI SCORE 10.17 9.96 9.93 9.75 9.68 9.63 9.63 9.58 9.43 9.37 SI RP AD,RP t cord NDER 9.14 9.14 9.13 9.11 9.10 9.09 9.09 9.08 9.07 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.02 9.02 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.97 8.96 8.95 8.94 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.91 Top Action Games AD.RP SI AD 98628888 Boeien und dabar!eanbabu sera RP ON WG,ST AD ST GAME Wing Commander It Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Prince of Persia 2 Out of this World Flashback Lemmings 2: The Tribes Spectre 51 Tetris Classic King's Quest VI: Heir Today... 53 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 54 The Castle of Dr. Brain 55 Eye of the Beholder 56 The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 58 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 59 Empire Deluxe 60 MiG-29 61 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 64 Stunt Island Red Storm Rising Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 68 Silent Service II 69 Quest for Glory 11 Gunship 2000 71 Police Quest 3 72 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 74 Space Quest IV The Incredible Machine Western Front 77 Carriers At War Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 79 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 80 Alone in the Dark 81 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Mech Warrior 83 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 85 The Island of Dr. Brain 86 Tony La Russa Baseball II Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 89 F-15 Strike Eagle III 90 Indianapolis 500 91 Elvira 92 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 94 Rex Nebular 95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 96 Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 High Command 99 Heart of China 100 Veil of Darkness COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Broderbund Interplay SSI Psygnosis Velocity Spectrum Holo Byte Sierra Electronic Arts Sierra SSI Sierra SSI Origin New World Spectrum HoloByte Sir-Tech Sierra QQP Disney MicroProse Legend Sierra MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Origin QQP Sierra Dynamix SSI SSG Sierra Dynamix I-Motion Electronic Arts Activision MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra SSI Dynamix Access MicroProse Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend MicroProse SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Three-Sixty Pacific Dynamix SSI SCORE 10.04 9.59 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.60 8.57 8.52 8.35 8.02 WG WG AD AD NOG AD 10 ST.SI AC,ST Top Sports Games 8.89 220 OVOU AWNGAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Links Hardball III Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony La Russa Baseball Il NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge PGA Tour Golf 4-D Boxing COMPANY Access Dynamix Access Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Electronic Arts SCORE 10.41 9.78 9.47 9.37 9.27 8.89 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.37 SI RP WG,ST AD AD 8.89 8.89 8.88 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 RP ST ST WG AD 8.78 8.78 RP 8.75 8.74 Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP-Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST=Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP-Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"Amhat suot What You've Been Playing Lately ****** PC Data Hits List Of Top-Selling Software September, 1993 PC Games (MS-DOS) Rank Tide and Source Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 (Microsoft Corporation) Privateer (Origin Systems, Inc.) Front Page Sports Football (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Street Fighter II (Hi Tech Expressions) Lands of Lore (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit (LucasArts Entertainment) Wing Commander Academy (Origin Systems, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Links Innisbrook (Access Software, Inc.) 12. SimFarm (Maxis Software) 13. Front Page Sports Football Pro (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Betrayal at Krondor (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) 16. Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) AD&D Dark Sun (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) SEAL Team (Electronic Arts) Wolfenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) Ultima VII: Part 2/Silver Seed (Origin Systems, Inc.) Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we ve found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of relcasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with sug. gestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulared opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately? query on the Reader Input Gard. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out...keep em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #112, November 1993 Privateer (Origin Systems, Inc.) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) Master of Orion (MicroProse, Inc.) Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, Inc.) X-wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Lands of Lore (Westwood Studios) Civilization (MicroProse, Inc.) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix, Inc.) Empire Deluxe (New World Computing) 10. Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) -niminen 18. 19. Rank ***** Amiga Games Title and Source Overlord (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Space Quest IV (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Leisure Suit Larry V (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Heart of China (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Rank Macintosh Games Title and Source Star Trek; 25th Anniversary (Interplay Productions, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) Prince of Persia (Brderbund Software, Inc.) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft Corporation) King's Quest V/Red Baron Bundle (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) **** Notable Quotables \"Front Page Sports Football Pro is reason enough to own a computer. What a game!\" A. Burke, Ft. Collins, CO \"Strike Commander has gone from a middle road challenge (easy to moderate) to a virtual impossibility in the add-on missions disk. I am curious as to other people's opinions on this. Hope to see some hints in some column before too long, because I gave up on it.\" E. Araujo, Gloucester, MA \"As a former infantry platoon leader, I find SEAL Team to be a realistic small unit experience. By far the best game I have played.\" J. Edwards, Sierra Vista, AZ \"Stronghold is not a good game-the hands on involvement for every detail is tiresome (except combat). I have enjoyed Mule, Empire, Kampfgruppe, the Ultima series, and others, including other SSI/AD&D games, but Stronghold was $45.00 down the drain.\" F. Bell, Hermitage, TX \"Scorpia may be correct in panning Darklands (in her survey) but I've noticed that on the Internet no RPG has demonstrated as much staying power as this game. While discussion frequently centers on the newest and hottest game, time and time again people will mention the enjoy ment they get from going back to Darklands.\" C. McMath Hillsboro, VA \"Clash of Steel, good! High Command, bad....very bad.... D. Stafford, Dublin, OH \"I remember when I had a life and a wife' before I started Betrayal ar Krondor.\" B. Faust, N. Hollywood, CA \"Betrayal at Krondor is the best CRPG to hit the hard drive yet. Excellent concept Easy to learn and a plot that won't stop!\" G. Emerson, Charleston. SC \"Rules of Engagement 2 is the closest you'll ever get to actually controlling the Starship Enterprise. This game alone is a reason to own a comp uter.\" K. Nosworthy, Pearl Harbor, HI *********] CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) ROMaterial (Moon Valley) King's Quest VI Upgrade (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Day of the Tentacle (LucasArts Entertainment) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Indiana Jones and the Fare of Adantis (LucasArts Entertainment) Just Grandma and Me (Brderbund Software, Inc.) Compton's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Compton's New Media) 10. Lord of the Rings (Interplay Productions, Inc.) This list is based on units sold by ten temail chains, representing over 1300 stores. For more informi rion, please contact PC Data ar (703) 475-1025. Page 240 Computer Gaming World "


"matches The Patch File and SuperClock, and fixes a 32-bit addressing problem. If you are getting random crashes or freezes, this update is for you. 8/20/93 *** Solitaire's Journey for Windows Patch: Corrects minor bugs in the Windows version of S/. 11/11/93 Strike Commander/Tactical Operations 1 Fix: Converts old Strike Commander save games to the Tactical Operations format. Only needed if you wish to run Strike Commander saves created prior to Tactical Operations installation. 9/30/93 ** Tony LaRussa II Version 1.2 Update: Fixes include: the small replay accurately recreates the action on the field; injured players are now displayed on all roster screens in red; pitchers' errors will tally correctly: and the //.maj crash bug has been squashed. 11/05/93 ** Tornado 1.0 to 1.0c Upgrade: An update for the US version of the game. 10/29/93 ** V For Victory 3.1 Upgrade (IBM): Upgrades Velikiye Luki and Market Garden Versions 2.0 to Version 3.1. 8/19/93 ** V For Victory Utah Beach 2.0 Data Upgrade (IBM): Upgrades Utah Beach to Version 3.1 8/19/93 ** V For Victory 3.11 Upgrade (Mac): Upgrades Velikiye Luki and Market Garden to Version 3.11. 8/19/93  V For Victory Utah Beach 2.0 Data Upgrade (Mac): Upgrades Utah Beach to Version 3.11. 8/19/93 ** V For Victory: Gold Juno Sword Version 4.01 (Mac): Upgrades the Macintosh version 4.0 to 4.01. 8/28/93 War In Russia 1.1 Upgrade: Fixes three bugs and adds an enhancement. 10/04/93 Warlords Version 1.1.5 Update (Macintosh): Updates any version of Warlords Mac to V1.1.5. 10/09/93 Warlords II c1.02 to v1.02a Update: Fixes a bug with certain VGA cards (Diamond) and updates a few sound drivers, including PAS 16. 10/26/93 WW2: Battles of the South Pacific: Corrects a problem with the ranking system. 9/21/93 Iomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at the need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks (e.g., CompuServe or GEnie), but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. (**** indicates new files) Air Bucks Version 1.21: Corrects lock-up and mouse compatibility problems. 8/06/93 ** Blue and The Gray V1.01 Update: With this patch, poor quality units will now rout at 15% rather than 10%, transporting troops will nor \"pop\" back into a train or ship, and the AI will now be rougher and quicker in battle. 10/23/93 Carriers at War Construction Kit Patch: Fixes the «CAP\" bug and a few other minor problems. 7/13/93 ** Darksun Update: Fixes problems with Wave Blaster and Sound Blaster + LAPC/SCC1. Eliminates the crash that may occur after the final battle, and random crashes when changing regions. 10/26/93 **Empire Deluxe V3.11 Upgrade: Updates Version 3.00 or 3.10 to Version 3.11. Corrects a number of minor bugs in the original DOS release. 9/14/93 Even More Incredible Machine Windows Patch: Corrects several problems including these specific errors: \"You cannot run more than one copy of this program\" error message when in 256-color mode, and \"Run Time Error: Stack Overflow\" error message when Windows MIDI Mapper is not configured correctly. 10/19/93 Imperial Pursuit Fix: In the original version, it can be difficult to lock-on to a target with missiles under certain system configurations. This patch should correct this problem. 7/08/93 ** Take-A-Break! Pinball Patch: Fixes the problem with the disappearing ball in the Endless Desert Temple Stone Wall trap. 8/24/93 Lands of Lore Version 1.11A Patch: Fixes a number of small bugs including the inability to retrieve Dawn's second key 9/08/93 Lands of Lore Sound Card Patch: Allows multiple sound cards to be used at one time. Now includes Wave Blaster/Sound Blaster 16 support. You need this patch only if you use more than one sound card. 8/16/93 Links 386 Complete V1.11 Update: Contains both the Links 386 Pro EXE version 1.11 and a collection of new VESA drivers for various video cards. 9/03/93 ** NFL Coaches Club Football Update: Corrects some rare problems, improves the Al, and adds some new features. 10/21/93 Omar Sharif on Bridge Upgrade (IBM/Windows): The latest version of Interplay's bridge game for Windows. 9/03/93 Patriot Version 1.1: The long-awaited patch to Three-Sixty's Gulf War simulation, 7/27193 Realms of Arkania Update #1: Corrects the \"Skeletarius» problem among others. 7/01/93 Red Sky at Morning V1.33: The latest versionof SimCan's new wargame. 9/18/93 ** Return of the Phantom CD-ROM Speech Fix: Fixes digital speech repeat and echo due to an odd EMS configuration. 9/14/93 Rules of Engagement 2 Version 1.05: Latest version of the Omnitrend/Impressions space war simulation. 8/01/93 Rules of Engagement 2 V1.05 to 1.06 Update: Patch for those having problems running the game with Viper graphics cards. 10/09/93 Rules of Engagement 2 Campaign Disk Update: Updates Campaign Disk 1 to version 101. This update adds 9 new Breach 2 IGS links to the campaign \"Operation Hammer.\" This update is only useful if you're playing the game in conjuction with Breach 2.8/30/93 Shanghai II Version 1.04 Update (Mac): Resolves incompatibilities with After Dark The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted online by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" in computer gaming. YNNELLO GATE PEE TOP TEN RANKED GAMES Leek of November 5 to November 11 RANK SCORE TAI RANK SCORE TITLE UNI 2963 Wolfenstein-30 1518 seventh Guest 2298 X-Wing ? 1412 Felcom 2211 Kings questiu a 1445 RCAS O Pacing 2099 Civilization 91409 USE TO 1616 bing Commander 2 12 1895 Front Page Football For gift ideas you'd never think of. LOOK Cool Tools? Exile Menn um Path | A-ZlXrefil January 1994 Page 241 "


"DOO The Rumor Bag shoulders as I wrote. «Don't forget to write down something about Colonization.\" I asked him what he was talking about and he explained to me that Jeff Briggs is working on that game and it is supposed to be built off lessons that the company learned from Sid Meier's Civilization. Creatingperience Suddenly, my train of thought was interrupted by cries of \"Take it off!\" and I sudThe 3DO Developers Symposium denly realized that everyone was looking at me. The real Trip had invited me up onto the stage and the developers wanted me to take off the bag that hides my perfect physiognomy. I sat down on one of the director's by William R. J. \"Trip\" Faber III chairs on-stage and Trip asked me what was William R.J. \"Trip\" Faber III new in the industry. Crystal Lite Software, Inc. I told him there were two new companies in the offing. Jeff Johannigman, producer of Master of Orion, and Sim-Tex, the developers of MOO, are planning to form Excalibur V e ll, they said it couldn't be done, What I didn't know, however, was that this Games. The first release will be a «SimCity anaged to finagle my way presentation was going to be the longest ses Goes to War\" project. Also, James DeGocy, V into the 3DO Developers Consion of the entire conference. The set may ser may author of the Harpoon Battlebook, is planning Barence Security was so tight that, in order to have looked like that of a late night television to launch Arsenal Games. By April, Arsenal get in, it wasn't enough to have your name on show, but I don't think Letterman has any. Games plans to release an operational level \" the list. You had to have a badge complete thing to worry about. One wag suggested that game of modern tactical armor and infantry. with photo ID. Well, I wasn't about to miss the session be called, \"Stupid Developer per A turn-based wargame, it is expected to supout on an opportunity to \"Talk With Trip\" Tricks,\" but I shut up when I felt the hostile port modem play, as well as E-mail. Each or a chance to pick up one of those cool black glances boring through my bag. (Ed: And I turn of the game will represent 30 seconds of bag/backpacks with the 3DO logo on it, so I thought the rumor guy was the only one who real-time and will feature air-to-air combat told my editor I was going to weasel my way could bore through his bag! I know when support resolved on-screen. The initial release in under false pretenses. I'm in a tough room. will emphasize the U.S.M.C. \"That you're a journalist?\" asked my editor I managed to change the subject by passing I didn't get off that easy, though. \"Tell us with his usual lack of tact. I immediately a note asking if anyone knew anything about about Microsoft.\" my host aueried further. decided that I would prove his lack of confia product called Zephyr. It sounded like some dence to be unfounded. After all, he couldn't kind of zen archery simulation for a VR game, I didn't really have any rumors about Mipossibly remain so sarcastic when I told him but I got a note back explaining that it was crosoft, so I pulled one of the Stupid Journalwhat I had found out about Electronic ArtsNew World's new 3-D hovertank simulator. ist Tricks out of my mental briefcase. \"I'm technically non-disclosured on all their prost 3D titles, just from hanging out in the That was news to me. The only New World jects, so I'll just have to tell you about a halls. I liked the one called Escape from Montitle that I was aware of was Inherit the Earth. company close to Microsoft.\" I told them that ster Manor. It's a first-person perspective It's a graphic adventure being developed by Mallard, the company that does all those DOOM-style game, using three-dimensional David Joiner (Faery Tale Adventure). Inherit realistic scenery disks for Microsoft Flight polygon-filled graphics. The big difference is the Earth has the 3/4 perspective view used in Simulator, was about to ink a deal with Sky Simula that you blow up this haunted houseful of FTA, but character interaction is the core of Warrior, one of those schools where civilians spooks with an ecto-gun type of weaponry. It the story. By choosing from a menu of rerecan dogfight in real planes can dogfight in real planes. was too early to see if they were going to sponses, gamers can advance the story line. With that news, the session was adjourned. texture map the graphics or not, but it moves By this time, the conference session was Everyone was in good spirits and headed for fast and has some very interesting monsters. running much longer than originally schedrunning much longer than originally schedlunch. Fact is, the race for lunch was very We entered the room for the \"Talk With oom for the \"Talk With uled and a barrage of notes was landing on uled and a barrage of notes was landing on much like another 3DO game, The Horde. much lile Trip\" and noticed how everything had been my lap. One said, \"Is Across the Rhine really lap. One said, \"Is Across the Rhine really That's the That's the new game from Crystal Dynamics where this horde of vile creatures tries to eat EA guys said it looked like the set for Twisted, Prose?\" everything in its parh and the gamer, as a their 3DO game show parody that features scribbled a quick note that said, «That's medieval hero named Chauncey, has to stop \"Wheel of Torture\" and a number of diabolwhat I was originally told, but whether it was it from eating his village. ical...well... twists on the familiar game show or not, Across the Rhine is now going to be an In fact, the whole idea kind of makes me format. Indeed. I couldn't help but wonder if MS-DOS simulation where gamers can jump wish I had announced something crary like those were old \"You Bet Your Life\" and around from tank-to-tank within a given batnd from tank-to-tank within a given batMicrosoft is about to launch a new operating Micro \"Queen for a Day\" audiences who were pic. talion. I was also told that Arnold Hendrick cute tured in between the different quizand puzzle was designing it. Now, I m told that Jim Day thing. Of course, if I'd said anything that sequences in all their black and white video is doing so.\" stupid, I'd never be able to show my bag in splendor. One of the developers was reading over my the Silicon Valley again. Cow Page 242 Computer Gaming World "


"lal MOOO S GATE OF THE up Us! < PEL ha STES WINN olaco 0100394 to DLL XI1 TO Ko Tu Tres graphics are lush and colorful, with skewed perspectives and grotesque .characters that could have been lifted from vintage Warner Brothers cartoons. --COMPUTER GAMING WORLD les *** KTE GVPL 1853 TLH It's one of a kind and one in a million. --COMPUTER GAME REVIEW Maniac Mansion. VITA 90 to H to TEXIDIR os actes 1063 TL SERCEG 11 OXAS 35 t ES Enter the world of the Edisons, where Dr. Fred's mutated purple tentacle threatens to turn the human Tace into a domesticated breed of pets. Only you and your daring band of friends can stop him. Fix the Chron-0-John, travel through time and save humanity from being sucked under.  Three different characters to control Over 100 digitized sound effects  Progressively challenging puzzles  Includes original Maniac Mansion as a game within a game \"Must have SoucedBlaster SoundBlaster Pro w 100% compatible for digitized sound ellects and yoke. Avallable for IBM, IBM CD ROM and compatibles, Visit your local retaller or call 1-800-5TARWARS to order your copy today. LUXO UN hotras TLO Circle Reader Service #84 YX TOXO TE LUCAS Spandex 2 LGH noast TCE Bad Label Ladalad TOXU let OLOR TU Prostato N owy links to 1 TECH aatiko U oni nel mond o Bolde della lyhd . Ba d eland Musk w del "


"PACIFIC R BETRACING THE MISSIONS OF World War I FLYING ACES IS FASCINATING BUT REWRITING HISTORY IS THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE In Pacific Strike, you cruise into all major battles of the Pacific theatre Pearl Harbor, The Coral Sea, Midway, Guadalcanal, the Solomon Islands, the Marianas, Leyte Gulf, Iwo Jima and Okinawa. Now you can change the outcome of each battle and the entire war through your own successes and failures. Can you force an end to the war before the bomb is dropped on Hiroshima? Fly the Wildcat, Corsair, Hellcat, Devastator, Dauntless, Avenger and Helldiver, enjoying the astounding realism of their fully instrumented cockpits. You'll do more than practice! Hone your skills as you face relentless enemy pilots in Zeros, Kates, Vals, Bakas, Betties and more so graphically detailed that you can even see enemy pilots and insignia. o Prove those skills in a stunning variety of missions grueling dogfights over the Pacific, dive-bombing runs against carriers and warships (including the Yamato! and challenging rocket attacks on pillboxes, airfields and other ground installations. ORIGIN. We create worlds. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Copyright 1993, ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Pacific Strike is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin ond We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts, Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders.  Actual screens may vary.. A Stand Alone Game Made in the USA Circle Reader Service #107 "

