"Special Industry Insider Issue COMPUTER GAMING WORLD August 1993 Number 109 EAGLES GOOD YEAR EAGLE TY The #1 Computer Game Magazine 100 GAMES RATED Bodum HOT FLASHES WOMEN From Summer CES The 7th Guest: Future of Multimedia? Freddie Pharkas Funny Frontier Pharmacist Sneak Preview: Clash of Steel..... Going Ballistic with Strike Commander ENEROUS DIZER billette BAS BOSCH $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 08 Papyrus' IndyCar Racing Heads for the Winner's Circle 129074 121581 "


"Snear of Destiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure 1 1 I I 4 1 1 1 1 1111 RE 12:1 FLOOR SCORE LIVES HEALTH AMMO 84400 3 36223FLOOR | 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 31 REALTH ARMO 17% 83 FLOOR 9 STORE 2800 LIVES 3 HEALTH ANNO 9 807 93 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle, between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover #4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players X saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is 'there' like no game I've ever played...\" the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" \"I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players. Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #55 "


"There's Sound... \"room, vroom\" TM ...And There's SoundMan\". GUARANTEED COMPATIBLE or your money back LOGITECH SoundMan 16 delivers sound so real, 85% of the time people can't tell the difference from live sound. That's because it's packed with the absolute latest in sound board technology: up to 16-bit/44KHz record/playback, Yamaha OPL-3 stereo synthesis 20-voice chip, 100% Sound Blaster« and Ad Lib compatibility, and more. SoundMan brings you the highest CD — quality sound available, for all your games and applications, in Windows and DOS. From Logitech, the peripherals leader. At your dealer, or call LOGITECH The Senseware Company SoundMan 16. Get Real. 1-800-732-3026. IM/ Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #77 "


"COMPUTER FEATURES FEATURES GAMING WORLD 12 New Technology Comes to Indy Papyrus Software's Indy Car qualifies for the big race SPECIAL INDUSTRY INSIDER SECTION Y ELM dominus TEXACO Hot News from the Consumer Electronics Show CGW proves Chicago is our kind of town On the Trail of Sam & Max: Freelance Police LucasArts' transformation of a comic book to computer game Guided Tour of Westwood Studios Las Vegas means more than bright lights and green felt Novotrade: Hungarian for Success? The story of a rising eastern European developer Can I Borrow Your Notes? The Computer Game Developers' Conference Part II Indy Car pg. 12 Cover Illustration by Andrew Kitson Dy f 7th Guest pg. 54 SIN or &  Prescription for Laughter Al Lowe's Freddie Pharkas: Frontier Pharmacist by Charles Ardai Trilobyte's The Seventh Guest Virgin's multimedia entertainment product sets the stage for more by Chuck Miller To the Moon, Aldrin Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space does launch by Jeff James Rocketing through Space with Carmen Broderbund's Where in Space is Carmen Sandiego? by Charles Ardai Are You Maniac Enough for ChessManiac 5 Billion and One? Spectrum HoloByte's lampooning release by Jay Kee Tsunami's ProtoStar Putting light years of exploration into a personal computer by Paul Schuytema Jeepers, Creepers Psygnosis takes a leaf out of a Lemmings playbook by Ken Hill The Robots Have Gone Lunicus Intense action gaming on the CD-ROM front by Tony Reveaux Nobody's Scared of Gobliins 2 Sierra reprises the animated puzzlesolvers in a new game by Allen Greenberg Tennis with a Viewpoint Electronic Arts' unveils EA Tennis in 3-D by Wallace Poulter No Needles in Cactus Basketball Two new stat-based products crash the boards, and score! Play-by-play from Wallace Poulter Freddie Pharkas pg. 50 96 Strike Commander pg. 130 "


"TM Tool The Creepers are on the move. It's the annual trek to the Butterfly Bowls. But, with over 70 levels of factories, caverns, and forests to cross and with the worst sense of direction in the entire animal kingdom, getting them all there is going to take some doing! Energy 2000 Toot Energy 3600 Creepers Features:  Over 70 puzzle levels.  256 colors (PC). Crazy Creeper animations.  Difficulty rating from easy to brutal. Full soundcard support with 16 funky soundtracks.  The Creeper-cam with multiple playfield views. Energy o 41000 The mean green creeping machine Look for Creepers crawling in your favorite software store, or call: (800) 438-7794 Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court, Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 731-3556 Circle Reader Service #88 "


"100 Profs Do It! Students Do It! Any person on the Internet can do it! Multiplayer role-playing by John J. Brassil Advertisers List COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD aan 110 103 112 76   The War to End All Wars Blue Byte's History Line: 1914-18 by Robin Matthews Once More, Over the Bridge Three-Sixty Pacific's V for Victory: Operation Market Garden by John Vanore Changeling's Pax Imperia Macintosh owners make peace in the cosmos by Doug Winship Clash Conflict Strategic Simulations' Clash of Steel WWII lite A sneak preview by Alan Emrich Falconing with an Expert Tom Basham unveils his campaign strategies for Falcon 3.0 All the Games We Missed An addendum to M. Evan Brook's Pre-20th Century Wargame list Origin's Strike Commander Chris Roberts' Wing Commander gets a new wingman by Tom Basham Overkill with the Comanches Novalogic adds to the carnage with Mission Disk One by Bryan Walker 91 m 89 mo  132 134 Bile Bption Sall Bules P h ase am Adanac Command Advanced Gravis Apogee Software Aztech Systems Bare Bones Software 146 Bitwit 135 CGW Book Store CH Products Cactus Development 93 Cape Cod Connection Chips & Bits 73,75,77,79 Colorado Computer 146 Computer Express Compsult Computability Creative Labs 63 Disk-Count Software Electronic Arts 7,8,9 Electronic Innovative Design Entertainment Software Consultants 76 Falcon Northwest Flagship Magazine Formgen Gamer's Gold 127 GEnie 33,35,37 Genovation Gosselin Computer 114 HPS Simulations 122 Homebase Products 56 Impressions 14,15,17 Inner Circle Software 67 Interplay 65 Keyboard Commander Lance Haffner Games Liberty International 97 Logitech Lucid Group Mallard Software Microprose Software 39,41,43,53 Mindcraft Software 47,61 Mission Control 125 MPG Net 104,105 Origin Systems 19,148 Paper Mayhem 114 Psygnosis QQP 28,29,131 Raw Entertainment 123 Realism Entertainment 133 Rom Time 84 SDJ Entrprises 22 Sideline Software 102 Sierra On-Line 48,49,83,147 Sir-Tech 11 Spectrum HoloByte 57 Strategic Simulations 87,115 Thalion Publishing 139 Three-Sixty Pacific 118,119 Thrustmaster 52 Twin Engine Gaming 101 Viking Software 128,129 Virgin Games 44,45 WTDT Planet Kidz 21 Winterbauer 121 Wizard Games of Scottland 102 Zeros & Ones 137 127 BINH 3 71 June 153 Clash of Steel pg. 120 V for Victory pg 112 10 46 66 DEPARTMENTS Editorial (Are Computer 106 Letters from Paradise Games Endangered?) 107 The Fifth Wave (Rich Tennant) Scorpion's Mail (A Hint in Time) 136 Taking A Peek Scorpion's View (Eye of the 141 CGW's Hall of Fame Beholder III) 142 The Top 100 From The Cockpit (Instrument Flight Trainer) 144 What's Hot? (Our Readers Tell Us) Over There (Shadow of the Comet) 145 Patches (Quick Fixes) Shareware (Homebrew 146 The Rumor Bag Software) (Ramblingus Elasticus) 74 82 86 Share "


"ink You w Were & ver This SOMETHING ELSE? 101010 SOMEONE ELSE? IS TO ME WHERE ELSE? Don't on't worry "


"@ IT'S ALL IN en Sources indicate that a rival syndicate has developed a dangerous new computer program, and our research boys want it. Your mission: build Company Agents using cybernetic implants and hi-tech weaponry. Utilizing action, strategy or a lethal mix of the TEAM SELECTLON. @ CIL RECET SOMEO two, you can infiltrate BECAS fifty remarkably deon tailed futuristic cities, each 'alive' in real-time. To confiscate a copy of Syndicate, visit your local software retailer, or call toll free 1-800-245-45 25. Available for the 18M PC and compatibles. Eliminate the Hooligans Take control the city. But expect maximum resistance. "


"YOUR HEAD. @ SYNDICATE  o Bullfrog Productions Ltd. 1993 ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #50 "


"cdntoral COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Give It to Us Straight, Doc? Is It Terminal? Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Associate Editor Chris Lombardi Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Chuck Miller Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg tate of the Industry: Serving as editor of CGW has been an ideal vantage point from which to observe the fascinating changes in the world of entertainment software. Of late, rumors have been thicker than swallows at Mission San Juan Capistrano; reporters from metropolitan dailies, film industry journals, financial market periodicals, and national consumer publications have kept our phone lines busy; and the collected industry seems to be holding its breath as layoffs and red ink provide the major news. One financial wizard recently put the question to us point-blank: \"Is the floppy-diskbased computer game industry dying?\" It should be obvious that we don't think so; otherwise, we would be looking for other jobs. Recently, three major players in the entertainment software industry had major layoffs: Micro Prose, Sierra and Strategic Simulations, Inc. All of these companies dropped their workforce by close to 20%, and personnel offices at the rest of the companies in the business were swamped. Doomsayers immediately saw signs of the Apocalypse. Yet, the layoffs at all three companies can easily be laid at the feet of hypergrowth. In this sense, we mean hypergrowth where companies expand faster than their earnings porential. This does not mean that their core business is dying, it simply means that they are encountering rough seas because their newer ventures are neither immediately profitable nor self-supporting. In the case of both Sierra and MicroProse, because of their nature as public companies, the rumor mill has been extremely active. Both CEOs have faced rumored coups and both have lost face in the eyes of their boards of directors because of acquisitions which have not yet paid off to the bottom line. Sierra's acquisition of Bright Star Technologies and Coktel Vision made sense for the long-run company strategy. CEO Ken Williams realized that Sierra's core business (graphic adventures for Sierra and simulations at Dynamix) would need to be supplemented by new revenue streams in order to continue their growth curve (remember, Sierra had over 13 straight profitable quarters before the last few disappointing ones!). He reasoned that cducation and edutainment would be nice supplementary products and both of the recent acquisitions were designed to move into this area. The return, of course, has been uneven. The new ventures have not reversed the vampiric effect that The Sierra Network (another long-range venture that has yet to pay off) has had on the company's bottom line. In the short term, there is plenty of room to second guess Sierra, but it is far too carly to write an cpitaph for either this pioneer computer game company or its visionary founder. MicroProse faces similar criticism. After acquiring their affiliated label, Paragon Software (Megatraveller, Twilight 2000), as well as Andy Craven's Vektor Graphics (Shuttle, B-17), MicroProse found themselves having to axe some projects, and getting disappointing sales results from others. This, combined with the disappointing performance and potential for the projected Darklandsstyle series, and the fact that it is taking longer than expected to get new products out from the graphic adventure engine (Rex Nebular), means that the bottom line at MicroProse is as red as a traditional fire engine. That directors and stockholders would be losing confidence in management is a given. The truth is, however, that there is plenty of legitimately good product in the pipeline, given enough funding to keep things moving. Finally, Strategic Simulations, Inc. is a company that was expanding more rapidly than the founder's philosophy allowed. It built up an in-house development staff to exploit the resources of its Advanced Dungeons & Dragons license from TSR. Then, before the company could produce the new engine needed to recapture the market (which was softening in their previously successful Gold Box Series), they faced a financial crisis of their own. Now, the health of SSI will likely rely upon whether they can get a new line of AD&D licenses on the marker in a reasonable length of time and whether said line captures the imagination of gamers like the original series did. As for the market in general, we continue to see incremental growth in traditional computer games. Some fear that disk-based entertainment will be swallowed up by other competing interactive platforms, but we see reasons for hope. First, disk-based entertainment is the most inexpensive R&D and test marker environment. One can inexpensively test market in the floppy disk market and see if a concept will fly or not. Expansion of CD-ROM technology will only enhance this test market capacity. Second, it is where the most innovative design community has always resided. \"Third, the installed base of personal computers is still growing; the industry just needs to find the right products to reach all of the potential new customers. Fourth, expanded telecommunications services simply enhances the possibilities. In short, we are in a period of consolidation, but we don't think this industry is dying. State of the Magazine: This issue marks the 10th anniversary of Scorpia's first appearance in CGW. It also marks the first appearance of Chris Lombardi as Associate Editor (Chris has moved up the ranks from Editorial Assistant through Assistant Editor to this new position) and Chuck Miller (formerly editor of Enchanted Realms) as Assistant Editor. CGW continues to expand its staff to cover what we still consider to be a growing industry. CGW Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993 Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601, Mt. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Subscription Dept. 1 (800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 Printed in the U.S.A. Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"IRAS ENTER A WHOLE NEW REALM REALMS ARKANIA AS OF A error EALMS HF pin Enter a whole new realm of fantasy roleplaying... Enter a rich and detailed gaming system... One that offers all you expect, and more, from a finely woven. carefully crafted epic adventure. One that allows you to choose your level of involvement in the \"behind the scenes\" detail, ideal for both novice and experienced players. One that places you in the midst of an PIN explosive era of strife and LE turbulence. One providing a true quest to challenge your imagination, a rich adventure to involve your mind, and careful balancing and smooth game play to make sure your time is spent playing. KANLA LAD1 Enter a world of mythical creatures, magic and old legends... Enter a world filled with peril, conflict and uncertainty... ENTER ARKANIA... Cut loose in a world of blazing adventure. Hundreds of hours of game play, exploring a vast continent richly studded with towns, dungeons and endless adventuring opportunities! Your heroic characters must track down every lead and every contact if they are to succeed in their search for the renowned Grimring. the Blade of Destiny. You'll face many hazardous journeys by road and ship as you explore the fantastic realms and cities of Arkania. Of course, you will encounter numerous foes determined to prevent you from succeeding in your quest. AVAILABLE A Fantasy Rule-Playing Stration CLUE BOOK BIRTECH Felstowse A4 HAL PRODUCT FEATURES  Fully Animated Isometric 3D Combat  Phased-time Game System  Town & Dungeon Automapping  2 Difficulty Levels for Novice & Experienced Players . True Point & Click Interface  Easy to Use Multiple Choice Dialogues  Impressive Musical Score & Sound Effects  Full 3D \"First Person\" View of Towns & Dungeons A LAND OF CONFLICT REALMS A LAND OF ADVENTURE GAME FEATURES  More than 70 Towns, Villages. Dungeons and Ruins  12 Character Archetypes  7 Positive & 7 Negative Character Attributes  Over 50 Skills, adjustable at the player's option  12 Magical Realms with over SO spells  Auto-Combat Option  Parties of up to 6 Characters may be Split and Regrouped HER FINNS WIE FENE > MODUGI MODELO A LAND OF CONVERSATION A LAND OF RICHES AVAILABLE FOR: IBM PC & 100% COMPATIBLES (VGA, 640K, 80286 OR BETTER, MS-DOS 3.x, 5.0 OR 6.0) SOUND SUPPORT FOR: AD-LIB, AD-LIB GOLD, SOUND BLASTER, SOUND BLASTER PRO, ROLAND LAPC-1/MT-32, PRO AUDIO SPECTRUM, THUNDERBOARD, PC & TANDY INTERNAL SPEAKER AMIGA (1MB REQUIRED) AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE RETAILER NEAR YOU, OR CALL: (800) 447-1230 Circle Reader Service #103 SIRTECH P.O. BOX 245, OGDENSBURG, NY 13669 FAX# (315) 393-1525 "


"TIME cmeak preveln TAKE PROD NO. SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY The Qualifying Lap. In the pit with Papyrus WindyCar Racing by Gordon Goble The year was 1989. Ex-Formula 1 autoThe original Indy achieved much of its nonor the cash machine variety, but angled track jockey Emerson Fittipaldi basked in the toriety by being a true \"driver's game,\" offerdesigned to keep one pointed in the right glory of his maiden victory at the esing superb handling characteristics alterable direction), and it actually works! teemed Indianapolis Motor Speedway, and through a multitude of pragmatic set-up adAdding to the ambiance and perhaps lendPapyrus Design Group, an inconspicuous justments. IndyCar Racing will seemingly foling some driving assistance, will be the pressoftware developer in Massachusetts, was set low in the successful footsteps of its ence of two very thoughtful amenities, that of to release its first product. Indianapolis 500: predecessor. Apart from releasing sim-o-matire smoke, and a «groove.\" (Although not The Simulation was playable right from the niacs from the confining restraints of the present on the preview copy, both are asprogram's sole diskette and boasted \"enIndianapolis oval, IndyCar Racing will captisured.) While tire smoke will merely increase hanced detail on 286 CPUs.\" Although the vate the eyes before anything else, much in the one's viewing enjoyment, a groove will be complexity of such programs may have grown same manner that Falcon 3.0 and Comanche: indicated on screen as pavement tears rubber since that year, Indy's realistic portrayal of life Maximum Overkill changed forever our comfrom the tires that pass over top of it. Being at the wheels of North America's fastest racing puter skies. \"in the groove\" is generally a good place to be, machines gradually captured the hearts of the secret to the look of IndyCar Racing is as this is a tried and true line around the track armchair racers around the computer gaming what has commonly become known as «3D and through the corners. world. texture mapping,\" and IndyCar has it in Time-warp to 1993, a year in which droves. Gone are flat polygons. Practically An intriguing, if not a trifle warped, aspect \"Emmo\" would repeat and for just his second everything on the screen is textured, creating bytured. crearing of the original Indy was the hell-bent multiple time reign supreme at the Indy 500 (and in the illusion of depth and, dare I say, an envicar crashes that could occur (or be manufacthe process frustrate race organizers and the ronment that is virtually real. This form of tured). This highlight will only change for the American Dairy Board alike with his callous graphical approach is most assuredly a racebetter in IndyCar Racing, with reliable sources sim first, and a welcome one at that. Track, stating that \"car wrecks will be unlike anyage of choice. Himself an owner of several grass, trees, barriers, and other cars all benefit thing seen before.\" The severest of impacts orange groves, the cocky Brazilian opted in from this advanced technology, but the most will result in colossal explosions, actually stead for o.j.). important difference is in the cars themselves breaking the car apart into its individual components. Engines will tumble and wheels will Where Emmo goes, it seems, so goeth that roll down the track with abandon. Says Indylittle company from Massachusetts, and in a Car Racing developer John Wheeler, \"We're case of «deja vu all over again,\" Fittipaldi's going to have some great explosions, let me second Indy triumph will be followed yet tell you...heh, heh, heh.\" again with a visit to Victory Lane by Papyrus. Propelling Papyrus to the front of the pack While the Papyrus special effect departwill be its fourth quarter '93 release of indyment has obviously been hard at work, very Car Racing, a wholly rewritten, graphically little of the above would really matter if Indystunning, and certainly more comprehensive Cardidn't offer solid mechanics. Tracks must competitor to the beloved Indy 500 racing be accurate, car set-up must be both compresimulation. However, the race to #1 in the hensive and effective, and most importantly, expeditiously evolving world of racing simu The cars now resemble actual racing madriving feel must excel. From early indicalations won't be an easy one. chines as opposed to rolling pyramids and, in tions, IndyCar Racing delivers on all three In the years since Indy 500's release, there the tradition of Indy 500, they are perspecaccounts. have been a number of forays into the racing tively correct from all angles, including th As alluded to earlier, no longer will one be sim market, not the least of which was Microof the six instant replay cameras: TV, In-Car, performing one? Prose's 1992 offering of World Circuit. It is Gearbox, Chase, Sky and Blimp. All vehicles dianapolis oval. IndyCar Racing will sport six fair to say that this little gem took the digital now carry the logos of team sponsors, and and possibly as many as eight tracks, includracing world by storm, and certainly, followvery legible corporate signage has been strate ing two or three courses shipped once IndyCar ing on the heels of such a warm-up act is never gically and liberally sprinkled across each purchasers complete and mail their registraa simple task. Fortunately for Papyrus, they track. Even the color of off-course grass variestion cards like good little race car drivers have prepared a package that should please (if from location to location, as does that of should. At press time, probable initial locales not astound) most serious armchair drivers. on-course pavement. Banking is present (no include the ovals of Michigan and MilwauPage 12 Computer Gaming World "


"cmeak preview kee, and the road course of Laguna Seca. Add-on courses will become available (for a small additional fee) as they are completed. The two tracks (Laguna and Michigan) included on our preview copy were depicted with remarkable accuracy. The former is far from temperate in real life—nor is it hereand both the Corkscrew and Turn 11 hairpin are particularly deceptive and difficult. Throw in some true-to-life elevation changes (driving backwards up through the Corkscrew shows just how steep this grade really is!) and you have one heck of a breathtaking course. Michigan, on the other hand, is built for speed, speed and more specd. I have taken a few laps around the real world banked monster that is Michigan, and IndyCar Racing does indeed provide the next best thing to being there. One can only suspect that new tracks will be created with the attention and care shown in these two examples. se two examples. It takes a very different car to tackle the screaming Michigan oval after a bout with the twisting Laguna Seca course, and never has a racing sim incorporated such an array of automobile alterations. Although we could tinker with only front and rear wings, fuel load, and gear ratios on the preview model, adjustments to the following have been promised by release date: tire compounds, tire stagger, tire camber, tire pressure, shock spring stiffness, anti-roll, fuel mixture, turbo boost, spark advance, wing configurations (large road wing vs. small speedway wing), brake bias, chassis and more! During preview sessions, less wing, taller gears and a decreased fuel load all did their job at Michigan (and resulted in a fast 31.1 lap time), while more wing and shorter gears got us down to a 1:17.2 time during limited practice at Laguna Seca. Once again, if developers have placed equal care and attention on other car set-up options, the only concern for the PC racer will be the arrangement of all of the above into some form of harmonious configuration for each track. The IndyCar Racing preview model included none of the driver's aids that will appear on the release edition, and we had to rely on our astounding natural ability to get us through the often arduous expert mode. There are but three words thar best sum up the handling of an IndyCar car in this ultrarealistic mode: it ain't easy. Game designers have devoted much effort and time into the illusion of realism, and there are a number of innovations to the digital racing world that are part and parcel of the real life fast lane. Still, these ideas are new to a computer, and there will most probably be a lengthy learning curve for IndyCar students, even those who have studied under the tutelage of World Circuit et al. Driving an IndyCar car for the first time presents a distinct experience from the sensarions provided by any previous computer racing simulation. Toral and individed concentration is a crucial factor for solid onbefore taking away from the sheer pleasure of track results, and one must be wary of the participation? Certainly anyone attempting to master IndyCar Racing's expert mode will REPLAY SKY have a long road ahead of them, but those drooling for the closest glimpse yer into real world racing need look no further. Kaemmer himself makes an interesting point in saying, \"Realism vs. enjoyment is the key issue. When you look at Indy 500 and World Circuit, they fall at opposite ends of the spectrum. I think interest fades in World Circuit because it's just too easy. Like the real world, 90. E people enjoy things involving skill and a conforces at work on one's car. These forces won't stant challenge. feel present on the computer monitor, but \"IndyCar Racing attempts to satisfy both certainly would in a real, moving racing maelements, with the most challenging and realchine. Until a joystick, computer desk andistic game in expert mode, but an easy and chair are capable of providing tactile feedenjoyable experience when all the driving asback, caution is the watchword. sistance features are enabled. I think people Not only will one have to deal with the today wa today want to feel that somehow the time horizontal plane, but likewise the omnipresthey've spent playing a game has been put to ent element of the vertical. Gravity has its good purpose. This is what we're trying to effects; the player's car will most definitely offer with IndyCar Racing.\" feel lighter at the crest of a hill than at its base, Yet another considerable first in the world and for a moment one may feel he or she is in of racing sims is Papyrus' decision to include a myriad of custom-designed control options RIGHT FRONT with IndyCar Racing. A huge variety of control and input devices exist today, and while COMPOUND SOFT one person will prefer «Brand X» joystick, PRESSURE 26PSI another may swear by «Brand A.\" Still others CHANGE TIRE possess a steering wheel of some description, DONE and more may have foot-triggered accelerarion and braking. World Circuit introduced graduated braking and acceleration, and that was greeted with much glee. Papyrus aims to please all of the people all of the time, and players will have the ability to assign any key, control of a fighter jet. Diving a tad too hotly switch, or button to control practically anyinto a given corner will provide even more thing they wish, with the option of deciding surprises. Sudden braking may provide an between analog and digital velocity adjustinnovative loss of adhesion with the track ments. A joystick sensitivity and calibration surface, while a prudent and exacting turn on program will also be part of the package. the steering wheel or joystick is most often a better way of keeping oneself on the black Following the lead of World Circuit, a mostuff. Are both these features consistent with dem play feature will be included, as will, the real thing? You betcha! sadly, some form of piracy protection. Music (which inevitably is switched to the off posiThese elements notwithstanding, the navition anyway) was not present on the preview gational characteristics of the car in the precopy, but engine notes and tire squeals are view version seemed a might jumpy, or I both up to par and informative. Menuing is skittish, if you will. Fortunately, IndyCar RacLa ing lead programmer David Kaemmer assures layered, straightforward and dead simple. one and all that he too is not yet satisfied with For those who enjoy storing those extra this aspect, and that the issue will be addressed special moments for posterity, any number of before release. replays can be saved to disk. Although remaining limited to less than a half minute FUEL apiece, visual search and frame-by-frame options are included, and, quite simply, never have race cars looked so good on a computer. The TV camera view is especially spectacular as our hero churns into view, swoops underLSIZER neath the camera position with perspectively Gillete co correct sponsor names for all to see, and 2015AL speeds off into the distance. In the progressive world of digital realism, IndyCar Racing is the next logical step in ANA racing simulations. Enjoy the view—it is pheSo...does all this realism make for a morenomenal. Beware the drive, though it is all enjoyable game? How far does realism go on 10.1757 JGTE August 1993 Page 13 "


"abowskis THIBILE, THLURAYA XX*** THE CETTYSBURG ADDRESS Where will you fire the first shot? Latest teh. whether that wa W. letul . CEO ecreate the power and excitement of the Civil War! As the leader of either side in this challenging simulation, you recruit, train and direct your armies around the American countryside. When two armies clash, fight out a Micro Miniatures battle in fast, high-resolution animation! Historically authentic, The Blue and the Gray features up to 200 animated figures per battle, naval units and blockades, river and rail transport, breathtaking graphics atmospheric sound and music. Authentic historic interludes faithfully recreate the atmosphere of the period! o GGE GEGGER BASE PROPERTY Includes a FREE copy of a specially commissioned book on the Civil War! Watch your armies battle in fast, high-resolution animation  Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #68 "


"WHEN TWO WORLD. WAR WWERTO nu MODEL:Junernout TECH Space IV 1 Fire Power: Rang: WE Prior: For: BUILD COT! LOL! nines 112 Power :25 In Production! LOSSES:  Command your entire planet's military resources in an effort to conquer a hostile neighbouring planet. You control a state of the art workstation from which advanced software tools enable you to design new craft, research new technologies, build new installations & craft, set up highly sophisticated missions and watch the progress of this strategic interplanetary conflict. ENO Design your own spacecraft for tanks, submarines, jet....!! DDDD Battles take place in space & on surface of both plameis Random planet generator for great replay value DEEDD DODD Designed as a 2 player game! EUILD OEGIC ONCER SYSTEM Send out units on missions to explore the unknown enemy planet and wipe out its military capability Impressions co ssions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #71 "


"cimdustry. nens.cpecial Is It Party Time For Consumers? CGW Dances Through The Summer Consumer Electronics Show COMPUTER CO GAMING WORLD The weiver come Mone the \"Shrimp Bowl Hypothesis\" of Hollywood convergence pushes entercomputer industry health has long tainment software onto the data highway. been held. It posits that the indusInterplay is prepared to move in any ditry cconomic outlook for the next six rection. Maybe they'll do a multimedia months is directly proportional to the version of Iron Butterfly's \"In-A-Gaddasteepness of the slope in the shrimp bowls Da-Vida\" with their live band performing served at the latest trade show. Translathe longest version of the song this side of tion: Companies don't usually spend the album, just like they did at the party. money unless they're expecting to make considerably more in the next selling seaAccolade had feet dancing and beach son. The hypothesis seems extremely apballs flying during their beach bash. Their ropos with regard to entertainment velcro wall had even normally sane joursoftware in 1993. Sales were flar to rapidly nalists putting on their velcro suits, perdeclining in the last fiscal year, and it is a forming flips and landing upside down as hopeful sign to see companies with rethey stuck to the material. The company newed enthusiasm and high expectations. had reason to celebrate. They are poised Here are some of the reasons for the optito take advantage of both dominant platmism. forms in the video game industry; they Interplay danced into its second decade have come to a settlement with Sega of of corporate existence as a company grossAmerica so that the cloud of legal reparaing between $20 and $30 million dollars tions no longer hang over their heads; and per year. The company filled up Chithey have managed to assemble an affiliared label program that keeps their toe in cago's famous Park West nightclub (ironically, the sight of many a great the water of disk-based development for Mindscape rock 'n roll party during the whenever they need to return to that software industry's last heyday) with a bar arena. Currently, the company is focused that would irrigate California's Central upon video game design, but they are Valley and a crowd that exceeded 1,200 expecting to convert their successes into (400 gate crashers were alleged to have more sophisticated disk-based versions in been turned away). Imagine a secret cotethe future. rie of Interplay employees carrying Brian Museums were especially in vogue as Fargo's photo around on cardboard fans and laving playful 'Sieg Heil's on one Three such events rather reminded us of another as they circulated among the the famous Activision/Infocom party at crowd. We thought we had joined a software cult for a moment there. Fargo is something of a software legend, however, since he went from selling ziplocked Apple II games with a piece of artwork on the cover (that had nothing to do with the game, save the fact that both were part of the fantasy genre) to the dealmaking head of a company which is so diversified into the different sectors of the industry that the company should be able to weather hard times whether multimedia becomes FOTO dominant, 3DO breaks through, or the Dynamix' Graue Wolfe CGW's publisher meets the trade. the Field Museum of Natural History where the Second City improvisational troupe performed a hall-dozen sketches to promote their line of upcoming adventure games. Sierra's Dynamix division celebrated their upcoming launch of Graue Wlf by renting the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry. Guests could not only enjoy the ambiance of the museum and grab their sandwiches and hors d'oevres from under a large ice sculpture of a U-boat, but attendees could explore an authentic captured WWII U-boat at their leisure. Meanwhile, Microsoft unveiled their new Space Simulator and Flight Simulator 5 at a Chicago planetarium, and Knowledge Adventure, the educational publishers, used the Shedd Aquarium as the backdrop for their special event. Hooray for Hollywood! One of the most amazing portents of why the «shrimp bowl slope\" is currently so steep in entertainment software was the joint presentation by Walt Disney Studios, Virgin Games and Sega of America. Breakfast was served in an elaborate bazaar with a lavish production number consisting of the overture from Aladdin and \"Prince Ali\" processional march, state-of-the-art staging (complete with laser show special effects), and cameo apPage 16 Computer Gaming World "


"CAESAR ROME WASN'T BUILT IN A DAY-HOW LONG WILLITTAKE YOU? Makes VITY immun MULTIWITHER Immo Amm of the As governor of a province of the Roman Empire you must Abuild cities for the good of your people. Fortify your cities with walls & towers but should your defences fail. you must command legions to crush the hostile barbarian tribes! Success will lead to promotion and ultimately, the very best may rise to become... Caesar! Battles muy also be fought out in detailed, animated combat using a much enhanced version of Impressions' Cohon (Cohort II will be available separately). TI E FUM DE 25 BD S T E FTS 1780) Grow your city with ampitheatres, forums, temples, aquaducts, roads, baths & workshops and much, much more! keg esprostile tribes with Cross-country walls to match The Great Wall of China Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #72 "


"Industru meus coecial Artists at work on Jurassic Park for Sega-CD to have more role-playing and strategic elements to it than the basic console game. The company is also expending considerably more in the graphic budget for the CD version. 3DO's Jurassic Park is expected to use an interface analogous to the computer interface in the labs (in the film) and to take advantage of the 3-D modeling capability of the system. live actors perform on artist-rendered sets a la Return to Zork or The 7th Guest). Trimark Interactive (the new game division of Trimark Pictures) has opted to take White Men Don't Jump onto the console machines as their first official foray into interactive entertainment. It does not appear that the division intends to blend actual film and interaction in any of their first generation products, but statements by Mark Amin (President of Trimark Interactive) indicate that they Virgin's Aladdin expect to have fully interactive full-motion video products on the shelf in appearances from the presidents and/or proximately three years. CEOs of all three companies. Even Paramount's Paramount Interactive though the product being touted at the division is currently specializing in diskbreakfast was a Sega Genesis cartridge, the based educational games. Richard Scarry's level of cooperation between these three Busytown is a marvelous implementation companies sends a significant signal. Virof the Scarry mythos (programmed by gin has developed a process for bringing Novotrade, sce related story this issue). It cel-based animation to the Genesis. Dis features an animated helicopter cursor ney Studios allowed the animators who Studios allowed the animators who and lots of animation. They are also reworked on the film version of Aladdin to leasing Lenny's Music Toons, a music video provide cnough access to cels that all of creation tool for five year olds and up; the movement in the game looks like the Rock, Rap'n Roll, an adult music creation animation in the film. Then, Sega adds its utility; and Movie Select, a database of markering muscle into the equation and 42,000 different films with a powerful expects to sell in excess of a million units search utility. There are a few movie clips, of the game. Welcome to the convergence but not very many. Thus far, Paraof mainstream entertainment and the inmounts film and television licenses are teractive entertainment industries! We're still up for bid. Interplay Productions has due for an interesting ride. a new adventure game based on the original series, as well as the multimedia verSony's purchase of Psygnosis has thussion of their original StarTrek: The 25th far enhanced the working relationship Anniversary Game. Spectrum HoloByte which already existed between the stucontinues to develop Star Trek: The Next dio's own electronic publishing division Generation products on console, personal (videogame-oriented) and the British computers, 3DO and location-based encompany with its disk-based expertise. tertainment centers. Deep Space Nine will Unlike the Sega-CD version of Dracula be published by a toy manufacturer and (where the cinematic sequences merely new player in the software arena, Playserve to set-up the sideways-scrolling mates (see this issue's Rumor Bag). fighting game), the expected first quarter SEWA 94 release of Dracula CD-ROM will feature more first person perspective with role-playing aspects. In addition, SEGA Psygnosis plans to publish games based JURADOR on The Last Action Hero and Cliffhanger films. Everybody's Doin' It! (3-D First Person Role-Playing) Five first-person perspective, 3D-style role-playing games will challenge cach other for market supremacy during the Fall of '93. Such formidable names as Westwood Studios, Origin, and Interplay will mingle with up and coming companies like Bethesda Softworks and Twin Dolphin Games in this genre. At first glance, the games are very similar, but a deeper look shows different design strengths for each of them. Interplay's Stonekeep uses a full-screen, optional on-screen interface approach. If one desires, it is possible to hide the interface and merely step through the dungeon. In addition to the beautiful wall textures and the first-person feel, Peter Oliphant and the rest of the design team have managed to create a technology that combines video with computer graphics in such a way that the full-size monsters/villains jump out at the player. The interface is optimized to put the gamer into the middle of the monitor screen and the company is working with a peripheral manufacturer (to be announced later) that will enable the combat to work with a simulated 3-D input device. Origin's Shadowcaster is not a fullscreen presentation. It features Id Software's hor 3-D polygon-filled technology with bit-mapped textures placed over the tops of objects (allowing the program to deal with simple polygon-filled structures/objects in the code itself while the gamer sees the pretty artwork overlaid on top that is not as processor intensive), Raven Software's (The Black Crypt) incredible fantasy art, music from Origin, and a fascinating story. Characters will explore pulsating hallways, walls that PARK The prehistoric gateway to the Sega area ICOM Simulations has thus far not tapped into the licensing potential of their new parent company, Viacom International. The large media conglomerate controls the Showtime, Nickelodeon, MTV and VH-1 cable channels, as well as syndicating television series and funding made-for-TV movies like their 25 Perry Mason films. However, ICOM continues to use interactive film as its primary graphic presentation. Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective is entering its third iteration (with the new video footage looking tremendously improved) and the new Dracula Unleashed takes advantage of fully-constructed sets (as opposed to using the Ultramatte technique where Naturally, this hasn't reduced the competition for high profile products such as Jurassic Park. Nearly every format from 3DO through Sega-CD has a Jurassic Parkgame under development. Sega built their booth around the Jurassic Park theme (see picture) and has not one, but two games under development using the property. The basic Genesis game is, essentially, a \"shooter\" like most arcade games. The Scga-CD version is expected Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"AR Add on The Silver Seed Module Disk For More Thrilling Quests! Balancing the Scales Clue Book Now Available! SERPENT ISLE SERPENT ISLE FEATURES: An original story line continuing the Ultima VII adventure, but no previous Ultima experience is necessary. Serpent Isle is a stand alone game. An unexplored region of Britannia with new terrain features you'll even trudge through ice and snow. \"Paper-doll\" system that lets you select clothing, armor and weapons from a detailed, full-length view. Large, close-up portraits of every character you meet in 256color VGA/MCGA graphics. Digitized speech, enhanced sound effects and a dynamic musical score (with supported sound boards). Available for 386SX, 386, 486 or 100% compatible systems. 200 ORIGIN We create world! An Electronic Arts Company Available at your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/VISA/Discover. Copyright  1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ultima is a registered trademark of Richard Garriot. Origin is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Serpent Isle is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. We creato worlds is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #86 "


"eneca breathe, and rooms that offer incredibly anything the company has ever done. FurMeanwhile, there is evidence that 3-D disorienting perspectives. ther, the entire story and game design was role-playing will be an even bigger arena Produced by Electronic Arts' Victor assembled with an emphasis on characin 1994. Interplay plans to release DunPenman, the game requires players to terization. One adds to the adventuring party geon Master II in that year, and Domark shift between six different shapes: a musthrough recruitment and has complete conis planning to unveil a game called Citadel cle-bound giant, a humanoid, a fire eletrol as long as the NPCs are with the party, that will use a voxel engine (which mamental, an aquatic creature, an electrical but the key is that one cannot control when nipulates blocks of pixels rather than each charge and sonic energy. By doing so, one the NPCs leave the party or why. pixel at a time) and texture mapping, can play the one-to-three hour scenarios Considering that NovaLogic is applying that make up the building blocks of the for a patent on voxel technology and is game. The metamorphosis from one creaplanning to use the technology in an upOH ture/being to another is not only imporcoming role-playing or adventure prodtant to solving puzzles and being uct, there may be very interesting times victorious in combat, but each creature ahead. moves differently and views the corridors Finally, Spectrum HoloByte's Star24 STELE and rooms from a different perspective. Trek: The Next Generation CRPG for the Westwood Studios' Lands of Lore is not 3DO machine uses three-dimensional to be confused with the engine built by modeling in a different way. Although the Westwood for SSI's Eye of the Beholder MS-DOS version of the game will feature series. It is a brand-new system built from Bethesda's The Elder Scrolls: The Arena traditional graphics technology, the 3DO the ground floor with the goal of working team is attempting to exploit the graphics with the 386/33 machines. Those who capacity of the machine by creating a face On the show floor, crowds were assemthink the detailed texture-mapped, technology that presents Captain Picard bled around the large screen displaying as a full 3-D object with over 5,000 polysmooth scrolling graphics are too slow or The Elder Scrolls: Chapter 1: The Arena. too disorienting can opt for a stepped gons. Gamers haven't heard much about Besequence through the dungeons/locales thesda Softworks in recent days, but they Reel It In (Video) via the stepped sequence (one discreet are pushing 3-D technology in three difmove at a time) found in earlier games. ferent games. Graphically, The Arena feaOne aspect of multimedia products that The company is also trying to put some tures texture-mapped objects and special designers have dreamed of for years is the of the cinematic knowledge they have effects to match those in the Westwood ability to integrate film/video with combeen acquiring from previous games to title (both companies are pushing the puter-generated images on the fly. ICOM use in their CRPGs, so they are using their edge of the envelope in light-sourcing, has led the way in terms of interactive film new technology, \"Westwood Outtake and both have an edge over the other in with their Sherlock Holmes Consulting DeManifold,\" to present smooth-running one special effect or another). one special effect or another) tective series, based on the Sleuth Publicut-scenes in which to advance the story. cations game, and the company is now The best news about The Arena for roleunveiling Dracula Unleashed. ICOM's players, however, is that the attention to formula has always been to reduce the Mist of Doom character generation and story may be the video window slightly and enhance the most careful design work since Roe image of the rest of the screen by framing Adams III consulted with Lord British on it with traditional graphics (including the Ultima IV. Character generation is storyinterface). The newest game not only based. Gamers read a case study and react boasts improved resolution on the video to the situation as they believe their charclips, but only cues up the clips if the acters would react. Then, derailed statisplayer's character gets to the scene at the tics are generated from the results of the appropriate time. Westwood's Lands of Lore quiz. Further, the game is big! It has over 2,500 magical items and the potential to The most impressive graphic aspect of mix and match them, as well as more than the game, however, involves the special 400 adventuring locales (not just rooms) effects associated with magic. Magic, in to explore. Plus, the company plans to the game's fiction, depends upon drawing fully utilize the engine by adding expanupon forces and having a dramatic (cinesion adventures and campaign modules in matic?) production develop on-screen the future. \"In spite of what 3D0 says,» observed Louis Castle, \"that the special effect we Yet another player in the 3D first-per. had just witnessed) was transparent imson CRPG market is Twin Dolphin ages across a 386 screen.\" The 3DO de Games. Their Forgotten Castle series is ICOM's Dracula Unleashed sign team claims that the special effect, opening with Forgotten Castle: The Awakwhere a semi-transparent image moves ening. Forgotten Castle allows one to play rapidly across other objects, cannot be with a full interface surrounding a reVirgin and Trilobyte's The 7th Guest, accomplished efficiently on a standard duced screen, or to hide the interface and Part Two: The 11th Hour Be Afraid of personal computer. play with a full screen. The thrust of this the Dark is not only expected to set a new game is plenty of action connected by a record for long titles, but is designed to Westwood believes that their multinumber of cinematic sequences. The feature more video than its predecessor, branching story structure (which unfolds company hopes to add modem-play to This time, the video will feature both live depending on the order in which puzzles the second game in the series and, assumand ghostly actors. The game, for both are solved or tasks accomplished) is both ing all goes well, network play in the third CD-ROM and 3DO, will take gamers C more complex and more satisfying than game of the series. Hes! Freba poom Vortex Somba! Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"Bute Into Planet Kidz Think computers are cool? On Planet Kidz you can check out all the radical new games and pick up top computer tips to help you with school. KUVZ And that's not all from the best in kidz fashion to sports Planet Kidz has got it goin' on! Don't get left behind launches are scheduled for Saturdays in May. Orbiteer in training Daniel Epstein Boca Raton, Florida Saturdays in May on CNBC. "


"Indust mecal both inside and outside the mansion, as designers to run true video at a fast rate the little town of Harley is presented enbehind the interface and allow the supertirely in live video. imposed interface to react at the slower Another company using real video for latency which most interactive multimetheir games is American Laser Games. dia games currently require. CGW will Their wild west shoot-'em-up, Mad Dog report on the card prior to its release, and McCree, will display non-stop live action we expect it to have a significant impact video on CD-ROM, Sega CD and the on multimedia game design in the future. 3DO platforms. Using the technologies What You Hear is What You which the company developed for the coin-op market, American Laser Games Get (Audio) also plans to publish similar games in the For more than three years, audio has Activision's Return to Zork 1994 time frame: Space Pirates (outer been playing an increasingly large role in space acrion), Who Shot Johnny Rock? the computer game industry. CD-ROM Sierra's Gabriel Knight uses sound in(gangster shoot-ours), Crime Patrol (law products, in particular, are beefing up credibly effectively to enhance the mood enforcement) and Gallagher's Gallery (a their soundtracks with extra music (somefor the game. Written by Jane Janson shooting gallery game with the comedian times extra video such as the Roberta (co-author of King's Quest VI), the game as host). Williams interview on the new King's centers around a series of voodoo murQuest VI CD) and a full talkie presentaAs noted in previous reports, Actividers, and the gamer has ten game days to tion. Interplay went to the studio with sion's Return to Zork features professional solve the case. The fascinating audio-visLeonard Nimoy, William Shatner and ual aspect is the way a cinematic cut-scene actors performing on computer-graphic DeForest Kelley for their Star Trek multi(that changes as the player's character zesets. The video was taken using an Ultramatte technique and superimposing media game; LucasArts cast WKRP in roes in on the murderer) integrates the Cincinnati's Richard Sanders (Les Nesssoundtrack and the dream symbology. It the video atop the graphics (the same man) as the protagonist of their Day of the was the first time we have actually experitechnique used in The 7th Guest). The Tentacle talkie; Activision's Return to great news for gamers is that the CDenced fear from watching a computer ROM version of this game will support Zork uses a full cast of professional actors; game product. The combination of art, and CD-based games from both Microan as yet to be announced video/sound music, sound and image really communiProse (Return of the Phantom) and Sierra card that will retail for under $500 and, cates the danger within the story. (King's Quest VT) will feature full digitized because of its built-in chip set, will play back video at 30+ frames per second with speech. Don't Grow Accustomed to the a 32,000 color display. This allows game mm Interface Across all genres, but particularly in the adventure and role-playing arenas, there In London is an increasing trend to hide the interface. ass The goal, of course, is two-fold. First, it allows the gamer more of a sense of suspended disbelief because it provides for a full-screen (or near full-screen) presentation. Second, it allows the gamer to call Electronic Arts' Seawolf up the interface, usually with one mouse click, when he or she needs it, rather than Now, with the new general midi boards having the interface always in one's face. coming into play, sound is going to play The latter will be extremely important as a significantly larger role. Electronic Arts' software publishers begin designing for Seawolf will use stereo sound cues as part multimedia computer games in the future BASED ON BRAM STOKER'S ORIGINAL NOVEL of the game, and «The Fat Man\" has because it allows for simpler controls and For Windows. Excellent graphics, interface, sounds! provided music with more \"game states\" larger on-screen figures, objects and backCount Dracula is somewhere in London. Use your wits to (different tension levels to the score) than grounds. track down the bloodthirsty vampire and put an end to his his previous efforts in the Wing Comevil menace Assume the role of Prof. Van Helsing, the renowned metaphysician or Mina Harker, the alluring mander series. John Ratcliff, the designer LucasArts has adapted its SCUMM inyoung schoolmistress. terface (Script Creation Utility for Maof the simulation, has even managed to Learn the secrets of Renfield, the madman. Explore haunted mansions and much more.. reuse the sound files to enhance the niac Mansion) to allow for bigger figures ARSINTETTE graphic look of the game by playing them and this will show in both Sam and Max visually over one of the on-screen gauges. Hil The Road and the Steven SpielDRACULA. NAIL UN BABY HEEDS LEN World Renowned $29 cach. Mail check, cash or moncy order to: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. St. Louis, MO 63131 (314) 966-5602 (Evenings Only) Activision's Return to Zork used 13 live studio musicians to create its soundtrack, and the cntire recording section was mixed by the engineer who mixed the Aliens 3 soundtrack and has worked with John Williams on his motion picture scores. The lead trumpet on the game's soundtrack is also the lead in the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra. Quality music continues to make a qualitative difference in the game experience. Requires: Windows 3.1 VGA graphics 386 25Mhz or faster Supports Sound Blaster Easy to Install LucasArts' Sam and Max Hit The Road Circle Reader Service #95 Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"YOU CAN OUTFLY THIS GUY.... BUT CAN YOUR COMPUTER? Yesterday's high speed games have pushed your Personal Computer to it's limits. Today's games are breaking them. You need a computer with no limits. You need to fly a Falcon. The Falcon MACH series are the first personal computers designed especially with the serious gamer in mind. The MACH systems employ new VESA local bus technology with the fastest graphics ever made for gaming and business use. They can produce 45 VGA frames per second. 30 Frames per second is flicker free to the human eye. Serious hardware for serious players. MACH 2 MACH 3 MACH 4 System CPU Type Motherboard 486/DX-33 486/DX-50 VESA Local Bus 8 Megabytes 486/DX2-66 VESA Local Bus VESA Local Bus DRAM Memory 4 Megabytes 16 Megabytes Hard Drive 170 Megabyte 212 Megabyte 130 Megabyte 111 MHZ Landmark v.2 Speed 167 MHz 223 MHz VGA Frames / Second 26 40 45 Price Price $1,599 $1,599 $1,999 $2,499 System Upgrade Options: All systems come standard with: Mini-tower case, 230 watt power supply. Internal CD-ROM add $249 1.2 and 1.44 floppy drives, Genoa 8500 VLB graphics card, 101 Key SoundBlaster Pro add $199 keyboard, 14\" .28dp SuperVGA monitors, 25/1P/1G ports, & DOS 6 and CH Flightstick Joystick add $ 39 are backed by our 1 year parts and labor warranty. Any system can be custom built to your specifications, please call for pricing. Sales: (800) 258-6778 Information: (503) 269-0775 Fax: (503) 267-2575 FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Drive Coos Bay, OR 97420 Circle Reader Service #53 "


"In a berg/Brian Moriarty collaboration called The Dig Activision and Tsunami have been using a pop-up interface in their latest prod. ucts, but Sierra is experimenting with their interface in a number of ways. They are breaking out into a \"letter box» screen look on a number of products in order to be able to move the text and remove it for CD versions) and trying to make each set of command icons look distinctive to the game. In addition, they have adapted the talking face technology of their Bright Star Technologies subsidiary and integrated it into many of their games. Further, Quest for Glory IV: Shadows of Darkness, will not only feature an impressive introduction using a Vistapro-generated world, but a new and improved combat interface, as well. In addition to the actual changes in the command line, Gabriel Knight will have a different look than previous Sierra games because many of the cut-away scenes are being handled like some of those impressive two-page spreads in the Frank Milleror Pepe Moreno-style graphic novel. Further, much of the game will be conversation-driven with plenty of cut-away perspectives there. port a memory-card storage system, but blown CRPG experiences in the Fall. Our this is not part of the original product. initial impressions of the first, BloodNet, Aesthetically, the downside of the CPU downside of the CPU are extremely positive. The backgrounds Bach program is that it does not create the are surreal, the story has gothic overtones, brilliant melody lines one associates with and the high concept is cyberpunk meets Bach. Nonetheless, the existing product is vampiric lore. The hero(?) is an ace hacker absolutely mesmerizing. One can adjust who has lost all contact with reality, conthe dynamics and tempo, change the instantly confusing cyberspace and reality. strumentation and, in essence, be the conA rogue scientist outfits his brain with a ductor for this Johann Silicon Bach and neural implant that helps, but he becomes his compositions. a mercenary, scrounger and \"cowboy.\" It turns out that the protagonist has Role Out the Character Hopkins-Brees syndrome, and when (CRPGs) properly inducted into the creatures of the This fall looks like it is going to be a rich night, becomes a vampire. So, this game forces one to dance the outlaw ritual of one for role-players. In addition to the 3-D first-person role-playing games, cyberspace and figure out how to slake there will be an intriguing mix of titles. one's blood in «socially acceptable\" ways Sequels will abound with Origin's Ultima enough to keep one's humanity level at an VII, Part II: Serpent Isle/Silver Seed ( operable point. BloodNet also features the $29.95 add-on), Mindcraft's Bloodstone most beautiful presentation of cyberspace (the Dwarven side of The Magic Candle we have seen yet in a computer game. saga), Interplay's Dungeon Master II (a The second is being developed by sequel to FTL's award winning Dungeon Xanth. Entitled, Secret of the Seventh Master), Sierra's Quest for Glory IV: ShadLabyrinth, the game builds upon the myows of Darkness (a hybrid adventure/rolethologies and cultures of seven ancient playing game in the tradition of the civilizations. The player's goal is to beoriginal Quest for Glory) and Pirates Gold come the philosopher-king of Lemuria by from MicroProse (the new version of the successfully completing seven different hybrid game will actually allow one's pidungeons. The action occurs from a firstrate captain to advance in existing skills person perspective and the emphasis in and to gain new ones). the game, with regard to both special cffects and play, is on magic. LH *sigt I'm sorry, but Ostriels out I mean, he's cut Sierra's Gabriel Knight The Artifice of Intelligence Interplay's Stonekeep On the artificial intelligence front, we In addition to the sequels, some games Dynamix' Betrayal at Krondor must report what we consider to be an were announced at earlier shows and are amazing breakthrough. Sid Meier's CPU just now nearing release. Dynamix will Strategic Simulations, Inc. and Event Bach for the 3DO machine is undoubtsoon release its first CRPG, the longHorizon have been working on another edly a breakthrough. The program actu awaited Betrayal at Krondor. The game, interesting collaboration. This time, the ally creates baroque compositions on the based on the popular fantasy series by name of the game is Dungeon Hack. This fly.» The software composes in the style tware composes in the style Raymond E. Feist, was previewed in game is similar to Rogue in that it is replayof the baroque composers. This, ofC W #103. able, but features much hotter graphics. course, belies the old aphorism thar comHowever, not only is the dungeon created puters will never be able to compose muAlso, Sir-Tech Software is nearing rerandomly, but the program gives the sic, but it's true. All of the compositions lease of its first game in the Realms of player a code so that he/she can replay the which we were able to hear were true to Arkania line, Blade of Destiny. Based on dungeon as another type of character or the style. They had marvelous counter the German hit, Das Schwarze Auge (The give the code to a friend so that the friend point and harmony, while offering just Black Eye), this deep CRPG features can experience the same dungeon. enough melody to keep one interested more than 50 different skills and 80 dif Psygnosis intends to provide multiferent spells for characters to learn and player role-playing for 1-4 players using The downside is that the personal comdraw upon. Further, the characters may one computer. Their game, Hired Guns, puter version prototype allowed one to also have negative attributes (phobias, puts players in the role of space opera save compositions and print our scores. avarice, bad tempers, etc.) which, in turn, mercenaries. The crew is hired to rescue We are not sure whether the 3DO version enliven the possibilities for interaction hostages that are members of an extremist will have this capacity or not. The comwithin the adventuring party. political group and are being held by a pany has suggested that the architecture rival group of extremists. The game sysof the 3DO machine will eventually supMicroProse plans to offer two fullPage 24 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game. Shareware Update «Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware... Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World Imprisoned in a Nazi Fortress In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape or die trying 967 19 300 3 E erot Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLibTM, Sound Blastert, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. APOGEE id P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), joystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. AdLib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #34 "


"netus coecia tem is skill-based, but skills do not inluxe (Macintosh) and the Empire Deluxe hear that HPS is sprucing up their Point crease as one plays. The good news for Scenario Disk featuring \"celebrity\" deof Attack game. «hack and slash» gamers, though, is that signed scenarios. there are more than 1.7 million cubic At the higher level of complexity, So, is It Party Time? meters of battle area (fortunately, it's CS Three-Sixty's High Command, Gary Ti As usual, there simply isn't enough automapped as one plays) with 20 differGrigsby's War in Russia from SSI, Threeroom in the first half of the CES report to ent areas to fight through. Sixty's Harpoon II and V for Victory: give the genre-by-genre rundown of all Meanwhile, gamers can celebrate the Gold\" Juno \"Sword, Changeling Softthe game types which CGW covers. Acrelease of New World's long awaited ware's Pax Imperium, SSG's Carriers at tion, adventure, simulation, strategy, and Might & Magic: Dark Side of Xeen, the War Construction Kit (as well as CAW II), sports gamers will have to wait for next CRPG that allows role-players to travel and Ed Grabowski's The Blue & The Gray issue's installment to find out everything back and forth between Clouds of Xeen from Impressions all appear to be oriin store for them. However, there is a and the current product. Gametek' s ented toward the advanced player. reasonable indication that this could also Daemonsgate, the huge CRPG that was in the middle of the spectrum, it looks be the consumers' year to party, as well as delayed by Hurricane Andrew's importulike Sid Meier's Civil War from Microthe publishers'. nate appearance, has yet to arrive. Prose will be the game to beat. Sid's em One reason for consumers to rejoice is The Caissons Keep Rolling phasis on design elegance and playability that the companies are beginning to con(Wargames) solidate technologically from the last leap. The games look like they are going to be Sound may be one of the most obvious more polished. The publishers seem to advancements in the next crop of warreally care about getting the bugs out and games. SSI's Clash of Steel, QQP's World managing the development process more War II: Battles of the South Pacific, and efficiently. Three-Sixty Pacific's Victory At Sea on Another reason for consumers to rejoice the MS-DOS platform, and Koei's PTO is that the companies are, in general, lis(Pacific Theater of Operations on the tening to what they are saying. They are Sega Genesis all had enhanced sound efImpressions' Blue and Grey following up successful products like Simfects; many that made us feel as though City with a SimCity 2000 that incorpothey we watching war movies instead of will make the game an interesting stretch rates a phenomenal amount of gamers' playing wargames. for beginning players and a solid chalsuggestions for improvement. They are Perhaps the most significant trend lenge for advanced players. Another midfollowing up games like Indy 500: The within the wargaming genre, however, is dle complexity game in this case because Simulation with the next generation, Inthe polarization in terms of difficulty of the less-than-intuitive interface) is dyCar Racing, fulfilling a wish list\" for level. The game designs are tending to Fields of Glory, the MicroProse import the satisfied owners of the original. They about Waterloo. are taking games like MechWarrior, with its established following, and making it MicroProse also plans to hit the center with Master of Orion, a 4E space empire more than one better by getting fanatical BattleTech fans to produce the amazing game (explore, expand, exploit and exterMechWarrior II. minate) with ten different alien races. Impressions has taken a different tack in the space conquest arena with When Two Worlds War. The latter features three different modes of play: real-time, «I go, you go,\" and a stop go play mode. GEDE PEDRER Talon L DOO D000 DO UCCA DI Three-Sixty's Victory At Sea PUILD L O STATS gravitate toward the poles of lower and higher complexity with fewer games of medium complexity in the center (where more wargames used to be). Games at the lower level of complexity include: QQP's World War II: Battles of the Pacific, Koei's PTO (Sega only), Koei's Genghis Khan II (SNES and Sega) Milton Bradley's Axis and Allies (CDI only), Hasbro's Stratego (coming soon to a popular online network), Elpin Systems' Conquer For Windows, Impressions Global Domination, SSG's Warlords II (with lots of new units, an optional Empire-style black map, graphs/charts, and a new economic system without adding to the complexity of the game) and New World's Empire DeConnectivity is also still an issue in the wargame arena. Impressions put a stop/go play mode into their When Two Worlds War game and made it modem compatible. Siege: Walls of Rome, Mind Impressions' When Two Worlds War craft's historical version of Sieve, should feature modem-play using the expansion In short, the most marvelous aspect of disk from the original Siege. Three-Sixty's this year's Summer Consumer ElectronV for Victory: Operation Market Garden ics Show seems to be that there was less will be modem-compatible when the sizzle (since most of the products were patch disk comes out. Further, Conquer beginning to use similar tools, techniques for Windows will allow modem play. and touches) and more stcak (since we What is conspicuous by its absence is any kept hearing designers and producers talk plan for Sid Mcicr to include modem play more about game play than usual). If in his upcoming civil war game. game play is really going to be taken seriously during the next era of computer Play-By-E-mail board wargamers will game development, it will definitely be revel in the fact that HPS Simulations is party time for the consumers. Hey, let's coming to an agreement with several throw an editor against the velcro wall boardgame manufacturers concerning and see if he sticks! It is party time! CGW the publication of special PBEM kits for favorite boardgames in the genre. We also Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"AGAINST ALL THESE ODDS WINNER CES INNOVATIONS SIGN AWARD 1992 YOU NEED THIS! GRAVIS NY To take on today's fast action arcade style games, you need all the help you can get. Enter the Gravis PC GamePadTM — the unique turbo-fire Gravis PC GamePad designed to react to your commands with a speed that leaves regular PC joysticks in the dust. With both right and left-handed control. Support for four independent buttons. A removable joystick handle. And easy to connect to any standard PC game port. So for superior search and destroy capabilites and Advanced higher scores, arm yourself with the lightning-fast Gravis PC GamePadTM For more information: phone (604) 431-5020 or fax (604) 431-5155. Gravis GamePad models are available for Amiga, Atari, Macintosh and IBM PC Compatible. Manufacturer's suggested retail price, $29.95 (PC version). TM trademark of Advanced Gravis. Circle Reader Service #33 GRAVIS "


"WORLD WAR BATTLES OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC QQP. Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. The time: World War II The place: The South Pacific Wage war for the sole ownership of the South Pacific. Historically correct battles challenge all, to do better than the Navy did as it happened in WWII. Not only naval combat, but air and land combat. Create and transport armies to enemy ports through air, naval, and bombardments from your adversaries to take over their bases. MANY SCORCHING BATTLES TO CHOOSE FROM PLAY JAPANESE OR U.S. FORCES MODEM PLAY EXPERT MENUS OR NOVICE MENU SEVERAL LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY STUNNING HISTORICAL ACCURACY HUNDREDS OF SHIP AND PLANE TYPES INTUITIVE INTERFACE The \"WWII: Battles of the Pacific\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #90 "


"CONQUEREO KUNGDOMS Scenario Disk #1 OOP Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. yaw StaBS The medieval realm of Conquered Kingdoms is about to get bigger. Devastate your opponent in these all new and exciting maps for Conquered Kingdoms ... THE MULTIAWARD WINNING STRATEGY AND TACTICS GAME. Beautiful ALL NEW scenarios UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH 21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI) MODEM PLAY  COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS The \"Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Disk\" is for the IBM PC It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"cumdustry, peus.gpecial Sam Enchanted Evening CGW Visits LucasArts for an S&M Orgy' few years ago, we discovered a when we found out comic book from Comico that that LucasArts was featured a team of sardonic, wisegoing to do a graphic cracking detectives. To be precise, this adventure called Sam detective team consisted of a dog named Max Hit The Road. Sam and a rabbit named Max. The two The adventure starts detectives were to Philip Marlowe and out in the dilapidated Sam Spade what Maxwell Smart and nouveau Chandler Agent 99 were to James Bond and Miss office of Sam & Max Moneypenny — well-meaning bumblers and takes the gamers who lucked into success in the most un Steve Purcell 'highway surfs' with his pals, Sam & Max. through the underlikely ways. side of America's The comic book was Sam & Max: Freelroadside attractions. From Twine Peaks programmed roughly into the scene. ance Police by Steve Purcell, and the art(the aforementioned ball of twine) None of the documentation is completed, work within the book was often as through a celebrity vegetable museum, so the designers circulate around the colorful and bizarre as the situations in and on past a combination alligator room helping some of the players get which the dog and rabbit found themfarm/miniature golf course, this game is started and offering hints on certain puzselves. The highlight of the first S&M weird. Of course, one would expect it to zles to those who are stuck. By noting the comic we saw, however, was not one of be. things which are giving the players diffithe stories. It was a boardgame (in the culty, they then have an opportunity to racetrack genre where one tries to go Let the Orgy Begin make some of the puzzles more intuitive around the oval before one's competitors or to clean up the interface. can accomplish the same revolution) Since we were all excited about the Having the pizza orgy on the schedule which satirized those cross-country trips game, LucasArts allowed us to experience also serves another purpose. It encourages where children are mesmerized by billone of the events that makes their graphic boards about weird roadside attractions adventures special — the pizza orgy. As artists/programmers to work a little extra in order to get as much of the game which are only 37 miles ahead\" and each graphic adventure is coming tocount down every 1/2 mile. Turns could gether with story, puzzles, interface and completed as possible. We heard of at be lost due to visiting the World's Largest combination pencil scans/placeholder art, least two programmers who had worked non-stop for more than 24 hours prior to Ball of Twinc or having to dine with the the company invites employees and other galloping gourmets at Snookies (the spouses to attend an after-work pizza the orgy, just to make sure that some clever animation was integrated into the omnipresent souvenir stand cum restauparty. The company provides soft drinks rant). The game, laid out in the center of and pizza, while just about everyone who program and working properly. the comic book, was even funnier than the has not been working on the game tries to On the night we visited, Hal Barwood rest of the book. play it in its rough form. The company (currently working on another high-proSo, imagine our surprise and delight places nearly every available computer in file LucasArts project) was playing the a common room, and everyone starts to game in his office (down the hall from the gather around during the latter hours of meeting room where most of the rest of the work day. People grab computers and us were involved). He wasn't being antistart to play. Some tag-team to see how social, however, since he would pop into many puzzles they can solve before the the room every 10 minutes or so with a design team calls time-out and tries to suggestion or a question. Watching Hal gauge the reactions of their friendly\" at work underscored the significance of playtesters, while others try to make a go this event. of it as individuals. Here were industry experts and virtual As they play the game, some of the game novices experiencing a work-in-pro\"rooms\" or \"locations are completely gress for the first time, with the former finished with full-color backgrounds and providing their insights as valuable, but animated characters. Some locations, free, consulting, and the latter assisting One team tries to solve a puzzle together. however, are merely pencil sketches with tremendously in making the interface the \"hot spots» for the puzzle solultions more friendly and the puzzles more fair. Sam & Max Pizza Orgy, that is. Computer Gaming World Page 30 "


"S coecial their versatile programmer who worked on everything from the Passport to Adventure Comdex demo disk (Fall, 1990) through CD-conversions with multiple languages to Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis. In addition, they tapped Mike Here were marketing, sales, programming and artistic personnel gathering together to meet their diffuse agendas. No wonder the design team was just a bit nervous as they watched their peers play the game. With Sam & Max, the team was probably a bit more nervous than usual. The familiar S.C.U.M.M. (Story Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion) interface has been significantly changed. Now, the animated on-screen figures are larger and the PLIQUOR YNDs Ea was interesting on another front. Several of those who played the game were concerned about some of the profanity in it. Even though Sam & Max look cuddly, Even though Sam & Max look cuddly, the comic characters themselves are rather worldly in their perspective and the humor is more entertaining to an adult audience (i.e. late adolescence through hip old geezerhood). One of the challenges brought out during the conversation was the fact that the design team is going to have to be true to the comic book origins of the characters (with their occasional bursts of street lingo) without offending (too much) those who buy the game thinking that the cuddly-looking derectives represent a family game. Other discussions during the pizza orgy surrounded the non-traditional elements of the adventure. Sam & Max Hit The Road is not just a graphic adventure; it's a toybox for warped adults. Some segments feature Sam and Max paper dolls, a highway surfing arcade sequence, a built-in screen-saver, and a game that is something like battleship (but features weird playing pieces). This is because Sean Clark and Mike Stemmle are real fans of Purcell's denigrating duo and noticed It's a wonderful day in the neighborhood. Sam & Max's Freelance Playtesters commands are icon-based. The latter pop-up as the user requires them. By the end of the night, the players comments about the new interface served to reduce the number of clicks that gamers will have to use in the finished copy of the game. Another reason the designers were concerned about the interface was the fact that the gamer no longer directly chooses what he/she will say as Sam or Max. Instead, the gamer picks an icon which represents the general feeling of how he/she wants the conversation to go. Then, when Sam or Max makes a caustic remark with Sremmle, who also started on Passport to Adventure, but moved on to become lead programmer on Fate of Atlantis, as well as Sam & Max. In turn, the two designers have read every possible Sam & Max comic and scripted the game based on Situations that they believed would fit the S&M universe. They write out the dialogue and situations and present them to Steve. Steve checks them out with regard to the verisimilitude toward his created universe and often suggests even funnier and wackier dialogue. We were impressed with how smoothly the trio work with each other, and Steve, in particular, seemed to feel very proud of the game. As for the pizza orgiasts, they seemed pleased with the game, too. As we left the LucasArts building, some of them were still trying to finish the game in its rough-cut form. FORGE Sam and Max question a suspect in an ink test background that there were goofy little activities in many of the Sam & Max comics. So, they added the same type of extras to the game. The Gator Golf Puzzle in pen and ink with Sophia as a place holder. lots of humor, it is much fresher than if the gamer read through all of the possible responses in advance, as was the case in the earlier S.C.U.M.M. adventures. Everyone concurred that this was the perfect solution for a Sam & Max game (since a lot of the humor to be found in the comics, as well as the game, is to be found in Max's comments), as well as other games which rely on a witty repertoire. We also thought the dynamic between the pizza orgy testers and the design team By Design The highlight of the evening for us was meeting the design team. Steve Purcell created the zany shamuses (shami?) as a way of doing non-superhero comic Sam and Max explore a trailer in books. He had drawn typical comic another pencil test. books, including a stint for Marvel on Animax and The New Mutants, but he The pizza orgy idea is an excellent one. wanted to do something a little zanier. It subjects the design team's work to the We originally thought that Purcell was scrutiny of their peers before they have the going to design the game, since he has ego-risk of presenting the game to a focus worked as an artist on several of the Lugroup, and it provides a sense of company casArts games since Indiana Jones and the unity to have almost everyone playing the Last Crusade, including the hilarious games as they are developed. In fact, there Grog machine ending to the original Seis only one drawback for us. How are we cret of Monkey Island. As it turns out, ever going to be able to play Sam & Max however, Purcell does contract work for Hit The Road without having the urge to LucasArts and the game project requires binge on pizza? Perhaps we'll end up in full-time attention. the next game as the World's Chubbiest Editorial Staff. CGW So the company recruited Sean Clark, August 1993 Page 31 "


"industry news.qpera Virgin Bets With The Winners In Las Vegas The Kyrandia I Design Team Westwood Studios Partnership Hits Jackpot The Dune Il Design Team Tell a person who doesn't know anything about computer games that you are going to take a tour of Westwood Studios, and it is very likely that they will ask what movies they have have made. The company's name simply sounds like a motion picture studio or, at the very least, like a recording studio or an animation house. Indeed, since so many technologies are converging in order to make computer games, visiting Westwood Studios is much like visiting a factory for other entertainment media. One is liable to encounter traditional light tables for animation in the arr de partment, black and white storyboards posted on office walls, and offices with equipment for composing/recording music and sound effects. Another office has been completely remodeled so that it looks like a theatrical stage set (artist Eric Gooch does set-design, as well). In fact, Westwood even has its own art museum, a collection of paintings, and one \"statue\" (actually a life-size stuffed doll). To be sure, one also finds the ubiquitous cubicles full of programmers, producers, writers, testers and support staff to be found at other companies, but one gets the feeling that Westwood's people are treated as artists, not merely as employees. Westwood Ho! naturedly than he should have and would always assure Wilson that they were getWestwood Studios began as a small deting more on-track all the time. velopment house in 1985. Brett Sperry, the current president, and Louis Castle, By 1992, just before Westwood became Vice-President of Creative Development, an affiliated publisher with Virgin, the founded the company and have always situation had so reversed itself that many been aggressive in their business plan. In publishers would assure CGW that a prothe early years, the company regularly bitject was going to be completed on time off more than they could chew. Toward because Westwood was doing it. Now, the close of the decade, they were considWestwood not only has a solid reputation ered notorious for missing milestones for getting product out on time, but a that is, being late with product. In fact, reputation for good product. Between the CGW Editor Johnny Wilson used to development of the first two Eye of the regularly greet Castle by saying, \"Missed Beholder titles for SSI. Dune Il for Virgin. many milestones lately, Louis Castle aland Legend of Kyrandia under their own ways took the ribbing more goodlabel, they have developed plenty of admirers. In fact, if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, it is noteworthy that a significant number of software publishers have found themselves targeting Westwood and their new technologies in order to emulate those innovations in their own products. Tour de Source Westwood is housed in a new office/industrial park near Las Vegas' McCarron Airport. Like most software companies, its offices cover more than one floor of work space. The bottom floor serves as Frank Klepecki, Resident Tunemeister Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"We don't know from friendly skies. | the-loop, look elsewhere. If you're interested in a career, sign on to Air Warrior-only on GEnie. You've beat all the flight sims? A furball doesn't raise a sweat anymore? Ten minutes of WWI combat isn't even challenging? Hanni... Maybe you are ready for Air Warrior That is, if you think you can handle the most realistic combat flying there is. Because Air Warrior does more than correctly model 28 different WWII aircraft, complete with spins, stalls and buffeting. It puts you up against other human beings. Online, in real time, for as long as you care to play. That's why Air Warrior attracts the aces. So if you're just looking to do a friendly loopSign Lup POW. 1. Set communication software for 81N or 71E | half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U# pronmpt, enter XTX99223, AIRCRAFT then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S. you may use your checking account number. (There is a$2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. | Air Warrior on 022 WERE multi-player games OS ( MAESA Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company, Graphic interface required and available for selected machines 100% Organic Opponents, || CorporationCircle Reader Service #61 "


"Industru melus Coecial Storyboards for Kyrandia II headquarters for programmers, producers, executives, support personnel and the all-important network server, while the upper floor provides for artists, sound engineers, testers and other programmers. Like most software companies, Westwood maintains its projects via a computer nerwork. Their network capacity is seven gigabytes and everyone keeps touch via e-mail. The network is the repository of libraries of software tools for the company, and actual game-related files of code, text and art are kept in project-oriented directories with restricted access on a \"need to work\" basis. Of the 50 or so employees at Westwood, up to 20 of them are usually artists. According to Castle, up to 10 artists can be working on a given project at one time. According to Castle and Mike Legg, producer of Kyrandia 2, the company's products have become so art-intensive that they are becoming increasingly storyboard controlled. This evolved largely from the fact that they had to cut so much art of the original Legend of Kyrandia that they decided to change the procedure. Now, the artists are given a detailed written spec about what is going to happen in each of the game's \"chapters\" (Kyrandia 2, for example, has seven game chapters). The artists return to Legg and Castle with thumbnail sketches and, once they are approved, they move on to the pencil sketches. These, in turn, are scanned, put into the program and tested. Finally, the animation sequences themselves are pencil-tested with a frame-flipping procedure and put into the program. if the backgrounds and animation sequences look right at this point, they are re-scanned and repainted in order to give the impression of software that has been handpainted pixel by pixel. Castle's right-hand man in art is Rick Parks. Rick is a well-known Amiga artist whose current projecr is developing lots of interesting \"morphing\" sequences for their upcoming adventure, Lands of Lore. He has opted not to use \"off the shelf\" morphing software for the magical transformations in Lands of Lore, even though such software is much more efficient than else, his office serves as the command the frame-by-frame approach he is using center where DAT tapes are sampled and He insists that, even though a full day's converted to code. Even with all of the work can be over in one second of game effort made on the acoustics in Pat's of play, the gamer can tell the difference. fice, most of the voice acting has to be Combine Parks' efforts with those of recorded in a real studio and sampled at Louise and Larry Miller, classically Westwood. trained animators who have worked respectively for Hanna-Barbara and FilmaThis is a Test tion, and Disney and Filmation, and one Interestingly enough, even though both has an animation team that would be Nintendo and Virgin (Westwood's major tough to beat. cartridge and disk-based distributors, reIn addition to animated \"morphing\" spectively) pur Westwood's products sequences for Lands of Lore, Parks is exthrough their own testing departments, perimenting with both light-sourcing and Westwood has its own resting departhue-sourcing for Kyrandia 2. A nifty fog ment. Louis Castle explains that this is effect is also expected to appear in one or worthwhile for two reasons. First, their both of the games. Such efforts are a in-house testers provide instant feedback. testimony to the graphic efforts being un Obviously, this allows the programmers dertaken at today's Westwood Studios. to fix the bugs faster. Second, fixing those earlier bugs means that they are sending cleaner programs to the outside testers, so the programs are approved faster by Nintendo and Virgin. Naturally, this tighter testing process has helped Westwood's reputation in moving from a developer that misses milestones to a publisher that can be counted on. That's a Wrap We closed out our tour of Westwood in their break room. It doesn't have a comLarry Miller works at his light table. missary like the studios in Hollywood, but it has a full assortment of classic coinOne of the side benefits of Westwood's op machines. Indeed, many of the Westrecent move into larger quarters was a wood employees have become quite room that could be converted into an art expert at the classics, largely because these museum. It gives the artists a chance to machines no longer require coins. They show off some of their non-game efforts and provides an interesting ambiance for the upper floor, Portraits, landscapes, still lifes and a rather unusual sculpture all add to the upbeat spirit of «The Westwood Collection. The Sounds of Violence Another portion of the upper floor serves as the sound wing. Most of this wing is packed with a typical collection of sound mixing equipment, computers and microphones. One office, however, houses composer Frank Klepecki, the composer of 90% of Westwood's musical scores. Klepecki still has his own performing group, but spends most of his time before the synthesizer keyboard in his office at Westwood. Most of his works are composed on the keyboard and converted to code using AdLib's off-the-shelf Visual Composer. Another office belongs to Pat Collins. His arca looks like we would have expected Phil Spector's old Wall of Sound (a \"garage\"-style recording studio that was refurbished into a hit factory in the carly '60s) to look. With eggshell padding as wallpaper and acoustical everythingThe \"statue\" examines a colleague's piece. are provided as freebies which allow for the employees to relax and take a break. In fact, that's what we did when we got to the break room. After all, we had to have something to do until Westwood actually releases the fascinating games which they were working on during our tour. Cow Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"Beyond fantasy. Beyond legends. If you've been looking for the mother of all fantasy role-playing games, we know where you can find it. Online, in GemStone III\". This is no kill-the-dragon-thank-you-verymuch computer game. And it goes far beyond any of the other so-called legends in the online arena. Here in GemStone III, you're joining real people, in real time for your online quests. Some of the best role players and game masters in the country all meeting together in a vast and constantly evolving world, rich with fascinating characters and demanding adventures. It's a place you can play forever. GemStone III makes every other fantasy game history. And your friends are already here. So sign onto GEnie\" today, and welcome home to GemStone III. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 81 N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt, enter XTX99224, FANTASY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. GemStone IIT'M: Shadow World on GEnie a multi-player games . GemStone III is a trademark of Simutronics Corp. Shadow World is a registered trademark of Iron Crown Enterprises, Inc. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Optional graphic front-end program available for IBM PC only. SIMUTRONICS 100% Organic Opponents. Circle Reader Service #62 "


"-Industry neus special Hungary's Capitalists Novotrade Bolsters Its Image Here And Abroad Peter Pan development group with the publisher of Richard Scarry's Busytown for Paramount 52 RICHARD CARRY G any CGW readers have probably played computer games programmed in Eastern Europe without realizIing it. Hungarian-based Novotrade developed Bugs Bunny's Cartoon Workshop (Hi-Tech Expressions), Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles (Walt Disney Software), Wilson Pro Staff Golf (Konami), California Pro Golf (Virgin) and Impossible Mission II (Epyx), as well as a host of conversions for nearly every publisher in the industry. Naturally, we were curious as to how such an international relationship developed and found that the story began in 1981. This was the year in which Jack Tramiel (still at Commodore) was going to build the C-64 into the global machine. As part of his 12 plan, he met a Hungarian expatriPeter Pan's ate who had founded a software Coloring Book Adventure company by running a contest on Hungarian television. This businessman, who already owned a large import/export company, used the entries from the contest to form the initial catalog for the new software company. Andras Csaszar won the contest with Caesar the Cat for the C-64. Csaszar is now one of the principal partners in Novotrade International, the current configuration of the company. His partner is Stephen Friedman, a former    marketing executive with Dr. cc) 1321 Stai MOTOTRE Dobbs Journal of Software Tools, who became Novotrade's U.S. representative in 1983. Friedman says that he took the position because he \"really wanted to be involved in international software.» Now, he is involved in a major way. From 1983 to 1989, the company basically programmed conversions. This was ideal because they were engineers, not artists. Ironically, the first conversion JIGSA contracts were not from Commo PUZZLES dore, but from Atari. The game POBUDE company hired Novotrade to convert their coin-op games to the Atari ST and paid a \"lavish» sum of under $10,000. As Friedman explains, \"We could only get low-priority projects on lots of platforms. We really weren't first line, but we consistently upgraded our engineering.\" Now, Novotrade consists of a unit in Budapest (called The Studio) that employs 25 people under seven project leaders. Each project team is responsible for two or three projects and, in a spirit of capitalCARTOONWO RKSHOP ism that would have been unheard of in the Hungary of a little over a decade ago, the teams are given incentive bonuses to finish those projects as part of Novotrade's commitment to follow-through with their commitments. BOXING Designed BE Ecco the Dolphin was the company's 000 DO first original bestseller, and Friedman ** BUSYTOWN is confident that more are on the way. \"Our frontline products are just beginning to come out,\" claims Friedman. With games like Richard Scarry's Busytown (Paramount), Peter Pan's Coloring Book Adventure (EA'Kids) and Deep Space Nine (Playmates) on the docket, we tend to agree. Many of these projects will take advantage of Novotrade's close proximity to three major animation studios in Hungary. We were curious about the logistics of having a production house KYANDER MULYFIELD in Europe and a sales office in the U.S. First, we asked if communications were handled in English or Hungarian. We were told that almost all of the studio's employees Nowote speak some English and that the company provides English classes developed for them. Occasionally, an interNOVOTRADE preter must be used to translate detailed design documents, but most of the business is handled in English. Then, we asked Friedman if they used air courier to get updates of programs under development or modem uploads. We were told that modem connections have been getting better since late 1990, but the Hungarian phone system is still abominable. New modem technology with error-correction capacity has made a big difference, however. Now, both Friedman and Csaszar live in the U.S. This means that the former makes about three trips per year to Hungary and the latter treks to Budapest about four times per year. Meanwhile, Novotrade continues to deDon velop frontline products and we stali would predict, though there are no specific plans, that titles under their own label will start to appear GIF within a couple of years. CGW MODA 09 SEGA C. 21 Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"Close encounters nightly. There's only one way to find out. Sign up and meet us in Federation II available only on GEnie. For the cold reaches of space, there's an awful lot of chummy people here. That's because Federation II isn't one of those shoot-the-ship computer games. This is a universe full of people. Real people, online, working with other real people in real time: busily building their fortunes, planets...nay, empires. And they'd love to throw some work your way so you can do the same. Of course, there's a lot of bargaining, buying and bulling that goes into it. We're social creatures, after all. But if you're one of those special individuals who understands that creating an empire is ever so much more interesting than destroying aliens, maybe you can thrive in our space. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 81N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt,enter XTX99225, NIGHTLY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Federation II On GEnie multi-player games (Federatio 50LAR ONO 100% Organic Opponents. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company Circle Reader Service #63 "


"mdustry nens cpecial More Hijinx with the Class of '93 Part II of CGW's Computer Game Developers Conference Coverage ast issue, we compared the annual by the police. Producer Jeff Johannigman gathering of artists, composers, de(Epyx, Electronic Arts, Sorcerer's Apsigners, producers, programmers prentice, Dynamix, MicroProse and and technicians to a combination gradumore) was tweaked in one response beation/homecoming and presented part of cause of his propensity for changing jobs. Eric Goldberg (designer of Prodigy's The Next President) checks out the centerfold our report as though it were a high school Someone suggested he would be arrested (schedule) in the CGDC program. yearbook. This issue, we want to concenfor indecent exposure while changing jobs trate on our lecture notes. Of course, in in a phone booth. Another suggested that can do anything. They later regretted our coverage, as in actual school, there is composer George \"The Fat Man\" Sanger their open-ended invitation. always a lot of kidding in the halls before would most likely be arrested for excessive Next, they established a design apclass starts. glare from his wardrobe, and a wag with proach: \"What would Mom play?\" They This year, a lot of the kidding was at a long memory suggested that Roberta decided that it needed to be pretty, so they Dani (nce' Dan) Bunten's expense. Dani Williams (Mystery House, King's Quest 1. opted for 24-bit color SVGA graphics. says she has made the transition from guy VI, The Colonel's Bequest, etc.) would be Then they decided that the interface had the victim of a Pat Buchanan-led inquisito be as simple as playing cards or using a tion in which an early Sierra advertisetelevision remote control. Most imporment would be unearthed as grounds fortantly, they wanted no menus and no text initiating a cultural war. Of course, there on the screen at all, because of the lowwere also the jokes that shouldn't be definition for NTSC television pictures printed. (the game was licensed by Nintendo and is expected to be released on a CD-ROM The 7th Guest for that platform, as well as 3DO). A popular lecture was Graeme Devine's Certain that the game was going to be a presentation on The 7th Guest. More than full CD disc, they determined early on two years in the making, the game they that music would be a major component said was impossible is now shipping of the product. They heard George Devine stated that the game was origiSanger's demo tape and hired him immenally inspired by the first episode of Twin diately. Not only was George so excited Peaks. Rob Landeros and Graeme Devine about the project that he started composallegedly watched the show and thought ing the music before they finished any of of combining David Lynch-style directhe game, but he was insistent that the tion and a murder mystery which would game support General Midi. George gor Roe Adams (right), co-designer of Wizardry take place in a mansion right out of what he wanted, but not before the game IV: Return of Werdna, scopes out the pro Parker Brothers' Clue. expanded to two CDs. gram possibilities with CGW's Alan Emrich. Actually, Graeme observed that their Then, they started to work in earnest. to doll...er...male designer to female de game desion was crystallized by the arrival That is when they learned two lessons. In signer in order to redress the imbalance of of Word for Windows. They started writGraeme's own words, «First, CD-ROM is male/female designers in the industry and ing up their ideas in a document filled bloody slow. Second, CD-ROM is bloody add to the general aesthetic of the designer with a variety of fonts, footnotes and slow.\" They also discovered that current community. Naturally, this means that every other feature. By the time they were resources required about one-half hour to Dani won hands down in the informal through, the murder mystery was now a compress one frame of video data. Yet, the CGW poll to determine which game deghostly murder mystery. Then, they worst discovery was just ahead. They signer would be most likely to appear on showed it to their boss at Virgin Games. budgered $5,000 to do a bluc-screen video the Oprah Winfrey Show. The bad news was that it led to the end of shoot with a hand-held camera. Not only One designer insists that Mike Berlyn their employment at Virgin. The good was the budget inadequate for covering (Infidel, Altered Destiny, Bubsy) is the denews was that Virgin assisted them in even the pre-production costs, but it turned out that the blue screen wasn't signer most likely to be mistaken for setting up Trilobyte. Thing One and Thing Two in Dr. Seuss' quite blue enough. Hence, they had to When they were ready to start working digitize all of the images and clean up the Cat in the Hat. Another made fun of Lords on the project, they handed their design pictures with 3-D Studio. Graeme admits of the Rising Sun and Return to Zork dedocument over to Matthew Costello (forthat they couldn't get rid of all those signer Doug Barnett, claiming that he is merly the game columnist for Isaac Asighostly auras, so they made it a feature. the designer most likely to be arrested mov's Science Fiction Magazine). At that «Those are real auras!\" said Devine to an because he was once mistakenly picked up point, they informed Matthew that \"We amused crowd of developers. Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"Pirates Has Gone Gold! The best adventure game ever just got better! Now Pirates! Gold Takes Inducted into the Computer The Excitement Even Further! Gaming World Hall of Fame!!  Bombard more enemy ships! Feel the ring of crossing swords! 1988 Action Game of the Year Experience more action-packed combat on Computer Gaming World ships and land! Plunder treasure in all-new harbor towns! Innovations Award Gain power, prestige, or even the hand of the governor's daughter! 1988 Consumer Electronics Show Here's lour the critics raven about Pirates L i ne feels like life only more exciting and a lonasto splendid graphics in every phase of the g enke it a pleasure to play. and it is so del designed that it never becomes tedio UPUTE game that's been in progress 1030 iching to get back.com Mac\\Vo Stunning new VGA/Super VGA art and graphics that bring to life the untamed era of piracy in the 17th century Caribbean! ENTERTAINL ESS SER DUSKUNASOFTWARE 1693 Morprese Sorteare, ine ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For a FREE INTERACTIVE DEMO DISK of the incredible Pirates! Goldi, send this coupon to: MicroProse Software, 180 Lakefront Drive, Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245. Please include $3.99 for postage and handling To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879 PLAY and ask for Dept. Fs todayi Mon. Fr. 8:30 am 5:00 pm ESTI Name: Address: AAO State: City Zip: Circle Reader Service #78 "


"Indus point: IBM PC and Macintosh, Sega Genesis, and perhaps 3DO. Despite Philips' enthusiasm for CD-I and a number of dedicated developers, skepticism ber of dedicated developers, skepticism persists about its long-term prospects. How important is Full-Motion Video Naturally, with Trilobyre expending so much effort on the product, they elected to broaden their potential by making the game easily adaptable to several formats. They created the GROOVY language and wrote drivers so that the same disk would run on both an MS-DOS-based and Macintosh platform. In this way, the same data plays in the same way on different systems. This also means that future games will be leveraged against this development system. Finally, Graeme confessed that one of the original design concepts became problematic. From the beginning of the script, they had intended to use classic puzzle designs and brain-teasers to advance the game. Suddenly, they discovered that they had to get copyright clearance from puzzle and toy manufacturers. Hence, they went back to a 19th century puzzle book in order to ger the puzzle designs they wanted. Computer Games and Art (Greg Johnson, Starflight) Greg Johnson's thesis was that the world at large does not consider computer games to be art and neither do the artists. If one asks whether the computer game \"artist\" is fulfilled by doing computer games, Johnson contended that the answer would be \"No.\" He suggested that most \"artists\" working in the computer field find their artistic satisfaction away from work. The reason for this, observed Johnson, FMV certainly adds spice and excitement to many titles. Many \"multimedia\" consumer hardware producers trumpet the abilities of their systems to produce video-like images on a portion of a video display. At present, however, no commercially available system supports true television-quality images or even full-screen video. This will change slowly over the next few years. As was noted several times throughout the conference, glitz is nice, but it is no replacement for quality gameplay. FMV is a new and powerful tool for game developers, just as sound and graphics evolved over the past few years, but it has significant limitations. Not all games require FMV to be viable. Can we really create Interactive Fiction? What's it like? Today's writers and programmers are struggling to define this nebulous type of future entertainment software. Debate ranged far and wide on the issue, but no New World alumni Ron Spitzer (right), coherent vision has yet emerged. Scriptformer CFO, and Nick Beliaff (center), SSI writers have tried-and-true formulae for producer, pose with New World creating winning stories. No such formuexecutive Mark Caldwell (left). lae exist yet for interactive fiction. No By the time the game was released, doubt many developers are working today Trilobyte and Virgin had spent consideron sophisticated concepts for tomorrow. ably more on development than they had For now, though, we'll have to wait until expected. Nonetheless, they need only sell these silent geniuses are willing to show two-thirds of the initial sell-in for the their secrets. project to hit breakeven. Is \"multimedia\" real? Multimedia: Revolution or Yes, and it is achievable in software Crock? products using today's technology. Even though we cannot seem to articulate the Summary by William C. Fisher of meaning of this holy grail of software, we Quicksilver Productions] all know what we want. We want more CGDC attendees faced several sessions engaging, exciting, satisfying entertainment experiences. We know, intuitively, this year which attempted to address the that the experiences we find in today's Big Questions of Multimedia. Everyone games are not at the absolute limits of our from Hollywood writers and producers to creative and technological abilities. would-be game programmers and artists is trying to decide who really knows what we can do better. Most of us cannot yet its all about. Here are some of those Big see the light, but a few visionaries are even Questions, and what developers are now grasping pieces of the vision, intethinking: grating it into the products of tomorrow. Will we ever see a multimedia standard Think of the current round of products as on the par of Compact Disc or VHS? grand experiments, our first faltering steps toward that brave new world. The Not likely, at least for a while. One confusion of today will evolve over the session presenter counted 21 different coming years into many new and exciting CD standards (including audio formats). products. Now it's up to the computer Leaders of the pack are clear, however, game designers — the visionaries leading from the CD-ROM publishers' standthe way — to make it happen. Early designers gather round to discuss \"The Dustbin of Computer Game History.\" is that, «The goal of graphics in computer games is generally to: Show something (a picture of a person you're talking to, the scene of a room, a landscape or a map). The goal of art is to: Evoke something (some sort of emotional response or reaction).\" The interaction produced by the latter is to create new connections as one thinks and responds to the work in view of its subtlety, texture, conflict, depth and evocativeness. In the former, such interaction is limited to a functionality (in terms of game mechanics) that precludes, or at least limits, the artist's vision. Greg noted three criteria for art. 1. The Creator Art must be an expression of something on the part of the Artist. It must be a concept, mood or emotion anything that is part of the artist's identity. 2. The Art Itself It must have a depth and subtlety to it that operates at many different levels at once. It must have an integrity and be \"connected to the world in many different ways such that a person could lose themselves in it. 3. The Person Experiencing It It must evoke some sort of emotional response in people. It may be very subtle or very blatant, but it must be, in some sense, meaningful and valuable to the person experiencing it. Having established his criteria, Johnson discussed the plight of the graphic artists who contribute to computer games. He hypothesized a situation where the project Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"If you don't have F-15 Strike Eagle III, you're still playing games! So real, you'll think you're back in Baghdad! un 10 Versatile, violent and victorious. Those are the kinds of adjectives that should accompany this cutting edge flight simulator. Computer Gaming World APexpected this game to knock me through the back wall. I wasn't disappointed.\" Computer Game Review E MORUN ORT DE & SER UNBGES 91------es \"Being one of the highest time pilots in the Strike Eagle. with about 1200 F-15E hours and some 115 plus sorties in the Persian Gulf theater, I can honestly say that your Strike Eagle III simulator is the closest example of combat flying I've seen! Outstanding A Letter from a Desert Storm F-15E Pilot Actual cockpit shown. F-15 Strike Eagle Ill is the most accurate and realistic combat flying simulator on the market today. And no wonder! Just look at all the startling features the third edition of MicroProse's landmark jet fighter has in store for you!  Experience all the real avionics of the F-15E from its seven actual CRTS to the sniff modes of the super sophisticated AN/APG-70 radar system! (No-sweat easy modes for first time pilots...until you can handle the real stuff!)  Fly the most realistic fighter flight model available in any PC fighter simulation! Designed, tested, and certified by Lt. Col. George Wargo, USAF Retired, formerly a TAC Stan Eval puke with over 3000 hours in fighters and 1500 in F-15's! Surround yourself in a revolutionary new 3-D graphics system that provides you with a digitized map of downtown Baghdad complete with every bridge, the TV famous Air Ministry building and the \"Baby Milk\" factory!  Cheat death in three explosive Actual F-15 Strike Eagle III scenarios cockpit screen shot shown. including Desert Storm, Korea, and Central America!  Go I vs. 1 with head-toSTRIKE EAGLE head modem combat mode or put your \"wizzo\" in the back seat via modem and fly like the real F-15E with a two-man crew! Patrol in two-fighter formation with your favorite wingman in an F-15 Strike MICROPROSE Eagle right next to you via modem! Adrva Penterne Parve y New fue como Action \"Nuclear power facility destroyed! Iraqi Air Ministry next target!!\" MITROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT. SOFTWARE SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE \"Scratch 3 more SAMs north of the 38th parallell!\" Fox a FREE INTERACTIVE DEVO DISK of the incredible F-15 Strike Eagle Ill send this coupon to: Microprose Software 180 Lakefront Drive Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245. Please include $3.99 for postage and handing To get out free catalog, call 300579 PLAY (Mon-Fr. 8.30 am 5:00 pm EST] Name: Address: City: 1993 MicroProse Software. Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. L ---_State: __ Zip: __ _AAM Circle Reader Service #79 "


" leader tells an artist, «I need a picture of a wizard, a picture of a troll, two Sherman tanks, a tree and a hillside.\" He continued with another list of \"visionary\" instructions \"...a map, side-view or top-down, with eight frames of a walking figure or 16 rotations of a spaceship. They can be so many pixels high by so many pixels wide and use 16 or 256 colors...and I need it by next Friday.\" What he illustrated in this catalog of demands was the reality of piecemeal instructions detracting from the possible implementation of a strong and common creative vision in computer game development, and further, the need for artists to be given some creative authority. He emphasized the need for coordinating the vision of what the game world is like and the philosophy for depicting events in a particular graphic style. This requires decisions prior to actual rendering so that the artistic team knows whether the game's philosophy requires soft focus or sharp contrast, light sourcing, warm/cool colors and partially hidden/candid movement. Finally, Greg's call to action on allowing more creative authority to the graphic artists was clarified to reveal three reasons to do so. 1. To Fix a Growing Problem Greg rightly observed that the new storage presentation technologies would alrecruiting of more individuals with experience in cinematography, staging, lighting and other fields conducive to using the new technologies. The current status of \"artist as underling\" is a major barrier in attracting certain types of talent, particularly traditional Hollywood types. 3. To Create New Kinds of Products Finally, Johnson argued that allowing more creative input from artists in the conception and direction of a product could potentially create, not just prettier products, but new types of products. He closed out his presentation by suggesting that the new \"interactive experience\" that would make more people want to participate in the genre may well be a more sophisticated weaving together of the old storytelling capacity of traditional technologies with the interaction of computer nologi games. It will take an artistic vision to weave these elements together. William C. Fisher (Quicksilver Software) fortifies himself to sit through yet another multimedia conference. low interactive experiences to reach a broader audience. In turn, this would engender more money-making potential into the enterprise and, in turn, draw many different types of artistic talent into the field. Unfortunately, this process is creating a growing friction between artists and programmers/producers. Providing creative authority/input from artists would reduce some of this friction. 2. To Attract More Talented Artists Greg observed that giving artists more creative authority would encourage the Moving on to New Horizons These were only a handful of the \"class notes\" to be taken during the 1993 conference. Readers who find that they are longing for more should pencil in the following dates on their calendar: April 23-26, 1994. That's when the \"Class of 94\" gathers at the Westin in Santa Clara, California for the eighth meeting of comDuter game developers. Cow THE ROAD FROM SUMTER  APPMATTOX June 25, 1861... \"The first shots of the Civil War have been fired... Fort Sumter has fallen. Volunteers on both sides rush to their colors. Across the Union the cry mounts... ON TO RICHMOND.\" Newerk Dails Tribune Union forces under General Molellan seize Harper's Ferry. The Road From Sumter to Appomattox covers the entire Civil War from the opening guns of Bull run to the final surrender. All the military and economic might of the Union or Confederacy is at your command. FEATURES: Human or computer opponents.  Naval system includes ocean and river going vessels. Over 100 individually named and rated generals.  Economic system includes foreign trade and blockade runners. Control the promotions and dismissals of those generals.  Beautiful 256 color VGA map that stretches from New Orleans Continuous-play, daily pulses, send orders-whenever to Philadelphia, from Kansas City to Bermuda. you like.  Fully integrated tactical combat system emphasizing command Different unit types combine to form divisions and corps. control and quick resolution of even the largest battles.  Full control over the national production system. Scenario editor allows players to construct their own battles or A detailed supply system using railroads, wagons and ships. play those already included. Send cheque or money order to: $54.95 ADANAC COMMAND SYSTEMS CORP.  IBM or AMIGA 102 1345 West 4th Avenue plus $5.00 S&H  Must have: Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H 3Y8 1 MB H.D., Mouse, Telephone: (604) 739-1162 TOTAL $59.95 US Keyboard, 286 or more Page 42 Circle Reader Service #32 Computer Gaming World "


"THE FUTURE OF ADVENTURE GAMING BEGINS WHEN THE PHANTOM RETURNS! MicroProse pushes adventure gaming to its limits with the most significant innovations in graphics and animation to date! htlus the world premiere of the Tragedy awaits you endary sol score 001 DUAN TEJUM FHOIT and the audience inside the famed Paris Opera House! HAS : : Explore the opera's labyrinth of catacombs! Confront the Phantom faceto-face! Search for clues along the catwalks, through the wings, and into the many backstage rooms of the opera house! Try Rex Nebular And The Cosmic Gender BenderTM for more mind-blowing adventures! To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY. (Mon Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST.) Or fill out this coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. D-10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name Address City State Zip AAN RETURN MOL; OF THE MOST PHANTOM MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #80 "


"372 LANDS OF LOIRE THE THRONE OF CHAOS The Dark Army encroaches. King Richard falls. And Scotia beckons you, laughing... In her mad quest for power, Scotia has ravaged the kingdom. She seeks the throne, yet it eludes her. She's getting desperate. She's getting mean. Mut of Doom Lightning CAN YOU STOP HER? DO YOU DARE? "


"FEATURING Compass and Automapper Included Adventure through ancient keeps and living forests. Unearth hidden ruins and haunted caves. da Make Friends and Influence People Cooperate with the helpful. sidestep the treacherous and destroy the dangerous. in Quick and Easy Combat and Spell Casting Indulge in a Land of Sensory Delights Over 20 megabytes of compressed art and special effects. Actually hear the clash of steel! Feel the blows of terrors who slip beneath your guard! LANDS OF LORE THE THRONE OF CHAOS Westwoog AN INSPIRED FANTASY RPG EXPERIENCE FROM THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM THAT CREATED EYE OF THE BEHOLDER\" I AND II. Westwood Distributed Exclusively by Available for your IBM PC. Eye of the Beholder I and II are trademarks of TSR, Inc. GAMES The Eye of the Beholder games, TSR, Inc. and SSI are not connected or related in any way to the Lands of Lore game, Virgin Games, Inc. or Westwood Studios, Inc. Lands of Lore is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc.  1993 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Circle Reader Service #109 "


"Scorpion's Mail Alone in the Dark Ultima VII: Black Gate Ultima VII: Serpent Isle Ultima Underworld II Eric the Unready Legend of Kyrandia The Summoning Crusaders of the Dark Savant C eems like we were here in the mail room still perform its special function, provided just the other day. (Come to think of it, you've got the two parts. While I do my best Fred and I were in here just the other to be accurate, on occasion I do (ahem) step day, cleaning up.) Anyway, yes, it's time to go in it (and with eight legs...no, let's not think poking through the sacks again and see what about that!). My apologies to all for this crror. the readers have been up to lately (mostly Ultima VII Black Gate: Some letters have getting stuck somewhere, but we expect that come in recently from readers having trouble sort of thing by now). with the Emp/Wisp quest. They get all the Before we get to the good stuff, I'd like to way to the end of it, signed contract and all, remind everyone of a couple of things. First, but nothing happens. The Emps appear not whether you live in the US, or overseas, please to know that the quest has been completed, do not send money in any way, shape or form. and therefore don't help with contacting the No payment is required for answering your Wisps. This occurs because the initial trigger letters. Okay? Got that? Even if you're feeling for the entire sequence has not been properly especially generous, keep the money in your set. The actual beginning of this entire section pocket (games are expensive; save up for those is up in Minoc, at the gypsy camp. Players instead!). should go there before visiting Yew. Second, some overseas readers have enUltima VII Serpent Isle: There are lots of closed a self-addressed envelope with their places to go wrong here, or find yourself up questions. While this isn't necessary, I appreagainst what appears to be a dead end. Moonciate their thoughtfulness in sending one shade is one of them. The first thing to do on along. However you knew there was a lowarrival is remind Flindo of his promise to you. ever, right?), you shouldn't put any stamps on Then be patient; don't expect anything to the reply envelope. The US Post Office does happen right away (these things do take a bit not accept foreign postage on outgoing mail, of time to set up). Go back the next day and only incoming mail. If you are writing from talk to him again. If you've already been to to him again. If you've already been to outside the United States and are enclosing a the banquet and nothing new seems to be self-addressed envelope, don't put any stamps happening afterwards, have a chat with Bucia. on it. Be sure to ask her about anyone who's around One more thing (really, this is the last one): now that wasn't before. In this game, it is vital before sending off your letters, do take a to talk to people several times, particularly moment to make sure everything is correct. after special events occur. One time, a reader put a Nature Conservancy Ultima Underworld II: The servant strike stamp on his SASE, instead of a postage is giving some people fits, which isn't surprisstamp. Another reader was feeling so rushed, ing. Because of a bug in the game, once the he put my address on his reply envelope. Just his reply envelope. Just strike starts, there is no way to end it. Nystul strike starts, there is no way to end it..Nystul recently, a player was in such a hurry, he left is then too weak to do anything with the my box number off the address. The letter got blackrock stones you bring him, which makes to me eventually, but it took awhile. So, getting on with the game rather difficult. however eager you are to get your problems There are three things you can do about this: solved, an extra minute for proofreading (1) Start the game over; (2) Restore to a time helps! before the strike and get Lord British to take Alone in the Dark: Mea culpa, mea maxima the servants' demands under consideration\"; (3) call Origin and ask for the patch that fixes benarch thar fixes culpa (this is the literate way of saying I blew it bigrime). After sending off my article on this problem. Do whichever of these is easiest AITD, I was in the local computer store one for you, but do avoid the strike. day, browsing the new arrivals rack, when I Eric the Unready: So you're on the way to heard two people talking about the game. sacrificing yourself a typically noble deed They were saying how nice it was that, even for a knight. It would, of course, help if no though broken, the saber still worked as long one noticed you were standing around in the as you had both pieces. Uh-Oh! That isn't room. This is a sort of half-and-half problem. what I said in the article (oops). So, this is a Half is wet, and half you can't see (well, it's correction: even if you happened to break the only semi-precious after all, Fro..err, Eric). sabre while fighting some nasty critter, it will And it would also help if the young lady in the room would just shut up and stop screaming. Here you're trying to do her a favor, but that's just not getting through to her. How tiring. Yawn. Think I'll sleep on this one for awhile. Legend of Kyrandia: The caves in this one continue to give people headaches. Even with the best and most careful mapping, they still find some dark areas that they simply can't cross safely (not to mention that annoying chasm). These places can be entered once the Pantheon has been completed (bet you had a suspicion about this already). That, in turn, means getting back out of the caves the way you came in and doing something out there. I'm sure you'll be able to figure out what that is; remember, a wellwisher is rooting for you. The Summoning: The White Knight has proven to be too elusive for some players. This is probably because he isn't where they think he is. Looking for Whirey on the top level isn't going to get the job done. Try down below have you been pushing stuff aside lately? If not, do that little thing). That by itself won't be enough, however. Some magic is necessary to bring you to his happy home. Crusaders of the Dark Savant: Adventurers messing around under Nyctalinth sooner or later come across a chamber filled with nasty, gooey T'rang eggs. They wonder how to get past these horrible things. There's only one way, and that's to join up with the Umpani. The only thing past the eggs is Queenie and friends, and killing them is mainly optional. However, if you are planning on trashing the Trang Queen, be sure to wait until after she (he?) has told you how to open the Sword lock because no one else knows how And Lock, because no one else knows how. And you really do need that Boat Map. That's it for this look into the mail bag. In the meantime, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the folTowing ways: On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO BOX 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"A DOLEH DI SELU STRIKE SQUAT asim NE R DOSSIP 13 DE INTERSTELLAR TRAVEL LEN STICK BUYING EQUIPMENT LEO TORA DOO MESE DE TWO-PLAYER PLAY EAT FIRE, BUG-EYED SCUM! 2015 DORADO LOG BAHAU 2. THE THESIDE ELEG LORE THE CONSORTIUM OF WORLDS HAS BEEN OVERRUN BY THE VILE INSECTOID K'KISTIKS. BRUTAL OPPRESSION AND MASS SLAVERY NOW RULE WHERE ONCE THERE WAS PEACE AND HAPPINESS A DISTRESS CALL FROM THE CONSORTIUM HAS REACHED YOU AND YOUR STRIKE SQUAD-A CREW OF SMUGGLERS, BOUNTY HUNTERS AND RAPSCALLIONS FROM THE BACKWATERS OF THE UNIVERSE. WITH THE RIGHT SHIP, THE RIGHT TOOLS AND WEAPONS, AND FOR THE RIGHT PAY, THERE'S JUST A CHANCE THAT YOUR STRIKE SQUAD CAN HELP. WILL NOBODY STOP THE KKISTIK SLAVEMASTERS? OR WILL YOU? -THIRTY MERCENARIES OF NINE RACES TO CHOOSE FROM. ALL-NEW HIGHLY INTUITIVE GAME INTERFACE. PULSING SOUNDTRACK AND INSANE DIGITIZED SOUNDS. -PLAY ALONE OR WITH A FRIEND OR AN ENEMY. Circle Reader Service #97 * MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual IBM VGA screen photos "


"\"If You Want To See The Future John Dvorak, NEW Y CERRAL 11:44 1 SHOP TSN Get Your First 3 Hours Of On-Line Time On Us! FREE! You win the BATTLE Yonconvent. I sint 10 Spreces and 1 Login Central Deep pand can 100 cassano Why would an industry visionary like John Dvorak, author, radio personality, and long time columnist for PC Magazine, point to a multiplayer gaming network as the future? Why are major magazines, newspapers and other media excited about The Sierra Network? Well, this is your chance to find out FREE! The Sierra Nctwork is on-line games and more, including products for every taste and skill level. With the games available ranging from the multi-player version of the award-winning Red Baron\" to the critically acclaimed fantasy role playing game The Shadow of Yserbius\" which was recently named the Best on-line Game by Strategy Plus Magazine, Fly the award winning Red Baron There's also more relaxing fare with pilots across the country... like Go. Bridge, Backgammon Checkers, and Chess. Even multiplayer games for children like Graffiti Boogers and PaintBall.\" Plus educational games like the math based RocketQuiz.\" So far, there are over twenty great games and even more to come! ...Join with others to explore But the thing that really makes the labyrinths of Yserbius... The Sierra Network special is the sense of community that you get when you visit ImagiNation. Each night, thousands of friendly people gather there to play games, mce friends, make new ones, and generally have a great time together The Sicrra Network represents an entirely new form of entertainment It allows you a completely safe and friendly cnvironment for you and your children to interact with other members, play games, exchange ideas, or just socialize. Truly, the future is here. \"Your credit card will not be charged unless you use more than 3 hours of on-line time. TM designates a trademark of The Sierra Network Red Baron is a registered trademark of Dynamix. Offer good until 12/31/ "


"Check Out The Sierra Network\" RK TIMES, April 25, 1993 \"Today's best place to play is The Sierra Network (TSN). This virtual game board offers a variety of multi-player games and enough opponents to keep you sufficiently challenged.\" ... \"the best place to play with and against people, not the dull-witted PC.\" OMNI Magazine, May, 1993 \"The Shadow Of Yserbius Best Adventure Game / TSN Best Customer Service\" Strategy Plus, May, 1993 \"TSN is like Disneyland, Nickelodeon and Toys R Us rolled into one. Thus, TSN has become my home within a home. Thanks, TSN.\" Alan Emrich, Computer Gaming World, November, 1992 \"(TSN) could define a new medium the merger of computer games and on-line information services into a form of entertainment never seen before.' Washington Post, November 9, 1992 Call 1-800-SIERRA-1 Or, Fill Out And Return The Coupon Below. The Sierra Network Valuable Coupon If you'd like to try The Sierra Network, all you need is a 386 or better computer, a 2400 baud modem, a VGA monitor, and a valid major credit card. If you have all of these things, then just send in the coupon, or give us a call at 1-800-SIERRA-1. We'll give you everything you need to enter the land of ImagiNation, and your first 3 hours are on us. So come to ImagiNation. See what all the excitement is about. Play new games, meet new friends, and find yourself never wanting to leave. Because there is no place you've ever been that can compare to the fun and friendship of the world's very first 2900493171 Cyberspace Theme Park. It's called ImagiNation and it's only ...Or get together for a leisurely on The Sierra Network. game like Bridge or Chess. For your FREE Trial Membership Kit and 3 FREE hours of on-line time, just call: 1-800-SIERRA-1, or fill out this coupon, place it in an envelope, and send it to: The Sierra Network, Offer #393, P.O. BOX 11, Oakhurst, CA 93644 Yes, I have at least a 386 computer, a modem, and a valid major credit card If I decide to use The Sierra Network after my 3 free trial hours are up, I will become a full member and be billed as little as $12.95 per month.* Name Y PASS DOUBLE BIO Address Erant City/State/ZIP Day Phone Evening Phone Card Number: Expiration Date Credit Card: Visa MasterCard American Express Discover *Subject to current rates, terms and conditions. See rate card in membership kit for details. Your credit card will not be charged unless you exceed your free 3 hours. Offer good through 12/31/93 01993 The Sierra Network This offer is available to first time TSN members only 01993 The Sierra Network. Offer #393. Circle Reader Service #98 "


"Deynew dheenshots Sierra's Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist Wheaton«Aces\" Hall by Charles Ardai Madame Sadie Ovaree town of Coarsegold, California. Will he, like Clint, eventually have to strap on the ol' spurs and holsters and revert to old ways to see justice done? Do you even have to ask? supply is poisoned, when rowdy cowhands come in to shoot up the town, when an arsonist torches the Assay Office, when horses stink up the town with their artificially induced flatulence, or when a big-city gambler arrives to cheat people out of their deeds? He It is the rare game that can make a jaded player laugh out loud. Rarer still is one that can make a jaded player laugh out loud frequently, and rarest of all is one that can make a jaded player laugh out loud frequently before it is even installed. Until recently, I would have felt comfortable substituting \"unheard of\" for \"rarest of all» — but no longer, not after playing Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist, the latest symptom of Al \"Creator of Leisure Suit Larry' Lowe's dementia. Freddy When You Are the line Crnator of Leire SaltStry ONES Tamannafi t , ami FREDDY DARKAS The game opens with a backstory that takes a poke at the \"Ballad of Davy Crockett,\" singing of Freddy's achievements as a youth, the loss of his right car at the hands of a crackshot villain named Kenny the Kid, his disillusionment with gunfighting, and his decision to become a pharmacist. (\"Now our hero, Freddy Pharkas,/With his wounded pride and carless carcass/Vowed to the heavens to give up gunnery...\") As the last strains of the catchy theme music dwindle, the player finds him or herself staring at a sepia-toned Main Street while a toothless Gabby Hayes imitaror narrates the start of the adventure, with occasional interruptions for hawking, coughing and forgetting what he has said. It seems that Coarsegold is mysteriously turning into a ghost town. It already has one foot in the grave, not to mention a crooked sheriff and banker just waiting, if one might mix metaphors, for the other shoe to drop. Actually, not just waiting. Sheriff \"Chicken\" Shifts and banker P.H. Balance are doing everything they can to hasten Coarsegold's shuffling off of its mortal coil. This is where our \"peerless, earless and free\" hero comes in. He has a lovely, colonial-style pharmacy toward the end of Main Street and he does not want to see it shut down. Nor does he want to see all his customers driven out of town. What can he do when the water Frontier Pharmacist Freddy Pharkas is the \"Blazing Saddles\" of computer games. Lowe and co-designer Josh Mandel jump on the Wild West genre and ride it for all it's worth, pinching tropes from every great Western right up to \"Unforgiven\" and treating them with the disrespect they deserve. Like Clint Eastwood's character at the end of last year's Best Picture, Freddy Pharkas gives up a life of violence for one of respectability: the ex-gunfighter studies pharmacology and opens his own shop in the wretched TIILE Pireddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEME IBM REQUIREMENTS: 286-16Mhz, VGAVEGA graphics PROTECTION Documentation Look-up DESIGNERS: Al Lowe, bsh Mandel PUBLISHERS: Sierra Coarsegold, CA (800) SIERRA-5 Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"neuein CIG De can roll up his sleeves and get to work, room, following instructions printed in that's what. the hilarious \"Modern Day Book of The standard Sierra interface is Health and Hygiene\" that comes with pressed into service once again, here the game. Yes, this is copy protection; containing Western-themed icons (a but between juggling polysyllabic pair of boots for \"Walk,\" a leather chemicals and figuring out which comstrap and buckle for \"Inventory,\" a pound to mix to address a particular pair of wire-rimmed glasses for complaint, one forgets that one is also \"Look\"). These commands function demonstrating that one has a legitimate, just as their counterparts do in the and not a pirated, copy of the game. This King's Quest and Space Quest games, is the way copy protection should be the one new feature being that each THIS THE done, if it must be done at all. icon (and every object in the game) After the first round of prescriptions has a hot spot: a brightly colored pixel has been filled, the Sheriff comes by to that indicates which portion of the close the pharmacy down. Not to worry graphic is \"active.\" This helps eliminate a lot like home, making the storyline that much Freddy can still come and go as he pleases, of the fumbling that has made some previous more effective. Coarsegold may be a rotten despite the \"CLOSED\" sign in the window. Sierra games frustrating. Never again will one little town, but it is our rotten little town, one (Lowe and Mandel never bother to explain ask \"Why can't I pick that up?\" while clicking ultimately feels, and it's worth fighting for. why, if every other closed establishment has the wrong portion of the hand cursor on an It is also worth noting that while the enviits door boarded up, Freddy is allowed to object. ronment is small, the game is not short by any wander in and out of the pharmacy. I guess Puzzles consist largely (and unavoidably, means. Divided into four acts, each contain the answer is, «Because otherwise there given the pure point-and-click interface) of ing plenty of puzzles and goings-on, Freddy wouldn't be a game.\") recognizing that certain objects on the screen Pharkas unfolds at a steady clip and never runs Freddy's job from this point on is to foil be picked up of picking them up, and out of material. The limited environment each scheme by Sheriff Shift, P.H. Balance, then bringing them into contacr with other permirs Lowe and Mandel to pack the game and an unnamed mastermind lurking in the obiects. What makes Freddy Pharkas's puzzles with more characters, animations, jokes, and shadows to drive the townspeople away. much better than the norm is that solutions music than they would otherwise have had Along the way, there's more chemistry to be often contain several steps, forcing the player co ntain averal stone forcing the plaver room for. One can spend the first hour of the done, a visit to be paid to an Establishment of to think in weird, convoluted ways. game just wandering around the town, never III Repute, a noble rescue to be performed even looking for a puzzle to solve, because So, for instance, dousing the fire in the not to mention a couple of ignoble ones), Assay Office is not merely a matter of smotheverything one encounters has a gag (or two and three or four gunfighting sequences offercring it with the right substance. That would or three) attached to it. ing rudimentary arcade action. be too casy. Freddy also has to find the right As usual, the action sequences are not the tool to distribute the substance over the area game's strong suit, though they aren't bad. of the fire, another tool to get into position to There are better games if one wants target make the first tool work, and so on. Almost shooting practice. Some gamers might enjoy everything Freddy does, from making himself the interludes but, thankfully, the rest of us a new car through assembling his gunfighter are given the option of playing these seoutfit to diverting a stampede, requires several quences at a very forgiving \"easy\" level. actions. Each step may be simple and straightThere is no such option for the game's forward, but the overall solutions rarely are. climactic gunfight, but there it doesn't matter so much, since whatever one does, Freddy will As Pharkas the Eye Can See end up lying in the dust spouting blood like All of the game's events take place in the a geyser. Is this the end of our hero? Or will he struggle to his feet and drag himself to the same location, the town. Coarsegold consists of about a dozen exterior screens and roughly It took me more than an hour just to make villain's lair for a showdown? the same number of interiors. This may seem it all the way to the end of Main Street, The Funny Frontier small — it is small — but it is also a wise because I was having so much fun fooling tactical choice. The limited number of scenes around in the saloon, the barbershop, the Actually, the final showdown is surprising means that the player has to revisit each locabank, and \"Mom's,\" a homey restaurant runand satisfying, though a tad misogynistic, and tion several times. This enriches the simulaby the mother of all battle-axes. When I fiit brings matters to a smashing finale. In terms nally got to Freddy's pharmacy I realized that of its demands on the player's craftiness, knows the town inside and out. It starts to feel I hadn't even started the game yet, in the Freddy Pharkas maintains a high level right up conventional sense, even though I had been playing and laughing myself sick for quite a while. The game acknowledges this peculiarity of its design when one unlocks Freddy's door. \"Congratulations,\" it says, as 500 points are added to one's score. \"You are halfway through the game.\" Once one enters the pharmacy, one gets a crash course in Freddy's new profession as a series of townspeople come by to have their prescriptions filled. The player has to learn to manipulate all the tools in Freddy's back USE am 03GAugust 1993 Page 51 "


"Deview no one should complain about Freddy Pharkas's flirtation with similar subjects. All great satirists play in the muck. That's their job. Lowe and Behold to the end. Puzzle hounds will find this game excretory themes, requiring Freddy to come a treat. into contact with substances the rest of us However, even the puzzles, as good as they would just as soon not touch. There are lots are, are not the game's real strength. Its real h. Its real of jokes about buggery, too: Trixie the Acof jokes about buggery, too: Trixie the strength is its comedy. Though satirizing the commodating Sheep is running loose in the Wild West is by no means a new idea, the trail streets for much of the game and, for those having been blazed by everyone from Mel with more refined fastes, a sheep in heels and Brooks to «F-Troop,\" Lowe and Mandel makeup is available over at Madam Sadie manage to find new jokes to crack and new Ovaree's place. ways to crack old ones. One of the weapons in their arsenal is self-deprecating satire. That 47 NEER is, not only do they parody the Wild West, but computer games as well, including a great takeoff on Lemmings and cameo appearances by suitably sleazy ancestors of Leisure Suit Larry and Cedric, the King's Quest owl. Other gags come out of left field, which is where the best gags tend to be born. Across from the church is the Coarsegold synagogue, which Freddy can't enter because he is not one of the chosen people.\" Outside the graveyard is a coffin which, if opened, starts coughin'. Halfway through the game, Freddy Lest I frighten away sensitive gamers with finds a faithful Indian companion: Srini Lalthis description (or Tipper Gore, should she kaka Bagdnish. The stampede Freddy has to happen to be reading), rest assured that nothstop is a stampede of snails. They (the gags, ing either disgusting or raunchy actually hapnot the snails) come fast and furious. pens on the screen. They're just jokes, folks. Nor can one overlook the ever-popular toiFurthermore, Lowe and Mandel are in good let humor. Not that anyone in the Wild West company, displaying a coprophilic glee worhad toilets, of course, but there are two outthy of Jonathan Swift or Laurence Sterne. houses in the game and they get plenty of use. Given that most people read \"Gulliver's TravThree puzzles have how shall we put it? els,\" with its dung-smeared yahoos, in school, Lots of gamers were unsure whether Al Lowe would be able to top himself. After all, where can one go but down after creating a success like Leisure Suit Larry. The answer is now clear: one can go up. Freddy Pharkas contains more concentrated hilarity than any of the Leisure Suit Larry games, plus better puzzles, great music (one can sample any of a dozen compositions from the piano player in the saloon), art that calls to mind Don Martin's characters from Mad magazine, and even (just to put the cherry on top) a funny installation procedure and documentation that would be worth reading even if there were no game to go with it. Now the question is, where can Lowe go after Freddy Pharkas? God only knows, but there is no indication that he is ready to ride there off into the sunset. One has to assume that he has more crazy adventures in store for us. For now, however, Lowe can cut another notch in his gunbelt and take a well-deserved rest. Once again he's proven himself the quickest draw in town. Cow We've Outdone Our Only Competition... Ourselves. Mark II WCS THE MARK II WCS *User Programmable Functions *Allows Joystick Programmability ThrustMaster Get Real HOTAST ThrustMaster Inc. 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Suite E-7 Tigard OR 97223 PHONE(503)639-3200 FAX(503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #105 Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"Games For The Power-Hungry Make the big decisions with four addictive strategy games from MicroProse. Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Play the award-winning MicroProse strategy game with all-new features! Build a sprawling railroad empire across six world regions! Watch your empire unfold with enhanced VGA graphics! Operate RAZLROR DE over 40 trains, each with its own speed and cargo capabiliDELUXE ties! And even compete against history's legendary rail barons! Sid Meier's Civilization Play entertainment software's most highly acclaimed computer game! As the guiding spirit of your own civilization, you'll build complex cities, balance economic growth Build An Empire To Stand The Test Of Tue with military power, and compete with history's greatest leaders. Sid Meier's TYCOON MOROPROS MACRO PRO Fields Of Glory Recreate the military brilliance and glory of the battles leading to Waterloo! In this action/strategy game, you'll command French, British, or Prussian troops. Lead your men through harsh weather in battles and complete campaigns. And zoom in THE ROAD TO WATERLOO and out of the action using any of five battlefield maps. FIELDS OF Master Of Orion\" Play the all-new game of space exploration and combat from MicroProse! With a powerful fleet of space ships at your command, you'll battle, trade, and negotiate with ten alien races. Develop new technologies. And expand your colossal empire as you inhabit or exploit inhospitable worlds. Eimumins to spin the correy MASTER ORION 4444444444 MICROPROSE MICROPROSE MICROPROSE To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. DIO. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Name: SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Address: City: 1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. State: _Zip: _ -AAP Circle Reader Service #81 "


"So. Devneu ALL The Arrival of a Long-awaited Guest Virgin and Trilobyte's CD Apparition Finally Appears by Chuck Miller riginally scheduled for a Halloween 1992 release, Virgin and Trilobyte's interactive drama, The 7th Guest (Guest), has finally arrived -in all its glory and gory regalia. Guest, a multimedia showpiece shipping on two CDs, may be a dream come true for most CD-ROM gamers, as there is finally an entertainment title available on this new medium that comes close to fully exploiting its capabilities. However, and I say this after investing an extensive amount of time with the finished product, Guest may fall more closely into the category of a nightmare than a dream. On the basis of my experiences in Stauf's Mansion, it appears that this long overdue \"guest\" arrived just a bit too early, in spite of its numerous delays, ence. This environment really lets Guest shine. Digitized \"ghosts\" can then go through their paces with the greatest clarity and detail; creaks and footfalls have their most chilling effect. The music, Guest's foremost element in my opinion, is ethereal, adding greatly to the atmosphere of the game. Playing Games with Your Mind As indicated, Guest is primarily a puzzle game, not a graphic or animated adventure. troubled community. Is it possible that after all these years this young journalist discovered something new about this \"haunted dwelling\" — something that eluded all past investigations and cost Morales her life? Whatever the case with a local resident's discovery of Morales' severed arm (floating in iscovery of Morales' severed arm (floating in nearby Hudson River), tales of the damned house surfaced once again. Strange disappearances, and stories of screams and unearthly wails heard emanating from the mansion have again become the subject of conversation. Meanwhile, both state and local police have refused to comment on their findings, and the reason for barricading off the Stauf residence. In Guest, the player assumes the role of the seventh individual \"invited\" to enter Henry A. Stauf's ominous domicile: an entirely computer generated structure of surprising realism and detail. The game, presented in gothic horror garb, consists primarily of a collection of 2 of 23 logic puzzles woven together in the form of a graphic adventure that takes the player through the 22 rooms of Stauf's cerie mansion. As such, Guest will appeal more to those enamored of puzzles and the horror genre than to die hard adventi But First, the Story Over 50 years have passed since the strange ne strange events surrounding the Stauf mansion transpired: mysterious circumstances in which six guests disappeared from this infamous Harley residence. Now, with the gruesome death of TV journalist Robin Morales, who vanished during the investigation of the Stauf residence for an upcoming story on Case Unsolved, the fervor has once again surfaced in this quiet, CD-ROM TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: Having Its Profound Effects Yet, however you define it, Guest is still a visual and audio showpiece employing 256color Super VGA graphics and an impressive 16-bit audio soundtrack, written and performed by master musician George Alistair (The Fat Man) Sanger. Graphics and audio in fact, all elements of this game — combine to create an intense, gripping atmosphere. Appropriately, Guest is best played with the volume cranked up and the lights dimmed, especially if one desires to get the full experiThe 7th Guts! $99.95 IBM 386DX or better, 2MB RAM, 16 bit SVGA video card with 512K RAM, CD-ROM drive with 150K transfer rate sound card with FM and PCM sound, mouse, hard drive with 10MB free space, MSCDEX 2.2 or higher None Graeme Devine and Rob Landeros Virgin Games, Inc. Irvine, CA (714) 833-1999 PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview While there is an element of exploration involved as one moves about \"experiencing\" the house, its goal is primarily to seek out the next puzzle to solve and learn more of the game's plot. Puzzles are mostly of the logic variety, and include rubic, spatial and word-based brain teasers. Chess boards are employed for three puzzles, necessitating the position or movement of chess pieces in the solution process. Several variants of the rubic cube are also employed, requiring the rotation of images or letters by row and column to arrive at the rrive at the desired solution. Word mixers are used in a few of the puzzles as well, asking that the player unravel their hidden messages. Though most of these conundrums are of average difficulty, some can be quite perplexing. Fortunately, help is available within the game. While attempting to solve a puzzle, one can visit the Library and examine Staufs Book of Clues. On the first and second visits, clues are offered to assist the player in solving the puzzle in progress. On the third visit, the puzzle is automatically solved (without revealing the solution). When the game is complete, the player has full access to all of Guest's puzzles, so that he or she may return and try solving them again. bered, however, that these are MINIMUM requirements. Systems meeting these minimums, though, may still experience difficulty in running Guest. For example, 386DX systems default to MCGA rather than SVGA unless a fast enough video card is detected, resulting in noticeable lower quality graphics (MCGA images are pitiful compared to their SVGA counterparts). Even if one's system has a \"fast enough\" video card to allow for SVGA graphics, it may be necessary to run in MCGA mode as some 386-based systems simply cannot decompress the data quickly enough for Problem number two, Guest's inability to SVGA mode. A 486DX (33MHz or better), work properly with some cards based on the 4MB of RAM, a fast SVGA card, and a Media Vision chip ser employed in the Pro double-speed CD-ROM drive will make Audio Spectrum 16 (PAS16) sound board game play much more enjoyable (please see (and in OEM cards employing the same chip and in E the sidebar, «Gaming on the ROM\"). design), was the culprit responsible for my Too Early Too Late woes. Other players with sound cards based on the Media Vision chip set may also experiWith the beta version of Guest (previewed ence these difficulties. in Issue 105), I experienced some hardware In the case of both problems, the player may compatibility problems. Of course, since the be greeted by audio drop-out and a quick exit previous article was a \"preview.\" such probto the system prompt. For those affected, the lems, appropriately, were not discussed in print. Ho initial release of Guest is virtually unplayable. print. However, now that Guest is in final release these issues must be addressed. It is in Fortunately, the above mentioned parch this regard that Guest may have arrived before cures the incompatibility problem for those with «lesser\" motherboards. Should I PAS on Guest? For those owning sound cards based on the Media Vision standard and experiencing DMA conflicts, there is still no final solution (as of May 28, 1993). The latest patch allows for continued play without exiting to DOS, bur sound still drops out frequently. (Just prior to writing this review, Trilobyte suggested a \"potential\" hardware fix-disabling Sound Blaster compatibility and locking DMA transfers. However, it did not resolve the problem on my system.) This is a serious concern, as the only way to hear each digitized conversation in its entirety (which is necessary to follow the plot and gain audio clues to help in solving the puzzles) is to keep restoring and replaying these segments until they successfully play through. Unfortunately, this results in an obtrusive distraction to play. It also lessens one's enjoyment and the suspension of disbelief. Further, Guest repeatedly \"locked\" on certain puzzles during audio segments (most likely a result of the same hardware conflict). As it stands, many gamers will need Dry Bones and Rotting Corpses Guest is not without its share of \"skeletons,\" however. To begin, it sets some very stringent hardware demands. Minimum requirements include a 386DX processor, 2MB of RAM, a 16 bit SVGA video card with at least 512K memory, a CD-ROM drive with a 150K transfer rate, a sound card with FM and PCM sound and a mouse. It should be rememits time. Some gamers (probably most) will not be affected by hardware incompatibilities. Others, though, certainly will. The two main concerns revolve around problems with some PC clone motherboards and sound cards based upon the Media Vision chip set. I have spoken with several gamers who have had absolutely no difficulties running Guest. However, indications are that many players are experiencing problems keeping, or getting, Guest running on their systems. Unfortunately, I am one of the latter. The first problem, relating to incompatibilities with certain morherboard designs, has been fixed (with a patch available directly from Trilobyte and by download from the major on-line services). It seems that IBMbased motherboards call for a 16K writethrough cache memory. However, not all clone makers employ this same standard. Some only allow for a 4K write-through. It is these boards that Guest has difficulties stomaching. August 1993 Page 55 "


"Devnem to acquire the patch file before being able to play the game. For a few, the game may be unplayable until the sound card issue is resolved. (Trilobyte is presently hard at work on a fix for the sound card conflicts). Oh, This Ghostly Apparition! Guest has both its pitfalls and pleasures. For those who manage to avoid compatibility issues, the visual and audible experience is striking and unique. The majority of puzzles offer sufficient challenge that makes completing them a satisfying experience, while serving to unravel the story further. Still, there are some annoying aspects to play that should be dealt with in the upcoming sequel, The 7th Guest, Part Two: The 11th Hour — Be Afraid of the Dark. Hot keys for accessing game options (loading and saving) and for providing the ability to bypass reperisition pass more quickly to alleviate the frustive audio and or video sequences are needed tration that can develop while waiting for the to speed game play. As an example, the same game to transport the player to the next locaaudio phrases are uttered with annoying repetion. tition during puzzle segments and serve only to annoy and delay after initial exposure. I A Welcome Guest! often wished for the ability to simply turn them off. Playing Guest in its final release leaves me There also needs to be the ability to bypass with mixed emotions, primarily due to the the 3D \"movement\" in the game for slower compatibility problems encountered. Had it systems. As it stands, the player is forced to not been for these, I could easily give Guest a endure the long video sequence of motion hearty thumbs up for those who relish gothic from one location to another, sometimes very horror and enjoy immersing themselves in a slowly. While one of the selling features of the good puzzle-based game. As it stands, though, game, this 3D motion only makes the process I feel that I have been deprived of the full a tedious one on slower systems. In addition, pleasure that Guest has to offer by the inability after witnessing the action several times, I to get the game to run satisfactorily. After would prefer the option of making the tran waiting so long for Guest's arrival, it has been disappointing to experience so much difficulty. It would have been better to further delay the game than to release it as was done, without sufficient testing. In summary, Guest offers a rich, enjoyable gaming experience provided one has a fully compatible system. Otherwise, one can anticipate encountering a configuration nightmare. If all bodes well for one's system, however, the deviously clever puzzles, combined with Guest's superb graphics and audio, will provide a truly atmospheric experience. I only wish that my rendezvous with the ghosts of Staufs Mansion hadn't been spoiled by these hardware specters. CGW TURN YOUR DESKTOP INTO A COCKPIT! SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS E BASE CONTROL STAND Sergports: $14.50 Thrustlasfer Flight Stick IBM, AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM BARGAINS UNDER 9.10 IBM/MS-DOS. BARCAINS UNDER $20MINDSCAPE/THUNDER MOUNTAIN FAST BREAK, Accolade $9.so Monday Night Football VGA $16.50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 DONT GO ALONE, Accolade $9.50 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19.50 1 10 CAMES FOR $14.50 OUTRUN, Sega Microleague Football $ 9.50 $14.50 Includes: Demolition Mission, Army Microleague Baseball SPACE HARRIER, Sega $5.00 F-15 Strike Eagle $16.50 Moves, Bad Street Brawler, Tal-Pan, GUNSHIP, Microprose $9.50 Solo Flight $16.50 Fist. Tal-Ceti. Mutants. Cyrus Chess, CROSSBOW, Absolute $5.00 Tomahawk $14.50 Doc the Destroyer, & Uridium. MIND DANCE, Mindscape $5.00 Star Glider 11 $14.50 Xiphos $14.50 MY GRAND PIANO,Fisher-Price 5 9.50 MEGAFORTRESS LEISURE SUIT LARRY BUNDLE $16.50 MAGIC JOHNSON BASKETBALL $ 9.50 Carrier Command FROM SIERRA for IBM/MS-DOS $14.50 BEGINNING ALGEBRA, Dinoso Sky Chase Includes: $ 9.50 514.50 GEN. KNOWLEDGE BUILDER KNOW EDGE BUILDER S950 David Wolf Secret Agent $ 9.50 $14.50 Leisure Suit Larry 1, 2 & 3 !! HUMAN BIOLOGY, A.E.C. $ 9.50 Blue Angels $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14,50 Only $30 SANDS OF FIRE, Three-Sidy $9.50 Air Strike U.S.A $14.50 ARMOR ALLEY, Three-Sixty $9.50 Blue Max $14.50 Dark Heart of Ukrul $16.50 MARVEL TRILOGY SIERRA for IBM $20 EACH Buck Rogers 1 $19.50 $19.50 Buck Rogers 2 QUEST FOR GLORY 2, FIREHAWK Heroes of Lance FROM MICROPROSE for IBM $19.50 Includes: CODENAME ICEMAN, HEART OF Dragons of Flame 519.50 Amazing Spiderman. X-men CHINA, KING'S QUEST 1 -or-4. Questron 11 $16.50 & Dr. Doom's Revenge. OIL'S WELL, COLONEL'S BEQUEST Hillslat $19.50 NEWSROOM PRO $19.50 Only $20!! LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 -or3, CERTIFICATE MAKER $16.50 RISE OF THE ORAGON, THEXDER. EGA PAINT 2005 $14.50 MIXED UP MOTHER GOOSE DAS BOOT $14.50 STAR COLLECTION for IBM SPACE QUEST 1 -of-2-or-3. MANHUNTER NEW YORK $14.50 10 GAME BUNDLE CALL FOR OTHER TITLESI X-MEN 2 $19.50 PUNISHER $19.50 DR. DOOM'S REVENGE from Electronic Zoo LAND, SEA & AIR TRILOGY AMAZING SPIDERMAN SUPER SALE $19.50 SUPER CONTRA by Microproso. 3 GAMES 220 TWILIGHT 2000 Includes: Paris-Dakar, Skidoo. Includes: AIRBORNE RANGER, LIGHTSPEED 20,000 Leagues under the Sca, COVERT ACTION Legend of Djel, Mouldy Old PIRATES! & GUNSHIP. FOR IBM Dough, Balloon Lagoon, Mechanic IBM SPECIALS WHILE THEY LAST... Panic, Plasma Pilot, Space Scape, Hoyle's Book of Games Vol. 2 RED BARON, by Sierra 325.00 & best selling TREASURE TRAPII BATTLECHESS 2, by Intly $1950 SOLITAIRE. by Sierra. $15 TROIKA 3-pack Includes:28 Solitaire games with ADULT FUN FOR IOM FROM FREE SPIRIT mouso support. Tons of fun!! SEX VIXENS FROM SPACE from Paragon Software for IBM SEX OLYMPICS (VGA only) $15.50 For IBM on 3.5\" disks only. ......SALE.......$14.50...... SOLD ONLY TO ADULTS 21 & OVER indade: REBEL PLANETS. IVAN G METAL VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE wo more Hem 1or al HEARTS. Ale Windows compatible with different computera.. Apple, VGA mour & sound card support!!! Fast paced 1-800-676-6616 Atard, Amiga, C64128, MAC, multilevel arcade action with 100's of levels of Credit Card Orders Only 11 ( $25 minimum & lots more IBMMS-DOS 11 lutting play. Strategy & Quickfans required COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 for | U.S.A., $8 for Canada, S16 all others, Californians must include 7 25% sales P.O. BOX 5160 tax. To receive our catalog with 1000's of closeouts for all computer types, SAN LUIS OBISPO sond 52 in cash or U.S. postage stamps.. DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOGIII CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 544-6616. Circle Reader Service #44 Computer Gaming World Nast any light control-sype ADD MORE REALISM TO YOUR SIMS! Clamps firmly to any desk, supporting the joystick out over your lop to more accurately reflect the positioning of a real control stick. It also turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel ollowing you to easily access the keys without taking your eyes off the oction. ** IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO FLY! Send check or money order for $28.95 plus $4.00 (CAN $7.00) for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 DEALERS CALL FOR DISCOUNT (503) 686-1809 Circle Reader Service #66 Page 56 "


"200 FEET. 600 KNOTS. ADRENALINE OFF THE SCALE. Buzzing the treetops at 200 feet above sea level, you can see individual trees, electrical pylons, bridge cables, even the windows in the control tower of the airport you're about to annihilate. TORNADO Introducing Tornado, the Gulf War's deadly strike fighter, a super low flying, radar evading emissary from the NATO forces. Now a white-hot, ultrarealistic flight sim. Tornado gives you the ultimate in realism. Three European worlds filled with hundreds of thousands of detailed objects. It's a whole new level of masterful ground detail never before seen in an air combat sim. TORNADO Multi-aircraft coordinoled altacks of up to six Tornados Accompanied by up to five other Tornados, your mission will take into account your squadron's efforts, thus no two missions will ever be the same. ION we Tornado. Realism that will blow you away. Distributed by Spectrum HoloByte Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-TORNADO (1-800-867-6236). For technical questions call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time) The cockpit's functioning instruments keep a close tally on your quarry. Digital Integration Digital Integration is a trademark of Digital Integration Lid. Spectrum HoloByle is a registered trademark of Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"RUInn RTS THE LEAFOLTS hy's Buzz Aldrin's K enia Solo by Teff James 09. INTOS MEBETAR SECOND f all mankind's technological tricontrolled opponent. Up to nine difficulty future missions, recruit astronauts, set game umphs in the 20th Century, perhaps settings are available, accessible by giving each preferences, and save games. no achievement is more awe-inspiring side one of three different handicap settings. As the game progresses, new buildings will than that of landing men on the moon. AlAt the easiest setting, the player can run his appear (representing additions to the player's though the technological breakthroughs necspace agency with absolute impunity; regardspace program). Buildings for the training of essary to accomplish that lofty goal were less of how many rockets explode on the astronauts will appear if the player begins wn right, some would launch pad, one cannot be relieved of duty research on a manned space capsule (such as argue that the most interesting and important At higher difficulty levels, the political leadthe Mercury, Gemini or Apollo capsules for aspect of the space race was the political tenership of the country may decide to sack the the U.S., and the Vostok, Voskhod, and sion and competitive interplay between the player after one too many failed missions. Soyuz space crafts for the Soviets). In the United States and the Soviet Union. From the Other preference settings include the option space museum, aspiring astronauts can take a first sputtering launch of Sputnik to the landof using a historical game model (with Soviet gander at space flight records, the current ing of Apollo 11 on the Lunar surface, both equipment seen as inexpensive and unreliprestige rating of directors, the records of of these countries were racing to assert their able, and American hardware viewed as pricey individual astronauts, and other information. ideological supremacy through a display of and dependable) along with a historical astrotechnological prowess. naut roster, replete with all the most famous of the American capital brings up an evaluastronauts — including, of course, Buzzation of the player's situation by the viceAldrin. For gamers with slower computing president, while a click on the Pentagon machinery (particularly 286 and slow 386SX brings in secret information on the status of machines), several options are available to the competitor's space program. Selecting the toggle sound, music and animation on and off to increase the speed of gameplay. Once game preferences have been ser, BUZZ ALDRIN'S BARIS begins by having newsman Carter WIN A Free Trip to the Walcrire (or a Soviet newswoman if the gamer EUS. SPACE ACADEMY decides to champion the Soviet cause) announce that the player has just been named KUSOHETSTAG RACE SIMULATORY director of the space program. After this brief Today, Interplay and its developer, Stratenews segment, the game proceeds to the main control screen, displayed as an overhead, isogic Visions, have sought to recreate those metric view of the space center of the player's hcady days of competitive spaceflight with the country. The American player begins with an arrival of Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space overhead shot of Cape Canaveral, while the (BARIS). Based on the Task Force Games boardgame LIFTOFF! designed by Fritz Soviet player sees an overhead representation of Baikonour, the Soviet version of the Cape. Bronner, BARIS places players in charge of either the Soviet or American space program In the beginning of the game, only a few beginning in the year 1957. Although the buildings are scattered across the screen, repplayer can direct the course of the space proresenting the limited initial options open to gram, all roads eventually lead to the moon: the player. The research and development the first player to send a team of astronauts complex is where new rocket systems, capMULTIMEDIA ON DESK safely to and retrieve them from the lunar sules, satellites and other space gear can be NO CONEGURED surface wins the game. designed and produced. The vehicle integrator shed assembles the disparate components TITLE: Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space POW! To The Moon! of a rocket launch (boosters, «kicker modPRICE: $59.95 ules,» capsules, et al), while mission control SYSTEMS: After hard-drive installation, the dash to the REQUIREMENTS: 286-12MHz, VGA/MCGA graphics, allows the player to set a launch timetable. lunar surface begins at the preference selec18MB of hard drive space The administration building serves as the # of PLAYERS: 1 or 2 tion screen, where players can customize the PROTECTION: nerve center of the player's space program. Documentation look-up game to their liking. Two human players can DESIGNERS: Fritz Bronner, Michael K. McCarty From this location, the player can check on PUBLISHER: Interplay choose to square off against one another as the the current budget, purchase hardware, plan Irvine, CA Soviets and the Americans, or a solitary player (714) 553-6678 may choose to match wits with a computer(LIATIBOANE IBM Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"SOUND GALAXY VIT WAS AS IF YOU WERE IN THERE! Forget about a primitive game session where gunning down a jet fighter or running away from a fire breathing dragon creates a dumb effect. And you reacted because you see it coming. If not, it's a game over for you. EASE OF INSTALLATION All configuration settings are via software without the hassle of setting jumpers. CD-QUALITY SOUND Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra change all that See and Do by giving you a whole new generation of sound technology that promises you superb CD-quality sound that match the best amplifiers and full stereo capability. SUPPORT MORE SOUND STANDARDS Let yourself go ga-ga over the full sound support for AdLib, Sound Blaster Pro, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. And you find yourself hacking away the jungle of games and entertainment software available under both DOS and Windows environment. VALUE FOR MONEY Topping it all are the bundled software such as Monologue for Windows, Voyetra Audio Station & WINDATIM OLE, just to name a few, so that you can edit audio, animate and create stunning graphics on screen. And not forgetting the free speakers that allow you to blast yourself to glory as you see your scores chalking up. So step into the world of imagination with Sound Galaxy * NX PRO Extra. MORE CD-ROM INTERFACE Besides the built in AT-BUS CD-ROM interface support for Mitsumi and Panasonic drives, the NX PRO Extra can also support the Sony AT-BUS CD-ROM drive simply by plugging the SG adaptor to the Mitsumi interface. It can be further upgraded to more powerful SCSI CD-ROM drives. Call us : 1-800-886 8859 Circle Reader Service #35 USA. Ollice: AZTECH LABS, INC. 46707 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 Head Office : AZTECH SYSTEMS PTE LTD 31 Ubi Rond 1, AVS Building, Singapore 1410. Tel : (65) 741-7211 Fax (65) 741-8678/9 Tx: RS36560 AZTECH 237808 (6519739 Tx : Rs36560 AZTECH # MATUREL All trade names A marks am requistered trademarks of mastertion campani Sharifications suchiert to change thout rrior notice "


"RESEARCH UNITS OR HANO! SAFETY FACTOR 57 BOLESTERK DEES RESEARCHERGBALLE ORTO mission. As the mission progresses, the FUTURE MISSIONS viewscreens display appropriate bits of digitBIRECT ASEET CUMAR CANDY ized footage, such as seeing an astronaut performing an actual space walk or the descent of a manned landing module towards the lunar surface. If the mission ends in disaster, the player will see actual footage of rockets exploding on the launch pad, looping back into the ground or otherwise failing to propel themselves into space. The speed of these tiny LITORAL digitized animations is rather slow-even on my 486DX/2-66MHz these mini-movies run he capital imparts to the at just a few frames per second — but they gamer how much of the lunar surface has been add a great deal to the game. reconnoitered and mapped by probes and Seeing astronauts finally walk on the lunar telescopes. After the player has performed all surface requires that players be able to manage of the actions deemed necessary for this turn, disparate and often conflicting tasks. Keeping clicking on a flag located in the compound astronauts trained and satisfied while painsends the player's turn and hands control over takingly testing and retesting new space to his or her opponent. There are two turns equipment particularly equipment deeach year: one Spring and Fall segment, each signed to carry humans — can be quite a six-months long. challenge. If a player achieves certain objecAs director, the player's command options tives before an opponent, that player is given are unfectered by any unrealistic program a bonus in prestige, an increased budget and limitations. Players can essentially choose improved astronaut morale. Juggling the agtheir own missions and decide which space gressive impulse to be the first at everything programs to develop. Instead of taking the with the cautious patience demanded for Mercury-Gemini-Apollo route of manned manned space missions can be an arduous spaceflight to the moon, players can pump all task at best. An unmanned test of a new of their research funds into the Jupiter procapsule which goes awry simply costs money; gram, a massive four-person spacecraft that a mission where the hardware fails and kills could land directly onto the moon without three astronauts exacts a much higher cost in requiring the complex lander/command money, morale and prestige. Sticking to small module docking procedures that the Apollo missions such as unmanned planetary flybys program did. Regardless of what programs and probe landings may be safe, but won't probe landings may be safe, but won't the player chooses, getting to the moon is not generate the increase in funds and prestige an overnight process. Since the player is venthat successful manned projects do. There is turing into virgin territory, early missions will a fine line between victory and ignominious tend to be chancy at best. As the game condefeat in BARIS, and potential space directors tinues the player amasses a wealth of scientific would be wise to learn the dimensions of that data about spaceflight, which results in more boundary well. reliable launches and spacecraft operations. To aid gamers in their quest to be the first From the launch of the first unmanned or to collect moon rocks, the game offers several bital satellite to putting men on the moon, a forms of context-sensitive, on-line help. well-structured program of extensive testing Pressing the F1 key brings up a help box that including \"dummy,\" or unmanned resting describes the current screen, F2 displays all of manned spacecraft -is essential. If the relevant keyboard commands, and F3 preplayer skips vital mission steps (such as not sents a list of mission abbreviations. If gamers testing a lunar lander before it carries astroprefer the use of a mouse, clicking the right nauts), the probability of failure will increase. mouse button performs the same function as pressing the F1 key. For even more informaMultimedia Moon Launches tion, players can look to the documentation After researching, developing and testing included with BARIS: a pithy 41-page rule space hardware, the actual launching of a book and a photo-filled 130+ page fact book. space mission is where the player gets to see The former describes the operation of the whether his efforts will result in brilliant sucgame, while the latter serves as excellent backcess or abject failure. When everything is prepared for launch, the player ends the current turn of play. Then, after being given one last chance to abort the mission, the player is whisked off to the mission control screen. Composed of a large central monitor flanked by four smaller viewscreens, mission control is where players get to watch the mission and hold their breath. For launches, BARIS uses digitized animation of actual NASA and Soviet footage to illustrate the progress of the ground information on the space race beTween the Soviets and the Americans. Fascinating reading, the fact book chronicles the development of the American and Soviet programs, from the first feeble attempts at space (Sputnik and Explorer) to the projects that never were such as the Soviet manned lunar expedition and the huge, 4-man Jupiter spacecraft mentioned earlier. Moths In the Command Module As polished as the documentation is, a few minor blemishes exist in the program itself. Hard drive installation can take a considerable amount of time on slower machines; users with slow '286 and '386 systems may have to wait through a 40-minute installation process. Once installed, however, the game runs surprisingly well. During the computer's thinking phase, the game screen blacks out. Striking the enter key or space bar will make the screen eventually reappear. For the screen blackout bug and Other minor bug fixes, Interplay has announced that an update is now available. Interested users can visit Interplay's forums on American Online, Compuserve and GEnie to download the fix. The Interplay BBS is another route, and users without modems can contact Interplay technical support directly. Splash Down BARIS is undoubtedly the best attempt yet at bringing the excitement of the Apollo lunar landings to the computer screen. Fritz Bronner is obviously well-versed in the history and procedures of space flight, and his interest evinces itself by the rigorous attention to detail exhibited in the game. The digitized NASA footage is one of the highlights of the program, although some gamers may wish to see more and longer clips. For this reason, BARIS cries out for a CD-ROM version. The immense storage capacity and crisp audio quality of compact disk would ensure that a much larger quantity and quality of digitized NASA footage could be incorporated into the game. CD-ROM wishes and program blemishes aside, BARIS is a game that should appeal to anyone with even a casual interest in space exploration. Players looking for a thoughtfully designed strategy game of the space race between the Soviets and the Americans should find BARIS a gaming experience not to be missed. CGW PITCOPE Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"A masusime AT SORINORTM ALLE BANNER kt. Strategic Ambush Simulation from the Makers of Siege! corinor's forests are dark and gloomy and full of dangers. But you took Clan Sernevan's money, and it's up to you to protect their princess on her journey. You peer over the shoulder of a wary swordsman into a clearing. As you're deciding whether it's safe to enter, you hear a branch snap on the trail behind! Orcs flood into the clearing! Boulders fly from the trees! Ambush at Sorinor! 4  Play a mercenary captain in a world of intrigue! Accept missions galore from the six Clan chiefs to make money and enemies! een OOOOOO  Command dozens of troop types hiding invisibly or charging in the open! Beware of traps, and set your own!  Design your own missions and create your own maps! MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual IBM VGA screen photos. Circle Reader Service #82 "


"Deview Where No Carmen Has Gone Before Broderbund's where in Space is Carmen Sandiego? by Clarles Ardoi Tust imagine the frequent flier miles she must collect. First, jetsetting around the world; then taking a cross-country tour of the United States, then visiting era after his torical era via time machine; and now hopping from planet to planet across the solar \" system. When does this woman sleep? Yes, Carmen Sandiego is back, together with a larcenous gang of extraterrestrials. This time, instead of stealing the pyramids of Egypt, they're after bigger game: the rings of Neptune, the elliptical orbit of Halley's Comet, and any other astronomical booty on which they can lay their sticky fingers, pincers, and/or pseudopods. All that stands between the thieves and the treasures of the night sky is the Intergalactic Division of the ACME Detective Agency. Three guesses who their best agent is. and stars, so that the task of locating a constellation on a star map or identifying one of Jupiter's moons from a piece of trivia about it becomes second nature. To help in the familiarization process, each location one visits appears on the screen (usually as a digitized photograph) along with a paragraph or two of text about it. The game also contains an illustrated on-line database of astronomical facts and comes packed with the Peterson First Guide To Astronomy as an off-line primer. Thus, even someone who goes into the experience a complete novice will emerge from playing this game an expert of sorts. One will know for instance, that \"Halley's comet is shaped like a lumpy potato.\" One will know that Voltaire and Jonathan Swift have been immortalized as features on the moons of Mars because of fiction they wrote in which the moons of Mars appeared. One will know that Arthur C. Clarke wrote 2001, A Space SERIMENPIXWAS THUGH THE GALA Carmen Get It Players familiar with previous episodes in the Carmen Sandiego saga will slide into the seat of their Cosmohopper 911 Turbo as though it were their favorite easy chair. Chasing Carmen around the solar system is, one quickly discovers, pretty much like chasing her anywhere else. The interface looks slightly more futuristic than before, and the tools are more space-oriented, but in all the important ways it's the same game. For those who are unfamiliar with Broderbund's idèe fixe, a summary is in order. To begin with, catching Carmen's gang, and not Carmen herself, is the first order of business. There are 14 of these unsavory characters (they look like refugees from the Mos Eisley cantina), each with a set of characteristics that makes him, her or it unique. For instance, each criminous creature has a favorite astronomer and science fiction author; each has a certain diet and mode of locomotion; and each has certain physical characteristics such as hair, wings, scales or eyes. As one pursues a fleeing perpetrator, one gets snippets of information from witnesses and informants which one uses to narrow the field of suspects. When the field is narrowed to a single suspect (which sometimes requires only one clue, sometimes three or four), the player receives a warrant for that criminal's arrest. The rest of the game involves tracking the criminal from planet to planet and moon to moon following arrail of cryptic clues left behind in radio transmissions and conversabehind in radio fran tions overheard by witnesses. These clues contain bits of information not about the criminal but about the location toward which the criminal was last seen headed. After about four correct hops from place to place, and assuming that the player has a warrant made our in the correct name, one catches up with the criminal and puts him, her or it in the slammer. Then, it's back to the Chief (an insectoid alien who speaks in digitized chirps) for one's next assignment. After every few successful cases, the player is raised a level, which means a new job title and more difficult clues. Early in the game, many of the location clues actually contain, in either anagram or pun form, the name of the location to which one must travel. So a clue that contains the words \"RAMS ARMS\" leads one to Mars, «PEN TUNE» directs the player to Neptune, and \"He said he wanted to visit someone named Karen\" sends one speeding off to Pluto's moon, Charon. As one gains experience, the clues become increasingly obscure, first referring to the mythological and literary characters after which many planetary features have been named, and eventually referring to topological features such as circumference, the names of craters, and distances between two celestial objects. Another example of the increasing difficulty levels can be seen in the star map sequences. In order to track down some of the \"radio signals,\" one has to locate constellations on a derailed star map. Initially, one is given both latitude and longitude for the desired constellation; after a few levels, the game drops one of these pieces of information; and, ultimately, the game supplies only the name (\"Incoming transmission from Capricornus!\") and leaves the player to find the constellation on his or her own. The idea, of course, is that as the player progresses in the game he or she should become increasingly familiar with the planets 2:10 IsCarinen Studiego TITLE: Where in Space is Carmen Sandiego? PRICE: $79.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz, VGA, 8 MB HD space PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS. Bob Arient, John Baker, Michael Barrett, Christa Beeson, Michelle Bushnelf, Jim Everson, Ken Goldstein, Lance Groody, Tom Rettig, David Ross PUBLISHER: Broderbund Novato, CA (415) 382-4400 Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"3 Sound BLASTER BLASTER BLASTER BLASTER Whether it's the menacing snarl of a chainsaw or the banshee scream of your F-1 Tomcat, just remember: it isn't real. Until you hear it on a Sound Blaster.\" Sound Blaster fidelity adds a whole new dimension to PC games, not to mention multimedia and other applications. And Sound Blaster is compatible with more of your software than any other audio card. No wonder it's the best selling sound board of all time. So when you're ready to hear what your games really sound like, get in touch with your Sound Blaster dealer today. Or call us direct at 1-800-998-5227. Or we may just have to send Bruno over to persuade vou. LAVE CREATE From games to stereo midtimedia to full-blown, CD-quality 16-bit Advanced Signal Processing andio...we've got the Sound Blaster for you.  Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Ltd. Sound Blaster and the Sound Blaster and Creative Labs logos are trademarks of Creative Labs, Inc. All specifications subject to change without notice. International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore, TEL 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. Sound Sound CREATIVE BLASTER CREATIVE LABS, INC. You never heard it so real. Circle Reader Service #46 "


"Deveu It is the animation that steals the show, of player is likely to click his way past these course, as should be the case. After all, it's the animations as well. reward one gets for doing anything right. Then there are the Chief's ear-grinding Find a constellation on the star map and that chirps and the not-especially-soothing engine constellation rotates into view and comes to thrum that accompanies space travel, both of life. Pursue a bad guy successfully to his next which one will probably want to escape after stopping point and a mini-cartoon is shown the first few repetitions. Even such nice fillips in which an enemy agent gets his slapsticky as the way a planet drifts gently onto the comeuppance. screen when one arrives seem unnecessarily These cartoons are grear fun, parodying time-consuming after one has visited each everything from The Three Stooges through location several times. 2001 ro vintage arcade games. There are also gags that don't parody anything in particular Odyssey and that the constellation Cassiopeia but which are clever enough to win a smile is supposed to resemble a seated woman. from the sourest curmudgeon: an amoeba (Anyone who looks up at a bunch of stars and spies the player's ship and, in terror, splits in thinks they look like a woman has been away two; a gum-chewing spacewoman blows a from real women too long, methinks.) One bubble inside her helmet and loses control of will also know that Mercury's surface temher scooter when the bubble bursts; a one-ton perature reaches 800 degrees Fahrenheit, that weight released above the player's ship drifts the Viking spacecraft traveled to Mars in harmlessly away due to the absence of gravity. 1976, and that the Moon's orbit is tilted five There is only one problem with the cardegrees with respect to the Earth's. toons — as many of them as there are (I 1 2 3 Of what use all this information is, I am not counted 16), there aren't enough. The game certain. We live in an information-worshiphas several levels, each containing several misping culture; our cups runneth over with data, sions, and each mission requiring several carFortunately, the game allows the player to data and more data. It matters not a jot in my toons. Yet, the game keeps doling out the cut these sequences short, too. One wonders, life whether the Moon's orbit is tilted five, same animations, apparently selected at ranthough, what one is playing the game for if rather than four or six, degrees; and all other dom from a fairly small pool. After a handful mall pool. After a handful one is aborting the animations, clicking past things being equal, I'd rather not know. My of missions, one has seen them all several the travel sequences, and silencing all the head is already too cluttered with things I times. characters who can talk. Is it that the puzzles don't need. are so much fun? Not really. They are fine, The surprising and wonderful thing is that The earlier Carmen Sandiego games taught they actually do stand up to repeat viewing but after a while even these become repetitive players things that are clearly of some value: because the same clues get used over and over. The gags are so quick and funny that seeing where countries are located on their planet them just once doesn't satisfy. However, there None of this reflects on the game's qu and who lives there, what happened in their is a limit to how many times anyone wants to which is quite high, but rather on its longevpast and when. Even in those games the emsee the see the same gag repeated. For some people it ity, which is low. Younger gamers may come phasis on memorization of trivia was somewill be twice, for some ten times, but at some back to it on more occassions than older ones, what annoying, but at least the trivia had point every player will yawn and say, \"Oh, but even kids will notice eventually that they some claim to relevance. With Where in Space that one again\" and terminate the animation have run out of new things to do and see. This is Carmen Sandiego?, the connection is more with a click of the mouse button. will happen, I predict, long before they \"win\" tenuous. The same can be said for the animations the game by catching all the criminals. Still, for those whose heads are less cluttered that illustrate the alien informants and conSo, while Where in Space is Carmen Santhan mine, or who are more patient than I stellations. There are only three informants in diego? is a worthy addition to the line in the am, or who have an appetite for astronomy the game, each of whom has only one animasense that it is both educational and entertainthat can be sated by nothing less than knoww tion, so their gags wear thin that much faster. ing. it gives the impression of being somehow ing the surface temperature on Mercury, try. Th They also speak in dissonant burps and caws Where in Space is Carmen Sandiego? delivers less impressive and less satisfying than its which are quite grating to hear. The constelthe goods. The game's intended audience of predecessors. Maybe it's that, while every lations have even briefer and simpler animacurious kids — like my brother who, at age country looks and sounds unique, one moon t age tions, and again just one apiece. Once one has five, memorized the names of all the bones in looks very much like every other. The earlier seen Hercules wave his club, one has seen the human body — will probably eat it up. games all feel bigger than this one does, which everything Hercules is going to do. (Some, is ridiculous when one compares the amount One Small Step for Carmen such as the animation for Crux, the cross, are of territory covered in each.) Maybe it's that even simpler.) After a half dozen missions, the Those of us who are less curious (or less astronomy has a narrower appeal than either hungry) may still be wowed, at least for a terrestrial geography or history. Or maybe it's while, by the package's bells and whistles. In just that the fourth time one plays what is addition to the digitized pictures mentioned essentially the same game, new pictures and a above (mainly cribbed from NASA photo and new subject aren't enough to make it feel new. animation archives), the game provides an original soundtrack which, though it won't Whatever the reason, Carmen seems to be sell any records, won't sell any carplugs, feeling the effects of middle age. Where in either; a variety of ambient sound effects to Space is Carmen Sandiego? is a slick, profesaccompany blastoffs, landings, and the like; sional piece of work which will make some an on-board computer that speaks to the players very happy, but it seems to lack the player in English and a bevy of aliens who staying power of the carlier games. Where in speak their own weird languages; and loads of Space is Carmen Sandiego? is perfectly good. OD animation. It simply isn't stellar. Cow Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"$5.00 REBATE A SERIOUS DISCUSSION OF CHESS IN THE 41ST CENTURY. Q: How has the classic game advanced in your time? A: It's about time you checked your mate, kingie. People in the 41st Century have brains the size of basketballs. So when we want a challenging game of chess, we want a true challenge, and that's BATTLE CHESS 4000TM Q: But what specifically sets you apart from the others? A: We have beauty, brains, and a sense of humor. Our gorgeous SVGA graphics are stunning. Our sophisticated chess algorithm rivals even Chessmaster\", and our library starts at 300,000 moves and learns as it plays. And when it comes to humor, well, only a maniac would laugh at anything else. We have moves that our competition can only dream about. And just wait until you hear our incredible digitized sound effects ... Q: So is BATTLE CHESS 4000» really the chess game of the future? A: You must be ready for a Fool's Mate, Kingie. BATTLE CHESS 4000TM is available today, at your local software retailer. Don't listen to a maniac with a wimpy algorithm and boring animations, or to someone who thinks you have to be serious to be smart. BATTLE CHESS 4000TM is the only computer chess game that's good enough for the 41st Century. BATTLE CHESS 4000TM Tomorrow's chess game, today. BATT CHESS 400D For more information on BATTLE CHESS 4000TM call 1-800-969-GAME -------------------------------------Buy BATTLE CHESS 4000T at any store including those listed below and we'll send you $5! Fill out the coupon, include your original receipt, and mail to: INTERPLAY PRODUCTIONS BATTLE CHESS 4000 REBATE 5070 Santa Fe Street, San Diego, CA 92109 Name Street Address City State Store Where Purchased Zip  electronics Babbage's EGGHEAD SOFTWARE Interplay Productions, Inc. boutique 17922 Fitch Avenue Product must be purchased by 10/31/93. Rebate Expires 12/31/93. Allow 6-8 weeks for rebate. Irvine, CA 92714 01993 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. BATTLE CHESS 4000 is a trademark of Interplay Productions, Inc. Circle Reader Service #69 "


"Scorpion's View Eye of the Beholder III: Hit or Myth-Demeanor? AclRC DHE DEL sss TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: Eye of the Beholder Ill: Assault on Myth Drannor $69.95 IBM 386-20 MHz, VGA graphics, IMB RAM for sound, 9.5 MBs hard drive space Documentation Look-up Nicholas Beliaeti, David A. Lucca, John Miles Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Characters can be brought over from EOB II, creared new for this Ten years ago, in the fated July August 1983 edition of game, or you can go with the Quickstart party provided in the first Computer Gaming World, the mysterious Scorpia invaded the save slot. New characters, and those in the Quickstart group, come in pages of our august (not to be confused with August, necessarat levels 9-11, and have mainly +1 equipment. Actual starting level ily) publication for the first time. Since the current issue of depends on whether a character is single or multi-classed. My CGW will bear the cover date of August and will actually hit Dwarven fighter started at 11th level, while the Half-Elf newstands in July, it seems like a tremendous opportunity to Fighter/Magic-User began at 9/10, respectively. offer a tribute to one of the most famous voices in the world of If you bring over your old party from EOB II, they will keep most computer role-playing and adventure. To Scorpia: May you of their goodies, including high-level armor and weapons. Some items keep your mind and pen sharp, while you continue to savage that were specific to the previous game, such as stone portal keys, will on-screen Foozles and game design foibles. Long live the queen not make the transition. Since you don't need them anyway, they are of computer gaming, not just Scorpia the First, but Scorpia the no big loss. Only. One thing to watch out for is the way the party will be brought over. You don't get a choice of characters; the transfer utility simply picks ssault on Myth Drannor is the third and concluding chapter of the first four characters from the indicated save game and brings them the Eye of The Beholder (EOB) series. As with the previous in. This could be a problem, as you may end up with characters you games, it is a pretty straightforward hack-and-puzzle romp don't want, or lose items you want to bring over that happen to be with the usual \"Kill the Foozle\" finale. In this case, the party is set with someone in the back ranks. down in the middle of a graveyard. From there, the characters make Fortunately, you do get a choice of save games from which to extract their way through a forest to the ruins of Myth Drannor to confront the characters. If one save doesn't have what you want, try another. If the various evil beings that now infest what's left of the city. As you none are satisfactory, you may want to consider reinstalling EOB IL might expect, there are quite a lot of them running around. and arranging the characters and items as you desire. While the city is fairly large and has some goodies tucked away here My own recommendation is to bring your party over from Legend and there, most of the game will be spent going through the Mages of Darkmoon if you can; failing that, create a new one. Transferred Guild and the Temple of Lathandar, which is the game's conclusion. characters, particularly with Don't be misled by that, however; while there are not and those potent +3 to +5 weapons, many different locations, none of them can be described will have a much easier time of as «small.\" The Guild, for instance, is deceptive. It goes it, especially at the beginning. on for much longer than it first appears, complete with Combat is much the same as a number of underground water passages. before, but a couple of longThis also means you'll want plenty of graph paper awaited improvements have handy, as there is no auto-mapping in the game. Since been made. The first is the Allthese areas are big, you can't really skip the mapping Attack mode. This nifty feature NA unless you happen to have a photographic memory. allows for simultaneous strikes Fortunately, once the local inhabitants have been disby as many members of the patched, you can explore in peace; in most places, they WILL SHOW THE WAY party as you wish, provided they don't regenerate. Will have the proper weapons. For Ertant LETBC Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best for less JEGENDS  PAST\" PTM \"...A remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) \"...no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) Now you can play the award-winning multi-player online game Legends of Future Past for as little as $1.80 per hour! Ureate your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting, intrepid and interesting people who populate these everexpanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches — even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. New Lower Rates: $9.95 a month includes five (5) hours online time. Additional hours charged at $1.80 hour total via direct dial and Internet, or $3.60 hour total fee via CNS local dialups. No surcharge for connecting at 9600 baud or during daytime hours. If you are on Internet: telnet to novalink.com, or write info@novalink.com.  No special software required.  Toll free number customer service and technical support.  All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older to use NovaLink.  American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. ...and you can try it free! Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City-State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. Nova link. uolink Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence. Not only will you interact with people just like yourself you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come try it for yourself. Circle Reader Service #112 MAKING THE WORLD A BIT SMALLER 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info P.O. Box 11, Shrewsbury, MA 01545 "


"ecoCO So MCT FOOD CAMP Sorel Elantra uir NOUS instance, the front rank is using swords and screen, which displays level, class, stats, exthe back rank is using bows. When \"All-Atperience, etc., cannot be read at all, except tack» is hit, everyone strikes at once. IS TOTI for the numbers themselves. This does not, however, apply to spells or Interiors show a depressing lack of variery, magic items. To cast a spell, or use a wand, and many seem to have been lifted wholesale you still have to click on the spellbook, holy from the evil temple of EOB II, with little symbol, wand in hand, or whatever. For all done to change them or dress them up. The that, with the new attack mode, it is now closest to novelty are the air bubbles that possible to have everyone in the party do KIKLIS drift by in the underwater passages and the something constructive (or destructive, desun doors in the Temple of Lathandar. pending on your viewpoint) in the same orang Aurally, the game is a nightmare. Monsters round. Generally, because there is still that announce their presence long before they are \"hesitation\" when a spell goes off, it is best to do a physical attack visible, with enough noise to wake the dead three countries over. The followed by a magical one. tension produced in the first two games by the subtle use of sound The other improvement is the ability to use polearms from the effects is completely destroyed here by thunderous clanks, rumbles, second rank. This one is more of interest to parties coming in with slitherings and similar noises. At times, I turned the sound off simply such a weapon already (like the +5 halberd from EOB I), since it wasn't because it was too much to endure. until fairly late in the game that I came across a halberd in Myth The puzzles and obstacles are, for the most part, standard EOB fare, Drannor. The staff is not considered a polearm, and can only be used but there are a couple of rather nasty situations. One occurs in the from the front rank. water tunnels, where a particular section is full of anti-magic zones, These two changes do make fighting a little easier. If you have (or several of them unavoidable. Walking into a zone cancels all spells, once you have) powerful weapons, that is +3 or better, it is only the and naturally the party begins drowning from lack of air. The influmost hardy opponent that will last beyond a single round of combat. ence of these zones extends beyond the actual spot stepped on, such Of course, when faced with multiple critters at the same time, your that spells fizzle when they are attempted. party will have to engage in the famous \"dance of death,\" hitting and So, the characters are now running around an unfamiliar area, slowly moving away, with one hand on the mouse and the other on the arrow dying, fighting off monsters, and casting spells every couple of steps, keys. keys. trying to find a place where magic will work before everyone dies off. Save slots have been expanded and allow for There is one Helm of Water Breathing a total of 12 positions. The Quickstart party down here; I used it to keep a Fighter/Magic is pre-saved in slot 1; if you aren't going to be User alive to map out the section and cast using this group, you can use the slot for spells to find the limits of the anti-magic saving your own party. zones. Then, I restored the game and raced Puzzles are similar to those in previous the party through to the spot where magic games, involving buttons, levers, pressure worked again, and that way I managed to plates, special items, and quite a few false keep everyone alive. walls. The True Seeing spell is therefore imThere is another frustrating situation in portant, especially in the Mages Guild; unless the water passages. At one point, an outlet you enjoy walking into walls to see if they're sweeps the party into a dead end, which real or not, this is one spell you should have appears to have no exit. In fact, there isa way active as often as possible. out. Unfortunately, the button that opens New critters to fight abound, including Ogre Slugs, Undead Beasts, the exit is indistinguishable from the rest of the wall. You have to click Nagas, Watch Ghosts, Slithermorphs, Death Knights, Feyrs, and blindly all over the face to find it. Naturally, you don't know which Living Muck, among others. The Mucks are actually one of the nastier wall is the right one, so you have to try all of them, hoping that you monster types, as any weapon (even magical) striking a Living Muck don't miss the button, which is an easy thing to do. has an excellent chance of dissolving away. These creatures are best The big fight at the end is a letdown. While \"Foozle\" has a couple dispatched with Hold Monster followed by a small barrage of coldof Death Knights and Shadow Hounds with him, these are easily based spells (Cone of Cold is very good here). removed from the scene (especially if you have a Time Stop spell), Spells for mages go up to 9th level of power, but it is unlikely that leaving the party to concentrate on the big boy alone. Supposedly a anyone in your party will be casting these from memory. A 9th level god in mortal form, he gave us far less trouble than Dran Draggore spell requires an 18th level mage which, in turn, requires three million in The Legend of Darkmoon. experience points. That adds up to a lot more combat than most which is not to say he just rolls over and dies; he can easily trash people care to indulge in, so save the higher-level spell scrolls for the group if you're not careful. Still, it didn't take much waltzing in-hand use rather than adding them right away to a spellbook. around the room to polish him off (with no character in my party Since Myth Drannor is the closcout of higher than 11th level). As a grand finale, this left a little something the EOB series, one would expect it to be to be desired. on the spectacular aside. Unfortunately, Overall then, Assault on Myth Drannor is a for several reasons, that isn't the case. disappointment. While a few much-needed Graphically, the game is not on a par improvements have been made, they aren't with the previous two. Wherever you are enough to balance out the rest of the game. the forest, the city, the guild, the temple Deficient in graphics and sound effects, mothe area is dark and murky. While it notonous in parts (especially the forest), and could be considered an indication of evil with a major confrontation that is more Making your way through the forest you.coms ypon srcat tomb influence, after a time this dreary sameness fizzle than sizzle, EOB III just doesn't stack becomes boring. Worse yet, this darkness up against the previous two games. What affects the character display. The invenstarted as a series with great promise has, alas, tory screen is fine, but the informational ended on a mediocre note. cow, H The S ied Prior continue. We were sent here to inuestite T C Derfor har running About the runs a crossed t.endia the PSUC Tones would definitely th would definitelyt e sort of dCVIOUS plot is in the making. Who or warran O scarcely se nap thao you orfer gréisty apprECIN ty appreciated around n d 3000 lud consecrated to che en warriors of Huth Orarinon Ancient Doushs high abouc cast shadows Cuerywhere, which shit and darken in the Brip or a sudden, icy wind. Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"Return of the Phantom Spectre RETURN An animated PHANTOM graphic adventure Shrouded in the mystery surrounding the Phantom of the Opera. Features ongrossing und unusual storyline. The latest in computcr, cinemagraphic and technological advances. You are Inspector Montand, a Paris police detective, who begins his adventure in 1993 and somehow falls into the supernatural world of 1881. You must rescue your girlfriend by gaining entrance to the Phantom of the Opero's lair, avoiding his diabolical traps and solving his clusive puzzles (For IBM DOS) Spectre Supreme is sequel to the best selling cyberspace combat/ action game. Contend with slicers, auto gun turrets and hunter Killers, Your deadly enemies now use radar shielding and optical cloaking. Fortunately, you now command smart missiles, seekers, proximity mines and spinners. Get ready for the hottest electronic adrenaline rush you'll ever experience! (For Mac) Spectre PC delivers advanced simulation technology featuring full color graphics, breathtaking scenery with fluid 3D animo tion, Customizable battle craft design. High quality digitized sounds (For IBM DOS) Spectre Supreme $38 Spectre PC $32 Publisher: Velocity 800-228-7449 XI. EXT. 322 Publisher: Mirtoprose $38 CD-7th Guest El-Fish The Lost Treasure of Infocom Vol. 1 Betrayal at Krondor Henry Staufis an evil toy maker whose work holds a sinister secret. When a series of children die in mysterious circumstances cfter buying his toys, the local commu nity begins to ask questions and the plot thickens when Stauf himself meets an untimely demise. The gomo begins when six guests are anonymously summoned to the late toymaker's remoto hilltop mansion, now eerily vacant (For IBM) Publisher: Virgin Your perfect opportunity to generate an exciting, life-like electronic aquari um Employs the latest grophics rendering tech nology that helps you create realis tic looking fully animated images that look and swim as if they were real lish hugging coral reefs in the Caribbean. Make your own colorful aquarium filled with unusual objects shells, castles, mermaids...and populated by colorful and dazzling, seem ingly three dimensional fish (for IBM DOS) A fortune of interactive mystery fantasy, and science fiction adventures. The big name games you love to play... hundreds of dollars worth in one value packed collector's edition Explore underground labyrinths, sorcerers climbers, lost space stations, and more! Hours of spino tingling suspense...brain teas ing puzzles...sidesplining comedy 20 titles you'll treasure in your software library For IBM DOS and Mac) Step into Dynamix first full-on Fantasy/ Role Playing game, based on Raymonds E. Feist's critically acclaimed Riftwar novels Sectoral which have sold over a million nomist copies worldwide. Room the world at Midkemia in different roles, untangling the mysteries of many sub-plots and mini adventures. Provides smooth and realistic animation Advanced combat intelligence makes confrontations more realistic and challenging Multiple paths lead to different events and conclusions, with characters battling an ancient evil with spells and weapons. Publisher: Sierra $46 for CD ROM $55 Publisher: Maxis $36 Publisher: Activision $42 $38 800-228-7449 EXT| FAX: 508-443-5645 JOYSTICKS/CARDS IBM EDUCATION Procom Ext 375ms (Phillip) Procom Int. 200ms (Toshiba) Procom Int 325ms Phillip KidDesk ... logo Writer Math Rabbit Enhanced Millie's Math House... Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA Playroom w/Sound Rock & Boch Studio.............. SAT Personal Trainer....... TreeHouse... . . Where in Space is Carmen Delux... Wild Science Arcade Auto Insight Betty Crocker Cookbook Windows... Flicks Micro Kitchen Companion Window... Print Shop Deluxe Comic Characters..... Print Shop Deluxe Windows ............ EXT. FAX: 508-443-5645 800-220-1444 322 Voice: 508-443-6125 Computer Express 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 FR: DO --* ! FAX:0011-508-443-5645, Xit.CompuServeID:70007, 15342 Blatt  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS SPEAKERS IBM HOME SOFTWARE World Tour Tennis ........ AMIGA RECREATION X-Wing... IBM RECREATION Flight Stick... GameCard III Automatic.......... GameCard III MCA Automatic Thrustmaster ACM Game Cord. Thrustmaster Pro Flight Chl Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Thrustmaster Upgrade F15/F117A Thrustmaster Upgrade Falcon Thrustmaster Weapon Control Thunderstock Koss HD-6 MPC Speakers...... Koss Speaker Pair HD 4... Koss Speakers Amplified HD 1 Labtec Speakers SS-700 A Train.......... ..... Couso. Civilization Dune.. Homer Assault.......... Human's Like You've Never Seen Legend of Kyrandio Out of this World Pinball Fantasies... SimAnt. SimCity Strip Poker III............. Strip Poker Ill #6 Data Disk. Wine Commander....... CD Animals MPC VERSION CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble.... CD-Beauty and the Beast MPC CD Cinemania Movie Guide WIND CD-Compton's Enc Comp. Upg CD-Curse of Enchantia................ CD Eco Quest Search for Cetus... CD Global Explorer CD Guinness bisk Records MPC 1993... CD-Just Grandma & Me... CD King's Quest VI.. CD-Laura Bow II.... CD-Leisure Suit Larry I Window ... CD-MPC Wizard Diagnostic.... CD Mantis Expertimental......... CD Musical Instruments CD-PC Karaoke CD Photo CD Access Windows CD ProPhone 1993 CD-Sleeping Beauty Storybook CD-Spoce Quest IV...... CD Ultimal VI. CD WinCD Professional.......... CD Wolf Pack............. ... CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble.. CD Beauty and The Beast CD-Guinness Disk Records 1993. CD-Iron Helix CD-Journeyman Project CD-Just Grandma & Me... CD Photo CD Access Macintosh CD Sherlock Detective Volume 3. CD Spaceship Warlock. CD-Vital Valerio Directors. Chinon CDS 435 Internal Drive..... 320 Chinon CDX-435 External Drive.................455 Edutainment Int. 16-bit kil..... 517 Explorer Upgrade Kit 363 Fusion CD (Internal)............... 514 NEC CD Express External IBM Procom Ext. 200ms (Toshiba) MAC RECREATION CD-ROM TITLES 8888QNN IBM RECREATION AD&D Dark Sun Shattered tands AD&D Eye of the Beholder Ill........ Aces of Pacific 1946 WWII Miss.... Aces of the Pacific VGA Aces over Europ.... . Alone in the Dark ............ Blue Force........... .... Bridge Master ........... Caesar Car and Driver ... ... Carrier Strike.............. Civilization Comanche: Mission Disk Comanche. Mission Disk II.... Comanche Maximum Overkill Command HQ Classic Conquered Kingdoms. Dacmonsgatel: Dorovans Key Dorklands VGA Day of the Tentacle: Maniac II Dragon's Lair III..... Dune Il Eco Quest II: Rainforest Eight Ball Deluxe... Empire Deluxe F-15 Strike Eagle III..... F 19 Stealth Fighter Classic... Falcon 3.0....... ....... Family Fun Pak w/Free Castaway..... Goblins ll:The Prince Buffoon Grand Canyon Upgrade..... Hardball ........ ... ..... HardBall Big League Parks HardBall ll Player Disk Hoyles Book of Game 1 Classic... Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Japan Scenery Upgrade......... Jet Fighter II Tadical Bundle King's Quest VI-VGA Legacy Realm of Terror.......... Legends of Volour..... Lemmings II..... Links 386 Pro Links 386 Pro Banff Springs Links Mauna Kea Course SVGA Lunar Commander Mantis Experimental Fighter...... Mantis Speech Pack...... Michael Jordan Flight........ Microsoh Flight Simulator 40 National Lampoons Chess Maniac Patriol... Pirates! Gold................... Populous .... .. Prince of Persia II.... Prophecy Rags to Riches Railroad Tycoon Classic .... Red Storm Rising Classic Rome:Pathway to Power..... Scenery Upgrode Bundle.... Sid Meir's Trilogy....... Silent Service II Classic... SimAnt for Windows SimCity Windows. SimCity/Graphics Set #1/Guide. SimEarth Windows Simlife for Windows... Space Quest V Street Fighter II.... .. Strike Commander VGA Strike Commander Speech Pack Tony Lurussa Baseball II.... Tony Carussal. AlNL Stodrums. Tony LaRussa Il Fantasy Draft Ultima Underworld it lateyrinth.. Ultima VII Part 2.Serpent Islo Ultima Vil:Forge Vitive Add On Ultrobots... Wing Commander ....... Wing Commander llc Wing Commander ll Speech Disk Wollenstein I Spear of Destiny....... World Circuit Grand Prix.......... X-Wing Mission I... Bill Elliot's Noscur Challenge... Capitalist Pig Carriers At War ......... Civilization........ Cognito Eight Ball Deluxe Pinball Falcon MC. Freddy Pharkas Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis ... King's Quest VI.... Legend of Kyrandia. Lemmings. Might & Magic III........... Out of this World S.C. Out.. Simlife Tesserge... Trump Castle il... Uncharted Waters V for Victory III Mt Garden Gravis Ultrasound ......... Port Able Sound Plus... Pro Audio Studio 16.. Pro AudioSpectrum 16.... Sound Blaster 16 Sound Blaster 16 ASP Sound Blaster Deluxe Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe Sound Blaster Pro Microchannel SoundMon 16. Viva Maestro 16VR... Voice Blaster WinSound 16. IBM 123 136 43 210 SOUND CARDS 216 MAC CD-ROM TITLES 78 s ....64 DRIVES Orders accepted on our toll free number Mon-Sat 8.30 to 6:30 EST VISA Same day shipping on in-stock items Continental US shipments: UPS Ground Handling Charge $3. Airborne Overnight S7. International shipments: UPS Express cost based on weight. Canadian, APO, FPO shipments: US Mail cost based on weight. No sales tax except for MA add 5%. Personal checks accepted, allow 5 business days for processing, NO COD) Products covered by manufacturer's warranty. Defectives replaced immediately. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. All specials and promotions limited while supplies last Educational government and corporate purchase orders welcome. 15% restocking fee on non-defective returns A 649 Circle Reader Senice #43 "


"e peunew Promises, Promises Spectrum HoloByte's Chess Maniac 5 Billion and 1 by Jay Kee he header on the back of the box reads: goddess\" that appears occasionally across the board. \"Great minds invented chess. Warped minds But players shouldn't worry — they aren't missing invented Chess Maniac! No argument here. much. National Lampoon's Chess Maniac 5 Billion and I, Chess Maniac promises \"60 outlandish ways for Spectrum Holo Byte's entry in the \"chess for one piece to take another.» Depending on one's laughs\" category, is definitely warped. And that's definition of outlandish, the program delivers. Or about the best thing that can be said for it. It's the not. There is a disturbing theme of violence undersort of thing that might have evolved from a parlying the slapstick comedy. Graphic, bloody scenes ticularly silly Spectrum HoloByte office party — of female characters being stabbed and slashed to the sort of joke that isn't quite so funny when one death are not, by any definition, funny. Nor are has sobered up. scenes of male characters being shredded by automatic weapons. Of The slick packaging promises much in the way of great laughs and course, not every take-out is violent. Some are tired, predictable great chess, but the program delivers neither. In fact, the best feature pie-in-the-face shticks; others are merely inane; few have any redeemof Chess Maniac is the manual. It could easily stand alone as a comedy ing comedic value whatsoever. One has to wonder, watching these magazine with its hilarious spoofs of chess and chess terminology. The scenes unfold, how anyone could have thought them funny. glossary alone is almost worth the price of admission. Almost. If only Chess Maniacpromises \"disgusting digitized sounds,\" and it delivers. the program matched that standard.... The sounds are disgusting, but not the way they were intended to be. Chess Maniac promises male and female models filmed and digitDetracting from the various burps, farts and sneezes that punctuate ized for full motion video skits.\" What one gets are animated characthe game are clearly audible loops and splices in the playback. In ters that actually move like real people. A nice touch, considering the fairness, my AdLib board doesn't match something like Sound Blaster work it required and the huge amount of disk space needed for the Pro for reproducing sound effects, but playing effects through the PC o files. The game takes close to an hour to install and nearly 27 speaker usually clears up the glitches. Unfortunately, when I atMBs of hard drive space.) Unfortunately, the supporting graphics — tempted to reconfigure the program to replay sound through the PC the things one needs to actually play a game of chess don't cut it, speaker, I discovered that it couldn't be done. There is no warning of and with sub-standard graphics for the game itself, the animation is a this on the box, and although it does state that specific sound cards waste of effort. are needed to reproduce sound and music, it does not say that the PC speaker option found in so many The last Outrageous Chess Sime Ever Made! What You See and What You Get programs is unavailable. Chess Maniac promises \"extravagant 256-color Chess Anyone? VGA graphics.\" \"The images on the back of the Chess Maniac promises \"ten levels of real chess package certainly look promising. Yet, what one from beginner to advanced.» What one gets is a very sces on the screen is something else again. The rudimentary chess program that, by today's standcharacters are fuzzy and indistinct, the background ards, is anything but sophisticated. It offers the is dark, and the view point of the board makes it basics-replay, take-back move, print, switch sides, nearly impossible to distinguish one piece from NATIONAL and force move — but not much else. another. Both board sets, the «Boring and LAMPOON \"Bawdy,\" suffer from this lack of clarity and poor At its highest level, the program is painfully slow perspective. (averaging around three minutes per move) and not CHESS Maniac very capable. At its lowest level, it's much faster and Fortunately, the program includes a \"Small much weaker. If this were a human opponent, one Board\" option that allows one to call up an over5 BILLION might feel sorry for it. At the beginner level, words head view of the board in standard format: without like laughable and hilarious come to mind, but it's it, one wouldn't be able to find the piece one not clear if the comedy was intentional. wanted with the mouse, much less play a game. Unfortunately, you can't size it to fit on the There is a time control option that allows the TITLE: Chess Maniac 5 Billion and 1 player to optimize the level and duration of screen without covering most of the main $69.95 SYSTEM: play to a certain extent, but there is no evidence board. Not that it matters. The program will REQUIREMENTS: 586-25MHZ, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics, or documentation of the use of hash tables or zoom in on the animations and drop the small 27MBs hard drive space, DOS 5.0 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up \"think-during-move\" algorithms (where the board into the background so all one misses are DESIGNERS: Paul Mogg. Erick lap program searches for its next move during the PUBLISHER: Spectrum HoloByte things like a small dog that constantly runs out player's turn) employed by more sophisticated and pees on the board, a toy doll that pirouettes (510) 522.1164 games. The program consistently takes a long across the screen, and the \"amply chested chess PRICE: IBM Alameda, CA Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"ETA, Autumn 1993. Mllard.  Copyright 1993, Mallard Software  Copyright 1993, Aviation Simulations, Inc. Circle Reader Service #76 "


"DU IND FOOD time to make its moves at the highest levels, even in obvious exchange situations, and it is consistently slow during the endgame — two areas that usually benefit the most from \"think-during-move\" and hash table algorithms. There is a \"Learning\" mode, but the term is misleading. It does not mean that the program is capable of learning from the player by storing and recalling exceptional moves; it simply shows all available moves for a selected piece. This is not a \"hint\" option either, by the way; the program offers no such option. The opening library is anyone's guess. There is no documentation to support it, but it appears to be somewhat limited in scope and depth. Even that limitation wouldn't be so bad if there were a hint option that would permit a player to study and practice the opening game. izes and smacks the computer-generated hand, forcing it to replace the piece in its original position. In another scene, a shark fin materializes and circles around the board. After a few laps, Son of Jaws riscs up and swallows one of the player's pieces. While this is funny at first, it quickly wears thin and becomes an irritation. Of course, given the program's overall level of play, cheating is probably the only way it can win against even a moderately experienced opponent. The spoken commentary deserves mention because it is one of the few things about this game that could actually be described as funny. Using digital voice samples, the program produces a very good imitation of the HAL 9000 computer from the film 2001: A Space Odyssey. The remarks are nicely scattered, unpredictable and quite funny. It's worth playing a very bad game just once to experience the full range of witticisms this computer-generated personality can deliver. The only irritation here is that the pseudo-HAL. insists on calling the player Dan, perhaps out of legal necessity. Beach Front Property Sadly, Chess Maniac is, in my opinion, an example of marketing strategy taking precedence over product quality. A lot of effort went into producing rotoscoped animation sequences and expensive packaging, but not enough effort went into producing crisp graphics, clean sound, state-of-the-art chess algorithms, or decent satire. Chess Maniac 5 Billion and I promises the world and delivers a small plot of swampland somewhere in the Florida Everglades. If one still giggles uncontrollably at underarm farts, or titters wildly over toilet talk,\" there is more than a 5th-grade-classroom full of such naughtiness here. Otherwise, one would be better off playing ChessMaster 3000 and renting a copy of Animal House, CGW Not All Bad Not everything about Chess Maniac is bad. There are a couple of things that stand out as unique among chess games. The first is the \"Cheat\" option; the second is the commentary. One of them is actually funny. The Cheat option, when turned on, turns the program into a thief. In one scene reminiscent of Monty Python, it will attempt to steal one of your pieces, slowly lifting it off the board while playing an innocent tune. Once one learns how to ESCape this problem, a ruler materialTHE ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer.. ..JUST GOT BETTER! Another five major play-by-mail games have joined our unique offer: Cluster Lords (rules and 10 free turns in this deep space opera), Death and Sorrow (rules and 10 free turns in this introductory fast-moving wargame), Perseus Arm (the 170-page rulebook and 3 turns in a massive new space opera), St Valentine's Day Massacre (rules and five turns in PBM's most challenging crime game), World Conquest (rules and 4 turns in this clean strategic wargame). And now all subscriptions are processed by first class mail, ensuring you get the hottest news in the hobby. Play by mail is America's most exciting form of gaming, pitting you against crack players across the country and abroad. (Call (216) 673-2117 for news of the big national PBM convention. Our offer gives you the chance to sample it and decide if it's for you. For those who haven't seen our guaranteed offer before, here it is: Take a $20 (4-issue) subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international play-by-mail magazine, and let our reviews, features and player comments help you pick the best of the latest games. We think you'll enjoy our frank, irreverent style. With your first issue we'll send you a $20 coupon for any of the above games and 19 others, with a description of each so you can decide which of these intriguing designs to try. The only condition: that you've not played with the chosen moderator before. But what if you don't like FLAGSHIP? What if you're not intrigued by the game you write for? Haven't you wasted $20? No! Write us within a month of getting your first FLAGSHIP to tell us you were disappointed, and we'll refund you the entire $20. (You can still use the coupon.) So: either you've enhanced your gaming with an exciting new dimension for $20. Or you've explored it and decided it's not for you at a cost of zero! Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07401-0454. [European readers: Send .99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 2PP for the equivalent European offer!) Circle Reader Service #54 Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-600-GAME Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Shipping to US PR,AK, HI APO & FPO SA per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling $i per shipment, 2 Business Day Air US $6 por order:PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. addT; AK 519 1st Item + $200. add. Handling S1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st item + $6 ea, add'l. Handling S1 por shipment. IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE CARRIERS AT WAR $34 $27 Star Trek 25th Aniv $36 Star Trek: Next Generation $46 Terminator 2029 $42 The Prophecy $36 Uninvited WIN $34 Universe 1-3 Each Where in America's Past Where in Europe is Carmen $29 Where in Time Carmen $32 Where in USA is Carmen S29 Where in USA is Carmen Dix $49 Where in World Carmen SD $32 Where World Carmen Dix $52 $37 'THE CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT' provides an infinitely flexible tool for creating a particular battle or an original scenario. Build ships and planes, organize squadrons, draft maps, position air bases and adjust the artificial intelligence. 3 new scenarios included; Wake Island, Tarawa and Guadalcanal. S37 Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P42 S159 Acoustic Research P570 $319 Acoustic Research P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $39 Adlib Gold Sound Card $149 Advancd Gravis Ultrasound $139 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Labtec 105 Powered Speakr $21 Media Concept $72 Pilot Control Stand $20 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $179 Sony SRSI Speakers Sound Blaster 16 ASP $219 Sound Blaster Deluxe $89 Sound Blaster MM Upgd Kit $499 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe $129 Sound Galaxy BX2 $65 Sound Galaxy NX2 $89 Sound Galaxy NXPRO $125 Sound Galaxy NXPRO 16 $169 Sound Machine $99 Thrustmaster FCS $59 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thrustmaster Rudder CS $99 Thrustmaster Weapons CS $72 Thrustmaster WCS Mark 2 $99 Thunder Board WIN $99 IBM ARCADE CONSTRUCTION KIT Elf S4 $21 $19 IBM CD ROM Become the Weeke n d! $45 'CONQUERED KINGDOMS' allows you to invade castles and fly over mountains as you battle for control of the world Features nine scenarios, a random map generator, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, several full campaign conquests, and complete game scoring history. $36 $46 $21 $31 Advent Willie Beamish $24 Advent Willie Beamish 2 $39 Alone in the Dark $36 Amazon S36 Attack Pack $42 Blue Force: Next of Kin $45 Cadaver Castle Wolfsten Spear Dstny $37 Coaster $32 Conquests Robin Hood $36 Covert Action $12 Cyber Race $42 Dark Half S10 Dark Side $28 Day of the Tentacle $39 Demon's Gate $32 Dog Eat Dog $32 Dominus $39 Don't Go Alone $6 Dragon's Sphere $42 $24 Eric the Unready $38 Flashback $33 Fred Pharkas Frontir Pharm $42 Gambit $38 Gateway $29 HUMANS Heart of China Heaven and Earth $32 Hook $32 Inca $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $36 Jack the Ripper $38 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 $36 King's Quest 6 King's Ransom $38 L.A. Law $9 Land of Lore $36 Laura Bow 2 $36 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA $36 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun $34 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $44 Lost Treasures of Infocom $42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 S29 Lost in LA Martian Memorandum Metal Mutant $32 Out of this World $36 Pepper's Adventure in Time $29 Plan 9 from Outer Space Police Quest 1 $24 Police Quest 3 $36 Police Quest 4 $46 Power Hits: Movies $19 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Return of the Phantom $42 Return to Zork $38 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Rex Nebular Master Edition $52 Riftwar Legacy $39 Ringworld Rise of the Dragon $34 Risky Woods $24 Rome: Pathway to Power $32 Secret Monkey Island $25 Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Sex Olympics $24 Sex Vixens from Space S12 Shadowgate WIN $34 Space Quest 1 S16 Space Quest 4 Space Quest 5 $39 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk $34 $32 $34 Airborne Ranger Aliens Ate My Babysitter Amazing Spiderman Arachnaphobia Artura Bar Games $20 Bargon Attack VGA $24 Bart Simpson's House Weird $31 Battle Storm $32 Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv $19 Brain Blaster $28 Cogito Windows $38 Colorado S6 Combat Classics $24 Continuum S29 Creepers $34 D Generation Dark Century Day of the Viper Double Dragon 3 Dr Doom's Revenge Dragon's Lair $22 Dragon's Lair 2 or 3 $34 Dragon's L Esc Singe's Cast $34 Dragons Breath $27 Galactic Conqueror Galactic Empire Gauntlet 2 Gobliiins VGA $24 Guy Spy $27 Hard Drivin' 2 $38 Hyperspeed $18 Killing Cloud $19 Laser Squad Ms PacMan Mystical Ninja Gaiden 2 Ninja Rabbits Obliterator Pac Man Power Drome Power Hits: Battletech Power Hits: Sci Fi Predator 2 Punisher S.C. Out Simpsons:The Arcade Game $31 Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 Space Wars Super PacMan $19 Swamp Gas Windows $38 Take-A-Break Crossword $29 Take-A-Break Pinball $29 Take-A-Break Pool $29 Teenage MNT Manhttn Miss $31 Teenage MNT Adventure Teenage MNT Arcade $24 Tetris Classic WIN Tetris Classic S26 The Tinies $29 Thexder 1 S15 Thexder 2:Fire Hawk $15 Tristan Pinball $29 X-Men 2 $10 ALIG OGW1 12 Roads to Gettsyburg WIN $48 7th Guest $56 Advent Willie Beamish Battle Chess WIN & DOS $46 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Campaign $35 Capstone Game Collection $45 Chessmaster 3000 Conan Conquests Robin Hood WIN $42 Curse of Enchantia $26 Cyber Space $38 Don Quixote Dune $42 EcoQuest Search for Cetus $42 El Grito Del Jaguar $46 Eye of the Beholder 3 $48 Fatty's Bears Birthday Surpr $38 Guy Spy $29 Indy Jones Fate Altantis $52 Interactive Storytime 1-3 Ea. $30 Iron Helix $60 Jones In The Fast Lane WIN $42 Jungle Book Win $34 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 King's Quest 6 $48 Laura Bow 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Library of Art: Renaissance $60 Loom $48 Lost Treasures Infocom 10r2 $46 Mantis Experimental Fighter $45 Omar Sharif on Bridge Putt Putt Joins the Parade $42 Return of the Phatom $42 Secret Monkey Island $39 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $48 Sherlock Holmes, Consul Det $44 Space Quest 4 WIN Spirit of Excaliber $32 Star Child $32 Star Trek 25Anv S46 Ultima Bundle $59 Ultima Underworld 1&2 $52 Where in the World CSD Dix $66 Wing Commander Deluxe $48 Wing Commander / Ultima 6 $57 W.C. 2/Ultima Underworld $59 Wolf Pack $39 $32 $6 $45 TONE $9 $38 $46 $34 $37 $36 $42 'SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16' supports the 5 most popular sound cards. Features CD ROM interface, 16 Bit stereo playback with 20 voices at up to 14.4 KHz, volume control, midi interface, game port, 4 watt amp, and software setup. $169 S32 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Detectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS "


"O srom the pocko 2165 HAWTHORNER LOS ANGE 28 Saddlo Paol RESTLICTIONS TOVERFLION TO INCLUDING 12.500 FEET SEE LOS VETERMINAL AREA CHARO APPROPRIATE PUHUCATIONS FOR GINNA 35 136'N 118 49.9'W Baldwin 6174 2403 A Different Approach Flight Deck Software's Instrument Flight Trainer Professional 6715.8 SOSSACRAT 13 H8:58.7'W VENTURA VTU 108.2 BURRANK GLENDALE PASADENA ATS 15 DARTS 2389 1345 32 093 2 1250) PURMS ELMOD 34. 05.O'N 11804.8'W CON 3111 SANTA BARBARA 24069'N DME C MCAVO 3700W ON Chien 2 POSNELES INTL 199 030') 252) CONTROU ZONEET 1500-05002 by Timothy L. Trimble 7289 NG ITS TIME OF CONTROL DON 2012220 1 More! PETER ILNOMEDI you've been in the clouds for almost 20 minutes, descending at and then pressing the left or right button to increase or decrease the 700 feet per minute. The CDI (Course Deviation Indicator) frequency. The throttle is adjusted by «grabbing\" the knob with the shows that you keep drifting off to the right, so you compencursor and moving the mouse. This flexibility and control of the sate by \"crabbing\" into the wind. Finally, at 1300 feet you break out instruments allows a novice instrument pilot to be gradually introof the clouds and see the runway right in duced to the more complex instruments front of you. Pausing the program, you as skills increase. Further, the crisp clear take another look at the approach chart, OO 10 :15:00 display of the instruments on a VGA and then back at the computer screen. display make the program a real pleasure \"That's cheating,\" your instructor ex02374289.0 115.00 100.5 to use, and the descriptions of the instruclaims. \"Just for that, I'm going to take ments in the manual helps to eliminate away an instrument.\" Your instructor some of their mystery. moves a pointer to the top left corner of Many of the small details of aircraft the airspeed indicator, clicks the mouse, operation are simulated in IFT-Pro. For and watches as the instrument disappears. 52 instance, it is possible to get a dead bat\"There! Now continue.\" tery by forgetting to turn off the master Does this sound like a $50 an hour switch. Check lists are provided for simulator? Well, guess again. It is Flight many of the standard operating proceDeck Software's Instrument Flight dures of the various aircraft, such as Trainer-Professional (IFT-Pro) for IBM startup, cruise, takeoff, landing, and compatibles. IFT-Pro is for the serious WIKI emergency situations. The oil can be armchair pilot, student pilot, or profesPart To Y T EST checked and filled, and individual fuel sional pilot wanting to brush up on his or her instrument skills. While tanks can be loaded to various levels. A flight plan can also be prepared some may think that IFT-Pro is just another flight simulation package with various legs and waypoints, and then, transferred and viewed on similar to Microsoft Flight Simulator or Sublogic's ATP, it is actually the map. a \"serious\" simulator specializing in instrument flight, known in the aviation world as Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) flight. Where Are We? Watch the Gages! The on-line map is a great visual aid, useful for both navigating from one point to another and evaluating the flight after the trip is comWhat sets IFT-Pro apart from other simulators is the precision and plete. Both the flight plan and the actual course of flight can be realism of the instruments. Depending on displayed on the map, and various levels the type of aircraft being simulated of zoom are available for viewing a single (Cessna 172, Cessna 172RG, Cessna 152, airport or half the State of California. A Beech Bonanza A36 or a Piper Malibu) line can be drawn on the map for measdifferent types of instruments will be disNOUILLE ELK GENG 0 uring distance, and the radials of the two played. For example, the Cessna 152 will currently selected VORs can be used to have a different set of OBI instruments identify intersections and mark flight (for VOR navigation) than the higher percourses. A lot of additional information formance Piper Malibu. However, for excan be displayed on the map, such as the ample, the HSI (Horizontal Situation field elevation and magnetic variation of Indicator) could be used instead of the the airports, the frequency and type of standard Gyro Compass for a Cessna 152 ILS, the radial and distance from the flight, selected easily by clicking the host VOR, and much more. Basically, mouse on the instrument. The frequency the on-line map is a great simulation of of the radio can be changed by placing the the ILS sectional map which usually sits mouse cursor over the frequency display in the lap of the pilot. Me M . 28. CUISTICS couro NTGL 30 FLT: 2539 it 110: 12 Pathi SHITA Tepi FEIRA OOC WLEFOONS Coto Outut Labels Into The DED9916989  Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-600-GAME Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Shipping to US PRAK, HI,APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada S6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Alr US SG per order: PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, ada RAK S19 1st itom + $2 ea, add'l Handling $1 por shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st Item + S6 ea, add'l Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall 525 1st Item 456 ca. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ROLEPLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $29 $6 $30 'CAPITALIST PIG' lets you take charge of your own company from the first shipment to the first billion. As the CEO you must balance marketing, public relations, manufacturing, & management. Features actual 20th century economic statistics, hiring & firing employees, advertising, office expansion, and disasters. $36 $32 ONS OR Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness Prophecy 1 Protostar Questron 2 $12 Ragnarok Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Rings of Medusa Sea Rogue Secret Silver Blades Sentinel Worlds 1 Shadow Sorcerer Sleeping Gods Lie Space 1889 Space Hulk Space Inc Spacewrecked $19 Spelcraft: Aspect of Valor $38 SpellJammr:Pirates Rlm Spc $38 Spellcraft:Aspect of Valor S38 Spirit of Excalibur $16 Star Saga 2 $19 Stonekeep S54 Stronghold $42 Summoning $38 Tales Magic:Prophcy Shadw $29 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Ultima 4 $35 Ultima 5 $35 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Black Gate $48 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle S48 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 $48 Unlimited Adventures $38 Veil of Darkness $37 Vengeance of Excalibur $16 Waxworks 529 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 5 $26 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Forge Wizardry 7 Crusaders $42 Wizardry Trilogy (1-3) $32 S18 Ace Detective $30 Ace Inquirer $40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe $48 AutoMap $64 AutoWorks $49 BodyWorks $49 Boom Box Castle of Dr Brain VGA $29 Cleo is a Dragon Clock Works $19 Comic Book Maker Cuckoo Zoo $32 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest VGA $32 EcoQuest 2:Lost Sort Rain $34 Fatty Bear's Birthday Surpris $32 Fay's Word Rally $32 Incredible Machine VGA $29 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Jones Fast Lane S24 Kidworks $30 Kidwriter Gold S32 Land of The Unicorn $39 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 S30 Marvin the Moose Vol 2 $30 Mavis Teaches Typing $26 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 $30 Milliken Sotryteller Vol 2 $30 Mixed Up Faery Tale VGA $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Mozart's Music Machine S18 Munchers Bundle $29 Never Ending Story 2 Crayn $9 Orbits: Voyage Solar Systm $39 Phonics Plus $25 Picture Perfect $32 Play Room $35 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Print Shop Deluxe Bus GraphS24 Putt Putts Fun Pak $22 Quarky Quaysoo's Turbo Sci $29 Read \"n Roll $36 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Read & Rhyme $31 Reader Rabbit 1: Early Read $37 Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Reader Rabbit's Ready Letter$37 Robot Writer Plus $30 Rodney's Funscreen S32 Scooter's Magic Castle S32 Secert Island Dr. Quandry Snapdragon $29 Speedreader WIN $30 Speedreader Data Disk A $12 Speedreader Data Disk B $12 Speedreader Data Disk C $12 Spell it Plus $31 Spell-a-Saurus Spelling $31 Spelling Wiz $22 Stickybear Opposites Stickybear Parts of Speech $32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Reading Comp $30 Stickybear Reading Tutor $31 Stickybear Shapes S29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tutor $32 Story Sketcher $42 Super Munchers $29 Super Solvers : Midnight Res $30 Super Solvers: Spellbound $31 Super Spellicopter $21 Treasure Mountain $39 Tree House $39 Wacky Funster $18 Weekly Rdr Reading Comp $31 Weekly Rdr Word Problems $32 Where Space Carmen SD $50 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks zooms, pans, and lades. Features full digitized voices & sound effects. S36 $48 2400 AD $9 ADD Collector's Edition 2 $45 ADD Starter Kit $29 Bard's Tale Construction Set $27 Beyond Blue Event Horizion S36 Black Crypt $32 Bloodwych Buck Rogers:Countdown $12 Captain Blood Captive S30 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms S44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $19 CHARACTER EDITORS $16 Cobra Mission $49 Companion of Xanth S36 Conan $16 Corporation $14 Curse of the Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Empire $32 Cyber Space $39 Cybergenic Ranger $6 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Sun $48 Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp Pak $34 Darklands $39 Darklands Master Edition $51 Daughter of Serpents $32 Death Knights of Krynn Dragon Strike $15 Dragon Wars S12 Dragons of Flame $9 Dungeon Master $34 Dusk of the Gods S24 Elvira Mistress Dark $29 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus S19 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 Eye of the Beholder 3 Flames of Freedom MWII $28 Fountain of Dreams Four Crystals of Trazere Gateway Savage Frontier $32 Gods Gryphon Masters of Havlar $38 Heaven and Earth Heros Quest 1 $24 Heros Quest 2 $21 Heros Quest 3 $36 Hillsfar $15 Immortal S17 Joan of Arc $12 Legacy of the Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $34 Legend $31 Legend of Valor $39 Legends of Drakka $38 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Loremaster $39 Lure of the Temptress S37 Magic Candle 1 $12 Magic Candle 2 $19 Magic Candle 3 $38 Martian Dreams $37 Matrix Cubed $32 Mechwarrior $19 Mega Traveller:Zhodani 59 Mega Traveller 2 $19 MegaTraveller 3 S39 Midwinter S8 Might & Magic 3 $24 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen $36 Might & Magic 5 D Side Xeen $42 Mines of Titan $9 Mission: Impossible $15 Obitus $27 Pirates $9 Pirates Gold $42 Planet's Edge $34 IBM HINT BOOKS $38 The Charge of the LIGHT BRIGADE $10 $27 $23 'THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE' during the Crimean War. was one of the bravest, and sadest incidents in British Military History. Of the 673 men who began the charge only 195 were fit for action at its end. Features a large game area, 2 player mode, animates graphics, strategic and tactical maps. $29 688 Attack Sub $10 A-Train $16 Adventures Willie Beamish $10 Bard's Tale 1-3 Each $10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown S10 Castle of Dr Brain Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization $16 Colonel's Bequest $10 Conquests Robin Hood S10 Countdown $10 Curse of the Azure Bonds S10 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands $14 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dungeon Master S10 Dynamix Great War Planes S16 EcoQuest Search For Cetus $10 Elvira 1 or 2 S10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $10 Fascination $10 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm $8 Free DC $10 Gateway Savage Frontier $10 Global Conquest $21 Gobliiins $10 Gunship 2000 S16 HORUS RORKE'S DRIFT NPRESSIONS Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS "


"R   STEFFATTUR Aircraft position chamed on sround. Me Dars Mur fat: 59.B na I ne DUR: BO:B4314 LAT: 30193:12.6 LOH: 119:19:27.1 NUS ELFE* Path ALT: 1.2 10 IAS: 125 kts PM: 2002 PIT: -6 Slou Replay ADD MEN HAYPOINT SLOT #3 RIP NIE: HOST VOR: ID LIK POIL 83.5 DISTS.3 DOOROINTES: LAT 33:55:11.8 LON 118:19:27.8 VERTICL NWU: ANGLE ENTEN: 18 Erase Rd LOR TES Profils Toggle Chume Locat. Oulut Map Center Home Li l 2008 Our Zoom In Adnetve Prof.Profillar at So Enough with the Details! gocs a long way towards educating and How Does It Fly? assiscing pilots with their instrument skills. Flying with IFT-Pro is a real pleasAlthough the time utilized on IFTure bur ir does take a little getting EL TEATE used to. The controls are very sensiPro cannot be logged as FAA approved tive, but the instruments provide imflight time, the price of the software SANTA M BA and a good set of flight controls will mediate feedback. Even someone easily provide the same type of training that is an expert with Microsoft Flight one would get in a $30 to $50 per hour Simulator will spend a few extra minflight simulator. IFT-Pro is not deutes getting accustomed to the sensisigned for the casual gamer with a tivities of IFT-Pro, but it is well slight interest in flight simulators, and worth the time. such a person would quickly become Using the Virtual Pilot flying yoke discouraged with the complexity of infrom CH Products and the Rudder strument flight. However, the serious Control System (RCS) from Thrustflight simulator fanatic who needs the master, I configured and flew a Piper Screen Cursor Labels Info Mon 1200S 62090 Wont Lert Richt next challenge beyond Microsoft Flight Malibu from Carlsbad to Van Nuys, Simulator will be delightfully pleased. California, using all of the advanced instruments. With the on-line Once again this is your daring aviator, \"The Timinator,\" with his map and the FAA approach charts (provided free with IFT-Pro), I was able to fly strictly by the instruments to Catalina Island, to the head in the clouds (a monitor) and his seat in the cockpit (a kitchen Fillmore VOR, and then \"shoot\" an instrument approach into Van chair), saying, \"So long till next time!\" Nuys airport. When I broke out of the clouds at 1000 feet the runway IFT-Pro is available from: was right in front of me. Throwing in a little weather and turbulance, however, can turn this little pleasure trip into a white knuckle expeFlight Deck Software P.O. Box 425 rience. Williamsburg, Virginia 23187 \"Out the window\" views are sparse (airport runways only) but then, 1-800-955-4359 this is an instrument trainer. The documentation expects the reader to be familiar with flying to some extent, and I couldn't find a single Other Products Mentioned: screen shot. If the roughly 120 pages of text were doubled with Flight Simulator by Microsoft Inc. additional detail and screen shots then it would be a lot casier to justify Virtual Pilot flight yoke from CH Products the $350 price tag for the package. However, aside from the rather Rudder Control System from Thrustmaster inadequate manual, IFT-Pro is a high quality, serious simulator which Air Transport Pilot (ATP) from Sublogic cow CAPE COD CONNECTION Entertainment Software Consultants Is Seeking Qualified Candidates for a Progressive, New Entertainment Software Producer In Southern California $46 Interested Applicants Should Apply For the following positions Computer Programmer (MS-DOS based) Graphic Artist 24 HR ORDERING (only) 1-800-729-6733 SUPPORT/INFO 1-5 EST Mon-Sat 1-508-457-0738 IBM Wing Cmdr 2..... $49 Rome................. $33 Eye Beh. II......... $39 SIMULATION Strike Cmdr....... $52 Spaceward Ho.. $39 KO VI............... $52 Aces/Pacific....... $52 WW II: 1946....... $26 Star Legions...... $39 Log of Valour.... $39 The Lost Adm.... $39 Mag.Candle 3.... $39 Air Warrior ......... $49 IBM V For Vict 1........ $46 M&Mag. Xeen.... $46 Commanche...... $46 STRATEGY V For Vict 2........ $46 Paladin 2........... 839 Comm. Data...... $26 Viking Fd Cong. $39 Protostar............ Dreadnoughts... $46 Bat. of Destiny... $39 539 F15 III.............. 559 Caesar................ $39 Western Front.... $39 Ringworld. Spellcraft ......... $39 Falcon 3.0......... $52 Carrier Strike..... $46 Ult. Underw 2.... $52 OpFlying Tiger .. $26 Carriers/War...... $46 IBM ROLE UIT. VII................ $52 Fireteam 2200... $29 Castles 2........... $39 PLAYING Gr.Naval Bat's... $46 Civilization......... $46 Gr N Bat Ships .. $25 Cong. Kingd..... $39 A&D Unl Adv.... $39 Jump Jet ........... $46 Patriot ................ $46 Amazon............. $46 Sec Weap Luf.... $46 High Comman... $45 Ch. 5 Realms..... $46 Plane disks ea... $20 Liberty or Dea... $39 Crus. Drk Sav.... $46 Sim Life ............. $46 Monopoly Del.... $39 Dune 2.............. $39 Task Force 42... $46 Pacific War ........$52 Lemmings 2...... 839 WILL SELL X-Wing.............. $46 Populous 2 ........ $39 YOUR INTERESTED IN SELLING YOUR USED USED SOFTWARE? Give Cape Cod Connection a call at 1/508-457-0738 for details! CAPE COD CONNECTION Music/Audio Effects applicants should send a resume and brief letter of interest listing applicable commercial projects to: SOFTWARE Entertainment Software Consultants 8780 19th Street, Suite #336 Alta Loma, California 91701 Highly Competitive Compensation Confidentiality Assured All Applications Will Receive a Response We hope you enjoy our new economical format. All remains the same, however except we have discontinued the Membership Option (we will honor members until their expiration date). PLEASE NOTE THAT CCC HAS ENDED THE PRICE WAR AND RAISED IT'S PRICES. In order to run an efficient and economically sound business we must see profits. It's time to put sanity back into this industry and we hope you, our customers understand our needs and support us. Our NEW pricing scale is calculated on 35% OFF Product Retail. Mail should be sent to: 21 Pleasant View Avenue, Falmouth, MA 02540. UPS Shipments within Cont. U.S. are $5 per order. Overseas rates are based on package weight. Delective soltware replaced with same only. There is a 15% restocking fee. Circle Reader Service #52 Circle Reader Service #39 Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-600-GAME Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Shipping to US,PRAK,HI,APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling si per shipment. msiness Day Ar US S6 per order: PRH 512 181 Item + $2 ea. add. AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea, adol. Handling s panenta Europe, S. America Air Mall S19 1st Item + $6 a. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM HINT BOOKS IBM WAR GAMES IBM STRATEGY $10 $10 $10 'CARRIERS AT WAR' brings to life six crucial carrier battles of WWII; Pearl Harbor. Coral Sea, Midway. Eastern Shores, Santa Cruz, and Great Marianas Turkey Shoot. Seek out and destroy en emy carriers, fleets, air forces. Features hundreds of individually modeled ships and aircraft from that period. $37 $10 CARRIERS $44         $10 $10 $17 $37 S6 Harpoon $16 Hero's Quest 1-3 Each Immortal Indiana Jones 4 Fate Atlantis S10 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 S16 King's Quest 1-6 Each Laura Bow 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1-5 $10 Lemmings $21 Lord of the Rings V1 S10 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $10 Lost in LA LucasArts Air Combat S16 Magic Candle 2 or 3 $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed $10 Might & Magic 3-5 Each $16 Patriot $16 Pepper's Adventure in Time $8 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1-3 Each Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness Populous 1 & 2 Power Monger Strategy Protostar $8 Quest For Clues 2-5 Each $21 RUN5 Issue #1-19 Each Railroad Tycoon $10 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Secret Monkey Island 1 or 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1-4 Each $10 Spellcasting 101 or 201 $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $10 Starflight 1 or 2 $10 Strategy Plus Issue 10 or 11 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 12-32 Ea. $5 Strike Commander S16 Stunt Island $16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic: Prophcy Shadw $12 Treasures Savage Frontier $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4-6 Each $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 and Underworld $16 Ultima 7.5 Balancing Scales Ultima Underworld $12 Ultima Underworld 2 $12 V Victory: $16 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $12 Wizardry 7 S16 Yeager Air Combat $16 $37 S23 $38 RIDA Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War $37 Carriers at War Exp Pak $37 Charge of the Light Brigade $29 Conflict: Middle East $32 Decision at Gettysburg $19 Dreadnoughts $39 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fifth Eskadra $22 Fleet Med $27 Frontline $13 Gary Grigsby Pacific War $48 Gettysburg: Turning Point $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $19 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon $25 Harpoon Battle Set 2 or 3 919 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $24 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series $17 Harpoon Designer Series 2 $25 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 High Command $45 Line in the Sand $26 MacArthur's War $6 Main Battle Tank C Germany $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $17 Midway $19 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $29 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $12 Patriot Patriot Battle Set 2 $24 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Patton Strikes Back Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Sky Morning $36 Return To Falklands Rising Sun $26 Rommel Battles For N Africa S24 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Storm Across Europe $12 Third Reich $27 Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 UMS 2 Civil War $24 UMS 2 Desert Storm Scen $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $19 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikiye Luki $44 V Victory: Market Garden $44 V Victory: Gold, Juno, Sword $44 Victory at Sea $37 War in the Falklands Warship Changed History Western Front $36 White Death $19 World War 2 $39 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the add on course disks for extra fun. $36 $44 S38 $12 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space S42 Caesar $36 Capitalist Pig WIN $36 Castles 2 $36 Civilization $32 Civilzation Master Edition $48 Clash of Steel $38 Cohort 2 $18 Command HQ $19 Conquered Kingdoms $36 Conquered Kingdoms Scen 1 $25 Conqueror WIN $39 Conquest of Japan $36 Diplomacy $12 Discovery Steps Columbus $34 Dragon Force S12 Dune 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Empire Deluxe WIN Fields of Glory $36 Fighting for Rome Fort Apache Global Conquest Global Effect Gobliiins 2 Princes Buffoon $24 Gold of the Americas $19 Inindo Koshan Conspiracy $32 Kye Deluxe WIN $26 Lemmings 2: The Tribes S32 Liberty or Death Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Scenario Disk Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Maelstrom Mega Lo Mania $31 Mercenaries Tegel's New World Order $38 Operation Combat $12 Overlord $21 Pacific Theater Ops $42 Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General S32 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect General Scen Disk 1 S21 Perfect General Scen Disk 2 $23 Populous 2 $38 Powermonger Push Over Railroad Tycoon Railroad Tycoon 2 Realms Red Zone Robo Sport WIN Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN Seven Cities Gold 2 $38 Shadow President ShadowGate WIN Sid Meir's Civil War Siege Siege Expansion Disk $19 Simlife Solider of Fortune $42 Spaceward Ho! Star Control 2 $36 Star Legions $38 Star Master Sub Version Sub Wars Task Force 1942 Tegels's Mercenaries 2 S44 Theatre of War Unnatural Selection Vikings Fields of Conquest $37 War in the Gulf Warlords Warlords 2 $42 When Two Worlds War $42 Worlds at War $19 INKS (386 $28  S19 Dreadnoughts $16 The most EXCITING SEA BATTLES aver fought $34 S26 S39 $29 $58 $21 $26 IBM WARGAMES DREADNOUGHTS accurately models the looks, specifications and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as: Coronel (1914). Falklands (1914), Jutland (1916) and Dogger Bank (1915). Features a menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view, & hidden movement. $39 $38 $42 IBM STRATEGY $34 $29 $19 Air Raid Pearl Harbour S22 Ambush at Sorinor American Civil War V1-3 Ea. $22 Banzai $12 Battle Stations $20 Battle of Austerlitz $9 Battle of the Atlantic $36 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blood & Iron Blue and the Grey 42 Borodino Napoleon Invades $30 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 CW No Greater Glory $21 Campaign $39 Carrier Strike       $52 A Train A Train Construction Set Armada 2525 Air Force Commander Airbucks Ambush at Sorinor Ancient Art of War Sky Ashes of Empire Battle Isle Battles of Destiny Big Business Breach 2 $38 $42 $34 $48 $32 $36 $19 $19 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivos replaced with same product. Oller. price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS $12 "


"Deunew NEW FRONT irpose vessels et development rporations to follow. ner Advisory Counr Spanning The Galaxy Protostarftom. Isunami Media IA by Paul Schuytema acters have a rough-edge to their looks (our friend in the bar even appears to have a very painful shard of something, perhaps glass, embedded in his jaw). \"The graphics really shine in the starship and explorer cockpits. Tsunami created a cluttered but concise\" look to the instrumentation, and the way in which the cockpits are lir makes them feel like properly claustrophobic command centers. The control interface melds into this cockpit concept, giving the player casy control of every aspect of the game with intuitive mouse movements. The cockpits of both the explorer and the starship feature icons which UR WAR ON THE FRONTIER, fter pulling back a stiff sip of your on the fringes of a frontier war. The game is drink, you turn to the companion played through a first-person perspective, and I s haring your table. He leans over toas an agent of the Protostar directive, the wards you, and you try not to look into his player must gather information, employ dieyes, focusing instead on the insectoid band plomacy or expert combat tactics, and must hammering away on their catherine-wheel of be a successful merchant, not only to outfit an instrument. Your friend is human, or at the starship but also to channel funds to the least was, once. Now he is a walking encyclohuman defense forces. pedia of the hazards of Thule sector. Still, you The general framework of Protostar is very listen to what he has to say. similar to the Starflight and Star Control series He explains to you the services offered by of games. A player starts out with a bare-bones Newfront, the firm which has established starship, a planetary explorer, and a small three outposts on the frontier. By utilizing tidbit of information. From there, the first your Newfront crcdit chip, you may access a course of attack is to find a suitable world to varicry of services, from a standardized exmine for materials that can be brought mine for materials that can be brought back change center to a qualified starship repair to an outpost (or mercantile center on a berth to this secdy but comfortable lounge in planet) and sold, so that one can upgrade the Outpost Bordertan. ship to a respectable level of performance. (Hint: first upgrade to the best engines, then STAROATL22112112336 LOCATIONGS 18.41811 PULLT 484.6 weapons systems, but only buy one set; since it is possible to transfer the systems between  the starship and explorer anytime.) Along the way, the player assembles a crew and channels funds to the human fighting forces. Probably the most important question to DETOX address with regards to Protostar is whether gaming consumers need another installment of this type of game. Is it just a rehash of old ideas or does Protostar offer something new? The answer is neither black nor white. ProtoYet, your real destiny lies elsewhere, out in star delivers on some points and comes up the folds of space, as a Protostar operative, short on others. specializing in covert action and grass roots diplomacy. The entire sector of Human space People Will Say We're In Space is relying on you, counting on your efforts to First off, the graphics in Protostar are ingarner allies and funds in the desperate war credible. Tsunami took the \"rendered by artagainst the Skeerch Empire, a territory-lunists\" approach rather than utilizing any gry race of semi-reprilians who have watched digitized photographis, but they did a very human prosperity from a distance for too convincing job of creating a world which long. suspends visual disbelief. The characters and aliens seem to come alive through the artThe Ship And I work, with select animations of facial features (such as the mandibles on the Ghebraant, a Protostar: War on the Frontier is Tsunami species of semi-sentient insects). Rather than Media's latest release. Protostar is a science create still-looking images, the artists went to fiction epic combining role-playing and acgreat pains to set the characters in telling tion components into a richly detailed quest poses, and they weren't afraid to let the charMS-DOS 3.5\" VGA TITLE: Protostar: War on the Frontier PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz, VGA graphics, 7MB hard disk space PROTECTION: None DESIGNER: Vas Nokhoudian PUBLISHER: Tsunami Media, Inc. P.O. Box 790 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (209) 683-8266 Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-600-GAME Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO S4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment, 2 Business Day Alr US $6 per order. PRHI 512 1st Item + $2 ea, add'; AK $19 1st Item + $2 $2 ea, ada RAK S19 1st Item + $2 ea. add. Handling S1 per shipment, Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asla, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling si per shipment. IBM SIMULATION IBM SPORTS IBM TRADITIONAL In 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek out and destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challenging artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $36 Solitaire WIN S32 Solitaires Journey $36 Strip Poker 3 $31 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 Each $19 Super Jeopardy $27 Super Tetris $29 Terminator Chess $34 Tetris $15 Tetris Classic $27 Trump Castle 2 $12 Trump Castle 2 DD 1 or 2 Ea. S4 Trump Castle 3 $34 Vegas Games Pak WIN S19 Video Poker $12 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Wayne's World $26 Welltris Wheel of Fortune $6 Wheel of Fortune 2 or 3 Ea. $9 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 Word Tris $27 World Champon Backgammn $24 $38 Hardball 3 $34 Hole in One Mini Golf Delux $9 International Sports Chall $29 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed $42 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 Lance Haffner Pro BBall $36 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 Lance Halfner College BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football S36 Lance Hafner Hockey $36 Links $29 Links Pro 386 Golf $36 Links Pro Course Disk 1 or 2 $19 Links Pro Course Disk 3 S20 Madden Football 2 $32 Michael Jordan Flight Sim S38 Microleague Baseball 4 $31 Mike Ditka Power Football $32 Mini Putt $9 NFL Challenge Premium Ed. $59 NFL Football S31 NFL Video Football $39 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed PGA Tour Golf WIN Pro Tennis Tour 2 $32 QuarterPole S39 Summer Challenge $34 The Games Winter Challnge $34 Tom Landry Football Tony La Russa Baseball 2 $36 Tony La Russa 2 Team Disk $12 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 $15 $38 *FREE GAME OFFER Second Conflict ATP Flight Simulator 2.0 A.T.A.C Aces Over Europe Aces Europe Mission 1 or 2 $27 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk 1 $27 Air Duel $38 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Allied Forces $12 Armoured Fist $38 B17 Flying Fortress $39 Birds of Prey $32 Car and Driver Das Boot Submarine $12 Design Your Own Railroad S29 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F15 Strike Eagle 3 $44 Falcon 3.0 $48 Falcon 3 Scen1 Fighting Tor $24 Falcon 3 Scen 2 Mig 29 $25 Great Naval Battles S44 Great Nav Bat America in Atl S21 Great Nav Bat Super Ships $19 Grt Naval Battles Scen Build S28 Gunship 2000 VGA $37 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk $24 Jump Jet $39 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Land Sea Air 2 $29 Mantis Experimental Ft $39 Maximum Overkill $44 Max. Overkill Mission 1 or 2 $28 MegaFortress $12 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Megafortress MD 1 or 2 $26 Power Politics WIN S34 Privateer Rags to Riches $36 Reach for the Skies Red Baron VGA $36 Red Baron Mission Disk $24 Seal Team $42 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $34 Secret Weapons Exp 1-4 Ea. S21 Strike Commander $48 Strike Commander Spch Pak S24 Stunt Island $37 Syndicate $48 Task Force 1942 $39 Test Drive 3 $29 Tornado $52 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $39 Voice Commander F1174 $18 Voice Commander F15SE3 $18 Wing Commander $19 WC Secret Mission 1 or 2 S20 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $48 Wing Commander 2 $48 WC 2 Operation 1 or 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 World Circut $32 X-Wing $40 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $24 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid only while supplies last. The Galactic Conflict Continues... SPEND $75 IBM TRADITIONAL $52 SECOND CONFLICT is a game of interstellar strategy & conquest for windows. Control all aspects of the economy, military. and civilian population. Allocate resources to produce battleships, planetary defenses, stealth ships, transports and missiles. Features multiple human & computer players, & a scenario editor. $34 $31 23.8\" 4th and Inches Airborne Ranger Artura Big Business Backgammon by George Bravo Romeo Delta Gunship Obliterator Pirates S.C. Out The Tinies Xenocide SPEND $100 SOUND MACHINE ACONPLETEC SOLUT 'SOUND MACHINE' brings together 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in one inexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp, volume control, a pairof 3 magnetically sheilded speakers, and a Quickshot joystick. $99 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 Amarillo Slim's Poker S12 Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud $10 Backgammon By George WIN S9 Battle Chess 4000 SVGA $36 Battle Chess Bridge 7 Bridgemaster Centerfold Squares Checkmate Chess Net WIN ChessManiac 5 Billion & 1 S48 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $22 Dr Thorp's Blackjack S32 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack $9 Faces Tetris $15 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD 1-3 ea. Gambit (chess) S38 Game-Maker $68 Go Master Ver 5 DOS/WIN $39 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Go Master Dix Ver 5 WIN $79 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grandmaster Chess $32 Home Alone 2 $26 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro Hoyle's Book Games 3 or 4 $29 Ishido $17 Jeopardy 1 or 2 Each $9 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary $15 Jigsaw Pinups $24 Monopoly Deluxe DOS/WIN $29 Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 Omar Sharif on Bridge S37 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $24 Planet of Lust $19 Risk $24 Risk WIN S26 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $26 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Sierra Family Fun Pak $29 MacArthur's War Dragon Force Defender of the Crown Grandmaster Chess Hole in One Mini Golf Deluxe Sentinel Worlds Dragon Force Blackjack For Windows Video Poker For Windows Operation Combat Covert Action Panza Battles War of the Lance Dark Half Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon IBM SPORTS SPEND $200 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Basketball $34 APBA College Basketball $32 APBA Football $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 ATP Tennis $34 Action Sports Soccer $26 All American College Ftbll $36 American Gladiators $21 Basketball Challenge $28 David Robinson NBA Action $44 Face Off $9 Front Page Football $36 Greens $34 Bridge 7 Cardinal of the Kremlin Lost Admiral Warlords Dune Allied Forces F-15 Strike Eagle 2 Command HQ Red Storm Rising ALIG OGWA Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & Availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #41 "


"CHOOSE 17 seems lietas fair prices STADILIUM: 77CR OFFER AMOUNT: 750R EU55ESIA G7290 CLEAR call-up particular stations, from the navigator to the biotech officer. Hello, Young Explorers Space flight (and also flying over a planet's surface) is controlled by bringing the mouse over the commander's control pad and selecting it. The cursor then changes to a flight cursor (or weapons cursor), and any movement of the mouse is translated into starship control. Combat is handled while in flight the plaver selects the weapon with right-clicks of the mouse and fires with a left-click. Defenses such as enerov shields and dampening fields are activated by a single command to the tactical officer. So how does the game play? Is it interesting enough to justify its good looks? A player who begins a game will find a double dose of relief and frustration as he or she opens the manual. The 23-page manual (13 of which don't directly apply to playing the game) is a short and concise introduction to the major systems of the game interface. The brevity is a welcome change from overly-long manuals which hold up game play, but Tsunami went a bit too far. There are precious few background notes in the manual, and a player will come away not sure as to what the point of Protostaris. Reading the splash-page on the back of the box gives more details about the actual reason for playing than anything in the manual. Also, for a game which is so sweeping in scope, the manual's brevity really doesn't provide for any practical examples of the myriad of situations a player may encounter. Fortunately, Tsunami bas two remedies for this: our disfigured bar patron, and a Help cursor. The barfly is actually a disguised game-encyclopedia. He generally appears in cach bar of each of the three outposts (though occasionally he is absent, and once in a great while others take his place), and he will talk to the player about nearly any subject of game importance, no matter what attitude the player affects. The help cursor allows a player to point and click on anything on the screen and get a brief explanation. This is a very helpful tool for learning the symbol-based interface, and should be a design feature on many, many more games. Yet, after accessing all of this information, the actual point of the game still seems a million light years away. It's true that after quite a few hours of playing time, quests and player can launch a cargo drone to salvage the larger purposes flicker into focus, but there wreckage for materials, but the payback is never really seems to be that urgency to make hardly worth the combat time spent. the play seem as grand as Tsunami had hoped. Shall We Fence? Although the streamlined interface and graphics are elegant, there are only really As a player works deeper into the game, the seven different screens of interaction, and diplomacy aspect becomes the most interestwhile the faces change and the dialogue ing, with the various sentient races cach poschange, the game begins to feel reperitive well sessing their own personal agenda which must before it should. One case in point is the be fullfilled before their allegiance can be com-link to Hawking, the field commander turned to the human cause. It does seem, of the Human Alliance. His dialogue seems however, that most of the races prefer submisvery limited, and the exchange so uneventful siveness rather than dealing with humans as (just channel him money in the beginning of equals or superiors. Tsunami has done a comthe game), that a player will cease to pay close mendable job in scripting believable dialogue attention to the details. for the various races and only rarely do their retorts smack of \"B\" movie eloquence. It may take some time to discern what a specific race wants or needs, and that task is one of the most enjoyable the game has to offer. As the struggle of the Human Alliance seems to move further and further away (but don't forget to keep sending cash infusions to BOUNCEMENTS Hawking, or the game will end prematurely), the diplomatic missions and intrigues between the various races make up the color and excitement of the game. Another weakness which borders on frusGetting To Know Space tration is starship combat. While combat is tration is starehin combat while All in all, Protostar: War on the Frontier is a simulated through the control center, and the solid, albeit uninspired game, and as in games feeling of three dimensional space is believsuch as Starflight, there are many worlds and able, combat lasts far too long. A simple battle beings to explore at whatever pace the player between the player and a pair of Skeetch chooses. As far as breaking new ground, Prowarships can easily last over 20 minutes (real tostarcomes up short. Yet the beautiful graphics and intuitive interface allow for easy time!), in which the player needs to fire dozcontrol. For a player well-seasoned in the ens upon dozens of direct hits (with the most sweeping \"sf/pc epic\" genre, Protostar will be powerful weapon) for a kill. The combat a disappointment, but for a player anxious to would be exciting for a minute or two, but see what the genre has to offer — and who after that a player will tend to glance over at hasn't played this sort of game before the desk clock wondering when it's going to Protostar would be an excellent place to start. end. After blasting the ships to atoms, the CGW CR RCMAIMINGI 200000 lace to unwind. BOGUESCU   WENT TO PURCHASEN TSC 593 TCS TURUS LOGO 14:20 Le Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"BARU Fly higher. MACH 2 Higher. Faster. Farther. CH Products is defining new standards of design and performance for computer pilots. We'll empower you to effortlessly relay commands with a feel of absolute control...to swoop, loop and soar like never before. Get your hands on the red-hot precision FLIGHTSTICKTM series joysticks. Or our lightning-fast GAMECARD 3 AUTOMATICTM. And VIRTUAL PILOTTM, a yoke that will defy your concept of reality. And there's more on the horizon. From drawing board Reach farther. to your fingertips, ours is a relentless pursuit of new and better products. CH Products began with a dream 25 years ago, and we've never looked back. Today, we give you the wings to fly. Higher. Faster. Farther. GAMECARD 3 se laul FUGLJICA MADE FLIONISTON PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive Vista, CA 92083 Phone: 619.598.2518 Fax: 619.598.2524 VIRTUAL PILOT Circle Reader Service #142 TM 1993 CH Products, Joystick Technologies Inc. Co "


"till ocenom zorrespondence urus Lord) C e Over There Aquin.. DECA Robin Matthews Launches a Detailed Tuvestigation of France's Latest Export by Robin Mathecos wa obin Matthews Hul C ters berican Jor*2** But ne of the real surprises of the last year some interesting research notes from oncited locations are shown and can be traveled or so was Infogrammes' stylish chiller Lord Henry Boleskine. Old Lord Henry (now to directly by using the map. Alone in The Dark (AITD). With its deceased) was, in 1834, staying in the sleepy idiosyncratic approach and very unique look, New England hamlet of Illsmouth. He was Actions are chosen either by invoking a AITD is a tough act to follow, and much is there to photograph the passing of Halley's menu bar or by using default keys. The early expected of Infogrammes with their latest Comet and made the curious observation plot surrounds finding some photographic title, Shadow of the Comet. This title uses the that, as it passed, the star configuration was film to take snaps of the comer and trying to original Call of Cthulhu license granted to all askew. He dispatched his many findings to track down the original guide used by Lord pen and paper and, lo and behold, Boleskine. Illswater is a fairly busy spot, and before one could say \"Silver Bullet,\" there are many inhabitants to speak to. Most and just before the next passage of of the conversations are short, however, and Halley's Comet, John Parker comes the system appears to be flag-driven. That is, across his findings. The player-asuntil NPC 'A' talks about a fact, one cannot John-Parker, being similarly fasciask NPC 'B' about it. This does make the nated by both Halley's Comet and the game slightly linear, but it keeps players from findings of Lord Boleskine, travels to stumbling into areas of the plot before they Illsmouth in 1910 to witness the next should. sighting of the Comet and to observe Sound effects are good throughout, and the strange goings-on. Shadow definitely wins a prize for the best scagulls yer in a PC game. They are so good Lovecraftian Cinema one could almost put the mouse to car and The initial animated introduction is hear the sca. (Well, maybe not quite. Read on Infogrammes. Originally, AITD was to bear very good, with an imaginative use of camera regarding the rodent situation.) the \"official\" designation, but the actual gamangles and viewpoints. The style of the ing system in that product became such a intro is very similar to the game itself project in its own right that it was decided to and not a bolted-on cinema extravasave up the Lovecraft license for a second titleganza to dupe would-be purchasers. — hence Shadow of the Comet. Soon one finds him or herself having Shadow is a graphic adventure in the tradiarrived in sunny Illsmouth, welcomed tional sense, using a clone of the standard by the local big-wigs and escorted to Sierra/LucasArts systems as opposed to the accommodations. revolutionary approach used in AITD. In The graphic locations are carefully common with that game and several recent drawn and are reminiscent of those releases, it is a member of the \"severed found in Infogrammes earlier Eterlimb/walking undead/ancient curse/don't nam. They are not as cluttered as those bring a clove of garlic party\" brigade, with a found in recent LucasArts games, and storylinc covering many decades of satanic some of the object and item detail is worship, demonic plotting and general misexceptional. The town of Illsmouth behaving, using Halley's Comet as the backSo far, so good. However, there is one probforms the main area of the first part of the lem with Shadow and that's the interface. drop. game, movement being either by cursor conCharacter movement is fine, responsive and trol or by selecting a map; all previously visquick, but this is by keyboard control only. A preamble introduces the hero, John T Parker: A budding scientist who has found The ruddy rodent is not supported — at least Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"* PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! P Sierra Discovery Series PRE-READING SKILLS A-C-L:S ARAB a gyce SPACE QUEST. V CIFIC Wo Talk DOT FRONT PAGE SPU The Merre SIERRA ROBERTA WILLIAMS SIERRA 1-800-877-1995 Choose any Two Sierra Games when you switch to Sprint directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.95 more! Now, when you switch your 'home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! And after enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you'll receive a second Sierra game or one month of free long-distance service.* Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber optic\" clarity that makes both your longdistance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and error free. But unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer.. calls each month to whomever they talk to the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide automatic 20 percent discounts on all calls to Sprint's millions of customers, anytime and anywhere. When the most frequently called number in a given month is a Sprint customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) + So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM travel card lets you continue to take advantage of clear calling and savings even when you're away from home. Plus the FONCARD is free, with cards available to every member of your family. Sprint SIERRA \"The Mostm\" A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called \"The Most\" available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint customers 20 percent on already low rates on their The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Circle Reader Service #100 * Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD only orders. Certain restrictions apply. Free month is up to $25 usage on 4th month invoice. To qualify for a second game or free month of long-distance the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. ** THE MOST discounts apply to intra-state calls only where authorized. "


"_foreign correspondence not in the European version. A couzles, which are varied and in some ple of years ago this would only have cases more devious than old Drac caused a minor stir, but with thouhimself. At certain stages, the linear sands of users accustomed to the nature of Shadow is exposed, as often Sierra/LucasArts type of interface, the game will ground to a halt until the lack of mouse control is a disada single head-scratcher is resolved. vantage. One or two puzzles may cause some real grief, but as they say in InThis is not too bad with character fogrammes, \"C'est La Disque.\" movement, but it is painful when it Most will be sorted out by volumicomes down to object manipulanous intake of decent coffee and a tion. Shadow contains many high good Chablis! class puzzles, several necessitating the merger or combination of a couIn short, Shadow of The Comet is a ple of items. Without mouse suphigh quality graphic adventure that port this becomes unwieldy and offers nothing particularly new as far breaks up the whole flow of the as technological advances are congame. In fairness, the storyline is so cerned and is, in some ways, a touch compelling that once within the game one tain some of the NPCs are caricatures of old-fashioned. This may, however, not be a forgets about the controls, but every now and Hollywood greats. Also used to considerable bad thing as it also returns to the concept of then when one is struggling to maneuver an effect are zoom shots and flashbacks that flesh having a well-written plot, which, when comobject or get to a tricky location, one instinc out some of the history and background of bined with some excellent graphics, elevates tively reaches for that redundant rodent. the town and its folk. it above the majority of today's all \"whistles and bells\" games. Its interface will be an initial Cthulhuian Conspiracy The strength of the storyline is achieved by computer-culture shock to some spoiled playgood writing, rather than by reams and reamsers, but Shadow of the Comet, like Halley's The good news is that the designers have of text, but all critical conversations and disComet. is something that doesn't come paid considerable attention to plotit is the coveries are automatically noted in the chararound that often and. when it does is well cornerstone of Shadow. This game outshines acter's diary. This aide memoir can be worth seeing. almost all of its contemporaries in this area referred to at any time to check one's current with sub-plots, mystery, subterfuge and some progress, and will be invaluable for those alShadow of the Comet will be brough to the of the best characterization seen for, well, lergic to taking their own notes. U.S. audience by I-Motion in October. The about 76 years or so! A rather naughty, dark U.S. incarnation will be offered on CD-ROM, Gallic sense of humor pervades, and I'm cerConsiderable effort has gone into the puzand will feature some enhancements. CGW COMPUTER Not Just Another Roll Of The Dice SPORTS IBM  APPLE I C -64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! HYPER | BACKGAMMON HYPER-BACKGAMMON is an exciting, new, fast-paced, CD-ROM game. But, unlike any other games on the market, HYPER-BACKGAMMON was programmed to calculate over 32 million different playing scenarios and is accurate to %. So be forewarned, your opponent is a formidable expert! 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule  766 teams included, NFL, WFL, USFL, WLAF & College from 1925 to present  Trade, draft or input teams. Standings and League Leaders FULL COUNT BASEBALL You manage all 26 most recent teams and 52 great past teams 45 man roster Stats compiler. Complete boxscore to screen/ printer . Auto scheduler. Input your own teams, draft or trade players  Wind/Weather Option You choose starting line-up, batting order, bunt for a hit, steal . Standings and League Leaders! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 ANGE:HAFENER GAMES: PO BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 HYPER-BACKGAMMON\"Muses fewer playing pieces than original backgammon, which makes the game faster, more exciting, and much more fun. You can easily master the basic offensive and defensive strategies, and soon you'll be testing your gambling instincts with the doubling cube! So, don't be surprised if you find it impossible to stop playing. But remember, in the lightning-fast world of HYPER-BACKGAMMON\", your fortunes may rise or fall with just one roll of the dice! Available at CompUSA and your local software store, or call 1-310-659-6707. System Requirements: PC or PS/2 compatible com puter, CD-ROM drive that supports the ISO.9660 standard, with interface card, cable, and software, minimum 640K of RAM with 400K available. DOS 3.1 or later, VGA card and VGA color monitor HYTER-BACKGAMMON 1992 ARCTO, INC. All rights reserved. Distributed by ROMTIME, a division of ARCTO, INC. HYPER-BACKGAMMON and ROMTIME are trademarks of ARCTG, INC. All other trademarks are the property their respective companieCircle Reader Service #73 Circle Reader Service #94 Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"Top Titles at the Lowest Prices! 800-554-9925 ComputAbility use cons sa tam som Since 1982 CGW 8-93 FAX: (414) 357-7814 TECH INFO: (414) 357-8181 HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm, Sat 11am-5pm P.O. Box 17882, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53217 Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! Consumer Electronics IBM 39.95 3495 SOUND CARDS CREATIVE SOUND $215 BLASTER.16 ASP 29.95 17.95 2995 39 95 3105 37.95 2595 3495 3.495 36.95 1995 3495 2995 CREATIVE LAUD, INC. AMIGA  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible Links Firestone Lords of Time Lost Treasures of Infocom. Madden Footbal Mega Fortress Mission Dusk 1 of 2 Megatraveller 2 Might & Magic III Nigel Mansells No Greater Glory Obitus Oh No! More Lemmings stand alone Oh No! More Lemm, adit-on Omar Shariff on Bridge Out of this World PGA Tour Golt... Golf Tournament Course disk... Paladin Il Paper Boy 2...... Perfect General WWII Scenano Disk Pinhal Dreams Pinball Fantasy Prey Pools of Darkness Pools of Radience Populous Populous II The Challenge scenario disk Powermonger Data Disk Prince of Persia Ultima Vi Part 2 Um VI Realms Road Rash Robosport Secret of Monkey Island I or il Shadowlands Shadow of the Beast III Sharif on Bridge 29.95 46.95 31 95 17.95 3495 2595 3495 19.95 2495 2495 24.95 37.95 15 95 31.95 3795 2095 3195 20.95 2495 37.95 42.95 19.95 3195 34.95 MEDIA WA VISION PRO AUDIO MPC SPECTRUM Multimedia PC $175 Pro Audio Studio 16 $205 Mauna Kea 19.95 Special Operations #1 of 2 20.95 Bart Spinosa 19.95 Wing Commander Deluxe 47.95 Lord of the Rings Il Two Towers 34.95 Wizardry Crusaders Dark Savant Lost Treasures of infocom 39.95 World Aria 4.0 44.95 Lost Vikings 29.95 World Circuit Champ Edition 39.95 Lunar Command ..34.95 World Science Arcade ... Maelstrom CALL World Circuit Grand Prix 34.95 Magic Candle lll 37.95 WWII Banties of the South Pacific Mantis / Speech Pack 39.95/19.95 World War II Europe 1939-1945...... CALL Maria is Missing 34,95 XWing ...... 39.95 Mega Lo Mania 29.95 Zodiac Signs... 39 955 Megatraveler llar lll. 34.95/39.95 Mercenaries .... 23.95 Moht & Magic lll......... 39.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win... 34.95 Mom Magical Music Machine 20.95 Abandoned Places 24.95 MS Golf for Windows 2 : AA . ..39.95 Mystery at the Museum 34.95 A Train Cons Se! 21.95 National Lampoon's Chess Maniac 39 95 Air Support 29.95 News of the Past... 34.95 Ball Game 2495 NFL Pro League Footbal Bane/Cosmic Forge Meg No Greater Glory 39 95 Bards Tale Construction 29.95 Omar Shariff on Bridge Windows 29.95/29.95 Battle Toads 24.95 Ongin FX Screen Saver 25.95 Birds of Prey 31 95 Out of this World 34.95 Black Crypt 31.05 Pacitic Theater of Operations... 39.95 Blitz Basic 2. 97.95 Paladin 2 3495 Caesar 3405 Patriot 42.95 Campaign 3495 Pathway to Power 29.95 Carmen San Diego Each 30.95 Pepper's Adventure in Time 29.95 Carmen San Diego America 36 95 Perfect General 3495 Castles 1405 Pirates of Gold 39.95 Campaign Disk 19.95 Populous !! 3795 Castles 11 Power Politics 29.95 Chaos. Dungeon Master 2 24.95 Prince of Persia ll 39 95 Civilization 39 95 PrintShop Deluxe DOS or Windows 44.95/4495 Combat Ar Patrol 29.95 Graphics Libanes Business 2995 Conflict Korea 37 95 Graphics Libraries Sampler 2995 Contraption Zach 24.95 Print Shop Deure Comic Characters 29.95 Creepers 29 95 47.95 Crime Does Not Pay 30.95 Proto Star War on the frontier 39.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 39.95 2995 Curse of Enchanta 28.95 Quest for Glory 3 3995 Curse of the Arufe Bonds 15 05 Rans to Riches 3195 Cyber Empires 31.95 Realms of Arlanda 3495 Cytron Red Crystal CALL Daumonsgate 34 95 Return of the Phantom 3495 Dark Queen of Krynn 31 95 Ring World. Patriarchs Hevenge/premium 34.95 Dark Seed RoboSport for Windows 2495 Death Knights of Krynn Rock and Bach Studio 34.95 Deluxe Music 77.95 Home 2995 Demoniak 30.95 Rules of Engagement II ..39.95 Desert Strike 31.95 SCOUT 3495 Digdal Dungeon Seal Team.. .. ..... 37.95 Discovery Columbus ...... 34.95 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe 39.95 Dragon's Lair 3 3495 Expansion Disk 1.2.3 or 4 1995 Dune... 34.95 Serpent Isle (U7 part 2) .....4795 Dungeon Master & Chaos (OMI) bundle 2495 Seven Cities of Gold Com Ed. 31.95 Elf 31.95 Shadow President 39.95 Elvira Il. Jaws of Cerberus Shadowgate for Windows .. ........ 31.95 Essence 39.95 Shadowlands 29.95 Eve of the Beholder tor 1 37.95 Shandon Bridge Enhanced 5995 F-15 Strike Eagle il 34 95 Sid Meier's Bundle 29.95 Fables & Fiends Legend of Kyrandia 34.95 Sim Ant OS Windows 34.95.3495 Falcon 29.95 Sim City DOS/Windows 29.95734 95 Fantastic Voyage 27 95 Sim Earth / Windows 29.95/29.95 Fighter Dual Pro 3495 Sin Farm 3495 Fire Force 24.95 Sim Life 39.95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 3195 Soitine's Journey 34.95 Gods 2495 Sound Graphics, Aircraft 24.95 Hardball 29.95 Space Hulk Harpoon 3795 Space Quest 5 39.95 Battleset 14 25.95 Special Forces 29 95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Spectre DOS premium 34.95 Spell Craft 3495 Heimdalt 24.95 Spellcasting 301... 34.95 Hockey League Simulator 2495 Spellammer Pirates of Healmice 37.95 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis Star Legions Jack Nicklaus Unlimited 34 95 Star Controll 34.95 Leander 29.95 Star Trek Screen Savers for Win 32.95 Legend of Mart.. 3: 95 Strike Commander 47.95 Lemmings 1/2 29 95/34 95 Strike Squad 37.95 Light Quest..... 31.95 Sino Poker 3/data disks 29.95/15.95 Stronghold. Summoning 37.95 Superbase Pro IV ... 167.95 Silent Service Il.... Sim Ant Sim City Sim Earth Soltaires Journey Sorcerian Space Hulk 39.95 31 95 29.95 3495 29.95 2995 19.95 3495 29.95 2995 34 95 36.95 31 95 34.95 34.95 34 95 29.95 1295 29.95 37.95 3495 29 95 29.95 MODEMS FREE Prodigy Starter Kil V with purchase of any Zoom Modem! V.32 bis Semd/Receive 14.400 for Windows Internal / External ................ ... S179 / $199 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 for DOS Internal / External. .. S179 / $199 31.95 Aces of the Pacific WWII 1946 add on disk........... 1995 Aces Over Europe AD&D Dark Sun: Shattered Lands... 47.95 AD&D Unlimited Adventures 31.95 ADIBOVADIJUNIOR VOL 1 34.99 Adventures of Pinocchio 45.95 Air Bucks ........... 34.95 Air Traffic Controller Air Warrior ............ ... 39.95 Aircraft & Adventure Factory 24.95 Airforce Flight Assignment 39.95 Aladdin and His Wonderful Lamp... 35.95 Alone in the Dark 34.95 Amaran 39.95 Ambush at Sorina...... 37.95 Archon Ultra 3795 Ashes of Empire 44.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 AT Air Comm.ind... ..34.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Barron's Book Notes... 44.95 Battles of Destiny 3495 BattleChess 4000 Super VGA... 29.95/3495 Battlefield 2000 3795 Betrayal at Kronder 39.95 Big League ballpark diskhardtail 1795 Bloodstone 2595 Body austrated Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space 39.95 Campaign 3495 Car & Driver 3795 Carrier Strike South Pacific 39 95 Expansion Set 20.95 Carners of War 3495 Carriers of War Construction Kit Castles 1 or II 3495/34 95 Caesars Palace........... ........19.95 Challenge of the five Realms 34.95 Charpions  3495 Civilization 44.95 Classic Adventures. Comanche Maximum Overkill 42.95 Mission Disk #1 or 12 ........... 25 95/25.95 Conquered Kingdoms 3495 Conquest of Japan... Creepers 29.05 Crosswords Deluxe................. 21.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 41.95 Cyber Empires...... 31.95 Cyber Race CALL D&D Stronghold... 37 05 Daemonsgate VGA 3495 Dagger of Amonra... 39.95 Dands 39.05 Darklands MPE... 44.95 Dark H 34.95 Dark Sun. 47.95 Daughter of Serpentes 31 95 Deja Vu l or II, Windows 3795 Dragon's Lait 3 3495 Dr. Floyds Desktop Toys 24.95 3495 Ealgle Eye Mysteries Ecoquest ll 29 95 Eight Ball Deluxe El-Fit Electronic Agiau 3895 Empire Deluxe 34.95 Erie the Unready 3495 European Racers CALL Eye of the Beholder til $2.95 F-15 12 Classic premium 19.95 F-15 Strike Eagle III .......34 95/4995 Fables & Friends Legend of Kyrandia. 34.95 Falcon 30 Disk 1 Operation Fighting Tiger 24.95 Financial Workshop 2595 Flashback 31 95 Flight Assignment: Air Force 39.95 Flight Simulator 40..... 39.95 Pear's Power Tonis 24.95 Freddy Pharkas....... Front Page Football Gambit 37.95 Gary Grisbys Pacific War 44.95 Gateway II: Homeword CALL Global Effect Gobblins II 24.95 Grand Slam Bridge II 31.95 Great Naval Battles ....... ..............42.95 Scenario Builder Expans Dik 25.95/2095 America in the Altantic... 20.95 Hard Baililor lll...............29.95 34.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47 95 Harrier Assult 3495 Heaven & Earth 29.95 Heroes of the 357th 1795 High Command .... 41.95 Hockey League Simulator il Humans 2495 INCA... 34 95 Incredible Machine 29.95 Indy Jones 4. Fate of Atlantis 34.95 Italian 50 55 95 J. Nicklaus Sign Tour 2 17 95 Jack and the Beanstalk .35.95 Jump Jet 39 95 Jump Jet Ace Pack.............. $9.95 Jutland 49.95 King's Quest 5 Enhanced 39 95 King's Quest 6 Lands of Lore 34.95 la Rusu Ricehall 37 95 Legacy, The 39 95 Legacy Realm of Terror 3495 Legends of Valou! 37 95 Leisure Suit Larry 5 33.95 Lemmings 29.95 On No More Lemmings (ad-36) 21 95 Lemmings il 34.95 Liberty of Death 34.95 Links 385 Pro 39.95 Star Controll Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strip Poker 3... Data Disk 1-6 each Super DJ il Tales of Magic: Prophecy Shadow Team Yankee Thunderhawk Thunderstrike Tom Landry Football Treasure of the Savage Frontier Tree Ultima IV or V Utopa Wayne Gretzky II Where in the Carmen each Wizardry Dark Savant Wizardry. Bare World Cucut 29 95 3495 29.95 3495 3495 3695 Zool 3495 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows ...... S179/5179 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone .......... $229 with Fax Software, DOS/Win .......... $239 / $239 Software available only on 3.5\" disk or premium packs, No individual 5.25\" disks are available JOYSTICKS 800-554-9925 29.95 29.95 37.95 ........... TA Break Pinball TA Break Pool Tales of Magic: Proph, Shadow Task Force 1942 Task Force Admirals Pack Terminator 2029 The Playroom 2.0 The Prophecy The Legacy Tom Landry football Tondo Treasures of the Savage Frontier Tristan ... Ultima VII Forge of Virture Data Disk Ultima Underworld it Ultrabots Uninvited for Windows ........... Unlimited Adventures V for Victory Gold Juno Sword V for Victory Muset Garden V for Victory, Utah Beach V for Victory : Velikiye tuki 44.95 39.95 29.95 2495 39.95 2995 44.95 31 95 29.95 49 95 S49 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick ...... $32 Eliminator Game Card ............. PC MouseStick........ CH Products: Virtual Pilot/Virtual Pilot Pro ................... $69/$89 Flight Stick ................................. $39 Hi Speed Adaptor ........ $19 Gamecard 3-Auto / Gamecard 3-PS/2 ....... 530/ MACH 3 Joystick $29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke ... .... MAXX Pedal Kraft: Kraft KC3 Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler ........... Kraft Thunderstick.. Thrustmaster: Flight Control $75 Weapons Control Mark II Rudder Pedals.. Thrustmater Pro. $119 20.95 47.95 37.95 ................... 42.95 42 95 42.95 4295 37.95 . One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. Women Owned Businesses.  All Products Sold  Corporate, Government & Carry Manufacturers' School POS Welcome. Full Warranties & VISA Documentation. er Card  APO, PO HI, AK No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian on Credit Cards orders welcome: 6%  Most Orders Shipped Min. $6. International within 48 Hours, Orders Shipped First Class  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: $5 per order, not per title. 15%-Min. SI5. If mail cost Hardware: 5% Min. $5. exceeds calculated amount .C.O.D orders welcome you'll be billed additional. with only a $6.00 Charge. Call for Free Catalog  We Ship Latest Version Items Not Listed Prices fluctuate heyond our control & may change for better or worse Detective returns must have a Return Authorization number. Call our 1.800 10 obtain a Return Authorization or your return will not be accepted. Shipping & handlingate non-refundable. All sales are final. All retums are subject to a restocking fee. 29.95 19.95 34.95 3495 Vikings Field of Conquest Wayne Gretzke 3 War of the Gut Warriors of Legend Ween the Prophecy When Two Worlds War Where Carmen San Diego Each Whete Carmen Past Where Carmen Space Where Carmen USA Deluxe Where Carmen World Deluxe Wild Science Arcade Wilson Pro Stall Golf Wing Commander II Speech Accessory Pack $99 29.95 44.95 44.95 4495 $119 24 95 15.95 Circle Reader Service #45 "


"BEST Thar's Gold in that thar GateWorld of the REST Arcade Fun From HomeBrew Software by Chuck Miller The world of shareware In general, shareware games are crafted by small, home-based Pro 2; Pro AudioSpectrum and PAS 16; and the Roland MPU401. software houses working on a very limited budget. These game Unfortunately, the digitized sound effects provided fall short of the development teams, which usually consist of anywhere from one music in quality. to several individuals, will occasionally \"farm out some of the work Action gamers who have enjoyed Apogee's shareware releases will on their latest release to another small shareware developer with find HomeBrew Software's Gate World a pleasant diversion. Though expertise in an area where they are lacking. However the work is it can be quite difficult at points, it is a fun and addictive way to spend handled, it remains largely true that games produced by shareware a few evenings. authors are primarily of the home grown or homebrew variety, the work of a few individuals. This month, Best of the Rest looks at the Registration for Gate World: Volume One The Seed Ship and for work of a homespun game company (consisting of several programthe final two volumes in the trilogy is $30.00, plus $4.00 shipping mers who used to work at Epyx), HomeBrew Software. and handling (CA residents must add sales tax). Please specify the disk size required 5.25\" 1.2M, 3.5\" 720K, or 3.5\" 1.44M. Upon Through the Gate registration, the player will receive Volume Two and Three, a hint sheet and the secret cheat code. GateWorld requires 560K of free RAM and GateWorld: Volume One The Seed Ship [IBMPC RT #32805) is VGA graphics. a new shareware release from HomeBrew Software in the style of Apogee's Duke Nukem and Commander Keen. Programmed by Ken For more information, contact: Rogoway and Dave Parquharson, GateWorld looks and plays much HomeBrew Software like the titles from Apogee, offering many hours of side-scrolling, P.O. Box 1593 arcade fun. The quality of these products, as well as the trilogy-based Vacaville, CA 95696-1593 design, is very similar. (707) 451-9653 (for information) GateWorld commences with the forced landing of Captain Buzz. (800) 242-4775 (for credit card orders only) Klondike on a mining asteroid. Rudely Again, it is time to draw this column awakened from hypersleep by his onto a close. I wish everyone the very best board computer, Klondike sets our ro MUNTINLUPIDUTINNITUMIZIERTE of gaming, and issue the reminder not to investigate the intricate maze of mines neglect the many fine shareware offerbelow the asteroid's surface. As expected, ings available. So, until the next time, it is not long before he is deeply involved enjoy! in searching a mining complex to solve Games reviewed in this column are the mystery at hand and collect as much available through many distributors of gold and gems as possible in the process. shareware and public domain software, As was already mentioned, GateWorld as well as on many national and private is a side-scrolling, arcade shooter. The on-line services (GEnic Round Table loobject of play, apart from simply staying cations and file numbers appear in alive, is to avoid numerous traps and SCORE ENERGY E18 brackers when available). If you do not opponents while collecting as much gold IBR004800 CEE have access to these services, you can 09 and as many precious minerals as possiFRESS FE FOR HELE usually write or call the game developer ble along the path to the game's end. The for an evaluation copy. Remember, if player must also make sure to keep his or Gate World: Volume One you find a shareware game enjoyable, her energy level as high as possible and please register it with the author. maintain a decent supply of laser shots. These levels can be rejuvenated by collecting supplies along the way. Send Us Your Best Unlike many of these arcade titles, progress can be saved at any point in the game. When the player dies in GateWorld, he or she can return If you have authored a shareware or public domain game for to the exact point where progress was last saved as opposed to the MS-DOS compatible, Macintosh (yes, we are now covering Mac beginning of a level. shareware offerings) or Amiga computers and would like to have it Graphics and sound are good by shareware standards, and acceptconsidered for review in this column, please send two complete copies able compared to most commercial releases. The VGA graphics fall (preferably on 3.5\" disks) with documentation and a cover letter to: somewhere between Duke Nukem and Jill of the Jungle in quality of appearance — perhaps a bit shy of similar offerings in the retail Best of the Rest marketplace. Music, on the other hand, is much more commercial in Computer Gaming World its quality. Surprisingly, support is provided for 11 sound standards 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 including Ad Lib and Ad Lib Gold; Sound Blaster, SB Pro I and SB Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 cow mille MAKAMLARDAN Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"Dungeons c Dragons COMPUTER GAME STRONGHOLDE THE POWER TO BUILD AND COMMAND YOUR OWN KINGDOM! STRONGHOLD is the first kingdom simulator set in the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game world. Battle computercontrolled adversaries to become Emperor by building and expanding a kingdom while dispatching all opposing forces. You'll deal with all the details of running your own domain: Construction farmland, population, housing, taxes, troops, morale changing seasonal conditions as well as a multitude of D&D game monsters. Stronghold's striking visual presentation includes a ground-view camera angle that zooms in and out using 3-D scaling technology. Music and digitized sound effects enhance the fantasy mood. The intuitive interface makes this unique game fast and easy to play! STRONGHOLD. Running a kingdom may not be easybut it sure is fun! IBM (386 or greater) TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC. SFEEL 20.00 TOTEUTO! hivying level 3 (125,19 LOYALTO FONTEARD 1 STK LEVEL EXFNEHOES IT FONTS 5752 NORMAL WEAPONS BAY SCREENS SHOWN: IBM 256-COLOR VGA My lady families are saueezed togetwintity TOMS CRIOU OU this neighborhood. We need more housing S hiter Wow Releron Tegnato lightning bol spell BEROUS ELEROCES DONE Care mler thiet T52. DUNGEONS & DRAGONS D&D, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc. 1993 TSR Inc. 01993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved "


"Deyneid AS THE WORM TURNS Inching Along with Psygnosis' Creepers tal» levels are caterpillars of a different color. The game features a neat soundtrack which changes with each level. It's a credit to the musicians that I could play for several levels without being forced to turn off the sound to keep my sanity. There are also some cute sound effects provided in the game. Tools Tools Je LA by Ken Hill kay, maybe we computer gamers have given direction. Finally, a creeper magnet can to face a potentially traumatic disaster be used to pull the critters in the proper in order to get our blood racing. While direction. we may be able to invest hours of game play One of the game's few innovations is the and tons of creativity in staving off the geno\"Creeper Peeper. also known as \"Creeper cide of hundreds of Lemmings, it seems to be Cam.\" Clicking on this icon opens a window awfully hard to get worked up over transshowing a close-up view of the lead creeper on any level. This is helpful for keeping track of the caterpillar clan while smoothing their round in another part of the screen. One can also place a static camera view on any part of the screen. This is a near bir of technology, but it certainly doesn't add much to the game. As in Lemmings, the player can use several interesting tools to get the little green goombas on the right track. Horizontal girders are Score used to cover holes, inclined girders can be 4400 used as ramps or jumps, and vertical girders can block movement if necessary. Further, if fpecessary. Further, if forming caterpillars into butterflies. In Creepers, Psygnosis has injected a new cast of cute the creepers are fecling particularly \"springy,\" characters into a Lemmings-style puzzle game, there's a creeper trampoline to bounce them but their Wand of Programming seems to on their way. There's also a bomb to blow have fizzled, and it comes off as just another holes in floors or walls when a level requires Lemmings look-alike with little new to offer. radical remodeling. The premise of the game is very simple. Each level supplies certain types and numCreepers are little green caterpillars (completebers of tools that can be used in its solution, with dancing antennae) which are ready to plus an energy allotment. Placing a tool exchange into beautiful burrerflies. Unfortupends energy, as does a swipe with the tennis nately, they don't have a very good sense of racket. A tool can be moved anytime after it direction and need the player's help in reach has been placed. Though, there is a limit on ing the butterfly bowls necessary for their how many tools can be used at a given time metamorphic transformation. On each level, on each level. a certain number of creepers are released, and Game play is very similar to its Lemmings the player must maneuver them into their cousin. Creepers are dropped or shot onto the butterfly bowls to advance to the next level. screen one at a time. The player must quickly figure out how to use the various tools availTools able to get them to the butterfly bowls without causing their demise along the way. At the successful completion of every level, one gets the password to the next level in case one wants to quit the game and come back later. There are over 70 levels in Creepers, ranging in difficulty from \"easy\" to \"brutal.» The easy levels are designed to teach the game, and they Score 3000 come complete with a Professor character to provide guidance. Most folks will be able to The little creepy creatures move across the get through the \"easy\" and \"moderate\" levels screen either by crawling very slowly or by with a little practice (the early easy levels curling up into a circular shape and rolling would even be appropriate for small chilalong merrily. Their movement, however, dren). However, the challenging\" and \"brucan be aided with the use of a tennis racket. TITLE: Creepers With this tool the player can give a creeper a $49.99 good whack, rolling it into a ball, and moving REQUIREMENTS: 386-20MHZ, VGA graphics, mouse ir along the screen at a good pace. There are PROTECTION: Code Wheel also two different types of fans in the game DESIGNER: Michael Hiebert & Steve Vestergaard PUBLISHER: Psygnosis (one for above ground and another for underBrookline, MA water ventures) which blow the creepers in a (617) 497-7794 KARAWAK Score 42001 On the whole, game play is a mixed bag. Some of the tools do pretty much what one would expect, others are problematic. Placing a girder to block a hole or to provide a bridge requires painful precision; the slightest misplacement causes a rolling creeper to bounce off a crease when it appears as though it should roll smoothly along. Other tools ignore the rules of physics. The most notable of these is the combination of the ramp and trampoline. In an early level, one solution seems to require that a creeper bounce off a trampoline and up to a slanted ramp. However, the creepers insist on bouncing straight back down the slanted surface! Such defiance of common sense can be very frustrating. Tools CREEPER CAHORA Tools BEB180 Score B 2800 B Score B All and all, Creepers is a disappointment, Something about the whole premise just doesn't work; the ideas here just aren't as fresh as they were in the original Lemmings. LIKE other games that have tried to cash in on Lemmings 'popularity, it is uninspired. There may be some who will enjoy Creepers, but I'm afraid that its audience is limited. Lemmings freaks or die-hard puzzle nurs might get their money's worth from Creepers. The rest of us would be better off sticking with the far more lovable Lemmings 2. CGW PRICE: SYSTEM: IBM Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"NOW AVAILABLE -ONPCTM NINJA OF THE \"Nth\" DIMENSION ZY Electronic Innovative Design 768 Two Mile Parkway Goodlettsville, Tn. 37072 Phone: 1-(615)-972-8085  Fax: 1-(615)-851-6098 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"CD-ROM pevnein ROCK 'EM, SOCK 'EM ROBOTS A Heavyweight Battle for the Planet in Cyberflix' Lunicus MESSAGE DANGER. DEMY ANLADI RIDHOFSTE INTIMEDIATE by Tony Reveaux rt was the year 2023 when the shovels of paleontologists digging corridors of Lunicus by using the keyboard or by selecting the navigathrough prehistoric rocks struck upon ancient artifacts of extratertion icon; click the homing cursor on a wall or door and one will restrial origin. The terror began after one of the devices was automatically be moved forward to that position. There is, however, activated, and a giant alien warship slid into no reverse. Nor is there a pause command. So, orbit opposite the moon. As it rained robotic if one feels a sneeze coming on or the doorbell attack drones upon the Earth, it was evident rings, the best way to \"take-five\" is to activate that the warship's goal was to capture the the Save function. When ready to roll again, the planet's major cities and enslave their inhabiplayer can just click \"Quir.\" tants. Hidden in the low-lying crater of Mare The fully three-dimensional attack robot Imbrium, the crew of the United Nation's sprites, in all their snarly varieties, come at the Moonbase Lunicus Station remained Earth's player as hard and fast as if they were pumped only hope. out from a floppy disk. Unfortunately, the fightIn the Earth's corner is the Macintosh CDing can get tedious after a while — especially owning gamer with a taste for arcade style since the player can't fire and move at the same mayhem. Lunicus is an action-packed excursion time, and each explosion needs a couple of secframed within a graphic adventure. The player LUNICUS onds to blossom and fade but generally the can choose between beginner, intermediare, adpace will be exceeded only by one's adrenaline. vanced and expert levels when cnlisting into the crusade to sweep The real-time action of Lunicus, charging pell-mell up and down Terra clear of the iron invaders. First, the player must get the lay of corridors and streers, keeps the player involved and maintains the the land on Moonbase Lunicus by spending a few days checking out illusion of being there.\" the facilities, schmoozing with the other crew members, and attending briefings before he or she can zip into a power suit, hoist a blast rifle, \"What You See ...\" or climb into the cockpit of a fighter. The cities of Los Angeles, Tokyo and Moscow must be liberated in turn. In cach city, players find The quality of the graphic adventure content, however, is mixed. themselves inside a huge maze, representing a building in dire need of Graphically, there are at least four different levels of detail and droid eradication. While droids are being slagged resolution that one is dropped in and out of very abruptly. Depending into recyclable bits, the player must scarch cabinets upon one's processor speed, the short movies that are for supplies of shields, energy and ammo. used for intros and transitions, such as spaceflights When all four floors have been cleansed, the player and landings, can be a bit jumpy. Further, the sound may sometimes be distorted. However, these eleadvances to the street where a tank awaits. The tank's ments do provide a nice pictorial and cinematic primary targer is the flying \"hypnode.\" If the player environment during those sequences. can manage to hit it ju-u-u-st right, then one can confidently climb into the fighter in order to return The Moonbase and the city interiors are composed to Lunicus for rest and briefings. The robocidal quest of rough-cut forms whittled out of low-level 3D continues after the liberation of Moscow as the pushy computer modeling masses, with crash-test dummy robots infest the engineering deck of the base itself. mannequins for figures. When the player interacts After a little radical janitorial work, it's time to invade with the other characters, such as Commander the alien Mother Ship and hit on the Hive city for a Molotov, Dr. Heisenstein, Raife, Terry or Sasha, it one-on-one with a mean alien Queen. is by talking with them in a separate mode where they are seen in high resolution close-ups and speak with Leaping Lunicus limited animation lip sync. One gets to them by clicking on their figures, which are of such low-resoCyberFlix has developed a new and more efficient CYBERFLIX lution that they appear as clouds of crunchy pixels. authoring system for Lunicus that was devised to These uneven pictorial transitions detract from the speed the player over the slow file loading and graphic adventure continuity. lag times that plague most games produced on CD-ROM. In the installation process, the user PRICE: An award-winning interactive story, Lunicus SYSTEM: is not. One shouldn't expect the sci-fi movie is offered three levels of installation, each provid REQUIREMENTS: Mac Il or better, 4 MB RAM, 256 color ing a tad more speed if one's hard disk can spare moods of Spaceship Warlock or the professional, monitor, CD-ROM drive, System polished detail of The Journeyman Project. Howthe elbowroom. This results in real time move PROTECTION: ever, for what it is — a CD-full of fist-fighting ment and action in the arcade and moonbase CyberFlix Bill Appleton action Lunicus is capable of some fancy sections. DISTRIBUTOR: footwork and a solid punch. cow San Diego, CA One can move quickly through the rooms and Red Hol 3D Action On CD-ROMI LUNICUS TITLE: Lunicus $79.95 Macintosh 6.03 or later None DEVELOPER: DESIGNER: Educorp (800) 843-9497 Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 45 49 49 290 Mantis 195 FS Pro 25 25° 31 69 240 36 Tahiti 4705 Sesame St In Classy Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. MASTER CARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESS ACCEPTED WITH NO SURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: NOT PER ITEM 908-396-8880 A Train 39 El Fish Leather God Phb 2 24 Print Shop, New 36 Studyware Biology, CD ROM Manhole Sound Cards Construction Set 22 Empire Deluxe Legacy Necromancrigu. Graphics (ea). 22 Magazine Rack Clc.,Chem.,Econ. Aces Over Europe 440 Entr Pak Win (ea) Legend of Kyrandia 35 Print Sp Companion 31 Physics, Statistic 25 Aesops Fables Mantis 45* Ad Ub Microchannel 69 Aces of the Pacific 390 Eric the Unready Legends of Valour 38 Privateer 47° Studyware LSAT 37 Aircraft Encyclopda 45 179 Marketing Master 39 Ad Lib Gold 1000 Mission Disk 25 Eye of Beholder 2005 Legion's of Krella Pro League Baseball35 37 109 Stunt Island Aloha Hawaii Mavis Beacon 39 ATI Stereo FX AD&D Collect Ed 2 420 Eye of Beholder 2 38 Leisur Suit Larry 5 395 Prophecy Summer Challenge 34 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Mixed Up Mothr Gse 37 VGA StreoFIX 1MB 369 AD&D Starter Kit 426 Eye of Beholder 3 42 Lemmings Prophecy of Shadow 38 Super Tetris Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Monarch Notes 75 Covox Snd Mster 11145 AD&D Unlimited 31 F 15 III . Oh No More Addon 23 Protostar Take a break X-Word29 Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Monkey Island 39 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Adibou&Junior Vol1 34 F 15 III Umited 4946 Lemm. Oh No More 31 Putt Putt Parade 32 Pinball 2806 Audubon Mammals 37 MS DOS Archives 35 Logitech Soundmn 179 Air Bucks 340 F117a Stealth Fight 41 Lemmings 2.. 350 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26 Task Force 1942 370 Autodesk Explorer 119 MM Music Mozart 33 Media Vision Air Duel 33's Facts in Action Liberty or Death 31 35 Quest for Glory 1 22 T.M.N.Turtle Arcade 25 Barney Bear Goes MM Music Vivaldi 33 Audio Port 139 Air Warrior SVGA 35 Falcon 3. 0 4 5 Life and Death 2 32 Quest for Glory 3 39 T.M.N.Turtle Advnt 32 to School North Amer Fax Bk 55 CDPC / XL 1199* AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Oper Fight Tiger 25 Line in the Sand 25 Rags to Riches 350 Tengons Arcade Hit 25 57 Pro Audio Spec + 139 North Amer Indians Algebra Made Easy 25 Family Tree Maker 42 Railroad Tycoon Links into Space ios Terminator 2029 390 50 Officers Bookcase M.M. Upgrade Kit 765 Aliens Ale Babysitter 32 Farm Creativity Kit 18 Links 386 Pro ReachForThe Skies19 Tmnt 2 Cybrchess 35 Batik Designs Our Solar System 29 Pro Audio Spec 16 194 Alone in The Dark 350 Fatty Bear Birthday 310 Course Disk ea 16 Tetris Classic 31 Battlechess PC Game Room 49 Pro 16 Multimedia Alphabet Blocks 290 Femme Fatale 26 386 Courses ea 19 Reader Rabbit 2 35 Tetris Trio Beauty & Beast 49 Peter & Wolf 45 Upgrade Kit 955 F. F. Data Disk Amazon 21 Lord of Rings 2 37 Ready for Letters 59 35 The Legacy Beethoven Ninth Pool Shark 19\" Thunderboard 95 37 Ambush Fields of Glory 33°5 Lost File Sherick H 41\" Read 'n Roll VGA 31 The Lost Vikings zoos Berlitz Think & Talk Presdnt:It Surt Geo 105 Thunder & Lightng 229 American Civil War 25 Flight Simul A.T.P. Lost Treas Infocom 42 37 Reading Adv in Oz 36 French 105 Time Riders America35 99 Programmers ROM 59 Sound Blaster Ancient Art War Sky 35 Flight Simul (M.S.) 41 Lost Treasures 2 29 Red Baron 39 Time Treks 36 Spanish 105 Publish id 69 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Ancient Empires NT Trc Cn 349 Lost Tribe 25 Mission Disk 17 Time Quest Bible Library Reference Library 59 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Animation Studio 75 Arctt/Scen Dsgn 28 Lost Vikings Realms 1905 Tom Landry Football 30 Bibles & Religon 30 Rotor/Airball Time 35 S B Pro 16 2 39 Armored Fist 1 29 Aircraft Adv Factory25 Lure of Temptress 32 Retum O the Phnom 33\" Tony LaRussa Base. 17 Bookshell 49 SB Multimedia Kit 560 San Diego Zoo # 685 Ashes of Empire Magic Candle 3 370 Britanica Family Chc 75 Rex Nebular Tony LaRussa II 37\" Secret Weapons 59 S B MM Starter Kit 459 A.T.A.C. # 701 Riders of Rohan Expansion Disk 15 Business Master 32 Seventh Guest 59 S B CDROM Intml 360 Automap Airport Facty Loc 17 Mario is Missing 350 Ring World Top Class Sieries sa 16 Buzz Aldrin Race 59 Sherlock Holme 39 Sound Machine ind. Automap Windows California Missing City Disk 17 Risk for Windows 29es Traders Carmen World Dixe 65 Sherl Holmes 2 42 SB, Speaker Joystick 95 Automap Europe 24 Mario Teaches Type 25 Risky Woods Treasure Cove 35 Career Opportunities42 Sleeping Beauty 37 Roland SCC-1 GS 375 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Great Britian 37 Math Blaster Mystry29 Road & Track Pres 35 Treasure Math Storm35 Cautious Condor 45 Sound Works 35 Sound Canvas 559 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Hawaii 19 Math Blaster Plus 29 Road to Final Four 37 Treasure Mountain 35 CD Game Pack 55 Space Quest 4 37 Roland MA-12C oa 105 Barbie Design Instant Fact Loc. 19 16 Math Blaster Wind 36 Robosports Wind 340 Treehouse 57 CD Speedway Space Series Apollo 49 SPEAKERS Shielded2B Barbie Fashion 25 Instrumnt Pilot Scen Math Copter 25 Rodney Fun Screen 31 Tristan Pinball Challenge 5 Realms 37 Spirit of Excalibur w/ 3 band Equilizer 45 Barbie Adventure 25 Japan Scanery 19° Math Rabbit 210 25 Rock & Bach Studio 35 Christmas Carol Trolls 33 Stellar 7 37 Altec lansim bo Pilots Pwer Tis Battlechess 4000 VGA 30 24° Math Zone Romance 3 King 2 39 CIA World Fact Trump Castle 3 39 Strange Bedfellows 39 ACS 300 W subwo 299 East/West U.S.ea 59 Battlechoss 4000 SVGA36 Mavis Beacon Type 29 Rome 298 CIA World Fact M/M 42 Turbo Science Star Child 33 Battlefield 375 MIDI Interface 17 Aescue Air 911 Mavis Beacon Wind 35° Rule Engagment 2 38 Clipart Goliath Turtle Tools 30 Star Trek Enhanced 49 Battle Toads 32 Conan Cimerion Scenery St A or B 37 McGee 3 Pack Ultima 7 36 Street Atlas 99 Midiator 101 Serial 95 Battles of Destiny 354 Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Mega Lo Mania 79 290s Forge of Virtue Science Adventure 42 17 Corel Draw Upgd 139 Talking Classic Tale 75 PC Midi Card Beat the House 290 Sound & Graphic 25 Scooter Magic Castlo32 Mental Math Games 37 Ultima 7 Part 2 Crossword Cracker 32 47 179 Talkng Jungle Safari 75 MOX-32 Betrayal at Krondor 350 Mercenaries Scrabble Deluxe 30 Curse of Enchantia 25° Ultima Trilogy 1 135 Time Mag Almanac 49 MPU-IPC Western Europe Betty Crock. Cookbook 19 MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Rogue Deathstar Arcade Ultima Trilogy 2 30 476 Time Table Science 59 Cakewalk Apprentic145 Bill Elliott NASCAR 30 Follow the Reader 2945 Michael Jordon Flight42 Dictionaries & Lang 30 Ultima Underworld 470 325 Too Many Typefonts 35 The Miracle Birds of Prey W/ Sound Source 40 33 Mickey ABC's, Second Front Part 2 47 Don Quixote Ultima 1-6 49 MIDI Software Four Crystal Trazer Blueforce Color or 1-2-3's 19es Sort Weapon Luftwf39es Education Master Ultrabots 37\" 32 Ultimate Shareware Body Illustrated Ballade Free DC 3 7 Mickey's Crossword 19 Electronic Cookbook 75 Tour of Duty Ba. 20 Uninvited Windows 31\" U S Atas Bodyworks 42 Band in a Box Mickey Jigsaw Pzl Front Page Sports 3ges 31 Elect. Home Library 49 U.S. Adas DOS US Aras W/Automap 49 Cadenza 31 Bridgemaster 30 G-Force Mickey Word Advent 25 Sesame St Publish 25 Utopia US History 39 Bug Bunny WikShp 31 Gambit Micro Cookbook 4.0 32 Sesame St. Vol.1or 17 V for Victory 12 a 426 Encarta Encydpd 249 US Presidents Buzz Aldrin 690 Game Maker Cakewalk Pro Microleagu 4 BaseB 32 Soven Cities of Gold 38 Vegas Games Win 1996 European Monarchs 49 USA State Fad Bk 45 Cakewalk Window Campaign Games:Summer Chig35 Microleague FB Dix 32 Shadow President 39es Vei of Darkness 37\" Family Doctor USA Wars:Civil War 49 Encore Capitalist Pig Games:Winter Chlo 35 Microleague Soccer 25 Shadow Prophecy 30 Virtual Realty St 2 59 Font Master USA Wars:Korea 49 Piano Works Car and Driver Gateway Microsoft Golf 39 Shadowgate Wacky Funster 19 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 Play Carrier Strike Gemfire Play it by Ear Midnight Rescue 350 Waxworks 35 Shadowlands USA Wars: WWII Carriers at War Global Conquest 49 Master Tracks Pro 35 Might and Magic 3 38 Shanghai II Wayne Gretzky 3 Front Page News 35 29 Voyage Planet 1.388.69 Midisoft Studio Castle 2 Gobblins 1 of 2 Might & Magic 4 40 Siege Western Front 2205 G Force White Horse Child 33 Mits Castle of Dr. Brain Music Bytes Vol 1 30 Gods Mike Ditka Oltimt FB 37 Dogs at War 2045 When2Worlds War 35 Game Master Who Killed Sam Rup25 Music Mentor Ceasar 35° Grand Slam Brdge II 31 Millie Math House 31 Sierra Action Five 25 What's My Angle 30 Game Pack 2 Willy Beamish Chalinge 5 Realms 33°S Grandmaster Chess 36 26 Music Printer Plus Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Wheel Fortune Vana 25 | Gettysburg:MM Hist 43 Sierra Award Winner 47 Win CD 32 Music Time Gofer Winkles Adv Champions Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 33 350 Great Naval Battle 43 Sierra Family Fun Where Carm San Diego 32 Wing Comm & Miss 45 28 Musicator Chemistry Works 38 Super Ships 2005 Monkey Island 1 or 223 Sierra Starter Bndl 390 Golden Immortal America's Past 3205 Wing Com Ultima 6 Greens Monopoly Deluxe 1996 34 Quick Score Deluxe 99 30 Europe Great Cities Vol 1 Wing Comm 2 Chessmstr 3000 Win35 Gunship 2000 52 Rhythm Aca 36 Moonbase. Guinness Book Roc 59 Time WC 20ti. Undwid 57 S Children Writ & Publ 3 Scenario Disk 24 Mystery at Museum 35 Sim City USA Guy Soy World Atlas Civilization 49 New Math Rabbit 2905 Sim Ant French 60 USA Deluxe Ham Call 21 Trax for Windows Adults Only Must be Civilization MPE Hardball 3 35 N.Y. Times X-Word 32 Sim City Windows 340s World Deluxe 4405 Inspector Gadget 37\" Animation Fantasy 65 Joystic Classic Adventure 36 Data Disk ea. 170 NFL Challenge Prem59 Sim Earth Wild Science Arcad35° Interactive Old Test 52 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 Coaster 65 CH Flightstick 25 Harpoon Designer 32 NFL F.B. Konami 30 Sim Lile Dos/Wind 35° Wilson ProStaffgolf 25\" Interactive Storytime 45 Private Collection Int Bus & Econ Atlas 39 65 CH Game Card 3 31 Comanche Harpoon Signature 49es NFL Video Pro 45° Simpsons Ween:The Pricy 34 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 CH Mach 3 Mission Disk 31 259s Harrier Assault 3.405 Nigel's World Intro Games Fr/Sp. 79 Snap Dragon Willy Beamish Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 CH Virtual Pilot Combat Classics 65 31 Headline Harry Jazz: Multimedia Mist 69 3 7 No Greater Glory 2005 Snoopy Game Club 29 Wing Comandr 2 475 Storm 1 or 2 Nobunagas Ambition 37 65 CH Virtual Pilot Pro 84 Solitaire Window 293 Wizardry Trilogy Jets & Props 31\" 55 Visual Fantasy 65 Eliminator Game Cd 26 Cohort 2 1 9 Heaven & Earth 30 Number Maze 36 Solitaires Journey 35 Word Muncher Jones in Fast Lane 37 Volcano Conquered Kingdom 35 Heimdall 1995 Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Space Ace 2:Borl 36 Word Torture Just Grandma & Me 36 Caddies 7.95ea. 31$ 19 Gravis Joystick 32 Conquest of Japan 35 Heros of 357th Operation Neptune 35 Space Adventure 42 Ital. Germ. Span Jutland 25 Contraption Zak 42 25 Hole in 1 Golf Dbx 25 Kings Quest 5 Wordtris Creepers 29° Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Oregon Trail 28 Space Quest 4 World Atlas DOS 39 Land of Lore . 34\" Skins & Pads Kraft Thunderstick 28 Crusader Drk Savnt39\" Hoyle Bk Game 2 22 Deluxe Space Quest 5 World Circuit Languages of World 99 Dust Covers 15 Maxx Flight Yoke Cuckoo 700 69 31. Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Origin FX Spaceward Ho Learn to Speak Span59 Writer Rabbit 30 Grounded Wrist Strap Cyber Space Humans Max Pedal Once Upon Time 30 Spear of Destiny Leisure Suit Larry X Wing Geyboard Skins 42 15 Mouse Yoke 29° Demonsgate Out of This World 36 Special Forces Your Prsnl Train SAT30 Libry of Art Renaisn 65 Static Pads Quickshot Game Cd 14 Dagger ol Amon Ra 39 Incredible Machine 294 Outnumbered Libry of Art: Overview 65 30 Spectre Zodiac Signs 39 Large-System 15 Quickshot Warrior Dark Half 39 18 Indiana Jones 4 37 Pacific Islands 2 29° Speed Reader Library of Future Zoo Keeper 99 Wrist Pads 39 Darklands Thrustmaster Flight 69 Inspector Gadget 35\" Pacific Wars Spellbound Loom Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Lovely Ladies II Stax (Dust Repellent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro 109 Darkseed 39 Island of Dr. Brain 29° Paladin 2 Spellcasting 301 Ady of Eco Island 22 49 Staby Complete Dark Sun Weapons Control 79 47\" Jack Nicklaus Signt39° Paperboy 2 MacMillian Child Dict49 Spell Craft Dinosaur World 22 Cleaning System 15 Thrustmaster Pedal109 Daughter of Serpnt 31 Jeopardy Silver Patriot Spell-it Plus Race Thru Space 22 Hours: M-F 9AM to 8PM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Dlx Paint Animation 85 Jeopardy Super 25 PC Globe 39 SpellJammer Store Hours: M-P9AM to 6 PM Dlx Paint II Enhnad Sat 10AM to 3 PM 85 Jetfighter 2 39 PC USA 31 Mice & Trackball Sports Adventure 33 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. 07065 Deja Vu 1 & 2 31\" Adv. Mission Disk 19 PC Study Bible 42 Sprout E39 Appoint MousePen 70 Design Yr Own Hm 39 Bundle Price 49 Peppers Adventure 29\" Slar Control 2 3505 Microsoft Mouse 85 Design Your Railrd 35 John Madden 2 3105 Perfect General 36 Star Legions 37\" Mouseman Serial 69 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Dosignasaurus | 23 Data Disk 22 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Trackman Serial 79 Diet Pro DOS/Win25/36 Master Card, Visa American Express & Discover Accepted. No 19 Phonics Plus Star Trek AudioClip 34us Modems & Fax Dinosaur Adventure 34 Surcharge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3, Carteret, N.J. Kid Cuts Pirtate's Gold Next Generation 38\" Dog Fight 370 Kid Desk 07008. All sales Are Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective Playroom w/ Sound 31 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 Star Trek Screen Sav37 Dr Jam Wind. 599 Kid Pictures Police Quest 3 3905 merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All Stickybr Math Tutor 30 Practical Peripherals Dr. Quandry Populous 2 Stickybr Pre-School 30 PM 14.4 Int. 129 Products are new. We do not guarantee compatability. Shipping Pool Shark PM 14.4 Ext. Dragon 1985 Stickybr Road Tutor 30 175 Kid Pix Companion 25 chargos: 48 contiguous states, chargos: 48 contiguous states, $4 por order. Alaska, Hawaii, Dragon's Lair ! 25 Kid Works 2 3505 Power Hits Kids 31 Stickbr Spell Tutor 30 Sportster 9600 Int. 129 and Puerto Rico $10 1st pc., $1 ea. add. APO/FPO and P.o. Boxes 2 or Singe Castle 37 Kings Ransom 3405 Movies 25 Storm Across Europe38 Sportstr 14.4 V.42b8309 $6 1st pc. $1 ca. add. Canada $8 19t pc. $1 ea.add. Heavier Dragon Lair III 39's Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Storybook Weaver 29es Zoom External 62 itomg axtra. Foreign orders call for shipping charges. N.J. Dune 2 36 King's Quest 6 Strike Commander 47°S Zoom Internal Residents add sales tax. call for current price and Dungeon Master 29es Knowledge Advent 42 Battletech-Mech 32 Strip Poker 3 3 2 Scanners availability. OOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.' WELCOMED. Quantities Dynamix Bundle 42 LA LAW Powermonger Data Disk (ca) 17 are limited on this item. For your protection, we will only Eagle Eye Mystery 31 Scanmaker 11 Land of Lore Print Shop Deluxe 45 Studyware for ACT Scanman 32 ship to the address the credit card company has on file. 201 Eco-Quest 1 or 2' 299 Laffer Utility Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 GMAT,GRE.SAT 30 Scanman 25.6 rostocking fee on all refused items. Eict Traveler:Call 33 49 Cakewalk  27 Eood Analyst Fresh Arto Chessmaster 3000 25 Silent Service service 2 Sim 42 Songwright 5 Guy Spy 93E 31 Health & Dier pm odio Cohort 2 30 65 Gravis Analog, Pro 33 avis de camepad Space Adventure 3703 29 3405 Inca 25 ast 3 Kid Pix 37 Sports Sci-Fi 3195 Circle Reader Service #47 "


"Deview Two, Two, Two Imps in Onens Double Your Puzzling Pleasure in Sierra's Gobliins 2 by Allen L. Greenberg ima Tith the release of Gobliiins, it was first revealed that tiny, mystical creatures had become an influence in governmental affairs. Saving their magical kingdom from what was sure to be a hefty dose of \"political correctness,\" they cured the king of his terrible insanity. While we might have hoped that the gobliiins would have gone on from there to give all world leaders a clean bill of mental health, such was not the case. A brief glance at any respectable news service will quickly reveal that the creatures have instead attempted to offer marriage counseling to Great Britain's royalty, restore the Earth's ozone layer, and peacefully resolve a confrontation in a small Texas town. Before they could extend their world influence any further, however, the creatures have been Fingus may politely converse with another character, although Winkle's crass Bowery Boys dialect and manners often provides interesting results. Whenever a strategy calls for hurting or humiliating someone, Fingus may refuse to cooperate, bur Winkle clearly feels no such compunctions. For most of the puzzles, however, the gobliins seem able to carry on without worry as to who performs which task. A favorite strategy calls for one of the gobliins to act as a cannonball, flying from one part of the screen to another, while his Twice The Mind-Munching Madness With Two Interactive Imps.. 12 6 technical talents of the original three goblinins. In their place are the good guy/bad guy team of Fingus and Winkle. Fingus is polite and follows his mission with sobriety, while the blue-hued Winkle is as much a prankster as he is an adventurer. Together, this fairy tale odd couple face an Alice's Wonderland filled with equally odd discoveries as they attempt to rescue the kidnapped son of their king. GOB2 is divided up into seven realms, each of which contains several locations. Solving the puzzles within each realm allows the game's title characters to escape and move on. The puzzles are largely mechanical in nature, and very few of them may be solved without careful thought. Equally few of the puzzles are directly related to the game's rescue mission, but their successful completion will guide the player, step by step, through the game. Generally, the gobliins must obtain a key, or more likely a key obiect, in order to move to the next realm. The screens are lictered with nccessary intermediate objects placed either out of the goblins reach or under the protection of some sleepy-faced, bug-eyed guardian. The formula for retrieval of an item is consistent, although usually entertaining: One gobliin either provides access to the object or distracts its guardian while his companion retrieves it. is puzzling as a Rubik's Cube with a bad attitude. for VGA OKTEL VISION called back to goblinland for Gobliins 2 (GOB2). Once again, the king is in trouble. Like the first game, GOB2 is a puzzle-oriented adventure game. This one features the talents of two, rather than three, of the crea tures (hence, the change in spelling of the game's title). Both gobliins are under simultaneous control of the player who must now employ a two-pronged strategy throughout the game. Gone are the magic, athletic and TITLE: Goblins 2: The Prince Bulloon PRICE: $39.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 286-10 MHz, VGA graphics, mouse PROTECTION: None DEVELOPER: Coktel Vision PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line Coarsegold, CA (800) SIERRA-5 Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"Devleu companion supervises and grabs whatever object comes free as a result. By the end of the game the gobliins are joined by the king's son who then participares, to some small extent, in the adventure. characters sound much like a sports figure who has neglected to remove his mouthguard before an interview. Fortunately, a translation of this comically indecipherable noise appears at the bottom of the screen. 12:29-31 their forefinger while voicing a high pitched \"No!\" Interacting with the goblins is near effortless. Clicking on a goblin allows the player to then select a destination, object to take, or character with which to converse. Once a destination is selected, the gobliin will casually walk to it without requiring the player to navigate curves or blockages. After giving a command, the player may then switch to the other gobliin and give him a command, so that the two may act in unison. Timing is critical throughout the game and, when both gobliins are involved, the player must learn exactly when to issue each command. A series of icons are available at the top of the screen which allow the player to save and load games at any time, select an item from inventory, travel to some other location, or receive one of a very limited series of hints. Successfully solving a puzzle earns the player a reassuring \"thumbs up\" from a gobliin, while a failure results in a disgruntled sigh. GOB2, as was the case with the first game, appears to have been inspired by the old Max Fleischer cartoons. Awkward, goggle-eyed characters populare goblinland, and they are liable to surprise the player with a sudden burst of animated mayhem. The gobliins have also retained their trademark displays of boredom. They will resort to loud whistling or back-flips if they are left alone without instructions for too long. When they speak, the HEY LITTLE GOBLITRS, HIERT D'YA WANT? While many of the puzzles may seem difficult, the player is given ample opportunity to experiment. Death never occurs in the game, and there is never a need to back-track or start over. No object in the gobliins' inventory is used up or discarded until it has been used properly. A jar filled with water contains an infinite supply until it is needed to hold some other liquid. These objects may also be handed from one gobliin to the other without the two standing nearby each other. Any action the player wishes to take which might jeopardize their mission is strictly forbidden by the gobliins, who will instead firmly shake Fans of the original gobliiins may be disappointed to discover that these gobliins are far less specialized than their predecessors, and that this program falls far closer to a traditional adventure game. However, its challenging puzzles, sharpwitted entertainment, and enhanced ease of use still qualify it as a very enjoyable romp. Beginners, or children receiving guidance from more experienced players, as was the case with the original game, may indeed find it the perfect exercise. If there is a political lesson to be learned from these gobliins, it is one of persistence: A failure is never really devastating as long as it's funny. CGW IF IT WAS ANY CLOSER, YOU'D BE ON THE COURT. CACTUS LPLEAGUE PROFESSIONAL ** BASKETBALI FROM THE LEVELOPERS OL CHBA HUESSIONAL EN EL''ORION NOT AN ARCADE GAME IT'S THE MOST STATISTICALLY ACCURATE BASKETBALL SIMULATION EVER CREATED You can create teams with any of the real-life players you wont! Or play games with the players on their real-life teams. It's up to you! Complete AutoSchedule Module, Statistics Module, Records Module and more! Perfect for fantasy leagues, but you don't need to be a basketball expert to have a ball. VERSION 3.0 NOW AVAILABLE USE YOUR VISA OR MASTERCARD CALL 1-800-336-9444 TODAY AND BE ON OUR COURT TOMORROW! LLICACTUS DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC. COWE TAKE FUN SERIOUSLY For IBM PC/X1/41/386/486s and compatibles. To purchese with check of money order, send $49.95 plus 54.00 shipping and handling 1o Coctus Development Company loc, 7113 Botnet Rood, Suite 214, Austin, Texas 78757 Copyright  Coctus Development Company, Inc. Customer Support: (512)453-2244, fax: (512)453-3757, B85 (512)453-3155. APBA Professional Basketbol do Trademark of the APBA Game Company, Inc., Lancaster, Pennsylvania. CACTUS LEAGUE PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL is a trodemek of Cottus Development Company, Inc. Circle Reader Service #38 Page 93 August 1993 "


"Devi Are You Being Served? World Tour Tennis from Electronic Arts by Wallace Poulter manual does not say so, I found that the computer wanted the drills taken in order. One must also remember that, in career mode, a player is allowed one practice session per week. These sessions, along with a player's overall game play, will improve his or her abilities. Base Forect seneste Promen Tennis was always a strange sport in our household. My mother (or as we say back 'ome, \"me Mum\") would complain about the amount of sports we watched during the year, and then, cheerfully sit in front of the tube for two weeks straight (and I do mean two weeks straight) watching Wimbledon. Therefore, while we ridiculed tennis throughout the year, during those two weeks it was either watch tennis or nothing at all. Margaret Court, Billie Jean King, Ille Nastase, Stan Smith, Ken Rosewall, Virginia Wade, and many more would be our entertainment. Slowly, I learned of the storied past, stars such as Fred Perry and probably the greatest, Maureen \"Mo» Connolly. Yet, tennis remains one of the few sports that has never made a great conversion to the PC. It is strange that tennis should seem so casy to produce on a computer, yet only Jimmy Connors Tennis has come close to a decent game. Cartridge tennis products have always been better mainly because of the multiple button control pads which allow the easy accessing of different shots. The latest to enter the center court of tennis simulations is World Tour Tennis by Electronic Arts. First impressions are favorable. The attractive packaging, easy installation and multiple options all bode well. Add to this the fact that Electronic Arts Canada (formerly Distinctive Software) is behind the product, and a rival to Jimmy Connors appears to have been found. I might as well reveal my bias, however. I remain a big fan of the 4D Boxing product produced by this stable that used a Tournaments and Exhibitions are fairly self-explanatory. Exhibition play allows a player a little more leeway in that he or she gets to select the court surface, number of sets and opponent. A Tournament will place a player into the Tournament draw for his or her competition. The Career option is at the heart of the game. Rank, Career Points and Career Earnings are kept track of and are saved automatically when one quits. As a player moves forward in Tournaments, his or her Rank, similar polygon technology based on human movement. Once into the main menu, one's first place of business is the player creation screen. A player's Name, Birthplace and Birthdate are chrome features, but Height, Weight, Handedness and Abilities do impact the player's overall ability. A large player, while strong, will be slow on his feet. This will be particularly troublesome on the quick grass courts such as Wimbledon. A player's ability is divided into three areas: Speed, Acceleration and Endurance. Oddly, these terms are not defined in the manual. It would be instructive to know the difference between Speed and Acceleration, for example. Ninety ability points are available to dole out to these three attributes. A final piece of chrome is the physical appearance of the player character. A player's complexion, shirt, shorts, shoes, racket, racket strings and even wrist band can all be assigned colors. Once the player has been created, one returns to the main menu. The next order of business is practice. After selecting one's player via the player list, one can choose the first drill. The drill description will give full details about the skill being worked on and the court surface. The surface, and therefore the speed of the ball, will determine the strength of a shot. The program keeps track of the player's performance by superimposing a yellow box over the target area. Each drill has a goal total of successful completions. One receives credit for each successful placement of a shot in the impact area, but loses credit for a wayward move. Although the WORLD T.O.U.R TENNIS NO MORE SECOND HAND ACTION IBM None TITLE: World Tour Tennis PRICE: $49.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386 or higher, EGA/VGA graphics PROTECTION: # of PLAYERS: DESIGNERS Stanley Chow, lan Tian PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (415) 572-ARTS ar Wally Antibion Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"meunew Career Points and Career Earnings will increase. Obviously, as in real professional tennis, the higher one's rank the \"easier\" the first couple of matches in a Tournament should be. However, as we know, that's not always the case. It would seem that combining all of these different factors should produce a sure-fire hit with lots of game play. Yet it doesn't, and it is hard to figure out exactly why. I honestly, had to force myself to play the game to write the review. The animation that worked so well in 4D Boxing just don't seem to work in the tennis environment. The bottom line is it just isn't enjoyable. This seems a shame, because it looks pretty cool. Once in a match itself, one may chose a number of options including a toggle which switches between a full grandsrand, an empty grandstand, or no grandstand. One clicks on the player icon to toggle between an animated thin player, a normal player or a thick player. It is this polygon graphic representation that, in this reviewer's opinion, doesn't work for tennis. Unlike 4D Boxing where the polygons worked very well after one got used to them, here one never get used to the polygons on the tennis figures. As strange as it seems, the distance at which one watches the player may have something to do with this perception. I would have thought the opposite would be true, polygons up close being unworkable, but strangely it seems that this is not the case. Shot selection is determined by the direction the player is moving the joystick when stick when one releases the shot key. The longer one holds the shor key down, the stronger the shot. Again returning to the manual, a diagram shows how to position the joystick to play: Topspin (joystick pushed up), Flat (joystick level) and Slice (joystick pushed down) shots. However, there are four descriptions accompanying the diagram. It notes «A lob is a high return shot that will usually buy you time to get into better court position.\" Yes, that is true. However, there is no instruction concerning how to make a lob shor! Further confusion rains throughout the manual where page 2 talks about entering \"any of 69 tournaments.\" Meanwhile page 29 talks about a character competing in \"up to 72 tournaments.\" Minor, I will grant, but it speaks to a lack of quality control. REPLAY SI PLAVER'S VEU amm o RIP B. K U W ANG Standard tennis strategy works well here. Keep the opposing player moving side to side keep the opposing player moving side to side and don't allow them to get set. Serve to the backhand wherever possible and use the advantage left-handers have on the tennis court. Finally, the lack of a drop shot again hampers the simulation. World Tennis Tour is, I'm afraid, a disappointment. As mentioned earlier, it is a little difficult to explain why. An exceptional practice mode that actually teaches the player real control, combined with Exhibitions on multiple surfaces, a good Career module, and a proven polygon rechnology, should combine into something more than another dust collector. Instead, similar to another recent Electronic Arts release, Michael Jordan in Flight, World Tennis Tour has the heart of a technological breakthrough, but not the soul. Cow DEMO SERVE EL EGY II Roger Spende d HPH The mind's eye is never blind. Meet 18,000 game players face-to-face! It burns brightly for a blind kid like Amanda Bruner who reads and writes in braille, bakes bread with her grandmother, and dreams of being a mathematician when she grows up. GEN CON PHOTO. CHRIS COWAN Celebrating 9 the 20th Anniversary of the DUNGEO CONS & DRAGONS Gamel August 19-22, 1993 MECCA Convention Center Milwaukee, Wisconsin Help other blind and visually impaired children realize their dreams. Support the American foundation for the Blind's education and literacy initiatives today. Call 1-800-AFB-LIND. In New York, call (212) 620-2147. August 1993 Page 95 "


"Impuan To ir is duman Cactus League College Basketball & Cactus League Professional Basketball 414 by Wallace Porte In my dreams, I stand next to the parquet floor in the Boston my first game. I was interested to see how the game played computer Gardens, deftly maneuvering my personnel such that this sacred vs computer. The statistical options available are astounding. At half Lshrine of basketball has become my personal domain. My subcontime of Duke vs Michigan the following line was available for Juwan scious thinks I can replace Red Auerbach in the hearts of the Boston Howard. populace. I like the dream. 3 Point Rebnds Sometimes, my ecstatic euphoria moves to the collegiate game. I Min Fgm Fga Fgm Fga Ftm Fta o D T Ast of St To Blk Pts stand in Rupp Arena, the hero or goat to thousands of (University of 15 2 5 0 0 2 2 2 0 2 0 0 1 2 0 6 Kentucky) Wildcat worshippers. The religion of roundball flows through this crowd of bluegrass gentry and their progeny with an The running commentary was quite entertaining and I noticed a lot electrical sizzle and an explosive potential. I like that dream, too. of variation. Fouls such as Goaltending were called where appropriate. Yet, my conscious mind knows that there is no way that I will ever Once familiar with the basics. I set abour exploring the interface. be able to coach the Boston Celtics, even George Plimpton-style for The information is provided in a clear and concise way, with a one exhibition game. My sense of reality error-checks my daydream basketball court placed in the middle of the screen. Above it is the and informs me bluntly that there is no way I can ever coach the Cats. current score, jump ball indicator, and an indicator showing whether Indeed, the only way to bridge the gap between fantasy and reality is either team is in the bonus. Below the court is the running commento use the computer and try my luck at a solid statistical simulation. tary. To their respective sides are the teams with the five players on Fortunately, this has been made much more pleasant by the addition the court listed at the top of the screen, and the reserves at the bottom. of two new basketball games, both from Cactus League Development Time Ours and Team Fouls are also displayed. Company. Hot keys are provided to access a number of options during play. To date, there really hasn't been a statistically accurate and graphiThese are: Offense, Defense, Configure, Display, Statistics, and the cally pleasing basketball product on the market. Usually a company self-evident Time Out and Substitution. aims for one side of the market or the other. To be sure, the Cactus The Offensive options are quite numerous. The pace of a game can games do not up the ante. They follow the trend by being a statisticsbe set to one of six different tempos, from Stall to Extremely Fast. Set oriented product with a limited graphic display as part of the interface. plays can be run which designate both the optimum shooter and his As a result, one's first impressions are mixed. The production values shot location. Nine different defensive schemes may be employed, are limited but functional. Each game comes in a three-ringed binder from zones to a steal foul strategy direct from the publisher. The College game comes with the latest Season Tournament disk, and Conference The configure option allows the adjustment of the display speed and team colors. Game speed can be Slow, Medium disks are available from the publisher. Finally, or Fast, and, more importantly, Instant or cach 50+ page manual has a lot of information, TITLES: Cactus League College Basketball and Cactus League Professional Basketball Instant til 10 minutes. This can speed up play but it is all text and simply cries out for graphic PRICES: College $49.95, Pro $49.95 considerably as can setting the base configurarepresentation of a number of screens. SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 640KB RAM, hard disk, DOS 3.0 or later tion so that only the scores are displayed. Three The second impressions were heavy on the PROTECTION: None coaching modes are also available: Computer, PUBLISHERS: Cactus Development Company, Inc. positive side. Diving right into the College 7113 Burnet Rd. Suite 214 in which all decisions are made for the player; version, I set up a couple of teams, place them Austin, TX 78757-2216 Override, where all decisions are still made by (800) 336-9444 in the hands of computer coaches, and watched IBM Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"Give Your Joystick a Thrill. on the early 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies, with dozens of legal arenas in the city. But for the leanest, meanest warriors, the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city, It's the hottest day of the summer and you're baking inside a dilapidated warehouse. You — and your opponent — wear the latest in MECHA armor. The best fighting armor in the world. THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES This won't be any picnic. With the intense heat and action, you'll both end up in less than full body dress. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money — action packed, arcade style fun for your PC. But be warned with its intense violence and voluptuous women, Metal & Lace: Battle Of The Robo Babes is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. METODE System requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, joystick recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum Adlib Gold and Speed Master. CONT A CTO LOCKDO This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors under 18. For a free demo, call our 24lur. BBS af 310-539-7739. (SNT), MEGA TECH All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners. Circle Reader Service #74 "


"D 11. SCOTT L HIRD 11:43 3 J.WORTHY & 2 :24 US S.PERKIKS Team l'outs Fouls H AD.CALITAS BJ.KLEINE AGLEY yeta ti tip DHAGLEY SU Lo GABLE. Gisit or to GLEY... ON IGLEY antido... P.11 CU.DIWC DJ.LLEY DE PINCKNEY IC F I RODINSON Dhad on! the computer but can be manually 1 J.BAGLEY overridden; and Manual, where all Arme decisions are the player's to make. .LEWIS One of the more amusing notes in the manual is a coaching tip which Time states \"If you call too many plays, your players may begin to ignore them.\" Definitely not from Bobby Knight's school of coaching! Initially, I played around with Duke vs Michigan, the National Fox Championship game from the MCHALE 1991-92 season. Duke won seven E PRITCHARD of the first ten meetings, yet I found a number of AI decisions puzzling. Both Duke players Grant Hill and Davis played after picking up a third foul in the first half. Davis, in one game, picked up a fourth foul with 14:41 to go in the game, yet remained in the contest. He subsequently fouled out with 7:49 to go. Meanwhile, Chris Webber of Michigan left early in the 2nd half with four fouls and never returned, even during crunch time at the end of the game. Michigan first broke through against Duke in a game where Laettner, Davis, G. Hill, Hurley, Jackson, Talley, Howard and Rose all fouled out. This out. This robbed each side of equal numbers of players, but it left Webber to dominate over an under-manned Duke team. Subsequently, Michigan was able to win without needing foul trouble. I used the 1991-92 season team disk for my numerous replays. The Fab Five of Michigan burst onto the scene that season after being a #6 seed in the Southeast regional. Laettner hit the incredible buzzer beater to pass Kentucky and little known East Tennessee State, and Southwest Louisiana beat Arizona and Oklahoma respectively. Below is a table which shows the seeds in each regional that year and the ranking of the team after numerous replays. East West Midwest Southeast 01 Duke (1) 01 UCLA (5) 01 Kansas (1) 01 Ohio State (1) 02 Kentucky (2) 02 Indiana (2) 02 USC (7) 02 Ok State (3) 03 U Mass (7) 03 Florida State (1) 03 Arkansas (4) 03 Arizona (6) 04 Seton Hall (4) 04 Oklahoma (3) 04 Cincinnati (2) 04 No Carolina (5) 05 Missouri (5) 05 DePaul (4) 05 Michigan S1 (3) 05 Alabama (2) 06 Syracuse (3) 06 Georgetown (8) 06 Memphis S1 (6) 06 Michigan (4) 07 UNCC (11) 07 LSU (7) 07 Georgia Tech (5) 07 St. Johns (8) 08 Texas (10) 08 Louisville (13) 08 Evansville (9) 08 Nebraska (7) 09 lowa (8) 09 Wake Forest (6) 09 UTEP (8) 09 Connecticut (12) 10 lowa State (6) 10 BYU (11) 10 Houston (13) 10 Tulane (11) 11 Princeton (13) 11 South Florido (9) 11 Pepperdine (10) 11 Temple (9) 12 W Virginia (12) 12 NM Stale (15) 12 SW Mo (11) 12 Stanford (13) 13 LaSalle (15) 13 SW La(10) 13 Delaware (12) 13 Miami (10) 14 Fordham (9) 14 Montana (14) 14 Murray St (15) 14 Tenn S1 (14) 150 Dominion (16) 15 E illinois (12) 15 NE La (16) 15 Ga Southern (15) 16 Campbell (14) 16 Rbert Morris (16) 16 Howard (14) 16 Ms Valley S1 (16) gratifying to watch Alabama win it all in one of the first replays that I ran. While it is possible to interpret statistics in many ways, I was impressed by how close the teams performed to specifications rather than just pure numbers. Tournament Schedules may be edited and seeds rearranged as needed. Probably the crowning #glory is the league function. The ability to set up one's own leagues and conferences is an excellent tool for all Fantasy League commissioners. Not only can individual teams be added to a new conference but individual players can be added and deleted from rosters. The possibilities for a college draft league are obvious, and one area of the simulation I intend to explore after the completion of this review. Imagine drafting Webber only to have him leave college after his Sophomore year (as he has). According to the manual, the computer keeps track of 98 team and individual records. Returning to my multiple replays of the 1991-92 tournament, a number of now familiar names spring from the record books. Miner with the most points (50. The S u ille O'Neal with most boards and blocks; Nick Van Exel with the most threepointers; Hurley with the most assists; and Mashburn with the most steals. The latter I found fascinating, especially for a power forward. Other names in the record book include solid pros Robert Horry and Anthony Peeler. Turning Pro Now 1 freely admit that I prefer college ball to the pro variety, hence my enthusiasm over Cactus League College Basketball. Yet, the Pro version is nothing to sneeze at either. With no official NBA license, each Pro Team must receive a nickname prior to the first time start of the simulation. While it is possible to use NBA team nicknames, I decided to have a little fun. The Denver Boots recently played against the Detroit Breakdowns; the LA Rioters at the Cleveland River Blazers, and my personal favorite, the Golden State Surfers playing at the Charlotte Bronts. (I can see the ads already: \"Before there was Air Jordan there was Jane Eyre.\") There are, of course, a number of differences in the pro version. The Defensive Pressure option becomes exclusively man-to-man (don't tell Don Nelson) and specific roles can be set for players concerning their participation in crunch time or whether they play with five fouls. The game comes with an Autoscheduler, which contains the entire NBA schedule by date, and an Auto Roster. If one so wishes, the Auto Roster will carry out all the transactions that took place during a season at the appropriate time. I will admit to having played only a half a season replay of the Pro version, but I was greatly impressed by the accuracy of the statistics. Scoring is usually pretty easy to do, but such stats like assists (Stockton, Kevin Johnson, Bogues, Hardaway) were very accurate. Now we all know that Karl Malone can rip a rebound, dribble the entire length of the floor, look at Stockton as he flies through the lane to slam the ball home, and somehow Stockton will get an assist, but even so, the numbers are right on target. The Cactus League Pro and College Basketball games are primarily aimed at the stat-oriented fan. In this, they succeed superbly. The accuracy of the stars is impressive. The addition of graphics and clearer documentation would enhance the product even more. However, as it stands, one need look no further than the Cactus League to find statistically accurate basketball simulations. A BBS is maintained by Cactus League at (512) 453-3155 for additions to the game, and Cactus President Ralph Rhoades is a regular contributor to the GEnie discussions in Category 21, Topic 32 of the Sports Round Table. Cow. What is so interesting about the above is that it is in line with thinking at the time. In the East, U. of Mass was a surprise #3 seed. In the West, picking UCLA #1 made no sense at all. Analyzing that bracket at the time of the tournament, I predicted that Oklahoma would win it. Of course, Oklahoma was upset, although as the only \"hot\" team in their bracket, the pick made sense. However, what Cactus League shows us is just how big of an upset that was. In the Midwest that year USC received a #2 seed solely on the basis of Harold Miner. As with UCLA, that seed seemed high at the time, and now the suspicion is confirmed. Finally, the Southeast regional was loaded with both #5 Alabama and #6 Michigan grossly under-appreciated going on to the Tournament. Alabama in particular with Sprewell and Horry was my dark horse pick prior to the seedings. It was rather Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"Wing Commander Flys Faster! Sherlock Solves Faster! Carmen Sandiego's Found Faster! Countries of the World The Complete Twain The Best of the Bureau Monarch Notes History of the World The Complete Dickens Biographies llustrated American History Free CD Include pic Lightning CD Runs All Your CD's Faster! Do you feel the need for speed? Lightning CD Lightning If you've ever played a game or searched through a reference library, you know how slow CD's can be. RID Pretra 100 Master Startly Redare Side Pages Werks W ALL DOS, Windows ACONOMI TETAMIN Lightning CD is the answer to your speed problems. Lightning CD is a CD cache that improves performance by moving frequently used information from your CD to RAM. The next time your computer needs information, it's available immediately. You'll notice the difference instantly. Is perfect for entertainment, reference, educational, and multimedia programs Significantly reduces annoying video pauses Includes six other powerful utilities for improving your computer's performance NoUTU... TIN  Also speeds up both DOS and Windows programs 93% Slower 81% Slower 62% Slower Lightning CD No CD Cache Lightning CD No CD Cache Lightning CD No CD Cache If speed is what you need, get Lightning CD to make all your CD's run Lightning fast. To order, or for the name of the dealer nearest you, call 800-9 67 5 5 5 0 Wing Commander Sherlock Holmes Carmen Sandiego Look for Lightning CD and other Lucid products at COMPUTER EGGHEAD SOFTWARE North American Software per L C D THE COMPUTER SUPERSTORE. Lucid Corporation is located at 101 W. Rennot Rood, Suite 450, Richardson, IX 75082. Phone214-9948100, Fox 214-9948103. lightning lighting for Windows, Lighting for DOS, and lighting (1) foderruks muulluxid is a registered trademark of lucid Comportion. All other trademarks are acknowledged. N Circle Reader Service #75 "


"O meuneing The Great Underground Empire Multi-player Role-playing on the Internet by John J. Brassil Klustration by Mark Poole ulti-player role-playing environsocial in nature, stressing player interments have been available to the action rather than questing. So, which I computer gaming public for several kind is the most popular? Well, that years now. Commercial networks like Comreally depends on what one is looking puServe, Genie, and America On-line have for. large numbers of players who, linked by their Those who want adventure with hutelephone lines, come together every night to man competition (I would say coopshare telecommunicated fantasies in strange eration as well, but from what I hear, most another), or through MUD client software, lands. But multi-player role-playing did not quest-oriented MUDs tend to be pretty cutwhich acts somewhat like TELNET, and also begin and does not end with these commer throat) would prefer the LP/Diku style, deals with things like the nasty problem of cial networks. The oldest, largest, and perhaps which is generally combat-intensive. Those other people interrupting the gamer and best gaming of this sort occurs on the Inwho simply want the chance to interact with with scrambling text while one is still ryping. ternet: the worldwide, public access network some folks without having to worry about bad that boasts more users than all of the commerbreath. ring around the collar. and all the MUDdy Deities cial networks combined. For over 10 years, other potential distractions of a face-to-face gamers and hackers have been forging their Time to explain gods and wizards. Hark encounter will probably end up in a Tinyback to those days when interactive fiction own role-playing worlds on this network, MUD derivative. It should be noted, howgrouping together in virtual communities of (because that's what we're dealing with here) ever, that MUDs (LP's in particular) are so was a single-player experience. Remember all people with common gaming interests. flexible, it's really up to the gods and wizards those really cool room descriptions (a maze of Faithful readers will recall an article in the of a particular realm as to what kind of envitwisty little passages, all alike) and wild NPCs May issue which gave a brief overview of the ronment the MUD provides. And, most(the cranky Wizard of Frobozz)? Somebody ronment the MU Internet gaming community. One topic MUDs allow you to \"design yourself to one had to write all those descriptions, not to mentioned was the existence of Multi-User degree or another. This can take the form of mention create puzzles to solve and hide treasDungeons, or MUDs. MUD is a generic term the race/class selection process familiar to the ure for the vigilant. In the MUDiverse, those for a program which allows many different RPG community, or simply writing a short functions are performed by the god/wizard people to exist in the same cyberspace at the description of yourself which will be disdece class of user. Basically, those players who have same time. Actually, the really generic term is played when other players \"look\" at you. MU', because there are several systems which the ability to change the structure or othershare the Multi-User idea, but don't use the So, essentially, MUDs are shared gaming wise modify the MUD have wizard status. \"D\" .c. MUSH M.U.Shared Hallucinaenvironments which are run as servers on The god designation is usually reserved for the tion and MUCK, which is just a play on the Unix hosts, usually at some educational instipeople who are responsible for the programs word mud). In total, there are 20 or so differtution, although there are now quite a few tution, although there are now quite a few and data which make up the MUD the ent types of MUDs (or MU's), according to MUDs running on commercial hosts which administrators. The good news for the novice the Totally Unofficial List of Internet MUDs provide Internet connectivity for a fee. I even player (known as a \"newbie\") is that by gain(TTULOIM), making this a huge topic. We got some e-mail from the UK chastising me ing enough experience through questing, testwon't try to cover it all in this article, but we for assuming that all MUDs were connected ing and lots of luck, one can become a wizard! will hit all of the highlights and give a general via the Internet. Evidently, there is a user (To become a god, one must start one's own feel for what MUDding is all about. community there that uses dial-up lines to MUD.) connect to their server. In fact, there's no It's worth noting that most of the MUDs The Dirty Details of MUD reason that a high-end PC (386/486) can't be out there pretty much allow free reign to the used as the server (I just read about one, player, but there are several theme-based What are the basic types of MUDs? Diku actually) and each of the three major MUD MUDs which restrict the kinds of characters and LP MUDs are grouped under the headvariants does, in fact, have a version written and environments available. This can actually ing of combat-oriented, \"hack 'n' slash,\" adfor the PC. By and large, however, MUDs are be a good thing, since it provides for a comventure-based MUDs, while the TinyMU\" accessed through TELNET (a program mon background that everyone is familiar variants are generally considered to be more which allows one computer to connect to with. Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"Degen) Common background? How can something someone made up be used as a common background? It is pretty easy when the theme is Anne McCaffrey's Pern (there are several Pern-themed MUDs), Star Trek: The Next Generation, Frank Herbert's Dune novels, the Chronicles of Narnia by C.S. Lewis, The Book(s) of Swords by Fred Saberhagen, the Elenium series and the Belgariad and Mallorcon books by David Eddings, the Xanth series by Piers Anthony, or the works of J.R.R. Tolkien, among others. There are also MUDs restricted to the BattleTech universe, The Neverending Story, Japanese animation (Go, Speed Racer, Go!), and even one devoted to meditation (om mane padme MUD). Any Terry Pratchett fans out there? There's a Discworld MUD on a host in the UK just waiting for gamers to grab their luggage and log in. We've been bandying about the word \"MUDiverse\" rather loosely here. (Actually, I made it up, but I think it captures the flavor of the MUD environment pretty well.) Just how big are gods and wizards can access, but after floating these cyberspaces, anyway? I quizzed a couple some numbers by them, both seemed to think of MUD administrators about this, and I was that about 1000 locations was about right. a bit surprised to find out that they didn't Even allowing for a good number of those really know for sure. Evidently, it's not combeing \"East Road,\" \"Farther Along East mon practice to maintain a \"map\" that the Road,\" and \"Boy, You've Come a Long Way Down East Road» kinds of places, that's still a very rich environment space. How about the denizens of these cyberspaces? Am I going to meet the same swashbuckling fishmonger over and over again as I wander through the realm? Several MUDs have a user community of hundreds of people, with 30-50 players on-line during the peak evening hours. Even though many people have characters on more than one MUD, one is not likely to meet the same folks at every MUD visited, since many people only play one style or spend most of their time in a \"home\" MUD. In my eternal quest for statistics, I contacted the MUD FAQ author, Jennifer \"Moira\" Smith, to get an idea of the total size of the MUD community. Since the MUDs tend to operate independently (although there is an InterMUD council which brings together the gods and wizards of about 50 of the LP MUDs), estimating like this is tricky at best, but she thought there were probably about 2500 active players at any given time. Since I wanted to get the insider's perspective in addition to gathering general information, I posted a message in rec.games.mud.announce, asking for \"tour guides\" to show me around their MUDs. Within a day I had 40 responses, and I eventually heard from over 60 people! I ended up OUT TIME DAYS Out Time Days is a Play-By-Mail game of life on a strange world. Emphasizing role playing and inter-player communication. OTD is a game for those who like to join with other players around the world in figuring out puzzles, creating working economies, exploring large sections of worlds. undertaking or tracking criminal activities, or fielding capable armies. The worlds explored are living, vibrant locales that will change through your character's actions. With the ability to journey in many eras (you'll start in a medieval-like location), you'll enjoy adapting to new sets of abilities and restaints or you can focus on a single place and become well established. OTD is a combination Science Fiction-Fantasy game. It is 99% computer moder. ated to ensure fairness, and 1% GM moderated to allow for creativity. A maximum of 1 turn per week is allowed. Cost per turn is $5.00. The game is open-ended with each new character playing a vital role. A special startup is available if you mention this ad. Receive a rule book, startup turn and 5 turns for just $5.00 ($20,00 outside U.S. and Canada), a $35.00 value! Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 Hit * bil Wanna try a tactical space game and pay only $20 for the entire game? Then ask for information on Space Combat. To sign up or for more information write to: Twin Engine Gaming, 3254 Maple Leaf Ct., San Jose, CA 95121 Circle Reader Service #107 August 1993 Page 101 "


"Deview spending about six hours on-line at two different MUDs, one of which was not open to the general public at the time I visited. Coincidentally, they were both located on a machine in Seattle operated by a company called Connections, Inc., which provides Internet access. Welcome to My Nightmare The first MUD I visited is called Nightmare, and my helpful guide was the Archmage Descartes the Borg (I told you anything goes!). Descartes in real life is George Reese, a Master Control Operator at the University of Maine, although since he says he spends 30-40 hours a week working on Nightmare, he may not have a real life. Nightmare is an LP MUD with a traditional RPG feel to it. George had trouble dialing in at the appointed time, so I enlisted the aid of one of the \"normal\" players and found my way to the large tree which is home to the Wizard class. After inducting myself as a novice mage, I left a note for Descartes on the Wizards bulletin board and left the MUD for a while. When I returned, Descartes had solved the riddle of the Maddening Modem and proceeded to give me a tour of Nightmare. He introduced me to an NPC he had written (being the Archmage, he was able to teleport us to any location in the MUD — sure beats walking!) that is used to send fledgling wizards on their first quest. It scanned my input for keywords and when I though it's an LP MUD, it has a very sociallyoriented favor to it. It has a well defined operational structure, including senior administration with titles like \"Technical Director,\" \"Comptroller\" and \"Operations Manager.\" Dreamshadow actually has an Academy which all \"officers» (those with the ability to create and modify) must attend. Currently there are 18 builders in addition to the senior staff (Soulsinger, Daina, Reeshau, Kit, and Mickelian were present for my tour) busily working on creating new worlds. Dreamshadow is actually a true MUDiverse with a central nexus connecting many different worlds. The location descriptions in the places we visited were absolutely beautiful and representative of the thoughtfulness which has gone into the making of this fantastic world. Also present on my tour was Soulsinger's white wolf, Borealis, an NPC asked the correct question (with a little help), which not only wagged his tail when I petted I was sent on a quest to retrieve the stolen Orchim, but was also \"smart\" enough to record Slayer. Nightmare seems to be the sort of my entire visit for posterity! world that would appeal to the type of gamer I would like to thank all those who rewho enjoys the Ultima-style CRPG. sponded to my call for help, and extra special My second stop was on Dreamshadow: The thanks to Jennifer Smith for the FAQ, Scott Legacy of the Three, which has been under Gochring for compiling the MUD list, development for over two years! It should be George for his time on Nightmare, and Marc, open to the public by the time you read this, Cathy, Matt, Mike, and Kit for sharing and there's something there for everyone. Dreamshadow with me (the fireworks were Dreamshadow was founded by three students great! And to all latent wizards out there at the University of Michigan, and even it's never too late to play in the MUD! Cow SIDELINE SOFTWARE D ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY | Your European PC Connection NEW TITLES TYPE SOPHISTICATED SIMULATIONS WIZARD GAMES from A 320 Airbus Amberstar Battle Toads Cohort 2 Daemonsgate History Line 1914-1918 Ishar 2 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix Reach for the Skies Shadow Worlds Sleepwalker Space Crusade Street Fighter 2 Tomado Flight Simulator Transarctica War in the Gulf WWF, T2, The Simpsons World Wrestle Federation 2 Zool Flight Sim. RPG Arcade Strategy Sim RPG Strategy Sim RPG Racing Sim Flight Sim. RPG Strategy Arcade Strategy RPGStrategy Arcade Flight Sim. Strategy Sim Strategy ALL THREE for only Simulation Arcade SANDAAG G2GOGOS Backgammon PC 14.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 BAT 14.95 Battlechess 18.95 Baltletech 2 16.95 Bloodwych 16.95 Centurion 18.95 Collussus Bridge 4 16.95 Command HQ 18.95 Conan the Cimmaron 18.95 Conflict: Europe 14.95 Crisis in the Kremlin 21.95 Defender of the Crown 16.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 16.95 Drakkhan 18.95 Elvina 2 18.95 F16 Falcon 19.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Five Treasure of Trazzar 21.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Grey Norman Goll 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero's Quest 18.95 Hills Street Blues 18.95 Imperium 18.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Obitus 18.95 Panza Kick Boxing18.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pit Fighter 18.95 Populous /Promised Lands 24.95 Quest and Glory 2 19.95 RAI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sargon S 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Shanghai 2 18.95 Shufflepuck Cale 14.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spol 16.95 Star Saga Two 14.95 Sinke Fleel 19.95 Storm Masters 18.95 Stunt Car Racer 16.95 Super 01 Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Test Drive 2 all data disks 18.95 Three Stooges 16.95 TV Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 18.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Winter Super Sports '92 16.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 25 of Scotland Ltd. Computer games for IBM and compatibles.  One-Nil* $30 . Goal 2* 30  Soccer Game 2 25  Greyhound* . Grand Prix 25 . Insanity 20  Rockstar  Capitalist 20 * As reviewed in CGW June 1993 by Wallace Poulter Orders Only 1-800-ITS-GOAL 10 AM to 12 Midnight EDT A MasterCard & VISA Accepted All other calls 1-508-658-2209 or write Wizard Games, 6 Chandler Road, Wilmington, MA 01887 20 EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC format, PC Review, PC Zone, or PC Plus, each only $10 T T SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to changel No refunds or exchanges. Detective products exchanged with same item Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 Dealer Inquiries Inviled! 840 N.W.57th Court, Fl. Lauderdale, FL 33309 E DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT DEALS! 4-D Sports Boxing 1 8.95 Armor Alley 16.95 A-Train 26.95 Ashes of the Empire 21.95 Advanced Destroyer Sim 16.95 Austerlitz 16.95 Circle Reader Service #96 Circle Reader Service #111 Computer Gaming World Page 102 "


"The Book Store CGW Presents... CONQUEST C | C A tin AIR COMBAT CIVILIZATION OxRoots PC GAMES BIBLE Global Conquest, The Official Strategy Guide by CGW On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Prima $24.95 Special features: floppy disk with updated (2.0) game version and a new map maker; and full-color player's aid card. A complete tutorial with five programmed scenarios. Strategy tips, detailed tables, and analyses of actual program formulae. A complete modem-gaming reference. The Official Guide To Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon by Russell Sipe COMPUTE Books $12.95 U.S. The best book on Railroad Tycoon. If you love Railroad Tycoon get Russell Sipe's book. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Here are just a few of the things you'll learn: get the answers to puzzling economic forces in the game; learn to defeat each of the tycoons; manipulate the stock market to your advantage; and learn optimal building and survey techniques. Luv Doze Lemmings, Lemmings 2 Hint Disk by Stanislaw Lemming 56.00 CGW's first Hints-On-Disk offers solutions to all 120 Lemmings 2 levels. Please specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disks. The PC Games Bible by Paul Rigby and Robin Matthews Sigma 520.00 CGW's British correspondents describe over 2,000 computer games in short \"Taking A Peek\"-size tidbits. Sid Meier's Civilization, Or Rome on 640k a Day by Johnny L. Wilson and Alan Emrich Prima $18.95 If you're serious about playing Civilization, this is the book you need. -Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Includes 100 charts covering technological advancements; 24 original tables and 22 specific formulae showing how the game works, as well as 17 ways to cheat and more than 20 ways to win. Falcon 3.0 Air Combat Pete Bonanni and Bernard Yee Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 Bonanni provides the insights of a trained Falcon pilot; Yee provides the perspective of an experienced game reviewer; and CGW's own Mike Weksler tells gamers how to maximize their computer systems in this useful book of tactics and campaign management for Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0. Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook by Russell Sipe and Mike Weksler Prima $18.95 U.S. Winning Strategies to all the missions. Campaign games for every player-flyable aircraft (P-51, FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, Phantom II, MiG-21). Valuable performance charts for each aircraft. Extensive information from the designers of YAC. Exclusive interview with Chuck Yeager. The Official Lucasfilm Games Air Combat Strategies by Rusel De Maria and George Fontaine Prima Publishing $18.95 History, tactics and programming insights are blended together into this compendium of strategies for Larry Holland's best-selling WWII air combat series. The SimEarth Bible by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne-McGraw Hill $14.95 I salute Johnny Wilson for giving us a new kind of book about the earth and the terrestrial planets. James Lovelock Wing Commander I & II: The Ultimate Strategy Guide by Mike Harrison Prima Publishing $18.95 Filtered through the viewpoint of Lt. Col. Carl T. LaFong, a fictional pilor, Harrison's book assists gamers in mastering the game in a logical, lincar fashion. The SimEarth Bible is a winning strategy guide to SimEarth, as well as a fact-filled guide to Earth sciences and theories of the balance of life on the planet. The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 Each time we read this book we learned something, because it explains the theory behind the game and doesn't just list one-two-three bints. START Magazine The Harpoon Battlebook by James DeGoey Prima Publishing $18.95 In addition to providing a solid guide to Harpoon tactics, The Harpoon Battlebook offers new scenarios, additional information on weapons platforms and handy reference tables. THE OTTICLE TO THE SIMEARTH BIBLE T Use order form bound into this magazine to order books. "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ 'Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" ATM DRAKKAR STAR CRUISER CRUISER Gran. \"Hey Balur, doer d er CENAT there QD ....llliii 1901 Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing. forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound, Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer; IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. come visit a land where dragons roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells, and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role-playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've I discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser — a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG-Net, Inc. Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG-Net, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Computer network versions of Empire Builder, Star Cruiser. Operation Market-Garden, and the Kingdom of Drakkar are designed and developed by Tantalus Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, Tx \"What tore you up, Merlin?\" EMPIRE IM OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN ARA 10G019-301 MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think: $4.00 per hour in the continental US and $3.00 per hour in the N.Y. city area. These costs are all inclusive. There are no hidden communication fees. Dial toll free 800-GET-GAME and we'll send you your account number, password, start-up kit, and 5 free hours right away. For more information call 800-245-0317. Three elite Allied paratroop divisions drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhine the last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine -the first line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history 12 Combining two great American loves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions. It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-GET-GAME 800-438-4263 Circle Reader Service #84 "


"Letters from Paradise 2 ESPANA APD W N BOOTME.COM Alone in the Library tion as the auto industry was during the A 100 Regarding Scorpia's column on Alone in MOV BX, 40 '50s, \"We own the market and the customer the Dark, it is possible to read De Vermis MOV DS, BX will take what we give them, poor service MOV BX, 1234 Mysteriis without dying. You just have to and all.\" Customers voted with their money MOV [72], BX read it while standing in the pentacle in the as soon as a better product showed up. You JMP FFFF:0 «secret\" room in the library. Also, she is RCX guys better wake up. All it takes is for a wrong to suggest that one should not use the 11 Sega or Nintendo to improve their games cavalry sabre because it is prone to breakjust a bit more or come up with a machine ing.» The sabre can still serve its special with a little thing like a mini-hard drive (or function later in the game if it is broken, as In order for DEBUG.EXE to assemble the give me a system where I don't have to long as you keep both pieces of it. above code, a space should be included reconfigure my memory in order to install Lemuel Cork between the JMP FFFF:0 line and the RCX the latest hot game) and you guys are dead. I think it's high time you had your smug Parts Unknown line as follows: faces rubbed in the dirt. It's nice to have contrasting perspectives N BOOTME.COM from more than one reviewer on some of Tom Synnott A 100 these issues (See Cork's review in CGW MOV BX, 40 Bound Brook, NJ #107). We see by your postmark that you MOV DS, BX Red Skelton regularly used a particular aren't far from the legendary haunts of MOV BX, 1234 line whenever a joke or gag would misfire MOV [72], BX Lovecraft himself. Try to stay away from JMP FFFF:0 before his live audience, \"We just do 'em dark houses and mysterious stone formafolks, we don't explain 'em.\" Since your tions and your name might even appear in RCX letter is predominantly an open letter to the 11 our pages again. industry. we hope you don't want our \"smug\" faces rubbed in the dirt. We will \"Dawg» On It risk \"explaining\" one aspect of the cusI read the article on Memory Management Support Woes tomer support problem. The earlier in a in the June 1993 issue of CGW and I am writing this letter to vent my utter product's release that a customer tries to couldn't get the BOOTME.COM to work frustration regarding the inadequate supcall (assuming that it has bugs and had It said ERROR when debug got to the line port provided by software game companies. reasonably good initial sales), the less that said C BX or something like that, and I have recently returned several games likely that customer is going to be able to error on every line after that. If there was a when all I could get was a busy signal on reach the support line in a speedy fashion. typo in the article or you can tell me how to the so-called customer support phone numCustomer support may have open lines for do it another way, I'd appreciate it. I found ber. weeks and then, with the sell-in of a new Mike's article very helpful and I'd like to Since this has occurred with three differproduct that pushes the envelope, even the see a series (like Scorpion's View) in future best staffed department can be under an ent companies, I can only reach the concluissues. sion that these are pseudo-support lines, avalanche. In fact, the terrible news for Casey Harrison where they have one person assigned to the them is that the longer a customer has to PRODIGY user support line which is clogged with incomwait to get through, the angrier that cusWe can't promise a regular column on ing phone calls. Why else would a phone be tomer is when they have to deal with them. technical issues, but we have \"Dawg\" busy eight hours a day every day and one As to why you might be able to get into the (Mike Weksler) hard at work on several never waits more than two rings when callsales line easier, there's a simple explanaother special articles. We sometimes have ing the sales number? tion for that. There are many ways to buy a to roll un a newspaper to get him to finish Why is it, after filling out warranty regis product besides a direct call to the publishthose articles, but he's usually \"Best of tration cards in which I give them valuable er. Indeed, one doesn't usually even get a Show\" when he gets them done. As for the marketing information such as machine discount when buying direct. So, there typo, Dawg answers: type, hardware configuration, software I aren't as many demands for the direct sales Attention all Neophyte Memory Comown, magazines I read, etc., I never hear lines and staffing requirements are less. manders: from them whenever a major bug is reYour points about customer backlash In my \"Dawg on DOS Memory Managevealed. Instead, I find out from a game against the disk-based software industry ment\" article, a typo occurred in the code review. Then, to top it off, I'm told I have are well-spoken, however, and we know that for the BOOTME.COM program bad to pay to get the debugged version. Why many of the companies Dawg! Here is the assembly code as it apcan't I send in my original disks and have canti se late are attempting to address quality conpeared in the article: them exchanged for the new version? trol and customer support issues as a high The software industry is in the same posipriority. Maybe your letter will provide inPage 106 Computer Gaming World "


"i etters DAG one. centive for those companies which have not thing like that, I decided to try it out. The future releases of this game and send us a yet done so. result of the experiment almost made me free patch. scream. Not only my suspicion turned out Felix H. Luk The 5-Minute Consumer to be true, but there is no mention of it Kowloon, HONG KONG Your magazine is the only one that takes anywhere in the manual. I was also surNormally, it is best to actually \"Quit\" out prised that this was not pointed out in your me more than five minutes to read. of a game rather than turn it off. Even in J. Reaban excellent publication. business software, it is possible to garble Melbourne, FL Imagine a poor soul who spent 16 hours data and cause unnecessary problems by Thanks for the compliment. We just called in his first session playing the game and turning the computer off in the middle of the up Scientific American and gloated. saving the game every step along the way execution of a program. Nevertheless, we just as the manual suggested. As he was are firm advocates of the gamer having the Star Quandry II playing the game, a brownout struck and option to name numerous saved game posiAfter reading the rave reviews of Star forced his computer to reboot. Would he be tions and we hope you get your wish on this Control II, I rushed out to purchase myself happy when he found out that none of his a copy, promptly installed it on my system, save game files were written to the hard disk? What good is the save game feature if and started playing it like a true addict. Go, Go Gadget Speech it does not protect me against power outAfter many hours of intensive struggling, however, I now stand ready to completely ages? In the June 1993 issue of Computer Gaming World, the \"Taking A Peek\" section wipe the last byte of it from the hard disk, The tale does not end here, however. After featured a review on one of our titles, Inthen proceed to hunt down the two culprits, taking some time off to calm down, I restartspector Gadget Mission I: Global Terror. er, programmers and cause them grievoused the game with earnest and made steady The review contained an error I would like bodily harm with large destructive impleprogress. To make a long story short, I to bring to your attention. ments. found out one day with horror that the proThe review states, \"The CD-ROM verThe adventure itself is not particularly gram actually invalidates an old save game difficult. Nor can the minor deficiencies. file that already exists on the hard disk. sion adds music and speech...\" While it is ver it right away when you save a new one over it right away say, the lack of an auto pilot for interplanetrue the CD-ROM version of Inspector Gadget does have music and speech, so tary travel, not be accustomed to. My bigand, of course, it does not write the new one does the diskette version (both 3.5\" and gest gripe is the save game feature, which until the game is properly quit. 5.25\"). From the review, a reader would can only be described as \"completely stulauestion the wisdom, or the lack thereof, draw the incorrect conclusion that the diskpid.\" of this unsafe save game function. My pro ette version has neither. After getting warmed up in Super Melee gress has been set back many times because Todd E. Cook and having a couple of trial runs under my of it. The time wasted, coupled with the belt, I embarked on a serious effort to solve mental anguish caused by finding out \"hidAzeroth, Inc. the game. The first session lasted many den features\" of the program has greatly Director of Marketing hours and, after saving my progress, I diminished my enthusiasm for Star Control Missed it by THAT much. Thanks for the switched off the computer, implicitly cerII. I hope Accolade will fix this problem in note. Cow tain that it has been tucked away in some corner of the hard disk safely. Unbeknownst to me, that was my first mistake. The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant The next time I went back to Star Control 0R1451EUMANT II and tried to reload my save game, it wasn't there. I stared in disbelief, since I was sure that I had saved the game the night before. After looking around the directory using DOS and even PC Tools, the save game file was still nowhere to be found. Getting a little irritated at this point, I broke out the manual to check if I had done anything wrong. The rulebook did not mention anything I have to do before or after I save a game. So, there I was, forced to start again from scratch. After going through the same bootstrapping process, again I saved the game and switched off the computer, which was what I was accustomed to do after long gaming sessions. Imagine my agitation when I could not find the save game file again. There was nothing wrong with my system because everything else works, but a thought was slowly taking shape in my mind. What if the program writes the save game files to the hard disk only after I quit the game instead of doing it as soon as I ask it to? Unlikely \"HOLD ON, THAT'S NOT A ROMAN LEGION, IT'S though it seemed like, because no programJUST A BOOGER ON THE SCREEN,\" mer in his or her right mind will do a stupid D August 1993 Page 107 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \"I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Of Course, You Know, This Means Wargaming! by Alan Emrich Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics GOMDU WARGACIWG WORLD In this issue. Blue Byte's History Line: 1914-1918 by Robin Matthews .. 110 Three-Sixty's V for Victory: Operation Market Garden by John Vanore .... 112 Changling Software's Pax Imperia by Doug Winship ... 116 SSI's Clash of Steel Sneak Preview by Alan Emrich .... 120 Falcon 3.01 Campaign Tips by Tom Basham ... 126 Origin's Strike Commander by Tom Basham ... 130 Novalogic's Maximum Overkill Expansion Disk by Bryan Walker ... 134 nce again, it's another great month to gaming classic, if there ever was one) and be a wargamer. This time, I've found Changeling Software converting their Pax myself spending uncounted hours Imperia from Mac to IBM, my biggest probwith SSI's upcoming Clash of Steel, a strategic lem right now is finding fresh excuses to give WWII in Europe game that I've previewed a my new wife <grin>. Actually, for the many little further on in this issue. Also, Microwho've asked, married life is great. We're a Prose has glommed onto a strategic space couple of happy gamers. Thanks again, TSN, game that is so darned addicting that I think for bringing us together! someone must have laced the beta copy with One late tidbit is that Steven D. Jones of some kind of narcotic. Hopefully I can stop SDJ Enterprises will be revamping his Big playing it long enough to preview it next Three and La Grande Armee wargames. Beissue. ginning with Big Three first, both games will be redone in a graphically enhanced windows Old Business format. They will include sound support, From the \"everything old is new again\" modem support, and his first effort at prodepartment, Three-Sixty has shot over a latc gramming wargame Al. He says \"It may take beta of their revision of High Command. The upwards of a year, but my heart's in it. We graphics and interface have been considerably wish Steven all the best. punched up, but I need to wade into the game What is really happening 'round these for a while to see what kind of improvements parts, however, is the Computer Gaming have made their way into the Al. I loved the World / New World Computing Empire Deoriginal Colorado Computer Creations ver luxe Inter-Network Tournament. With the sion of this game, and since they're also doing first round over and half the entrants gone, the Three-Sixty version, what could go there were some tremendous battles fought. wrong? (Don't answer that!). First of all, let me give some statistical analysis For people (like me) who are using HPS of the first round. I don't have complete Simulations Aide de Camp product, Scott reports from all the matches (some players Hamilton has released a free upgrade. Called grade Called merely to merely reported the winner with no other version 1.13, ir adds hexes instead of squares, information), but from the information I a new hex numbering system, some improvehave, here are the figures: ments in the \"paint\" features, and several Game lengths ranged anywhere from 21 to other minor tweaks. To obtain a copy, make 197 turns, with the average game lasting 86 sure that you're registered and send a blank, turns. No game went to the end to be scored formarted 3.5\" IBM disk and $.52 return on points. Instead, matches were decided by postage (the address is in the manual). Also, conquest of capitals and players surrendering an unofficial ADC BBS has sprung up in hopeless situations. South Carolina. The number is (803) 356In terms of color march-ups, there is more 8101 or 8102. I've uploaded my A House of a pattern developing. In the Red vs. Green Divided there, in case anyone with ADC games, Red took three and Green four. There wants to try it out. (Don't ask me for a match, were fewer Blue vs. Green games, with Blue I've got my hands full playing Michael Hinde taking four out of five. Most of the action was in Stockholm, Sweden via CompuServe right in the Red vs. Blue matches. Here, Blue dominow!) nated with seven wins to only four Red wins. (Something tells me that those paying for the New Business calls and, thus, choosing color first will be Be sure to read this issue's CES report for opting for Blue from now on.) the latest on the computer wargaming front. New releases, particularly from QOP, are Messages from the Front hovering out there. With Gary Grigsby hard The best part of the tournament is the at work on an improved Second Front (a warcombatant's tales of battles won and lost. Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"There is nothing like a wargamer in \"histoDan Hayden told his story as so: \"There we from Benjamin Duval. In his own words, rian\" or \"propagandist» mode when they dewere, slugging it out over the city in the valley. «Where did I go wrong? Was it poor strategy? scribe their glorious victories or disastrous He took it. No! Was it bad luck? No! Was it the misaligndefeats. To me, this is what this tournament I sent two dog-face units over the moun-ment of the planets? (I couldn't see them is all about. So, without further ado, allow me tains. They arrived, tired but ready. Next because the Florida sun was too bright). No, to quote a few of the commanders fresh from thing you know, the city's mine and the it was none of those things. It was because I the trenches of Empire Deluxe troops cheer as they congratulate each other forgot to wear my Empire Deluxe hat while \"The plucky blue forces led by Jeam on a job well done. playing! I demand a rematch!! (Shrill whin'Beamer' Garvey defeated the evil red forces (RING!] \"This is Command Headquarters. ing) It will be different next time! Dang! of Noah 'WizBang' Best by capturing all of Enemy infantry approaching from the west! should have worn my Raybands when! the capitals on turn 101. While blue luckily Fortunately, our 1st armored arrives with looked up at the sky. I'm still seeing a mote captured the computer's green capital on turn alpha wing covering the skies overhead. 'Can of tiny suns. 44 with a lone infantry unit, turns 60-70 saw we take 'em' radios the pilot. So there it is. Watch for the results of round both players with units outside of all three \"Does a bear Ibleepl in the woods' replies two, and in the meantime enjoy playing Emcapitals. Blue managed to sink both the red the confident tank commander, boring down pire Deluxe. Cow and green transports while turning back wave on the enemy position. after wave of red armor.\" The pilot saw it all. When Ist armored was \"Alas. I let down the honor of Genie by massacred by the enemy infantry, he dove in losing in the first round to a Ci$er! The game for revenge screaming 'You shall pay dearly was a real hoot, though. I was red and he was for your impudence, infantry scum!' (Clearly, Tournament Match-ups blue. I used my patented 'Dondo Gambit the pilot was one of those college boys the Round Two where I send my plane over the ocean and troll sergeant had warned us grunts about.) for enemy transports. I knew he'd mosey toWe watched as the planes were torn from wards the big island with the two 130% cities Name Network City, State the sky, their once proud steeds reduced to on it and, although it exceeds the range of a fragments of dark disgrace. R. Rutdlege P Seattle, WA fighter, if you sink the other guy's transport This was the beginning of the end. The city M. Isom P Bremerton, WA carly, it could be lights out. fell with much weeping and gnashing of teeth. \"Sure enough, there it was the enemy (RING!\"This is 43rd infantry to HQ. We T. Webb Reno, NV transport. And I didn't sink it! (Sigh, why is have failed. Enemy stormtroopers are marchC. Wright Palos Verdes, CA such genius wasted on the unlucky?) Aftering on the capital. We're done for! M. Kohn Walnut Creek, CA that we settled into a long slugfest where I had A n aide rushed in. 'Enemy approaching K. Clark Upland, CA a couple of opportunities to take the third from the north, sirAnd the from the north, sir.' And then another. 'Encapital and blew them both (with armor yet!). emy approaching from the east, sir.' M. Conder Littleton, CO My opponent was a true gentleman and it was The dumbfounded commander put down J. Longshore Ann Arbor, MI a tremendous experience.\" the phone, glanced at the reports and looked Dondo's opponent, \"Bob\" wrote back A. Neal Mason, OH up at the red glow of the situation map. 'May that \"Don tried for my transport within the God have mercy on us all' were his final D. Aldrich Minneapolis, MN first two moves, but I managed to elude his words.\" E. Best fighter and he lost his eye in the sky. I got the Carrollton, TX Then there is the really tragic tale of Paul M. Clouser San Angelo, TX green capital but lost it both to green and to \"The Hammer\" McClellan. He took all of his Dondo several times. I believe the green capihandicaps in production so that he would be M. Ellis Tupelo, MS tal ended up the game with a 37% production commanding the best fighting force on the K. Reimer Radcliff, KY efficiency!\" board. Ironically, however, he lost virtually Matt Clouser sent us this \"press release\" on every land engagement and the game). Even S. Palmer N. Olmsted, OH his game: his opponent, John Longshore, felt a bit guilty R. Andrews Waterville, OH \"WAR IS OVER! at winning in the wake of such bad luck on D. Eheredge T Cockeysville, MD Blue Forces Grab Surprise Victory! his opponent's part. Another commander, B. Marchesani P Lyndhurst, NJ BLUE CAPITAL CITY, TURN 122 — In caught in a see-saw battle, kept flinging his the late hours of turn 121, Klauser's blue units into it with a comment to his opponent D. Crandell C NJ forces dealt a quick end to hostilities by occuthar «By God, if we throw enough peasants at J. Garvey Snyder, NY pying Baker's green capital city in a lightning them, they'll run out of bullets sooner or raid. This was following blue's capture of the later!\" B. Brennan College Point, NY red capital (occupied by green) by amphibiLines like \"It seems that Alan's defeat was V. Wong Bayside, NY ous assault a mere 15 turns earlier. due to his focusing on the computer player J. Lesko Linwood, NJ Representatives from all three powers exand not spending enough time expanding\" H. Gale Westwood, MA pressed surprise at the quick victory. Green's and «I won primarily by building up strength forces held a decisive advantage in the field off-continent and then performing surgical M. Gravel Cranston, RI and at the factories (and had since turn 80 attacks on the two capitals» were offered for B. Winslow Lyme, CT when they occupied most of the mainland advice. Mark «Skulker\" Carroll (co-author of including red's capital city while repeatedly Empire Deluxe: The Official Strategy Guide) M. Lott Alexandria, VA thrusting at forces defending blue's capital). won by (surprisingly) building transports and W. Haberer Tucson, AZ Unconfirmed reports from the field suggest taking the capitals from their seaward sides. D. Hertzler Sarasota, FL that the final victory raid on green's cap was There were even a couple of matches by R. Moser actually a small diversionary force placed in opponents agreeing to play a best 2-out-of-3 green's rear. Unexpectedly, they defeated a series. It takes true wargaming gentlemen to R. Matthews Assonet, MA superior green force to the south of that city, agree to a mini-match within a tournament, M. Carroll Rocky Point, NY thus setting up the win.\" This was from the and my har is off to those players. Disassociated Press. However, the best excuse for losing came Ho 00 00 on Doon 00 0 0 0 0 => FL n August, 1993 Page 109 "


"Deunew Oh, What A Lovely War! Blue Bytes History Line 1914-18 IRRI by Robin Matthews hvor s a military conflict, the First World War evokes terrible In History Line, either one or two players can take part, with the pictures of static trench warfare, desperate stalemates, poor computer providing a very reasonable opponent for the former. The leadership and hideous battles of artrition. The \"war to end all overhead map of the battlefield is divided into two halves, and each wars\" appears to offer virtually no \"attractive material for any form player is able to control the forces on his/her side of the screen. The of strategic or tactical wargame, with perhaps the exception of diploboard is not actually marked with hexes, but all movement and macy. In fact, the dearth of wargames of any type covering this period combat is calculated using a traditional (but invisible) hex/distance tends to prove the point. All credit, then, to Blue Byte for selecting system. Players can choose to play either the German or French side, the 1914-18 war as the backdrop for what may well be the first of but as the historical accuracy is very, very relaxed, there is little many History Line simulations. difference between the opposing armies. In each battle, one side or Blue Byte, for those who do not recognize the company, is a German the other will have set advantages and disadvantages with respect to software house thar, until recently, has been distributed by Ubisoft. the other and will have varying geographic or strategic objectives, Until this release, Battle Isle has probably been their best received title. which basically reduce to cither capturing the opponent's HQ or Battle Isle was a hex-based, futuristic wargame with some nice features wiping said opponent our. and an unusual interface. The game engine used for Battle Isle has \"The emphasis in History Line is on playability, so there is no real been substantially improved and is now the driving force behind their attempt to re-create the battles of the Somme, Verdun, Cambrai or new release, History Line 1914-18 (History Line). Jutland. Upon entering the scenarios, each side's forces are already With History Line, they have deployed, and the player can concencreated a game that is both trate on how and where to use them. simple to play and serves as a The gaming system operates on claschallenging tactical simulasic movement and combat \"phases,\" tion of warfare, using generic but because of the split screen and an military units loosely based on off-set orders system, an illusion is crethose that fought during ated of almost simultaneous action, to World War I. The four years a point. All orders are issued using a of that conflict are divided mouse driven, point-and-click system, into two-month segments, (C) 1992 Blue Byte whereby they select the required unit with each segment constitutand then point to its target or destinaing a single scenario. Once a tion. scenario is successfully comCombat is resolved by the computer plered, of course, the player comparing the many values, loadings moves forward to the next sceand handicaps imposed by terrain, exnario and so, eventually plays perience, morale, and the other usual through the entire war. influences. The combat is then shown HISTORYLINE 1914-1918 Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview D wow WEIGHT: on the screen via a series of military units generic, animated graphics. Milibuildings are also lumped tary Units are represented together into one of three in a generic fashion, so one types. HQs must be degroup of elite infantry look fended/captured at all much like another, but costs, Depots which are there is certainly a differbuilt by specialist units ence between, say, the Incan do some maintenance fantry Units and Armored or repair, and Factories Cars. can actually manufacture The graphic sequences new units. All these buildvary according to the types ARMOURED CAR ings produce the \"energy\" of units and terrain inthat is needed to produce volved. Each unit is deHEAPONS SIZE/RADIUS) GROUND: 35 / 1 and maintain an army. WATER: 351 fined by way of Range, As the months slip by, ARMOUR: Weight, Strength, Armor SPEED: the seasons also change. and, particularly, Fire HAN GROUP SIZE: This means that the first power against different tartime one is faced by a gets, whether airborne, snow-covered landscape, ground or naval. Infantry, ARMOURED CAR one can almost feel the Cavalry, Armored Cars, shivers going down one's Sappers, Transports, Supspine. The weather greatly ply Trains, Artillery, Anti-tank and Anti-aircraft weapons, loads of affects movement and the general making of war, and, as in the real different Planes, Balloons, Submarines, Battleships and more are thing, it can often defeat both combatants! This attention to the game depicted and form a varied and impressive armory. play detail is what really makes History Line and keeps the level of Casualties are portrayed in numbers, and the units take \"damage.\" interest and challenge high throughout. If they win their conflict, they improve in battle capability, but they A nice touch is the use of contemporary newspaper clippings can also be destroyed. One quirk of the History Line system is that the between the scenarios. \"stacking\" of units is not allowed. This will seem strange to regular This reinforces the wargamers, but is in accord with the general principles of simplicity. links with World War As the war proI and also serves to gresses, technological meld together the advances in weaponry separate scenarios. It is are reflected by the also a wonderful type of armaments source of WWI trivia Session that become available. as it covers not just the Planes, armored war news, but current trains, and tanks all WAMESISTENTED sport and social slowly make an apevents. pearance, and it is The Al of the comthose feelings of puter opponent is of a high standard and each scenario may need to \"Right, now I can sort be played several times to work out the best strategy, especially in the those bunkers out\" later parts of the war when lots of diverse military units interact. and \"When do I get those heavy bombers?\" that gives History Linea The interface takes a little getting used to, but is then simple and far greater depth than would normally be associated with this lighter quick to use. Graphics, particularly the animated sequences, are type of wargame. In this respect, at least, it resembles Civilization. strong, and there is plenty of variety. However, the documentation Matters really become impressive when the naval units also come into translation is a bit woolly and could be tidied up with a good tutorial. the fray, amply supported by some of those graphic scenes with big This is only a minor complaint, for if a player can get through the first guns blazing and heavy metal flying. battle, he is well on his way to world domination. To avoid getting too History Line is a genuinely unique prodbogged down in detail uct that may be dismissed by very serious and statistics, the miliwargamers, but will be welcomed by a tary units are inevitamuch larger audience. It combines some bly very generic. In almost arcade game qualities with depth fact, it would be fair to and detail that will entertain and challenge say that the entire gamfor many a long evening. This is the best ing system could just as release yet from Blue Byte, and is almost easily be applied to any certainly not the last we will see of this conflict, past present innovative wargaming system. or future. The prospect Blue Byte's History Line 1914-18 is curof this system being rently available on the IBM from specialist used in a Civil War or import suppliers. Strategic Plus Software a Napoleonic setting is in the UK (tel 0101-81-977-8088, FAX intriguing, as is the 0101-977-4822, CompuServe possibility of high class 1000014,3466) is currently able to supply interplanetary warfare. for the equivalent of  plus postage and Not only are the handling. CGW tegen BUCH * August 1993 Page 111 "


"meu Once More into the Breach Roger MacGowan Illustration Three-Sixty's V for Victory: Market Garden by John Vanore borne Division), and an independent Polish airborne brigade were dropped deep inside The Netherlands. Their objective was to seize strategic bridges leading up to and across the Rhine River in advance of a powerful ground drive spearheaded by XXX Corps. Market Garden recreates this situation in seven progressively more seven progressively more complex scenarios depicting aspects of the airdrop and the XXX Corps attack, united, of course, by the campaign game. presentation and smooth mouse-driven interface are also present, making utmost use of the Macintosh's excellent capabilities in these areas. As with the other V for Victory series titles, Market Garden is played by consecutive game turns, each broken into several different n ven before the echoes of artillery fire have faded from the streets of Velikiye Luki, Three-Sixty has released the third title in their successful V for Victory line, Market Garden. Whereas the previous title's subject may only have been familiar to hardcore wargamers, Market Garden has much better name recognition. The subject of ition. he subject of countless board games and films, Operation Market Garden was actually two operations, Market and Garden, which encompassed both a massive airborne operation and the XXX Corps' drive to link up with the paratroopers, in order to capture key bridges in The Netherlands. Remarkably, this is only the second computerized treatment of the operation, the first being SSI's 1985 release, Operation Market Garden. Operation Market Garden was a bold conPARKET BROS FOR VIETORY 1 tibbi Starr Butirs Menny Man DUREBB BOBB. 2 BG Bu V is for Version 3 What follows will actually be a review with a split personality. One one hand, I'll be discussing the battles and scenarios of Market Garden, which add a new dimension to the V for Victory series. On the other hand, we've got version 3.0 (with 3.1 in testing) of the basic V for Victoryengine. These two tales will be intertwined through the course of my review. Market Garden will be instantly recognizable to anyone with even a cursory knowledge of previous games in the system. In fact, when it came time to write this review, I had quite a hard time finding the documentation, as I previously had little need for it. There is the familiar battalion-level situation, with a few companies thrown in for good measure. Not surprisingly, game scales remain constant at four hours per turn and one square kilometer per hex. A distinct hex grid underlays the playing area, which can be toggled on or off at the player's discretion. (I suppose it depends on how much you'd rather be playing a board game.) Three-Sixty's superb graphic SAR TITLE: V for Victory: Market Garden PRICE: $59.99 SYSTEMS: IBM, Macintosh REQUIREMENTS: IBM (386SX or better, 512K VESA compatible video card, 3MB RAM, mouse), Mac (System 6.0.X or higher, 2.5 MB RAM, 4MB hard drive space) PLAYERS: 1 or 2 via modem PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Larry Merkel, Ed Rains, Eric Young Keith Zabalaoui PUBLISHER: Three-Sixty Pacific Campbell, CA (409) 776-2187 cept, which in reality turned out to be a bit too bold. In the largest airborne combat drop in history, three divisions (the U.S. 82nd, 101st Airborne Divisions and British 1st AirPage 112 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview e Delon Surf Duties Play hane CD-UNA WAS A phases: Planning, Execution, and After Action. In the Planning Phase, the player issues commands to all available forces, both on map and off. Besides designating ground force attacks and artillery barrages, air strikes are also an option using medium bombers and fighter-bombers. I say \"option,\" but one shouldn't take that too literally; air strikes constitute one of the easiest and most effective ways to soften up a panzer battalion before hitting it with ground troops, and the player who doesn't cycle through this side of the command bar is unnecessarily handicapping his troops. Also during Planning, more explicit orders can be given. For instance, three defensive levels can be used, depending on how badly one wants to hold a particular piece of terrain. Those options are Rerreat If Attacked, Defend If Attacked or Defend At All Costs. Likewise, four different levels of effort can be specified for attacks: All-Out Assault, Assault (the default selection), Assault with No Advance or Probe. The immediate implications of these choices are obvious. Perhaps not so obvious is that the more strenuous options— All-Out Assault and Defend At All Costs — require high morale levels in order to be carried off successfully and carry the potential for much higher casualties in a failed effort. All of the commands issued during the Planning Phase are put into operation during the Execution Phase. The Planning Phase is particularly important because, once play moves to Execution, the player can only sit back and watch as his scheme is implemented In the spirit of the old Simulations Canada games, the player is powerless to intercede once the tanks start rolling. One can only hope that his proper prior planning will prevent piss-poor performance. As the Execution Phase moves along, each battle is resolved, and an appropriate flag appears over cach affected hex (Stars & Stripes, Union Jack or Swastika) to give a quick \"heads-up\" on the result of the combat. this Command Box if one decides the odds aren't adequate to ensure success. Move down to the Unit Window to see information on whichever unit or stack is selected with the mouse. The information display looks like the data presented on a cardboard unit counter. The player can see the entire spectrum of values for any unit as long as Fog of War and Limited Intelligence are toggled off. To increase the level of difficulty (or uncertainty), one can toggle these options on, and all that can be seen is a string of question marks. I find this window particudescription of both sides' performance (excellarly helpful in checking up on fatigue states. lent, good, fair, or poor), casualties as a perMy experience has been that, all things being centage of forces, and the number of units equal, high fatigue will kill off units much eliminated. If an artillery interdiction barrage faster than any other factor. was fired into the hex, the player will be apprised of how long movement through chat Operation Seven Scenarios hex was delayed. Market Garden features seven scenarios covering various aspects of the campaign. These Operation Game Mechanics run the gamut from one-hour-long introductory scenarios to the Campaign Scenario enMarket Garden retains the familiar and very titled, you guessed it, \"A Bridge Too Far.\" satisfying features that made Utah Beach and Although the shorter scenarios are intended Velikiye Luki such versatile products. Two for beginners, I find them useful for getting a elements familiar to veteran wargamers are quick fix on the system when I don't have the options and variants. Each specific option or time for \"Destruction of the 1st,\" a ten-hour variant has an effect on one player or another, slugfest with a depressing title which portends and can be used alone or in combination to the battering of the British 1st Airborne Dihandicap a player (or the computer), to alter vision at Arnhem. Other scenarios are dediplay balance, or to explore certain \"What If?\" cated to other formations, such as \"Breakout scenarios. of 30th Corps,\" showing the armoured thrust Bv options. I refer to such items By options, I refer to such items as Fog of intended to relieve the paras (pardon the BritWar. Limited Intelligence and Variable speak), «Screaming Eagles,\" or \"Groesbeeck Weather Fag of War limits the amount of Weather. Fog of War limits the amount of Heights,\" featuring the landing and objecinformation each player has regarding his tives of the Amos 'n' Andy Division (which is own forces and reflects the fact that reports what the \"AA\" on the 82nd Airborne Dividon't always get back to headquarters from sion's patch really stands for). the front lines. Limited Intelligence, on the other hand, restricts knowledge of enemy force strengths, capabilities, and even locations (until contact is made). Variable Weather can screw everything up. By restricting air sortie generation, it can adversely affect both offensive air missions and, in this case, air drops of reinforcements! Variants concern historically valid possibilities that could have affected the battle in question. What if the German 9th Panzer was present in its entirety during the battle? The player can give the Germans some extra forces if he feels he's winning too easily as the Allies. Operation Patsy Panzers (Remember, this was the offensive that gave us A Bridge Too Far.) As was the case with Velikiye Luki, all is not In a feature now standard for the V for perfect with Market Garden. One significant Victory series, we find the map area surproblem persists with this latest iteration of V rounded by the basic Mac menu on top, a for Victory. The Artificial Intelligence algoCommand Box at the right, and the Unitrithms used by the computer to control its Window along the bottom of the screen. The forces still leave much to be desired. In fact, Command Box gives the player the where the computer German in Market Garden withal to manipulate supply levels, assign seems even more spineless than its counterunits among the various headquarters echeparts in earlier iterations of the series. I am lons available, allocate air strikes (my personal constantly amazed by the reticence of the favorite), and estimate combat odds calculadigital panzertruppen to take on a battalion tions before combat kicks off. And, yes, one of paratroopers, the quintessential light infancan scrub an attack by clicking on a button in try. I've intentionally played many of these Toplins Sal Betis Pam JE, Me Upliant Wall lies Planning Phase ALI D aco The After Action Phase is also self-explanatory. During this phase, the player can click through cach hex where any sort of combat took place and get either a brief or detailed report of the combat. In the case of a ground attack, the briefing will provide a qualitative August 1993 Page 113 "


"Roger MacGowan scenarios with the \"Fog of War\" and \"Limited Intelligence\" options turned off, so I presume the computer is as all-knowing as I am regarding enemy force dispositions. Yet my Screaming Eagles keep on grabbing turf, digging in, and running up the victory point tally. The Allies have to achieve some very well-defined territorial objectives in order to win, so I suspect the computer has a better time at identifying and going after these objectives. (I say \"suspect\" because I'll never be satisfied I've done a definitive test of all the options and possibilities to cover all the bases.) The most satisfying way to get in a good and challenging) game may be to play as the Germans and let the computer handle the Allies. That way, one is more likely to see the Rhinelanders put up a spirited defense against air landings and simultaneous advances of armored columns. There is also a weak spot in the documentation. Although it does an excellent job of of describing all the game features and func. rions, it has almost ne historical notes. Al though this omission is not so great a problem with Market Garden as it was with Velikiye liliw Luki, most wargamers nonetheless enjoy a block of historical background and narrative which fixes a few of the bugs encountered in 3.0. Now, engineers will not disappear from the map after conducting a bridging operation; also, units can recover from an out-ofsupply status by re-establishing supply lines to respective headquarters. Ferries also function in accordance with the reference manual. Granted, these are small fixes that should not impair compatibility, but they are indicative of ThreeSixty's efforts to keep on top of the software. Right now, everything works fine. Whether or not we'll have compatibility problems when Gold-Juno-Sword (the next title in the series) is released, only time will tell. illustration with their games. Granted, there are a few pages up front discussing the various forces portrayed in the battles, and a bit of history trickles down throughout the reference book. However, a serious wargame needs more than this. Now, on to the Battleset concept. It appears that Three-Sixty has finally cleared this one up with software release 3.0. With the release of Market Garden, we now have three sers of scenarios that can be played using the same basic software application (Market Garden, Velikije Luki, and the newly-revised Utah Beach). However, Three-Sixty keeps on tryBeach), ing to improve the basic software engine of the V for Victory series. While this is generally laudable, it will continue to raise the spectre of compatibility problems between newer of compatibility problems between newer applications and older scenario sets. A case in point is version 3.1 of the software, Operation Concluding Remarks In my opinion, the V for Victory series has finally come of age with the release of Market Garden. Version 3.0 of the system software essentially brings the original Battleset concept to fruition, even though Three-Sixty has officially dropped that concept. Also, the eventual addition of the modem play option should do much to overcome the wimpy computer opponent. V for Victory is a good, fun system that really feels like a wargame and provides a great deal of bang for the buck. CGW THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you i to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all! of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4). Drakkhen. Pool of Radiance. Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds 1, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2). Keel the Thiel, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7). Dark Heart of Uukrul. Savage Empire. Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000. Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming today! Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 HINT BOOKS — $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul. Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 (12.95). IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. VISA GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 MasterCard Also available, The Journal of the PBM Gamer for $3.00 $5.00 for overseas orders FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00: 1 year to Europe $51.00; 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. Page 114 Circle Reader Service #65 Circle Reader Service #87 "


"WORLD WAR 11 The war is about to begin. Soon, the German blitzkrieg will sweep across Poland and the rest of EUROPE Europe. Starting in 1939, CLASH OF STEEL spans the European Theater of World War II with one complete 1939 1945 campaign and six scenarios, including the Fall of France, Operations Barbarossa, Blau, Citadel and D-Day. SLASH STEEL . SEL 256 color VGA displays To order, visit your retailer or call 1-408-737-6800 x186 with VISA/MC (U.S. and Canada only). For play on IBM  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"TRUNGTIN Peace Through Strength (Lots of it) Changeling Software's Pax Imperia by Douglas Winship Fue tant came teper View the player GK 29 Tutart Game Report View Action Player so faster than planets that are missing one or the other, or both. the other or both Beyond exploration, the other major activity is designing, building, dispatching and fighting ships. There are essentially four kinds of ship: Scouts, Transports, Fighters and Tenders. The Tenders are an innovation in Pax Imperia. One must have a Tender to repair damaged ships. Even ships in home systems must be repaired by a Tender. Another differch h is is great, but I wish I could do for social unrest. Players then select the emthis...\" and \"Hmmm, this really pire's six Ministers. Good Ministers keep I should be more developed...\" and their departments functioning well, bad Min\"That's not realistic....\" isters leave them functioning poorly. If MinThese are the sorts of things that game isters are chosen well to begin with, there is players say as they enjoy the games in a favorno reason to replace them later, unless they ite genre. The people at Changeling Software are bribed or assassinated by an opponent. clearly said an awful lot of things like that Finally, players choose what region of the while playing Reach For the Stars and Spacegalaxy to play in and select up to 50 stars to ward Ho—and Pax Imperia is the result. The play with on the star map. A good number to one sentence description of the play of the choose is around seven to ten stars. This may game is the same as for its predecessors: Exnot seem like many, bur cach star will have on plore the galaxy, colonize other worlds, and average seven planets, each with up to three deal harshly with any alien scum who get in moons, and every planet and moon is potenyour way. What makes Pax Imperia worth tially colonizable! This is a tremendous adding to the collection is all the new things amount of geography to contend with. A 50 involved in accomplishing traditional goals. star game with only two or three empires will take hours of play just to achieve first contact, and days to complete. Once a game begins, players have a number Once a game begins, players have a number of information and map screens to navigate between. There are four maps: a Star Map of the entire play area; System Maps showing the currently selected star and its planets; Planctary Maps showing the selected planet and its moons; and a Surface Map which shows the natural resources of the world, along with whatever infrastructure has been built there. There are also a variety of other useful control screens. Pax Imperia can be played by up to 16 human or computer players. The current verPlayers explore other star systems, then sion is for single machine play, but Appletalk colonize the rich or environmentally suitable network and remote support will soon be planets or moons they find. They then, as cash available. The game may be played in a turnand population resources allow, build infraby-turn mode or in continuous real time. structure: Factories for extracting raw materials and manufacturing ship components; With more than one player at a single maCities for increasing the tax base; Shipyards chine, turn mode is required. The real time for assembling starships; Bases for defending mode is more entertaining, but events can against space attacks; and Ports. When a Colboil over on players in a big hurry. ony builds a Port, it becomes a Home World, At the start of the game, players choose the which then begins to produce tax revenue species they wish to play, or they can design instead of consuming it. Home World popuone from scratch. Racial characteristics deterlation growth is dramatically lower than Comine which planers will be most valuable for lonial, however. Any world can become colonization and exploitation. They also afprofitable eventually, but planets or moons fect population growth rates, research effiwhich have the right atmosphere and temciency, militaristic ability and the potential perature for the player's chosen race will do empire Simulato EM IMPERIA TITLE: Pax Imperia: The Galactic Empire Simulator PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: Macintosh REQUIREMENTS: System 6.0.7 or better, 1MB RAM (2 for color) # OF PLAYERS: Up to 16 PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Pete Sispoidis, Andrew Sispoidis, and Jeanine DeSocio PUBLISHER: Changeling Software Windsor Locks, CT (203) 623-1963 Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"Meunew in111133351351331 Emploration Erpar DE ALLADA to be very spread out and are often intermingled. Death blows do not come easy. While players are clearing out one sector of space, making it free of alien infestation, the aliens will be starting new colonies in others systems, reclaiming destroyed worlds, or cleaning out sectors of their own space, making it free of player infestation. In the early game, ships are simply too slow to prevent this situation. Later, as ships become faster and are equipped with better sensors, it becomes easier to cordon off the enemy. Then players must be careful with resources which suddenly and alarmingly become quite scarce. If all goes well, the player wins. Too many mistakes, and there is always \"New Game.\" T ERRESTRE Sler: Castor DDD kill everyone off and take over. Ground combat takes place on larger planets that have been colonized by more than one race. As one colony or another grows too big to support itself, excess population will migrate into other areas of the planet. If there is enough of this migrating population, it can overwhelm its neighbors. Players can influence these Migration Wars by landing additional troops to start a migration of their own or by strafing the migrating hordes from space. While all this colonization, building and fighting is going on, the player must also keep ence between Pax Imperia and its predecessors a sharp eye on the mechanics of the empire' s is that building a transport is not very expeneconomy. Taxes must be adjusted, depending sive in terms of cash and resources, but filling upon the empire's needs. High raxes bring in a large transport will consume at least 50% of a lot of cash, but hurt the economy. A fracthe entire popularion of the planet that built tious race may even riot if taxes are set too it. There is a good selection of canned ship high. Players must also decide how much cash designs, each of which becomes available as to set aside for research. Too little research to set aside for research. Too little research one's tech level reaches an appropriate level. leaves players with low tech ships that get Players may also design custom ships and wiped out easily, while too much research even custom ship components. As technology aucochin componente Astechnolcou lea leaves the economy crippled and unable to advances, older ship designs become less exbuild expensive high tech ships. Players also pensive but much less effective. allocate money to ship maintenance, colonial development, and social spending on Home Another nice innovation in Pax Imperia is Worlds. Raising colonial spending increases the way ships move between systems. Instead population growth on Colonies. Raising soof hyperspace, where all ships are invisible and cial spending lowers population growth on out of communication, ships in Pax Imperia Home Worlds, but raises the efficiency of travel on the star map, where they can be seen. those worlds. Efficiency is the rate at which They can be redirected or recalled in midworlds mine resources and build ships. It also travel, and if their range is low enough and affects the cost of infrastructure. sensors good enough, ships can see the ships of other empires passing by in deep space, and One last important budget item is espioeven intercept them. There is no range liminage. Once a player makes contact with an tation on ships, other than the probability obability alien race, the Espionage Minister comes into that a slow ship traveling very far will likely play. Through him or her, players can steal be obsolete by the time it arrives. alien technology, bribe alien ministers, or even assassinate them. Players must also alloThe space combat portion of the game is cate a continuing budget to counter-espio also pleasing. Instead of a dry report detailing nage, to prevent the same things from results, Pax Imperia allows the players to achappening to them. tually fight the battles. A map is displayed which shows all the combatant fleets, with the range and effectiveness of each fleet's weapons and ECM/ECCM shown as circles. The playcrs can determine targets and move their ships. In most small head-to-head battles there is little that the player can do to significantly affect the outcome, but in larger fleet battles the player can have an impact. Also, the battle module allows outmatched fleets the possibility of retreat. Realistically, the battle module could be dropped from the game without seriously affecting a player's chances of winning or losing, but its presence means a lot in terms of enjoyment. If I am going to The difference between galactic success and lose a fleet that I have spent a lot of time and failure lies in a delicate balancing act between effort building, I want to have the pleasure of Growth, Assets and Efficiency. Too much seeing it get shot up, instead of just getting a growth limits efficiency, drawing out too message like \"Fleet 8 lost a battle at Sirius, all much cash from the economy limits growth, 287 Battleships were destroyed. The enemy and encouraging very high efficiency prevents lost I out of 3 ships.\" assembling the assets needed to use it. As the There is Space-to-Ground and Ground-togame progresses, players must adjust their Ground combat as well. Space-to-Ground emphasis continuously as their situation combat consists of eliminating the planet's changes. defenses, then either bombing its populace Winning is simple, though not easy! just into the stone age, or landing a transport to be the last empire in existence. Empires tend de tot Came Report ve Action Player DESCU Cell 17 .00 Pax Imperia has the feel of a work in progress. The manual is out of date and will soon be reprinted. A very good supplement is provided on disk for the time being. There are also a few minor bugs in the game, which are annoying rather than fatal. The main problem is with the star map, which does nor zoom in or out effectively. Also, ships in transit through deep space sometimes leave ghosts or erase what they cross over. There are also occasional problems with changing the destination of ships traveling through deep space. All of these annoyances appear to have a common root and are supposed to be fixed shortly. The interface is attractive and entertaining, with good graphics, digitized voices, and some neat music that fits the flavor of the game well. It does lack polish, however. A little more animation would be nice, for instance. Also the controls are best suited for playing the game in turn mode, but when playing solo, the game plays best in real time mode. There are simply so many windows to move between that events can run away from players at higher real-time speeds. On the grand cosmic gaming scale, the quality of Pax Imperia more than outweighs its blemishes. The interface takes a little longer its blemishes. The interface takes a little lon to get used to than it might, but ends up being quite serviceable. The important thing is that the game system itself is rich and deep. Each game takes a long time to play and is totally engaging throughout. For those who like monstrous, involved strategy games, especially space-based ones, Pax Imperia is a pleasing and challenging addition to its genre. Cow E August 1993 Page 117 "


"WHAT IF THE WOR THEY PUT YOU IN CH "


"WERE AT WAR AND AGE OF EVERYTHING? 1 COMMENLI voinmand High Command captures WWII in Europe on a grand scale. Spanning the war years 1939 through 1945, you are placed in complete control of all military, economic and political resources. Choose to lead the Allied or Axis war machine. Command all land, sea and air forces. Exercise your diplomatic options. Build up your military or invest in your country's Infrastructure. High Command is more than a wargame. It's the ultimate hot seat. Visit your local retailer or call to order 800-653-1360 in the U.S., or 800-697-2360 in Canada. HIGH COMMAND WILL BE AVAILABLE IN JUNE FOR THE IBM PC AND 100X COMPATIBLES. HIGH COMMAND EUROPE 1939-45 IS A TRADEMARK OF THREE SETY PACIFIC, INC. 1993 THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. IBM IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES. "


"TIME TAKE PROD NO SCENE smeak.preven A Clash Of Cymbals DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY Clash of Steel Plays the 1939 Overture with Cannon by Alan Emrich whiz by (so it \"rastes great\"). It is a simple, attack made nearby each turn), artificial harSneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. strategic wargame that manages to touch on bor units (handy for invasions), and the all They are feature articles based on \"works in pro all the major aspects of the war and yet never important Army Group/Front formations. gress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of gets itself too dirty in the details. In that These latter units, also known as \"headquarearly coverage. These articles are not intended to regard, it is much like the ever popular board ters\" among my gaming group, are not only provide the final word on a product, since we wargame, The Russian Campaign — clean, a player's strongest pieces, but they also exexpect to publish appropriate review coverage comprehensive and well-designed. tend one's supply lines beyond friendly cities. when the game is finished. Clash of Steel is similar to a lot of Thus, they are the American Express card of boardgames, most notably Australian Design this game one shouldn't wage war without yhose who have enjoyed Mel Brooks Group's World in Flames. The resemblance to them. classic comedy, The Producers, will re that game is particularly strong because Clash Another charming element in Clash of Steel member the outlandish title song from of Steel uses bimonthly turns, each consisting is the naming of many of the pieces. Oh, sure, the play, \"Springtime for Hitler.\" Wargamers of several \"pulses,\" during which one side the ships are all named, but the really cool part may again be hearing that chorus when they conducts its movement and combat. How is that many of the land units are named as consider the three major releases for the well. Headquarters with names like IBM that will soon cover WWII in Zhukov, Montgomery, Alexander, EisEurope, cach on a similar grand strategic enhower, Bradley and DeGaulle for the scale. While Three-Sixty's High ComAllies, and Rundstedt, Bock, Manstein, mand and Avalon Hill's Third Reich are Rommel, Kesselring and Garibaldi for probably well known to our readers, the Axis, give an enjoyable element of SSI's Clash of Steel from newcomer Marhistory to the game. Even the armored tin Scholtz may take gamers by surprise. units are named after some of the war's Like the war in Europe, this game more celebrated generals such as Patoriginates from Germany (where, ironiton, Kleist, Hoepner and Manteuffel. cally, national censorship would once As for getting these boys around, we have prevented its sale), and Mr. Scholtz found the movement and combat sysGermanic perspective on the subject tems to be so natural and the interface adds some delightful nuances to the so intuitive, that we figured out most of game. His perspective is clearly one of a the game mechanics during our first wargamer/history buff who enjoys a Mal/Sun 114 game without any documentation to good, clean, playable game. 3. Iraula guide us. Just plunking down in front A Gathering of Generals many pulses will be played during a single of the computer and pushing the turn and who will go first each turn are both pieces around\" was all it took to overrun a few Clash of Steel has that same kind of wondermysteries (determined by die rolls), but the countries and wage a little strategic warfare. ful addictive gaming quality to it that I have winter months tend to be very short, while the As jaded, mega-manual-reading wargamers, found in such titles as Warlords, Empire Desummer turns of May/June and July/August this was a delightfully refreshing change of luxe, Command HQ and the V for Victory I've seen drag out as many as 11 impulses. The pace. series. To make sure that my impressions were turn/impulse system gives Clash of Steel a lot The land units maneuver around using correct, I invited a few of my wargaming of charm. The real beauty, though, is that the regular, hex-by-hex movement. Alternately, buddies over to see and play it. Well, when I player with the initiative might not only go on each player's first impulse of a game turn, bad to shoo them out at 3:30 AM because first, but also last during a game turn that has each nationality can move one to three pieces they couldn't stop playing, I knew the game an odd number of impulses. Not only that, by strategic movement (simply teleporting was a winner. Now to explain why we're all but if that player also has the initiative next them to any connected friendly city). A difplaying this wargame, laughing, having a turn (although moving last in the previous ferent type of movement, called \"operational good time, and singing the \"Naughty Nazi\" turn lowers one's chances of that happening), numbers from Mel Brooks' To Be or Not To redeployment,\" allows a player to move one he might get a \"double move\" opportunity to unit in a ten square jump. This can be used attack the other player before he can react! to \"force march\" infantry in order to keep up with the tanks, or to quickly shift air forces to Rock 'em, Sock 'em, Kick 'em in Hitler Lite needed sectors of the front. the Corps Clash of Steel is best summed up as « High Units pay a single movement point to enter Command Lite.\" It is a far less serious study The units of maneuver in Clash of Steel are most hexes, with mountains and swamps of the European Theater of Operations (and, corps, armies, air fleets and capital ships. The costing two. Moving directly from one enemy thus, is \"less filling»), but it maintains an ease land unit mix also includes paratroop corps \"zone of control» to another costs one addiof play and quick tempo that makes the hours (which don't \"drop\" but can influence one tional movement point. With most moveBe.... Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"MICHAEL WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION DESIGN Ninja Taro Might and Magic w 2400 010 A Wing Commander 1220 LYNDON STREET #22 SOUTH PASADENA, CA 91030 Spaceward Ho When you need the finest in computer game illustration, call Michael Winterbauer. Partial client list includes: New World Computing, American Sammy, JVC, Taito, Bandai America, CSG Imagesoft, The Software Toolworks, and Atlus. TELEPHONE 818 799-4998 FAX 818 441-3086 "


"Cheakor unew 1943 ment allowances in the two, three and four hex range (for headquarters, armies and corps, respectively), there can be some useful infiltration of weak lines, as well as viable screening and delay tactics for players on the retreat. Tanks move at speeds of four for the Russians, five for the Allies, and six or seven for the Germans. The trick with movement is to cut off enemy forces before smashing them in combat. When units are eliminated while isolated, they can only be rebuilt after a year's wait and their full price must be paid. Other eliminated units are bought back cheap with a 60% discount and reappear on the next turn. Thus, a good strategy is to have armor units push forward and create pockets for the infantry to mop up. \"Hold 'Em by the Nose and Kick 'Em in the Butt\" Land combat is a function of movement. At any point, an enemy unit can be selected as the target of strikes (from friendly airplanes or shore bombardment from friendly ships) and assaults. Assaulting an enemy position allows multiple units to attack an enemy unit in concert. Each friendly unit can only participate in one friendly assault per turn, however, so keeping fresh troops around so that a single stronghold (like Leningrad, Gibralter, or just about any other city) can be hit with multiple strikes and assaults in a single impulse, is a viable and important tactic for capturing them. The other form of combat is simply trying to move one's units into an enemy-occupied hex. These \"overrun attacks» are conducted by individual units, though with a penalty to the attacker's actual combat strength. Often, assaults slap the enemy line around, causing strength losses and retreats, while overrun attacks charge after the weakened defenders and finish them off. The War at Sea \"The naval system in Clash of Steel is very much like the Avalon Hill boardgame War at Sea. Each ship has two ratings: one for naval combat and the other for the interdiction of enemy supply, or its «raider value.\" Combat values range from two, for the Russian October Revolution and a German U-boat, to three, for the British carrier Glorious, and up to five for the Bismarck and Ohio-class battleships. When a naval action occurs, it will usually be an air-to-sea battle with only carriers, submarines, and land based airplanes having a chance to roll some dice. In any event, if a ship rolls less than or equal to its rating, an enemy ship takes a \"ding.\" Two such hits and a ship is sunk. Damaged ships can be brought back to port (assuming they survive the battle) and have a 1/3 chance each turn of being repaired. \"A Slice of Turkey, A Drop of Greece Politics has even been woven into Clash of Steel, although exactly how the machinations work behind the numbers is far more opaque than the breezy land, sea and air systems in the game. At any time, one can spend some of his political capital in an effort to \"press\" another country into joining his alliance. Each neutral is rated for their ability to resist such pressure. There is even a Balkan Pact wherein Greece, Rumania, Turkey and Yugoslavia stand united against foreign pressures. Hungary and Bulgaria might also join this pact, if pressured One odd thing about this pact is that I often would attack Yugoslavia as the Germans only to find Turkey so happy about it that it joined my side outright. Again, there is more to the diplomatic options than meets the eye, and The WARGAMER'S NEW! IER'S FROM Computer Company HPS POINT OF SIMULATIONS ATTACK AIDE DE CAMP Authentic weapons capabilities with authentic combat results. Take ANY board wargame and play it on your PC, Play-by mail or modem. Unmatched detail down to individual rounds resolution. Save floor space and playing time. Over 100 weapons from 11 nations. ARTI, Set in the volatile Middle East, Point of Attack operates on Create colorful maps, up to 30,000 hexes, by using the a platoon-section level. Create custom engagements, or drawing editor to design terrain and units. Multiple explore one of the five scenarios. Features night combat, user-defined zoom levels. Permanently save game set-ups adjustable weather conditions, morale and other intangible as well as turns including movement and combat for later factors, advanced artillery, and lots more. review/replay. Compatible with all game systems, theaters, scales and eras. Design your own game. The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation Imagination is your only limit. available! Requires a hard disk, VGA display, and at least 600K of RAM. Requires an EGA display and at least 512K of RAM. Mouse optional. (Board games must be purchased separately.) IBM only $54.95 IBM only $79.95 Available only by mail. Mail checks/money orders to: VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. HPS Simulations, P.O. Box 3245 CA residents add state sales tax. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Please specify disk spec when ordering, Circle Reader Service #67 Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"SPOILS OF WAR RAGNAROK R.A.W. 29 Spails RALES goes Direct for Recession Proof Pricing and AVAILABILITY! ACTION Molonize and conquer Toin the final great far away lands. You J Viking quest to will have to fight long aid the Gods in their and hard to achieve final battle victory! Naval and Land Ragnarok!! 200 races, battles, R and D, tactical multiple quests with no option, colonists. predetermined AT+ / 1 Meg RAM/ storyline, 100's of EGA / VGA / Adlib/ BUY FROM RAW ENTERTAINMENT items. HD req'd. War / Satisfaction Guaranteed! XT+ / 640K/VGA/ Management $59.95 $34.95. Includes FREE Adlib / HD Required. Map Editor for Roleplaying Extended Gameplay!! $59.95 $34.95 ACTION STATIONS! FIRETEAM 2200 Guarantee: Includes FREE Construction Return your purchase Kit (PC Only) !! Available SIATION within 30 days of invoice PC and Amiga date, with reason for relurn (1 Meg) and with the product(s) in a resalable condition and we will refund your money | ARALA INCLUDING the shipping and handling charge for DRAW that title! The Naval Surface Combat Tactical Simulator. WE WANT YOU TO BE L i -tech combat on distant worlds! Command COMPLETELY IT Covers 1922 1945. 30 scenarios, build and your Fireteam of up to 16 units. 30+ SATISFIED!! Combat Units, 25 Weapons Systems, Battle generate scenarios, 180+ ship classes, superb A1 Computer, 20 scenarios, modem play between PC * Refunds only on titles and historical accuracy, 160 page manual. and Amiga versions. purchased directly from XT+ / 640K / EGA / Adlib / Modem / HD required. XT+ / CGA / 640K / HD recommended. RAW and with enclosure of Wargame suggs $29.95 Wargame $49.95 $29.95 original invoice. Includes Free Construction Kit (PC Only) !! TASSEN Also Available: Terms: Shipping and Handling $3.50 U.S. (S5 Canada) for first title, $1.50 (S2.00 Canada) (All 640K / EGA PC and 1 Meg Amiga.) for each additional title ordered at the same time. Goods sent Priority mail (Airmail Canada). Worlds At War Science Fiction, Wargame $40.95 $29.95 Credit Card Sales: (MC / VISA). Call: 1 800 323 7878 (24 hours). Telephone Orders: Action Stations Scenario / Utility Disk(s) $21.95 $14.95 Colorado residents add sales tax. Checks / Money Orders: State machine I disk size I format. (Amiga 1 Meg Only) Napoleon 1. Wargame $40.95 $29.95 Also daytime and / or evening phone number. Make check out to RAW Entertainment Inc. 64 Page 8 1/2\" 11\" Ragnarok Strategy Guide SH95 $9.95 Mail Order ordre's;Texas residents add sales taz. Goods usually shipped within 3 business days. Bravo Romeo Delta Global Nuclear Wargame $40.95 $29.95 R.A.W.Entertainment Inc.957 NASA Road One Suite 146. Houston Texas. 77058 3098 (713) 286 2 386  R.A.W. Entertainment, Inc. All Prices Relate to Advertised Titles Only Circle Reader Service #92 "


"  MLARI some of the results have been surprising. I've seen Russia declare preemptive war on the Germans (thus keeping Rumania and Hungary from becoming German allies) on the same turn that America entered the war. There is so much variation in the diplomatic circles of Clash of Steel that it almost excludes coming up with a perfect plan.\" Seldom have I seen the political situation break the same between any two games played. Besides politics, a good number of strategic and operational elements have found their way into Clash of Steel cach an example of simplicity in itself. Strategically, bomber campaigns can be waged by both sides. One selects the target (either enemy factories, harbors or oil) and it's bombs away! Each hit on a factory permanently increases the cost to produce a land unit by a single point (they initially range from around 10-25 points each to build) while hitting harbors increases the cost of ships. Targeting oil is supposed to reduce the speed of enemy units, although I've yet to see it work with any particular effect in the beta copy previewed. Operationally, Clash of Steel allows players to construct an engineer unit whose task is to build fortifications. These forts are real bears to capture, and make invasions against them (even if unoccupied) risky at best. At specific times in the game, the Russians will learn low level infiltration tactics and the Germans mobile defense and kampfgruppe techniques, each of which modifies the strength and results of land battles when they occur. to bring all depleted units up to full strength, \"Hey, This Computer Cheats!\" while the remainder is available for the purchase of new or previously eliminated units. Yes, the computer wargamer's constant irSuch purchased unirs take a certain number ritant computers clearly cheating just to of turns before they appear and, when placed, keep up with their human counterparts — pop up in or adjacent to friendly controlled may be found in Clash of Steel. The early cities. Fortunately, there are more units availversions of Clash of Steel featured some comvers able (and being added to each side's force puter player \"gimmies,\" which were also pool) than one can hope to build, so there are spelled out in the manual (so it's safe to always plenty of strategic choices to be made assume they will be a part of the final game). when considering a production strategy. Frankly, I wasn't that perturbed about it particularly since it was very clear how I was When the first draft copy of the documenbeing cheated. Sure, the computer players can tation finally arrived, it was slightly better than the typical SSI Wargame documentamake strategic redeployments on any impulse when I can only do them on the first one. I tion. Because Clash of Steel is a \"kinder, gencan live with that. Besides, a smart human tler\" wargame, the tables and formulae provided were particularly informative, an player can still triumph, and it's possible to the important game concepts were clearly laid have so much fun that the computer's cheatout (save for the mysteries of politics). When ing simply doesn't matter (well...much). finally completed, they will have the game Still, this will bother some wargamers and well covered, I expect. could detract from their enjoyment of the game. Wargaming in Stereo Some might hope for relief by playing with other human players, but the only multiEven my 7-year-old son's interest was player options to be found were to have playpiqued by Clash of Steel, especially after hearers \"hor scat\" in front of a single computer. ing the game's raucous sound effects. Hon There is no plan for modem or network play in the finished version of Clash of Steel. Also, in the beta version previewed, one could not split up the Allies politics and just play either Russia or The West. The victory conditions, too, were as subtle as a sledgehammer. The Allies must crush Germany and Italy by the historical date of May/June 1945, or the Axis must defcat both Russia and England by that time. Any other case is a draw. Heil, Baby! The drugged out hippie character, named LSD, who played Hitler in the Jan, 1948 aforementioned Springtime for Hitler\" often said, «Heil, baby!\" That's estly, it's like having the battle soundtrack enough to make any serious wargamer from a Hollywood movie playing in the backsmile, but it is even better when wargamers ground: the bullets whizzing past one's ear, are entertained as well as smiling. Clash of the roar of tank engines and the whine of dive Steel is a \"First Clash\" piece of wargaming bombers all punctuare game play. While it entertainment software. I didn't learn anymight drive a gamer to distraction over time, thing new, but enjoyed a rollicking good time it is a pretty neat \"Hey, check this out\" feature using what I already knew from 20 years in to impress others with. wargaming. Crank up the panzers, boys! Better still is the plethora of strategic game We'll be in Moscow before you can say options in Clash of Steel. Each game the Ger«Franken Furher.\" (Somebody pass the chips, mans will randomly choose from one of three please.) CGW major strategic plans which will kick in after the fall of France. These are to either invade England, Spain or Russia. Computer player handicaps can be modified, the Allies can be given random \"extra strength\" units, Japan could attack Russia, Hitler's \"no retreat\" orders could be implemented, the Axis might receive \"liberated legions\" from conquered cities, chaos could strike the German high command, and more. The entire tempo of the game can be dramatically altered by simply applying different options when next played. ROX983 Don't Douse the Edisons! Research & Development also has a place in Clash of Steel. Players can work on such discoveries as multiple rocket launchers (which, when fully developed, allow for special preparatory bombardment on some artacks), panzerfaust, anti-aircraft radar, improved anti-submarine warfare, strategic rockets, jet aircraft, anti-tank guns and heavy armor. Each of these has a specific game effect and has an important influence on the game. The economics are incredibly simple. Play ers earn one point per friendly controlled city and two per resource hex. Added to this are any convoys that make it past the enemy navy at sea. From this total an amount is subtracted Sine 13 Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Summer Sales Bonanza! Specialists in International Sales . Fax (201) 677-9484 GAMES Ultrabots ................... Unlimited Adventures ..............37 V for Victory Tl:Velikiye Luki ......47 Vlor Victory: Utah Beach .........44 Victory II:Market Garden ..........47 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 ..........37 When Two Worlds War ............37 Wing Commander Deluxe Ed....50 Wing Commander ll ..... Wing Commander Speech Pack 17 World Circuit Grand Prix ..........37 X-Wing ...... ....42 888 ....52 CD ROM Mantis: Experimental Fighter ....43 Mario Teaches Typing.............27 Megafortress Mission Disk2....27 Microsoft Flight Simulator ........45 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen 43 Might & Magic Ill......................40 Naval Battles:America Atlantic .22 Naval Battles:Scenario Builder 27 No Greater Glory .................. Out of This World ......... Pilots Edge Version 1.0 Pilot's Edge Version 2.0 Pilot's Edge Version 3.0 Pilots Power Tools ........... Police Quest 3 VGA...... Prince of Persia II..... PrintShop Deluxe Windows... Privateer ... . Quest for Glory III Rags to Riches Railroad Tycoon Classic.. Rampart .......... . RingWorld .......... Rome........... . Rules of Engagement 2.. Scenery Collection Set A .........37 Scenery Enhancement Editor.....27 Scenery Upgrade Bundle Tropics & Rocks .......** Scenery Upgrade: Grand Canyon22 Scrabble Deluxe Windows.........30 Secret of Monkey Island Il .......24 Shadow President ...................43 Sharif on Bridge .......... .........32 Shanf on Bridge for Windows ....32 Sim Ant............. Sim Ant Windows ... Sim City .......... Sim City Windows Sim Earth So Much Shareware 2... Software Jukebox ....... Soundworks Space Quest 4. Stellar 7................... Storm I, II or III .......... Swimware 1993 Talking Classic Tales ... Talking Schoolhouses .............39 The Jungle Book:Kaa's Hunting 33 The Jungle Book:Mowgli's Bro...33 Things Change the 1st Time.....69 Time Table of History ..............59 Time Table Science Innovation.59 Time Table of Arts Entertainment 65 Timetable Bus., Politics, Media .65 Timetable of Science/Innovation 65 Total Baseball 93 Ed. .............45 Twelve Roads to Gettysburg ......47 U.S. Presidents .... U.S. World Atlas .... Ultima 1 thru 6... Ultima Under/Wing Comm 2 ... 54 US Atlas 1.5 with AutoMap......42 US Atlas w/ Automap ...........57 USA Wars: Civil War ...............39 Where in the World is Carmen ..69 Willie Beamish ..... .29 Windoware Windowmaster ............... Windows 1993 ................. .34 Wing Commander 2 Deluxe ......52 Wing Commander Deluxe .........54 Wing Commander & Ultima 6 ...39 Women of Venus .. 39 World & U.S. Atlas 32 39 .69 7th Guest.. . Amanda Stories CD/MPC... Animals MPC Asian Ladles..........................49 Audubon Mammals ............. B. Babes Bamey Bear goes to School .....29 Bamey Bear Goes to Space .....29 Basics Electronic Cookbook .....64 Battle Chess Enhanced ........ Beauty and the Beast ...... 39 Best of Vivid ...... .69 Bible Library .................... Britannica's Family Choice .. 64 Business Master Chess Maniac ....... ChessMaster 3000........... 32 Classic Book Collection ........ Clip Art Heaven ...... ..... Complete Bookshop Compton's Encyclopedia ...... ..99 Compton's Family Choice .........39 Desktop Publisher's Dream .....34 Dictionaries & Languages ........39 29 .49 .43 .99 34 0 om Campaign Canyon Capers Cashblz Conquest of Longbow VGA 35 Crime Does Not Pay Crusaders of Dark Savant Dark Half Dr. Wong's Video Poker Dragon's Lalr 3 Dream House Pro Dune 2 Dvorak's Top 30 Eagle Rider Elite Plus Eye of Beholder 3 Expert Pet Care F:15 Strike Eagle III FallSafe Computer Guardian Femme Fatale Flight Simulator 4 Flight Planner Geo Jigsaw Great Naval Battles Greens: Ultimate Golf Gunship 2000 VGA Hearts (Classic Card Game) Inspector Gadget Knights of the Sky L'Empereur Leather Godoss Phobos 2 Logal Letter Works Legal Lotterworks Legend of Kyrandia Lemmings 2 Letter Works Llightspeed Lottery Weekly Winner Maelstrom Martian Dreams Martian Memorandum Math Blaster Plus Windows 32 Mavis Beacon 2 Windows 32 Mavis Beacon Typing 2.0 29 Mc Gee Bundlo MicroLeague Baseball 4 27 Monopoly Deluxe Windows 32 Mouse Mat NFL Pro League Football Ninja Rabbits Oregon Trall Deluxe Origin FX Screen Saver Pacific Islands Paperboy 2 Poker Personnel Roadyworks Race Into Space Rex Nebular Roulette Salling Simulator III VGA Sales Letter Works Sea Rogue Secret Island Dr. Quandry 29 Slege Silent Service 11 Space Quest 5 Spolls of War Storybook Weaver Strike Commander Super Munchers Swap The Humans Tom Landry Football Time Treks Trolls Trump Castle 3 Ultrasound Vaccuum Kit Vell of Darkness What's My Angle Zoo Keeper JOYSTICKS Air Dual.. . .. ...... 2 A.C.P.: Flight Commander ........37 Aces of the Pacific ..........47 Aces of the Pacific 1946 1 ..... Aces over Europe ................47 Air Force Commander.............. Air Traffic Controller .............. Alr Warrior ..... Alrbucks Aircraft & Adventure Factory......32 Airport & Facilities Directory......20 Alone in the Dark ................. Animation Studio ................ Animation Studio Windows ......79 Armored Fist ............... Bart Simpson's Arcade Game ..32 Battles of Destiny ......... Beat the House ........... Bridge 7.0 .......... Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space ..39 Caesar .. .37 Carriers at War ....................43 Carriers at War Construction....39 Challenge of the 5 Realms .....42 Chess Maniac 5 PC ..................43 Civilization Master Player Ed.....47 Cobra Mission ..............47 Comanche: Maximum Overkill...47 Comanche Mission Disk 1........28 Comenche:Mission Disk #2......28 Conquered Kingdoms ......... Creepers .... .... Dark Sun: Shattered Lands ......50 Darkseed .......... Dark Side of Xeen... Daughter of Serpents ... Design Your Own Rallroad ........34 El Fish.......... Empire Deluxe .......... 37 Eric the Unready .......... Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3.0 Camp Fighting Tiger 27 Family Fun Pack Flashback......... Fight 685 Flight 701. Freddy Pharkas ..... Front Page Sports: Football .. Game Maker................ Gary Grigsby's Pacific War Grand Slam Bridge 2 ............ 33 Graphic Library Sampler Edition 25 Guy Spy .................. Hardball 3 ........ Harpoon Chall SIGNATURE .......52 Hockey League Simulator 2......30 Home Alone 2: Lost in N.Y. .....27 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyle's Book of Games 3.........32 Hoyles Classic Card Games ....32 Incredible Machine 2....... Indiana Jones IV Atlantis ...... Island of Dr. Brain VGA........32 Jet Fighter 2 Bundle Dual ....... Jordan In Flight ..... ...... Jump Jet ................. King's Quest 6 VGA...... Lands of Lore Throne of Chaos 37 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA..........27 Life & Death II: The Brain ... 32 Links 386 Pro ..................... Links Course Disks..................22 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes ..47 Lunar Command.. 37 Clip & Mail SAVE $5.00 C662-666-008 TOUUNOD NOISSIAL SOULS 20 .43 order must be over $50.00 Limit One Per Address expires September 31.1993 $ ACM Game Card .... Analog Plus.. Analog Pro Joystick Analog Sabre........ Aviator Yoke ..... Eliminator Game Card.. Flight Control Pro ........ Flight Control System... Flight Control Yoke...... Flight Stick.. FX 2000.................. G Force Yoke.............. Gameport Automatic MCA..... Gameport III Automatic..... Gravis Analog Joystick. Icontroller..... Intruder Joystick for. Mach 1... Merlin .......... Mouse Wheel Mouse Yoke PC Command Control. Rudder Pedals. Virtual Pilot.... Weapons Control ....................89 .34 ...37 ..40 40 ***.37 40 Sim Earth Windows ............. Solitaire's Journey ...................37 Sound, Graphics Air Upgrade ....29 Space Hulk ..... Spaceward Hol .....................37 Special Operations 1 .... 25 Special Operations 2 Spellcasting 301 .... .37 Star Trek 25th Anniversary ........37 Street Fighter II ...... Strike Commander Speech Pack 22 Super Jeopardy .................. Super Tetris Windows........ Terminator 2029 ..................43 Teminator 2029 Op Scour ......22 Tetris Classic......... Tetris Classic Windows.............29 Tony Larussa Baseball 2 .........40 Tomado ... ....... Ultima 7: Forge of Virtue ..........19 Ultima 7 The Serpent Isle .......52 Ultima 7:The Black Gate ... Ultima Underworld Il........ Ultima Under Pui Stygian Abyss 50 27 ...32 SOUNDCARDS GWBO Ad Lib Gold 1000...................139 Multi-Media Kit 16 ...............499 Pro Audio Spectrum 16.......... 179 Sound Blaster 16 ASP............239 Sound Blaster Pro Baslo.........139 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe.......149 Sound Machine ..... UltraSound Board ..................129 40 50 44 ON SALE!! Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 E. Encounters ... Ecstacy ......... Education Master .... Encyclopedia of Clip Art .. Eric the Unready. Family Doctor .... Family Education Collection ...29 Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise .call Future Wars ... .49 Game Pack 2 ........... Game Pack 1....... Gifs Galore Golf Guide:California/Hawaii ....37 Grolier's Encyclopedia Guinness Disc Records 1992 Indiana Jones 4.... Island Girls........ Jack in the Beanstalk Jets & Props ....... Jutlands ... KGB/CIA World Factbook Kings Quest V. Local Girls ..... Loom ....... .........34 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 ....47 Lost Treasures of Infocom .......47 MacMillan Dictionary Children ..40 Mantis: Experimental Fighter ....47 Mayo Clinic ........ ...............59 Mixed up Mother Goose ...........30 Monster Disk (2 disk set) ...... 59 Mother Goose ... Multimedia Grammy Awards .....44 Multimedia Music:Vivaldi .... My Private Collection 2 Nightwatch Interactive ....... Our Solar System .................. PC Pix 1, 2 or 3................... .69 Private Pictures Vol. 1........ Physical Therapy ............... Putt Putt Joins The Parade .......39 Putt Putt's Fun Pack ..Call Reference Library ............... Secret of Monkey Island ..........47 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe ...34 Seedy Rom Movie Disk ..........99 Shakespeare Complete Works 39 Shareware 1993....................44 Shareware Extravaganza ..... Shareware Overload ....... Shareware Studio ... Sherlock Holmes Detective .....39 Sherlock Holmes Detective 2 ...47 Sherlock Holmes Detective 3....47 Sleeping Beauty.......... For the Best in ADULT CD ROM. Call, write or las Mission Control for a list of the Hollest Titles and most competitive prices. You must be 21 or over to order. ...30 A Line In the Sand A.T.A.C. Action Station Action Station Scenario Ad Lib Gold 1000 An American Tall Ancient Art of War Skles Auto Map AutoMap Windows AutoMap: Europe 69 B-17 Flying Fortress Barble's Glamorous Quest 19 BattleChess 4000 SVGA 32 BattleChess 4000 VGA Bush Buck Adventure Business Card Maker Delxe 32 International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School. State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for our Mission Control Communique 24 Page catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) / UPS Blue ($7minimum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: .69 MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW0893 Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! TROL "


"(  Winning Falcon 3.0 Campaigns Strategies for a successful-Air War by Toni \"KC\" Busham An admitted sim maniac, Tom is fortunate in that he has a viable excuse for his many hours in digital cockpits: he is the co-author of Falcon 3.0: The Complete Handbook and Dynamix Great Warplanes: The Ultimate Strategy Guide. alcon 3.0 campaigns are incredibly detailed and can be quite intimidating. Promoting you to the Commanding Officer (CO), Falcon 3.0 campaigns require you to personally lead your squadron to victory by allocating the limited resources available in the most effective manner. This means allocating sufficient aircraft, equipping them with appropriate weapons, defining the most effective flight paths, and assigning the pilots best suited for that particular mission. To do this. a player must first understand the intermal workings of campaigns and how the com puter-controlled enemy fights. Internal Workings Each theater is divided into strategic points called nodes. Each red and blue square on the campaign map represents a node. A node can be any site of strategic importance, including bridges, airfields and radar installations. At the start of the campaign, the computer decides a high-level strategy for each side, and determines a ser of nodes that must be controlled in order to achieve a victory. To win the war, your forces must conquer the predetermined victory nodes while denying the o the enemy access to his victory nodes. Ownership in of nodes are checked at the beginning of each day and reported during the «Theater BriefBrief ing.\" Each node has a type and is assigned capacities for holding and regenerating military units. Some common node types are Military Airfield, Bridge, City, Radar Site and Army Base. Units at nodes include air defenses, ground forces, and aircraft. For example in a Kuwaiti campaign, Karbala Industrial Center, an Industrial Target, can contain up to 10 There are many utilities written by Falcon 3.0 units, has three AAA units, no SAM units and players, two of which are designed to make cannot create new units. your job as squadron CO much easier. These The status of nodes is independent of the utilities are primarily available in the Modern status of units at the node. Overall, operaAir Combat library of CompuServe's tional status of a node is less important than FSFORUM, the message forum dedicated to ownership of the node. For example, take a flight simulation software. Falccalc by Bill bridge. Any modern military can lay and White is your simulated friend in the inte repair bridges across most rivers, yet you may gence community. Among other things, still be assigned to attack a bridge. Success Falccalc lists the victory nodes for each side in fully destroying the assigned bridge will result the campaign, the current status of every node in a successful mission, but will not effect the in the theater including the quantity and long-term usage of the bridge. Destroying a types of units at each node, and gives tactical bridge that has not been assigned will have intelligence on each mission including wayabsolutely no impact on the outcome of the point information of enemy flights. Falccala campaign. Unlike nodes, when a unit is deis your substitute for satellite photos and restroyed, it stays dead for the remainder of the con aircraft. war. If, while enroute to the assigned bridge, Falcnr by Rob Heittman is a roster and your forces attack and destroy SAM units at weapons supply editor. Using Falcnr you can a nearby Chemical Weapons node, those edit any attribute for any pilot, change pilot's SAMs will be gone forever and subsequent ranks, revive MIA, KIA and court martialed attacks on that node will not have to contend pilots, and edit the number of pilots, aircraft, with them. and weapons stores available during your The most vital resource your army has is campaign. With Falcnrand Falccalcyou have your squadron. Although other friendly airthe same control over your squadron and craft are performing missions and friendly access to intelligence reports that real-world forces are engaging enemy forces, your squadmission planners have. ron is considered the elite, war-winning element. The success rate of your squadron sets Rules for Designing Attacks the moral of the entire theater. Out of the four As mentioned, your army depends primarmissions you will be assigned each day, when ily on your squadron's mission success rate. you successfully complete three or more, Your squadron's success rare depends entirely friendly forces will benefit greatly from your Friendly forces on your leadership abilities. The following successes an successes and advance against the enemy. If guidelines will help maximize your mission your squadron successfully completes only your squadron successfully completes only success rate. two missions on a given day, advances by friendly forces will slow and few, if any, en The first rule of mission planning is to emy nodes will be captured. Complete zero never cut corners. or one mission per day and enemy forces will Always take sufficient time to thoroughly efit from your failures and capture nodes from friendly forces. Maintain three successes investigate your mission, the targets, and the ingress (approach) and egress (departure) per day per day and your army is headed for victory! routes. Note the location and proximity of Tools of the Trade enemy airbases; if there's an enemy airbase nearby, you can count on encountering enHow does one learn the details about nodes? emy aircraft. Check for surface-to-air threats Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"near the flight route and at the target. If you crs you have, the more computer-controlled Next, consider enemy defenses. Is there an havc Falcal, tuse it to analyze the enemy pilots w ill be actually making decisions and airbase nearby? If so, additional -16s may be nodes you will be flying near or over and judgments during the mission. Always assign required to fly Combat Air Patrol (CA). Is determine exactly how many surface-to-air at least one flight of two F-1( the target heavily defended by SAMs? If so, units are present, and use Falcon 3.0s own 01 cVery mission you may need to send a flight of F-16s armed recon» feattire to view the position of the The fourth and final rule with HARMs and Shrikes in first to take out your pilors wisely. the air-defensc radars. Falccalc helps you deThe second rule is to always assume termine the enemy's exact strength and dethe number of aircraft Falcon 3.0orUs Falcto assign skills to each pilot, then cide how many aircraft you need to allocate. ders you to use is the minimum numrotate your pilots through fligglht duty. ReFor example, if you have six F-1 6s available ber of aircraft required to come mcmler, skills drop when good pilots become to attack bridge with heavy air defenses, try fatigued due to too much cockpit time, and nhission. poor pilots can only increase skills by actually sending one flight of two F-16s in with antiradition missiles to attack the defenses, one If Falcon 3.0 orders you to lead a flight of flying missions. You need to carefully choose flight of two-F-16s to fly cover, and the third four F-16s on a defensive screen, you can bet the pilots for each sorrie based on their skills. being careful not to overfly your bestpilots or flight armed with GBU-15 TV-guided you're going to need more than four aircraft to complete the mission safely. You may only bombs to attack the bridge. If, however, you underfly your worst pilots. have the same six F-16s to attack an armored assign a maximum of eight F-16s per mission, sometimes less. Unless you are low on fuel or column with 20 vehicles last sighted near an Putting It All Together enemy airbase, try using two F-16s armed out of weapons, you should strongly consider When you're ready to start assigning airusing the maximum number of F-16s availwith a total of 12 Mavcricks to attack the craft, first consider the target. Is the target able to yol on every mission. If you are low convoy, two F-16s to flyCANover the target, irborne or ground based? How much ordon fuel, you should talk to your personal and two F-16s with INTERCEPT waypoint nance will be required to destroy it? A single version of Radar Keilly, your enterprising actions to atrol over the entiny airbase. missile will destroy a single aircraft, but it may company clerk named all, and acquire talke multiple Ml-82 bombs to damage a You will almost never have as many aircraft few thousand pounds of extra fuel. bunker or building. A 111issile is cflective as you need to execute the Iission, and you have to make decisions on how to use your  The third rule is to e against all aircraft within rang, but an AGMassign more than two F-16s to a single flight 38 HARM missile is useless guinstru1ways. limited resources. Through careful plan group. A single -16 can Carry six ACM-G5 Mayer and the use of user-made utilities like Face Wingleaders malke decisions, but wingenicks, but an enemy column 11:ly consist of 30 and Fal, determine the resources requ simply follow their wingleader. You always or more vehicles. You must determine how . to destroy the target, then allocate the rem want two aircraft in a flight group to provide imuch ordnance this attack will take, and then ing resources to protect cover for each other, but the more v ngleadassign sufficient aircraft to carry the load. 19rd Cliller o) kybird plat (nd\"Keybrid Colluloiticle y concentrate on winning. Our h|uality, color templates turn any AT101 Kyurclinto a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, alcon 2013 Sultan #ity 3D graphics Color:Coded Layout rd commander corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave , , #402 Davie, FL Most items shipped some day. SS UPS/S7 2nd Da \"Games must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. GAMER'S GOLD  1008 W. 41st Street  Sieux Falls  South Dakotd  57105 up || Cad 4WebEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-6066 rcle Recier Service  1993 "


"curvey Wargame Survey Version 2.0 While this rendition of the famous board game ostensibly covers Europe c. 1914, scenarios with less than seven opponents simulate the world of 1805 or 1870. The play remains the same, and the computer opponents are not overly intelligent. However, the basic game system is present and this alone is sufficient to gender a recommendation. Although a \"revised» version was issued for the ST and Amiga, IBM owners are not missing anything important. DISCOVERY: In the Steps of Columbus (Am/I) Impressions; David Lester; 1992; $59.95. ** Int/Nav-Land/Op-Str The 500th Anniversary of Columbus was PIC (politically incorrect). The movies, televisions, books quickly became major \"busts.\" This game was no different. Slow, dull, userunfriendly . Evan Brooks must have lamented, DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL \"Look what they done to my paikWAR II tography, Mom!\" when he saw the (Ap/C/I/M; #54,65) Strategic Studies missing section of the \"Pre-20th Century Group; Roger Keating and lan Trout; 1989; Computer Wargames Survey\" in CGW #107 $40.00; *** (June, 1993). In our zeal to squeeze the maxi Int/Land/Tac-Op mum amount of text into a minimal amount 0-2 of space, we accidentally elided a section from the annotated list. Unfortunately, we did not See above. Covers the Battles of Gaines Mill, discover this until after it had gone to press. Stones River, Gettysburg, Chickamauga and We hereby present the missing entries, with Chatanooga. our apologies, at no extra charge. DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR III LEGEND (Ap/C/I; #57) Strategic Studies Group; NA-Data not available Roger Keating and lan Trout; 1989; $40.00; LINE 1 — Title LINE 2 Machine Format: (At)ari/(C)omInt/Land/Tac-Op modore/(Ap)ple 11/(T)RS-80/II(GS)/(Am)iga 0-2 /(ST)/(M)acintosh/(I)BM; See above. Covers the Battles of the WilderCGW Articles: Issue #'s in which game was ness, Spotsylvania, ness, Spottsylvania, Cold Harbor, Atlanta, mentioned (bold print refers to major article): Franklin, and Nashville. Company/Designer/Date of PublicaDEFENDER OF THE CROWN tion/Price (O/P = Out of Print) (C/I/S/Am/GS; # 34 ,39) Cinemaware; KelRating lyn Beeck; 1987; O/P; **+ = Good use as a magnet holder Int/Land/Op = Avoid = Marginal Graphically superb, this medieval simulation = Average to good of the Norman-Saxon reunification of England is a series of arcade sequences loosely **** = Very good strung together. With sword duels, tourna= Highly Recommended ments and sieges, the major elements are preN-R = Not Rated sent; it is just that the simulation resembles a LINE 3 — Difficulty Level: (Beg)inseries of arcade trials held together by story boards. ner/(Intermediate/(Adv)anced Emphasis: DIPLOMACY (Land)/(Nav)al/(Air)/(Dip)lomatic/(Econ) (C*/I/Am/ST; #4.5) Avalon Hill; NA; 1984; omic $34.95; *** Level of Command: (Tac)tical/(Op)eraInt/Land/Dip-Str tional;(Str)ategic 1-6 # of Players: (M = modem play) ST EATEg1 STUD IES GROUP Tactical: man-to-man up to company level (turns represent seconds to hours) Operational: battalion-level to division-level (turns represent hours to weeks) Strategic: corps-level to theater army or higher (turns represent weeks to years) Military Organization Fire Team 2-3 Squad 9-12 Platoon 40 50 Company 120 150 DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE Battalion 500 1,000 AMERICAN CIVIL WAR Brigade 3,000 5,000 Volume III Division 10,000 15,000 Wilderness to Corps 20,000 80,000 US Nashville Army 100,000 up DUEL FOR ATLANTA (Ap) SGP; NA; NA; NA; NA NA NA An early \"simulcast\" — release of board and computer wargames simultaneously. Both vanished quickly. ***** EMPIRE OF VENNOLANDUA (Ap/I) Aigis Circle; NA; NA; NA; NA NA 1-6 Conquest and magic in the Middle Ages; poof! it disappeared. EXCALIBUR (At; #4.2, 4.4) APX; Chris Crawford; NA; O/P; ***+ Int/Land/Str Chris Crawford's initial rendition of the Arthurian legend, Excalibur is a strategic rendition of the unification of Great Britain. Good graphics and an interesting story line cause this product to still generate a recommendation, even on an obsolete machine. We are anxious to see how his upcoming project on this subject matter will play. FEUDAL LORDS (Am/ST) Impressions; NA; NA; NA; NA NA NA More of an arcade game than a strategy game. Hack and slash ro glory. Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"curvey GETTYSBURG .   POINT, tions thereof. Circumnavigate the globe with Magellan, decide the proper mix of cconomics and shipping. GENGHIS KHAN (I; # 55 ) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1989; $59.95; *** Int/Land/Str 2 Shareware simulation of Napoleonic strategic options in the period of the First Empire. Note that there is no computer opponent. 1-4 ATTOISELLANANLAR 1-4 GREAT BATTLES (ST;#38) Royal Software; NA; NA; NA; NA ?/Land/? 1 The Battles of Austerlitz, Waterloo, Shiloh and Gettysburg. GREAT NAPOLEONIC BATTLES (ST/I) Impressions; Edward Grabowski; 1991; NA; NA Int/Land/Op 1-2; M (1993 edition) A simulation of the Napoleonic battles of Waterloo, Marengo and Quatre Bras, as well as a construction editor to \"design-yourown.\" To be revised in 1993 with modem capabilities. HALLS OF MONTEZUMA (Ap/C/I/M/Am; #45) Strategic Studies Group; Roger Keating and Ian Trout; 1988; $40.00; *** Int/Land/Op 1-2 The history of the U.S. Marine Corps, most of the scenarios herein cover the 20th century. However, the initial scenario (Mexico City) does cover the anti-climax of the Mexican War in a tactical rendition. Using the Battlefront system, the game is accurate, but does not have the spirit of 19th century warfare. HEART OF AFRICA (C; #25) Electronic Arts; D. Bunten; 1985; O/P: +++ 1-2 A detailed strategic and diplomatic simulation of Genghis Khan's drive for conquest, this simulation is thought-provoking and challenging. cf. also Nobunaga's Ambition and Romance of the Three Kingdoms. GENGHIS KHAN II SEL (1) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1994; NA; NA FIELDS OF GLORY Int/Land/Str (1) MicroProse; NA; 1993; NA; NA Int/Land/Op A proposed revision using better graphics, 1-2 sound capabilities and AI. A \"miniatures\"-like version of the Battle of GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT Waterloo. Although designed by Microlrose (A/Ap/C/I/Am; # 33, 51) Strategic SimulaUK, preliminary looks appear promising. tions, Inc.; FIGHTING FOR ROME Chuck Kroegel (Am/ST/I; #86,96) Merit/Impressions ; Ed and David Landrey; 1986; $59.95; *** ward Grabowski; Adv/Land/Tac-Op 1991; $49.95; ** Int/Land/Tac Possibly SSI 's best seller in the Civil War 1-2 simulation market, Gettysburg: The Turning A clumsy interface coupled with mediocre Point is a detailed grand tactical recreation of graphics shows why British products are gen the Civil War's most famous battle. While its erally not ready for the American market. Still graphics may appear dated, the game play is a detailed game of Roman military tactics; still high enough to garner a recommendasuperseded by Cohort II. FORT APACHE GLOBAL DILEMMA: GUNS OR BUT(Am/I) Impressions ; Edward Grabowski; TER 1991; $49.95; NA (M/I; # 77) Mindscape; Chris Crawford; NA 1990; $49.95; ** NA Int/Land/Op-St Another product deemed not ready for the American public; the Wild West — British Graphically dull, but economically detailed style. (albeit unrealistic) simulation of warfare and its impact on society. Some interesting conFROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX cepts are marred by an otherwise undistin(I) Adanac; NA; 1993; $59.95; N-R guished game. Int/Land-Nav/Op-Str GOLD OF THE AMERICAS A simulation of the American Civil War — (I/S/Am; #68) Strategic Studies Group; from start to finish. Initial responses have Stephen Hart; 1989; been less than overwhelming, with mediocre $40.00; ***+ graphics and bugs that make the game virtuInt/Land/Op ally unplayable. Yet problems are being rap1-4 idly fixed by the designer who is avidly A semi-light hearted look at the Age of Disatrempting to support the product. covery in the New World, this game may lack GALLEONS OF GLORY a serious gamer's historical basis, but it more (I; #79, 83) Broderbund; Gene Portwood; than makes up for it in case of play and $44.95; 1991;** entertainment. Beg/Nav/Tac GRAND ARMEE 1 (I) SDJ; NA; 1992; $25.00; NA An \"educational\" game, with all the implicaInt/Land/Op-Str tion. NA NA less successful sequel to Seven Cities of Gold, this product is an arcade-like African explorer game. It owes its ancestry more to Hollywood (King Solomon's Mines) than to history. CGW 1-2 S OF MONTEX A Battle History of the United States Marine Corp HALLS O KAMIN tan The Bicol August 1993 Page 129 "


"Deynew ON STRIKE Origin's Strike Commander by Tom \"KC\" Basham 92 eu rigin's Strike Commander is an actionand draws the player into Strike's fantasy. To packed, disk space-consuming, CPUfully appreciate Strike, though, requires a demanding cross between an good deal of reading action/role-playing game and a flight simula While the story is attention holding, it has tor. As in the Wing Commander series, one a few weak points. First, the actual technical assumes the personality of a single pilot and section of the manual is quite short compared proceeds through a multifaceted story line. to the story section, and lacks detail. Second, Visions of the Future Stern's character is a little too politically correct\" to be the leader of rogue mercenaries Strike takes place in the year 2011. Followin a Road Warrioresque 21st century, accepting a U.S.-Iraq war in 1994, middle eastern ing only missions that serve to unite warring nations halt oil exports to the U.S., leading to factions and feed scarving children. Dialogues the bankruptcy of the FDIC, the secession of with Stern are a bit too corny for some tastes. Texas and the fall of the Union. Eventually, Third, nicpickers will find a few other comthe majority of governments go bankrupt and plaints with Origin's story line, especially the majority of armies are disbanded. Multiwhen it comes to ranks. Stern, a former avianational corporations fill the vacuum left by tor for the U.S. Navy, is referred to as both a Colonel and a Commander. Another officer attained the rank of Lt. Colonel in the U.S. Navy a very rare distinction! pletely foolproof. On the test bed machine, Strike installed flawlessly, but the speech pack hung the machine. Both installers have an \"a\" option that bypasses the auto-detection routines and solves most Strike has some serious joystick compatibility problems. It supports the Thrustmaster WCS and FCS, but does not support analog rudder controls. In fact, Strike won't read the FCS \"hat\" switch properly on most PCs un less analog rudder pedals are disconnected first. Other users have reported compatibility problems with high-end game cards. The most common solution has been to pull or disable the high-end game card and recorti COMMANDER A Chris Roberts Game Installation and Compatibility Strike comes on eight 1.44 MB floppies, and the optional Speech Accessory Pack (sold separately) uses three more. Installing both products requires around 41 MBs of free hard disk space. Origin states that Strike is incompatible with disk compression utilities such as Stacker and DBLSPC, and that it must reside on an uncompressed partition. Feedback from players on CompuServe indicates that Strike can be made to run on compressed partitions, but may require configuration tweaking to make it work. ADIGAN the defunct governments, and hire unemployed military personnel as mercenaries to protect their assets and execute military aly strikes against rival corporations. The player ne player is part of a band of F-16-flying mercenaries mercenaries operating out of Turkey, the safe haven for mercenaries in the 21st century. The player's band of mercenaries, the Wildcats, are led by Commander James Stern. Stern adheres to a strict set of ethics, and only accepts missions that comply with those ethics. The game's manual is written in a Soldier of Fortune-style that promotes the game's fantasy world. Although the apocalyptic picture Origin paints of the future may not appeal to everyone, the manual fits that picture well Installation is fairly straightforward, although time consuming. On the test bed 486-50, Strikerook over 20 minutes to install. Fortunately, manual intervention was required only during the first five minutes. A documentation check is required during installation, but the product has no other copy protection. The install program for both Strike and the speech pack feature hardware auto-detection schemes that are not comTITLE: Strike Commander PRICE: $65.00 $20.00 for Speech Accessory Pack SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 486-33MHz, 4MB RAM, VGA graphics, 41 MB (with Speech Pack) hard disk space PROTECTION: Documentation check during installation DESIGNER: Chris Roberts PUBLISHER: Origin Austin, TX (512) 335-5200 Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"peview 17.0 LLC 200 A lower quality game ports, such as on the view and a \"victim» view allow the player to Sound Blaster. I find this an unacceptable watch many enemies die dramatic deaths. solution. Once the RCS pedals were removed Strikesupports a view panning system using from the test bed system, Strike operated finecither the arrow keys or the coolie hat on a with a Thrustmaster ACM game card. If one Thrustmaster FCS. This panning system is using standard joysticks one is unlikely to models the movement of the human head and experience problems. allows the user to control when and where to look. Although it's easy to become disoriented, after some practice, this is one of the most effective methods of view control I have used. Unfortunately, Strike only marginally supports a padlocking view system. Although there is a padlock-style view, it only functions while the player maintains radar lock on the target. This system is useless in situations where visual tracking is most needed, such as close-quarter knife fights and when a bandit sneaks in on one's tail. e 1101111181 On the downside, only very few of the between-mission cinematic sequences utilize digitized voice. Players installing the speech pack should still be prepared to read a lot of dialogue. Strike is also very picky about memory managers and runs best on a clean configuration. At Origin's suggestion, I excluded two regions of memory, but when using a loaded configuration, still suffered from crashes complaining about \"null pointer assignSounds Sound support in the base package is merely average, containing engine sounds, missile lock tones, gun sounds, screeches when other aircraft pass nearby, and dull \"chunks\" indi cating bullet impacts. The optional Speech Accessory Pack adds about $20,5 MBs of disk space, and a few additional sounds to the product. With the speech pack installed, the death screams of enemy pilots are heard over the player's radio, wingmen will vocally warn of threatening bandits, and will announce when various activities need to be performed. Gameplay Gameplay focuses on action, and many corners have been tweaked for the sake of player enjoyment. That is, gamers should not expect a flight simulator. Strike is an action game with elements of a flight simulator. Strike has two modes, training and game. Training mode allows one to practice cither air-to-air or air-to-ground skills, while game mode is a role-playing adventure along the lines of Wing Commander. The player begins as Stern's apprentice for squadron leader, and works his or her way into control of the Wildcat squadron. Although there is a defiP's Strategies of the Month Vol. 22 quency of this crash, Strike seems to be relatively bug free otherwise. Visuals Graphics are a mixed bag of joys and irritants. Rendering of aircraft in flight may be the most detailed I have ever seen. Further, Strike features attractive, rolling terrain, complete with snow-capped mountains and winding valleys. Streaking through a twisting canyon with 6,000 foot walls at 500 knots is great fun! Strike uses a hazing on objects at the edge of visual range. The effect causes mountains to slowly fade in and out of view. Unfortunately, objects only fade into view at fairly close range. It gives the impression of flying in a perpetual fog bank with a 15 or 20 mile visibility. The horizon in Strike is the single ugliest representation of the Earth's curvature ever to grace the PC. A wide, stark-white band is superimposed over the margin between earth and sky. The band completely blocks view of the actual horizon, making it difficult to tell up from down. Bit-mapped representations of cities are scattered over the landscape. As with most bit-mapped graphics, from a distance they look absolutely wonderful, but become distorted and unintelligible at close range. Most cities, therefore, are only eye candy, and not meant to be viewed close up. Actual ground targers (bridges, power plants, etc.) are unattractive silhouetted polygons. Strike's graphics have many finely polished cdges, though. Bir-mapped explosions are vibrant, tracers litter the sky during combat, missiles have consistent smoke trails, and many objects will have glints of reflected sunlight, making them visible at greater ranges. Many external views, including a \"weapon\" A monthly column to improve the quality of play CONQUERED KINGDOMS: . There are many different variations of play in Conquered Kingdoms that can bring a whole new feel to the game. Try playing with Single or Alternating city starts. This will change your strategies immensely. Another test of your skills is to play the short or long game. Again you must completely revise your approach. Playing short game is much tougher than the normal game in that you now must covet each unit that you have placed in your ranks. The long games make you plan more for the future, thus you would have to capture the resources early and keep a defense against your enemy. For the experts: Choose only one of the starting areas, while the computer will start in more areas. This should give you quite a challenge. BATTLES OF DESTINY \"Pesky bombers, always destroying my front lines!\". This quote is one that we have heard many times from fans. The solution: fighters. These quick and deadly units can quickly clear the skies from bombers, air transports, and other fighters. This will give you a chance to wage war from the sky with your own bombers. Once these bombers and fighters are out of the way, have two or three air transports ready to plunge into the heartland of your adversary. Coming Soon: WWII: Battles of the Pacific Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Disk Solitaire's Journey for Windows The Red Crystal Quantum Quality Productions 1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 Circle Reader Service #91 Page 131 August 1993 "


"meunen DEXTRZE HE 486-50VLB using a 2MB disk cache, Strike often paused when loading images. The frame rate would move incredibly smoothly during combat until a target was hit, then the game would pause for one or two seconds while loading a bit map of an explosion. Despite using the large disk cache, the hard drive would spin constantly during the pause. Strike is not and does not attempt to be a high-fidelity simulation of flight and air comTalk to Janet nite story line, multiple paths appear to be in evidence, allowing the player some room for individual preferences. Air-to-air combat in training mode is fairly uneventful. Although the player can choose Rookie, Veteran, or Ace level pilots to fly against, computer-controlled pilots are fairly easy to bear. After flying straight and level for several minutes against two MiG-21s with Ace pilots, the MiGs still won't have achieved a firing position Overall the artificial intelli gence appears extremely weak. Enemy aircraft tend to make only horizontal maneuvers even when flying high-horsepower birds like F-15s and Su-27s. In every battle, when a bandit saddled up on my six, simply pulling a loop caused him to overshoot. During ground attacks, bandits often position themselves behind one's bird and follow it through an attack without firing. Air-to-air combat has certainly been tweaked to give the player more than a fair chance. Flight modeling was acceptable, with a few rough edges. To its credit, one's turn radius varies appropriately with speed, vertical maneuvers can be used to tighten turns, available G-loading is reduced as speed falls, and pulling Gs sufficicntly depleres speed. Origin's rep on CompuServe stated that turn performance had been deliberately tweaked to make it easier to play, but in general the flight model feels good. On the downside, Strike does not handle angle of attack very well. Pulling the nose above the horizon while reducing throttle will cause the velocity vector on the HUD to correctly point downward, but the F-16 will continue to climb until airspeed drops under Okts and stalls. Due to this, realistic landings using a nose-high descent are not possible. Strike suffers from a severe thirst for CPU power. The box recommends at least a 48633, and many 386 owners have reported woefully slow frame rates. Even on the test bed bar. It focuses on action and excitement. It doesn't have the stark realism of Falcon 3.0 or Red Baron, but has a much gentler learning curve. Strike compares more directly to products that focus on action rather than simulation, such as F-117 Stealth Fighter or the Jetfighter series, but with much better graphics and sound. Strike is designed to get the player in the air and having fun in the shortest amount of time possible, installation delays not withstanding. cow STICK ITT YOUR NOTEBOOK. PARALLEL GAME PORT. ATTE IN Portable computers are great except when it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come equipped with a gameport. The Parallel Game Port\" (PGP) fixes that problem and lets you connect a joystick, yoke, weapon systems controller or pedals to any portable or desktop MS-DOS computer. And even if your computer already has a game port, the PGP's software features make it an indispensable accessory for any serious gamer. Use it to customize key joystick switches and eliminate inconsistencies between games. Even eliminate the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. PGP's Standard mode is fully compatible with all game software. And an Enhanced mode adds sensitivity and response for most simulation games. Look for the Parallel Game Port in the software section of your computer store. Or call (714) 833-3355 and say: \"Stick it to me!\" 11. TURN YOUR NOTEBOOK COMPUTER INTO A FLYING MACHINE  Connect your joystick to any IBM-compatible computer  Program your joystick switches for specific games GENOVATION GENOVATION Circle Reader Service #64 Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"Brian Vodniks s ubstitute fields of conquesta The BEST Multi-Player Medieval Strategy Game made. PERIOD. Brian Vodnik's  1-6 Players, 199 Territories \"... Quality strategy war game that is well worth looting and pillaging to get.\" Computer Gaming World, July '92  7 Troop types and catapults  5 Castle types, 5 Difficulty levels . an excellent strategy game that should appeal to strategists of all levels of experience.\" Amazing Computing, Nov. '92 ikings Sields of congueer  Toggle each kingdom between human, computer, and off ... REAL WINNER! Superior graphics and superb gameplay.\" Chicago Tribune, Sept. 25, \"92  Resource management of food. wood, stone, iron  Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics ... Unlike so many of the lacklustre wargames out there VikingsTM has a difference-it's actually good.\" Computer Trade Watch, June 22, '92 + Huge 800 X 896 pixel map that you actually play on! RO . The intuitive control system is so straightforward that you can get hooked immediately ... addictive and highly enjoyable.\" CU Amiga  Simple point and click interface to an intricate and detailed game SCREENSTAR  Handicapping Hone Castle Siege of Strathcta -Nererve Territory 'none' 153 TOH :14 Owned by Lord Brion Stronghold: Home Castle (102) Terrain : Mountaint Harvut: Surplus +1 Populace: 02/21 STOCK:O food Gorrissa: n on Oued : 470 Mer : Unlimited Land HOMOLAND C raft : Cr TITIE BLE Efficiency 28 Holl Sections Hou Strength Storm Cartie 20 5 2 fields net in CYT. You have 3 Orks with 3 men here 8 Crossbowmen O STOAM GETRCAT X13 All the details of a territory can be found with a single click of the mouse. Looking at the overview map, we see an even game in progress. Sieging a home castle with only two catapults ... NOT a good idea! Available NOW for Amiga and IBM. Coming soon for Color Macintosh. Beadism Tentertstinment VIKINGSTM, Fields of ConquestTM and TRUE 32-BITTM, are Trademarks of Realism EntertainmentTM Realism Entertainment TM 6N522 Pine Street Bensenville, IL 60106 (708) 595-7487 Circle Reader Service #93  1993 Realism Entertainment All Rights Reserved Worldwide. "


"e pevneun Collective Consciousness NovaLogic's Comanche Maximum Overkill Mission Disk One by Bryan Walker LA 0006 An avid computer game and flight simulator fan, the author is also an AH-64 Apache pilot and Armament Officer for the U.S. Army. He is a combat veteran of Desert Storm, currently tioned at Fort Campbell. Kentucky. The author's views do not reflect official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the United States government. eleased during the '92 Christmas season, NovaLogic's Comanche Maximum Overkill (CMO) immediately set a breathtaking standard for PC flight-sim graphics. Unfortunately, as I reported in issue #104, the game lacked the depth, accuracy and variety of some other flight-sim titles. Despite tremendous sales, NovaLogic knew that players were going to want more very soon. The Comanche Maximum Overkill Mission Disk One(MDI) is the first of two add-on disks for their popular title. What Boots Up... Installing MDI is quick and easy, increasing the size of the ICOMANCHE directory to just over 12 megabytes. After just a few minutes and keystrokes, the player can enjoy the enhancements MD1 has to offer: New Enemies The limited enemy selection of the original CMO gets a shot in the arm with MDI. The rugged Mi-24 Hind attack helicopter, the BRDM-3 armored car, and the infamous SCUD-B mobile missile launcher now enrich the target environment. Enemy Al is also stronger, forcing the player to fly better and fight smarter to survive. men make the job of really raising hell much casier. Compared with the airhead that the player was originally saddled with in CMO, these new allies are a blessing. New Missions Many players completed the original game's 20 missions in a matter of days. MD1 provides 30 new missions to tackle, divided into three 10-mission \"campaigns.» The Overload missions are training cakewalks, with the player flying a nearly invulnerable Comanche bristling with weapons. The Restore Peace and Clean Sweep missions become progressively more difficult, STLIGERS with more realistic durability settings and missions, graphics and enemies MDI proweapons loads. While certain missions may vides. Players expecting a big improvement in be too challenging for some gamers, the genthe game's depth or flight model will proberal play balance and variety is far superior to ably not be satisfied. Mission Disk One is like CMO's original forays. refueling a gunship without rearming it. PlayNew Graphics — MDI also adds Arcticers can fly to new places and see new things, and Desert terrain models, along with new but some will find MDI doesn't deliver the graphic touches such as tents and sparse trees. ordnance it takes to raise the Comanche MaxiObservant players may also notice a couple of mum Overbill experience to the next level. uple of mum Overkill experience to the next level. surprises swimming around, too! The author can be reached on Genie at Program Update Even though the origiB.WALKERIO, or America Online at nal CMO proved to be virtually bug-free, WALKER34. CGW various patches and refinements are included to ensure compatibility with most major hardware. I've yet to encounter a single glitch with either CMO or MD1 using DOS 5 or 6, which is more than most players could say about nearly any other game on the market. Prer ...Must Come Down While other touches such as new music are present, I honestly expected more from an add-on disk that retails for $40. Unfortunately, MDI doesn't fix what I regard as the two major weaknesses of CMO. First, the flight model still handles like a B-52! While CMO's Comanche is fast, I was hoping MDI would find a way to add more aerobatic capability. Even with MDI installed, CMO's Comanche still flies like Barney Fife is at the controls. Second, as in the original CMO, the campaigns and missions of MDI just don't mesh. Despite their variety and superior balance, the lack of a constant encmy and progressive plot can make it difficult to \"get into the game. In addition, MDI still neglects award sequences, watering down a player's sense of accomplishment upon completion of a campaign. Armchair gunship jocks who enjoyed the original CMO will have a ball with the new ITET MIRLFRED INDO UTTURE SMITETT New Friendlies One of MDI's greatest improvements is the ability to fly with multiple wingmen. Even better, the Al of the wingmen is much stronger. Now capable of fighting independently, the enhanced wingTITLE: Comanche Maximum Overkill Mission Disk 1 PRICE: $39.95 SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386-16 or grealer, VGA graphics. 4 MB ram, 8 MB hard drive space, original Maximum Overkill required PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Kyle Freeman, John Garcia PUBLISHER: Novalogic, Inc Tarzana, CA (818) 774-0600 Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"We Will Beat ANY Nationally Advertised Price*. We have more titles not listed. Call for the best prices. BIT A Train ... ................. ..... 5 WIT SOFTWARE Hours: 9 am to 9 pm Central Standard Time Powermonger ......... Quest for Glory 3: Wages of War. Rampart..... Realms........ Red Baron ..... Rex Nebular... Kingworld... Rollerblade Racer......... Rome: Pathway to Power. Second Front Secrets of Monkey Island 2 Shadow President ..... Siege ................ Siege: Dogs of War ... .... Sierra Award Winners 3Pk. Sierra Family Fun 3pk.... SimCity ............. SimEarth... SimLife.... SpaceQues! 4: Roger Wilco Space Quest 5: Next Mutation Spaceward Ho. Specter ........ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break. Star Control 2....... Stor Legions......... Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Strip Poker 3 Strip Poker 3: Disk 1-5. Stunt Island.. Summoning, The. Take A Break: Crosswords. Task Force 1942............... Tegel's Mercenaries ............. Terminator 2029................ Theater of War........ Tony LaRussa's Ult. Value 5 pk. Trump Castle 3 ........ Ultima 5: Warriors of Destiny ........... Ultima 6: False Prophet .... Ultima 7: Black Gote. Ultima 7 Part 2: Serpent Isle. Ultima Underworld: Stygian Abyss............. Ultima Underworld 2: Labyrinth of World............. Utopia ............... V for Victory: Utah Beach... V for Victory 2: Velkiye Luki..... V for Victory 3: Winter Garden........ Valhalla ............... Veil of Darkness.. Western Front... Wilson Pro Staff Golf Wing Commander Deluxe. Wing Commander 2..... Wizardry 6: Bane of the Cosmic Forge........... Wizardry 7: Crusader's of the Dark Sevant.. Wizardry Trilogy: 1-3...... World Circuit ............. X Wing .......... Tosswords.............. A Train Construction Set.. A10 Tank Killer 1.5. .................. Aces of the Pacific. Aces of the Pacific: Disk 1 & 2. ............. Alone in the Dark. Ashes of Empire..... Batman Returns.... Battlechess 4000...... Battles of Destiny.......... Betrayal of Krondor...... Buck Roger's: Countdown to Doomsday........... Buck Roger's 2: Matrix Cubed.... Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space........ Caesar. Castles 2: Siege & Conquest.... Civilization...... Comanche Maximum Overkill.. Conquered Kingdoms...... Conquest of Japan .......... Conquests of Longbow..... Creepers ............... Dagger of Amon Ro.. Darklands Daughter of Serpents.. Discovery: In the Steps of Columbus ........... Dune 2....... Eco-Quest 2: Lost Secrets of Rainforest... Elvira 2: Jaws of Cerberus ....... Empire Deluxe ...... Eric the Unready.... F15 Strike Eagle 3..... F15 Strike Eagle 3: Limited Edition Falcon 3.0... Floor 13. Front Page Sports Football... Gateway ........... Global Conquest.......... Gobliiins ...... Great Naval Battles.... Great Naval Battles: Disk 1-3... Hardball 3........ Hardball 3: Disk 1. Harrier Assault .... Hong Kong Mojong Pro.. Humans, The Inca ............... Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis Jack Nicholas Signature Golf.... King's Quest 5: Absence..... King's Quest 6: Heir Today... Laser Squad ......... Leather Godesses of Phobos 2.. Legend of Kyrandia. Legends of Valor Lemmings... Lemmings 2: Tribes Line in the Sand..... Links 386 Pro.. Links 386 Pro: Disk 1-3.... Lord of the Rings 2: Dark Towers.... Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes.... Lucas Arts Classic Adv. 4 pk Maelstrom... Magic Candle 3 Mega Lo Mania Megafortress Mega Pack MiG 29 Fulcrum Might & Magic 4: Clouds of Xeen.. Monopoly Deluxe......... New York Times Crossword Puzzles NFL Football....... No Greater Glory Out of this world.... Pacific War Patriot... Perfect General Perfect General: DDI. Police Quest 3: Kindred... Populous 2...... Power Game Software 5pk P.O. Box 115023-343 Carrollton, Texas 75011 800/259-2453 Joysticks & Game Cards CH Game Card Il.. CH Flight Stick.......... CH Mach III........ CH Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke.. Quick Shot Game Kit ...... Suncom G-Force Flight Yoke Thrust Master Joystick............. Thrust Master Weapons Control Thrust Master Pro Joystick... ............. Fax 26 214/306-9603 ... ................. 84 Sound Cards & Speakers Gravis Ultra Sound ..... Koss HD/1 Speakers............ Koss HD/4 Speakers Media Vision Thunder Board W/F15... Media Vision Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Bit Sound Blaster Sound Blaster Pro 8 Bit .. Sound Blaster Pro 16 Bit. Sound Blaster Pro Basic 8 Bit .. 179 184 220 154 Most items shipped same day. UPS add $4 per order  2 Day Air add $6 per order Policies: All sales final. Check compatibility before you buy. We accept Visa/MC, money orders, personal checks (please allow 2 weeks for check to clear Detectives replaced with same product. Price, availability & shipping times subject to change. Texas residents add 8.25% sales tax. 'Does not include closeouts, liquidations, or limited quantities. Circle Reader Service 137 "


"Traking a peek cult action puzzles, battling guards and magic creatures on his way to a show down with Evil. Beautiful music and background graphics team up with Mechner's amazing trademark animation to create one of the best action games yet. However, be warned, young Princes-to-be: the puzzles and difficult action sequences will have even the best gamers bashing their turbans against the nearest solid surface. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #2. PUSAIDIACEAC The Terminator 2029: Operation Scour Bethesda Softworks 1370 Piccard Dr. Rockville, MD 20850-4304 (301) 963-2002 THE TERMINATOR 2029: OPERATION SCOUR: The Terminators are back! This time they've returned on the first mission disk for The Terminator 2029-Operation Scour. Strange things begin to occur after the destruction of an Orbital Satellite Platform during a systematic clean-up of remaining Terminators, Hunter-Killers and Eradicators certain Skynet forces are coming back on-line. In addition, a strange, new weapon code-named Guardian has appeared, and with devastating results. Reassigned to the Roosevelt Island Base, the player's mission is to seek out and put an end to this new threat to the Resistance. Such is the background for what looks to be an intense sequel to T2029, a mission disk featuring an additional 12 action-packed scenarios (T2029 required). The dark, futuristic tone of the Terminator films is reproduced well, with graphics, sound and game play identical to the original T2029. Additional armor and weapons have been provided to assist in the new challenges the player must face. Failure in one's mission, however, will result in termination! IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Prince of Persia 2 The Shadow and the Flame Capstone Solutions, Inc. P.O. Box 101 Hugo, MN 55038-0101 (612) 433-5010 SPECULATOR: Having its roots in Acquire, SimCityand Market Madness, Speculator, a game of land acquisition, pits the player against three computer opponents in the trading of properties and land holding companies, the expansion of existing businesses, and the development of parks and recreation facilities. The goal is a simple one acquire the greatest amount of assets by game's end. Turns are timed with cach play period being 30 days long. At the end of each month, a financial tabloid appears on screen with a summary of that month's limited investment activity for the player and his or her opponents. Available for IBM compatibles, Speculator itself is \"freeware\" (freely distributable). Additional Map Sets are available for $19.95 cach (a combination package of 3 Map Sets is $39.95) and include Ancient Tymes, Country Side, Slick Cities and Mooned Puzzles. IBM ($19.95 $39.95). Circle Reader Service #3. zuba Speculator FlixMix Broderbund 500 Redwood Blvd. Novato, CA 94948-6121 (415) 382-4400 PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 THE SHADOW AND THE FLAME: Anyone who has ever sword-fought with shadows behind closed doors, or sat through a dull lecture with visions of Doug Fairbanks sauntering suavely through their heads, is likely to have this game of high action and adventurc unravel their turban. Designer Jordan Mechner has made his reputation by providing games with fluid character animations, tough action-oriented puzzles, and the ability to tell rich stories with short cinematic segues. In his latest release, he draws upon all of his past strengths and raises them to the highest minaret. Drawing loosely from the Persian legends in the \"1001 Arabian Nights,\" Mechner tells the tale of a Prince robbed of his name and bride by a mysterious imitator. The imitator, of course, turns out to be the evil vizier, Jaffar, who hopes to steal the Sultan's kingdom. The player's quest is to lead the Prince through 15 levels of diffiCeleris 21955 Plummer St. Chatsworth, CA 91311 (818) 709-2181 FLIXMIX: If this were an old, Hollywood Reporter headline, it might read «FLIX MIX HITS HIX.\" The translation (for all non-Hollywood types) would mean this game is well received by the masses of computer gamers. While the reviews remain to be seen, FlixMix is a definire rush as mind game/puzzles go. One of several moving images is cut apart into a number of player defined pieces and scattered around the edges of the screen. In the middle is a grid wherein these pieces are reassembled. It's the moving images, however, that add such a challenging dimension to the game. Although there are many levels of difficulty (largely determined by the number of pieces one opts to assemble), it can be frustrating for some to try and assemble a picture from a moving target.\" Truc puzzle devotees are likely to find several hours of rapture in this product, grooving to the fine music and the dancing graphics. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Desert Strike Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S SUMMER SPECIAL YOU PAY GROUND SHIPPING, WE SHIP 2-DAY ON ALL SUMMER SOFTWARE PURCHASES* (800) 788-2193 * Offer good only for prepaid software purchases in Continental USA for orders received during June, July or Aug, '93. 31.95 25.95 HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: CD 16 Kit (Business) 635.00 Discovry 8 CORom Kit 399.00 Discovry 16 CDRom Kit 469.00 Edutnmnt 8 CORom Gt 449.00 Edutnmnt 16 CDRom Gt 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro DIX 119.95 Video Blaster 329.95 Video Spigot 427.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Kit 499.95 Pro Aud Spect 16 Snd Cd 165.95 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 929.95 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pos Coblo 495.00 Al TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309.95 Pro VGA/TV Plus 636.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO CARDS: ATI Ultra Grph Plus w/2mb 308.00 Computer Eyes AT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 138.95 TelevEyes VGA-TV 229.95 WIN TV 399.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto Ill Game Card 29.95 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach 11 24.95 Mach III+ 29.95 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HiSpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control 72.95 Weapons Control Mach II 99.95 U-Prom for WCS 26.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99,95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 MODEMS Prices too low to Print: Boca, Sportster, Supra, 37.95 Sample Listing of Products Zoltrix, Zoom and others Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Spoce Quest V 41.95 FLT SIM/WAR Creepers 29.95 Spear of Datiny. Wilnstn 35.95 Dagger Amon Ro 41.95 Spellcrft:Aspects Volor 35.95 A Line in Sand 26.95 Dark Half 34.95 Star Control 11 35.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Dark Seed 41.95 Star Trek 25th Anniv. 35.95 Ambush 35.95 Darklands 41.95 Stunt Island 33.95 Armored Fist 42.95 Daughter of Serpents 32.95 Terminator 2029 41.95 ATAC 34.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Ultima Underworld Il 47.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Discovery Columbus 35.95 Ultima VII Part 2 45.95 Birds of Prey Dragon Loir III 35.95 Ultrabots 36.95 Campaign 35.95 Dune 11 35.95 Veil of Darkness 35.95 Comanche:Maximum Ovrk 43.95 Dungeon Master 29.95 Waxworks 35.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 El Fish 35.95 Wing Commander II 47.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 Wizardary VII:Creaders 41.95 Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Freddy Pharkas 41.95 X-Wing 41.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Global Effect 19.95 CD ROM Empire Deluxe 35.95 Goblins 2 24.95 F-15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Heimdall 21.95 7th Guest 52.95 Falcon 3.0 44.95 Home Alone 2 27.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbis 41.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Humans Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons call Inca 34.95 Composer's Get MPC 54.95 Harpoon Chlgr Pak Sig Ed 47.95 Indy Jones 4 35.95 Compton Interact. Encyc. 249.95 Jetfighter 11 39.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Daggar of Amon Aa 41.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Kyrandia (Legend) 34.95 Dinosauer Adventures 41.95 Liberty or Death 35.95 Legends Valour Eco-Quest 1 41.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Leis. Suit Larry 5 41.95 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 Megafortress Mega Pak 37.95 Lemmings 2 35.95 Global Explrer-Delorme 89.95 Pacific Wer 47.95 Lord of Rings:2 Towers 35.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 Patriot 43.95 Lost Treas Infocom II 29.95 King's Quest VI 41.95 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Lost Trens. of Rain Forest 29.95 Just Grandma & Me 38.95 Perfect General 35.95 Magic Candle 111 37.95 Kodak Photo CD 29.95 Secret Weapons Luftwffe 29.95 Magnetic Scrolls 24.95 Mayo Clinis (jewel box) 29.95 Special Forces 29.95 Maniac Mansion 14.95 54.95 MS Cinemania MPC Strike Commander 47.95 Monarch Notes Mantis 31.95 61.95 Task Force 1942 38.95 Mario Is Missing! 34.95 Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 Theater of War 19.95 Mercenaries (Tegel's) 37.95 Our House-Fam Circus 41.95 V Victory 1.2, or 3 en 43.95 Might & Magic IV 41.95 Playing with Language 29.95 ENTERTAINMENT Monkey Island 2 25.95 Prophone 1993 Ed 149.95 Putt Putt Fun Pack Out of This World A-Train 26.95 36.95 41.95 Paladin II Rodney's Fun Screen ADD's 39.95 call 35.95 Police Quest 3 ADD:Unltd Adventure Sherlock Holmes 3 39.95 43.95 31.95 Prophecy by Sierra Space Adventure Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 24.95 81.95 Populous 11 Adventre Starter Sierra 19.95 Space Quest IV 37.95 41.95 VGA Spectrum 1 Price of Persia II Air Bucks 15.00 tba 35.95 Willy Beamish 41.95 Alone in the Dark 41.95 Quest for Glory III Amazons Wing Commander II Dix 52.95 Ringworld 38.95 35.95 Arcade Hits WCmdr Il/Uit Undrwrld 52.95 Romance 3 Kingdoms 24.95 39.95 World Fact Book '92 Rome:Pathway to Pwr Armourgeddon 29.95 59.95 39.95 Back to Future II 26.95 SciF:5 Actvision Games 26.95 WINDOWS Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 Shadow President 41.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Batman Returns 41.95 Shadowlands 29.95 Audio:Star Trek V.1 34.95 Batitch 1.26Mechwrior 31.95 Sherlock Hims:Lst Files 42.95 MS Golf 42.95 Caesar 35.95 Siege 22.95 Musicator GS 197.95 Carmen SD-Space Deluxe 47.95 Sim Ant 35.95 Origin FX Screen Svr 24.95 Castles 11 35.95 Sim City 29.95 Star Trek Screen Svr 44.95 Challenge of 5 Realms 39.95 Sim Earth 42.95 Take BreakcCrossword 22.95 Civilization:Master Playr 49,95 Sim Life 41.95 Uninvited 35.95 Classic Adventure-Lucas35,95 Simpson's Arcade 29.95 Winsense 44.95 Space Hulk 36.95 SPORTS Car & Driver 37.95 Front Page Sports Ftbl 41.95 Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf 41.95 Jordan in Flight 36.95 Links 386 Pro 39.95 Banff 19.95 NFL Pro Football 1992 35.95 NFL Video Pro Football 35.95 Sports Adventure 47.95 Tony LaRusso Bsbl II 37.95 Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 35.95 World Circuit Grnd Prix 35.95 World Tour Tennis 31.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Kid Works 2 34.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 24.95 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail DIX 35.95 Playroom 29.95 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters 34.95 Rock & Bach 34.95 Time Treks 35.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle Geom 29.95 FEATURING THIS MONTH MY 35.95 Wing Commander I Dk 52.95 EA Kids THE KIDS SOFTWARE EXPERTS CUCKOO ZOO 31.95 SCOOTER'S MAGIC CASTLE 31.95 EAGLE EYE MYSTERIES 31.95 PETER PAN PAINT 31.95 AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A...TO Z...! EA KIDS is a registered trademark of Electronic Art ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 6472B WINDY RD. LAS VEGAS, NV 89119 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l games add $1 each inContinental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, edd'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #110 "


"Takunga peek Murders,\" dredges up a total of five bodies and the possibility of a serial killer on the loose. Subtle, but noticeable, improvements have clearly been woven into this newest Holmes volume. Video images appear crisper and cleaner than ever, and the game runs acceptably well on slower systems. All in all, this title looks like another solid release for mystery buffs and Holmes devotees. IBM CD-ROM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #7. lake and Jennifer Eagle in Eagle Eye Mysteries SEDIE Electronic Arts 1450 Fashion Island Blvd. San Mateo, CA 94404 (800) 245-4525 DESERT STRIKE: Positing a world in which a madman dictator of a Middle East state threatens the world with Armageddon, this British import is a shoot 'em up of the most explosive sort. Players will fly an AH-64 helicopter armed to the collective with air-toground ordnance. From a bird's-eye, third person perspective, players will blast structures and weapons while rescuing hostages and picking up extra ammo. Each scenario progresses a plot which culminates in a run on the dictator's headquarters and the \"libya\"ration of the Free World. Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5. JAKE AND JENNIFER EAGLE IN EAGLE EYE MYSTERIES: Young detectives ages 8 and up should keep an eye out for this adventure designed to develop deductive reasoning and reading skills. A fresh offering from Electronic Arts new EA*Kids division, Eagle Eye Mysteries offers young sleuths the opportunity to match wits with some of the world's youngest and smartest junior detectives. Players can try their hand at solving 50 cases as a member of the Eagle Eye Detective Agency, ranging from the Case of the Stolen Skateboard to the Case of the Basketball Blooper. Interaction with the game world is very intuitive, all input being handled with a mouse. Graphics and audio are of very high quality, taking good advantage of 256-color VGA graphic cards and major audio boards. The real treat, however, lies in the area of discovery. In the process of becoming a master detective, junior sleuths in Eagle Eye Mysteries will learn about history, science and logic, and will do so in an enjoyable and encouraging atmosphere. Teaming up with Jake and Jennifer will provide a positive and fun learning experience. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6. LYRIQ Corp. 1701 Highland Avenue Cheshire, CT 06410 (203) 250-2070 LYRIQ CROSSWORDS: Here's a product one might find on the President's laptop. With all of the aerodynamic slickness of the Windows interface and scads of crossword niceties, Lyriq seems to have one of the jazziest puzzle collections in the arena. The package claims 250 puzzles from such publishers as the Washington Post and the Penny press. Handy menu options allow the player to get hints, check off clues as they are solved, print out puzzles, and play in a timed tournament mode. Lyric also offers a monthly service wherein they send 25 new puzzles a month to its members. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #8. Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective Volume III Melk Boler um MTINY Timp CHORWILD Muarie PAM. ALLINN NOMAD NEMOOD GOR -18 SSESSE 21 Orne | v ol 5 20 Go SET CITIT BLEONORE 21 Champion 27 GPS 20 Dave 27 Mindcraft Software 2291 205th St., Suite 201 Torrance, CA 90501 (310) 320-5215 AM 18 Sci-fi visitor Verity Lyriq Crosswords ESGESE GES ESTE AMBUSH AT SORINOR: Mindcraft's Siege engine has found new lands to lord over in this real-time fantasy wargame. The player takes the role of a mercenary commander, hired by various clans to carry out missions of great import — for a price. Hiring troops and purchasing traps, the player orchestrates clandestine attacks on unsuspecting enemy troops. Though the interface has been rearranged a bit, the basic mechanics are the same as in Siege. Also like Siege, Ambush offers a complete scenario construction kit. Unlike Siege, these scenarios can be combined into campaign games for those who play the long game.\" Interesting as a concept, some players might rake issue with the implementation; those who were bothered by the slow and jerky performance of the earlier game will find much of the same here. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #9. 20242 ICOM Simulations, Inc. 648 S. Wheeling Road Wheeling, IL 60090 (708) 520-4440 SHERLOCK HOLMES CONSULT ING DETECTIVE VOLUME III: The game's afoot ... again! It's time once more to don one's cap and cloak and assume the role of London's most famous sleuth. No, nor Chief Inspector Clouseau. Rather, the indubitable Sherlock Holmes. This third volume of mystery cases from ICOM allows the player to test his or her skills as a detective in solving three more \"interactive» murder mysteries. In \"The Solicitous Solicitor,\" players must determine if the untimely death of an unscrupulous casanova was by «natural causes\" or not. \"The Banker's Final Debt\" provokes the question of why anyone would want to silence a hard-working, quiet, unassuming man. The third case, \"The Thames Ambush at Sorinor Ocean of America, Inc. 1855 O'Toole Ave., Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 LETHAL WEAPON: This new action release from Ocean is yet another entry in the overcrowded field of look-alike, sideLethal Weapon Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"On final approach to the United States 1320 AIRBUS Developed in cooperation with Lufthansa and Deutsche Aerospace Airbus Trademarks \"AIRBUS and A320 registered (applied for) Circle Reader Service #104 "


"Deek VIDEOT SPEEDWAY scrolling, platform shooters. Based loosely on the movie by the same title, Lethal Weapon offers the joystick jockey the opportunity to play through a series of four missions and a grand finale as either Detective Riggs or Murtaugh. Each mission is divided into two or three levels with «extreme force\" necessary to reach the end of each. There is no ability to adjust the difficulty of play. However, codes are provided upon the completion of each mission so one can pick up where they left. Amiga, IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. Video Speedway Knock difficult in any area), Accompanied by a compelling new-age soundtrack (a CD of the soundtrack is available direct from Sierra), this game offers one an experience that is extremely diverse. Space and time converge as one rockets through the heavens battling space age conquistadors and as one explores the shores of 16th century Lake Titicaca. As the name implies, all this is somehow tied to the ancient Inca civilization, with the player being the one to fulfill a 500 year old prophecy. Most gamers should find Inca an interesting game, despite weak documentation and the inability to save one's progress as in traditional adventures (codes are provided at specific junctures during play). A CDROM version is planned for later release. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #13. THE PROPHECY: Another new release from Sierra's \"French connection,\" The Prophecy is an interesting puzzle-based graphic adventure. Again, an evil sorcerer is hard at work wreaking havoc and seeking absolute control. Now, the player, as Ween, must fulfill the Prophecy, the promise that «On the day of the great eclipse, if three grains of sand are placed in the REVUSS by a brave hero, the enemy will be vanquished.\" The problem is that only three days remain for the Prophecy to come to pass. Three days in which to complete three quests. As has become the norm, 256-color VGA graphics are provided and major sound cards are supported. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #14. Philips Interactive Media of America 11111 Santa Monica Blvd., Suite 700 Los Angeles, CA 90099-3663 (800) 845-7301 VIDEO SPEEDWAY: Our initial expectation for this CD-I product was that we would be able to race the digitized video image of actual race cars around the tracks of authentic race courses. (That's the image that CD storage and the title Video Speedway conjured in our minds). Instead, one drives a bit-mapped car which uses all of the physics of the classic Pole Position and only shows video images during the instant replay of a crash (and the replays occur randomly, not being tied to any car's actual position during the crash). It's fine for Pole Position fans looking for a little extra glitz, but not for the hard-core racing aficionado. CD-I. Circle Reader Service #11. 666999999 Hoyle Classic Card Games Sierra On-Line, Inc. P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (209) 683-4468 Inca I've got nothing to teach you on this use PEIROYON PADLOCK The Prophecy HOYLE CLASSIC CARD GAMES: Spanning a range of competitiveness for players from kids to card sharks, Sierra has dealt out another winning hand with the latest installment in their Hoyle Book of Games Series. Although Hoyle Classic forges little new ground, it does continue a fine tradition of providing the gamer with a choice selection of classics card games in an attractive, competent and enjoyable package. Provided in this collection are Bridge, Euchre, Hearts, Klondike, Gin Rummy, Cribbage, Crazy 8's and Old Maid. Each game has easy-to-customize play options, including several variations apiece. Like all of Sierra's recent releases, 256-color VGA graphics, major sound card support and the ability to run the game under both DOS and Windows provide the proverbial icing on the cake. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12 INCA: Winner of the Best Graphics award at Supergames Show Paris, 1992, this new release from Coktel Vision is part space combat simulator, part arcade shoot'em up, and part graphic puzzler (but not exceptionally Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc. 2105 S. Bascom Ave., Suite 165 Campbell, CA 95008-9664 (409) 776-2187 HARPOON DESIGNERS' SERIES II: POST-GRADUATE NAVAL OPERATIONS AND TACTICS: Armchair Admirals will be pleased to know that they have more \"harpoons\" at their disposal, specifically, 48 new scenarios from the Harpoon Designers' Series II. Designed to illustrate difficult lessons in Naval Operations and Tactics, this new collection challenges the player to master the art of modern naval warfare. Twelve new scenarios are provided for each of the four Harpoon Battlesets available, offering the opportunity for one to develop effective first strike capabilities, conduct anti-submarine warfare against vastly different platforms, and locate the enemy while remaining safely concealed. A Data Annex (with complete information on military bases, weapon systems and sensors) and Tactical Guide are included. The Harpoon Designers' Series II requires the Harpoon program and Battlesets. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #15. CGW MCGM Orders Settin Ca garts Misc GROUP To Go 2:2323 DER Pla Cruz Speed: 3 kts Throttle! Cine Course: 120 Alt: t [FSell Report Display Harpoon Designers' Series II: Post-graduate Naval Operations and Tactics Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rared for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGWhas in its possession. Induction Ceremony! Sid Meier's Civilization (MicroProse, 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh CIVILIZATION He r tha Sure The Tes of The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Civilization (MicroProse, 1991) Amiga, IBM, Mac Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Tlree-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM, CD-ROM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats Most readers know that Sid Meier holds the record for having the most titles in the CGW Hall of Fame. Sid Meier's Civilization makes the fifth Sid Meier title inducted into the prestigious circle of award-winning games. Previous inductees included: F-19 Stealth Fighter, Gunship, Pirates and Railroad Tycoon. Interestingly, Meier built his reputation on flight simulators, but the addition of Civilization to the Hall of Fame means that his non-flight classics now outnumber his flight simulator hits, underscoring his versatility as a designer. Sid Meier's Civilization is a fascinating design that melds elements of construction with elements of combat. In many cases, it crossed the gender barrier and appealed to female gamers, even while hardcore (and predominantly male) wargamers appropriated the game as one of their own. Sid himself avoided calling the game a wargame from the very beginning, but eventually acceded to the point that a game which required one to move military units across a map and conquer other civilizations was definitely a wargame. Yet, many gamers argued that the task of building a civilization was enough of an interest ing activity within itself, that the combat elements were almost secondary. Sid Meier's Civilization does not attain its standing on the basis of advanced graphics, incredible sound, or sophisticated technology. Rather, it proves its excellence by providing a solid design with superlative gameplay, Economics, exploration, resource exploitation and management, military strategy and diplomacy are all areas that impact one's success or failure in Sid Meier's Civilization. The variety of decisions to be made seem endless and open-ended. Over and over again, our readers tell us that this game is addictive. We take that to mean that it is always worth another game. Such is greatness. August 1993 Page 14 "


"ONKEY Top Adventure Games Reader Poll #107 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD + GAME Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Star Control II The Secret of Monkey Island Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CD Alone in the Dark King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Top 100 Games The Premier Computer Game Magazine COMPANY LucasArts LucasArts Accolade LucasArts Sierra ICOM l-Motion Sierra Accolade Electonic Arts SCORE 9.97 9.84 9.77 9.72 9.56 9.55 9.54 9.42 9.28 9.20 NO Type SP 10 RP GGGGG VOULAWN 78 Ultima,  Score 10.51 10.45 10.37 10.20 10.18 10.13 10.10 10.08 9.97 9.93 9.84 SI Top Role Playing Games The Stugan SP O NOUAWN9.77 GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.45 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 9.68 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.62 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.51 Might & Magic II New World Computing 9.41 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.34 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.25 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.10 Bane of Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 9.75 9.74 9.72 9.68 9.63 9.63 9 10 WGST AD WG AD ADAC WG ST AD RP WG AC WG RP SI AD,RP AD AD RP 9.62 MOROCUK Top Simulation Games 00000 Game Company 1 Links 386 Pro Access Ultima Underworld Origin World Circuit MicroProse Wing Commander 11 Origin Solitaire's Journey QQP 6 X-Wing LucasArts 7 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 8 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 99 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 10 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty 11 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 12 Star Control !! Accolade 13 The Perfect General QQP 14 Dune 11 Virgin 15 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 16 Ultima Underworld II Origin 17 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 19 Empire Deluxe New World Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 21 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 22 Quest for Glory III Sierra 23 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 24 Alone in the Dark 1-Motion 25 Eye of the Beholder II Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 27 Links Access 28 Warlords SSG 29 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 30 Might & Magic III New World Computing 31 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 32 Hardball III Accolade 33 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Ultima VII Origin 36 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 37 High Command Colorado Comp. 38 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 39 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 40 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 41 Stunt Island Disney Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 43 Lemmings Psygnosis 44 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 45 Second Front 46 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 47 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 48 Eric the Unready Legend 49 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 50 Eye of the Beholder SSI SSI SI SP DOPRODE GAME COMPANY World Circuit MicroProse X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill Novalogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Stunt Island Disney F-15 Strike Eagle III MicroProse Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse WG,ST SCORE 10.37 10.13 9.58 9.51 9.39 9.23 9.23 9.09 9.06 9.04 AD RP SI 9.62 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.54 9.51 9.51 9.47 9.44 9.42 9.41 9.39 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.32 9.29 9.28 9.27 9.25 9.23 9.23 SP 9 10 WG RP RP ST SOLITAIRES JOURNEY WG AD Top Strategy Games GAME SP RP 9.21 von AWN Solitaire's Journey Dune II Chessmaster 3000 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro The Lost Admiral The Incredible Machine Mech Warrior The Island of Dr. Brain Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Populous II COMPANY QQP Virgin Software Toolworks Electonic Arts QQP Dynamix Activision Sierra Sierra Electronic Arts SCORE 10.18 9.74 9.32 9.13 9.05 9.05 8.94 8.91 8.78 8.78 SSI AC,ST AD WG AC ST AD AD 9.20 9.17 9.14 9.13 9.12 9.11 9.10 9 10 RP "


"SI AD WOOOTE WG Top Wargames SI RP ST AD, RP A CON GAME Conquered Kingdoms V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach Empire Deluxe Warlords Pacific War High Command Second Front Conflict: Korea AD 9.09 9.09 9.09 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.03 COMPANY QQP Three-Sixty QQP Three-Sixty Pacific New World SSG SSI Colorado Comp. SSI SSI SCORE 10.08 9.93 9.75 9.63 9.62 9.44 9.34 9.29 9.17 9.09 6 AD,RP SI 9.02 9.02 8 9 10 AD RP WG,ST AD MicroProse Sierra SSI Electronic Arts Sir-Tech Dynamix Sierra QQP MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Microprose Sierra Origin QQP Sierra SSI SSG Dynamix Activision SSI Psygnosis Three-Sixty Pacific MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Dynamix Access SSI Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend MicroProse 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 WG COMRENDER WG 8.97 AD Top Action Games ST,SI RP 1 2 3 4 5 6 GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Lemmings 2: The Tribes Oh No! More Lemmings Out of this World Terminator 2029 Speedball 2 Conan the Cimmerian COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum Holo Byte Psygnosis Psygnosis Interplay Bethesda Konami Virgin 51 F-15 Strike Eagle III The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 54 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 55 Bane of the Cosmic Forge The Incredible Machine Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 59 Red Storm Rising Conquests of the Longbow 61 Silent Service II 62 Quest for Glory II Gunship 2000 64 Police Quest 3 65 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 67 Space Quest IV Western Front 69 Carriers At War 70 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 71 Mech Warrior Veil of Darkness Lemmings 2: The Tribes V For Victory: Market Garden 75 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 77 The Island of Dr. Brain 78 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 80 Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball II 81 Indianapolis 500 82 Elvira 83 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Rex Nebular 86 Gateway to the Savage Frontier Great Naval Battles 88 Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 90 Heart of China 91 Battlechess Gateway 93 Starflight II 94 Battles of Napoleon 95 F-15 Strike Eagle II 96 Pools of Darkness 97 Typhoon of Steel 98 Armada 2525 99 Amazon 100 Space Quest V: Mutation SCORE 10.20 9.63 9.21 9.14 8.94 8.92 8.57 8.17 7.92 7.91 AC,ST WG SI AC,ST 8.96 8.94 8.94 8.94 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.89 ST AD AD SP 8 9 10 8.89 SI RP WG,ST AD AD 8.86 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.80 SSI RP 8.79 Top Sports Games WG,ST ST SCORE 10.51 10.10 ST AD SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Dynamix Interplay Legend Electronic Arts 9.47 ST von A WNU GAME COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access Front Page Sports Football Dynamix Links Access Hardball lll Accolade Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball || SSI NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports The Games: Winter Challenge Accolade PGA Tour Golf Electronic Arts Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball SSI 9.37 9.27 8.86 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.49 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.70 8.69 8.68 8.67 8.63 SSI 9 10 AD RP WG SI RP WG ST AD AD MicroProse SSI SSI Interstel Access Sierra 8.62 8.60 Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. Top game of type. AD=Adventure, RP-Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine, "


"what's Hot PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software What You've Been Playing Lately April, 1993 Rank PC Games ( MS-DOS) Title and Source X-Wing (LucasArts) Strike Commander (Origin) Commanche: Maximum Overkill (Novalogic) Alone in the Dark (Interplay) Links 386 Pro (Access) Tony Larussa Baseball II (Strategic Simulations) Wolftenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) Links Banff Springs (Access) Ultrabots (Novalogic) Commanche Mission Disk #1 (Novalogic) The 7th Guest (Virgin Games) Hardball HIT (Accolade) Jump Jet (MicroPose) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) Space Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Star Trek 25th Anniversary (Interplay) AD&D Unlimited Adventures (Strategic Simulations) Lemmings II (Psygnosis) Empire Deluxe (New World Computing) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and ontspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with sug. gestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulared opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out ... keep em coming! Playing Lately? Results for CGW #106, May 1993 X-wing (LucasArts) Strike Commander (Origin) Empire Deluxe (New World Computing) Civilization (MicroProse) World Circuit (MicroProse) Falcon 3.01 (Spectrum Holo Byte) Tony LaRussa Baseball II (Strategic Simulations) Dune II (Virgin Games) Ultima VII: Serpents Isle (Origin) The 7th Guest (Virgin Games) 12. oop NOUA 14. 15. 17. 20. Rank cie Amiga Games Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Operation Combat (Merit) Medieval Warriors (Merit) AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations) Legend of Kyrandia (Virgin Games) Just Me and You...and Our CPU, Part 2 In issue 106 the prying minds at CGW asked you about computer gam ing's effect on your relationships with other humanoids. The overwhelming response indicates that there are a lot of neglected Significant Others out there! Where families of gamers were concerned, the classic \"Battle for the TV Remote\" has been moved to the computer room, where the power struggle continues. On the positive side, many of you have made cyber-friendships on networks and have made gaming a part of family Quality Time. Here are some more responses \"We have an IBM clone and active SNES and NES systems. My sons (2) friends love to come over because we always have something new for one of the systems. Even my wife finally gave in, thanks to Scrabble and Trivial Pursuit for the IBM. We are definitely a gaming family.\" Royce Brainard, South Windsor, CT \"Non-gamer types think I'm gonzo for wanting a dark house, a full pack of smokes, and a 12 pack of Pepsi on a Saturday night (and a screaner PC).\" G. Klepinger. Troy, OH \"My co-workers suffer the most. I have to wait until my wife and baby (yes, I am whupped) are asleep before I can turn on the computer. I get pretty cranky on 3 hours of sleep!\" B. McGeorge, Cincinnati, OH \"When I am playing late into the night, and my S.O.(i.e. wife) is sleeping, the music from some of the games gives her nightmares... she Rank Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Spectre (Velocity) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Lemmings (Psygnosis) Award Winners: KOV & Red Baron (Sierra On-Line) 4. 5. says.\" Rank inGN0a CD-ROM Products Title and Source The 7th Guest (Virgin Games) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainnient) Compron's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Compron's New Media) Corel Art Show (Corel) Key Clipmaster Pro (SoftKey) Ginemania (Microsoft) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delorme) Key Fonts Pro (Softkey) Battle Chess (Interplay) King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Anonymous, No Post Mark, U.S.A. \"Some folks just don't understand the interest ('for a grown man is understood). These are compensated by the computer game literate who establish a firmer bond. Unfortunately those who don't under stand are further alienated when they fail to understand the language or game referents. Pity!\" -Misunderstood, Los Angeles, CA Justifying money spent is the biggest problem w/S.O. A $40 game somehow seems worse than $40 worth of murder mysteries spread out over a month or two. As to others, it's like any other innocuous pastime; it develops common ground with those who are in tune and blank stares from those who are not.\" Unnamed Gamer, Kansas City, MO \"Other people: Oh, you mean the Sysop. He's the only one I know by a vedl name. My poor wife keeps trying, but I'll never admit most of her problems would be cured by the pause button. C. Brandon Quinn, Tyler, TX 10. This list is based on units sold by Software Etc. Babbages, Waldensoftware and Electronics or more information, please contact VORescarci at (7037435-1025.1 Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"patches The Patch File Jomputer game programs have grown so massive and the Solitaire's Journey Patch V1.03: This is a patch for those having problems number of possible configurations has become so huge that with saved Tournament games and those having mouse troubles. 2/12/93 incompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an Space Quest 5 Patch: Corrects the following: (1) Inability to Restore or exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at Quit after running out of time on WD-40's ship. (2) Inability to skip polthe need for adding patches into \"buggy' programs, but they seem ishing the Star Con crest in EGA mode. (3) Loss of cursor when Roger to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a steps off the log which spans the river on Kiz Urazgubi. 2/26/93 while (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is Sumpter to Appomattox Update: Fixes the «Build\" routine and eliminates the memory crror that some gamers were having. 3/13/93 agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regTask Force 1942 Update: Corrects the waypoint problem, among others. 2/15/93 ular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. These patches can usually be downloaded from most major net*The Seventh Guest Fix: Corrects the problems with some video cards and works (eg, Compuserve or GEnie), but can also be obtained from a few other minor details. 5/12/93 Tom Landry Football V. 1.03 Update (IBM & Mac): Corrects problems individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to with high-speed modem play. 3/06/93 keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. *Tony LaRussa II Patch: Fixes bugs in SSI's baseball simulation. 5/21/93 ( indicates new files) Twilight 2000 Colonel Upgrade (VGA only): Adds extra sounds and Aces of the Pacific 1946 Add-On Disk Update: Single Missions will now graphics, and adds a new ending to the game. 2/02/93 be saved correctly, and several fixes have been made to Career Pilors, Ultima VII Version 3.4: Lord British fixes some minor leaks in the roof of including the elimination of known Shell System Errors. 3/10/93. Castle Britannia. Updates from Version 3.0 to 3.4. 2/17/93 Air Bucks Version 1.2: A major overhaul of the original airline strategy Ultima Underworld II Patch: Fixes the \"strike\" problem, local bus difficulties, and a few others. 2/24/93 game. 4/17/93 Ancient Art of War in the Skies Update: Version 02 of the game. 3/01/93 *Unlimited Adventures Version 1.1 Parch: In addition to new files for the software, this file contains a supplement to the game's manual. 5/21/93 *Battles of Destiny V1.1 Patch: Enhancements and bug fixes include: *Unlimited Adventures Design Guide Supplement: A Technical Manual Patrol Mode, Map Editor, and two player modem enhancements. 5/06/93 for Adventure Design by Scott Gries and MicroMagic, Inc. The official *Buzz Aldrin Race Into Space Update: Fixes the screen blackout\" bug manual supplement. 5/20/93 and adds an Undo button to the Purchase screen. 5/04/93 Wilson Pro Staff Golf Update: Corrects mouse driver problems and errors Caesar with Stacker: Allows players to use Impressions' game with the where incorrect driving clubs were selected for certain ranges. 4/21/93 Stacker utility. 3/05/93 World Circuit Modem Update V1.05: Corrects problems with 2400 baud Civilization Version 1.0.8 (Macintosh): Latest and greatest version of the modems. 4/08/93 reigning king of strategy. 2/23/93 X-wing 1/0 Soundcard Patch: Allows 1/0 port settings of 210-260. Darklands Version 07 Update: Latest version of Micro Prose's RPG. 4/15/93 3/05/93 X-wing Roland Sound Patch: Fixes crash bugs associated with the Roland Dune Il Patch File: Fixes problems with the delivery of items from soundcard on 486 machines. 4/15/93 CHAM. 4/18/93 Empire Deluxe Version 3.1: This new version makes a myriad of feature The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten changes and bug fixes to Version 3.0.4/30/93 *F15 Strike Eagle III Version 3 Update: Corrects minor errors in earlier Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for us in versions. 4/25/93 their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted on-line by CGW Front Page Sports Football: A new version is available which improves and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can be reached there at upon the original release in many ways. 2/15/93 EXIT 40B), The Prodigy Game Poll is run by Prodigy based on a list of games Great Naval Battles/North Atlantic Update: Updates all GNBNA files to provided by CGW and is updated weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative ratversion 1.2.2/23/93 ing over time (like the CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is Gunship 2000 Islands and Ice Patch Version .085: Corrects keyboard a weekly \"Snapshot of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a lockout problems some gamers are having. 2/11/93 1-10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" in computer gaming. *Harpoon Version 1.32A Upgrade: Makes changes to the Harpoon game system. 5/18/93 Hockey League Simulator 2 Update V1.11: New version for the IBM. 2/03/93 IndyJones/Atlantis Mac Patch: Corrects the \"desert balloon\" crash bug in the Mac version. 4/15/93 TOP TEN RANKED GAMES Indy Jones/Atlantis 486 Patch: Allows one to play the game on a 486 without color problems or errors. 5/26/93 TASKE SOORT TITLE RAK SURE TITLE Jordan in Flight SVGA Patch: Allows owners of Diamond Stealth, Diamond Stealth 24 and Orchid Fahrenheit 1280 Plus video cards to run 37 HG : 10-31 the game in SVGA. 5/21/93 Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.09: Includes new drivers for specific HEID 125T ACAS B att video cards, a new Sound Blaster Pro 16 driver, and fixes the Harbour 1776 Hit Commander  123 Prat De Esta Town Hole 14 lockup. 3/03/93 Magic Candle III Version 1.16: Fixes problems with Sound Blaster support, mirror of honesty/candlewick problems, difficulties with tranferred characters from MC2, and other minor glitches. 2/17/93 Mantis Update (IBM): Adds new features and improves gameplay. For disk-based version only. 3/01/93 when LU blace an Online sted for 90 COUS Pacific War V1.1 Upgrade: The «official» SSI upgrade to Gary Grigsby's Menu X-re Jump Path C opy Tools Help Exit Pacific War. 4/18/93 GATEFELL SAVE 25% LOOK August 1993 Page 145 "


"PRESS The Rumor Bag by Sir Oscar Lloyd Hammerstein III I reached into the bell and pulled out, not a Meier's Civil War, but we were hearing all of melon like the Sousaphone player in Activithese baroque chorales coming out of his sion's upcoming Simon the Sorcerer comedy office. Somehow, we didn't think they fit the adventure, but a toybox. It was a near empty civil war motif. So, we stepped in the door box with the Playmates label on it. Inside the and Sid quickly hid Arnold Schoenburg's box was a note that said, «Thought you'd classic work on counterpoint under one of the want to know, Novotrade is currently develvolumes from Shelby Foote's history of the oping the Deep Space Nine license for PlayThe orchestra pit at the Hollywood Panwar. He insisted that what he was working on mates.\" I looked quickly around the orchestra was just a mental exercise, a programming tages is not really all that large. The old pit to see if I could determine which musician experiment. What he had created was sheer _movie house, now resurrected as a lehad been my source. Everyone seemed to be genius. C.P.U. Bacht for the 3D gitimate theater, has a pit that doesn't seem is a revoconcentrating on warming up, but I couldn't. much bigger than the sprites on an old 8-bit lutionary piece of artificial intelligence. Sid cartridge game. Nonetheless, here I was in bag The large theater with its ornate teak woodand Jeff Briggs have managed to program the and black tie. My motto is, \"Have tux and carving was about halfway full as I lipped a rules for baroque composition and countertuba. Will travel.\" few octaves and absent-mindedly listened to point into a computer program. Then, the As the concertmistress gave us a concert the flutes playing some familiar runs as they program creates an infinite number of comB-flat on her english horn, it reminded me warmed up. I suddenly realized that they were positions in the style of Bach. The DOSplaying the old theme song to the Speed Racer based prototype can even print out musical that Three-Sixty Pacific has acquired the cartoon series. I placed my tuba on the floor scores and our sources indicate that users will rights to the soundtrack to Victory at Sea for and, since it wasn't time to start, maneuvered be able to save selections, even on the 3DO use with their upcoming game of the same next to the second chair flute player. I don't version (the only announced version) of the namc. I made a mental note to remind my know why I suspected her as my source, exproduct. Plus, interactive multiplayer users readers that the Richard Rodgers melodies cept that one look at that clingy, black, se li.e. 3DO owners) will be able to adjust were orchestrated for the films by Robert quined dress with the side slit perfectly tempo, select instrumention and, essentially, Russell Bennett, a prolific composer who en positioned for tantalizing limb exposure conduct the dynamics for each arrangement. hanced many of the Rodgers and Hammermade me hope she was my source. I probably would have stayed in my reverie srein scores of Broadway's golden era. \"Accolade,\" was all she said before her had it not been for the fact that one of the Then, I played my low B-flat and tried to Mona Lisa smile transformed into a proper dancers in the big production number chose drop to the pedal tone below it. It sounded flutist embouchure and she flipped her long that moment to come flying off the stage and like a sound effect from an episode of the brunette hair in my direction as if to say, \"Go land in my tuba. Once my lip and teeth quit Star Trek television series. I tried again. There away.\" Well, I can take a hint. I can tell when hurting from having the mouthpiece jammed was something rattling inside the bell of my someone has told me all they are going to tell. into my face, I couldn't make up my mind horn. If I didn't know better, I would swear If Accolade was going to be publishing a Speed whether she looked like she had just been it was like the time in high school when this Racer game, that was fine with me. \"Mach-atackled in EA Sports' upcoming Bill Walsh clown threw his lunch bag in my sousaphone go-go!\" I whispered, using the Japanese lyrics football game or MicroProse's projected 3-D and kept me from being solidly in tune all to the theme song as I moved back to my seat. football game by Ed Fletcher (project leader semester. It wasn't until we washed out the We tuned again and our conductor prefor the original Wayne Gretzky Hockey). All I horns at the end of the year that we discovered pared for the downbeat of the overture. We knew was that my wife was never going to why my tone had been so far off all year long. offered cacaphonous sounds as an introducbelieve that a pulchritudinous young dancer This time, I was determined to investigate. tion; wove subtle nuances throughout the had bruised my lip like this without my dewoodcarved auditorium as we foreshadowed serving to get clobbered (wink, wink, nudge, the love theme; and swelled to the rich orchesnudge). trations which the crowd would hear in the I also knew that the conductor was scowling final reprise. Even Bach himself, or at least at me as though this interruption was my The Fat Man, would be pleased with the Top Prices Paid fault. Who did he think he was, \"king\" of the applause garnered after the overture. The orchestra pit? I submitted to his authority and Convert titles you've beaten thought of The Fat Man reminded me that prepared for my favorite piece, the one where or grown tired of to CASH or his score for Electronic Arts' upcoming Seathe tuba has a melodic line for a whole four wolf is supposed to feature music for 16 diftrade credit (20% more)! measures, but I longed for revenge. Maybe, I ferent game states and support up to 20 sound thought, now that Avalon Hill has anIBM AMIGA C64 cards. nounced their intent to publish Kingmaker as  Call or send list It served to remind me about a great techa computer game, I could thrash Sir Stuff nological breakthrough I had observed when Shirt in our own little War of the Roses. The Bare Bones Software I did a gig in Baltimore, recently. We had glorious thought almost made me miss my 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 dropped by MicroProse to check out Sid cue. For a tuba player, that can be even more 1-800-638-1123 Meier's latest project. Here Mr. CGW Hall serious than missing a deadline (but don't tell of Fame was supposed to be at work on Sid my editor). CGW Circle Reader Service #36 Page 146 Computer Gaming World SELL YOUR USD AMES "


"Family Entertainment From Sierra t Family Budget Prices $3995 All 3 for just Plus.. SIERRA FREE Screen Saver FAME You can't beat Sierra. Sierra's standards are the highest in the computer game industry. We have a knack for combining the newest technology with imaginative storytelling to create the most intriguing, most exciting and the most entertaining games. Take the FAMILY FUN PACK. Each game is a VGA masterpiece with full soundcard support and the distinctive Sierra style. It's the promise. Sierra is committed to making games for the family to enjoy. The FAMILY FUN PACK has a variery of games and there's something for everyone, from adventures to board games. Plus, there's a special FREE bonus of an entertaining screen saver ! It's the value. Sierra consistently offers their customers special budget values. Take the FAMILY FUN PACK. The total price for the 3 games in this pack originally sold for $159.85, plus the Johnny Castaway screen saver originally sold for $34.95. You get over $194.10 worth of computer entertainment for just $39.95. You'll save over $150! For U.S. orders add $5.00 shipping and handling charges. For orders outside the U.S., call for details. Special Bonus: If you order right now you can get the hint books for Conquests of the Longbow and Gobliiins for just $4.95 each. That's a 50% savings! Fun Pack 3 GREAT GAMES FOR ONE GREAT PRICE! GOBLMNS PLUS A PREE SCREEN SAVERI Gobliiins The King has gone insane! You're next. Guide three imps through a task only they can perform. Dwayne carries objects, but only one at a time. BoBo packs a mean right hook. And Hooter casts spells that can help well, sometimes. \"Anyone who enjoys objectand magic-oriented puzzle solving will love Goblins. Highly recommended.\" Quest Busters magazine Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3: Great Board Games Hoyle has games for every member of your family. You'll love these six classic board games: Yacht, Pachisi, Checkers, Backgammon, Dominoes and Snakes and Ladders. Play against human or animated opponents. Best of all, you can adjust the skill levels to accommodate your expertise. That means parents can have as much fun as their kids! \"A great game for children and adults alike.\" Compute magazine TATAL BIELS Conquests of the Longbow: The Legend of Robin Hood You'll live the legend of the Outlaw of Sherwood Forest in this critically acclaimed, exciting animated adventure. To survive, you must rely on your compassion as well as wits and cunning. This master-level game features authentic medieval games, music and language, as well as multiple paths with varying implications and at least five possible endings. \"Possibly the best Sierra On-Line adventure game to date.\" Enchanted Realms Plus a Free Screen Saver! Screen Antics: The Adventures of Johnny Castaway This screen saver not only protects your monitor it also tells the story of Johnny, a castaway trying to escape from a small desert island. Johnny Castaway even features special screens for special dates. (Note: Screen Antics requires Windows 3.1\") \"The most entertaining utility we've ever seen.\" Computer Gaming World SIERRA Available for IBM and PC compatibles only Call 1-800-326-6654 Call today to order direct from Sierra ! Circle Reader Service #101 Available for IBM and PC compatibles only. Monday-Friday 7AM-7PM (PST) Offer HA 121 "


"commADER MISSION NAME EROT SEE SEARCH FURTHERN Relentless Space Combat For Naive Rookies or Hardened Vets LOGO SUES DOHL ADBE QUEC DED HE EXCCUTE NE FECTIVE is a student at the TCSN Academy, you customdesign and fly unique combat, rescue, and search and retrieval missions from the CyberSchool's holodeck console. In the Wing Commander tradition, the game features a dynamic musical score, improved rendered, bit-mapped graphics, and a dazzling array of customizing options. But Wing Commander Academy isn't another cinematic extravaganza — it's an intense dogfighting marathon. BOTSHE Custom-design a variety of missions that match your skill level as you place fighters, capital ships, data pods and ejected pilots up to 10 in each of the four action spheres. Save up to 24 games to disk and trade with your friends or upload them to bulletin boards to challenge others.  Request random missions where each action sphere yields an unknown number of enemy ships with pilots of varying skill levels. Climb into the cockpits of the new Confederation Wraith or Kilrathi Jrathek fighters for a new combat experience. Select a cybernet wingman from a frightened cadet to a hotshot veteran. Fly from the cockpit view or try the chase-plane view for a new perspective on the dogfighting action. Sharpen your combat skills as you compete for high-point honors. Engage the \"Wave\" a dogfighting marathon with 15 progressively difficult levels of attacking ships including three flights of fighters in each level. Build missions so tough that even our professional Wing Commander pilots can't survive. WINGMAN SELECTION NO2C%ATE UTY DINGO WER GRUNTLET AFANUS RECEPERCANCEL parent NWS CLEAR CANCES 2002 RES D320 DE Actual screens may vary! CHECLIYE ORIGIN We create worlar. A Stand Alone Game No previous Wing Commander experience necessary. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 For MS-DOS 386SX, 386, 486 or 100% compatible systems. Sound Support: Ad Lib, Sound Blaster, Roland LAPC-1 or 100% compatible sound card required for music. Requires: 256-color VGA, 2 megs RAM, 7 megs hard drive space free, joystick. Circle Reader Service #85 Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin, We create worlds and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Academy is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. -Electronic Arts is a registered trademark o Electronic Arts. "

