"Mantis. Carriers At War Cyber Empires 3.95 Number 101 7.95 Canadiat COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JO Game Rated December 1992 The Premier Computer Game Magazine INTERPLAY'S \"Buzz ALORIN'S RACE bOTO SPACE 6th Annual _Holiday Buying Guide > Ons 60% Als his suc 01129074121581 UVU Sneak previews Mort en "


"Surar of Destiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure il III HARIAN FLOOR SCORE LIVES 4400 3 HEALTH ARMOI 367 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES ES REALTH AMROT 2900 3 172 83 H FLOOR 9 SCORE 2800 LIVES 3    80% 938 Virtual Reality! Features! What the Reviewers Say Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to # spectacular VGA virtual reality system the player is there' like no game the PC, hurling you into an intense battle breathtaking musical soundtrack for I've ever played...\" between good and evil in which only you Adlib, Sound Blaster \"the sound and the visual action, is can save the world! A breathtaking digitized stereo sound effects for frighteningly realistic...\" musical soundtrack sets the mood, while Sound Blaster, Sound Source \"I can't remember a game making amazing first person\" visual perspec over 20 complete floors to cover such effective use of perspective and tive and spectacular digital stereo sound 4 levels of play difficulty sound and thereby evoking such effects give an experience like no other special extra challenges for advanced intense physiological responses from game you've ever played! game players its players.\" saves multiple games in process Circle Reader Service #77 Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 "


"-W:ZARDRY A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation by D.W. Bradley * CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT WA HILARO LRIORE NACE 6.1 Welcome to the sequel to Bane of the Cosmic Forge and the only game that could possibly follow its lead. It's everything Bane was...and more. 256 Colors Outdoor Campaigns Full Musical Score & Sound Effects  Auto Mapping True Point & Click Mouse Interface. Unprecedented depth of story SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E Ogdensburg, New York 13669 To order or for a dealer nearest you call 1-800-447-1230 Circle Reader Service #144 "


"Features COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 8 The Buzz over Buzz Interplay's Race for Space Rockets Forward by Johnny (Jr. Space Cadet) Wilson 12 The Holiday Helper for Software Shoppers The Annual CGW Holiday Buying Guide A Matter of Course (Design) Part II in a series on Course Design for Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition by Mark Willett $ EA's John Madden II vs. Konami's NFL Jason Brooks Referees a Gridiron Showdown \"Hello, Poetry Lovers...\" A Fireside Reading of CGW's Readers-Turned-Poets Moving Heaven & Earth Proving That Disney Really Owns the Rights to Everything by Scorpia The Politics of SPA Washington D.C. Serves as the Site of Sights Race for Space 8 HIGH All That Glitters is Not Boxed Chuck Miller Launches a New Shareware Column LEY.EU forth UITS 30 30.99 Gunther Cruise for a Corpse has the Cast Adrift U.S. Gold Spotlights a Dead Man's Float A Cadaverous Undertaking by Jeff James 39 40 9901 Setting Tables in the Darklands Survival Guide Information for Calculating Adventurers Forged by Sam Baker FIELD INSATZARZARLAR Darklands 76 . Gaming the Night Fantastic on The Sierra Network The Live, Real Time, On-Line Gaming Network Expands its Frontiers As Told by Alan Emrich from Lefty's Lounge in Larry Land Seeing Mantis Means it's Time to Prey MicroPlay's Space Combat Game: Threat or Mantis? by Stanley Trevena, Flying Entomologist 96 Kicking 'Bots and Taking Frames Maxis' Robosport Meets a Well Oiled Reviewer in Jimbo Cooper 102 Cruise for a Corpse 64 The Worm Turns in Dune II Virgin's Latest Resembles SimCity Wargaming in a Sandbox Despite the Heat, Grows our Reviewer Chuck Moss House Atreldes 10 Home planet of the Araldes is the warm. temperate <Moce 109 Getting Off on Floor 13 May Prove Unlucky A Cloaked Charles Ardai Levels His Dagger at Virgin's Latest To Our Readers 3 Love, The CGW Stall Dune II 102 Holiday Buyer's Guide 12 Page 4 "


"TM THEY'RE BACK!!! with new skills, for a new world... 75<NOSIS * 12 BRAND NEW TRIBES OF LEMMINGS, EACH WITH THEIR OWN SKILLS * SKIERS, SURFERS, BONGO PLAYERS SNAKE-CHARMERS & MORE * PUZZLING PROBLEMS WITH HILARIOUS ANIMATION production designed by * SAVE THE TRIBES & WIN THE TALISMAN * 8-WAY SCROLLING * ENHANCED SOUND SUPPORT WITH DIGITIZED LEMMING VOICES RIVETING GAME PLAY IN THE LEMMINGS TRADITION Tel: (617) 731-3553 Fax: (617) 731-8379 DMA DESIGN Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 Circle Reader Service #121 "


"Computer Wargaming World COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 134 A Fleet Inspection of SSG's Carriers at War An Admirable Job done by Bob Proctor 138 Getting Down to the Pacifics Three-Sixty's Operation Skymaster as Overseen by Bernie Dy 142 Evan Brooks Draws A Line in the Sand SSI's TSR Licensed Wargame Meets a Desert Storm Veteran 148 Flight Simulator Hardware Update Mike 'Moondawg' Weksler finds Himself \"Strapped\" for Voice Recognition 152 New World for Empire Deluxe A Sneak Preview of the Hall of Fame Classic Revisited by Alan \"Sleep? Who Needs Sleep?\" Emrich 158 More Hordes for Warlords And Strategies for Dealing with Them by Jim \"The Saint of the Sirians\" Lowerre 168 A Look at Forging Cyber Empires SSI's Strategic Level Sci-Fi Action Game Has the Right Elements As Jacked Into by CyberRanger Chris Lombardi 174 Joining Team Yankee Readysoft Gets Up Close and Personal, Even on Pacific Islands by Richard \"The Jungle\" Savage 180 Giving Static to an Air Force Commander Impressions Scrambles Its Birds in the Middle East by Michael \"No Fly Zone\" Peck Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphics Manager Gene Allen Assistant Graphics Manager Mike Weksler Editorial Assistant Caitlin Ackelson Ad Manager Jlm Messing Subscriptions Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1992. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686-8629. The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check druwn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe( 76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Subscription Dept. 1(800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572.7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 184 Now Harpoon is Really Whaling! A Recconnaisance of Updated Versions and New Releases for Harpoon by Tim \"Commodore\" Carter Departments 52 Scorpion's View (Darklands) 132 Computer Wargaming with Counterpoint World Editorial 106 Over There (European 178 Opponents Wanted Software Report) 192 Company Profile: Sir Tech 108 Advertiser Index Software 115 The Rumor Bag (Gossipius 198 Taking a Peek Maximus) 206 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games 116 Inside the Industry 208 What's Hot! 118 Scorpion's Mail 209 CGW Hall of Fame 122 Letters from Paradise 210 Editorial-A CGW Glossary 126 From the Cockpit (Flights of Fancy) Page 6 "


"\"A Case Worthy of Your Talents Holmes A young actress has been these bas bangun brutally murdered behind Interact with dozens of unique characters, each with their own personalities and alibis the Regency Theatre. CHERICK OUER Use the detailed overhead map of 1888 London to identify your next sleuthing location Jack the Ripper appears Refer to Dr. Watson's journal for a detailed record of your investigation to have struck again. PICK tinue carr Close Cu S tam Use your laboratory at 221B Baker Street to analyze clues Classically-scored soundtrack with over 30 original themes Scotland Yard turns Digitized voice and sound effects (soundboard required) ROUPAL Boet u to you my friend. The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes for the IBM PC and compatibles. SHERLIES Visit your local retailer, or call 1-800-2151525. By Mythos Software and Electronic Arts. 1992 Mythos Softwarc. All Rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. the PC ever done for The largest Graphic Adventure ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #72 "


"Sneak Preview TO THE TA DON, ALICE! Interplan Lifts Off with Buzz Aldrin si Race Dato Space Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final work on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. BY MIKE WEWSLER Then Sputnik-1 dropped into free-fall orbit in October of partments, astronaut training facilities, mission control and the 1957, the tiny 184 pound payload (little more than a launch pad, at will. One can even point and click on Washington thermometer and a radio beacon) served as the starting and the Kremlin on the respective horizons in order to get instrucgun for the space race. The U.S. tried to gain ground when it tions and make appropriate decisions. Once these iconic buildings launched the Explorer-1 satellite on January 31, 1958. Who would are chosen, the gamer can sort through dozens of sub-menus, many have believed that the U.S. would take the lead little more than a of which are illustrated with digitizations of historic photos or new decade. Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space gives computer gamers the 3-D drawings. Later in the game, players can click on the moon to chance to see if they can win that same race or reverse history. get their latest lunar survey results prior to the moon landings. The nice thing about this interface is that the spaceport grows as the Last One There Is a Rotten Faberge Egg player's space program comes on-line. Ideally, this occurs serBuzz Aldrin's Race Into Space is a strategic management simuendipitously with the player's mastery of the program's mechanlation of the space programs of both nations from the earliest stages ics. of satellite launches through the race to the moon. Players can take How Much for Spam in the Can? the reigns of either nation's space program and compete against either a computer-controlled program or against a human rival. Time passes in six month blocks with each turn occurring either The game, designed by Fritz Bronner (based upon his boardgame in the spring or fall of a given year. Players are given the entire Liftoft) and programmed by Michael McCarty, puts the player gamut of available space programs from their very first visit to the directly in charge of mission planning, astronaut training, imple administration building. This is where all programs are initiated. mentation of various space In fact, as missions become programs, hardware procuremore complex, many proment, research/development grams must be co-developed expenditures and last minute simultaneously in order to launch schedule adjustments. achieve the mission's success. Yet, even though the game is What this means is that based on solid research and of gamers will not necessarily fers multiple tracks upon have to opt for the \"spam in the which players can succeed in can\" approach (astronauts winning the space race, it is not placed in small capsules with a game with a tremendous 90001 very few controls to help them learning curve. A dynamic determine their own fate) that map of a spaceport (more acwas actually used in the U.S. curately, an amalgam of sevspace program. Gamers can eral locations in both space create their own paths and reprograms) serves as an iconic write history. main menu. Gamers can navigate through research and deSe In order to initiate a particuvelopment facilities, player lar space program, the player records (disguised as a space Mission Control: Apollo 11 prior to litoff will need to purchase the reqmuseum), procurement deuisite hardware with megaPage 8 Computer Gaming World "


"Sneak Preview bucks (an abstract monetary unit used in the game). Reflecting reality, initial hardware purchases are always more expensive than subsequent purchases. Since the main cost is in initiating programs, stocking up on existing hardware should not prove a problem as the game progresses. The second phase of each turn will likely require the player to enter the research facility and allocate research megabucks on new and existing space progams. Naturally, the more time and megabucks invested in R&D, the more likely the program is going to be successful. Of course, time is one of idle astronauts are a Freudian workshop. It is best to keep astronauts in specialized training when there are no immediate plans for their services. Once programs are initiated, astronauts who rank high in capsule, docking, lunar module and endurance should be moved from their specialized training facilities into a manned program. It then becomes necessary to match astronauts into crews where their skills and psychological make-up complement the rest of the crew. Even with the best attributes, unhappy crew members put the performance of the mission at risk. ESTE FRE C CE FILME U.S. Spaceport. Mission Possible Players also select the administration building in order to plan missions. Missions assigned during a given turn will be available for hardware assembly and launch during the next season. From the administration building, players may either cycle through all of the available missions which could possibly be assigned during the course of the game or use an event mask (somewhat analogous to a piano chord) to screen out the types of missions. The latter For the US, these are the following historical and proposed space programs from which to choose: Explorer: Earth satellite Ranger: Lunar/planetary satellite Surveyor: Lunar probe Atlas: Rocket Titan: Rocket Saturn V: Rocket Nova: Rocket Boosters: Strap on Mercury: 1 man spacecraft Gemini: 2 man spacecraft Apollo: 3 man spacecraft Jupiter: 4 man spacecraft XMS-2: Mini shuttle Eagle: Lunar module Cricket: Lunar module Kicker a: Booster Kicker b: Booster EVA suits: Extra vehicular activity suits The following space programs, both historical and proposed, are available for the Soviets: Sputnik: Earth satellite Cosmos: Lunar/planetary satellite Luna: Lunar probe A-series: Rocket Proton: Rocket N-1: Rocket Vulkon: Rocket Boosters: Additional Stage for above Rockets Vostok: 1 man spacecraft Voskhod: 2 man spacecraft Soyuz: 3 man spacecraft Kvartet: 4 man spacecraft Lapot: Mini shuttle Duet Lunar module Razvedchik Lunar module Kicker a: Booster Kicker b: Booster Kicker c: Booster EVA suits: Extra vehicular activity suits the constraints in the game. It takes successful launches to gain prestige and prestige to guarantee funding. If the opposing space program keeps garnering all the \"firsts\" in the space race, the player is likely to be removed as director of his/her respective space program. So, there is always this tension between being first and being safe. Fortunately, one can keep tabs on the opposing program by accessing the CIA or KGB buildings respectively. As in real life, however, the intelligence supplied is not always reliable. Sometimes it may be dead on, while at others it can be pure fiction. The player will never really know until the game is over. allows gamers to select certain aspects of a mission and lock them into place so that one need only view missions which utilize these aspects — a very useful feature considering the 300 possible combinations of missions, We Seven Astronaut training begins by recruiting the seven original astronauts (if playing the historical roster game) and then, after a turn, taking them out of basic training and placing them into specialized training. Each astronaut is rated in six categories: capsule handling, lunar module piloting, EVA, docking, endurance and mood. As the player micro-manages the astronaut facility, he/she will soon realize that After one has allocated all available resources, the turn comes to an end and Buzz himself enters the picture. He'll give players a good idea of how they're doing in the overall picture. If space permits, the final version will include digitized vocal advice in the same manner as the digital Chuck Yeager in Electronic Arts' Chuck Yeager Air Combat. FCIUNILOR Soviet Spaceport December 1992 Page 9 "


"Sneak Preview PAD 1 W TYPES38 12 DAYS A OK BEST Next turn, everything revs up again launch will see a brief mission sumFUTURE MISSIONS with a news brief from either \"Carter CONTINUE mary and be given the choice of Walkrite\" or \"Svetlana Izvestia\" setHISTORICAL MANNED LUNAR LANDING whether or not to launch. Once the ting the stage. This is where players launch sequence is initiated, the find out about random events in the player will be transferred to the congame such as funding cutbacks, trol room where one main monitor breakthroughs in R&D and astronaut and four smaller ones display the training accidents. mission using actual NASA video If missions are scheduled for this footage, conditionally executed season, the player has one final based upon the selected mission. chance to scrub a mission before the Each phase of the mission is descheduled liftoff. Otherwise, the turn picted and failure may occur at any is played out much like the sequence time during a mission. described above. Fortunately, playAccording to Bronner and ers will discover that both new funds LUNAB DEEOBBITIBUBN McCarty, one may land on the moon and new hardware appear at the beas early as 1964 and as late as 1976. ginning of each new season. If misPlanning the historic lunar landing Both cautioned, however, that it will sions were planned from the prebe very hard to beat the U.S. provious season, then the hardware will be waiting in the vehicle gram and its logical progression from the solo Mercury program, assembly building. through endurance and docking testing with two-manned Gemini Vehicle assembly is where the player assembles the various program, to the lunar flybys, orbits and finally, the lunar landing components of a mission. Although one may have a manned in the three man Apollo program. Yet, they insist that there is orbital mission, the player may choose to substitute a Gemini nothing stopping anyone from researching the Nova rocket and capsule atop of a Titan rocket with Jupiter spacecraft first and creating an boosters for the historic first E VEHICLE ASSEMBLY alternate history. manned orbital, instead of the default Mercury capsule atop the AtLAUNCH PAD: The Eagle Has Landed MISSION: APOLLO I las rocket. One time I ran out of HIST. MANNED LUNAR LANDING The gameplay in Buzz Aldrin's Saturn V rockets and substituted a CREW THREE PEOPLE Race Into Space is a blend of the Nova rocket, which saved the mismicro-management to be found in sion. MAXIMUM PAYLOAD: 3200 CURRENT PAYLORD: 3100 Paragon's Millennium and the strateIt is here, along with mission gic level of management encountered MISSION HARDWARE planning, that one may play out SELECT PAVLOADS AND BOOSTER in Impressions Air Bucks. Although missions in a variation-on-a-theme PRIMARY AFOLLO34% the game is detailed and historical, it manner of actual historical events. KICKER: NONE 0x0 does not require the tactical manipuFor instance, in mission planning, LIMEAGLE 8sx 1 lation of Virgin's Shuttle. one may decide that the direct as PAVLORD: NONE ... 0x0 Since the game is turn-based, it is cent mission is safer in a particular ROCKET SATURNUS season than the historic lunar landEXIT possible to e-mail saved games to SCRUB friends. Devious gamers will note, ing mission. Also, the player may however, that both players would Assembling the Apollo 11 mission hardware wish to have a joint lunar landing have the ability to play ahead into the mission waiting on his/her other next turn and see what the other optwo pads in the event that the direct ascent mission proves to be a ponent is doing. So, the multi-player option (at the same computer) failure. I landed my astronauts on the moon in a joint mission in may prove the most logical. this manner when my historical lunar mission ended in disaster. If the requisite hardware is not available for a mission, the mission Making The Headlines may be scrubbed from the vehicle assembly building. However, Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space has several groundbreaking feathe player will have to schedule another mission from mission tures. The graphical user interface is well-implemented and explanning which will not take effect until the next season. tremely intuitive. The NASA footage is nicely rendered in VGA After assembling the hardware for and there is enough variety in the each mission, the player needs to MISSION SCHEDULE ASSIGN footage to keep the visuals interestvisit mission control to schedule ing for quite awhile. Of course, each launch. Upon exiting the vehiSCHEDULE DOLINGRADED MISSION compact disk storage would allow cle assembly building, one sees MANNED LUNAR ORBITAL LM TESTI the designers to include even more small animations of rockets being BUSHING PENALTYE COST: 6MB such vintage video and sound, and moved out to the launch pads. Up to DOWNGRADE PENALTY PRESTIGE Fritz Bonner has mentioned that this three launches may be assigned or SCHEDULE: ORIGINAL MISSION is a definite possibility. Space histoscrubbed. Also, the player may deHIST. MANNED LUNAR LANDING rians can only hope. cide to downgrade a mission if it looks to be unsafe. For instance, one BUSHING PENALTY COSTE 3MB DOWNGRADE PENALTV: NO PENALTY Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space might need to cut out the docking SCHEDULE ORIGINAL MISSION should serve as the \"launch vehicle\" phase of a manned orbital mission. DIRECT ASCENT LUNAR LANDING for multi-media games and may do All Systems Go for historic simulations of its kind, RUSHING PENALTY: COST OME what Sputnik-I did for the space DOWNGRADE PENALTY. NO PENALTY Upon returning to a new season, race. cow players with missions ready to Scheduling launches for the season Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"Can Furballs Really Fly? WEPOLAM21211_ Neapon:dark ar Puntul Guru RODUCE here's only one way to find out. Jump into Wing Commander, the game series that defined interactive entertainment on the PC. You're whisked to the front lines and left in the middle of an intergalactic brawl with a bunch of flea-bitten, battle-scarred felines from Kilrah. And the cats are ready to rumble! You'll launch into more than 160 dogfight-filled missions, first as a scared rookie pilot assigned to the carrier Tiger's Claw, later as a combat-hardened veteran fighting to save his reputation. And you'd better be good, because the action intensifies, the opposition stiffens, and the stakes climb with each victory. 25 DOO BOBB BUND Tidi: WING WIDGL connais comnDÉ Wenzano ' WIDGY comNA DI COMMANDER EWING DONE be 3-D Space Combat Simulator Word The 3-0 Space Combat Simulator Klar -The 3-D Space Combat Simulator Y SPECIAL ORDEELLIONS SECRET IISSIONS RUSADE V SPECIA OPERATION ORIGIN SECRET LISSIONS ORIGIN TRT ORIGIN HORIGIN Look for SNES & Amiga versions this fall/winter WING COMMANDER WING COMMANDER II Game of the Year: Game of the Year: Computer Gaming World and OMNI Magazine Video Game & Computer Entertainment Best Action Game of the Year: Best Sound Effects and Speech: Chicago Tribune, Game Players Computer Game Review Now available at your favorite software retailer on all popular MS-DOS formats including CD-ROM! conOD HE TEKNE Call 1-800-999-4939 HEFUR Wing Commander, Secret Missions, Special Operations, Vengeance of the Kilrathi and the distinctive ORIGIN logo are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. We Create Worlds is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. for MC/VISA We create worlds orders Circle Reader Service #116 "


"CGW's 6th Annual politan 1ping Buide This year's Holiday Buying Guide is dedicated to our celebrative readers whether they're snowbound or beach bound, religious, agnostic or atheist. This list is designed to provide as many screenshots and descriptions of upcoming games as space will allow. Our hope is that our readers can circle the interesting titles and pass this article along to their personal Santa, Father Christmas, sugar daddy, parents, spouse or significant other. As has been the tradition with the Holiday Buying Guide, most of the products covered should be on the shelves by the time this issue hits the stands, but some are sure to miss their expected ship dates. Our editorial staff has tried to be extra careful about the products in this year's guide and hope to have a better batting average than in the last couple of years. Also, since we have not seen all of these games in their final form, mention in the guide does not equal a complete recommendation. Nevertheless, we hope you find these pages to be both interesting and useful in preparing for the holiday season. A-Train Construction Set: Gamers who want to keep their strategy on the right track will be able to expand the basic A-Train set-up and place hills, fields, houses, water, apartments, stadiums, skyscrapers, trains and track, but it does not allow players to actually edit the trains and redraw them like SimLife players can edit life-forms. The add-on To My Master Strategist $900 million in order to get their fiscal steam up faster, but does not allow players to edit the basic economic model of the original game. (Maxis, IBM, $34.95) Aero Biz: As president and CEO of an airline company, the player chooses between one scenario (1963-1995) where the player leads his/her company through a transition in technology that we all lived through or another scenario (1983-2015) where the player leads the company to look toward the future. Although the game has the same types of investment decisions, marketing decisions, and management decisions as one would find in Air Bucks or Railroad Tycoon, having the routes limited to 22 cities provides for a more focused, but limited, game. Gamers essentially handle negotiations and set budgets on a quarterly basis, rather than running the operations where the meter is continually licking as in Railroad Tycoon or Air Bucks. Even with those limitations, however, AeroBiz stands as one of the deepest strategy games we've seen on a dedicated game machine. (Koei, SNES, $74.95) Air Bucks: A multi-player (1-4) game of airline entrepreneurship, Air Bucks allows each gamer to found, build and operate each pamer to found. build and op his/her own commercial airline from the pioneering days of passenger airline service to the present. Air Bucks is sometimes called Runway Tycoon because of its similarity to Railroad Tycoon, but the emphasis in the airline game is on operating the best airline airline oame is on oner: and customizing the operating parameters without getting into hostile takeovers and building peripheral industries. Players get landing rights, plan air routes, purchase planes, configure aircraft interiors, set fares and customer service level, maintain fleets and establish advertising strategies as they try to create and operate the number one airline in the world. (Impressions, IBM, $59.95) Chess, but the setting in this latest version of the computer gamer's ultimate showcase chess set is a battle against alien conquerors. The animation sequences and beginning Al levels should please the most helpless novice, while the library of over 300,000 moves and the advanced Al levels should engage even the most proficient expert. (Interplay, IBM, $49.95) Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space: See the sneak preview on page 8 of this issue for more information on this product. (Interplay, IBM, $69.95) Castles 2: Castles 2 may well be the game many wargamers were looking for in the original Castles. Now, castle construction is a task which is better integrated into the overall strategy for running a feudal kingdom. The game has much more of an emphasis on conquest and empire building without sacrificing the storyline elements and \"random events\" that many gamers liked in the original Castles. Indeed, the stories have been enhanced with ambient video. The economic and diplomatic models have become much more integral to the game and tactical considerations include the necessity of designing castles to secure conBoeing Inc. SEATS 550st FUEL RANK E RANGE 8560ML PRICE $140000K B747 lans-umbaJet. heayiig trafficked Battle Chess 4000: It probably wouldn't be a good thing to play this game with Chewbacca from Star Wars. He might find it amusing, for a while, to watch the 3-D rendered animation derived from clay models, but he certainly wouldn't be interested in losing to the grandmaster levels of Al which underpin the game. The animation features the same types of hilarious death scenes which were used in the original Battle routes. CASA $12056 20K Aero Biz A-Train Construction Set Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"ROADTRACK Insends GRAND PRIX UNLIMITED Enter the Exciting Grand Prix Unlimited Track Design Contest Sponsored by Road&Track and Computer Gaming World ACCOLADE 1. WIN A COMPLETE AUTO SOUND SYSTEM! | To order Road & Track Presents Grand Prix Unlimited, visit your favorite software retailer, or call 1-800-245-7744. Here's a fantastic chance for you Formula One race fans to win a complete auto sound system or one of 31 other great prizes* during the first ever Road & Track Presents Grand Prix Unlimited Track Design Contest. Grand Prix Unlimited is the incredibly authentic IBM PC racing game from Accolade-the world's #1 publisher of driving simulationsso the judges from Road & Track and Computer Gaming World will be expecting your best design. Use the Unlimited Architect to create a track with straightaways, curves, chicanes, tunnels, pit-stops, hills, buildings...the only limit is your own creativity. Then test your design by racing one of the five authentic Formula One cars through pelting rain, swirling mist or blazing sun. Hurry and send in your entry today. Your winning design could earn you a sensational auto sound system. To enter, Using the Grand Prix Unlimited computer game, design a track with a start and finish, a minimum of 75 tiles and a maximum of 100 tiles Export you design to a floppy disk and mail, along with your completed entry form to: GHAND PRIX UNLIMITED TRACK DESIGN CONTEST. PO Box 1946, Cupertino, CA 195015-1946. Note: Entries will not be returned, and must be postmarked no later than November 30, 1992. Winners will be contacted by January 31, 1993. For complete official rules, send a stamped, sell-addressed envelope to GPU Rules, P.O. Box 1946, Cupertino, CA 95015:1946. Grand Prize: a complete Pioneer auto sound system (approx. retail value $2,000): 2nd Prize (0); a radar detector (approx. retail Value $400), 3rd Prize (10): a collection of 5 greal Accolade games (approx. retail value $300), 4th Prize (20); a one-year subscription to Road & Track and Computer Gaming World magazines (approx retail value $40). Prizes are non-transferrable and subject to change depending on availability and state restrictions. Applicable taxes on prizes are the responsibility of winners. OFFICIAL ENTRY FORM Road & Track and Computer Gaming World present: The Grand Prix Unlimited Track Design Contest Name Address City State/Zip Daytime Phone HECOL DE The best in entertainment software. ROAD & TRACK COMPUTER Road&Track is a registered trademark of Hachette Magazines, Inc., used under license by Accolado, Inc. GAMING WORLD Grand Prix Unlimited is a trademark of Accolade, Inc. Circle Reader Service #159 "


"A z oilala Anjou3 Albion 3 Burgundy 3 Happiness? Tin totalitat dels vir 1s WEE 2013 980 9822 200 bed Costa) role of a Repair Man and attempts to repair the entire contraption by traversing a labyAttack complete rinth of rooms, filled with Rube Goldberg style machines. The gamer tries to fix all of 003 Scout these contraptions in order to repair the entire machine. The animation and sound STOCHARD RELATIONS should add to the entertainment value. Relations Valois: 3 (Software Toolworks, IBM and Amiga, $39.95) The Pope Grand Slam Bridge 2.0: The standard bridge program from 1986 has now been upgraded in both appearance and play Castles 2 value. Grand Slam Bridge 2.0 offers a mouse-driven interface, VGA graphics and Battle Chess 4000 trol and improve the economy of conquered sound support to its strong tutorial and chalin CGW #99, but significant design changes territories. We also welcome the new siege lenging computer opponents. Players can have been made to reflect the criticisms and open battle systems. (Interplay, IBM, now use cue bids, four and five card majors, brought to bear in the preview. Power Poli$59.95) preemptive bids and a host of specialized tics is a point and click tour de force of Chessmaster 3000 Multimedia Pro: In orbidding conventions (Stayman, Gerber, Japresidential politics in the U.S. (Cineplay, der to make the most successful chess game coby Transfers and Blackwood). In addiIBM with Windows, $49.95) ever into a multimedia product, Software tion, gamers can type in the hands from newspaper and magazine columns in order Rampart: After playing Rampart, one Toolworks elected to provide audio instruction from the fictional Chessmaster pictured to solve bridge problems or replay famous wonders why the coin-op favorite ever lost on the box as well as a PRO edition which hands. Players can also save hands to disk its popularity. Two gamers at the same comoffers four hours of narration and instruc(with custom annotation) or print out indiputer (or two SNES players) compete in this tion from former World Champion Anatolyvidual or entire hands for later replay. (Elecgame of castle destruction and defense. One player bombards the castle from his warKarpov. Many gamers love the option of tronic Arts, IBM, $49.95) selecting their artificial opponents from a Megalomania: Knowledge is power in the lalu world of Megalomania. Players fight a seTue Opere che la Holding I 71302 ries of battles in a quasi-Powermonger type of environment, the lone player takes on the computerized opponents in power struggles which begin at caveman era technology (sticks and stones) and rise up to nuclear weapons. Fighting over a vast number of \"worlds,\" each of which becomes progressively more difficult, the charm of this game is undeniably imprinted in its cute graphics and animations. A real-time strategy game for persons who do not want to get mired Spaceward Ho! down in lots of details and documentation, Simlife Megalomania is another absorbing import library of artificial personalities. Another from the Powermonger school of game theships off-shore and the other defends by popular option is the War Room feature ory. (UbiSoft, IBM and Amiga, $49.95) trying to sink the warships and, at the end of which shows the move list and allows the each round, rebuild the damaged castle. The National Lampoon's Chess Meister 5 Bilgamer to observe the moves currently under player tries to accomplish the latter in such consideration by the artificial opponent. lion And 1: Rotoscoped live-action images (Software Toolworks, CD MPC, $99.95) cavort across the chessboard in this send-up a way that the randomly appearing Tetrisof all computer chess games. The chess sets esque pieces of castle wall are placed to Contraptions: Gamers can expect to see will have a medieval fantasy-role-playing expand the castle and allow room for more several logic puzzle games in the next few look and a bawdy medieval theme with cannon. (Electronic Arts, IBM and SNES, months. Contraptions may well be the first plenty of physical and scatological humor. $39.95 and $49.95) of this new generation of logic puzzles to hit imagine the king moving stately across the Sim Life: In many ways, Maxis has become the market. It certainly has the most coherboard and performing a pratfall a la Chevy the artificial life company. SimLife may well ent plot we've seen. The gamer takes on the Chase and that expresses the idea. Even the be the apex of their efforts to date. The game box and manual will carry out the irreverent theme. Underneath the earthy animated pranks, however, we are assured that the chess model will be competitive. (Spectrum HoloByte, IBM, $69.95) reorg Buch Power Politics: Donald Segretti, Richard Nixon's renouned dirty trickster from the 1972 U.S. Presidential campaign, would be proud of an election game that includes: dirty tricks, media buys, debates, fund raising, campaign appearances, random events and the ability to customize a half-dozen Power Politics variables within the game. The game was Rampart SNES already good when it was sneak previewed Catatat non Cute Intet i Este DI 11-20 Ginestormten On l ine G cuk elushi 37,367.774 Camin Press Conference Analyse Daria Van D Mer Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"sont War Room SPORTS EDSKINS FRASHDILLE alltid E ESTONIA A football fan's fantasy. NFL\" Video Pro\" is your ticket to the 50-yard line of 14 pro contests each week. The FIRST to capture pro football's fury at knee-level, using actual, fully-digitized B&W NFL video footage. Stalk the sidelines this season, barking out commands from a playbook of 150 offensive, defensive and special situation moves. Coach one key game or go where you're needed; lead all 28 NFL teams, if you're up to it. Digitized announcers and crowds react to your coaching decisions on every play. Take the winners to the post-season. Good luck... it's a long off-season for the losers. Seh Team names and logos are the registered trademarks of The NFL and of teams depicted. Ron Ross/NFL Photos, David Boss/NFL Photos, Al Messerschmidt/NFL Photos, VideoPro and Spirit of Discovery are trademarks of Park Place Productions. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd. 1992 Konami.  Park Place Productions. All rights reserved. Konami Game Hint & Tip Line: 1 (900) 896-HINT (4486). Calls are $.70 per minute. Touch tone phone required. Minors must have parental permission before calling. A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP Circle Reader Service #91 KONAMI  Spirit DISCOVERY fische Bergen Service M "


"allows players to create their own ecosystems, life-forms and mutations, all via very user-friendly sliders and definition windows. One can engender mythological creatures or create alien life-forms to invade custom ecosystems. Even though artificial life sounds very complicated, since it involves the creation of software-driven rules sets, the program helps players get their life-forms off the ground relatively painlessly, since establishing the genetic algorithms necessary to set an experiment in motion can be handled efficiently with its Utopia well-designed mouse-driven interface. (Maxis, Macintosh, $69.95) pick up an airline magazine where the crossword isn't, at least partially, filled in. TakeTake-A-Break Crossword: Anyone who A-Break Crossword provides Windows doubts the appeal of this product needs to users with 375 puzzles out of those very look at the number of crossword magazines magazines mentioned earlier and allows that hit the newstands every month or try to NAD 145610 puzzle solvers to try puzzles at three levels of difficulty; compete against other players by time and score; get On-Line Hints; enjoy cheese screens full of congratulatory animation sequences; and print out blank or partially completed puzzles to be completed away from the computer. (Dynamix, IBM, $49.95) Utopia: As previewed in CGW #98, this strategy game requires the player as planetary administrator to develop a solid economic base, high quality of life and fend off alien threats on 10 different planets which feature a variety of climates. The graphics look remarkably similar to Powermonger and the economic model is something of a cross between SimCity and Moonbase. (Konami, IBM and Amiga, $49.95) To My Favorite Arm Chair General Battles of Destiny: For those overhaul) and each turn equals a who have ever wondered what a week in game time. Players order company like QQP could do forces (on an operational level) with a game like Empire, here is from point-to-point (base to base). an answer. While the similarities In addition, economics and logiswill be obvious, the differences tics are all factored into the combat are numerous and striking, inand movement results in a detailed cluding: modem play (with (but manageable) fashion. Finally, \"easy to email\" files for PBEM the game even includes a special fans), a campaign game and a PBEM feature for serious warmap maker. Perhaps most imand the Perfect General (with a hint of gamers that want to campaign portantly, Battles of Destiny's shining eleSSG's Warlords thrown in), this strategy against real, rather than artificial, intelliment is the diversity of unit types and their game puts players in the land of Cascatia (a i g ence. (Strategic Simulations, Inc., IBM, interactions. Plenty of features makes this a randomly-generated map for each cam$79.95) definite \"must play\" for fans of Empire and paign game), a fantasy world where knights, Great Naval Battles in the North Atlanother games of futuristic world conquest. monsters and wizards have combined to tic: Imagine Silent Service Il meets Kri(QQP, IBM, $59.95) form powerful armies in an attempt to rule egsmarine. The truth is that Great Naval Carriers at War Editor: This scenario through conquest. The game comes with Battles in the North Atlantic has something creation kit features SSG's latest invention modem and PBEM features, as well as a of the look and feel of the former (except (the one which caused the eight-month decampaign game and almost a dozen individthat all of the digitized ships are seen lay in the release of Carriers at War), War ual scenarios, to provide enough variables through binoculaurs rather than a periscope Room. Here, players can actually change or to keep even the most jaded wargamer inand they look more detailed than they did in create artificial intelligence routines and trigued for a long time to come. (QQP, IBM, the earlier game) and the strategy of the \"plans\" for the computer opponents to use, $59.95) latter (except that one is continually making including contingency plans! Players can Gary Grigsby's Pacific War: It is certainly real-time game-time decisions rather than create their own ships and airplanes (alabout time that prolific wargame designer giving orders in distinct phases). The tactithough they will also have to create new Gary Grigsby received title billing in one of cal scope of this simulation will really apgraphics in another program like Deluxe his games. As implied in the title. this game peal to miniatures gamers who enjoyed the Paint to accomplish this), too. (Strategic Sicis Gary's magnum opus, covering all of is Gary's General Quarter's rules, as well as Jane s Studies Group, IBM, no price) WWII in the Pacific Theater of Operations. Fighting Ships aficionados who will really Conquered Kingdoms: A fine blend of It uses a modified Second Front system loms: A fine blend of It uses a modified Second Front system enjoy seeing those deck diagrams come to play mechanics between The Lost Admiral (although it has actually undergone a major life in full-color animation. In addition, frustrated admirals will enjoy the campaign SINera Mats Wom Product Law UOTTEET antry til Tank in pir Tramp COSIDE 2 o e Dete Cal rece. BETHLE T I dan IDOL RAM CHOLL come out Battles of Destiny Great Naval Battles Conquered Kingdoms Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"NAOME IS WHERE TINE HEART STOPS. MOVING CAN BE SUCH A HARROWING EXPERIENCE. ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU'RE THE SOLE INHERITOR OF THE BLOODCURDLING WINTHROP HOUSE. LUCKY YOU. FOR THE PAST 400 YEARS, YOUR EVIL ANCESTORS HAVE BEEN PLANNING A HOUSEWARMING PARTY JUST FOR YOU. AND IF THEY HAVE IT THEIR WAY, THIS IS ONE PARTY YOU WON'T BE LEAVING. IN THIS PIECE OF UNREAL ESTATE, YOU'LL EXPLORE UP TO 400 TERROR-RIDDEN ROOMS IN A DESPERATE STRUGGLE TO STAY ALIVE. YOU'LL ENCOUNTER PUZZLES, MAGICAL ITEMS, AND FORBIDDEN BOOKS. AND YOU'LL MEET THE HIDEOUS HOSTS WHO KNOW WHAT EVIL FORCES ARE BEHIND THIS NIGHTMARE. CAN YOU TAKE THE TENSION? WILL YOUR MAGIC COMBAT SKILLS WORK AGAINST LOATHSOME GARGOYLES OR DEATH LEECHES? Actual Screen Shots May Vary WILL YOUR NEW HOUSE DRIVE YOU COMPLETELY INSANE? ALL YOU KNOW IS THAT TIME IS RUNNING OUT. THE HEAVENS ARE ALIGNING. AND THERE'S A LOT OF HOUSECLEANING TO BE DONE. THE LEGACY: REALM OF TERROR\" FROM MICROPROSE. PROOF THAT THERE'S NO PLACE LIKE HOME. AT LEAST NOT IN THIS WORLD. ISPINE-TINGLING GRAPHICS WILL TURN YOU CHALK-WHITE WITH HORROR! HAIR-RAISING COMBAT WITH GROTESQUE CREATURES! STUPEFYING STUMPERS IN SURREAL ROOMS! To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY. (Mon Fri.. 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST.) Or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software. Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. D-10  Hunt Valley. MD 21030-2245 Name Address City State AAG MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE  1992 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Circle Reader Service #104 "


"GAME MAP PHASE SEP 1989 FORCE ALLOCATIONS AXIS PLAVER es 20 2 L EELEST ALLAVETLE FOR REOPEOVRENT High Command Scenario Editor option which requires logistics, strategy and dedication (one can literally play for weeks using the campaign game). (Strategic Simulations, Inc., $69.95) High Command Scenario Editor: This scenario editor allows players to get into the formulae and data bases to create their own historical and hypothetical WWII scenarios. For every enthusiast on the subject or dedicated High Command fan who cannot get enough of the game or wants to be a computer game designer, this is the tool that can Valka FIN D circumvent the enemy's resource advantage and, eventually, conquer his territory. O PATRIOT Historical purists will have difficulty suspending disbelief with some of the mechanics of this game, just as they did with DIE DEEG L'Empereur, but Koei's games tend to be very well play-balanced and extremely challenging, so wargamers will have to decide for themselves whether they are at liberty to purchase it or willing to let it die on the shelf. (Koei, IBM, $59.95) Line in the Sand: Previewed on page 142 of this issue, Line in the Sand is faithful conversion of the TSR boardgame which features the 1991 Persian Gulf Conflict. Patriot (Strategic Simulations, Inc., IBM, $39.95) with surface invasions. Unfortunately, Pacific Islands: A Pacific atoll takes its toll gamers who played the sequel never seemed in this casual wargame sequel to Team Yanto be able to reach the point in the program kee. See the review of Team Yankee and where those surface battles could take place. Pacific Islands on page 174 of this issue. In Star Legions, the unattainable is now (Readysoft, IBM and Amiga, $49.95) attainable. The planetary invasions are not only accessible in this game, they are the Patriot: Named after the successful missile heart and soul of this game. Further, experiused during the Gulf Conflict of 1991, Paenced gamers can torque up the competition triot is Three-Sixty's command simulation until they reach a level they're comfortable of modern land warfare. Designed by war (or uncomfortable) with. (Mindcraft, IBM, game experts from boardgame company $59.95) GDW, the game features new innovations a like variable (gamer-defined) zones of control, as well as windowed command structures that let gamers page through unit after unit in tremendous detail. (Three-Sixty Pacific, IBM, $69.95) Siege: The Dogs of War: More fun than pouring boiling oil over one's enemies is this expansion disk for Mindcraft's Siege. With the expansion disk, wargamers can play head-to-head over their modems, beStar Legions siege six new castles, challenge 24 new scenarios, command new monsters (with Task Force 1942: Not only were the naval new abilities) and tangle with a brand new battles in the Pacific Theater a different ball computer opponent. (Mindcraft, IBM, of wax than those in the North Atlantic $29.95) (primarily due to the use of air power), but Spaceward, Ho! for Windows: If n ya'all MicroProse has elected to take a different wanna' tame some wild planets and shoot approach with this game (and its expected down some 'ornery space hombres, this cute sequel) than SSI took in Great Naval Battles cowboys-in-space game of strategic conin the North Atlantic. Where the latter uses quest is what ya'all been hankerin' fer. MSdigitized images, the former will move DOS gamers will find it convenient to think ships faster via polygon-filled technology. of this game as Reach for the Stars with a We are assured that ships will not look as humorous cowboy theme and Mac-like indetailed as the on-screen miniatures of terface. Macintosh gamers have probably GNBNA. but are told that the ships will already heard about this relatively obscure perform more realistically. In addition, (by DOS standards), but exciting multiplayer game. Both the old Macintosh game a . (sold by independent Mac publisher, Delta Tau) and the new Windows version support network play, same console multi-player games (hot seated) and solitaire play against several computer opponents. (New World, IBM with Windows, $59.95) Star Legions: Once upon a time in a galaxy far too similar to ours, there was a popular sequel to a best-selling game. The best-sellCENZE UNIL, MEXIT 1120 ing game featured starship-to-starship com Puson AVERTINO bat in outer space and the sequel was supposed to allow captains of those very Grigsby's Pacific Wars same starships to be able to conquer planets Anna EE V for Victory: Velikiye Luki make it happen. While they're at it, gamers who have not upgraded to High Command v1.I should get their free upgrade (available to all registered users) and enjoy the improved artificial opponent, as well as the changes to the way ships and planes destroy ground units. (Colorado Computer Creations, IBM, $24.95) Liberty or Death!: The American Revolutionary slogan takes on new life in the latest challenge from Koei. Just like earlier Koei games, players must marshal economic, diplomatic and military forces in order to Task Force 1942 Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"They're Not Even In Our League. SSON Sb. Down to 31 Snixi  Hi every detol from unpredictable ball bounces, diving tackles and audibles, to NFL draft, trades, Introducing a new football dynasty. NFL from Konami. It Time Play and digitized does more than out-class the competition. It gives you depth, gridiron sounds. detail and authentic NFL action that's in a league by itself. * NFL features all 28 league teams, plus bigger rosters than any other game.  Only NFL has real-time play action with fluid, life-like player animation. Not clumsy and stiff like the competition.  Only NFL gives you 10 player attributes plus 6 vital statistics for every player, more than John Madden II or Mike Ditka Ultimate Football. Only NFL can call 22 different penalties.  Use the Playbook to execute your game plan. Or create and practice your own offensive and defensive plays, choosing from 72 variables with millions of combinations. Play pre-season games, run a training camp, or play an entire Super Bowl season with divisional, NFC and AFC playoffs. Instant replay with VCR interface, and TV 1/50/58. 1/50/50.0 broadcast style scoring updates from around the NFL Available Spring 1992 for MS-DOS. <Extensive statistics including halftime and end-ofgame scoring summaries, end-of-game team and player stats, plus season stats for each player Season Arerage Bengals 18/88/4.8 10/263/20.9. 0.899 B/B Rushing (o/Yds/Ave) Passing No Yas/AVE Passin (Corp/Atts). Completion X . .. Punting No/Yds/ava) Tumbles No/Lost).... Intercepted **** Sacked ... . 1st Dorns ... Net Yards . ... Touchdowns ****** Extra Points***** reld Goals N/Atts) Penalties (No/Yds) ... Total Score **... Total Plays ********* Time of Possession **** Total Yards.. . . 1/2 ANS 3528 San Diego CHARGERS SEAHAWKS BEARS BUCCANEERS LIONS, Team names and logos and the registered trademarks of the NFL and teams depicted MIKE DITKA ULTIMATE FOOTBALL is a trademark of Accolade JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL and EASN are trademarks of Electronic Arts. Konami is a registered trademark of Korum Co, Ltd 1992 Konami. All Rights Reserved Play Speed Stop View Rewind Frame: Na Pos Helcht Welcht Birthdate Exp 30 ASW203 MG15s Intelligence 177 Speed Agility Endurance Position RB Tackline Helcht Su Blooking Welcht 213 Catching Birthdate 1/25/57 Throwing Zyperience as Kicking Cancel injuries FAGLES CIANTS Sere SPORTS UPDATE KONAMI Circle Reader Service #92 "


"players will have to contend with lots more variables in terms of realistic weather than players of the North Atlantic game. Task Force 1942 will focus on the campaign for Guadalcanal. (MicroProse, IBM, $69.95) V for Victory: Utah Beach: Believed by many Macintosh owners to have been the best wargame in 1992, Vis for Victory: Utah Beach is finally available for MS-DOS gamers. See the CGW article on the Macintosh version of the game for more details (#94, p. 86). (Three-Sixty Pacific, IBM and Macintosh, $69.95) V for Victory: Velikiye Luki: Using the acclaimed V is for Victory system, the latest release will allow wargamers to command either side during the classic Eastern Front battle that raged from the winter of 1942 through the winter of 1943 between Leningrad and Moscow. This is not an expansion disk, but a completely new game with an artificial opponent expressly designed for the problems to be encountered during this historical conflict. (Three-Sixty Pacific, IBM and Macintosh, $69.95) wat te To My Knight In +5 Arnar Challenge of the Five Realms: Based on an original story by Traveller (the people and paper role-playing system) creator Marc Miller, Challenge of the Five Realms is a CRPG where the player's character is confronted by a menace from another dimension and must defend his homeland by, essentially, drawing together the five realms of the beyond the adventures in the boxed set. game's title. Since one discovers even beCharacter disadvantages, villains with perhe game sonality, a fascinating method of character aims were once one realm, the interaction, crisp animated combat sechallenge is to create a character (warrior, quences and clever plots make the game a dered what it would be like to be a su hero. (Hero Software, IBM, $59.95) hear the maitre d' of game designers calling out such a challenge for any gamers who are willing to brave the continent of Hestor, a land mass equivalent to 3,000 computer screens which has, in turn, seven cities which zoom out to provide another 10,000 screens each for the gamer's party to explore. The design team set out to create the largest and most complex CRPG ever and they may well have done so. The player, as Captain Gustavus of the Imperial Tormishan, can assemble a party of eight from 32 potential player characters (complete with physical, mental and emotional statistics) and has the potential of running into 128 migrating NPCs (with full physical, mental and emotional statistics) and about 400 citizens in each city (all following a daily timeline, much like that to be found in the Ultima series). Even the magic is detailed, since it is divided into five ascending categories (Hedge Wizardry, Elementalism, Daemonology, Spiritualism and Magick), each with its own alchemical recipes and rituals. Finally, everything the party does, including combat, is affected by the personalities of the characters. (Gametek, IBM, $79.95) Gemfire: When the Kingdom of Ishmeria was being terrorized by a fire dragon, a battle ensued in which several magical beings were transmogrified into cold gems. The King of Ishmeria set the seven stones into a crown which he called Gemfire. Naturally, the crown possessed magical powers equivalent to those beings and all was well as long as the king was a good king. Then, King Eselred entered the picture and a war ensued in which the stones were separated from the crown. Now that Eselred is dead, it is the player's job to restore those stones to the crown and does this sound familiar?) 2.CONTROL MODESOFTENENTENCERE VITER2 OOK BODY clever personality quiz character generator that will be able to bring together diverse kingdoms. New features include: the ability to customize the look of one's character (using the game's paint program, importing scanned photographs or selecting from default faces); option to choose from three different styles of combat (quick, descriptive or interactive); and the PAL option which allows members of the party to act as distinct computer-controlled personalities. (MicroPlay, IBM, $59.95) Champions: Fighting breathlessly against the dreaded Beta Plague, a fiendish supervillain that has caused this much anticipated game to be much delayed, the superhero design team at Hero Software may have to hire Marvel Comics' Damage Control, the famous team of insurance adjusters and crisis managers, in order to handle gamer complaints in case they don't ship this Christmas. The game has everything serious comic fans could want from a spreadsheet style character generator that makes creating characters a breeze and an easy-to-use editor for creating that essential hero look to the promise of future add-on adventures so that one's character can live HAIN MENU Champions Crusaders of the Dark Savant: David Bradley's merger of fantasy and sciencefiction (begun in Bane of the Cosmic Forge) continues in the seventh installment in the famous Wizardry series. Bane players will be able to start the game from any one of the three possible endings to that episode and new players have a special starting position for novices. As Bradley continues to massage the role-playing system, skills are becoming more and more important for the party (swimming in particular for some of the dungeons in the game). Further, the reputation of the party among different races can affect the type and quality of information received and the likelihood of an alliance between the party and other NPCs. We also think that the experience of having the player's party competing against computer-controlled parties should be extremely interesting. Computer gamers will also appreciate the fact that Crusaders of the Dark Savant uses a maximum of 6.5 MB (including all saved games) on the hard drive. (Sir-Tech, IBM, $79.95) Daemonsgate: \"Party of eight, daemon bait, your CRPG is ready!» We can almost Izar I Jan. Laakshine 2 Londre Harend in Eselred MESELELER 0406 73 364.60 296 59 EQE ATEIT fron ZALOMFE Sinoded Tantra BIETETRAR-TOOD IS Gem Fire Daemonsgate Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"It makes J-8s cry and MiGs fighting mad. IUMI No jet fighter frustrates enemy planes more easily than the incredible Harrier Jump Jet. That's because the Harrier can baffle opponents with sudden The Harrier Strike Fighter In Explosive Front Line Action mid-air stops. It takes off and lands vertically. It hovers. It even flies in reverse. Take full control of the world's most unique strike fighter and tear through ultra-realistic battle theaters in Hong Kong or the Falklands. Face ruthless opponents along front lines. Actual screen shown. Land in secret hides. Perform wild ski jump-assisted take-offs. And fly action-packed missions To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon.Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST on fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive Dept. D10. Hunt Valley. MD 21030-2245 with a friend as wingman via modem. Name: Jump Jet from MicroProse, Jump into the cockpit today, Address: City: State Zip: _ Telephone: AAB 1992 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Your enemies will hate you Actual screens may vary. for it. MICROPROSE To order, visit your favorite ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE retailer or call 1-800-879-PLAY. SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #105 "


"Jewels Ponders Stones WAXWCH the worlds of both games, but will find that they have different strengths and weaknesses in each game world and that there is yet another quest (almost half the size of JAHE Clouds) to reward them for their success. FC (New World, IBM, $69.95) ELKE Paladin 2: \"Have Sword Will Travel» should be emblazoned on the hilt of the ilala player character in this tactical-combat level role-playing game. The player takes on the role of Brandon, a young would-be paladin Clouds of Xeen who must succeed in 20 pre-built scenarios Spellcraft reunite the kingdom. This is done in typical to prove himself and win his knighthood. Koci fashion using a menu-driven iconSimilar to Breach, players command a band attain his official appointment as Captain based interface. There are fewer options that must fight over a variety of terrain and and get ready for the next adventure. (Strathan in most Koei games, but the icons against a wide spectrum of villains in a tegic Simulations, Inc., IBM, $59.95) (derived from the cartridge versions of the fantasy environment. Every activity in the fantasy environment. Every activity in the The Summoning: The Summoning: A 3-D, isometric dungame) are not very intuitive and take some game from spell-casting and movement to geon romp for a single character. For more getting used to. Fortunately, it looks like a combat is handled via an easy point and information, see the Taking A Peek column good introduction to the special type of roleclick interface. Finally, one of the most in this issue. (SSI, IBM, $59.95) playing to be found in these games. (Koei, popular features of most of the games develIBM, $49.95) Waxworks: Anyone who touches the exoped by Omnitrend (whether published by Omnitrend, Mindcraft or Impressions ) is aw vrahom the scenario builder. In Paladin 2, the scenario builder looks like the easiest to use ever. (Impressions, IBM, $59.95) BUMS Spellcraft: Aspects of Valor: Wizards, warlocks and witches take note. This roleplaying/action gaming hybrid offers the most extensive magic system we've ever seen in a game. 56 ingredients combine in an unlimited number of combinations to HEND HAVE THE DATA. create 100 spells of varying effect and quality. Magic users will hop back and forth between planes of existance as they seek out ingredients and spell recipies in both the real Spelljammer: Pirates of Realmspace world and in the planes of an alternate diWaxworks Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen: Using mension. With the proper supplies, players the same basic point and click icon-based enter their workshop to experiment with enter their workshop to experiment hibits in Uncle Boris' very special wax muCRPG engine as Might & Magic III. Clouds their ingredients, searching for the combiseum will find themselves transported into of Xeen introduces a fascinating new villain nations that generate the most powerful the historical era being depicted. This, of in the evil Lord Xeen. It also uses animated spell. Then, with spellbook in hand, they course, can be very disconcerting when one full-screen characters and digitized speech venture forth into realms teaming with finds oneself trapped in an Egyptian lomb, to provide more cinematic transitions and nasties and battling with them in real-time. for instance. This game, developed by Horenhance the pacing of the game. In perhaps. Of course, the 50+ hours of game time all rorSoft for Accolade, uses the basic Elvira one of the boldest design concepts in leads up to a battle with the Ultimate Evil Il engine, except it has gone back to gross CRPGs to date, Jon van Caneghem conWizard Dude. (ASCIIware, IBM, $59.95) Wizard Dude. (ASCIlware, IBM, $59.95) hit points rather than using the Runequest ceived Xeen as a two-tiered world: the Spelljammer: Pirates of Realmspace: style of discreet hit points for each limb or world of brightness to be found in Clouds section of the anatomy. The player takes on Take the atmospheric sailing vessels of and the world of darkness to be found in the Edgar Rice Burroughs' John Carter of Mars the role of a loyal nephew who has to solve sequel. Gamers who have both Clouds and complete with its romantic view of age of the mystery of why his Uncle Boris' body is its upcoming sequel on their hard drives will sail style combat, add the capacity to sail i missing from the grave. A diabolical twin, find that they can, not only, travel between through space and mix it well with the A Gypsy magic and macabre time travel add vanced Dungeons and Dragons system and to the mix. (Accolade, IBM, $59.95) universe. That is the recipe for the Spelljam(11 LANDER THE GR mer series. SSI's first foray into the Spelljammer universe is Pirates of Realmspace, an adventure where the player's character commands a mercenary crew of ING: 90% 12 and travels from planet to planet in search of the slave base where the evil ARROUS: 30 BOLTS: 30 Neogi keep their human cargo. Naturally, the character will face lesser pirate ships, potential mutiny from his/her own crew and alien monsters (who attack in analogous manners to the traditional AD&D bestiaries) along the way. Then, once the Neogi's slave base is found, it is the player's job to Paladin 2 Crusaders of the Dark Savant destroy the flagship of these space pirates, TIME: 01:59:30 OUES: 35 PITAL: 95% HEALTH: 100% E COME: TIELLE: 90% <3 DETECT: 50% SEDILIG: 90% 32 Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"Hell hath no fury like the wrath of a woman scorned. LURE OF THE Temptress DARZ is Dr fede llin Join the King's army in a perilous mission to free the people of Turnvale and restore peace to the land. Explore your surroundings as you unravel the mystery behind the Temptress and her diabolical plots. Your fate is decided when you fall in battle you become a prisoner of the Temptress and her evil Skorl warriors. in the world of Virtual Theatre, other characters take on a life of their own. You never know what may happen.. oegin to take in Obviously... smoky torch. Sie walls... the p Slowly, you open your eyes in the dim light and begin to take in your surroundings. The rough stone walls... the filthy straw.mattress under a flickering, smoky torch.. the barred window and massive oak door. Obviously, this isn't the guest suite. The peaceludland of Turnvale has been seized by the enchantress Selena... and so, it seems, have you. Enter the world of Virtual Theatre, an innovative new graphic adventure system where fantasy_becomes reality and characters take on a life of their own. You assume the role of Diermot, an unlikely hero caught up in a web of sorcery and intrigue. Match your wits against the cruel Temptress and her monstrous creatures, the savage Skorl. Just who is this mysterious Selenaand what is she after? The answer to these questions lie hidden in Lure of the Temptress. KONAMI Lure of the Temptress and Virtual Theatre are trademarks of Virgin Games.  1992 Virgin Games.  1992 Revolution Software Ltd. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co. Ltd.  1992 Konami. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #93 REVOLUTION sheatre "


"Amazon Guardians of Eden: As previewed in issue #98, this campy adventure takes the episodal adventures of early TV and the Saturday afternoon movie serials as its inspiration in creating a story built of self-contained scenarios that end with \"spine-tingling\" cliff-hangers. As in previous Access adventures, Amazon makes extensive To My Adventurous One There is a penalty involved in seeking such clues, but the clues are layered (a la Elvira's acid-laced hints in Elvira II) and do not give the game away. Travel is handled via a delightful map of the London of the 1890s that functions similar to the map in Rise of the Dragon. Interior locales are handled via a modified SCUMM-style interface (instead of the icon-based menus of the present [  D .10 Challenge of the 5 Realms Amazon Guardians of Eden use of digitized images for its backgrounds, digitized video footage of live actors for its characters, and a speech track in addition to a nice jungle-rhythms score. The story is, of course, set in the lush South American jungles and can easily be compared to a \"B\" LucasArts products, EA has opted for the original one word commands, placed on wooden drawers). Finally, the game uses a journal as a device for auto-notetaking a la The Magic Candle to make it easy for gamers to keep track of the story so far.\" All in all, the Jack the Ripper-style mystery looks like an intriguing entry into the genre. (Electronic Arts, IBM, $69.95) as well as watching it, whenever puzzles are solved and choices are made. The wellcasted voice talent certainly adds a new dimension to the gaming experience. (Dynamix, IBM and Sega CD-ROM, $69.95) Inspector Gadget: Go, go gadget adventurers! The fiendish Dr. Claw and his M.A.D. minions have made accelerating the pollution of the earth into their numer one priority. Naturally, it is up to young sleuths (ages 8-14) to put an end to his schemes. Players will trot around the globe looking for clues and using inductive skills while tracking down the baddies. The design team has worked closely with animation studio DIC and is using digitized images from the cartoon series as the on-screen characters. The game is simple enough to serve as a great introduction to interactive adventures for both children and those adults who enjoy the humor because they think of Gadget as a cross between Maxwell Smart and Doc Brown from Back to the Future. (Azeroth, IBM, Mac, $59.95) King's Quest VI: Heir Today, Gone Tomorrow: In the latest and most lavish adventure in Sierra's flagship series, young Prince Alexander is in search of Cassima, his love, whom he must find before she marries the evil Vizier of the Land of the Green Isles (aka Fantasy Plot #2). Its book of techno-wizardry lists an opening sequence featuring 3-D animation rendered by Chronos (the special effects team behind Lawnmower Man and Batman Returns) and a soundtrack featuring a new love ballad, expected to be promoted as a single on Top expected to be promoted as a single on Top 40 radio. The design team has refined Sierra's work with rotoscoping and scanning background scenes from other art media. The result is exceptional. In addition to the flash, this quest appears as if it will have the most challenge of any of the more recent King's Quest games, with multiple endings and more than the average complement of interesting puzzles. (Sierra, IBM, $79.95) The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes: Gamers who would know to look for Mycroft Holmes at the Diogenes Club should enjoy the flavor of Electronic Arts' first foray into the graphic adventure category, The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes. The adventure features a rich use of Holmes trivia and attempts to reward the gamer for keeping the game afoot in true Sherlock fashion. When one is stuck, one turns to one's smarter brother and receives clues. Kings Quest VI: Heir Today, Gone Tomorrow Romancing The Stone. The puzzles are very involved and some are real-time, but frustrated adventures can access the tiered online hints to help them along. (Access. IBM. $69.95) The Adventures of Willy Beamish CDROM: The exuberant animated adventure becomes even more like a truly interactive cartoon in the CD-ROM version of the game. Now, gamers can toggle off the written dialogue and listen to the story unfold, Koshan Conspiracy Quest For Glory III: The Wages of War: The dark spectre of war hovers over the land of Tarna, a world visually inspired by ancient Egyptian and deep African civilizations, and guess who must step in to stop it. One can either import his or her character from previous Quests or begin anew as a thief, magic user or fighter. The combat system has been enhanced to offer unique my OXIEIRI 2000 e) a 2 Inspector Gadget Quest for Glory 111 Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"All right. So maybe there is one flight simulator more thrilling than F-15 Strike Eagle II. Alteca's Prome Revolutionary New Air Combat Action Jet Fighter Raturns in MICROPROSE Introducing F-15 Strike Eagle III! So blow the dust off your flight helmet and climb aboard the F-15 Strike Eagle ill! We're sure it will be the most thrilling flight simulator you'll ever pilot. Look for exciting MicroProse flight simulator games at your nearest computer software retailer. MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE How could we possibly surpass the non-stop action of F-15 II? For starters, we've introduced a revolutionary new visual system. A system that creates dogfighting so realistic you'll wish you were wearing a G-suit. We've designed incredible new photorealistic starting and ending screens to surround you in the complete Strike Eagle experience. And we've created modern high-tech opponents as ruthless as those real F-15 pilots face. But, of course, the real test for any great flight simulator is how fun it is. And what could be more fun than blasting a friend out of the sky in our new head-to-head combat mode? Or flying with a friend in our pilot/weapons officer mode? Or flying alongside each other in our sensational two-plane mode? We enhanced the gameplay of the F-15 to challenge even the most experienced pilots, too. But if you're not experienced, don't worry. Because we also worked to ensure that the easy-to-learn qualities of the F-15 and F-15 II remained intact, as well. SERIOUSLY FUN SOFT STARE To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY (Mon. Fri., 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST) or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive Dept. D10  Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name Address City State UP AAE O 1992 MicroProse Software. Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Available For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #106 "


"Decrate I Go Consum TO liilor ELADICK U Violin N VEntory Omai Tuled TO mouc walk Close GIVELSET Un Ve y a hedge The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes and features an unheard of two compacte peast Wadow Help disks full of gory animations. We've seen Ex Oprache Speak the sights and the incredible sounds but we've yet to see a playable game, so the details of its gameplay will have to remain a mystery. What we do know is that this product will be the showpiece item on this year's list of CD-ROM titles. (Virgin, IBM CD-ROM, $99.99) Shadowgate For Windows: The best-selling Macintosh adventure will come to the Windows environment this holiday season. This fantasy/horror game combines the obTU Shadowgate for Windows choice quiz. Gamers who have played the people and paper game, 221B Baker Street, are likely to find themselves feeling very comfortable with the game mechanics in this game. This new version adds some much needed features — fast-forward and rewind buttons — that make fact gathering and fact checking much easier. (ICOM Walk acrossifloor Simulations, IBM CD-ROM, Mac CDLOOK Talk to 2 ENDE ROM, $69.95) Open Close options for each character type and conversations have an interesting twist, allowing the player to give NPCs information as well as receive it. Multiple solutions to puzzles based upon a character's attributes and several different story endings promise to make this one of the very few truly replayable adventures on the shelves. (Sierra, IBM, $69.95) Push Pull Rex Nebular and the Cosmic Gender Benders redeticka end tartar baadrillinell PER Spell INI te nel lelle FOY Iceladas TN (levitati Spellcasting 301 Rex Nebular and the Cosmic Gender Benders: MicroProse's first launch into the universe of graphic adventures will put players into the boots of space stud, Rex Nebular. Originally scripted by Steve Meretzky (see Spellcasting 301 below) and feshed out by a stand up comic/script writer, this promises to be a bawdy romp in its Naughy mode and a goofy, though still suggestive, game when played on the Nice setting. It will feature rotoscoped animation, hand-painted backgrounds, sprite scaling motion, digitized speech and other gee-whiz flash that will ensure its competitveness in the graphic adventure arena. (MicroProse, IBM, $69.95) The Seventh Guest: Virgin's long-awaited multi-media gothic horror story should fisuld fi nally make it to the CD-ROM owner's home this holiday season. The game is set in a haunted mansion rendered in 3-D Studio The Ancient Art of War in the Skies: Though designed in the spirit of the Ancient Art of War line, this is definitely the most action-intensive game in the series. Players direct bombers and fighters in the air war over the battlefields of the first world war. As players make successful bomber ject-oriented puzzles typical of early graphic adventures with a combat, weapon and armor system reminiscent of a typical role-playing game. The new version will offer fresh '90s graphics and, obviously, a slightly modified interface. (ICOM Simulations, IBM w/Windows, $49.95) Sherlock Holmes, CD II: In another digitized visit to 221B Baker Street, the sequel Sherlock Holmes, CD II to ICOM's interactive murder mystery game will offer three more scenarios for Spellcasting 301: Spring Break: Some would say that Ernie Eaglebeak never gets a break, but the third installment of Steve Meretzky's sophomoric series will prove them wrong. Spring Break will find Ernie packing up his spell book, loading up the cooler, and heading to the beaches of Fort Naughtytail. One can be certain that Meretsky's campy wit will slash out at everything associated with the average collegian's yearly migration to the coasts and one can be even more certain that it will all be covSeventh Guest ered with gratuitous flesh galore. Indeed, there's a slice of digitized cheesecake to sleuths to solve. As in the original, this game head off every chapter. As per the Legend is composed of 90 minutes of digitized, style, Spring Break will offer more than the quarter-screen video running near 15average number of tough puzzles and sev11 frames-per second. The player wades eral graphic conundrums. (Legend, IBM, through these well-acted video clips, gath$59.95) ering clues to build a case, and bringing the case before a judge who gives a multiple attacks on critical enemy structures and lines, the war on the ground will reflect their efforts. Dogfights are hot and fast action sequences resembling those in Wings of Fury and bomber sequences are exercises in strategy and timing, viewed from the bomb bay window. As in the previous To The Best Joystick Jocky Ever Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"APETIKA UNAMAR WHAT'S THE PEMBUTN UN TOT rigid winter winds swept over an already chilled Gotham City. Random street crimes were running at an all-time high, despite the holidays. Down below, in the city's frozen sewers, Oswald Cobblepot, known as The Penguin, planned more mayhem and schemed the takeover of the frightened metropolis. Gotham City is in trouble. A desperate call to Batman goes up. Partner with Batman to salvage Gotham City from The Penguin's cold-hearted plot. Guide him in swift, life-like moves from dark alleys to rooftops in vivid scenes straight from the hit movie, \"Batman Returns! Control his combat style, and help conduct relentless interrogations of The Penguin's gang. Use the Batcave computer to input clues, analyze evidence, and review enemy bios. You're in charge of weapons and utilities, too. Save Gotham City. and put The Penguin on ice. HE'LL BE AT THE CAN AT HIDICHT. RETURN CS4 KONAMI Spirit le face in BATMAN and all related elements are the property of DC Comics Inc.  1992 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd. 1992 Konami Spirit of Discovery is a trademark of Park Place Productions.  1992 Park Place Productions. All rights reserved. Konami Game Hint a Tip Line: 1 (900) 896-HINT (4486). Calls are $ 70 per minute. Touch tone phone required. Minors must have parental permission before calling KONAMI Spirit A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP V DISCOVERY Circle Reader Service #94 "


"HTU THE 1103 LE PCAVERI 000EL PCAVCO 2 000000 PLAVEN 000000 PLAN 12 000000 MASCORE ORS000 3-D Pinball Ancient Art of War in the Skies AAW games, Skies offers dozens of scenarios to challenge and a scenario editor allowing one to create one's own madness. (MicroProse, IBM, $59.95) Batman Returns: Using digitized sets from the lavish Tim Burton film, but not the likenesses of the acting talents or the plot from the popular film, the player maneuvers Batman through the crime venues of the Gotham City underworld. Batman does have to battle the Penguin, Catwoman and ing. Through the trials and tribulations of their efforts in the first 200+ levels that comprise the original and its add-on Oh No! More Lemmings! the Lemmings have found their homeland Lemmingland. Fortunately, through the course of natural selection, they have begun to speciate and differentiate into tribes with special skills. Thus, not only will the Lemmings climb. dig, build, and explode as in the original, but there are now: the Beach Lemmings that love to surf; the Sport Lemming that run and leap like pudgy, green headed Carl Lewis clones; the Polar Lemmings that ski; and the Circus Lemmings that have a penchant for Dark Queen and her renegade space troops. Princess Angelica and the player's pal Pimple have been kidnapped and only a runningjumping-scrolling attack on the dark hordes will bring them home. (Software Toolworks, Amiga, IBM, $39.95) Creepers: A spiritual descendent of Lemmings, this strategy/action puzzler challenges players to try to save little inchworms by altering the terrain over which they creep or by moving them along with various objects (fans, tennis racquets, trampolines, etc.), eventually bringing them to the end of the level where they turn into butterflies. How sweet! (Psygnosis, Amiga, IBM, $49.99) Dragon's Lair 3: Don Bluth's daffy hero, Dirk Daring, continues his exploits beyond the laser-disk in this third series of animated action-puzzles. Daphne the perennial damsel-in-distress, has been accosted by the Mordread the evil witch and Dirk must dust off his trusty two-handed sword and wade into the sea of animated adventure. The gamer knows what to expect more ingenious animation and yet even more hilarious ways for Dirk to be squashed, shocked, impaled, immolated, pounded and pulverized. (Ready Soft, Amiga, IBM, Mac, Atari ST, $59.95) Introducing The Humans: Silliness abounds in this action/strategy puzzler inspired by Lemmings. The setting is a prehistoric, volcanic landscape populated with dinosaurs and a goofy new race of beings called — the humans. The humans live in a hostile world, but they are not defenseless. They have an opposable thumb (the dinosaurs laugh!), a moderately complex brain (that they are all too proud of), and each other. Survival requires that the humans use their modest collection of skills in cooperation. Spear chucking, pole-vaulting, torch wielding, rope climbing, wheel riding and the magic of the witch doctor must all be used in combination to get the humans safely through another day. Their human, all too human, antics are as endearing as a lemming's any day. (Game Tek, IBM, $39.95) Lemmings: Who knows how many green headed furries will lose their lives after Macintosh owners get hold of this converget hold of this conversion of a much loved hit? Climbers, diggers, miners, builders, even suicidal spontaneous combusters will serve the player as he or she assigns the Lemmings their one small part in a larger (dare we say giant?) strategy that may save their little souls. Over 100 fiendish levels of obstacles, traps and tricks will challenge the Lemming commander. This is a truly original action/strategy game that has spawned a new gaming genre and is a natural for the Mac. (Psygnosis, Mac, $59.99) Lemmings II The Tribes: Oh, no! Yet even more and more Lemmings! This sequel to the all-too-cute action/strategy classic will be even more cute and more challengBatman Returns Dragon's Lair 3 Red Triangle Circus Gang, but the resemblances between game and film end there. Having the digitzed sets is extremely appropriate, however, because the concept of this game is putting the player in the role of director in choosing how Batman reacts to the situations in between the swinging, sliding, leaping and combat sequences. (Konami, IBM, $49.95) Battletoads: If one hasn't played the Nintendo version of this European action hit, here is the opportunity to control a militant reptile in his bid to rid the universe of the balloons. Players wil need an overall strategy for the game, as they must save enough of each tribe to face the final challenge requiring all their skills combined. (Psygnosis, IBM, $59.95) Shadow of the Beast III: Intense action and incredible graphics may find their way unAMMUDRABUHI LETETT Telitit tittel when AQUT 430 % TIME 3-5 HINSERITI Lemmings Macintosh Introducing the Humans Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"Before you play Special Forces, you'd better put on your game face. MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE When your drop-point is smack in the Special Forces from MicroProse. middle of fierce enemy forces, you'd FORCES Defeat is not an option. What you wear better dress for the occasion. is up to you. That's why, in Special Forces, you're equipped with high-powered rockets. Rapid-fire pistols. Rifles. Grenades. And whatever it takes to secure your objective quickly. SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Your objective? Today it could be rescuing a POW. Tomorrow, sabotage or cutting off enemy supply lines. To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon.-Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. But you can't do it all alone. So take along your 180 Lakefront Drive  Dept. D10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 pick of the military's elite commandos to help you. Name: Specialists who you'll have creating diversions, Address: sniping, setting off explosives, jumping enemies, State: and carrying out your master strategy. 1 Telephone: ( ) 1992 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. City: Zip: AAF Circle Reader Service #107 "


"Sad S ALE TRISTAN 0000 TRISTAN HESPINOSE 1911 5000 GALLE Rad 1 TEST TEE ships in the intense combat system. The sights and sounds are quite stunning; the game uses a refined fractal planet generator similar to that used in the Star Flight series, uses hand-painted images to depict the alien races, and has a strong musical score. (ACcolade, IBM, $59.95) Terminator 2029: When Dark Horse Comics does a graphic novelization, each page is crammed with exhaustive detail, particularly when the subject matter involves a dark future with cyberpunk edges where technolShadow of the Beast III ogy has gone awry or violent aliens from an der the tree of the Amiga owner this holiday inhuman society present a horrend season. Players battle a relentless onslaught threat. So, when Bethesda Softworks opof baddies as they parallax scroll their way through many levels of puzzles on their way to \"the ultimate challenge.\" A pumpin' musical score accompanies players the whole way through the game. (Psygnosis, Amiga, $59.99) Star Control II: Taking the original Star Control combat system and immersing it in a vast galaxy of exploration, alien communication and adventure (modeled after the zany aliens in the Starflight series), Star Control 2 creates a gaming hybrid that may please both the joystick jock and the advenTerminator 2029 ture gamer. Players battle the Ur-quan threat tioned Terminator 2029 from the comic by scouring the galaxy for mineral republisher, it is no wonder that they created sources, building ship components to add to an impressive dark blue palette in finely an impressive dark blue palette in finely their mother-ship, uniting alien races against detailed VGA graphics with plenty of pyrothe common enemy and battling enemy technic special effects to convey the hard hitting fast-paced violence of that epic. The perspective is first-person; the scrolling is fast; the tactics and strategy are as reminiscent of a simulation as of an action game; and the story is tied closely to the universe of the Terminator films. Colonel John Connor assigns the player to perform the first operational field test of a new prototype A.C.E. (Advanced Cybergenetic Exoskeleton) Assault Armor. The whole feel of the game is something like MechWarrior meets Terminator, except that the graphics are FLOOR SCORE LIVES HEALTH ANNO 9 much more lavish than the former's polygon-filled graphics and the latter's combination EGAWVGA pastiche. (Bethesda, IBM, Spear of Destiny $69.95) Tristan Pinball 3-D Pinball: This is one of a dozen or so products that Villa Crespo has added to their Coffee Break Series. While it doesn't have as strong of a physical model as Tristan (described below), it does offer a variety of machines to play, and it's cheap! (Villa Crespo, IBM, $12.95) Tristan Pinball: This excellent bumperbuster has plungeed into the MS-DOS world, to the delight of pinball wizards everywhere. The ball action is quite realistic and players may find themselves bumping their groins into their computer desks — to no avail (they'll have better luck jostlin' the machine with the space bar). The product only features one pinball machine but playonly ers will get plenty of coffee break action while waiting for the promised 8-Ball Deluxe first quarter 1993. This is definitely the best pinball game since David's Midnight Magic. (Amtex, IBM, $49.95, Mac, $59.95) UTID HORI Er Star Control II To My Main General Manager David Leadbetter's Greens: As tough as it is to compete with the look of and ease of play in Links 386 Pro or the customizability and connectivity in Jack Nicklaus Golf: Signature Edition (the connectivity, of course, with the Prodigy Network Golf Tour), MicroProse has actually found a new angle with which to approach golf games. In David Leadbetter's Greens, the design team has taken the teaching approach. David Leadbetter, a pro who teaches many of the pros, follows the player about the course and offers timely advice. In addition, the game features a full handicapping system and approximately 12 different ways to keep score lator in this 3-Space style game from Dynamix. All the players have been modeled and rotoscoped in 3-D and the game uses over 8,000 frames of animation to simulate the action. Front Page Sports Football is a game that tries to appeal to both statistics-based and arcade-oriented fans. Unlike most games which try to reach this artistic middle ground, FPSF allows players to create on-going career) leagues in several different configurations, rather than just being able to play one season (a la TV Sports Football). In such leagues, new players become available for drafting and older players decide to retire. Stat-oriented gamers will follow their players via 350 (including a realistic tournament option for up to four human players). We particularly like the hole-by-hole analysis of each player's performance in both statistics and graphics. (MicroProse, IBM and Amiga, $59.95) Front Page Sports Football: The war on the gridiron almost becomes a flight simuPage 30 Computer Gaming World "


"STEVE MERETZKYS SPEHIGASTING 301 blokeliikun, p y ), VGA 256-COLOR SPRING Hollow the sun and the scent of coconut oil straight to Fort Naughtytail where Ernie Eaglebeak parties hardy with his fraternity pals in this high energy seaside romp. Ernie is hoping to find sand in all the wrong places, but ends up battling a rival fraternity from back home in a series of zany beach contests complete with gorgeous babes, wet T shirts. mud wrestling and body surfing. Welcome to the Royal Infesta Hotel... VESA compatible Super VGA support. drnie must use his wits and a healthy dose of magic to save the honor of his fraternity. There's a lot to do, and the Ft. Naughtytail Police Dept is desperately trying to keep everyone from doing it! ...where you can relax after a day on the beach.. Richly detailed environment allows unlimited exploration. 256-color VGA! Stunning original art plus digitized \"Girls of Spring Break.\" ...or enjoy the finest in evening entertainment. WLEGEND  1992 Legend Entertainment Company Spellcasting 301. SPRING BREAK IS a trademark of Legend Entertainment Company ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Actual VGA graphios shown ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY 14200 Park Meadow Drive, Chantilly, VA 22021 Distributed by Accolade, Inc. To order, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-245-7744 Circle Reader Service #162 "


"starting on page 44 of this issue. (Electronic Arts, IBM, $49.95). MicroLeague Baseball 4.0: Along with digitized footage from actual major league games, MicroLeague Baseball 4.0 has another technological surprise: the capacity to download updated statistics on a weekly basis from the USA Today Sports Center. The game itself features accessories for creating one's own league and the company supports each product with a wide range of franchise history disks (with ten great teams from each major league franchise), GM/Owner disks Front Page Football to allow customized teams, season disks, all star disks, World Series disks statistical categories. They can even simuand stadium disks, as well as products to late game play and let the computer resolve help with player analysis and fantasy rotisthe games, if they want. More hands-on serie teams. In short, this is a thinking fan's would-be coaches can modify the 200 stock product with a heavy emphasis on strategy plays in the library or build them from and statistics. (Micro League, IBM, $49.95) scratch as in John Madden II. Further, the replay editor offers Stunt Island-style possiMicroLeague Football 2: Statistics-oribilities of recording action from nine differented football fans who have always wanted ent angles and assembling highlight films to see how they would perform as both from every game. (Dynamix, IBM, $69.95) coach and general manager of their favorite NFL team will get their chance in MiHockey League Simulator II: The original croLeague Football 2. Beyond being able to Hockey League Simulator, a product demake the kinds of coaching decisions to be signed to complement the original Wayne Vayne found in their fascinating MicroLeague found Gretzky Hockey by providing a means for Football 1.5: The Coach's Challenge Decreating one's own league and customizing mg luxe, MLF2 allows gamers to customize inxe teams, was a relatively simple text-based based the their leagues and teams, including a college product with no artificial intelligence. It draft. By providing a college disk with the draft. By pr simply kept track of what the gamer did and program, would-be GMs can test their draftdid quick calculations to resolve the games ing ability against that of their hometown which the gamer did not want to play and GM. Plus, the look of the game has been offered a cute little budget/attendance enhanced with digitized film footage, more model to provide a mini-game for Gretzky statistical categories, ability to customize players. In its current configuration, the deplaybooks for each team and capacity to sign team has introduced a tough Al to trade develop custom coaches. (MicroLeague, against, lots of user-defined options on how IBM $54.9 to get results (including integrating HLS II with Gretzky 3), a much stiffer budget model NFL Pro Football: Not to be confused with NI and the capacity to get league results almost NFL Video Pro, NFL Pro Football is an instantly. In fact, the new product is so action-strategy game developed by Distincbeefed-up that we can imagine a lot of \"Rotive Software. It is compared with John tisserie Hockey\" and \"Hockey Pool\" players Madden Football Il on page 44 of this issue. using this game as much or more than they (Konami, IBM, $49.95) use the remake of the classic. (Bethesda, NFL Video Pro: Anyone who has ever enIBM, $44.95) vied those sportscasters who sit at their John Madden Football II: The remake of desks in Sports Central, preparing their brief a classic, John Madden Football Il is comreports for half-time as they are surrounded pared and contrasted with NFL Pro Football by monitor after monitor of constant football action, should love this game. Not only can one view all 14 NFL games simultaneously while viewing digitized footage representing each game, but one can intervene on behalf of any given team at any given time and make the calls necessary to turn games around. Each of 28 teams has its own custom playbook, accessible to the gamer, and the gamer gets to be the ultimate head coach. Good calls are rewarded with film footage and digitized voice affirmation. Wins are rewarded with newspaper-style NFL Video Pro statistical summaries and a variety of MicroLeague Baseball 4.0 individual and team statistics. (Konami, IBM, $79.95) NHLPA Hockey '93: Not only does this remake use real player names of NHL players, but it has unique new features like: opportunity to involve the crowd in the game (a crowd meter allows gamers to know how much the crowd is in the game and how it is affecting one's players); ability to put goons ... er ... enforcers into the game to take out key players more statistics to be tabulated; an organist who plays all the cliche sound bytes; an battery-powered Insta-Save option; and more fight options provided. Naturally, the goalie's crease has been modified to reflect recent rules changes and, in a less than encouraging feature, NHLPA Hockey '93 became the first game to feature blood on the ice. Unfortunately, the game misconducts that are supposed to accompany such bloodlettings are not included with the violence. (Electronic Arts, Sega Genesis, $59.95) Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3: In addition to better graphics (256 color) and a 3/4 view of the players (for those who don't like to play from the overhead perspective), Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 offers more intuitive controls (like holding down longer on the mouse button when one wants to execute a slap shot), icon-based menu system, \"smarter\" artificial intelligence routines for nongamer-controlled players and better sound support. In addition, there is plenty of video glitz, like digitized footage of slapshots, referee calls and, of course, fights. WGH3 is smoother and more exciting to play than ever. (Bethesda, IBM, $59.95) 1231 cep telt SOFLUORKS Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"D U N EII The Building of A Dynasty MENTULUYTWNS Creats 9193 Atreides Trike. Only one house will prevail. MUSSILE TANI bMe areAER HOVE BETREAT OM Uredima IT 1918 Colt 300 (strap DE Control all aspects of combat and construction BUILD DISINI OS113s19 Select and build varieties of installations. Acquire valuable information from your Mentat. Conguer Arrakis this tall an your IBM PC! For more information, pricing and orders please call 800-VRG-IND7. Visa, Mastercard, American Express and checks accepted Westwood Distributed exclusively by SCI-FI EPIC OF ALL TIME! A SIMULATION OF THE BEST SELLING DUNE narko Dim Do Hon Airphy Tyco n m ins Corportion and licens g  Mua Siriun, Inc M nghi (EMCT v ersal Meciding. In 1984 Ding De Laurentii GAMES Code Reader Serie #152 "


"To My Pilot With The Fanciest Maneuvers ATAC: Players take on South American drug cartels as the leader of the United States's «War On Drugs\" in this combination simulation/strategy game. On a strategic level, players command a task force of F-22 flighter bombers, helicopters and 250 secret agents. As agents provide leads to the locations of important coca plantations, manufacturing facilities and warehouses, the player sends helicopters to confirm those locations in low-flying reconnaissance runs. Once the preliminaries are accomplished, the player takes the controls of an F-22 and personally buries the drug lords' infrastructure in the \"snow.\" (MicroProse, IBM, $59.95) GELSE 1. CAUSE GLA LE SL REPLAY Car & Driver Super VGA Air Warrior: In a fascinating experiment, the designers at Kesmai and the marketers at the GEnie network have asked Konami to distribute packaged versions of the impressive multi-player flight simulator, saw had significant improvements in the array of weaponry, as well as the way HUDs and cockpit displays were implemented including a fully-functional Forward Looking Infra-Red pod implementation for night vision through the HUD). Also, if the design team doesn't have to downsize the world from the beta, it is the most zine to enhance the fiction of providing the detailed world we've seen in a ultimate test track experience for car aficio. flight sim (including the most realistic sky nados. In fact, the main interface screen we've vicariously experienced through the looks like the table of contents of the magacomputer). (VICTOR zine and one can choose cars from these Falcon MC: The original ground-breaking contents or read actual reviews of the cars. combat simulation will come to the MacinThere is a delicious choice of quality matosh this holiday season to the delight of the chines including the Porsche 959, the Ferrari F-40, the Lotus Esprit Turbo, among other symbols of phallic virility. The test courses 2013 minut include the Monterey Raceway, un sie California's Pacific Coast Highway and the San Dimas Mall parking lot, among others. Of course, the game includes several viewing and replaying possibilities, as well as the ability to record an entire race for later view. This may be a good way to defer the disappointDEL ment of someone who was actually wishing for the real thing for F-15 Strike Eagle III the holidays. (Electronic Arts, IBM, $59.95) jet set. The program based on the 2.5 version of Falcon will offer Mac color, new misComanche: Maximum Overkill: In the sions, expanded weapon systems, a more past, helicopters were difficult to fly. This detailed cockpit, and a more realistically was an extremely reasonable price to pay, rendered flight model. Fill the void in your however, for their versatility and ability to fly NOE (nap of the earth). Now, if the flight stocking and fill the void in Macintosh flight sim software. (Spectrum HoloByte, Macinmodel used by NovaLogic in their new tosh, $69.95) helicopter simulation is anywhere close to as realistic as they claim it is, helicopters Jump Jet: Computer flight-jocks may jump are going to be easy to fly. In Comanche: straight up out ol their seats when they see Maximum Overkill, the design team has this product featuring the AV-8B Harrier provided would be computer pilots with strike fighter; the only active combat jet that some of the most exciting and fast-moving can take off and land vertically. Jump Jer is 3-D terrain to fly NOE that we can ever a high-profile state-of-the-art remake of remember. Frankly, the technology used Mindscape U.K.'s Amiga game of several in this simulation is some of the hottest in years ago. Pilots will fly the sorts of sorties the business (if not the hottest). The sceone would expect of this low flying craft narios may not be as realistic as they could frequent, short, fast-paced, ground attack be from an air support doctrinal standand close air support missions. It features a point, but they sure provide lots of excitement and plenty of challenge. Our editor doesn't fly many simulations (at least, in front of people), but we had to pull him away from this one. (NovaLogic, IBM, $69.95) $69.95) . F-15 Strike Eagle III: Versatile, violent and victorious. Those are the kinds of adjectives that should accompany this cutting edge flight simulator when it gets into simulation junkies' hands. In the aircraft, gamers can choose to serve as either pilot or Weapons System Officer (WSO). A major innovation enables gamers to either File 70 shot down have a modem buddy in the back seat or to challenge a friend in head-to-head compeSVGA Air Warrior tition. Also, even the beta version that we Group AK Fe m About REME ADQUI REME 4 Scouts Point 171000 ft Point 2: 108 Point 3 560 Ft Point 431565 Points 1500 + Pot 566 it Point 7 2006 11 Point 8 500 Ft Assignments New Group Alliance Group type Scout Aired Recon Botiber Ballon Zeppelin Cancel Heberoup LEL AN Hission Grid Red Baron Mission Builder OK1-04: BZ Air Warrior. Kesmai usually distributes its games via the GEnie network, but finds that some people don't enjoy spending all that time downloading a program. Now, would be pilots can purchase the latest build of the popular flight simulator with its gorgeous SVGA cockpit, install it like any other program and plug into immediate on-line action via their GEnie account. (Konami, IBM, no price) Car and Driver: As previewed in CGW #100, this test driving simulation uses a license obtained from Car and Driver magaJE SIWEPO 220 what do Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"Trade Up! The Game You Grew Up With Has Grown Up Too! 3:45 LERNE TE === == WINDOWS  version 22-2637 IBM PC version DEL == == => MONOPOLY ORIENTAL AVE CO TO JA DE LUX 20 PODGE 2. = 29ERE IBM PC version WINDOWS  version It's more mercenary than your lawyer, shrewder than your accountant, greedier than the IRS and tougher than your granny. Get ready for the most challenging game of Monopoly you've ever played with MONOPOLY DELUXE. Combining 90's technical knowhow with plenty of good oldfashioned fun, the bestselling board game of all time is back and better than ever with completely that keeps track of all previous moves and the ability to play by traditional or custom-designed rules. Enjoy the thrill and excitement of wheeling and dealing as you amass, or reluctantly part with, great fortunes buying and selling railroads, utilities and properties of all types. This game's a must for the library of any TRUE gamer or future real ERBARIERE estate tycoon! 1812 GAMES revamped levels of difficulty and greatly enhanced graphics for your computer! You'll get more deluxe for your bucks with dazzling animation of all ten official tokens, easy o s-pie interface, a game activity log MONOPOLY DELUXE with the ultimate easy-to-use point-ond dick interface will be available this fall in PC and WINDOWS versions WINDOWS version features all of the DELUXE features listed above plus the odded bonus of easier-to-use point-and-click interface. For more information, pricing and orders, please call 800-VRG-IN07. VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS ond checks accepted. and RICH UNCLE & design are registered trademarks of Tonko Corporation. Rich Undeo 1936, 1992 Porker Brothers. All rights reserved. Monopoly 1935, 1992 Parker Brothers, Inc., o division of Tonko Corporation. All rights reserved Licensed to Virgin Gomes, Inc 01992 Virgin Gomes, Inc Virgin iso registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ld, WINDOWS is o trademark of Microsoft Corporation MONOPOLY Return your authorized version of the original Monopoly computer game to a participating dealer and receive $10 off your purchase of Monopolye Deluxe! Circle Reader Service #153 "


"LINGO Become the World's Greatest Conqueror! 39 98 (11 TYTUOTETT 133 SITETETETTY OURE MOOP... Y PODCAST Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia, an untamed land of conquest & glory. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forest to your advantage as you battle across the Cascatian Realm, to become the reigning king. Just about the best strategy and tactics game you will ever play. NINE BEAUTIFUL SCENARIOS. A RANDOM MAP GENERATOR. UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH. 21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI). MODEM PLAY. COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY. RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS. SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS. Circle Reader Service #168 The \"Conquered Kingdoms\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines Amiga is a trademark of Commordore, "


"BATTLES ULETINY 20 QOP Conquer the world in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state of the art global conquest simulation. It's simple to play, but only a true master will reign in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Challenging Artifical Intelligence (9 levels of difficulty) Air, ground and naval combat 22 different units to construct Modem play  Over 20 beautiful worlds to conquer Complete player history Dynamic scoring system Campaign play Several dudes holistic gaming The \"Battles of Destiny\" computer game is IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  1992 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #123 "


"Exit LOO Stunt Island been included for duels and many rare, little used and experimental airplanes have been added to the flight roster. Two laps up for Red Baron Mission Builder. It's just what the players wanted and is worthy of the Pour Le Merite. (Dynamix, IBM, $29.95) Stunt Island: For the player who has ever wanted to fly a crop duster through a barn or a Mig 29 through a tight canyon, or for those who wanted to film such daring feats, X-Wing Fighter there's Stunt Island from Buena Vista (a tiny division of Disney). X-Wing Fighter: A short time in the future The player assumes the role of stunt pilot, in our very own galaxy, gamers will have director, film editor or a mixture of roles the opportunity to prove they are made of for a Hollywood production company. As the same heroic fiber as Luke Skywalker. the pilot, the player can compete in a Stunt Indeed, they will almost become competiPilot of the year contest, fly various stuntstive allies of the Star Wars protagonist as in front of the camera, or just explore the they serve in a different part of the conflict island setting. There are 40 different planes from our hero. Larry Holland's latest flight to try out, including an F-16, U2, F117 simulation is an outstanding use of comStealth Fighter, 747, Cessna 172 and others. puter technology to put gamers right in the As director, the player will build sets and midst of the action. Everything he learned scenery, position cameras, and choose the about coding campaign games (from type of stunt to be flown. And finally, as film SWOTL) and action games (from Their Fineditors, players will put together scintillatest lour') comes into play in this intriguing ing action shots using an editting deck that new product. See the Sneak Preview in may set the standard for future VCR feaCGW #99 for more information. (Lutures. (Buena Vista, IBM, $59.95) casArts, IBM, $79.95) hot, rock sound track to get the adrenaline pumping. (MicroProse, IBM, $69.95) Red Baron Mission Builder: For what is undoubtedly an 'A' flight simulator (even for non-flight sim buffs), the premise that more is better really applies in the case of this expansion disk. Featuring a powerful mission builder which allows players to create an endless array of flights with varying missions, paths, destinations, targets, formations and pilot qualities, other variables such as time of day and weather can also be factored into the player-generated designs. In addition to new missions limited only by one's imagination, several new aces have a Our Precious Children Love Mom & Dad Alphabit Blocks: Bananas the monkey and Jack (the one who resides in a cube and retired from running fast-food restaurants) provide hours of babysitting in this cute edutainment product for Windows from Sierra's Bright Star Technology subsidiary. The aforementioned characters not only teach the alphabet to children, but they also communicate the sounds of the letters and how to form their mouths in order to pronounce those sounds correctly. (Sierra, IBM with Windows, $69.95) Follow the Reader: Beach blanket bingo is not the goal when Mickey Mouse takes off for the beach for fun in the sun and provides reading lessons on the run (verbs in the surt!) for children from ages 4 to 7. in the sequel to Mickey's ABCs, children use a no-typing interface to put together animated stories about Mickey and the gang. Then, of little surprises, the sights and sounds include a talking alphabet (English or Spanish) and \"rubber stamps\" (with their own wacky sound effects). Who knows what kids will find under their own masterpieces when they erase them? One thing is for sure, it will be something else that is fun to color as they work with one of the broadest sound effects and voices bring the advencolor palettes and the most painting uree to life creating an atmosphere where OOIS that we have ever seen in a child's children want to learn to read. Children who paint program. (Broderbund, IBM, $49.95) read can even print out their own stories and The Manhole (New and Enhanced): pictures to read at a later time. (Walt Disney Imagine a hands-on Alice in Wonderland Computer Software, IBM, $49.95) where children uncover wild animated seIsland of Dr. Brain: As the doctor's new quences and bizarre discoveries with nearly lab assistant, the player journeys to the good every click of the mouse. When Cyan, a doctor's secret island in search of a special CD-Developer for Activision originally battery Naturally Dr Brain has set up a created The Mannoie, I was the very s series of security puzzles to prevent tresinteractive CD entertainment product to passers from entering his top-secret facility. ship. Adults and children alike were fasciFortunately for youthful gamers, this sequel nated with just now many layers or weir to the very successful Castle of Dr. Brain features an EncycloAlmanac TionaryOgraphy to help them with the many logic, matching, science puzzles to be encountered. Also, the game changes via a randomization sequence, so no one can expect any walk-throughs for this adventure. (Sierra, IBM, $49.95) Kid Pix: Santa's elves must have cousins at Broderbund. Clearly, if there were such a thing as a kid's wishlist for what could possibly make a paint program more fun, Kid Pix has found the recipe. Filled with plenty Island of Dr. Brain LAANA DDDDD Carmen USA Deluxe Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"THE ADVENTURES OF ONE BADVIKING EMDA Viraun. GAMES HE'S LIVING PROOF THAT THE GODS HAVE A SENSE OF HUMOR Here's what the reviewers are saying: FEATURES: \"Heimdall is constantly surprising and so huge it is going to be some time before you Choose from over 30 different characters with have exhausted the possibilities!\" varying RPG attributes \"A delightful combination of action and animation.\" Explore the mysterious realms of the \"The graphical content is never less than good and in many places it's stunning.\" Norseland as you solve puzzles guaranteed to live the life of the viking warrior Heimdall in the ultimate quest adventure as you pit keep you challenged for hours on end your brawn and brains against that evil dude Loke. Follow Heimdall through a series of Top-down scrolling isometric viewpoint misadventures on his action-packed crusade to save the world... and his reputation as Fluid animation and stunning graphics created one BAD Viking! by a team of world class animators FOR PRICING DEVELOPED BY AND ORDERS, PLEASE CALL 8-VRG-IN. DEDION LIMITED VISA, MASTERCARD, WWW2 AMERICAN EXPRESS AND CHECKS ACCEPTED. AVAILABLE IN SPRING OF 92! GAMES AMIGA SCREENSHOTS SHOWN. Heimdall is a trademark of Virgin Games, Inc. and Core Design, Ltd. 01992 Virgin Games, Inc. and Core Design, Ltd. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd Circle Reader Service #154 XIG "


"Tile Edit Goodies DOWSANCHES 1292 <?)? 63 8852 ? O Kid Pix ness and frivolity could be found in each segment of the product. Now, the creative CD comes packed with even more sounds and animated sequences to help a new era of gamer/player/discoverer experience the playful atmosphere. (Activision, IBM and CD-ROM, $49.95 and $59.95) Rodney's Fun House: Rodney Alan Greenblat's illustrations have been popular with parents and children alike for years. Now, the same colorful illustrations adorn a children's product that is both reminiscent of Activision's classic Little Computer People and Broderbund's The Playroom. Children will play memory games like Concentration, guessing games and counting games in a playful environment designed specifically for ages 3 to 6. (Activision, IBM and CD-ROM, $49.95 and $59.95) Swamp Gas: An alien scout has to discover all of the important states, cities and landmarks in the U.S. as part of the fiction underlying this geographical learning game. As a reward for answering geographical trivia questions, the player gets to unwind with three variations on classic action games in the Alien Arcade. The product has been available on Macintosh for some time, but should be out on MS-DOS machines before Christmas. (Inline Design, IBM and Macintosh, $49.95) Turbo Science: Played in an arena that looks vaguely reminiscent of the junkyard in the old Bill Cosby / Fat Albert cartoon show, Turbo Science is a race against opposing science teams and toward scientific knowledge. The game is designed for ages 9 to 14 and has enough clever cartoon graphics and impressively animated discoveries to keep most any budding Einstein enthralled. (Dynamix, IBM, $49.95) Where in the USA is Carmen Sandiego (Deluxe): One needn't be an opera lover nor a Southern Californian to know that Carmen Turbo Science Sandiego is the first word in making the lessons of how to learn enjoyable. The redcoated V.I.L.E. villianess is back in the U. S. of A. with enhancements to add even more entertainment value to what is a \"top engrossing\" (if not top grossing) product. While enlarged to an impressive 8 MB on the old hard disk, the inclusion of 50 topographic state maps, talking characters, original music, 3,000 new clues and more of those lovably, wacky animations makes Carmen the true star that she is. Catch Carmen for the holidays (if you can). (Broderbund, IBM, $79.95) Now if all that information doesn't fall on our readers' significant gift givers like an avalanche on an unwitting Alpine climber, we'll be surprised. It takes a lot of work to put that much information together and, the truth is, we wouldn't bother if we didn't have an ulterior motive ourselves. That is, we want to give a few hints to our significant gift givers, as well. Of course, now that we've confessed our wicked motives, we have another confession. There were a few products we wanted to mention, but we just couldn't figure out where to put them. So, in this case, we'll call them stocking stuffers. FLICKS! Film Review Library: Although this product is priced higher than one would expect of a stocking stuffer, we didn't know exactly where to put it. The product contains details of over 30,000 movies, mplete with colorful animated graphics and music written specifically for each film category. The product allows film buffs to Sort by numerous data fields and even has Screen Antics: Johnny Castaway: In the first of the story-telling screen savers, Johnny Castaway ends up having worse luck than the crew of the Minnow. He looks the wrong direction as a goofy aviator flies by: nearly has a run-in with the infamous Flying Dutchman; and always seems to catch junk instead of fish when he dips his hook into the water. Well, at least he gets to wine and dine a gorgeous mermaid in one sequence. The animation is delightful in this first effort from Jeff Tunnell Productions and this is definitely the most entertaining utility we've ever seen. (Dynamix, IBM, $34.95) Finally, here's the one stocking stuffer that no computer game loving stocking stuffer can afford to be without: Computer Gaming World: Twelve issues per year (of over 100 pages each) include: computer gaming news, views, gossip, hints, strategies, reviews and analysis. At $28.00 (for U.S. subscriptions), it's a bargain. CGW Johnny Castaway its own trivia game associated with the database. (Villa Crespo, IBM, $69.95) Kids & Computers: Our sister publication just hit the stands a couple of weeks ago. It is a hands-on, parent-oriented magazine de signed expressly to meet the needs of parents in the computer age. At $12 for a one year subscription (six issues), it's cheaper than a college textbook and might sure that a child eventually needs one. Happy Holidays Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"REALMS Your froops were victorious and report very few casualties DBENA   1000 WATUITS they are up to me  N , site ski feel strong DUOTU The King is dead. Long live the new King you. Endowed with the divine right to rule, your father bequeaths to you his Realm. Unfortunately, as your sphere of influence grows, so does the resentment from the rulers of neiglbouring Realms. Jealousy is such an ugly thing. The fragile peace has been shattered and war rages between the Realns. Now your brief reign has become a fight for survival. The neighboring Realms are growing in strength at your expense. Do you build lines of supplies to barter with them? Or do you build armies to battle with them? Each Realm vies to GAMES be the ultimate power. But there can only be one. Just make sure its yours. Enter the world of REALMS and you could control: OVER 125,000 SQUARE MILES OF FRACTALLYGENERATED LANDSCAPE 128 ARMIES, EACH A THOUSAND STRONG WITH DEFINABLE BATTLE FORMATIONS SIX DISTINCT HUMANOID RACES COUNTLESS FOLLOWERS AND THEIR MONEY  IN INNUMERABLE CITIES Created by the award-winning Graftgold development team, REALMS combines the intuitive playability of an arcade game with the depth of strategy usually found only in the most complex simulations. LOVE THY NEIGHBOR ? OR PUT HIM TO THE SWORD? THE CHOICE IS YOURS. DEVELOPED BY RAFT GOLD Creative Softw.to AMIGA SCREEN SHOTS Realms is a trademark of Virgin Games, Inc.  1991 Virgin Games, Inc. All rights reserved.  1991 Graftgold Ltd, Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. illustration by Dermot Power. SHOWN. FOR PRICING AND ORDERS, PLEASE CALL 800-VRG-INO7. VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS, AND CHECKS ACCEPTED. Circle Reader Service #156 "


"Course Design The Lay Of The Land Part Two Of A Series On Golf Course Design by Mark A. Willot If there is a single element that makes Accolade's Jack freeware courses out there, but from the courses available on Nicklaus Golf-Signature Edition (JNSE) stand out when the Accolade BBS that were designed for the original Jack compared to any other computer golf game, it is the fact Nicklaus Unlimited Golf and Course Design (JNUG) softthat the package includes a Course Design Module where one ware. That's almost 400 additional courses which include: can recreate a favorite golf course or design a dream course. mountain courses, seaside, linksland, parkland, desert When done, one can play it courses. alone, with computer opAnnamora Myself, I prefer to build my own landplots. ponents, with a circle of I sometimes start by envisioning a course in friends, or even distribute an area I'm intimately familiar with (like it nationwide through a Michigan, where I grew up, or the American loose network of BBSs that West, where I've lived the past fifteen years). specialize in supporting Other times, I may collect pictures from more JNSE golf. Some 100-plus exotic areas, like the South Seas. hobbyist-designed courses HOME are currently available on PORTE From there, I usually spend 2-4 hours buildAccolade's own BBS, and ing my plot with the easy-to-use terrain editor these run the gamut from found in the \"Edit Plot\" menu. From this AFL 12 79 meticulous recreations of menu, I can raise and lower hills, add water, DIN 2UNDO E M 2X 1740 famous courses to a recent shoreline, beach and even decorate the plot release of a course set on a The Alhambra landplot under construction. with native trees and foliage objects that I've planetoid in outer space. Building hills is as easy as simply outlining either borrowed or created. Since getting started in the area to be raised. While doing this, I rarely think in specifics any new activity always about the golf course I want to build. What I seems to be the tough part, do think about is variety: Are there promontories and beaches we're going to look at the first two steps usually associated along the shore? Do I have rolling hills, cliff sides, interesting with any golf course: \"acquiring\" the land on which little dips and valto build a course and laying in the course routing OPTIONS leys? Is there a the mix of holes. stream? Should TEXTF2 there be one? Why Unreal Estate not? The more interesting the land, There are two more-than-suitable ways to develop the easier it is to the land one will need in order to build an original create a good golf course. The first is simple: borrow it. course somewhere JNSE comes with two fully-developed landplots, on it. California Canyons and Louisiana Banks. When the option \"Create A New Course\" is selected from the 1466 EURRENT Since, in game 6972. EMBER terms, I have unDesign Module, JNSE prompts the would-be course ERRENT 71 ARSE money, architect to select from one of those. Ir, however, RAW para limited GANT California and Louisiana are not desireable, there is there is absolutely The JNSE Routing Screen. Routing is simply a matter of point-and-click. an ocean of landplots, objects, and backgrounds availno reason why my new golf course able in various BBS libraries. All the JNSE hobbyistshouldn't be set on designers I've met are honored when anyone borrows from the finest and most compelling land that I can imagine! their courses. So, architects with access to a modem can simply start their courses by borrowing/reworking someone By the way, that course landplot window encompasses else's landplot. almost 3,200,000 computer-simulated square yards. This is Since JNSE allows courses from its predecessor to be immore than enough to put in at least three tightly laid-out ported, not only can one borrow from the existing 100 JNSE courses or two loose ones. That is plenty of space to work when the electronic bulldozers arrive. 14 15 18 FURRENT Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"Course Design The Landplot Thickens: Alhambra comes in at over 6,800 yards, Pete Dye's real Kiawah Island course exceeds 7,700 yards, and the historic Laying The Course Track Merion comes in around 6,400. The routing of holes on a golf course is an art in itself. If the Length is not always an indicator of difficulty. The first architect's route is plain and uninteresting, the golfer's route hole at Jack Nicklaus' Castle Pines is a par-5 of over 640 will be so, as well. yards! But it plays sharply downhill, and in Colorado's rarefied atmosphere it is not uncommon for the It should come as no surAinampra game's strongest professionals to reach the prise that this is true of the green in two. computer course, too. But B F1 for every rule-of-thumb It is important to take elevation into that may exist about routconsideration. Very long uphill par 4's and ing, there's almost always a very short downhill par-5's might be best as fine real course that breaks par-5's and par-4's, respectively. the rule and breaks it suc— The game seems more enjoyable when cessfully. played downhill so that golfers can see where 102 Here, then, are some key they're going. Consider keeping uphill holes 230 ONEFITS ideas that the new designer and shots to a minimum. Though there are a can use when laying out # # ORO BANGET few other uphill shots, Alhambra only has that first track. For the purUNDO EXIT 20 one hole that plays uphill end-to-end. poses of comparison, l'ul The Landplot Object Screen. JNSE allows you — Hole direction is another interesting mention some real courses to place trees and other objects on your variable because it forces the golfer to play as well as my own fictional course landplot. with the wind coming from every which-way. Alhambra course. Some of the best courses in the world have no — Since the days when Old Tom Morris more than two successive created Muirfield, the most common course holes playing in the same arrangement has placed the first and 10th tees, direction before turning. and the 9th and 18th greens, near the clubhouse. — Most courses include This makes it easier for golfers to choose to play two par-3's and two paronly the front or back nine, or to stop at the 5's on each of the front and clubhouse for a break. It's not, however, a law, back nine. But, again, hisand many older courses may leave the 9th and tory provides variety: The 10th out in the fields. When I created the AlOld Course at St. Andrews hambra Hotel and Country Club design, I did only has one 3 and 5 per just that for the sole purpose of hinting that this nine holes; and some of was an older course. Jack Nicklaus' courses, inWhile we often think of courses as being cluding Sherwood CounThe landplot may be viewed from any par 72, there are certainly some fine par 70s, try Club, have three 3's and position on the course. 7ls, and 73s out there. And JNSE certainly three 5's on the back nine. allows you to create an all par-3 course, or any Par-3's usually don't other par-total you start or end a course. In the first instance, this is may desire. I let Albecause it doesn't give the golfer a chance to exerhambra stop at 71; cise a fully-powered drive to get warmed up. Paragain, just a small 3's are usually \"control\" shots. In the second, it's touch to indicate a because par-3's rarely offer the same degree of less-than-contempo challenge that one associates with the final hole. rary design. or the four typical par-5's, two are often Variety and balreachable in two strokes, and two tend to be reachance is critical. The able in three. Mackenzie, designer of Augusta, conventional wisdom tended to think of par-5's as \"par-4 1/2's\" and is that, for every right Alhambra Hole 18 tempted the golfer to shoot for the eagle. Alhambra dogleg, the course has one clearly reachable in two, one full-blown should contain a left RIATE PRAF 2 Dar three-shot par 5, and one which may be reached in dogleg. This is in The finished 18th green at Alhambra. two under the right conditions. tended to make the The JNSE Design Module can provide Getting the right mix of alternating par-3's, course a fair test for spectacular results. all instead of favor4's, and 5's is certainly a noble effort, and can add ing a golfer who may excel at drawing or fading shots. While greatly to the golfer's sense of variety. Alhambra my Alhambra course has four par-4 left doglegs and four par-4 has an unusual five consecutive par-4's. The course just right ones, think about this: Augusta National only has two seemed to fill out best that way. But those five holes are so right-hand dogs, the first and 18th. Great holes are always unique to themselves that in a year of play on both the JNUG great holes and seem to provide their own balance. and JNSE versions, not one gamer has ever commented on the unbroken string Championship courses tend to run at about 7,000 yards Rules are made to be broken. And it's your course, of in length. Usually, the older the course, the greater the likelicourse. See ya at the first tee. Cow hood that it runs short of that mark. While my fictional  December 1992 Page 43 "


"Review A One-On-One Match-Up EA's John Madden Football I and Konami's NFL Go Head-To-Head JOHN MADDEN FOOTBAH EN +  Malo KONAMI by Jason R. Brooks For the football aficioand what one should utilize at nado, the time has arTITLE: JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL II NFL any particular time. Forturived for \"couch po SYSTEM: MS-DOS MS-DOS nately, John Madden himself 0-2 tatoism» 0-2 # PLAYERS: (or \"couch is on the sidelines (or \"onPRICE: $49.95 $49.95 potatoeism\" if you hold PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts Konami line,\" at any rate) to offer ashigh political office). But DESIGNER: Robert Antonick and Distinctive Software sistance. The game manual John Madden let's face it, there are simSOUND CARD: Adlib/CoVox/Roland Adlib/Soundoffers succinct instructions, ply not enough games to Blaster/Roland but with the plethora of plays, GRAPHICS: EGAWGA EGANGA keep you glued to the set DISK SPACE: 1.2 MB 1.2 MB their actual impact must be for the entire season. Even PROTECTION Manual Look-Up Manual Look-Up determined by actual play in a after watching ESPN's practice or game mode. Overcoverage of the PFL (Polyall, the manuals are sufficient The Playbooks nesian Football League), there are still for the user already familiar with foottoo many hours available for social dis(Documentation) ball, and a novice may expect a long course, interaction with others and learning curve to understand the intrimere living JMF2 comes with no less than four cacies of actual formations. Luckily, there are two new computer manuals; a game manual plus two defootball simulations, each of which can fensive and one offensive playbooks. NFL sports a much slimmer set of safely carry one through an entire sea Each play is carefully diagrammed rules. While game mechanics and opson without having to talk to another with general strategic comments for tions are explained, the actual plays human being: EA's John Madden each type of formation (e.g. near, far, themselves can only be accessed durFootball II (JMF2) and Konami's goal line). While the diagrams are easy ing actual play-time. Perhaps this is NFL. Whether either one \"splits the to read and the name of each play yields because each team has a separate set of uprights\" or is thrown for a loss will be additional information, it is often diffi plays (although all teams share basic up to the gamer to decide. cult to determine the subtle differences plays). As may be said of JMF2, the Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"To CHALLENGE THE EMPIRE IN AN X-WING, YOU NEED DESIRE. BURNING DESIRE. STAR WARS Climb into the cockpit of an X-Wing and battle for freedom. The galaxy is being plundered by the Dark Side, and you are desperately needed by the Rebel Alliance. Take the controls of the X-Wing Starfighter—now! Experience the incredible realism of polygon graphics and bit-mapped special effects as you fly against deadly TIE Fighters and menacing Star Destroyers. Be swept along by the interactive musical score and digitized Star Wars movie sound effects. At last, a new generation of space combat technology to challenge the evil Empire. Destroy the Emperor's ultimate weapon and end his tyranny, Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-STARWARS New integration of polygon graphIcs and bitmapped special effects 17 different views from any of three cockpits Star Wars is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Ltd. All rights reserved. Used under authorization. X-Wing game 0 1992 LucasArts Entertainment Company. LucasArts is a trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company Advanced 3-D modeling of spacecraft TIE fighters' unique roar, one of many digitized movie sound effects Cinematic sequences Infamous characters LUCAS Aris JOIN THE REBEL ALLIANCE NOW Circle Reader Service #98 "


"Review The sound is adequate, that is, functional and easy to understand. It doesn't amaze one with digitized voices or a quasi-\"sound pack,\" but even so, it drops JMF2 for a big loss. ALL-MADDEN 00 playbooks are geared to a user who is Whistle blows — \"Unnecessary roughalready \"football-knowledgeable.\" In ness, fifteen yards!\" comparing the two programs, JMF2 NFL's graphics are much better depasses for a first down in this area. fined. The individual teams sport their Sadly, neither program can offer proper colors, and while the perspec\"real teams.\" JMF2 has 1990 teams by city IE ALL-TIMERS 00 and a number of \"dream teams,\" but both team and player names are missing. NFL offers properlynamed teams, but the players' names bear little resemblance to reality (although their statistics do reflect re1 ality). The lack of an overall \"player association\" with which to BALL ON 35 QTR 1 negotiate mandates 111 DOWN 20 14:54 this failing. Baseball has a \"Player's AssoJohn Madden Football 11 ciation\" which can sell such rights in one transaction; football would require individual deals with each and every player. Thus, one cannot expect to see \"real teams and players\" anytime soon. On the other hand, on-line users often trade teams which they have converted to a more accurate semblance of reality. LCDW olsu The Fundamentals of The Game (Mechanics) Game mechanics are more open to debate. JMF2 allows joystick, keyboard or mouse interfacing, while NFL limits itself to keyboard and joystick. For those who have grown to appreciate the fine-tuning available with mouse input, its lack in NFL is disappointing. Both programs offer weather conditions: sun, rain, snow. JMF2 reflects weather both play-wise and graphically, i.e. in snow conditions, the field is white. NFL merely reflects the weather conditions in terms of game play, i.e. the ability to pass and hold onto the ball. Given JMF2's marginal graphics, the reflection here is marginal at best. Besides the \"stock\" plays, both programs offer the user the ability to \"design-hisown\" playbook. Such an editor is relatively easy to access in either program, but JMF2 has a distinct advantage in \"match-ups.\" One can look at his players t and determine their strengths and weaknesses vis-a-vis the opposing team. A differential of \"+2\" or better illustrates domination, and the user may well have different playbooks in order to take maximum advantage of his player's personal strengths and weaknesses. nije Untud: 1+ NFL YS The Flash & The Crash (Graphics & Sound) Sound and graphics have become increasingly important. JMF2 has proTime Play on to go duced a state-of-the-art product — assuming that the year is 1989. But since JMF2 was released in 1992, the penalty flags are flying all over the field. The sound is inarticulate and incapable of being understood; after playDURABILITY: TUF IHSIDE Teams DLT ing with ALL-MADDEH MEAN GREEN various sound options, one will quickly opt for \"No Sound.\" But the graphics are even worse! The players look like squat ogres who have escaped from a Even dungeon quest, and bear a distinct re EXIT semblance to the crew inhabiting DURABILITY: Play: FIELD GOAL Grave Yardage. WINE Te ALL-TIMERS When they \"set,\" the players seem to squat John Madden Football 11 on one knee and never \"assume the positive does not offer the depth downfield tion.\" The football is oversized, and that JMF2 does, it is graphically more brings to mind an oblong medicine ball, pleasing. The players are smaller, but and the goalposts resemble something do resemble football players. \"First and held over from a shareware game. 0 1972 Play Execution (Game Play) Perhaps JMF2's greatest strength is John Madden himself. His \"on-line\" availability and analysis of \"what to call when\" yields an easy-to-follow tutorial in becoming an expert coach. Of course, one should avoid over-reliance on the computer-Madden — not because his advice is incorrect, but simply because the user will not mature into a first rank coach if he never makes his own decisions. As a play begins, one may view it in a \"single-frame\" advance simply by pressing the space-bar. While this (Continued on Page 66) ten!\" Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"Mignt and Magic ENTER THE CLOUDS OF XEEN A 3-D world beseiged with MERE mystics and A22 SE3 EEEE om AT monsters, sages and sorcerers, diabolical plots and sinister and singer schemes! No set course of play or predetermined path of events either you perish or prosper. The terrain of Xeen comes alive with state of the art illustrations and animated graphics. 256 VGA color, musical scores, sound effects and digitized speech to move your soul. New updated automatic message keeping enables you to keep your eyes on the action. ENOUGH TALK--LET'S PLAY-THE CLOUDS OF XEEN AWAIT YOU. AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT COPYRIGHT 1992, NEW WORLD COMPUTING INC + MIGHTG MAGKC AND NEW WORLD COMPUTING ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF NEW WORLD COMPUTING. IN 0090 IOR 1-818-999-0607 OUTSIDE U.S. P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CA 90078-4302 + IBM SCREENS SHOWN. ACTUAL, SCREENS MAY VARY. bende, ae mehr:ROM NEW WORLD at 1-800-325.8000 NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC.\" Circle Reader Service #12 Circle Reader Service #124 "


"CGW's Last Annual Computer Game Betry Contest We've gathered together in the Jack Kerouac Avenue Coffee House and Bongo Factory. Unbeknownst to its habitues, however, we have replaced the fine poetry they usually read with CGW brand instant art. The judges are ready, crushing their smoldering cigarette butts in the thin film of espresso left at the bottom of their cups, the bongos are cued and we only have a brief moment to remind the participants that the three top prize winners receive CGW back issue binders, as noted in issue #99. Before announcing the award-winners, however, we have a full evening of diverse and perverse verse for your metrical pleasure. Mangled Meter Rebels Without A Cause There once was a young man named Mick, Who flew till his girlfriend was sick. He shot down a lot, But his carpals were shot 'Cause he couldn't afford a joystick. Brad Snick. Sale Lake City Note that you asked for a poem as Question #61, which is also \"Playing Lately?\" Bet you get a lot of short poems with game titles in them! 2. Hartl Traverse City, m? Okay, so that wasn't actually a poem. He was right, though. I want more games for the Mac LC. They're all made for IBM, you see. How can I have fun, When my housework is done 'Cause there's not a Mac version for me? Barbara Denke. Hot Springs. SD \"The Dark Side of Tetris\" To Tetris and all its descendents, Please think of my lonely dependents. While I sit hypnotized, Watching falling shapes rise, Each smolders with angry resentments. Bab Olivere, Phoenit. 43 I think that you guys really need, A warning, so this you should heed: Another stupid question, And I'll bust your head in, So sober up and stop smoking weed. Rob Jones Ewing, ny Does this mean we can't serve on the Supreme Court? Scorpia's sage musings are a must, For us adventurers not to go bust. Frustrated to the hilt, We know she won't wilt, From assisting with hints you can trust! Martin Hrauat, Slidell, 44 The Anecdotes to Civilization As I build my own Civilization, I have come to the realization, Its Al has no peer, Babylonia I fear, Will be the first with a space station. Bal Olivere Phoenit. 43 Now my wife is complaining, And is thinking of leaving, Rationalization? Civilization!! Where my time is spent playing. James Logue New Factfield, C7 There once was a man named Jason Who liked to play Civilization. His newborn was eighteen When he glanced from the screen And his wife, he found, was on permanent vacation. Kirk Carroll Alord. 74 The price of games is out of sight. For average games my wallet's tight. To make me a buyer I must see \"Sid Meier\" It's a guarantee they got it right. Mark Molus Oslikosh. W9 Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"Poladall NITR EN FT WAR P.O. BOX 733  WEST SIMSBURY, CT 08082 Impressions Circle Reader Service #84 "


"Poetry An SONGS IN THE SPRITES Honeymoon Tycoon Our wedding was a bright day in June And we embarked on a short honeymoon. My bride was thinking romance But I couldn't pass up the chance For a whole weekend of Railroad Tycoon. John Hamilton State College, P4 \"The Gamer's Counting Song\" (In Hexidecimal Meter) One, two, three, four, Get those lemmings out the door! Five, six, seven, eight! Civilization! (Is it ihat late!) Nine, A, B, C, Up all night on a gaming spree! D, E, F, oh gee! Computer gaming has captured me! Joseph Goodwin Oblakowa City, OK (To the tune of \"Home On The Range\") Oh, give me my home, When it's dark and I'm alone, And the computer in my basement is on. I'll play games till it's dawn, Then I'll shave and be gone, Till the next night brings me back down. Cames, games, buy more games! Till I've spent my next paycheck on games. Then my wife will know why. To our creditors, we lie, Till she figures out how to make my hard disk die. R. Cleris Dagle Galanna, 07 CPU Haiku Haiku usually consists of 17 syllables in a five, seven, five format. Though it is usually untitled, the first offering is entitled \"Patrol at Dawn (Red Baron).\" Sky blue, grey and red Hot guns speak in cold, tight air One rule win or die. 3. Banick Garland. 77 IMPERIAL FORCE My eyes are weary As fresh legions are rallied beyond the hushed glow. Warner Mustin Plattsburgh 478. NY Kitty Litter I've voiced the call \"Tis War!\" But first, I must explore And build up a base At a hurried pace Before the big guns can roar. With fighters and subs around My armies and transports seek enemy ground With carriers and destroyers Battleships and cruisers The might of my force is found. To the computer I've rushed in a hurry, I've fought till my vision was blurry. For many an hour, I was caught in the power, Of Empire, the wargame of the century. Guy Gustafson Bethel. 27 Blast the kitties out of space, Fire particle cannons in their face. Turn Kilrathi ships into waste, Save the missiles, just in case. Jasore m. Spangler East Liverpool. 07 There once was a man from Earth, Whose hair was as blue as a Smurf. Killed critters with paws From his ship, Tiger's Claw Of Kilrathi there now is a dearth. Mane Tofaced Holland. PA With hours left to while away With games that challenge the matter gray, I'll sit here at night until I tire With a pot of coffee and Empire Until the sun dawns in another day. David Daruell Clarktose. 72 Continued on pg. 130 Computer Gaming World Page 50 "


"DONT GET MAD. GET EVEN STAR WAR IZEN Watch with pride as your warriors move into intricate formations (HIGH RESOLUTION mode IBM PC only). Circles Attack City The game is full of sumptuous graphics Your Chance to get your own back! Conquest of Japan gives you five cities, each with money to hire armies it is up to you to buy the right soldiers, and direct your armies to conquer Honshu, Japan's main island! In a truly epic production, you are both the general planning campaigns, and the army commander, directing troops within each battle. All battles are played out in real time, with your soldiers moving into formation in fantastic, colourful animation! You can become as involved as you like from watching progress, to instructing individual men if you wish to! You can even choose to play each battle in Hi Res (386/25 machines or better reccommended) or faster Low Res. FEATURES: Miniature-style war simulation Cities located differently each game Choice of authentic troop formations Simple to play Your chance to conquer Japan!! IMPRESSIONS SOFTWARE INC. 7 MELROSE DRIVE FARMINGTON CONNECTICUT 06032. Circle Reader Service #85 "


"Scorpion's View MicroProse's Albuns MicroProse's Darklands as told by Scorpia Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to provide this forum for her distinctive and often controversial prespective. rost CRPGs are set in a fantasy world of the designer's own creation. It's the simplest way to allow for a land where magic and other mystical forces can operate in a believable fashion. Darklands, however, takes a step in a new direction by placing the adventure in a real setting, 15th century Germany. Outside of a few mythical creatures from folklore, medieval Germany is recreated rather well, which is no surprise, as a great deal of research went into this effort. Walled cities, isolated villages, bandit-infested roads, devout pilgrims trekking toward shrines, refugees from plaque-struck towns, evil barons who maltreat their serfs, merchant caravans plodding the trade routes, bishops and knights who extort outrageous tolls all these and more are part of the game. Perhaps the most interesting aspect is the inclusion of religion. In a typical CRPG, gods are either an invention of the designer or not mentioned at all, except possibly in the most oblique fashion. Since Darklands is set in real Germany, however, it contains a real religion, namely Catholicism. Every town and village has at least one church where the characters can go to Mass or confession. This is handled with text, and no Catholic ritual is actually portrayed beyond a short paragraph stating that the party feels uplifted in the case of Mass) or cleansed (in the case of confession). The real purpose of religion is to allow the characters to call upon a pantheon of saints for temporary blessings or other benefits. Each party member has a virtue rating, which can be increased over time by doing certain good acts. This virtue, when combined with divine favor, is used to determine the success of a \"saint call.\" All saints have a minimum virtue requirement, so obtaining more virtue is an important part of play. This brings us to the magic system, which is unique among role-playing games. There are no mages casting fireballs hither and yon, or blasting opponents with mighty lightning bolts. Magic, as such, is accomplished only through the art of alchemy and by praying to saints. Alchemy involves obtaining various formulae, and then mixing the required ingredients to create potions. These potions are of two types: offensive, to be used in battle against the enemy, and defensive, used to enhance attributes, weapons, and armor, or heal damage taken during combat. Offensive potions can be thought of as grenades, since they are meant to be thrown at oncoming opponents. Like grenades, they cannot distinguish friend from foe, so once melee begins, hurling potions around can be a dangerous business. Thus, alchemy is usually an adjunct to battle and not an overwhelming force. Defensive potions generally last about a day (except healing, which is of course permanent). This makes them of limited usefulness while on the road, but they come into their own when the party explores dungeons. The time scale is different in dungeons, and enhancing potions will usually stay in effect for the entire expedition. Character creation is the most detailed and extensive of any CRPG on the market. The system is reminiscent of the pencil-and-paper games Traveller and Warhammer, in that career choices are important means of building a character. The process starts with a basic template (one for males, one for females) of attributes. You then choose a background for the character, which will have some minor affects on certain attributes, as well as providing \"basic training\" in a variety of skills plus a pool of experience points that are used to increase the attributes of your choice (to a maximum of 40 points per attribute). This represents the first 15 years of the character's life. After that, adulthood begins, with the character following various careers until you decide he or she has had enough training and is ready to adventure. Each career term of five years builds certain skills and attributes, and provides experience points for further increasing the skills of your choice. So creating your group of four is going to take some time and effort. NovPage 52 Computer Gaming World "


"ODISCO IN THE STEPS OF COLUMBUS FEATURES: 6 New Worlds to Discover In Discovery, you are the 1 master explorer and adventurer: Set Sail into the distance, in search of new lands; Explore new worlds ; Pirates are everywhere be prepared for sea battles; Create Cities fell trees, build farms, forts, warehouses, schools; Trade the produce from your new world to buy new ships; Fight the other nations trying to establish their empire. Piracy mutiny & battles Land & Sea combat Simple point and click interface 8 ship types; 4 maps 5 competing nations In 1492 Columbus discovered America for God, Gold and Glory! 500 years later this is your chance to discover a new world! TULL. PETIT YOUR CHANCE TO DISCOVER AMERICA BANK QL i = 0  HORAGGIO O, CHYTRO ROUTC SUFRIGOTO ORITISH FROM PORTO CSC RAAJ ATTEGA CARGO DISCOUCR FO OED VOORPORTUACSG Animated people develop buildings all by themselves. Watch your empire grow. You will need to fight off pirates and more! Impressions IMPRESSIONS SOFTWARE INC: 7 MELROSE DRIVE FARMINGTON CONNECTICUT 06032. Circle Reader Service #86 "


"Scorpion's View time when he came under attack, and did not fight back at all until directed to do so. A Dark and Stormy Opinion by Johnny L. Wilson ice gamers may be a little overwhelmed by this, and even veterans will need to play with the creation process a bit to get a handle on all its subtleties (there is a pre-created Quick Start party for those who want to get into the game right away). For all that, this is the best character creation scheme I've seen yet in a CRPG, particularly since you have control over it from the start and can build exactly the type of characters you want. TEREM The game makes extensive use of menus, with most actions accomplished by choosing from a list of options appropriate to the situation. At the city gates, for instance, you can decide to go in during broad daylight, wait for night and try to climb the walls, attempt to bribe a night guard to let you, and so 31 28 30 997 Canther 1 35 40 99 F 27 25 996! Es hard 51 19 25 34/ s something of a gadfly and cynic, I tend to be extremely skeptical of absolutes in any form. Ethical absolutes tend to be conditioned by cultural presuppositions, religious absolutes tend to be forged from personal experiences, scientific absolutes tend to be made obsolescent by new discoveries and political absolutes seem to fall out of fashion in a cyclical manner. In short, even those ideas which some people hold dearest and strongest are not truly absolute. They do not hold true universally. So, I really hate to see absolutes show up in a magazine which I am responsible for editing. Even when the writer responsible for such an absolute is a respected expert in, in this case, her field. Hence, I was horrified when I read this month's \"Scorpion's View\" and discovered that she could not recommend Darklands to anyone, not even me. Now, Scorpia is a columnist. We don't expect to agree with all her opinions and we give her leave to express them. That's why we often double her columns with reviews by other reviewers in order to provide checks and balances. Yet, I happen to be part of the exact target market that Darklands was aimed at and I expect to continue playing this game over the next several months. I don't mean to understate the fact that Darklands has problems. I've had the game crash after sneaking into some raubritter's castle. I've had patrons «forget\" that they had sent my party off in search of artifacts, even when those artifacts were in my possession. (Of course, the fact that I had accepted four quests at once without knowing what the limit was might have something to do with that.) I encountered the raubritter menu that ended up being printed as a text box instead of appearing in interactive menu form. I don't (Continued on Page 58) Combat is a quasi-real-time affair. It can run its course without any direction on your part, as the party will fight automatically when attacked and continue to fight until the battle ends, one way or another. However, you can halt the action at any time to give individual orders to your characters. These orders can be anything from having the character flee combat, to attacking a particular enemy, using a missile weapon, hurling a potion, or just moving to a different location. This works well most of the time, although the Al is a little weak in some cases. For instance, Leo has just finished off his opponent and is looking for a new target. Hans is a short distance away, and the poor fellow has three enemies attacking him. Leo seems not to notice this, and decides to walk halfway across the screen to swing at someone already dead. Of course, you can stop Leo and have him help out Hans, but Leo really ought to have done that on his own. There were also a few occasions when a character seemed not to understand his orders. As an example, Siegfried is directed to attack a particular opponent, but doesn't move or do anything at all. It might take two or three tries to get him to wake up and start fighting. There was, in addition, one on. Live action, actual movement, occurs only in combat and in traveling across the countryside on the wilderness map. While the menus make interaction fairly simple (although the choices may not always be easy to make), it does give the game a static feel after a time. Every town looks just like every other town, offering pretty much the same things, with only minor variations. Certainly Leipzig was not the same city as, say, Salzburg, but you wouldn't know it from the presentation here. Some names (such as the central market and local inn) change from town to town, but overall there is nothing really different or unusual to set one place off from another. A little something here and there to give at least a few towns a personality of their own would have been welcome. The party's basic goal in Darklands is to acquire fame and virtue, to be remembered in times to come as great and daring heroes. While this appears to be a novel twist, something a bit different than the more common \"Kill Foozle\" objective, in actuality the game isn't quite so different. Your party will spend much of the game running errands for people, and these tasks are of two types: taking out Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"BUILD YOUR OWN AIRLINE! TIIS Chuteiro feed BOO Eigenbadits kelasca in: 1225 Dude FonctO000  . Develop your own global route network Buy the latest planes as new technology becomes available. . You decide how to fit out all your planes. Air Bucks is your chance to build an airlineit won't be easy, but if you make it the rewards are huge! Start with $100,000 and a DC3 in 1946, at the start of the air travel boom. Decide which places to fly to, where to use as a hub, when to buy new planes and which ones to buy. New planes become available over time, from a DC9 to Boeing's 747! But beware just because a plane is new does not mean it is right for you. You must also find the cash to pay for it; and planes don't come cheap! You are sure to need the help of your friendly bank soonerorlater, or even to sell shares! AIR BUCKS 1 to 4 players (human or computer) Sophisticated economic model. World map can change every game. Fleet size larger than you're likely to ever need! Detailed Graph Chart and reprints Hi-Resolution Graphics supported (IBM PC). * Easy to use point 'n' click interface. Dude r worriente e the onis SET 1-FLIGHT CORPORT LEVEL current levels INDOcenenit Perconal Entertainent centre Increase er CANON RIGHTS COUTEED Site Havana Gempat tith Longinanti OG You can even set the luxury level on your fleet. . There's money to be made in cargo as well as passenger flights. Will you beat your rivals to this and other targets. YOUR RUNWAY TO SUCCESS! Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Circle Reader Service #87 "


"Scorpion's View much anticlimactic. So while there is no definitive end to the game (i.e., there is no \"you won, it's all over\" type mesErm ter with Foozle, although the final confrontation, in this case, is not exactly a battle in the usual sense of the word. ID 30 30 991 nther 39 40 99 the local raubritter (robber knight) or retrieving a particular item for someone. Both will bring the party some measure of fame and money, but of the two, only the raubritters are generally worth your time and effort. The quests to bring back items are inane, since they send you across huge distances, often half of Germany or further and back, of course!), for a small amount of money (usually 5-6 florins) and with a time limit besides. Compare that to going only a short distance from town to kill the local raubritter, and picking up 20-40 florins for your work. Which makes more sense to do? Between knocking off evil knights and decimating the bandit population around the country (bandits are everywhere), you can take time out to perform more heroic actions, such as clearing obstreperous Dwarfs out of the mines and going after dragons, once these rumors start showing up at the inns. 27 25 991 26 25 992 All this, however, is just marking time until you get the call from God (literally) that sends you on the way to the major encounter of the game. After that one, continuing on with the raubritters and silver mace errands is pretty sage), there is generally no point to playing on, unless perhaps you want to see how much more fame you can rack up, or you left a dragon or two for dessert. Shorn of its trappings, then, Darklands operates in much the same fashion as any other CRPG, with the party working toward that big encounHere we do have something different, with the showdown resolved by making the right choice rather than battering an opponent into jelly. Darklands also has its share of problems, both design flaws and bugs. There are several versions of the game extant, the most recent (as of this writTMAVON A time when the world seemed more fantastica and anything was possible! DH ourney back in time to the year 1957 on an expedition to the dark heart of the Amazon Basin. A desparate, crazed message sends you on a perilous search through a land where legends come to life, danger hides behind every corner, and incredible treasures wait to be discovered. AMAZON is designed in the style of the serials of the 1940's and 50's such as Flash Gordon, The Lost City, and Rocketman. These serials were made up of intriguing, fast paced episodes which placed the hero in unbe. lievable peril. AMAZON contains 14 exciting episodes filled with plot twists, mysterious charac, ters and heart stopping cliff-hangers. You haven't had this much fun since the drive-in days! X22)APPUBE Metal monsters seek your destruction! "


"Scorpion's View porated the patch into the original (1483.051) game, the program still froze on occasion, and I found the graphics were much more likely to go bad. In one instance, I had to go back to a save before last in order to get clean graphics again. lancers, who have an item you need. Your choices here are to fight them as a party, have your leader fight a single combat with a lancer, or call on a saint for help. Skipping over fighting as a party (which is pretty much useless), it comes down to whether you want to 25ar I t.Firmian 26 25 99 En ing) being v483.06, which fixes some of the problems, but not all. The game as originally released had, at the very start, three drawbacks: (a) no in-game restore; (b) no saving in the dungeons; and (c) while you could have as many save positions as you wanted, only the first nine were accessible; to bring up later saves, one or more of the first nine had to be deleted. Version .06 corrects two of these problems, so that saves can be loaded from inside the game, and the save menu can be scrolled through to reach later positions without having to delete anything. However, it does not allow for saves to be made in the dungeons, and this is very serious indeed, since the game is liable to crash at any time, often in the dungeons. The game can die when you click on a character's icon to bring up the inventory screen, going to black and staying that way. Or the game might just freeze where it is not responding to the mouse or keyboard. Or the graphics may go berserk, with your characters suddenly showing up in ugly colors. If any of these happens in a dungeon, the only thing you can do is reboot and try again. Version .06 seems to have fixed the black screen problem, but after I incor27 25 99 unther Known for his feud with St. Columba, and for extravagant miracles including moving a biver), he provides a small increase to Streetwise, and a modest increase to Charisma, FAgility, Speak Common and Read/Write. While heis invoked, the party may travel on water as though it wereland for a period OF One clay. 39 40 990 Gretch 30 30 991 Success: 49 DFRemaining: 59 ore divine favoris apent es divine Favoris spent Saint Dag ray now For... on't pray right now September 11 The real killer, however, comes at the sacrifice one member of the group or end, in the Castle of the Apocalypse everyone. (the major encounter of the game). BeConsider Siegfried, my best fighter. hind the sixth door is an army of goblin He had natural endurance of 39 and A Multimedia Entertainment Extravaganza! Super VGA and VGA Modes. Rich Characterizations. A Cliff Hanger around every corner! From the designers of the Award Winning Martian Memorandum. A ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED ACCESS Software, Inc., 4910 West Amelia Earhart Drive Salt Lake City, UT 84116. (801)359-2900  (800)800-4880 EXIT Battle for your life at the Bridge of Death!* Pulse pounding excitement with full motion video sequences and synchronized speech a SA EXIT 2020 Gasp in disbelief at the lost tribe of Amazon women!* *Actual Amazon VGA screens. They grow them big in these parts!* Circle Reader Sanice #12 "


"Scorpion's View (Continued from Page 54) know why the Alt-L command to load saved games didn't make it into the final product. I know the game can be extremely repetitive (particularly when one gets used to a certain solution working and uses it all the time), but I still like the game. Darklands has an open-ended feel to it and an element of free-will that I haven't previously experienced in a CRPG. I mean, Scorpia is even right about the UBG, that spawn of Satan, being equivalent to a \"Kill the Evil Foozle\" ending, but even that ending underscores a fresh element in this game. Most CRPGs have a \"Monte Haul\" syndrome. They build up one's characters to god-like levels and end up having to take them down a peg when it is time to import them into the sequel. They arbitrarily state that something has happened to weaken one's characters or remove the characters' special weapons. At least, Darklands performs this service for the player interactively. The player decides if one character is going to make the sacrifice or not. The player decides if the entire party is going to bear the burden. One way or another, the party is weakened in the context of the story and play balance is restored toward both any future games or the party's return to Darklands itself (one can keep on playing after the main plot is solved). How many other CRPGs let the player's characters live on between sequels in any fashion? Further, the game is as repetitive as Scorpia and some of the game's on-line critics have noted. One comes across some of the same encounters over and over. Yet, only occasionally did I find this disconcerting. I had a tendency to try all the options on the menu at one time or another. One time I might challenge a raubritter to single combat; the next I might sneak into his castle. Another time, I might besiege his castle. The same encounters didn't have to be handled the same. Another way that the game allowed me to bring variety into play was in changing the marching order. Since many of the encounters were based on the leader's current profile, even the same encounters played out differently with different leaders. I just don't know of another CRPG, with the possible exception of Wasteland, that gave me this much of a sense that the different characters in my party and the way I used them made a real difference. Speaking of Wasteland, lots of CRPGs have used skill-based algorithms since its release, but Darklands is the first one that has really suspended my disbelief to the same extent. Having my party fall down a cliff because my best climber wasn't good enough; having to pay tolls because I had accidentally placed a leader with lousy charisma on the point; being turned down when asking to use a monastery's library because my leader was out of divine favor; or not getting quests because my party's reputation wasn't growing fast enough were all delightful touches. I truly enjoy the variety of choices on the menus, by the way. What other game would give a party the choice of extorting a defeated witch for useful information; being bribed by a defeated witch (allowing her to give one alchemical formula); forcing her to repent (gaining divine favor in the process, but wondering how long her repentance could possibly last); or killing her? In what other CRPG does the party really have to think about whether to let a physicker try to heal them or not? In what other CRPG can one avoid a major battle by asking a saint for protection? How many potential ambushes can players sneak around and avoid in most CRPGs? I honestly believe that Darklands gives players more authentic role-playing choices than any CRPG since Dragon Wars. Of course, it is entirely possible that Scorpia is right and I am wrong. She certainly plays more CRPGs than I do. Yet, I can't help but feel that part of the reason I don't play more CRPGs is because they feel so constraining, so unlike live people and paper role-playing. Maybe that's why I've only enjoyed a very few CRPGs and why I enjoy this one so much (the designers were heavily influenced by their own people and paper campaigns, played after hours in the MicroProse offices), because it stretches its wings and breaks the rules. Scorp may be right, but she certainly could have recommended the game to Sam Baker (see the strategy article in this issue) and me. We may be a minority, but we do undermine her absolute and I just couldn't bear to see that absolute stand without a counterpoint. Darklands does have problems, but it can certainly be recommended to someone, even if it's just 42 year old men with weird taste. CGW strength of 39, both pumped up further by potions. His weapon and armor had been alchemically enhanced, and while his sword skill was maxed at 99, we had invoked St. George as an extra precaution. Siggy fought one-on-one with a lancer (done text-only), and the best he could do was a standoff. We got the item, but the lancer said \"his wounds will never heal.\" That was true, all right. Siegfried went from 39/39 to 14/15, and that drop was a permanent one. Not yet even 30, he was a wreck, barely able to totter around in his armor, much less wield a sword. Calling on a saint (Godfrey, who can prevent fights from happening) wasn't much better. In this case, no combat takes place, but the lancers demand blood from each party member before they give up the item. As you probably guessed, this means a permanent drop in Strength and Endurance for each party member. While not quite as severe as what Siegfried suffered, it was certainly bad enough, averaging about 10 points per person per attribute. There seems no way around one or all being drained, as I tried this several times with the same results, one way or the other, depending on the choice made in the lancer room. This, by the way, comes on top of having to give up all your gold in my case, some 600 florins) elsewhere in the castle. So your team has sacrificed its money and its health to defeat a major demon from Hell, and what do they get? A free trip to the inn, a handful of pennies, and a lot of fame points. Is there something wrong with this picture? Possibly some Bright Mind at MicroProse thought it would be a Good Idea to have the player «make a real sacrifice.\" If so, that Bright Mind needs a new brain. It is inexcusable to treat the player in this manner, to not only provide no real reward for success, but to make the victory a Pyhrric one. For this point alone, I would not recommend the game to anyone. Darklands started out with a good idea, and had some interesting aspects. Unfortunately, between design problems (some of which I didn't have room to mention) and bugs, the game ultimately brings little or no satisfaction when \"finished.\" This is a shame, since Darklands might have been one of the great ones. Instead, it turns out to be a game more to be avoided than anything else. CGW Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"reAlr OVER THREE THOUSAND TRAVEL SCREENS Sti: tatue STVAR E STE FIVE THOUSAND INDIVIDUAL VILLAGE INHABITANTS A VHS INTRODUCTION TAPE SHOT ON FILM IN SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA POSLO AN OVER SEVENTY THOUSAND WORD CONVERSATION VOCABULARY. A POSTER-SIZE MAP OF THE MYSTICAL CONTINENT OR ELSOPEA THE DIARY OF LORD GUSTAVUS, LEADER OF THE DAEMON-BATTLERS A COMPLEX, RATIONAL, AND REALISTIC GAME ! ENVIRONMENT CREATED BY OVER FORTY ARTISTS, PROGRAMMERS AND PRODUCERS, BUT ONE COMPONENT IS STILL MISSING FROM ONE OF THE LARGEST ROLE-PLAYING GAMES OF ALL TIME YOUR SOUL VOLUME ONE DOROVANS KEY GAMETEK DAEMONSGATE COPYRIGHT 1992 IMAGITEC DESIGN INC. ARTWORK COPYRICH 1992 AVETE INC Circle Reader Senice #78 "


"Review | Cosmic Conundrum Buena Vista's Heaven & Earth by Scorpia Heaven & Earth TITLE: Heaven & Earth SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $49.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look Up DESIGNER: Michael Feinberg & Scott Kim PUBLISHER: Buena Vista Burbank, CA A Dazzling Journey for the Mind inding a unique game these days isn't easy. There are rafts of roleplaying games, adventure games, flight simulators, war/strategy games, arcade games, and sports simulations, as well as computerized versions of game shows, board games, and card games. Sometimes, every game begins to look like every other. So it's refreshing to come across a little gem like Heaven & Earth, which isn't quite like anything else out there. This product from Buena Vista, with overtones of Eastern mysticism, features four distinct sections: the pendulum, the card game, the illusions, and the pilgrimage. possible. What makes things interesting are the \"celestial phenomena\": suns, moons, stars, rainbows, lightning, and the like, which appear at random on the cards and turn them into point multipliers of either the positive or negative variety. An added attraction to the celestial phenomena is the use of small animations and sounds. For example, picking up a card with the setting sun causes the sun to actually slide below the horizon to an accompaniment of chirping crickets. Picking the full moon precipitates a moonrise, complete with wolfhowling in the distance. There is a little something like this for each phenomenon, which adds a nice touch. For extended play sessions, the animations and/or sounds can be turned off. SU Illusion Profusion The illusions are, perhaps, the heart of the game. There are 12 classes of them, with four levels per class, making for over six hundred puzzles in all. These puzzles are primarily exercises in perception and visualization. Many, though by no Foucalt's Forte File Oplions About The pendulum is described in the manual as a \"toy.\" The goal is to influence the pendulum (via mouse or keyboard) to swing gently around the inside of a bowl until it comes to rest on a vortex, thereby \"capturing\" it. This is an exercise in patience and subtlety, since wild movements of the pendulum won't accomplish much. Inner harmony and peace of mind are definite assets when playing with the pendulum. Whatever Suits You The card game is a deceptively simple strategy affair, where one tries to gather cards into tricks to accumulate as many points as possible. There are 48 prettily-designed cards in the deck, which are dealt out four at a time on the first hand, three on the second, two on the third hand, and finally the remaining 12 at once on the last hand. The player chooses one card from each deal, until the deck is exhausted and he/she has twelve cards. These cards are then combined in a variety of ways to make the most points Score 0 Goal 9,000-Return to Silence.. Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"Review means all, require putting blocks or tiles together to create a particular pattern or figure. This is not always so simple as it sounds. Consider the Figure Ground illusions on the Desert level. Moving the red tiles uncovers black ones, moving the black ones uncovers white ones, and moving the white ones uncovers red ones again. Manipulating these tiles to Filo Lovel Options Help form the required patterns definitely takes some thought. Heaven & Earth also has some unique puzzles, such as the AntiMaze. Normally, in a regular maze, one moves through open spaces. In Anti-Maze, one can only move through the walls. There is also Identity Maze, where players maneuver several squares at once through a regular maze towards a goal, with the squares moving in different directions: as one (or more) go horizontally, the others Flip Turn Ocean Rainbow move vertically. The most eye-boggling (if not mind-boggling) set of puzzles are in the Concave/Convex section. Almost everyone is familiar with the shaded cubes that seem to go one way, then another. The constructions in this set are all based on that principle, which doesn't make the task any easier. Players can save their sanity by only solving these a few at a time. In this day of bug-infested releases, it is a pleasure to relate that Heaven & Earth operated flawlessly each session. The program did not crash or do anything odd, nor was a separate boot disk necessary. It does take up about six meg on the hard drive, but compared to many products that require 15-20 meg or more, that's almost a drop in the bucket. The manual is a little difficult to I ODCI understand at first. The best thing is to pick something to work on, then refer back to the manual as needed. This will make things much clearer than just trying to read the manual alone. If there is any quibble to be made about Heaven & Earth, it is the fact Composite Goal that, nice though it is, the card game doesn't quite fit into the Eastern theme. The pendulum can be seen as teaching the precepts of inner harmony, patience and control. The illusions are lessons in looking at things in different ways, expanding one's perception. The card game is, well, just a card game, with an emphasis on strategy and point-collecting, which seems a little out of place with the rest. That, however, is really a minor quibble. Overall, Heaven & Earth is a terrific game for people who like puzzles, especially visual ones. There is more than enough here to keep one busy for quite some time and enough variety to keep things from becoming stale. Puzzle fans will certainly get more than their money's worth from this product. Cow A Journey Of A Thousand Miles... The final section is the Pilgrimage. This is a journey of 108 steps, composed of occasional bits of Eastern wisdom interspersed among puzzles similar to the previous ones (pendulum, card game, and illusions), but specially created for the Pilgrimage alone, so there are no repeats. Deluxe Solitaire 40 Card Games for Windows Forty of the finest solitaire games provide a wide range of entertainment for adults and children. Quote from Jan. '92 Computer Gaming World \"...beautifully rendered for a Microsoft Windows environment...\" AN EXCELLENT GIFT! Features:  Complete On-line Help  Multiple Players  Top Scores Saved  Undo  Auto Card Moves  Auto Game Saves  Manual Card Moves  3 Levels of Play  Animation . 10 Card Backs Supports EGA, VGA in color up to 800 x 600 resolution. Requires MS Windows and compatible mouse with 256K of free memory in standard or enhanced modes. Gamers can solve the Pilgrimage a bit at a time, going as far as they like and coming back to do more later. The game seamlessly remembers where the player left off. There is a special reward at the end when the Pilgrimage is completed. The interface is mouse-driven (keyboard can be used) and simple to use. Graphics, at least the VGA graphics (MCGA, Tandy and EGA are also supported) were very good, being sharp and clear throughout the game. Ask your dealer or order by check payable to WinWare for $35.00, in Texas $37.89, Foreign $37.50 U.S. Call or write for more information. WinWare 7438 Lynworth Dallas, TX 75248 214-458-0540 Circle Reader Service #157 December 1992 Page 61 "


"Industry News Mordred in the Land of Camelot The Software Publishers Association and Mass Market Seduction CSC It depends on how one reads the legend whether it was Arthur or his half-sister who initiated the seduction in which Mordred was conceived. Most likely, it was a combination of Arthur's newly discovered virility and his half-sister's desire to have power over England's future king. It doesn't really matter which individual had designs on the other, the result of their incestuous union was Mordred, the bastard \"nephew» who destroyed the dream. As noted in CGW's last report on the Software Publishers Association, there is a recurring emphasis on the mass market. We even called it a \"holy grail» which many software publishers are seeking. We really can't blame the publishers for wanting a wider audience. We are enjoying seeing our audience grow, as well. We certainly can't blame the publishers for wanting their profits to grow. Yet, there still seems to be this seductive influence that causes some software executives to lose sight of their established market and take risks in trying to broaden that market, risks that one cannot imagine another executive in any other field being willing to take. The trend continued in the recent Fall Conference of the Software Publishers Association, held in Washington, D.C. during the last week of September. and a bad product launch. Frankly, we had trouble telling the difference between them. The distributor made a good point in his \"bad\" launch when he talked about a box that wouldn't fit on any retailer's shelf (a problem that we expect to get worse before the industry finally standardizes), but he confused the issue with his \"good\"launch. In order to make sure that there was really going to be product on the shelves when the ads came out, he was allotting two full months of lead time between his advertising plans and his street date. Further, he wasn't going to let the press see the product until it was on the shelves. That way, he reasoned, there would be an even playing field among reviewers and they would be reviewing final product. Finally, his advertising plan was directed at real consumer magazines that real consumers read. Pardon us if we think his plan is a trifle naive. Even among computer magazines (and we turn issues around faster than most consumer magazines) there is a minimum lead time of three to four months. How was this ideal software publisher expecting to get his advertising placed in either computer or consumer magazines within two months? Also, if retailers are so concerned about \"turns\" per square foot (the way they allegedly measure sales), how are they going to feel about keeping a product on the shelf for the almost six months it would take this ideal software publisher (who doesn't believe in providing advance copies to the press) to get his product actually reviewed. Finally, though we have an obvious interest in this question, reaching all those consumers in the real consumer magazines isn't (Continued on Page 190) Home-Based Business Work Brought Home Mass Market Channel Penetration For example, the panel on penetrating the mass market featured a fascinating discussion by Casey Hughes of Merisel Corporation. Hughes cited the previous experiences of mass market merchandisers with software sales and observed that retailers are totally focused on getting the most return on investment out of the minimum space. He observed that consumer electronics outlets need a 29% margin in order to handle merchandise and suggested that computer software is, at most, a 19% margin situation. How then does one get one's wares before the crowds who purchase their electronics at such high volume dealerships? It is going to cost! Where most MDF (Marketing Development Fund) programs are currently set at an extra 2% to 4% discount, which presumably gives software and computer stores to merchandise the products more effectively, Hughes said that publishers who wish to have a real impact in the consumer electronics market will have to put up closer to 10% in MDF discounts in order to get cooperation from such retailers. He went on to say that these retailers would get the margin they wanted, even if they had to charge it as fixture allowances, cooperative advertising, shrinkage, etc. Later, in the same presentation, Jeff Abrams of Best Buy presented in role-playing form) his version of a good product launch Education Recreation/ Entertainment Personal Productivity 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% Portions of PC-using households that use application category Scutor: SIA Comet Market Study Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"PLAY BRIDGE WITH THE MASTER HIMSELF SHARIF NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS Omar Sharif On Bridge Imagine yourself at the tables of Monte Carlo, playing bridge with the masters of the game...with Omar Sharif, world famous bridge columnist and card player, as your partner and personal tutor! Omar Sharif On BridgeTM is the world's first talking bridge game that features full VGA graphics, major sound board support, an on-disk tutorial, and an easy-to-use, point and click interface. You'll hear Omar Sharif congratulate you on a bold finesse, or suggest another lead if your game needs some fine-tuning. Full VGA graphics allow you to select from several types of card decks while the userfriendly interface makes bidding and playing fast and intuitive. Omar Sharif On Bridge'sTM many features allow you complete control over the game. You can set up your own hands to practice slams, no trump hands, defensive play, or work on specific weaknesses of your game. Explore «What If?\" scenarios with the \"Take Back\" and \"Rebid» features. And with the on-disk tutorial, Omar Sharif On BridgeTM is the perfect way to learn to play the world's greatest card game...with Omar Sharif as your own personal tutor. SOL Omar Sharif On Bridge includes: VGA graphics Digitized speech From one to four people can play, or the computer can play by itself Complete control over play with \"Take Back\" and \"Rebid\" Random deals or design your oum hands Switch hands and then replay them Reveal any or all hands at any time Review bidding or display score at any time Claim or concede tricks Speed up or slow down play On-disk tutorial Novice mode for beginners Offers hints at your request when you're stuck Music for most major sound boards Printer control to print out hands Loading and saving hands Plus much, much more! To order Omar Sharif On Bridget call INTERPLAY 1-800-969-GAME. PRODUCTIONS Available on MS-DOS 17922 FITCH AVENUE IRVINE, CALIFORNIA 92714 compatible machines for 714 553-6678 $49.95. Coming soon on Windows, Macintosh, Enhanced CD and the Amiga.  1991 CP Software. All rights reserved. Omar Sharif On Bridge is a trademark of Interplay Productions. MS-DOS, Windows, Macintosh, Enhanced CD and Amiga are trademarks of their respective corporations. MS-DOS Screens Pictured. Circle Reader Service #164 "


"thos TIRE tarat for Almond Can Choose Artillery target for New Relillery Can You Be?.... Prt Plot TI Cred ca 2 til Bang 1 Alt en Alte Blocks 15 PER Scenario Disk-World War II Battle Requires The Original «Perfect General» Game. OOPQuantum Quality Productions. Ina G query Orne 15 Beautiful And Exciting New Scenarios LIST OF BATTLES \"The Perfect General\" computer game is  Pegasus Bridge  Okinawa Gorgeous Playing Field IBM PC and Amiga compatible. It can be  Sicily  Saipan Clean and Simple Guadalcanal  Gazala-Bir Hacheim obtained through your favorite retailer or Kasserine Pass Iwo Jima ordered direct by calling: Interface Gafsa Arnheim 1-908-788-2799. 3 Difficulty Levels Anzio Oahu Utah Beach  1991 QQP and White Woll Productions. All rights rosorved.  Kharkov IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines Omaha Beach Amiga is a trademark of Commodore. Circle Reader Service #125 "


"Andrew Visscher's and Bruce Williams Zaccagnino's ... SOLITAIRES JOURNEY. TM A he Game for a lifetime!! 01... OTROSU SAN LE 2 ARTHANH max 1 oop Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. The greatest collection of solitaire games ever! In addition to the 105 individual games, there are tournaments, quests and cross country journeys for a lifetime of gaming entertainment. \"Solitaire's Journey\" ranges from the simple and easy all the way up to the strategic and challenging. 105 SOLITAIRE GAMES (Most of the world's best) TOURNAMENT PLAY (Set tournaments or create your own) 4 INTRIGUING QUESTS. SEVERAL CROSS-COUNTRY TOURING COMPETITIONS. COMPLETE HISTORY AND OVERALL AVERAGES FOR EACH GAME The \"Solitaire's Journey\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commordore. "


"Review An 8-10 yard pass play against a computer defense all too often breaks open for a 30-40 yard gain. The defensive (Continued from Page 46) would appear to offer a valid learning tool, it is defeated by the graphics. Their caliber is such that as the ball-carrier is tackled, it often appears that a fumble has occurred. What has actually happened is that the graphics simply do not portray the action in sufficient detail to understand what has occurred. Perhaps JMF2's biggest weakness is defensive. One chooses the play, but has relatively little impact thereafter. NFL allows more player input and the ability to take charge of what is going on in the field. There may be an \"undocumented feature\" in JMF2. While I was unable to duplicate it on a regular basis, the situation was third and long inside my own 20yard line. A short pass up the middle went for two yards, insufficient for a first down. Obviously, a punting situation would be next, but lo and behold, the computer recognized the play as a touchdown. Talk about a quarterback sneak! Finally, JMF2's defensive coverage simply is not up to professional levels. Surprisingly, JMF2 is a game of onetime events; there is no continuity or season. This omission is difficult to understand and even harder to forgive. Granted, hard copy results are desired by the purist, but the ability to play over an entire season would seem a must. In addition to a complete season, NFL offers a draft and trading options plus competition leading all the way to the Super Bowl. Both programs also offer \"instant replay\" options. Like the 1992 season, these cannot be used to overcome bad referees, but they do provide interesting options. NFL offers a normal and reverse angle view, while JMF2 offers a standard view. Neither offers the flexibility of Mike Ditka Ultimate Football with its four separate angles. First Down Seahawks 20 202 NFL secondary simply does not provide adequate coverage in the backfield. Gains and Losses Statistically, both programs offer statistical reports. However, JMF2 allows one to print out the results in hard-copy, a much appreciated asset. While this would seem to be an insurmountable lead which NFL does not try to match, the latter program has its own benefit the ability to play an entire season. End Game Analysis As may be inferred, I would recommend NFL as the more interesting football simulation. It lacks John Madden's insights, but it more than makes up for this by a graphically pleasing program with a full season and a more detailed simulation. With the ability to play both offense and defense, NFL simply outscores its opposition by a wide margin. Cow The KING'S QUEST games and Sierra On-Line, Inc. are not connected or related in any way to THE LEGEND OF KYRANDIA game, Virgin Games, Inc., or Westwood Studios, Inc. GAMES Circle Reader Service #155 Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"Bruce Williams Zaccagnino's and Thurston Searfoss!... Featured this month at Egghead Software and Electronic Boutiques Game The Lost Admiral Stratec Nominated Computer Gaming World of the The Strategy and Tactics Game of the Decade!! c Strategy Best Po Game Game Players Magazine illustration by Mare Pagodin Downs  Mare Pagodin Downs sot the ady Gas strategi Year Chicago Tribune mputer tegy Co Strate 9 DARS Best Video Games and Computer Entertainment Game Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. You're an admiral who was dismissed from the service and exiled from your homeland on trumped-up charges. You're given another chance by an old friend who's the head-of-state of a world power Can you meet the challenge and regain your vour admiral's rank? 9 superb scenarios. \"The Lost Admiral\" computer game . 1 random map scenario, with virtually millions of is IBM PC compatible. It can be obmaps. tained through your favorite retailer  15 campaign games. or ordered direct by calling!  Flagships with special abilities (In campaigns only).  The challenge of a very strong artificial intelligence. 1-908-788-2799. An in depth officer's ranking system.  1991 QOP Productions. All rights reserved.  A thorough history of your combat endeavors. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines  Play either side against another human or a computer. Circle Reader Service #126 "


"Shareware BEST Other Worldly and Other Worlds OF TE by Chuck Miller Best Of The Rest will focus on quality games from non-commercial developers PRED na y Tith all the emphasis on technological advancements her only living relative and heir to her estate, the player must in the software entertainment industry, the tendency now unravel the secrets locked up in her house. V is to focus exclusively on the newest developments in the commercial game marketplace ruled by the entertain This graphic adventure is reminiscent of those produced by ment giants. Generally, this is where the greatest strides in ICOM Simulations, Uninvited in particular. Those who engame technology and design take place. However, limiting joyed Uninvited will certainly feel right at home with Last one's focus in this way often leaves another deserving market Half. Three main windows are provided for interaction with entirely overlooked--that of the shareware game developers. the game world: a location window, one for inventory and an This is truly an unfortunate situation, as many good and very \"exit\" window showing the directions open to the player. Also affordable) games are neglected, those provided is a command list and dialogue created by individuals and design teams box. Keyboard and mouse are both supwhich, though small and struggling toported. day, may become tomorrow's technowizards. A perfect example of this is ID While EGA and CGA versions are Software's Wolfenstein 3D (for more available, the VGA version is definitely information, see the review in the Septhe one of choice. In addition to imtember 1992 issue of CGW) and the proved graphics, it features support for games detailed below. digitized sound (PC speaker, Covox Thus, beginning this issue, CGW will Speech Thing and Sound Master II). provide up-to-date information on RORYing game development in the shareware and Overall, Last Half has a solid story public domain arena a best of the rest The Last Half of Darkness line and logical puzzles, plus adequate column focusing on quality games from graphics and sound. All contribute well non-commercial developers. This area has been largely unto the game's attapped by mainline computer gaming publications, resulting mosphere to proin a significant number of quality games remaining, for the vide a solid and most part, unnoticed, and their authors insufficiently supenjoyable playported to continue developing new products. Hopefully, CGW ing experience. can help encourage and give recognition to this neglected Though not a source of try-before-you-buy entertainment and its dedicated threat to commerauthors. cial games like Elvira, Last Half A Haunting Experience offers solid value for the price. The Aunt Martha has died and gone to her grave with a secret. real fun and chalThe Last Half of Darkness Part 11 A secret no one can live without! Now, the last half of lenge of the game darkness approaches... is not found as much in its presentation as in the nature of its puzzles and the The goal in The Last Half of Darkness, an adventure in the atmosphere conveyed. gothic horror tradition, is to uncover that secret. Of course, remaining alive is the key to that goal. As the story unfolds, The Last Half of Darkness is a shareware adventure. When the player stands before the ghostly mansion of his or her the player begins to play it, he/she is asked to register with the deceased aunt, a scholar in witchcraft and dark magic. Being author for a modest fee. Upon doing so, the player will receive COM Operate The online or full l ines the front of the last par NR. There is a listen the Attie Hetter en litt Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"History records the evolution of man's journey to the skies... AO ACES PACHIPIC FOR relive it. PRIE A-CE:S STE PACHANIC RCD Barun Blast your way through dangerous, low-level attacks. (RBMB) Sink enemy ships with torpedoes and dive bombs -if you can. (Aces of the Pacific) MISSION BUILDER BYDRATE Hang on as enemy fire rips through your cockpit. (WWII: 1946) Take on the great Axis and Allied aces in one-on-one duels. (Red Baron) The Great War Planes Series Excellence in Flight Simulation. From the mud-filled trenches of WWI to the smoking ruin of Pearl Harbor, the evolution of flight is celebrated in Damon Slye's epic Great War Planes\" series of historical flight simulations. Beginning with the award-winning Red Baron\", the series continues with WWII Pacific Theater combat in Aces of the Pacific and moves into modern-day action over the Persian Gulf with A-10 Tank Killer 1.5\", Now the excitement continues with all new expansion disks for Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific. The Red Baron Mission Builder updates the classic WWI simulation with new planes, new aces and a powerful mission builder that allows you to create your own historic missions For Aces of the Pacific comes WWII 1946\", an expansion disk chat explores the new planes and missions of an alternate future where the atomic bomb was never dropped and WWII continued past the boundaries of hiscory. Circle Reader Service #135 Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Shareware an attractively packaged version of the sequel, The Last Half of Darkness Part II (the conclusion to this story) and a hint booklet for both parts. Purchasers need to be sure to indicate a choice of the CGA, EGA or VGA version, and send the registration fee of $20.00 by U.S. check or money order to: SoftLab Laboratories 2012 Gregory Street San Diego, CA 92104 (619) 2-TERROR (Monday-Friday 9:00am-5:00pm PST) Additionally, The Last Half of Darkness Part III is also available from SoftLab for $39.95 (high density 5.25\" disks, $41.95 on low density 5.25\" disks), plus $3.00 shipping and handling. It features 256-color VGA graphics and supports Sound Blaster compatible sound cards. Part III requires VGA, Galactix 640K and a hard drive. clining Leather Bucket Seats and an ACME Toothpick Dispenser. Strange Roon Inventory Commands As mentioned previously, the graphics and Examine Go F audio are exceptional in this commercial-qualOpen ity space shoot'em up. It is, in fact, better than Close Hit some so called commercial offerings. Game Take control is smooth and crisp with the use of a Speak Operate joystick. Keyboard and mouse/trackball are Save F also supported, as is a combination of the above Load F16 input devices. Galactix requires 640K, a Quit 286/10MHz or better system, a hard drive, VGA, and an Ad Lib or Sound Blaster sound card for music, and Sound Blaster for digitized The surroundings around you are unfamiliar as the last thing you remember is sounds and voice. beautiful girl taking you through a stone doorway into darkness. You must of blacked out, because somehow you ended up here. Galactix is a fully-functional shareware game with a very modest registration fee of $15.00, The Last Half of Darkness Part III gaining the registered user both the latest version on disk and a clear conThis sequel will appeal mostly to science. Cygnus will also dothose who enjoy a good horror POINTS nate $1.00 of the registration 006350 mystery. The version we had was WAVET fee to help save the rain forests. still in final beta and exhibited B05 To receive a registered version some glitches. However, it does M:0009 of Galactix, send a U.S. check have potential and should provide B:08 1 or money order to: numerous hours of haunting play. Just don't expect state-of-the-art Cygnus Software graphics and sound. Like its predeSuite 309,98 W. 63rd Street, cessors, the strong point of this adWillowbrook, IL 60514. venture is its play and atmosphere. Missiles, Megabombs Games reviewed in this column are available through nuand More merous distributors of The first in what we hope is a Galactix shareware and public domain long line of game releases from software, as well as on many Cygnus Software is Galactix, a space arcade game reminisnational and private telecommunication services. If you do cent of a cross between Galaga and Space Invaders. In its not have access to these services, you can, in most cases, write current version (1.1), Galactix sports superb 256-color VGA or call the game developer for an evaluation copy. graphics and super smooth animation, plus an exceptional soundtrack and digitized sounds for those with an Ad Libor Send Us Your Best Sound Blaster sound card. If you have authored a shareware or public domain game and would like to have it considered for review in this column, As the story goes, Earth is under attack by the vicious Xidus please send two complete copies of your game to: armada. Armed with only one Epsilon-class Interceptor, the player must defend wave after wave of the relentless Xidus Best of the Rest fighters. At his or her disposal, the Interceptor's pilot has Computer Gaming World Molecular Displacement Shielding, Thermal Burst Missiles, Attn: Chris Lombardi Tactical Nuke Smart Bombs, a Manipular Hydraulic Arm 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 (with Claw), Particle Accelerator Cannons, Comfortable ReAnaheim Hills, CA 92808. Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"The most popular computer game series of all time... ... Now, the best chapter yet. VO   HEIR TODAY. CONE TOMORROW Can you guide Alexander through a series of mysterious Islands? Meet characters as curious as the countries they inhabit. ROBERTA WILLIAMS SIERRA Explore the animated garden on the whimsical Isle of Wonder. Encounter enemies and rivals bent on stopping you at any cost. Bold Characters, Bold Design A shipwrecked prince must find his way across a series of islands in search of a princess in peril. You'll need all your wits and imagination to overcome the gauntlet of baffling puzzles and fantastic creatures that block you on your quest. In this richly detailed game of discovery and adventure, every choice you make can affect your future options and the attitudes of the many characters you'll encounter. Depending on your skill and the paths you follow, your adventure can end in many of different ways. Nearly half of the possible events are optional! Filled with deeper puzzles, more fantastic creatures, and a moving saga of romance and adventure, King's Quest VI is a mysterious and magical adventure for the entire family. Circle Reader Service #136 Excellence in Adventure Gaming. SIERRA To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Review the clUB DEAD VACACION U.S. Gold's Cruise for a Corpse by Jeff James Tith Cruise for a Corpse, U.S. Gold and DelTITLE: Cruise for a Corpse phine Software have followed an admirable SYSTEM: Amiga, IBM recipe for a classic adventure of murder most PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION Code wheel foul. Combining a strong dose of classic Agatha Christie DESIGNER: Delphine Software fiction (\"Murder on the Nile\") with a dash of Sierra's U FOR A CORPSEL PUBLISHER: U.S. Gold clo Accolade Laura Bow series, Cruise for a Corpse offers a playable San Jose, CA albeit bathetic — tale of a murder on the Mediterranean in the 1920's. The story revolves around Inspector Raoul Dusentier, Sierra and Lucas Arts, the invited on a dream cruise of the Mediterranean aboard Cinematique system is not withthe Karaboudjan III, a restored sailing vessel owned by out its merits. Only the left and the wealthy Nikolas Karaboudjan. Soon after the French right mouse buttons are needed; Inspector's arrival, a panicky butler leads him to Mr. the left moves Raoul about and Karaboudjan's study, where the lifeless body of Mr. selects objects, while the right Karaboudjan is found. Before the Inspector can begin to displays a list of currently carperform his investigation, an unseen stranger knocks the ried items. Using a combination Inspector unconscious. Awaking to a throbbing head of the two allows the manipulaamidst the wrecked furniture of the study, the Inspector tion of objects, such as inserting finds that his host's corpse has disappeared. The player keys in locks, using a hammeron enters the adventure at this point, guiding Inspector a nail, et cetera. Dusentier about the ship searching for evidence and Cinematique Cinématique\" AUSROLDIE Soon after Inspector Dusentier clues. awakes from his cudgel-induced Assisting in this sleuthing endeavor is Delphine's slumber, the task of finding the \"Cinematique\" playing interface, used in other Delphine produc murdererand perhaps more importantly, the missing corpse tions such as James Bond: The Stealth Affair and Future Wars. is underway. The player has only 10 hours to find the murderer, Although it lacks the polish of the point-and-click interfaces from from 8:00 A.M., when the Inspector awakes, to 6:00 P.M., when DELPHINE Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"This season, the most detailed football simulation ever hits the field... ...and sidelines the competition. FRONT PAGE SPORTS ELEMENT FOOTR ALL Play as a coach, quarterback, or general manager. Imagine playing football and watching the action from all points of view. Cleoque plor Slating N namix Desigu your own plays or customize over 200 stock plays. The action varies from city to city, just like in real life. Stats... Action... Everything... Excellence in Sports Simulation. From Dynamix, the company that redefined flight simulation with Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific, comes the most comprehensive and graphically detailed football simulation to ever hit the computer field. Unlike the competition, Front Page Sports: Football isn't a watered down version of reality covered by a fancy license of famous names. It does everything, like you've never seen before. Action, stats, management... every conceivable element of the game is recreated in amazing detail. And most importantly, you decide what to control. Pure action, pure stats or anywhere in between... the choice is yours with a simple click of the button. Front Page Sports: Football Everything a football simulation should be. Circle Reader Service #137 Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Review the identity of the murderer must be revealed to the captain. Beginning in the study, the player must guide the Inspector through the two dozen locations spread across the four decks of the Karaboudjan III, searching for clues and grilling suspects. Most of the on-screen action is represented in a typical adventure game fashion, with the player's alter ego moving from location to location, searching for objects. Conversing with characters inpoint, filling up the screen as he smoothly approaches. The scene then cuts to the Inspector's retreating back as the other end of the deck is displayed. Other characters in the game exhibit similar animated characteristics, moving about in their seats, smoking cigarettes and so on. As intriguing as Cruise's storyline is, however, several foibles hinder the program from achieving its true potential. The first problem occurs even before the game is loaded — the copy protection is simply atrocious. Getting past this copy protection involves matching up an alphanumeric code displayed on the screen with one on the included code wheel, then entering the correct sequence of colored pictures from the wheel into the program. What's more, not only must the player successfully bypass the copy protection twice, but s/he must also deal with the poorly aligned codewheel which makes mistakes infuriatingly easy to make. Cruise also suffers from a decidedly mediocre treatment of graphics. In an era of verdant VGA palettes and lushly illustrated characters, Cruise bucks the trend and uses 16-color EGA graphics. Of course, it is an older game in Europe. The interface has its share of foibles as well. For example, opening the closet door on The kitchen is my territory, so get out of here Inspector !! volves a separate conversation screen, with close-ups of Inspector Dusentier and the current suspect, flanked by a list of topics. Selecting a topic elicits an appropriate response from the suspect, complete with unique facial gestures, head movements and other small but effective ancillary movements. Although a far cry from a full-blown parser (such as in the Infocom adventures), the dialogue system used in Cruise provides a surprising amount of flexibility. Time is the player's greatest enemy; fortunately, Time only advances after an important piece of evidence has been found or an important bit of dialogue has been heard. An on-screen clock then appears and visibly advances a few minutes, serving as both a barometer to the player's success while simultaneously imparting a sense of urgency. the lower deck places our good Inspector squarely between the player's viewpoint and that of the objects in the closet the Inspector serves admirably as a door, but lacks the transparency to successfully emulate a window. Moving Raoul out of the way causes him to politely close the door, again blocking the player's view. With Cruise, U.S. Gold and Delphine set out to create an enjoyable murder mystery in the classic Agatha Christie fashion. For the most part, they've succeeded. The story is interesting, the characters believable, and the central character, Inspector Dusentier, is an intriguing amalgam of Agatha Christie's redoubtable Hercule Poirot, Conan Doyle's Sherlock and Mickey Spillane's Mike Hammer. Having a 19th Century sailing vessel as a backdrop kills two design bugbears with the same dose of arsenic; it limits the playing area to a manageable size and infuses the story with one of the best story settings in the murder mystery genre. Cruise does have it's share of problems: the aggravating copy protection, lackluster EGA-quality graphics and the occasionally obtuse interface thwart the true potential of this program. Dedicated whodunit aficionados may find much to like in the story and setting of Cruise For A Corpse, although the general adventure gaming audience may find it a rather tedious journey through stagnant gaming waters. CGW The influence of other Delphine games particularly Out of this World can be seen in the movement of game characters. Inspector Dusentier walks with the smooth, fluid gait reminiscent of the rotoscoped polygon animation used in Out of this world. In addition to the smooth animation of moving characters, this animation technique produces some impressive effects. For example, walking the Inspector from one end of the ship's upper deck to the other requires that the Inspector walk towards the player's viewPage 74 Computer Gaming World "


"The most playable computer role-playing game ever created... ... is also the most replayable. Gure er der Choose your character and modify his skills and attributes. Puzzles have multiple solutions depending on your character type. ASIERRA Every decision molds your Hero... and shapes his destiny. Overcome obstacles with might, magic, and cunning. The key to this world is your wits. If your character survives, he may discover an unspeakable evil that lives at the very heart of fear and violence. To succeed, he must cut to the core of the mystery with his mind, not sort through a series of stats or slash through a thousand computer-generated monsters. This is the newest chapter in the series Compute magazine called «a breakthrough in adventure game design.» Play as different character types, approaching problems with different skills and solutions. Every decision you make builds your Hero... and shapes his destiny. Play as a Fighter, play as a Magic User, play as a Thief. Each calling will lead your Hero down new roads of wonder, danger and excitement. Circle Reader Service #138 Excellence in Adventure Gaming. SIERRA To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Review Aces Takes Off .. Finally By Doug Fick s originally released, Aces of the Pacific was a letdown from the expectations generated by the immensely popular Red I B aron. Fortunately, when a few consumer test pilots got on the case, Dynamix quickly realized that the program needed to be tuned up in order to hit on all 18 cylinders (Pratt and Whitney Double Wasp radial, of course). Now, all consumer pilots can rest easy. The mechanics from Eugene have this beauty purring like a 2000 horsepower kitten. Problem One: Stalling Engine (Slow Game Speed) Game speed has been improved significantly by program tightening and dropping the level of background detail during combat. The frame rate has jumped from unplayably slow to a noticeable, but not too bothersome, slowdown during the heaviest fighting. The only times the program really bogs down is during multiple aircraft dogfights (10 aircraft or so, depending on the speed of the computer) and when flying low over large ships and airfields. Don't think Dynamix merely yanked out tons of graphics in order to increase speed, however. They added flak, both small and large calibre around all targets and lots of it). Lost an engine? Not to worry, just step out and walk home on the erupting AAA fireballs, it's that thick! Problem Three: Clunky Transmission (Inaccurate Aircraft Performance) The single advantage which most Japanese aircraft possessed during WWII was the ability to out turn their American rivals. As originally released, Aces took the one Japanese trump card away. By compressing turning performance, the game prohibitively favored the American fighters. In the new release, the player may well be dismayed to see those Zeros regularly clawing around onto their tail. Of course, this change is a great boon to play balance and realism, making the simulation far more challenging and enjoyable. Problem Four: Shorting Stereo (Weak Sound Support) With a total rewrite of all sound effects, the game now soars in the audio department. Everything from exploding flak to different pitches for radial and in-line engines is well done. The only area sound support isn't superior to Red Baron is when the player's aircraft is being used as a target sleeve. It's still a little hard to tell what aircraft in the furball is being peppered. Problem Five: Crazed Windshield (limited view modes) Problem Two: Faulty Steering (Weak Computer Opponents) The computer opponents have improved immensely since their first foray against consumer aces. The original program presented adversaries in a \"Turkey Shoot\" fashion. I could almost hear the carnival pitchman shouting \"Step right up, six kills for a dollar!\" No more! I found myself working hard to bring home one or two per sortie. Gone are the days of camping behind an enemy aircraft, waiting for the perfect shot, knowing his buddies were too stupid to chase you off. Just as in Red Baron, quick snap shots and aggressive checking of one's six is called for. In fact, with the increased level of intelligence and larger number of aircraft involved in some of the dogfights, Aces may now provide a much better feeling of being in a 'furball' than Red Baron ever did. Well, I can't have everything. Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific both leave me feeling like I'm looking at combat through a soda straw. The different view modes just cover too small a patch of sky. Perhaps, an expansion disk or the forthcoming Aces Over Europe will address this problem. Off the Rack (Conclusion) As updated. Aces of the Pacific lives up to its tremendous advanced billing and is now superior to Red Baron in almost every category. After a shaky couple of months. Dynamix should feel confident in the future of their Great Warplanes Series. CGW Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"An epic too big for one player... ...Introducing the first on-line, multi-player Fantasy Role-Playing game. Trial INVENTORY ITE915 MEMBERSHIP KIT HCAO COVER COSTORE KOSE SULYE COLOR IM FACI DORE OU sogchen OUR od RS Co our character un cuer ou see. Ch ou ree has region 3 Save your stats and inventory at the end of each session. Your character grows every time you play. Create your own face and personality, modifying your skills, attributes, and character class. 41585604 The 120 ceas to The You see ther Cap ITOU 1 Buckler You Re Short word Uov tee Short Sword b bounter110 fire Choose Paru flotion Join others or set out alone but beware. Anyone you meet could be a real person... or a deadly foe! Recruit real people from coast-to-coast to help find the secret at the heart of an ancient volcano. Real People. Real Time... Join real people from all over the country in your quest to find the secrets of The Shadow of Yserbious. A kingdom has been buried by an ancient curse. The bravest adventurers have been called to band together to penetrate these shadowy dungeons, challenging monsters and madmen along the way. Will you take up the cause? Quest with real people in real time, in an epic char's as real as a fantasy can get. Try it! FREE! If you have an IBM PC or compatible (286-16mhz or better) with VGA and modem. Call: 1-800-SIERRA-1 for a FREE TSN Start-Up Kit and 3 FREE HOURS of game play. Circle Reader Service #139 Excellence in Multi-Player Games. The Sierra Network "


"Strategy my Knight It was a Dark A Player's Guide to Darklands by Samuel B. Baker II ARKLANDS is a game of wide scope and possibilities. This is evident from the start in the rich character creation system, as a new player wanting to make the most of his initial four characters will spend several hours crealing the first party of adventures. Making the Most of it Different family histories provide advantages to particular career paths. For example, the easiest way to become a knight is to be nobly born. In addition to the skill benefits a character gets from different \"births,\" there is also a penalty the higher born a character is, the fewer points one has to increase his or her basic stats. Since these basic stats seldom change for the better during play, it is often best to take the lowest birth one can and aim for the position one desires. The following chart will the physical effects of a character's family background. The experience points on this table are those used to increase the character's basic stats, so they are especially valuable. Bishop Stroganoff Start with a stock of noble birth. Add Charisma: Obviously, this is the core characteristic of the people person.\" The most experience points to stats until perception, charismatic character should be the party intelligence and charisma are at least 25. spokesperson (the party leader) when outDistribute other points as desired. Add one doors and have high values in Speak Comcup noble heir, one cup abbot and one cup mon, Speak Latin, and Read and Write bishop. Bring to a roiling boil and cook for skills. 30 years. Season with EPs to taste, paying particular attention to the religious and Party Favors speaking skills. Remove and set I put together my current party as so: aside to adventure. Serves a two noble birth peasant/noble heir/knights party of four. Enjoy! (good Religion and Virtue, high strength [40] and endurance [41]); one country commoner novice/monk/priest (charisma of 42, Religion, Virtue and Speak Common of 37); one country Strength and Endurance: These stats keep a commoner oblate/ student/ physician/ hermit/ character alive, so one should make them as hermit. high as possible. Also, a high strength will This last fellow is 40 years old, but this was allow the character to wear heavier armor and the only way I found to get a healing skill of 45 carry larger weapons. Generally, one should at the start. The nearest I could get to that eschew careers that put a divot in these two number in four terms is 44 for healing. That stats, such as abbot. one point of skill is the difference between Agility: One character in the party should have healing at two points a day and healing three a high agility. Occasionally, it will be necespoints per day. This fellow is interesting in that sary to climb walls and such, and agility also he starts out with two saints, one formula and helps characters stay hidden while they sneak. the highest virtue (47) of the lot. He also has decent alchemy and artifice skills. Needless to Perception: One character should have good say, he's on point indoors. If I had to do it over perception. This character should also have a again (and I will as soon as I get my hands on high artifice skill. The person to nominate for version .6), I would make one of my characters trap detector is the alchemist. This fellow will female. Most likely, I would make her my be your party leader in indoor fights, so bear healer/mine detector or people person, since this in mind when creating him or her. they have the highest virtue, and there are many saints that work better for women, and at Intelligence: The alchemist will need all the least one (Agnes) who only works for women. brains he can manage, as it is essential for success in creating potions. A country comWhen assigning skill points, don't put any moner background is almost a must for this points into any weapons skill (except missile character since it provides the most develop devices) until every point possible has been ment points. spent on the non-weapon skills. The weapons Table of Birth Benefits/Penalties Nobility Wealthy Town Country Urban Country Urban Trades Crafts Commoners Commoners Gretch ELAST ZU 30 30990 ewat 90 DAL 225 . 13 During a character's first career, there is a bonus of +2 added to every skill. There is also an additional pot of 20 experience points added to the normal total for this first profession. During the next tour, there is a bonus of five EPs added to the pool. It is evident from experimentation that there are increasingly severe penalties for extended careers, particularly since characters age as time passes in the game. With the possible exception of the character one chooses as healer, a character should begin adventuring at 30 to avoid any pregame age penalties. The following table lists the potential penalties for getting a late start in life. The parenthetical numbers show the cumulative loss of points. +1 +1 +1 Endurance Strength Agility Perception Intelligence Charisma Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"Sure we're the biggest name in computer games... ...But we still make the best CROSSWORDS e. A  Bre a k ! little gifts. burpose CARHARTHANDROID ADPOSS GIANLAH SIERRA TH weddings DOWN. 2 The King Has Turned into a Raving, Drooling Lunatic! LCOME **** Take-A-Break! Crosswords features over 360 crossword puzzles with scrolling clues and a hint option. Incredible Machine is a warped and wonderful workshop for your brain. Build bizarre machines on screen. BOOBS You're Next. GOBLANS WARNING: Containerd puzleslachanowplayers! COKTEL VISION Screen Antics: The Adventures of Johnny Castaway is a Windows screen saver that tells a story. ja Gobliiins is brain-bruising game goodness for true warriors of the warped. This is an adventure game starring imps with attitudes. Stuff a Stocking with Sierra Just because we create best-selling adventure games like King's Quest and best-selling flight sims like Aces of the Pacific doesn't mean we can't put together the best little packages of fun for your computer. Check out Take-A-Break: Crosswords, aj package that provides fast-loading fun for Windowsim users. Or build a convoluted contraption on your computer with Incredible Machine, an erector set for your brain. Or control Hooter, Dwayne, and BoBo, a trio of fun-loving imps with a mission in Gobliiins. Or just sit back and watch The Adventures of Johnny Castaway, the first screen saver that actually tells a story. More proof that really cool things still come in small packages (with small price tags to match). Excellence in Time Wasting Stuff. SIERRA huise sit, and Bedible is userken To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 Circle Reader Service #140 "


"Strategy 65 Age End Str Agl Per PerInt Chr 30 -1 (-1) -1(-1) -1 (-1) 35 -2 (-3) -1 (-2) -2(-3) 40 -2(-5) -2(-4) -2(-5) Aging Effects Chart 45 50 55 -3 (-8) -3 (-11) -3 (-14) -2 (-6) 2(-8) -3(-11) -2 (-7) -3(-10) -3(-13) -1 (-1) -1 (-2) 2 (-4) -1 (-1) -1 (-1) -1 (-2) -2 (-4) -5(-16) -4 (-15) -4 (-17) -3(-7) -2 (-3) -3 (-7) -6 (-22) -6 (-21) -4 (-21) -3 (-10) -2 (-5) -3 (-10) Captain: +l to intelligence and charisma. 1 to endurance. 17 free EPs. The character must have a minimum of 20 in perception, intelligence and charisma, and must have been a veteran, captain, knight, schulz, courtier, manorial lord or bishop. Hunter: +1 to endurance, agility and intelligence. -1 to strength. 20 extra EPs. The character must have a Woodwise skill of 15 or more, must either be age 15 from a noble or rural family, or have been a recruit, soldier, veteran, captain, knight, friar, hermit, peddler, traveling merchant, peasant, schulz, hunter or bandit. skills will advance quite rapidly through their use in combat, All the skills are used in the game to one extent or another. As in life, some skills are \"more equal\" than others. Religion is used to recharge the religious batteries (i.e., divine favor). Speak Latin and Read/Write are used when attending mass or talking to church figures, alchemists, physicians and the university, so the «hail fellow well met\" guy or gal should get boosts here. It is possible to get through the entire game without an alchemist type and without an adept Artificer. However, it will get expensive having to continually buy potions, and there is always a need for Eater Water potions. Most of the time, Stealth and Streetwise are not important, and the penalty for failure will be more fighting (and usually loot, hehe). One character should have high numbers in these areas and Woodwise for those special occasions when it really matters (unless one doesn't mind attracting the kind attentions of the witch's sabbat!) Ride is used mostly for escape, and the whole party needs to pass the check to succeed. There is at least one instance where having a high Ride and Polearm skill together might be useful. One good healer is all that a party needs; the higher, the better. For the first 29 points of Healing skill, the healing rate is 1 per day. At 30, the rate is 2 per day. At 15 point intervals thereafter, the healing rate improves by one. wealthy family, or have recently been a schulz, captain, knight, priest, abbot or bishop or have ever been a manorial lord or courtier. Knight: +1 to strength, endurance and agility. 16 extra EPs. The character must have a virtue of 16+ and be a noble of age 20+ or have just been a captain, courtier, noble heir, abbot or bishop, or have ever been a knight or manorial lord. Manorial Lord: +1 to intelligence. +2 to charisma. -1 to strength. 16 free EPs. The character must have been a manorial lord or have spent the previous ten years as a noble heir, courtier, abbot and/or bishop. Hermit: +1 to strength, endurance and perception. -1 to charisma. 20 extra EPs. Gets one saint. The character must have a virtue of 15 or more. Novice Monk/Nun: +1 to intelligence. 23 additional EPs. No saint awarded. A character may only be a novice once and may not have previously had a higher religious rank. Friar: +1 to strength and charisma. -1 to perception. Only 12 free EPs. Plus one saint. The character must be male and have been a hermit, novice, monk, priest, abbot or bishop. Priest: +1 to perception, intelligence and charisma. -1 to strength. 23 extra EPs. Plus one saint. The character must be male and have been a manorial lord, pricst, abbot or bishop, or have just been a noble heir, courtier, schulz, monk, clerk or professor, or have spent the last ten years as a combination of one or more of the following: novice, oblate, student or friar. Abbot: +1 to perception, intelligence and charisma. -1 strength and endurance. 23 free EPs. Two saints awarded. The character must have a perception, intelligence and charisma of 20 or more, Religion of 15 or more, and just been a noble heir, courtier, manorial lord, priest, abbot or bishop, or spent the last 10 years as a monk and/or professor. Bishop: +1 to perception, intelligence and charisma. 1 to strength. 18 free EPs. Two saints awarded. The character must be male and have perception, intelligence and charisma of 25 or more, and must have just been an abbot or bishop, or have spent the last 10 year as a courtier, manorial lord and/or priest. Apfer Select an occuration Trim XETA Bandit: +1 to endurance and agility. -1 to charisma and virtue. 22 free EPs. The character must either be 15, or have been a recruit, soldier, veteran, captain, knight, peasant, hunter, friar, hermit, schulz, peddler, laborer, thief, bandit, vagabond or swindler. Peasant: +1 to strength and endurance. I to intelligence. 28 free EPs. Characters may always be a peasant unless they are 15 and of noble or wealthy birth, or have just been a schulz, captain, knight, courtier, noble heir, priest, journeyman craftsman, traveling merchant, professor or alchemist, or have ever been a person of high place: manorial lord, abbot, bishop, merchant-proprietor, master alchemist or master craftsman. Village Schulz: +1 to intelligence and charisma. 24 extra EPs. The character must have been a peasant and a veteran, captain, noble heir, knight, manorial lord, priest, abbot, bishop, merchant-proprietor, professor or schulz. Noble Heir: +1 to intelligence and charisma. to perception. 21 free EPs. The character must have been of noble birth or have been a courtier. Courtier: +1 to perception, intelligence and charisma. I to strength. 12 additional EPs. The character must be 15 and from a noble or Professional Matters There are 35 professions. Most of the religious and alchemical professions grant characters a saint or formula. However, the formula or saint is determined randomly and if it duplicates one already awarded, the saint or formula award is lost. Some occupations give extra attribute bonuses and some penalize a character, though characters will not receive any strength or endurance benefits or detriments after the age of 40. Though a character may be eligible for more occupations, only the 14 highest stature occupations are available at any one time. Here follows a list of their benefits and penalties. Recruit: +1 to strength and endurance, and 18 extra EPs that may be applied anywhere. The character must be 25 years old or younger. Occupation may only be chosen once. Soldier: 18 extra EPs. The character must have been a recruit, veteran, captain, knight, schulz or bandit. Veteran: +1 to strength and endurance. -1 to charisma. 21 extra EPs. The character must have been a soldier, veteran, captain or knight. A nticeaft CAN VALOT TEASUT D ate Ballen Oblate: +1 intelligence. -I charisma. 22 EPs. Receive one formula. The character must have an intelligence of 12 or more, not be from a common background, and never have been a novice, monk, friar, priest, abbot, bishop, clerk, professor, physician or alchemist. Student: +1 to perception and intelligence. 24 EPs. Anyone 15 years old can be a student. Also, anyone who has an intelligence of 12+ and Read/Write of 6 or more and have just been Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"You get so much out of it because we put so much into it. ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES FALCON DO0oC \"Be excited. Falcon 3.0 makes other efforts in this genre seem like test runs for the real thing.\" STRATEGY PLUS EDITORS Spectrum HoloByte We could tell you about the superb graphics we put into Falcon 3.0\" And the incredibly real F-16 feel. And the sensational scope that delivers everything from Instant Action arcade excitement to plotting your own Red Flag training missions to engaging in a different campaign every time you play. But we couldn't say it half as well as the critics have said it. Look at the high marks they've given Falcon 3.0 \"The visuals during flight are awesome.\" JIM DOUGLAS, ACE \"If you aren't in the armed services and maybe even if you are this is as close as you can come to flying the Falcon.\" PETER OLAFSON, COMPUTE \"The most complete and accurate jet fighter simulation to be found this side of a security clearance. Period.\" RICHARD SHEFFIELD, COMPUTE \"The most appealing aspect is the realism. This is as true to life as I've seen on a computer.\" COMPUTER GAME REVIEW EDITORS INCLUDES 2 PLAYER MODEM VERSION FALCON30 OPERATION: FIGHTING TIGER Spectrum Habiye \"The graphics are stunning the sound is incredible and the game play is a rush.\" DAVID ETHEL, VIDEO GAMES & COMPUTER ENTERTAINMENT \"It's not so much a game system as it is a way of life.\" EVAN BROOKS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD \"Realistic, contoured terrain. Your view from the cockpit is the best in the flight simulator world. And Falcon's user interface is slick and easy to use.\" PC GAMES EDITORS SFRED 0000 VITALTM Now Falcon 3.0 takes you places you've never flown before. Operation: Fighting Tiger takes you on action-packed missions in three new Asian campaigns. Fly your F-16 to Korea, to the Pakistan/India border, to Japan and the disputed Kurile Islands, where you can also fly the advanced FSX, Japan's newly modified F-16. Operation: Fighting Tiger requires Falcon 3.0 For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only) For technical questions and availability call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F: 9am-5pm PST) Spectrum HoloByte 2002 Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 Operation Fighting Tiget and Falcon Boare trademarks and Spectrum HolaByte is a registered trademark of Spectrum Holly in Available for IBM/compatibles Circle Reader Service #145 "


"Strategy Table of Weaponry Speed Pen Damage Skill Str Weight 95 55 3 2 4 14 12 10 8 40   19 18 18 14 16 10 8 12 21-31 10 19-29 19-296 15-294 13-28 13-28 3 12-27 1 11-27 1 22-30 8 15-29 4 14-28 5 10-75 0 25 36 100 45 2 9 65 1 7 25 1 4   120 130 130 90 11 10 129 12 10 10 a recruit, soldier, veteran, hermit, friar, novice, monk, oblate, peddler, local reader, traveling merchant, apprentice/journeyman craftsman, noble heir, swindler or student. Clerk: +1 perception and intelligence. -1 strength. 27 extra EPs. Must be 15 years old from a wealthy urban family, or have an intelligence of 12+, Read/Write of 15+ and have been a noble heir, courtier, captain, knight, schulz, priest, abbot, bishop, student, clerk, professor, alchemist, master alchemist or merchant-proprietor, or have spent the last ten years as an oblate, monk and/or traveling merchant. Physician: +1 perception and intelligence. 1 strength and endurance. 21 EPs. The character must have an intelligence of 30 or more and have been a student, clerk, professor, physician, alchemist or master alchemist. Professor: +1 perception. +2 intelligence. 1 strength and endurance. 24 EPs. Earns one formula. The character must have a Read/Write skill of 20+ and have been an abbot, bishop, clerk, professor, physician, alchemist or master alchemist. Alchemist: +1 to perception and intelligence. -1 strength. 22 EPs. Plus one formula. The character must have an intelligence of 30 or more, and have been a priest, abbot, bishop, student, clerk, professor or alchemist, or have spent the last 10 years as an oblate, monk, friar and/or physician. Master Alchemist: +1 perception. +2 intelligence. 1 strength and endurance. 20 free EPs. Two formulae received. The character must have an intelligence of 35+ and have been an alchemist. Vagabond: +1 endurance and agility. -1 charisma 27 additional EPs. Characters may be a vagabond unless they have just been a schulz, captain, knight, courtier, noble heir, priest, journeyman craftsman, traveling merchant, professor or alchemist, or have ever been a person of high place. Peddler: +1 perception and intelligence. 23 EPs. Commoners of age 15 or anyone older may be a peddler unless they have just been a captain, knight, courtier, noble heir, priest, journeyman craftsman, traveling merchant, professor or alchemist, or have ever been a manorial lord, abbot, bishop, merchant-proprietor, schulz, master alchemist or master craftsman. Local Trader: +1 to perception, intelligence and charisma. -1 to strength. 22 EPs. Open to any 15 year old of noble, wealthy, or crafts birth. Also, anyone with an intelligence of 12+, Speak Common of 5+ and experience as a captain, noble heir, courtier, monk, priest, abbot, bishop, clerk, physician, professor, alchemist, journeyman/master craftsman, swindler, peddler, local trader, traveling merchant or merchant-proprietor. Traveling Merchant: +1 to perception, intelligence and charisma. 18 EPs. Anyone may be a traveling merchant who is 15 years old and of noble or wealthy birth. Also, anyone who has an intelligence of 15+ and Speak Common of 20+, and has been a local trader, traveling merchant, merchant-proprietor, noble heir, manorial lord, professor, master alchemist or master craftsman. AO AGO 15 15 12 12 90 50 24-30 27-33 27-33 25-32 25-32 15-29 14-29 45 16-30 5 Weapon Edged Weapons: Two-handed Longsword Longsword Falchion Shortsword Shortsword Poniard Dagger Battleaxe Hand Axe Hand Axe Field Axe Small Knife Impact: Great Hammer Giant Cudgel Maul Military Hammer Mace Club Flails: Two-handed Flail Military Flail Polearms: Pike Halberd Long Spear Short Spear Quarterstaff Thrown: Throwing Axe Javelin Dart Throwing Knife Bows: Composite Bow Longbow Shortbow Missile Devices: Crossbow Arbalest Iron Handgun Brass Handgun 130 70 5 4 12 10 18 14 20-35 8 17-994 4 21 140 105 85 85 70 40 12 12 15 11 w WA 12 20-32 17 23-31 20-32 20-329 17-33 7 16-33 10 0 0 240 2 240 180 18036 240 2 5 1920-31 3 10 18-29 3 16-29 13-50 0 210 180 150 6 6 4 5 5 5 25 20 22-32 20-31 16-29 7 8 6 6 7 14 17 00 540 660 720 780 18-999 20-99 19 17-99 14 16-99 13 12 11 7 9 Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"Packwasn't nimble Jack wasn't quick SoTack became a candlestick QE 183 203 NA LRP B TV ON 109 TOINT No other fantasy role-playing experience delivers the undiluted horror of WAXWORKS\" for the IBM PC. Descend into five vast worlds of molten terror, battling over 100 evil denizens that occupy the WAXWORKS. Decaying graveyard ghouls, man-eating plants, bloodthirsty Egyptian priests-even Jack the Ripper-are all dying to enter the world of the living with only you in their way. But stand warned: the first-person perspective, VGA color graphics are not for the squeamish. WAXWORKS. It all boils down to terror. The best in entertainment software.\" Actual game scroons from the IBM PC VGA version of the game. Other versions may vary Waxworks is a trademark of Adventure Soft (UK) Ltd., used with permission by Accolade, Inc. IBM IS A registered trademark of International Business Machines. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are properties of their respective owners. Waxworks 1984 and 1992 Mike Woodroffe. All other materials  1992 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. FEE BEAN CCOLADE TRT 7 TN 100 600 TRY Circle Reader Service #43 "


"Strategy NNWAA 8/10 Merchant-Proprietor: +1 to perception, intelligence and charisma. -1 to strength and endurance. 23 EPs. The character must have an intelligence of 20+, Speak Common of 10+and have just been a traveling merchant, merchantproprietor, manorial lord or bishop. Laborer: +1 strength and endurance. -1 to intelligence. 31 EPs. Anyone may be a laborer unless they are 15 and of noble birth, or have just been a schulz, captain, knight, courtier, noble heir, priest, journeyman craftsman, traveling merchant, professor or alchemist, or have ever held a high-placed position. Apprentice Craftsman: +1 to agility and intelligence. -1 to charisma. 28 extra EPs. Anyone may be an apprentice craftsman unless they are 15 and of noble birth, or have just been a schulz, captain, knight, courtier, noble heir, priest, journeyman craftsman, traveling merchant, professor or alchemist, or have ever held a high-placed position. Journeyman Craftsman: +1 agility and perception. -1 strength. 26 EPs. Any 15-year-old from the two craft backgrounds may pursue this career, as well as anyone who has been one of the three types of craftsman or a physician or alchemist. faster the weapon. For example, a shortsword The Armoury (40) is two and a half times as fast as a battleaxe (100). Pen(etration) the armor thickness that Armor Type Thickness Weight a weapon of average quality i.e., 25) will Vitals/Limbs match (penetrate). A weapon that does not match or exceed the thickness of the victim's Plate 28/31 armor will do 1/8 its damage against the en Brigandine 27/29 emy's endurance. Thus, a weapon that does Chainmail 23/26 seven points or less will not normally do any damage against a superior armor. For example, Scale 21/24 if a character is wearing chain, he/she will be Cuirboulli 6/8 annoyed by an enemy with a longsword. If that enemy has a two-handed sword, it's time to pay Studded him some attention. Leather The Strength) range is the range over which Leather 414 no penalties or benefits apply to wielding the Padded 6/6 weapon. Lower strength will reduce the damage done by one point for every five points should wear the heaviest that can be used and below the minimum. Higher strength will instill leave them normally loaded. Consideracrease the damage done by one point for every tion should be given to how much weight the five points greater. For armor, the two Weight character can handle and still be at normal load. figures represent those for protecting the vitals Since characters will get beat up in the course and limbs, respectively. of their travails, leaving them at normal load For every 10 points a weapon is of a quality will enable them to still wield their weapons better than 25, that weapon will do one more effectively as the nicks and scratches add up. point of damage if it penetrates. For every 10 I would like to thank Arnold Hendrick and points of quality less than 25, a weapon will do the other folks at Microprose for their kind one point of damage less. Armor of better cooperation and contributions to this article. I quality will reduce damage received by one would also like to tip my helm to the users on point for every 10 points of quality above 25, GEnic for their \"band of brothers\" assistance. and armor of worse quality will increase damThe career, skill, aging, weapons and armor age by one point for every 10 points of quality data are used with the permission of Microless. prose from their forthcoming hint book Chies Shields increase the user's skill during melee to Darklands. cow combat by one half of one percent per seven, five, four points of quality for small, medium and large, respectively. They decrease one's skill by an IBM, AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE equivalent amount for IBM ARCADE GAMES: IDM SPORTS SIMULATIONS: shields of lesser qualSUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 Arkanoid 11 $14.50 T.V. Sports Football $14.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 Bubble Bobble ity. For missile com$14.50 TV Sports Basketball $14.50 includes: Demolition Mission Operation Woll $14.50 Super Sunday $ 9.50 bat, shields directly Dix Army Moves, Bad Street Brawler, $14.50 NBA Basketball Rambo III $14.50 Blades of Steel $16.50 Tal-Pan, Fist. Tai-CetiMutants, subtract from the Renegade $14 50 Double Dribble $16.50 Cyrus Chess, Doc the Destroyer Sky Shark $14.50 Monday Night Football $29.50 & Uridium. Less than $1.50 each! shooter's skill by 17 Harmony $16 50 John Elways Football $16.50 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19.50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR AMIGA 18 points for a large Pick n Pile $16.50 Pro Tennis Tour 1 $16.50 10_GAMES FOR $14.50 shield, 10-11 for a The Ball Game $ 5.00 Microleague Football $14.50 $14.50 Microleague Vampre Empre. Sxy Baster, Triplex Savage Baseball medium and five for a Cybergenic Ranger $14.50Tennis Cup Crystal Hammer. Fral Mission Little $16.50 Final Orbit $14.50 Grave Yardage $14.50 Dragon. Eskimo Games. Powerstyx Son small. Batman Caped Crusader $14.50 Subuteo Table Soccer $ 9.50 World & Clever and Smart Treasure Trap $16.50 Downhill Challenge Skiing $14.50 Where one comes IBM STRATEGY GAMES Superbike $14.50 IBM_ADVENTURE GAMES: Challenge Waterloo $19.50 Championship Football $14.50 Buck Rogers 1 $19.50 First Over Germany $19.50 Championship $14.50 Heroes of Lance down on weapons deBaseball $19.50 Sons of Liberty $19.50 Championship Golf $14.50 Dragons of Fame pends on how much Red Lightning $19.50 Pro-Beach Volleyball $16.50 Question Under Fire $12.50 Superstar Indoor Sports $ 950 War of the Lance $1950 one wishes to micro Gulf Strike $14.50 Superstar Hockey $ 9.50 Hilstar $195 Roadwar Europa $16.50 IBM FLIGHT SIMULATORS: Phantasie manage the party. The Mid-Winter $19.50 F-15 Strike Eagle 316.50 Time & Mack $14.50 Firezone $14 50 Solo Flight $16.50 BAT $1650 shortsword and mace S.D.I. $14.50 Gunship $16.50 Star Sagai $19.50 Berlin 1948 $16.50 Tomahawk $14.50 Dragonlord $ 950 are among the fastest Fireteam 2200 $16.50 Super Huey 11 $ 950 Defender of the Crown $14.50 Dambusters $ 950 Star Glider il $14.50 Pirates! $ 1650 weapons, and they Navcom 6 $ 9.50 Xiphos $14.50 Leather Godesses of Phobos $145 penetrate everything Das Boot U-Boat Simulator $19.50 Carrier $ 1450 Command Sands of Fire $16.50 Sky Chase $14.50 IBM CD-ROM SOFTWARE: except plate. The IBM TRADITIONAL GAMES: David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 Bamey Bear goes to School $19.50 Amarillo Slim's Real Poker $14.50 Blue Angels $14.50 CD Grab Bag $ 1500 military hammer also Friday Night Poker $14.50 Rocket Ranger $1450 CD Game Colection $39.00 Blackjack Academy $ 9.50 Air Strike USA $14.50 Chessmaster 3000 $4400 bears consideration, Jigsaw $16.50 Blue Max $19.50 CD ROM Collection w CIA $29.00 BattleChess 1 since it will match $19.50 IBM $39.00 EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS: Golden Immortal Super Password $ 9.50 President Elect $ 950 Great Ctes of the World 549.00 plate. If a shield is I WILD & COOL GAMES: World Geography $ 950 Hound of the Baskervilles $4900 | Continuum $16.50 US Geography  950 Jones in the Fast Lane $39001 used, one has to use a Drakkhen $19.50 Barney Bear goes to School S14.50 kings. Ouest 5 $ 2900 3D Gamemaker $ 5,00 Discover Numbers $4900 one-handed weapon Weird Dreams $14.50 Discover Alphabet $ 500 Maed up Mother Goose $39.00 Sex Olympics $16.50 Discover Math $ 5.00 hoen Shareware 20 $2400 to gain any benefit. Sex Viens from Space $14.50 Grade A Math 1-2-3 $16 Sn Secret of Monkey Island $4900 $49001 The longsword has a VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE O s more items for all So Much Shareware good speed/damage different computers... Apple ma 16 Bunde $4900 1800 676 6616 Atari, Amiga, C64/128, MACA NGA Spectrum $39.00 ratio, but it does not Wing Commander Bunde $4900 Credit Card Orders Only!!!! ($25 minimum) lots more IBMMS-DOS!! Wing Commande Uma 6 Bude $4900 penetrate brigandine TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 for COMPSULT and chain. U.S.A., $8 for Canada, $16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales tax P.O. BOX 5160 To receiveour complete catalog of over 2,000 items for all computer types, send Armor is less amSAN LUIS OBISPO $2 in cash or stamps to the above address. The catalog is FREE with any order biguous. Characters CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call (805)544-6616. SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS $ 9.50 Cycles $14.50 $16.50 $14.50 Mnes of Tean Master Craftsman: +1 perception, intelligence and charisma. I endurance. 20 EPs. The character must have an intelligence of 12+ and have been a journeyman craftsman, a master craftsman or a merchant-proprietor. Thief: +1 agility and intelligence. -1 charisma and virtue. 22 EPs. Any non-rural 15-year-old may be one. Also, anyone who has a Streetwise of 10+ and has been a recruit, soldier, veteran, priest, friar, hunter, bandit, clerk, professor, alchemist or journeyman craftsman. Swindler: +1 agility, perception, intelligence and charisma. strength and Virtue. 26 extra EPs. Any 15-year-old of noble, wealthy or urban crafts birth may be a swindler. In addition, anyone who has an intelligence of 25+, Streetwise of 15+ and has been a recruit, soldier, veteran, priest, friar, hunter, bandit, clerk, professor, alchemist or journeyman craltsman. $ 500 ROOM Sturm und Drang Some notes about the weapons and armor tables: Speed — the lower the number, the Circle Reader Service #61 Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


". . CIMER SUMMER CHALLENGE SISI IT WILL PUT MORE THAN HAIR ON YOUR CHEST. CUMMER So you didn't bring home a medal party-Summer Challenge allows this past summer? Don't sweat it. CHALLENGE up to 10 players to compete for The greatest name in sports simuthe gold, silver or bronze. lations gives you another shot. Why wait four more years? Accolade's Summer Challenge Get Summer Challenge now. Then pits you against the world's greatshow the world your treasure est athletes in eight remarkably chest. realistic events. Represent your To order, visit your favorite softcountry in the hurdles, pole vault, ware retailer or call 1-800-245-7744. high jump, cycling, kayaking, javelin, archery and equestrian events. Play by yourself or at a The best in entertainment software. Neither Accolade nor this product is associated with, or authorized by the International Olympic Committee, The United States Olympic Committee or any similar organization for any other country. Summer Challenge is a trademark of Accolade, Inc.  1992 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. ACCOUDE Circle Reader Service #44 "


"Update Networking the Sierra Way by Alan Emrich It's all about community, described by my rather tattered dictionary as, among other things, \"a society at large.\" When one acquires their first personal computer, they usually become assimilated into the community of computer users -learning the basics of bits and bytes, the hard facts about hard drives and appreciating that they can never have enough memory, storage space or processor speed. Still, the PC community, for the many who have joined it over the past 10 years, hasn't exactly been socially active. Unlike those who take up dancing, science-fiction or buy season tickets to something, computer users have few real meeting places where they can get together and hang out. and, in the process, meet each other) and private electronic mail. Electronic town halls\" and live forums, too, have become common on-line staples on all the major computer networks, save Prodigy. Even these, however, only tend to create sub communities within their own, greater electronic kingdoms. Where can a computer user cum modem find a place to relax, have fun and make a few friends? The Permanent Game Convention fact, just plain folks.\" TSN may not have been born in a barn, but that's where the community really does meet. Hanging (or Wearing) Your Hat at TSN When Ken Williams launched TSN, he wanted \"something my grandmother could use.\" In particular, that meant something that would keep her company and allow her to play bridge with friends just like her from all around the country. It had to be intuitive to use (user friendly) and be stocked with nice people (friendly users). So TSN was designed right from its inception for mass appeal, to be marketed at families and set in a friendly, game club type of atmosphere. Users create onscreen images of themselves, chat and play in a live, real-time environment. The \"community atmosphere was built in from the start, but despite it novelty, the public simply wasn't flocking to TSN. Besides the community of computer users, readers of this magazine belong to another community; that of game enthusiasts. One thing that board gamers have enjoyed for decades is the social interaction of inviting friends over to play with them, regular game club meetings and even dedicated game playing conventions. Wouldn't it be great if there were a big, electronic game club? Something like a permanent computer game convention, only on-line? Just dial up the old modem, instantly find people, talk and play games 24 hours a day, year round? Well, there is such a place. It's called The Sierra Network (TSN) and, after more than a year in business, they're adding so many improvements and new features that CGW felt compelled to take a fresh look at it. It was worth the trip. Playtester Heather \"BrandyD\" Davis Small Town Atmosphere TSN's \"Home, Sweet Home\" Let's Do Launch Enter, the modem. Following rapidly on the affordability of home computers came this device that connects them to telephone lines and, thus, to other computers with modems. The possibilities for information exchange were quickly realized and many networks exist today primarily to do just that. It is fairly common knowledge that people can get stock quotes, pay bills and book flights through their home computers. While allowing computer users to more easily share information, these \"electronic libraries are still not very social. After all, how many people go to the library to talk and socialize? Fortunately, the computer networks saw that a real \"on-line community\" was growing through the use of SIGs (Special Interest Groups — bulletin boards where people could exchange ideas on specific topics Small towns provide a very warm and personal type of community to its members. Everyone, it seems, knows everyone. Folks tend to be friendly, helpful and, well, folksy. So it is on TSN. Years ago, rural gatherings often took place in the largest barn in the area. It is not entirely a coincidence, perhaps, that the offices of \"TSN are located in a converted barn (actually, the barn was remodeled as a fine restaurant first, then TSN took it over when the restaurant closed down). Still, it's an appropriate atmosphere to be working in when one is providing an on-line meeting hall for gamers who are, in Launched primarily in California in May, 1991 with what was, essentially, beta software and few guarantees, The Sierra Network started out low and slow. As the software stabilized and users got reliable, TSN was rolled out nationally on the Sprint access network. However, TSN was simply not a \"must have\" service with the six basic games (backgamPage 86 Computer Gaming World "


"5 7 8 TOON Our Keys To The Future. The Computer Learning Foundation We're helping you put kids on computers. Write to us today. We're here to help you... Help kids key into computers ... Kids are the key to America's future. And computers are the tools of their times. By the year 2010, virtually every job in America will require some use of technology. That means we must prepare all of our youth today to take on technology tomorrow. You Won't Believe What you'll Achiever The Computer Learning Foundation helps parents and educators The Computer Learning Foundation is an international non-profit foundation taking the lead in computer literacy efforts. We are here to help parents and educators with the information and resources they need to help our children. We have involved millions in discovering the benefits of technology. Our Computer Learning Month in October is a focus for thousands of community and school programs. In addition, our lesson plan books, resource guides and information books help thousands of parents and educators each year use technology with children. Computers benefit children today. Computers can enhance children's learning and unlock their creativity. They can help children be more productive and develop better communication skills. Plus, children love using computers, so children maintain a positive attitude toward learning. For more information, write to: Compl. CGW Computer Learning Foundation Dept. CGW P.O. Box 60007 Palo Alto, CA 94306-0007 The Computer Learning Foundation is a non-profit educational foundation funded by corporations. Corporate Partner: Sega Youth Education & Health Foundation Corporate Associate: IBM Corporation-EduQuest Principal Sponsors: Apple Computer, Inc. Computer Gaming World Curriculum Product News Egghead Software Electronic Learning Media & Methods Microsoft Corporation PC Home Journal Scholastic Software, Inc. T.H.E. Journal Teaching K-8 Technology & Learning "


"Update mon, chess, hearts, bridge, cribbage and checkers) that it had to offer. TSN needed more steak and more sizzle. Fortunately, the \"S\" in TSN stands for Sierra and the talented folks there rolled up their sleeves and got to work on helping realize TSN's potential. On-Line Fantasy Role-Playing Finally, there is the volcano on the main map, which leads to The Shadow of Yserbius, a live, on-line fantasy role-playing game. Designed out-of-house by EA/Infocom alumnus Joe Ybarra and his team at Tsunami, there is a real look and feel of playing a decent Dungeon Master style clone here. Parties travel in groups of up to four players (whom one meets in the volcano), and it is wise to mix the six different character types available (barbarian, knight, ranger, cleric, wizard and thier). Some areas of the dungeon can only be accessed by certain character types (or combination of types!). Players can create a stable of six characters, but play only one at a time. There are some bizarre distortions in Yserbius (two-handed SYSOP Coordinator Winnie (Tawn) Lawler Sterlund Sterroton 814 TSN got to work planning and programming new features to attract the family market they sought. After all, with an ambitious goal of growing to 100,000 members by the end of 1992, there was much to do for a fledgling network with less than 1/10 of that number after their national roll-out. Thus were LarryLand and Sierruland born. Each area was to add new places to go and games to play, featuring interactive Red Baron, Dynamix' outstanding flight simulator. While in their current, beta test incarnation (which was what I had to go on as of this writing), these improved features are nice, but the game is still a bit kludgy. One thing that can be said about TSN, however, is that although they don't have the largest customer base among the big computer networks, they certainly listen to the customers they have! Customer requests for features have remained the design goals for TSN improvements. Each revised beta I received while researching this article was another major refinement. From the effort and output I've seen, this certainly bodes well. TSN: The Next Iteration PaintBall Il is Colorful Amusement This is a much improved version of the present e-mail system on TSN. There is no more \"hosting around,\" with all mail boxes now being \"global,\" and the address book, forwarding and save to disk features have all been made easier to use. While the BBS section was closed during the version two playtest. SierraLand was in full swing. Players enter by creating a \"kiddie\" characture of themselves (and selecting from some rather unusual interests such as jokes and talking). Games here include a greatly enhanced Red Baron (the inviting player selects time of war, starting altitude and several other options) and the old standby, Mini Golf. A 3-D tic-tac-toe game called SneakATac is looking good, as is the Rocket Quiz trivia game. PaintBall Il enhances the original game, while the addition of a demented Checkers-style game called Boogers and a multi-user paint and draw program called Graffiti round out the games to play. A new trophy room has also been added where the top ten players of Red Baron, MiniGolf and PaintBall II are posted. Also on the main map is an Information Booth where you can type in a friend's name and find out where they are located on TSN in an instant. Above that is the TSN Clubhouse (aka \"The Constant Companion\"). This is the next incarnation of the basic TSN service, adding Go and Flip Flop to the family games selection. Furthermore, Chess and Backgammon games can now be saved for later play. Many meeting rooms are provided for different interests, including the Treehouse, Yak Shak, Teen Club and the Bridge Club (Bridge gets a lot of respect on TSN). At least, those were the room names on the test version where I spent the most time at the TSN Clubhouse. There is also a TSN building on the main map where customers can go to change their password, get their billing statement, print documentation, read the event calendar, arrange conferences and so forth. Like a town hall, much of the civic activity of the TSN community takes place here at the TSN building. A \"transporter\" building is also on the main map. It will take TSN users to new maps and worlds when they are created. Above it, though, is LarryLand. Users can restrict entrance to other family members by creating a separate password for access to this adult-oriented hang out. Players create another persona (a la the Leisure Suit Larry universe) and receive some \"Larry Bucks» (those who are broke can always run to the blood bank and get around $100 more) which are used to gamble at the Poker, Roulette and Blackjack tables, or at the Slots. (For \"real gamblers,\" the Roulette is very good, Poker is limited to five players, dealer's choice and the 21 and Slots are passable little sims). Alternately, one can meet someone at Lelty's Bar, where kisses and flowers can be bestowed to another user's image (cute, and a nice way to flirt with others in total safety) and various bar games can be played. While the Larry Libs wasn't working in the version I examined, both the Liar's Poker (played with serial numbers from a fake bill ) and Veracity (a formalized Truth or Dare game) were a lot of fun. The first thing one will notice about the new TSN (dubbed \"Version Two\"), when it is released, is that connection time is much faster. 14 Plate Low Cornion Lorrylond Cone Clear 1 Chip 1-107TVIN S TOPD 119936 Your Be weapons do not prevent a player from using a shield in the playtest version I've been using) and the amount of gold and experience points heaped on the player seem inflationary from the fantasy games I'm used to. Regardless, it all hangs together very well and will no doubt be an extremely popular addition to TSN. The key thing that bodes particularly well for TSN regarding Yserbius is that it comes from outside Sierra. This means that other outside game development groups can solicit their ideas to TSN and, possibly, get their products on-line for all to enjoy. Since TSN had the foresight to make their network accessible to out-of-house developers, it has neatly created a win-win-win situation for TSN, the creators of new services and all TSN users. Comparatively Speaking So where does that place TSN in terms of the other big, on-line networks? Well, while CompuServe and GEnie have memberships in the 150,000 500,000 range, the graphic interface, flat fee structure and marketing toward nontraditional computer network users of TSN leads more appropriately to a comparison to The Prodigy Service Network. Here's a quick comparison table: TSN Prodigy Users 12,000 1.7 million Fee/month $12.95* $14.95 Focus Games Information HD space 2.5 Megs 1.4 Megs * = For 30 hours of usage, $2/hour beyond that. Another interesting aspect of comparison is how both networks deal with unruly users. 3 T 9112012112211013012] INE2120 RT19129451270 Branduo Monica An Excellent Little Roulette Sim in Larryland Also, the switching of \"hosts' need no longer be done manually it will be done seamlessly by TSN). Then, upon entry into TSN, one is greeted by an overview map of the places that can be visited and a cursor with which to select a destination. Beginning clockwise on this map, at one o'clock, one finds the post office. Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"THE MILITARY MASTERPIECE The Campaign Concept Includes:Campaign Gaming System Software albumpaign Map Editor Software Tactical & Strategic War Simulation Extensive User Guide and Gameplay Manual Incorporating Historical Background, Vehicle Factfinder and Campaign Maps 2 World War II Propaganda Posters 2 World War II Propaganda Postcards D-Day Landings Battleplan Map empire Authentic Wartime Newspaper Reprint The Most Comprehensive Military Simulation of Warfare in World War II UNLIMITS M achine RS Total bort Card Take full command of up to 1 Over 150 vehicles, each one disM36 CMC has seen Panzer 3000 vehicles on over 20 historically played in Super Fast 3-D; Russian, accurate predefined maps ranging in American, German & British tanks, size from 625 to 10 million square artillery, support vehicles, aircraft kilometres. Locations range from the and ships. Campaign gives you full Sahara and Russian Steppes to the control over all aspects of combat Battle of the Bulge in the Ardennes including airstrikes and sea battles. and the D-Day landings. Your playing area covers a stagThe level of control is up to you, if you wish, you can let the computer handle the 'hands The Amazing Map-Editor allows gering 10 million square kilometres on' side of actual combat you to modify the exsisting maps and of detailed terrain featuring towns, create new ones of your own. This option is available at any time villages, rivers and woodland. allowing you to pause and enter the editor to modify the forces. You can Breath-taking graphics that are even swap sides! accurate in every detail, give a unique Control either Allied or Axis forces from the level of Field Marshal atmosphere of realism. right down to tank driver. Over 100 Kilobytes of 3-D shape  As Field Marshal coordinate strategy for all groups of tanks, data used to create the vehicles. convoys, aircraft, ships and production centres. Sound Blaster, Ad-Lib & Roland  As General, control the fighting of an individual battle with as many as 16 active tanks plus artillery and air support. sound card compatible. Available on IBM PC & Amiga  As a Tank Driver/Gunner experience the battle in stunning 3D. THE MOST SOPHISTICATED COMPUTER WARGAMING SYSTEM EVER DEVISED FOR THE HOME COMPUTER, USING ACCURATE BACKGROUND INFORMATION FROM WW2 CAMPAIGNS AND INDIVIDUAL BATTLES. SOFTWARE EXPERIENCE THE SHEER PRESSURE AND ANXIETY OF PLANNING THE Readysoft Software Inc. 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2, Richmond Hill, WORLD'S MOST FAMOUS BATTLES. Circle Reader Service #128 Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Telephone (416) 731 4175 empire "


"Update October 2nd release date, version two of TSN simply wouldn't be ready in time. At the furious pace I saw them working on and testing version two, there is a real commitment being made to timeliness it may even be out by the time this article hits the newsstands). However, most customers would rather have software with fewer bugs than released on time, so TSN is doing the right thing. TSN did announce that their deal with Radio Shack has been formalized. The new Tandy Sensation multimedia PCs will have TSN bundled with them, along with enough free connect time to get users hooked into TSN as a way of life. It's a step in the right direction, and the more gamers one can meet on TSN, the better it is for all the users there. A Home Within A Home Since both are very family oriented, they must keep an eye on the less mature members who cannot resist insulting or abusing fellow users. While Prodigy takes a proactive approach by scanning all of the bulletins posted there (using, primarily, a glorified spell checker), it is \"No harm, no foul» on TSN until, and unless, someone hits the \"Complain» button found at the bottom of every message received. (These are, after all, live chats, so discourse can be much less formal than the method of posting bulletins on Prodigy, where a single bulletin can easily lose its context). When a complaint comes in on TSN, a warning is issued and a repeat complaint will deny access to the (ab)user until they check in with Winnie (Tawn) Lawler, the combination mom and vice principal of TSN. She, or one of her staff, will discuss the situation with the person on probation and either grant a final chance or cut that user off completely. It is all very human, civilized and compassionate, but then what else could one expect from a community like that found on TSN? The Troubles With TSN U Leather Can V544 Short Sword Salewau leads to THE MINE V encounter 2 Losse Lotues int attack of but misses! Totver attack Grunt caviing & damage! If attacks Grunt causing damage! Choose Your flotion Granted, those who frequented TSN really loved it. Nice people from around the country have made so many friends on-line that TSN has become a regular meet\" market. On TSN more than any other network, one can find intelligent people who express themselves artistically in their self portrait), socially (with their live, back-and-forth message \"chatting) and personably (as they play games with new found friends one can learn a lot about a person at the old gaming table, says I). In fact, TSN has been a huge hit with the elderly and infirm, in addition to lovers of computers and games. It really is, as advertised, \"the constant companion. For me, I don't have to find a home away from home. TSN is like Disneyland, Nickelodeon and Toys R Us rolled into one. Thus, TSN has become my \"home within a home.\" Thanks, TSN. TSN has three large and interrelated problems. It suffers from: 1) past broken promises to their current user-base regarding timely updates and new features; 2) a user base that is still too small, and 3) heavy financial costs at the corporate level. To try to set things straight with the users, version two of TSN promises and delivers a lot of extra punch and should really wow them. However, it became clear that despite the round-the-clock playtesting and tons of overtime being put in to make the Combat in the Shadow of Yserbius Stockholders in Sierra On-Line received the bad financial news in the stock report for the year ending in March, 1992. (Even Forbes magazine commented on it.) TSN lost close to $2 million that year (much of which can be contributed to R&D and equipment purchases for their national launch). Still, with all of Sierra's clout, it's a wonder why the user base isn't any larger than about 12,000 members. To that end, the marketing people have a great deal in mind in regards to building up a more robust TSN. While much was discussed off the record in terms of pending negotiations, For more information on TSN and the new features to be found in version two, call 1-800SIERRAI. When you sign on, look for AlanE and be sure to say \"hello.\" Like the rest of the members already there, I'm always happy to make new friends on-line. CGW THE ROAD FROM SUMTER  APPMATTOX June 25, 1861.... \"The first shots of the Civil War have been fired... Fort Sumter has fallen. Volunteers on both sides rush to their colors. Across the Union the cry mounts ... ON TO RICHMOND.\" New York Daily Cribune Union forces under General Mclellan seize Harper's Ferry. The Road From Sumter to Appomattox covers the entire Civil War from the opening guns of Bull run to the final surrender. All the military and economic might of the Union or Confederacy is at your command. RES Human or computer opponents. Naval system includes ocean and river going vessels,  Over 100 individually named and rated generals. Economic system includes foreign trade and blockade runners, Control the promotions and dismissals of those generals. Beautiful 256 color VGA map that stretches from New Orleans  Continuous-play, daily pulses, send orders-wheneven to Philadelphia, from Kansas City to Bermuda. you like. Fully integrated tactical combat system emphasizing command Different unit types combine to form divisions and corps. control and quick resolution of even the largest battles. . Full control over the national production system. . Scenario editor allows players to construct their own battles on A detailed supply system using railroads, wagons and ships. play those already included. Send cheque or money order to: $54,95 ADANAC COMMAND SYSTEMS CORP,  IBM OR AMIGA 1021345 West 4th Avenue plus $5.00 S&H Must have Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H 3Y8 MB H.D., Mouse, Telephone: (604). 739-1162 TOTAL $59.95 US Keyboard, 286 or more Page 90 Circle Reader Service #45 Computer Gaming World "


"Don Bluth Multimedia Presents DRAGONS LAIR DI: ** CURSE IMORDREAD) DE TEA After destroying the evil wizard Mordroc in his bid for marriage to your beloved Daphne in Dragon's Lair II: Time Warp, his sister, the evil witch Mordread, is demanding revenge. You, as Dirk the Daring, must test your skills as you are thrust into a frantic quest through time to save Daphne and the children before they are trapped forever in the Vortex of Eternity. Dragon's Lair III: The Curse of Mordread brings the classical animation style of Don Bluth to your computer featuring full-screen animation, digitized sound and new animations not included in the original laser disc arcade game. DUW U Ready Soft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2 READYSOFT Tel: (416) 731-4175 Fax: (416) 764-8867 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 139 ReadySoft Incore \"Dragon's Lair\" is a registered trademark of Bluth Group, Ltd. . \"Dragon's Lair II: The Curse of Mordread\".  Don Bluth Multimedia, Inc.; Character Designs  Don Bluth:  all audio, visuals and concept Don Bluth Multimedia, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED: Programming  ReadySoft Incorporated. Circle Reader Service #129 "


"Review A Wing In A Preyer MicroPlay's \"Mantis: XF5700 Experimental Fighter\". by Stanley R. Trevena TITLE: Mantis SYSTEM: Amiga, IBM # PLAYERS: 1 PRICE: $69.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up DESIGNERS: Paragon Software Corp. PUBLISHER: Microplay Hunt Valley, MD EXPERIMENTAL FIGHTER Tust when I thought the marketing department had thought of it all, along comes a new innovation in software packaging, pop-up endorsements (sometimes called \"shelf talkers\"). The game shopper will spot this little yellow post-it sized endorsement for Microplay's Mantis protruding out about two inches in front of the Mantis box. In nice bold print are the phrases \"If you liked that \"other\" space adventure, you'll love Mantis!\"...\"Ultra-realistic space flight simulation.\" The only thing wrong here is that Mantis is neither a successor to that \"other\" space adventure nor is it an \"Ultra-realistic space flight simulation.\" Mantis is based on the game Warhead by Glyn Williams and its storyline reads like a mix of too many science fiction films. The Earth has been attacked by an insect-like alien race called the Sirians. These aliens bear a strong resemblance to the terrestrial cockroach, only a lot taller (1.4 meters and weighing in at 58 kilograms). The Sirians communicate telepathically and while individually they are about as smart as the average roach, collectively they are highly intelligent. Using the strategy of a group mind the Sirians destroyed all the major population areas on Earth, thus disrupting the human collective mind, or so they thought. Like other \"aliens\" of recent popularity, Sirians need host bodies to incubate their young. At first the casualties of war were used as hosts, then Moon. From Solbase the Earthlings plan to launch a counter offensive to squash the alien infestation. Mantis will run on systems equipped with VGA and MCGA only. Support for most major sound boards is provided. A mouse or a joystick are recommended (the box fails to mention support for the Thrustmaster joystick). Players who seldom browse the \"README\" file when installing a new game are going to miss some important information if they skip this one. Printed out there are three full pages of changes. A message from Glenn Dill, a Mantis Programmer, on Compuserve stated that the manual had to be done several months before the product was complete, thus the large \"README\" file. The manual is an inadequate 48 pages in length, lacks a tutorial, and omits basic information on some aspects of gameplay. A misprint on the box states that there are over 100 missions when in fact there are only 70-80 depending on pilot performance. One manual change players will want to note is that in order to activate the Quad-Jump engine the \"Q\" key has been replaced by the Ctrl-Q combination. Unfortunately, on most keyboards the \"Ctrl\" key sits next to the \"Alt\" key. Naturally, hitting the All-Q combination jettisons the player immediately to DOS without so much as a confirmation check, almost like entering the black void of space without a suit. the infestation grew to the survivors of the initial attack. The remnants of humanity joined together to form F.O.E (The Fist-OfEarth) to fight this infestation, counter any future attack, and ultimately destroy the Sirian race. The player assumes the role of a Mantis pilot. The Mantis is a one-man space fighter based on Solbase, a massive space station orbiting between the Earth and the Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"FREE\" GAME WITH EACH ORDER OVER $100 CALL 800 753 GAME $39 MAZO) $21 $19 $42 $24 $24 $19 $28 Castles $19 $31 $15 $22 WE ARE 38 IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM WARGAMES IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS A Train S42 Mercenaries -838 SimCity Graphic 2 S23 Main Bitle Tank N Grm $36 Crime Does Not Pay $29 Manhunter SF $15 Days of Thunder $24 Madden Football 2 <-$32 Air Bucks S34 Merchant Colony $34 SimCity Terrain Editor S15 Main Bitle Tank ME S36 Crime Wave $37 Maniac Mansion $18 Dirk's Baseball Encycpd $19 Magic Jhnson Fst Brk $12 Ancient Art of War S29 Microcosm $32 SimEarth DOS/WIN $41 Malta Storm $36 Cruise for a Corpse $34 Martian Memorandum $37 Espana Games $24 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Ancient Art War at Sea $29 Millenium $24 Star Control $29 Man of War $36 Cybercon 3 $29 Mean Streets $37 Fast Break $12 Michael Jordan Fit Sim $44 Ancient Art War in Sky $34 Monarch $38 Star Control 2 $37 Mare Nostrum $26 Dark Hall $34 Nebulas $27 Front Page Football $39 ML Basbil 4 USA Today $31 Are we there yet? $17 New World Order $38 Starfleet 1 $17 Marianas Turkey Shoot $28 Dark Heart of Uukrul $34 Oregon Trail $28 Games Winter Chiling $34 ML Basbil 4 Fantasy Mg S25 Armada 2525 $29 Nobunaga 1 or 2 $37 Starfleet 2 $38 Midway $26 Demon's Gate $36 Out of this World $36 Grand Prix Circuit $17 ML Basbll 4 General Mg $19 Bandit Kings of China $37 Nuclear War $12 Star Legions $38 Moscow Campaign $36 Deja Vu 2 Lost in LV *$12 Plan 9 from Outer Spaces31 Greens $34 ML Basbll Mngr's Chling $19 Battle Isle $32 Objection $34 Strategic Forces S19 Northern Fleet S36 Die Hard $28 Police Quest 1 $24 Gretsky Hockey 2 $34 ML World Series Disks $17 Baitle Isle Scenario $22 Objection Enh S89 Sword of Aragon $28 Operation Overlord $36 Don't Go Alone \"$12 Police Quest 2 or 3 $34 Gretsky League $26 ML TD 1982-1990 Ea. $17 'STAR LEGIONS' Task Force 1942 AMAZON' recap Power Hits: Movies $32 'PIRATES GOLD is another in the Theatre of War --$32 tures the fun of the Prince of Persia lets you become a Star Fleet series of Theatre Sets 1950s drive-inmov. Rex Nebular Cos Gen B $39 swashbuckling piTraders space strategy ies. Travel to un Riftwar Legacy rate in the 17th simulations $31 Utopia You explored regions of Rise of the Dragon EGA $29 century Caribbean command more Viking Fields of Congst $37 the Amazon, fight Rise of the Dragon $34 Expands on the than 100 legions of sof Visions of Aftermath $12 10 foot ants, and Risky Woods original with more battle hardened Warlords $24 find emeralds sto Robocop 3 opportunities to Krellan warnors in Warlords 2 lentyCortez. Amaz. Rockelease gain treasure Battlecruisers. Worlds at War ing cinematic efSearch for the King power, and presDeastroyers and fects such as mulSecrt Monky Isind 1 $23 IBM WARGAMES tige. Features troop transports. tiple camera Secrt Monky Isind 2 $38 swordfighting & Features real time ne Action North Atlantic $26 angles, flashbacks, Sex Olympics combat capabili combat, state-ofAction off River Plate S26 Sex Vixens from Space $12 zooms, pans, & ties, realistic digi Action Stations $29 the-art graphics fades. Features full Sierra Adventure Bundle $39 tized speech &sup Action Stations Scenario$ 14 animation and digitized voices & Shogun S12 port for all major sound. Air Raid Pearl Harbor $38 $26 Space Quest 1 *MNITAT soundeffects. 539 $15 sound boards. 534 Amer Civil War 1 S22 Space Quest 2 $15 Battles of Destiny S38 Omega 530 Amer Civil War 2 S22 Pacific Storm Midway $36 Earthrise $9 Space Quest 3 $34 Hardball 2 $28 ML All Stars $17 Big Business $19 Operation Combat $12 Amer Civil War 3 $22 Pacific Storm Solomons $36 East West:Berlin 48 $ 9 Space Quest 4 $39 Hardball 3 $34 ML Franchise Disks Ea. $20 Black Crypt $32 Overlord $24 Banzai $19 Panzer Battles $22 Eco Quest 1 $34 Space Quest 5 $39 Hardball 3 Player Disk $19 ML Basketball Breach 2 Enhanced $19 Pacific Theater of Oper $42 Battle of the Atlantic $36 Patriot $44 Elf $24 Space Quest Bundle $39 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk$19 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Paladin 2 $34 Battle of Austerlitz $12 Patriot Battle Sets Ea. $24 Epic $32 Spaceward Ho! $38 Hole in One Mini Golf $12 ML Football Deluxe $39 Buzz Aldrin Race to Spc $42 Perfect General $38 Battle Stations $26 Patriot Editor $27 Felony $12 Spaceward Ho! WIN $38 Hole in One Course Dsk $ 7 ML Football 2 Carrier Command $ 9 Perfect General Disk 1 $23 Battles of Napoleon $24 Patton Strikes Back $27 Free DC $24 Spellcasting 101 $19 Indianapolis 500 $17 Microsoft Golf WIN $36 Perfect General Disk 2 $23 Battleship Bismark $26 Prelude to Jutland $26 Future Wars $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 International Sports Ch $29 Mike Ditka Football Castles Disk 1 $19 Perfect General 2 944 Battle Tank Barbarosa S36 Red Lightning $12 Galleons of Glory $24 Spellcasting 301 $34 J Conners Pro Tennis 32 Mini Putt 59 Castles 2 $36 Populous S17 Battle Tank Kursk S39 Return to the Falklands $28 Gamma Force $ 6 Star Trek 5 S12 Joe Montana Football $31 MUDS Centurion $19 Populous Promise Land S14 Blitzkrieg Ardennes S24 Rising Sun $26 Gateway $36 Star Trek 25th Aniversry S36 John Elway's QB S 6 NASCAR Challenge Civilization $39 Populous 2 $38 Borodino $30 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Godfather ar Trek Nxt Generatn $46 Lakers v Celtics $17 NFL Challenge Civilization Master Ed. $45 'GAME MAKER\" Rommel at Gazala $36 Gold Rush SPEAR OF DES NFL 1984. 1987 Ea. $15 Command HO $19 allows you to cre. Rommel North Africa $24 Grail Quest $27 TINY' is a Castle NFL 1988 1991 Ea. Conquered Kingdoms $38 ale 256 color VGAS Rorke's Drift $34 Hare Raising Havoc Wolfenstein 3D NFL Preseason Disk $22 Conquest of Japan adventure and ar dventure and ar. Second Front $36 Harley Davidson NFL All Star Teams $22 graphic adventure. Control of the Seas $32 cade games with Seventh Fleet $36 Heart of China NFL College Alumni $22 Encounter well Crisis in the Kremlin $42 out programming, Spoils of War $39 Heaven & Earth NFL College Teams $19 trained enemy sol Dark Seed $39 Features soundl Stalingrad Campaign $36 Heimdall NFL Dream Teams $20 diers, secret door Dark Star $36 Storm Across Europe $12 Hired Guns ways, gruesome NFL Greatest Teams $22 Dino Wars $28 levels per game, Third Reich 527 Hook NFL Roster Editor $20 Diplomacy mulants and pow. $25 import images from To The Rhine $36 Hostage ertul bosses in first NFL Situation Editor S20 Discvry Steps Columbus $34 $12 HUMANS Typhoon of Steel .GIF files, charac person perspective NFL Challnge Prem Ed $59 DRAGON Force ter & monster ani UMS 2 $19 Indy Jones L Crsd vga $27 Dragon Lord $24 UMS 2 Civil War Indy Jones Fale Atlantis $38 mation, scrolling in of plete floors, 4 lev. NFL Proleague Football$19 Dune all directions, adal UMS 2 Desert Storm $24 Isle of Dr Brain els of difficulty.digiNicklaus Signature Edit $39 Dune 2 $42 or subtract hit UMS 2 Planet Editor $28 Jack the Ripper tized stereo sound Nicklaus SE Clip Art $24 Empire Deluxe S39 points, lives, score V for Victory $44 James Bond Stealth All S34 Nicklaus SE Course 1 $19 effects, & multiple Fighting for Rome and money. $681 Velikiye Luki $37 KGB S19 saved games. 537 Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Final Conflict $34 $37 King's Quest Enhnca S19 Nicklaus Unismited Golf S27 FireTeam 2200 $29 Power Monger $34 Bravo Romeo Delta $34 War in the Falklands S26 King's Quest 2 or 3 S15 Summoning $38 LH 3 in 1 Football S36 NG Clip Art S17 FireTeam Const Kit $25 PowerMonger WWI $21 Campaign $29 Warship Changed Hist$26 King's Quest 4 $34 TMNT Arcade $25 LH Boxing $36 NG Course Disk 1-5 Ea. S15 Fort Apache $34 Pushover $32 Carriers at War $39 Waterloo S12 King's Quest 5 vga $39 Time Quest $12 LH Boxing Contenders $16 Over the Net Volleyball S 9 Gemfire $37 QQP Bundle $59 Carrier Strike $42 Western Front $36 King's Quest 6 vga $45 Train $6 LH College Basketball $36 Pete Rose Baseball $9 Genghis Khan $37 Railroad Tycoon $34 Carrier Strike Expan Pk $19 White Death $24 LA Law $34 Uninvited $ 9 LH Full Count Baseball $36 PGA Tour Golf Global Conquest $39 Rampart $27 Charge Light Brigade $34 Lane Mastodon $9 Universe 1-3 Each $34 LH Hockey $36 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Global Effect $32 Reach for the Stars 3 $19 Civil War SSI $42 IBM ADVENTURE Laura Bow 2 $39 Walker $32LH Pro Basketball $36 PGA Tour Golf Disk 1 $17 Gold of the Americas S19 Realms $29 Conflict: Korea $36 Advnts Willie Beamish $34 Leather Goddesses $12 War in Middle Earth $15 LH Team Disks $16 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Edt $45 Impenum $26 Red Zone $32 Conflict: Middle East S36 Advnts Willie Beamish 2 $39 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Where Amrcas Pst CSD $37 LH League Leaders $16 Playmaker Football $26 Inindo $37 Renegade Legion IntrcplS12 Conflict in Vietnam S12 Altered Destiny S34 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Where Europe CSD $30 LH Utility Disks $16 $16 Power Hits: Sports Power Hits: Sports $32 $32 Koshan Conspiracy $32 Rider of Rohan $19 Decision at Gettysburg $29 Amazon $39 Leisure Suit Lory 1 vga $15 Where USA CSD $30 Links Golt S29 Pro Football Analyst S24 Lemmings $32 RoboSport WIN $37 Dreadnoughts $42 Attack Pack $42 Leisure Suit Lrry 2 $15 Where World CSD $27 Links Disk 1 Bountiful $17 Pro League Baseball $36 'SPACEWARD Dreadnoughts: Bismark S29 PRO AUTO 'PRO AUDIO Where Time CSD $30 CARRIERS AT HOP' lakes you to Dreadnoughts: Ironclads $29 PM SPECTRUM Weird Dreams WAR' brings to life the stars as you Fall Gelb $36 PLUS' features hi Wonderland $19 six crucial carrier explore and conFifth Eskadra $36 fidelity recording & Zak McKracken W/HB battles of WWII; quer the galaxy Fire Brigade $34 playback in 44kHz Zeliards Pearl Harbor, Coral You allocate funds Fleet Commander S39 stereo, advanced Zombie Sea, Midway, East& resources to German Raider Atlantis $26 20voicestereosynern Shores, Santa build armadas, inGettysburg:Turning Pnt $36 IBM SPORTS thesizer, high per Cruz, and Great Golan Front $36 habit & terraform formance 16 bit in 4D Boxing Marianas Turkey planets, research Grand Fleet $36 terface, 4 watt per 4th & Inches S6 Shoot. Seek out new technologies. Great Naval Battles -$45 channel amp, built ABC Boxing $32 and destroy enemy Features an ad Grt Naval Battles Exp S19 in SCSI interface. ABC Mon Night $34 carriers, fleets, and justable galaxy Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 MIDI sequencer, All American College Fb$36 airforces. Features size, number of Halls of Montezuma $24 waveform editor. All Star Sports Pak $34 hundreds of indiplayers up to 19. Harpoon four track music American Gladiators $24 vidually modeled network and moHarpoon set Harpoon Set 2 or 3 $19 Studio, & windows APBA Baseball $28 ships & aircraft from dem play. 5381 Harpoon Set 4 $24 HE 3. 1 drivers. $139 APBA General Manager $29 that period $39 Harpoon Design Series $32 APBA Micro Manager $32 Lemmings Data Disk $19 Romanc 3 Kngdm 1 or 2 $42 Harpoon Editor $27 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $37 Leisure Suit Lrry 3 $24 APBA Stat Master $29 Links Disk 2 Firestone $17 Road to the Final Four $37 Lemmings 2 $32 Rules of Engagement $37 Harpoon Challenger Pak$42 Chambr Sci Mutant Prst $25 Leisure Suit Lory 5 $34 APBA 1908 91 Ea. $21 Links Disk 3 Bay Hill $17 Reel Fish'n $12 L'Empereur $37 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Harpoon Chalingr PK SE549 Coaster $32 Leisure Suit Lrry Bundle $39 APBA Basketball $34 Links Disk 4 Pinehurst $17 Serve & Volley Liberty or Death $37 Second Conflict WIN $34 High Command $44 Code Name: Iceman S15 Loom S19 APBA Bowling $14 Links Disk 5 Dorado $17 Skate or Die $15 Lost Admiral $24 Seven Cities of Gold 2 $38 In Harms Way $36 CodeName : Iceman 2 $39 Lord of the Rising Sun $34 APBA Football $34 Links Disk 6 Brtn Creek S17 Sport of Kings $15 Lost Admiral Scenario $23 Slege $38 Kampfgruppe $37 Colonel Bequest $15 Lost in LA $37 Basketball Challenge $28 Links Disk 7 Troon Nrth $17 Summer Challenge Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Siege Expansion Disk $19 Kriegsmarine $36 Conquests of Camelot $15 Lost File Sherick Hms-$44 Bball Ch. 1987-88 Ea. $13 Links 386 Pro $42 Super Car Pack Lost Patrol $32 Sim Ant $37 Kursk Campaign $36 Conquests of Longbow $39 Lost Treasures Infocom $42 Bball Ch. 1989.90 Ea. $17 Links 386 CD 1-6 Each $20 Team Suzuki $15 Medieval Lords S14 SimCity $29 Line in the Sand $27 Conspiracy Deadlock $34 Lost Treasures Infocom2$32 Bo Jackson Baseball $32 Low Blow $12 Tennis Cup $32 Medieval Warriors $9 SimCity for Windows $37 MacArthur's War $29 Countdown $37 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $24 Cycles Grand Prix $28 Madden Football $17 Tie Break Tennis Mega Lo Mania $31 SimCity Graphic 1 $15 Main Bille Tank C Grm $36 Covert Action S29 Manhunter NY $28 Daily Double Horse S19 Madden TD 89 & 90 $18 TKO Boxing $ 6 NFL Football $19 ALSE eatures 20 com. $32 $12  SPECTRUM $18 $3: $14 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"Review a minute each with a quick stick and trigger inger. Ag lbs Da in Sting Commander without getting very close to the enemy. Missiles will exterminate almost Unlike that \"other\" space adventure, all enemy ships encountered while the Mantis claims to model the actual use of the Mass-Driver Cannon in the physics of space flight. The Mantis ship heat of battle will almost always lead to has a single thruster that, when fired, a quick death by enemy missile fire. The pilot is free to fly around Solbase but the coorStinger Nuke Stinger Nuke dinates of the enemy are alStinger Nuke Stinger Nuke ready programmed into the Stinger ship computer and the ticket Stinger Stinger there is a quick press of the Stinger Data Probe Ctrl-Q key. No need to fly Data Probe around and find the enemy, Fuel = 1 min 30 sec when the ship comes out of Quad-Jump the enemy is sitting in the center of the HUD. Dala-Gathering Probe Fire a few missiles, press Ctrl-Q again and docking is all that remains. Pivot the ship around and Solbase should be in sight, fire the thrusters and get within 3000 sets the craft in motion in the direction meters, press the \"L\" key and the ship the ship is pointed. To stop the ship the lands automatically — end of mission. pilot must rotate 180 degrees and fire the thruster to counteract the forward Green with Envy motion. To assist the player in navigation there is a field of small colored dots Back at base the player is debriefed overlaid on the HUD that indicate di (awarded medals if earned), and once rection of movement and velocity. Af in a blue moon treated to some onboard ter initiating forward thrust, rotating interaction with the post-flight robot, or the ship 90 degrees and firing the thrus with the player's fiancee, an old flame ters, the ship will be moving in a diago who slings drinks at the bar. If the nal direction. player went down in flames during the The sound in Mantis is impressive mission, answer in the affirmative and and some of the clearest heard to date. the mission can be replayed with no Sound is used extensively in the intropenalty. Not completing the mission duction and sposuccessfully earns radically throughthe pilot a repriout the game. A MISTELITEN SULAR mand, and too many ESTAS LACILE speech disk is of these will get the ALPIN citas promised as is a player booted out. CD version of the Breaking away from game. This game that \"other\" space has some of the adventure, Mantis best explosion uses digitized imsounds ever, the ages of actors. only problem beThese images are ing sound waves grainy and have a cannot travel in the yellowish green vacuum of space tinge to them. Either so how can a pilot hear his target exthe inhabitants on Solplode? (This little fact seems to be conbase all suffer from sistently overlooked in these sorts of space nausea or the games). color palette used does not have a color The typical mission follows a tradithat simulates flesh tional path. Pilots attend a briefing tones. cut to ships scrambling for launch, shot of pilots waving in cockpit, launch aniAlso, it is nice to mation — and the mission begins. know that animation While all the animations and speech in sequences can be Mantis are quite impressive, the game skipped by pressing falls flat the minute the player leaves button #1 on the controller. This cerSolbase. This is because edge of the tainly saves time. For example, removseat dogfights do not play a big part in ing the animations means that the first this game. Almost all battles are won 30 missions can all be played in under Staying in Control Controls are split between the joystick and the keyboard making for difficult combat sequences. Direction is controlled by the stick (or the keypad), cannons are fired with button #1, thrusters with button #2, and missiles are launched with the Enter key. Target selection is activated by the \"T\" key while the \"TAB\"key switches between weapon types. Using a Thrustmaster joystick these controls are all handled without the keyboard. Using the on-board computer, nine levels of auto-pilot are provided, all offering varying degrees of control. If the player wishes to have a high success rate on missions, use of Mode 3 is recommended as a cheat. Not only will auto-pilot mode three pursue targets, it will intelligently select targets. A super ship that goes by the name Berserker likes to be entertained by the player, who is affectionately referred to as George. On one mission, using auto pilot Mode 3, a lock on the Berserker is made. He then starts to send targets toward the player. The ship computer will drop the lock on Berserker and acquire the new targets. Playing in Mode 3 will, in most cases, allow the player to defeat all enemies by simply pressing the Enter key when a lock is made and toggling weapons when one type of weapon is depleted. LAITOHU IT CHOOSE DEMIE TI 1.12 TUL 3.7 2060 ST20010 Collision Course Some Mantis enthusiasts have suggested that for anyone \"looking for a realistic space simulator, then Mantis is it (for now anyway).» Having reviewed Shuttle, by Virgin Games (issue #94), and having played Mantis over the past few weeks, I cast my ballot in favor of Shuttle as the \"Ultra-realistic 3-D space flight simulation.\" To me, Mantis just doesn't have the right stuff. The flight model is weak, the action limited, and overall gameplay, poor. The flashy graphics, incredible sound, and fast (or is that short) action scream out \"Arcade!» On the other hand, the use of the actual physics of real space flight seem to indicate a target audience of simulation fans. When these two opposing forces meet, the effect is a cancellation of mass and a null game. JUJJII11 Dragon Total Drone Oragonly = 1 11111 Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"& BUY 2 EAD GAMES GET 1 EAD GAME FREE CALL 800 753 GAME 1000C $19 17012 S LINKS (386 om wonty copo Ultima fase convoys, and OPIS $45 $24 824 $31 $21 $16 $26 IBM SPORTS IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL HINT BOOKS IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ACTION/ARCADE IBM ACTION ARCADE Tom Landry Football $29 Hong Kong Mah Jong $32 Trump Castle Data Disk $12 Quest for Glory 1.3 Ea $10 Buck Rogers 1 $12 Shadow lands 530 Gremlins 2 S 9 Take a Break Pinball S29 Tony LaRussa Basebil $19 House of Cards $12 Turn-n-Burn $10 Railroad Tycoon $10 Captain Blood $ 9 Sleeping Gods Lie $29 Guy Spy S29 Take a Break Pool S29 TLaR Fantasy Manage S15 Hoyle's Games 1 821 Vegas Entrimnt Pk WIN $20 Rise of the Dragon $10 Captive $30 Space 1889 $16 Hard Driving 2 $38 Taking of Beverly Hills $24 TLaRussa AL Stadiums $15 Hoyle's Games 2 S21 Video Pokrby Masque\"$19 Run 5 Issue 1 20 Ea. 56 Celtic Legends $32 Space Hulk $38 Hare Raising Havoc $32 Teenage Mont Nnja Tril $25 TLaRussa NL Stadiums S15 Hoyle's Games 3 or 4 529 Video Poke Ala Carte \"S24 Savage Empire $10 Challenge of 5 Realms 544 Space Inc. $34 Home Alone $27TMNT Manhattan Miss $31 TLR Teams 1901-68 $15 Ishido S17 Video Poker WIN 534 Search for the King $10 Champions $37 Space Rogue $30 Killing Cloud $19 TMNT Arcade $24 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Jeopardy 1 of 2 $26 Secret Mnky Isind for 2 510 Cobra Mission $44 Space Wrecked $19 Knight Force 529 Terminator Weaver Commisnt 20 $16 Jigsaw Pinups $24 Weltnis $21 Secret of Silver Blades 510 Conan $19 Spellbound $39 Lemmings $32 Tetris Classic WIN $27 World Circuit $34 Living Jigsaws $12 Wheel of Fortune 1-3 Ea $10 Sentinel Worlds $10 Corporation $19 Spellcraft Aspot of Valor 38 Lemmings Data Disk S19 Tristan Pinball $39 World Class Soccer $28 Lotto Gold $29 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Cybergenic Ranger $32 Spell Jammr Pirts RS-S38 Light Corridor 529 Troika $ 9 TRISTAN PINWordtris $27 \"LINKS 386 PRO TASK FORCE BALL' brings you Wrld Chmp Backgamn $24 Offers Super VGA Starlight 1 $17 1942 gives you a $24 R W , all the excitment of Wild Chmp Cribbage Starflight 2 $17 graphics and ad. chance to command TRISTAN playing realpinball Star Saga 2 vanced features a fleet of destroy Flip andnudge your HINT BOOKS Sword of the Samurai $ 9 designed for your ers, cruisers, and 688 Attack Sub way to the highest S10 386 or 486. New Swrd Samral & Pirates $16 battleships against score possible us us. Adunturs Willy Beamish S10 Tangled Tales features included $21 aggressive enemy ing great features Altered Destiny S10 Terran E $12 forces in the South computer oppo from traditional pin $16 A Train Third Courier **$12 nent, save game Pacific Features Bard's Tale 1 3 Ea. ball games. Fea $10 Times of Lore option that allows night combat, reais Buck Rogers 1 or 2 tures authentic ball $10 SK FORCE S15 Tunnels & Trolls your friends to play tic weather condi action, wild pinball Castle of Dr Brain $10 Twilight 2000 $34 against you in an tions, blinding exdevices, rocketflipChampions of Krynn $10 existing game, pre Twilight 2001 plosions, flares,tor. pers, thumper Civilization S16 Ultima Martian Dreams $37 recorded games pedoes, ability 10 bumpers, multimulti Code Name Iceman S10 Ultima Savage Empire $34 trom worthy oppo sendorders to ships Colonel Bequest 1 or 2 $10 ball, extra ball, and Ultima Trilogy $35 nents, and many AMTEX stereo sound $39 Conquests of Camelot $10 Ultima Trilogy 2 game modes. $42 Conquests of Longbow $10 VGA graphics. $39 Ultima 4 $35 IBM TRADITIONAL Lexicross $24 Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Simcity/Simearth $20 Cyber Empire $32 Ultima 5 $35 Loop $24 Vaxine 3D Pool $12 Monopoly $24 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Space Quest 1.4 Ea. $10 Cyber Space S29 Ultima 6 False Prophet $39 Monty Python $15 Viking Child $32 3 in 1 Players Pack $24 Omar Sharil on Bridge $37 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Spellcasting 101 or 201 $10 Darklands $39 Ultima 7 Black Gate $46 Ms Pac Man S6 Vollied Acquire S15 On Target $10 Dragon Wars $10 Startlight 1 or 2 $10 Drakkhen $37 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $19 M.U.D.S. $19 Wild Streets Advance to Boardwalk $15 Peanuts $31 Drakkhen $10 Star Trek 25th Anniv $10 Dragon Wars $12 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $46 Mystical $27 Wild Wheels $32 Armada $10 Penthouse Jigsaw $24 Dungeon Master S10 Strategy Plus 3-11 Ea. S 8 Dungeon Master $34 Ultima Stygian Abyss $48 Nevermind $25 Wrath of the Demon S29 Amarillo Sim 7 Card Std $10 Pictionary $19 Dynamix Great War Pin S16 Strategy Plus 12-22 Ea S5 Dusk of the Gods $29 Uncharted Waters $42 Night Breed $15 X Men $9 Amarillo Slim Poker $12 Pinball WIN $29 EcoQuest S10 Strike Commander S16 Elvira 1 or 2 $29 Vengeance of Excalibur $19 Night Shift $17 X Men 2 Backgammon WIN \"*$24 Planet of Lust $19 Elvira 1 or 2 $10 Stunt Island S16 Escape from Hell $17 Waxworks $34 Ninja Rabbits $10 Xenocide $12 Battle Chess 1 or 2 529 Price is Right $15 Eye of Beholder 1 $10 Time Quest $10 Fire King $19 Windwalker $28 Nova 9 Battle Chess WIN 529 Prime Time Hits 1 or 2 $25 Eye of Beholder 2 $12 Treasures Savage Frntr $10 Flames of Freedom S28 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Obliterator $6 IBM HARDWARE Battle Chess 4000 5% Rackbe S12 Fountain of Dreams $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Fountain of Dreams $15 Wizardry 4 $19 Oil's Well $15 Ad Lib Sound Card $49 Blackjack DOS/WIN S 10 11 VIRTUAL PILOT | Ultima 4.7 Ea Four Crystals of Trazere $ \"F15 KE VIRIH STRIKE Ad Lib Gold 1000 $179 Bridge 7 $31 isa flight yoke that Ultima Avatar Advntures $16 Gods EAGLE 3' will Adib Progrmes Manual $27 Bridgemaster $29 mounts on your Ultima Underworld $10 Hard Nova $17 challenge even Adib Surround Sound $64 Casino Craps $10 deskandplugs into nol Ultima 7 & Underworld $16 Heaven & Earth $32 Adlib Telephone Module $64 seasoned pilots. Casinos of the World $32 V for Victory your IBM compare S16 $21 STRIKE ENGIE Hero's Quest 1 EGA Includes a new Ad Lib Visual Composr S75 Centerfold Squares $21 ible Features lett, Wizardry 6 Cosmic Fog 512 Hero's Quest 1 Ad Lib Speakers visual system that $15 Check Mate DOS/WIN $36 right, front, & back Wizardry 7 Crusade S12 Hero's Quest 2 blends 3D poly. Flight Stick S37 Chessmaster 3000 $32 views accesible al Yoager's Air Combat S16 Hero's Quest 3 gon and bithite Flight Stick w Falcon 942 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $38 the touch of a but Immortal mapped graphics Game Card 3 $39 Chess Net WIN \"$24 IBM AD & D ton, flap & gear Keys to Maramon Features cam. Gravis Ultrasound Brd $129 Chess X Collossus S17 controls tactile firel ADSD Collectors Ed 2 $45 King's Bounty $15 paign mode, 21 Champ Joystick $24 Classic 5 DOS/WIN 532 buttons under your AD&D Starter Kit $45 Knights of Legend player head-toMaxx Control Yoke $59 Clue Master Detective S15 thumbs, precisel Champions of Krynn $19 Legacy of the Necrmncr $19 head by modem Maxx Rudder Pedals $39 Combination Lock $10 trim control, and Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Legend $31 Mouse 3 Button $29 and 2 player coop Crossword Magic $29 thumb-screw ter Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Lord of the Rings 1 $32 erative in separate Pro Audio Spectrum 165199 Dealers Choice Poker $29 minals for easy in Dark Sun $37 Lord of the Rings 2 $37 Pro Audio Spctem Plus $139 planes or in the Demon Blue $10 MICROPROSE stallation S541 Death Knights of Krynn $20 Loremaster same F15 $44) Sound Blaster 500 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Dragon Strike $15 Lure of the Temptress $37 Sound Blaster Pro $189 Dr Thorp's Mini Bickick $10 Risk $24 Free DC $10 Dragons of Flame S12 M $45 Wizardry 5 $32 Pac Man $ 9 Sound Bistr Pro Basic S159 Ewd O'Thorpe Bickick \"S24 Risk WIN $29 Gateway Savage Frnt $10 Eye of the Beholder $19 Magic Candle 1 $12 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg $37 Pick N Pile $27 Snd Blaster Speakers $15 Electric Jigsaw S12 Rodeo Games $10 Global Conquest w/Disk $21 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Magic Candle 3 -838 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Pipe Dream $19 Snd Blaster Voice Edtr $54 Faces: Tetris 3 $15 Sargon 4 or 5 $34 Goblins $10 Gateway Savge Front $32 Matrix Cubed $32 Pillighter $22 Sound Star Snd Board $24 Femmes Fatale $26 Scrabble $24 Gunship 2000 $16 Heroes of the Lance $12 Mechwarrior $19 IBM ACTION/ARCADE Powerdrome $12 Thrustmaster Joystick $69 Femme Fatale DD 1 $18 Scrabble Deluxe $24 Hard Nova $10 Pool of Darkness $38 Megatraveller 1 \"$24 Airborne Ranger $12 Power Hits: Battletech $32 Thrstmstr Pro Joystick $109 Femme Fatale DD2 $18 Shanghai 2 $24 Harpoon Battlebook S16 Pool of Radiance $15 Megatraveller 2 $19 Aliens ate my Babysitter $32 Power Hits: Sci Fi $32 Thrstmstr Ruddr Pedal $109 Femme Fatale DD 3 $18 Shogi Master $34 Heart of China S10 Secret of Silver Blades $15 Megatraveller 3 $39 Amazing Spiderman S 9 Punisher \"S24 Thrustmstr Weapn Cntrl $79 Game Maker $68 Solitaire WIN $32 Hero's Quest 1.3 Ea. $10 Shadow Sorcerer S15 Midwinter 1 $12 Arachnaphobia $28 Roller Babes S25 Thunder Board SndBrd $84 Games People Play $27 Solitaire Royale $19 Hero's Ost 3 Strat Guide$19 Tales Magic: Prophcy S $38 Might & Magic 1 or 2 $12 Artura \"$12 Rotox $20 Thunder Board for WINS109 GO Master 5 Dix $109 Solitaires Journey $38 Immortal $10 Treasurs Savage Frontr $32 Might & Magic 3 $38 Back to the Future 2 $15 Savage $19 Thunder Board Spkrs $15 GO Master 5 Dix WIN S109 Sorry $15 Indy Jones Lst Crsade $10 War of the Lance $9 Might & Magic 4 or 5 546 Back to the Future 3 $15 Sierra Arcade Bundle $24 Video Blaster $349 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $10 UERTE DREADNOUGHTS Bargon Attack $24 SECOND CON Island of Dr Brain Secon $10 UREAUNUDU is a WWI Surface Bart Simpsn House Wrd $31 Jetfighter 20 I $16 FLICT is a winU feet battle simula Conflict tet hattto simula Battle Master Battle Master $37 dows game of in King's Quest 1.5 Ea. $10 tor. It recreates the Battlestorm The Galactic Conflict Contes terstellar strategy Leisr Sur Larry 1 5 Ea.810 look, specificatons Bill & Ted's Exclint Adv $19 andconquest. Test Lemmings w Disk S21 and tactics of fleeil Blockbuster **$12 your skill against Loom S10 combat. Features Brain Blaster S28 friends or the com Lord of the Rings 1 or 2 $10 3D views, comore. Budokan puter in one of 6 Lost in LA hensive manuals Colorado $ 6 exciting scenarios LucasArts Adventure $16 and soa charts, all Continuum S29 or create your own LucasArts Air Combat S16 potent English.com Cool Croc Twins with the built in edir Magic Candle 1 or 2 S10 mandparser.one ol Crackdown tor. Choose be Manhunter NY or SF S10 two player model Dark Century Iween warships. Maniac Mansion $10 and computer con 'FLIGHTSTICK' is one of the most popular joysticks available $19 Day of the Viper stealthships, mis. Martian Dreams $13 trolled ships, gun Generation $32 today. Features total 360 degree cursor control, greater Matrix Cubed siles, & transports $10 durability, a contoured pistol griphandle with audio and tactile Mean Street nery and damagel Dig Dug in your quest to rule control $421 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 feedback firebuttons and separate throttle control. $37 the galaxy $34 Might & Magic 1 or 2 $10 Dragon's Breath GO Joseki Genius $39 Space Vegetables S10 Might & Magic 3 or 4 $16 IBM ROLE PLAYING Mines of Titan $12 Dragon's Lair S24 Spheed $21 IBM SIMULATION GO Junior $19 Spot $15 Oficial Sierra Hint Bks S12 2400 AD $28 Mission Imposs ble $19 Dragon's Lair 2 934 Simpsons Arcade Game S31 688 Attack Sub $19 GO Master 5 DOS/WIN 539 Stratego $31 Planet's Edge $16 Autoduel S26 Murder $29 Drgn's Lair Singe Csul $34 Sliders S27 A10 Avenger 546 GO Scbbler S34 Strip Poker 3 $31 Police Quest 1-3 Ea. $10 Bad Blood $31 Obitus $27 Freakn Funky Fuzzballs 519 Space Ace 1 of 2 $34 A10 Tank Killer 1.5 53: GO Tactical Wizard $39 Strip Pokr 3 DD 1-6 Ea. $19 Pool of Darkness $12 Bard's Tale 2 $19 Pirates Gold $34 Galactic Conqueror $31 Space Wars $37 Aces of the Pacific S42 GO Master Toolkit $39 Super Jeopardy 527 Pool of Radiance $10 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Planet's Edge $38 Galactic Empire 327 Speedball 2 $25 Aces Pacific Mission 1 $27 Grand Slam Bridge $17 Super Tetris S29 Populous 182 Officl Str $16 Bard's Tale Cnstretn St $19 Prophecy 1 $12 Galaxian $ 6 Stellar 7 $21 Aces Pacific Mission 2 $27 Grand Slam Bridge 2 --$32 Terminator Chess S34 Power Manger $10 Battletech 1 $12 Ouestron 2 $12 Gauntlet 1 or 2 $9 Super Oll Road $15 Aces over Europe $46 Grandmaster Chess $37 Tetris Classic $27 Power Mngr Strategy Bk$16 Battletech 2 $31 Rings of Medusa *$24 Goblins S24 Super Pac Man S9 Aces Europe Mission 1 $27 Home Alone 2 $26 Trump Castle 2 $24 Prophecy of the Shadow $12 Black Crypt $32 Sea Roque $39 Gold of the Aztecs $29 Super Space Invaders S25 Aces Europe Mission 2 $27 Home Casino Spectacle $15 Trump Castle 3 $34 Ouest for Clues 2.30r4 $21 Bloodwych S15 Sentinel Worlds \"$12 Grave Yardage $12 Take a Break Crosswrd S29 AH 64 Helicopter S46 ce of FraDry $39 Flight Stick mula Thu The S17 $24 san $6 S10 Circle Reader Service #55 "


"Review 0 0 A Cyberpunk Meets Robopunk be Maxis' RoboSport for Windows by Jim «Bot\" Cooper ROBOSPORT MAXE TITLE: Amiga, IBM Windows, Mac REVIEWED ON: IBM Windows PLAYERS: 1-4 PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up Serial Number Comparison w/multi-players DESIGNER: Edward Kilham PUBLISHER: Maxis Orinda, CA member to use protection. Garbage cans, rubble, fences; nothing compares to a good bush. Can you do it in public? Four people can do it at a time. But try not to get attached to any one partner because you never know which way they'll turn. o you ever get the urge to guzzle down a quick lube, juice up the old bunny, jack in to suck out the latest aggressor routines and just throttle off with the cyber-droogs for some serious chassis-bashing? If you know what I mean, it's Robo time, Sport. Over the summer Maxis released a Windows version of the robot basher already available on Amiga and Macintosh. If you want an exercise in empire building, clever up, robo brain: this is not your Software Toy. They call RoboSport \"the thinking man's shoot-em-up\" and guerrilla chess with sound effects. What it really feels like is shooting one of those SuperSoaker squirt guns on your computer. It takes less than five minutes to learn the programming language your \"bots» obey and a single game to master. The map interface is only slightly more challenging, since both are intuitive and powerful. A lot of thought obviously went into them. This leaves plenty of time for strategy. What do you get? RoboSport is \"Tank\" with an attitude, the ultimate electronic wind-up toy. Up to four teams of 1-8 robots field seven different weapons: three projectile, two missile, one up-close-and-personal, and one booby-trap. Remember Maze Wars, the real-time gang-banger for Macintosh networks? Same feeling. How quick is the rush? Fast. It takes only two game seconds to enter the arena. You can shoot three times, duck, turn, switch weapons, and die by the third second. Survive 15 seconds and you've survived round one. Can you do it with a friend? You might say your equipment was made for it. Everything works perfectly with two people at the controls. Just reCan you prove it later? Smile; you are always on film. Watch, gloat, or plot revenge at your leisure. The afterglow viewpoint pioneered by flight sims is half of this game. So, if your situational awareness gets airsick at altitudes above 10 feet, try piloting these mechanized grunts. Can you squeeze a quickie in during the day? If you've got five minutes, you've got a time and another 90 in peripheral vision; you don't have to look where you're going. Three robot postures trade speed and visibility against protection. You can fire into a square or at whatever pops into sight. Three guns balance rounds-per-second against accuracy. Bullets have to hit first; grenades and missiles don't, but they scatter. Two kinds of time are important. You decide how much (real) time you get to program your moves each turn: the bad news is this interval never changes during a game; the good news is your job only gets easier as you lose bots. The second kind of time can be reset after every move, and that's how big a slice off the (game) clock the next round will take. date. Can you get away with it? Maybe if you're both real gentle. But we're talking noise here. Gunfire, explosions, death-screams. Real dogs-and-catsliving-together stuff. You can turn it off, sure, but then, what are you getting away with? Whatever your decision, SoundBlaster will support it. What's it like? That's putting your finger on it: to play just follow a simple algorithm. Plot your moves: watch the carnage: repeat. The basics are look, move, cover, and shoot. You see 90 degrees accurately at a The beauty of the game is that you write a short program every turn for each of your robots. The only conditional allowed is called \"Scan&Fire\"-our old friend opportunity fire — so you really do end up strategizing as much as you would in a chess game. After every round your concentration is rewarded with a fireworks display: reward or punishment, at least the feedback is quick. There are sneaky things to do aplenty. Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"FREE« GAME WITH EACH ORDER OVER $100 CALL 800 753 GAME $12 $37 $26 S15 O THEATRE 110 b all game 543 $24 $32 $36 $19 $19 $34 $24 $39 om 333 oMPICS $3: IBM SIMULATION I BM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION BM CHARACTER MAC STRATEGY MAC STRATEGY MAC TRADITIONAL AMIGA WARGAMES AMIGA WARGAMES Air Force Commander $34 Megafrtrss Mission 1 $26 Test Drive 2 Euro Chilg $15 EDITORS Harpoon Battle Set 4 $27 Solitaire Royale $15 Blitzkrieg $29 UMS 2 $34 Allied Forces Bundle S29 Megalitess Mission 2 $26 Test Drive 2 Muscle Cr $10 Treasures Savage Fint $16 Harpoon Challenge Pck $59 Stratego S31 Blitzkrieg May 1940 $34 Wargame Constrcin Set $12 Armor Geddon S29 Megafortress 3D Editor S27 Test Drive 2. Supercars $15 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Harpoon Chilngr Pck SE$59 Super Tettis $32 Campaign $29 Warhead $34 ATAC $29 Megatortress Mega Pk-$38 Test Drive 3 $29 Ultima 4-7 Ea $16 Lemmings $29 Swap $29 Charge of Light Brigade $34 Waterloo ATP $37 Miami Enforcer $39 TD3 Road & Car Disk $19 Ultima Martian Dreams $16 Mission Starlight $29 Tetris Civil War No Gir Glory $42 Western Front B17 Flying Fortress $39 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32 TFH & BH1942 544 Ultima Savage Empire 516 Moonbase $29 Wordtris $29 Conflict Korea $36 White Death Battle Command $19 Orbits $37 Thunderhawk $24 Ultima Underworld S16 Operation Combat $15 Conflict Middle East $36 Battlefield 2000 S37 Power Boat Simulator $39 Thunderstrike $27 Wizardry 4 or 5 $16 Railroad Tycoon S45 MAC ROLE PLAYING Dreadnoughts $42 AMIGA STRATEGY Birds of Prey S32 Rapcon $29 Top Gun Danger Zone $31 Wizardry 1-3 $16 Reach for the Stars $29 Curse of Azure Bonds $38 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Archipelagos Blue Max Aces WWI $12 Reach for the Skies 531 Tracon 1 or 2 WIN $34 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $16 Robo Sport $35 Dark Queen of Krynn $38 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Armada 2525 \"THEATRE OF Tracon 2 \"JOHN MADDEN) King's Bounty PATRIOT is the Ultrabots FOOTBALL 2 im. Might & Magic 3 TIR WAR'Isareal-time $38 definitive land warUnnatural Selection $32 $34 game of strategy provesononeofthe Pirates tare simulation for and conquest ona Vette $29 $38 most popular footPools of Darkness the PC. In this ini chess-like board Virtual Reality Studio $49 ball games avail/ Pools of Radiance tialbattleset.coali SISATEYA Features Super Wing Commander 1 $39 able with, play byl Secret of Silver Blades $38 tion forces meet W ASTE VGA graphics in WC1 Secret Mssn 1 or 2$19 Spirit of Excalibur $29 play analysis, an BAGN with the defiant $45 640x480, tay tracedl WC 1 Bundle 1 icon menu, instant Starflight 1 of 2 troops of Saddam 3D game pieces. es Wing Commander 2 $45 replay, and evenl Vengeance of Excalibur $29 Hussein. Com modemplay, 1 or 2 WC2 Opertn Mod 1 or 2 $27 help from Madden Windwalker $28 mand over 2000 player game, mu-WC2 Speech Pack $15 himself. Other fea. Wizardry 1 units from either sic that varies with $15 Wolfpack tures include player Wizardry 2 side. Features 256 the mood of the tures include player Wizardry2 X Wing SS M ODO ratings, match-ups Wizardry Cosmic Forge $37 color VGA graph gme configurable Yeager's Air Combat $38 injuries, field conics, state-of-the-art game board up to MAC ARCADE ditions, & ability to database, interface 50x50 tiles. $32 IBM CD ROM designplays. -$32) 4D Boxing $32 & mapping, -$44 BUY 2 GET 11 7th Guest $32 $56 + BUY 2 GET 1 MI BUY 2 GET 1 Armor Alley Aesop's Fables $32 Crazy Cars $25 Campaign Strat Flight S$37 Red Baron $39 Battle Chess DOS/WIN $46 IBM EDUCATIONAL Romance 3 Kingdoms $12 Dragon's Lair $34 Fire Brigade $35 Bandit King Anct China $37 Car and Driver $38 Red Baron Missn 1 or 2 524 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Castle of Dr Brain $29 Simcity S29 Dragon's Lair Color $34 Fleet Med $36 Battle Isle $32 Cardinal of the Kremlin $27 Red Storm Rising S14 Capstone Game Collect $45 EcoQuest 1 or 2 $34 Simcity Graphic 1 or 2 $23 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Gettysburg Turning Pnt 36 Beast Busters Carrier Command $12 Road&Track Grand Prix $37 Conan $24 Island of Dr Brain $29 Simcity Terrain Editor $15 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe $34 Great Naval Battles S42 Bg Business Conqueror Multi Tank $16 Sailing Instructor CGA $199 Cnast Robin Hood WIN S42 Jones in the Fast Lane S24 Sim Earth $41 Faces Tetris 3 $25 Halls of Montezuma S28 Black Gold $28 Crash Course 56 Sailing Simulator CGA $39 Don Quixote $32 Mario Teaches Typing S24 Spaceward Ho! 537 Guy Spy Color s23 Harpoon 538 Breach 1 Scenario Disk $16 Design yr own Railroad S29 East Coast Voyages $34 Dune $35 Mixed Up Faery Tale $29 Strategic Conquest $37 Nova 9 Color $21 Harpoon Battle Set 2 519 Breach 2 Dynamics Bundle $39 West Coast Voyages $34 El Grito Del Jaguar WINS46 Mixed Up Mother Goose S34 Uncharted Wators $42 Oids $25 Harpoon Battle Set 3 $19 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 El Fish $41 Sailing Instructor VGA S239 Fascination WIN $39 Quarky Quayso Science S29 Warlords $29 Pick n Pile $28 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $26 Buzz Aldnn Race Space 536 Elite Plus $19 Sailing Simulator VGA 842 Jones in the Fast Lane $42 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Pipe Dream $19 Harpoon Chling Pck SE $49 Castles Eye of the Storm $29 East Coast Voyages $39 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 Twisty History $29 MAC ADVENTURE Shuttlepuck Cafe $27 Harpoon Scenario Editr $27 Castles 2 $36 F117A Nighthawk $42 West Coast Voyages $39 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Adventes Willie Beamish $39 Space Age $34 In Harms Way $36 Centurion Deinde Rome $32 F14 Tomcat 'SEX OLYMPICS MAC SPORTS Conquest of Longbow $39 Civilization $39 F15 Strike Eagle 2 combines sexuall 4th & Inches $12 Heart of China Covert Action F15 SE2 Scenario Disk $17 tongue-in-cheek Fast Break $30 Indy Jones Grphe Adver $32 Deuteros F15 Stnke Eagle 3 S44 humor, adult Hardball 2 531 King's Quest 5 Dino Wars F19 Stealth Fighter graphics, unusual Jack Nicklaus Great 18 527 Leisure Suit Lryl Color $34 Dragon Force F22 ATF sound effects and J Nicklaus CD 1-5 Ea. $15 Leisure Suit Larry5 $39 Feudal Lords F29 Retaliator an icon driven Mean 18 Golf $30 Loom $29 Final Conflict $34 Falcon AT $19 point-and-click in NASCAR Challenge $31 Lost Treasures Infocom $46 Fireteam 2200 $34 Falcon 3.0 PGA Tour Golf terface to create a $43 $38 Mutant Beach Full Metal Planet Falcon 3 Scenario 1 game that is a little PGA Tour Course Disk1 $17 Out of this World $36 Dk Tao MIND MATUTINE GUTE Genghis Khan $37 Fire & Forget 2 different than your Playmaker Football $32 Police Quest 3 Color $34 Global Effect $32 Flight of the Intruder $19 usual fare Fea. Tom Landry Football $29 Rise of the Dragon $34 Gold of the Americas Flight Simulator 4.0 $42 tures 3 levels of Wayne Gretzky Hockey $36 Secret of Monkey Island $39 Imperium Aircraft Scenry Design $35 game play, and Weaver Baseball $32 Sky Shadow $28 Koshan Conspiracy Flight Planner 524 MERCENARIES' lets you command a group of soldiers on objects thatchange Space Quest 3 or 4 Lemmings $32 New Facilities Locator $27 MAC WARGAMES location each time Where Europe CSD interplanetary combat missions. Each mercenary, civilian $30 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Sound, Graphics Upgrde $27 and alien has their own personality. Produce your own you play. $30 S24 Americn Civil War Vol 1 $29 Where Time CSD ABRAD STALLION ADMINTURN L'Empereur Fly Grand Canyon 3D $45 J Civil War No Gtr Glry $42 Where USA CSD $30 missions with the built in scenario editor. BUY 2 GET1 < $38 Lost Admiral 834 Gunboat $33 Scenery Collectn A or B S37 Lost Treasurs Inlocom $46 Hals of Montezuma $29 Where World CSD 927 Space Ace 2 $34 Kampfgruppe $37 Medieval Warors S15 Gunship $12 Secret Weapons Litwft $44 Mantis Expert Fighter $45 Harpoon Scenario Editr $27 Space Ace 2 Color $34 Kreigsmarine $36 Mega Lo Mania Gunship 2000 $39 S Weapons Exp1 P38 $21 Omar Sharif on Bridge $46 Panzer Battles $29 MAC TRADITIONAL Starglider 2 $29 Kursk Campaign $36 Merchant Colony $34 Gunship 2000 Scenario $24 S Weapons Exp2 P80 $21 Secret of Monkey Island 549 Patton Strikes Back $37 Battle Chess 1 or 2 $29 Tesserae $32 LongLance $36 Millenium $24 Harrier Combat Sim 56 S Weapons Exp3 He162 $21 Secret Weapon's Luftwit$59 Rommel North Africa $29 Bridge 6.0 $29 Thexder 1 515 Lord of the Rising Sun $30 Moonbase Heathv S25 S Weapons Exp4 Do335$21 Sherlock Holmes $44 UMS 2 $34 Bridge 7 $31 Tristan $48 Lost Patrol $34 Navy Moves $27 Heroes of the 357th $32 Shadow President $34 Shuttle $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $29 Checkmate $36 Welltris $24 Main Battle Tnk C Grmy $36 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Hoverforco $31 Shuttle $29 Space Quest 4 $42 V for Victory $38 Chessmaster 2100 $32 Xerion $25 Main Battle Tnk N Grmy 536 Nuclear War $15 Hunt for Red October $22 Sim Earth 2000 $42 Spirit Excalibur $24 Classic 5 Malta Storm $36 Ogre $19 Hyperspeed $34 Sim Farm $41 Star Child $32 MAC STRATEGY Cribbage King Gin King $27 MAC SIMULATION Moscow Campaign S36 Omega $34 Jet Fighter 2 $39 Sim Lile $41 Star Trek 25th Annivrsy $46 Ancient Art of War $29 Crossword Magic 832 Carrier Command $31 North & South $27 Operation Combat $15 Jet Fighter 2 Missn Disk $19 Silent Service 2 $34 Stellar 7 $42 Ancient Art War at Sea $29 Go Master 5 $39 Design your own Train 532 Operation Overlord $36 Overlord \"PC SYMPHONY\" Ultima Bundle $59 \"MEDIA CON F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 RAGNAROK is an 8 bit Adlib Where in World CSD $64 Falcon lets you experie compatible sound White Horse Child $32 ence the vast, un card for your PC Wing Commandr Bundle $45 A patible sound card. Falcon Color bounded world of Features 11-voice Features 11-voice Grand Prix Circuit FM music, built in IBM CHARACTER Norse Mythology FMmusic, digitized Hunt for Red October Acquire the arcane EDITORS 4 watt power am-1 Life and Death 44EDIA CONCEPT voice input, digiskills of polymorph plifier simulta. S16 Bard's Tale 1-3 Ea tized voice output Megafortress and transforma neous 9 voice, 61 Champions of Krynn $16 full duplex MIDI Red Baron Color tion in order to de melody, 85ihythm Curse of Azure Bonds S16 Sands of Fire interface, 4 watts feat Surt and his sound generation, S16 Dark Heart of Uukrul Sim Ant perchannel output 535 hordes of Demons hardware volumel Dark Queen of Krynn $16 volume control Sim City Supreme Indudes 100 action control to 4 ohm &l Death Knights of Krynn $16 microphone and Specter $37 packed realms RC 8 chm speaker chm sneaker Drakkhen $16 line in jacks, a Tank $37 over 200 magical $16 earphone output & Escape from Hell Test Drive 2 joystock port, and artifacts. 200 disinternal speakerl Eye of Beholder 1 or 2 $16 Hardware decom Test Drive 2 CA Chaling $15 tinct races,& VGA S16 output S37 Fountain of Dreams pression S84Test Drive 2 Euro Chilg $15 $84 graphics. $38 Hard Nova $16 Test Drive 2 Muscle Car S15 Jump Jet $39 Stormovik $15 Keys to Maramon $16 Balance of the Planet $19 Hoyle's Book Games 1 $21 Test Drive 2 Supercars S15 Operation Spruance $34 Paladin $28 Knights of the Sky S29 Strike Aces $19 Knights of Legend S16 Castles $36 Hoyle's Book Games 2 $21 Tracon S31 Overrun $15 Perfect General Land, Sea & Air 1 or 2 $39 Strike Commander S45 Lord of the Rings 1 or 2 $16 Citadel $26 Hoyle's Book Games 3 $29 Tracon 2 $29 Panzer Battles $29 Perfect General Scen LHX Attack Chopper $17 Stunt Driver $15 Magic Candle 1-3 Each $16 Command HQ $39 Ishido $34 Vette $33 Patriot 538 Populous $32 Life & Death 1 or 2 $23 Stunt Island $34 Megatraveller 1 or 2 $16 Cyber Empire $32 Lexicross $32 Yeager's AFT $32 Rommel El Alamein $36 Populous 2 Lightspeed $29 Tank $37 Might & Magic 1-3 Each $16 Darwin's Dilemma $32 Monopoly Rommel at Gazala $36 Populous World Editor S16 M1 Tank Platoon $24 Team Yankee $34 Planets Edge $16 Genghis Khan $37 Omar Shanton Bridge $36 AMIGA WARGAMES Rorke's Drift $34 Ports of Call $25 Mantis Exprmntl Fght $29 Team Yankee 2 $29 Pool of Radiance S16 Gold of the Americas $29 Risk $29 Action Stations S29 Second Front $36 Powermonger Mantis Speech Pack S19 Test Drive 2 $30 Prophecy of the Shadow $16 Go Master 5 $109 Sargon 5 $32 Action Stations Scenario $14 Storm Across Europe $12 Powermonger WWI Maximum Overkill $44 Test Drive 2. Collection $29 Secret of Silver Blades $16 Harpoon $39 Scrabble Deluxe $29 Afrika Corps $34 To the Rhine $36 Railroad Tycoon Megafortress $26 Test Drive 2. CA Challg S15 Sentinel Worlds $16 Harpoon Set 2 or 3 $22 Shanghai 2 $32 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Typhoon of Steel $15 Reach for the Stars $28 $26 S2 $37 531 $29 $24 ENDY EN PC SYMPHONY undblastercomFalcon AT  $39 $27 $34 $38 $32 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"Review Zapping at close range is marvelous when you have both backed up carefully, and at A 23 -1-------Cade tar ut ihan i 1401 0752 Select rabat position in to set centietilen Cyborgd In Pubble Thre Fue fun Robeh frese C who's with whom. Next to a four-player free-for-all, the most fun is taking on two allied computer teams with a human partner. For that arcade feeling, crank turns down to five seconds with 30 seconds to plot. Chess instead? Firefight sans missile weapons in the Battle arena in 30-second chunks with no time limits and no substitutions. D-Day? Invite your friends to the Huge arena, pump up the computer forces with Al on Crafty, dial a pyromaniac's portion of missiles and grenades, and warp those 'bo's in waves. High Elle Movie Bobots Arena MOODID meile What's Bad Figures on the map are so small it can be hard to tell their facing, especially crouched. The plot and move interfaces are near perfect, but moving between them requires an unnecessary step or two, and every break in the action is fatiguing in a game that comes this close to real-time. Computers in Computer Four tack may be painful, your robots' pathetic Ow's and Aargh's will be amusing. The charm of role-playing lies dormant in every game, but it would take a terawalt imagination to coin pet names for these robots. Identical but for weaponry, thickness of skin, and aim-whose inter-relationships are hard-wired-all robots look and sound alike from the color down. If Maxis opts for an expansion set, I would hope to mix and match chassis, engines, sensing and targeting systems, as well as a few more weapons. What's the Word? RoboSport is a classic anyway. The interfaces are greased lightning. Customizing your games means you can happily play for a long, long time. And perhaps best of all is the multi-player dimension. When even the best Al has taken you as far as it will go, RoboSport's modem and serial connections stand ready to bring your friends right to your throat. Kudos to the programmers for the flawless quality I've experienced. Of course, cooperation is always orders of magnitude more fun than pure competition, and its innate capability in RoboSport may be the one trait that gives this away as a Maxis product. For increasing our global competitiveness alone, employers around the country should place this game high on the list of network applications to install first. Ross Perot should hire any team that can tackle a Hostage Firefight Melee in the Suburbs. I still don't understand how something that plays like a street game feels like chess, but it does. If you like Heavy Nova, Lemmings, or particularly MechWarrior on GEnie or PC, try RoboSport. It will be interesting to compare it to Three-Sixty Pacific's new abstract conflict title, and especially to SSI's Cyber Empires. All in all, RoboSport is at least three excellent games crammed into one nearly seamless package. That's the best excuse for putting out another entry in a well-worn category, and the only good reason if it's still chock full of virile titles. CGW COMPUTER WARGAMES Historically Accurate...Easy To Use For IBMTM PC and Compatibles BIG THREE la GRANDE (V 2.01) ARMEE WWII Strategy Game Napoleon's Campaigns Seven Scenarios, Map Seven Scenarios, Map World-Renown New Release Hard Drive Required Challenging, Intense European Theatre Austerlitz to Waterloo $25 Each. Send check or money order to: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Department C 314) 966-5602 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. Evenings Only St. Louis, MO 63131 Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk THE Movie Bobots the end of the last turn realized walls don't wear bandoleers. Even nastier is the Time Bomb. Once you've made it to a treasure pile or baseball base, what better way to return the hospitality? They work really really well. Die-hards will appreciate Johnny Baker's fail-safe tactic. Driving home with my copy, I narrowly avoided a car that pulled into an intersection and stopped. Just like a mynah bird taught to say \"here kitty kitty\" or an S&L president, you could say its driver was programmed for self-destruction. It's a lot more fun on the small screen; the sound effects are better, for one thing. With a little practice you can take out two or three silicon cousins, if not quite as many taxpayers. Can you make excuses afterwards? Sorry, there's not much luck here. Chess it's not, but smarts will win out, and quickly. Dummies crash and burn. If you know how to look, know how to move, and know how to shoot: hey, you're an expert. The rest depends on who you're with. What's Great? The interfaces are so clean they disappear. Programming takes a point and a click. There's no need to order the robots step-by-step as they find their own way around, and those you already ordered even move around the map as you program the rest. If you change your mind, just erase and re-program. Watch the clock! Does Robo Know Baseball? My favorite scenario is Baseball in the Huge Suburbs arena as a Beat-the-Clock challenge, but in ten minutes I can grab a Capture-the-Flag Skirmish in the Small Rubble arena, Missile-Fest style. You design your own games with the scenario selection interface, choosing among five objectives, five battlefields, three terrain types, and five scenarios, plus details like how much missile ammo comes with and Arena What's Missing RoboSport might have been a better game if it embraced the gospel of the Terminator. As it is, it lacks a satisfyingly violent milieu and I miss the usual megalomaniac's manifesto. Victory crows tend toward \"We put paid to them. By Jove! They came a cropper,\" more than \"We breathe fire and fart grenades. Mess with us. Get blowed up.\" In Maxis's defense, by the nature of the game, action will at times feel out of your control. This potential for frustration was deftly countered by RoboSport's humorous slant. Although watching a pivoting defense eviscerate that brilliant pincer atCircle Reader Service #133 Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"& BUY 2 EAD GAMES GET 1 EAD GAME FREE CALL 800 753 GAME $31 $22F20 $28 CARA DRIVER UMMON ing game. Play in side this game filled Heavy Metal Home Alone secret passage. Hyperforce ways & dungeons. Killing Cloud TTLES ic during WWII           5 **$24 *$12 Utopia SPELAAMMOO PIRATES OF Punisher PIRATES OF Punisher REALMSPACE Hings of Medusa HOLMG have struck apain have struck again Bard's Tale 3 $28 AMIGA STRATEGY AMIGA ADVENTURE AMIGA ADVENTURE AMIGA SPORTS AMIGA ROLE PLAYING AMIGA ARCADE AMIGA SIMULATION AMIGA SIMULATION Realms S19 Ivanhoe $34 Shogun $41 PGA Tour Golf 532 Legend of the Lost S34 Cyber Space $29 Blue Angels $15 Test Drive 2 Euro Chilg S15 Renegade Legion Intop! $12 James Bond Stealth AlfrS34 Space Hulk $38 PGA Tour Golf Course 1917 Lord of the Rings V1 $34 Dark Castle S31 Blue Max Aces Grt War $34 Test Drive 2 Muscle Car S15 Riders of Rohan $31 Joan of Arc Space Quest 1 $34 RBI 2 $32 Lure of the Temptress S37 Dark Century $29 Cardinal of the Kremlin $32 Test Drive 2 Supercars S15 Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 KGB $19 Space Quest 2 $15 Reel Fishin $31 Matrix Cubed $32 Day of the Viper $33 Conqueror $34 Their Finest Hour $21 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $42 Khalaan $34 Space Quest 3 $34 RVF Honda $30 Midwinter $28 Dragon's Lair $34 Das Boot Submarine $34 Thunderhawk $29 Rules of Engagement $38 King's Bounty $15 Space Quest 4 $34 Shark Attack Unlim Golf $28 Might & Magic 2 $38 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Eye of Storm Flight Sim $29 Thunderstrike Simcity $33 King's Quest 1 $19 Steigar $27 Ski or Die $32 Might & Magic 3 $38 Dragon Lair Esc SingeC $34 F15 Strike Eagle2 $29 Tracon 2 Simcity Terrain Editor $15 King's Quest 2 $15 Street Rod 2 $27 Sport of Kings $15 Murder $29 Fire Power $17 F16 Combat Pilot $34 Virtual Reality Studio $49 Star Control $34 King's Quest 3 $15 Theme Park Mystery $15 Summer Challenge $34 Pirates $19 Flood $29 F19 Stealth Fighter $34 Western Europe Disk $22 Starfleet 1 $38 King's Quest 4 $34 Time Machine $34 Superstar Basketball $24 Plan 9 from Outr Space $31 Globulus F29 Retaliator $34 Yeager's AFT $26 'CAR & DRIVER Total Eclipse THE ULTIMATE FANTASY DRIVING GAME THE SUMMONGolden Axe $17 IN GREAT NA lets you test drive Treasure Savage Frontr $32 ADVANCED MILLATOR ING' is a single pole Gravity VAL BATTLES Turrican 10 of the best per$28 character roleplay Guy Spy you to command Universe 3 $34 formance cars like the British or War in Middle Earth the Porshe 959. $15 Test Drive German navy in Shelby Cobra, and Warriors of Legend $19 with mazes, casties. Ten of the Best | Hoverforco the North AtlanFerrari Testarossa Where in Europe CSD $34 tic during WWII Features 10 differWhere in USA CSD $34 Captain's view Where in World CSD ent tracks, bit $27 NORTH You gather clues. Killing Game Show puts you on the ATLANTIC mapped land. William Tell $28 solve puzzles,con Knights of Crystallion 1939-43 bridge with state Wonderland $19 scapes, drive in verse with NPC's, Last Ninja 3 of-the-art graphics any direction or ott and battle hordes Leander Fleet view gives you road, head to head AMIGA TRADITIONAL of monsters. FeaLight Quest aneagle's eye view via modem, instant American Tail Color Bk S19 tures 40 levels. Matrix Marauders of a task force. Ad. replay, and 256 Battle Choss $29 automapping and Menace miral view allows color VGA. $38 Battle Chess 2 Chinese $29 pitablemaps-381 Mystical STEL strategicplay.-$45 Checkmate BUY 2 GET 1 TEL BUY 2 GET 1 Navy Seals S27 BUY 2 GET 1 Chessmaster 2100 $34 Never Mind $26 Stock Market $15 King's Quest 5 $34 Clue Master Detective $28 Team Suzuki $15 Pool of Radiance $15 Night Breed $14 FA18 Interceptor S18 SPEND $100 GET 1 FREE Sword of Aragon $12 Leather Goddesses $15 Cribbage King Gin King $28 Tom Landry Football $29 Prophecy of Shadow $38 Night Shift S19 Falcon $34 3 in 1 Players Pack $24 Theater of War $32 Legend of Faerghail $28 Harpoon Design Series $32 Wayne Gretzky Hockey $36 Rings of Medusa $34 Nitro $32 Falcon Mssn Disk 1 or 2 S19 Backgammon \"$24 Third Reich $27 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Home Alone 2 $29 Wayne Gretzky Hoky 2 $34 Secret of Silver Blades $15 Nova 9 $21 Flames of Freedom $29 Chess Net Traders $19 Leisure Suit Larry 1 Enh S34 Hayle's Book Games 1 $21 Wayne Gretzky League $28 Shadow Sorcerer $32 Ork $29 Flight Simulator 2 $34 Deja Vu 2 Las Vegas \"$12 Uncharted Waters $42 Leisure Suit Larry 1 S24 Hoyle's Book Games 2 $21 World Circuit $34 Sleeping Gods Lle $29 Out Run $28 Galactic Conqueror $31 Don't Go Alone 831 Leisure Suit Larry 2 S15 Hoyle's Book Games 3 $29 World Class Leaderbed $26 Space Ace $34 Paperboy 2 $27 Gun Boat $33 Dragon Lord \"$19 Warlords $32 Leisure Suit Larry 3 S24 Ishido $36 World Class LB CD 1 S15 Space Inc. $34 Pick'n Pile $27 Hawaiian Odyssey $22 Edward O'Thorpe BJ \"$24 Worlds at War $29 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $39 Jones in the Fast Lane S24 World Class LB CD 2 $15 Space Roque $34 Pitfighter $22 Heatwave $28 Fast Break Basketball \"$12 License to Kill S28 Monopoly S24 World Class LB CD 3 $15 Spirit of Excalibur $19 Plague $28 Hunt for Red October $22 Mi Tank Platoon $24 AMIGA ADVENTURE Lord of the Rings Vol 2 $36 Omar Sharif on Bridge $32 World Champ Soccer S12 Starlight 1 $32 Power Drift $28 Japan Scenery Disk $22 Magic Johnson FB \"$12 Advenir Willie Beamish $34 Lost Treasures Infocom $39 Peanuts Starflight 2 $32 Power Drome S18 Jet $33 Megatraveller Zodani **$24 Altered Destiny T $37 W IN THELOSTFILES STFILES AMIGA ROLE PLAYING Sword of Twilight 834 $12 Xhen 'SPELLJAMMEROperation Combat An American Tail $29 OF SHERLOCK Alien Drug Lord $34 Terran Envoy **$24 Arthur Ouest Excalibur $34 HOLMES' Jack the Autoduel $26 Third Courier \"524 B.AT Bard's Tale 2 Ripper appears to $19 Times of Lore Sentinel Worlds Betrayal \"S12 $29 combinesa 3D space $32 Twilight 2000 Sound Star Sound Card\"$29 Black Cauldron Battle Master and you must stop Simulator with AD&D $38 Ultima 4 $12 PILATES OF tactical combat Sail Third Courier Cadaver $27 Black Crypt him. Explore doz. $32 Ultima 5 REALMSPACE through space and Video Poker A'la Carte \"S24 Chambr Sci Mutant Prst $31 ens of authentic Bloodwych $34 Vengeance of Excalibur Video Poker Masque engageenemyships Chuck Rock \"S19 London locations. Bloodwych Data Disk $21 Windwalker Codename Iceman in real time battles use your laboratory Captive $30 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $39 CHIPS & BITS Colonel's Bequest then board the en $15 to analyze clues Carthage $29 Wizardry 7 $45 Conquest of Camelot PO Box 234 $15 Celtic Legends emy vessel for and interact with $32 Wrath of the Demon close range tacts Rochester VT 05767 Conquest of Longbow many unique char. Champions of Krynn S32 Xenomorph Courtroom Fax 802-767-3382 cal combat with S27 acters Features Chaos in Andromeda 802-767-3033 Crime Does Not Pay S34 weapons & spells. AMIGA ARCADE VGA & a classicall Chronoquest2 Features point and Cruise for a Corpse soundtrack (544 Conan $19 Agony $29 click control. 338 Cyber Empire \"Spend $100 on any in BUY 2 GET 1 Corporation $19 Amazing Spiderman BUY 2 GET 11 stock software and get 1 Damocles Curse Azure Bonds $15 Amnios starred game free Dark Halt $34 Magic Fly $28 Penthouse Jigsaw $24 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Anarchy $24 Predator 2 $15 Kennedy Approach $34 Darkman $29 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $24 Pinball Dreams $32 Death Knights of Krynn $32 Aquaventura $29 Prehistorik $29 Knights of the Sky S34 Buy 2 marked games Dark Side $28 Manhunter NY S29 Pool Shark $15 Dragons of Flame $12 Arachnaphobia $27 Quix $25 Mi Tank Platoon S34 and get a coupon good for Death Bringer $28 Manhunter SF S29 Risk $24 Dragon Strike $15 Artura $34 Rick Dangerous $25 Mantis Experimntl Fghtr $34 1 game marked by Dick Tracy $22 Mean Streets $31 Scrabble $24 Diakkhen $39 Atomino $29 Robocop 2 $34 Megafortress $38 Duck Tales $31 Moebius $41 Shanghai 2 S32 Dungeon Master $28 Awesome $29 Robocop 3D $32 Megaforts Mssn Dsk 1 $27 We accept Visa, MC &Money Dune $35 Munsters $27 Solitaire's Journey $36 Dungeon Master 2 $28 Back to the Future 2 $15 Rollerbabes $25 Megafortess Mssn Dsk 2 S27 Orders. COD add $5. Checks East vs West Berlin $27 Oil's Well $21 Solitaire Royale $24 Elvira Mistress Dark S34 Back to the Future 3 $15 Shadow Beast 2 $27 Reach for the Skies $31 Held 4 Weeks. Most items Ell $32 Omnicron Conspiracy $29 Spot $15 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $39 Barbarian $28 Shadow Beast 3 $27 Red Baron $34 shipped same day. All shipping Free DC $34 Out of this World $36 Stratego $32 Eye of the Beholder $39 Barbanan 2 $29 Shockwave $29 Red Storm Rising $29 rates are per order not per item. Future Wars $34 Planet of Lust $28 Strip Poker 3 $29 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Bar Games S34 Sliders $27 Sherman M4 $34 UPS $4:2 Day Air $6: Mail $5: Godfather S12 Police Quest 1 $24 Swap $29 Faery Tale Adventure $31 Batman Caped Crusade $28 Spacewrecked S31 Shuttle $29 Airmail Canada S6: HIAK, PR. \"GRAND SLAM Tetris \"MEGAFORTRESS Space Ace 2 \"V FOR VICTORY BRIDGE 2 im. Trump Castle 2 MEGA PACK Space Wars thrusts you into into M ore provesontheong combines the origi Speedball 2 AMIGA SPORTS nal to provide the Stellar 7 the role of military FOR VICTORY nal Megafortress most complete strategistduring the 3D Pool game, version 1.11 Stryx Normandyinvasion 4D Boxing bridge program upgrade, OperaSuperman of WWII. Features ever. Includes tul 4th & Inches tion SledgehamSuper Off Road ABC Monday Night FB $34 torial hands, flexfull color scrolling mer, the Mission Super Space Invaders ible practice mode, Challenge Golf map, nearly 500 Editor & the novel Targhan hints for new playCycles Grand Prix $34 military units. B *Flight of the Old TMNT ers, more bidding Days of Thunder types of combat $34 Fast Break TMNT Arcade Dog\" in one pack $17 conventions, & an maistcweather play Treasure Trap age. Features VGA either american or adjustable partner. Grand Prix Circuit a 3D world with uniUntouchables Supports mouse Greens $34 germancommand. versal camera Warlock Hardball VGA & all major 6 different sce. Wild Streets angles, 31 different Hardball 2 sound cards. « 832 narios, & 11 histor$28 Wild Wheels missions. -$38 Indianapolis 500 $32 calvariants. BUY 2 GET 1 $44 BUY 2 GET 1 Xenophobe BUY 2 GET 1 Internationl Sports Chilg 829 Zany Golf Gold Rush $24 Police Quest 2 $15 Jack Nicklaus Great 18 527 Federation $34 Batman the Movie $31 Zone Warrior S26 Silent Service 1 $15 2 Day Air $12. Airmail Europe Heart of China $34 Police Quest 3 $34 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited $39 Four Crystals of Trazere 832 Battle Bound $34 $12 first item plus S6 per addiHeimdall $19 Pools of Darkness $38 J Nicklaus CD 1-5 Ea. $15 Gatowy Savage Frontier $32 Bill & Ted's Excellet Ad S27 AMIGA SIMULATION Skyfox 2 $18 tional item. Horror Zombies Crypt $34 Prince of Persia $28 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $17 Hard Nova $32 Blockout S28 688 Attack Sub $32 Star Trek 25th Annivrsy $36 Hostage $31 Rise of the Dragon $34 J Connrs Pro Tennis Tr $32 Heart of the Dragon $34 Brain Blaster $28 A10 Tank Killer S34 Strike Aces $34 All Sales Final. Check Hound of Shadow $19 Search for the King S37 Links $37 Hero's Quest 2 $34 Bride of the Robot $28 A10 Tank Killer Enhncd $34 Strike Fleet S26 compatibility before you buy. Hunter $24 Secret of Monkey Island $38 Madden Football $32 Hilstar $12 Budokan $26 Aces of the Pacific S42 Team Yankee S34 Shipping times not Immortal $32 Secret Monkey Island2 $38 Mean 18 Goll S30 Journey $34 Chase HO $28 Armour Geddon $29 Team Yankee 2 529 guaranteed. Detectives Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $38 Sex Olympics $24 Mean 18 Course Disk 1 S15 Keel the Thief $15 Continuum $32 ATAC $29 Test Drive $27 replaced with same item. Indy Jones Grphic Advtr $24 Sex Vixens from Space $28 NASCAR Challenge $31 Keys to Maramon $32 Crackdown $20 Battle Command $26 Test Drive 2 $30 Offer, price, & availability Iron Lord S28 Shadow of the Beast S29 Over the Net $24 Legend $31 Cybercon 3 S29 Birds of Prey $32 Test Drive 2 CA Chling $15 subject to change. 3888888 $15 $25 krvaren Platoon Foto MEGAPORTRESS certifies the orig      BRIDGE $15 $27    $33 #3333 $18 Circle Reader Service #57 "


"FREE: Up To $140 Value nilly Will Enjoy! Castle of ADVENTURES Cuesta Wiratif you were nine again, knowing what you know no AKES THE Sin HOBIES Choose the Unsurpassed Clarity of Sprint L Sprint long-distance you a nationwide 100% service just became more digital, fiber optic valuable up to $140 network that provides more! Now, when you the long-distance quality switch your home long and reliability you need. distance service to Sprint, Experience for yourself you can select any Sierra Sprint's \"pin-drop\" clarity game, free! And after that makes both your longenjoying six months of distance calls and PC high-quality longdata transmissions crystal distance connections, clear and error free. you'll receive a second But unsurpassed call Sierra game or one and data clarity is just month of free long one of the many distance service.* benefits you will enjoy Only Sprint can offer as a Sprint customer... Save 20%, 25% more and you'll save Even 30% over ATT more as much as With Sprint PLUSSM 30% without any monthly fees or When you spend as calling restrictions!t little as $20 a month No matter what your on long distance, you home long-distance will receive automatic needs are, Sprint has a discounts of 20% over service or calling plan AT&T's basic rates on that's right for you. evening, night or Save on Long weekend direct dial Distance When You're state-to-state calls. And 10% savings on Away From Home, Toc your direct dial Sprint's FONCARDSM daytime calls. Spend travel card lets you "


"CLEAR LARRY Doda. Distance and Get Two Sierra Games Free! * continue to take advantage of clear calling and savings even when you're away from home. Plus FONCARD is free, with cards available to every member of your family. heers Van Derete At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all: operator services, directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong service you want while numbers. And we do it getting two Sierra games 24 hours a day! you enjoy? WEBS Gerarepte Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to Circle Reader Service #141 switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD only orders. Certain restrictions apply. Free month is up to 325 usage on 4th month invoice, So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the tRate comparison based on Sprint PLUS rates (8/1/91) vs. AT&T basic state-to-state rates (7/1/91). clarity, savings and Suportes CALL over 1-800-767-4547 Sprint "


"Sneak Preview Sim City In A Sandbox A Look Into The Future of Westwood Studio's Dune II by Chuck Moss \"Who asks for justice? We make our The resulting epic struggle made up to progressively gain control of the own justice. We make it here on Arrakis Herbert's classic novel. planet, region by region. Each region is — win or die...let us not rail about In Dune Il the player joins a three way won by competition in increasingly difjustice as long as we have arms and the fight for control of Arrakis between ficult scenarios. freedom to use them.\" — Duke Leto House Atreides, the Harkonnens, and a The meat of the game lies in contestAtreides, Dune. non-Herbert bunch called the \"Ordos.\" ing for regions. A player is an enyo it's back to the trepreneurial viceroy, plopped down in beach...more acHouse Atreldes the desert with a quota of credits to curately the sand1 3 :19 earn. He is equipped with a construcbox. As Frank Herbert's Home planet of the Atreides is the warm, temperate -tion base, a small military force and a Moce? stunning science fiction starting amount of monetary credits. novel Dune produced The unexplored regions of the map are many sequels, Westa dark unknown, as in Interstel's claswood Studios/Virgin sic Empire. Games are working on a The player must explore the region, sequel to their computer build up his base and mine spice (thus game Dune. Title? Dune bolstering his income), make quotas II. A sneak preview of a and win the scenario. Of course, there beta version left this is an enemy around somewhere doing Dune fanatic and tireless the same thing. Success in one region gamer as addicted as any moves the player on to another region: spice-dependent Fremen a harder scenario with more menu to a game that combines choices (i.e., bigger factoelements of Sim City with The Perfect Genries, stronger units). Credits 12726 eral. Dune marries the devel[Wind trap power center ostao opment/financial manageDune It Make Your ment dynamic of Sim City to the tactical battle chalBrown Eyes Blue, Too? lenge of The Perfect General. Players build their Background: In Herbert's series, bases by pouring concrete planet Arrakis, aka \"Dune,\" was a de(a lot of concrete gets sert world inhabited by giant sandpoured. So much that one worms who excreted \"spice,\" an begins to feel like an old addictive drug that gave long life and Soviet Empire techno-comprophetic abilities (as well as turning missar), and constructing one's eyes deep blue.) The Imperium spice refineries, windtrap was dependent on spice, which was BUILD BUIS power stations, storage simore precious than anything. GrapRESUME GAMERS los and various military inpling for the wealth and power spice stallations. Development is provided were the feudal Houses A player picks one House, the others handled as in Sim City, with building Atreides and bad guys) Harkonnen. are computer-controlled. The object is DO US Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"SUBVERSIONIM 1.0 War has been declared! As Commander of the Attack Submarine \"Nautilus\", your mission is to engage any and all enemy vessels within the region and obliterate them. Warning! They are armed with high-tech equipment and they are out to sink you! Chase down and sink destroyers with either a speedy torpedo or a nuclear-tipped missile. Blow enemy submarines out of the water as they close in on you. Dodge the cumbersome but sensitive mines -snag a cable and it's off to a watery grave. Send out your frogmen for some demolition work. Watch your resources! With only two supply ships, you'll have to be careful. Use them unwisely and you may find yourself sinking helplessly towards an implosive end. SubVersionTM is a challenging balance of strategy and tactics. With 10 levels and over 300,000 combinations of game play, Sub Version is sure to provide you with hours of destroyer-bashing fun. SubDersion Situation Display Torpedo Sonar 151 Status Creu 30  Depth 100 56 Convert Engine 5048 You destroyed 2 mines, Captain Nemo. You sank 2 destroyers, sir. Depth charges! Light damage Captain Nemo Your supply ship was sunk by gunfire! Score 70 Timer 0500 Ships 24 Level 5 Auxiliary Controls Available for Macintosh and compatible machines. Coming soon for IBM PCs and other computer systems. Macintosh 16 color screen shown See your local retailer or call: Game Created by: Captain Byte's Bit Shop Point Of View Computing, Inc. Box Artwork by: Josh Stigers 5050 Edison, Suite 221 Computer Artwork by: Steve Laveirge Colorado Springs, CO 80915 719 591 5320 Copyright  1992 Captain Byte's Bit Shop. All rights reserved worldwide. SubVersion is a trademark of Point Of View Computing, Inc. Circle Reader Service #120 "


"Sneak Preview choices made on a separate screen Of course, strategy is a major consid Bottom line: This is a stripped-down menu, paid for in credits, and placed via eration as well as of tactics. Although Dune. There is no Guild, Bene Gessemouse. Dune II is, at root, a tactical game, rit, Sardaukar, Muad'Dib, Fremen, To afford all these improvements, the strategy cannot be overlooked. An shields, Face Dancers (or face suckers, player must mine spice, shown on the ecologist's nightmare, the purpose of for that matter), interstellar politics, remap as red deposits. Spice is sucked up Dune Il is to suck dry the planet's only ligion or planetology. It is strictly a by a harvester machine, taken back to natural resource. Victory is decided by build, fight, and make money game base and converted to credits. Unfortumeeting spice quotas, and while it's with a Dune hook and a Dino Denately, rich spice beds will be contested loads of fun to go on a construction Laurentis movie look. by the enemy. Fortunately, orgy and roll over the rubble of enemy Verdict: I love this game! The that's where the game gets interMENTAT OPTIONS graphics are gorgeous. The topesting. Players start with a small Credits (T27112 view of the desert terrain looks force of units composed of ingreat, while the little cars leave fantry and light armor. As in The tracks, dead men sprawl on the Perfect General, individual ground, damaged units smoke and units are controlled by mouse. burn, and the ground shakes when Orders are given (move, attack, a building blows up! It is all fasciguard, etc.) and objectives on nating! the map designated. The now-standard mouse interThis makes Dune Il a handsface is simple. Regional set-ups on game of tactical exploration change to provide replay value. and combat. The player actively The game is easy to learn (I did it moves and fights his forces. without documentation) and alThere is no generalized \"battle\" though the AI isn't the brightest or \"defend\" command. Players bulb on the porch, it's hard to beat. take command and fight, deThis game is a fast, tense, visual velop tactics, or get slaughtered. feast that can easily swallow up an It's a tense grope in the dark to bases, one can stand supreme in the otherwise productive workday. To find and harvest the spice, a frantic race quote Paul Muad'Dib: \"Kull Wahad!\" region and find the spice used up! Also, to build, and a wild melee of shooting, Dune II will definitely spice up one's each house has its own strengths and burning, exploding units, with the weaknesses. Harkonnen has brute miligaming stew. Cow player clicking between different entary power, Ordo must work in stealth. counters. The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 Page 104 Circle Reader Service #75 Computer Gaming World "


"PANDEMONIUM INCORPORATED i Gaming Rig!! $18,00000 IN PRIZES! 3650TUNER Tours NH TONE SCORE 00019601 x 0700 toodud HELLLLLLLLL LLLL Lllla LLLLLL BOTE SPELELELLI You have the POWER. In this contest you don't rely on the luck-ofthe draw. You determine if you win or not. You win by outscoring others in a game of skill. Can you solve the puzzle below? Then you have what it takes. It looks simple, but it's only the start. Each of five more puzzles gets a little harder. But this time it's all up to you. Stay in to the end with the highest score and the gear is yours. With whatever options you want. Do you have what it takes? Then play to win! Video Gaming Rig Contest Win the ultimate home theatre/video game rig. You'll win all the audio/video components shown plus the Sega Genesis, Gaming Gear (w/TV tuner), Power Clutches, Intruder and Joystick. Bonus Options include: CD-ROM drive, VCR, S1,000.00 in games, cash, accessories and more! Computer Gaming Contest. Win a 50 Mhz'486 with 17\" SVGA monitor, 8 meg RAM, 340 meg hard drive monster machine (upgrade to '586 or 66 Mhz at your option). Bonus options include: CD-ROM, Thrustmaster joystick and weapons controller, Sound Blaster Pro, modem, cash,games and more! We're talkin' GAMING HEAVEN! Directions. Fill in the Mystery Word Grid with words going across that spell out the Mystery Word down the middle. Hint: use the Mystery Word Clue. In the future. There will be four more puzzles at $2.00 each and one tiebreaker at $1.50 for each prize package which will be sent to you by mail. You will have 3 weeks to solve each puzzle. We don't know how many will play but typically 47% will have the highest score possible score to Phase 1, 30% to Phase II, 25% to Phase III, and 20% to Phase IV. The tie-breaker determines the winner. If players are still tied they will split the value of the prizes. Yes! Nm Mystery Word Grid ENTER ME TODAY, HERE'S MY ENTREE FEE: ($3.00) Video Gaming Rig Contest ($3.00) Computer Gaming Contest ($5.00) SPECIAL! Enter Both (SAVE $1.00) CLIP AND MAIL Name Address City State Zip ACE EEEEE WORD LIST RANGE ARC QUEST APE TURBO ASK MAJOR ANT WINGS MUTANTS INDIANA INVADER RUNNING CRAWLER CHASE EAT TOWER FLINT PET MICRO SET SETS DREAM FIT MYSTERY WORD CLUE: One who practices the ancient Japanese martial art of assassination and terrorism. SIT TOP SEND CASH, M.O., OR CHECK TO: PANDEMONIUM, P.O. BOX 26247 MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55426-0247 VOID WHERE PROHIBITED. ENTRY DEADLINE: POSTMARKED BY JANUARY 16, 1993  ENTRY FEE MUST BE INCLUDED Only one entry per person. Employees of Pandemonium, Inc. and its suppliers are ineligible. Judges decisions are final Where judges are in error the sponsor's liability is limited to the amount of entry fees paid. Not responsible for lost, delayed or stolen mail. Merchandise names and models are trademarks of their respective companies who have no affiliation with this contest. 1992 Pandemonium, Inc. Circle Reader Service #118 "


"Foreign Correspondence Iride 000'DEN 4 .1.1.1 T Cantal Ayuntancu. OCEAN Over There Lopes The Pond To Check Out d isi trasa mm H an Start Coslav cepillo by Robin Matthews content c onnerie lu ots happening this side of the select who he/she has as relations (inpond, with more and more of teresting idea eh?), and this will affect the European software houses, how the story unwinds. or European subsidiaries of U.S. Companies, now releasing their own prodA very detailed plot is contained in ucts. Microprose UK is following Legacy, with the storyline being 'rehot on the trail of B-17 with the eagerly awaited Harrier, and also a graphic adventure called Legacy. This is the first Microprose graphic adventure designed in the UK, and is also their first collaboration with the wonderful people at Magnetic Scrolls. Magnetic Scrolls is one of the great names in European software, and its links go back to an arrangement with Rainbird Software, and titles such as The Pawn, Guild of Thieves, the bizarre Jinxter and lately, with Virgin, both Wonderland and the Magnetic Scrolls ColLegacy lection. This is not however a text based game with bells on, but rather a leased' as the player progresses fully scrolling, free-movement gaming through the game. Suffice to say the world. Winthrop's have been through one or two trials and tribulations over the cenLegacy is a horror type adventure set turies, and via various astral planes Alin Pressis, New England. The player is beroth the Sower of Discord and the sole remaining heir of the Winthrop Melchior Master of the Endless Void family, and has very recently become are 'house guests' at the ancestral the sole heir upon the passing away home. Full 256 colour graphics, digitof... well, depending on who one ized sound, auto mapping, plus lots of chooses, it could be anyone of several. interesting touches make this one to Confused? Well, OK, the player can keep half an eye (and a clove of garlic) out for. The skies over Europe may be rather crowded in the coming months, as both Harrier from Microprose UK and Tornado from Digital Integration are nearing completion. In Harrier, the famous VTOL aircraft that served with distinction in the Falklands War, and its adapted version in the U.S. Marines Corp are included, and there has been some massive attention to detail with the programmers spending days at the local RAF base — RAF Wittering. This innovative aircraft should be an absolute cert for a computer simulation, especially with its revolutionary Giruad shading. Tornado is still sitting in its hangar under development, but the simulation of the famous RAF multirole aircraft promises much. Hopefully it will get off the ground before it's actually replaced in the various air forces! Yet another flying promise comes from the Argonuat development team (hopefully better than the disappointing Birds of Prey), this being A.T.A.C. This combines a flight sim with very strong strategy elements as the player co-ordinates the flights of four planes, Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVENTURE LIKE NEVER BEFORE... I he year is 999 A.D. The time of great dread has come. Long have the Viking prophets foretold of RAGNAROK, the final battle of the gods, which will determine the fate of the world. From before the ancient times, the great gods of your people Odin, Thor and the forces of Asgard have championed the human race and have withstood the power of evil Surtr and his hoards of fire demons. Now the days have become dark and cold. Many travelers and warriors have passed through your village into the wild lands beyond. Strange tales of distant lands, wizards, powerful creatures and magic are whispered by firelight. Some of the boldest warriors say that the final great Viking quest is to aid the gods themselves as they prepare for RAGNAROK. The outlook is grim, but to stay behind and wait for the end is worse. You have packed your belongings and have decided to follow the dark trail into the forest... It's time to break the mold. Step up to RAGNAROK and experience the vast, unbounded world of Norse mythology,  Explore over 100 action-packed realms, featuring vivid, superfast VGA graphics. Enter a highly interactive world where you pursue quests and adventures as you see fit... no set story line to follow. Challenging and Intriguing.  Master the use of over 200 magical artifacts. Encounter up to 200 distinct races of beings Acquire the skills and knowledge needed to finally defeat Surtr and his hoards of Fire Demons. Why be human?  Shed your human form as you learn the arcane skills of polymorph and transformation. Easy to play!  Extensive on-line help and intuitive interfaces have you playing immediately. Infinite variability and non-stop action will keep you coming back.   The liuag CAT CAMIC QUIT 1941 152 CON & ENT 110 COLD The GMME MESS25. mm NOW AVAILABLE FOR IBM & COMPATIBLES! TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-892-3488 to order. VISA/MC and checks accepted. Norsehelm Productions, Inc.; P.O. Box 494388; Redding, California 96049-4388. Circle Reader Service #115 ORSEHELM PRODUCTIONS "


"Foreign Correspondence Advertisers List 211 165 87 and two choppers in a 'war' against the Sacre-Couer dome and behind every Drug Barons. Set in the near future, the earthman looms the invaders silhouColumbians have truly cracked it, hay ette...\" Bargon Attack promises 256ing penetrated all the major cities and color graphics and digitized sound reducing law and order to a shambles. effects, with a promised CD-ROM verThe player leads an elite force of some sion having more graphics and a full 250 agents plus the sound track with above aerial hardspeech. ware. The product should be released This month has as this is read. been a bumper one for adventures in The French develmany styles; one oper, Tomahawk, of the more tradihas unleashed Fastional is Curse of cination on an unW Enchantia from suspecting world. Core Design. The player takes on Here the player the role of a female take the role of a flight attendant Lurete young hero, Brad, who, of necessity, must turn detective who is whisked away to the cursed in order to trace down a stolen formula realm of Enchantia, where (surprise and make sure she clears her own surprise!) all is not well. Locations inname. Fascination is a multi-location clude a full and well crafted castle comgraphic adventure with plenty of puz plete with dungeons, a cave system, the zles, most of which are logical and Valley of the Lost, the Ice Palace and sensible, good variation in locations, the Graveyard. The interface works and a fascination for smoothly enough, risque humor. Fasthe product style cination offers being a Loom/ some interesting KOV Legend of cinematic cuts and Kyrandia appresents its aboveproach. Full 256average, but far color graphics and from state-of-thesound support in a art graphics, within pretty looking innovative product. Available \"frames.\" The digiton the Amiga ized voice actors (1 Mb) and IBM. Tornado (on the CD-ROM version), however, are not convincing Finally in a busy and the entire presentation comes off as month, Virgin has published its long a B-movie style of production. Availawaited graphic adventure, Lure of able both on MS-DOS machines with The Temptress. Players control the un256 color graphics and sound effects, swerving hero, Diermot, who starts the or on CD-ROM with some new locagame banged-up in a prison cell, not tions/views, a sound track, and 45 minknowing who he is, nor why he is there utes of speech for some 20 characters. (sense of Deja Vu?). Meanwhile in the quietish little hamlet of Turnvale all Another French outfit, Coktel Vision hell is breaking loose, caused by an is launching their ugly bunch of tournew Bargon Attack ists called the with blurb like Skorl. They are journey to the limcausing chaos, and its of distress in a guess who's the Paris like never beTIL TO only one to sort fore\" (obviously them out? OK, based on travelling we've heard the on the Metro in the plot once or 30 rush hour). The plot times before, but is along the line of Lure does have its space invaders esHarrier own charm, with a caping from their congood interface and soles to take over the world. The 'B' some cracking graphics. The game is movie plot is actually presented quite not overlong, and provides a pleasant well, but be warned this is a very respite after a lengthy hack n'slay in the French' product albeit in English. An latest AD&D RPG, or having conother interesting quotation from the quered the bugs in Ultima VII. CGW box artsets the scene...\"under the Abracadata 161 Access Software 56-57 Accolade 13, 83, 85 Adanac Command 90 Amtex Software 163 Ascii Entertainment ATI Technologies Aztech Systems 195 Blue Valley Software 128 Cape Cod Connection 193 Cerebel Info. Arts 194 Chips & Bits 93, 95, 97, 99 Colorado Computer 164 Computer Express 191 Computer Learning Foundation Compsult Computability 125 Covox Creative Labs 189 CWI Products 187 DC True Software 185 Deltax Gaming 166 Digital Dungeon 119 Disk-Count Software 159 Disney Software 167, 205 Electronic Arts Enchanted Horizons 124, 130 Flagship Magazine 196 Flying Dutchman Games 194 Formgen Gametek GEnic 139, 141, 155 General Videotex 203 Gosselin Computer 188 Homebase Products 188 Impressions 49, 51, 53, 55 In-Line Design 177 Inner Circle Software 169 Interplay 63 Keyboard Commander 172 Koei 181 Konami 15,19,23,27 Lance Haffner Games 172. 182 Legend Liberty International 175 LucasFilm Games 45 Machiavelli Designs 173 Media Vision 171 Midi Land 157 Merit Software 145 Microleague Sports 136-137 Microprose Software 17, 21, 25, 29 Microsoft Corp. 143 Mindcraft Software 199, 201 Mission Control 120-121 MPG Net 146-147 National Videotex 151 New World Computing 47, 131 No Name Software 153 Norschelm Products 107 Nova Logic 183 Origin Systems 11, 212 Pandemonium 105 Paper Mayhem 182 Point of View 103 Psygnosis QOP 36-37, 64-65, 67. 160 RAW Entertainment 133 Readysoft 89,91 Reality Simulations 186 Recreational Software Designs 114 RKW SDJ Entrprises 132 Sideline Software 170 Sierra On-Line 69, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 100-101 Simcoarum Systems 170 Simulations Canada 128 Sir-Tech Spectrum Holobyte Strategic Simulations 112-113, 149 Supersoft 150 Thrustmaster 156 Twin Engine Gaming 123 Viking Software 127 Virgin Games 33, 35, 39, 41, 66 Winware Zeros & Ones 117 115 81 61 Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"Review Unlucky 13 Virgin Games Floor 13 by Charles Ardai FLOOR 13 Murder... Corruption... Intrigue... The Power behind the Democracy There is something about espionage games that is extremely unpleasant. However much fun they might be as action-adventures or as political thrillers, they have a dark side which is disturbing in direct proportion to how realistic a particular game is. 's face SUJECT MATTER MY 01 FOR YOUNG GAIE PLAVERS TITLE: Espionage games, by their nature, even if one makes them carturn players into characters of ques toonish in order to render them tionable morality. This is not because inoffensive, is questionable. DE UNGUITABLE espionage is immoral (though one While espionage may be a could make this argument), but be necessary evil in our imperfect cause the things spies do are many of world, our enjoying it is not. the same things trom PST software GAMES which, if done by orAll games Floor 13 dinary people, would SYSTEM: IBM on the subject, be seen in an instant PRICE: $19.99 even good ones such as in saying that Floor 13 is the most PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up as horrible. Spies Sid Meier's Covert Ac unpleasant espionage game ever made. DESIGNERS: Shahid Ahmad, David Eastman spend their days ly PUBLISHER: Virgin Games One hesitates to call it disturbing, if tion, have things about ing, breaking into Irvine, CA them that make sensi only because that term might be misplaces they are not tive players cringe. Bad taken for a compliment great novels, supposed to be, stealing information espionage games can be very bad in after all, are frequently disturbing. and property, abducting people, inter deed. Floor 13 is disturbing only in the way rogating people, and killing people. that a genuine fan of the James Bond Turning these activities into a game, Having said this, I feel no hesitation ouevre (sic) feels about the film version December 1992 Page 109 "


"Review of Casino Royale. It is simply handled poorly. TOP SECRET In Floor 13, the player takes on the role of Director General of a Secret Service-type organization lodged on the 13th floor of a London office building. The DG's mandate is to keep the current British government in power at all costs. If this means infiltrating opposition parties and undermining them from within, so be it; if it means initiating smear campaigns in the tabloids, very well; and if it means ransacking people's apartments, kidnapping people and torturing them, or simply killing people in one of a number of ruthless ways, well, that's fine, too. The only restriction on the DG's activities is that he must keep a low profile no one must know that Floor 13 exists, much less that its activities are endorsed by the government. these departments from the main menu brings up a sub-menu. Select \"infiltration\" and the computer asks how many of one's uncommitted agents one wants to use to infiltrate a particular group. Select \"heavy assault\" and it asks when the assault should take place. Then it asks the player to confirm his orders. That's the whole game. So a standard \"round» of gameplay consists of reading the morning's reports, committing some of one's resources to whatever problems have cropped up overnight, and then selecting \"Next Day\" from the main menu. This process is repeated (with some slight variations, such as days when one is tonguelashed by the Prime Minister for not being sulficiently secretive) until one either gets the boot for being a bad DG or quits the game out of boredom and disgust. \"negligble» political damage, for instance, and a government foe is described as a \"closet homosexuel.\" Punctuation is sporadic and unreliable. The text is also peppered with clumsy obscenities — the mildest is \"Screw yourself\" — which seems to have been added to the game from the puerile perspective that such language, no matter how laughably employed, adds realism and depth to a project. Floored It is the game's indulgence in profanity more than anything else that justifies the sticker on the game box which incorrectly states, «Subject Matter...Unsuitable For Young Gamers.\" In fact, the subject matter is equally odious to players of all ages, perhaps least so to those young enough not to know better. There is a difference between a game that treats dark subject matter with candor and maturity (for instance, Corruption from Magnetic Scrolls) and a game like this one, which merely exploits such subject matter. DIRECTOR GENERAL'S EYES ONLY If this game were set in the U.S.S.R., it would be called \"KGB.\" If it were set in Nazi Germany, it would be called \"Gestapo.\" Fictionalizing this sort of loathsome secret police activity does not make it more palatable. Floor 13 is as ugly a game as any I have played since that memorable disaster, Custer's Revenge. Covert Operations The game is not even a good game from a strictly technical point of view. Floor 13 resembles nothing so much as that old BASIC game, \"Hamurabi.\" One's activity is limited to selecting choices off a series of menus and then reading the results as they arrive on the DG's desk in the form of reports, transcripts, and newspaper clippings. The player controls eight departments: Surveillance, Pursuit, Search, Interrogation, Removal, Heavy Assault, Disinformation, and Infiltration. Selecting one of Hannah Arendt could not have conceived of more banal evil. Floor 13 turns acts of unmitigated cruelty into bloodless, arm's length bureaucratic functions. According to the storyline, the DG is permanently isolated in his office, so that he never sees his own operatives, much less the innocent people whose lives he is destroying. In game terms, this means that one has no interactions other than with the menus. In fact, aside from a dozen Floor 13 seems to relish its own depravities. It has no sense of distance, no self awareness and no irony. One gets the feeling that the designers thought it would be \"neat\" to make a game in which one got to control a secret police force, and that they had no inkling of the sensitivity and care one would have to bring to such a project in order to pull it off. Garibats tanie US Smo le tento arts at a Chat Deixa orter. ULE 34 MINISTER INVOLVED 7 ES! LIES: black-and-white still pictures against which the menus are superimposed, this is a pure text game. Insofar as it makes light of the very real pain of people who have suffered at the hands of real-world Floor 13's, this game is obtuse, naive and worthy of our pity. Insofar as it tries to pawn off on today's gamers a type and quality of gameplay that was obsolete by 1978, except in the poorest public domain software packages, Floor 13 would be best kept as what its fictional characters want it kept — a deep, dark secret. CGW To make matters worse, the text itself is corrupt in any number of ways. There are numerous misspellings: one act produces Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"classics F15 STRIKE EAGLE II RE-CREATES THE HIGH TECH SURROUNDINGS OF THE USAF'S PREMIER DOGFIGHTER AND STRIKE JET. TEAM YANKEE IS THE DEFINITIVE ACTION SIMULATION OF MODERN TANK WARFARE. TEAM YANKEE TESTS YOUR LEADERSHIP AND TACTICAL SKILLS TO THE FULL...... Ana IINS 688 ATTACK SUB PUTS YOU IN COMMAND OF A TOP SECRET BILLION DOLLAR SUB IN SOME OF THE MOST NOTORIOUS POLITICAL HOT-SPOTS OF THE GLOBE......  AUTORPEDOTIASTALACREDITS TARGET XOGACY COMBAT CLASSICS IS ..... TERIA THE FIGHTING FORMATION OF THE 90'S STRIKE ENGLE (688 ATTACK SUB Available for IBM PC & Commodore Amiga ELECTRONIC ARTS MICROPROSE empire SIMULATION. SOFTWARE ReadySoft Incorporated, 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2, Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 189. Tel: (416) 731-4175 F15 Strike Eagle Il Microprose Software. 688 Attack Sub is a trademark of Electronic Arts. All rights reserved. Used with permission. Software John W Ratcliff Team Yankee O.D.E. & Empire Software Circle Reader Senrice #166 "


"Advanced Dungeons Dragons COMPUILA 200 Edition MODUCT SAIL THE SOLAR WINDS TO FANTASTIC SWASHBUCKLING ADVENTURES! PIRATES OF REALMSPACE Captain your own Spelljammer space ship in a spectacular AD&D adventure unlike any before! Recruit officers and crew to man your magic-powered ship. Soar into the ether, explore the planets of Realmspace and embark on exciting missions. Engage pirate vessels such as neogi snail warships in real-time combat from a first-person, flight simulator viewpoint. Fire huge bolts from your ship's ballista and bring the enemy to heel. Boarding combat is true AD&D phased battle using weapons and magic. Point-and-click your way through the game. Superb graphics and sound effects heighten the drama. With so many planets to visit and missions to fulfill, every adventure will be different from the last! Prepare for swashbuckling excitement and the magic of AD&D adventuring in wildspace! BAR IBM AMIGA TO ORDER: Visil your retailei or call 1-800-245-4525 ( USA & Canada) will. VISA/MC. To receive SSI's complete product callo, send $1.00 16: SSI 675 Alinanon Avenue Sile 201. Smyvale, CA 94086. AXEL 12S Real-time space combat uses flight simulator mode with firstperson viewpoint. Boarding combat is AD&D turn-based, with weapons and magic. Visit the splendid ports of different planets for great adventures. BS ngkons SPELIJAMMER PIRATES OF REALMSPACE Szil TITIT GEL IS STRATEGIC SIMULATION, INU! TAT. D ANAS SCREENS SHOWN IRM250 COLOR VGA ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, ADXD. SPILLIAMMIR and lie TSR 600 huks owned by God used under license from ISR, IC w 1992 1SRIH 19992 Sale Simulations, Inc. All rights reserve SQUAS KITS THE IT SURE Circle Reader Service #146, "


"THE UMMONING Live a tale of magic and mystery, filled with shocking plot twists and multiple endings. Embark on a dangerous quest that is both role-playing and action adventuring. Generate a single character and train in specific disciplines of magic and martial arts. Explore a huge world with forty levels of dungeons, and travel to mystical alternate dimensions. Encounter a great multitude of characters and monsters that inhabit this enchanted domain. Relish the splendidly detailed graphics, cinematics, sound effects and musical score. Glide smoothly through the game using the auto-map feature and Real-Time Visual point-and-click interface. Above all, heed the call and revel in the glorious excitement of The Summoning.  IBM  CLUE BOOK AVAILABLE 4ST19hys. 97/99975, 186/125*3-4 AC & DEN IBM 256-color VGA SEL Reste heet Creature N X JE 15, DAR 4. BORDO OXAS BER 27@DOO ed / 1200 Overhead view smoothly scrolls as you explore 40 levels of dangerous dungeons and mazes. TO ORDER BY VISA/MC: Call 1-800-245-4525 in USA & Canada). To receive SSI's complete product catalog, send $1.00 to: SSI. 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201, Sunnyvale, CA 94086. 1992 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Innovative magic system features Your character can carry a large spell casting through use of inventory of items, easily accessed arcane hand gestures. by the point-and-click interface. Circle Reacler Service #167 "


"YOU THOUGHT YOU LOVED COMPUTER GAMES. BUT... DIMIT EINE HELP MENU >ANY (HELP MENU Easily construct complex worlds. Each scene can be over 62 times as big as your screen. Draw pictures of characters, monsters, and scenes by creating picture blocks. REEEECI 58 DJ BE SA 2012 ke lok Sud LE: || GKED GITTE HP CHEC Design Palettes Import Graphics Animate Monsters Plan Movement UNTIL YOU PLAY WITH GAME MAKER, YOU'VE ONLY BEEN PLAYING AROUND. A technological breakthrough by Recreational Software Designs lets you do the impossible. Now you can create 256 color VGA computer games without programming. NOW SHIPPING V1.04 with high-level picture and scene drawing tools! Design unlimited numbers of animated monsters and good guys. * Animated characters walk, run, fly, hop, pop from scene to scene.  Design your own sounds. Make arcade and adventure games as unique as your imagination. > Modify and enhance GAME MAKER games. Available at your local retailer or from: Mouse driven and graphics based, GAME.MAKER is Computer Aided Game Design at its best. Is a game too easy? Increase the speed. Too boring? Add danger, sounds, and monsters. Too plain? Dress up the graphics, add animation. Too short? Add new levels. KD SOFTWARE Great Falls Avenue, Box 448 Rochester, NH 03867 GAME MAKER includes lots of extras: hundreds of pictures, monsters, objects, good gals and guys, and detailed scenes and worlds. Use these extras in creating your own games. Plus you'll enjoy the sample games included with GAME.MAKER. Game-Maker requires an IBM AT compatible 286, 386, or 486 with a color VGA monitor and mouse. Joystick optional. GAME.MAKER is designed and produced by Recreational Software Designs. Circle Reader Service #131 VISA/MC Orders: 1-800-533-6772 Call Toll Free for latest price. Sugg. Retail Information: 603-332-8164 FAX: 603-332-8125 "


"Rumor Bag Rumor Guy Discovers Grave Consequences by Baltimore Irving to do, immediately shifted gears from the grim reality of war to the challenge of wargaming. I thought briefly of Impressions' scheduled game of world conquest and how it is supposed to be their first true modem-to-modem game. It's also supposed to be a real-time game and I was beginning to think my «real-time\" was up. The shadow of horse and rider covered my prone body. In abject fear, I raised my eyes and glanced helplessly at my nemesis. Two factors changed my perspective on the situation. First, the headless horsewoman (her cloak could no longer conceal her shapely physique) was holding a rumor bag in her hand, replete with eye-slits and mouth slot. Second, the once empty collar was now beginning to blossom with a beautiful brunette coiffure which topped a familliar and even more lovely face. \"Gotcha'!\" laughed my source, «I knew you'd be excited about Ringworld, but I figured I'd have to get your attention in order for you to write anything about our Zombie High.\" foggy mist rolled across the gentle slopes of a wooded cemetery in Tarrytown, NY. Between this sleepy little township and the wooded southern hills of Connecticut, a legend was born. So, it was with a certain amount of unease that I waited in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery for the appearance of my contact, a well-connected industry source who was supposed to confirm or deny a rumor about a major new science fiction license. According to another source, Electronic Arts has acquired the license to publish a Ringworld game. Not only is the game based on the science fiction classic by Larry Niven, but I had even heard that Niven himself was going to be contributing to the design. A slight chill caused me to shake for a moment and when my eyes focused again on the line of birch trees at the far side of the graveyard, the zebra-striped trees seemed covered with a shadowy shape, a shadowy shape that was slowly moving toward me. I glanced over my shoulder with my first thought being that I was being ambushed. Even in my panic, I thought for a moment about the fact that Sir-Tech Software is working on a multicharacter espionage game that is tentatively called Ambush. The whole concept is a unique blend of role-playing and strategic elements with plenty of high-tech glitz like 3-D rendered interiors and a super musical score. Even as the silhouetted equestrian drew closer, his or her (dare I say, «its») appearance remained in shadow. The whole scene seemed as ethereal and out-of-place as some of ZZ Top's appearances in their music videos. Except, the equestrian wasn't singing, not even like the crossover country western band is expected to sing in a soundtrack for an upcoming game called ZZ Top Pinball. In fact, the equestrian wasn't likely to talk or sing, since said rider had no head. I had to look twice to make sure he, she or it wasn't a \"nightmare\" from one of Piers Anthony's Xanth novels. The nightmares were black horses who brought bad dreams to the characters in Xanth. In fact, I was beginning to wonder if one of those nightmares hadn't just brought a bad dream to me! If I hadn't been so scared, I probably would have told the shadowy rider that Legend Entertainment has just acquired the rights to publish an adventure game based on Piers Anthony's fantasy universe of puns and malapropisms. In fact, it isn't certain, as of yet, but there may be a tie-in between the game and the very next Xanth novel. As it was, I didn't say anything. I just looked again to see if I was wrong about the rider's lack of both a physiognomy and a head to hang it on. No, that was, indeed, an empty collar jutting out from the rider's overcoat. It was an otherworldly sight in quite a different manner than the goofy aliens in LucasArts' upcoming sequel to Maniac Mansion. Day of the Tentacle: Maniac Mansion 2 is a graphic adventure written by Tim Delacruz and Dave Grossman and using the familiar LucasArts interface (Story Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion SCUMM). Only the gamers who actually read computer game credits are likely to recognize those names. Their credit line in The Secret of Monkey Island insisted that they wrote all the clever and funny material in the game. In the spring, gamers should find out whether the bizarre pair can live up to their earlier billing. As I watched the rider maneuvering masterfully between the historic tombstones, I was suddenly glad that they were placed so closely together that the horse couldn't hurdle them. I began to zig-zag in a backwards retreat through the graveyard, stumbling occasionally and scrambling to my feet as the horse's hooves occasionally struck against the tombstones and added a sense of urgency to my flight. It's amazing what sound can do. Even in the midst of my panic, I wondered if the QSound audio for Virgin's Terminator CD-ROM (for Sega Genesis) would get my adrenaline flowing like the sound of those hooves. I tripped over a tombstone and came crashing to the ground. I looked up and read an epitaph from a Revolutionary War veteran and my brain, as it is programmed She was right, but I just have to hope they stick with the tried-and-true horror themes and don't ever decide to do a game based on solving mass murders. I can just see their entire PR department coming after me with chain-saws in order to get my attention. In fact, it's such a vivid image that I'm not going to write anything else about Zombie High until next month, just to spite them. Cow DARKLANDS CHARACTER EDITOR IBM $14.95 OTHER TITLES AVAILABLE RKW P.O. BOX 4760 SOUTHINGTON, CT. 06489 December 1992 Page 115 "


"Industry News Inside The Industry Spectrum HoloByte Buy-Back Launches Next Generation n September 24th, Spectrum HoloByte's CEO, Gilman Louie, announced that the company had received $4 million in venture capital funding from Kleiner, Perkins, Caulfield and Byers, a high-tech venture capital company with an uncanny record for picking winners (gamers will be interested in the fact that the company was a major player in Electronic Arts's initial funding and is currently involved in the multimedia tri-venture with EA and Time Warner called 3-DO (nee SMSG)), AT&T and other partners. The infusion of capital allows Spectrum HoloByte to purchase back the shares in the company owned by SWICO, a charitable trust which was formerly part of Robert Maxwell's multi-national media empire. SWICO has severed all ties with the Maxwell family, but not before being tainted by the scandals that forced the family into bankruptcy. Indeed, British journalists investigated Spectrum HoloByte thoroughly in the light of the Maxwell pension fund scandals and tried to pin down a rumor that Spectrum HoloByte did not really produce software, but served as a shell company where the Maxwells were hiding funds. Fortunately, this was easily disproved, the buyout was able to proceed and both Spectrum HoloByte and SWICO are out from under the clouds of suspicion. Spectrum HoloByte has also moved into spacious new offices where a large portion of the floor space is apportioned for the research and development of virtual reality experiences. In the past, Spectrum HoloByte has been a VR developer on two paths: as a developer of cockpit-based military trainers (based on F-16s, of course) under subcontract to defense contractor Perceptronics and as a developer of full-immersion entertainment experiences for Edison Brothers for their mall-based entertainment division. Instead of using cockpits, games developed for Edison Brothers require the use of goggles, controls and sensors that read the body's position to place players in a virtual world. Perhaps, the most exciting announcement from Spectrum HoloByte, however, is that the company is joining with Paramount Pictures and Edison Brothers to produce a virtual reality game based on Star Trek: The Next Generation. Since virtual reality is a hardware-intensive forebearer of the fictional \"holodeck» which is featured on the television series, it seems particularly appropriate that StarTrek: The Next Generation is the first television show to be licensed as a full-immersion entertainment product. Neither Spectrum HoloByte nor Paramount Pictures has revealed what the story line of the product will be, but Paramount Chairman Brandon Tartikov's carefully worded announcement concerning the venture stated that players will be able to be fully-immersed on the bridge, holodeck, engineering deck or in the transporter room. Legend Entertainment To Buy Back Unit Legend Entertainment (publisher of the successful Spellcasting series of games, Timequest and Frederick Pohl's Gateway) has announced its intention to buy back the interest in the company held by American Systems Corporation, the Chantilly, VA-based defense contractor. Details of the purchase agreement have not been released, but CGW has received word that the terms are extremely favorable for the group of partners (including the company's original partners, Mike Verdu and Bob Bates) which is purchasing the entertainment software company. In addition to previously announced products (the just-released Spellcasting 301: Spring Break and the soon-to-be-released Erik the Unready), the company has recently acquired another major book license (see The Rumor Bag) and has agreed to develop an adventure game that teaches the government ethics code to United States Department of Justice employees. Electronic Arts Launches Japanese Venture Electronic Arts (NASDAQ:ERTS) and Japanese corporation Victor Musical Industries (VMI) have announced a joint venture to convert existing EA properties to Japanese products for Sega Genesis, Super Nintendo, NEC 9801, DOS V platforms and the FM Towns. To be called EA Victor, the new venture will be headquartered in Tokyo and will eventually publish original titles for the Japanese market, as well as translations of EA products. Steve Salyer, an experienced EA executive who used to live in Asia, will serve as chairman of the new venture and Satoshi Honda, a VMI director, will serve as president and CEO of the company. Electronic Arts is not only gaining an indigenous marketing partner by joining with VMI, but the new venture also creates a strategic alliance which Larry Probst (president and CEO of Electronic Arts) states will allow both companies to exploit emerging technologies.\" CGW Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S PC WAREHOUSE 6472-B Windy Road, Las Vegas, NV 89118 (formerly 7525 Rosecrans Ave #203, Paramount, CA 90723) 800-78 8-2193 (orders) 8-6 M-F, 9-4 Sa P.S.T. ALL IBM COMPATIBLE SOUND BOARDS GAMES Martian Memo 34.95 Snoopy GmClub 29.95 Wired Sound Pro 41.95 We carry an extensive line of sound A-10E Tank Killer35.95 MegaFortress 36.95 Solitaire games call CD ROMS boards, speakers, headphones, and A-Train 41.95 Might & Magic series Strip Poker 29.95 Aesop's Fables 37.95 CDR drives for all your multi-media Aces of Pacific 46.95 Missn Imposble 29.95 Super Jeopardy 24.95 Os Amanda Stories 35.95 29.95 Action Stations 29.95 Nobnaga Amb II 34.95 Super Tetris needs. Advanced D&D series No Greater Glory 45.95 Welltris of Amer. Bus.Phone 19.95 19.95 JOYSTICKS AND MICE Bible Library 46.95 Nova 9 Airbus A320 21.95 Wheel of Fortune 23.95 53.95 Take control of your games with joyBusiness Master 42.95 Air ForceCmndr 35.95 Out of ths World 36.95 Wordtris 27.95 ( Crmen San Diego 59.95 Amer Civil War 24.95 Pacific Islands 31.95 HOME & OFFICE sticks by Thrust Master, CH Products, CIA Facts + 750 29.95 Amer Gladiators 24.95 Patton Strike Bak 35.95 Gravis and Winner. Aminate,PC Arcade Hits 119.95 Cse CautsCndor 29.95 31.95 24.95 Pacific Islands Animatin Studio 77.95 Classic Fairy Tales 72.95 Armada 2525 32.95 Perfect General 35.95 AutoMap MULTIMEDIA 59.95 Corel Artshow 91 72.95 36.95 ATP Fit Assign. 36.95 Planet's Edge 99 Boom Box 35.95 Education Master 42.95 CL MM CDR Drive/bndl for SB Pro 369.95 B-17 Flying Ftrss 41.95 Police Quest series -Deluxe Paint II 85.95 Elec. HomeLibry 74.95 CL MM CDR Drive/bndl w/SB Pro 559.95 Back to Future series Power Monger 33.95 FamCarePedias 14.95 Family Doctor 52.95 Bart Simpson 29.95 Prince of Persia 29.95 CL MM CDR Drive w/SB ProBasic 449.95 Game Maker 84.95 French lang. 53.95 Battle Isle 29.95 Prophecy Shadw 37.95 CL Video Blaster 349.95 Objection! 29.95 Jets & Props 35.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Quest for Glory 35.95 Road Scholar 34.95 Jukebox 36.95 MediaVis kit w/ProAudio Spec + 769.95 Carriers at War 35.95 Rampart e Tempra Pro 299.95 Jungle Safari 72.95 MediaVis kit w/ProAudio Spec 16 959.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 Realms 19.95 Virtual Reality 54.95 King's Quest V 41.95 Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Castle Dr. Brain 29.95 Red Baron VGA 39.95 Vista Pro 77.95 LangGame/Span 59.95 TelevEyes VGA-to-TV converter 229.95 Civilization 38.95 Romanc3King II 39.95 Command HQ 35.95 Railroad Tycoon 32.95 SPORTS Mixed MothrGse 37.95 WIN TV 449.95 pin 35.95 Andretti Racing 19.95 Cnqst Long Bow 39.95 Sea Rogue 10 05 Monarch CliffNote 74.95 Crisis in Kremlin 41.95 Second Front 38.95 Boxing, 4D 19.95 M Monkey Is. 51.95 Math Co Processors call Mother Earth II 36.95 Cruise forCorpse32.95 Sec Monkey is series CarlLewis Chal. 29.95 O Movie Dir databs 47.95 Boca Fax Modm 14400bps v.32bis. Int 239.95 Cybercon III 27.95 SecWeapnsLuft 42.95 College Football 35.95 SupraFax Modm14400bps v.32bis. ext. 299.95 | DaggerAmon Ra 41.95 Sex Olympics 24.95 Grand Prix MSDOS archives 31.95 34.95 M SupraFaxMdm 14400bps v.32bis.ext.win319.95 Dark Half 34.95 Shuttle 35.95 Hardball III 34.95 Mrdr Str.Dedfelw 38.95 Night Owl's 6.1 44.95 Dark Lands 41.95 Silent Service || 34.95 Int'l Sport Chal. 29.95 0/S 2 Archives EDUCATIONAL ENTERTAINMENT 35.95 JMontana Ftball 29.95 19.95 Decsn Gettysbrg 23.95 Sim Ant 29.95 JMadden Ftbl 2 31.95 Prescrip. Drugs Design Railroad 34.95 Sim City 47.95 Alge-Blastr + 29.95 NmbrMncher 29.95 Presidents, Geo...94.95 Dragon's Lair series 42.95 JNickls Signtur 41.95 Sim Earth Barbie Fash Sec. Wpns.Luftwf. 37.95 24.95 OperNeptune 34.95 Dune 34.95 Space Ace 35.95 Links 386 pro 41.95 dec. Body Illustr. 47.95 Orbits SharewareXpres 33.95 Dungeon Master 29.95 Space Quest IV 37.95 Microlg Bsbl 4 35.95 29.95 Bodyworks n 47.95 Oregon Trail 29.95 call Spellcasting series nsit Detect 43.95 Elvira series Microla Football 41.95 Bushbuck ball 300 Sleeping Beauty 36.95 24.95 Out Numbrd 29.95 41.95 Spoils of War Epic 35.95 Mike DitkaFtball 32.95 F-117A Nitehwk 44.95 Star Control 29.95 Spanish 05 Spanish lang. Carmen S.Diego 29.95 Nascar Chal 53.95 Phonics Plus 26.95 O F-15 Strk Egle II 29.95 Star Trek25th An 35.95 NFL PRO Ftball 44.95 Stellar ! Stellar 7 40.95 ChalAncEmp 29.95 Playroom 40.95 29.95 Falcon 3.0 44.95 Stellar 7 ChemWorks 44.95 Rndm HsEnc 71.95 24.95 NFL (Konami) 29.95 Street Atlas, win 109.95 Final Conflict 29.95 Teen Ninja Turtle 24.95 Pit Fighter 25.95 . TimeTbl:Art&Ent 73.95 Danc Planets149.95 Read 'n Roll 29.95 Flames Freedom29.95 Terminator II 39.95 ProLeag Basebl 35.95 Os Time Tbl: Science 85.95 Donald Alph 12.95 Readr Rabb 2 34.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Theatre of War 31.95 Speedball 2 Toolwks RefLibr 98.95 24.95 Dr. Quandry 35.95 Reading & Me 24.95 FS add-ons call Ultima series Total Baseball 43.95 call Sports Advent 47.95 Duck Tales 14.95 Ready Lettrs 34.95 Floor 13 14.95 Uncharted Water 41.95 Stunt Driver 29.95 Ultima I-VI 82.95 Eco Quest 33.95 Science Adv 47.95 4 Crystls Trazer 31.95 Utopia 29.95 TLaRussaBsebl 29.95 5 Ult.Undrwl&WCII 52.95 Eco Saurus 35.95 Western Front USA Factbook 24.95 Second Math 32.95 Genghis Khan 37.95 Test Drive III 39.95 34.95 U US Atlas, win Earthquest 93.95 39.95 W. Gretzky Hocky 33.95 35.95 Speed Readr 29.95 Global Conqst 35.95 Willie Beamish Global Effect Gramr Gremln 29.95 Spell-a-Sarus 29.95 05 US Wars, each 31.95 Wing Comndr series Weaver Bsball ll 31.95 51.95 Hedline Harry 29.95 Spellbound Gods 24.95 Wizardry series 2105 VGA Spectrum 31.95 call Wild Wheels 29.95 31.95 Gunship 2000 Vintage Aloha 29.95 H.Harry 256 34.95 Spell It + 29.95 39.95 YeagerAir Com 36.95 WINDOWS WCI w/Msns 1&2 69.95 IQ Smarts 24.95 StikybrRead 24.95 Guy Spy 29.95 BOARD, CARD AND Battle Chess 29.95 WCI W/Ultima VI 69.95 Harpoon series Kid Pix 34.95 StikybrType 29.95 Heart of China 35.95 SHOW GAMES Casino Pack #1 31.95 WCII W/Sp.1&2 52.95 Kid Works 29.95 Story Teller 31.95 Heroes of 357th 31.95 Battle Chess 29.95 Chessmstr 3000 37.95 Wild Places 38.95 KnwledgAdv 47.95 Student Org. 29.95 29.95 Curtain Call 119.95 World View Hill Street Blues 24.95 Blackjack 29.95 Life & Death 23.95 Studyware: exams Home Alone 24.95 Bridge games call call Distant Suns 47.95 CDROM MPC Mario, typing 24.95 Studyware: classes Indy Jones IV 38.95 Casinos otvoria 29.95 Casinos ofWord 29.95 Entrtnmt Pak ea 27.95 American Vista 49.95 mathbister + 29.95 Supr Mncher 29.951 Jetfighter 1 3 9.95 Chessmstr 3000 31.95 Money Managr 19.95 Math Blster Sp 29.95 Think Quick 129.95 Annabel's Dream 62.95 31.95 Kings Quest series 19.95 MS Works Craps 27.95 Perks, utilities 24.95 Autodesk Explr 127.95 Math Mystery 29.95 Time Riders 34.95 Leathr Goddess 46.95 Cribbage e Battle Chess 47 05 47.95 35.95 Dealer's Choice 29.95 ProComm Plus 89.95 Battle Chess Wan Fabbit 25.95 Treasure Mtn 29.95 / Legn Kyrandia 29.95 6 Beethoven MM 54.95 24.95 Risk MBeacn Type 31.95 Treehouse Leis Suit Larry series Femme Fatale 34.95 35.95 Chessmstr 3000 62.95 McGee 24.95 Typing Tutor 29.95 Lemmings 29.95 4Queens Casino 24.95 Robo Sports 42.95 ComposerQuest 54.95 Les Manley series Heaven&Earth 35.95 Sim Earth MetgnmMus 29.95 What's My Angle Loom Mickey's series 19.95 Hngkng Mahing 31.95 Speed Reader 29,95 Dictnry Children 39.95 (geometry) 29.95 Lord of Rings series 29.95 Guiness Records 69.95 29.95 Super Tetris Hoyle III ManitRescue 29.95 vvora Attack vocab. Lost Admiral 35.95 Monopoly 24.95 Typing Tutor 5 29.95 Mammal enc NG 39.95 Mission UFO 24.95 Eng Fr,Spn ca. 29.95 Magic Candle II 36.95 Pinball: Tristan 19.95 MBeacon Typing 69.95 Magic Candle II 36.95 Pinball: Tristan 29.95 Vegas Games 29.95 24.95 Video Poker MixFairy Tale 29.95 Wrd Muncher 29.95 Magnetic Scrolls 24.95 KISK MS Bookshelf 32.95 MO 139.95 MixMthrGoos 29.95 Writing/Pub 39.95 Mantis 41.95 Scrabble Deluxe 35.95 Waves, sounds 19.95 MS Works (win) 134.95 89.95 Spirit Excalibur 37.95 Newsrm Pro 29.95 Windows 3.1 26.95 Writer Rabbit 29.95 Martian Dreams 35.95 Shanghai | World Atlas, win 93.95 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee comparability. All software is factory fresh and VISA unopened. We are not rosponsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game $5; addi MasterCard gamos add $1 oach in Cont. US. 2nd Day Air 56 1st game, add'l games add $1 oach in Cont.US. COD add $4. All prices are US S. Circle Reader Service #158 "


"Game Hints Scorpion's Mail Darkseed Legend of Kyrandia Dagger of Amon-Ra Magic Candle II Indiana/Atlantis Ultima Underworld Ultima VII Eye of Beholder 11 Dark Queen of Krynn I know, I know...we promised to make some extra room back here. Actually, we're always promising that, but somehow something else always comes up, and there's never enough time to get on with moving out some of the mail sacks. We will get around to it one of these days; in the meantime, remember not to sit up fast, or your skull will have a brief and meaningful relationship with the ceiling. Since last time, Activision has released a second collection of old Infocom text adventures, Lost Treasures of Infocom, Volume 11. However, so far as I know, this is available only for the Mac at the current time, and I have no information as to whether an MSDOS (or other) version will show up in the future. If you want to see it for your machine, be sure to send in those cards and letters to Activision and ask for it. Based on what I've heard from Mac owners, you may have a little harder time with the second collection: it doesn't come with a hint book or set of maps. Fortunately, if you get stuck, you can always send me a letter, or order one of the older back issues that has a Tale on the game (who knows, if there is enough demand, maybe we'll reprint some of those older Tales). Finally, before getting to the good stuff, I'd like to thank everyone who responded to my editorial on the breakneck pace of technology in the issue before last. All who wrote to me agreed that matters had gotten out of hand; even those who disagreed with some of my comments still felt things had gone too far, too soon. Now, if you'd just send those same letters to the game companies, they might actually start listening for a change. Okay, on to the mailbags! Darkseed: This game can be difficult because so much depends on trial and error, with many points often obscured until too late. In one instance, a very important item is to be found in the library, but only if you happen to run the cursor across it, since the object itself is virtually impossible to see. So those of you having a hard time getting out of the dark world jail need to restore the game and see what you can turn up near the librarian in the real world. Legend Of Kyrandia: This is another adventure where trial and error plays a large part. Some people have been having problems with the birthstone puzzle. This one's not really much of a puzzle. Just collect all the stones you can, save the game, and keep trying until you find the stones that work. There's really no other way to get the job done. Dagger of Amon-Ra: Act V comes as a surprise to a lot of folks, since they don't expect it to start right off with Laura being chased by the killer. Not only is this upsetting, but one wrong move can bring the game to an untimely end. Moving fast is a necessity here. So is moving to the armor room and beyond (don't forget about that chair next to the locked door; it's there for a purpose). That should put you on the right track towards escape. Magic Candle II: Getting out of the treasure trove is a problem for some people. There's no handy door, for one thing. Or is there? Perhaps if you seek a light to the west, you'll be able to twist your way around and get out. Indy/Atlantis: In the depths (inner ring) of Atlantis, there's a giant machine, and some would like to know just how to make it move. A good thing to know, too, since you can't get much further along without a ride. First off, you only need two levers, not three. Then take a good look at the floor, and the wall outside. That ought to get you moving. And for those who are having trouble with the final alignment of stones in the frog statue room, ya missed something in the lava area, something really big. Ultima Underworld: Some folks have gotten almost to the end of the dungeon here, and are stumped by Garamon's questions. Well, the first one is a little tricky, since you have to answer in the singular, not plural, and the word you want isn't artifact\" (that trips up a lot of people). Then you get to the second question, about a power source. That one's easier, just think about where you are. Ultima VII: A little clarification needs to be made on how to get to the main path through the game. It isn't enough to just bop up to the monastery at Yew. The real first step is talking to the gypsies outside Minoc. This will set you up for the rest of it. My apologies to those who went haring off up north and didn't get anywhere (oops!). Eye Of The Beholder II: In one part of the game, there's a room with some plates on the floor, a couple of teleporters, and some niches on each side that are blocked off by force fields, and this place is driving some people crazy. Hint: there's no way that you are getting past those force fields. That doesn't mean something else can't. Those teleporters are there for a reason, after all. Now do something with the plates, and see if you can figure out the whole pattern. Once you're on to the trick, it's not hard. Dark Queen of Krynn: Once you've done the lighthouse and the tombs at Kristophan, it isn't exactly obvious where to go next. The best thing is to go visit those \"friendly\" Elves, the Hulderfolk. Not that you'll have a fun time with them (they just won't leaf you alone, so to speak), but it's a start. Then you might want to wander down towards New Aurim, which should put you on the proper track. Well, that's about it for this look into the mailbag. In the meantime, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi, visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie, stop by the Games Roundtable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By U.S. Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia PO Box 338, Gracie Station New York NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! Proo 118 Computer Gaming World "


"HACKING and REALLY MEANS... ...It means that we've hacked our way through hundreds of titles to find the best, then we slashed our prices. So you spend less time trying, and more time flying! Here are some of the games we're playing this month... B-17 Flying Fortress.......$39 Yeager's Air Combat.......$38 Links 386 Pro .............$42 Global Conquest........ Out of This World ..........$36 Indiana Jones 4.......... Ultima Underworld ........$47 Gunship 2000 ............. THE SOURCE FOR SOFTWARE, THE GUIDE TO GAMES 1-800-624-8228 Internat'l Fax/Phone: 1-718-624-8228 HOURS: 12PM 12AM EST, M-F ADDRESS: Digital Dungeon 45 Duffield St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 TERMS: We accept money orders, personal checks, wire transfers. Credit Card and CASH/CERT C.O.D.'s from established customers. SHIPPING: We charge by shipping weight/class + 15%. We use U.S. Mail, UPS, Federal Express & Airborne Express. APO's are no problem, charged 1st class mail rate. Foreign shipping by weight & courier + 25%. N.Y.S. residents add 8.25% sales tax. All products are new and guaranteed. Call for exchange/return policy. NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR TYPOS! Circle Reader Service #68 "


"MISSION CONTROL SOFTWARE HEADQUARTERS A Full Selection of Software and Accessories for the IBM. 40 W Battle Chess 4000 Yesteryear's time classic now a game for trenores con Batle Chess-1000 Yesteryer une condena a game for echos depois da dini chau games 37 h 30 BattleChess 4000 is the classic chess game that rushes headlong into the future. With all it's humor. BattleChess 1000 is the strongest and most versatile chess program on the market. With a massive opening of jiwer 300,000 mave, it can handle any level of opponent. Also learns plays by constantly adding strong moves to its databas....... . The Ultimate Sound Solution! UltraSound-Now you can add 16 Bit 32 Voice Stereo Sound unheard of audio realism to your games and presentations. Ultrasound is the most advanced sound technology available delivering 16 bit, crystal clear sound to your IBM. Supports Windows. compatible with SoundBlaster & Ad Lib. 8 bit digital sampling, 256K onboard memory, amplified output. 9 joystick port, standard MIDI interface, one year warranty. by Advanced Gravis........5139. . Legions of Krella Leisure Larry 1.2 or 3 VGA Lemmings Lemmings 2...... Les Manley Lost in LA...... Lexicross Life & Death 24 Life & Death The Brain 32 Light Quest Loom Lord of the Rings Il 37 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 47 Lost Treasures of Infocom Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 The Lost Tribe Lure of the Temptress Oh No! More temmings Magic Candle 2.. Magic Candle 3...... . .40 Magnetic Scrolls Collection.......37 Maniac Mansion w/clue book..19 Mantis Experimental Fighter......43 . Sargon 5 Scrabble Deluxe Scenery Upgrade: Hawaii Secret of Monkey Island Il.... Secret of Monkey Island VGA Secret of the Silver Blades... Shadow of the Sorcerer Shadowlands Shanghai ll:Dragons's Eve Shuttle Space Flight Simulator 37 Siege Sim Ant Sim City Sim City for Windows Sim City Graphic Ancient Cities 23 Sim City Graphic:Future Cities 23 Sim City Terrain Editor Sim Earth. Sum Earth for Windows .......... Sleeping Gods Lie Solitaire for Windows...... ... 32 Solitaire's Journey....................37 by InterPlay............................$37. IBM GAMES 37 43 Arturo MEMAKER 37 Dagger of Amon Ra........... ..43 Daemonsgate..... ..... Dark Hall... DarkLands.... ... . Dark Queen of Krynn .......... DarkSeed ....... . Dark Sun... Double Dragon 3.... ...... Dragon's Lair Singe's Castle... Dragon's Lair II Timewarp ........ 42 Dragon's Lair 3... 37 Duck Tales: Quest for Gold.......22 Dune 2... Dvorak's Top 30.... ........ Eco Quest 2 Empire Deluxe..... .........CALL Eye of the Beholder 2.............40 Femme Fatale.. Femme Fatale Data Disk 1.2.3..20 Femme Fatale Data Disk 4........20 Flight Planner.... ....... .29 Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs ........ 23 Game Pack 1........... . Games People Play..............29 Gateway to Savage Frontier.......33 Airbucks........................CALL Amazon....... American Gladiators..... American Tail... A Slim's Dealer's Choice .......32 Are We There Yet? ...... . Armor Alley... 29 Batman Returns ...... ... .43 Bandit Kings of Ancient China...37 Barbie Fashion Design & Color. 27 Barbie's Glamorous Quest........27 Barbie's Print Palace...... . Bard's Tale Construction Set....34 Bard's Tale Ill.......................31 Bart Simpson Arcade Game..... 32 Bart Simpson/House Weirdness32 Battle Chess ................ 32 Battle Chess 4000..... Battle Chess Il.. Beat the House.... Beverly Hills 90210.. 37 GAMEMAKER It's as fun to make them, as it is to play them. Adventure games and Arcade games can castly be created with Gamemaker. All games display full 256 VGA graphics. Several games are included, other games available through the Game Maker Exchange. Characters, monsters and parts of scenes can all be animated. No programming is needed to make sophisticated professional quality computer games. The design tools are all mouse driven WYSIWYG. by Recreational Software Designs....582. Wheel of Fortune Vanna White 27 Where America's Past Carmen 37 Where in Europe is Carmen..... 32 Where in Time is Carmen..........32 Where in USA is Carmen...........32 Where in World is Carmen.........32 Where in World is Carmen VGA. 48 Wing Commander 2... ...... Wing Commander 2 Speech Pak17 Wing 2 Special Operations 1 Wing 2 Special Operations 2...22 Wing Commander Deluxe 47 Wings of Fury........ 27 Wizardry Trilogy WordTris.... Wrath of the Demon... WARGAMES 688 Attack Sub..... Aces of the Pacific ............... Action Stations ...... Air Force Commander...........CALL Air Warrior .......... Allied Forces Bundle.... ... 29 Ancient Art of War at Sea..........31 MegaFortress: Flight of Old Dog 40 Mig 29 NA,.. Patton Strikes Back Patriot Pirates GOLD PT.O. Red Baron Secret Weapon P38 Missions 22 Secret Weapon PSO Missions. 22 Secret Weapon Heinkel 162 22 Secret Weapon Dornier 335......22 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe ...44 Silent Service II Spectre Spoils of War. CALL Task Force 1942 UMS Il Planet Editor UMS : Nations at War... Uncharted Waters V for Victory Waterloo Western Front... X Wing 21 .43 ..32 . WWWWW ...37 Stock! PC Command Control Pad Comunang Control Brings the excitement of Video Game joypads to the world of IBM game play. The exclusive ergonomic design makes it the ideal controller for action and role playing computer games. The Command Control utilizes an exclusive 360 degree high definition digital to analog cursor control for flight simulator games, and includes auto-tire, fixed centering and Finally... a way to 'combo' A-B button. mactor the competition. by Suncom Technologies................$25. Martian Memorandum ............36 Matra Cubed...... ............... 34 MegaTraveller 3..............43 Mercenaries. Merchant Colony... Mickey & Minnie's Print Kit...... 17 Might & Magic 3... 40 Might & Magic.Clouds of Xeen.43 Millenium ..... ...... 27 Monopoly.... .. ..... 27 Monopoly Deluxe Edition........ Murder Ninja Gaiden 2... Ninja Turtles: Arcade ............32 Ninja Turtles: Manhattan Mission32 No Greater Glory.... Nobunaga's Ambition II........ Nova 9 Obitus. 32 Omar Shant on Bridge ...... Orbit Out of this world... Palladin II...... Paperboy 2. Pitfighter Planet's Edge.... 20 Sound, Graphics & Air Upgrade 29 Space Ace 2 Bort's Revenge.....37 Space Ace.... .. .. Space Quest 4.......... Space Wrecked..... Spellcasting 101.... Spellcasting 201.... Spellcasting 301... Spellcraft... Spellammer......... Star Control 2.......... Starflight 2.... Star Trek 25th Anniversary..... 37 Stratego... Strike Commander......... Strip Poker 3............ Stunt Island........ The Summoning........ . ...40 Super Jeopardy.... Super Space Invaders... Super Tetris.......... Terminator................. Terminator 2029..... Test Drive Ill....... Tetris Classic Theatre of War.................. 33 .33 37 25 This multi-voice sound synthesizer and digital-to-analog converter for sterco playback of music and sound effects and speech features a microphone input for digital recording, midi in and out, 20 channels of synthesized sound and more! AdLib Gold 1000.........$199. ...37 ***** .39 AINATOR 47 Black Crypt.... Breach 2.... Bridge 7.0... Bugs Bunny Cartoon Workshop 32 Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space 43 Captain Comic II.....................17 Castles 2: Slege & Conquest...37 Challenge of the 5 Realms.......37 Champions of Krynn.. Chessmaster 3000 ....34 Chessmaster 3000 Windows... 39 Chuck Yeager's Ait Combat.....40 Civilization Classic 5..... Clue Master Detective.... Coaster... Comic Book Creator... Conan the Cimmerian.... Conquest of Longbow... Corporation.... Creepers... Cribbage king/Gin King... Crisis in the Kremlin..... Crusaders of the Dark Savant. 42 Curse of the Azure Bonds.........33 Cyber Empires.............33 Genghis Khan... Global Effect..... GODS... Gold of the Americas.. Grand Slam Bridge 2... Guy Spy... Halls of Montezuma.... Heaven and Earth... Heimdall.... Heroes of the Lance... Home Alone Home Alone 2:Lost in N.Y. Hoyle's Book of Games 3 Hoyle's Book of Games 2 Hoyle's Book of Games 1 The Humans........ . Indiana Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis Island of Dr. Brain KGB King's Quest 5 King's Quest 6 L.A. Law L'Empereut...... Land. Sea. Air Trilogy 2..... ..32 Leather Goddess of Phobos 2...43 Legend of Kyrandia.............. Terminator 2029 Battle Skynet's forces on the twisted and charred landscape of L.A. in the year 2029. Choose from more than a dozen lethal weapons and defensives systems to aid you in terminating Skynet's assault units. Meet the ultimate killing machine, the CSM Model 101-1: The Terminator! Do it right and you'll be at the ultimate showdown. Skynet Central. by Bethesda Softworks. ..43. Ancient Art of War in Skies....37 A.T.A.C.... 31 A.T.P. Flight Commander.....37 B-17 Flying Fortress...... ...43 Birds of Prey... Campaign... Carriers at War... .. ..37 Carrier Strike .. .43 Conflict: Korea...................37 Conflict:Middle East...... F15 Strike Eagle 3 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Ace Pack....50 F.19 Stealth Fighter............43 Falcon 3.0.......... Gettysburg: The Turning Point....39 Great Naval Battles.. Gunship 2000 VGA.. Harpoon.... Harpoon BattleSet #2, #3......21 Harpoon BattleSet #4... Harpoon Challenger Pak ....46 Harpoon Scenario Editor .... Heroes of the 357th. Kampfgruppe........ LHX Attack Chopper....... A Line in the Sand..... Mac Arthur's War... MegaFortress Mission Disk2....27 SPORTS 40 Boxing.... .......22 Action Sports Soccer............ All American College Football....37 Andretti's Racing Challenge....22 Bill Elliot's Nascar Challenge ....32 California Games II.... . ...27 Cat & Driver.....................40 Carl Lewis Challenge........32 Earl Weaver Baseball 2.......40 Front Page Sports Football.......43 Games Winter Challenge .........35 Greens:Ultimate Golf Simulator 37 HardBall 3.......................37 International Sports Challenge 32 Jack Nicklaus Golf Unlimited ....37 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed.......43 John Madden Football 2.........33 Links Barton Creek Course .......20 Links Bayhill Course Disk...20 Links Bountiful Course Disk.....20 Links Dorado Course Disk........20 Links Firestone Course Disk......20 Links Pinehurst Course Disk.....20 Links Troon North Course..........20 Links 386 PRO.....................42 Links: The Challenge of Golf ... 27 --..41 43 32 MOUSE KYOKE Monopoly Deluxe The bestselling boardganic of all time is back and better than ever with completely revamped levels of difficulty and greatly enhanced graphics for your computer! Game activity log keeps track of all previous moves and the ability to play by traditional or custom-designed rules. A must for the library of any TRUE gamer or future real estate coon. by Virgin Games......................537 Playroom... Pools of Darkness.. Police Quest 3.. Populous:Promised Lands... Powerhits: Battletech Series .... 32 Powerhits: SciFi Powerhits Sports Powermonger Prince of Persia Prophecy of the Shadow The Prophecy 27 Quest for Glory 3 Railroad Tycoon Rampart... Reach for the Stars. Realms....... Rex Nebular Robosport for Windows.............37 Romance of Three Kingdoms 2.43 Rules of Engagement... Rules of Engagement 2..........40 Three in 1 Player's Pack ..........37 Tracon 11 Air Traffic Controller ....32 Tracon Il for Windows.... Treasures of Savage Frontier ... 34 Trump Castle 3.. Turbo OutRun Ultima Underworld..... Ultima Inlog Ultima Trilogy 2. Ultima 7 Ultima 7:Forge of Virtue Ultima 7: Serpent Isle Ultima 6 Uncharted Waters Vengeance of Excalibur... Vette.. Video Paker...... Virtual Reality Studio... Volpheed. Waxworks...... Wayne's World... Turn Your Aircraft into a realistic air-craft style yoke! Innovative design converts your mouse to a full size aircraft-style yoke for realistic flight simulation. Adds realistic, precise yoke movement to any simulation program that utilizes a mouse for directional control. No gameport or gameport required. Assembles in scconds and stotes easily in a drawer. 39 by Colorado Spectrum..............$35. "


"We Specialize in International Sales! Call 800-999-7995 in NY State 212-962-7168 Fax 212-962-7263 CONTROL MISSION 89 Maxximum Presents! 25 Get a Real Feel to Flight! by Maxximum Maxx Yoke gives you the precision you always wanted. It's a full sized multifunctional aircraft joystick for your PC. I Photograph to Remember .......30 Information U.S.A... .. Jets & Props.... ...... Jones in the Fast Lane ...... KGB/CIA Fact Book............ King's Quest 5...................43 Learn to Speak Spanish ...........64 Legend of Kyrandia.... .......52 Loom McMillan Dictionary for Children 44 Mammals Encyclopedia ............99 Money Money, Money.............30 Murder Make StrangeDeadfellow 44 P.C. Globe... 7th Guest... Secret of Monkey Island..........47 ..........569. 57 Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven independent controls including radar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter measures control...........589 Flight Control The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as 2 button joystick. . ..$69. Flight Control Pro. ... $115. Rudder Pedals........................$115. Auto Map: Europe..... .... AutoWorks............................47 Bannermania ........ Body Works ..... .....47 Chemistry Works...... Design Your Own Railroad.......37 Dream House Professional..... Dvorak on Typing Dvorak's Top 30 Estimating & Invoicing...... Estimator Plus..... FailSale: Computer Guardian...37 Fast Pack Mail........... Floor Plan Plus............ Form Tool Gold ......... Lottery Trend Analysis ..........18 Mavis Beacon 2.0............ Mavis Beacon 2.0 Windows.......37 My Advanced Mail List... My Advanced LabelMaker ....... 32 My Business Checkbook........ My Back Up... Maxx Pedals are floor style modular attachments which are fully assembled and ready to plug in and play. ...S39. Maxx Yoke & Pedal Bundle..$99. 32 SOUNDCARDS Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe ....57 Shant on Badge ....................47 Sherlock Holmes Detective...49 Expert Fax Forms Expert File & Calc Expert Home Design.. Quickshot Aviator 5.... ...32 Quickshot Intruder 5... Quickshot Warrior 5.... Yoke/Pedal Bundle Thrustmaster Flight Control.......69 Thrustmaster Weapons Control 89 Thrustmaster Pro ..............105 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals...105 e Dita Ultimate Football....35 AA Road to the Final Fout...34 L. Full Motion Video............47 L Pro League Football..........47 A Course Disk...............19 A Limited Edition..... ..46 A Tour Goll............. 33 maker Football... Football Analyst .................37 League Baseball... mer Challenge am Suzuki......... . Landry Football ...............32 w LaRussa Al Stadium......... 18 w LaRussa Baseball......... 33 ty LaRussa Great Teams.....18 7y LaRussa NL Stadium....18 Gretzky Hockey League Sim 30 yne Gretzky 2 Canada's Cup 35 ayne Gretzky Hockey 3 ..........37 aver 2.Commemorative........59 Call Now! 800 999 7995 212 962 7168 in NY 212 962 7263 fax BUSINESS Math Rabbit.... . .21 Mickey's 123..........................27 Mickey's ABC....... ............27 Mickey's Colors & Shapes ........27 Mickey's Crossword Puzzle ......22 Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzle.............27 Mickey's Memory Challenge......22 Mickey's Runaway Zoo...........14 Midnight Rescue... Nigel's World..... .... Number Munchers............ Operation Neptune............. Oregon Trail... Outnumbered...... ..... PC Globe 5......... PC U.S.A.2.0....... ....... Personal Trainer S.A.T. Read & Roll VGA... Reader Rabbit 2. Reading & Me....... Speed Reader.... Speilit Plus Talking.... SpellBound....... Storybook Weaver ... .. 166 Design Your Own Home Remodeling your home's interior Interiors Choose an appropriate scale, then draw your room from a top view. Select furniture or fixtures from the dozens of BU pre-drawn objects provided and place them in your room. Use your mouse to manipulate these objects, then view your room from any one of four side views. Design Your Own Home Interiors.......37. Design Your Own Architecture...........537 Design Your Own Landscape............37. by Abracadata AmiPro 2.0 (SPECIAL) ...........199 Central Point's Anti-Virus.......84 Central Point's Back Up....... Copy 11 PC............ Geoworks Designer Geoworks Desktop Harvard Draw Harvard Graphics Laplink Pro 4 Letter Perfect Lotus 1-2-3 ver 2.4 Lotus 1-2-3 ver 31 Lotus 1-2-3 Windows....... Lotus Agenda.... Call us For the Newest and Latest in Software Prices based on MSRP. Not responsible for Typographical errors. Please Check Compatibility before ordering. Prices subject to change without notice. All sales are final. Defectives replaced with same item only PC Joystick Combo Gravis Analog Joystick is constructed of the highest quality materials PC JOYSTICK COMO available. Its unique low profile www design, full-sized padded handle and adjustable handle tension provide vears of playing comfort. Himinator Game Card is guaranteed to work with all IBM and compatibles regardless of speed. CRAIVIS Supports one or two joysticks. by Advanced Gravid.........555. My Checkbook... My Database My Invoices My Labelmaker My Mail List My Phonebook. Pacioli 2000.Personal Lawyer Printshop New Quicken for Windows Screen Works Speed Reader for Windows.. Sprout! Studia of Greetings Super Mario Teaches Typing. 27 Ten Best Publisher's ............19 Travel Partner .....47 Turn Your Ideas Into Business 27 Webster's Dictionary Webster's Dictionary/Thesaurus 32 Weather Brief... World Atlas World Atlas for Windows........ Sherlock Holmes Detective 2...49 Sleeping Beauty.......................45 Software Jukebox.............. .45 Spirit of Excalibur ....... ...... 47 Star Trek 25th Anniversary .47 Time Table:Science&Innovation. 59 Time Table Arts & Entertainment 49 Time Table Bus Politics & Media 49 Ultima 1 to 6... U.S. Atlas w/ AutoMap...........79 US History 249 U.S. Presidents............ Where in the World is Carmen 74 Wing Commander/Ultima 6.57 Wing Commander Deluxe Edition 47 World View Wrath of the Demon. 32 WC2/Ultima Underworld........54 Wing Commander 2 Deluxe...54 ACCESSORIES PONT Groundbreaking 3D Flight Simulation! In Strike Commander, you'll command Stein's Wildcats, an elite squadron of mercenaries trying to fly straight in a world of deceit and violence. You'll pilot a staggering variety of fighter aircraft, from the lowly P38 to the F22 Lightning 2. as you engage rival squadrons, renegade thirdworld dictators. neo-nazis, and the armies of the dreaded IRS all in the vice of Corporation and Country S by Orgin...............................547. 22 Ad Lib Gold 1000........... 199 Ad Lib Music Card Ad Lib Micro Channel........ Ad Lib Personal Music System.99 27 AMAZON .95 Super Munchers...................32 Super Spetlicopter........... Think Quick.. . Time Riders in American History 37 Treasure Cove Treasure MathStorm. Treasure Mountain U.S. Atlas.. U.S. Atlas for Windows What's My Angle. Where America's Past Carmen.37 Where in Europe is Carmen...... Where in Time is Carmen. Where in USA is Carmen.... Where in World is Carmen..... Where in World is Carmen VGA. 48 Word Attack Plus..... Word Munchers....... Writer Rabbit.......... Writing/Publishing Center.........42 EDUCATIONAL oblaster Plus.......... 32 renstain Bears: Counting...18 renstain Bears: Letters...27 renstain Bears:Colors........ renstain Bears Junior Jigsaw. 18 shbuck Adventures allenge of Ancient Empire....32 Signasaurus II. nald's Alphabet Chase thQuest Esaurus her Price: Farm.... her Price Picture Dictionary 27 sher Price:Neighborhood... Jigsaw....... .. ofy's Railway Express...... ar Gremlins. adline Harry EGA adline Harry VGA To by Night Works 2. Pic ath and Me. oth Blaster Mystery 3th Blaster Plus oth Blaster Plus Windows. 37 Lotus Magellan ...89 Lotus Symphony ................ 479 Managing Your Money ......... ...99 Windows 3.1 .92 Microsoft Word for Windows....299 Microsoft Word 5.5 .209 Norton Commander.......... Norton Anti Virus ..85 Omnipage Professional...........639 Q&A.... Sidekick. ...57 Superbase 4 for Windows.......469 Willmaker ty NOLO Software.....37 Wordstar 7.0. ..259 249 L.cts the user feel that they are involved in a real lite movie adventure Cinematic effects are aimed to new heights with multiple digitized characters on screen. multiple camera angles Flasbacks. in-cut action scenes and much more A full scute digne voices and sound effects actually carry you to the thick jungles of the Amazon With such high production values, you become a part of the story characters seem to actually come to life by Access Softwatc............ ........538. Hours: 9am to 7pm Monday Friday (Saturday 10am 5pm) Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, M/C, Discover Card, certified checks & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School State & City purchase orders accepted. Shipping: UPS ($5 min). APO/FPO( $5 min.) 2 Day Air ($7 min.) CAN, HI. AK & PR ($9 min). Overseas minimum $30 (please fax orders if possible). Pre-Orders on Now Releases get shipped 2 Day Alr-$5 (U.S. Only). NY residents add 8.25% Sales Tax. Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL, 43 Warren Street, Dept. CGW 1292 New York, NY 10007 Military Orders given special attention! PRODUCTIVITY AccuWeather..........................34 America's 25 Best Home Finance 15 Animation Studio... 79 Architecture Design Your HomeCALL Auto Map... ...............57 BUDGET Addams Family Print Kit............19 Adventures of Beetlejuice........ 19 Beetlejuice Print Kit Bug's Bunny's Adventure.........14 Chip N Dale's Rescue Rangers..19 Datty Duck P.... Expert Astronomer Expert Calendar Expert Checkwriter........... Expert DOS Tutor..... 35 FEMME FATALE 59 49 Femme Fatale Build the Girl of Your Dreams! by Graphic Expressions Fertime Fatale is a jigsaw puzzle consisting of a group of exquisite girls digitized in full color. These LARGE FULL SCREEN images may be scrambled into varving numbers of preces including 2540.64.80 or 100 Numcrous fcatures include audio assistance. 16 ravishing girls, import feature & more. Warning: Must be 21 or over to CD ROM 5 Game Pack by Capstone..... Amanda Stories ........ 44 Audubon Mammals.. . BattleChess. Beauty & the Beast... Book of Lists 3....... Britannica's Family Choice.........65 Case of the Cautious Condot....44 Conan the Cimmerian.........37 Compton Family Encyclopedia 295 Electronic Cookbook...... European & American Art..........59 Future Wars. Game Pack 1... Game Pack 2 Golf Guide:CA and Hi edition.....44 Grammy Awards Geolier's Encyclopedia ............249 Guinness Disc of Records 92...39 Sound Blaster Pro Basic Pk 199 Sound Commander FX... Sound Commander Gold........169 UltraSound Board..................139 Disk Holder for 5.25 or 3.5...... 9 GameCard 3 Automatic........ 32 GameCard 3 Microchannel......48 Mouse/Menu Direct/Lemmings 24 Suncom controller PC... MaxFax 9624 Fax/Modem...89 MaxFax 9624 Portable ......... 199 MaxFax 9696.............. Analog Plus........... Analog Sabre....... Flight Stick by CH... Gravis Joystick for PC.. Mach Il by CH Products Mach Ill by CH Products Maxx Flight Pedals... Maxx Flight Yoke Merlin Mouse Yoke................... DAVIDSON'S Kid Works 2 The Creativity Kit that Writes, Paints. &Talks! .49 For Ages 1 thru 10 Imagine a program that allows a child to Create and hear their very own illustrated stories, Kidworks2 uniquely combines a word processor, paint program, and advanced text-to-speech technology all in one! With the ability to convert text to pictures and pictures to text, children learn to express their thoughts both visually and in writing. Delightful sound cffects and exciting paint tools provide children with endless hours of creative fun! by Davidson......................$37. .65 Femme fatale Data Dak 1 thru 4...520.ca Femme Fatale......... ...529. 2 . Circle Reader Service #110 "


"Letters GREETINGS from Behind in the Polls Your \"Top 100\" poll lost all credibility when it ranked Aces of the Pacific as the third best game around. As your review in issue #98 correctly pointed out, the game has serious problems, namely its frame rate and sound. What gives? C.B. Blackard Conway, AR Woodrow Wilson's father, a Presbyterian minister, was said to have been criticized for having the finest fed and bestgroomed horse in the county, while being less well-dressed himself. The answer was simple, according to the ofi-quoted anecdote, \"I take care of my horse,\" said Rev. Wilson, \"while my people take care of me.\" In the case of the \"Top 100,\" the simple answer is: \"We take care of the reviews, our readers take care of the ratings.\" Two possibilities come to mind: 1) cither the readers simply liked the game better than our reviewer (it's not the first time and we don't expect it to be the last) or 2) the readers are happy with the patch which came out after the review was printed. RUSH to Judgment Let me start by saying that Computer Gaming World is the only computer magazine that I currently read. This has been the case on and off for numerous years, through Apples and Amigas and finally, now, on MS-DOS. I find the reviews thoughtful, typically accurate and well-written. The previews your magazine presents offer the information that I am interested in, rather than harping on the graphics or sounds (not that those don't hold any of my attention). But I must finally get off my chest what has bothered me for some time. I believe in the 1st Amendment. I believe that you can run your magazine in whatever fashion you see fit. But I also believe that in the same sense that a bird shall not teach lessons in barking, Computer Gaming World should not belabor its readers with its political views. Since your magazine does have a tight focus (entertainment software) and increasing success (the last issue numbering 160 pages), why do you find it necessary to label certain games \"Politically Correct?\" My beliefs about the above-named phrase would be inappropriate to list, just as it is inappropriate for you to do. Its use has darkened the pages of your magazine for the last year or so, at least once an issue (approximately). Do you truly find it necessary to point out any slight reference to environmental concern \"Politically Correct?\" Regardless of the answer, the review of Global Effect, written by M. Evan Brooks, far surpassed anything you or your writers have done on the subject to date. His rambling tirade of offensive ideas (most plagiarized from popular talk-show host Rush Limbaugh) caused me to put down the issue and consider tossing it away. I didn't, but refused to complete the article. Your quoting of bible passages, while surprising, were always done with grace. You didn't force it down the readers' throats (I didn't take notice until a letter referring to it was printed) and I have tolerance for whatever beliefs you hold. But the magazine does not deal with political fads or buzz words, so their use is out of place and disjointing. I will continue to read your magazine, regardless of your political views. The quality is constant and the writing, for the most part, excellent. It is just disappointing to see the magazine that I look forward to more than any other, sucker punch me at least once an issue. You won't change anyone's opinion with the \"Politically Correct\" jibes, and might bias the readers' views of the game. Perhaps, I would have loved Global Effect, but I no longer trust Mr. Brooks. Nobody reads Computer Gaming World for new insights into political concepts. You and your staff are doing everyone involved a tremendous disservice with preaching about such issues. Jeffrey Morris San Francisco, CA Frankly, Jeffrey, neither M. Evan Brooks nor our editor would be caught dead listening to Rush Limbaugh. Mr. Brooks did not tag the article with the headline in question, but our liberal editor approved the headline for a very specific reason. Judging from your letter, his theory almost worked. Though the majority of the editorial staff is concerned about environmental issues and considered \"Environmentalist Wackos\" by the lone Limbaugh fan on our staff), we feel that unscrupulous marketing departments have a tendency to simultaneously sensationalize and trivialize authentic issues in order to sell computer software. The headline was approved because we sincerely felt that Global Effect was both a very poor game, in general, and used ecological issues in more of an exploitative than useful manner. We think that if you had finished reading the review, you would have understood our point. As for other uses of \"politically correct\" in our magazine, we believe that you have jumped to a conclusion. Some uses, written by our token right-winger, have been exactly as you thought they were intended. On the other hand, our too-liberal-for-theDemocratic Party and \"Let's get rid of the two-party system!\" editor often uses the word to describe those nescient types who take a political position because it's fashionable rather than because they truly believe in it. He thinks there are PC rightwingers (particularly among the doctrinaire rightists) as well as left-wingers. So, he doesn't react quite as negatively to the term as you have. Finally, we must completely disagree with your assertion that we need to stick to computer games and avoid political references. We make reference to religion, literature, film, art, stage, social movements, politics, science and music of all sorts in order to communicate the importance of computer games. Those references to art and music are not always directly related to the way something is executed in a computer game program, either. Sometimes, they are made to convey a mood or develop an ambiance for the discussion of a computer game's performance and potential. Our editor was questioned about his approach to SimCity in The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook (where he refused to take out his \"PC\" anti-nuclear stance, by the way). He felt that the history of city planning and reality checks against real urban problems had to be included in order to create a companion book that was more than a hint book. Not only has the book been used as a resource by a civic safety committee and an environmental consulting firm for a public utility in Southern California, but it has been used in college classrooms as a textbook. Yet, people said, \"It's just a game.' Can we really say that something is \"just a game\" or shouldn't we say that while games are produced to be entertaining, they sometimes teach valuable lessons we aren't expecting? At Computer Gaming World, we use a diverse spectrum of writers and we have a variety of political ideologies within our editorial construct. Any attempt to read one political ideology into our editorial voice is definitely, at least in our view, a misunderstanding Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"Letters Top 100 Blues Is there an error in your list of the \"Top 100\" games? Ever since I've subscribed, a mediocre, outmoded game, Battlehawks 1942, has maintained the near identical score and position, while other, newer games have come and gone. Has there been a glitch in your numbers or am I out of touch with modern gamedom. Oh, yeah! Love your magazine and literally, count the days till the issue arrives. (Yes, I have a life.) Dave Morris Sandusky, OH Since the \"Top 100\" ratings are cumulative and only change (in score) whenever the game in question is one of the 40 rated in a given month, it is not unusual to see a game sit in roughly the same spot with the same rating for quite a while. Usually, a game as old as BH 1942 is not re-rated unless another game fies with it. Then, we re-rate it to break the tie. We wouldn't say you are \"out of touch\" with modern gamedom (after all, you love our magazine), but what the BH 1942 anamoly does tell you is that the game still has (or had, at the last time it was rerated) a solid core of adherents and our readers believe that it is still, even with its outmoded graphics, one of the top 100 games available. Blood and Guts In response to your recent editorial about graphic violence in Wolfenstein 3-D, please consider this: Violence is the central theme in all wargames. For example, in Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe, say you make a head-on pass at a B-17, damage it, but do not knock it down. What have you just done? Maybe this (from Flying Forts by Martin Caidin): \"B-17 Tinkertoy ground-looped just off the runway. Tinkertoy had her nose shot out and the pilot had his head blown off by a 20-mm cannon shell. There was hardly a square inch of the entire cockpit that was not covered with blood and brain tissue. One half of his face and a portion of his cervical vertebra were found just in front of the bomb bay. The decapitation was complete.\" This is one example of many I could cite. I'm not condemning violence in games — far from it. I like violent games. I am condemning an attitude that says it's okay to maim and kill at long range, as long as we do not have to see the results of our handiwork. Why do you think there are so many air, tank and ship combat simulators and so few infantry ones? That's because Gis kill individually and personally and we might just see some blood and flying body parts (incidentally, Wolfenstein 3-D left out grenades, I wonder why). I applaud Wolfenstein 3-D's daring to attempt to bring home some of the reality and horror of war. Larry Smith Monroe, TN Fortunately, only a small minority of readers understood the two editorials on violence as you seem to have interpreted it. The point was not that long-distance violence was okay, while close-up violence was reprehensible. The editor was expressing his viewpoint that the new possibilities for graphic presentation of violence are so much more realistic that we need to rethink the \"Why?\" behind the game designs. The editorials stated that there should be a reason for violence (and, hopefully, a very good one) when it is used and that effective game designs should have some non-violent solutions, also. The editorials did not state that games should only have nonviolent solutions nor that they should have less violence. They were concerned about realistic graphics with unrealistic meTWIN ENGINE GAMING PRESENTS: Out Time Days Space Combat a game of Time Travel in an alternate dimension a game of pure tactical combat... in a rather unique environment THE EXPERIENCE: OTD is a game of life on a strange world. Although populated by a variety of You'll be fighting in an edgeless contest zone aboard livsemi-humanoid races, it is nothing like the Earth ing crcaturcs. Space Combat is almost all combat. with that your character left behind. Gone is the industrisome room for diplomacy. Offensive actions include al might of large nations. The multi-talented worker thc crcaturc's Psychic Screams to mentally disrupt is a thing of the past. Even your famed Time Jumpothers, launching Inverse Mincs that will implode ing skills have been checked to a certain degree.. near your enemy, freeing Spores to destroy interHowever, you do happen to be one of the few Time nals, using Nerve Pulses to paralyze posky scouts, Jumpers on this world, and that in itself is a major strength. and Virally Infecting your opponent in the hopes of You'll choose one of several sects to work with, or attempt to taking over their alicn. Each turn comes with a special full-page graphic create your own from scratch, which will help set your general methprintout of your cnding position to aid od of operation. As each new time opens, there are new discoveries to you in planning. make, new lands to chart, and new people to meet. The world awaits change, and you are the catalyst. Space Combat was designed to be casy to Icarn, but difficult to master. OUT TIME DAYS is a highly interactive role-playing Play-By-Mail Every game starts with ten players, game with turns processed weekly. It has received excellent reviews, and as cach is climinated, the chances notably from Flagship and Paper Mayhem. Turn cost of the game cnding will increasc. is $5.00. The game is open ended and 99% computer Turnshects are custom made on a laser moderated. The rulebook may be obtained for $5.00 printer to aid you in filling out your (refundable with startup). A special startup is next turn. The games run about 12-18 available that gives you the rulebook, the startup turns. Cost is $3.50 per turn. A rulesu turn, and five turns for only $15.00. book (required before you can join) is Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 $1.00 (free if you mention this act!). $ Twin Engine Gaming; Dept 631; 3254 Maple Leaf Ct., San Jose, CA 95121 @ 340 Circle Reader Service #150 December 1992 Page 123 "


"Letters chanics (unlimited ammunition, unclear objectives and the capacity to shoot everything in sight without penalties) and results (bloodless disappearing bodies and multiple lives). We think Wolfenstein 3-D is an awesome experience in much the same way you do, but we think it could be a better game with NPCs that you didn't want to kill or that you had to decide whether to trust or not. We think that games with violence ought to show more than just violence. Messy-DOS I'm writing to respond to Scorpia's opinion piece in the October issue of Computer Gaming World, in which she rails against the very real frustrations of trying to get a game to run on a DOS machine. I wish I could say that I knew exactly how she felt ... except I don't. I have an Amiga 1000 bought in 1985 and a Macintosh II I bought in 1988, and just about any game for each of those computers will run on it. I need only look at the \"system requirements\" sticker on the package to determine whether a game is one of the few ones that won't run on the computer I have. And I challenge you to find a DOS game regardless of what system enhancements the DOS computer has — that sounds looks, and plays better than a good Amiga game. (The Macintosh games are looking pretty good, too.) So, the golden days of glitch-free gaming aren't gone -it's just that they exist outside the DOS world that Scorpia (and other CGW contributors) too often take to be the alpha and the omega of computer gaming. (Take off those blinders, okay?) I was particularly taken by Scorpia's comments about the tendency of game companies to substitute artwork and great graphics for good game play. It's the eternal content vs. presentation, substance vs. flash battle that will be with us as long as humankind has any kind of art. We see this same battle in the arenas of film (\"Can you say 'special effects?»), literature, theater, music and every other artistic form. So, I applaud her concern, and I hope that CGW keeps such concern visible in its pages so that game companies can't say that gamers are satisfied with the status quo. Gregg Williams Santa Clara, CA In answer to your challenge to find a DOS game that plays better than an Amiga game, how about Wing Commander (MSDOS) versus Wing Commander (Amiga)? Sid Meier's Civilization? In answer to your charge that our editorial staff and contributor's wear blinders, please note that 82% of total diskbased sales in 1991 were DOS titles, while Macintosh (8%) and Amiga (5%) lagged behind (from the SPA's recreational software research report). Frankly, as we have said on numerous occasions, it is impossible to cover games that do not exist (it's hard enough to cover those that are late, <grin>). The heavy MS-DOS emphasis in CGW merely reflects the realities of the market. Y'all Come Back Now, Y'hear? Every month, I am just more and more impressed with your magazine. This month's issue was your best, yet. Every article was very informative and covered a wide range of games. It also didn't hurt that I have a birthday this month!) Y'all are the greatest. Y'all's \"tried and true\" beats their \"new and improved\" any day Robert Shofner Port Arthur, TX PORTINIUM Combine primitive, medieval, conventional and futuristic technologies to create an unparalleled play-by-mail fantasy world where time travel is commonplace. To assist you in achieving your goals, you will begin play with a character, city, espionage unit and two divisions in each of the four ages on the planet Glacieria Players may compete in all time periods simultaneously. The struggle to become a dominant player and participate in \"The Gathering of the Four\" creates an unprecedented challenge. Receive over forty double-sided pages of high-quality laser graphic output on each turn. Explore over 24,000 sectors packed with exciting battle action and adventure. PORTINIUM employs no wizards, magic or spells and has no hidden costs. PORTINIUM Voted best P.B.M. game of the year at AndCon'92, National P.B.M. Convention, &.Cleveland, Ohlo ALSO AVAILABLE in two smaller versions: PORTINIUM Hi-Tech and Lo-Tech games offer many of the larger game features in one age of play: PORTINIUM PORTINIUM HI-TECH and LO-TECH $20.00 per turn $8.00 each per turn (4-wk turnaround) (2 and 4-wk turnarounds) One-time, LIFETIME setup fee of $25.00 includes; 198-page Hi-Gloss Player's Guide, start-up packet, free start-up turn, plus one free turn and subscription to game newsletter. is Write or call for free brochure www ENCHANTED HORIZONS  P.O. Box 9897 Spokane, WA 99209-9897 (509) 325-6941 Circle Reader Service #73 Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Since 1982 CGW 12/92 ComputAbi ity THE MULTIMEDIA SPECIALISTS 800-554-9925 4295 CD ROM MULTIMEDIA CDRUM CALL US FOR OUR CD-ROM TITLES!  DRIVES  PACKAGES. CREATIVE MEDIA W VISION SoundBlaster Pro  Pro 16 Multimedia Internal $559 $969 free delivery! MAPC NEC SONY CD-ROM Drives 37.95 CD-ROM Packages featuring Sony 31A 39.95 $545 $609 Consumer Electronics FAX (414) 357-7814  INFO (414) 357-8181 HOURS: Mon-Fri 9am-9pm Sat 11am-5pm Jet Fighter Adventure 11 ..39.95 Tales of Magic: Proph Shadow 3 795 Harpoon ..37.95 IBM John Madden football 2 31.95 Task Force 1942 ....... 3996 Bartleset 14 25 95 Jump Jet 2095 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Advent 29.95 Harpoon Challenger Pak.. Pak. . .. 49 95 A Line in the Sand 24.95 Terminator 2029 3995 Harpoon Designers Series Battles! 31.95 Aces of the Pacific Xid Pa Windows.................34 95/34.95 Test Drive Ill 34.95 Heimdall 2495 Aces Over Europe 4495 Kid Pix Companion........... 39.95 Road & Car 11 15 96 Hi là 2495 AD&D Collectors Edition il...... 42.95 29.95 PO Box 17882, Milwaukee, WI 53217 Kid Works Tetris Classic / Windows ..Call Indy Jones 4. Fale of Atlantis 37.95 AD&D Starter Kit... King's Quest 5 Enhanced 39.95 Theatre of War 31.95 International Sports Challenge....... 30.95 Air Force Commander 34.95 King's Ouest 6 44.95 Thunder Hawk..... 24.95 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited.............. 34.95 Air Support....... 29.95 King Yankee 11 29.96 24.95 King's Quest 4 or 5........ 34.95 Aliens Ale My Babysitter! 2995 Koshan Conspiracey............... 31.95 Time Quest... 34,95 Knights in the Sky 19.95 Amazon 39.95 Legions of Kreta 37.95 Time Riders 34.95 Land, Ait, Sea Compl 2. 34.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 Leisure Sur Larry 5 39.95 Tom Landry Football 29.95 Leisure Suit Latry Enhanced 3495 ATAC 30.95 Leisure Suit Larry Bundle 1.23.... 39.95 Top Gun 29.95 Leisure Suit Latty 5 34.95 Award Winning Bundle (King Quest 5. Red Lemmings 29.95 Tracon for Windows 34.95 Lemmings 28.95 Baron, Rise of the Dragon).. . 46.95 On No More Lemming (add-on) 21.95 Tracon 11 29.95 Light Quest 31.95 B-17 Flying Fortress.... ...39.95 Light Ouest 31.95 Traders... 29.95 Links 20.95 Bane of the Cosmic Forge ...... ...... 36.95 Line in the Sand ...... . 24.95 Treasures of the Savage Frontier 3195 Firestone, Bountiful Course Disks ... 17.95 Buds Tale Ill. 31 95 Links 386 Pro........ ..... 39.95 Trectious ..34.95 Lord of the Rings 1, 2 or 3 3495 BattleChess 4000 2195 Lord of the Rings Il. Two Towers ....... 34.95 TIVE LABS.INC. Tristan 29.95 Lords of Time 29.95 BattleTech Power Hits 24 95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Twilight 2000 VGA 3495 Lost Treasures of intocom 39.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 MacArthurs's War 2995 Ultima VII 44.95 Madden Footbal 31.95 Black Crypt 3195 Magnete Scrolls 3495 MM Upgrade Kit Forge of Visture Data Disk 17.95 Manager's Challenge 2995 Body Ilustrated 4495 Ultima VII Part 2.... 44.95 System Internal Mantis 3495 Bridge 70 29.96 Mario Teaches Typing.... ... 24.95 Ultima Trilogy 11 4,5,6 44.95 Matrix Cubed 31.95 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space.... Mavis Beacon Typ. V.2.0/Win 29.95/34.95 Ultima Underworld 59.95 Mavis Beacon Typing 29.95 Campaign. Megafortress CALL Ultimate Challenge Golf........... 34.95 Mega Fortress.............. 37.95 Cat & Drive Megatraveler llor lll . 34.95/39 95 CD-ROM Uncharted Waters 39.95 Mission Disk 11 or 2... 2595 Carl Lewis Challenge 29.95 Mental Math Games................. Drive Package Underworld Stigan Abyss 44.95 Mercenaries 37.95 Carrier Strike South Pacific 39.95 Mercenaries US Atlas 30/30 Windows4495/44.95 Megatraveller 2 34.95 Expansion Set 20.95 Merchant Colony.... 3195 .... (il you have Sound Blaster Proj Utopi 29.95 Mig-29 3095 Carriers of War 34 95 Michael Jordan Flight ........ 42.95 Internal S369 V for Victory Battle Set 11 4295 Might & Magic lil 34.95 Casties or Il 34.95/3495 Microleague Baseball 4. 19.95 Wayne Gretzke 3 34 95 Mike Dita Football 3495 Challenge of the Five Realmas. 3495 Mg29 29.95 Warlord 29.95 Mixed-Up Fairy Tales 29.95 Champions ... 34.95 Might & Magcill 34.95 Wax Works .... 34.95 Monty Python..... 32.95 Champion of Krynil........... Millenium 2200 24.95 Where..Carmen San Diego. Each... 29.95 Napoleon I... 29.95 Civil War ... 37.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win....... 29.95 Where. Carmen Past.................... 34.95 Navy Seals 25.95 Civilization 39.95 MS Entertainment Pak 1.2 or 3... 28.95 Where... Carmen USA Deluxe 44.95 No Greater Glory 3995 Clouds of Xeen 3995 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 Where Carmen World Deluxe 2295 Cebra Mssion. 2995 Nm 1965-1975 inch 29.95 Add $79 for NEC XT/AT Whie Death 29 95 Obitus 34.95 Comanche Maximum Overkill ... 42.95 NFL Pro League Football Wing Commander 11 44.95 On No! More Lemmings stand alone.2995 Conflict Korea 34.95 New Print Shop SCSI Interface. Speech Accessory Pack 1.1495 14 95 Or No More Lew gon Oh Not More Lerm add-on... 21.95 Confict. Middle East 34.95 New Print Shop Campanion...... 29.95 CDR-84 CDR-74 Special Operations #loill................ 24.95 Out of this World............... 46 95 Conquest of Japan 34.95 No Greater Glory Internal External Wing Commander Deluxe.. . 4495 PGA Tour Goit .. ..... Crossword for Windows 2995 Omar Shariff Bridgo Windows 29.95/29.95 Wizardry Crusaders Dark Savant 3 9.95 Golf Tournament Course disk 17.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 4195 Orbits .. 36.95 Call for Details! World Atlas 3.030 Windows 4495/4495 Pacific Islands 29.95 Curse of Amon Ra 39.95 Oregon Trail 2995 World Circuit Grand Prix 3195 Paper Boy 2 25.95 Cyber Empires 31 95 Out of the World 3495 Worlds at War 29.95 Perfect General 34.95 Cybercon 3 29.95 PGA Tour Golt 31.95 WWII 1946 24.95 WWII Edition 22.95 Daemonsgate 34.95 PGA Tour Golf for Windows.... 37.95 Yeager's Air Combat 37.95 WWII Scenario Disk 1995 Dagger of Amonra 39.95 Course Disk for Windows 17.95 Zookeeper 39 95 Pinball Dreams 2495 Danger Zone 29.95 Patriot 42.95 Pa-Fighter 21.95 Dark Queen of Krynn 31.96 Palton Strikes Back... 34.95 Plan 9 from Space 29.95 Darklands...... 39.95 AMIGA Perfect General CREATIVE LAN, INC. 34.95 Police Quest 1 Enhanced ... 34.95 Dark Halt 34.95 WWII Edition 21.95 Police Quest 2 of 3 34.95 Dark Sun WWI Setario Disk 19.95  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & A-10 Tank Killer V.1.5 Upgrade 3 4.95 Pools of Darkness 3795 Design Your Own Railroad Pinball for Windows 29.95 Playback for Voice Channel Aces of the Pacific 39.95 Pools of Radience 1595 Disney s Animation Studio 7495 Pirates of God 39.95 Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Adventures of Wille Beamish 3495 Populous 31.95 Dr. Quantary 34.95 Plan 9 From Outer Space 24.95 Agony 29.95 Populous 11 37.95 Dr Thorps Black Jack Police Ouest 111 39.95 Stereo FM Music Synthesizer Air Force Commander ......... 34.95 Powermonger .31.95 Dragon's Lair 3 34.95 Poals of Darkness 37.95  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces Air Supp 29.95 Prehistoric 29.95 Dragonlance Collector's Edition ....... 42.95 Populous II. ATAC .30.95 Prince of Persia ...... 2495 Dungeon Master 29.95  Windows 3.1, SB & Power Hits Bartletech .......... 24.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Prophecy of the Shadow 3795 Dusks of the Gods 3495 Powermonger ...31.95 SB Pro Compatible 24 25 Ball Game Advertise! Ouest for Glory 1 or 2 3195 Eagles Rider 29.95 PrintShop Deluxe.. 44.95 Bane Cosmic Forge 1 Meg 34.95 Alroad Tycoon 34.95 Eco Questi 34.95 Graphics Libraries Business 2995 Birds of Prey 31.95 Red Byron 34.95 EP|| 3995 Graphics Libraries Sampler 29.95 Black Cryp! 31.95 Red Zone 29.95 Empite Deluxe 34.95 Pro League Baseball 2495 Boombox 36.95 Rise of the Dragon 34.95 Eye of the Beholder 2... 37.95 Prophecy of the Shadow 37.95 34 95 Campaign ..... Road Rash PRO AUDIO 16 Bit / MIDI Interface, Eye of the Storm... Putt Putt Join the Parade... 31.95 Carmen San Diego/Each ........... 30 95 Robin Hood Conquest Long Bow36.95 F-117A Nghthawk 2.0 44.95 Quest for Glory 2 or 3.... 34.95/39.95 True 16 Bil Stereo Sound, Carmen San Diego America 36.95 Robocop 30 F-15 Strike Eagle Il of Ill 3 4.95/44.95 Ral in the Pacific 24.95 Advanced 20 Voice Castles 34.95 34.95 Robosport F-15 Strike Eagle lll Limited Edition 44.95 Ragnarok 29.95 Campaign D   19.96 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 1 or 2...39.95 Fables & Fiends Legend of Kyrandia.34.95 Stereo Synthesizer, rt 25.95 Castles 11 34.95 Rules of Engagement . 37.95 Falcon 30 ... 44.95 Realms 2995 Joystick, Amplifier, Castle of Dr. Bran... 29.95 Secret of Monkey Island Toril 34.95 Disk 1. Operation Fighting Tiger2 4.95 Rex Nobur 39.95 Chaos: Dungeon Master 2 24.95 Software Call for List! 15.95 Secret of the Silver Blades Fighting for Rome Cohort 29.95 Road & Track Grand Prix Unlimit....... 34.95 Muline Chessmaster 2100 29.95 Shadow of the Beast llor lll 34.95 Final Conflict 29.95 Robin Hood Conquest of Long Bow 39.95 Civil War... 37.95 Shandon Bridge 29.95 Fire King Robocop 3.0 31.95 Conan the Cimmerian................ 29.95 Shuttle.......... 34.95 Fire Team 2200... 29.95 Robosport for Windows 3495  JOYSTICK  MODEMS .. Conflict: Korea.... 37.95 Sim Ant...... 34.95 Flight Assignment. Alt Force ... Secret of Monkey Island Il 34.95 Conflict Middle Eas! 34.95 Sim City 29.95 Flight Simulator 40 39.95 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe. 39.95 . MICE Covert Action 36.95 Sim Earth 39.95 Add-on Disks Expansion Disk 1.2.3 or 4 ZOOM 34.95 Cruise for a Corpse Solitaires Journey  GAME CARDS 34.95 29.95 Four Crystals to Traete Secret Silver Blades 15.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 39.95 Sorcerian 36.95 Frederick Pohls Gateway 34.95 ShadowLands 29.95 Curse of the Azure Bonds... AMC 2400 Internal with RPI 15.95 Space Quest 3 or 4.. 34.95 . Front Page Supports: Football... 39.95 Sharif on Bridge for DOSWindows... 29.95 Cyber Empires 31.95 Spoils of War 34.95 AMX 2400 External with RPI........ 34.95 Gateway S65 Sherlock Holmes Los! Files 37 95 MACH 3 Joystick ........... $29 Daemonstrate ... 34,95 Star Control Il... 34.95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier Sid Meier's Bundle ... 29.95 AFC 2400 Send9G/Rec 48 RPI Int............. $59 Dark Queen of Kryno ............... 31.95 Star Trek... MAXX Flight Yoke ........... $69 34.95 Gemfire 29 95 Siege. AFX 2400 Send 96/Rec 48 RPI Ext.......... $75 Death Knights of Krynn .. ...3195 Starflight II 3195 Global Conquest 34.95 Sim Ant DOS/Windows...... 34.95/34.95 MAXX Pedal NEW...... $39 FC 2400 Send/Rec 9600 Internal ............. 579 Deluxe Paint IV (wule Supplies Last) 9795 Sleitar 7 2195 Global Effect 31.95 Sim City DOS Windows 29.95/34.95 Flight Stick ..... FX 2400 Send/Rec 9600 External ... $89 30 95 Demoniak Stratego 29.95 Goblins 24.95 Sim Earth / Windows 39.95/39.95 Hi Speed Adaptor .......$19 2400 V.42 Send/Rec 9600 with Winfax. Disney Animation Studio 74.95 29.95 Strip Poker 3 Grand Canyon Scenery.... ..... 19.95 Sim Lite 39 95 CH Game Gard Automatic$30 Dog Eat Dog 30.93 Super Space Invaders 24.95 Grand Stem Bridge 11 31.95 Salitate for Windows 29.95 FCV Internal / FXV External .....$119/$129 Dune 29.95 Tales of Magic. Prophecy Shadow 3793 Great Naval Battles 42.95 Solitaire's Journey..... 34.95 ADVANCED GRAVIS: 9600 V.32 Int/ext ... $192/8192 Dungeon Master & Chaos bundle 2495 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adven. 29.95 Gunship 2000 VGA 39.95 Sound Graphics, Artcraft . 24.95 PC GamePad ................ $21 9600 S/R 9600 Int/ext.............$205/$225 ECO Phantas 24.95 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turles: Arcade.29.95 Scenario & Missions Buildor ......... 24.95 Space Hulk... 39.95 Analog Joystick ............. $35 Pocket Modem Ecoquest... .. .34.95 Tengen Arcade Hits .............. 24.95 Guy Spy ... 30.95 Space Quest 4 Enhanced 39 95 Eliminator Gamecard ......$31 ||V.32 bis InternalExternal............. $209/$225 Elvira Il Jaws of Cerberus ........3995 28.95 Terrain Envoy Hard Ball or til 29.95 31.95 S OUS 39.95 . Eye of the Beholder I or II 2995 37.95 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14.400 Int.......... $219 Thunderhawk Player Data Disk for HB III 17.95 Spaceward HO! GOLDEN IMAGE: 3195 Eye of the Storm 2995 Thunderstike 29.95 Harpoon CALL Spell Craft 3 Button Mouse w/Driver$19 ivar S19 || V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Ext... $249 F-15 Strike Eagle 11 34.95 Tom Landry Football... 29.95 Heaven & Earth 29.95 Spellcasting 301 3495 Fables & Fiends Legend of Kyranda. 34.95 Tracon II 39 95 Heimdall ..... 24.95 Spelljammer Pirates of Realmspace 37.95 AMIGA Falcon 29.95 Traders ..29.95 Heroes of the 357th. 31.95 Star Control II 34.95 Fantastic Voyage ... 27.95 Treasure of the Savage Frontier .... 31.95 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 31.95 Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary .... 34.95 Wilco Ergo Stick ............. $18 Supra Corporation Fighter Dual.. 29.95 Twighlight 2000 Hoyles Book of Games 3. 30.95 Strike Commander ............ ADVANCED GRAVIS 44.95 Final Conllict 34.95 Ultima 6 39.955 Humans 24.96 Strip Poker 3 29.95 Switch Joystick ............$31 SupraFax Modem Internal 24/96 NEW! ....$59 Flames of Freedom 29.95 Utopia 29.95 HyperSpeed...... 3495 Stunt Island 36.95 2400 Internal w/ Mirror II $51 Fight of the Intruder 34.95 ... Viking Field of Conquest... 36 95 Incredible Machine 29.95 Mouse Stick ....... $59 Summer Challenge 34.95 2400 External ....... Four Crystals of Trazere 31.95 Warlord 29.95 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis 37.95 Summoning 3795 GOLDEN IMAGE: Supra Fa Modem V.32, Ext. alone.......... $219 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 2.3195 Wheel of Fortune Vanna 29.95 International Sports Challenge 29.95 Super Space lavaders Replacement Mouse.... $35 Global Hect 31.95 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone .... $279 29.95 Where in the Carmen cach Island of Dr Brain 29.95 TA Break Crosswords... 29.95 Gods 24.95 Wide World of Boxing...................2995 J. Nicklaus Sign Goll............ 39 95 TA Break Pinball ......... 29.95 Optical Mouse Pad .... $45 with Fax Software, DOS/Win ... $299 / $299 . Guy Spy 28 95 World Atlas 25......... ..... 3495 Data Disk. ...... ......... 17.05 TA Break Pool .............................. 29.95 Hardball ll. Handball .............................. ... 29.95 World Circuit ....... .. . .. 34.93 ORDERING INFO: Specily system. For last delivery send cashier's check or money order. Personal & company checks allow 14 business days to clear. P.O.'s welcome. C.0.0. charges are $5.00 Jn Continental U.S.A. Include S5.00 for software orders 5% shipping for hardware, minimum $5.00. MasterCard and Visa orders please include card, expiration date and signature. We residents please include 5% sales tax. HI, AK, FPO, APO,Puerto Rico and Canadian orders, please add 6% shipping, minimum $6.00. All other foreign orders add 15% shipping, min $15.00 All orders shipped outside the Continental U.S.A. are shipped first class insured U.S. mail, where available. If foreign shipping charges exceed the minimum amount, you will be charged the additional amount All goods are new and include factory warranty. We do not guarantee compatability & versions. Due to our low prices all sales are final. All Detective returns must have a return authorization number. Call (414) 357-8181 to obtain an R.Aor your return will not be accepted. Prices and availability subject to change without notice Shipping & handling are non-refundable. We ship the latest versions available to us, updates must be handled by end user directly with the manufacturer. Not responsible for typographical orrors. In an effort to be complete, some new products may not be available from the manufacturer at press time. ...SOUND CARDS ... CREATIVE NEW! SOUND BLASTER.. 16 Price to Low MEDIA WA VISION 3195 3195 PC ........ $49 37.95 .......... 544 S85 .. $69 Circle Reader Service #62 "


"From The Cockpit THE C MT GKP KPIT FR Flight Simulator Dreams be done with software to create a realistic flying simulation. Realize also that when these products were on the drawing board, the rest of the world was still working with 286 based computers. This type of technology takes time to develop and the designers have to have an eye toward the near future technologies. We are also beginning to see a new market in add-on products for flight simulations. There are various flight yokes, rudder pedals, control panels, throttle controls and flight planning/configuration software products available to fill the need for realism. Used in the correct configuration, these products can add a lot to the simulated flight experience. (Some have even built special chairs and compartments for their computers and attachments in an attempt to add realism.) So, with these current technologies and the trend towards realism (or virtual realism), what can we expect to see in the near future? Well, we can only speculate, but we can do it with knowledge of current products. For example, Falcon 3.0 is a recent release (Q4 1991). We can expect that it will be another two to three years before we see the next technological release of a new version of Falcon. So, what could we expect? How about 1024 different color shades on a monitor that supports 2048 by 2048 pixels. The program would have to come on the standard media of the time which would be CDs. With the graphic capabilities of the display and the higher speed of the CD and computing technology (Intel 686s?), the depicted aircraft of Falcon 4 (52) would be actual digitized photos. Add-on peripherals would include more realistic throttle and flight control devices. A more realistic rudder system will also be available. A set of goggles could also be plugged into the computer video board which would allow the wearer to view the screen from within the goggles. The goggles would also sense the movement of the head in relation to a sensor placed on top of the standard monitor, thus allowing the program to \"sense\" where the pilot is looking and scroll the goggles screen to the appropriate view. Four channels of sound will provide digitized voice, background music (CD quality of course), engine, wind, radio and instrument noise. Another add-on product would be the pressure suit that squeezes the wearer during high G maneuvers. The real fun would come with the ability to connect to other Falcon systems via phone lines or networks. Although this feature already exists it could be greatly expanded to include connections to other types of aircraft or even be a part of a much bigger situation with ground troops calling for air support. For air combat these could be other F16s, by Timothy L. Trimble The report from your wing man is that you've got smoke pouring out from the left engine. The enemy has just forced you into a five G. turn. You feel the pressure on your chest as you look left and scan the ground, watching for SAM launches. Your target rolls right as you pull back on the throttle, roll inverted, and hope that the target continues his turn. Looking up through the canopy toward the ground you see the enemy plane. Pulling back on the stick you bring the nose toward the target while adjusting the radar for a lock-on. As soon as you hear the solid tone in your ears, you pull the trigger, setting the AIM-9 missile free. Watching the trail of missile exhaust to the target, you scream an enthusiastic «Yeah\" when the target explodes. \"Keep it down!\" your wife shouts. You remove the Sim Visor from your head, unzip the pressure vest, and then reply to your wife, «Whew, what a flight!\" Your wife takes the Sim Visor and sits in the flight chair. \"About time,\" she says. «I've been wanting to do some thermal soaring all afternoon.\" Does this sound too futuristic? Not in our lifetime? Well, think again. The future is not too far away. With the technical advances in CD-ROMs, computer processing, video technology, \"Virtual Reality\" and sophisticated controls, the future as described above is just around the corner. So what does this mean for the serious armchair pilot? Well, for example, take a look at the following list to see what is currently available in computer and software technology: 486 DOS compatible computer, running at 33 MHz or better — 17 inch VGA (or Super VGA) monitor SoundBlaster card attached to stereo speakers (or headphones) Thrustmaster Weapons Control System (throttle) and Flight Control System Maxx rudder pedals Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0 With the above configuration any armchair pilot can experience the next best thing to sitting in an F-16 style military simulator. Falcon 3.0 is a good example of how far the software technology has advanced toward providing a realistic representation of flight combat. Flight Simulator 4 is also a good example of what can Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"VKNG ) VIKING RATINGS Airbucks B-17 Carriers at War Darklands Harpoon Designer Series High Command Madden 11 Mantis Pro League Baseball '92 Spoils of War Tristan sqq SOFTWARE, INC. ADVENTURE/ROLE PLAY STRATEGY PRE WWII MODERN IBM AMI IBM AMI FUTURE IBM AMI 37 39 . 39 . TIT Might and Magic PAST IBM AMI AD&D Starter Kit Betrayal at Krondor Black Crypt 34 34 Castles Castles 11 Castles N. Camp Challenge of Five Realms Champions Kr Conquest of the Longbow 42 37 Curse Azure Bonds 34 34 Dark Lands Darklands Art Disk W.HB 15 . Dark Queen of Krynin 34 34 Dark Sun Darkside of Xeen Feb Dungeon Master Dragonlance Collectors Edit 42 Eye of Beholder 34 34 Eye of Beholder 2 38 38 Four Crystals of Trazara Gatewy Savage Frontier Heimdall Heroes Ouest 3 Kings Quest Enhanced Kings Ouest 5 VGA Kings Ouest 6 Legacy of Necromancer 27 27 Legend of Kryandia 37 37 Lord of the Rings 36 36 Lord of the Rings 2 Fall Ancient Art of War in Skies Bandit Kings China Battles of Napoleon Civil War Vol. 1, 2 or 3 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of Americas (SSG) Grand Fleet Kingdoms of England L'Empereur No Greater Glory Nobunaga's Amb. 2 Paladin 11 Prelude to Jutland Red Baron Mission Builder Red Baron VGA Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 Siege Siege Expansion Disk V for Victory Warlords Enhanced B MICROPROSE 19 A Line in the Sand Adv. Tac Air Com. Comanche: Max Overkill 43 Conflict Korea Conflict Middle East F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F-15 111 F-15 III Mstr Edit Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3.0 Campaign Disk Global Effect Gunship 2000 Gunship 2000 Disk 1 Harpoon v.1.2 Harpoon 2 Or #3 Harpoon 14 Challenger Pak SIG ED Harpoon Designer Series 32 Harpoon Scen. Edit Harpoon Challenger Pack 43 Jump Jet M-1 Tank Platoon MBT Centr. Germany MBT Middle East 39 MBT North Germany Megafortress (360) Megatartress Mission Disk 1124 Megafortress Miss 12 Megafortress Megapak 37 Patriot Dec Special Forces 7th Fleet 83 Battetech 2 Buck Rogers 1533 Buck Rogers 2 Breach 2 Dune Dune 2 Epic Elite Plus Free D.C. Gateway Hard Nova Jonny Crash Leather Godesses Phobos 2 46 Legions Krella/Star Legions 37 \"M XMas Mantis Fighter 38 Martian Memorandum 30 MechWarrior 25 Megatraveller 1 Megatraveller 2 Megatraveller 3 Nova 9 Out of this World Planets Edge Powerhits Battletech Rex Nebular Rise of Dragon VGA Rules of Engagement Space Quest 4 Space Quest 5 Spelljammer Star Control 2 StarFlight 1 17 34 StarFlight 2 1934 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 36 . Twilight 2000 32 Fall Twilight 2001 Jan 93 Ultrabots Wing Commander 2 47 . W/C 2 Spec Ops 1 W/C2 Spec Ops 2 19 . Speechpak 15 42 F-15 III Using a revolutionary new visual system, F-15 I will create the most realistic dogfighting so far. Z player abilty via modem or direct link, will allow formation flying, head to head combat or pilot/RIO teams. IBM $47/42 Dec 32 32 ... 'M 22 .. . 15 39 Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 MOM CLouds of Xeen Merchant Colony Pilates Gold Pool of Radiance Pool of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory (New) Quest for Glory 3 Ragnarok Rampart Realms Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret Silver Blades Shadowlands Spoils to War Surirmorning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima 6 Ultima 7 Ultima inlogy 2 Ultima Underworld Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wirardry 6 Wirardry 7 GENERAL A-Train Airbucks Civilization 38 Civilization Mstr Edit Empire Deluxe Global Conquest 39 Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced Winter Monopoly Deluxe DOS/WIN 37 Perfect General Perfect General Disk 2 Nov . Perfect General WW II Disk 22 Populous 2 Populous World Editor PowerMonger 34 34 Power Monger WWI Disk 22 SimAnt 38 38 Sim City 34 34 Sim Earth Sim Lite Fall/Winter Spoils of War Theatre of War 42 HINT BOOKS INSIN loop. . 44 36 AD & D Clue Rooks 10-12 Chuck Yeager Handbook 16 Civilization Darklands H.B. w/Art Disk 15 Eye of Beholder 2 Falcon Air Combat Lord of Rings Lucasfilm Air Combat Harpoon Battle Book Magic Candle 2 Might & Magic Ill Hint Planet's Edge Railroad Tycoon Rex Nebular Run 5 Magazine 1-17 Seria Hint Books Star Trek 25th Ultima 7 Ultima Underworld Wing Commander Hintbook 15 Wizardry 6 Hint Book 12 Dansa CONQUERED KINGDOMS Become the world's greatest conquerer! Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia Nine scenarios, random map generator Basic or fantasy units or both. Rich in strat & lact. Full ranking system Win awards and promotions. Modem play. 1 or 2 players. 21 difficulty levels. Must own! IBM $37 CLOUDS OF WORLD WAR II XEEN Aces Over Europe Aces Over Europe Disk 1 Feb Might & Magic IV-Clouds of Xeen. Aces of the Pacific Bigger and more astonishing than Aces of the Pacific Disk 1 20 Aces of the Pacific Disk 2 20 M&M III! This now linear game Action Stations V. 3.2 includes state of the art 3-D graphAction Sta. Data Disk ics and digitized speech. Includes Air Raid Pearl Harbor new monsters, plots and schemes. Ancient Art of War in Skies A sure must for first person per 3-17 Flying Fortress B. Tank Barbarosa spective gammers. Bismarck IBM $42 Carriers at War Carrier Strike Fleet Commander Winter Fleet Med Great Naval Battles Great Naval Battles Expan19 In Harm's Way Malta Storm Midway MBT Kursk Pacific War Panzer Battles Rommel N. Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luft. P-38 (LUCAS) P-80 (LUCAS) DO 335 HE 162 Silent Service 2 Task Force 1942 Their Finest Hour/Battlehawks 44 Third Reich Typhoon of Steel V for Victory Hea V for Victory 2 Mar Victory at Sea 1993 RAGNAROK Western Front An excellent single-character roleplaying game based on Norse mythology. As addictive as Warlords, SCI-FI this detailed, yet easy to learn product uses a point and click system. Armada 2525 Breach 2 It has six (6) character classes. 200 Cyber Empires unique races of beings and hunImperium dreds of items to discover Look for Mantis add on disks soon. Mantis Speech Pak Reach for the Stars Robosport (Windows) Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 Apr Second Conflict (Windows) 34 Spaceward HO! (for WIN) 37 Spaceward HO! (for DOS) Jan . SPORTS 39 39 PRESENT 4237 39 . HARDWARE All Amer College Football 92 37 Battle Chess 4000 VGA/SVGA33/42 Front Page Sports: Football 37 Front Page Sports: Baseball Mar Front Page Sports: Basktball '93 Grand Prix Greens Hardball 3 Players Disk Stadium Disk Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf 42 Links 39 Links Disks 1-7 16 ea. Links 386 42 MicroLeague Baseball 4 33 NCAA College Football '92 37 NFL NFL Pro League '92 The Games/Summer The Games Winter Tony LaRussa LaRussa Disks Madden Football MLBPA Stats '90 Pro League Baseball Solitare's Journey Wayne Gretsky 2 Hockey League Simulator World Curcuit NOVEMBER SPECIALS Buzz Aldrin Space Classic Adventures Crisis in the Kremlin D/generation Dagger of Amon RA Elvira 1 Elvita 2 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jones Atlantis KGB Leisure Suit Larry 5 Lost Flies: Sherlock Holmes Lost Treas. Infocom Oh No! More Lemmings! Jaws of Cerberus Lost in LA Marcenaries Out of this World Police Ouest Rocketeer w/Sound Savage Empire Sea Rogue Strike Commander Willy Beamish Waxworks . Adlib Soundblaster (Pro) 180 Soundblaster (Pro Basic) 150 Soundblaster (Micro Ch) 269Gravis Eliminator Card Gravis (Joystick) 39 Gravis Ultrasound CH-Flightstick 49 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Bit 239 Thunderboard Thrustmaster J/S Thrustmaster Weapons Cntrl 79 8P 34 130 19 IBM $35 Balletech 11 Conflict Korea Champions of Krynn Curse Azure Bonds Death Knights of Krynn Knights of Legend MechWarrior Ogre Omega Overrun Patton Strikes Back Quest for Glory II Secret Silver Blades War of Lance 79 12 For information and release dates 1-(404) 840-7906 SAME DAY SHIPPING depending on availability. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm Eastern (6am-7pm Pacific). UPS $4.00 (AK & HI = $11) COD $8.00. Second day air: $2.50 extra. SHIPPING OUTSIDE OF U.S. is $12 & UPS Foreignavailable. UPS OVERSEAS: 3 day shipping time! Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE (404) 840-7906... ...24 HR. FAX Line: (404) 840-7925 To place orders, call 2890 LAKE COLONY DRIVE, SUITE 12, NORCROSS, GA 30071 Please Have Credit Card Ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for Your Convenience "


"From The Cockpit A-10, AWACs, and other types of air environment which even allows you to craft — not just with the ability to go look down at your feet on the rudder pedhead-to-head but with the ability to go als. With this much realism, the sensation squadron-to-squadron. of G forces and the destructive capabilities The next step of technology will most of your aircraft become more of an expelikely be in the area of virtual reality envirience instead of a \"fun\" simulation. At ronments. No monitor, no keyboard or this point, you may be a lot less willing to flight control sticks, just the goggles, and take simulated risks and experience a VR a full sensor equipped body suit. For ex\"crash.\" ample; you plug into the computer, turn on There are bound to be a lot of social and the environment, and become an actual moral questions that will be asked about part of the program. You will be able to the implications of Virtual Reality on resee your hands interact with the virtual ality itself. In other words, when does it controls and yet feel the sensation of grip become too real to still be fun? The eduping controls in your hands. Your move cational aspect will also come into play ment is more pronounced within your and will allow higher levels of training BUURUMUMUMUMUMUMUTUMUT MUUMLMUTLUM before actually stepping into the aircraft. (Hum, think the FAA will finally approve Flight Simulator for recording flight time?) As technology advances we will be around to see the changes and the implications. For now, though, all we can do is dream, speculate and enjoy the current offerings. Remember, it wasn't too long ago when you were playing Flight Simulator on a computer that had a single color (green), one floppy drive, and less than 64K of memory. Once again this is Timothy Trimble, from the cockpit, flying a TRS-80 (Radio Shack) and saying, \"So long, and keep the dreamy side up. QUUM TUMUTUMUTU \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD., Clinical Psychologist. $39.95. THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN... a journey into another reality. Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. I CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. VISUALIZATIONS ... $35.00. Programs for Children ... call or write. Created by an Educa. tional Psychologist. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 anununununununu Products Mentioned: Flight Simulator Microsoft Inc. Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Thrustmaster Weapons Control System and Flight Control System Thrustmaster Inc. Maxx Rudder Pedals The Maxximum Company. Cow MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (after 5 p.m.) IBM/Compatibles and AMIGA ERU PUPUMUPUNUMU Wuuuu THE POTENTIALS OF THE NEAR FUTURE THE ACTUALITIES OF THE PAST. HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER GAMES IGNORE THE FACTS? PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE PRETTY PICTURES, THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH. TESTING & DESIGN. PACIFIC STORM: THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN, Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat In The Med, 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterranean, 1941-1942. KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations in the Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920. IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacilic, 1942. SEVENTH FLEET, Modern Naval Operations in the Pacific Ocean. FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations In The Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Combat. WE DIDN'T. LAND COMBAT: \"New\"\"MAIN BATTLE TANK: MIDDLE EAST, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. The Middle East seems to forever be in turmoil. And i recent history is any indicator, this situation will not be changing in the near future. MBT:ME, our third MBT game in design for two years and delayed to incorporate data from the recent Gull conflict) provides the terrain of the Middle East deserts and the forces of the local powers, as well as intervention countries, in a command oriented simulation that allows for past, current, and future combat situations. Prebuilt scenarios and a \"build your own\" System are provided. Amiga, Atari ST, & IBMPC. SIMULATIONS CANADA... FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING BATTLE TANK: KURSK TO BERLIN, Tactical Armoured Combat In The NAVAL COMBAT: East, June 1943 May 1945. New\"RED SKY AT MORNING, Naval Strategy In The Modern Era. In this MBT: NORTH GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. first of our worldwide naval studies, we examine the very confusing current BT: BARBAROSSA TO STALINGRAD, Tactical Armoured Combat In The situation at sea. RSAM was designed as a modern period global command East, June 1941 May 1943. Simulator, such as would be used for stall studies or naval command training MBT: CENTRAL GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. exercises. The political and military standings of every major world naval ROMMEL AT EL ALAMEIN, Battles For Egypt, 1 July to 6 November. 1942. power can be brought into play and adjusted prior to the start of conflict. Situation and intelligence briefings are prime elements in a game that MOSCOW CAMPAIGN, Typhoon & White Storm, Aug 1941 to Feb 1942. concentrates on plan formulation and execution via command and control. Your TO THE RHINE, The Allied Advance In The West, 29 Aug to 11 Dec, 1944. staff will always provide detailed recommendations, which you may accept, ROMMEL AT GAZALA, Battles For Tobruk, 26 May to 27 June 1942. reject, or modify. And for the historical gamer, scenarios from the potential STALINGRAD CAMPAIGN, The Turning Point In Russia, Jun 1942 Feb 1943. situations of 1973, 1982, and 1991 are presented. Amiga, Atari ST, & IBMPC. KURSK CAMPAIGN, Operation Zitadelle, Summer 1943. OPERATION OVERLORD, The Invasion Of Europe, 6 June 28 August, 1942. ***New**MAN OF WAR, Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765_GOLAN FRONT, The 1973 Arab/Israeli War In The North. 1815. In another initial game of a new system, we place the player on the deck of the flagship of a fleet of Ships Of The Line about to enter into battle. MOW is a FALL GELB, The Fall of France, Spring 1940. fleet level study of the height of the age of sail. Ships, from England, France, Spain, Holland, and the United States, are represented individually, using a turn ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are structure of 4 minutes per interation. The game system concentrates on command, combat, maneuver, sailing ability, and crew quality. 12 historical $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and scenarios ranging from Ushant to Trafalgar, as well as a scenario builder to $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear create custom actions, are provided. Amiga, Atari ST, & IBMPC. before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own. Purchasers from outside of Canada PACIFIC STORM: THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra Pacific, 1942. 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Page 128 Circle Reader Service #143 Computer Gaming World "


"All those who think \"Patriot\" is the ultimate Gulf War simulation, please raise your hands. PATRIOT The experts agree. PATRIOT is more than the most authentic re-creation of Desert Storm ever made, PATRIOT is the definitive land warfare simulation for the IBM PC. With its initial Battleset, you'll engage in the mother of all battles\" as Coalition forces meet battalion-tobattalion with the defiant troops of Saddam Hussein. Command over 2000 units from either the Coalition or Iraqi side — the most lethal high-tech arsenal of firepowereverto scorch the face of the Earth. Stunning 256 color Super VGA graphics capture the fury of modern ground warfare as never before. Astate of-the-art database, interface and mapping system Harpoon and Patriot are registered trademarks of Three-Sixty, Inc. All other product and corporale names are trademarks and registered provide authenticity that other wargames can only dream of. And future Battlesets make PATRIOT expandable: always combat-ready for future global conflicts. Like World War III in Europe or land wars in Asia and South America. A revolutionary simulation as current as the morning headlines. That's PATRIOT. But what else would you expect 1.SIN from the creators of HARPOON ? To order, visit your favorite software retailer or call 409-776-2187 trademarks of their respective owners c 1992 Three-Sixty, Inc. All rights reserved PHOTO AEUTERS RETTUAN Circle Reader Service #40 "


"(continued from pg. 50) A Bag Full of Rumors Poet Laureates (Our Favorites) \"Vice-Verse Ah!\" While playing Empire on my computa, My wife entered the room in the nude, uh! \"Let's make love,\" she cried To which I replied, \"Can't you wait? I'm invading Bermuda!\" Mitch Willis Wetrompka. 44 Seems folks either love or hate the rumor guy! The rumor guy is back! And rumors are back on track! The campaign was a bust, His return was a must! For a while, though, I thought he'd been sacked! Martin Houat Slidell. 44 There once was a man who wore a bag And he wrote for a computer game rag. Some hoped he was dead, But he came back instead, That irrepressible man with the bag. Jonathan Barlow Cave Junction, OR \"My Amiga Is...\" ...omnipotent. It always knows the square root of 193 And how to spell onomatopoeia. ...all powerful. Il organizes my life, helps me write and entertains me. ...addictive. Il calls to me al night: \"Don't just lie there you worm! You haven't conquered the 67th level on Lemmings, yet. What are you, a man or a mouse?\" ...cold and impersonal. It expects me to understand every nuance of its language But makes no effort to learn mine. ...spiteful. It broke down while I was writing this. Erle Muudlc Oromolto. New Brunswick. CAN CG-Dub had a news guy named Rumor, Who covered his beat in good humor, But the jokes he created Were half-asphyxiated In the masque of his grocery-bag tumor! 9. Antell Los Angeles, CA There once was a rumor guy. Who wore a bag on his head. Not only does his writing stink, He was also born brain dead. Joku Caspersen Delray Beach. 94 \"With Apologies to Walt Whitman\" I sing the war games electric, The armies of ihose I fight engirth me and I engirth them, The Als will not let me off till I go with them, respond to them, And defeat them, and charge them full with the charge of the role. 336 Olivere Phoenit. 43 PORTINIUM PORTINIUM Voled bes! P.B.M. game of the year al AndCon'92, National P.B.M. Convention, Cleveland, Ohlo TECH TECH Compete with up to 99 players in either of two low-cost versions of the P.B.M. game PORTINIUM. Players compete in a single age on the planet of Glacieria with one character, one city and four divisions. Fierce battles are commonplace as players pursue victory across more than 6500 map sectors. HO Save both time and money by playing either Hi-Tech or Lo-Tech. Minigames, time travel, player espionage units and indigenous cities not available. Cost at game start averages $1.33 per game unit. (based on initial 6 units received with player's first turn output) No hidden costs. PORTINIUM HI-TECH and LO-TECH $8.00 each per turn (2 or 4-wk turns) LIFETIME $25.00 setup fee includes; 198.page Hi-Gloss Player's Guide, start-up packet, free start-up turn, plus one free turn and subscription to game newsletter w Write or call for free brochure W ENCHANTED HORIZONS P.O. Box 9897 Spokane, WA 99209-9897 (509) 325-6941 Circle Reader Service #74 Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"Muut wowy wat 16 How Go where no cowboy has gone before. No two games are exactly alike. Full network modem.compatability ye We OK flerede List in this 991 SPACEWARD HON 1211 The Conquest Game of the Stars I....tolli 8. Design your own ships, create your own galaxy, personalize your opponents, Enjoyable \"point and click\" interface makes playing a snap. Explore colonize and conquer in a galaxy of your own design, Up to 20 human and or computer players each game. Full Windows support with menu driven commands. Rustle up some stars and get ready for action. minute to learn, an hour to kick butt. Spaceward Hol is a space strategy tame for the conquest of the universe. Players start out with a rather low level of technology and income with which to build ships explores and colonize planets, and eventually take over the universe. Spaceward Ho! is an adventure lasting many hours and days, and Scherer the same game. twice. Due to the multiplayer compatability you and your friends can go head to head, against the computer or BOTH libar a showdown at Talos in 2230 Sou Steve 1 1/Sed 25 2 Round em up and head 'em out. It's time for a showdown. 4 Microne 1 Cypr Color Slie Slip NEW WORLD COMPUTING LABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT WOUU.222.000 (OR 1.818.999.0607 OUTSIDE U.S. P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302 COPYRIGHT 1992 NEW WORLD COMPUTING INC. SPACEWARO 10 SATRADEMATUKOFOELTA TAD UNDER LICENSE TO NEW WORLD COMPUTING NEW WORLD COMPUTING IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF NEW WORLD COMPUTING INC. B SCREENS SHOMIL ACTUAL SCREENS MAY VARY Circle Reader Service #113 "


"Editorial COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD « I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Computer Wargaming World Broadsides & Gripeshot by Alan Emrich 138 Editorial: A National Strategy Gaming Tournament? 132 A Pass in Review of SSG's Carriers at War 134 Same Dog, New Tricks Operation: SkyMaster Resolving Sand Hassles A Review of SSI's A Line in the Sand 142 Joy Schtick? Mike Weksler Looks at Flight Sim Hardware 148 A Sneak Preview of New World's Empire Deluxe 152 Forging Victories for Conquerors-turned-Warlords 158 SSI Projects the Future: A Review of Cyber Empires 168 A \"Savage\" Review of Team Yankee / Pacific Islands 174 Opponents Wanted: Reach Out and Crush Someone 178 Below the Radar Line With Impression's Air Force Commander 180 Reviewing Ships at Sea: Three-Sixty's Harpoon Designer's Series be the editor of the Computer Wargaming World section of this magazine). With our growing popularity on the Prodigy Services Network and constant monitoring of networks such as GEnie and CompuServe, I became the de facto \"communications officer\" (though I can't sing like Lt. Uhura). I've met many of our readers through e-mail and bulletin boards on-line and really love serving our readers there. Being a wargamer, naturally, I tend to check with special interest all of the topics on war and strategy games on every network. Being a true \"multi-network user,\" I'm in the fortunate position of being able to see larger trends which occur commonly on each network. Interestingly enough, one positive trend I see is the strong, continuing growth of war and strategy gaming tournaments on all the networks. 152 range a match between the best from all the various networks. Then it hit me (ouch!). Why not stick my neck out and moderate a truly national, multi-network tournament of some popular war or strategy game? Through the good graces of this magazine, the winners of each round and their opponents could be posted in these pages (along with any player anecdotes). A single-elimination tournament with 64 players would take six months to complete (at one game per month/issue, per player), with the winner announced seven months after the event commences. With some company \"sanctioning\" of whatever game was chosen for this event, it could truly be a national event (possibly with some kind of spiffy prize offered, to boot!). To make it easier for me to organize, however, I'd want every player to be on one of the networks where I could send them e-mail (my preferred method of communication). Players would have to agree to participate in, at least, one play-by-modem game per month (as long as they are winning, that is), which means there will be some probable (but not unduly high) long distance calling expenses involved. Still, it could be a lot of fun. Even those not directly participating should enjoy reading about it and keeping up with the event. I'd like your opinion, however, so write me. I can be reached on Genie or America On-Line at [CGW], on CompuServe at [76703,622] and Prodigyat [EXPT40B). Next issue, watch this column for a fascinating interview with SSG's Roger Keating, who has the dirt on the Carriers at War Scenario Editor, Warlords 2 and The Road to Appomatox! cow Why not a CGW sponsored national strategy gaming tournament? Thile it is a singular honor to have this forum in which to express my views concerning computer wargaming (an action often greeted around the office with «Oh, no. What's Alan on a tirade about this month?»), words are never enough. Since I'm not a politician, it is not sufficient for me to complain about this while promising that while, after being granted the imperium, ultimately, doing nothing. After some introspection (and a quick \"reality check\"), I'd like to bounce an idea off the faithful computer wargaming multitudes out there who read this column. Recently, I've received a change in title here at Computer Gaming World magazine. The switch from Assistant Editor to \"On-Line Editor» was merely making a title which more accurately reflected my job description. (I'll still While I have proffered my advice to many of the individual tournament organizers, I always felt a little guilty because, ultimately, they were doing the real work and helping their fellow gamer. I would, for instance, tell the likes of Robert E. Lee, Jr. (his real name, by the way), who organized the Command HQ tournament on PRODIGY how that same event was structured by Frank \"Turk\" Bartolotta on CompuServe. Sharing information while always wishing that I could arPage 132 Computer Gaming World "


"Spoil YOURSELF WITH RAW Spoils of SPOILS OF WAR is a game of discovery, colonization and conquest of faraway lands. The player(s) function as commanders over several explorers. These explorers carry out the orders of the player. Race to be the player who achieves power and influence over these new lands. Features:9 different start positions; load and save; 2 to 4 players (human or computer); 19 difficulty levels; 4 seasons; Governors, Admirals, Commanders and Generals to command; infantry, cavalry, artillery, engineers, naval fleets, colonists and much much more!!! $59.95 IBM, Amiga (Imb) Det B CICAHpian NAVO-STUDE_COMBAT TACTICAL SLAVONION #1922-1945 2 RAW Contain, PACIEG-ATANIC and MEDITERRANEAN THEATERS ACTION STATIONS A Naval Surface Combat Tactical Simulation is unique. A combat modelling system designed by an active duty naval officer to test computerized tactical decision support systems has been adapted into a commercial simulation of unparalleled accuracy and authenticity. CHECK OUT THE SCENARIO/UTILITY ADD ON. Features:Effortless menu system; Take full command or delegate, Authentic Battle Plot; 21 display/status boards; smoke, star shells, flares, searchlights, radar, weather, burning oil slicks and much much more!!! $49.95 IBM, Amiga (Imb) FIRETEAM 2200 A tactical WORLDS wargame set in the 23rd century. Fight alone WAR or command a \"Fireteam\" of up to 16 units. Features:30 different combat units; 25 weapon systems; modem play between IBM and Amiga. RAW $49.95 IBM, Amiga (mb) TARZAL WORLDS AT WAR A game of planetary conquest for 1 or 2 players that can be played as a small tactical study with the flavour of a chess game, or for a weekend as a campaign game with vast regions of territory to explore! Features:Configurable battle map from 10 x 10 to 50 x 50! Bombers, missiles, scouts and much much more!!! $49.95 IBM, Amiga (mb) SRAMA ALSO AVAILABLE BLITZKREIG A WWII simulation of \"Battle of the Bulge\" with sophisticated Al. Based on the GDW boardgame of the same name. $49.95 IBM, Amiga (1mb) WHITE DEATH WWII simulation of one of the battles around Stalingrad; detailed Al. Based on the boardgame of the same name. $49.95 IBM, Amiga (Imb) COMING SOON  SPACE INC A simulation/RPG of interplanetary trading. Encounter pirates, sabotage, financial problems and much much more!!! $59.95 IBM, Amiga (mb) FLEET COMMANDER From the designers of the award winning ACTION STATIONS comes a new WWII naval simulation. All of the historical accuracy of Action Stations with carriers and submarines. State of the art VGA graphics. $59.95 IBM, Mac, Amiga (Imb) DOMINANT SPECIES A strategy game based around the theory of evolution! For 1 to 8 players (human or computer). You create new species to survive and thrive. More than 30 billion species to develop. $49.95 IBM ARAW RAW Entertainment Inc. 3027. Marina Bay Drive, Suite 110, League City, TX 77573 2772, Telephone (713) 538 3399 Fax: (713) 538 2174 Circle Reader Service #127 1991 Raw Entertainment Inc. All products and corporate identities are trademarks. "


"Review DOING ADMIRAL'S WORK in Carriers at War by Bob Proctor Like a long submerged hulk being raised painstakingly to the surface after resting many fathoms deep for many years, Carriers At War (CAW), SSG's classic operational level game of naval war in the Pacific, can now be experienced in the MS-DOS world. In all fairness, the new game bears only a superficial resemblance to its 8-bit predecessor. Where the older game was played via menus overlaying sophisticated algorithms, the newer game strikes players as colorful and accelerates play via its easy-to-use, mouse-driven interface. Don't get the wrong picture, however; it is also a very detailed simulation. The player's role is Task Force Commander and the decisions to be made have a realistic feel. Is it safe to go within range of enemy airfields? Where should the force be at dawn? What is the ideal range to launch a strike from? How reliable is this sighting report? Page 13 Computer Gaming World "


"Review CAW uses simultaneous movement with a continuous clock. Eastern Solomons battle, the USN sent a strike after the light Players can intervene to review the status or change orders but carrier Ryujo and then tried unsuccessfully to redirect it frequent intervention is not needed. The game can be played when bigger targets were spotted. against another human or the computer but the emphasis is on Combat Air Patrol (CAP) is also hassle-free. One designates the solitaire play. The computer is a very able opponent (more on this number of planes to use and the computer will launch at dawn, in a bit) and a solitaire game is more interesting because ships, keep most of the planes in the air and refuel them as needed. When planes, and sightings (which are hidden in two-player mode) there is a warning of approaching bogies, the Emergency CAP appear on the screen. An option for modem or network play would button will get every available fighter up. be very desirable but is not present. Attacking is done by clicking the «Strike\" button and selecting Clear The Decks a target. The player sees a screen that shows which squadrons are available and can reach the target. Planes will arm automatically For Action but one must remember that torpedo bombers only carry bombs at Where the ancestor of CAW used menus and reports to inform extended range. It is often best to wait and close on the target until the player of his/her successes, the latest design uses lavish graph these planes are able to carry torpedos. ics to portray visually what its progenitor offered largely in text CAW includes a surprisingly good simulation of surface combat. form. If Dauntlesses attack the Akagi, the player sees an accurate All those IJN cruisers and destroyers armed with Long Lance drawing of the ship and watches the bombs hit, the splashes of near torpedoes represent a real threat to the U.S. and often cause early misses, a plane going down in flames, and torpedoes racing withdrawal when one more strike would finish off some cripples. through the sea to the target. The graphics are abstract; they are Differences in gun and torpedo ranges are taken into consideration. not one person's point of view but the collected reports of many. The range at contact depends on visibility, and getting caught in By counting hits, the player has a good idea of how bad the damage torpedo range at night can be a disaster for the USN, as it was at is. Watching CAW play out is like watching a movie that can be Savo Island interrupted for new orders. Submarines are another pleasant surThere are six scenarios; after choosing one, prise. The Display Submarines comthe player sees all of the commanders of naval mand displays the location of every forces and land-based air. There are as many friendly sub. They move and attack indeas four commanders a side. Each can be conpendently, giving sighting reports and trolled by human or computer but once the inflated claims of enemy ships sent to the game begins, this can't be changed. bottom. Still, not a game goes by without The screen is 80% map with a menu bar a cruiser or oiler being picked off. The across the top and a \"control panel\" on the possibility that it might be a 170 point right. The latter presentations consist of two carrier next time means no game is over large buttons showing the US and Japanese until the very end. flags and indicators to call one's attention to certain events. Each side is warned when: enI'm On A Mission emy aircraft are sighted; an enemy task force From Nimitz! is sighted, and a new report comes in for an existing sighting. Players can tell the clock to CAW has a realistic feel because all stop automatically when any of these events operations take place within a strategic occur. There is also a warning indicator for context. This means one side has a missurface combat. Only one is needed since both sion to perform whose successful comsides have to give orders when this occurs. pletion will win at least a marginal victory. It might be unloading \"cargo Seek and Ye Shall points\" (representing an invasion or a supply mission) or it might be bombard(Usually) Find ment of a key enemy base. No matter CAW gives the player control over searching TITLE: Carriers At War what, it forces the other side to come out SYSTEM: MS-DOS without the need for constant orders. Each base or and engage. PROTECTION: None carrier has a compass on which the player clicks # PLAYERS: 1 or 2 same computer only Victory is determined by points, which PRICE: $70.00 to show the direction(s) to search. If done in the DESIGNERS: Roger Keating and lan Trout one gets for sinking ships, destroying airmiddle of the night, search planes will launch at PUBLISHER: craft, and completing missions. No points dawn. If a task force is discovered, the plane will 8348 Monticello Drive Pensacola, FL 32514 are awarded for damage; so protecting the automatically shadow it and new planes sent out (904) 494.9373 cripples is important! There are also Victory to finish the search and relieve the spotter. The Conditions which limit the degree of a vicplayer just sits back and watches the sightings come in. Although tory; usually they serve to keep either side from sacrificing too aircraft can only find the enemy by day, submarines, coast watch many carriers. ers and surface units provide occasional sightings at night. The scenarios are: Of course, one can't believe most of these reports! CAW does a Pearl Harbor Dec. 7, 1941 great job recreating the inaccuracy of sightings. Subsequent reports on the same sighting become more reliable so there is a strong This battle serves mostly as a tutorial. The IJN carriers are in desire to wait for better reports. Such delays are often fatal, but the position to launch a surprise raid on Hawaii. Obviously, it is an same can be true when players become too aggressive and send all easy way to learn the mechanics of air strikes. It is also interesting their planes after the wrong target. CAW does NOT allow strikes to take the US side and see how much damage can be inflicted. in the air to be redirected they must be recalled and sent out Coral Sea May 3-5, 1942 again. This seems historically reasonable. For instance, in the The IJN has two missions: resupplying the Solomons and invadGARRIEN IMTCEVGA EGA) December 1992 Page 135 "


"Review ing New Guinea. They don't have many aircraft left, but their planes and pilots are better than those of the allies. There are several possible strategies for both sides. Midway — June 4-6, 1942 Here, the IJN has the advantage of both quantity and quality. It is not too hard for the U.S. to win decisively by closely following Spruance's historical actions. Whoever ends up with control of the skies over Midway will win. Eastern Solomons — August 22-24, 1942 This is the most evenly balanced of all the scenarios. Each side has 3 carriers and naval air strength is just about even. The U.S. has more fighters and the IJN has more bombers. The IJN can deliver 12 cargo points to Guadalcanal to win if the US doesn't challenge. Santa Cruz October 25, 1942 Once again, the IJN is resupplying Guadalcanal. Only this time the U.S. is down to just two carriers and losing both means a decisive win for the Japanese! Philippine Sea — June 18-20, 1943 US carriers are plentiful now and the pilots and planes are strong enough to attack land bases. For the IJN to win, they must distract the Americans with tempting surface targets and get in a strike without retaliation. plane. It can even try a sneaky trick like launching in the evening when planes must return after dark! It handles its carriers very well and forces the player to make decisions for reasons that are historically accurate. However, a person still makes a better opponent. The computer has trouble when completed missions and coordinated attacks are needed to win. Here's an example: in the Santa Cruz scenario, the U.S. can win a marginal victory by sending all its ships home, leaving only the aircraft at Henderson Field to defend the Solomons! If a human plays the Japanese, they will pound Henderson and land most or all of their cargo points to win. The computer, in three tries, has not been able to do this. Players can try this for themselves by taking command of all IJN forces AND the U.S. carrier force. One can give the latter orders to return to Noumea and play the IJN for the rest of the game (the computer controls U.S. land-based air). A game like CAW doesn't really seem complete without a SSC Fiio Piny Dispiay Controi Mondav. Odays hours and 45 minutes canaining Task Group Status 121902 LOGOVARU GU Jorkton ACEH Sur Sta NERD Damage CRTOO Speed Up GV Pork CERTO GOOTER GAL Porslin GAMALT ad in Her DDAREN DNP DDZRDEBT ODONTICHUB 2 002 DIEET VED D OUB Furl For 27 days Daun PE SCUELT C U Yorktown Tak Group Stur Medals For Good Conduct The quality of the computer opponent is a strength of CAW. It's tactics are unpredictable. Sometimes it will close the range and sometimes stay away. Sometimes it will launch unescorted strikes at long range; at other times it will wait until it can send every CHEESEBUR GER MICROLEAGUE ACTION SPORTS ACTION SPORTS SOCCER MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL4. MICROLEAGUE BASEBA4 220 ORDERCOTELES Arcade-style action! European critics raved, and you will, too. Test your coordination and your managerial skills as you play for the European-championships. More than 170 actual clubs are included. VGA and EGA. Arcade, management and full simulation modes. Real life action: corner kicks, free kicks, trick shots. Much more! It's the best game yet for the soccer buff--and a perfect way for the novice to learn the game. HAL.GEHRIGE HERE'S THE 2-2 PITO The newest and the greatest! Take your choice: manage 54 teams, past and present. With multimedia, digitized sound, 256-color, 3-D VGA Graphics. You control the players and all the action. More stats than ever! Plus: programmable computer manager, detailed Stadium Graphics. You can set up your schedule...\"Quickplay\" a season in minutes. Print out complete post-game summaries...much more! GM/Owner Disk available (separate purchase). FOR NEW EXCITEMENT T "


"Review scenario editor. SSG knows this but they have decided to make it a separate product and promised it before the end of the year (darn, I forgot to ask what year!). A unique feature of CAW, which can't be evaluated until the editor comes out, is that the player will be able to use the editor to \"program\" the artificial intelligence for both sides. This will make it possible to edit existing scenarios and make variants with a more aggressive or more cautious opponent, as well as with alternate positions and forces. The option to randomly select from all the variations of a scenario already exists but, at present there are only two of each. The first is accurate historically and the second is an interesting\" variation. What that means will have to wait until we get the editor. What Would I Add in the Next Version? Allow the player to change the make-up of Task Forces and Groups. This is important in two ways. When a carrier is badly crippled, it can be detached and sent home with a destroyer escort. Secondly, the remnants of battered groups could combine to make a stronger unit for surface combat and air defense. Some forces start a scenario with a mission to bombard an enemy base. If anything happens to this force, the player can't assign the mission to another group. Allow this. Show secondary explosions graphically, just for the thrill of it. Make the player specify the type of bombs and the size of the load when arming planes in advance. As the game stands, it is much less risky to pre-arm because the player can't guess wrong, like Nagumo did at Midway. Debriefing Room CAW is the most accurate simulation of carrier warfare available and is by far the best for solitaire play. Players interested in the Pacific Theater of World War II should not miss it. Cow 586 in Piayiinia Control File Piay Display Contrai La loro nove skatu torrado CAANtoria 1268 1 912 Pondov 8 das 10 hours and 25 Hinutas rei ROWER HIT GV Vorrepen De Hov Surt CA Otorin  PICCOMPLGD op 3BRINDES Flok 33.kano be JESDB IDEE vurde Pure FENME WENDURO ORDED ENCIJI mchang REPRESENTER DORO MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL2 $10 COUPON LMHTIRDID OVER THE MIDDLETO RICE on any auxiliary MicroLeague COMING product purchase when you SOON: buy any MicroLeague game at EXCITING NEW ...most major GAMES Software Retailers. FROM Send proof of purchase to MicroLeague. MICROLEAGUE We'll send you your $10 coupon. Officially Licensed by the National Officially Licensed by the Major Football League Players Association. League Baseball Players Association ALEVOBAR MLB MICROLAGUE FLAVERSES Coach your own team, using real NFL players. 28 current teams, plus all-time greats! As close as you can get to the real thing: all the stats, real action, real strategy. 3D VGA Graphics. Digitized Video and Sound. Quickplay Option for a game or an entire season with playoffs!) You can program different coaching profiles. Print out post-game box scores and summaries. Input new stats. And more! Free GM/Owner disk. See box at right. Circle Reader Service #103 2201 Drummond Plaza, Newark, DE 19711 (302) 368-9990 FREE WITH MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL2 FREE GM/Owner disk ($29.95 value). Input stats, make trades between teams, even between eras. Wheel and deal. Season disks available, too. (Separate purchase.) Coming soon: Auxiliary Disk to convert pro game into college game...featuring the great college bowls! E NAME OF THE GAME IS "


"Review Binun Wotis A BOMBER WITHOUT PARALLEL Megafortress Mission Disk Two Operation SkyMaster Name: System: Price: Protection: Designer: Publisher: Operation SkyMaster IBM $39.95 Document Look-up ARTECH Digital Entertainments Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc. Campbell, CA Rwangit ENTOMASTER by Bernard Dy Firu   A Be U    00, SCI MESAS Mission Disk MEGAFORTRESS O On multiple antennae. Use voice-over as of command officer explaining, OFFICER: ROGAN — Radio Object-Guided Airburst Nuclear. What intelligence has confirmed is the most dangerous high explosive nuclear device ever held in the arsenal of our enemies. With the current instabilities in the North Korean government, I don't have to inform you gentlemen that a surgical strike is both necessary and desireable. We need the Old Dog. INTERIOR: Shots of both the pilot and co-pilot at their stations with continuing voice-over. OFFICER: We need the Old Dog ... INTERIOR: Shot of ECM Officer with continuing voice-over. OFFICER: and we need it with new tricks. Such is the way a screenplay might unleash the drama to be found in Operation Sky Master, the new mission disk which takes the EB-52 air crew to the Western Pacific. There, the Chinese have begun an offensive to overtake the Philippines and Korea. Adding potential holocaust to the ruthless nationalistic aggrandizement which sets the stage, the North Koreans have started development on the aforementioned ROGAN project. Naturally, the destruction of the ROGAN launch and research sites is the climax of the collection of missions. Somewhat mirroring real life, the Soviets are offering aid to the Americans and, in the final mission new Soviet weapons will be available for use against North Korea. With Operation Sky Master, as in Operation Sledgehammer, Three-Sixty Pacific continues to expand and reinvigorate the EXTERIOR: The camera pans across dark Pacific waters and, flying low, comes upon and pulls up to gain altitude while traveling across a Pacific island of obvious volcanic origin. As the camera angle tilts upward, it focuses upon a dot on the horizon. Then, it zooms to dot itself. Each increase in magnification bringing the EB-52 into clearer focus. INTERIOR: Close-up shot of the navigator at his station. He is concentrating on the instruments in front of him. A set of orders rests beside him. Zoom into orders and focus on the acronym ROGAN. SEGUE: Cut to film footage of bunker with Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"THE BEST IN GAMES 7 FEATURING \"HYLO STEAHHITZ\" \"TROUBLESH THIS GAME 15 SURREHRAE UMAN BOTOS SIIS SEOHD 20600 ZESTATE 10) CRYSTAL CAVES (F262) $4.00 WOLFENSTEIN 3-D (F323AB) $8.00 COSMO'S ADVENTURE (F315AB) $8.00 560.C 00009400 POINTS 398072 HEALTH 188 M:8868 B9088 TOULETET! PIESS STEERI COMMANDER KEEN IV (F290AB) $8.00 DUKE NUKUM (F252) $4.00 GALACTIX (F321) $4.00 CWI Information Services Po Box 4851 Anaheim, CA 92803 Order TOLL FREE 1-800-777-5636 PLEASE SPECIFY 5/4\" OR 312\" DISKS FOR FAST DELIVERY CALL 1-800-777-5636. VISA/MASTERCARD OR. MAL CHECK OR MONEY ORDER SORRY NO COD. ADD 5400 SHPPING & HANDLING FOR ENTRE ORDER CALIFORNA RESDENTS ADD 775% SALES TAX. ALL TITLES ARE SHAREWARE CONTINUED USE OF SHAREWARE REQUIRES SEPARATE PAYMENT TO AUTHOR (HONOR SYSTEM). CWD Free shareware Catalog The Best Place QUALITY low-cost software 1 Over 1000 titles listed Circle Reader Service #65 "


"Review 105NID ODPLAY EDIT) RANGES PIZOD SHOE 2M SELECT MISSION AFT HOLCUP HARISHA: FLOTILLA NERVOUS INSETTI GHS FLASH FROM THE YALU DOHE CHIUNE HOT :  0000 ROBOTA EDIT MAYPOINT X:-292 Y-340 (MILES) EDIT ALTITUDE (FT) ORDERS + THE FROTS CONSIDERINGATOTNC THE NORTH KOREAN ASSAULT INTO FOUTH KOREA WITH TROOPS AND ADDITIONAL SUPPLIES. CHINESE FORCES ARE CONCENTRATING NEAR SINUTJU. AND ELEMENTS OF THE PHINESE AIR FORCE ARE ALREADY EASED AT THE NEARBY AIRFIELD. THE MECAFORTRESS SHOULOATTACK THE ASSEMBLY AREH TO DISSUADE THE CHINESE FROM ENTERING THE CONFLIOT. MAP 900:03:90, GMT STORT SMO WA RESET RADAR Megafortress universe, much as they have continued to support the Harpoon gaming environment. One can almost imagine Three-Sixty's CEO entering a briefing room in dress uniform with riding crop in hand and chewed-off cigar in his mouth. \"Gentlemen!\" he assertively begins, \"we're going to string these products out ... and sell 'em!\" Since the scenario disks provide new campaigns for successful programs, while only adding about 2 MB more to one's hardware capacity, this seems to be a welcome and successful marketing strategy. Naturally, given the strategy of supporting an existing product with supplemental disks, Operation Sky Master's forte is not exciting new graphics or sound support. It does automatically update the game to version 1.2, but its authentic value is in the new scenarios and manual (offering maps, fiction passages to flavor the scenarios, and new weapon statistics). The interface is unchanged from the basic game, as is the sound support. Although the mission disk updates the game to version 1.2, I was able to uncover a few infrequent but definite glitches. The Three-Sixty customer support line was usually busy, but when answered, correspondents were generally friendly and willing to help. The plot is developed primarily by the documentation and brief mission introductions on-line. The final mission, Dragonslayer, is one of the longer missions, involving long range flight, refueling and arming at a Russian airbase, and traveling back to North Korea for the final strike. This mission is divided into segments connected by single screen story shots that give clues as to how to accomplish the mission. Like the Flight of The Old Dog mission in the original, Dragonslayer is a rigidly structured mission (part adventure game, part sim, really) that the player must figure out piecemeal. The majority of missions are less structured and provide a variety of assignments and difficulty levels. Goals include the standard anti-radar and land attack objectives and a selection of anti-ship strikes. Strategies learned in the basic game will continue to prove useful in the completion of Operation SkyMaster. Ordnance disposition and fuel trade-offs are important as many of the assignments involve long distance strikes. Players will need to be adept at low level flying, radar jamming and evasion, ordnance delivery, and damage control. The Dragonslayer mission is particularly interesting, as the Megafortress will be able to use the Soviet AS-4B \"Kitchen\" missile. This weapon has a greater range than any other weapon offered in the basic game, and used properly can make life a little easier for the Megafortress crew, or at least instilling them with the bravery of being out of range. I found Sky Master (and Megafortress in general) to be a game which requires great patience. Unlike Wing Commander and Aces of the Pacific, the \"warp speed\" function in this software does not take the player immediately to the action. Even at the highest warp setting, the game seems to move slowly, and when the EB-52 finally approaches any adversaries, it is beset by SAMs, radar, enemy aircraft, and anti-aircraft fire, which sometimes give the impression of insurmountable odds. Even using the strategies offered in the basic game's manual sometimes proved futile. It would have been helpful had additional strategies been documented in SkyMaster's manual. Most players would probably prefer a faster \"autopilot\" function, and a better balance of action. The Sky Master package claims the mission disk \"...demands the highest level of Megafortress mastery.\" This is quite accurate practiced Megafortress players will receive the greatest value from this package, though some easy missions are also included. The EB-52 seems hardly as stealthy as the documentation claims. Perhaps I needed more practice, but I rarely completed a mission without taking at least moderate damage. In most cases, the objective targets were successfully bombed, but trying to fly home on four engines usually resulted in a crash. Of course, this made hard-earned victories much more enjoyable. There are some suggestions which Three-Sixty may want to consider. First, increase the size of target selection screens in the offensive and electronic warfare stations. Even with the \"hot keys,\" finding targets, maneuvering the aircraft, managBing damage control, and jamming multiple radars all at once u proved to be an unwieldy task in the heat of battle. Second, imagine a LAN version of Megafortress! Up to five players could operate the Megafortress, each with his/her own station and responsibilities. The added social interaction, realism, communication and team management dynamics would make Megafortress an incredible package. (Some people already hook their computers up with null link modem cables, and play Falcon using voice-operated radio headsets to communicate from separate rooms. Long-distance teams can simply connect the software on one phone line and talk through another. Either way can be great fun!). Since Megafortress lacks a scenario builder, enthusiasts will probably enjoy the amenities SkyMaster has to offer in the extra playability and interesting premise. As mission disks go, it meets basic requirements and offers good graphics and sound, considering the relatively light hard drive requirements. Strict fans of fighter simulators or those searching for the cinematic style of Wing Commander may not find SkyMaster enough reason to purchase the Megafortress package. Gamers interested in the unique style of simulation Megafortress offers are encouraged to ask their vendor for a demonstration. Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.\" Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware...\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World alles Imprisoned in a Nazi Fortress In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape-or die trying. UL SCORE SINCALTA TAMS LEVEL SORUS Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLibTM, Sound Blaster, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing 192 53 SOOS FUEL Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600 (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. DOOGEE INC P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), joystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Adlib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #64 "


"Sneak Preview IT'S SAUDI DUTY TIME A Preview of SSI's A Line In The Sand by M. Evan Brooks Captured Iraqi equipment from Desert Storm at Subhan, Kuwait City. Photo by author. Due to be released by Thanksgiving, A Line In The Sand is Strategic Simulation, Inc.'s game of the Gulf War and potential Arab-Israeli conflicts, with the latter portion covered in both military and diplomatic modes. TITLE: A Line In The Sand SYSTEM: IBM # PLAYERS: 0-6 PRICE: $39.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up DESIGNER: Flint Dille, Lee Chin & David Landrey PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA The title itself derives from President George Bush's famous statement referring to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990. However, since the Gulf War was \"less\" of a war than anticipated, the computer release postulates a more effective Iraqi military machine. In fact, the board game was initially released by TSR before hostilities commenced and modifications were made to the rules after the war was concluded. Thus, Line is a direct and almost literal translation of a \"paper\" wargame to the computer medium. An initial look at the product reveals both the strengths and weaknesses of such a translation. booklet. No historical overview or player hints are given, but this reviewer was only able to see a rough draft of the manual. The graphics are an exact translation of the board game. Utilizing area movement, the entire Middle East is divided into one hundred separate land and sea areas. The map rendition is somewhat generic with only major sites being defined and roads totally absent, e.g. Dhahran, Saudia Arabia is noted as a city hex, but not identified; similarly, KKMC (King Khalid Military City), an airbase of note in the war, is on the map but not identified. Bahrain, the island nation near Dhahran, is omitted altogether, as is TapLine Road. Thus, one may consider the map to be generic to the max. Combat units are portrayed by appropriate silhouettes (e.g, a tank for armor, a soldier for infantry, etc.). Units represent divisions or corps (land), 3-4 squadrons (air), and battle/carrier groups (naval). Sound effects include explosions and guns firing as well as the \"whoosh\" of air units returning to their bases. The sound is adequate, but the beta version became somewhat tedious. The designers have given their assurance that the sound will be appropriately shortened to yield a faster moving game. The interface is keyboard or mousedriven, and works smoothly. One accesses units and moves them to the destination. If it is enemy occupied, combat will occur in the combat phase. However, the beta version did have some cumbersome effects, e.g. one must choose a scenario and then exit. The designers plan to make the interface smoother and more \"user-friendly.\" Drawing the Line (Look and Feel) The documentation is standard SSI. The game mechanics are succinctly and adequately explained and a text rendition of the map is on the back cover of the rules Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"Get in 18 holes during lunch. Microsoft Golf Swing Control Practice Shot Type Clubs Straight Draw O d2 Chip O Fade 3w Putt Custom 21 Swing Microsoft Excel 9.97 COCO CCO 3 GOL Or any other time you feel like play Tour course down in San Diego. Secondly, ing a round of golf. All you need is a PC and the Windows interface, along with our pushMicrosoft Golf for Windows. button controls, lets you control everything. Using new Golf is pracExcept the weather, of course. tically like being right out on For a limited time, when you pick up the course itself. We're talking Golf, you can also pick up a free Microsoft heavy-duty realism. The fact is, Golf hat. So call (800) 323-3577, Dept. HL5. you'd be hard pressed to find And find yourself working through Introducing Maderosopt another golf game as realistic. lunch. Not to mention your swing. Why? Well, for one, we've used actual photo footage from Torrey Pines, the PGA MICIOSOIL Offer goed only in the 50 United States. Offer apires 12/31/92, 1992 Microsoft Corporation. All rights resened. Printed in the USA. In the United States, call (800) 323-3577. Dept. HLS. For information only: in Canada, call (800) 563-9018: outside the 50 Limited States and Canada, call (206) 936-8661. Microsoft is a registered trademark and Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation Circle Reader Service #108 "


"Sneak Preview Also, the game flows quickly. As the Coalition Forces break through Iraqi lines, one must ensure that no openings are allowed to the Iraqis. A one area opening can allow an Iraqi unit to penetrate the line, and if it seizes a single airbase and oil field, the Iraqi will secure victory. Is it realistic? No, but it does allow an Iraqi player a chance to win. One of \"a thousand points of light burning from an oil fire southwest of Kuwait City. Photo by author. Land combat units can move two areas per turn, naval units eight, while air units can traverse virtually the entire map. The game sequence of play is attack or move (player choice of order), although normally, one will opt to attack and then take advantage of any breakthroughs during the movement phase. Stacking is limited to two land units per area, while three air units may be located in a single airfield. Despite the air unit's range, one should move them to the front, since enemy air may be intercepted, but only by air units within three area spaces. Thus, if the air units are not moved forward, their interception capabilities will be severely limited. The direct translation of board to computer does have some weaknesses. Air strikes undergo anti-aircraft fire, but each unit may undergo three separate fires and so, when multiple strikes are planned, the air offensive gives way to tedium. The designers have looked at the delay and have assured this reviewer that the entire air strike will be \"cleaned up\" in final release. Instead of single resolution, the entire anti-aircraft firepower will be resolved in a single combat resolution. Similarly, when air interceptions occur, the beta version randomly selected a defensive air unit. Randomization selected a helicopter unit to counter a Mig-25 when an F-15 was available. Fortunately, the released version should allow the player to allocate proper air units to air superiority versus ground support missions. Please note that throughout this preview, Line has been referred to as a \"game.\" It is a \"game,\" and not a simulation. The generic map and unit density makes Line an enjoyable game to play. It is a relatively easy game to play (being of beginner-intermediate difficulty), but any relation between Line and reality would have to be one of pure coincidence. Chemical and nuclear weapons are optional, but Scud missiles are not. Militarily, the Scud missile was a disaster; however, politically, it was a success that compelled Coalition airpower to divert from more \"essential\" targets. Given the initial design date of the game, the Scud was an unknown entity, and it has no role herein. The title of Line suggests that the Gulf War is the crux of this game. Actually, the Israeli and diplomatic scenarios are more open-ended and interesting. While unit density is much more intensive in the latter scenarios and the human player will have an often interminable wait for his turn, these scenarios present more of a challenge. \"An accurate simulation of the Gulf War would be a less-than-fascinating gaming experience.\" Brine in the Sand (Conclusions) Sandblasting (Game Play) Line is composed of three separate and distinct games — Desert Shield/Desert Storm (Basic Games I and II), potential Arab-Israeli conflicts (Holy War, Israel Surrounded) and the diplomatic game (with up to six players, each of whom has his own war aims to achieve either by diplomacy or force, with victory generally being achieved ultimately by force of arms). The \"Desert Shield/Desert Storm» scenarios allow one to examine what would have happened \"if\" the Iraqis had fought. Yet, the correlation of forces is such that units occupy all front areas — there is simply nowhere for a Coalition Force to flank the Iraqi line. Instead, one bludgeons an area free of defenders and then attempts to exploit the hole. If the game were not entitled Line in the Sand, one would be justified in assuming that the game could represent the German Army on the Marne in 1914. Line is a \"beer-and-pretzels\" game-or more appropriately, since alcohol is forbidden in most of the Arab world, it is a \"pretzels\" game. Light entertainment that, like \"non-alcoholic\" beer, simply lacks the gestalt of reality. As a participant in the Gulf War, this reviewer was interested in seeing its presentation as a wargame. Truthfully, there is little congruence. The \"Hail Mary,\" the difficulties of maintaining the Coalition as a coherent force, the air war itself-these elements are lacking. Of course, then again, an accurate simulation of the Gulf War would be a less-than-fascinating gaming experience. CGW 22 e B ) Player: Alles Scroll To View The Situation Turn. Turn : guh: 5 : PTayer: Your Har Ain IS: Ancient Israel Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"SIT DOWN DITKA. MOVE OVER MADDEN. TOM LANDRY STRATEGY FOOTBALL IS HERE IPATITERUGITIMIT MUKOU DOBOU 13 SITEISIT TO STAND TID Sientos th PINN PETTO m he all-or-nothing decisions. The bone-busting action. The thrill of victory. It's all here in the most realistic pro football strategy game ever introduced! Co-designed by one of pro football's greatest coaches, Tom Landry Strategy Football puts you M ENECMER: \"TODOST OF sta Anna Catalud . Enjoy \"point-and-click\" menus that make everything fast, fun and easy! A LISE ... . .... You'll thrill to super animation and sound effects as the action unfolds! in the coach's seat. You'll choose from thousands of offensive and defensive formations. Then watch your plays unfold in eye-popping animation! You can analyze in-depth game stats and scouting information. Make substitutions. Check weather conditions. Get on-line help, from the basics to advanced coaching tactics. And \"Ask Landry» when you want advice from one of the best minds in the game. Make the right decisions, and you'll coach your team all the way to a Super Bowl victory! See if you've got what it takes to go the distance. Order Tom Landry Strategy Football today! ASK LANDRY The I zen TOM LANDRY 122. GULLES \"Ask Landry» for advice from one of the greatest coaches of all time! Call now to order or for the name of a dealer near you! 1-800-238-4277 2 13635 Gamma Rd., Dallas, TX 75244 214-385-2353  Merit Software IBM PC and Compatibles 5.25\" (12 MB) and 3.5\" (1.44 MB) disks enclosed. Requires: DOS 3.3 or higher,286 or higher, 640K RAM, VGA Graphics, Hard Disk, and Mouse. Recommended: DOS 5.0 and 12 MHz or faster. Sound Support: Ad Lib \"Sound Blaster, PC speaker and more. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"First there were board games. Now there are multi THE ATH DIMENSION IN GAMING It's a whole new gaming dimension, the Multi-Player Games Network. The Multi-Player Games Network (MPG-NetM) links you to game players around the world right from your own home. MPG-Net enables you to play with up to 100 players at the same time with no delay. As you travel through our games, you can talk to each other, form strategies, share secrets, solve puzzles, anything. Of course, you can always go it alone. But, add players to a game and you multiply the fun. And wait until you see what these games are like. Not just text, but full-color, all-graphic games. MPG-Net offers you action you can't find on a floppy disk: multi-player games ranging from science fiction to fantasy, from empire building to all-out war. Pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging. And all very accessible. All it takes is a modem, an IBM PC or Compatible, Apple Macintosh, or Commodore Amiga. You don't have to be a computer expert to join the network. Simply call our 800 number and we'll give you all the help you need to start playing. Now, on with the games. From your living room to outer space in one second: Star Cruiser. The aliens are coming! The aliens are coming! They're invading our space, and it's up to you and your team of players to take them Experience fantasy role-playing at its best in The Kingdom of Drakkar. Choose your character. A paladin perhaps, mentalist, or thief, among many others. Each has its own abilities and advantages. As the lands unfold, you must develop your skills and abilities, gain wealth and power, and acquire magical knowledge that will enable you to withstand the challenges ahead. Team up with players from around the world to search unexplored areas using your enchanted weapons S DE and mystical spells. You can sail to uncharted islands, solve the most curious puzzles, and destroy the mightiest beasts: gain riches and glory. and become one of the Kingdom's greatest warriors. Sophisticated animation, painted with 256 colors creates the magic behind this ultimate role-playing game. Will wonders ever cease? Not for you and your fellow players. So don't stay away for too long r the world may not be as you left it. The wheels and deals of Empire Builder. Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and discover how you can build a railroad empire. The wheels are you and up to five other players, locked in a power struggle that spans the continent. Commodities across the country are booming but trade is impeded due to lack of transportation. You race one another to build a railroad wa empire, crossing rivers and plains, tunnelling through mountains. Using your cash in hand, you can cut your opponent off at the pass, control key cities and claim your empire. 35 But, beware. Disasters like strikes, floods, and snow storms are right around the bend. It takes power, planning, and ambition to build a railroad empire and only the best will endure. IN on ship-to-ship. Careful. Rogue pirates are lurking out there, and other players are ready and eager to test their prowess against you. Based on GDW's classic space combat game, Star Cruiser is a constantly developing space combat campaign of split-second action, light years from your living room. The action is all three dimensional and the players add yet another dimension in fun. "


"Then there were computer games. player computer games. Descend into World War II: Operation Market-Garden. It's September of 1944 and Allied paratroopers are landing behind enemy lines in perhaps the bloodiest corridor of the European Theater. Their mission, to drive a wedge through Nazi territory, seizing bridge after bridge until they reach the Rhine. Against them, the Germans hurl flak, tanks, and all the troops they can muster. In this two player game, surprise, deception, and piecedThere are no prime time hours or rates for together estimates of MPG-Net. Access fees are the same no matter the enemy strengths when you call for 300/1200/2400 baud. All it and intentions takes is a modem, an IBM PC or Compatible, assume historical Apple Macintosh, or Commodore Amiga. importance. You and We don't think you can beat our prices anywhere: we your opposing know you'll never find so much for so little. commanding general plot strategy, probe enemy We're in business for the fun of it. positions, and strive to seize Well, mostly. The point is, nobody is more dedicated to the initiative. your entertainment than the people at MPG-Net. We're The campaign is incredibly constantly working to keep our games fresh and alive. Also, tense. Its outcome, always in new games are continually being added to our product line. doubt. It takes a great deal of skill and daring to achieve victory Look for Dark Conspiracy, Cyberpunk 2020, and well-known in this game. May the best general win. board games. We like what we've created here, and we'll do Act out in role-playing. everything we can to see that you do, too Our meeting halls are open every atrol For more information, you can write to: day too--for on-line role playing sessions with the human touch. Find worthy MPG-Net, Inc. opponents by leaving a message expressing Department B your interest. There are electronic bulletin boards for public PO Box 367 messages, and an electronic mail system for private messages. Pawling, NY 12564 Your player network, coast to coast and beyond. You can join forces with players nationwide or from other If you wish to get started right away. call 800-245-0317, countries like Great Britain, Germany, and even Australia. MPG and we'll send you your account number, password, and startNet is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and up kit with ten free hours. Call the same number if you have over 80 cities internationally. Playing with players from around any questions at all. It's very easy to enter this remarkable new the globe, MPG-Net challenges your skills unlike any other dimension, your Multi-Player Games Network computer game. There's a world of people like you out there: new partners, teammates, friends and opponents, all part of our network that's open 24 hours a day, every day of the year. What price adventure? A lot less than you think. Fees range from only $2.00 to $3.00 per hour, depending on which plan you choose and the hours you play. MPG-Net accepts Mastercard, Visa, American Express, and Check-Free. WWWWW MPG-NET Your Multi-Player Games Network 800-245-0317 1992 MPG-Net Inc. Multi Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG-Net, Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders u l . n . _.-++ "


"Hardware Survey What's New in Flight Hardware? Brackets, Joysticks and Chairs, Oh My! by Mike \"Moondawg' Weksler This article will discuss the latest in flight simulation hardware that will be available in the months to come, including a makeover for one's office chair, and a voice recognition system for air combat simulations. The Flight Sim Chair One day not too long ago, a gentleman was in the CGW offices assembling an office chair. Considering how much CGW has been expanding these days, this incident would normally go without notice. This time, however, I noticed that the chair in question had a Thrustmaster flight control system bracketed onto the arm rest. By the time the chair was fully assembled and fitted with the Thrustmaster weapons control system, a keyboard, and, would you believe, parachute straps, the curiosity of this indefatigable propeller-head was piqued. The speedy conversion from a drab old office chair to an ACES Il ejection seat would have made \"Q\" of James Bond fame turn green with envy. The prototype bracket being demonstrated was made of anodized aluminum and hard plastic — quite sturdy. As a prototype, though, it was currently attached to the handrest of the chair with automotive hose clamps. Of course, this will change in the production version. Overall, the mount provided a steady platform (steadier than one's knees and less awkward than sitting high on a desk, that is) for flying air combat. Since the joystick and throttle are fixed to the bracket with velcro, any joystick not just Thrustmaster equipment — will work with these brackets. It would also be possible to use the mount as either a convenient mouse platform and/or beverage holder between flights. There is also a rudder mount in the works for the Thrustmaster rudder pedals. Attached to the chair and mounted directly in front of the user is a swing-out keyboard mount that positions the keyboard in one's lap. This is extremely convenient and would make a fine addition to anyone's office, as the chair mount and side bracket allow one to place both keyboard and mouse at a comfortable distance and to lean back and work in comfort. For that extremely discriminating air combat enthusiast, Interface Dynamics provides a full shoulder harness and lap belt system. Sound a bit extreme? Perhaps, but it may provide a good excuse now and again (\"I can't, Honny, I'm strapped in!\"), and it may increase suspension of disbelief for those with lively imaginations. Not all chairs will allow keyboard or rudder pedal brackets so the potential flying executive should write Interface Dynamics for the latest list of compatible office chairs. Prices for the brackets begin at $59.95 each or $99.95 for two, while working drawings are available for $9.95. Interface Dynamics 957 NASA Road 1, Suite 106 Houston, TX 77058 (713)935-2845 Contact: Kirk Goodall mwenu w Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"LAND! ALRL SEAL GARY GRIGSBY'S PACIFIC WAR STRATEGIC COMBAT ON A MASSIVE SCALE! FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER, YOU COMMAND IT ALL! Finally! In Gary Grigsby's PACIFIC WAR, PACIFIC WAR delivers nothing less than a truly the entire Pacific Theater of operations is at your monumental simulation of the entire Pacific War. command. Never before has there been a strategic You will change the course of history ... war game of such massive scale. On all frontsFEATURES land, air and sea—you are in control ... As either the Allied or Japanese Supreme  10-100 hours playing time for 1-2 players Commander, all land forces from battalions to  Strategic simulation of WWII's entire divisions—air forces in individual squadrons-and Pacific War naval forces of individual ships await your orders!  3 play levels of human and computer From the Aleutians to Australia, from involvement Burma to America's own West Coast,  5 campaign games and 2 scenarios Circle Reader Service #147 STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. TO ORDER: VISIT YOUR RETAILER OR CALL SSI DIRECT SALES: 408/737-6800. TO RECEIVE A CATALOG, SEND $1.00 TO SSI, 675 ALMANOR AVE., SUITE 201, SUNNYVALE, CA 94086 01992 STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. "


"Hardware Survey The Covox Soundmaster II, Voice Recognition Comes of Age. Where Thrustmaster modeled their flight hardware from the cockpits of modern fighter jets employing a hands-on approach, Covox chose to go with the hands-off route with voice recognition. Air combat simulations are becoming increasingly more complex. Almost every key is used to some extent, with different combinations for different simulations. This results in steeper learning curves when moving on to new programs. Using the latest version of the Soundmaster Il soundboard and the Vmkey 3.1 voice recognition software, it is now possible to assign voice commands to every possible keystroke required in an air combat mission, from the user interface to the flight mechanics itself. More than saying \"pow\" into the provided microphone headset, Vmkey suspends disbelief by allowing one to communicate directly to the simulation. For instance, when flying the B-17 in SWOTL, one can give commands into the microphone to switch 05100 P:-12* H: 56 00:335A Covox, Inc. 675 Conger St. Eugene, OR 97402 (503)342-1271 Film Command CroupMacro Sutup Tost Status NUM T1 Hop Macro/template File Active Croup Name SWOTL B-17 Croup Commands — Macro Link Macro Description Auto Pilot Auto Pilot  Belly Gunner Belly Cunner Bombardier Bombardier Bombing Misson Bambing Misson Bombing Practice Bombing Practice Bombs Away Bomba nway <CR>  Captain Captain  Exit Program Exit Program  Cunnory practice Cunnery practice TITE Cung  Loft Cheek Loft Chook Left Waist Left Waist  Lock On Lock On Puttin It All Together NO NO ONEA ZWOOL Hose Gunner  Other Enginan  Quit  Right Cheek  Right Waist Nose Cunner Other Engines Quit Right Cheek Right Waist Whether one straps into the Interface Dynamics modified Executive chair or sets up the Covox Soundmaster Il board for voice recognition, simulated flight will never quite be the same. Stay tuned until next time fellow propellorheads: full-blown home built cockpits and Steve Edwards' HOTAS system \"Can you say user-configurable joystick buttons?\" CGW Voice Master 3..10 (CoCopright 1992 CavoxInc. TARI Noxto SuperSoft. 1-800-285-1881 1-800-285-188 Orders Outside U.S.: 206-542-1518 HOURS: 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. PST M-F .......OCT to the appropriate location in the aircraft to man the various stations. \"Guns\" will cause the TSR program to feed a \"G\" character to the main program causing the guns to fire. The heart of the Covox voice recognition system is the Vmkey software. Once loaded, it is invoked from DOS by holding down first the left and then right shift keys. Original templates may then be created and edited. Sample templates are provided including one for F-19 Stealth Fighter. Covox provided me with a SWOTL template, but it seems like it would be easy enough to create one from scratch. The software is well implemented and the documentation is very clear. The Vmkey software, when run with the EMS option selected, will require approximately 21K of lower RAM, though this can vary depending upon how large a template one wishes to use. Once the desired template is loaded, the software is invoked with either a right shift press or the right mouse button. Individual voice training is required prior to using the templates with a program. As the user will be flying in heated air combat, he/she may wish to include a few choice expletives in his/her template. There are potential downsides. Since the Vmkey TSR software requires precious lower RAM, only a few air combat simulations will run with it. Also, the Soundmaster II audio card, while capable of Soundblaster emulation with the simulator software, still may not run the user's particular game with Soundblaster sound. Before purchase, users should call or write Covox for Soundmaster II and Vmkey compatibility for their specific flight sims prior to purchasing the hardware. The Vmkey system runs for $229.95. IBM Aces of the Pacific........... $46 AD&D Pool/Curse/Sec....38 AD&D Starter Kit..............49 Battle Isle............ Battle Tech. Trilogy.........30 Birds of Prey.............35 B-17.....................41 Carrier Strike.......... Crusaders Drk.Savant.......OCT Cyber Empires..............36 Dark Sun......... D&D Collectors Edition 2....43 Falcon:Op.Fight. Tiger...24 Global Conquest................35 Great Naval Battles............49 Harrier........ ...............OC T Heroes of 357th........ ..... Kings Quest 6.............. Legend of Kryandia........ Lemmings 3..................OCT Line in Sand..... OCT Lost Files Sherlock.. 49 Mantis....... 42 Prophecy of Shadow................. .38 Ragnarok........... .36 Red Baron/Rise Dragn/kngs@5... Realms....... Rex Nebular..................42 Seige.................................42 Spellbnd:5 Realms...........OCT Ultra Bots...... DEC Ultima Underworld............. V for Victory .49 V for Victory 2......... DEC AMIGA AD&D Tril. Pool/Curse/Secret....$38 AD&D Dragonlance.......45 Bravo-Romeo-Delta......... Civilization......... Crusaders Drk. Savant.....NOV Cyber Empires...................36 Dune................... Epic. Eye of the Beholder 2. 46 Sports Driving...... Harpoon Sig. Ed... Kngdms Eng 2:Vikings Legend Kryandia.... No Greater Glory... Out of this World............ Pinball Dreams...... Plan 9 Outer Spce Project X............. Secret Monkey Isle 2. Shadow of Beast 3. The Summoning...... Tracon 2.......... Ultima 6... .. EURO MAGS...........$ 7-9 02 46 35 ........20 Product availability/Prices Subject to change Minimum S/H $7.00 MAIL ONLY to: 110 N. 201 St. Sea., WA 3 98133-3012 No C.O.D.'s Products waranteed by Manufacturer .46 This ad produced on a Commodore Amiga using Soft Logik's PageStream 2.2 and ASDG's AdPro 2 Page 150 Circle Reader Service #148 "


"Explore Strange Lands, Meet Exofic Beings, Confront Malevolent Creatures and Kill Them. SIA AND Venture to the The Island of Kesmai\" where you are a valiant warrior beginning endless jour. neys through many different KESMAI lands. The everexpanding play area includes over a dozen towns, fetid dungeons, dark forests, deserts, caverns, and frozen clifftop aries! Join a band of hearty comrades or brave the Island alone as you solve diabolical quests and battle thousands of loathsome creatures. In Galaxy II you'll embark on an intergalactic campaign. Beware, play is fast, realtime, and loaded with unpredictability as other conniving live players try to outwit you. Natural disasters, disease and starvation abound to further thwart your plans for claiming and presiding over your planet. Membership is $5.95/month and includes free software. Connect time charges are only $6.00/hr. non-prime and $9.00/hr. prime. To join, set your 1200 or 2400 baud modem and dial 800-336-9092. Upon connection, type CG920L and press <Return>. 800-336-9096 NATIONAL VIDEOTEX Basic Package price of $5.95/month does not include Premium services. Price and service content subject to change. Connect time billed at $6,00/hr: 6pm Sam weekdays and $9.00/hr. 8am-6pm weckdays, S6.CX) all day Saturday and Sunday. Central time zone. National Videotex is a pending mark of National Videotex Network, Corp. All others are for identification purposes only and belong to their respective companies or organizations. "


"Sneak Preview Defining Deluxe A Preview and upire De Sneak Previews are not designed 10 be reviews. They are feature articles bases of works in progress ltal CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate vrew coverage when the game e completely finished by Alan Emrich With the forthcoming release of Empire Deluxe from New World Computing, the long evolution of the quintessential strategy game, Empire, continues. stel's Empire, a game that I had seen a friend play some years before. Fortunately, I still had enough money from the trip to buy a \"PC Transporter card which, it was promised, would allow my Apple IIGS to run MS-DOS software. It worked to the degree promised in the ads, at least), and I quickly realized the addiction which has afflicted so many for so long, an addiction to playing Empire. Setting the Wayback Machine In the mid 1980s, I made the decision to purchase a \"real\" home computer. Having graduated from the Magnavox Odyssey to an Atari and on through Mattel's Intellivision to an Atari 800XL, it was time. At work, we used both an original IBM PC and an Apple Ile. Personally, I preferred the Apple. Since it was to be a \"game\" computer and there were more games available for the Apple Ile, I knew that was the route I would go when the time came to purchase a computer. Yet, I procrastinated. After all, that was a lot of money to plunk down for something everyone knew would be outdated in a few years. Two events happened in quick succession which afforded my purchase. First, I had just come home from a particularly winning trip to Las Vegas (having placed second in a poker tournament), so money was no longer a concern. Second, the Apple IIGS was just released and the future looked promising for that machine. (Which shows how wrong it's possible to be, right?). Yet, for all the games I bought which quickly followed that computer's purchase, the one I really wanted wasn't available on that platform. It was InterEmpire is an \"ancient\" (1960s) mainframe computer game that proved so solid in its basic design and playability that even today... well, I'm getting ahead of myself. Suffice it so that it survived for many, many years in the misty domain of computer mainframes. Originally designed by Walter Bright for the VAX computer (while he was attending Cal Tech), Empire has moved from publisher to publisher (originally distributed by DECUS, almost released by Epyx and most recently released by Interstel), finding minor improvements and additions along the way. Back to the Basics Empire has long been regarded by computer war and strategy gamers as a \"classic\" and has even, rightfully, found its place in the CGW Hall of Fame. If there was ever a staple diet for strategy gamers, Empire would be served with the main course. While neither fancy with ultra-gee -whiz blinding graphics and BLAMMO!sound support nor elaborate with 27 ratings-per-unit to go with the detailed logistics, production and 200+ pages of rules with units conducting battles that would require a dozen spreadsheets to understand, Empire is simply a \"meat and potatoes», abstract wargame. Like a burger and fries, it's a diet that gamers never seem to grow tired of. Frankly, if there were ever a computer game invented which needs no introduction, it would have to be Empire. Since so many people are already familiar with the core elements of that game, this preview Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"MasterCard de VISA votre Win $500 Worth of Computer Software!! Help us name our company! The name will change from No-name Software to ...?? Here's the details: 1) Mail or FAX your entry to us, or give it to us over the phone when you place an 5) All decisions are final. order. Sorry, entries will not be accepted over the phone without an order. 6) Winner agrees to have their name and hometown printed in a future ad. 2) Deadline for entries extended to January 15, 1993! 7) We retain all rights to the new name. 3) A winning entry will be selected from all entries by the management. 8) The winner has until Dec. 31, 1993 to order all free software. 4) In the event of multiple winning entries, one will be chosen at random to be the 9) We'll pay the shipping for the software. prizewinner. 10) Have fun! No-name Software  800-788-GAME (4263)  FAX: 205-980-1953 For Fax orders please include MC/Visa credit card number, expiration date, and shipping address GAMETEK Daemon's Gate $35 SIR-TECH Bane of the Cosmic Forge......... $35 Crusaders of the Dark Savant........$40 Wizardry 5 .. Greens $35 Gunship 2000 VGA.. .$40 Jump Jet Jump Jet ................ ......40 $40 Rex Nebular.....................$40 Silent Service 2 ....... Task Force: 1942...... ....$40 ........$25 $35 ACCESS Amazon **** .... ........... $40 Links Links 386 ...... .. $40 Bountiful CC Course ....... $17 Firestone CC Course $17 Bay Hill CC Course ............. $17 Pinehurst CC Course ........... Dorado Beach CC Course ........ $17 Barton Creek CC Course ........ $17 Troon North CC Course ......... $17 $35 IMPRESSIONS Air Bucks. ..................... Conquest of Japan....... Discovery Paladin 2 $35 ... $45 $17 $35 SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE Falcon 3.0 Operation: Flying Tiger $25 Super Tetris ......................$30 Tetris for Windows................ $30 $35 INTERPLAY Buzz Aldren's Race into Space.......$35 Castles 2 Future Wars........ S30 Lord of the Rings ..............$32 NFL Pro League Football (*)....... Out of this World (\"). ............. Star Trek: 25th Anniversary... ... The Two Towers (') ................$35 SSG Carriers at War ...................$39 Reach for the Stars ................$25 Warlords ...........$30 ..$35 $35 $18 MINDCRAFT Magic Candle 2....................$35 Siege ......... ............ $35 NEW WORLD COMPUTING Might & Magic 3...................$35 Might & Magic: Clounds of Xeen ......$38 Planet's Edge ..............$35 ORIGIN Strike Commander ................ Ultima 6........ ... Ultima 7.................. Ultima Underworld ........ $45 Wing Commander 1......... $40 Secret Missions 1........ Secret Missions 2........ Wing Commander 2. $45 Special Operations 1.... $25 Special Operations 2.... $25 Speech Accessory Pack ........ $15 $45 $35 $40 $45 ACCOLADE Elvira 2......... . . $40 Gateway.............. ..... . $40 Hardball 3 .............. $35 Hardball 3 Data Disk Jack Nicklaus' Signature Golf.. $40 Jack Nicklaus' Unlimited Golf.... Course Disk, Vol 1 & 2.. $20 Course Disk, Vol 3 $16 Course Disk, Vol 4......... $16 Course Disk, Vol 5 $16 Mike Ditka Ultimate Football ....... $33 Spellcasting 301 ................ $35 Star Control 2 .................. $35 Super Space Invaders.............$25 **+..$42 $35 .... KOEI Gemfire ....... ..........$31 Nobabunaga's Ambition 2..........$36 Romance of the Three Kingdoms 2....$41 Uncharted Waters .................$41 $20 $41 LEGEND Spellcasting 201 ..................$35 TimeQuest............ .......$35 SSI AD&D Collectors Edition 2 ....... Dark Queen of Krynn. Queen of Krynn.............. Dark Sun ...................... $53 Eye of the Beholder............. $23 Eye of the Beholder 2 ....... $40 Gateway to the Savage Frontier Pool of Darkness.............. Prophesy of the Shadow ......... $41 Spell Jammer The Summoning ...... $41 Treasures of the Savage Frontier .... A Line in The Sand. Buck Rogers: Matrix Cubed ............$35 Carrier Strike ............. ......$44 Cyber Empires....................$35 Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic 1939-43..... No Greater Glory .. .$40 841 .....$35 ACTIVISION Leather Goddesses II ............. Lost Treasures of Infocom (\") ....... Lost Treasures of Infocom 2()...... S44 $40 PARAGON Mantis ... MegaTraveller 2 Twilight 2000 VGA.................$35 ...$40 ...$35 $30 $47 AMTEX Tristan Pinball e .$36 3338 PSYGNOSIS Armourgeddon...... Atomino (*) .................... Carl Lewis Challenge ........... Lemmings VGA... Lemmings Additional Levels (*).... Oh No! More Lemmings (\")...... BRODERBUND Prince of Persia (\") ............... The Ancient Art of War (\")......... The Ancient Art of War at Sea (*) .....$27 $25 LUCASFILM Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis ...... $35 Secret of Monkey Island ...........$22 Secret of Monkey Island 2...........$35 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe .... $40 X-Wing ..... ...........$38 MAXIS SimAnt(\") ...................... SimCity (*).......... .... $31 SimEarth (*)................. SimEarth for Windows (\") ......... MICROPLAY Challenge of The Five Realms....... $35 Command HQ. $35 Elite Plus...... $30 Flames of Freedom .. Global Conquest Megatraveller 3 $40 Sea Rogue .... ** Twilight 2001 .................. $42 $30 $23 $30 THREE-SIXTY Harpoon....................... Harpoon Battle Set #2 ......... Harpoon Battle Set #3 ......... Harpoon Battle Set #4 ......... Harpoon Challenger Pak......... Theatre of War $29 $21 $21 $24 QQP Solitaire's Journey................$35 The Lost Admiral ................$38 The Perfect General ............$38 DYNAMIX A-10 Tank Killer Enhanced (-)........$35 Aces of the Pacific.. $45 Castle of Dr. Brain .............. Nova 9() ..................... $22 Red Baron VGA..................$40 Rise of the Dragon VGA (*)..........$35 Willy Beamish $35 $30 $35 $34 VIRGIN GAMES Dune Heimdall.....................520 Overlord......... ...... . Spirit of Excalibur ...... $20 Vengeance of Excalibur .............$20 $25 $30 $40 ...$35 $35 $39 ELECTRONIC ARTS Birds of Prey ...................$35 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat .........$35 Earl Weaver Baseball 2.......... $32 PGA Tour Golf.................... Golf Tournament Course Disk.....$17 PGA Tour Gold Limited Ed ..........$42 Populous ........................$21 .$45 SIERRA ON-LINE Conquests of the Longbow VGA..... EcoQuest Heart of China VGA Hoyle's Book of Games, Vol 3 (*) .....$23 King's Quest 5 VGA................$40 King's Quest 6................ Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA.. $39 Police Quest 3 VGA......... $35 Quest for Glory 3................$40 Space Quest 4 VGA Quest 4 VGA ............. $39 The Dagger of AMON RA ...........$40 MICROPROSE ATAC ..$34 B17 Flying Fortress..... . Civilization ............*** $39 Civilization MPE ............ .$45 Darklands .... $39 F-117A Nighthawk VGA.............$40 F-15 Strike Eagle 3...............$44 SOUND BOARDS Sound Blaster Pro... .....$155 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus..........$140 Pro Audio Spectrum 16...........$190 Both 32\" and 5/4\" disks included. Order all other titles by specifying the proper disk size. No-Name Software  P.O. Box 381463  Birmingham, AL 35238-1463 Orders/Info: 800-788-4263 FAX (24 Hrs): 205-980-1953 Hours: 9 AM 9 PM Central Time 7 Days (Closed 11/23-28 for vacation) We accept MC, Visa, Money Orders and personal checks (held 10 business days). No surcharge for MC/Visa. Pre-orders for new releases shipped 2nd day air for $5 Continental U.S. only. Orders received before 2 PM shipped the same day whenever possible. Shipping rates: UPS: UPS: $4 for the first item plus $1 for each additional item. Defectives replaced with the same title. 2nd Day Air: Add $3 to UPS shipping rate. Alabama residents add 4% tax for hardware & books. Overnight: Add $6 to UPS shipping rate. We have lots more not listed. Call our 800 number for a quote. Circle Reader Service #114 "


"Sneak Preview will concentrate largely on the differences between Interstel's Empire (\"Wargame Of The Century\") and New World Computing's release of White Wolf Productions' Empire Deluxe. Finally, the advanced game is chock full of new little goodies. The two most significant additions are the inclusion of bombers and armor units to the unit selection and adding effects to the various terrain types found on every map. Cities, too, have their production abilities tweaked around a bit (nothing dramatic, but it becomes occasionally useful to take cities Crying Wolf For those who don't recognize the name White Wolf Productions right off the bat, it is probably because they didn't see the opening credits to QQP's The Perfect General. As a corporation formed around Mark Baldwin (one of the co-designers of Interstel's release of Empire) and Bob Rakowsky (White Wolf's \"modem man\" and connectivity expert, among other things), their splashy debut with The Perfect General received quite a bit of notice in the hobby press. Having secured the rights to Empire from Interstel (in a deal that we'll discuss another day when someone else is buying the drinks), White Wolf reached an agreement with New World Computing for publishing and distribution, and the rest, as they say, will be history. believe, remains unsurpassed by any other disk based computer game. In Empire Deluxe, more is better. The number of players is no longer limited to either two or three. Now, games can include up to six players! Each position selected for play is set before the game commences as either; on the same computer, playing via a specific comm port (for modem/serial connections), a playby-email position or a computer player of either beginning, average or expert skill level. Alternately, a position can be just plain switched off. Note that the inclusion of computer player skill levels replaces the \"sliding bars» found in the original Empire (whereby the speed of production and luck in combat of the various players could be adjusted). While it is difficult to imagine a single person with five phone lines and modems connecting up with other people to play a live, 6-player modem game of Empire Deluxe (imagine how long one would have to wait for their turn!), the improvements in the play-by-email element will keep games full of human players viable and interesting. Modem play of Empire Deluxe is more likely to see direct head-tohead applications. Messages are sent via a \"chat\" line along the bottom of the screen, but are not displayed until \"sent\" and the receiving players (everyone receives every message) click on their \"mailbox\" icon to read the latest gossip. Kludgy, but non-intrusive for the pure strategists who hate interruptions. \"off line\" from production and damage sustained can affect the speed with which new units are produced). Players can turn their infantry units into \"air bases.\" A one-way conversion, it defends like a city (or an infantry unit, for that matter) and offers a landing strip for airplanes. Some programming enhancements include the ability to move through (but not end movement in a stack with, except, as usual, at cities) other friendly units. Also, production can be vectored so Deluxe Philosophy The makers of Empire Deluxe want to make it emphatically clear that it is NOT Empire II. Empire Deluxe was perceived as and, judging by the beta copies received, has become a game which would maintain the \"pure essence\" of the classic Empire game, easing it gently into the world of competitive 90s software products. It is more of a facelift than a radical redesign. For those who are seeking a radical redesign of the classic Empire game, there are two options. Either wait for Empire Il to be released (no, there are no \"official\" plans for that game -however, Mark has been accumulating player feedback comments for years and, in this day of sequels, it seems like a natural) or consider a look at QQP's forthcoming Battles of Destiny (which will be examined in a future article). that new units built in one city will automatically move to another. Such vectoring can even be specified for land, air or sea forces only (or in any combination). Gee, if only it included setting transports to \"convoy\" units automatically between ports, it would be perfect! Tools of the Gods Empire Deluxe features a complete scenario builder, too. Maps for every scenario generated (either by players or randomly by the computer) can be \"defined\" with pinpoint precision by players. Map height can be any number from 20 to 150 squares, width can range from 20 to 200 squares (Empire's original maps were all 60 x 100). Thus, players can be fighting over a board of up to 30,000 squares in size (the same size as a large Global Conquest map). This compares to the original Empire's 6,000 squares and Civilization's 4,000. In other words, it can be either a very large or very small world, with many sizes in between. Players will also be pleased to note that and east/west map \"wrap\" feature may be toggled as well. Thus, only the top and bottom of the map can be made safe, edge-of-the-world boundaries. The scenario builder is more than just a mere map maker. Naturally, it allows the user to \"paint\" worlds from scratch (or operation on newly created random worlds within the scenario builder) by Three Tiers Empire Deluxe features three levels of gameplay. The basic level offers something less than the classic Empire game in order to facilitate learning it. By beginning with the map completely exposed from the beginning and reducing, somewhat, the naval unit types available for production, it offers great tutorial potential. The standard game is essentially, \"good old» Empire. The same unit mix, the same world to explore (with the same deluge of small islands as opposed to large continents) but with all of the graphic, sound and user interface enhancements to bring it into the 90s. Connectivity Deluxe Interstel's Empire was quite novel in its day for being such a popular 3-player game. Supported with a play-by-email feature almost as an afterthought (because, Mark Baldwin admitted, he couldn't support modem play in those days), Empire has, over the years, created a torrent of play-by-email games which, I Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"Sneak Preview card occupied. Visually, the map can be zoomed to a variety of different levels (and, depending how well one can squint, played at even the largest magnification). have come to know and love are still on call. Perhaps the most useful new feature is the 'X' key, which toggles an \"Auto Explore\" function. While made for fighter units and destroyers during the early stages of a campaign, it can come in handy in other circumstances as well. I've found that it has sped up my play (and enjoyment of the game) immeasurably. placing various terrain upon its squares (mountains, rough, forest and rivers constitute the new landscaping). Additionally, one can place units and cities of any of the six player's colors (and neutral cities) on the board. Furthermore, the ships can start out with specific names and the cities can have their initial production efficiency and specialties defined as well. Thus, honestto-goodness scenarios can be created that will require an added measure of imagination. Dare I suggest that even (gasp!) historical scenarios could be generated? (Gee, take the six major powers from WWII, create a map of the Earth, customize unit placements for early 1942, define ship names and city specifications. Perhaps something like the photo to the right). Those \"Other\" Improvements New Empires To Conquer Although there are more nuances to describe, space is short. Allow me to leave a mystery as to the capabilities and proper employment for the new bomber and armor units. After all, there must be something left in the box to be discovered! Suffice it to say that most owners of Empire have gotten a lot of replay value from their beloved, beat up copy of the game. It's time to trade in the old classic for the newer model, gang. She's still as sleek as ever, with nicer lines and more chrome for those who like Empire in the fast lane. The engine has been tuned and she purrs better than ever. Strategy gamers will definitely want to give this reborn classic a serious test drive. cow A plethora of pixel possibilities is also included. Screen resolution can be formed to exactly fit one's monitor and, at the higher resolutions (even VESA SVGA is supported), the graphics look dramatically better. The interface will look instantly familiar to Perfect General players. Some further refinements have been added, though, all of which are fairly intuitive. Naturally, the charts, tables and histories that players Naturally, many technical upgrades to Empire's sound and graphics (it had little of either to speak of) have been put into Empire Deluxe. Musical themes and a variety of sound effects for moving different unit types and production, battle sound effects and so forth will keeps one's sound Look Up Look CENTER Look RIGHT Look LEFT FIRE MISSLES L BACK FIRE GUNS Select Missles COMPATIBLE WITH ALL FLIGHT SIMULATOR PACKAGES AS A Two BUTTON JOYSTICK. RADAR ON/OFF THRUSTMASTER INC. 10150 S.W. Nimbus Ave Ste E-7 Tigard, Oregon 97223 (503) 639-3200 3 Dealer Inquiries Welcome Thrustmaster STANDARD GAME PORT INTERFACE. FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM December 1992 Circle Reader Service #149 Page 155 "


"Industry News (Continued from Page 62) toon characters, books, cars, magazines, celebrities, comic books, going to do a lot of good if those consumers don't have computers. organizations, unions, songs, venues, networks and musical Further, we think that potential: stereo buyers read stereo magagroups. The advantages of licensing existing properties are trezines, car buyers read automobile magazines, model railroaders mendous with regard to providing instant positioning for a rew read model railroad magazines and baseball card collectors read product and providing promotional crossovers. As Marlis defined baseball card magazines. Why would an ideal software publisher the process, \"A license is a short-cut that saves marketing/adverignore the magazines read by the opinion leaders in a hobby? Mass tising dollars while guaranteeing product quality and exclusivity.\" media coverage is, in general, a positive factor, but there are The disadvantages for the computer entertainment field lie in the several industry executives who are saying, \"Let's ignore the long lead times necessary to develop products and the expensive computer press, they're going to be there for us. Let's focus on the percentages that licensors are currently charging. Indeed, Paraconsumer press.\" mount's Newman observed that the use of existing properties will As we noted in our last SPA coverage, the mass market and the require licensees to deal with four guilds in addition to the studios cutting edge \"early adopter/opinion leader\" market are two differ(Screen Actors, Screen Writers, Directors and the American Fedent animals. The latter provides the core business for this industry eration of Musicians). He suggested that there will be a period of and games that move toward the former provide new income and greed in which the four guilds and studios demand so many points future growth. One cannot obtain the former by ignoring the latter, that it will become impractical for software companies to license however. existing properties. He expressed hope, however, that the current negotiations with regard to multimedia would allow contracts to Reaching A Broader Market be changed so that permission to re-use likenesses, songs, footage, etc. would not be handled in the same way as it is currently There was, however, some remarkably good news about the negotiated. The current situation can truly be a nightmare. expanding entertainment software market presented at the SPA For those who are interested, the current deals (which usually do conference. Total sales of entertainment software reached $376 not include actors' likenesses and musical score run 6 to 10% of million, a 6% increase over the gross sales with the lithe previous year. That censee paying a guaranseems a hefty increase in a teed sum up front 25% flat or declining economy. on signing, 25% on apor that amount, MS-DOS Video Game proval of game design, programs accounted for 25% at Beta and the final 82% with Macintosh pro25% on shipping). Differviding 8% and Amiga providing 5%. ent contracts are of differPersonal Computer ent lengths and there is no Further, CGW readers can set book value on a given be expressly pleased beproperty. Contracts may cause two of their favorite Total US start at a low of approxicategories are the leaders in mately $25,000 to a high disk-based sales. Simulain the hundreds of thoution games (including warLHHHHHHHHH sands of dollars. games) account for 40% of 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% Each deal has to stand on disk-based sales and Ad4 Year Degree venture/Role-Playing its own, but the studios are Up to High School L Some College DK/Refused in the licensing business to games account for 14% of make a profit and they domestic sales and 29% of Education Attainment want to make sure that the international sales. Source: SPA Consumer Market Study licensee is going to market The percentage of comthe property in the best puter-using households that possible way. As Parause entertainment software is increasing at a fast pace. This year, mount's Newman says, «I certainly don't back the Enterprise out recreation and entertainment became the second most common of the garage for anyone who comes in.' use for home computers (See Chart 1). Further, the SPA's research showed clearly that households which used personal computers Back to the Holy Grail had a higher educational level than households which simply had a video game machine or the overall U.S. family demographics Perhaps, the most encouraging words to be heard in the business (See Chart 2). of the Software Publishers Association were in the special interest groups and committees of the organization. The word \"standards\" Licensing in Hot Properties was becoming quite prevalent and that bodes well for the consumer. Standards in labeling, package sizes, UPC codes, sound By far the most interesting session was the one provided by Dick card protocols and installation programs are all being discussed Lehrberg, vice-president of Interplay Productions. Lehrberg and worked on. If such effort bears fruit, the publishers who make brought together a panel consisting of Neal Newman from Para up the association just might have a better chance at reaching that mount Pictures, Rand Marlis from CLC (the licensing agency mass market they long for. That, incidentally, means it should used by 20th Century Fox, Orion and Nelson pictures) and Murray become easier (and maybe less expensive) for CGW readers to find Froikin of New Frontier Entertainment (a licensing agency for what they want on the store shelves. literary properties). Licensing is going to be a fascinating field When it comes to the holy grail of the mass market, though, our over the next four years, since the new technologies that are stand is where it has always been. The market will expand as the currently under development are well-suited to exploit properties products get better, the platforms become more stable and more which already exist. people get excited about the software. Until then, the quest for the Said properties, of course, include: films, television series, car mass market is a chasing after wind. CGW Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"5 Blg Software Titles Included N-Key Play Music from Your Computer Keyboard wih Your Own Back-up Band. GISEGFZ623 Audio-Toys Direct-To-Disk Recording, Editing and Playback Software Wolfenstein 3D A 3 Dimensional Shoot Em'up Rambo Style Action Game apud Commander Keen A Multi Level Mario Style Adventure Game. GPU JULIU ELS A HUILCUN WILL LOT TER GOODYE Chunyo Cakewalk Pro for Windows DEMO, A Working MIDI Sequencing Studio Don't Play Games Without It... Okey Dokey Sound Card FEATURES:  Digital Sampling, Recording Sample Playback . Music, Sound Effect Speech Voice Playback YAMAHA Sound Chip CD-ROM Connectable . Low Noice Rate . Multiple Compression Rates  MIDI kit & Cable Included . 4 Watt Amplifier & Volume Control . No Joystick Jumper Adjustment  Easy Installation COMPATIBILITY  Sound Blaster  Ad-Lib  Thunder BoardTM . Sound Commander Sound Galaxy  Sound Magic . MPU-UART Mode  Window 3.15  Multi-Media Supported by The Largest SOFTWARE Library . Have You Ever Played Games with Live Sound & Speech? . Do You Want to Play CD-Software with Realistic Feeling? . Do You Want to Sample and Edit Any Sound? . Do You Want to Run Window 3.1 with Sound? . Free MIDI Kit & Cable Will Save You $69.00 SINCE for the VISA MasterCard DISCOVER Sound Baske, Ad Lb. Pro Austo Spoctrum Third Boud, Sound Cardy Sand Galaxy, Sand Mege, Wadow 3 1. YAMAHA Celowak, ero todomerk and proports of the respective companies Dealer and Distributor Inquiries Welcome . Please Call for Your Local Dealer Information MIDI Land, Inc. Poliddy 398 Lemon Creek Drive, Suite L, Walnut, CA 91789 Tel:(714)595-0708  Fax:(714)595-4106 Circle Reader Service #101 "


"Strategy On War(lords) How to Successfully Take on Seven Enhanced Warlords with only Wit, Luck and Normal Production. by Jim Lowerre Ranger The story of this treatise begins in the land of Illuria when the techniques are those practices used to provide the required type of last Arch Mage, Peace Enforcer, lay on his death bed. Not armies at the location and time needed to successfully conduct four days away by Khorfian Griffin, a Leader of one of the operations and tactics. Operations are military campaigns coneight empires sought ancient knowledge in the Great Library. A ducted in specific geographically defined \"theaters» to accomplish copy of what the Leader found is below. The original is enshrined strategic objectives. Tactics are the techniques used to win the in the Royal Illurian Palace at Ilnyr, the seat of government for the battles that occur during operations. entire land. Phase One Expansion On War In Illuria STRATEGY — Capture and hold as many neutral cities as In the beginning, before the coming of the Arch Mages, there possible. Don't make enemies doing it. Buy only heroes and only were many wars in Illuria. All of these wars occurred in three the most necessary towers. natural phases. These phases were: Feit Stack orders Reporis fame PRODUCTION Produce arPhase One, Expansion the race mies using these priorities: shortbosgp 1 16 to capture neutral cities. est production time, fastest Baigonne Production movement, and greatest strength, Phase Two, Limited War the Curchill productions turi in that order. In the immortal words defense of empire and preparation of 1. V. Lenin, \"Quantity has a for Total War. 2 quality all its own.\" Phase Three, Total War the detgl anfarley OPERATIONS: PLANNING liberate and calculated elimination Olime: Itum of opposing empires. Corap Offense — Decide which \"theaBrangios ter(s)\"to capture first. Theaters are So shall wars always be in Illuria. provenien: 10 geographic areas defined by natuHere, then, is advice for each phase ral boundaries such as rivers, (addressing strategy, production Send army to... mountain ranges and deep forests. techniques, operations and tactics). K UOMO Strategy is the overall plan to acPlan which cities to capture first. complish the phase objective. It inUse the following criteria: proximcludes military, political and fiscal ity to friendly forces/cities, defenconsiderations relative to the other sibility after capture, distance from seven empires of Illuria. Production turn 29 1 other empire forces/cities, army Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. 800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 88 8468 41 25 l Due 31 &&& 8888888 37 988 35 19 Privateer 35 & 31 Railroad 25 16 && 8888 AWA 29 8820 289 30 37 MASTERCARD, VISA, DISCOVER, ANO AMERICAN EXPRESSACCEPTED WITH NO SURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY 34.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCTINFO&OTHER BUSINESS: RITEM 908-396-8880 4D Boxing 20 Dr. Quandry 31 Laffer Utility 22 Phonics Plus Studyware LSAT 30 Illustrated Shakesper 27 Fontmonger Dragon's Lair A Train 25 Leather God Phb2 42 Pinball Studyware for SAT 30 Sound Cards Intl Bus & Econ Atlas 39 Geoworks Pro Construction Set 22 Dragon's Lair 2 Legend Pitfighter Stunt Island 37 Intro to Game Fren 79 Grammatik 5 Ad Lib Sound Card 65 A320 Airbus Dragon Lr:Sing Cst 37 Legend of Kyrandia 35 Plan 9 Outer Space 25 Summer Challenge 34 Intro to Games Span79 Hijaak DOS or Win 129 Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 ABC Wide Wild Box 30 Duck Tale:Qst Gld 15 Legion's of Rrella Planets Edge Summoning Jones in Fast Lane 37 Info Select 87 ATI Stereo F/X 139 ABPA Baseball Duerk BaseB. Encyl 20 Leisur Suit Lar Bndl 39 Playroom w/ Sound 31 Super Tetris Kings Quest 5 42 Language Assistant VGA StreoF/X 1MB 369 Aces of the Pacific 39 Dune Leisur Suit Larry 5 37 Police Quest 3 Take a break X-Word 29 Languages of World 99 Fr. Gr.Heb,Ital Span 42 Covox Snd Mster II 145 Mission Disk Dungeon Master Lemmings Pools of Darkness 38 Pool 29 Learn to Speak Span69 Laplink 4 Pro 99 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Action Stations 29 Dusk of the Gods 38 Oh No More Addon 22 Populous 2 Tank (new version) 37 Library of Future 99 Lotus Works og Media Vision Addon Disk 22-45 14 Dynamix Bundle Lemm. Oh No More 31 Power Hits Sports Task Force 1942 39 Loom Microsoft Ock Basic 65 Audio Port AD&D Collect Ed 2 44 Earl Weaver 2 20 L'Empereur Sci-Fi Team Yankee M-1 Tank Platoon 62 Microsoft Quick C 65 COPC AD&D Starter Kit 44 Commisioner Dsk 12 Lexicross Battletech-Mech Tengens Arcade Hit 25 MacMillian Child. Dict.49 MS DOS 5.0 47 Pro Audio Spec+ 139 Adv Willy Beamish 37 Play & Mgr. Disk 12 Liberty or Death Powermonger Terminator 35 Manhole MS DOS 5.0 Upgrd 62 M.M. Upgrade Kit 765 Air Bucks 36 Earthquest Life and Death 2 Principles of Biology 25 Terminator 2 Magazine Rack Norton Desktop v2. 95 Pro Audio Spec 16 198 Air Force Command 36 | Eco Phantoms Links Principle of Calculus 25 Tetris Classic 28 Marketing Master Norton Dsktp DOS 115 Pro 16 Multimedia AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Eco-Quest 1 Links 386 Pro Principle ofChemsty 25 Theatre of War Mavis Beacon Norton Ulilities 111 Upgrade Kit 955 Algebra Made Easy 25 Elvira 2:Jaws Course Diskea 16 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Thunderhawk 25 MIG 29 / MIG 29M 62 One Write Acct. 100 Thunderboard 95 Amarillo Slim Di Ch 32 Entr Pak Win (ea) 28 3 or more (ea) Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Time Riders America35 Mixed Up Mother Gse37 Pacioli 2000 v2.0 31 Thunder & Lightng 229 American Gladiators 25 Syeol Beholder Loney Tune Prnt/Ply 19 Print Shop, New Time Treks 36 MSDOS Archives 35 PC Animate Plus 115 Sound Blaster 9 9 Ancient Art War Sky 35 Eye of Beholder 2 38 Lord of Rings 2 37 Graphics (ea). Tom Landry Football 30 Presidnt:It Start Geo 105 PC Anywhere4 115 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Animation Studio 69 EZ Cosmos Lost Admiral Print Sp Companion 31 Tony LaRussa Base. 17 F-14 Tomcat Prince Persia/Nam'6565 PC Kwik Powerpak 72 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Are We There Yet? 18 Lost File Sherick H 41 LaRussa addon 15 Railroad Tycoon 62 PC Paintbrush 5 + 99 SB Multimedia Kit 560 Armada 2525 30 F 15 III Lost Treas Infocom 42 Pro League Baseball 35 Tracon 2 31 Red Strm/Carr Cmd 62 PC Tools 109 SBMM Starter Kit 459 Armourgeddon F 15 11 Master Edit. 49 Lost Treasures 2 29 Quest for Glory 1 Tracon Windows 37 Reference Library 80 Peachtree Basic 75 SBCDROM Intel 360 75 A.T.A.C F117a Stealth Fighter41 Magic Candle 2 38 Quest for Glory 3 Treasure Cove Shakespeare : 37 PFS: First Choice 75 SB CDROM Extrnl 429 Automap Facts in Action Main St Creatvity Kit 17 Ragnarok Treasure Math Storm35 Sherlock Holme Cnslt42 PFS:First Publisher 75 Sun Moon.Starw Sony Automap Windows 48 Falcon 3.0 Manhole Railroad Tycoon Treasure Mountain 31 Sleeping Beauty 37 PFS:Prospect 75 CD, SB Pro, S/W 599 Automap Europe 74 Oper Fight Tiger 25 Mantis 39 Rampart Treasure Savg Frntr 32 So Much Software 59 PFS:Publisher Wind 75 Roland SCC-1GS 375 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Family Tree Maker Mario Teaches Type 25 Random Hs Encycl Treehouse Sophistical Santa Fe 45 PFS: Window Works 75 Sound Canvas 559 Back to Future 3 Far Side Calendr Martian Memorndm 32 Reader Rabbit 31 Tristan Pinball Space Quest 4 Farm Creativity Kit Backgamn By Geo 26 PFS:Write w/Grmtk 69 Roland MA-12C ea 105 17 Marvin Moose 1/2 31 Reader Rabbit 2 Trump Castle 2 31 Spirit of Excalibur 37 Presention Task Frc119 SPEAKERS Shielded 28 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Femme Fatale Math Blaster Mystry 29 Read 'n Roll VGA 31 Trump Castle 2 Delx 42 Siat Pack Print Shop 36 W/3 band Equilizer 45 Barbie Design F.F. Data Disk Math Blaster Plus 29 Red Baron Twilight 2000 37 Stellar 7 Procomm Plus 2.0 69 Altec Lansing 200 219 Barbie Fashion Fighling for Rome Math Blaster Wind 36 Mission Disk Ultima 7 Strange Bedfellows 39 Procomm/Window 82 ACS 300 w/subwof 299 Barbie Adventure 25 Final Conflict Math Rabbit 25 Realms Forge of Virtue 17 Street Atlas Pyro Screen Saver 35 Bart Simpson Hous 30 Flames of Freedom 31 MIDI Interface Math Zone 31 Rex Nebular Ultima 7P12 Time Mag Almanac 129 QEMM Battlechess (allver) 30 Flight of Intruder Riders of Rohan Matrix Cubed Midiator 101 Serial 95 Time Table History 69 Q DOS 3 Ultima Trilogy: Battlechess 2 Flight Simul A.T.P. 37 Mavis Beacon Type 32 Risk for Windows Time Table Science 59 Ultima Trilogy 2 Quicken 6.0/Win PC Midi Card 45 Battlechess 400 39 Flight Simul (M.S.) 41 Mavis Beacon Wind 38 MOX-32 Risky Woods Quicken Quick Book 84 MPU-IPC Ultima Underworld 47 Ultima 1-6 Arcft/Soen Dsgn 28 Battle Isle McGee at Fun Fair 25 Road & Track Pres Ultrabots 37 Ultimate Basketball 35 Sitback DOS or Win 59 Car Battles of Napoleon 31 California Mean Streets 19 Road to Final Four 37 U.S. or World Atlas 49 U.S.Atlas Stacker Cakewalk Apprentic145 Battlestorm Flight Planner Medieval Lords 38 Robosports Wind Vintage Aloha to the Miracle Stacker 16 Bit Card 179 Utopia 325 Berensin Bear Cnt FS Pro Mega Fortress Romance 3 King 2 Vfor Victory #1/42 44 Wild Places Superstor MIDI Software Berenstn Bear Color 25 Great Britian Mission Disk Rorkes Drift 34 Turbo Cadd v2.0 Vegas Games Wind. 19 Wing Comm & Miss 45 79 Ballade Hawaii Berensin Bear Lettr 25 Mega Traveller 1/2 37 Rules Engagement 37 Vengeance Excalibur30 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Word Perlct5.1 Win 249 Band in a Box Berlitz Interpreter Instant Facit Loc. 26 37 Mega Man 3 17 Rule Engagment 2 38 Warlords 31 Wing Comm 2 Windows 3.1 Bicycle Poker 92 Cadenza Instrumnt Pilot Scen Mental Math Games 35 Scrabble Deluxe Wyn Gretzky Hcky2 35 WC/Ulti. Undrwld 49 Winfax Pro East/West U.S. 59 Bill Elliott NASCAR Cakewalk 30 Merchant Colony Scrabble Dix Win 38 World Atlas Western Front Scenery Set A Birds of Prey 37 MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Roque What's My Angle World View Scenery Set B 30 Mice & Trackball Cakewalk Pro 37 Blitzkrieg Michael Jordon Flight42 Second Front Wrath of Demon Where Carm SanDiego Appoint MousePen 10 Cakewalk Window Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Bloodwych Mickey ABC's. 85 Drummer Secret Monkey Is. 2 38 Adults Only-Must be 21 in America's Past 36 Microsoft Mouse Sound & Graphic 25 BoJackson BaseB Color or 1-2-3's Tahiti 25 Scrt Weapon Luftwl 42 in Europe 30 Animation Fantasy Mouseman Serial 69 Encore 65 Bodyworks Mickey's Crossword 19 Dornier 335 20 in Time 30 FAO Set Trackman Serial 79 Piano Works Western Europe 19 Play it by Ear Mickey Jigsaw Pzl 31 P-38 Mission Dsk 20 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 in USA Floor 13 65 Modems & Fax Master Tracks Pro 249 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Mickey ABC Combo 37 P-80 Shoot Star 20 in USA Deluxe Private Collection 65 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 Music Printer Plus 419 Fly Grand Canyon Buzz Aldrin Mickey Word Advent 25 Heinkel 162 20 in World Deluxe 49 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Follow the Reader Captain Comic 2 Maxlite 9624PC189 Music Time Micro Cookbook 31 Sesame St. Lrn Clas 31 Four Crystal Trazer 32 Wild Wheels Storm 1 or 2 Carl Lewis Chaling 29 Maxlite 96/96 349 Musicalor Microleagu 4 BaseB 39 Sesame St.Publish 25 Visual Fantasy Wing Comm 1 Dixe 49 Free DC Carrier Strike 419 Quick Score Deluxe 99 Maxlite 14.4/14.4 Microleague FB Dix 42 Sesame St. Vol. 1 17 Wing Commander 2 49 Volcano Front Page Sports Carriers at War Practical Peripherals Recording Studio 75 Microsoft Golf Sesame St Vol. 2 17 Special Oper Disk 25 Gateway Caddies 7.95ea. 3/$ 19 PM 2400 Internal 129 Rhythm Ace Casino Pack 1 Midnight Rescue Seven Cities of Gold 38 Speech Disk Global Conquest Castles PM 2400 External175 Songwright 5 Utilities Might and Magic 3/4 38 Shadow Prophecy 30 Wizardry Trilogy Gobblins 31 Northern Campgn 19 Sportster 2400 Ext. 149 Trax for Windows Millennium 2200 60 25 386 Max Shanghaill Word Muncher 61 30 Castle 2 Godfather Milliken Storyteller Sportster 2400 Int. 129 32 Shuttle Adobe Type Mgr Wordtris 59 Joysticks Castle of Dr. Brain 30 Gods 25 Mike Ditka Ultimt FB 37 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 Sportstr 14.4v.42bis 309 After Dark for Wind 29 loki World Circuit 31 Cathy Daily Planner 43 Gold of the Aztec 67 CH Flightstick Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Silent Service 2 Zoom External  . Writer Rabbit Gold Sheet ProFB 37 Ching Ancient Emp 30 65 CH Game Card 3 31 Mixed-Up Mother Gs 30 Zoom Internal Sim Ant Your Prsnl Train SAT30 Autodesk Explorer 119 CH Mach 3 Challenge 5 Realms 35 Grand Slam Brdge 231 Monopoly Deluxe 34 Sim City Bannermania Zoo Keeper Scanners Champions 44 Eliminator Game Cd 26 Great Naval Battles 38 Greens Moonbase Calendar Creator + 55 Sim City Graphic 35 Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Microtek 600G Champions of Krynn 20 829 Gravis Joystick 35 Muncher Bundle SimCity Windows 37 Adv of Eco Island 22 Carbon Copy 129 Microtek 60OZ 1359 Gravis PC GamePad21 Chemistry Works 38 Murder 29 Sim Earth Dinosaur World Central Pt AntiVirus 84 22 Scanman32 Scenario Disk 160 Kraft KC3 Joystick Chessmaster 3000 32 18 Mutanoid Math Chlg 31 Simpson Adventure 31 Race Thru Space 22 Choas Scanman 256 Guy Spy 265 Kraft Thunderstick Chessmstr 3000 Win38 28 NFL Challenge Prem 59 Snap Dragon Colorix Children Writ & Publ 39 Hardball3 CD ROM 69 NFL Print Pro Skins & Pads Maxx Flight Yoke Copy ll PC Snoopy Game Club Data Disk 39 Chip'n Dale NFL Pro League FB 35 3D Cnstrct Cast Mst 62 Solitaires Journey 15 Maxx Pedal Corel Draw v3.0 379 Dust Covers Civilization 39 Hare Raising Havoc 29 32 Nigel's World Space Ace 2:Bort Aloha Hawaii 45 Data Ease Personal 68 Grounded Wrist Straps 9 Mouse Yoke Civilization MPE 47 Harpoon Space Quest Bundl 39 Ninja Turtle Arcade 25 Atlas Pack 59 Desgview 2.4 79 15 Quickshot Aviator 5 32 Keyboard Skins Classic5 Headline Harry Space Quest 4 Ninja Turtle: Adventr 31 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Desqview 386 125 Static Pads Quickshot Game Cd 14 Coaster Heimdall Space Quest 5 Nobunagas Ambition 37 Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Quickshot Intruder 5 30 DOS Fax Large-System Comic Book Creator 17 Heros of 357th No Greater Glory 15 Quickshot Warrior 42 Speedball 2 25 Audubon Mammals 37 Dvork on Typing Wrist Paris 8 18 Conan: Cimmerian 30 Hole in One Golf Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Speedreader 31 Autodesk Explorer 119 Express Publisher 99 Stax (Dust Repellent) Thrustmaster Fight 69 Conflict: Middle East 32 Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Operation Neptune 35 Barney Bear School 26 5 Thrustmaster Pro Spell-a-saurus Facelift 59 109 Conflict Korea Hoyle Bk Game 1/2 22 Sta.Complete Cleaning Weapons Control 29 Orbits Spellbound Batik Designs Far Side Calendar 49 45 79 Conquest Longbow 39 Hoyle Bk Game 3 30 Spellcasting 301 Oregon Trail Battlechess I System 49 15 Thrustmaster Pedal 109 Conquesto lanan 25 Humans Conquest of Japan 35 Origin FX Spell Craft Beethoven Ninth Hours: M-F 9AM to BPM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Crime Wave Indiana Jones 4 Once Upon Time Spell-it Plus Bible Library Store Hours: MF 9AM to 6PM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Island of Dr. Brain Crisis in the Kremlin 39 Out of This World Spelllammer Bookshelf Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. 07065 Crossword Magic 32 Jack Nicklaus Signtr 42 Outnumbered 30 Spirit of Excalibur Britanica Family Chc 75 Cruise for a Corpse 33 J. Nick. Crse 3.4.5 14 Overlord Spoils of War Britannica Family Dr 59 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Datty Duck P.I. J. Nicklaus Clip Art 17 Pacific Islands Sports Adventure Business Master 39 Dagger of Amon Ra 39 Jetfighter 2 Paladin 2 Sprout! Carmen World Dixe 65 Master Card, Visa American Express Discover Accepted. No Dark Half Adv. Mission Disk 19 Paperboy 2 Star Control 2 Cautious Condor 45 Surcharge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3. Carteret, N.J. Dark Queen Krynn 32 39 Jobhunt Patriot Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 CD Game Pack 55 07008. All Sales Are Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective Darklands 39 John Madden 2 PC Globe Stickybr Math Tutor 30 CIA World Fact merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All Darkseed Jump Jet PC USA Stickbr Pre-School 30 Compton Encydpd 409 Products are now. We do not guarentee compatability. Shipping Dark Sun. Kid Pix Stickbr Read Tutor 30 PC Study Bible Conquest Longbow 37 charges: 48 contiguous states. $4 per ordet. Alaska, Hawaii. Death Knight Krynn 32 Kid Pix Companion 25 Penthouse Jigsaw Stickbr Spell Tutor 30 Corel Draw Upgd 149 and Puerto Rico $10 1st pe.. $ea. add. APO/FPO and PO, Boxes Dix Paint Animation 85 Kid Works Perfect General Strip Poker 3 $6 int pe. $1 Electronic Cookbook 75 a. add. Canada $8 ist pc. $1 a. add. Heavier Dix Paint ll Enhncd 85 Kings Quest Bundle 39 Data Disk Strip Poker Data (ea)17 Font Master 39 items extra. Foreign orders call for shipping charges. N.J. Design Yr Own Hm 39 Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 PGA Tour Golf Strike Commander 45 Food Analyst Residents add salos tax. Call for current price and Design Your Railrd 35 King's Quest 5 42 Storybook Weaver 34 PGA Golf Windows 38 Game Collection availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL. P.O.'S WELCOMED. . Does not 45 Railroad Robbery 19 King's Quest 6 39 Studyware for ACT 30 Course Disk Game Master include closeouts, liquidations, or limited quantities and Designasaurus II 23 Knowledge Advent 47 PGA Golf Complete 49 Studyware GMAT 30 Golden Immortal product must be shipping for your protection, we will only Disney EntertainPk 47 Konami NFL F0018 30 Studyware GRE 30 Gunship / Midwinter 621 nip To Che address the credit card company has ship to the address the credit card company has on file. B&B 19 Bridgemas wikShp 15 45 15 42 m&#8208 35 36 30 88 17 888888 48488808 37 8588388 87987838 26 36 3 39 Circle Reader Service #69 "


"Strategy ple. production capacity, income and OPERATIONS: EXECUTION defense. Plan for two armies to Offense Beat the other empires capture each neutral city. Plan to to as many neutral cities as possible. capture a city near the closest temDon't attack other empire's cities (Kill their armies but don't antagoDecide the starting Hero's initial nize anybody, yet). Capture a city priorities; explore ruins (which near a temple. Get as many armies and when)? assist armies to capas possible blessed by the temple. ture cities? capture cities alone? Defense Occupy positions in Defense Study the terrain and choke points and vulnerable directhe other empire's starting locations before capturing the neutral tions. Identify choke points (i.e. cities behind them. bridges and mountain passes) that Watch the other empires expand. must be held to prevent penetraWatch the other empire's hero(s) as tions of the fledgling empire. they go into ruins. Know which ones Know the vulnerable wide open found magic items (they survived spaces on disputed borders and the and didn't find a magic ally). If they crucial cities located there. got eaten, did a magic item survive? Know the army strengths and Can you retrieve it? weaknesses of the first empire(s) you will come into conflict with TACTICS (likely enemies). Determine around which city(s) contact will be made. Where is the terrain your armies are most effective on/in? Offense — Send two ordinary armies to take each neutral city your opponents least effective on/in? and attack one army at a time, weakest first. If a special army or Odds of Winning With A Given Relative Strength Relative Strength -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6 Odds of Winning 3% 6% 10% 17% 26% 37% 50% 63% 74% 83% 90% 94% 97% (i.e. a 5 has the same odds of beating a 3, as a 9 does a 7 (+2=74%)) hero is used to attack a neutral city pair it with an ordinary army. Use every movement point to get Strategies of the Month Vol. 15 armies to unconquered neutral cities. Defense Use powerful magic allies to defend A monthly column to improve the quality of play choke points rather than nearby cities (the intent CONQUERED KINGDOMS: New!!! Start playing at difficulty level 1 where is to seal the emerging empire). Seal off single square choke points (i.e. the Huinedor side of the the game mechanics are casily learned. Give all pieces a try. Each unit is reasonably bridge to Ilnyr) with cheap and powerful units balanced and can be important in the right situation. Some examples: Shoot catapults and garrisoned towers. at castle keeps and at other units. Sncak spies around they can't be seen except when Don't garrison cities until they are threatened an enemy unit is in same square). Shoot dragons at two enemies in same square. Fire (when an enemy's army is one turn away). Hold wizards normally as well as (a) casting fire ball, (b) teleporting while bringing other cities with the same number of armies that are units, (c) casting far sighting spell. Shoot archers on land or from boats. After attacking. If a city is lost, immediately counter thousands of games tested here at Q.Q.P. we cannot tire of «Conquered Kingdoms». attack. Don't let city defenses drop below level two. Note: In all phases, unoccupied cities always BATTLES OF DESTINY: New!!! One powerful game with some wonderfully eventually attract the other empire's armies. amazing worlds to conquer. A simple thing to remember is when there is a lot of water in a given world, use many types of naval transports plus air transports. When Heroes Gain magic allies (early in Phase 1 magic allies are much more valuable than magic the world is mostly land use these units less. Don't underestimate the use of items). Go to ruins near friendly cities in the rivers(naval) in the land games. direction of expansion. \"Escort\" with as many SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY: When you get locked in on 3 or 4 games you love, armies as possible. Wait a turn if it will increase the escort by at least two. try a simple quest or journey to broaden your horizons and introduce you to the scores of other great games. Figuring The Odds Know what the chances of success are before attacking or accepting enTHE LOST ADMIRAL: If you are having trouble winning at the lower levels gagement (if given the choice). For one on one when you first try \"The Lost Admiral», try a short campaign. It is easier to beat the engagements use the following chart: computer in some campaigns than in some of the individual games. For multi-army engagements use the formula or THE PERFECT GENERAL: If your opponent is bogging you down with guess! artillery barrages, try infantrying (new word) him to death. Quickly transport infantry to within 5 hexes and shoot. Phase Two: Limited War Quantum Quality Productions STRATEGY — Strengthen geographic posi1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 (908)788-2799 || tion, military forces and the treasury. Don't make Circle Reader Service #122 Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"Abracadata DESIGN More Than SOFTWARE: A Game... the source of plan-making software SINCE 1985 The Hit Em C DESIGN YOUR OWN Thr DESIGN PRECISION, TO SCALE (HO, N, O, Z, S, G) LAYOUTS AND RUN REALISTIC RAILROAD SIMULATIONS . % DESIGN! Sketch a track plan! Unique tracklaying tools are specially designed to keep curves aligned and precise. Bly Tear the titre Silicon Guleh 00/ T. BUILD! Create a colorful setting! Draw buildings, trees, rivers, roads, bridges, circus tentsA complete set of drawing tools is included. Stor Gutt H ASAN true railroad simulation coupling, uncoupling, switching, revenue tracking underpasses, overpasses, bridges, crossings, train wrecks zoom in on any of the dozens of cars in your layout for a picture and waybill design and print accurate, to-scale layouts RUN! Make up a train and drive it down the track! Operate track switches. Each train has its own controls. But be alert! A crash leaves wreckage scattered everywhere! CONTROL Hours: 9am to 7pm Monday Friday (Saturday 10am-5pm) Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card, certified checks & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School. State & City purchase orders accepted. Shipping: UPS ($5 min.) APO FPO($5 min.) 2 Day Air (57 min.) CANADA. HI. AK & PR ($9 min.). Overseas minimum $30 (please fax orders if possible). Pre-Orders on New Releases get shipped Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 2 Day Air-S5 (U.S. Only). NY residents add 8.25% Sales Tax, Send money orders or checks to: 800-999-7995 MISSION CONTROL 43 Warren Street, Dept. CGW 792 in NY State 212-962-7168 New York, NY 10007 Fax 212-962-7263 Foreign customers welcome! FOR FREE CATALOG OR INFORMATION ON APPLE PROGRAMS CALL (800) 451-4870 OR FAX (503) 683-1925 $3700 Circle Reader Service #41 "


"Strategy enemies unnecessarily. Determine which enemy empire is to be OPERATIONS: EXECUTIONdestroyed first Offense Capture other cities critical to the defense of the new PRODUCTION Produce flying armies with at least one city empire. Seek out unexplored ruins. (the objective is one flying army per hero and non-dragon magic Defense Don't get upset when attacked, penetrated and one army). or two cities are lost, it's only temporary. Vector quickly produced armies to garrison non-threatened cit Let the other empires attack one another at every opportunity. ies. Vector medium to high strength armies near a temple for blessings. Don't vector to a threatened city (another empire Extend choke point defenses into the other empires. army(s) is/are one turn away) that may be lost (two turns of vectored production go right out the window with the captured city). Switch instead to garrisons behind the threatened frontier. Start at least one navy. OPERATIONS: PLANNING Offense-Determine which (if any) other empire cities threaten the defense of the new empire. Anticipate making an enemy if the city(s) must be captured (like von Clauswitz always says, \"War is an extension of politics by other means\"). Determine the most likely empire to be the first Phase Three victim. Based on this, plan where to mass armies and heroes for Phase Three. Plan to use new temples in Phase Three. Defense — Pick a central location in each controlled theater to position theater reserves in (hopefully but not necessarily near a good road net. Iftwo theaters are geographically small, one reserve Use reserves to destroy invading armies before they attack on the common border may suffice for both). Plan on theater friendly cities. Keep reserves concentrated. Create a new reserve reserves being three or more, highly mobile (i.e. sorcerers, cavalry, as soon as one is committed. wolf riders) medium or high strength armies. Plan to reinforce TACTICS threatened areas with the theater reserves (see Phase Two TACOffense Conduct reconnaissance on large enemy stacks by TICS below) attacking with one cheap army. Count on having the frontiers attacked and interior penetrated. \"Max Stacks\" (a stack of eight units with a bonus adjusted strength of eight or nine). Use a hero with bonus of four or five, a flying army and six weak armies, or a magic army, a flying army and six medium to high strength armies. Ambush enemy heroes to capture magic items The Most Compatible (use a hero and non-hero max stack to be safe, attack first with a non-hero then the hero max Sound Card In The World stack, and pick up the left over magic items  MIDI interface with simultaneous input (clean them off, unless you like'em sticky)). and output. Includes PC-LYRA music Attack other empire cities and stacks of eight composition software. armies with max stacks. Audiophile sound quality. Low noise, 100% AdLib Compatible. precision engineered electronics. Defense Use both fixed and mobile deExclusive SMULATOR\" sound file 4-watt amplifier with volume control. fense. Use max stacks for mobile defense. conversion software. Operates Extensive software tools, including \"Sound Blaster\" compatible titles, At choke points: (1) on the enemy's side, digital compression and editing utilities. WITH IMPROVED SOUND QUALITY! deploy light infantry armies, one army per Supported by the largest library of VOICE COMMAND SOFTWARE. square, two armies in width, in the direction of software titles in entertainment, Covox Voice Master, Speech Thing, business, music, and education. the other empire's approach to the choke point. MIDI Maestro compatible.  Dual 3-inch speakers, 6 foot MIDI cable, (2) build towers at the narrowest point on the 8 bit DMA sound digitizer. Sample and internal speaker bypass included. other empire's side and man them with medium rates to 25 Kbytes/sec with \"direct to Made in USA by Covox -THE microstrength armies (+2 defensive strength). (3) disk\" record/playback options. computer audio specialist since 1975. place medium strength armies, one army per Your Best Choice For Multi-Media Sound. square, behind the towers and running back through the choke point itself to the nearest ONLY $229.95 (plus $5 Shipping & Handling) friendly city (Defense in depth attrites and deORDER HOTLINE: (503) 342-1271 Mon-Fri, 8 AM to 5 PM PST lays the opponent. He pays 2 MP for each road VISA/MC/AMEX phone or FAX orders accepted. NO CODs. 30 Day Money Back square fought into. Al opponents are confused Guarantee if not completely satisfied. One year warranty on hardware. when their stacks are completely surrounded TRADE-UP OFFER: Your current PC sound card brand is worth $$$ toward the purchase with light infantry). of a Sound Master II. Contact Covox for details. CALL OR WRITE FOR FREE PRODUCT CATALOG Frontier cities in vulnerable wide open direcCovox inc. 675 Conger Street  Eugene, OR 97402 tions can use the same deployment. Phone (503) 342-1271  FAX 503-342-1283 In wide open vulnerable directions: (1) put a majority of available forward strength in tactical reserves between cities (2) move tactical SOUND MASTER II Page 162 Circle Reader Service #63 Computer Gaming World "


"New! TRISTAN Available for IBM PC and Macintosh color, \"Best Simulation\" Finalist 1991 computers. -Software Publishers Association \"(TRISTAN) should be a big winner.\" John Sculley \"You can easily forget you are playing on a computer -Miami Herald . 1000 \"TRISTAN puts a new tilt on old fashion pinball.\" -MacWEEK \"Superbly lives up to its billing as solid state pinball.\" -MACWORLD Enjoy the Excitement of Real Pinball!  Authentic Ball Action  Wild Pinball Devices  Fabulous Sound  TILT and much more... LLISELLE Solid State PINBALL TRISTAN To Order: Contact your favorite retailer or call (613) 967-7900. AAAA 98 1000 PLE COPYRIGHT! 000 19158007 IC BALLSZ AMTEX Compatible with Windows 3.x, Sound BlasterTM, Adlib SoundTM, and 256 color VGA. SOFTWARE CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #46 Amtoy Software Cornoration 206 George Street, BellevOntario "


"Strategy reserves into a city(s) when threatened (another empire army(s) is/are one turn away) (3) reinforce with theater reserves (4) if the enemy's armies determine that the city is now too strong and try to by-pass it to invade your interior, counter attack from the rear once he's in the open, OR get around him into the next threatened city (fortunately the invaders rarely look back) (5) continue to build strength as more reserves arrive. Try to destroy invading armies in the stronger frontier area before they get into the weaker interior, Sorcerers, cavalry and wolf riders make good theater reserves. Heroes can augment theater reserves by moving (hopefully flying) from crisis to crisis. Navies transporting slow medium to high strength armies on rivers can be theater reserves. Defense Against Deep Penetrations (usually an all flying stack) — Use a \"matador\" technique. Deliberately evacuate a city just a little more than one turn away from the invader's nose. Pick the least valuable city (one producing weak armies or that just completed production, hopefully surrounded by rough terrain that gives your armies an advantage over the penetrators). When the enemy takes the bait, mass your reserves and destroy him (preferably before losing the city and on advantageous terrain). If the city is lost, try to counter attack in the next three turns (enemy vectored armies start arriving on his third turn after capturing the city). General Defense — Garrison all cities with at least two to three medium strength armies. Strengthen city defenses to a rating of seven if and when necessary (i.e. don't waste money). Do this for a numerically weak garrison before the city is attacked. If towers are an option they're always cheaper. If a city can't be held, don't try. Evacuate to a nonadjacent position and wait. Watch when the enemy takes the city to see what armies he has. Gather reserves. If necessary, wait until some of the enemy moves out to take another city and recapture the lost metropolis behind him. Then mass against the marauder out in the open and cut him down like the dog he is. When weak in a frontier city and threatened by stacks from two other empires, retreat and let the two of them fight it out. After they have attrited one another move back in and retake the city. Don't block access from one empire into another. Use navies and the units they transport to attack flying armies at sea and vice versa. STACKS Maximize Bonus Points Evenly distribute magic items and allies between heroes. Have only one of each special army type per stack (i.e. only one hero, one flying army, one magic army per stack). Don't create stacks with army strengths greater than nine. A Military, Economic, and Political Simulation of World War II in Europe HIGH COMMAND The War in Europe: 1939-1945 \"High Command is one of the most exciting computer wargames I've ever seen and is packed with many clever design elements.\" Alan Emrich, Computer Gaming World \"The best strategy/simulation of 1992.\" Strategy Plus Not just a war game, this is the ultimate game of integrated grand strategy for World War II in Europe. In this game, just as in the real world, economics and politics are just as important as the military. Will you spend your time and resources on your economy, diplomatic initiatives, or the production of a war machine second to none? Will you develop your industry, provide economic aid, or plow resources into research and development? Conduct land, air, and naval operations with 15 types of units and 16 types of missions. Transport units across the seas, perform amphibious assaults and airborne operations, launch an armored blitzkrieg, or use your submarines to prowl for enemy merchant marine. Conduct strategic bombing campaigns and naval blockades to bring your enemies to their knees. And you can assign almost any activity to your computer high command so you can concentrate on the strategy that most deserves your attention. Whatever your philosophy, High Command provides you with the means to implement your strategy on the huge 72x68 hex full-color map that spans more than 40 countries and territories. Assess the current situation on the strategic map with 20 display modes that can be activated alone or in combination with others. Review the progress of the game in the General's Notebook, which automatically records major events for the entire game. The menudriven game system, makes this game easy to learn and play. A Product of Colorado Computer Creations, Inc. 640K PC or Compatible Required: Only $44.95 plus $4.00 for prompt UPS shipping and handling. Add $2.00 for Second-Day Air. Demo disk 5.00 Colorado residents add 3% sales tax. Visa, MasterCard, Discover, Personal Checks, and Money Orders Welcome. No CODs. Mail orders specify disk size. On-line support is provided on CompuServe, GEnie, Prodigy, and America Online. Microtech 4725 N. Academy Blvd., Colorado Springs, Colorado 80918 Phone: (719) 593-1100 (10:00 am 6:00 PM MDT Monday through Saturday) Circle Reader Service #58 Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"Better Equipment. Better Sound. while supplies last SPEAKERS FREE Forget primitive monkey-see-monkey-do technology like Sound Blaster and AdLib. Today, even a chimp can hear the difference, between the tinny, toy-box mono of older cards, and ATI's big-as-life stereo sound. Sound Blaster and AdLib lets you hack your way through the jungle of games and multimedia software, in DOS or Windows. Our bundled software, including MIDI editing and playback utilities, is more fun than a barrel of monkeys and a lot more useful. Stereo Sound The fact is, ATI sound cards make monkeys out of the competition. They give you crystal-clear CD-quality sound at sampling rates up to 44 kHz, and add stereo separation to your existing mono software applications and games. They even let you play and record your own stereo sound files. STEREO-F/X Superior stereo sound, with multi-speed game port. MIDI port optional. High Speed Joystick Port Why let the older type of joystick port throw a monkey wrench into your gaming, with erratic response on today's fast 386 and 486 computers. Our stereo cards let the gamer in you really go ape, with a built-in multi-speed adjustable joystick port that works smoothly on any PC. Don't add mono sound to your PC when you can have stereo. Ask for ATI, ask for STEREO-F/X and hear the difference. Software Compatibility Let yourself really go bananas with ATI's 11-voice FM synthesizer and digital sound support. Full compatibility with VGASTEREO-F/X Same great stereo sound, with multispeed game port and MIDI as standard equipment, plus ATI's award-winning VGAWONDER XL graphics all on a single card. ATI TECHNOLOGIES INC., 3761 Victoria Park Avenue, Scarborough, Ontario, TECHNOLOGIES INC. Canada MTW 352 Tel: (416) 756-0718 Perfecting the PC Fax: (416) 756-0720 Copyright  ATI Technologies Inc., 1992. All company and/or product names are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers. New Lower Pricing Windows 3.1 Drivers Available Circle Reader Service #48 "


"Strategy Keep all but the special armies in a stack of the same type, strength and movement. Fighting Order — Infantry, cavalry, flying armies, magic armies and heroes fight in that order. Giants and heavy infantry fight before light infantry. Phase Three: Total War STRATEGY Make enemies one at a time, then eliminate them. PRODUCTION — Vector \"max stack\" replacement and garrison armies into the captured interior cities in the target empire. Continue to vector to threatened friendly frontier cities. Disband unwanted Phase Two armies. OPERATIONS: PLANNING OffensePlan to eliminate the weakest of the adjacent empires first. Plan to eliminate next the weakest empire contesting your control of a theater (reduces the forces needed to hold secured areas). Defense See Phase Two above. OPERATIONS: EXECUTION Offense Capture all the enemy's interior cities before going after his frontier (the internal cities are not as well garrisoned and are vectoring production to the frontier). Gut the enemy's interior as quickly as possible. Attack enemy interior cities with a max stack. Have a stack of replacements nearby to make up losses. Don't lose any magical items. Keep attacking hero max stacks within several turns of each other. Rescue dropped magic items. Defense — See Phase Two above. TACTICS Offense Don't leave penetrating max stacks adjacent to an enemy frontier city on the way in (they may be attacked). \"Tough Nuts\" (enemy cities defended by multiple possible max stacks) — Attrite the enemy with non-hero max stacks until the hero max stack is assured of victory. Pick up any left over magical items Defense see Phase 2 ABOVE. Fundamental Truths Fate is fickle. Might makes right. Run away to fight again another day. It costs two MP to pass through another unit in a bridge square. Everyone hopes that SSG creates two or three more worlds such as Illuria. Stars Bues ARE YOU TIRED OF PLAYING AGAINST YOUR COMPUTER? Broaden your horizons, challenge your mind and interact with other players across the nation. Star Quest is a computer moderated play-by-mail game, allowing you to compete with up to 100 other players. Imagine...an area of 1,000,000 cubic lightyears around our own Sun consisting of 800 stars and close to 10,000 planets, moons, and other objects. Players become explorers, diplomats, merchants, warlords and emperors competing for victory points in five different areas. Game turns are run every three weeks and cost from $4.00 to $12.00 depending on the number of orders. Our \"Game Startup\" package includes rules, map and first five turns for only $18.00. Rules are only $3.00. For more information on this game or to receive information on other games offered contact: DELTAX GAMING VISA 548 Great Hill Drive Ballwin, Missouri 63021 MasterCard Sour 63021 VISA. Circle Reader Service #67 Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"You Call The Shots. Dive down an island canyon as blasts buffet your biplane and you head toward your landing strip -a speeding train! Trade your stunt pilot's stick for a megaphone and direct the action from the ground, a moving vehicle, even the air. Edit the explosive footage you've filmed with the thunder of sound effects, music and voice-over' in the post-production studio. Do it all. Fly. Film. Edit. Or just watch it all unfold. It's up to you. Stunt Island is a flying and filmmaking paradise. With more than 45 dynamically-correct aircraft, 30 diverse shot locations, 1,000 pre-built props and eight cameras at your disposal. All made graphically real through advanced Gouraud shading in 256-color VGA. All at your command. DISNEL.. S 0 F T W ARE STUNT ISLAND The stunt flying and filming simulation EN STUNT TO ORDER: Visit your software retailer or call 1-800-688-1520. Published by Walt Disney Computer Software, Inc. 500 S. Buena Vista St., Burbank, CA 91521-6385 For IBM and 100% compatibles Actual VGA screen shots Sound Blaster card and microphone required O DISNEY "


"Review The Robots of Brawn Mechanized conquest in SSI's Cyber Empires by Chris A. Lombardi TITLE: Cyber Empires SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM PLAYERS: 1-5 GRAPHICS: VGA SOUND Adlib, SoundBlaster/Pro, Roland PRICE: $49.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up DESIGNERS: Silicon Knights (Denis Dyack, Rick Goertz) PUBLISHER: SSI Sunnyvale, CA year-old Asian boy who ordered Giant Robot around via his dual-purpose watch/robot command center. In Strategic Simulation's Cyber Empires, the eternal child in this reviewer found the means of expression to a 15 year-latent fantasyhe can now command legions of Giant Robots and not glance even once at his digital watch. Cyber Empires is both a tactical and strategic game of global conquest set in a dark, future-fantasy world of tribal-technological warfare (based on the European boardgame, Steel Empires). One to five human or computer players command an army of behemoth warriors as they \"slag it out\" for control of an island continent divided into 72 territories. ry first exposure to hulking, mechanized defenders of good was in the lazy after-school hours of obscure broadcast TV. Between the Godzilla hour and The Little Rascals came a cheesy piece of Japanese television called Giant Robot. Giant Robot was a tinny, cylindrical being identical to the Dorothy's Tin-man in every respect except that he was several orders larger and he was armed to the teeth. From his eyes shot a glowing red laser and from his fingertips came cigar-shaped missiles that were the immediate end to any foe, be it a flying saucer, an overgrown reptile or a looming Tokyo skyscraper. What made this particularly marvelous to a grammar school kid was that this enormous hunk of firepower was at the command of a 10 Inevitably, these wandering conquerors will bump their titanium noggins with other wandering conquerors, and things will have to be settled on the battlefield. This involves a very intense action sequence where the player grabs his joystick and takes full, real-time control of one cyborg. Battles can take place on five terrains (volcanic, forested, arctic, desert, urban) each with interesting advantages and disadvantages for each different type of cyborg. For example an Achilles unit can use its lightning speed along with forested terrain to its advantage, using the cover to avoid fire while working into position. On the other hand, the Crossbow unit with its long-range missiles, can be rendered ineffective by the dense foliage. One cannot, then, count on joystick skills alone. Thought must be put into which cyborgs are fighting on which landscape. The game's basic dynamic is very simple. Each player begins with one country upon which he builds a factory. At the player's command, any one of nine different cyborg warriors rumbles forth from this factory to conquer new territory, establish government control, and extort money to build more factories, create more cyborgs, conquer new territories... In addition, there are other tactical matters to be considered before combat begins. If, on the defensive, the player has the option to place his cyborgs on a tactical map and can choose which cyborg he will control (though control can be switched in Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"\"...no other game, no matter how graphically advanced, captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one. (Compter Game Review, Oct. 1992) \"...a remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Compter Gaming World, Aug. 1992) Do you own a modem? Then live out your favorite roleplaying fantasies in the finest multiplayer interactive fiction game ever Legends of futures NICOLE LEE '92 past Every day, the intrepid, the romantic, the imaginativa and the adventurous meet as player characters in the Shattered Realms, a virtual fantasy world created from shared imagination on the Digital Dreams Network Explore the dark reaches beneath the Teeth of Sharian or enjoy a casual stroll with friends through the 33 | enchanted Grymwood Forest. Become a champion of justice, or a force for darkness. Delve into political intrigue or play the lone wolf on a personal quest, Share adventures and make friends with people calling from across the country. Skilled authors create special quests nightly that allow you to become part of an en ongoing plot within a never ending tale. Call 800-937-7644 to join the adventure (1200/2400 bps, 8N1, full duplex) or 800-274-2814 for more information volela As low as $3.00 per hour all day every day Visa  MasterCard  American Express Circle Reader Service #88 Legends of Future Past\" is available only on the Digital Dreams NetworkTM, a service of Inner Circle Technologies, Inc. Other features include forums containing thousands of files and featuring discussions on a wide range of topics from science fiction to PC computing. Other entertainment products, teleconferencing, nationwide matchmaking and news serviceas are also available. "


"Review combat with the F10 key). On the offen gamers should be warned, however, that sive, the player must choose the primary this game is probably not for them. objectives for the cyborgs he will control. Though the strategy game is simple and Will this be a hit and run mission? An engaging, the heart of Cyber Empires is attack on enemy structures? Or on the the action element and those who would enemy capital? The player must specify opt not to enjoy this aspect will probably and must select the degree to which the be treated better by \"dedicated\" strategy cyborgs will stick to the plan. At the low games designed for this sort of gamer. est \"commitment\" With that said (and setting, the cyborgs cacharias the audience thinned a may change their obBar bit), we can get to the jective in mid-battle; THES MERCE specifics of game at the highest setting, play. Cyber Empires they'll play by the offers a number of prebook. I don't really HI game options that can understand the need significantly shape the for this \"commitstyle of the game. Afment\" setting, and ter selecting the genI've never really noeral wealth of the ticed it ever effecting I continent THI \"WIB anything. If anything (affecting the amount of revenue at all, it merely in D I IN ITATO each province crecreases the player's ates), the number of perceived level of control. computer opponents and their intelligence Thus, success requires both a skilled level, the player is randomly placed on the joystick and the strategic savvy to put the map. If the player has selected the \"Show right cyborg in the right battle on the right All» option, then he will see the opposing terrain using the right tactics. empires and all their movings about. If he For those gamers who consider the joysselected \"Fog of War,\" such things will be tick an ignoble device unsuitable for a PC, cloaked from view. Cyber Empires can be played from the Often, one's initial placement can be strategic level only. Such non-action decisive in itself. If the player has the good con HT fortune of finding oceans to his rear, he is in good stead; whereas if he finds himself in the center of the continent, he may only be around to see the tenth round of play. After placing one's initial factory, the player begins throwing cyborgs to the four winds, capturing as many provinces as possible. Eventually, expanding empires will bump into one another and lines will begin to form, with fortifications being built on the fronts. Fortifications give a strong advantage to a defender in the tactical battles, as they provide sturdy walls and come decked-out with long range missile launchers and other weapons. From this point, the game becomes a slow, seesawing, battle-by-battle struggle. The smart player will usually fortify against one opponent while making a strong of fensive against another until he develops a large enough revenue base to build more factories and more cyborgs, and thereby generate enough steam to mow the rest of the opponents down. It can be a long game anywhere from 15 to 25 hours for a complete campaign. So one had better come into this one with a strong interest in the mechanoid mythos and a yen for action-style gaming. In addition to the campaign game and the bare-bones strategic game, Cyber Empires also has an action sub-game where A NATIONAL WILL \"A National Will\" is a computer moderated play-by-mail game where each player runs an economy of a country. Players make decisions on production, labor allocation, revenue, trade, ect. The strength of a country's military depends on the vitality of its economy. SIDELINE SOFTWARE orders 1-800-888-9273 only 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Need Into? Call (305)-491-9519 Your European PC Connection NEW TITLES TYPE $ DISCOUNT TITLES Epic Arcade Simulation 4-D Sports Boxing 18.95 Eternam RPG 4-D Sports Driving 18.95 Shadowlands RPG Advanced Destroyer Sim 16.95 Humans 18.95 Arcade Strategy Bard's Tale 3 BAT 14.95 Pushover Arcade Strategy Baltlechess 18.95 Hook Adventure Centurion 18.95 Magic Pockets Arcade Colorado 14.95 Ishar: Legend of the Fortress RPG Conan the Cimmaron 18.95 Lure of the Temptress RPG Conflict: Europe 14.95 Drakkhan Moonstone Arcade Strategy F16 Falcon Special Forces Arcade Strategy Flight of the Intruder 18.95 A 320 Airbus Flight Sim. Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Daemonsgate RPG Hearl of China 18.95 Toyota Celica GT Rally Simulation Hoverforce 14.95 California Games 2 Sports Imperium 18.95 Wizkid Arcade Strategy Jack Nicholas Grealest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 World Wrestle Federation 2 Simulation King of Chicago 14.95 Manhallan Drug Dealers 13.95 Miq 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Pylhon 16.95 Get the latest news on the best PC Neuromancer 16.95 titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Plt Fighter 18.95 magazines also feature a demo-packed playable RBI Baseball 2 14.95 cover disk with each Issue! Sherman M-4 14.95 PC Format or PC Review. $10 each. Shufflepuck Cale 14.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Spo! 16.95 Mastercard & Visa $5.00  C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Star Saga One 14.95 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special Slunt Car Racer 16.95 shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Super Oll Road 16.95 Price & Availability subject to change! Three Stooges 16.95 No refunds or exchanges. Delective products exchanged with T.V. Sports Baskelb. 14.95 same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. T.V. Sports Football 14.95 FAX ORDERS CALL: (305) 491-6134 Wolfpack 18.95 88888 To order the rule book and take your first turn, please send $6.50 or $3.00 for the book only with your name and address to EUROMAGS Simcoarum Systems P.O. Box 520861  Salt Lake City, Utah 84152 Turn fees are $3.50 Circle Reader Service #142 Circle Reader Service #134 Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"REE MICROPROSE STORE EAGLE Combat Flight Simulator Super 3-D Graphics While Supplies Upplies Last IH AL 041 22.231 in THUNDER BOARD. PC GAMES LIKE YOU'VE NEVER HEARD THEM BEFORE. Lend us your ear. And we'll stuff it with a calibre of sound that's ears ahead of the competition, Introducing Thunder Board from Media Vision. No other sound card out there today can soar to such incredible heights. Or plunge to such awesome lows. And Thunder Board's dynamic filtering means dynamite sound. Higher fidelity. Bigger ka-booms. And more bang for the buck. Our guarantee is that we put the quality where your ears are. And the money where our mouth is. In fact, we'll refund your money if you don't agree Thunder Board is the best sound board for your PC games. In addition, with Thunder Board you get three free PC action game samplers: Nova 9\", Lemmings, and Lexi-Cross. Plus, free Thunder Master software that lets you record and edit sound files with a Wave Form Editor. And Thunder Board is fully compatible with all the newest PC games. Plus 100% compatible with AdLib\" and Sound Blaster applications-to support the largest library of games possible. What's more, Thunder Board has breakthrough fea tures to let you break all the sound barriers. Like twice the Digitized Audio Playback and Recording Capability at an explosive 22kHz-compared to the competition's puny 11kHz. Also, you get a squadron of powerful extras. Like a Joystick Port. Headphone Jack. An 11 Voice FM Music Synthesizer that lets you score music as well as score points. And a Power Amplifier with built-in Volume ** Control, so you can have yourself a real blast-without blasting the neighbors. So take off-for a dealer near you. And go from static to ecstatic. Because, with Thunder Board, hearing is believing. Approved by STMENT GINT Microprose Gunship 2000 Interplay Productions Star Trek Sierra On-Line Conquest of the Longbow Electronics Arts PGA Golf Tour Broderbund Sofrware Prince of Persia For the name of a Thunder Board dealer or simply some good sound advice, call Media Vision. 1-800-845-5870. Media Vision, 47221 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538.510-770-8600, FAX: 510-770-9592. Media Vision, Thunder Board, and Thunder Master are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. , Media Vision, Inc. Circle Reader Service #100 "


"Review cyborg commanders can hone their skills before they step into a campaign. The player can choose to either engage a particular type of cyborg one-on-one, or takeon increasing numbers of enemy cyborgs in a game of \"survival.\" It is in this action sub-game that one comes to find a weakness of the game, that is, the computer controlled cyborgs. The Al cyborgs have two states of action; either they sit back and pummel their opponent with long range weapons, if they are so equipped, or they race recklessly toward their opponent without any considerations for terrain, positioning, or their current condition. Often, in forested terrain, the clever human intelligence need only to sit back and wait while the computer cyborg's blast their way through the trees and in so doing, overheat their hulks 990 SPEED SLOU COOLIRS FACTOR! G ,  and freeze in their tracks. Easy pickings. puter's front line, he can wreak delicious In open terrain, the human will quickly havoc on the innards of its empire. develop a simple \"side-step and fire\" Of course, one can avoid the computer matador maneuver for the computer's AI altogether by rounding up one to five bullish tactics that will easily cut the Al's humans. Unfortunately, Cyber Empires armor in half before they finally bump has no modem capability, so players must head-long into the \"hot seat\" a multiplayer. The Al is OK not the quickest player game. wit. Fortunately, SPECIFICATIONS Cyber Empires is a L what it loses in ARMOUR AANEOUS solid game. It has smarts to the hunothing to really rave MOST EFFECTIVE TERRAIN: man it usually gains about and nothing that EGONIFERIDUS in numbers. Behobbles it. It's graphsides, in the camics are simply adepaign game, the REUTRINO CARRON quate and the sounds player can only can be taken or left. L TEt control one of his RANGE: 203 The interface is, IPACT DADASE:20 (up to 10) cyborgs again, adequate, in any one battle. though there is the ocThus, one's own casional irritant. On a units act as recklessly as the enemy's matter of gaming taste, I felt that the camwhile the human-controlled cyborg runs paign game could get a little drawn out. I around playing a small, though certainly prefer a more dynamic game to a slow war advantageous role, in each battle. of attrition. Finally, as mentioned, gamers looking for an exclusively strategic game The computer Al does much better at the had best steer clear. Gamers who have a strategic level. When placed at the higher penchant for joystick-jamming and are intelligence settings (there are 6) it puts up fans of the BattleTech, RoboTech and Gia good, aggressive fight, even if it does ant Robot universes, however, will find tend to leave its interior weakly defended much to like in the setting and mechanics a fault not limited to the computer of Cyber Empire's cyborg warfare. CGW alone. If one can punch through the comRUBBER ADPD: PIRIRS HEAT KEYBOA DER CORRS COMPUTER SPORTS GAMES PREMIUM TEMPLATES\" Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS@ flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin and shootin Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color;coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another. NMM Watch 'yor Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember. xl er. AAN w IBM  APPLE IL C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts. Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule Over 500 teams included, pro and college from 1948 to present! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies 25 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! B-17 Available! XT LAYOUTS COMING SOON.. Cool gift Idea! Falcon 3.0 Acos of the Pacitic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Jeftfighter I & II B-17 Flying Fortress CY Air Combat A-10 Tank Killer F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Megafortress ATP Flight Simulator 4.0 ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 cach for Apple II and C-64 or $49.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. * High-quality, 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard * Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards *Sturdy, laminated stock 1 Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! 1 $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 lister deliver Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 each Nam. Country S & H add $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL Address City KCC. Inc.. Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 4839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 1 Items (Discounts per order only: Allow 2-4 Weeks) Prodigy, DKRV2GA 1-800-262-6066 Circle Reader Service #89 LANGE HAFFNER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594  NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #96 Page 172 Computer Gaming World "


"Machiavelli Designs presents the PC version of: New World Order Need an Opponent? Pick One! DOOGE When: World War II (1939-45+). Choose from scenarios or the campaign game. Where: Earth global simulation with multiple zoom levels. Toggle units, weather and place names. Who: 1 to 5 (smart?) human or intelligent computer players. You select difficulty and complexity. What: Realistic, historical simulation of strategic, military, diplomatic, economic, political, scientific and social factors. Detailed specifications of all major weapons and production systems. How: As Churchill, Hitler, Roosevelt, Stalin or Tojo, you struggle to shape the future of humanity. Can you forge your will into a New World Order? FREE SERVICE Fill out and send us this coupon and we will match you up with gamers in your area. This is a totally free service... just what we think the hobby needs. I wish to be enrolled in MDI's gamers' matching service. I Name: release MDI from any liability for providing me with this First Middle service. (No purchase necessary). SAVE! Pre-order before Feb. 1 and we pay shipping. You save $6! IMDI Last Street State Zip Country City Area code Phone Signature (we need your release to enroll you) I play: Strategy/Military Role playing Fantasy/Sci. Fiction 0 Other: I want players for: (list in order of preference) MACHIAVELLI I DESIGNS INC. Please send me copies of NWO at $59.95 each. Add $6 shipping and handling. California residents add sales tax. Disk type: 031/2\" 5 1/4\" Check enclosed Master card Visa Discover Credit card # Exp, date   Send coupon to: Machiavelli Designs, Inc. 2550 Ninth St., Suite 204 Berkeley, CA 94710 or Call: 800-955-4MDI F AX 510-486-0032 Signature (required for credit card authorization) New World Order copyright 1992 by Machiavelli Designs, Inc. New World Order trademark 1992 by Machiavelli Designs, Inc. Circle Reader Service #99 "


"Review Tanks Times Two Empire's Team Yankee & Pacific Islands Two Tank Simulations Using One Formula by Richard Savage Hacific slands TASHLEITUTIEAWARD WINNING TEAMYANE 61. TITLE: Team Yankee & Pacific Islands SYSTEMS: IBM, Atari ST, and Amiga PRICE: $59.95 & $49.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up DESIGNERS: Steven Green and Richard T. Horrocks PUBLISHER: Empire Software Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada Team Yankee Having read the book, Team Yankee, a few years ago, and also having served as tank crewman in the Army, I was looking forward to reviewing Team Yankee and its follow-up, Pacific Islands. Both games are easily played using just the mouse, although the keyboard or a joystick can also be used, if preferred. Naturally, anyone who wants to become very proficient will begin with the training scenario. In this case, the scenario is familiar to anyone who has ever played a tank simulation, a circular course based on a modern tank range and filled with different targets to shoot up. Since Team Yankee starts with a \"parade\" of vehicles that one expects to meet later in the game, each passing temptingly in front of one's unit, many gamers are likely to have the same embarassing experience I did. Figuring it was just a training range, I innocently trained my sights on one of the vehicles rumbling in front of my tank. My trigger finger itchy, I clicked my left mouse button, just to see what would happen. What the heck, right? Wrong! I received a message a millisecond later saying, «You JERK, you just destroyed a friendly vehicle!\" Well, excuuuuse me! How was I supposed to know I was entered in a Gomer Pyle act-alike contest? My run-in with the authorities completed, I waltzed smoothly through the training course. Basically, the player controls four platoons. Unit one consists of two M-1 Abrams tanks, and two ITVs. (M-113 armored personnel carriers with TOW missile launchers specially adapted.) Unit two has four M-1 Abrams, along with unit three. Unit four rounds out the group with two M-113's, and two M-2 Bradleys. The challenge is that the player is expected to control all four units at once. That's 16 vehicles simultaneously! Fortunately, the screen can be divided into four sections, known as \"quadrant mode,\" in order to keep track of onefourth of those vehicles and one can zoom in and out, jumping from unit to unit with the icon\\mouse interface. Most gamers should be able to oversee the battlefield situation without too much strain, once they familiarize themselves with the interface. Once one has completed the training stint, it is time to get into the game proper. This main portion of the game consists of eight scenarios in each of five difficulty levels. In order to advance, players must complete all eight as a PFC, before starting the second round (as a Corporal) and advancing through the ranks up to Captain. The bad news is that one must win at a scenario, no matter how many times the result has been a frustrating defeat, until one can move on to the next one. Worse yet, there are no provisions for saving a scenario once one has gotten into it. So, if the player commander is just about to capture that crucial hill, and a distraction from outside the game world (family, phone, friends or fiends) comes up, it is necessary to pause the game and hope that one can get back to the computer in a reasonable amount of time. Otherwise, it is necessary to return to the beginning of that scenario and start from scratch. The first scenario in the game requires one to defend a wooded hill. Basically, the Soviets were shredded by accurate weapons fire, if I remember the book correctly. It seemed simple enough, but proved deceptively tough. As I sat placidly in my tanks, blazing away at every Russky in sight, I was receiving disturbing messages on the bottom of my screen. \"Unit 2 has just lost a vehicle,\" \"Unit 3 has just lost a vehicle.\" What was I doing wrong? A short time later, the computer ended the scenario, telling me I had suffered a mortifying defeat. After a debriefing by M ES TEAM YANKEE le Fritli W Cancel RSOS SAL Premiery support about to brin Page 174 Computer Gaming World "


"You stumbled back to your office after a long day of detective work. But before you can get cozy with a whiskey bottle, there's a message waiting on the phone machine. Cobra OC Mission \"This is a life and death emergency!! Young ladies have been disappearing left and right, and now, Donna is missing!! We need your help!! Please come quickly!!! Donna's rescue is only the beginning of this sizzling adventure. There's dozens more tantalizing women held against their will. Free them from the evil clutches of General Kaiser, Cobra's psychotic master criminal you screaming in ecstasy. overlord, and they will thank you in ways that will leave You'll be dazzled by the quality of the full screen emotionally to them! It's AWESOMEI! ANIMATION graphics and find yourself reacting physically and BOND WAS HOT STUFF. SO WAS ARNIE NOW IT'S YOUR TURN. To purchase your copy of Cobra Mission, visit your favorite software retailer. Or call 800-258-MEGA CA residents add 8.25% sales tax $79.95 (suggested retail) plus $5.00 shipping and handling and use your VISA or Mastercard. Or send check or money order to MEGATECH, P.O. BOX 11333, TORRANCE, CA 90501 System requirements: 286 or faster machine with 640K RAM; hard disk with min. 8 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster Pro, Adlib Gold CALL 800-258 MEGA RATOR (This program is voluntarily rated due to the partially violent and adult nature of the graphic imagery) This program is intended for mature audiences only!! No sales to minor under 18 and where prohibited by law, R aha on the room MEGA TECH Circle Reader Service #97 "


"Review IRURE the computer, which basically told me what a goon I was, I went back to the same scenario, and looked harder at the positioning of my units, and what the objectives were. Instead of dispersing my units into nearby tree lines, I had basically sat there in a big group! The second time around, travel orders were immediately posted to all my units (one simply clicks onto the maps at the desired positions and adjusts their speed). A short time later, all units were in position and, courtesy of thermal imaging, and laser range finders, the battlefield had become full of Soviet combat vehicles so torched that even Monkey Island's Stan the salesman couldn't sell them as «Previously Owned Tanks.\" The second scenario involves an attack on two objectives, Log and Link. I played this one several times before I finally won it, mainly due to the victory conditions. The first objective, a large group of woods, has to be completely free of the enemy before you can move onto the second. The frustration factor of not being able to save a game in the middle of a scenario started to kick in while playing this. I also discovered several disappointing facts about the game. First, those M2 Bradleys and M113s are empty. Either that, or the soldiers won't come out! There are no infantry in this game, either friendly or enemy. Which brings up a second sore subject: machine guns. There is nothing in the game they will kill, or cripple! In other words, they are useless. No wonder they are the only weapon with unlimited ammunition! I finally won the second scenario, and pushed on to the third, another defensive manuever. At this time, I realized that I had basically \"mastered» the game system, and rather than waste more time, I would move onto Pacific Islands to see if the second version of the game had made any improvements. DOPUnit True REUTER 009 20 nothing happened. I called up the gentlemen at Empire Simulations in Canada, to see if it was a fluke in the program and they explained 09201 to me that the helicopters were \"armored,\" and therefore impervious to machine gun fire. Oh, OK, uh huh. 25 The icons are the same in Pacific Islands, except for one that really shows this game's arcadish roots. There secret electronics gear on it, and North is a stack of dollars on your Koreans, along with some disaffected icon panel now, and the amount of Soviets, have seized the islands. The money goes up or down, depending on player is assigned the mission of cap whether you shoot up enough tanks and turing the atoll, which consists of four enemy radar installations. It goes down separate islands. So far, not so bad, but if you accidentally hit a church or now, here comes the trip into arcade house. Therefore, at the end of the sceland. The Pentagon has recently sent nario, you are forced to pay off any out directives regarding the funding of natives for damage done to them, beoperations, so the player has the direct fore you can buy new ammo, or replace responsibility of funding the offensive. and repair your vehicles. Definitely Basically, the something player has you'd see in an fifty-five milarcade game. lion dollars In closing, available to I'd like to say fund his camthat these paign at the games aren't beginning of for the hardthe game. core warThis means ESTO gamer, but are you can purfor people who chase your Unit 1 has just lost a vehicle enjoy a quick own units, and relatively substituting an M-1 Abrams for a useeasy run-through of a tank game. Team less M-113. Of course, the Abrams cost Yankee is the more authentic of the two, quite a bit more, but it is worth it, while Pacific Islands will please those because the infantry are still nonexwho like to play \"against time.\" With istent in this game also. No engineers, all the money bonuses for destroying Dragon anti-tank teams, or grunts apenemy installations in a certain amount pear in Pacific Islands, just as in Team of time, and the ability to buy your own Yankee. Also, sad to say, there is no air units, Pacific Islands comes closer to a power, also like in Team Yankee. All Nintendo game than a wargame. Pathose attack aircraft on the box art are cific Islands is a \"fun\" game, designed just for show! Even though Pacific Isto keep a player constantly busy, and lands promises Hughes 500 helicopters requires more hand-eye coordination and SA9 Gaskins, once you start playthan strategy. If you're looking for a ing, it soon becomes apparent that both serious wargame, best look elsewhere, items are not weapons, but merely tar but if you're looking for a few hours of gets on the ground! You receive more fun, then these may be just what the money by destroying them, and theredoctor ordered. Cow fore more repairs for your tanks, R & R for your crews, and ammunition for your weapons. The final indignity is that your machine guns STILL can't destroy anything! I sat in an M-1 next to an enemy helicopter on the ground, and literally poured thousands of rounds of MG fire into a helicopter sitting a hundred yards away, and URE Unit 1 PACIFIC ISLANDS: Nintendo, anyone? While Team Yankee was a pretty straightforward re-creation of the book, the designers were on their own making up this sequel. This appears to be unfortunate, because it seems like they spent a lot of time playing Nintendo while hashing over the \"script\" of Pacific Islands. The player starts off as Capt. Bannon again, but this time, you direct \"Team Pacific\" in recapturing the Pacific Island atoll of \"Yama Yama.\" (No, I didn't make the name up!) It seems the atoll has a lot of top 0922 Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"S.C.OUT NEW It's a nasty job... but someone but someone has to do it. To re-activate the abandoned moonbase, S.C.OUT must first seek and destroy the alien infestation. The base's entire arsenal is at your disposal: bombs, SAMS, force mirrors, cannons and even atomics. But first you have to find them — using all the ingenuity and strategic powers at your disposal. Then attack! PAD But be careful...the enemy has some nasty surprises of its own: mazes infested with worms, viruses, explosives and the sinister \"Slime\". Dazzling graphics and driving soundtrack add to the fun of your mission. POCIDO IT:-TTTH But remember, we warned you! OB 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 TITRE TUTTI Check out our other hot new games Cogito and The Tinies! A Kalisto game by INLINE DESIGN To order, visit your local retailer or call: 308 Main Street Lakeville, CT 06039 1-800-453-7671 S.C.OUT is available for IBM compatible (VGA) and Macintosh systems. Circle Reader Service #163 "


"Opponents Wanted The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky, Command HQ, The Perfect General and Global Conquest (just to name a few!). We have online games, message base and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton. NJ at either: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342; 9600 v.32 (908) 706-0305: HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The World of Windows is looking for some great game players like you! Try your skills and compete for monthly prizes. Sports: Drag racing excitement at The Motor City Raceway, a fishing tournament at The Freshwater Fishery, play in the Tournament Goll game or even pick your favorite NFL team and play some Pro-Bowl Football. in RPGs there are the post-apocalyptic horrors in The Land of Devastation, warriors collide in The Pit, explore SinBaud's Dungeon or conquer the galaxy during Trade Wars 2002. For Strategy games, try our ChessMagic chess tournament, deluxe versions of Scrabble and Blackjack or solve a murder at the Who-Dun-It Hotel. Modem settings are 8-N-1,300-38400! There is free access and thousands of Windows games to download for off-line enjoyment. Call today at (305) 751-3117. Mindcraft Software, Inc., publisher of the Magic Candle scries, Rules of Engagement, Seige and Breach 2 is proud to announce that it now has a BBS running 24-hours a day. The BBS offers on-line help, upgrades, demos, scenarios, technical support and more. Set your modem to 2400, 8-N-1 and call (310) 320-5196. \"The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn, IL invites you to join their Tradewur 2002 game. Fly your spaceship, battle the ferrengi and other traders. Download TWRULES.ZIP before starting. Once you start, you may not restart for 4 months. Only 150 players maximum per game. Call (708) 424-6136. Space Station Aragon welcomes all adventure gamers to call (206) 277-5489 in Bellevue, WA. This unique board features free downloads of the latest demos from many major software companies and text files on subjects like Star Trek and Star Wars. Take part in our forums to discuss and get hints on the latest games. Take a break and play one of our adventure doors. Sysops llibard and Tiern. Those wishing to place their own free ads can send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX [714-2833444] or E-Mail (Prodigy [EXPT40B], CompuServe [76703,622], GEnie and America On-Line [CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another after each publication if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However,  Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing. Games being played other than by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face). At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers. Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in, and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. We reserve the right to edit all Opponents Wanted ads. Networks The Sierra Network from Sierra On-Line brings people together \"just for the fun of it,\" for a flat fee of $12.95 per month for 30 hours of evening and weekend access. Players gather to meet and play (or watch others play and just kibbitz) real-time games of twenty different on-line, multi-player games including: Red Baron, Bridge, Chess, Poker, Mini Golf and their new real time FRP The Shadow of Yserbius. Using an interface anyone could learn with no instruction whatsoever and featuring the quality gamers have come to expect from Sierra, this network is worth exploring. For more information, call (800) SIERRA-1. Attention Canadians! The SUZY information system has added a comprehensive play-bymail section to their network. With Craig Russell in charge of this new section, players can play PBM games, download special software to facilitate PBM play and exchange information with other PBM gamers. For further information contact Saraka Chobot (VP of Marketing) at W-(604) 439-1311. Join the Summit Games Network, the first network to feature multi-tasking. This unique clement allows a member to perform four functions at once plus upload and download files simultaneously through a menu driven interface. This is an entire network dedicated to games only! Role-playing, adventure and wargames for commercial, shareware and public domain releases are featured. Direct games support from such companies as: TSR, Inc., Origin and Lucasfilm Games. For more information, call W-(800) 955-9957 or M-(915) 672-2810 (7. even, I stop bit). IBM or compatibles only (with a Hayes-compatible modem). CompuServe is the first international information system to offer three unique services specifically for modem gamers: Modem Games Forum (sm): Discussing any and all aspects of games that support modem play, the Forum features an electronic bulletin board for correspondence, data libraries for file exchange, and conference rooms for real-time interactive discussions. Type: GO MODEMGAMES. Challenge Board (sm): A directory of modem game players where participants profile themselves so other gamers can search for them as opponents for most commercial, public domain and shareware games that support the play-by-modem feature. Type: GO CHAL LENGE. MTM Lobby (sm) features On-line Playing: This new service allows players to connect their modem-capable games to opponents directly through the CompuServe network. Thus, players can connect to international opponents for no more than the price of a standard domestic long-distance phone call. Also, both players can maintain anonymity since neither party needs to give out his phone number to connect, and each has the opportunity to choose from hundreds of potential opponents. Type: GO MTMLOBBY. If you are not currently a CompuServe subscriber, you can join by calling (800) 848-8199 and mentioning that you are interested in Modem Gaming. Bulletin Board Systems Thunderbolt! BBS in Chicago, IL now offers online entertainment with Poker, Blackjack, Bingo, Galactic Empire, Zorgon. Quest for Magic, The Arena and Flash Games (\"The Next Generation\" of online gaming). Play RPGs with online multi-sided dice! Eric Spanitz, SYSOP. Modem settings 8-N-1.300/1200/2400. Phone (312) 248-4822. Opponents wanted for XSHIP, a space conquest strategy game. The game is played via BBS with two to ten players per game. Game turns update as fast as the players take their tums. For more information, call the Battlefield BBS in North Babylon, NY at (516) 669-0522 300/1200/2400 8-N-1. Call the Missile Silo BBS. Contestants wanted for Command HQ. F-29 Retaliator and many others. Tournaments to be held soon. Files, message base and (soon to come) on-line games. Bunning on Telegard 2.5 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Located in Skokie, IL outside of Chicago, Call (708) 581-1735. Mention this ad in CGW for no-hassle access validation. HARPOON USERS UNITE! The Harpoon Users Group (HUG) invites you to join the ranks of its members. HUG publishes the quarterly newsletter C31 which features articles on design tips, game strategy and tactics, weapons platform information, Harpoon product development and much more. HUG also operates the Harpoon Scenario Warehouse BBS where members have access to hundreds of user-created Harpoon scenarios. Our BBS can be reached at (718) 746-7466. Information on joining HUG is available on the BBS or by sending a stamped, self-addressed envelope to our new address at: HUG, PO Box 5138, Bryan, TX 77805-5138 The Delphie Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (ADED, GURPS), play-by-email games (Diplomacy, SL), Empires at War (a Naploconic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 [2400 8-N-1] Free access. Conventions The Computer Game Developers Conference is where the insiders meet to discuss the technical aspects of creating computer games. For more information, call or write: Dev Con, 5339 Prospect Road, Suite #289, San Jose, CA 95129; (408) 374-4340. The Gen Con Game Fair will be held August 19-22, 1993 at the MECCA Center in Milwaukee, Wisconson. For more information, write to Gen Con Game Fair, PO Box 756, Lake Geneva, WI 53147. Origins '93 will be held July 1-4, 1993 at the Tarrant County Convention Center in Fort Worth, Texas. For more information, write or call: Gemco, PO Box 609, Randallstown, MD 21133; (410) 298-3135. By Area Code Teams being accepted for a Playmaker Football league using Al coaches. For guidelines or rules write to: David Darnell, RTE I, Box 143, Clarkton, MO 63837. Also willing to swap teams i not interested in league play. Ace fighter jock looking for Tally Ho! on bandits for modem play with Falcon 3.01. Will duel or ally with ace pilots. Up to 14.4V BPS modem support. Call Hank \"Batman\" at H (201) 728-8245, evenings. \"Yo, your fries are done!\" Seeking worthy and bloodthirsty teammates for Genie's multi-player Bartletech. I'm willing to answer any questions that I know about the game or questions about signing on to Genie. Call Dave in Tallmadge, OH at H (216) 633-2362 between 6pm and 12am Eastern Time. If I'm not in, leave a message. I can also be reached on GEnie (of course) at: D.HUANG2. Lock and load! I'm looking for Perfect General opponents in the local area. Call Joe Rundell in Aurora, CO at H (303) 680-6583. Seeking a play-by-mail opponent for Empire or a modem play opponent for The Perfect General in the Orlando area. Call Khris at H (407) 339-8264. Secking live ones\" for Second Front, Western Front (either play-by-mail or face-to-face) or for most board wargames. Please contact Joe Silva in Pleasanton, CA at II (510) 846-2903 or W (510) 423-1472. Looking for fellow sim enthusiasts in the San Francisco Bay/Tri-Valley area. I enjoy Falcon 3.0. Aces of the Pacific, MI Tank, Command HQ and Powermonger. I also play strategic boardgames (i.c., Risk! and Shoglot). Cannot do long distance. Contact Chris in Pleasanton, CA at H (510) 846-7857. Local modem opponents wanted for The Perfect General, Global Conquest, Modem Wars, Theatre of War or face-to-face Lost Admiral, Second or Western Front, Warlords, Battles of Napoleon and Red Lightning. Call Ben Tobin in Mesa, AZ at H (602) 969-5816. Tucson gamer seeks local opponents for any Amiga wargame. Modem, PBM or FTF. Call Bob in Tucson, AZ at H (602)883-4825. Local modem opponents in the southern NH area wanted to play The Perfect General. Falcon 3.01. Modem Wars and am willing to try new sims. Call Sam at H (603) 437-3417 after 2pm. I can be reached on America Online as: \"Pardus.\" Seeking local opponents in the Chicago area for modem play of Command HQ and Global Conquest. Call Joe Seidel at H (708) 782-6267. Lieutenant General \"Shifly\" Pierre challenges you to battle in The Perfect General. The battle: Stuck in the Middle Again. Leave message on Electronic Estates BBS, Oak Lawn Illinois (see above) at (708) 424-6136. Cygnus 4 Technologies of San Anselmo is proud to announce the pre-release program for the Warlord Role-playing System softwarc (WRS). The pre-release program provides GMs the opportunity to evaluate and make suggestions on the WRS softw interface assists GMs conducting fantasy adventures by providing a quick means to retrieve spell, weather, PC and NPC information without interrupting game flow, and features modules for combat, environment, and campaigns. The WRS runs on a IBM PCIAT or compatible system with EGA/VGA display adapters under DOS 3.2 or higher. Interested GMs should write, Cygnus 4 Technologies, PO Box 834, Belmont, CA 94002 or call (800) 932-2409 for an application. Qualified applicants will receive a discount for the WRS software upgrade and other special benefits. Secking opponents for The Perfect General, Global Conquest and others. Call Randy in San Gabriel, CA at H (818) 337-1131 from 4-6pm Pacific time. Seeking local opponents for Falcon 3.0 in the Sacramento, CA area. Call Alex at H (916) 967-6076. CGW Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"For Your Christmas List A subscription for your favorite computer person Don't miss out-start now with our premierissue! PREMIER ISSUET ENTERTAINMENT GAME WORD Best Kids Computer Products of 19921 KIDS COPIIPUINTEIRS A Muyazine for Parents Deter Shopper's Holiday Guido Children's Software How to Choose Programs Reviewed Quality Vides Walt Disney stunt Isian Do Our High Schools Waste Cou Activity Guide Insider ?3? Out of This Jack Nickla A gift subscription to CGW makes a wonderful holiday gift. Noendless treks through massive malls seeking that elusive something. If someone you know playscomputer games, they will cherish a subscription to the premier computer game magazine, Computer Gaming World. A year's worth of enjoyment is less than the cost of a single game. Use the order form in this issue or call toll free. Computer Gaming World Binders What do parents of pre-schoolers through 8th graders have in common? They have children at home who are part of the computer generation. If they are like most parents, they need to know more about this world that is shaping the lives of their children. Kids & Computers gives them that help. What better holiday giftcould there be than one that strengthens and informs a family? Atonly $12 it's an unbeatable value. $8.50 och To order call our toll free number 1-800-827-4450 WZ 3 for $23.00 5 for $36.00 "


"Review Oil's Well That Saves Oil Mid-East Air Conflict in Air Force Commander by Michael Peck Air Force Commander Amiga, IBM IBM TITLE: SYSTEMS: REVIEWED ON: # PLAYERS: PRICE: DESIGNERS: $59.95 Chris Bamford, Simon Bradbury, David Lester Impressions Software Farmington, CT Huey helicopters (the spare part situation would be a game in itself). Though the air forces may be hightech, they are also fragile; the number of planes available is small and, more importantly, the combatants have limited supplies of fuel and ammunition. PUBLISHER: FORCE ne has to hope that the scenarios in Impressions' Air Force Commander will remain hypothetical. Still, the game offers a rare perspective in that it allows players to command an overall theater strategy that includes targeting priorities, logistics and a myriad of other factors. After all, it doesn't matter how many Migs a Falcon pilot shoots down if his country's airfields and factories are being blown out from under him and that's why the strategic viewpoint (and resultant accountability) of Air Force Commander is so refreshing. Rather than controlling individual dogfights, the player manages a general air campaign in which he must determine his strategic objectives and how best to achieve them with limited resources. Arcade and flight simulator buffs, beware; there are virtually no combat graphics in this game, no bombs to drop, or cannon to shoot. quality of radar coverage; if the Syrians lose their radar stations, the Mediterranean will disappear in a sea of green electronic haze. Surprisingly, however, there are no provisions for electronic jamming warfare or aircraft. Players launch aircraft by clicking the mouse pointer on an aircraft icon, or on a particular airfield, and then, cycling through a list of air squadrons and support units. Planes are rated for various types of ground strikes, as well as air combat and maximum altitude. Missions include attacks on enemy ground units and installations, as well as defensive patrol and strike escort. There are also cruise missile and Surface-to-Air Missile batteries, as well as mobile radar stations to plug surveillance gaps. Every Bomb Counts It is important to remember that when a squadron is given an order, it only launches one plane at a time. Thus, even small squadrons of two to six planes have staying power. Once launched, though, squadrons will continue the same mission indefinitely until ordered to stop. In the process, they COMMAND AN ENTIRE AIR FORCE IN THIS SOPHISTICATED SIMULATION OF MODERN AIR WARFARE. Impressions Mix-and-Match Air Forces Instead players step into the shoes of the air force commander of one of several Middle Eastern countries. The 28 scenarios range from a mini-war between the pygmy states of Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, to a full-scale conflict between a U.S.-Israeli alliance and a strong Arab coalition. The inclusion of the small Persian Gulf states adds a particularly colorful touch, as the Qatari Air Force launches a motley fleet of French Jaguar fighters, Soviet Tu-22 bombers and U.S. A state concedes defeat when its public opinion crumbles from strikes on food and power sources or when its air force runs out of supplies and can no longer fly. The result is short but fierce conflicts as each side tries to knock out its opponent's economic and military infrastructure. Players can scroll about the map in three modes, varying from a high-altitude strategic view of the region to a close-up satellite view. Most of the game, however, will occur on the radar map, a reasonable facsimile of the type of map to be expected in a real-life war room. Colored dots of various hues denote different ground installations, including airfields, radar stations and oil refineries. Vertical bars indicate the position and altitude of enemy and friendly aircraft. Not surprisingly, visibility on the radar map depends on the will run down their efficiency rating (which can be restored by rest and repair) and, just as important, eat up fuel and munitions stockpiles. Put simply, a player who flies every aircraft around the clock will lose the game. Because every operational air and ground unit, including missile batteries Page 180 Computer Gaming World "


"for the Fight Birth Nation of a IRODA The first shots have rung out. The American TM Revolution has begun! Assume General George Washington's post and prepare the colonists to fight for independence. Or, as Lord Cornwallis, you have the chance to redirect the outcome of the war. Build forts, forge weapons and gather wartime supplies. Then approach the battlefield with bayonets in an imposing array. In these turbulent times you must watch your military closely for insurgents and deserters. Maneuver your ships along the coast to gain control to key ports of entry. Then pillage enemy ships and win over extra supplies. The battle is set: the Colonists vs. the British Empire. The outcome is in your hands! * IBM PC * 640 K * EGA Color * Mouse Support * Ad-Lib Sound * 1-2 Players BE Command colonial regiments. Defend ports of entry. *Pre-Release Version Screenshots We Supply The Past, You Make The History KOEI KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415) 348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). 1350 Bayshore Hwy, Suite 540, Burlingame, CA 94010 Liberty or Death is a trademark of KOEI Corporation. Circle Reader Service #83 "


"Review UPTO and radar stations, consumes re tion and assess the effectiveness of sources, players must keep a constant friendly air strikes. That's why checkeye on the supply consumption update, ing the situation reports is so crucial. which lists hourly expenditures and the There are few quiet moments in Air point that a player will run out of sup Force Commander, a player is always plies. Installations can be shut down to doing something or having something conserve supplies, though closing the done to him. power plant may provoke civil unrest. Electronic Overload The display also includes a status report (complete with the face of a news Indeed, the real-time workload may commentator) of friendly and enemy be the most frustrating aspect of the attacks and air losses. A key indicator game. Doing all those functions while is the political poll chart which monitors the public opinion on both sides. Public opinion is controlled by the state of a country's food and power supplies. Given the short; duration of the sceMLICHT PATH TRANSFER BASE narios, players must quickly decide whether to con enemy bombers are streaking in at sucentrate on an opponent's air force personic speed is a daunting task. Playthrough strikes on airfields and fuel and ers busy launching their own strikes ammunition dumps or on civilian mo may not have time to launch interceprale by destroying food and power sup tors or order tired squadrons to rest at plies. As the game progresses, care the appropriate moments. The overload must be taken to rest tired squadrons, can also cause a player to attack hapstop all unnecessary supply consump hazardly with whatever is available, rather than rotating squadrons as part of consistent strikes on precise targets. It's worthwhile to pause the game occasionally and consider strategy for a minute or two. The user interface contributes to the problem. Though generally adequate, it still requires players to find their planes by clicking on the right airfield or cycling through a squadron-by-squadron list; a single display listing the efficiency and missions of all aircraft would be welcome. And, as is too often the KK case, the documentation is lacking in many places; for example, there are many anti40 aircraft units, yet their effectiveness and capabilities are not listed. Despite these problems, Air Force Commander is a simple yet relatively thoughtful treatment of a vital but overlooked topic. Dogfight lovers may not like it, but players who are interested not just in the how, but also in the why, of air warfare will certainly be in their element.cGW 50a AIR COVER XXX ATRIOT UNIT S RAEL ACTIVATION REPAIR PATROL ASHCLUSRAEL ADORT HISSION DATA PREV NEXT HOTHRALLE co MPUTER MAYHEMI HOCKEY BOXING IBM  APPLE II  C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! HAT TRICK PRO HOCKEY Up to 26 skaters per team rated individually in a dozen categories All current teams plus 60 great teams of the past. On ice decisions. Computer opponent Stats compiler  Draft, trade, create teams option. TKO PRO BOXING Includes over 60X) boxers (200 active, 400 retired) all divisions. Ability to fight -retired lighters at different stages of their careers.compiles records & rank contenders. Fight boxers across eras. Select between round strategy or let computer manage boxers. Pre-light condition option. Between round condition report & three judge scoring. Cuts, TKO's, KO's & color commentary during rounds \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do your know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 9 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $49.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Cardi. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. LANCE HAFFNER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594  NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use Intemational Money Order in US funds. Circle Reader Service #95 Circle Reader Service #119 Computer Gaming World Page 182 "


"\"The best simulator I've ever seen!\" Rick Zalud, Computer Game Review \"Makes the term 'virtual redundant!\" Dave Moskowitz, Video Games and Computer Entertainment REALITY! BEYOND THE EDGE OF THE ENVELOPE \"Sets a totally new standard for helicopter simulations! Arnie Katz, Electronic Games \"Redefines the state-of-the-art in computer simulation graphics!\" Computer Gaming World COMANCHES From Navalogic M, the creators of WOLFPACKIM COMANCHEMSHMUM OVERKILLTM IS the promise of maulation action come true! You come the ultimate in 21st Century Attack Helicopters the Boeing Sikorsky RAH-66 Comanche, not just over, but in and around ultra-realistic 3-D terrain. Can it be true? Absolutely! Thanks to NovaLogic's radical new simulation environment VOXEL SPACE, which produces graphics 500 times more detailed than any of those tired old polygon graphic games. You'll dive from mountain peaks, dart through winding canyons, and roar through pulse-pounding combat in stunning cloud-filled skies Se per ready for awesome graphics, rad , and sweet dripping, teeth clenching, white knalle excitement unlike anything you've ever experienced on a passanal computere Taarnet to your nearest software dealer and tear into a flow reality BELY d e toate Saer colema sunula first simulator with real-time concols of RAH-66 Comanche Unsurpassed speed and maneuverability Real-time fly-bys through actual terrain data, One-minute learning curve Superb musical score and sound ACTUAL SCREENSHOTS CHA55-23 TLASE 30 Forche /M.PAVO SX ongeace ISIS 3201 mode gani www.gayres w wear addressed power Womack Comwnche, Maximum Overkil VOXEL SPACE Novalogic, and me Novalogic logo are trademarks of Novizogic Inca 19510 Vantura Blvd. Sl. 200 Tarzan, CA 9/3W 1992 by Nowogibne. All Rights Reservan. "


"Review More Toys for the Boys Harpoon Version 1.3 and Designers' Series Scenarios by Tim Carter TITLE: Harpoon Designer's Series Battleset Enhancer SYSTEMS: 18M, Mac (B&W, Color) PRICE: $49.95 DESIGNER: Harpoon Design Team PUBLISHER: 360 Pacific Campbell, CA Designer scenarios and an upgrade to your existing Harpoon game are included in one package. The upgrade aims to remove memory problems and improve the game Al. HARPOON he flag officer bowed his head in what seemed like either prayer or resignation. He had been sure enough of the last | contact to launch aircraft, but the Soviet sub had vanished and the ASW units were approaching bingo fuel. He would have grabbed the earphones from the sonar operator himself if he had thought it would have done any good. He steeled himself to order the aircraft to return, anxiously hoping that the sub had been forced to flee rather than finding a place to lie in wait for the fleet and the lives it represented. One of the best ways to vicariously experience modern naval conflict from the command perspective is to play Three-Sixty Pacific's Harpoon. With the series continually expanding and improving, the game is almost more of a lifestyle than a game. The latest release, the Harpoon Designers' Series is actually two packages in one: it includes both new sets of scenarios and an upgrade to Harpoon version 1.3. Both of these additions can be installed automatically onto a hard drive. DESIGNERS SERES BATTLESET ENHANCER Creates 12 all new scenarios for each Harpoon Battle Set you own. Up to 48 new scenarios in all! Tinkering with the Electronics With Harpoon version 1.3 Three-Sixty has put forward its last major modification of the Harpoon system before the release of Harpoon II. The version aims to remove any remaining memory problems as well as to modify some elements of game play. Both the AAW and ASW elements of Harpoon have undergone revisions. In terms of air combat, the goal of these modifications is to make the artificial intelligence more effective and to make air operations as a whole more realistic. Aircraft may now jettison drop-tanks and other ordinance in order to better deal with interceptors. According to the documentation, the computer will automatically instruct aircraft to jettison when facing heavy SAM or interceptor threats. In fact, the computer does not exactly accomplish this automatically, but it happens often enough to become a consideration when creating operational plans. Air raids can now be defeated without shooting down all enemy aircraft. This is useful if one is running out of interceptors and has to make tough decisions about allocating attacks. It is also dangerous, however, as some attacks will proceed right to the bitter end, despite determined opposition. On the whole, aircraft now operate in a more realistic fashion. Search aircraft automatically move to higher altitudes and attack missions are carried out more efficiently. Interceptors need to switch on targeting radar to use radar guided missiles, giving a greater importance to \"fire and forget\" weapons such as the AMRAAM. The computer now tends to allocate smaller numbers of aircraft to many missions, leading to attrition combat rather than huge all-or-nothing raids. Again this varies depending on the situation. Overall, I experienced more losses and less operational success against computer aircraft than in past experiences with Harpoon. Despite these improvements, however, the computer is still weak in its use of air assets. Players will have to hope that the major reworking of the Harpoon system in Harpoon II addresses this problem. Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"\"...cutting-edge.\" \"The entire CGW crew was deeply impressed...\" Computer Gaming World Shadow President TM The Simulation of Presidential World Power are \"We're talking global power stuff.\" PC GAMES YOU are the President \"...a chance to get on-the-job training as leader of the free world...\" NBC News/Chicago \"...can give you a creepy sensation of having actually hacked your way into a secure government network, so plausible & fine-grained is the flow of information.\" Game Player's PC Entertainment At the controls of the most powerful nation on Earth, you are armed with money, weapons, and influence. Promote human rights or drop the bomb? Will you be reelected or assassinated? You will change the course of world history and uncover your vision of the planet and its people. Based on CIA World Factbook data and 7 years of Tufts University doctoral research, informally presented to the U.S. State department to aid in NATO strategy development, Shadow President is brought to you by the D.C. True, Ltd. award-winning team of John Madden Football\" creators of software for the mind and heart IBM $69.95 To Order: Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-929-1243 There FREE SGU  1992 D.C. True, Ltd. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #66 "


"Review GROUP TO GO URUZA Underwater, things have changed as well. The SONAR model has been upgraded to depend less on range and more on the characteristics of the platform itself. The speed of the platform now affects both the probability of being detected as well as the probability of detecting threats. Torpedoes have also been modified. Using more accurate targeting and attack models, torpedo warfare is no longer the sure thing it used to be. The net result of these modifica PC Gane Orders Settings 512 ) EXHX] tions is to make ASW warfare more realistic, but also more difficult for the player. Micro-management can yield high returns, particularly for BAC submarine commanders with the patience to maneuver their boats in 5 V X X UNIT 1 sec close relatively) at low speed. However, in larger scenarios, where such control is not possible, ASW operations can become slightly frustrating (although this may reflect a personal preference). Missile warfare at all levels has been improved. Bearing-only attacks are now possible and actually act as an attack against unlocated targets would. Additionally, missiles can only be used against the types of targets they were originally intended for. No more sinking an enemy task force with anti-radar missiles and Tomahawks intended for land targets, and no more taking out an enemy airfield with Harpoons. already located in the Harpoon directory and loads an additional series of scenarios for each battleset. Users must have a battleset installed in order to use the scenarios in the Designers' Series. There are many new units available across all battlesets. Some of these units, such as the French and CIS CVs, were available in battleset four and have now been incorporated into the earlier battlesets. Others, such as the FReports Misc 22, the MV-22 Osprey and the Super Tomcat are entirely new. Complete sets of platforms for countries such as Sweden, Canada, Germany and Yugoslavia are now available. All of this provides scenario builders with an unpreceBLUE Carrier Unit, AADO dented range of options. The designers have taken advantage of these options to provide players with 48 (12 per battleset) [Full Report Display new and highly diverse scenarios. Most scenarios tend to be pretty seriously removed from the current state of affairs in international relations, however they are entertaining none the less. Unlike other battlesets, the Designers Series comes with a scenario manual which provides some initial background to each scenario as well as designer's notes. While the background writing could be stronger, the designer's notes provide a useful insight into the intentions of the scenario's creator. A major theme in all of the battlesets is the change in the naval balance of power due to some of the new units introduced. New VTOL aircraft give even helicopter carriers a strong defensive AAW capability. The French and CIS CVs add another dimension, ending the US Navy's monopoly on naval power projection. In many cases, an attempt has been made to take advantage of Nane: Adniral Kusnotsou Class: Adniral Kusnetsov, CU Speed: 20 kts Course: 1959 Danage: 0% Planes Landed: 29 Heady: 29 Adding New Components: The Designer Scenarios The meat of the package is the Designers' Series scenarios. When the battleset enhancer is installed it identifies the battlesets THE NEXT EMPIRE PLAY BY MAIL LIKE THIS EVERY TURN! ...the only game that sends you fabulously detalled maps like this one, showing your fleet's sensor views every turn ...along with clear, complete stats on each starship you design, build, and maneuver individually using up to 21 different onboard systems...plus status reports on starbases, probes and asteroids you control! The Next Empire is a completely computer-moderated game, over 6 years In the making. Each universe is a unique, complex gaming environment populated with 21 allen players itching to blow the hulls off anyone who gets in their way! FREE SET-UP AND RULES!  $7.50 per turn; no hidden fees or double turns  fast game (two weeks per turn) or slow game (three weeks per turn) Recently voted 81 PBM game in a nationwide player magazine survey !  clear, concise rules; our complexity comes from your gaming freedom  FREE SET-UP AND RULES! Reality Simulations, Inc. P.O. Box 22400 Tempe, AZ 85285-2400 (602) 967-7979 Circle Reader Service #130 Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"ON GENIE THE MECHWARRIORS ARE VICIOUS CONNIVING UNPREDICTABLE, GLOATING SOBS Circle Reader Service #80 "


"con "


"INOTHER WORDS: PEOPLE MUCH LIKE YOURSELF. time, with other GEnie players. Some of the best gamers in the world. The crowd viewing your BattleTech duel? They're real people. The guys in your mercenary unit? Real. The greedy creeps who sold you your Mech? Too real. Good thing your lancemates are real too-because your life depends on them. art. 3 090 Han Con Nation Cone iver here and 57455& now! your : 17 TiCELOS So if you're tired of computer games you can solve and S KESMAL You're in your 85-ton battle Mech. You've shelve, join the living on GEnie. We'd really just entered the arena on Solaris. Another enjoy having someone like you in Multiplayer Mech moves into position against you. BattleTech. For lunch. But something's Sign up now: different. This time, 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo). the MechWarrior at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. you're facing isn't 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon some programmed drone. It's another perconnection, enter HHH son. A real, live, devious human being obsessed 3. At the U#= prompt, enter XTX99325, with reducing you to tiny fragments of organFASA then press <RETURN> ic debris. But that's what makes it soooo good. 4. Have a major credit card or your checking 6. When you play Multiplayer BattleTech account number ready. on Genie-or any of our way For more information in cool online multi-player gamesthe U.S. or Canada, call you're in real competition, in real multi-player games 1-800-638-9636. 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS Circle Reader Service #80 Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark of Kesmai Corporation. MechWarrior, Mech, and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech available only for IBM PCs and compatibles. Frames from Multiplayer BattleTech. "


"Review Admiral Kusnetso Roosevelt Leahy Inproved Spruanc Inproved Spruan Kirou Sovrenenny Udalog krivalk II krivak II 0. 11. Perry 0. H. Perry Nitro interesting twist, and it works well in many scenarios. However, in some cases the player is asked to do things that do not fit well with the Harpoon system. For instance, I was never very clear on how I was supposed to evacuate the U.S. 2nd Armored division from Germany, given that there are no provisions for this in the game mechanics. 2010 6000 Adniral Kusnetsov CU Admiral Kusnets A Refreshing Sea Breeze The Designers' Series is a useful addition to the Harpoon system. While most players are unlikely to find all of the scenarios enjoyable, there is enough diversity to ensure that there is something for everyone. The additional platforms and the program modifications do not change the essence of the Harpoon system, but they do give it enough of a fresh feel to keep even hardened grognards happy. Cow [E]xecute (Cancel> (Change Zone Sizes Slet Air Patrol (2)both to Main Body 1.0 Scenario 1 COMPHIBGRU 21.13 INFO: CINCNAVEUR LONDON UK COHNAVSURFLANT NORVA COMNAUBASE BERGEN NORWAY COMAIRBASE STORNOUAY UX the current turbulence in world affairs to create innovative and ingenious situations upon which to base scenarios. While some inevitably end up as weak rationalizations for a CIS/SovietNATO confrontation, there are some commendably creative designs as well. For instance, one can take sides between the Baltic nations in a fight over the disputed territory in Kaliningrad, or repulse a Russian intervention in the Balkans. My personal favorite is the scenario that has NATO attempting to prevent the transit of Soviet made diesel subs to Third World countries with money to burn. (The U.S. protested the CIS sale of three Kilos to Iran on Sept 24, 1992, as this article was being written.) In a change from past battlesets, the Designers 'Series does not provide clear cut victory conditions. Instead, mission objectives are provided much as they would be in real life. This is an SECRETI/ N02522 // SUBJ: EVAC PHIDGRU 24.13 FROM SPITSBERGEN 1. AT 12302 4 APR UNITS OF PHIDGRU 24.13 ON PHIBOPS IN THE SPITBERGEN REGION WERE STRAFED BY COMMONWEALTH AIRCRAFT. THIS FOLLOWS A CONTINUED INCREASE OF CIS MILITARY ACTIVITY WHICH INCLUDED THE RAMMING OF US FFG IN MED SEA. COMMAND AUTHORITY HAS ISSUED DEFCON 2 REPEAT DEFCON 2 ALERT STATUS. [OK] II ATTENTION III PILOTS INTRODUCING THE VE BASE DE 2 CONTROL SIAND THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95.  CHARACTER EDITORS — $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4). Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4. Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend. Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, Mega Traveller (1 or 2). Keet the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell. Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7). Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. ! Hakk, keyboard in upright position Joystick tray adjusts for moximum comfort HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul. Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders), Eye of the Beholder 2. Might and Magic 3 (12.95). Clamps up Tray designed to 2 inches to accommodate FlightSlick Thrustmaster Gravis Joysticks The HOME BASE clamps to any desk and allows you to position your joystick and keyboard in a more comfortable TRUE cockpit configuration. IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO FLY! Send check or money order for $24.95 plus $4.00 for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 Add more REALISM to your sims! CALL VISA NOW! (503) 686-1809 IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. or VISA GOSSELIN COVE | GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083. Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #82 Circle Reader Service #83 Page 190 Computer Gaming World "


"world Daniela Amiga Recreation Software Get Aber we canish IBM PC Access/Books/Herdware CORON /ho ORON V COON Dodaten   15 Expert Esportland.com Lay FREE Lollory Whela Honoring Your H omme Pertanyapot Sheg Dev nu en Print Shop Deluxe Suple Recreation Software ADLO Collec tion IRDS les of the Pacifc-VGA Har Force Comedor Dokond VGA Dr Mutlook Dungeon w/sound In a red goles VCA Erpur Co olidge Espatu Mare FISSI F! Slede k Taken 30 Islom Cortion Figlior Right Sourd Graphic Dp Hol Salah Satery Gametek: The Humans ORDOORS Bridge 70 Artworx: Bridge 7.0    DEON to let the COMMurder Store flow Soo Wipes CORO Seif Munky Band CORONarod Debt (PIONSup , CD 10 Sohvert C10 Sold caldur (DRONS ? ( USA CD ROM Tere Sambal ( D gl (DEO Where in World Delut COTON Wing Commander Il be COROWIng Window Soweit ohney Carvey Goch 2300 VGA Retail: 539.95 Our Price: $2400 S0SSOR Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen Myhim My Retail $49.95 Our Price: Working with your tribe and discovering new tools (fire, weapons, the wheel...) is the key to survival in this cruel world of chaos and carnivores. It's a struggle against extinction, where you score points by finishing levels with as many of your tribesmen intactos $3000 Atvo possible! Retail: $69.95 Our Price: A complete bridge-playing program that allows you and your computer partner to bid against 2 computer opponents and play out the hand. Features digitized hi-resolution graphics, hint modes that tell what to bid and why, auto bid and play, digitized speech for all opponents, and more! Macintosh Education Soltware CAN Where in the World Deluxe Home Productivity Design Your Denim De Dones Deign Your Own indepe Der Sons perto Goll C oor Recreation Software 40 lang $4200 Master the Mekulak Med W allachita Mislave Lubok N/A Now all for Weders Moreply Dulat fundo Momoy Belafu Out of Horld Pono Due Spec Theme for Virtuels Fogar Com for Windon Wheel of Fortune The Pack Wheel / Waydet Wing Contender Il Speech bok Urdity Software Bus Momebook the WC L 105 o . Pomelock w/Canada OROG 3000 Window ROM Game Pack Sounds Your personalized party of adventurers must save the 3-D world that has follen under the control of the diabolical Lord Xeen Your explo rations will take you en fantastic quests facing fearsome monsters and challenges beyond compare Features state of the art illustrations and animated graphics, musical scores, sound effects and digitized speech La owed O foll Populos Prophetal O E993 Over the Pack Sound Proshow Pw C ontrol The Won Cool Thunder Lightning Education Soltware Shode Cann Me fall Word General het Badet Tad Born in altor ku da VGA door Sport Foto Maryland ArchScenery Dona 317 Flyers Fares Borile the 1500 Super GA igre Dess000 164 But Alsat Spect Carte Com G7000 Sen WA Horila Harpoot Drug Serin Mewah Indian Jones Fotele Jellige Internal Burde Joh Modelos de Spellcraft: Aspects of SPELLCRAFT ASICTS OF VALOK S Scrabble B u dition Window Shadow cion Fod Strand Wening Bundle Sierra D i lande VGA Sortid VSA Valor ronda H to World od Works Mon Berlenchelyping Voyee Solo Sple Where the World Dele Home Productivity Labs Astolop A Works Design Your Des Mometrin Den Yown landscape Design Your Own Ford Die Sus Wadens Castles Siepe & Co Chiron Book G /FREE Cont CHO tasun Lopeed Scores Journey w hakarit Due Did Sivigo eta Bisk SP 12 Dick Poker On Shake 113 Vull Body World Grill brides Sny london Cort Action Duksed the tra les of Sherlock Holmes Londom Lost enesel Martop Fighter Marsh Martin Modul Solhere's Journey Spore Bed Spelketing Springby Sierad Star Trek: 15 Shrinky Retail $59.95 Our Price: $3600 Bartok Duta Dok Art Desk Poker Dotsd SP Data Bak Spel Tds Aukso Toks A Breskrbol Windows Catapulted through a portal in time and space, you must save both the Modern and Magic Worlds from the power mad, warring Lord Wirords. With the help of a Mentor Wizord, you will learn to craft and cast spells, conjuring a mulitude of magical effects: scorching fire. balls, fire breathing dragons and ominous armies of ores. Features 256 color VGA Graphics, 100+ hours of game play spellbinding music and sound effects. Thestra Tomandy Portal December Special Accolade/Prodigy Bundle $42 CD ON Gold COTON Geburginal Rode CRONG stolar SA Spor dine Hry Letramures afica ostres of land Melony time. The North Care Compete with the best! Get \"Jock Nicklaus Signature Edition golf and the Prodigy Service Startup Kit for TACK NICKLAUS only S42\"! With Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition you get a golf masterpiece with 256 VGA graphics, 5 digitized golfer cnimations with textbook swings, digitized sounds and panoramic backgrounds, and 2 of his signature courses. And with the Prodigy Stort-up Kif you can compete on line with golfers nationwide, check the leader board, and meet with fellow golfers in the electronic club house. Tee off today with the best golf bundle around! The Ultimate On-Line Superstore COMPUTEExpress 1-800-228-7449 B+ 2) + 1 + 1) d) :-*-kit 4 : H + Arc F A < 10011-08-1435645 XI 2 -9--E2PX-LD. 70 007, 1534 Orders accepted on our toll free number Mon-Sat 8:30 to 5:30 EST. Visa, MasterCard & Discover card accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours. Continental US shipments; UPS ground $5, Airborne Overnight S7. Corp, Gov't, Educ, APO, FPO, International orders accepted. No sales tax except for Mass add 5%. Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's guarantee. Defective soltware replaced immediately. No COD's. Item availability & price subject to change wilout notice. 15% restocking fee for non-defective returns. Shop our on-line stores located on Prodigy, CompuServe, Genie, Delphi, LA Online and America On-line. VISA Monica Prodigy, CompuServe, Genio, Delphi, LA Online and Amerito Online are trademarks of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #59 Savoy Products, Inc. 31 Union Avenue Sudbury, MA 01776 DISCOVER "


"began building custom homes on a \"pay as you go\" basis. Then, added small commercial buildings to their agenda (gas stations, in particular) and went on to government contracts such as the Wind Tunnel at the Ottawa Airport and a linear accelerator (as well as ion lab) for Canada's National Research Council. COMPANY SIR-TECH REPORT Wizardry's Family Infotree Turning a House of Sand into a Castle of Silicon by Johnny L. Wilson The power generator of Heart Island Castle is a miniature version of the main castle located nearby. The Roots of the Infotree Entrepreneurial roots tend to stretch in many directions, however, and it wasn't too many years before Fred Sirotek, Jr. became involved in a novelty business with Cornell computer science student and soon-to-be Wizardry co-designer Robert Woodhead's mother, Janice. The novelty business used resin molds to form its products and sand is a vital component in the resin mold process. Indeed, the company used sand in such quantities that it had to be shipped in by rail. Since shipping rates were particularly volatile for the railroad industry in the late '70s and a penny's difference per pound could make or break the profitability of a given load, Janice suggested that her son write a computer program where they could enter the current rates and immediately know whether a load could be profitable or not. Sirotek bought the idea, as well as a $7,000 Apple to implement it. So, Robert Woodhead entered the picture and, once he was successful with the rail rate program, moved on to handle the company's mailing list. He developed a mailing list manager qua database and thought it could be marketed on its own. He asked Fred Sirotek to allow him to take the Apple to the Trenton Computer Show and use it to demonstrate his mailing program, Infotree. When Sirotek discovered that Woodhead planned to fly to the computer show, he was adamant that there was no way he was going to put that expensive computer into the hands of some airline baggage handler. Woodhead decided that if the baggage handling was the problem, he should just take the Apple in a carefully packed car. Unfortunately, Robert didn't drive. Fortunately, Norm Sirotek did. All Woodhead had to do was convince Norm to drive him to the show. Norm wasn't keen on the idea of spending a weekend with computer enthusiasts, but informed that Atlantic City wasn't too far away from Trenton, he readily agreed to provide transportation to the show in order to try his hand at the tables in Atlantic City. After Norm cashed in his chips that weekend, he returned to pick up Robert and saw this enthusiastic crowd of people around the programmer. The family's entrepreneurial spirit kicked in and Norm began to see the potential for a business. So, whether he won in Atlantic City or not, he became a winner when he returned to the show. On the long drive home, he excitedly began to query Woodhead on other potential products for the computer. They talked about the possibilities for a science fiction game and the basic idea for Galactic Attack took root during the drive home. Naturally, their father (Fred Sirotek Jr.) was not immediately convinced. He told his sons that \"Computers are not for games, they're business machines.» The grandsons of the master builder were absolutely crushed. At least, they were crushed until Fred decided on another way to approach the investment. \"I said to myself,\" said the father, \"how much could I lose by bankrolling this venture? Probably less than what it would cost to send my sons to Harvard Business School, and here was an opportunity for them to acquire hands-on business experience from the ground up.\" With the father's capital in place and Woodhead working on Galactic Attack, it seemed like nothing could stop the business from snowballing toward success. With the venture netting solid sales on Galactic Attack, Woodhead brought another product to the Sirotek's attention. He had played a game designed by a fellow student at Cornell University, Andrew Greenberg. Greenberg had taken his satisfaction at playing in face-to-face role-playing romps and turned them into a fantasy role-playing game on the computer. On Heart Island, in the center of New York's «Thousand Island\" region, sits a castle. Built for his new bride by the founder of New York City's Waldorf Astoria Hotel, the castle has reverted to New York State and is a popular tourist attraction which can only be reached by boat. Somehow it seems appropriate that CGW's first glance at this castle occurred when we visited Norman and Robert Sirotek, respectively President and Vice-President of Sir-Tech Software. After all, their grandfather once owned a historic castle in Czechoslovakia. Frederick B. Sirotek, Sr., an architect and master builder, had purchased the castle and was approximately two-thirds finished with the remodeling and restoration process when the Communist regime took over. Now, his grandsons rule over a software company that, each year, sells millions of dollars of computer games based on castles, corridors and conjuring. Our impromptu cruise around Heart Island was also appropriate because the Sirotek's major passion outside the software industry is power boating. Living on the St. Lawrence River, the Siroteks get to \"play\" across an international boundary. That seems appropriate, as well, since they plan a global strategy for marketing Wizardry in nearly every conceivable country over the next few years. Fred Sirotek Sr. escaped from Prague and came to Canada in a fascinating bit of intrigue in which he had to surrender the two handguns in his possession and all the family's capital (since it was mostly in real estate, accounts receivable and equities in companies seized by the Communists). Amazingly enough, the elder Sirotek and his son, Frederick Sirotek, Jr., were able to get a $1,000 credit line and about $500 together. They immediately Page 192 Computer Gaming World "


"CAPE COD CONNECTION'S VARGAMERS CORNER GAMES . SOFTWARE ACCESSORIES ........... ...........$160 $21.17 NF622 Thunderbolt Global Conquest GlobalConquest........ $31.77 $31.77 MS-DOS Simulation Thunderhawk.... vo nasxdurante MS-DOS Adventure Lost Treas. Infocom.... $37.07 Tracon/Windows ...... $31.77 43min Global Elfect S29.47 Lost. Treas II............... S26.47 Software Wing Commander .... $37.07 NF 158 The Dam Busters Grand Master Chess .. $31.77 & Role Playing Lost Treas.CD.......... $50.00 Membership Priceslistedonly. Wing Comm. ll ......... $42.37 120 Min. Hardballlll.... ............. $31.77 Games Magic Candlell .......... $35.37 Please Callfor Non-Member WC Spec. Ops 1 ......... $21.17 NF723B-17 Trilogy Harpoon, . ............... $35.37 AD&D Coll. II(SSI)...... $41.27 Magnetic Scrolls ........ $35.37 Pricing!! WC Spec. Ops2......... $15.87 Featuring\"Conquestofthe Air Harpoon Set2............$17.67 Altered Destiny ......... $31.77 Martian Memorad...... $31.77 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + WC Mission #1......... 515.87 packed with combat action WC Mission #1 Harpoon Sot3.........$17.67 Bane/Cosmic Forge... $31.77 MegaTrav. II............ $31.77 A.Train S37.07 WC Mission 2 $15.87 from 1942-45, and mission Harpoon Set 4............ $20.62 Buck Rogersll.......... S29.47 Midwinter. m m ........... $26.47 ABPABaseball........... $21.17 WWII: 1946 .............. tba accomplished, the B.17'stirst Harpoon Set5............. tba Castle Dr. Brain .......... $26.47 Might&MagicIll......... $35.37 Acesin The Pacific..... $42.37 + + + + + + + + + + + + + +++++ combat mission, andlastbut Harp. Designer S ....... $29.47 Celtic Legends.............. tba Objection. ............ $26.47 Airbucks .................... $31.77 notleast, \"Bombers Over Harpoon Gold............... Iba Champ.of Krynn ........ S29.47 Spg 47 Outof This World ........ $31.77 A.T.A.C. .................. Iba North Africa\" Flight Simulator Harp. Scen. Editior...... $23.57 Cong. Longbow......... $37.07 over zoz Overlord............. $26.47 AirbusA-320.............. $42.37 55min. Accessories $31.77 Hyperspeed............ NF 724 The Flying Wing Air Force Command... $31.77 Conq. of Camelot....... $31.77 Police Quest lll........... $37.07 L'Empereur ............. $31.77 Consp:Dealock F.......... tba Power Hits BTech....... $26.47 Air Force Trainer ........... tba A2 Leather Flight Jacket with 23min. Liberty of Death ............. tba zipper Frontand Europeaon Prince Persiall........... $26.47 Continium.................. $29.47 Aldrin's Race/Space.....ba NF 180 How To Fly the B-26 Links. 186 $37.07 Theater Map Lining, 2 dual Countdown................$26.47 ATP(w/Ad Lib Snd) .... $31.77 $26.47 50min. Prophecy/Shadow.... $35.37 Ridersof Rohan.......... Mercenaries................ tba Crus. Dark Savant.....ba $26.47 B17 Entry ................ $37.07 NF 181 How To Flythe B-17 Pockets with flap. distressed Merchant Colony....... $26.47 Dark Queen Krynn....... $29.47 The Four Enginetail Sec. Monk. Is ICD...... $50.00 Birds of Prey .............. $29.47 cowhide gloveleather with Millenium................... $21.17 dragger bomber that made C Yeager ACT............$35.37 Dark Seed ..............$37.07 Sec. Monkey Isill........ $35.37 knitcuffs, waistandshoulder historvinevertheatreol WWII. Nob.Ambition il ........ $31.77 Darklands................$37.07 Spellcasting 301 ........ $31.77 F-117A Stealth F....... S42.37 epulets where it wasused, Thisthrcc Panzer Battles............ $21.17 Death Knights Kry.... $29.47 F15 Str. Eagle Ill............ba Spiritof Excalibur ....... 826.47 .......$170 partcheckouttakesnew pilots Patton Strikes Back.... $31.77 Degeneration ............... Iba Falcon 3.0................. $42.37 The Dark Half ........... $31.77 throughflightoperations. Populous .......... $29.47 Falcon Campaign ...... S21.17 Demonsgate................. tba Time Quest................ $31.77 Leather Flight Jacket with emergency operations, and Powermonger............. $29.47 Dune.. Fleet Commander......... tba ... ... ... Treasure Sav. Front... $29.47 $31.77 Pile Lining.zipperfront. the inductionsystem. Railroad Tycoon ........ $31.77 Grand Canyon Scen. S15.87 Twilight 2000.............. $31.77 Dungeon Master ....... detachable pilecollar, zipout 90 min. Ramparts .......... $23.57 Elviral................ ..$31.77 The Two Towers......... $31.77 Great Naval Battles........ tba liner, 2 dualentry pockets Reachfor Stars........... S21.17 Elvirall ................. $37.07 Ult. 1,2,3,4,5,6bun ..... $68.87 Gunship 2000 .......... $37.07 with flappluscigarette Many more video'scallfor Realms. .............$15.37 Eye Beholder Il........... $35.37 Ultima VI................ $15.87 Hero'softhe357th... $29.47 pocketonsleeve, knitcults, complete listing Red Phoenix.................. tba Forgeof Virtue............ $13.22 Ultima Trilogy............ $31.77 Inst. Pilot Scen. East ... $52.97 waist and shoulderepulets ============== Rom. 3 Kingdoms...... $37.07 Four Crystals Traz...... $29.47 Ultima Trilogy2..........542.37 Inst. Pilot Scen. Wes... $52.97 Rulesof Engag.......... $35.37 Free D.C..................... $31.77 Ultima Undergr .......... $42.37 Mantis: Exp. Fighter ... $37.07 MS-DOS Strategy ScrabbleDelux......... $31.77 Gateway .................. $31.77 Ultima VII............... 542.37 MegaFortress ............ $35.37 Second Front (Imtd)... $31.77 Software VHS Flight Gateway Savage Fr.... Ultrabots Sant. E...........ba MegaF Mission 1........ $23.57 $29.47 Siege.. $35.37 Gods ................... A Line in Sand(SSI)........ba MegaF Mission 2........ 523.57 Untouchables............... tba $21.19 Documentares Solitaire's Journey..... $31.77 Godfather............... Action Station Util....... $11.13 $26.47 Vengence Excalibur... $26.47 MIG 29Fulcrum.......... $26.47 Spoilsof War (RAW)... $31.77 and Flight Oper. Light. Storm...... 515.87 $31.77 Heartof China ............ Virtual Reality ............. $47.67 Action Stations..........$26.47 Star Trek Anniv.......... $31.77 RAFinthe Pacific ........... tba Amer, Civil War V1 ...... Indy Jones:Fate......... 331.77 $21.17 Indy Jones: Fate......... Willy Beamish ............. $37.07 Training Films The Lost Admiral ........ S31.77 Koshan Conspiracy tha Red Baron.................. $37.07 Amer.Civil War V2 ...... $21.17 $19.95 each The Perf. General....... $31.77 RedBaron Miss. D......... tba Amer. Civil War V3... $21.17 Laura Bowll ............. $37.07 Perf. Gen. Scen's ....... S18.52 CCC Carries Leather GoddessII..... $37.07 Scen Collection A...... $31.77 Bandit kings............... $31.77 Powermonger............$29.47 NF 701 Flight Reports Scen. Collection B..... 531.77 Battle Command........... tba Lei. Suit Larry V............ $37.07 Tabletop Rareflightfootage including Theater of War............ $29.47 B.for Guadalcanal....... tba Scen Coll. Gr Brit....... $31.77 Lemmings................. Wargames and $26.47 atwo-place P47 aflight Third Reich (AH)............ Iba Battle Isle ................ Sce. Weapons M#1... 515.87 Role Playing Legend..................... $37.07 reporton Germany's ME-262 Uncharted Waters...... $37.07 Games Legend/Kyrandia....... $31.77 Sec Weapons M#2 ... $15.87 Bridge6.0................. ... tba jetlighter, the XP79 Flying Victory at Sea ............... tba A2 Leather Sec. Weapons M#3 ... 515.87 Loom CDROM............ $55.00 Campaign.. Wing andacrashofa B17 in. .................. tba Wing, andacrashofa B17 inWarlords .... .... $26.47 Bomber Jackets Lordofthe Rings......... $31.77 Sec Weapons M#4 ... $15.87 Carrier Strike.............. $37.07 tendingtoblowupenemytar. Western Front ............ $31.77 VHS War Sec Weap. Luff .......... 837.07 Lord/Ringsil ................. Iba Carriers at War ........... $37.07 gets 40 Minutes Documentaries Sim Ant....................... $31.77 Castles...................... $31.77 and Flight Training Sim City.................... $26.47 Castles Il................. NF 705 Flight Training .. tba Films Sim City Graph. 1........ $15.87 Wingoverandchandelles. Castles Northern C..... $15.87 Replica Baseball Sim City Graph.2........ 515.87 thewing-overroll, the barrell Chessmaster 3000..... $29.47 Football, and Sim City Il ....................... tba rollandlundamentalsoffor NoGreator Glory ........ $37.07 Toshiba 26\" Stereo, Collegiate Caps Sim City Terr. Ed......... 515.87 mation 60min. Replica Baseball Civilization.................$37.07 Remote Control, Color TV Jersey's Sim Earth Civilization Collect..... $42.37 ............ $37.07 Sim Earth Windows.... S37.07 Osprey. Valor and NF 159 Howto Flythe B-24 FOR CCC MEMBERS ONLY Conflict: Korea........... $31.77 RAFM Military Sound Graph. Airer .... $21.17 Liberator 60min, Conflict: Middle E....... $31.77 All you need to do is order, in fact, the Books Strike Commander ........ tba Crisesinthe Kreml...... $37.07 more you order, the more chances you'll AD&D Products Task Force 42................ tba Old Tyme Replica Baseball Fighting for Rome....... $26.47 Team Yankee2 .......... $26.47 Football Capsmakegreat Final Battle.................. have of winning. The drawing will be ... tba All at discounted 1.Finest Ht/Battleh. $37.07 gifts at $22&up!! Flames of Freedom.... $26.47 December 10th, 1992, just in time for CATALOGAVAIL!!! CD-ROMCARRIED!!! Christmas!! If you are not a member, this is prices!! the time to become one! ANNOUNCING The CCC Giveaway!!! CAPE COD CONNECTION has essentially evolved into a Membership Club. For that reason the product prices listed above are for MEMBERS ONLY. You do not have to become a CCC Member to order from us. Please call for Non-Member Pricing. Memberships cost $20.00 for a full years benefits III CCC offers every electronic means known to mankind for ordering. We are open Monday Friday 10 AM 8 PM and Saturday 10 AM 5 PM. Overseas Dealer Inquiries welcome. (Prices and availability may vary.) CCC policy is to replace detective software with the same. VOICE ORDERS 1-800-729-6733  1-508-457-0738 24 HOUR MODEM SHOPPER 1-508-420-1115 (setting N,8,1)  FAX 1-508-457-4558 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS 02540 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"Company Report sell? They saw the future as bringing larger and larger distributorships into the picture and elected to return to their core business. With the agreement of the Siroteks, Greenberg and Woodhead began to polish that game for release as Dungeons of Despair. Alert readers will notice that this name has two capital letter \"D's in its title, much like both the most successful people and paper\" role-playing system in the world and a recent entry into that market which is, currently, under litigation. People who believe in karmic retribution will also be amused that the same E. Gary Gygax who, as chairman of TSR's board, threatened litigation against the Siroteks when they started to market Dungeons of Despair at 1981's Boston Apple Fest is the designer of the Dangerous Journeys system (originally Dangerous Dimensions) system against which TSR has currently initiated legal action. Dungeons of Despair, of course, became Wizardry: Proving Grounds of the Mad Overlord. In plastic bags with photocopied manuals, the original Wizardry hit the 100,000 sales mark in its first year of sales. During that time, the Siroteks and Robert Woodhead managed to produce the game out of a 100 square foot area which they rented from their parent's novelty business. Today, the company has published seven different Wizardry adventures in a variety of formats, as well as a utility designed to print out Wizardry characters. The family's entrepreneurial spirit also led the Siroteks to help establish what was once the largest software distributor in Canada. They worked with a fellow named Shannon Edwards, who owned a major East Coast distributorship. Edwards would supply dealers at the Boston Apple Fest out of the back of a semi-truck stocked with product, saving the publishers the trouble of bringing mass quantities of the product to the shows. They decided to enter the Canadian market, so Edwards, the Siroteks and a family friend named Len Francescini ran Frantek Software Distribution from 1983-1987. In 1987, the company was sold to Micro-D and became part of the Ingram's acquisition of Micro-D. Why did they Branching Out Today, visitors to Sir-Tech Software are most likely to be overwhelmed by the intense focus on Wizardry. Although the popular series has not been the only product from the company (Sir-Tech has published software as varied as The Clan accounting package, the children's program Police Artist, arcade games like Star Maze and Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs, polygon-filled simulations like Deep Space, and the action/adventure Seven Spirits of RA) it has truly been their mainstay. Their marketing emphasis in Japan has brought about audio-CDs with narrated Wizardry adventures; licensed anime (animated cartoons) and manga (comic books) with Wizardry characters, and a vast array of plastic models and lead figures based on the series. Once one looks beyond the obvious marketing/licensing success of Sir-Tech's strategic alliance with Japan's ASCII Corporation (begun in November, 1984), the most fascinating part of Sir-Tech is its employees. Any \"Who's Who\" of Sir-Tech employees would have to include documentation author Brenda Garno who not only plays every CRPG out there, but writes the Wizardry manuals (especially those with reference to pumpkin man, the stuffed doll the entire company bounces off ceiling fans to relieve stress, and Elvis) and maintains all of Sir-Tech's on-line support. In addition, Phil Mitchell in customer support is the fellow who has to deal with replacement requests (one came addressed to \"Dear Tech Support God-Like Beings\") such as the one from a gamer whose brother's girlfriend's 14-month old baby chewed on five different disks and the young gamer whose mother kept the documentation look-up sheet when his father retained custody during a messy THINK SPORTS THE GRAND CANYOS QUEST OF THE GREAT JEWELS In Quest of the Great Jewels, choose to be one of four races: The Azoni builders of great citadels; the Quntag, rulers of vast empires; the Rilris, hoarders of great wealth, or the Slenth, destroyers and ravagers of the land. Begin as the ruler of a single province and send your armies out to fulfill your race's destiny. Quest is a fantasy wargame combining elements of strategy and tactics with a healthy dose of magic. Over 90 magical talismans abound in the game, each granting its owner the ability to bend the rules in some way. GRINDPRO S29 The Playbook of Sports-related Software Our complete guide describes hundreds of products for the sports minded. It is the most comprehensive volume of its kind anywhere. Find popular strategic simulations, the latest action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We help you select the right one! The Playbook is free with all phone orders or simply send $1.00 (check or cash) for your copy. Call for a play today, 800 747-0908. 11DECEMBER SPECIALS HOCKEY NA GOLF NEW Fly the Grand Canyon W Gretzky 3 Ultimate Challenege $39 ROADTRACK OLYMPICS NEW TENNIS Summer Challenge $39 Jimmy Connors 11 $32 MOTORSPORTSEN RECREATIONAL Road&Track Grand Prix$19 Ski-ulator BASKETBALL JAN FITNESS M Jordan Flight Sim $49 Exerlog $39 FOOTBALL CARD COLLECTING NFL $39 Lineup $39 BASEBALL SPECIAL INTEREST Rood&Track Grand Prix Hardball 111 $34 NFL Print Pro $25 AVIATION EDUCATION Fly the Grand Canyon $45 Sports Adventure $49 MARINE HANDICAPPING Bass Champ $47 RaceMaker $49 Send $1.00 for Think Sports Playbook Call to order this month's specials NFL CEREBEL 675 Mass Ave  Cambridge MA 02139  USA V ORDERLINE 800 747-0908 Circle Reader Service #52 ** WINNER BEST FANTASY PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME ORIGINS 1985 & 1986 ** V Flying Dutchman Send $15 for the rules, setup information, and the first three turns, or $5.00 for the rules alone. Flying Dutchman Games Dept. C P.O. Box 957434 Hoffman Estates, IL 60195 GAMES Circle Reader Service #76 Page 194 Computer Gaming World "


"DISCOVERED THE * POWER OF SOUND SOUND GALAXY Sanh Cupei Your favourite game has never been more exciting. NOW! With the Sound Galaxy BX II, bring yourself to new heights! Sensational sound effects with 4 watts to power your speakers or headphones! With a flood of multimedia, education, entertainment and other new age software, you need the full power of sound; you need Sound Galaxy BX TIP Gef one today!! Fully CALL US TODAY! TOLL FREE: 1-800-866 8859 Adlib & Sound Blaster Compatible Out of this world! Fully AdLab & Sound Blaster Compatible Latest Dynamic Adaptive Filtering for clearer sounds Lots of Bundled Software Digitized Audio Playback Analog Digital Recording 11 Voice FM Music Synthesizer MIDI Interface Latest for Bundlaio Playtding der MM Musi Recoroack FREE Speakers America Offices AZTECH LABS, INC. 46707 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont CA 94538. U.S.A. AVS Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 urope Office: IZTECH SYSTEMS GmbH m 4.71-4.74 Asia Pacific Center, Bir kerstrasse 15. 800 Bremen 1, Federal Republic of Germany. el: (0421) 1690843/4 Fax: (042171640845 Ix: 245610 AZTEC-D sia Pacific Office: ZTECH SYSTEMSNTE LTDA member of AVS Group 1 Ubi Road 1, AVS Building. Singapore 1440 el: (65) 7417211 Fax 16517418678/9 Ix: RS 36560 AZTECH xcifications subject to change will prorreth und Galaxy is a negistered trademark of AZTECH YSTEMS PTE LT72. All trade names and marks are gistered trademarks of m i ne compimnies. The 1PC logo is a trademark of the Montorer RC Marketing Council. Tom MICROSOFT WINDOWS COMPATIBLE Circle Reader Service 149 "


"Company Report divorce proceeding. His favorite phone call? \"I've been up since three this morning, waiting for you to get in.\" Todd Ashley heads up the hint lines. His job is to help gamers through the worlds of Wizardry, but alert listeners can sometimes hear him say, \"We don't usually help with Ultima VI, but here's what you do ...\" The Sir-Tech spirit exudes from Barry Kiah who was so excited about preparing to preside over the chaos of shipping 37,000 copies of Crusaders of the Dark Savant (over the first weekend finished materials were available) that he couldn't wait to look up the very first Crusaders order from over a year ago and see that Denny Workman of Redondo Beach, CA would get the first production copy. The playful corporate spirit invades fax machines all over the world as the PR and Marketing duo of Lori Sears and Shari Mitchell infuse their vital info with playful practical jokes and hilarious captions. The push for quality continues with David Bradley's design to allow Crusaders to take up less space on the hard drive than the current state of the art (its 243 compressed files on the hard disk decompress during play so that it only takes 5.4 MB for the program and advises gamers to allocate 6.5 MB to make sure there is room for saved games) and with Ian Currie's design for a mission-based espionage game that would be heavy on personality-based interaction and real-time combat. Both designers function as team leaders in out-of-house design shops. Not only do they function as developers for Sir-Tech, but they also serve as a potential \"farm team\" for future leaders of design teams. Sirotek has explained to CGW that 1992 has been a year of entering new markets. The company has experienced phenomenal success in Asia and is participating in several strategic alliances across Europe that could provide a larger sales base in Europe, as well as an infusion of new products to be imported into the U.S. Next year, according to both Siroteks, will be a year of product line expansion. The goal is to stabilize the existing product line with more products, both within and without the world of Wizardry. They sincerely want to broaden their line-up so that they are neither thought of as a \"one product company» nor as a CRPG-only company. To do so, should present the most interesting challenges Sir-Tech has faced since the earliest days of Wizardry Asked if the company was ready to participate in new technologies (optical storage, interactive video, connectivity games and SVGA graphics), Rob Sirotek stated that the company had been looking toward new technologies for years. Randall Bore, the designer of Seven Spirits of RA, had left hooks in the game for a CD-I version of the game which they had hoped to release when the platform became stable. Unfortunately, neither the game nor the platform were well-received enough to justify such a product. Norm Sirotek suggested that the company had strategic partners in Asia that would enable them to compete in new technologies when the actual platforms were ready. \"Interactive video will not cause us to fade away.» In summary, Sir-Tech Software is a company rooted in an entrepreneurial heritage. The Siroteks haven't actually built a castle (though they would sure like to regain their grandfather's), but they have built a successful business and seem as ready to plow through the rough waters of new technologies and business expansion with as much enthusiasm as they pilot their power boat in poker runs along the St. Lawrence, cow Room At The Top The reference to the future is appropros, as well. Even though Sir-Tech's past is totally dependent on the Wizardry series, the company's executives continually keep an eye on the future. Rob The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 Page 196 Circle Reader Service #75 Computer Gaming World "


"The Book Store CGW Presents ... NEW RELEASE Sid Meier's Civilization, Or Rome on 640k a Day by Johnny L. Wilson and Alan Emrich Prima $18.95 If you're serious about playing Civilization, this is the book you need. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine NORDAL HATEVE Granlund Includes 100 charts covering technological advancements; 24 original tables and 22 specific formulae showing how the game works, as well as Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook by Russell Sipe and Mike Weksler $18.95 U.S. $25.95 Can Global Conquest, The Official Strategy Guide by Computer Gaming World On-Line Editor Alan Emrich is only $24.95 plus $1.81 tax and $3.50 shipping and handling. Winning Strategies to all the missions. Campaign games for every player-flyable aircraft (P-51, FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, Phantom II, MiG-21). Valuable performance charts for each aircraft. Extensive information from the designers of YAC. Exclusive interview with Chuck Yeager. The SimEarth Bible by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne-McGraw Hill $14.95 Special features: floppy disc with updated (2.0) game version and a new map maker; and full-color player's aid card. A complete tutorial with five programmed scenarios. Strategy tips, detailed, tables, and analyses of actual program formulae. A complete modem-gaming reference. I salute Johnny Wilson for giving us a new kind of book about the earth and the terrestrial planets. James Lovelock The SimEarth Bible is a winning strategy guide to SimEarth, as well as a fact-filled guide to Earth sciences and theories of the balance of life on the planet. ZATION OROKOSMOLADE The Official Guide To Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon by Russell Sipe COMPUTE Books $12.95 U.S. $16.50 The best book on Railroad Tycoon. If you love Railroad Tycoon get Russell Sipe's book. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Here are just a few of the things you'll learn: get the answers to puzzling economic forces in the game; learn to defeat each of the tycoons; manupulate the stock market to your advantage; and learn optimal building and survey techniques. THE OPTICAL GUIDE TO TYCOON THE SIMEARTH BIBLE AIR COMBAT The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne McGraw-Hill $14.95 Each time we read this book we learned something, because it explains the theory behind the game and doesn't just list one-two-three hints. START Magazine Use orderform boundinto this magazine to order books. "


"Taking A Peek ENGLAND W REU GERMANY 31 SWITZ STIILOR LES TO The Avalon Hill Game Co. Baltimore, MD (800) 999-3222 DIPLOMACY: Set in pre-WWI Europe, seven Great Powers vie for supremacy as they maneuver their armies and fleets across an area map of Europe. This is a new version of an old program, with a lot more spark coming off the flying daggers aimed at players' backs. New Al routines go along with the upgraded sound and graphics, making the computer players particularly treacherous when the higher competition levels are selected. (Hey, when Avalon Hill's own Diplomacy guru, Rex Martin, gets hosed by the computer that's saying something!) MS-DOS gamers take note: an IBM version is being packaged in the new box but it's not the new version, yet. Amiga ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Diplomacy Davidson Torrance, CA (800) 545-7677 ZOO KEEPER: Something tells me it's all happening at the zoo perhaps it's the latest release from one of the leading developers of kidware. Like most of the edutainment packages on the shelves, this one can easily be compared with Carmen SanDiego. Trouble is brewing at the zoo, instigated by a group of slothful ne'er-do-wells. Eager young beavers must follow on the trail of the bad guys, cleaning up their messes or feeding the animals (one or the otter), and capturing the rowdies before they perpetrate any more monkey-business (upholding the maxim \"cheetahs never prosper\"). Eagle-eyed players will notice lots of animated creatures and 50+ digitized photos of zoo animals. Young zoologists will have a whale of a time as they work their way from Cage-Cleaner to Head Zoo Keeper (and I'm not lion). IBM with VGA card ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Mouse Wheel Colorado Spectrum Fort Collins, CO (800) 238-5983 esentatieteelunden W La er Dry Out Me Best 21 119Dr. T's Music Software Needham, MA (617) 455-1454 880 8803 01 DFDFD1 DF OP BE THE MOUSE WHEEL: The innovative people who brought us the Mouse Yoke have steered their venture in a new direction. Using a clamp contraption with a widget, driving buffs can strap down their mouse and take the wheel of their favorite driving simulation. While it takes a bit of getting used to, the wheel adds an extra bit of realism to games that one normally controls with the mouse. Comes with Broderbund's 1990 release, Stunts. ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #2. DIS DISO Computer Eastfront Columbia Games, Inc. POB 3457, Blaine, WA 98230 (800) 663-8453 / (604) 873-6591 COMPOSER QUEST: Name that tune! This multi-media Music Appreciation course gives players two ways to explore the classics of Western music. In the learning mode, the player can browse the world of music by choosing stylistic periods from a timeline, with each period highlighting the most important composers of the era. Along with very poorly digitized photos of each composer comes a brief bio of the individual and samples of his work. Unfortunately, the player only gets to hear about 20 seconds of a piece, each usually ending at a particularly interesting spot. On an even more disturbing note, many of the composers included do not have music to sample from (there's only one piece from the Modern Era and only one piece in the entire jazz section — potentially leading the naive user to believe Joplin's \"The Entertainer\" is all that jazz is about). The quest portion of the game is a rather contrived bit, the gist being that the player must listen to a piece of music and identify its author. Top these weaknesses off with a rather poorly implemented interface and a stiff price tag (one could easily go baroque), and what seemed to be a promising piece of multimedia edutainment, ends on a rather sour note. IBM CD-ROM ($99.00). Circle Reader Service #5. Zoo Keeper DE EM COMPUTER EASTFRONT FOR WINDOWS: Sold as a computer \"player aid\" for the popular wooden block wargame, EastFront, this product features a faithful translation of the boardgame for the computer. Including neither an artificial opponent nor a printed map or rules manual (the latter are available separately), Computer East Front is a play-by-modem/email kit for enthusiasts of the board wargame. East Front, by the way, has won many accolades and awards in the board wargaming community and covers the Russian front of WWII at a strategic level using a unique command and battle system. IBM, for Windows only ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #3. BAB Quick Index e me Descartes Ilaudel Vival Chardin Hegarth Composer Quest Page 198 Computer Gaming World "


"Trevor Sorensen's romance STAR LEGIONS by Supernova Creations and Mark Baldwin DONDUPV antes U NIKATION CECTELECCELA From the creators of the Star Fleet series, Star Legions puts you in control of a mighty Imperial fleet invading the hated Alliance. Your warriors fight for the glory of the Empire, to earn battle honors for their legions, and to wipe democracy from the galaxy. Only the strong should survive to rule! Each new planet is a fresh challenge. Bombard it with your battlecruisers and destroyers. Assault its critical sites with your elite shock troops, then follow them with waves of heavily armored warriors. Lead your troops at the strategic or tactical level as they conquer in the name of your emperor. Then on to the next planeti Your victories bring rewards and honors, leading you to your ultimate goal of gaining the Empire's most noble rankImperial Tribune! Star Legions provides deep and exciting real-time game play in a truly advanced space war simulation with a unique \"Invasion Command Console\" graphic interface by Brett Keeton. Your legions will conquer an almost unlimited variety of planets, frozen or scalding, barren or drenched. Hours, months and years of enjoyment are yours as you command the Star Legions. MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 (Actual screens may vary.) . Circle Reader Service #160 "


"Taking A Peek The Addams Family Hi Tech Expressions New York, NY (212) 941-1224 THE ADDAMS FAMILY PRINT GALLERY: Doo-do doo-do-click click. Yes folks, don the ghoulish garb and get those fingers snapping. The latest glorified clip art collection from Hi-Tech features America's favorite undead family. Gomez, Morticia, Fester, Lurch and the rest of the gang are ready and waiting to model for calendars, posters, stationery and whatever else calls for a little splash of pallor. It will even lend one's desktop creations a hand. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #6. MEGA MAN 3: Lube up the arrow keys and batten down the carpals because action gaming's favorite android has made the biggest leap of his many lives the platform leap. Players can run, jump and shoot-shoot-shoot their way into a NonEmotive Stupor (NES) (which is not unlike Sub-Emotional Gaming Autism (SEGA)), as Mega Man has to face his toughest foes yet. He has to duel Bit Man, Shark Man, Wave Man, Oil Man, Blade Man and Torch Man (oh horrors!) on \"seven rapid-fire levels of action and excitement.\" This is one that will certainly raise the player to the next level of the action-gaming enlightenment transcendental vegetation. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #7. fame if they strive to be the worst that they can be. In this adventure game, based upon what is widely held to be the worst movie ever created, players take on the role of a private dick hired by a Hollyweird studio to find the stolen original cut of Plan 9. Apparently, Bela Lugosi's double in the film, jealous of his infamy, has stolen the reel and, like a wayward network exec, has re-edited and colorized the film, replacing every scene featuring Lugosi with those depicting himself. The player must recover the scattered pieces of the film and re-edit it frame-by-frame to ensure that Lugosi won't avoid blame for this classic celluloid catastrophe. With a rather crude interface and campy graphics, this game evokes the right celebratory feel to honor its predecessor. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9. UTOPIA: This is a hybrid strategy game that crosses elements of SimCity with those of Powermonger. See the preview in the September CGW, #98. Amiga, IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. Mega Man 3 VIE FLLROUTE Air Bucks LWS Software Havertown, PA (215) 449-9767 STRATEGIC VIDEO POKER: It is fairly common knowledge that the fastest growing game in casinos for the past few years has been Video Poker. A computerized mini-magnum opus on the subject of Video Poker, Strategic Video Poker offers an amazing diversity of game variations, including differing payoffs (featuring both the Las Vegas and Atlantic City styles). Variations include wild Jokers and deuces, plus altered coin values (which might also affect the odds). Study menus have been added so that statistics can be easily kept track of. This one is definitely a high hand at the showdown among computer Video Poker games. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #11. to strange Female Resport Impressions 7 Melrose Drive Farmington, CT 06032-9812 AIR BUCKS: For those who love to build up economic empires, this business simulation is akin to Railroad Tycoon with wings. Players begin after WWII and try to build up a profitable airline through 1985. Three opponents (who can be either computer players or human controlled) provide the competition as landing rights are secured, stocks bought and sold, loans taken, new aircraft purchased and the perils of rising fuel costs are faced. Definitely for the spreadsheet conquerors out there, Air Bucks is undeniably the best offering yet from Impressions. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #8. balloon coffee cup Plan 9 From Outer Space Maxis Orinda, CA (510) 254-9700 SIMLIFE: From those wacky Simulated Designers at Maxis comes the ultimate neo-Darwinian jungle-gym. Players design a complete ecosystem from the planet to the highest organisms in the food web (the Scientifically Correct term for the food chain). Wielding the power of a godlike genetic engineer, players design their own creatures by specifying traits in their genetic structure — with the potential for B:)*81E01 DPD Konami Buffalo Grove, IL (708) 215-5100 PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE: Even if Bela Lugosi is dead, his work lives on which goes to show that one can attain Utopia Page 200 Computer Gaming World "


"SIEGE The hordes approach! Are the archers on the battlements? Are there cauldrons full of boiling oil atop the towers? Are the castle gates fiercely guarded? Are your concealed wizards in place? Can your castle withstand the Siege?? RGATURPRT SLOT OUR EDIT S102923 COACHCH 1 BNDESIGN DOGSOF GAME RPRT SLCT ORDK EDITO R o BC GATERFRT SLCT ORDR EDIT 207 120 Your best friend is your worst enemy, over the MODEM! The new monsters are harsh, the new castles are breathtaking, the new scenarios are wicked, and the new SIEGE EXPANSION is everything you've been waiting for! Add Dogs of War to SIEGE and get: More fantastic monsters, New Castle designs, and More Scenarios to Conquer! Plus, with a modem or serial link, experience Real-time Person to Person Combat!! Mindcraft presents: Siege. Finally, a strategic simulation of pulse pounding, thought provoking medieval style castle assault. Fantastical elements challenge your leadership with a never-ending variety of contests and dilemmas. Should your knights sortie out against the attacking rabble? Is your wizard strong enough to throw another fireball into the enemy ranks? Siege gives you four castles to defend and attack, You can't do it all yourself; you must depend on your vassals and their troops, each with their own abilities and skills. Prove your mastery of the art of Siege! Test your mettle in the existing sieges, or design your own scenarios. What if Highrock Fortress were held by trolls, or Usk'hem Gart by elves? MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual screen photos from the IBM VGA version Circle Reader Service #109 "


"Taking A Peek HELD MELD HELD HELD PLE won WILD ROTO FTUE OR TAKIMI MIKROL min PLAY 0-05 STATI creating a phantasmagoric menagerie of hybrid species. One can watch a million years of evolution pass in minutes as creatures mutate and speciate according to the capricious winds of selective pressure. Or course the player-as-not-so-Blind-Watchmaker can reach down into the equation and fiddle around with all of the mechanics of life. Like the other SimProducts, players have the joy of calling down all sorts of biblical disasters on their creations, happy events like: plagues, heat waves, cold waves, floods, and sexually transmitted diseases. Also like other SimProducts, the game features several scenarios with explicit goals and an experimental mode in which one can toy around. This is certainly the most complex and narrowly focused game in the SimLine great fun for the casual biologist and student of artificial life. Mac ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #12. to Lord British's domain, ready-made with new characters and quests. Briefly, the new story runs something like this: Lord British had built an island in preparation for the coming Avatar (sometime pre UIV we presume). This island was home to three shrines of virtue (love, truth, courage — Amo-Ver-Cor!) each guarded by all sorts of nasty traps to ensure that only the Avatar could make use of them. Unfortunately, in a record case of continental plate slip (whoops!), the island disappeared before the Avatar arrived. Of course, now the island has reappeared and there is trouble brewing. New evil in Britannia? Or do the forces of darkness have a recycling plan? IBM. Circle Reader Service #14. Strategic Video Poker Simlife Pilot External Vian MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 B-17 FLYING FORTRESS: Open the bomb bay door, Hal! Actually, the player will get little assistance (or resistance) from a computer in this simulation of the airwar over WWII Europe. The player has full control of the B-17 as he fills the worn-out boots of every person on the behemoth bomber, from both pilot and co-pilot to bombardier to ball-turret gunner. Like other be-all do-all simulations (like Epyx's old Destroyer, and ThreeSixty's MegaFortress), the action can be intense and the player can become quite harried as he tries to run from station to station, piloting to nav points, lining up bombing runs, performing field patchwork on injured crew mates, and fighting off pesky German ME 109s. While the graphics aren't cutting edge and it has its share of gremlins in the mechanics, fans of the period may want to give this one a fly-by. IBM ($69.95). Circle #13. Psygnosis Brookline, MA (617) 731-3553 RED ZONE: The chaps across the pond have fired another product out of their software machine — the one with its levers set to simple, hot and shallow. Players ride super-horse-powered racing bikes on 10 different tracks around the globe, vying for enough victory points to be crowned the Champeen Of The World. The game sports a number of options that control realism and the level of graphic detail. At its best, the graphics are of the very rough polygon sort, though the action can be quite intense. Naturally, of course, like most Psygnosis games, it is a great testosterone pumper when one needs to unwind. Amiga ($49.99). Circle #15. B-17 Flying Fortress Thom dost want to Unp. a ship? the old man asi.s, ismlung (Apparentlp not too many folk's Day ships these laps) Sanctuary Woods Victoria, British Columbia (604) 380-7582 Ultima VII C TIME Origin Systems Austin, TX (512) 328-0282 ULTIMA VII FORGE OF VIRTUE: Wait! Don't zap that Ultima VII directory just yet. Players may have spanked the collective behinds of the Fellowship but there is still more to do and see in Britannia. With the wave of one's magic card of credit, it is possible to get the latest patch to the system and add brand new real estate VICTOR VECTOR & YONDO THE VAMPIRE'S COFFIN: From a brand new multi-media developer in the Great White North comes this light-weight adventure of paradoxical time-meddling. The player commands special agents Yondo, the cybernetically enhanced St. Bernard, and his human, Victor Vector, as they attempt to save history from itself by pilfering artifacts of power from the past for safe keeping in their museum of the future. The dangerous object of this mission is, as the title implies, the coffin of Count Dracula. Heavier on the flash and light than on adventure gaming substance, this product is more of a talking comic book than the typical graphic adventure. The game features a full music score and voice track Y reporto qualify1 LAPS) Red Zone Page 202 Computer Gaming World "


"If You Use CompuServe or GEnie, You Could Lose Some Very Close Friends. 000 HAMILTON $327.95 MONTLYIE MONTHLY FEE CONT OF 5 HOURS USAGE 25 HOURS USAGE S154 95 $71.05 $14 $34.95 DELPHI 10/4 PLAN GENIE COMPUSERVE DELPHI 20/20 PLAN GENIE COMPUSERVE Compuserve and GEnie promote \"flat rate» membership plans, which are fine if you just want to use basic services. Unfortunately, to get \"extra value» on those networks you'll have to pay extra. At DELPHI, we recognize that interacting with friends is what being online is all about. We believe that you shouldn't have to pay extra to be a part of the DELPHI community. That's why DELPHI's membership plans include access to tens of thousands of downloadable files, \"char\" lines with hundreds of participants, exciting multi-player games, computer support, and special interest groups for almost every type of hobby. Of course, there's also news, electronic mail, and all the other basic features you expect from a quality online service. \"Comparison is based on total evening/weekend sese in one month of Geme\" Value Services and CompreSerre Extended Services at 2400bps. Rates are current as of July 10. 1992. Genie' is a service mark of General Electric Comparty. CompuServe is a trademark of HoR Block, Inc. So join today through this special trial offer and hang on to your close friends Alex, George, and Andy while you make new friends on DELPHI TWO GREAT PLANS! 10/4 Plan: $10 per month includes your first 4 hours of use. Additional use is $4 per hour. 20/20 Advantage Plan: $20 per month includes 20 hours of use. Additional time is only $1.80 per hour. This plan has a one-time entry fee of $19. Rates apply for evening and weekend access from within the mainland 48 states. Access during business hours carries a surcharge of $9 per hour for both plans. TRY US. 5 HOURS FOR $5! Join today through this special trial offer and get 5 hours of evening weekend access for only $5. 5 HOURS FOR $5! DIAL BY MODEM 1-800-365-4636 PRESS RETURN ONCE OR TWICE AT PASSWORD, ENTER CGW55 DELPHI A service of General Videotex Corporation 1030 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138 Tel 1-800-695-4005 Circle Reader Service #165 "


"Taking A Peek (Victor and Yondo will banter between themselves every step of the way) but both the voice acting and the script are pretty weak. CD-ROM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Sierra On-Line Coarsegold, CA (800) 326-6654 Victor Vector & Yondo The Vampire's Coffin QUEST FOR GLORY III: WAGES OF WAR: The people on the hill are at the peak of their game in this adventure Lori and Corey Cole's eagerly awaited third installment in their acclaimed series. In continuing to pursue their vision of a replayable adventure game, the Coles have designed this adventure to include multiple solutions to its many puzzles. As in the earlier games, players may choose one of three character types (thief, magic user, paladin), each with their own set of battle options and unique skills (i.e. magic users have a large repertoire of spells, paladins have a smaller group of specialized spells, thieves have a bag of tricks for stealthy solutions). The graphics are standard for Sierra, that is, stunning, and the animation only continues to improve. Set in the savannas and jungles of Taarna, a world modeled after the both the ancient Egyptian and deep jungle civilizations of Africa, this story has character and will be an unqualified hit with adventure gaming crowd. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Seryice #17. Ventana Press Chapel Hill, NC (919) 942-0220 THE MAC SHAREWARE 500: Though we don't usually feature books in this section, we thought a book that came with 4 disks packed with 500 shareware programs might be of interest. Among the 500 programs are a few games, but these are of the type and quality that one typically associates with public domain stuff. It includes several versions of the old, two-player Artillery game and a few Missile Command clones among other coffee break games. While the games are weak, this package is ideal for the new computer user who doesn't yet have a library of basic utilities, fonts, communication programs, file compression programs and desk top accessories. Along with descriptions of the programs, the 400 page book is loaded with good novice tips on hardware, BBSs, memory, and everything else computer adepts assume is a part of every human's common knowledge. Mac ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Quest For Glory Ill. Wages Of War It! Rola815, Damage 11. The Summoning SSI Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 Zug Ware Torrance, CA (310) 793-0610 ZUG'S RACE THROUGH SPACE: Following in the wake of success created by his three previous edutainment releases, Zug the Edusaurus has launched a new enterprise — the Dinosaur Dinner Delivery service. His goal is to be the best fast-food delivery service in the solar system, but first he'll have to beat the competition — Mr. Bronto and his chain of Burger Blaster restaurants. To outsell Mr. Bronto, Zug has employed players from age 5 to 12 to help him decipher cryptic delivery notices and get the Dino-Dinners to their correct address in space. As young ones help Zug sling hash around the solar system they'll learn about their immediate universe (the position, atmosphere, size and history of neighboring planets as well as interesting deep space phenomena) in addition to improving their inductive reasoning skills. Like Zug's previous two games (Spelling Adventures and Adventures on Eco-Island), this game features a speech system (with appropriate sound card) that allows Zug to rap with kids along the way. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #20. The last word on the best virus-free Mac shareware tuto THE SUMMONING: SSI breaks free from its AD&D formula long enough to publish this role-playing game with some original mechanics. Players guide a single adventurer through 40 levels of 3-D isometric dungeons following the typical script --fighting creatures in real-time, using magic with an original system involving hand-gestures, having terse conversations with NPCs, and following the story to one of its promised multiple endings. An interesting feature is the ability to print out the maps created by the automapping system. Previewed in CGW #100. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Seryice #18. The Mac Shareware 500 oo DESTINATION The Astrocenter H.O We have five deliveries to go. Let's move it PILOT CO-PILOT Zug's Race Through Space Page 204 Computer Gaming World "


"JUMP START YOUR MIND. Heaven & Earth A Dazzling Journey for the Mind TURUN LED TOURADO Surge through the elements of Heaven & Earth as three vibrant games flash before your eyes. Master the brilliant illusions, where more than 575 puzzles test you, and the path you choose rates as highly as the solution. Sweep into the hypnotic and fiery grip of The Pendulum, as slight, controlled movements-not quick reflexes, delicately influence its motion through four geographic arenas. And blend the awesome beauty of the elements and seasons together, as you match suits in The Cards, inspired by ancient Japanese Hanafuda cards. Once you've ventured past these levels, a fourth awaits. Beckoning you to combine the skills of reason, spatial relation and balance you've acquired into 108 new and electrifying challenges called The Pilgrimage. Heaven & Earth. When you're done playing games, play with your mind. Rita Opis A TO ORDER HEAVEN & EARTH: Visit your software retailer or call 1-800-688-1520. For IBM, 100% compatibles and Macintosh. Published by Buena Vista Software Burbank, CA 91521-6385 Actual VGA screen shots 0 Goal 0,000-Return to Silence . "


"o o o o o o o o o o o     ooi oi oi oi oi oi oi oi oi oi o  + ?  ? ?   ?    : 2 sly puc doo | Jogueuuuu00 6uANA spePM    8  6 % %% % # 89  19 SeLeE enue/Oz Sub buel do seeb Abe/S do| "


"Review 12.00 WG Top Wargames AC 11.00 Poll #96 Poll 97 poll #98 Poll #99 ST AD 10.00 ST ST.RP SSI Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte MicroProse Accolade Dynamix Access XOR Corporation Koei Electronic Arts Spectrum HoloByte Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay New World Computing Mindcraft Wesson International Three-Sixty Pacific Mindcraft 9.00 AC.ST ST RP WG.ST RP 8.00 Perfect General Warlords Second Front ST ST 12.00 WG Top Action Games SSI RP RP ST RP 11.00 Poll #96 Poll #97 Poll #98 Poll #99 10.00 Overrun Oh, No! More Lemmings Falcon F-117A Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum NFL Challenge Romance of the 3 Kingdoms Indianapolis 500 Super Tetris Populous Elvira Command HQ Might & Magic II Rules of Engagement Tracon V for Victory: Utah Beach The Magic Candle Gateway to the Savage Frontier Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Bard's Tale III Heart of China Covert Action Battles of Napoleon Battlechess Gateway Breach 2 Starflight 11 4-D Boxing Neuromancer F-15 Strike Eagle 11 Action Stations Typhoon of Steel Curse of the Azure Bonds NFL Pro League Football Indiana Jones/Graphic Adv. Ballistyx Armada 2525 Wayne Gretzky Hockey Megafortress Pool of Radiance Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball PGA Tour Golf King's Quest IV Wide World of Sports Boxing Buck Rogers Carrier Strike Chessmaster 2100 Conan the Cimmerian AC,AD WG ST Sierra Electronic Arts Dynamix MicroProse SSI Interplay Legend Omnitrend Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Interplay MicroProse RAW Entertainment 393893*** ABB%83593889893383433394383439993394033 8.93 8.92 8.90 8.90 8.89 8.89 8.89 8.87 8.86 8.85 8.85 8.84 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.81 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.77 8.75 8.73 8.72 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.71 8.71 8.70 8.69 8.68 8.67 8.67 8.66 8.65 8.65 8.63 8.62 8.62 8.61 8.60 8.60 8.59 8.59 8.57 8.57 8.56 8.56 AD ST,RP 9.00 RP SP AD 8.00 SI Wing Commander ID Castle Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings SSI WG WG RP 12.00 Top Sports Games 11.00 Poll #96 Poll #97 Poll 998 Poll 99 AC.ST SIST 10.00 SSI Micro Sports LucasArts Psygnosis Interstel Bethesda Softworks Three-Sixty Pacific SSI SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Data East SSI SSI Software Toolworks Virgin 9.00 SP AD SP RP WG ST AC,RP 8.00 Hardball III Links Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. Prepared by Golden Data Services. "


"What's Hot PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software What You Have Been Playing Lately August, 1992 The Feedback Forum of Reader Response Beginning in issue #93 we added a new question to our CGW Poll cards. Along with the list of games to be rated (which is the basis for the Top 100 Chart and serves as a lasting indication of which games are quality works and which are not) we also wanted to know which games have grabbed you, which are hot, which keep you up into the wee hours, which have become the foundation of your spouse's divorce filing. The following list was composed by adding up the number of times a game was written into the blank line provided on the CGW Poll card and putting them into rank. Since the data for this column will not be accumulated over time, this list will be more dynamic and will serve as a good indication of just which games have been responsible for the greatest loss in GHP (gross human productivity). innon EOS PC Games (MS-DOS) Rank Title and Source Links (Access) Civilization (MicroProse) Aces of the Pacific (Sierra On-Line) Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis (Lucasfilm Games) Quest for Glory I (Sierra On-Line) Legend of Kyrandia (Virgin Games) FUI7A Stealth Fighter 2.0 (MicroProse) Powermonger (Electronic Arts) Gunship 2000 (MicroProse) Darklands (MicroProse) Hardball III (Accolade) 12. Monopoly (Virgin Games) Ultima VII (Origin) Sim City (Maxis) 15. Dagger of Amon Ra: Laura Bow II (Sierra On-Line) A-Train (Maxis) 17. Dark Seed (Cyberdreams) Star Trek 25th Anniversary (Interplay) Realms (Virgin Games) 20. Flight Simulator 4.0 (Microsoft) Feedback from CGW #97, August 1992: 1. Civilization (Micro Prose) Darklands (MicroProse) 3. Ultima VII (Origin) 4. Aces of the Pacific (Dynamix) 5. Falcon 3.0 Fighting Tiger (Spectrum HoloByte) 6. The Perfect General (QQP) 7. Links 386 Pro (Access) 8. Wolfenstein 3-D (Apogee) 9. Ultima Underworld (Origin) 10. Solitaire's Journey (QQP) Interesting responses of the month: Multiplayer Battletech (GEnie) \"And the bill is the scarriest thing I've ever seen. \"Just waiting summer doldrums\" The Dagger of Larry Bowman IV Tangled Tales Castle of the Winds (shareware) Darklands, Darklands, and more Darklands Amiga Games Rank Title and Source Civilization (MicroProse) Links (Access) Dark Queen of Krynn (Strategic Simulations) AD&D Eye of the Beholder II (Strategic Simulations) 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) rint rimo Macintosh Games Rank Title and Source Sim City Supreme (Maxis) Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Lost Treasures of Infocom (Activision) Might & Magic I & II (New World Computing) -nin Home Education (MS-DOS) Rank Title and Source Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing (Software Toolworks) Where in the U.S.A. is Carmen Sandiego? (Broderbund) New Math Blaster Plus (Davidson) Your Personal Trainer for the S.A.T. (Davidson) Algeblaster Plus (Davidson) Body Works (Automap) Playroom (Broderbund) Reader Rabbit I (Learning Company) Mario Typing (Interplay) Quotes of note: \"I got Pirates for 99 cents when I bought Global Conquest through a promotion from MicroProse. I can see why Pirates is in the CGW Hall of Fame. Great game.\" Von Bismarck. Pittsburgh, PA [Ed: You got the gaming deal of the decade.) \"I've just discovered Pirates at my local electronics store. I'm glad MicroProse reissued it. It's outstanding, even compared to today's complex games!\" Chaz Berkheiser. Stratford, CT \"Darklands is probably the best computer game ever made. I got so addicted to the game that it eventually led to an ultimatum from my wife: the game or me!. My wife looks better than the computer and won.\" Tiro. \"I wish Darklands would work better. I have received the patch disk & 1 still get memory allocation errors. Otherwise, I love the game.\" Nameless. Van Nuys, CA \"How long do we have to get these cards filled out and mailed off each month? I'd hate to think it too late to be counted.\" Mike Alderfer. Houston, TX [Ed: For the purposes of the CGW Poll, we need to receive them about 2-3 weeks after the issue has arrived in the mail/hit the stands. You did just fine this month, Mike.] \"The worst thing about living in Australia is that I get CGW two months after it's been printed. The best thing is that when I do get it, the great games are just hitting the shops.\" Roland Inman. Canberra, Australia This list is based on units sold by Software Etc., Babbages, Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025. Page 208 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Each month, we will highlight at least two of these games as part of this listing. The Bard's Tale Electronic Arts, 1985 Many Formats ,  TALES OF THE UNKNOWN La Rani's Tale The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster 2000 (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988)   IBM The Burd's Tale excelled within the conventions of the CRPG genre of its day and established the state-of-the-art for 3-point animated monsters and 3-D mazes presented in color (both in \"windowed» presentations). The look and feel of the series became CRPG standards. Later, The Bard's Tale III was one of the earliest games with automapping, another CRPG innovation which became widely used. Chessmaster Software Toolworks, 1986 Many Formats CHESSMASTER 200 Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM M-I Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats The Finest Chee Program in the World Chessmaster 2000 quickly became the standard against which all computer chess programs were to be measured. It was, arguably, the strongest chess program of its time when it was introducted into the CGW Hall of Fame and has constantly improved through the 2100 level and the current 3000 incarnation of the game. December 1992 Page 209 "


"Editorial Anatomy of a Rumor by Johnny L. Wilson State of the Magazine: At CGW, we are sometimes criticized for taking our jobs too seriously. This month, we take you behind the scenes of computer game journalism in order to let you see just how seriously we do approach our job and what the effects of haphazard reporting might accomplish. Thursday, September 3 (1:30 P.M. PDT): Only six working days from sending the biggest issue in our history to press, the entire staff was overworked and under stress. The phone rang. A well-connected industry source asked if I knew what company Electronic Arts was planning to purchase on Friday. I suggested several possibilities, but my source stunned me with the rumor that EA planned to acquire Origin Systems, I promised to check maiters out and get back to my source if we could find confirming evidence. Before 2:00 P.M., I had informed my publisher, Russell Sipe, about the rumor. We formed a battle plan and sauntered forth to land the rumor. Before approaching official channels, however, we usually prefer to harvest the industry grapevine and glean enough evidence to have a chance at catching and throwing back any red herrings the companies involved might care to foist off on us. By 2:30 P.M., we suspected the rumor was true. Sources within and without both companies were able to verify a recent West Coast trip by Origin's principal officers and shareholders (Robert and Richard Garriott); speculation about a potential stock swap; and scenarios regarding possible ongoing talks between the companies. Before 4:00 P.M., we were trying to contact official channels at Origin Systems. Since this was 6:00 P.M. in Austin, I couldn't get through the switchboard. Sipe tried the home numbers for both of the Garriotts. Having had no luck, I contacted an after hours number at Origin and left a message for an employee who might be able to contact Robert on our behalf. Not informing him about the reason for needing to talk to Robert, I simply said it was an urgent matter. He returned the call later to my voicemail and said that Robert would be calling later that night. It was getting late and we realized that we were not going to be able to file a story about the acquisition on PRODIGY's Game Center if we didn't move quickly. We called Electronic Arts Public Relations and told them that we were following up on a rumor that EA had just purchased Origin. One PR professional was very cool as she said, «We did? How very nice for us!\" I realized she had neither confirmed nor denied anything and asked her to transfer me to her supervisor. Her supervisor countered with an outlandish rumor and attempted to obfuscate the issue by saying that there were always rumors. Fortunately, we were armed with enough information to sharpen the challenge. There was a long pause. We took that as a good sign. We pressed the advantage. We were urged to consider it a rumor, even when we pressed for a denial. The long pause, the unanswered call from Robert Garriott and the information from carlier sources made us virtually certain that the rumor was solid. We agreed that we were 95% sure, but noted that it was that 5% that could undermine our credibility in the future, should we be proven wrong. Since the stock market had already closed for Thursday, we were certain that either Origin, EA or both would have confirmed the rumor if they planned to announce the information before market opening on Friday, September 4. So, we held off on the story until we could get more definitive confirmation. Friday, September 4 (9:30 A.M.PDT): My publisher and I met in his office to discuss the story. We had hoped to have a voicemail message from Origin's CEO or a number to reach him by that time. We had neither, and Origin's switchboard wasn't answering. Worse yet, our PRODIGY liason (who could rush the story to \"press\") was planning to leave their White Plains, NY headquarters early to get the jump on the Labor Day holiday. Our problem was that companies usually make their announcements prior to market opening or immediately after market close. If the rumor were correct, the announcement could be made early Tuesday morning (the next day the stock market would be open, September 8) and we would lose our chance to break the story. If we could post the story upon market closing on Friday, though, we should be able to protect our sources and get the scoop. We called every likely source we could get in touch with from both companies and gave them the opportunity to deny the rumor. We told them that we were publishing the story as rumor if we did not hear from them by market close of that day. We called our contacts at PRODIGY and informed them of the story and our intent to run it as rumor. By this time, continuing phone calls had us 99% certain that the rumor was solid. The catch was, we really don't even like to run rumors until we have confirmation that they're solid. This was putting our reputation on the line. We made contingency plans to upload the story by market close, but there was one problem. We had given the companies until 1:00 P.M. (PDT market close) to contact us, but we had to upload the story by 12:30 P.M. (PDT) in order to get it on-line before Tuesday. September 8 (because of the holiday). By 12:00 P.M. (PDT), we had heard from no official sources. However, a series of phone calls began which forced our hand. We started receiving calls from solid sources on both coasts and Texas, providing new lines of evidence and solidifying the rumor. \"Run it!\" said our publisher, using his best Ben Bradlee impression. We posted the story as rumor, knowing we were reporting on the rumor rather than starting it, and worded the story carefully enough that we felt that the companies were covered from any charges of releasing inside information. Tuesday, September 8 (9:15 A.M. PDT): No press release from either Electronic Arts or Origin. Could we have guessed wrong? Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi and I reread the PRODIGY article to prepare for damage control, just in case. Since we had not specifically said the deal would be announced on Tuesday, we decided to wait until the end of the week before deciding we were wrong. Meanwhile, the evidence continued to point to a deal. Thursday, September 11 (4:10 P.M.PDT): Galen Svanas and Fred Schmidt of Origin call to confirm the deal, noting that some of the rumor story was dead on but suggesting that our pessimistic assumptions about Origin cash flow and employee morale were incorrect. By 4:15, EA's Holly Hartz calls for the first time since the conversation with the long pause. \"It's true!\" she says with obvious delight and we congratulate EA on their purchase of an excellent subsidiary to shore up their product needs. Epilogue: If we hadn't printed the story as a rumor, we would have been putting our reputation on the line and, perhaps, the jobs of employees in both companies. The SEC does not like leaks and any other approach could have gotten some folks in trouble. As it was, PRODIGY readers could smile smugly on Friday, September 12 and state, \"Oh, that! I read about that last week. We hope that being behind the scenes of this PRODIGY story will give readers a clue about how careful we try to be in covering the industry. We are not Woodward and Bernstein, but we do try to give our readers, in both CGW and on PRODIGY, the best coverage we can possibly provide. CGW Page 210 Computer Gaming World "


"SPELLCRAFT ASPECTS OF VALOR WITHOUT THE WORD, THERE WITHOUT THE MAGIC, THERE IS No WORLD. IS No MAGIC. atapulted through a portal in time and space, you encounter a Mentor Wizard who will teach you the basics of magic. In return for this coveted knowledge, you must shoulder a grave responsibility... helpful allies, who will provide you with the knowledge and commonplace objects required for the art of SpellCraft. Conjure a multitude of spectacular magic effects, from scorching fireballs and firebreathing dragons to ominous armies of orcs. Combine everyday items with the right Magic Words to awaken their magical Aspects. Then, test these spells in combat against Valoria's cunning Lord Wizards. Start the game from the Circle of Stones, gateway to Valoria's Magical Realms and re-entry point for the Modern World of Terra. Learn to craft and cast spells to save both the Modern and Magic Worlds from the tyranny and destruction of the power-mad, warring Lord Wizards. SPELCRAFT Accept the challenge and travel the Modern World of Terra in search of A challenge to be mastered by only the most experienced player, SpellCraft offers:  100+ hours of game play Richly detailed graphics (256-color VGA) Spell-binding music and sound effects that are compatible with Ad Lib, Roland, and Sound Blaster sound cards Experiment with almost 60 ingredients to create over 100 supernatural spells in your wizardly workshop. Available for MS-DOS and compatible systems. lorlee Candles Stones of 100 Circle Reader Service #47 AsciiWARE ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. P.O. Box 6639. San Mateo, CA 94403. Telephone: 415/570-7005  1992 ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. Asciiware is a trademark of ASCII Entertainment Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Screens shown are actual IBM/VOA. All brand names and products are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. "


"SERPENT ISLE SERPENT ISLE FEATURES: An original story line continuing the Ultima VII adventure, but no previous Ultima experience is necessary. Serpent Isle is a stand alone game. An unexplored region of Britannia with new terrain features you'll even trudge through ice and snow. \"Paper-doll\" system that lets you select clothing, armor and weapons from a detailed, full-length view. Large, close-up portraits of every character you meet in 256color VGA/MCGA graphics. Digitized speech, enhanced sound effects and a dynamic musical score (with supported sound boards).  Available for 386SX, 386, 486 or 100% compatible systems. 2DP #ORIGIN We create worlds Available at your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-999-4939 for MC/VISA. Copyright  1992 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ultima is a registered trademark of Richard Garriott. Origin is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Serpent Isle is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. We create worlds is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Circle Reader Service #117 "

