"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine 100 October 1993 Number 111 GAMES RATED Role-Playing Games Evaluated Sound Cards Surveyed Detailed Reviews: Betrayal at Krondor Pirates! Gold Tornado Clash of Steel Rules of Engagement 2 $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian Shadowcaster Transforms Role Playing o2907412158 || "


"200 EEEEE Explore the depths of Fribbulus Xax Journey through dangerous, yet Discover the secrets of the alien Battle horrible aliens and elude in search of your baby sitter! beautiful alien territory! machinery to aid you in your quest! clever traps on the alien base! The arcade adventure hit of the year! 360° VGA Full Screen Smooth \"The best game I've seen on a PC!\" Aliens Ate My Baby Sitter features Scrolling breakthrough graphics technology that \"Amazing graphics...\" Original Sound Track and Sound, beats anything you've seen before! Effects for Sound Blaster & Adlib \"This game is positively addictive!\" Travel through beautiful, but Multiple Play Levels Fun for the \"Great puzzles... terrific humor...\" dangerous alien territory, discovering weird and wonderful new creatures. Whole Family Can you solve the puzzles and locate Arcade Quality Action & Cinematic the treasure that leads to Molly? Sequences Fantastic animation and breathtaking Special Challenges for Advanced music make this fun and exciting Players CORPORATION adventure the best in its class. Circle Reader Service #54 FormGen Corporation P.O. Box 279 North Andover MA USA 01845-0279 (416) 857-4141 (800) 263-2390 Whole Formality Action & Cinematic Form GEN "


"GLOBAL DOMINATION 0.0.0.0.0.0 The Ultimate Multi-Player Conquest Simulation inally, you can conquer your friends in state-of-the-art graphic splendor! Amass armies with your choice of units, then invade! Watch your back, though you'll need to divide your forces with care to avoid being conquered yourself! Global Domination is turn-based and features modem play; a wide variety of historic opponents from which to choose; random world generator, large number of units; spies; diplomacy & subversive activists; by far the best graphics and sound ever seen in a conquest game; and even more fun than Napoleon had at Waterloo! ARER EMPIRE RS IN TO LEVIS HIIL REVOLUTION THERAS 844TURELINAS US Take your ego for a rollercoaster ride as you see your empire rise and fall! -EU \"\" * + Here's where you amass your armies and make your moves! BRUY.MOVES UN TO SENEGAL Take tactical control of a battle in graphically stunning animated combat! C1993 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234. Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #61 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 11 À 54. Shadowcaster Pg. 12 Cover Illustration by Denis Loubet en e ADVENTURE AND ROLE-PLAYING SECTION Digital Dragons And Silicon Slings A Journey Through The Realms Of Adventure Revolutionary Perspective Origin's Shadowcaster Highlighted by Johnny L. Wilson The Krondor Passes Betrayal at Krondor From Dynamix by Jay Kee Return of the Phantom MicroProse Avoids Sir Andrew by Chuck Miller Fatal Inheritance The Legacy From MicroProse by Allen L. Greenberg Opening Up The Archives Scorpia Surveys The World Of Role-Playing MicroProse Uncovers Pirates! Gold The Lost Treasure Of Sid Meier Resurfaces by Chris Lombardi Noteworthy Musical Entertainment Microsoft Musical Instruments by Donald S. Griffin Total Reminiscence SSI's Flashback Offers Colorful Challenge As Recalled by Dave Pyron Skunk Works Software Domark's Flight Sim Toolkit by Paul Rigby Spectrum HoloByte's Tornado Doug Fick Test Flies The British Airplane CGW's Game Of The Year Awards AWARDO Why Not The Best? Sound Card Roundup CGW's Technical Editor Corrals 20 Sound Cards by Mike \"Moondawg\" Weksler Digital World's Futurist Vision CGW Reports On New Directions In Interactivity Railroad Tycoon Deluxe New Maps For \"Model\" Railroad Executives H. E. Dille Takes Rolling Stock Double Your Space War Impressions' When Two Worlds War by Martin E. Cirulis \"Rules? In A Star Fight?\" Omnitrend And Impressions Rules of Engagement 2 by Stanley \"Butch Cassidy\" Trevena Colorful Conquest And Colonization VGA Planets 3.0 Explored by Martin E. Cirulis Books That Compute Books And Software From The Waite Group by Randall Black l'obli anchan Ilier Return of the Phantom Pg. 20 g . Tornado Pg. 66 Tutland 102 TITANO 106 M TOR AND 108 Jutland Pg. 164 "


"TM THEY'RE BACK!!! with new skills, for a new world... 75KMOSIS * 12 BRAND NEW TRIBES OF LEMMINGS, EACH WITH THEIR OWN SKILLS SKIERS, SURFERS, BONGO PLAYERS, SNAKE-CHARMERS & MORE * PUZZLING PROBLEMS WITH HILARIOUS ANIMATION production designed by * SAVE THE TRIBES & WIN THE TALISMAN * 8-WAY SCROLLING * ENHANCED SOUND SUPPORT WITH DIGITISED LEMMING VOICES RIVETING GAME PLAY IN THE LEMMINGS TRADITION DESIGN Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 Tel: (617) 731-3553 Fax: (617) 731-8379 Circle Reader Service #84 "


"118 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 122 Mindcraft Grows Up The Kingdom Of Prince Ali Atabek Gametek's Ashes of Empire Fanning The Flames Of Freedom In Eastern Europe by Paul Schuytema Planes Of Fame And Shame MicroProse Challenges Gamers To An Air Duel by Bryan Walker 126 132 134 142 Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Associate Editor Chris Lombardi Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Chuck Miller Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg 144 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD SSI's Clash of Steel The Sound Of Fury Across Europe by M. Evan Brooks Class Of Steel Alan Emrich's Lectures On Clash of Steel Strategy More Conquered Kingdoms QQP Expands The Borders Of Its Highly Rated Wargame by Randall Black Brooking More Warfare M. Evan Brooks' Annotated Listing Of 20th Century Wargames, Part II Booting To Conquer Elpin Systems' Conquer for Windows by Neil Harris Three-Sixty's High Command The Lofty Pinnacles Of Military Power In WWII by Terry Lee Coleman Shipyard For Carriers At War SSG's New Construction Kit Is No Drydock by Bob Proctor Jutland Bound Software Sorcery Forms A Line Of Battle by H. E. Dille 150 156 160 164 ZD Computer Gaming World joins forces with Ziff-Davis Publishing! See pg. 178 Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601, Mt. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add ST1:00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703.622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet CGW@WELL.SF.CA.US Subscription Dept. 1(800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 8 DEPARTMENTS Editorial (The Digital Highway) 131 Opponents Wanted 24 Scorpion's View (Victim Listing) (Realms of Arkania) 166 The Rumor Bag Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints) (Mouthus Grandiosus) Shareware 168 Taking A Peek (Universal Hint System) 173 Hall of Fame 86 Over There 174 Top 100 Games (Sports Games From Europe) 176 What's Hot 112 Letters From Paradise 177 Patches 130 CWW Editorial 178 From the Publisher (Boardgames On Computer) 178 Advertiser List Printed in the U.S.A. "


"Nobody knows air combat like   legendary ace pilot General Chuck Yeager. And his brand of dogfighting on the Macintosh is hot. Choose from 50 missions or pursue a full campaign to count your kills. Create your own battles, mixing three I S T H eras and 24 aircraft in the most realistic dogfights ever. WWII: The pinnacle of prop-driven combat. Fly the 16. famed P-51 Mustang against the Luftwaffe's FW-190. ULTIMATE KOREA: Jets rule the day. Take an F-86 Sabre nose-to-nose with a MiG-15 in \"MiG Alley\". VIETNAM Missiles dominate the sky. Pilot a F-4 Phantom after a squadron of MiG-21's. FLY I N G You can even fly against a friend over a network and then relive each harrowing mission and analyze your tactics using the flight recorder. Like Yeager says, \"It's the man, not the machine.\" EXPERIENCE\" FOR MACINTOSH AND POWERBOOK -Chuck Yeager To order: Visit your local retailer or call (8001245 4525 anytime, Morintosh version by Looking Glass Technologies. TB vertian by Brent Iverson. Yenger Air Combat is o trademark of Electronic Arts. Macintosh & Powerbook are registered trademarks al Apple Computers in Circle Reader Service #48 ELECTRONIC ARTS "


"EDOTORDAL Signposts Along The Digital Highway Photography by Susan Zurawik: Montage by Jack Rodrigues per/gamer decides which channels to search, when to download information (movies, features, game software and demonstrations), and when to venture into interconnected interactive opportunities (multi-player games, shopping, and conversation). The important fact is that the user has control. How will the highway be built? There are currently two models. One model is for cable television to become the nexus point. The cable companies would bring fiber-optic cable into neighborhoods of around 500 homes. Then they would install set-top cable boxes with powerful RIC-based processors in each subscriber's home. The set-top boxes would be able to use the coaxial cables already in the homes to access the fiber-optic network and, as a result, bring in the digitized information which the cable viewer desires. Initially, this would be used primarily for videoon-demand (a more sophisticated pay-per-view and The general media has discovered the idea of the digital highway easier-than-VCR time-shifting), downloading of and is fast making it their own. Whether it is called the digital software and shopping transactions. I highway, interactive infrastructure or information highway, The problem with this model is the existing cable television mess. this amorphous octopus of a future technological network has capLargely the fault of self-interested city councils, the map of the U.S. tured the imagination of the press. It has had cover stories in Time has been politically gerrymandered with regard to cable television and Newsweek combined with numerous features in business publicontracts. It will be difficult to interconnect these cable television cations. The Clinton ticket invoked it as though it were a sacred providers considering the amount of local government red tape that incantation during the last presidential election and Hollywood seems has to be cut. to have discovered it as the next big thing.\" But what is it and why The other model is that of the telecommunications networks, is the media so excited about it? letting the Baby Bells have even more potential for monopolizing our Jonathan Seybold (CEO of the group which sponsors the Digital daily lives than that which Ma Bell previously possessed. Letting the World conference, see the related story on page 88) says that \"inforBaby Bells bring fiber optic into everyone's home creates a level mation highway\" is the wrong metaphor. In a recent publisher's note playing field and avoids the political gerrymandering problem, but in his Digital Media newsletter, he rightly observes that what we are also means that the phone companies could feasibly play havoc with talking about is not a highway per se, but one huge interconnected every aspect of our lives (E-mail, credit accounts, investments, telecomputer network. Unfortunately, to the average consumer (the commuting, entertainment, and more) rather than just controlling couch potato as potential information handler/shopper/gamer which our telephones and modem lines. The capacity for the phone compamost of the companies gearing up to service the information highway nies to improve our lifestyles is awesome, but the downside is omiwant to reach) the computer network idea conjures technophobic nous, as well. images of being controlled instead of being empowered. Whichever model becomes dominant (and it seems clear that the The highway imagery appeals to the average citizen, the kind of free market will decide), it means that information providers (whether person who doesn't take mass transit because he/she doesn't want to they be publishers of software, producers of film/television/recordings have to overshoot the destination and backtrack. On the highway, the or, ahem, editors of magazines) should be able to reach a broader motorist is in the driver's seat and, under optimal conditions, deteraudience than ever before (with potentially greater profits) and conmines the speed at which he/she travels, the rate of rest stops, the sumers should have more choice and more instantaneous response casual side trips to satisfy curiosity, and the ultimate destination. So from those same providers (more control). Potentially, it is a win-win it should be with the information highway. The viewer/shopsituation. We're just waiting for the potential to be actualized. CGW Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"ENTER A WHOLE NEW REALM REALMS AR KN LA AS OF A T.C. SA REALM Enter a whole new realm of fantasy roleplaying... Enter a rich and detailed gaming system... One that offers all you expect, and more, from a finely woven, carefully crafted epic adventure. One that allows you to choose your level of involvement in the \"behind the scenes\" detail, ideal for both novice and experienced players. One that places you in the midst of an PIN explosive era of strife and LT turbulence. One providing a true quest to challenge your imagination, a rich adventure to involve your mind, and careful balancing and smooth game play to make sure your time is spent playing. KANIA Enter a world of mythical creatures, magic and old legends... Enter a world filled with peril, conflict and uncertainty... ENTER ARKANIA... Cut loose in a world of blazing adventure. Hundreds of hours of game play. exploring a vast continent richly studded with towns, dungeons and endless adventuring opportunities! Your heroic characters must track down every lead and every contact if they are to succeed in their search for the renowned Grimring, the Blade of Destiny. You'll face many hazardous journeys by road and ship as you explore the fantastic realms and cities of Arkania. Of course, you will encounter numerous foes determined to prevent you from succeeding in your quest. ILS A A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation AVAILABLE CLUE BOOK BIRTECH    PRODUCT FEATURES  Fully Animated. Isometric 3D Combat  Phased-time Game System  Town & Dungeon Automapping  2 Difficulty Levels for Novice & Experienced Players  True Point & Click Interface  Easy to Use Multiple Choice Dialogues  Impressive Musical Score & Sound Effects  Full 3D «First Person\" View of Towns & Dungeons A LAND OF CONFLICT REALMS A LAND OF ADVENTURE GAME FEATURES  More than 70 Towns. Villages, Dungeons and Ruins  12 Character Archetypes  7 Positive & 7 Negative Character Attributes  Over 50 Skills, adjustable at the player's option  12 Magical Realms with over 80 spells  Auto-Combat Option  Parties of up to 6 Characters may be Split and Regrouped T OO FORTHCSS LONG A LAND OF CONVERSATION A LAND OF RICHES AVAILABLE FOR: IBM PC & 100% COMPATIBLES (VGA, 640K, 80286 OR BETTER, MS-DOS 3.X, 5.0 OR 6.0) SOUND SUPPORT FOR: AD-LIB, AD-LIB GOLD, SOUND BLASTER, SOUND BLASTER PRO, ROLAND LAPC-1/MT-32, PRO AUDIO SPECTRUM, THUNDERBOARD, PC & TANDY INTERNAL SPEAKER AMIGA (1MB REQUIRED) AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE RETAILER NEAR YOU, OR CALL: (800) 44 SIR-TECH Circle Reader Service #99 P.O. BOX 245, OGDENSBURG, NY 13669 FAX# (315) 393-1525 REALMS OF ARKANIAM IS A TRADEMARK OF SIR-TECH SOFTWARE INC. REALMSOL ARKANIA IS MANUFACTURED AND DISTRIBUTED UNDER UCENSITY SIR-TISH FROM ATTIS INDIKTAINMENT FANTASY PRODUCTIONS AND SCHMIRT SPILL FREIZI "


"\"My Most Dangerous Adventure Of All Will Never Be Shown  \"I've had some close calls. But this is crazy! In The Challenge of Racer X* you'll face danger two ways. First, you'll take on the mysterious Racer Xin a 200MPH free-for-all. You'll need everything in the Mach S's arsenal just to stay close... Autojacks to leap clear of danger, chopper-blades to cut through obstacles, even a new on-board CRT that allows you to receive messages from Pops, Trixie, Spridle and Chim-Chim. And that's just the half of it. You'll also race against me from the cockpit of Racer X's incredible Shooting Star. But it won't be easy. Because Snake Oiler, Captain Terror, and all the evil villains from my TV show are 30 28 TESTO out to send you over the guardrails. So fasten your seatbelt. Because you're gonna rip around blind curves on icy mountain roads. Leap over rocky chasms. Witness horrible fiery crashes! Gosh, I hope no one gets hurt.\" Coming soon for Super Nintendo and Sega Genesis.\" To order, visit your favorite retailer or call 1-800-245-7744. DEL SPEED Available for the IBM PC and compatibles. 01993 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. 01993 Speed Racer Enterprises, Inc. Speed Racer and Racer X are trademarks of Speed Racer Enterprises, Inc and are used under license. 18M is a registered trademark of International Business Machines. All other trade. marks and registered trademarks are properties of their respective owners. SuperNES is a regis tered trademark of thateside of America toc Sega and Genesis are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd ACOW DEL GAMES WITH PERSONALITY Circle Reader Service #32 "


"cital Dragons us and Silicon Slings nter A the world of tr hyenture and role-playing games in this month's theme section. Illustration By Eric Gooch "


"acital Dragons ans Silicon Sling GAST PARTY From A Cast Of Thousands A Sneak Preview of by Johnny L. Wilson Swak Pawis niet vlesigned to be wwiews, They are formu widles lzseel on \"nworks in press C Wwvlitars Candicowe wwahy of carly cor . These articles are at intended to provide l fimm word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review cown when ile game is finished. T consider myself a credit watcher, the in the movie biz, I watch the credits more | kind of person who stays in his seat at religiously than ever. Lthe movie theater until the credits end Those who are computer game credit or the projectionist turns off the film. I watchers should get excited just from have watched the credits ever since I recreading the names of companies involved ommended a film to a friend in high in Shadowcaster. It has taken four compaschool and the friend asked, \"Why? Who nies to put this project together: Raven directed the film? Who wrote the screenSoftware (Black Crypt), Id Software play?\" Now that I've met a couple of folks (Wolfenstein 3D and the forthcoming Doom), Origin Systems and Electronic Arts. Talk about culinary perfection, this combination cooks. Computer game credit watchers know that starting with Raven Software provides the ultimate in detailed, macabre, gruesome graphics. Combine their art with Id's latest 3-D first-person perspective scrolling, and the product gets body. Take another part of D 900 NOD3 0902980 Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"gigital Dragons are ons and Silicon Sling Origin's role-playing expertise, stirred in with magical elements from their musical and sound effects departments. Finally, whip it into shape with both the overall coordination of and story development from a top Electronic Arts producer. Serve prior to Christmas and one has a visual, technological feast for the holiday season. Play Mystic For Me When Shadowcaster was first unveiled, my initial impression was that it was yet another Ultima Underworld knock-off. Within two minutes of play, I discovered that this was not your father's underworld, but today's \"state of the art dungeon crawl.\" What changed my mind? It was the overall concept combined with technology that enhanced rather than detracted from that concept. In the game's original concept, the protagonist was a mystic shaman who would take the shape of sentient winged creature and a gargoylesque verbeings from other dimensions by tempo sion of a stone-hinged \"Incredible Hulk\" rarily trading bodies with them. In the creature. current version of the game, the player's Shadowcaster presents a graphically apcharacter is named Kirt and is the last of pealing animation for the actual transfora race of shapeshifters from another dimations between beings and also changes mension. There was a massive battle bethe perspective from which one views the tween the good and evil shapeshifters. dungeon. For example, the leprechaunNaturally, the good guys lost and Kirt is sized creature sees everything from a predestined to confront a Foozle (the ultimate bad guy, an evil shapeshifter SUMIDS named Veste) and try to recover the MacGuffin (the late Alfred Hitchcock's term for the viral artifact or bit of knowledge that a protagonist needs to retrieve, the obelisk). Of course, it isn't by any means certain that Kirt will succeed. Where the soothsayers had foreseen momentous disasters bcfalling the offspring of other shapeshifters, there was a shadow across the fate of Kirt. Hence, the justification for the name of the game. The fabulous part of the game is that the player's character can morph from human form into any one of six creatures in order to traverse the locations necessary to fulfill his quest. One creature is similar to a grizzly bear with four arms, while the others run the gamut from leprechaun-sized faerie creature through beholder-esque flying orb, frog-like humanoid, pseudo-fire elemental much lower line of sight H than the other crcatures and the flying creatures (the elemental-type creature and the flying orb) see everything from a higher line of sight. It really adds to the suspension of disbelief. In addition, the different beings have different attacks. The froglike ETINUTE creature has a sonic attack that features concentric circles moving across the target in a ripple effect. He also has a melee attack which reacts as though he were an electric eel. The elementalesque creature has a spiked, demonic tail for a melee attack and a fireball at a distance. The flying orb has two ranged attacks, each with their colorful special effect. Add sound effects to enhance those attacks and the combat really becomes vivid. The art is vintage Raven and is texturemapped across the 3-D objects used in the latest Id graphic engine. The texturemapped walls have tremendous detail, presenting sculpted stone and moldy surfaces with equal attention to detail. Some surfaces, like the water in one level and the walls in others, throb. Some surfaces are obscured by fog, like the scenes set in the necropolis, and others feature animared star-bursts like the dimensional gateways sprinkled throughout the levels. Another surprise is the use of detailed landscapes on the horizon. As one's character explores open-roofed ruins, there are mountains beyond the walls that are as impressive for this genre as those in Comanche: Maximum Overkill were for their genre. As one of our editors commented, \"It sure beats ceilings!\" Even when one is used to the look of a level, there can be other surprises to make it worthwhile to explore everything. I was surprised to hit a trip switch which literally flushed (complete with marvelous digitized sound effect) the watery level my character was exploring. Underneath the water was an entirely different look with skulls engraved at the base of the walls. The sound effects are also impressive. From the first sword thrust with its Errol Flynn film whoosh, through the choking, phlegmatic death of one's character, the OSZT ECONOS CODVO July 1993 Page 13 "


"bacital Dragons and Silicon Sling sional screen points up, the character moves straight ahead. If it points down, the character moves in reverse. This is fine in most 3-D scrollers, but it loses something in the translation for a game that has flying characters. I would have expected the up and down arrows to deal with altitude, not forward and backward movement. Then, there is the matter of speed. The higher the up The P arrow appears on the screen, the faster the character moves through the maze, ruins, dungeon or temple. It also took me a while to realize that I had to de-select all of the icons underneath the 3-D view window in order to get active arrows on the view screen. While the interface may be learned fast enough, it is not exactly an instant winner. Using the keypad option was extremely helpful to me, avoiding the occasional ambiguity and awkwardness of the mouse interface. The heart of the game deals with the morphing from creature to creature, and that is smooth and painless. Underneath the character portrait, there are six icons. Each represents the face of one of the creatures. One merely clicks on the creature desired and the transformation is almost instantaneous (well, it's instantaneous on a 486/50, but almost tedious on a 386SX), assuming Kirt has sufficient mana (a Polynesian term for the spiritual energy necessary to accomplish magic) to do so. Across the bottom of the 3-D window, there is a command line full of icons. One icon takes the player to the disk functions (there are four save game positions), another leads to the automapping screen, one icon controls the character's left hand and another the right, and others control the special attacks for each creature. sounds are terrific. At one point, I was moving about a maze as a colleague talked on the phone with a representative from a sound card company. I absentmindedly the resulting sound was so loud and vivid that the person on the other end of the line jumped and said, \"What was that?!\" When my colleague told her it was only the 8-bit sound card manufactured by her company, she was truly impressed. Most she was truly impressed Most gamers are likely to be as equally impressed. Icon-O-Clash The interface is strictly icon-based. Ultima Underworld fans will likely find it ideal, but it is not, strictly speaking, intuitive. If the arrow on the three-dimen2002) IF YOUR IDEA OF A GOOD TIME IS SITTING ALONE IN THE DARK, SE FIGHTING OFF EVIL FORCES 'TIL THE SUN COMES UP... Circle Reader Service #67 "


"cital Dragons and Silicon sli Silicon Slings 3. sw D3 While the main interface might not be intuitive, combat certainly is. The player places the ready weapon in the right hand so that it appears on the icon command line. Then, one has the option of selecting that weapon for an ordinary attack or selecting one of the special attacks. After selecting the weapon, one places the target cursor over the monster to be wasted and right clicks on the mouse. The sword whooshes, the trident stabs, the lightning sizzles and the fireballs explode as monsters are reduced to quivering puddles of mush. Since some gamers have complained about how easy it is to get lost or disoriented when moving around 3-D terrain, Shadowcaster has a solid approach to automapping. It shows the gamer a large map with a clear-cut \"You Are Here\" arrow and a smaller map of the entire level which the player is exploring. Every area which the on-screen character has seen or traversed is portrayed on the automapping screen. The whole thesis of Shadowcaster is that Veste has lined up the denizens of evil from multiple dimensions against the player's character. As such, one doesn't worry about whether to kill anything which appears on the screen, but rather how to destroy whatever beings Kirt encounters. Indeed, I found myself wondering if it were truly appropriate to call Shadowcaster a CRPG. The role-playing element is strictly limited to choosing a creature to shift into and is roughly equivalent to having an entire party of character classes in one character. Yet, the character does not improve in strength or skills, a vital element in role-playing. Further, the shapeshifting is more puzzle-solving than role-playing, as one figures out which shape will have the optimal combat value or best chance of solving a puzzle. The puzzles themselves are primarily of the graphic adventure variety (i.e. what do I have to move/find in order to open/shut this or that). They are spatial logic puzzles and \"hit and miss» explorations more than anything. Since, however, this is a sneak preview of only a portion of the game, we cannot be sure that this will be the final limit of the puzzle selection. Also, our version of the game did not have the climactic battle with Veste, so commenting on the endgame is impossible. What I can say, with confidence, is that Shadowcaster is a visual and aural cornucopia, a showcase game that will be a must have for owners of high-end systems. I can also state unequivocally that Shadowcaster features a unique premise that is supported by advanced technology. It is a \"hack and slash» masterpiece with plenty of visceral support to undergird its chrome. What I cannot say with certainty is whether it is a role-playing game or not. It may just be the most advanced action game I've ever played. Cow Till There Was You One factor that is decidedly missing is non-combative character interaction. YOU NEED PROFESSIONAL HELP. CYBERMAN A mouse and keyboard are fine for tackling spreadsheets, not teeming legions of blood-thirsty marauders. Stateof-the-art Cyber Man\" puts an unlimited range of motion within your grasp: three directions (x, y, and z] and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll]. 30 INTERACTIVE CONTROLLER Just move or twist it any way you want to go. Plus it's the only controller with vibrating feedback that lets you feel the action. CyberMan is 100% compatible with conventional mouse applications, and comes with 3D game titles that will pull you into the next dimension in PC entertainment. CyberMan is available now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928. TM Trademarks belong to their registered owners. LOGITECH The Senseware\" Company "


"cigital Dragons and Silicon Sling [° My. But you're A Feisty One! Raymond D. Feist And Dynamix Conspire In A \"Betrayal\" + their objectives change just as they would in any novel. Each chapter has a unique goal and a different mix of characters, and takes place in a different part of Midkemia. Fortunately, there is no time limit or lincar chain of events imposed here. Players are completely free to go where they want, do what they want, and see what they want. The only limitation is that they achieve the specific goal for a chapter before they move on to the next. These goals are clearly defined, and players are given lots of guidance along the way, so there's never any danger of not knowing what to do or where to go. While each chapter has a primary goal, there are dozens of minor quests and subplots waiting to be discovered. Considering that the game world occupies the equivalent of 224 million square feet of terrain, that's a lot of surprises. Seeing The Forests In The Trees It should be stated up front that the by Jay Kee graphics in Krondor are not going to knock players out of their chairs. Scenery is a combination of digitized trees and shrubbery overlaying hand-drawn mountains, rivers and grassland. Characters are digitized images of live actors in costume n the surface, fantasy role-playing Opening A New Chapter often seen in rotoscoped animation. games seem to have come a long While all of this is skillfully done, the way since the carly days of text Krondor is laid out exactly like a novel. overall impression of the 256-color VGA based gaming; the days when dungeon Nine chapters comprise the beginning, mazes were created by bored programmiddle and end of a drama that takes up mers on mainframe computers. Today, where Darkness At Sethanon—the last of the graphics, sound effects, music and the Riftwar, but not Midkemian booksanimations produced on increasingly soleft off. Instead of the usual party of wizphisticated personal computers make ards, clerics, fighters and thieves, the those early efforts look like cave drawings. player starts and finishes the game with Yet, for all the glitz and glamour, the characters right out of the novels themactual game play itself hasn't really selves. There's Locklear, Jimmy the Hand changed a heck of a lot. The player still and Pug, plus three new characters: \"rolls\" a character or party of characters, Owyn, an apprentice magician; Gorath, a chooses race, sex and profession, then Moredhel rebel; and Parrus, a veteran graphics is of haze and grain. Still, what spends the rest of the game mapping dunspellcaster. Of course, anyone expecting the graphics lack in resolution, the game geons, killing monsters and finding treasto play with these characters in the tradimakes up for in design. Small details ure. It doesn't make any difference if the tional party of six for the duration of the greatly develop the suspension of disbegame world is based in a medieval land or entire game is in for a major surprise. In ntire game is in for a maior surprise. In lief: birds and insects produce an audio outer space, the objectives and methods fact, anyone expecting anything like a backdrop that changes with the time of are the same. standard CRPG is in for a lot of surprises. day; colors change across distances; light sources cast shadows that recede along All that may change with Betrayal at There are never more than three chardungeon walls. The graphics, while simKrondor from Dynamix. Krondor is a fantasy role-playing game unlike any other. acters in a party at any time-sometimes, ple, manage to evoke a constantly-shiftIr is drawn direct from Raymond Feier's only two. As the party progresses froming mood. From the north country, with chapter to chapter, the characters and fantasy trilogy, The Riftwar Saga, with the its brooding snow-covered trails, to the dark forests of Elvandar, the overall effect same world, cast of characters and history. This isn't one of those \"based upon\" is just right, with a storybook quality that Seeing Forests In The Trees is both satisfying and products with little more than surface appropriate. similarities and names to link it to the TITLE: Betrayal at Krondor original. This was a collaborative effort PRICE: $69.95 Elegant simplicity between Dynamix and Feist, with the SYSTEM: seems to be an underREQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHZ, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics, author providing guidance and inspiralying theme through15MB hard drive space tion from start to finish. The result is an PROTECTION: None out the game. Every DESIGNER: John Cutter interactive fantasy adventure that could action is mousebishmagali PUBLISHER: Sierra/Dynamix best be described as a sequel to The RiftCoarsegold, CA driven and has a war Saga, and a new high-watermark in Roomdor (800) 326-6654 handy keyboard RPG design. IBM Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"THE HOTTEST 3-D ACTION SINCE WOL FENSTEIN AKE STONE ALIENS OF GOLD PARENTAL WARNING PC-15 GRAPHIC VIOLENCE Terror has been unleashed! And now...the violence that plagues a distant research colony threatens the planet Earth. As British military agent Blake Stone you're thrust into deadly combat against the malevolence of a mad scientist and the insidious mutant army under his command. Dr. Goldstern, driven by his insanity and bent on the annihilation of mankind, won't rest until he rules the known universe. The forces of heroic good and villainous evil collide in this life-or-death struggle to control Earth's future. Sign up to fight as Agent Blake Stone. The fate of humanity is in your hands! Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, The Star Institute. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are: (508) 365-2359: 2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036: 9600-14.4K (508) 368-4137: 14.4-16.8K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by Salling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence. Engagil AdiD music; Intense Vidound Blasteri sound effects ADD TO PINTERNO 3-D texture mapping virtual reality in 256 colors . fake on dozens of vicious opponents in combat 2011 Battle through 60 levels of JAM PRODUCTIONS SOFTWARE \"heart-pounding terror! P. O. BOX 496389 GARLAND, TX 75049 APO OTWAR T EMENT Blake Stone: Allens of Gold requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, mouse, Adlib, Sound Blaster or compatible cards are optional. Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #35 A001CGW "


"migital Drasons and Silicon Sling digitized sound effects add a touch of realism not found in many computer games. This is a realism, it should be noted, that excludes any hint of gore. The action is fierce, the effects are compelling, but the violence is relatively tame. Further, there is more here than meets the eye. Combat is comprised of a series of turns that continue until one side or the other is defeated. During each turn, characters have complete freedom of movement and a full range of offensive and defensive options. The player can move them anywhere on the field of battle and take whatever action is necessary. To make things even more interesting, the enemies are intelligent and often unpredictable. This a far cry from the basic Darvoge 53% Rocuracy) games. Success here depends as much on force. In Krondor, you think, or you die. 2355 equivalent. All a player needs to know is taverns and inns; and Haggling deterwhich button to click: right button for mines how much they can knock down information; left button for action. the price of an item before buying. Everything else follows logically. If the purpose of some icon or object is not self-explanatory, right-clicking on it will tell the player what it is and what it does. If the player wants to use it, abuse it, attack it, or talk to it, he or she just left-clicks on it. This creates a hands-free environment where the player can enjoy the game without having to constantly look up information in a manual. Another slick feature is the two-tiered mapping system that allows the player to see an overhead view of either the immeAll of the skills and some stats are imdiate area or a full-size map of Midkemia. proved as the player progresses through The overhead view can be zoomed in or the game, but improvements are not out, and the full-size map displays the party's position and bearing. Best of all, even successful actions. Sometimes, just the overhead view can be used to map dungeons—a great boon for people who increase. The player can even exercise break into a cold sweat at the mention of limited control over the developmental graph paper. process by highlighting individual skills in the stat screen in order to increase the Chapter And Verse rate at which they are improved. This allows the player to direct Lockpicking There are no long lists of exotic weapincreases to the character with the best ons and fancy armor in Krondor. No comlockpicking potential, or Casting inplicated stat tables, no shields, helms, bracers, gauntlets or other accoutercreases to the spellcaster, and so on. ments—just simple sets of armor, swords What's Your Point-Of-View? and staffs. The only variables are in the type and quality of the item. Some swords Travel in Krondor is ground-level, realare a lot more powerful than others; some time. The world is seen from the characarmor does a lot better job of protecting, ters point-of-view in the upper About the only complication is sometwo-thirds of a split-screen display. Obthing called a Racial Mod, which reflects h reflects jccts exist in three dimensional space ccts exist in three dimensional space sioned for through a full 360-degree panorama. humans, some for elves, and others for others for Players can walk around buildings or obTsurani or dwarves. All this means is that jects, examine things from any angle, wander through forests, circle mountains, ffers a small move along rivers and cross bridges. All degradation in the item's capability. It's of this is a product of something Dysimple, but surprisingly effective. namix calls 3Space technology, a system used in their combat fight simulators (Aces of the Pacific and Red Baron), but PALESTIE players familiar with those simulators will notice a couple of differences in Krondor. First, there is no joystick support; movement is directed by mouse or keyboard. Second, instead of the smooth-scrolling action found in simulators, the motion in Krondor is executed in steps.\" The game preferences let the player set the degree of these steps from large to small and reduce detail to a minimum, but even at the Stats and skills are simple, too. There are lowest setting, movement is still a jerky only four stats and twelve skills, and all the affair. If there is one disappointment in information that pertains to them can be the game, this is probably it. easily accessed. The stats cover the usual Crossing Swords Health, Stamina, Speed and strength, and the skills include some familiar labels, like If there is one pleasant surprise in the Melce, Casting, Lockpicking and Stealth game, it has to be the combat sequences. Less common skills include Weaponcraft Without a doubt, this is the best I've seen and Armorcraft, which determine how in a fantasy CRPG. Characters and oppogood a character is at repairing weapons nents are clearly displayed in a near-perand armor; Barding determines how fect perspective. Rotoscoped animations much gold a character can earn singing in produce actions that are quite lifelike, and There is a price to be paid, though. Because of this cncmy intelligence, som of the fights border on the impossible. Without the best armor and weapons and a good stock of spells and potions, a few key encounters can't be won Wilthie can be a major frustration, the designers thoughtfully made saving games as painless as possible. When a player gets blown out, he or she can simply go back, restore the game, and try again. One must just be sure they have a lot of disk space because each save takes a huge 335,000 bytes! A Bestseller? Nothing's perfect, and this game has its flaws. Some people will not like the look of the characters or their costumes. Some will dislike the jerky movement or the VGA graphics. Others might frown at the lack of joystick support. Yet, all of these are minor annoyances, trivial when viewed against the overall context of the game. Trivial, because Betrayal at Krondor is a rare gem. It has broken free of the boundaries of common fantasy CRPGs, has given players a compelling story, and has set new standards for others to follow. For once, a game actually lives up to, even exceeds, its advance billing. There's already talk of a sequel. I can hardly wait. Cow Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"Same lightrung quick action as the NHL. Don't blink If you still The only computer game tough enough to require these licenses. can't imagine what it's E Trophies like Hart, Smythe, Ross, Calder and, of course, Lord Stanley himself NHPA like to play Howitzer from Steve Yzerman Unfortunate meeting with Tie Domi. Collision with Zamboni this game, rip out this ad,  KE EASTON tape it to a Digitized sound including Ron Barr's voice, link organ, and very loud hits. Very loud PID Deked by Adam Oates Rare 5-hole through Andy Moog ALUMINUM concrete wall, GILMOUR then hurl ALUMINUM your body NOLSVEK Actual NHL players and teams represented here by authentic jerseys. Note the skating zebra against it. THEORE. RON FRANC. TOP DEFENSEMEN PLAYER TEAM PHIL HOUSLEY WINNIPEG PAUL COFFEY LA DET LARRY MURPHY PITTSBURGH STEVE DUCHESNE QUEBEC RAY BOUROUE GARY SUTER KEVIN HATCHER WASHINGTON JEFF BROWN ST LOUIS CHRIS CHELIOS CHICAGO WRATE WASHINGTON 21 BOSTON GARY. Historical stars. Cumulative stais. A coach's dream. Or nightmare 12 OREIGNERONT es January 1993 pacco Instant replay to relive the highlights Say hello to Pavel Bure FLETAE HOCKE a If it's in the game. it's in the game.\" Full season mode guarantees at least a couple of meetings with Bob Probert. SPORTS. Finally real NHL Hockey for your IBM or compatible ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #49 "


"pisital Dragons Sons and Silicon Sling Chasing Down Organ Donor Unmasking MicroProse's Return of the Phantom by Chuck Miller AR T rik was his name. Most, however, ports Raoul back to the late 1800s where and Room Fades (slow, medium or fast, knew him by the pitiable monikers he awakens as an historical character of with slow being the most mood effective L bestowed upon him by a cruel socisimilar name. However, lest I spoil the but the least time effective of the three). ety. Disfigured from birth, his was a face game by continuing further, suffice it to Players with slower systems will want to that not even a mother could love, his first say that this digital drama is unique, opt for instant panning and fast fades. gift being a mask to hide his horrid countouching upon the mysterious and superAdditionally, in the few situations where tenance. Shunned by his own family, Erik natural. one's character can die, a restore is unnecleft home at an early age and joined the essary. The game will automatically recircus. There he earned his living, being An Engine Of Construction turn the player to his or her position prior exhibited as a \"living corpse.\" In humiliPhantom is based upon MicroProse's to that last, fatal decision. ation, he traveled all of Europe, cavorting Animated Graphic Adventure (AGA) On the down side, keyboard comwith vagabonds and completing a macagame engine, first seen in Rex Nebular and mands are sorely needed to speed and bre education in the arts and magic. Fithe Cosmic Gender Bender. The AGA ensimplify play. Providing key equivalents nally, after a protracted stay in Persia, gine has changed little since its inception, for the mouse driven commands, as in Erik made his way to Paris where the final and so brings with it both the pleasures LucasArts' adventures, would be a defidays of his tragic existence brought him and pitfalls of the first release. nite plus (e.g., \"I\" for \"look\" or \"t\" for his greatest fame. For, dear reader, it was \"ralk\"). Another weakness involves charthere that Erik became known as the acrer movement which, though fluid, is a Phantom of the Opera. bit slow and in need of a speed adjustment option as in Sierra titles. While The Fat Lady Is Mute many screens do allow \"jumping\" from The year is 1993; the location, the Paris place to place (by clicking where the Opera House. Raoul Montand, a detecplayer wants to go and hitting the spacetive with the Paris Surete (France's bar), this does not work on all screens. equivalent of the FBI), suddenly found Traversing the Opera's stairs, for inhis plans for a pleasant evening thwarted stance, was a tedious process that did not as the immense chandelier of the Opera employ the \"jump\" feature used elseHouse crashed down upon an unsuspectOn the positive side, Phantom offers a where. A \"quick move\" feature would also ing crowd, its support deliberately sev simple and attractive interface. Installahave been appreciated, allowing the ered. Who could have perpetrated such tion is a breeze, as is configuring the player to go from one location to another violence? What fiend could be so heart software to one's system and playing prefwithout actually having to walk there one less? This is what the player, in the guise erences. Though Novice and Challenging screen at a time. of Raoul Montand, must discover. modes are once again provided, they differ little in actual difficulty of Though only roughly resembling the play (both are relatively easy). play and novel of the same name, the plot Return of the Phantom of Return of the Phantom (Phantom) is a Other adjustable game play gripping one. The legendary Phantom of options include the choice of TITLE: Return of the Phantom the Opera (presumed dead around the two mouse modes, Standard PHANTOM PRICE: $69.95 and Easy, with the latter idenSYSTEM: turn of the century) has appeared in preIBM, IBM CD-ROM REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, 2MB RAM sent day Paris. With vengeance his drivtifying the objects under the VGNMCGA graphics, mouse pointer as it passes over ing force, the Phantom has bridged time, 8MB hard drive space them; Panning, which allows PROTECTION: caused multiple deaths, and entangled None DESIGNER: Raymond Benson Raoul Montand in his evil machinations. the player to select the scroll PUBLISHER: MicroProse, Inc. Not content with his efforts up to this rate of certain large locations Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 point, the Phantom mysteriously trans(slow, medium or instant); Lools at decorative molding RETURN MICROPROSE Computer Gaming World "


"You can outfly this guy... But can your COMPUTER? Yesterday's high speed games have pushed your personal computer t Today's games are breaking them. You need a computer with no limits. You need to fly a FALCON. Introducing the Falcon MACH 5. The latest advance in our line of high speed personal computers, the MACH 5 is the ultimate machine for gaming, personal and business use. It features new VESA Local Bus technology and the fastest 486 processor to produce over 40 VGA frames per second. 30 frames per second is flicker free to the human eye. The MACH 5 is serious hardware for serious players. The MACH 5 comes standard with: VESA Local Bus Motherboard with 256K Cache and Intel 486DX/2-66 Microprocessor VESA Local Bus Graphics Card with 1 Megabyte Video Memory VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card (4 Megabytes per second transfer rate) 4 Megabytes of RAM Upgradable to 32 1.2 and 1.44 Megabyte Floppy Drives 130 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive The MACH 5 Internal Caddyless CD-ROM Drive (350 ms) CTX 14\" Super VGA Color Monitor Mini-Tower Case Creative Labs SoundBlaster Deluxe Multimedia Speakers Microsoft DOS 6.0 3 Button Serial Mouse 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover CH Products Flightstick Joystick and High Speed Joystick Port Backed By Our 1 Year Parts and Labor Warranty is Complete Including Shipping For Only $2,499 66 Fractal landscape created with VistaPro 3.0. 3D modeling courtesy of Oregon Data Products. Prices subject to change without notice. Optional equipment shown. FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 Circle Reader Service #52 VISA & MasterCard Accepted. Financing Available. "


"cigital Dragons and Silicon Sling Scoping Out The Opera sent, most of the story conveys a sense of Rotoscoped animation is the star of gravity. Phantom. If any one area of development The Curtain Falls outshines the rest, this is it. While the graphics are attractive, on par with those Overall, I found the plot of Return of the of Rex Nebular, it is the rotoscoped aniPhantom intriguing, but the adventure a mation that distinguishes itself, being as bit too linear. There just didn't seem to fluid and lifelike as that of any computer be enough to do during play. Offering product to date. Be it walking, kneeling only 12 to 18 hours of gaming for the or taking a fall from the catwalks above average player seems a significant weakthe Opera's stage, the movements of the ness in a producr that retails for $69.95. characters in Phantom are completely Finding Madame Giry's book, detailing Apart from the problem with the book Erik's damned and tormented life, mentioned above, the only bothersome natural. proved very frustrating. It simply was not aspect of play was the process of mapping in the library where it was supposed to be out the maze of catacombs below the and progress was halted until it could be Opera House. This is good for several located. As it turns out, one cannot simhours of work, but does not enhance the ply \"look\" for the book, at least not until play value. It is a process that I and most one has \"looked\" at the entire row of of my friends have long since tired of shelves; only then does it becomes visible performing in preference to some form of (like being unable to see the trees for the automapping being incorporated into an Tallico Monsieur Richard forest?). Another puzzling conundrum adventure. involves the fire axe. One knows, without a doubt, that it is needed, even vital. However, it can only be acquired and Music is richly textured and thematic, used in \"emergency situations. Until sounding especially good if General then, one cannot get it. (This is simply a MIDI or Roland support is available. In frustration, as it is unmistakably clear this case, it is excellent, more opulent when the axe is finally needed. In fact, its than the FM synthesis supported by most acquisition and use is automatic.) sound cards (though the music is still rich and full with any Ad Lib or Sound Blaster The game takes an occasional shot ar compatible board). Sound effects, humor, but it sometimes seems our of though, are a mixed bag. While the sound place in a game containing such a sinister of footfalls is mediocre, the digitized and intense atmosphere. One example Yet, in all, I enjoyed pitting wits against laugh of the Phantom and the screams of presents itself upon finding a skull in the the Opera Ghost. Phantom offers a plot the player's character are great. The catacombs beneath the Opera House. with a twist, one that comes full circle sound of squeaking doors is also reproWhen the player examines the skull, it without being predictable. It offers interduced especially well, though it was overelicits the response «Some poor skeleton esting dialogue (when it's not spoken, sce used to the point of annoyance. It seems must be running around without its the sidebar) and is pleasant to the eyes and every door in the Opera House is due for head.» In a title like Monkey Island, such ears. What it doesn't offer is inspired puza good oiling. Still, the music and sound a phrase might be worth a smirk, but it's zle design or extended play. If a player effects complement the game well. not really funny in the context of this values story over puzzles and low impact adventure and works against the suspengaming over an exhausting cerebral workWhere's That Damned Book? sion of disbelief necessary in a horour, Phantom is worth a look (even more ror/mystery. Phantom, for the most part, so with a discounted price tag). Others Most puzzles are of average difficulty, is a serious title and should be understood would be better off seeking a different though a few proved unduly perplexing. as such. While a touch of humor is premarquee. CGW Did You CD The Phantom? For many developers, the time between the release of disk-based and CD-ROM versions of their products is lessening. In the past, it has taken several months for titles to appear on silvery disk, but delay time is now beginning to hover around a period of several weeks, at least for some vendors. In keeping with this trend, Micro Prose has just shipped Return of the Phantom CD, a short two weeks following the disk-based release. Since the review of Phantom was already complete, we felt it prudent to provide an update in sidebar fashion, focusing on the enhancements to the CD product. Though not apparent from the packaging, Phantom CD has been given the \"talkie» treatment. However, this talkie version has not received the full attention of similar products. Only \"conversation between characters is spoken. Room and object descriptions are still text only. In addition, there is no way to turn off the displayed text. One still sees the text box containing the speech and motionless faces of those speaking. Furthermore, the quality of vocal talent employed is a mixed bag. Poor inflections and a strange bouillabaisse of English sprinkled with French accents didn't help strengthen the game's believability. Fortunately, speech can be toggled off if so desired. Another weakness, as may be expected, is CD-ROM access time. Since only a token amount of data is installed to one's hard drive, most game data must be extracted from the CD itself. What this amounts to in Phantom (more so than in other CD products we have played) is a significant delay in transitions from scene to scenc. Even a double speed CD-ROM drive does little to alleviate the data flow crunch. Provisions to copy all game data except speech to one's hard drive would have been appreciated. This data would only consume 15MB of space, but would allow greatly accelerated play. Overall, Phantom CD is a disappointment. Uninspiring vocals and slow access mar an otherwise solid product. Let's hope the next effort has higher production values. CGW Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"WE TEN TWO ORLDS WAR. nu MODEL SUUgarnnut Tech Speed Lond: Tys Ar! Tots Fire Power: 17 Ronge A5 TORSETIS PROCE Rador: Transport: FUILD COST: LOS!   2013 U STATS: In Production: LOSSE! Command your entire planet's military resources in an effort to conquer a hostile neighbouring planet. You controla state of the art workstation from which advanced software tools enable you to design new craft, research new technologies, build new installations & craft, set up highly sophisticated missions and watch the progress of this strategic-interplanetary conflict. END  Design your own spacecraft for tanks, submarines, jet....)! Battles take place in space & on surface of bourplanets Random planet generator for great replay value Designed as a 2 player game! POD CUILO CECIGA OROER TITATS SYSTEM Send out units on missions to axplore the unknown enemy planet and yvipe out its military capability ssions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #62 "


"sucital Dragons and Silicon Slin Digital D ilicon Slings Scorpion's View Sir-Tech's Realms of Arkania by Scorpia, Adventure/RPG Editor REALMS ARKANIA TITLE: Realms of Arkania: Blade of Destiny PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: Amiga, IBM REQUIREMENTS: IBM: 386-16MHZ, VGA graphics, 6MB hard drive space. Amiga: 1MB RAM, hard drive recommended PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNERS: Hans-Jrgen Brandle and Guido Henkel PUBLISHER: Sit-Tech PO Box 245 Ogdensburg, NY 13669 (315) 393-6633 calms of Arkania: Blade of Destiny Orcs' location. This was a waste; there is one rather vague mention of the road from Sir-Tech is a computer verno information available. berween Phexcaer and Skelellen being sion of Das Schwarze Auge, a popuIt turns out that you have to take the \"adventurous.\" lar German role-playing system. No road from Skelellen to Phexcaer and translation of the title is given in the game What A Character! climb a sheer rock wall along the way. Not manual, which is probably a prudent many players are likely to do this, as there Character creation can be an involved move. \"Das Schwarze Auge\" means \"The is a swamp between the two towns, and process. Rolls are made one at a time, and Black Eye,\" and that might be appropriplayers will inevitably lose valuable items you allocate them to seven physical stats, ate here. when the swamp is crossed. Fortunately, trying to obtain the character type you The plot of the game offers nothing if you start from Skelellen, you won't have want (each has minimums in certain arnew. Your party of six adventurers ramto worry about the swamp. Unfortueas). This is followed by another set of bles across the countryside assembling nately, you are more likely to start from rolls for negative attributes of claustrothat hoary old chestnut, the treasure map. Phexcaer, as that town has a couple of phobia, necrophobia, avarice, superstiThe map leads to the resting place of tion, acrophobia, violent fabled Grimring, the Orcslayer sword. REALMS temper and curi temper and curiosity (all charWith that in hand, you rush off into the acter types come with these middle of an Orc army encampment to same disadvantages). challenge the head Orc to single combat. If your allocations meet the If you win, the Orcs pack up and go standards for a character \"arinvade somewhere else. If you lose, they chetype,\" you then go to the follow through with their plans to trash skill screen. Here you have 20 the human settlements of Arkania. That's chances to raise some of the the extent of the story. skills available. All skills are available to all characters, but For the most part, the path to the map some types will be naturally is fairly simple. You start with one perOGRE WRAITH BIGFOOT DUBREVIARKANE ZVNARYX LX sonal contact and learn of others who can better at certain skills than others. For instance, Warriors help you through the game. It's a simple tributary roads and Skelellen doesn't. Afstart with better combat abilities than matter of following the chain of people, ter one bout with the swamp, losing who mages, and Rogues are better at lockpickacquiring map pieces as you go along. knows what (the items are taken at raning. Skill increases are not automatic. You dom), many players would probably give can make up to three attempts to raise a The big problem arises after you have up on that route and be a long time particular skill. If all three fail, you must Grimring—the information dries up. All finding the cave. wait until the character advances a level the clues and people are there only to get That's a serious matter, since there is a of experience before you can try again. Ar you to the sword. Finding the Orc army time limit here. You have roughly two level gain time, this process is repeated, is an entirely different matter, and for that years game time to find the sword and the with another 20 chances to raise abilities. there is no help at all. I was stuck at this Orcs. After that, the Orc hordes will de Thierom This can make for difficulties, as there back through the towns and villages, is quite amazing that no clues to the locais no guarantee that any skill will be raised. So, for example, a fighter going drinking in innumerable bars, hoping to tion of the Orc map are given, aside from pick up some clue or rumor leading to the from level one to level two might fail all THE OLD FORTRESS ISSN Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"EXP798 DEITY 8200455 18/18 18/19 19/18 18/18 18/18 2:2235 SISSSS AP 070 same). Digital Dragons is and Silicon Slings REALMS counter, all monsters (or huIn some places, NPCs can be invited to TAORHALIAN UK GUA man opponents) are worth exjoin your party, but they are usually more LEVEL 1 actly the same amount of FINGER MONEY 240 75 78 trouble than they're worth, as you have experience, either 57 points or no control over them in combat. They BORON 114 points, depending on how also leave the party whenever they feel like many of them there are. doing so, and you have no idea when that During combat, you can rewill be until it happens. W load a save position. Most Those, however, are almost trifles comLP 32634/32639 games force you to sit through pared to the three major strikes against MR the wcarisome experience of this product, of which the first is saving watching your party be ENDURANCE the game. You can save almost anywhere, trounced by superior oppoexcept while traveling on the road. If you WATERCKIN nents. In Arkania you can get save outside a temple, however, each three chances in sword skill, thereby makour of this situation if you see that your party members loses 57 experience points ing him no better at second level than he characrers are in over their heads and per save (the manual says 50, but it is was at first level. It is also possible to blow return to a previous save. This is a feature actually 57). it twice in a row, as happened to one of my fighters, who made no advance in more games should have. This atrocious concept is a slap in the swords on two successive level gains. Extra Baggage face to game players. Either you go through several levels of dungeon, hoping Magic users go through several addiMoving to the down side of Arkania, you won't have to reload (thereby losing tional screens where they can have several there are several differences between what all your progress so far), or you save once attempts to raise spell skills in similar the manual says and what actually hapin awhile, giving up the experience. And fashion. Most spells start off well down in pens in the game. For instance, the pause when it takes 5,000 experience just to ger the negative numbers with only a relative key does not work; you have to bring up from level 1 to level 2, every point is handful available for casting, and these vary by type of mage. REALMS the passage of time (and time The entire spell system is awkward and moves on ARXXNIN regardless of confusing. After going for the obvious whether the party does the combat and healing spells, you have no idea what other spells are really going to While the \"Lightning\" spell be useful in the game. With only three chances to improve a spell, choices berounds, they can still parry, alcome difficult and points can easily be though they're not supposed squandered on useless spells. to be able to do that. \"Visibili\" A BOOTH AT THE MARKET The game offers two play modes: Novonly makes the caster invisible, ice and Advanced. Novice mode should not the entire party. «Iron certainly be avoided. In this mode, you Rust\" is supposed to be a OGRE WRAITHI BIGFOOTI DUBREVIARKANE ZVNARVA ZA cannot check on any of your character's \"touch\" spell, but enemy precious, particularly at the start. I would skills or spells. You have absolutely no mages were able to cast this across long not mind, and I doubt anyone would, idea how good any character is at anydistances. \"Arax Poison\" (used on weapreceiving bonus experience for going thing, nor do you know which spells they ons) is noted as reducing an opponent's without saves. But to penalize someone are supposedly competent at casting. It's stats; it actually does mega-damage, for being prudent, to pur players in the one thing to let the computer handle this, sometimes as many as 35-40 points in one position where they must risk possibly but being unable to see a character's abilishot. redoing a substantial portion of a dunties is poor design. geon (as well as the trip to the dungeon; One irritating feature is the inability to many are outdoors) is almost too outrasce a weapon's damage potential except in Positive Attributes geous for words. combat. There, you can pick \"Check Valucs» from the combat menu and see how Combat does not make this situation There are so many things wrong with the game play that we should start off much damage a weapon is capable of any better, and is the second strike. No with the few that are right. The game doing, but this is the only time you can one expects beginning characters to fight offers auto-mapping, which is available in see these numbers. as well as veterans. However, when the average hit percentage for melee weapons both towns and dungeons. It uses a colorcoding scheme, and once you get used to Haggling with merchants can be dan is 20% or less, and when that percentage it, this works rather well, although sepagerous. If you're haggling to raise or lower does not improve much with advancerare colors for taverns and inns would prices and fail three times in a row, the ment (especially if you miss skill inhave been more helpful. The party's poparty is kicked out of the store and will creases), fighting becomes a tedious, sition is always shown and large areas can never be able to deal with that merchant frustrating, boring, long-drawn-out afbe scrolled sideways. Of course, you have again. In a large city with many merfair. ro walk through an area for it to show up chants, this isn't much of a problem. Out in the boonies, where there may be only This applies to spells as well. Many of on the map, but once you do that, it is them fail. even at decent skill levels. The permanently displayed. one shop, it's a serious matter. only ones I found to work reasonably One interesting new idea is the giving often were \"Lightning\" and \"FulminicRole-playing, as such, is pretty much tus,\" but even with these you can't count of extra experience the very first time a nil. About the only opportunity for it is party encounters a monster. This is a to be rude or insulting to shopkeeperson them going off properly. reward for facing the unknown, and not the best move if you're hoping to buy Exacerbating this further is the incredmakes a lot of sense. After the first enor sell something in that store. ible number of weapon fumbles made by July 1993 Page 25 "


"Bicital Dragons ans Silicon Sling Playing Tips the characters. While playing this game, I could absolutely guarantee that at least one fighter would fumble, in every single combat. Every fight, and I kept track to be sure. These characters were not using exotic or unfamiliar weapons, but plain ol' everyday one-hand swords. They were trained up in swordplay (skill rolls permitting), yet even when the sword skill was up at 10 or 11 they fumbled with the same depressing regularity, occasionally breaking weapons or hitting themselves for damage. A fumble now and then is one thing; when supposedly-competent characters do so in combat after combat, something is seriously wrong with the game mechanics. This is especially true as this ineptitude does not apply to bow weapons. A Green Elf or Hunter with bow in hand will hit, even at level 1 experience, about 80% of the time. A regular fighter with bow in hand and some missile weapon skill will hit about 50% of the time, occasionally better. It's quire obvious that the combat is extremely unbalanced. Now we come to the last straw. After finishing the game it occurred to me to check whether or not it was possible to win the Big Showdown with an ordinary sword instead of Grimring. Well, I had a hard time during my first attempt, and I decided to try again. To my surprise, the Quit/Reload command didn't bring up the load game screen. It brought up the victory screen. My experimentation with the game showed that the best party is probably composed of two fighters (one a Dwarf), three Green Elves (best archers, and they have spells, too), and a Magician. Since the fighters, especially at low levels, are almost useless, you should tank them up in the best armor you can manage and use them as targer dummies for the opposition. Fighters should carry a spare weapon for those times when the primary one breaks (as it inevitably will). Once they've attracted the enemy, send the archers around to pick them off with arrows. You can never have enough arrows (or bolts), so the Elves should be lightly-armored and carrying as many missiles as possible. Do not neglect sword skill however; sometimes the combat arena is too confining, or your Elf might run out of arrows, so a melee skill is necessary. Rogues, even with training, are the worst fighters around. Take the Dwarf instead and build up his lockpicking. One character, preferably with good charisma, should work up haggling skill. Avoid the fancy weapons and stick to the everyday kind; your fighters will do a little better that way. When you have some cash, save the game, buy a bunch of exotic weapons, equip them one at a time, and take a look at the Attack/Parry values. It's a real eye-opener. The Magician should specialize in combat spells and should always take the skill attempt/astral point exchange. Also work up Analyze Magic; there are a few goodies out there that you don't want to miss. At the start of the game, enchant the wand for the permanent light spell so you don't have to carry torches or lanterns. Later on, enchant the wand up through the rest of its special purpose functions. Good spells to have are: Lightning, Fulminictus, Ignifaxus, Somnigravis, Paralyze, Horriphobus, Balm, Pure and Clear, and Accurate Eye. On the road, always have your best survivalist go foraging and send your best herbalist (the Magician) hunting for herbs. Always set guards when you are not sleeping at an inn. Never use Talents to heal people. More often than not, the attempt will fail, and you can make the patient worse, adding to the injury or even giving him or her tetanus. The professional healers are sometimes no better, so avoid them, too. Use healing spells, healing potions or healing herbs instead. Upon gaining a new level, concentrate on reducing: superstition, acrophobia, claustrophobia, and necrophobia. The other three disadvantages don't seem to have any effect on game play (at least that I experienced), so leave them for later. Riding skill has no function in this game, as all travel is by ship or foot. Put points into climbing and swimming, self-control, physical control, and some of the other body skills. Arkania And The Gravis Ultrasound Card Arkania is the only game I've played so far that would not work with the Gravis Ultrasound card. Everything else I have on my new system has gotten along with the SBOS (SoundBlaster emulator), but nothing I tried would make Arkania accept it. Therefore, I could not comment in the main article on any sound effects or music in the game, as it naturally played silently. After configuring for Sound Blaster (original) and booting up, the program would display the message \"sound hardware not found.\" This seems to indicate that it is looking for the actual physical card, rather than just accepting the drivers. I could find no way around this, which was very irksome. I am currently using SBOS v2.04. If anyone out there with a Gravis manages to get it to work with this game (although after my current article, there may not be too many attempting it!), I would like to hear from you. Send full details on your config and autoexec files, SBOS settings, SBOS version, and any parameters you used (see end of Mail column for the address). If I can duplicate sound in the game, I will print the info in a future issue. CGW That's right folks, if you quit during the final battle you automatically win the game, without having to fight at all. You don't need the treasure map or Grimring (though it's a nice weapon to have), just the Orc map showing the army's position. With this you can finish the game at any time, at almost any level. This is not just a seam; it is the Grand Canyon of seams. How did the 20+ playtesters manage to miss this one? If they didn't miss it, why wasn't it fixed? As it stands, this bug makes playing the game a farce, even without all its other problems. Those who worship at the mythical altar of Realism often end up sacrificing fun and playability on it. That is what happened with Blade of Destiny. In their attempt to make the game \"like real life\" (something few players actually want in the first place) the designers went overboard in the wrong direction more than once. I would not recommend Arkania to any game player, but I do recommend it to game designers as an example of what to avoid in their own products. Let us all hope we don't see another one like this any time soon, C6W Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"EVEN THE BEST EQUIPMENT NEEDS SOLID SUPPORT SOUNDMAN 16. THE BEST SUPPORTED CD-QUALITY SOUND BOARD IN THE BUSINESS SoundMan 16 is endowed with 7 day-a-week technical support, a 3-year free replacement warranty, a limited lifetime warranty, and discount hardware upgrades. SoundMan includes 16 bit, 44.1 KHz sampling/playback, a 20-voice Yamaha OPL-3 stereo synthesis chip, sound-enhanced jumperless installation, and a bundle of multimedia titles including MCS MusicRack, Screen Craze II and ICON Hear-IT Lite. It's guaranteed 100% SoundBlaster« and Adlibe compatible, and is the only 16-bit sound board backed by Logitech's reputation for quality and service. Pick one up at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2959. LU TM/ Trademarks belong to their respective owners. The Senseware Company SOUNDMAN 16 Soun "


"icital Dragons and Silicon Sling Scorpion's Mail Serpent Isle Labyrinth of Worlds The Summoning Magic Candle II Darkside of Xeen Eye of the Beholder III Alone in the Dark Legend of Kyrandia Monkey Island I Wherein CGW's Adventure Games Editor Offers Aid For Adventurers s you can see, Fred and I have not made too much progress lately in cleaning up the place (I just don't know where all this mail comes from). Fortunately, there's still a small space left in that corner over there, and as long as you don't sit up straight, your head probably won't hit the ceiling. Before we get to the good stuff, I have a message for Kevin C. in Malaysia. Kevin and I have been corresponding fairly regularly, but over the last several months a problem seems to have developed. While all his letters have been arriving in my box, and I've answered all of them, the contents of his letters indicate that those replies are not being received. While it could just be that outgoing mail is unusually slow, that would not explain this occurring over a number of months. I am really concerned about this and don't want Kevin to think I'm ignoring him. Since regular mail doesn't appear to be working too well (at least from here to Malaysia), this column is the only means I have to let him know about this problem (and with the publisher's lead time, even this is going to take awhile). is going to take awhile) Serpent Isle: It seems a lot of Avatars have gotten themselves stuck in the Endless Corridor of the Mountains of Freedom. We can't have that; after all, how can you save the world (again) if you can't get our? So, you'd better find that secret door that leads to the last part of the maze. It's there; just go one step at a time, look to the rising sun, and you should find it. Labyrinth of Worlds: Here's mud in your cyc! Also your boots, your pants, and everything else. There's just nothing like a refreshing filanium mud bath with basilisk oil to make your day...or your body into a bottle of gin (or something like that). Well, there's a little more to it than that, but it's enough to get you started anyway. The Summoning: Some people are still wandering around down there in the caves, and it would be a shame nor to give them a helping hand (or at least a hint). picture gallery yet? After you do someFor example, they're having a hard time thing about that annoying Indian chief, finding the last wizard skull. It's behind a you'll be able to enter a very important door just pasr the medallion slots on the room where you should come across a Crimson Knight level. A sun key is couple of items that will help out in the needed to unlock the door. ballroom. Magic Candle II: Interestingly, mail Legend of Kyrandia: The birthstone still comes in occasionally about this one, \"puzzle\" continues to make life difficult and everyone pretty much asks the same for game players. This is not surprising question. Namely, where is that unmensince it's strictly a trial-and-error solution, tionable iron key that opens the final with no clues at all as to which stones dungeon? Well, it happens to be in the work on the altar. While you do need the Caverns of Mandarg, and it's not easy to stone from the stream, the other gems are reach. In fact, you'll have to get up to the randomly determined. All that can be fourth level of the caves before you can done here is to collect as many different find the way back down to level one and gems as possible, save the game at the the secret area where the key is hidden. altar, and try them one at a time. When Darkside of Xeen: A little surprisingly, you get the first one, restore the game, use that stone, then start on the rest of the some adventurers are having a hard time gems. Eventually, you'll know which are in the northern tower of the Vowelless Knights. They've gotten to the top, but the four right ones. the chalice eludes them, probably because Monkey Island I: This one remains they have not learned from their lessons. popular, and the problem of getting Think about it: all those questions (lesaround under the Monkey's Head is sons) down below, how were they anpopular, too (heh). Come to think of it, swered? The same thing works here. there are a lot of heads around here (well, Eye of the Beholder III: Getting out of Funfuhr. Beholder III. Carrin after all, this is cannibal country). And the starting graveyard, and/or out of the you do need to get a head to get ahead. forest, has proved to be a chore for a few The trick is what to trade for it. Rememfolks. The graveyard itself isn't really that ber, in this situation, navigation is everymuch of a problem ifyou have an axe with thing! you or can find the one that's lying A nd that's about it for this look into the around somewhere. The entire area is will mailbag. In the meantime, if you need actually a large square, and the boundahelp with an adventure game, you can ries can be mapped with a little patience reach me in the following ways: (and axe). The forest requires a different item, which can be found in one of the On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under thorn mazes. By the way, for those muckthe Groups and Clubs menu). ing around in the mausoleum, I have heard on good authority that a certain On GEnie: Stop by the Games Roundtigerish individual in the front ranks is Table (type: Scorpia to reach the Games really, umm, death on Undead Beasts. RT). Alone in the Dark: Care to dance? Yes? By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, Oh, you don't like the music. Too bad. stamped envelope if you live in the It's a pity that none of the records you United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, found so far suit the tastes of the waltzers Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. in the ball room. Then again, perhaps you haven't looked hard enough, in the right Until next time, happy adventuring! places. Have you taken a stroll down the CGW Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"Most People Can't See a Single Reason to Try Something Besides SimCity. We See 2000. Coming this Christmas. MAXIS Circle Reader Service #70 "


"cital Dragons and Silicon Slin DILIIT The Call Of The House Of Winthrop Exploring MicroProse's The Legacy by Allen L. Greenberg Green botue taken The wood panelled door is now open A folded sheet of paper. The nelle urna 25 T he Legacy is filled to its bloodthe game, the character will gain experiview. A scrolling narration of the action choked attic with the writings of ence points that may then be distributed appears at the bottom of the screen. Most Edgar Allan Poe, H.P. Lovecraft among these attributes. Magic plays an important of all, a self-drawing map is and more than a dash of Clive Barker. As important part in the game, and the in also visible. Each of these functions apin most gothic stories, the protagonist pears in an individual window that may discovers that he/she is the last known be sized and placed anywhere on the member of some mysterious clan and has screen the player desires. A window arjust inherited a home with a built-in rangement may be saved to disk just as problem of the supernatural variety. Exthough it were a saved game in progress. ploring that property and learning its unInventory management is a major task speakable secrets usually associated in The Legacy. There are several times with some diabolical pact between one's more objects to be found in the Winthrop ancestors and an evil force—becomes the mansion than the player may carry at one primary objective of said heir. So it is in time. Nearly all of these objects are necThe Legacy, a fantasy role-playing game essary, or at least useful, at some time in from Micro Prose where the player's char heritor's ability to use it will increase the game. An attaché case, whose slender acter inherits the mansion belonging to along with his or her experience. The outward appearance is belied by a generthe mysterious Winthrop clan. house has its share of secret walls and ous storage capacity, becomes the players According to the game's documentasliding panels, but the player is not so constant companion. Like a business pertion, it was Poe's visit to the Winthrop overwhelmed with them as to make the son fumbling for an appointment book, house that inspired his account of The entire game an exercise in puzzle-solving. players are forced to retrieve their spellFall of the House of Usher and may have book, or an appropriate weapon, while even contributed to the insanity which some fiend or monster attacks. ended his life. Anyone familiar with the writings of H.P. Lovecraft is aware that Early Gothic Decor the human race is not the first to inhabit our earthly dimension. Beings too hideA tour through the mansion reveals an ous to appear in any respectable book interesting variety of decor. Much of the (although not, apparently, in this prohouse consists of dull wood paneling and gram) were cast out by magical means. To threadbare furniture. However, this this day, a firm of extra-dimensional lawunique piece of real-estare also features a yers stand ready to sign agreements with Your sense that the door is Timmy seated by musical shining temple, a family crypt and a musome foolish member of humanity who seum of occult paraphernalia. Another will allow these demons to re-enter and of the action which takes place in real level holds a grisly, blood-splashed asyreclaim their former home world. time. The mouse is the most strongly lum which is rendered in such appalling Clearly, the Winthrop family has been recommended interface device, although detail as would leave a tabloid journalist involved in some casteless negotiations a keyboard equivalent for each command speechless. A dungeon, sickeningly upwith these spirits. is also available. The player selects one of holstered by a dermatologist gone mad, six on-screen arrows to issue movement generates an atmosphere which could Rococo Interface commands, while other icons are reserved only have been inspired by Clive Barker. for battle or spellThe heir to this foreboding real estate is casting. In addition The Legacy: Realm Of Terror a character chosen by the player. Fourto a view of the acmale and four female pre-written charaction, the screen also TITLE: The Legacy: Realm of Terror rers are available for this purpose, any of displays a view of the leQACy PRICE: $69.95 IBM whom may be modified should the player inheritor. Objects in REQUIREMENTS: 386SX-16MHZ, 2MB RAM, so desire. Character attributes include the hero's inventory, VGA graphics, 18MB hard drive space PROTECTION: strength, knowledge, dexterity and as well as any weapDocumentation look up DESIGNERS: Jim Bambra and Magnetic Scrolls willpower. Several of these also contain ons at hand, are also PUBLISHER: MicroProse subcategories such as brawling and medisplayed in this Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 chanics. As the player progresses through to f are un chichten SYSTEM: MICROPROCE Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"Beat The NFL Coaches At Their Own Game. 410 1481 DOUA luun 13. Blisacka kie and pass your way to the playolis though your facemask graphics! Use winning strategles designed by actual NFL coaches and players SEO Marv Levy. Jimmy Johnson. Bill Parcells. Chuck Knox. Marty Schottenheimer. Bill Cowher. These are just a few of the sideline strategists waiting for you on the gridirons of NFL Coaches Club Football, the most authentic football game ever created for the PC. Each gameday, you'll go head-to-head against NFL coaches. Coaches that will be cursing themselves as you create your own trick plays, bark out any of 80 offensive and Create your own NFL team dynasty 80 defensive plays, and hand-pick the players that will carry your team to the Super Bowl. and head to the Super Bowl. This is NFL action so real you'll be scraping the mud from your face. You'll plow through the trenches. Shake off bone-crunching tackles. Perform acrobatic catches. And choose players based on true-to-life characteristics like blocking and coverage skills, height, weight, and speed. No other football game brings more to the playing field. Full 3-D field display lets you view the action from every conceivable angle. Detailed instant replay function lets you quickly analyze plays. And individual plays or entire games can be saved so you can view your greatness (or learn from your mistakes!). NFL Coaches Club Football from MicroProse. Your chance to learn from the best. Choose players based on Then beat them at their own game. skills, size, and speed. ! To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri., 8:30am-5:00 pm EST or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive. Dept. D10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 ENTERTAINMENT. SOFTWARE Name: SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE Address: | City: State: __Zip: _ Zip: AAR MICROPROSE 1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. NFL Coaches Club is a trademark of the National Football League and is licensed exclusively by Leader Enterprises, Inc., Orlando, FL. Circle Reader Service #75 "


"cital Dragons and Silicon Sling Rendered in dull, textured colors, the walls throughout the mansion are impressively real. Ultimately, players will have the chance to stop through those walls and into a rift which separates the dimensions in order to experience what lies on the other side. You fail to dodre bastvour attaci woodpindoor Con formed human servants are particularly impressive. Only the fact that the monsters do not always seem to be aware of their surroundings, and may continue to walk even though they have reached a wall, mars the illusion that they are alive. The Legacy features an interesting story involving an ancient Winthrop who formed an agreement with an extra-dimensional demon. Since that time, other members of the family have found them found, spells are copied to the book and selves caught up in the repercussions of may be cast provided the hero's spell that agreement. Several outsiders have points and attributes allow him to do so. ventured into the home, leaving behind A full spellbook contains the usual variety hints, food and weaponry of all types. The of combat, protection and ability-entime is quickly approaching when the hancing formulas. The spells are capable doorway between dimensions will once of producing some amusing effects on the again open. This will prove an excellent demons, some of whom may throw their opportunity to destroy the original dehands up in surprise, or find themselves mon, rendering both it and its contract spinning around in confusion. null and void. Leading up to this climax are several smaller rituals which, when Baroque Appeal complete, will cause many lesser spirits to be evicted from this earthly property. Those who find The Legacy's frightenWhen not armed with a spellbook, the in s ingly realistic demons excessively trauhero often becomes a ghost-busting Rambo in order to kick ectoplasmic burt matic should avoid the program. Others will be disappointed because The Legacy with more conventional weapons. does not attempt to widen the envelope Magic spells are scattered throughout of conventional computer role playing. the mansion, and some heirs enter the However, within that envelope it delivers house, spellbook in hand, with one spell some very solid entertainment in the form already under their belts. For the others, of eye-opening visuals and a page-turner a spellbook is waiting in the foyer. Once of a story. Let the gamer be heir. CGW Your sense of direction becomes cuddled. The supernatural creatures who populate the Winthrop house would prefer that the heir neither receive the expected inheritance or accomplish the required task, and it is with these creatures that The Legnicy scores its highest marks. Using some innovative techniques, the game's programmers have produced a cast of demors who shine with supernatural depth and move with ncar video quality. Were anyone to actually see one of these firstfloor zombies shuffle out from a bedroom shadow, they would surely spend the rest of their life in intense psychiatric therapy. A race of sea demons and their transTHE ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer... ...JUST GOT BETTER! Another five major play-by-mail games have joined our unique offer: Cluster Lords (rules and 10 free turns in this deep space opera), Death and Sorrow (rules and 10 free turns in this introductory fast-moving wargame), Perseus Arm (the 170-page rulebook and 3 turns in a massive new space opera), St Valentine's Day Massacre (rules and five turns in PBM's most challenging crime game), World Conquest (rules and 4 turns in this clean strategic wargame). And now all subscriptions are processed by first class mail, ensuring you get the hottest news in the hobby. Play by mail is America's most exciting form of gaming, pitting you against crack players across the country and abroad. (Call (216) 673-2117 for news of the big national PBM convention. Our offer gives you the chance to sample it and decide if it's for you. For those who haven't seen our guaranteed offer before, here it is: Take a $20 (4-issue) subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international play-by-mail magazine, and let our reviews, features and player comments help you pick the best of the latest games. We think you'll enjoy our frank, irreverent style. With your first issue we'll send you a $20 coupon for any of the above games and 19 others, with a description of each so you can decide which of these intriguing designs to try. The only condition: that you've not played with the chosen moderator before. But what if you don't like FLAGSHIP? What if you're not intrigued by the game you write for? Haven't you wasted $20? No! Write us within a month of getting your first FLAGSHIP to tell us you were disappointed, and we'll refund you the entire $20. (You can still use the coupon.) So: either you've enhanced your gaming with an exciting new dimension for $20. Or you've explored it and decided it's not for you at a cost of zero! Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07401-0454. [European readers: Send .99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 2PP for the equivalent European offer!] Circle Reader Service #53 "


"Pirates Has Gone Gold! The best adventure game ever just got better! Now Pirates! Gold Takes Inducted into the Computer The Excitement Even Further! Gaming World Hall of Fame!! Bombard more enemy ships! Feel the ring of crossing swords! 1988 Action Game of the Year Experience more action-packed combat on Computer Gaming World ships and land! Plunder treasure in all-new harbor towns! Innovations Award Gain power, prestige, or even the hand of the governor's daughter! 1988 Consumer Electronics Show ilere's how the critics raved about Pirates se feels like life only more exciting and a lonasto Splendid graphics in every phase of the gainsake it a pleasure to play and it is so deftly desioned that it never becomes tedim 30 h TEOL me that's been m DE agut mitching to get back MacWor Stunning new VGA Super VGA art and graphics that bring to life the untamed era of piracy in the 17th century Caribbean! ESTERDAINEN ALFONSOFTWARE 6-1989 CroPro Setar VE ALL RIGHTS RESERVED For a FREE INTERACTIVE DEMO DISK of the incredible Piratest Goldl, send this coupon to: MicroProse Software 180 Lakefront Drive. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245. Please include $3.99 for postage and handling To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879. PLAY and ask for Dept. FS today! (Mon. Fr. 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST) Name: Address: City: State AAQ AAQ Circle Reader Service #76 "


"scital Dragons and Silicon Sling Scorpia's Magic Scroll Of Games A Survey Of Computer Role-Playing Games OBoris Vallejo/Interplay from the Dragon Wars game box wners of yellowed, dog-eared copies of issue #87 may well remember portions of this article. To others. many of these references are mysterious arcana from the past. By updating this list of references, we hope to serve both types of reader, those that have been with us longterm and those that have just encountered the computer role-playing genre of megavames (CRPGs). Here, then, is the wisdom of Scorpia, a summary of CRPGs olde and new. The compendium that follows is not all-inclusive. It would be nice if I had (and had room for) an Amiga, Atari ST and Mac in addition to my old Apple and IBM compatible. Unfortunately, that's not the case. I can only talk about games I've played, and while I've played many, there isn't enough time even for me to get to all of them. Since such an overview can cover games only briefly, I have included the issue (by number and cover date) in which the particular CRPG was covered, either as a review or a Tale (my regular hint column). Finally, a word about Foozle. This is my generic term for the Big Bad Guy (or Gal) who is behind all the trouble. Invariably, who is behind all the trouble. Invariably, Foozle is either an evil wizard or demon who has unleashed the ravening hordes of monsters that are making everyone's life difficult. Games that feature a Foozle almost always have a big battle with him (or her) as the major goal of the game. These days, there is a slight trend away from \"Kill Foozle\" endings, but most CRPGs still include it as the grand finale. by Scorpia, Role-Playing Games Editor do beyond mapping out the city and building Bard's Tale II up your character for the next scenario. Of Interplay; Am, Ap, C64, IBM course, much was planned for you in later Review: #38 (June-July '87) scenarios, but the total lack of any true goal Without doubt, the worst of the series. turned what could have been a really involving Combat reaches ludicrous proportions and its CRPG into a tedious exercise in hack and \"Death Snare\" puzzles are nothing more than slash. A game for those with great persistence monotonous, real-time run-arounds designed and patience. to frustrate and aggravate the player. The \"big battle\" is a farce, with Foozle going down Alternate Reality: The Dungeon pretty quickly, but his guards taking many Datasoft; Ap, At, C64 rounds to dispose of. Boring and pointless Review: #44 (Feb. 88) about sums up this one. Second and last in the series, AR: The DunBard's Tale III geon was a slight improvement with several little ques Interplay: Am, Ap, C64, IBM little quests to be completed. However, the design was very loose, and you could stumble Review: #48 June '88) on quests without being told of them by the The series redeemed itself with the third Oracle at all. A Devourer that showed up to installment, flawed though it was by several steal items when your inventory became too scams in the game. It is basically a sequence of large did nothing to improve matters. Al mini-quests in which the party visits various though there was a bigger area to explore, the lands and times to acquire a variety of special emphasis remained primarily on fighting. Betmagical items. All of this, of course, is the ter than the first, but not by much. prelude to the usual \"ultimate combat\" at the end, which is a ler-down. The best parts are the quests themselves, which have a slight Ancient Land Of Ys \"adventure game\" feel to them, as the use of Broderbund; Ilgs, IBM different objects is often necessary to accomReview: #77 (Dec. '90) plish one's goal. Still, too oriented towards the Japanesc import converted from game ma\"hordes of monsters\" approach to combat, chine to computer. A fairly simple entry with along with spells of absurd power, but othera few puzzles to solve, it offered Nintendo wise worth playing, style combat and graphics. There were several tough battles with major monsters (called Beyond Zork Beyond Zork \"bosses\" in the idiom of arcade gamers), but infocom; Am, Ap, IBM, Mac otherwise it was pretty much a romp. Interest Review: #42 (Dec. '87) ing mainly for secing what the Japanese do in Infocom's only entry in the hybrid game terms of lightweight CRPGS. approach, its merging of CRPG with adventure does not mix as well as it should. Combat Bard's Tale I in particular is more a matter of getting the Interplay; Am, Ap, At, C64, IBM, Mac \"lucky hit\" rather than damaging an opponent Review: #5.5 (Nov-Dec '85) sufficiently over time to kill it. The adventure The initial game of the series is a combinaportion is, of course, much better, as you tion of puzzle-solving and hack'n'slash with a would naturally expect. So this one is really an very linear approach. Dungeons must be done adventure game with some CRPG features in strict order for successful completion. Gerrather than a true hybrid. ting started can be extremely difficult and the game can be saved only in one place, making Buck Rogers: Countdown to Doomsday for a certain amount of aggravation. However, SSI; Am, C64, IBM it does have many points of interest, particuReview: #78 (Jan. '91) larly in the puzzles, and is definitely a game A surprisingly enjoyable little game using worth getting. the ADODGold Box engine with the addition Alternate Reality: The City Datasoft; Ap. At, C64 Review: #32 (Nov. '86) First of a proposed multi-game adventure, AR: The City was a fascinating premise that turned out rather poorly, especially in the 8-bit versions. There was literally nothing to Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"officially sanctioned TM RACING O INDYCAR. MOVE OVER DHE TVDS Racing To Real IndyCart Racing IndyCarTM Racing is the real 3-D thing. Blast through the corkscrew at Laguna Seca. Doppler, shifting IndyCar engines scream to the max. Suddenly, someone spins. Blam! Parts fly everywhere. You slip by. Whew! Caution light. Time to pit. Take on fuel. Right side tires. Adjust front wing. Too late! You finished 2nd. Get 'em at Michigan. Feel too real? (Almost.) REPLAY BE -0.375 RIGHT FRONT. COMPOUND PRESSURES CHANGE TIRE DONE SOF. 26 PS 16 Stefan Joharisson 1667 0 SS 188 33 11926 .33 6  Real Graphics: Experience all new Papyrus 3-D Super Texture technology. Bit-mapped cars, tracks, terrain and scenery, accurate down to the last detail; including billboards, paint schemes and decals on actual IndyCars. Tread marks \"groove\" every turn to help you find the line.  Real Game Play: Gobs of Newtonian physics calculate real car behavior...speed, chassis, engine set-up, tire temp and wear, fuel load, track bank, etc... hundreds of calculations per second. What you do makes a real difference.  Real Set-Ups: You choose wing angles, tire types and pressure, suspension, camber, gearing, and more. Adjust turbo boost, brake bias, roll bar settings from the cockpit. Custom tune engines in the dyno room. (Or take the default car and hit the track running.) From the creators of Indianapolis 500: The Simulation First in a series of Real World 3-D Racing Games PAPYRUS Blo PUBLISHING, INC. 126 29. 1925 90 19 GAMES Virgin Games, Inc. Distributed exclusively worldwide by Papyrus Publishing Indying Available November 1993  Real Race Tracks: Michigan International, Laguna Seca, Milwaukee Mile, Long Beach... you get it all in IndyCari Racing...right down to the grass, fans, stands and six real TV camera-type replays from car-cams to blimps. The Indianapolis 500 is a registered trademark of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. Indianapolis 500 : The Simulation is a trademark of Electronic Arts Inc. Actual IBM PC screens shown. Circle Reader Service #82 "


"Bicital Dragons and Silicon Sling of character skills. Typical plot of stopping the bad guys, but the atmosphere of the old serials is re-created quite well. Side bits connected to the main story add significantly to the game; everything is related, one way or another. Es sentially a quick-playing game, but fun nonetheless. Darklands MicroProse; IBM Review: #101 (Dec. '92) MicroProse sticks its toe into the CRPG waters and ends up over its head. Perfect exdungeons now require some puzzle-solving, but clues and directions on where to go or what to do are scarce. Many improvements over the previous game and an interesting plot, although combat is not as balanced as it could be. The demon of the title is the main foe, but the ending does not rely on the usual \"Kill Foozle\" battle, which is refreshing, Buck Rogers: Matrix Cubed SSI; Am, IBM Review: #94 (May '92) Disappointing sequel to Doomsday. More combat than is necessary, including three separate excursions where the party must fight sans armor and weapons. Plot and side quests are uneven and poorly developed. Most astonishingly, after the final battle, you get three cheers and a drop to DOS as a reward. This one is best avoided unless you're a real hard-core Rogers fan. medieval Germany) gone wrong. Menu approach allows for more options than most games of this type, but over time, gives the game a static feel. It offers an unusual magic system based on alchemy rather than spells, along with prayers to various saints to obtain temporary benefits of one kind or another. Much of the game play involves \"ferch it\" quests or knocking off local robber barons, until the call comes to wipe out a witch cult and exorcise a demon. Horrible ending, with the player being shafted rather than rewarded. for this and other reasons detailed in the article, it is not a recommended game. ANI TALES OF THE UNKNOWN Champions Of Krynn SSI; A1, A2, C64, IBM Review: #70 (April '90) First in the Dragonlance series, this game is a slight variant of standard ADD, different in its handling of magic. Go forth and beat up on dragons and dragonmen (as well as other critters) to stop the evil Myrtani from corrupting the eggs of good dragons. Standard fare for the most part, although the final battle with Myrtani is wearisome rather than exciting. Cameo appearances by some of the characters from the books is a nice touch. Bard's Tale. harSOAP VENUE Curse Of The Azure Bonds SSI; Am, Ap, At, C64, IBM, Mac Review: #63 (Sep. '89) Sequel to Pool Of Radiance with a bit more plot. Characters must rid themselves of five blue tattoos that put them under the control of evil forces, Improved combat with fewer opponents per fight; no more hordes of critters to slow things down. It's more linear than the previous game, though it has some interesting side bits, especially with the Rakshasa. For all that, it's still mainly hack'n'slash leading up to the usual \"Kill Foozle\" ending. Dark Heart Of Uukrul Broderbund; Ap, IBM Review: #67 (Jan. '90) A standard dungeon-delving expedition with some interesting points, not least of which is the best auto-mapping in any game to date. Combat is better balanced than in many CRPGs of this type. Solving puzzles is key in the latter half of the game, so this one is not for those seeking only hack-and-slash entertainment. It has an unusual ending for a CRPG (play it and find out!). Don't Go Alone Accolade; IBM Review: #65 (Nov. 89) Imagine a boring trek through a haunted house with simplistic puzzles at best, when there are any. The character classes are ill-described with functions which are completely unknown. Magic is performed through the use of chemical formulac, the only point of interest in an otherwise dreary product. Dragon Wars Interplay; Am, Ap, C64, IBM Review: #66 (Dec. '89) First of a proposed series that never came to pass, Dragon Wars has a lot going for it: balanced combat and magic (no mega-death spells), skill use, interesting subplots, and a battle with Foozle that will not be of the \"ho hum, over in two rounds\" variety. The only feature lacking is the ability to have conversations with NPCs. There isn't much talking to be done here: most information comes as it did in Wasteland from reading designated paragraphs in a separate booklet. While the game does have a few rough edges, overall it's a good choice when you want something a bit more than a standard slicer/dicer. Drakkhen Infogrames/Data East; Am, ST, IBM A Japanese import with an interesting idea, but poor implementation, Drakkhen allows you to take sides in a war among dragonkind that has profound implications for the human race. Its odd combat style allows for little in the way of tactics or even control during fights. Character movement is occasionally awkward with people getting stuck at times behind obstacles, or the party not following the leader through doorways. Its sparse documentation does not provide enough information and the terrible character generation system requires creating the party together (one poor set of stats and you may well have to start it all over again). This one is only for the patient. Dungeon Master Dungeon Master FTL: Am, ST, IBM Review: #100 (Nov. '92) This is the ground breaker that set the standard for 3D, point-of-view dungeons. It is similar in many ways to the Eye of the Beholder series (which owes it a lot), but with its own points of interest, not least of which are more varied puzzles. The game still holds up well after seven years, even graphically, and is worth playing today, especially if you like the EOB style. The end game with Lord Chaos can be a problem, so this one is not for the easily-frustrated. Elvira: Mistress of the Dark Accolade/Horrorsoft; Am, IBM Review: #82 (May '91) Elvira is a beautiful graphic CRPG with many gory close-ups and is not for the squeamDeath Knights of Krynn SSI: Am. C64. IBM Review: #84 (July '91) This is a sequel to Champions Of Krynn where Lord Soth and his endless undead legions are causing trouble. Gerting to Soth is a linear, step-by-step process that needs to be followed carefully, however you can take time out to wander the countryside for interim adventures as the fancy takes you. The showdown with Soth is standard stuff. Afterwards, two special areas open up for additional adventuring and goody-grabbing. All in all, though, it's mainly just another chop-em-up. Deathlord Electronic Arts; Ap, C64 Review: #46 (April '88) Poorly designed and implemented mishmash with a quasi-Ultima look. Everything that could be taken from other CRPGs was thrown in with little coherence, covered with pseudo-Orientalism, and developed into an extremely pointless game. A deficient manual makes it worse. Definitely one to avoid. Dark Queen Of Krynn SSI; Am, IBM, Mac Review: #98 (Sep. '92) Conclusion of the Krynu scries, and none too soon. It is an extensive game, larger than either of the previous entries, featuring combat galore mostly with enchanted Draconians of all varieties that blow up when killed. More back-to-back (and back-to-back-to-back) fights than any other Gold Box product. Many situations where one's \"choice of action means nothing. Only for the dedicated Gold Box fan. Demon's Winter SSI; Ap, C64, IBM Review: #53 (Nov. '88) Follow-up to Shard of Spring, pretty much Follow-up to Shard of Spring, pretty much in the same style, but with an expanded engine. The world is larger, with more to do, and Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"icital Dragons and Silicon Slin second rank), the game is rather dreary with: dark graphics everywhere, much-overused sound effects which are occasionally monotonous, and a Foozle fight that is a lerdown instead of a grand slam finale. This one is only for the hard-core EOB player. (Note: Westwood had nothing to do with it.) ied by the weight of incessant combat: 20 quests, all in the same mold (bring back an item stolen by some type of creature), tend to become tedious after a while. The game emphasizes battle techniques over all else. Only wargamers or devoted hack'n'slashers are likely to enjoy this onc. ish or faint of heart. This is true of combat as well, where much blood goes flying as you fight your way in and around the castle. It offers plenty of combat using a variety of weapons and spells (cooked up for you by Elvira herself with ingredients you have to find). Lots to do and explore, this is a tough game and will not be finished in a few sittings. If you don't mind gruesome visuals, it's definitely worth playing. Elvira II: The Jaws Of Cerberus Accolade/Horrorsoft; Am, IBM Review: #92 (March '92) In a surprisingly bad follow-up to the original game, gamers must rescue Elvira and save the world from the demon Cerberus, who has taken over a movie studio. Half the game is an incredibly tedious hack'n slash through seemingly endless tunnels and caverns. The other half is poorly-designed adventure puzzles. If solved incorrectly, the latter can prevent you from winning. This one is best avoided. Fountain Of Dreams Electronic Arts; IBM Review: #78 (Jan.'91) This is a horrid post-nuke loser with a quasiWasteland interface. Its inane plot, ridiculous combat, and terrible ending make it a poor value for anyone. Gateway To The Savage Frontier SSI; Am, C64, IBM Tale: #88 (Nov. 91) Standard Gold Box fare in this first of a two-part series, this one lets gamers save the world from an invasion by hordes from Zhentil Keep. A few new touches have been added to the basic engine, but otherwise you've played this one many times before. Legacy Of The Ancients SSI; Ap. C64, IBM Review: #43 (Jan. '88) Would you believe a CRPG in the Questron style? Of course you would, since it was done by the same people. The only novelty is a muscum with exhibits you enter by depositing the proper coins. Plot is almost identical to that of Questron II: destroying a scroll of evil spells. Primarily a hack'n'slash epic of moderate interest. . AS2 Eternal Dagger SSI; AD, A, C64 Review: #40 (Oct. '87) As a sequel to Wizard's Crown, this uses the same engine with a few enhancements and minor changes. It's not as good as the previous game. It is heavily weighted towards magic use in combat and opponents are far more difficult to dispose of, making for lengthy battle sequences much of the time. Fighting in dungeons is especially frustrating. Though it features an interesting plot idca, this game is only for the most patient. Eye Of The Beholder SSI; Am, IBM Review: #83 (June '91) First in a new series from SSI, this one features a totally new engine based upon the Dungeon Master model. It uses excellent visuals and sounds to create a \"you are in a dungeon\" fecling. It departs from the Gold Box series in that it emphasizes puzzles over combat. The combat portion needs work, as controlling up to six characters during real-time fighting becomes unwieldy at times. Nonetheless, it is an impressive first effort that bodes well for the future. Eye Of The Beholder II: Legend Of Darkmoon SSI; Am, IBM Review: #93 (April (92) More substantial than the previous entry EOB Il features better puzzles and more areas to explore. Combat remains a sore point, as nothing was done to improve handling of multiple characters during fights. It has a standard \"Kill Foozle\" ending with Dran Draggore being even more of a tough oppo nent than the Beholder of the first game. A definite must for all EOB fans. Eye Of The Beholder III: Assault On Myth Drannor SSI; IBM, CD Review: #109 (Aug. '93) The series ends on a disappointing note. Though combat is finally fixed up with the \"all attack\" command (allowing everyone with a ready weapon, mclee or missile, to attack at the same time, and halberds to fight from the Legend Of Faerghail Rainbow Arts; Am, IBM Review: #79 (Feb.'91) This is a German import that should never have crossed the Atlantic. Its poorly translated manual has several mistakes, the graphics are ugly, and combat is absurd (characters in the rear rank can be hit by opponents nowhere near them-opponents that do not use missile weapons). There is nothing new or of interest in the game. It's a mediocre effort at best. (The review presents a quite different picture of it; makes me wonder if we were looking at the same product.) Lord Of The Rings Interplay; Am, IBM Review: #81 (April 91) Probably the best so far of the various Tolkien adaptations, although not without its weak points, it follows the book (Fellowship of the Ring) fairly closely in its main aspects, but also has a lot of side stuff added. The terrain covers a huge area, and walking around can be a bit much at times, especially considering the number of things that can be found only by stepping on the right spot. Since new material has been put in to round out the game (this being only the first of three parts), those familiar with the original story may find themselves a little bewildered now and then. It is best to go through this one slowly and carefully; it's a big game and will not be completed quickly, no matter how well you may know your Tolkien. Hard Nova Electronic Arts; Am, IBM Review: #81 (April '91) This science fiction CRPG uses an improved variation of the Sentinel Worlds engine. Indoor locations are now fully graphic and movement is no longer a tedious business. You take on mercenary jobs for the Starkillers, recruiting a variety of NPCs along the way. Its strong plotline has an interesting ending that allows for two different ways of handling the main problem and there is plenty of well-balanced combat with little of it random, except in space. It is definitely worth your attention if you like space games. Knights of Legend Origin; Ap, C64, IBM Review: #69 (March '90) Playing Tips: #69 Tactical wargaming with a thin veneer of role-playing, Knights of Legend features interesting backgrounds and NPCs which are burMagic Candle I Mindcraft Software: Ap, C64, IBM Review: #58 (April '89) CRPG in the late Ultima style, with much trekking around and gathering of information, as well as multiple mini-quests to perform. No endless stream of monsters or extraneous combats; this is not a hack n'slash game. Careful note-taking is a must. Superior nonviolent ending; one of the few CRPGs that does not depend on «Kill Foozle\" for the denouement. CGW's Computer Role-Playing Game Of The Year for 1989, and deservedly so. Magic Candle II: The Four and Forty Mindcraft Software; IBM Review: #95 (June '92) Follow-up to the first game, taking place about 10 years later. This time your party of October 1993 Page 37 "


"WORLD WAR RE BATTLES OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC QOP, Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. Qeyd ed's The time: World War II The place: The South Pacific Wage war for the sole ownership of the South Pacific. Historically correct battles challenge all, to do better than the Navy did as it happened in WWII. Not only naval combat, but air and land combat. Create and transport armies to enemy ports through air, naval, and bombardments from your adversaries to take over their bases. MANY SCORCHING BATTLES TO CHOOSE FROM  PLAY JAPANESE OR U.S. FORCES MODEM PLAY EXPERT MENUS OR NOVICE MENU SEVERAL LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY STUNNING HISTORICAL ACCURACY HUNDREDS OF SHIP AND PLANE TYPES INTUITIVE INTERFACE The \"WWII: Battles of the Pacific\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #86 "


"CODQUIEREO KINGDOMS Scenario Disk #1 QOPQuantum Quality Productions, Inc. GARY SHAVENS The medieval realm of Conquered Kingdoms is about to get bigger. Devastate your opponent in these all new and exciting maps for Conquered Kingdoms ... THE MULTIAWARD WINNING STRATEGY AND TACTICS GAME. Beautiful ALL NEW scenarios UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH 21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI), MODEM PLAY COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS The \"Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Disk\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #107 "


"Bicital Dragons and Silicon slino heroes is trying to find out what happened to the original guardians of the Magic Candle whose disappearance set off the events of the previous entry. Sports pretty much the same engine, with a few improvements, such as an automatic note pad (which could have done better). However, the game is uneven, with a surprising overemphasis on combat, and one dungeon that is a nightmare. While better than a number of CRPGs on the market, The Forty and Fourisn't quite up to its predecessor. Might & Magic I New World Computing; Am, Ap, C64, IBM Review: #36 (April '87) Extensive CRPG rivaling (possibly even surpassing) the Ultima series in the size of its world. Map-making is a must; expect to have 50+ by the time you're finished. Plenty to do besides cartography and exploration, with resides cartography and exploration, with many mini-quests to complete and puzzles to solve. One of the few in this genre that has a nonviolent ending. Biggest difficulty is getting started, as combat in the early stages is unbalanced. However, it's well worth the effort. Might & Magic IV: Clouds Of Xeen New World Computing; IBM Review: #102 (Jan. '93) Similar to MOM III in game engine and mechanics, although with several improvements, including auto-notes for quests and a separate list for quest items acquired. Two play modes: Adventurer, which makes combat a little easier (critters die sooner), and Warrior, which makes it harder (critters die later, if they don't kill you first). Ending is \"Kill Foozle,\" and rather disappointing; it's strictly a oneshot deal. Still, Might o Magic fans will enjoy this one...and should keep it handy on the hard drive (see next entry). Magic Candle III Mindcraft Software; IBM Review: #106 (June '93) OFFICIAL Conclusion of the series, and, in common with many CRPGs these days, ends on a mediocre note. The main goal is to save the southern islands from a mysterious blight that is taking over the land. There is nothing really new or exciting about this one; in fact, the game is remarkably dull, and after a while it becomes hard to maintain interest. Unusual for a Magic Candle game, there is a Foozle fight, which is so easy it's laughable. This one is only for the hard-core fan of the series. Advanced Dungeons aragons COPi  EYEME PROIDER Martian Dreams Origin; IBM Review: #86 (Sep. '91) Visit Mars in the 1890s! Second in the Worlds of Ultima series, it uses the same engine as Ultima VI. A nice recreation of Victorian science fiction with an interesting story line, It is really more an adventure game than a role-playing game, as character stats have relatively little importance in accomplishing the mission. Too much walking around and backtracking, with no means of easy travel, is a definite weak point. The game requires patience and careful attention to detail, but is otherwise enjoyable. Might & Magic IV: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing; IBM Review: #110 (Sept. '93) The conclusion of the current Might & Magic series that began way back with M&M I, featuring the final showdown between Sheltem and Corak. Can be played as a standalone or incorporated into Clouds to make the complete World Of Xeen, allowing you to slip back and forth between both sides of the world. You must create the full world if you want to use your Clouds party. The most enjoyment will be obtained by installing both and playing them as a single game. Nothing really new has been added, and play is pretty much the same as in the previous gamne, although monsters here are tougher. Puzzles are a disappointment, most being blatantly obvious and not much of a challenge. Non-Foozle ending; great scenes of the fight berween Sheltem and Corak, and later when the two halves of Xeen are brought together into a single world. A must for those who have followed the series since its inception. A LEGEND SERIES Fantasy Rak-raying suga, Vol. 1 SEL STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. Mega Traveller I Paragon; Am, IBM Review: #76 (Nov. '90) The first computerized version of the popular Mega Traveller role-playing game comes off rather poorly. Its most serious flaw is an atrocious combat system that makes fighting excruciatingly frustrating. Much time must be spent in earning money to get on with the game. Nowhere near as good as it should have been, it is only for the devoted Mega Traveller fan with a high tolerance for exasperation. Might & Magic II Phantasie 1 New World Computing; Am, Ap, C64, IBM SSI; Ap, At, C64, IBM, ST Review: #57 (March '89) Tale: #5.4 (Sep-Oct '85) Not as good as the previous game on many A surprisingly good little game, with many counts. Worst is the excessiveness of the cominteresting features: auto-mapped dungeons, bat, which turns this one into a \"Monty multiple parties (only one at a time can be Haul/Monster Mash\" extravaganza. It has a our), dropping off of characters in different weak plot padded with many extraneous actowns, and monsters that can (sometimes) be tivities leading to a \"Kill Foozle\" encounter, bribed to leave you alone. Combat is a little followed by a real-time solve-the-cryptogram weak, as party members are strung out across finale. Graphics are much better and the party the bottom of the combat screen when fightcan be filled out with various hirelings, buring begins, but this is not too serious a drawoverall, this one is only for the devoted hack back most of the time. Standard \"Kill Foozle\" and slash crowd. ending, but he is tough to defeat. Mega Traveller II Paragon; IBM Review: #88 (Nov. '91) Somewhat improved over the previous game, although not by much. Combat is better and is not as large a part of play. There are many worlds to visit (perhaps too many as your party looks for a way to save Rhylanor from a creeping ide of slime. Much of the action ends up going into side quests that have nothing to do with the main plot, but you don't often realize that until too late. In time, the game becomes mechanical and tedious, as you find yourself doing pretty much the same things over and over again. Might & Magic III: Isles of Terra New World Computing; Am, IBM Review: #90 (Jan. 92) Tips: #90 A completely redesigned engine, interface, and graphics display turn the series away from the excesses of the past and on to a more reasonable route. Combat is much more balanced, although Neat items are a little too easy to come by too early in the game. Skills are brought into play for the first time, with a long list available. The party is after Sheltem again, although they won't catch up to him here (see Darkside below). Overall, a big improvement in the series, and worth playing. Phantasie II SSI; Ap, At, ST Review: #30 (Aug. '86) Tough follow-up to the first game. It is almost identical in terms of engine and interface; the same manual is used for both I & II (with a card to detail the few differences, which are very minor). The world is smaller, but the monsters are nastier, so getting through this one will be hard slogging. Also, this isn't exactly a \"Kill Foozle\" epic, and the rewards afterward are fun and better than in many games of this type. A good sequel to the previous game. Page 40 ter Gaming World "


"cital Dragons and Silicon Sliv icon Slings difficult and involved. Has one of the neatest and best reward» sequences around. Phantasie III SSI; Am, Ap, C64, IBM, ST Review: #38 (Aug-Sep '87) This one closes out the trilogy and is by far the weakest in the series, even with the changes to the basic engine. For one thing, it is quite short. Players may be astonished how quickly they reach the typical \"Kill Foozle\" end. Fewer dungeons to visit, so the world seems smaller. Monsters, of course, are nastier than before, but the game can be finished with lower level characters than usual. Still, the final battle is a toughie, though the rewards are very nice. The conclusion ends up being satisfying, if perhaps a little too brief. Questron SSI; Ap, C64 Review: #4.3 (June '84) Something along the lines of an carly-Ultima clone (a license had to be obtained from Lord British for this game to be published). but with its own points of interest. Monsters roam the outdoors in specific places and require particular weapons to kill them. Travel is accomplished in a variety of ways, including by ship, llama and giant eagle (the most fun way to get around). There are three nasty dungeons to traverse before the big one with Foozle. Though a bit old, it still has one of the neatest reward endings in the genre. requires uniting a variety of native tribes who are all more or less at war with each other. Like Martian Dreams, it is more oriented towards puzzle-solving than role-playing, although there is a fair amount of combat to be done along the way. Not too difficult, but occasionally tricky. Good for filling in the hours while you wait for the next real Ulrima. Scavengers Of The Mutant World Interstel; IBM Review: #59 (May '89) Another post-nuke scenario that should never have seen the light of day. It is a game with ugly graphics, incredibly awkward interface, killer-dungeon mentality and truckloads of aggravation. Pass it by. Secret Of The Silver Blades SSI; Am, C64, IBM, Mac Review: #75 (Oct. '90) In this sequel to Azure Bonds, the party is summoned (sans equipment) to help a mining town besieged by monsters in the mines. Of all the Gold Box games, this is the most combat-intensive and most boring. There is virtually nothing to do but kill almost everything in sight. For hard-core slicer/dicers only. Questron II SSI; Am, Ap, C64, IBM, ST Pool Of Radiance SSI; A1, A2, CH4, IBM, Mac Review: #49 (Dec. '88) The first Gold Box game-the one that started it all. Multi-quest format, leading up to the standard \"Kill Foozle In The Big Battle\" ending. Has a more open format than later games. Biggest drawback to this otherwise well-designed slicer/dicer is the inordinate number of creatures to fight as the game progresses. Combats become drawn-out and tiresome, with no way to avoid them or speed up the action. Patience (possibly of Job) required to get through this one. Reprise of a familiar theme; pretty much the same stuff as the previous game, although somewhat easier. Here you're out to destroy the evil book of magic by going back in time, a plot device rather reminiscent of Mondain and lis evil gem in Ultima I. It is mainly hack'n'slash with some dungeon-delving and no puzzles to speak of. Auto-mapping is available in some dungeons. Overall, not as good as the first Questron. The Magic Candle Pools Of Darkness SSI; Am, IBM, Mac Review: #89 (Dec. 91) Conclusion of the series that began with Pool of Radiance, this otherwise fine game (the best of the lot) is marred by two nasty points: One is having to put aside all good magical stuft (armor, weapons, etc.) whenever you pass through a portal to another dimension, where you have to find temporary replacements that won't make the trip back. The other is that the ending is almost as bad as a drop to DOS: intervention by the gods makes everyone except your party and Elminster forget what happened. If you can live with that, Pools provides the ultimate challenge for the experienced Gold Box gamer (not recommended for the novice). Sentinel Worlds I: Future Magic Electronic Arts; C64, IBM Review: #54 (Dec. '88) Once you get past the slow beginning, this is an interesting science-fiction CRPG. It has a good plot with several smaller stories inside the large one. Biggest drawbacks to the game are the incredibly tedious indoor movement system and the terrible ending (\"Okay, you won! That's it! Donc, over, next\"). If you can live with that, this is a good game to play. Shard Of Spring SSI; Ap, C64, IBM Review: #33 (Dec. '86) Imagine a typical hack-and-slash romp where your party attempts to retrieve a magical gem (the shard of the title). The party rambles across the countryside and through dungeons (most of which are small, except the final one), with numerous battles leading up to the usual \"big confrontation.\" This one is not bad for its type, and better than some. MINIT RAFT Quest For Glory 1: So You Wanna Be A Hero Sierra On-Line; Am, IBM Tale: #67 (Jan. '90) Cure hybrid of adventure and role-playing one of the few that are truly replayable. The puzzles have multiple solutions depending on character class. Several different quests, but no overall \"Kill Foozle\" plot quite a nice change of pace. Great graphics, particularly the animations. Lots of humor. Essentially a beginner's game, but can be enjoyed by all. Realms Of Darkness SSI; Ap, C64 Tale: #37 (May '87) A CRPG of only moderate interest. You march through various dungeons on little quests, solving obvious puzzles along the way. Not as well-balanced as it could be in matters of combat. Extremely linear setup, requiring completion of one quest before moving to the next. Overall, it is a game for beginners more than anything else. Space 1889 Paragon; Am, IBM Review: #80 (March '91) Paragon's attempt to bring this paper RPG to life falls flat on its face. Uninspired graphics, disorganized plot, irksome interface, terrible combat system and humdrum ending create the disappointment. While not a total disaster, it is likely that only the most hard-core Space 1889 (paper version) fans will enjoy it. Quest For Glory II: Trial By Fire Sierra On-Line; Am, IBM Tale: #79 (Feb. 91) Second in the series, this one is more structured and linear than its predecessor. It is not as replayable, as many events are time-dependent with little to do in-between after you've gone through the game once. It is also slightly harder than the first game, but not by much. You have to save the home town of the Kattas and \"Kill Foozle\" at the end, but cach \"Foozle\" battle is different depending on character class, with the thief ending being the most Savage Empire Origin; IBM Review: #80 (March '91) First in the Worlds of Ultima series, it uses the Ultima VI engine and graphics. Avatar and friends are pulled by accident into a jungle world and must find a way to get home. This The Summoning SSI: IBM Tale: #102 (Jan. '93) This is a neat single-player CRPG with an emphasis on puzzles. It overdoes it a little with the floorplate/teleporter combos, but otherwise a lot of fun, if occasionally frustrating. Very good automap, which can be sent to the printer for hardcopy. Balanced combat, with good mix of melee and spells. Short but unique ending. Despite only two disks in the box, this is a BIG game with much to do. Save October 1993 Page 47 "


"cital Dragons and Silicon Slin Digital Di licon Slings The Evolution Of ULTIMA I-VII the emphasis is on fantasy alone. Plot and structure are better developed. It is the first Ultima to feature party adventuring with a group of up to four, and a revised combat system with individual depictions of monsters and characters. Destroy Exodus, offspring of Mondain and Minax, in a surprisingly quiet and nonviolent fashion. This marked the turn of the Ultima series away from the standard \"Kill Foozle In A Big Battle\" ending to resolutions that are less combative in spirit, a trend that has continued through Ultima VI. CAREERUL Ultima IV Origin; Am, Ap, Ar, C64, IBM Review: #25 (Jan-Feb '86) Still my personal favorite of the scries, this is the only game on the market where personal development of the character, beyond mere fighting skill, is the heart of the plot. This theme makes the game occasionally difficult for those who are only used to the typical slicer/dicer where the sole matter of importance is the body count of monsters. Structure is very tight, but the format is open; this is by no means a linear game, and you have much freedom to roam and explore. Combat is better-balanced here than in previous Ultimas, so even the beginning character is in no danger of being trounced by over-powerful opponents. A class act throughout. ESP biat Gia1 19815697:6141 FBAHA98L1919 Medisebaia1 F.DE -Player 4 Hang A tack 2-Player 1 I-Vexort 202P files grow quickly, so reserve a lot of space on the drive for this one. It's worth your time. Treasures Of The Savage Frontier SSI; Am, IBM Tale: #96 (July '92) Last of the Gold Box games, this one is almost indistinguishable from any of the others. A couple of twists (such as reinforcements for the enemy that can pop up at any time), but otherwise pretty much a yawner. Tunnels & Trolls: Crusaders Of Khazan New World Computing; IBM Review: #79 (Feb. '91) Here is a perfect example of a good game gone wrong. Poor programming and/or playtesting allowed far too many bugs in the game and it featured a very loose design, with little direction for the player on what to do or where to go. Unbalanced combat, especially late in the adventure. Overall, a big disappointment; for the hard-core fan only. 2400 A.D. Origin; Ap Tale: #44 (Feb. '88) This is a science fiction cartoon pretending to be a real game. Hokey graphics and simplistic play destroy any feeling of excitement or suspense. It is shallow, bland and not particularly imaginative, but may be good for a summer afternoon or rainy day when you want something that isn't mentally taxing or especially involving. Ultima I Origin; Ap, At, C64, IBM, Mac, Vic This first game in the series is truly epic in scope: aside from a large land (with dungeons) to explore, cras pass from primitive to hightech, providing ever-better weapons, armor and transportation. There is even an outer space combat segment! The basic goal is to eventually go back in time and destroy Mondain and his evil gem of power. One of the first games of its time to have a real outdoors; most in the genre were busily pushing you through underground passageways. This game also introduced interaction with NPCs, although in a much more rudimentary form than the current Ultimas. The biggest problem in the game (not really fixed until Ultima IV) is the unbalanced combat system. Otherwise, it is a classic not to be missed. Ultima II Origin; Ap, At, C64, IBM, Mac, Vic Review: #3.2 (March-April '83) In this game, Lord British began tightening up the design. Here you're after Minax, the protégé of Mondain. There is still some flying around in space (which could well have been omitted), and moongates are introduced for the first time, but there is also considerable scaling back in the structure with a trend towards more plot. Aside from the uneven combat and the fact that dungeons tend to be extraneous excursions, it is a good sequel to the original game. Ultima III Origin; Am, Ap, At, C64, IBM, Mac, ST Review: #3.6 (Dec. '83) This is the best of the first trilogy. Time travel and space stuff have been dropped, so FH0292CH2010) Ultima V Origin; Am, Ap, IBM Review: #47 (May '88) A more somber theme prevails in this one, with the land of Britannia crushed under laws enforcing pseudo-virtues. Lord British is missing, and the Avatar is called back to set things right again. It is a worthy follow-up to the previous game, although the manual is surprisingly poor, omitting much basic information of importance. The Underworld is likewise a disappointment, being vast but essentially empty and rather tedious to move around in. The structure of the game also seems a bit loose, and there is a slightly unfinished feel to it. For all that, this is the logical continuation of the previous game with an involving storyline. Not to be missed. T634-5-135150 51 ON progres »South »South South East >East Vexor SALES Shanino Tolo 88XCE? Soxersteel door -04-01G1 Hindig opened! KAESEELEY Yorg! Ultima VI Origin; C64, IBM Review: #71 (June '90) This is the ground breaker that ushered in a new era in Ultima graphics, with a world and interface so completely different it comes as a shock to veteran players. The game is seen on a single scale with no more \"zoom-ins\" to cities and dungeons. Virtually all items are tangible and can be manipulated some way or other. Overall, the real-world feel to this one is astonishing and takes a little getting used to. This is enhanced further by putting all the monsters in dungeons, so that combats on the surface are few and far between. The plot wraps up the first trilogy as well as the second, reveals the secret of the Codex Of Ultimate Wisdom, and provides some lessons on getting along with those who are different. The weak spot is the middle portion and the hunt for the pirate map, which is more a time-waster than anything else. Regardless, this one is definitely worth your time. cada ELBRUS GADGE um 21 AOR:36 VIDIO dWtu 30. DIS Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"30 scenarios that allow strategy enthusiasts to command all the major weaponry used in that era — infantry, artillery, cavalry, warships (including U-Boats), tanks such as THE GREAT WAR: 1914-1918 takes an all-new approach to traditional strategy war games. Fight World War I through an escalating series of battles that introduce new units, terrain, and tactics — re-creating the flavor and scope of that terrible conflict. For one or two players, THE GREAT WAR presents over THE GREAT WAR the Renault, and planes like the legendary Sopwith Camel. Interspersed between combat scenarios you'll find incredible cinematics, still photos and text making this unique game an exciting history lesson on World War I. Available for IBM/COMPATIBLES. TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call SSI Direct Sales at (408)-737-6800 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC. 1 9 1 4 1 9 1 8 Developed by EL Bronne $11993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. 45CES 15 CAVALRY IBM 256 GOLOR VGA DISPLAYS Beste DELLER CLIT BATAY "


"Digital D cital Dragons and Silicon Slin Silicon Slings Ultima VII Part 1: The Black Gate Origin; IBM Review: #97 (August '92) Sporting a completely new mouse-driven engine, enhanced graphics, and a somber story line, Black Gateushers in a new era of maturity in the series. The Avatar returns to a Britannia 200 years in the future where many modernday problems have their counterparts, and the evil Guardian is gathering power through his benevolent-appearing \"Fellowship\" (ring not required). Putting an end to this nefarious required). Putting an end to this nefarious scheme is the main objective. Early releases had many bugs, including trashed graphics of one kind or another. Be sure your version is 3.4 or better to avoid these and also the infamous \"key deletion\" bug that removed keys, used or unused, from your inventory. While the game has its annoying aspects, such as minimally-controlled party members in combat and excessive disk access, it is certainly worth playing ing Lord B's castle in a mountain of blackrock. The Avatar heads down into the sewers and below to find a solution, which turns out to be a blackrock gem that acts as a portal to other worlds. All must be visited, some several times, before Britannia can be saved. A traitor/murbefore Britannia can be saved. A traitor/murderer in the castle itself adds to the tension. Only one world is an \"outdoors» setting, so the game still has a tendency to make one claustrophobic. One drawback is not being able to bring your character over from Abyss; you have to start over again from level one. More complex in some ways than the previous game and somewhat more combar-intensive, it is a good follow-up to the previous entry. Wasteland Electronic Arts; Ap, C64, IBM Tale: #48 (June '88) Really the only decently-designed postnuke game on the market, Wasteland features Desert Rangers who investigate strange happenings in the deserts of Arizona and discover more than they bargained for. It has a bang-up ending, though not exactly in the \"Kill Foozle\" class. There are interesting subplots, multiple solutions to many situations, an emphasis on skills (although this part was not as well thought out as it could have been) as well as on stats. It has, perhaps, more combat than is really necessary, but fighting is better-balanced than in many games of this type. A CGW Hall of Famer and a good one to choose. they're there); static monster pictures (although in full color) during encounters; alltext combat resolution. Of course, Wizardry was never noted for its graphics, but for the quality of its game play. Moving through the dungeon Moving through the dungeon levels was exciting, and occasionally frustrating thanks to Dark! areas (where no light worked), Fizzle! areas where no magic worked), spinners, teleporters, pits, and other nasty contrivances, not to mention all manner of hostile critters. This was in addition to the tricks and puzzles, most of which were solved by having the right item equipped, and a host of mysterious magical objects whose uses were determined by trial and error. While mainly hack'n'slash, it's still a grand expedition, even today. Wizardry II: The Knight Of Diamonds Sir-Tech; Ap, C64, IBM, Mac Disappointingly weak follow-up to the original, it has a tiny (comparatively) dungeon with only six levels. Pick up the pieces of the Knight of Diamonds armor that are scattered around throughout the dungeon. Playing Wizardry I first is a necessity, as characters must be imported in from that game. Nothing really new or innovative to be seen here, although the non-Foozle ending is a nice touch; best for the hard-core fan only. Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle Origin; IBM Review: #108 (July '93) Follow-up to Black Gate, starting where the previous game ended. For the first time, an Ultima takes place off the main continent of Britannia, in the area called Serpent Isle. Tracking down Batlin, who escaped at the conclusion of Black Gate, is only part of the story. The Avatar must discover the secrets of an ancient and long-gonc race, the Ophidians, in order to save the world. Much more grim than the prior entry, with wholesale slaughter of innocent people, as well as the sacrifice of one of that hardy trio of Shamino, Dupre, and lolo at the end. The game is marred by many poorly-designed puzzles and event triggers that can be tripped at the wrong time. Voodoo memory is still in use, and disk access has not improved much over the previous game. Overall, it has a good story with poor implementation. Prepare to be frustrated with this one. Might and Magic Clouds of Xeen L'92) Ultima Underworld I: The Stygian Abyss Origin; IBM Review: #96 (July '92) First in a new series featuring the Avatar, with superb graphics that model a dungeon almost perfectly, it produces that \"you are there\" feeling in a way no other game before it has ever done (including the venerable Dungeon Master). The Avatar is railroaded into an underground complex used now as a prison and must escape, incidentally saving the world along the way. The combat system takes some getting used to, but is otherwise balanced. Spells are cast using runes instead of reagents. Much interaction with the inhabitants, many of whom are not hostile. Its fantastic automapping feature lacks only a printing function to make it perfect. The only drawback to this one is a lot of excessive running around between levels. A definite must for game players (at least those who are not claustrophobic). Wizardry III: Legacy of Lyllgamyn Sir-Tech; Ap, C64, IBM Review: #3.6 (Dec. '83) This one is not a true sequel, as you start out with level one characters. Essentially, Legnicy is Wizardry / all over again, with a few bells and whistles added. The object is to obtain the Orb of Lyllgamyn from the dungeon. This requires running two parties alternately, one good and one evil. Aside from that novelty and a change in the monster graphics, there is little to distinguish it from the previous two games. Wizardry IV: The Return of Werdna Sir-Tech; Ap, IBM Review: #41 (Nov. '87) Wiz IV is an interesting RPG inverse: Instead of being the good guy, you play the evil Werdna, making his slow way up through the dungeon to retrieve the amulet of power. Along the way, you can summon a variety of nasty critters to help you in your fights against wandering bands of adventurers who want to keep you down. In addition, there is a raft of diabolical puzzles to solve as Werdna treks upward to the exit. When he gets there, the second half of the game begins. This one is involved and complicated, with multiple endings, and by no means linear. It was designed primarily for the experienced, hard-core Wizardry player and is not for the novice gamer. Wizardry fans who want a good workout shouldn't miss this one. Wizardry V: Heart Of The Maelstrom Sir-Tech; Ap, IBM Review: #56 (Feb. '89) A better game than Wiz II or III, although it does away with the neatly-sized dungeons, making for a lot of aggravation in mapping. This one is a combined rescue mission/kill Foozle expedition. Combat is not as well-balanced as it should be, and there is a lot of silliness in the game. Monster pics are improved over previous Wizardry titles, but the Wizardry I: Proving Grounds Of The Mad Overlord Sir-Tech; Ap, C64, IBM, Mac, Review: #2.3 Hints: #4.5 (Oct, '84) The original classic and the first CRPG to give you a full party of individuals to control instead of the usual single character. It was also the first to provide for heavy-duty magic use, with reams of spells for mages and priests. Delve into a 10-level dungeon to retrieve Trebor's (the Mad Overlord) amulet that was stolen by Werdna. It has 3D point-of-view perspective with mediocre graphics: walls and floors are line drawings without color or decoration; no visible objects on-screen (stairs, for instance, have to be stepped on to find out Ultima Underworld II: Labyrinth Of Worlds Origin; IBM Review: #106 (May '93) This one offers pretty much the same engine and graphics as the previous Underworld. The Guardian makes a cameo appearance, encasPage 44 Computer Gaming World "


"Need for 14 14343 RECUT RESEARCH The Darkest Knight is Still Ahead GABRIEL See your favorite retailer or call: 1-800-757-7707 ILUZ SIERRA Circle Reader Service #96 "


".95 MACH, NINETY FEET ABOVE THE GROUND, BOTH SIDES TRYING TO SHOOT HIM DOWN. WOUNDED IN THE ARM, KAPITAN ALEXANDER ZUYEV GUIDED HIS MiG-29 TO FREEDOM LEFT-HANDED. COULD YOU? Turkish air defenses to land safely on a civilian airfield in Turkey. On May 20, 1989 MiG-29 pilot Alexander The pilot who wrote the book on the MiG-29, Zuyev began Alexander Zuyev, tells a desperate his harrowing story (including authentic plan to steal Soviet dogfighting tactics) in Fulerum the Soviet from Warner Books. Union's most advanced combat aircraft and fly it to political asylum. THE FINEST TECHNOLOGY RUBLES CAN BUY The plane he flew is the MiG29 Fulcrum, the crowning achievement of Soviet aeronautics. Now, with NOTHING WAS LOST IN TH TRANSLATION The flight model was pa terned after actual Mikoya Gurevich (MiG) design spec So you can be sure th every system and eve control is painsta ingly accurat the wa all #215 The Arms Communication Shot in a life and death struggle with the sentry, Zuyev managed to take off. Then, flying dangerously low to avoid radar, he eluded pursuing fighters and deadly Soviet and MiG-29: Deadly Adversaru of Falcon 3.0, Spectrum Holo Byte's add-on to Falcon 3.0, you can climb into the cockpit of the F-16's nemesis. down the Russian-accente cockpit warnings. IT'LL TEST YOUR SKILL AND YOUR PATRIOTISM Unlike the F-16, the MiGisn't a fly-by-wire aircraft, sc For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time). Circle Reader Service #100 "


"Next time you have an F-16 glued to your tail, try the MiG-29 's \"Cobra\" eurer: Now you can choose from multiple aircraft, multiple theaters, even which side of the conflict to fight on. And you can 3) You abruptly pitch the nose go head-to-head back to level over a modem or flight. Now you're on his you're on his with up to six sia, with a little score to settle. computer never limits your control inputs, whether inspired or foolish. Its twin Isotov RD-33 engines produce 36,600 lbs. of thrust, to the F-16's 25,000. And superb aerodynamics make it controllable at low speeds and high angles of attack that would have enemy pilots The most fear. SPECTRUM fightsome opponent ing to is a human one. With HEAD avoid EBS, up to six players can go a spin. head-to-head. HOLOBYTE 1) You pull up past a 90 2) Your alpha airspeed climb. drops rapidly; the F-16 zooms past. THE ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES: THE ULTIMATE CYBER-BATTLEFIELD EBS is the first series of interconnecting simulations. Each title works with the others to bring you closer to the real thing players over a network. It all begins when you add on MiG-29 to Falcon 3.0. Anything more realistic wouldn't be a simulation. INTRODUCING MiG-29 OENOSIVES MiG-29 Choose your weapon. The Falcon is lethal at long distances. The Fulcrum, deadly closein. Now you can fly for either side. FALCON DEADIN A RY MERACCONXO VS. Spectra odobytu Spectrum Holebyte THEY WON'T EVEN KNOW WHAT HIT THEM Your MiG's IRST (Infrared Search and Track) system can track an F-16 without revealing your presence on his threat display. So you can get on his six o'clock before he even knows you're there. Once in range, you'll be able to lock on to the Falcon just by turning to look at him with the MiG-29's helmet mounted sight. Then call 'pusk» (launch) as you fire missiles or \"ogon\" (firing) as you ventilate him with your computer-accurate 30mm gun. Either way, his plane will make a satisfying crunch when it hits the ground. MiG-29 add-on requires Falcon 30. Available on IBM compatibles. Spectrum HoloByte HIGHTER VR COMBAT MiG-29 FALCON FALCONO ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES The fight of your life. "


"ucital Drasons and Silicon Shi icon Slings The Evolution Of WIZARDRY I-VII FOREWARD GRADE STATUS dungeon graphics are still colored lines. This one began the trend of actually using objects during play, instead of merely having them with you. Most puzzles, however, are simple once you have the right item (or right instructions, as the case may be). One of the better features is (arc?) critters you can talk to as you progress through the dungeon, who will provide information and/or have important items for sale (it's refreshing not to have to kill everything you come across!). Overall, a me. dium effort, better than some, not as good as others. FASTECT NCERS 2 YETIC HOGAR 13 ONESTI APAX THUNDEPSONS OFTTONS H SPELLRARRY CHARACTER MANECL LORO KING AROLO OUTLETACERS STIC HOGAP Wizardry VI: Bane Of The Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech; Am, IBM, Mac Review: #79 (Feb.'91) Tale: #82 (May '91) At last the series breaks out of the line-drawing mold and starts to get into real graphics. The bleak and colorless walls are finally a thing of the past. While there isn't that much variery, it's still better than outlines. This one is not a sequel to Maelstrom, as you have to create a brand-new group. Character creation isn't much different from before, except in some of the classes and races you can have. More puzzle-oriented than most previous Wizardries, with a lot of objects (not necessarily magical) to be used in different places, and posers to unravel; however, the majority are not difficult. Interesting use of multiple endings, although how to get to them is somewhat obscure. Combat in the latter part of the game tends toward imbalance. Weak in parts, but better than Wiz V. A2 STRANGE PLANUS.53 23 5 CRAML THO KELP TARG THUMBERSON'S OPTIONS: BAN Bike BRT BACK AC HITS STATUS CHARACTER.HONE JAL AURA ROLO 11\" QUICKE INGERS Ak nene 11 3 UNDEAD KOBOLD TIDDLEFADDLE'S OPTIONS Wrath Of Denethenor Sierra; Ap, C-64, IBM Review: #37 (May '87) An Ultima Il look-alike, right down to the graphics, only not as good as the game it copics. Trek around the world to find out how to bring about the downfall of the evil Denethenor of the title. There's lots of tedious backtracking with nothing particularly new or inventive in the game. If you didn't play it, you didn't miss much. Moldy Oldies These games are old, REALLY old, and it's doubtful you will come across any of them these days. Even if you did, most are likely to be unplayable, since they were written mainly for the old Apple II and TRS-80 lines, although some might run on the IIGS. This collection of the first CRPGs may surprise you a little. Nor all of them were of the endless hack and slash variety, and some contain features you might not expect in games that were designed to run on small machines. Many were slow in terms of play speed, and their graphics were primitive by today's standards, but the concepts they introduced have been incorporated into most of the modern CRPGs. So take a look and see what was going on in \"the good old days\" when Apple was king and 64K RAM was more memory than one could ever use! Aklabeth California Pacific: Ap This was Lord British's first published game. Bluntly, it wasn't all that terrific. Ultima fans may find it hard to believe, but the outdoors were an absolute, unrelieved blank slate. The only features were little five-square symbols that represented towns and carried over to early ltimas), big X's that looked like scars (and represented dungeons), and way, way down on the right-hand side, a castle. In the castle was a lord who kept sending you out to kill particular monsters, after which he would raise you in rank (you started as a peasant). That was the whole \"plot\" of the game. The main point of interest (other than it being Lord B's first) was the dungeoneering. This is where all the graphical efforts went. The dungeons were point-of-view, 3D perspective, and you could see monsters in the distance approaching you and becoming more defined as they got closer. What makes this especially noteworthy is that Aklabeth was the first CRPG to use this form; other dungeons typically took the overhead, bird's-eye-view. Otherwise, Aklabeth was a pretty standard hack-cm-up. APventure to Atlantis, Odyssey: The Complete Apventure, Wilderness Campaign Synergistic Software; Ap This trio of games by Robert Clardy, published sometime between 1979-81, were some of the finest of the early CRPGs. While mainly along the \"Kill Foozle\" lines, they incorporated an astonishing range of features: true wilderness with swamps, mountains, jungles, etc., that had hazards of their own to overcome; travel by horse, ship, magic carpet or teleportation; sailing by the wind (which required re-rigging the sails when the wind changed); non-hostile travelers such as merchants to buy from or mercenaries to recruit; (8/8E-FTOR SORRY TAKE BACK STEA HANE SLASS AG HITS Wivardry VII: Crusaders Of The Dark Savant Sir-Tech: IBM Review: #103 (Feb.'93) This is a sequel to Bane with essentially the same engine. This time the party is after the Astral Dominae, an artifact of great power. So is the Dark Savant of the title, as well as other groups. More detailed than any previous Wizardry with some real and very interesting interactions between the party and the various inhabitants of the world. This is also the first Wizardry to provide an actual outdoors, with towns, rivers, and an open sky. The design is a little weak in some places, and there is too much unnecessary running back and forth, but this one should not be missed, especially not by Wizardry fans. RANDER QALDERDASH'S OPTIONS 681829 830E44Ten RSBRRY TAKE BACK RAROERO BHEKARA I LANTOK TARDEROES DITIONE FARU SEE HURE LOUIT MOVE Wizard's Crown SSI; Ap. At, C64, IBM, ST Review: #31 (Sep-Oct '86) A better-than-average hack'n'slash game featuring tactical combat and other interesting points, Wizard's Crown features detailed, but time-consuming combat. Fortunately, a quick combat mode is available for the speedy disparch of weaker opponents (done in text mode with the computer running both sides). It features no levels as such; experience is traded for increases in skills and stats, a very intelligent way of handling things. Good balance of magic/weaponry in combat, and spells do not become overwhelming. It also offers a very tough fight with Foozle at the end. A good game for the bash'em crowd. IGCRO Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"ON THE EFIELD OF FIRE Eriti om 1966 in The First Realistic 3-D Battlefield. Run from hut to hut, or hit the dirt and take cover behind trees and rocks. MILOFOCUSOC.notified about uspected Unmatched Depth and Authenticity 80 historical missions based on actual combat reports provided by the UDT-SEAL Muscum Association Inc. Leading Edge Simulation Technology See tracers and explosions through your own eyes or seven external views. Hear real digitized battle sounds. was so spelled ambulanslatlan er her You and your team jump out of a Huey and belly through 200 yards of mud and darkness toward, the village. You signal your team to fan out and take out the guard posts, but your flanker goes down-booby trap! Suddenly rounds from an AK-47 shriek overhead and the night is ablaze with tracers and the shock waves of mortar fire. Welcome to \"Forest of Assassins\". Vietnam's Mekong Delta. Your worst nightmare come true. Available for IBM and compatibles. ELECTRONIC ARTS Seal Team is a trademark of Electronic Arts, 1933 Electronic Art Circle Reader Service #50 "


"nigital Dragons ns and Silicon Sling temples, ruins, crypts and castles to explore; a bunch of items and magical objects to use; and monsters that inhabited specific areas (so you knew pretty much what you'd be up against in many locations), among others. Not only that, but success required a lot of people on your side, especially for the final battles. Wilderness Campaign, for example, recommended that you have 50-75 warriors-a veritable army!--in your party before going to take on Foozle. And you thought you had it good if your present-day groups were six or eight characters strong! More amazing yet, this type of detail was squeezed into games that were designed for 48K RAM Apples. Sometimes it makes me wonder what the modern CRPGs are doing with all of that 640K. This game was eventually released into the brought in the use of magic potions to tempopublic domain, along with utilities for creatrarily enhance attributes. The interesting ing your own adventures. It survives to this kicker was that some of the potions were day, and both the utilities and new scenarios addictive: if you used them too much, your can often be found on local bulletin boards (by permanent stats began to decline, forcing you this time, there may be other versions besides to use the potions more and more (and makApple floating around, but Apple Eamon is ing for more and more decline, etc.). Overall, still the most prevalent). this one was better than Apshai, but not by too Sword thrust was a revised and enhanced vermuch, since the game considered the queen sion of Eamon. Still all text, it allowed you to \"just another treasure\" and there was no spepick up other characters in a scenario who cial message for getting her out of the dunwould join you for the duration of the advengeon. Two follow-up scenarios for the Apple ture. Interestingly, monsters had a chance to were published, The Keys To Acheron and Daneither like you and go with you), or ignore ger in Drindisti; as with the Apshai add-ons, you (as long as they weren't bothered), as well they were only extra adventures with not as rush to rip out your throat. After the origimuch new about them. nal game there were six different scenarios, with #7 \"Hall of Alchemie\" ending the series Telengard (the master diskette was #1), and each being Avalon Hill; Ap more difficult than the last. It's a pity that Review: #3.3 (May-June '83) Swordthrust did not survive into the graphic era, as it had great potential. Another of the early \"hacknslash with no main goal\" extravaganzas. Create a character and explore ever deeper into the dungeons below the surface. Very much influenced by DOD, as shown by (a) the attribute range of 3-18; (b) the requirement for getting treasure out of the dungeon before it counted towards experience, (c) one level at a time advancement, regardless of the amount of experience acquired and (d) the spells available for use (do names like \"Magic Missile,\" \"Cause Light Wounds,\" \"Phantasmal Force,\" and \"Power Word Kill\" sound familiar?). Interesting for its time, the game would be pretty dated today, especially with the advent of SSI's Gold Box series. Back then, however, it was hot stuff, and a fun way of passing the time. THE NUMMONINO Beneath Apple Manor The Software Factory; Ap One of the earliest (1978!) CRPG-type games for the Apple. It used ASCII graphics (letters, numbers and symbols) for the display. A single character fought through successive levels of nastiness beneath Apple Manor to recover the fabled golden apple. Written in BASIC, it was terribly slow even by the standards of the day, but it was fun nonetheless. Interesting points: experience was traded for stat increases, gold for \"brain scans\" that were essentially save game positions, and your character was able to use both weapons and magic. Even more, each new game created a random dungeon over which you had some control, such as choosing the number of rooms per level and the difficulty factor (how tough the critters were). Not bad for a game that was designed to run in as little as 16K of memory! The big drawback (aside from the slowness) was that the game had to be played in one sitting, as the save game was good only for the current session. FEL Bronze Dragon, Twisted Speare Commonwealth Software; Ap Review: #32 (Nov. '86) Hybrid adventure/CRPG in the Sword thrust mold, but a little more sophisticated, as you could create a new party right from the start and go adventuring with them. Aside from the main scenario, there were 12 others that you could play. These were somewhat like Beneath Apple Manor in that you had control over their creation and difficulty. This did not change the plots of the scenarios, but did confer some advantages in having an idea of what you were up against. Twisted Speatre was a follow-up with more scenarios to play, set in the Twisted Speare tavern. Most interesting was having NPCs drop in now and then to give clues and information about the various quests. It was another fun series that did not survive the graphics onslaught. Eamon/Swordthrust Series CE Software; Ap Eamon was one of the first (if not the first) of the adventure/CRPG hybrids, blending standard role-playing features with puzzlesolving. You created a character with physical and mental attributes and sent him out into different scenarios. These scenarios required a combination of fighting and a little magic) and regular adventure game puzzle-solving to complete. Galactic Adventures SSI; Ap, At Review: #3.4 (July-August '83) This was a sort of follow up to Galactic Gladiators, a tactical wargame with a sciencefiction flavor. Galactic Adventures kept the tactical combat and added a bunch of little quests for the party to complete, thereby giving a bit more to do than merely bash. It was actually quite involved, though the adventures themselves were simple, with people to hire (they had to be paid and fed), skills to perfect, and various planets to visit. Also, like several other games mentioned in this section, you had control over creating the scenarios themselves. Of course the main part of the game was still the combat, and this one if you can get it) is likely to appeal more to wargamers than anyone else. Temple Of Apshai Epyx; Am, Ap, ST This game caused a sensation when it first appeared, being one of the earliest graphic CRPGs. A fully-defined character was maneuvered through a series of corridors and rooms in a four-level dungeon. It was a hack-andslash game, with no particular goal beyond killing monsters and grabbing treasure. The programming was not as polished as it could have been, since the game could never remember how much gold you carried, and always asked on replays what you had a really powerful incentive to, ahem, pad a trifle). It was also very slow, being another BASIC game. However, in a day when most CRPGs were text (like Eamon) or had graphics but text-only combat, it was a marvel to be able to see the fighting, especially when your character lunged at a critter. The game was later ported over to the Atari 800 line with several improvements in the way of speed and graphics. Two add-on scenarios for the Apple were also released, Upper Reaches of Apshai and Curse of Ra, but they didn't add much new, being just extra adventures to take your character on. One of the more interesting aspects of Apshai was its use of paragraphs to describe the various rooms of the dungeons (the Apple graphics being rather Spartan). This feature was later taken on by more modern games such as the Gold Box series from SSI and Wasteland (to name just a few), but, so far as I can tell, Apshai had it first (these paragraphs, by the way, were a great means of ensuring that you didn't miss any rooms on a particular level!). CGW Hellfire Warrior Epyx; Ap, TRS This was the true sequel to Temple of Apshai. It brought in some improvements, such as remembering how much gold you carried, and having an actual goal (rescuing a sleeping warrior queen, lifted pretty much right out of Wagner's Ring cycle). It played almost the same as the previous game, although this one Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"EMAIL The Modern Version Of The Award Winning Classic Availah Windows Version OWEGO EV  An Addictive Strategy War Game  Network and Modem Compatible  Super VGA Giaphies  Advanced Sechlario Editor  Superior Computer AL.  Digitized Sound Effects Various Difficulty Settings completely Re-Playable Scenario Pack By Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1-800-325-8898 (OR 1-818-999-0607 outside U.S.) P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302) 1992 New World Computing, Inc and White Walt Productions. Empire Deluxe is a trademark of New World Computing, Inc. New World Computing is a registered trademark of Nuw World Computing, Inc, IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary. Circle Reader Service #77 NEW WORLD COMPUTING "


"BEST OF THE Shareware for The Adventurer's Backpack REST by Chuck Miller he Legend of Kyrandia Heps of the Serpent Drotto Can you put Heybe i can I t ridge Maybe Hermann II Do you have rything he could not herm GMT L it e n Print Windows 2000 Hekt Mindou Then I begin an adventure, I always like to keep several helpful Heart of China, Rise of the Dragon and Willy Beamish), many of the objects tucked safely away in my backpack; items that make old Infocom titles (including Hitchhiker's Guide and Leather GodV a difficult quest just a bit more enjoyable. So, in keeping desses), LucasArts graphic adventures (Loom, Monkey Island 1 & 2, with the theme of this issue, adventure and role-playing games, I Zak McKracken, Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade and Fate of would like to focus our attention on a handy \"backpack» resource Atlantis) and an assorted bag of other quests (Alone in the Dark, Lost designed for the intrepid adventurer who, at times, feels a little less Files of Sherlock Holmes, Legend of Kyrandia, Rex Nebular, the Spellintrepid than usual. The subject of our interest is an application that casting trio and more). New hint files are regularly being added that has been available for several years, but which has received too little can be found on many on-line services, including the GAMERS attention—the Universal Hint System. library on CompuServe, PC Games on America Online, and Scorpia's Games RT on GEnie. The hint files are free, only the file readers Universally Accepted are shareware. The Universal Hint System (UHS) by Jason Strautman is a nifty In addition to the UHS reader for MS-DOS, Jason Strautman has gaming utility that I wish would receive greater, perhaps even univercreated a TSR version of the program that enables players to activate sal, support in the gaming community. Originally released back in hints from within many games with just a single keystroke (unfortu1988, the UHS has undergone several upgrades and has grown nately, some titles will not allow the TSR to function properly). This beyond its original DOS-based incarnation to comptons lesendal Computer Cantry was version, however, has much steeper system deinclude versions for the Amiga, Macintosh, and mands. It requires a 386-SX or better, 2MB Windows environments. Fortunately, UHS files, RAM with 256K configured as EMS, DOS 5.0, the actual hint files for each game, are designed and an expanded memory manager. to be exchanged across computer formats, makRegistration costs vary depending on which ing it possible for a hint file written on one version of the UHS reader one prefers. The system to be shared with someone using another MS-DOS and TSR versions are both available computer format (as long as a current reader is from Jason Strautman. Registering the DOS available) version costs a mere $10 and includes the UHS The UHS file reader (Version 1.50) has been compiler (for compiling hint files) and the deenhanced greatly since its inception, offering coder (for creating a text file of a hint file's improved hint options, the ability to include Universal Hint System Reader content), plus several minor features not en16-color pictures (great for maps and diagrams) abled in the shareware version of the program. and an improved file structure making future revisions much easier A registration fee of $20 will buy both the DOS reader and the TSR to implement. Its interface is quite intuitive, being fully menu driven version. Adding an additional $5 provides the gamer with a disk full and supporting the ever faithful \"digital rodent.\" Included are options of all the available hint files. for hint counting (informing the gamer of total hints available for a To order the DOS and TSR versions of the UHS, send payment to given puzzle and the number accessed), tiling and cascading of open Jason Strautman, 239 Redwood, San Antonio, TX 78209. Those windows, printing/saving of the contents in the current window, and preferring the Windows version may order it by sending a registration displaying of pictures when available. fee of $10 to Robert Norton, 706 Copeland Street, Madison, WI Patterned after the old Infocom InvisiClues hint books, the UHS 53711. A freeware Amiga reader is available on CompuServe only gives the user as much of a hint as they wish to see at a time, (GAMERS LIBrary 1, General/Help) and GEnie (Scorpia's Games RT). A newly released Macintosh reader is also available on Comranging from subtle clues to complete answers. Thus, rather than spoil the puzzle by offering the outright answer up front, hints are given in puServe (GAMERS LIBrary 1, General/Help). a progressive fashion. For example, let's say that one has to get a locked I heartily recommend the Universal Hint System as an adventurer's steamer trunk open. The UHS would direct the gamer as follows: 1) resource par excellence. Hopefully, many gamers will support Jason Do you have the key to unlock the trunk?, 2) In what location do you Strautman's efforts, increasing both its popularity and the number of think it might be kept?, 3) Have you checked the Captain's quarters?, hint files available. 4) Did you look on the night stand?, 5) Take the key from the night stand and unlock the trunk. This process allows one to get a nudge Send Us Your Best in the right direction without spoiling all the fun by immediately If you have authored a shareware or public domain game for revealing the solution. Personally, I find this method preferable to the MS-DOS compatible, Macintosh or Amiga computers and would present alternatives: complete step-by-step walkthroughs (which like to have it considered for review in this column, please send two often result in the player accidentally seeing the solution to puzzles complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" disks) with documentation and yet to be encountered) and coded keywords (which must be \"transa cover letter to: lated to provide the solution). Best of the Rest At present, over 60 games are supported by the UHS, including both Computer Gaming World classics and new releases. Hint files are currently available for most 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 Sierra and Dynamix games (all of the King's Quest, Space Quest, Leisure Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 Suit Larry and Laura Bow adventures, plus Quest for Glory I & II, CGW Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"Bad Day in Bagdad! M000 You've been cast out of the palace as a beggar. The princess has turned against you. The palace guards want your head on a skewer. And you haven't even had breakfast yet. This is not good. It gets worse. One minute you're fleeing for your very life across roof tops. The next, you find yourself washed up on a desert island...or amidst ancient ruins, face to face with a disembodied head (and boy is it hungry!). This is really not good. You stumble upon quicksand, serpents, spikes, magic spells, a skeleton with a sick sense of humor, and then...well... things get just a mite tricky. Introducing Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & the Flame. Some call it a dozen Arabian Nights movies rolled into one. Actually, it's your worst Arabian nightmare. So get some sleep. Once this swashbuckler begins, you may never sleep again. 1 PULSE-QUICKENING ACTION RICH MOVIE-LIKE STORY AND SOUNDTRACK INCREDIBLY REALISTIC ANIMATION A CINEMATIC ACTION GAME BY JORDAN MECHNER SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE: $69.95 (MS-DOS VERSION). SEE YOUR LOCAL DEALER OR CALL 1-800-521-6263 AND REFER TO CODE 262 TO ORDER AT A 25% SAVINGS. REQUIRES 10 MUIZ 286 OR FASTER MACHINE. HARD DRIVE AND VGA REQUIRED.  Broderbund Software, Inc. Prince of Persia is a registered trademark and The Shadow & the Flame is a trademark of Broderbund Software. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #39 "


"REVIEW Scraping Off The Bamcie Microl me Res Its Ship In Pirates! Gold by Chris Lombardi Take One Spas CME 2340 ga perpendere s noted in this issue's Hall of Fame, tender, depending on the success of his and flag animations. When players run across Pirates! is considered one of the best younger days. This personalized role-playing a ship in the open sea and decide to investi[ \"hybrid» game designs to come along thread binds all of these various facets into a gate it, they will first see an animated model Though called an Adventure Game for the game that goes right on being good, even of the ship pitching with the swells, and then sake of our awards and ratings, Pirates! fits while editors quibble over its categorical desa close-up animation of the ship's flag blowinto that round hole like a square pegleg. ignation. ing atop the mast. The look of the main While players do have the opportunity to MicroProse has thrown their har into a over-head sailing view has been jazzed up strike out on quests to find lost members of growing ring of publishers who are revampslightly, but remains virtually the same, with their family atom and seek out buried Incan ing some of their great, but aged games. The the exception of those pesky wandering storm treasure, they must also strategically plan new and improved version of Pirates!, dubbed clouds that now look somewhat 3D and a bit raiding excursions and trading routes, they Pirates! Gold, brings this classic into the world misplaced in their 2D surroundings. must lead men into tactical land battles, they of VGA, 8-bit sound support, expanded must cross blades with skilled swordsmen in RAM and 386/486 processors. This general trend of updating classics appears a good thing for all involved. There are some fabulous ideas lying in the rubbish heap of gaming history, and restoring them will expose newcomers in the gaming community to these great designs and make some extra cash for publishers for the cost of, essentially, little more than a new paint job. And that's what Pirates! Gold is, in essence a great game engine with some body work and a few coats of high quality paint. MicroProse has not made any significant deThe renovation has been very good to the Salon sign changes nor added much additional play interface. Where players once chose items value to what was present in the original from menus, these menus have been replaced action sequences and cross \"Ts\" with hostile ships in tactical ship-to-ship battles. The What they have done is made some interface by graphic depictions of the menu choices. game also has a wargame feel in its historical tweaks, added a couple features that help When players enter a city, for instance, they scenarios that challenge gamers to best the smooth the rough edges, and heaped upon are given a picture of the town with mouse performances of buccaneers like Francis the game three disks of graphical hotspots representing the variDrake and Henry Morgan, Running through gold. Pirates! Gold ous possibilities: visit a tavern, it all, and perhaps the secret to the game's And does that gold glitter! All appeal, is a touch of role-playing. The player of the game's still-shots are deliTITLE: Pirates! Gold cately painted in 256-color VGA, $69.95 dons the sabre of Dread Pirate X, who, in the SYSTEM: course of his adventures, can earn titles of and with a style and palette that REQUIREMENTS: 386, 4MB RAM, 19MB hard drive rank from chosen national interests, earn a powerfully evoke the feeling of space, VGA graphics, mouse PROTECTION: Documentation look up reputation for either his bold or cowardly the period (Dutch and Flemish DESIGNER: Paul Murphy actions, wed a fair daughter of a Caribbean schools, by and large). In addiPUBLISHER: MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD governor, and end his days with the retiretion to the paintings, there are (410) 771-1151 ment benefits of a king's advisor or a barsome excellent 3-D modeled ship PRICE: IBM Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"\"The humor and originality of Zork are always present... its images are the most spectacular in the history of video games\" -JOYSTICK MAGAZINE \"The interface may be revolutionary Cand] allows a richness that has been absent heretofore in graphic adventures.\" Johnny L. Wilson, COMPUTER GAMING WORLD An epic adventure...underground. RETURN TO ZORK A Cast of Hollywood Actors Over I hour of Spoken Dialouge Revisit Flood Control Dam #3 Try to Outwit Devious Dwarves SURN; JASON HERVEY ROBIN LIVELY A.J.LANGER JASON LIVELY EDAN GROSS SAM JONES ROUES INFOCOM mesecu na wa ACTIVISION MODERN JOE ASPERIN COLEMA MICHELE EM INFOCOM. MENATHAN WANG ..TERI MASONS WILLIAM VOLK SON: DOUG BARNETT HY EDDIE DOMBROWER ARCHEOPETER SPRAGUE ACTIVISION. Available for IBM and Compatibles. Enhanced version for CD-ROM also available. To order: See your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Circle Reader Service #33 "


"The Tower on the Arun the merchant, the bank, the shipwright or the mid-range from a low-range thrust in Pirates! governor. For those who are iconically illiterit is now more difficult to decide, making it ate, each hot spot also has a verbal label which a bit tougher to defend against attacks. In pops up to identify the option. spite of this, the sequence seems easier than The main information interface, or the before. I've only lost one swordfight, and that Captain's Cabin, has been similarly treated. when outmanned three to one. I might attribA visit to these cluttered quarters will enable ute this to my (relative) youthfulness and one to access the current collection of treasure morning calisthenics, except that I was never maps, peruse the ship's log with its party and this good in the original game. It seems it is personal information, and save the game. quite easy to develop strategies with the new These options will all be very familiar to swordfighting that will win in all but the most players of the original, but several new fearidiculously out-matched fights. This may be tures have been added as well. The \"Sun because sword-play effectiveness can be imSpor\" feature a navigational tool with which proved through practice and over the course players could get a rough idea of their latiof many successful battles. This step toward of many successful battles. This step toward tude, has been replaced by a full map of the improving the \"role-playing aspects of the Caribbean that gives the exact position of the exact position of the game with improving skills is a nice one, but ship, in addition to city information. As one doesn't seem to apply to the other skills (at who generally tends to vote for playability least, such improvements are not mentioned over uninteresting attempts at accuracy, I in the manual and, if they exist, are not visible find this a nice change. Another handy tweak to the player). is a new \"time compressionfeature for sea travel. In the original, sea travel could be quite Purt Revale slow, especially when sailing against the prevailing winds. Add a slow sailing galleon to one's fleet, or worse yet, a galleon with sail damage, and the up and coming Blackbeard could quickly go Gray. The new Turbo feature can greatly speed sailing; however, like similar features in flight simulators, it is best LL used with caution as it can quickly ger a player OUD into trouble. One rather bizarre feature of this new interface is that, while a player can save games from the Captain's Cabin, one cannot restore those games. The only way to do so is to dive The original Pirates! was a tremendous out of the game universe and into DOS, and game, but it wasn't perfect. There were some there restart the game. I can only see this as a goofy and frustrating parts of the game. The design oversight, as I can't fathom any reason land combat module leaps to mind as an able design motive for such an inconvenience. example of both. Here, the player led one or more groups of men in tactical combat against town defenders. The player directed the men from the overhead perspective, trying to get his men into cover and lure the enemy into a «killing field.\" The Al was moronic. Clever players could quickly learn how to lead the computer into ambush after ambush, dwindling a defending force hunKita dreds strong to nothing while taking few KISS losses. It became a joke and was part of the reason I eventually lost interest (after several months of play, mind you) and moved on to other waters. One can also practice fencing while in the I was hoping that Pirates! Gold would make Captain's Cabin. This is an excellent new land combat a little more interesting, but that addition for the first time player. In the origiisn't the case. They've tweaked things a little nal Pirates!, the player was thrown into the and the Al is less of a moron (now just an game and forced to learn swordfighting under average-grade idiot), but on the whole it isn't very difficult circumstances, apparently buya very interesting affair. The units do not fire ing into the questionable notion that the best their musket volleys as far, so the battle is way to teach someone to swim is to throw reduced to melees for the most part and usuthem into the deep end of the pool. ally involve placing your men in cover and The sword-fighting segment has been rewaiting for the Al to attack (though somevamped, and in more than just new graphics. times you have to lure it). In addition, keyThe animations of the dueling buccaneers are board commands are not supported (despite smoother and more subtle in their motions. what the manual says), and the mouse interWhereas it was very easy to distinguish a face is terribly clumsy. Speaking of clumsy, the main traveling interface should be keelhauled a bit. A mouse interface has been added that enables players to direct their ship with the right and left mouse buttons (one is forced to the mouse because the keyboard commands are much less responsive). But like the original there are some hair-pulling aspects of this system, especially the land travel/sca travel interface. When a ship strikes land, a party of men immediately sets out from the boat. This includes insignificant little patches of islands. I often found myself in an archipelago of little islands or a tight cove that was nearly impossible to escape from because the ship kept hitting the islands and turning into a party of men. Add a gusty wind to the equation and I was tempted to reach fer me belayin' pin. Beyond a few superficial attempts at adding game play-adding a few new cities on the Mexican and North American coasts; adding the possibility of marriage to a merchant's daughter instead of only a governor's-Pirates! Gold is identical to its predecessor. So being, it has much to offer a new player and comes with the highest recommendations. Whether it is worthwhile for players of the original game is another question. Personally, it didn't offer enough new game play to fill my rop sails beyond three full carcers. Others may find an old love rekindled by the new look, but these suitors should keep in mind that they are buying three disks of pretty pictures and a few interface tweaks-not a significantly revised game with fresh game play. Cow ta Bed Bugs In The Bunks The first run of Pirates! Gold escaped from MicroProse with a few significant bugs (so significant we are baffled as to how they could have been missed!). When encountering the evil Spaniard with information about a family member, the game will crash. It will do the same when fulfilling a secret mission for a governor. Thankfully, MicroProse responded quickly with a new version. This new version can be had by contacting MicroProse directly or by phoning their bulletin board system at (410) 785-1841. It is also in the software libraries of the major on-line networks. Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"BEST MULTIMEDIA ARCADE GAME FOR WINDOWS! | DIIIIDEEN LET INVASION ID00100 EDIO MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WINDOWS 30 3DI PRODUCTIONS INC. Actval Windows Screens Three Complete Games in One Box! SPECTACULAR GRAPHICS! AMAZING SOUND AND MUSIC INTENSE ARCADE ACTION  Breathtaking 16-Million Color Screens  Fast 3D Scrolling and Flight Simulator Displays Incredible Photo-Realistic Graphics  Animation, Animation, Animation!  Full MIDI Sound Support  Custom Music Scoros  Studio Digitized Sound FX  Professionally Recorded Spooch FX  Over Thirty Levels of Play  Tremendous Depth and Playability  Multiple Weapons and Bonus Objects Five Separate Levels of Difficulty Special lodrodstery Price $3995 Arcade Excitement comes to Windows! Alone on patrol in earth orbit you hear the first reports of o giont Cyborg Mothership. Only a few thousand miles from the plonot, it has already lounched a massive attack on ground defense systems. Total surprise hos rendered the planet nearly helpless. You are civilization's only hope... Incredible Valuc! 3DI PRODUCTIONS INC.Now available of software retailers throughout America To order call 1-800-546-7677 LEADERS IN MULTIMEDIA PRODUCTS FOR WINDOWS Circle Reader Service #30 "


"REVIEW no Does Anybody do Here Have A Sackt A Sackbut? Microsoft's Musical Insturments CD-ROM Fondentender I thrombose ha deses fren 14a as of the standard militaryba bant Tel ecame known as the main the INR yand andi Animale has changed alle since the by Donald Griffin That's the difference between a CorMicrosoft Mustest instrumente and Percussion. Families allows you to exnet and a Cornett? A Diple and a Mest Endom plore a family of instruments to see how they Dimple? Until I started playing Sackbut relate to cach other. Instruments Of The with Microsoft's Musical Instruments CDWorld is similar to Families except that it uses ROM, I wouldn't have been able to answer a map of the world as the menu. I clicked on these questions. Yes, my friends, until rethe Middle East because I was working on cently I too was the lowest of the low. A man music for Virgin's Aladdin cartridge and in search of a Duda! wanted to hear what authentic instruments Please forgive my momentary foray into from that part of the world should sound like. evangelistic silliness but Microsoft Musical InThere, I discovered that the stringed instrustruments CD-ROM (MSMI) is terrific! Proment my brother bought for me in Egypt was ducer John Porcaro and Ethno-Musicologist called a Kamanche, but upon clicking the Jon Kertzer have put together a wonderful pronunciation icon, found that the name array of musical sights and sounds, so full of sounds different than the Native American pictures and music that one doesn't even need These showed close-up views and sometimes Comanche. to be able to read in order to enjoy it. From more musical examples and text. In this case, Musical Ensembles shows and plays how the opening screen. one is immediately clicking on \"Bell\" brought up a picture lookinstruments are used in groups. MSMI breaks treated to pictures of 15 different musical ing straight inside the bell along with text, down what most of us younger folks listen to instruments from around the world and plus four more pictures of various mutes. into a large category called Rock Bands and quick musical samples of several of them. From here you could hear how the trumpet then further down into Rock'N'Roll. HeavyMSMI immediately brings up a screen sounded with each mute inserted into the Metal, Soft Rock and Pop. called Contents but unlike the usual dreary bell. Along the bottom of this screen were lines of text that the term implies, the user is four icons labeled Sound Box, Types, Facts, The Options choice contains the only flaw offered more crisp graphics and invited to and See Also. I found in the program. It will let you copy a screen to the clipboard or to a printer. Howselect from Families Of Instruments, Musical Sound Box brings up another screen with ever, I was unable make the MSMI print in Ensembles, Instruments Of The World and more photographs, text and speaker icons landscape mode. It kept forcing it back to A-Z Of Instruments. offering musical examples of how the Trumpet sounds with various musical ensembles portrait mode. This is unfortunate since the screens are all landscape oriented and in porlike Orchestral, Jazz, R'N'B and Latin. Sound trait mode my HP Paint Jet did not print the Effects describes and plays examples of variCONTENTS labels clearly enough to read. In a music and ous techniques used with the instrument. It sound multimedia product this may go uneven has a musical scale where one can play noticed by almost everyone, but it bothered tunes using the sound of the instrument! FAMILIES OF MUSICAL me. INSTRUMENTS ENSEMBLES Even with the momentary delay after clicking on each note of the scale, the response was fast My overall impression of MSMI was excelenough to me to play slow, simple tunes. lent. Given my broad musical background, I Next, the Types icon brought up a new was surprised and delighted to find so much INSTRUMENTS A-Z OF that I didn't know. Although MSMI was not OF THE WORLD screen with photographs of all the instruINSTRUMENTS ments related to the trumpet and described intended as a complete encyclopedia of muhow they are similar. Finally, the Facts icon sical instruments, it does have surprising brought up a small page of general informadepth considering the amount of the CD that A-Z OfInstruments offers an alphabetic list tion in categories like Name, Family, Pitch was needed for graphics and sound. For those of all the instruments in MSMI with accomRange, Material, Size, Origins, Classification looking for a good quality, low cost CDROM for the entire family to justify the panying pictures and sound icons. The sound and Did You Know. Some of the latter were investment in a CD-ROM drive—this is it. icons allow you to hear the instrument to very interesting. For the Natural Trumpet, By the way, the Sackbut was an early version decide whether this was the instrument you for example, it says, «In the 17thand 18thof the Trombone. You'll have to look up were looking for. Since I started my musical century Germany, only members of the Duda in MSMI. CGW life as a Trumpeter, that was where I started Trumpeter's Guild were allowed exploring MSMI. I found I could choose to play. Anybody else would have nstruments from Trumpet, Conch Trumpet, Natural his trumpet smashed and his Trumpet and Piccolo Trumpet. Decisions. teeth knocked out.\" I'm sure glad TITLE: Microsoft Musical Instuments decisions. I opted for plain old Trumpet. A I was born a few hundred years PRICE: $79.95 SYSTEM: IBM full screen photograph of a trumpet was ac later! REQUIREMENTS: 386SX, 2MB RAM, VGA companied by the word \"Trumpet\" and a Back at the Contents screen I graphics, CD-ROM drive, mouse speaker icon which played a voice pronouncselected Families Of InstruPROCTECTION: None ing the name. Next was a paragraph about the ments. This gave me five more MUSICAL PUBLISHER: Microsoft, Inc. trumpet. Active text labels filled the screen photographs labeled Brass, ASTRUMENTS Redmond, WA (800) 426-9400 and pointed to every part of the picture. Strings, Woodwinds, Keyboards 5 JO Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"commADER ACADEMY Relentless Space Combat For Naive Rookies or Hardened Vets ST MISSION NAME TESTESTES SE 01 D sa student at the TCSN Academy, you customdesign and fly unique combat, rescue, and search and retrieval missions from the CyberSchool's holographic simulator. In the Wing Commander tradition, the game features a dynamic musical score, improved rendered, bit-mapped graphics, and a dazzling array of customizing options. But Wing Commander Academy is not another cinematic extravaganza — it's an intense dogfighting marathon. DULE SLED DELL 000 izle  Custom-design a variety of missions that match your skill level as you place fighters, capital ships, data pods and ejected pilots up to 10 in each of the four action spheres. Save up to 24 games to disk and trade with your friends or upload them to bulletin boards to challenge others.  Request random missions where each action sphere yields an unknown number of enemy ships with pilots of varying skill levels. Climb into the cockpits of the new Confederation Wraith or Kilrathi Jrathek fighters for a new combat experience. Select a cybernet wingman from a frightened cadet to a hotshot veteran.  Fly from the cockpit view or try the chase-plane view for a new perspective on the dogfighting action. Sharpen your combat skills as you compete for high-point honors. UNGAN SELECTION AGUSTUS GALETTI HAGE CCE CANCEL DD BE DAN ES DE EDETI Actual screens may vary. Engage the \"Gauntlet\" a dogfighting marathon with 15 progressively difficult levels of attacking ships including three flights of fighters in each level. Build missions so tough that even our professional Wing Commander pilots can't survive. ORIGIN We create worlas. A Stand Alone Game No previous Wing Commander experience necessary. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 For MS-DOS 386SX, 386, 486 or 100% compatible systems. Sound Support: Ad Lib, Sound Blaster, Roland LAPC-1 or 100% compatible sound card required for music. Requires: 256-color VGA, 2 megs RAM, 5 megs hard drive space free, joystick. Circle Reader Service #78 Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin, We create Worlds and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Academy is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. "


"REVIEW FLASH FORWARD TO FLASHBACK A Review Of SSI's Flashy Action Game, Flashback by Dave Pyron n rom Out of this World, Delphine's extra-dimensional action hit for Interplay Productions, the French developer now takes gamers on a far-future shoot-out with superbly rotoscoped graphics and diabolical aliens which are definitely \"out of this world.\" In Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Flashback: The Quest for Identity, the protagonist is a young scientist extraordinaire, top athlete, and all-around good guy. This character, Conrad B. Hart, has discovered that Earth is being invaded by shape-shifting aliens with genocidal intentions. Naturally, it is up to the gamer to guide Conrad safely through 200 screens of action, intrigue and suspense in order to penetrate the mystery of the alien invaders and prevent the destruction of mankind. native, of course, is abrupt termination, folThe Earth of 2142 (levels IV and V) is not lowed by another start from the previous much different from some inner-cityscapes of saved game. today. Grimy concrete walls, near-dead trees, and bits of trash litter the walkways. Corrupt On The Levels police patrol the polluted streets of WashingThe dense leaves, twisted branches and ton, itching to shoot Conrad on sight. The dripping water of the first level evoke the plot thickens considerably when our hero organic atmosphere of the jungle. Each screen discovers the secret plans of the aliens and of the level is seen from a two-dimensional their scheme to invade Earth! These aliens are cross-section, and the lush background not easy kills, absorbing repeated blows and graphics form a consistent continuum changing shape to confuse their attackers. A throughout the level. Completion of the juntruly hideous adversary, they! gle level accomplishes two things. First, the player will gain skill at running and jumping, and also at avoiding or eliminating the omnipresent antagonists found at every turn. Second, the plot will unfold, revealing a story to match some of the most ambitious \"B\" sci-fi movies. Levels I and II take place within the Titan city, New Washington. This city is built underground, complete with its own subway, bar and shifty denizen. Whirring ventilation fans, metal panels and a mix of concrete and steel walkways evoke a somewhat sterilized cyberpunk feel. Just arrived from the jungle, The final levels find Conrad being teleConrad is penniless and must earn his keep ported to the home world of the aliens, a by running errands, killing a deviant cyborg, grotesquely different environment than any and miraculously saving the city from an found on Earth. Strangely colored globes crrant power turbine. Unfortunately, players glow in the dim light, giving eerie shadows to will soon learn that a ticket for the necessary the terrain. Oozing plants and weird rock passage to Earth is exorbitantly expensive and formations surround the passageways that must be procured in some other way. Fortulead into the depths of this world. The player nately, a TV studio is awarding starship tickwill soon discover that the aliens are not the ets for Earth to those players who can only deadly entities to be found here. It will complete a deadly game show, not unlike rake Conrad many attempts before he can Arnold Schwarzenegger in The Running Man. decipher the mystery of the planet, and so After battling cyborgs and killer robots before change the course of history forever. Long live a galactic TV audience, Conrad just might Conrad! Long live Earth! Save often! earn the First Place Prize of a free voyage to Farth Flashy Sights And Sounds Flashback: The Quest For Identity Flashback really excels in the graphics department. FLASHBACK Each screen is rendered in TITLE: Flashback: The Quest for Identity $49.95 sharply detailed VGA REQUIREMENTS: 286-16Mhz, 1MB RAM, graphics. As in Out of this VGA graphics PROTECTION: Documentation look up World, cinematic seDEVELOPER: Delphine Software Int'l quences bridge together PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA the plor and give the player (408) 737-6800 a much needed rest from the action. Conrad, suffering from a massive memory loss, begins his adventures in the midst of a dense, steamy jungle on the Saturn moon of Titan. Before he can save the world, he must recover his identity and rediscover the alien plot that landed him in this strange environment. Though his memory fails him, Conrad is blessed with the combined athletic skills of a Tarzan and a Terminator, and his inventory includes a remarkably lethal and inexhaustible pistol. His graceful coordination and quick trigger finger will be needed to fight killer robots, deadly cyborgs, corrupt police and sinister aliens. In the course of his quest for identity, Conrad will travel back to Earth and then, to the aliens' home planet. There, the fate of the world will be decided by Conrad's quick thinking and sharp reflexes. With skill, determination, a bit of luck and many \"saved\" games, Conrad just might succeed. The alterPRICE: Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


" Fly In The Face Of Reality. ........................ VIRTUAL PILOT Whether you're diving blind through fog to find a runway or loop-de-looping to save your tail, get your VIRTUAL PILOT hands on VIRTUAL PILOT, the flight yoke that looks and feels exactly real... because it is. Designed by an airplane builder, VIRTUAL PILOT flies any simulation or game that supports a joystick. Works with all IBM and compatibles. And you won't have to fly halfway around the world to buy it. Just buzz your local store. VIRTUAL PILOT PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #41 970 Park Center DriveVista, CA 92083 . Phone: 619-598-2518 FAX: 619-598-2524 "


"STONE What really stands out, though, is the fluid movement of the characters. The game boasts impressive animation derived from 24 frames-per-second rotoscoping—a truly uncanny thing to watch! Conrad jumps, rolls, twists and runs with ease and grace. With a little imagination, the player might even see the muscles rippling under Conrad's drab clothing. And the superb graphics don't stop with just our hero. All the baddies are endowed with the same smooth movements. The aliens slurp along like hideous purple blobs, but with the quickness of a cat. Cyborgs stride with robotic precision then suddenly transform themselves into a speeding blur, impossible to track with weapons. The game designers earn extra \"attaboys\" for the interesting interactive environment in Flashback. Stones, passkeys, ID cards and other nifty devices are scattered throughout all levels and must be used to interact (in a limited way) with other characters, switches, electronic doors and elevators. In many places the screen flashes a modest \"alert\" icon, just to make sure that Conrad doesn't overlook one of these devices. From the opening scene of the game, players with sound cards will be well rewarded. Flashback supports Sound Blaster, Ad Lib and Roland sound cards. The haunting cries of jungle birds, explosive blasts from Conrad's pistol, and the gurgling screams of dying aliens reverberate dynamically over the loud throughout the game, but each level is quite speakers. lengthy and difficult. If a gamer is near completion of one level and becomes interrupted, Glaring Errors he or she can only begin that same level from All that flashes is not gold, however, and the start. In Europe this may be common Flashback has a few glaring flaws within its practice, but many American gamers will find jeweled framework. A real problem is the this unacceptable. awkwardness of the interface, whether with keyboard or joystick, which results in unnecFinal Flashes essary frustration for the beginning gamer. The \"A\" and \"B\" buttons are used for certain Flashback is an excellent game that truly actions, but at times their functions were creates a sense of reality. The plot, farfetched reversed. This needless confusion brought at times, is better than most other action/arpoor Conrad to his death more often than cade games. And, while Flashback does have not. its blemishes and save-game frustrations, the Another significant problem was the lack of actual game play is superior to many, and the a game saving feature that can be accessed at graphics and rotoscoped movement are tops! any time, rather than only at pre-determined Flashback should brings flashing smiles to points in each level's scenario. Temporary everyone who enjoys a good shoot'em-up. save-game opportunities were scattered CGW Talk to her Talk to a GIRLFRIEND in Your Computer SIDELINE SOFTWARE D. ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman!  1869 War Sim. A 320 Airbus USA Flight Sim. Bat, Midwinter. Cadever, Bloodwych ALL FOR Battle Isle '93 War Sim. D-Day War Sim Daemonsgate RPG Fields of Glory RPG History Line 1914-1918 Strategy Sim Ishar 2 RPG Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix Racing Sim. Reach for the Skies Flight Sim. Rnbac3d. Arcade Shadow Worlds RPG Strategy Sleepwalker Arcade Strategy Street Fighter 2 Arcade Transarctica Strategy Sim. Whales Voyage Strategy Sim. WWF. 12. The Simpsons ALL THREE for only World of Legends RPG World Wrestling Federation 2 Simulation PC EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Formal, PC Review, PC Zone, or PC Plus, each only $10 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00 .0.0.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to changel No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same item, Products warranlied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info7 Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, FL Lauderdale, FL 33309 G2GOGCE Watch he Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. Add $4 shipping. Add $4 if C.O.D. Elvira 2 18.95 F16 Falcon 14.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Four Crystals of Trazzar 21.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fool's Enand 16.95 GP Unlimted Road & Track 21.95 Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Harpoon 14.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero Quest 18.95 Hook 16.95 Imperium 18.95 It Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Microprose Greens 27.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Obitus 18.95 Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Paperbay 2 16.95 Pit Fighter 18.95 Populous /Promised Lands 24.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sargon 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Shanghai 2 18.95 Shuttlepuck Cale 14.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 Spacewrecked 16.95 Space Crusade 18.95 Special Forces 21.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spot 16.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Storm Masters 18.95 Stunt Car Racer 16.95 Super OM Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 Test Drive 2. all data disks 18.95 The Immortal 19.95 Three Stooges 1695 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Basketbal 1895 T.V. Sports Boxing 18.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Truro Casino 2 18.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Winter Super Sports 92 16.95 Wizkid 18.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 Zool 21.95 Girlfriend Lisa $69.95 AldeaLabs, Box 450971, Garland, TX 75045 (214) 495-6047. Specify 31/2\" or 5 1/4\" HD disk. DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS!  Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles  Artificial Intelligence, Interactive Conversation  3000+ word vocabulary, synonyms, idioms . She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen She learns from every conversation!  VGA video of a REAL Woman. no cartoons!  Runs on any 286, 386, 486 (12MHz min.)  Requires 640K RAM and 8Mb hard disk  No nudity, possible mature situations  Ask about Girlfriend Teri and other Personality Kits constantly being released! 4-D Sports Boxing A-Train Action Stations Advanced Destroyer Ashes of the Empire Atac (Microprose) Austerlitz 3-17 Bomber Microprose) Backgammon PC Bard's Tale 3 BAT Battlechess 18.95 26.95 1895 16.95 21.95 24.95 16.95 24.95 14.95 18.95 14.95 18.95 Bicodwych Carrier Command Centurion Defender of Rome Collossus Bridge 4 Command HQ Conan the Cimaron Confict: Europe Crisis in the Kremlin Defender of the Crown Deluxe Strip Poker Deluxe Strip Poker 2 Drakkhan 16.95 16.95 189S 16.95 18.95 18.95 14.95 21.95 16.95 16.95 18.95 18.95 Circle Reader Service #34 Circle Reader Service #97 "


"Sound BLASTER BLASTER Whether it's the menacing snarl of a chainsaw or the banshee scream of your F-1 Tomcat, just remember: it isn't real. Until you hear it on a Sound Blaster.\" Sound Blaster fidelity adds a whole new dimension to PC games, not to mention multimedia and other applications. And Sound Blaster is compatible with more of your software BLASTER BLASTER than any other audio card. No wonder it's the best selling sound board of all time. So when you're ready to hear what your games really sound like, get in touch with your Sound Blaster dealer today. Or call us direct at 1-800-998-5227. Or we may just have to From games to stereo multimedia to frell-blown, CD-quality 16-bit Advanced Signal Processing send Bruno over to persuade you. audio...we've got the Sound Blaster for you. Sound CREATIVE\" BLASTER International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore. TEL 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. CREATIVE Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Ltd. Sound Blaster and the Sound Blaster and Creative Labs logos are trademarks of Creative Labs, Inc. All specifications subject to change without notice. CREATIVE LABS, INC. You never heard it so real Circle Reader Service #45 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW The Do-It-Yourself Sim Kit Sneak Previews are nor designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on works in progress that CGWs editor har deemed wort)y of early coverage. These are ticles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished T A Preview Look At Domark's Flight Sim Toolkit by Paul Rigby i th the increased power of the home unlimited number of scenario possibilities. The Cockpit Editor allows designers to imcomputer, the flight simulation enOpening the toolbox one finds, well, tools! port a cockpit they have created or digitized thusiast has been treated to a gamut Actually called \"editors\" in this context, they (some are provided as well) and select the of impressive products. Whether civil or miliare the Cockpit Editor. Shape Editor. Terrain types of instruments that can be used in the tary, the offerings have presented a wide vaEditor, Flight Model Editor and the World proposed aircraft. There will be a number of riety of subject matter. With add-on products Editor. Screen resolutions for these programs different instruments provided by the toolkit, like scenery disks and mission builders, flight can reach 640x480, although the actual sim some digital, some analog. Most will be gesim nuts have been able to extend the life of can only be flown at that resolution with a neric to a particular time-period, so if one is their favorite sims to a certain extent, but no Windows accelerator video card (with an S3 a stickler for accuracy, a dial can be loaded company has yet opened up the program and chip ser). The Windows interface makes the into a paint package like Deluxe Paint for exposed its innards to the users, enabling toolkit a breeze to use, although how cleanly editing. The dial can then be loaded back into them to tinker with the code and experiment the individual tools will work together as a the toolkit and inserted in the cockpit. Any with the simulation environment. unit could not yet be determined. changes to a cockpit shape (or any shape at Now Domark (AV8B Harrier all, for that matter) can be saved as a Assault, MiG-29) is proposing to separare object in one's user-library. FSU Shape GOU hand their simulation develop Filc Edit View Shape Grid Using the dials in the library, one ment tools to sim fans and let should be able to perform just about them have at it. This toolkit, any type of flying that the imaginawhich they are simply calling tion can perceive. There will be minor Flight Sim Toolkit, will allow both exceptions for the highly specialized the civil and military flight simucockpits like the Harrier, which carry FSTerrain 99 lator fan to completely design rather idiosyncratic instrumentation. their own sim, from the scenery, As the cockpit is a bitmap, the user to the aircraft, to the aircraft's will also be able to design the window cockpits, the enemy craft, their onto the outside world and any exterordnance, and so on all within nal detail seen from the cockpit winthe Windows environment. The dow (such as the engine coaming, technology will be at the level of exhausts, fuzzy dice). their AV8B Harrier, so there The Shape Editor uses a CADwon't be any snazzy Garoud shadbased system. Shapes can be manipuing (that's for Domark's next prolated in a number of different ways. A ject), but there will be an i user can load an object from the shape Window DOOG IFIC TER BER 0.00M Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"le DA UNIONO cently produced toolkits, such as Unlimited Adventures from SSI, Domark's toolkit will allow the user to create a freely distributable file containing scenery, a batch of shape files, and even a complete simulation. Essentially, a user could upload a complete battlefield to his or her modem buddy and then slug it out in head-to-head combat. Sound effects will all surround the popular.WAV sampled formar. Sound Blaster or compatible is the only sound hardware currently supported. Other sound cards may be supported, too, but no concrete news was announced at the time of writing. No sound editors are supplied, but Domark says that .WAV files produced via a third party editor will be compatible. Add all of these functions together and one library and then, stretch it into FST Shape another shape. A flat surface, Edit View Polygon Object Shape Gold Window Help line, square or polygon can be created and extruded into a 3D N object. Further, individual 27 points can be input to form an object (as in Mallard's Aircraft 60 e Scenery Designer); an object bet can be deleted from another to form a third object (e.g., by taking a piece out of a cube) and a group of several items can be LL placed together to form a new object. CAD-like tricks can be utilized to save time, such as mirroring or flipping. It's rather nice to design one wing and flip it to form a perfect mirror-imsold in age. The Terrain Editor, the tool that creates hills, rivers and so 0.00M Select Group 15.00 0.00 -7.00 on, uses what Domark calls al Terrain uses Data Eleinfluences its mode of Flight. One can select vation Maps from the U.S. Geological Survey the wing area, engine type and position, cento generate rough approximations of actual ter of gravity, and so on. A \"slider-bar\" interlandscapes. The initial release of the game will face is used, via the mouse pointer, to change probably include a few hundred square miles niles settings, but data can also be input via keyof terrain, but there is talk of a CD-ROM board for the sake of accuracy. version that will provide terrain data for the The World Editor is the glue that links entire continental U.S.! The program will everything together. Once the terrain is also allow the user to generate terrain using loaded and dropped into the world, 3D obfractal algorithms. jects can be defined as to how they will beThe Terrain editor includes many tools have, and then placed onto the terrain. found in a standard bitmap paint package. It Domark plans a wild menu of objects, offeroffers a contour map view of the terrain with ing such bizarre things as the Sydney Opera shaded blues and browns designating differHouse, Noah's Ark, Jet Packers, Zebra Crossent features and altitudes. The user can select ings, and the Parthenon, as well as more any point in the map and raise it to any height mundane things as Scud Missile Launchers, or depth. Creating a river-valley is easy. Just Sherman Tanks, civil and military shipping, use a sort of \"smudging' tool (as found in and an array of military aircraft. The min paint packages) that can smooth out a mounreels with the scenario possibilities.... tainous region into a valley. The terrain is If a military simulation has been created, the World Editor would control how the enemy behaves. For example, if the user has destroyed an enemy base, the World Editor would control the enemy \"supply logic,\" in this case, perhaps controlling trucks that bring supplies to repair that base. The Al of the enemy aircraft cannot be changed, however. That is, one cannot rell an Filc Edit Me109 what maneuvers to perform and when to perform them. A range of algorithms can be selected, though. One can set the AI divided into square tiles spanning 50km x to be aggressive, or to pa50km, which is pretty large, so one rarely trol and attack only if unexperiences frustrating pauses while the hard der attack, and so on. disk loads a lump of new scenery. The wait Domark does recognize for the scenery is largely imperceptible and is that anything in a toolkit is greatly aided by disk cache and, of course, a upgradable, so altering enhigh-end microprocessor. emy Al in a specific manThe Flight Model Editor allows one to ner is not a closed subject adjust the aerodynamic design of an aircraft. and may be considered in Here, as in Mallard's AG:SD, the user can the future. change nearly every aspect of an aircraft that Unlike some other rehas a very powerful creative environment. Knowing how seriously simulation fans take their hobby, we can expect to see all manner of user-created scenarios, aircraft, and object libraries cropping up. Flight Sim Toolkit may turn out to be the ultimate playground for sim enthusiasts. Look for it in October '93. CGW FST Terrain FST Viewer XOLOGO DE DO October 1993 Page 65 "


"REVIEW Tornado Kicks Up Some Wind Digital Integration's Tornado by Doug Fick BDBIR variant (ADV), and running full multi-misDoug Fick is an F-16 Instructor Pilot and sion campaigns in which up to six Tornadoes Flight Examiner with the Vermont Air National can be sent to attack assigned targets. Guard. He has logged over 1500 hours of flight When one jumps into the driver's seat of time in both F-16As and F-16Cs. the Tornado for the first time, the first impression is bound to be that it flies like a lead n anavia's Tornado is the European versled. The aircraft is great for slashing over tree sion of an all weather interdiction and lines with lots of Mach, just don't ask it to strike aircraft. The aircraft is used by turn. Even with the wings swept forward and Britain, Germany, Italy and Saudi Arabia, maneuvering flaps down, the plane was never and much like America's F-111 and F-15E, designed to be a dogfighter. is designed to carry out deep strikes into enemy territory no matter the time of day or distinct subparts, those being terrain followweather condition. Digital Integration's Toring, autothrottle, and auto altitude/heading nado is the European simulation that models acquire. After going back to the manual for a all aspects of this strike fighter. refresher and smacking the ground a few times, it became second nature. Weapons for Storm Front (The Big Picture) the air to ground mission include low and high drag general purpose bombs, laser Tornado comes packaged in the high qualguided bombs, cluster munitions and the ity manner I've come to expect from SpecJP.233 dispenser that's used to destroy enemy trum HoloByte. An excellent manual that runways. Once again, the manual does an runs to 332 pages, theatre maps and keyboard excellent job of describing each delivery techcommand summaries are included. In addinique, making the learning process fairly tion, the limited edition contains keyboard Overall, the flight dynamics feel very accupainless. Don't expect to jump right in and overlays to help in familiarizing many of the rate and continue the recent trend of flight find everything to be intuitive, but after a commands. simulations away from arcade style performlittle trial and error everything starts to make The manual does a nice job of explaining ance and much more firmly into the realms sense. of simulation. Hand flying a strike aircraft at all of the important concepts presented in the Air-to-air weapons include the gun, AIMprogram. It comes loaded with tons of pic200 fect for any length of time would be next OL heat seeking missile, and on the ADV tures that make learning the game far easier to impossible at night and too taxing during Tornado, the Skyflash radar homing missile. the day. In addition it would take all one's than it would have been otherwise. Air-to-air operations are talked about more concentration that could be better spent tarfully later in the article. As is becoming standard on all high tech gering, navigating and avoiding threats. Terflight simulations, there is an abundance of Graphically, the program runs the middle rain following (TF) radar uses ground radar keyboard commands to master in order to fly ground in terms of what's already on the naster in order to fly returns to automatically fly an aircraft at a the Tornado into combar. This program market. While nothing fancy, the terrain is pilot selectable height. Since the Tornado forces players to spend quite a bit of time makes its living on the deck, well-contoured and there is plenty of good mastering the keyboard before really getting a good percentage of time detail. Power lines, roads, railroads, into the swing of a typical mission. More on will be flown under terrainTornado towns and targets are cleanly displayed. keyboard commands later. following operations. By letTornado Maneuvering around the program interface ting the on-board computers PRICE: $79.95 is clean and straight forward. The menus are do the flying, the task loadSYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 386SX-16Mhz, 1MB RAM, easily navigated and the graphics that accoming is eased tremendously. VGA graphics, 11 MB hard drive pany them are excellent. Options include When I first jumped into the space, mouse, DOS 5.0 PROTECTION: jumping into the simulator to get a feel for game, I had some difficulty Documentation Look up DEVELOPER: Digital Integration various aspects of employing the Tornado, in figuring out the system, PUBLISHER: Spectrum HoloByte flying single missions in cither the interdicsince it incorporates three Alameda, CA (800) 695-4263 tion strike (IDS) version or the air defense TITLE: Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US.PR,AK, HI APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI 512 1st item + $2 ea. add'l: AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + S6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st item + $6 ca. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM HARDWARE IBM CD ROM IBM ADVENTURE WORLD $36 $9 $19 $38 'WORLD WAR 2: BATTLES OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC' Wage war for the sole ownership of the South Pacific. Historically correct battles challenge all to do better than the Navy did as it happened in World War Il. Create and transport armies to enemy ports. Play U.S. or Japanese forces. Modem playable. $39 S33 ATTIS. OP THE SOUTH PACIFIC Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P42 $159 Acoustic Research P570 $319 Acoustic Research P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $39 Adlib Gold Sound Card $149 Adv Gravis Ultrasound $134 Champ Joystick Flight Stick Joystick S36 Flight Stick Pro Joystick $55 Game Card 3 Automatic $39 Labtec 105 Power Speaker S21 Maxx Cobra Flightstick S54 Maxx Control Yoke $59 Media Concept $72 Pilot Control Stand S20 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $175 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus S149 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $219 Sound Blaster Deluxe $89 Snd Blaster Discovery CD 8 S399 SBlaster Discovery CD 16 $469 SBlaster Edutainment CD 8 $448 SBlaster Edutainmnt CD 16 S519 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe S129 Sound Galaxy BX2 $65 Sound Galaxy NX2 $89 Sound Galaxy NXPRO $125 Sound Galaxy NXPRO 16 S169 Snd Galaxy Multimedia Kit $450 Snd Galaxy 16 Multimedia $575 Sound Machine $99 Thrustmaster FCS $59 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thrustmaster Game Card $27 Thrustmaster Rudder CS $99 Thrustmaster WCS Mark II 999 Video Blaster $349 Virtual Pilot S70 Voice Blaster $64 $48 QOP. Inca Indy Jones Fate Altantis $52 Interactive Storytime 1-3 Ea. $30 Iron Helix $60 Jack and the Beanstalk $34 Jones In The Fast Lane WIN $42 Jungle Book WIN $34 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 King's Quest 6 $48 King's Ransom $38 Laura Bow 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia S49 Library of Art: Renaissance $60 Loom Lost in Time $42 Mantis Experimental Fighter S45 Microcosm $51 Multimedia: Vivaldi WIN $34 Omar Sharif on Bridge S46 Putt Putt Joins the Parade $42 Rebel Asault $45 Return of the Phantom $42 Rodney's Funscreen $46 Secret Monkey Island $39 Sherlock Holmes 1 or 2 $44 Shuttle $24 Slater & Charlie $42 Software Toolworks Refernc $80 Space Quest 4 Spirit of Excalibur $32 Star Child S32 Star Trek 25 Anniversary $46 Stellar 7 WIN $42 Stronghold S36 Team Yankee 2 $29 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 Velveteen Rabbit Childrens $58 Where in the World Deluxe $66 White Horse Child $32 Wing Commander/Ultima 6 $57 W. Commander / Ultima UW $59 Wolf Pack $39 Wrath of the Demon $29 $39 888333% Dragon Knight 3 $49 Dragon's Sphere Dreamweb Duck Tales $15 Earthrise East vs West Berlin 1948 $9 EN $24 Epic $32 Eric the Unready Flashback Floor 13 $15 Fred Pharkas Frontier Pharm $42 Free DC Future Wars Galleons of Glory Gama Force Gateway Gateway 2:Homeworld Godfather GrailQuest HUMANS Havoc for Hire Heart of China Heaven and Earth Heimdall Hired Guns Hook Hound of Shadow Inca Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $36 Innocent Until Caught Inspector Gadget Isle of the Dead Jack the Ripper KGB King's Quest 5 King's Quest 6 King's Ransom Kristal Kronolog : Nazi Paradox L.A. Law Laffer Utilities WIN Lane Mastadon Laura Bow 2 $36 Leather Goddesses $12 Leather Goddesses 2 Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Suit Larry 5 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun $34 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $44 Lost in LA Lost in Time Magic Pockets Manhole Manhunter New York Manhunter San Francisco Maniac Mansion Martian Memorandum Max Pac Metal Mutant Mixed Up Faery Tale Mixed-Up Mother Goose Murder Club Murder by the Dozen Nebulas Out of this World Pepper's Adventure in Time S29 Plan 9 from Outer Space $31 Police Quest 3 $36 Police Quest 4 $46 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $45 Return of the Phantom Return to Zork $46 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Rex Nebular Master Edition $52 Riftwar Legacy Ringworld $36 Rise of the Dragon 534 Robocop 3 $32 OCT CGW 1 IBM CD ROM 8 $54 IBM ADVENTURE CARRIERS AT WAR 2' offers more tension and excitement. Features eight new scenarios, some hypothetical, others controversial; an improved war room intelligence system; and tougher artificial intelligence. S49 842 $35 $43 1989 $26 $44 fres ul. Create Test $38 12 Roads to Gettsyburg WIN $48 7th Guest Adventures Willie Beamish Aegis: Guardian of Fleet $54 B17 Flying Fortress $42 Backroad Racers Barney Bear Goes to School $23 Barney Bear Goes to Space $23 Battle Chess WIN & DOS $46 Blue Force: Next of Kin Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Campaign $35 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan S21 Conquests Robin Hood WIN $42 Curse of Enchantia $26 Cyber Space Day of the Tentacle $45 Don Quixote $32 Dracula $48 Dragon's Lair $36 Dune $42 EcoQuest Search for Cetus $42 El Grito Del Jaguar WIN $46 European Racers S44 Eye of the Beholder 3 $48 F15 Strike Eagle 2 $44 Fantasy Empires $36 Fascination WIN $39 Goblins $30 Gobliiins 2 $30 Gunship 2000 $44 Guy Spy $29 Guy Spy Terror Deep $36 Hell Cab $52 Hi-Tech Aircraft $43 Impressionist Sources WIN 969 $29 FREDDY PHARKAS FRONTIER PHARMACIST brings you back to 1888 in the old west where you uncover a plot to turn a once thriving metropolis into aghost town. Purchase Freddy Pharkas and receive Leisure Suit Larry 5 for S19. Two great comedy games from the past and present. S42 007 James Bond Stelth Affair $19 Adventures Willie Beamish $24 Alone in the Dark $36 Altered Destiny S34 Amazon $36 An American Tail B.A.T. $12 Batman Returns $32 Bloodnet S42 Bloodstone $36 Blue Force: Next of Kin $45 Cadaver $27 Castle Wolfstein-Sper Dstiny $37 Chamber Sci-Mutant Prstss $25 Codename Iceman $15 Colonel's Bequest Conquests Robin Hood Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy Deadlock Files $34 Covert Action $9 Crime Does Not Pay $12 Crime Wave Cruise for a Corpse S26 D Generation $28 Daemon's Gate $32 Dark Half $9 Dark Heart of Uukrul $34 Dark Side David Wolf Secret Agent $15 Day of the Tentacle $39 Deja Vu 1&2 WIN Diehard $28 Dog Eat Dog $32 Don't Go Alone $6 $36 FREDDY PHARKAS Frontier Pharmacist $37 542 $28 $28 $37 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Olfer, prico & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGE 6 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #40 "


"does have an excellent avionics package that includes a real radar. The IDS version of the plane has a maximum range of ten miles. Most World War II nightfighters had better. By the time an adversary aircraft is detected on radar, if it has radar guided missiles and has employed them, the player has less than five seconds to live. This drops the game from simulation to arcade reflex shooter in one quick stroke. Even the ADV version of the Tornado is limited to a thirty mile radar to accompany is Skyflash missile. Once the player gets within visual range of an adversary, turning engagements are practically impossible as the enemy can't be tracked via a view mode and are poorly presented graphically. be set up so the mouse is clicked on the appropriate control (i.e. the gear handle or radar range knob). What could be more realistic? That's basically what pilots do in the aircraft. Almost every important function could be controlled by point and click. The only disadvantage is that most people would have to release the stick to operate the mouse, but enough of my soapbox sermon, let's move on. My second gripe has to do with view modes, or should I say the lack thereof. Forward, forward high, left, right and back seat plus a couple of worthless external views is all one is provided. I found myself starving for information about the outside world. I knew it was there somewhere, but I just couldn't find it. Sure, the Tornado is primarily a night striker i but quite a few missions occur during daylight and, even at night, a missile is visible for miles during its boost phase of flight when the rocker motor is burning. A track mode that locks on enemy missiles or aircraft should be mandatory on any top of the line simulation. Some gamers say it isn't realistic since it's external to the aircraft, but I don't buy it. Many of the things that are intuitive and natural in the real airplane just aren't available on a flat monitor. External modes just balance gameplay and give a more fluid feel to the combat environment. Finally, air to air combat is a farce. Yes, I know the Tornado isn't a dogfighter, but it TOTIC PICT U UM Explosions and other effects won't elicit any ooh's or ah's as they are run of the mill. Overall, the game hits a good balance between game speed and graphic look and feel. It plays fast in most circumstances, which is a lot more than can be said about a few other recent releases that are all graphics and no game play. The most unique feature of Tornado is the mission planning phase. Flying at 200 feet provides a lot of terrain protection, but nothing beats purring a mountain between the aircraft and the enemy's radar. During mission planning, the player can use an overhead terrain map to pick low level turn points that optimize use of ground features to hide behind. The interface is a simple point and drag using the mouse and can be mastered fairly quickly. Since up to six Tornadoes can take part in a mission (the player flies his and the computer handles the rest), mission planning for larger multi-aircraft strikes can get a little more complicated. If one isn't careful, it's possible to have the bombs from a previous aircraft explode underneath the next aircraft over the target, often with fatal results. I've scen real world missions that incorporated 40 to 60 strike aircraft attacking the same target over a period of a few minutes. Believe me, it can get hairy in the target area if everyone isn't on the same sheet of music. If this type of involvement doesn't interest the gamer, don't worry, the options allow for either campaigns to be flown as a series of single ship missions or running the multi ship packages. Dust Devils (Program Shortcomings) Tornado comes with a few thorns that really detract from the game. The first involves keyboard commands. There are more oddball combinations of keys to push than I've ever seen. It isn't merely a matter of taking time to learn complex commands—that would be acceptable on a simulation of a complex aircraft. What gets me is the unnecessary awkwardness of some of them. Better utilization of the keyboard could have been made. Hunting for Alt and Ctrl keyboard combinations just doesn't hack it. I'll be glad when game designers start taking advantage of this device called a mouse that most people have on their computers. Instead of hunting for one key on the keyboard, the controls could Modem play is an option but a very limited one. Instead of allowing two players to either team up in the same aircraft or run a strike with a pair of aircraft, all that's possible is flying head to head against each other. Since the Tornadoes' systems and flight characteristics are optimized for strike operations and not dogfighting, this is a little more enjoyable than watching paint dry. I'm convinced that the only reason modem play is even offered is to put a \"Head-to-Head\" emblem on the box as a selling point. Very little effort was put forth by Digital Integration to give gamers a modem option that really offered something. If modem play is what the gamer is after, several other programs offer much more. Dissipating Clouds (Summary) Except for mission planning, Tornado really doesn't cover any new ground and overall, the game comes across as having a one dimensional feel. Strike operations and mission planning are nicely presented but don't hunt for any depth of game play beyond that. It seems as if Digital Integration had a certain mindser of how the game was to be played, then wrote the computer code to force the player to adhere to their idea. Tornado has some strong features: the manual, flight modeling, flight planning and the graphics to game speed balance. For me, however, its negatives drop it out of contention in the competition for King of the Flight Simulations. cow. JUISIBILITY (ILES) CEGUNDI PLAIN TEXTURE MILLS PLAIN (TEXTURES INDEKS MIDDER SMS 1 CRITEOL DEVICE KEYLORED KEYIARIO 9 BINATIECE B NERIZUA HLAIN ASCO O SOUND CITECOST D-EAS 20 (as NIRIRISE RESTORE Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US PR. AK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling s1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l: AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea, addll. Handling S1 per shlo Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st Item + $6 ca. add'l. Handling si per shipment. IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE GATEWAY II $21 WLM BOOK AMISED S15 'GATEWAY 2: HOMEWORLD More deep space adventure, more alien encounters more exotic new worlds and special effects in the continuing saga. Battle a fantastic cult of terrorists and cross the event horizon of a black hole to discover mankind's last remaining hope for survival the Heechee Homeworld. $38 Terminator Terrorpods The Light Corridor The Tinies Thexder 1 Thexder 2:Fire Hawk Tristan Pinball Vaxine Volfied Wrath of the Demon X-Men X-Men 2 Xenocide Xiphos Zool $19 S24 $19 $21 $36 S10 S34 IBM ADULT 256 COLOR LEGEND   Rocketeer $32 SDI Sam & Mac Screen Antics WIN Search for the king $24 Secret Monkey Island $23 Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Secret of the 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster $52 Shadowgate WIN $34 Space Quest 4 Space Quest 5 $34 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk $34 Star Trek 25th Anniversary $36 Starship $38 Stellar 7 $21 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles$25 Terminator 2029 $42 Terminator 2029 Oper Scour $21 The Dig $45 The Prophecy $36 The Train S6 Time Quest Transylvania 3 Trolls Uninvited Uninvited WIN Universe 1-3 Each $34 Walker $32 War in Middle Earth Warriors of Legend Weird Dreams Where America's Past CSD $37 Where in Europe Carmen SD $29 Where in Space Carmen SD $50 Where in Time Carmen $32 Where in USA CSD Deluxe S45 Where in USA is Carmen $29 Where in World Carmen SD $32 Where World CSD Deluxe $52 Wonderland Yserbius $24 Zeliards $12 COMPANIONS OF Adult Reference CD Adventures Brad Stallion CD Busty Babes CD Centerfold Squares S21 Ecstacy CD $32 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD 1-3 Each $18 Jigsaw Pinups $19 Lovely Ladies CD $38 My Private Collection CD $36 PC-Pix CD $40 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $24 Planet of Lust $12 Sex Olympics Sex Vixens from Space Strip Poker 3 $31 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 Each $19 $34 512 $19 $9 $19 $12 $27 'COMPANIONS OF XANTH' Explore Piers Anthony's magical world of mystic wonders and become a player in a game where the stakes are the existence of magic itself. Interact with Elves, Ogres, Demons, Centaurs, a serpentine Naga princess, and the deadly Gap Dragon. A stateof-the-art graphic adventure $36 IBM ROLE PLAYING Dragons Breath $27 EMotion $9 Eagle's Rider $29 Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Fast Track $25 Finale $6 Fire & Forget $19 Flintstones $9 Freakin Funk Fuzzballs $19 Galactic Conqueror $31 Galactic Empire $27 Gauntlet 1 or 2 $9 Goblilins $24 Gold of the Aztecs $12 Grave Yardage $12 Gremlins 2 $6 Guy Spy $26 Guy Spy Terror Deep $36 Hard Drivin' 2 $38 Hare Raising Havoc $14 Harmony $5 Highway Patrol 2 $27 Home Alone $27 Incredible Machine 2 $30 Indy Jones Act Game $17 Infestation $31 Innocent $38 Jetsons Laffer Utilities $21 Larry's Casino $9 Laura Bow Parlor Games $9 Loopz $24 Monty Python $15 Ms Pacman $6 Mystical Never Ending Story 2 $9 Never Mind $19 Night Breed $26 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Ninja Rabbits $10 Nova 9 Obliterator Oil's Well $12 Out Run $28 Pac Man Paper Boy 2 $27 Pick'n Pile $9 Pit Fighter $22 Power Drome $9 Predator 2 $7 Prehistorik $29 Psychic War $24 Punisher Quix $25 Rick Dangerous $9 Risky Woods $24 Robocop $28 Rollerbabes $25 Rotox $20 S.C. Out S38 Savage $12 Simpsons:The Arcade Game $31 Sliders Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Speedball 2 $25 Stellar 7 Street Ball $12 Street Fighting Man $9 Super Off Road $12 Super Pacman $19 Super Space Invaders $25 Swamp Gas WIN $38 Take-A-Break Crossword $24 Take-A-Break Pinball WIN Take-A-Break Pool WIN $29 Taking of Beverly Hills $9 TMNT Manhatten Mission $31 TMNT Adventure Game $32 TMNT Arcade Game $24 Tengen's Arcade Hits $12 $21 S6 $16 $15 $9 IBM ARCADE ALEGEND 18 $9 $9 THE UNREADY 8 $4 CD-ROM HI-RES 256-COLOR SUPER VGA! $36 $14 2400 AD 59 ADD Starter Kit $29 Arborea Jour Inner Sanctum $34 Bard's Tale 2 $19 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Bard's Tale Construction $27 Battletech $12 Battletech 2 $31 Black Crypt Bloodwych Buck Rogers Captain Blood Captive Celtic Legends Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $19 CHARACTER EDITORS Ea. $16 Cobra Mission $49 Companion of Xanth Conan $16 Corporation Curse of the Azure Bonds $15 $15 Cyber Empire Cyber Space Cybercon 3 $29 Cybergenic Ranger Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Sun $48 Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp Pak $34 Darklands $39 Darklands Master Edition $51 Daughter of Serpents $32 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Dragon Strike $12 Dragon Wars $12 Dragons of Flame $9 Dungeon Master $34 Dusk of the Gods $24 Elvira Mistress Dark $22 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus S19 OCT CGW2 $17 Airborne Ranger Aliens Ate My Babysitter $32 Amazing Spiderman $9 Arachnaphobia $28 Armor Alley $15 Artura Back to the Future 2 $19 Back to the Future 3 $12 Bar Games Bart Simpson House Weird Battle Storm $32 Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv S19 Blockout $28 Budokan Cogito WIN $38 Colorado $6 Continuum $29 Cool Croc Twins $24 Crackdown Crazy Cars Creepers Dark Century Day of the Viper Dick Tracy Dognapped Double Dragon 2 $15 Double Dragon 3 Dr Doom's Revenge Dragon's L Esc Singe's Cast $34 Dragon's Lair $22 Dragon's Lair 2 Time Warp $34 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 'ERIC THE UNREADY' is on a madcap quest through this hilarious fantasy world packed with dragons, dwarves, wizards, unicorns and the dreaded Attack Turtles Cut through a swath of destruction as you unravel the secret of Queen Morgana. Features Hi-Res SVGA graphics. Available on floppy or CD $38 $32 $39 $6 MEYER LEVENT $29 $6 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. S ms Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Oller, price & avaliability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE PAGEG FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #40 "


"Computer Gaming World's ach year, prior to the Summer Consumer Electronics Show, the editors of Computer Gaming World examine the games that have been released since the last SCES. Games are selected based on three criteria (technical excellence, artistic presentation and reader rating) and the nominations are revealed at the show. Later, we examine the nominees genre-by-genre and different editors present their cases for each title. We cross-reference our conclusions with the Top 100 Poll results, take any differences into consideration, and reach a consensus. This year we had difficulty reaching a consensus in two categories: Adventure Game of the Year and Simulation of the Year. We opted to have co-winners in those categories. Here then, we proudly present this year's outstanding productions. Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US PRAK, HI,APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling si per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US S6 por order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add\"; AK S19 1st item + $2 ea. add. Handling s1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mall 519 1st item + $6 ea, add\". ASIA, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + S6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM EDUCATIONAL FRONT PAGE SPORTS $38 $12 *FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL PRO' kicks off the new season with real NFL player names and stats. Contains everything from the original plus vastly enhanced artificial intelligence, complete printing capabilities, user de finable team uniform colors, 2500 different plays depending on the situation plus an All-Stargame. $42 Summoning $38 Tales Magic:Prophcy Shadw $29 Terran Envoy $12 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Trilogy $15 Twilight 2000 $24 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar $35 Ultima 5 Warriors of Destiny $35 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Black Gate $48 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $18 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Ultima Underworld $48 Ultima Underworld 2 $48 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $38 Veil of Darkness $37 Vengeance of Excalibur $16 War of the Lance $9 Waxworks $29 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 5 $26 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Forge $34 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $42 Secert Island Dr. Quandry S38 Snapdragon 529 Speedreader WIN $30 Speedreader DD A-C Each Spellit Plus $31 Spell-a-Saurus $27 Spelling $31 Spelling Wiz $22 Stickybear Opposites $23 Stickybear Parts of Speech $32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Reading Comp Stickybear Reading Tutor $31 Stickybear Shapes S29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tutor S32 Story Sketcher $42 Super Munchers $29 Super Solver:Midnite Rescue $30 Super Solvers Spellbound $31 Super Spellicopter $21 Treasure Mountain Tree House $39 Wacky Funster $18 Weekly Readr Reding Comp $31 \"If you want more reallam you'll have to multon bunday afternoon $39 $39 21 IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM WAR GAMES $29 $12 S48 $39 Eternam $36 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Eye of the Horus Fire King $19 Flames of Freedom MWII $12 Four Crystals of Trazere $19 Gateway Savage Frontier $32 Gods $26 Gryphon Masters of Havlar $38 Hillsfar $15 Immortal $17 Joan of Arc $12 Keys to Marimon Lands of Lore $36 Legacy of the Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $34 Legend $31 Legend of Valor Legends of Drakka $38 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Loremaster $39 Lost Tribe $29 Lure of the Temptress $37 Magic Candle 1 $12 Magic Candle 2 $12 Magic Candle 3 Martian Dreams $37 Matrix Cubed MechWarrior $19 Mega Traveller:Zhodani MegaTraveller 2 MegaTraveller 3 Megatravler Metal and Lace Midwinter Midwinter Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $24 Might & Magic 3 $36 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen$24 Might & Magic 5 D Side Xeen $42 Mines of Titan Mission: Impossible Murder $29 Obitus $19 Pirates Dry Pirates Gold $42 Planet's Edge $34 Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness Protostar $39 Quest for Glory 3 $42 Quest for Glory 4 $42 Questron 2 Ragnarok $34 Realms of Arkania $37 Red Crystal $38 Rings of Medusa $19 Rome: Pathway to Power $32 Savage Empire Sea Rogue $29 Secret Silver Blades Sentinel Worlds 1 Shadow Sorcerer Shadows of Mordor Sleeping Gods Lie Sorcerian Space 1889 Space Inc $34 Space Rogue Spacewrecked $19 SpellJammer:Pirate Rim Spc $38 Spellcraft:Aspect of Valor $38 Spirit of Excalibur $9 Star Saga 2 $19 Star Trek: Next Generation $46 Stonekeep $54 Stronghold $38 i us in \"WARLORDS 2 brings the fun and excitement of the first Warlords with 640 x 480 graphics, a hidden map option, and totally new Al system. Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports and warships for amphibious warfare, and a diplomacy option that provides a framework for backstabbing. S42 $19 7888 $32 $42 $9 $38 $30 $32 Ace Detective $30 Ace Explorer: Sequencing S36 Ace Inquirer S40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe Annabel's Dream Ancient Auto Map $64 AutoWorks $49 Body Works $49 Boom Box $29 Castle of Dr Brain $29 Cleo is a Dragon $30 Clock Works Comic Book Maker $32 Cuckoo Zoo $32 Eagle Eye Mysteries EcoQuest 2 Lost Scrt Rain $34 EcoQuest Evelyn Wood Dynamic Readr $24 Fatty Bear's B-Day Surprise $32 Fay's Word Rally $32 Incredible Machine $29 Island Of Dr. Brain $29 Kidworks Kidwriter Gold Land of The Unicorn $39 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 $30 Marvin the Moose Vol 2 $30 Mavis Beacon Techs Typing $26 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 $30 Milliken Storyteller Vol2 $30 Mozart's Magical Music Mac $18 Munchers Bundle Orbits: Voyage Solar Systm $39 Peanuts $9 Phonics Plus $25 Picture Perfect $32 Play Room $35 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Print Shop Deluxe Bus Graph$29 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Putts Fun Pak $22 Quarky Quaysoo's Turbo Sci S29 Read 'n Roll $36 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Read & Rhyme Reader Rabbit 1 $37 Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Reader Rabbit's Ready Let $37 Robot Writer Plus S30 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Action North Atlantic Action Stations Scenario 1 Action off River Platte $26 Air Raid Pearl Harbour American Civil War V1-3 Ea. S22 Banzai $9 Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk Battle of Austerlitz Battle of the Atlantic Battles of Napoleon Battleship Bismark Blitzkrieg Ardennes Blood & Iron Blue and the Grey Borodino Napoleon Invades $29 Bravo Romeo Delta $36 Campaign $39 Campaign Mission 1 $19 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Charge of the Light Brigade $24 Civil War No Greater Glory $21 Conflict Conflict in Vietnam Conflict: Korea $19 Conflict: Middle East Decision at Gettysburg Dreadnoughts Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads S29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra 522 Fire Brigade $34 Fleet Med S27 Frontline 59 Gary Grigsby Pacific War 548 Gary Grigsby War in Russia $48 German Raider Atlantis S26 Gettysburg: Turning Point $36 Golan Front $36 Grand Fleet Grey Seas, Grey Skies Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Harpoon Battle Set 2 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $24 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series S17 OCT CGW 3 $12 'THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM MARK II Brings the function of the keyboard into your left hand while your right hand controls the joystick. All functions are fully programmable. Plug your Thrustmaster FCS into the back and program allits functions as well. The ultimate control! $99 $39 $34 $15 $30 536 $19 $31 $25 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE PAGE 6 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #40 "


"David Whatley, designer. CyberStrike combines real-time, polygon-filled graphics and local machine sound card support to provide a visceral experience of \"being\" in cyberspace. Add the teamwork and communications aspects to the competitive challenge of fighting it out through multi-colored streets and alleys, and it becomes a definite winner. Action Game of the Year In the Action Game of the Year category, we nominated Minotaur: The Labyrinth of Crete (Bungie Software) because of its exciting multi-player capacity. Jason Jones' design is a multi-player network Rogue for the Macintosh cnvironment. Summer Challenge (Accolade) features a fluid and attractive implementation of Des Olympic events, complete with head-tohead human competition. Jeff Sember and Mike Benna were the designers. And the winner is: Wolfenstein 3-D (Id Software), John Carmack and John Romero, designers. When the fast-scrolling action captures the hearts, minds and hard drives of CGW readers and non-gamers alike, there must be something to it. Wolfenstein 3-D's visceral images and responsive interaction make it a worthy winner. Special Award for Artistic Excellence Though we were mesmerized by Cyber Strike's technological achievement and game play breakthroughs, we were also overwhelmed by the creative power of storytelling and fertile liveliness to the game mastering in Legends of Future Past. We are proud to present a Special Award for Artistic Achievement to Legends of Future Past, (Jon Radoff, designer). It should remind us all that an artistic presentation means more than graphics and sound. ERICUNTRIEDY Role-Playing Game of the Year In the Role-Playing Game of the Year cate( Un) gory, Event Horizon Software had two CRUSADERS nominees: The Summoning (Chris Straka and of the Thomas Holmes, designers) and Veil of  DARK SAVANT Darkness (Chris Straka and Thomas Holmes, designers). Although purists may claim that che later was more of an adventure game than a CRPG, both games featured satisfying stories and intriguing environs. In addition, Horrorsoft produced another gory CRPG for Accolade, called Waxworks. It features interface improvements over its predecessors and a diabolical storyline. Another nominee was the sequel to last year's winner in this category: Ultima Underworld II (Origin, Tim Stellmach, Doug Church and Paul Neurath, designers). Though it was technically as excellent as its award-winning progenitor, it was not perceived as exceeding that performance. Crusaders of the Dark Savant (Sir-Tech), however, is David Bradley's best CRPG to date. The hybrid sci-fi/fantasy story, plus improved graphics and technological excellence in data compression and hard disk storage) make this a worthy winner in this category. Adventure Game of the Year The Adventure Game of the Year category THE was particularly competitive this year. The UNREADY 3-D polygon-filled perspective and innovacive camera angles of I-Motion's Alone in the Dark (Frederick Raynal, designer) brought the eerie world of H.P. Lovecraft to life. The wizards of Westwood Studios (Brett Sperry and Michael Legg, designers) brought the rich textures and vivid animation of The Legend of Kyrandia to the computer screen, widening the field of graphic adventure publishers. Corey and Lori Cole brought their CGW awardSTAR CONTROLLI winning talent to the party with Sierra's Quest for Glory III, putting vivid art and vital storytelling in the same context once again. In spite of such worthy contenders, the co-winners were: Eric the Unready (Legend), Bob Bates' hilarious send-up of the entire adventure genre, and Star Control 2 (Accolade), Paul Reiche III and Fred Ford's hybrid romp through a universe of bizarre alien races. Both games had CGWeditors commend them as the best games they had played all year. BAR-TECH On-Line Game of the Year This is the first year that CGW has offered an On-Line Game of the Year award. With more and more modems among our readership and numerous games appearing with graphic front-ends, it has been an interesting year for this genre. The Kingdom of Drakkar (Multi-Player Games Network) put an entire game network on the map. This clever graphic role-playing experience is only the beginning of what may become an empire of on-line games. Jim Dunnigan put his hat into the ring as his dream game, Hundred Years War, took to arms (and diplomacy) on GEnie (Jim Dunnigan, Dan Masterson and Al Nofi, designers) and later NVtel. Though it seems largely to be an extension of a Play-By-Email game, it is well-executed and incredibly involving. Sierra's Shadow of Yserbius (Joe Ybarra, designer) continues to evolve in both graphics and play mechanics as it takes its position as one of the most played multiplayer role-playing games on-linc. Legends of Future Past (Digital Dreams Network), Jon Radoff, designer, is a human-moderated, on-line roleplaying game that makes up for its lack of graphics with stunning prose and challenging situations that exploit the communal aspect of role-playing. This year's winner, however, is CyberStrike (GEnie/Simutronics), Simulation Game of the Year For Simulation Game of the Year, the nominees featured a host of familiar names from the past. Award-winning designer WING Damon Slye raised the ante on game graphics with the beautiful detailing in Aces of the Pacific (Dynamix). Kyle Freeman and John Garcia made voxel graphics almost a household word (and a soon-to-be patented process) with the mind-boggling graphics of Comanche: Maximum Overkill (NovaLogic). F-15 Strike Eagle III (MicroProse) shows the programming magic of Andy Hollis, Jim Day, George Wargo and Chris Clark in one of the best implementations of cockpit instrumentation we've ever seen. Stunt Island (Walt Disney Software), Ronald J. Fortier and Adrian Stephens, designers, is the first flight simulation that doubles as a film direction sim. It is unique enough to have garnered one of our special awards. And this year's co-winners are: X-Wing (LucasArts), Lawrence Holland and Edward Kilham, designers, and World Circuit (MicroProse), Geoff Crammond, deESTROS signer. The former presents one of the toughest space combat games to come our cond Prix Raso SA Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US,PR, AK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment, 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add'I; AK $19 1st itom + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail S19 1st item + S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st Item + $6 on. add\". Handling $1 per shipment. IBM WAR GAMES IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION RED CRYSTAL \"'The Seven Secrets of Life\" $32 S32 $38 Sai 'RED CRYSTAL Seek out the seven secrets of life. Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or modem it with a partner. Features over 50 dungeon levels, breathtaking graphics and an auto-mapping feature. $38 S34 -QOP. STRIKE $34 Harpoon Designer 2 Harpoon Scenario Editor High Command In Harms Way Kampfgruppe Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 Line in the Sand $20 Long Lance $39 MacArthur's War $12 Main Battle Tank C Germany $39 Main Battle Tank Middle East $36 Main Battle Tank N Germany $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $14 Midway $12 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $29 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $12 Patriot $44 Patriot Battle Set 2 $24 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Patton Strikes Back $14 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Lightning $12 Red Sky Morning $36 Return To Falklands $28 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $26 Road Sumter to Appomattox $45 Rommel Battles For N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 The Great War $36 Third Reich $27 To The Rhine Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS Original $14 UMS 2 $16 UMS 2 Civil War $24 UMS 2 Desert Storm Scen $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $16 UMS 2 Planet Editor $28 Under Fire $12 V Victory: Gold, Juno, Sword $44 V Victory: Market Garden $44 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikye Luki $44 Victory at Sea War in the Falklands $26 Warship that Change History $26 Waterloo $19 Western Front $36 White Death $19 World War 2 $39 $39 STRIKE SQUAD' The insectoid K'kistiks have overrun the planets of the humans. Your strike squad of unruly, but talented mercenaries may be the consortiums's only hope. Choose 30 mercenaries from 9 different races. For one or two players. **SPECIAL: BUY 1 MINDCRAFT GAME AND GET 1 FREE! $39 Armoured Fist $38 Reach for the Skies $31 Assignment Miami $15 Red Baron $36 Attack Pack S42 Red Baron Mission Disk S24 B17 Flying Fortress $39 Red Storm Rising $14 Battle Command $9 Road & Track Grand Prix $29 Birds of Prey Sailing Instrctr Pack $239 Blue Angels $12 Sailing Sim 3 East Coast Blue Max Aces Great War S6 Sailing Sim 3 West Coast $32 Car and Driver Sailing Simulator 3 $42 Cardinal of the Kremlin $9 Sea Wolf $38 Coaster $32 Seal Team $42 Conqueror Multi Tank $12 Search for the Titanic $27 Crash Course $9 Secret Weap Luftwaffe Cyber Race $42 Secret Weapons Exp 1-4 Ea S21 Das Boot Submarine S9 Shuttle $26 Delta V $48 Silent Service 2 $19 Design Your Own Railroad $29 Sky Chase $25 Elite Plus $19 Strike Commander S48 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 Strike Commander Spch Pak $24 F117A Stealth Fighter S42 Stunt Driver $15 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces Pak $52 Stunt Island $36 F15 Strike Eagle III $44 Stunts $15 F19 Stealth Fighter S19 Sub War 2025 $42 F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 Syndicate $39 Falcon 3.0 S48 Tank $34 Falcon 3 Scen1 Fighting Tgr $24 Task Force Admirals Pack $52 Falcon 3 Scen 2 Mig 29 $25 Team Yankee Fire & Forget 2 S30 Team Yankee 2 S24 Fleet Defender F14 Tomcat $48 Test Drive 3 $29 Flight Simulator 4.0 $42 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $12 Flight of the Intruder Thunderhawk $12 Fly the Grand Canyon Thunderstrike $27 Grand Canyon Scenery $16 Tie Fighter $46 Graue Wolle $42 Tornado $50 Great Naval Battles $44 Tracon 2 $29 Great Nav Bat America in Atl $21 Ultrabots Sanction Earth Great Nav Bat Super Ships $19 Vette $15 Great Nav Battles Scen Build S28 Voice Commander F117A $18 Gun Boat $33 Voice Commander F15SE3 $18 Gunship $12 Wing Commander $19 Gunship 2000 $37 WC Secret Mission 1 & 2 $20 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk $24 Wing Commander 2 $48 Harrier Assault S29 WC WC 2 Operation 1 or 2 $22 Heatwave $ 9 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 Heroes of the 357th $15 Wing Commander Academy $42 HoverForce $31 Wolfpack Hunt for Red October $19 World Circuit Hyperspeed S12 X-Wing Indy Car Racing $48 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 Infiltrator 2 $28 Yeager's Air Combat Instrument Pilot Scenery Ea $59 Instrument Pilot Scenery We $49 Iron Helix $49 IBM SPORTS Japan Scenery Disk $22 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 4D Boxing Jet Fighter 2 Mission Disk $19 ABC Monday Night FB Jump Jet $39 ABC Wide World Boxing Jump Jet Aces Pack $50 APBA Baseball Killing Cloud $19 APBA Basketball Knights of the Sky $29 APBA Bowling LHX Attack Chopper APBA College Basketball Life and Death $19 APBA Football Life and Death 2 $24 ATP Tennis $34 Lightspeed $12 American Gladiators $21 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 David Robinson NBA Action $44 Mantis Experimental Ft $39 Days of Thunder $24 Maximum Overkill $44 Face Off Max Overkill Mission 1 or 2 $28 Front Page Football $39 Mechwarrior 2 S42 Front Page Football Pro $42 MegaFortress Greens $34 Megafortress Miss Disk 1or2 $26 Hardball 3 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $44 Hardball 3 Players Disk $17 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk S19 New Facilities Locator $18 Harlem Globetrotters $15 Orbits $37 Hole in One Mini Golf Delux S9 Pacific Strike $52 Hole In One Mini Golf Crs Disk$4 Power Boat Simulator $39 International Sports Chall S29 Power Politics WIN $34 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed $42 Privateer $52 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 $36 Links $29 Rapcon S29 Links Courses 1-7 Each $17 OCT CGW 4 S15 $32 MINDCRAFT WALLS OF 67 $37 $32 $34 \"WALLS OF ROME' gives you the experience of siege warfare as the ancients knew it. Play single battles or extended campaigns of conquest and defense against an unpredictable computer. You give the orders, your troops carry them out. **SPECIAL: BUY 1 MINDCRAFT GAME AND GET 1 FREE! $39 IBM SIMULATION 59 $12 $34 ATP Flight Simulator 2.0 $29 A.T.A.C $30 A10 Avenger $46 A320 Airbus $44 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces Over Europe $42 Aces Europe Mission 1 or 2 $27 Aces of the Pacific S42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk $27 Air Duel $38 Air Warrior SVGA $35 AirportFacilities Dir Armour Geddon $29 MINIT RAFT $12  SPECIAL OFFER: Buy Walls of Rome, Bloodstone or Strike Squad and get one other Mindcraft game free. Coupon enclosed in game. Circle Reader Service #40 "


"way, and the latter received praise for its accurate handling characteristics from nearly every racing buff we know. Special Award for Innovation A Special Award for Innovation is presented to Stunt Island (Walt Disney Software) because its designers, Ronald J. Fortier and Adrian Stephens, refused to be satisfied with having gamers fly planes and perform stunts. They wanted to allow gamers to create something they could keep. Moments to relive. V for Victory: Velikye Luki is Three-Sixty Pacific's follow-up to their successful V for Victory: Utah Beach. Ed Rains, Eric Young, Keith Zabalaoui and Larry Merkel have created a versatile and attractive game engine for traditional wargamers. The winner of the 1993 Wargame of the Year is Gary Grigsby's Pacific War (Strategic Simulations, Inc.). Gary Grigsby has packed almost everything we could want in a wargame into a layered game design that allows as much or as little control as gamers want. It teaches valid historical lessons in an intriguing way and keeps veteran gamers coming back for more. The Big Day Strategy Game of the Year The nominees for Strategy Game of the Year were extremely varied this year. All were interesting in their own right. Air Bucks (Impressions), Ed Grabowski, designer, featured an intriguing subject matter and solid challenge. David Lester's Caesar moved Impressions up in class from British importer to American software publisher. Though a hybrid game, Caesar features strategic depth, nice graphics and a capacity for expansion using Cohort II. Though some argue that it is too data intensive, Shadow President (D.C. True), Robin Antonyck, designer, is a strategy game with bite. It touches on knotty relationships and tough problems. Sim Life (Maxis) is Ken Karakotsios' entertaining product built around the idea of artificial life. In addition to being colorful and entertaining, it is educational. Konami created a hybrid SimCity-style/sci-fi wargame with Utopia, Graeme Ing and Robert Crack, designers. The winner of the 1993 Strategy Game of the Year award is Dune II (Virgin), Aaron E. Powell and Joe Bostic, designers. Its fast-action, great graphics and sound, and challenging scenarios make it a marvelous crossover hit between action and strategy gamers. Sports Game of the Year Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Golf (Accolade) is not only excellent as a stand-alone, but connects to the tournament on Prodigy, as well. Ned Martin is the designer. Microleague Sports FRONT PAGE SPORTS latest baseball game, Microleague Baseball 4: USA Today Edition, Jim Nangano, Ed Daniels and Skip Haughay, designers) uses video and a connection with the national newspaper's sports network to enhance its value. Bethesda Softworks' Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 (C. Walton and D. Gregory, designers) is light years ahead of its immediate predecessor and still the best overall hockey game on the IBM. Tony La Russa Baseball Il (Strategic Simulations, Inc.), Tony La Russa, Hudson Pichl, Don Daglow and Mark Buchignani, designers, won our Editors Choice award, but is still an evolving product. Links 386 Pro (Access) will be discussed later for reasons that should quickly become obvious. The winner of 1993 Sports Game of the Year is: Front Page Sports: Football (Dynamix), Patrick Cook, designer. This football game literally brought an extra dimension to the look of computer football games and extra depth to such games with the ability to design and implement cu custom plays. Overall Game of the Year It is probably obvious that this year's Overall Game of the Year is Links 386 Pro from Access (Vance Cooke, Kevin Homer and Roger Carver, designers). It receives consistently high marks from our readership and rested atop the Top 100 Games list for so long that we would have been remiss not to select it as Game of the Year. Even non-gamers are attracted by the incredible sounds and graphics of the detailed courses. Gamers like the smooth interface and the ability to play head-to-head at the same computer. Where Do We Go From Here? Wargame of the Year Carriers at War from Strategic Studies Group (Roger Keating and lan Trout, designers) is a remarkable and versatile product. Its approach to the artificial opponent alone is worth the price of admission. Castles 2: Siege & Conquest is Interplay's response to those who didn't think there was cnough game in the original Castles. The new design by Vince DeNardo, William Fisher and Byon Garrabrant was exciting enough as a solitaire game that it may become a multiplayer game on a major network during 1994. Award-winning designer Bruce Williams Zaccaggnino's Conquered Kingdoms is a well-balanced and addictive fantasy wargame. The only thing missing is a solid PBEM feature. Proving that it is possible to make an old classic better, Mark Baldwin's and Bob Rakosky's Empire Deluxe can be as easy or as difficult a challenge as the player desires. It offers the best of the classic game with a modem option that is efficient and entertaining. Mindcraft's Siege brought a new level of beautiful graphics and sound to the wargame genre. Purists wished for the historical scenarios to become available in its upcoming sequel (Walls of Rome), but gamers liked the intricate tactical challenge of the fantasy wargame. Ali Atabek, Larry Froistad, Patrick E. Hughes and James B. Thomas are the designers. It was an interesting product year to cover from June, 1992 to June, 1993. Products seemed to reach comparable levels of quality all over the spectrum and this year's award winners seemed more predicated on design features and elegant implementations rather than the grand Icaps of technology or game design of past years. We suspect that next year will be similar, but anticipate that we may be only a year or so away from another grand leap in technological sophistication. Meanwhile, here's to all the nominees! Out of all the games released during the product year, they represent the 43 games we will most remember out of that time period. And here's to the winners. Out of 43 outstanding products, they represent the 11 products we were privileged to single out. CGW Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US.PR.AK, HI APO & FPO $4 por order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling 51 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st itom + $2 ea. add'l, AK $19 1st Item + $2 ca, add I. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 ist Item + $6 83. add'l Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall 525 1st Item +$6 ea, add. Handling S1 per shipment. IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $44 $17 ZORK S21 $19 RETURN TO ZORK'is the next generation in the classic Zork series. Return to Zork is an amaz. ing interactive adventure of danger, intrigue, and low cunning. Filled with fascinating puzzles, it features a cast of Hollywood stars, a revolutionary interface, over an hour of spoken dialogue & an enchanting musical score. $46 Tegel's Mercenaries Tegel's Mercenaries 2 Theatre of War Theatre of War Set 1 Traders Unnatural Selection Utopia Vikings Fields of Conquest Visions of Aftermath Walls of Rome War in the Gulf Warlords Warlords 2 When Two Worlds War Worlds at War Links Pro 386 Golf Links Pro Course 1 or 2 $19 Links Pro Course 3-6 Each $19 Madden Football 2 $32 Michael Jordan Flight Sim $38 Microsoft Golf for Windows $39 Mini Putt $9 NFL Challenge Premium Ed $59 NFL Proleague Football NFL Pro League Football 92 $19 NFL Video Football $39 NHLPA Hockey $38 QuarterPole $39 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 $36 Tony La Russa 2 '92 Teams S16 Tony La Russa Fantasy Man $14 Tony La Russa 2 Stadiums $18 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Gretsky Hockey Legue Sim 2$29 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Class Soccer $28 $32 S29 $37 $24 $39 S12 $38 $12 $42 $42 $19 An Epic Adventure In the Great Underground Empire. IBM TRADITIONAL S12 $31 IBM STRATEGY $19 $29 $12 $24 'FLIGHT STICK PRO' is the ultimate battle stick for computer pilots. It can activate radar, arm and disarm weapons and view your aircraft without ever removing your hand from the stick. The trigger and 3 fire buttons gives you full range of combat while the viewer gives you total command of the aircraft. $55 $44 $32 $25 A Train $34 A Train Construction Set $23 Air Force Commander $19 Airbucks $36 Ambush at Sorinor $42 Archon Ultra $30 Armada 2525 $29 Ashes of Empire $48 Battle Isle $32 Battles of Destiny $36 Bombsquad $30 Breach 2 $19 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Breach 3 $36 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space $42 Caesar $36 Campaign 2 $36 Capitalist Pig WIN $32 Carrier Command $9 Carriers at War $27 Carriers at War Const Kit $32 Carriers at War 2 $49 Castles $18 Castles 2 $36 Civilization $32 Civilization Master Edition $48 Clash of Steel $42 Cohort 2 $18 Command HQ $19 Conquer for Windows Conquered Kingdoms $36 Conquered Kingdoms Scen 1 $25 Conquest of Japan $36 Crime City $13 Crisis in the Kremlin $39 Dark Seed $28 Dark Star $36 Defender of the Crown Designasaurus 2 $28 Detroit S36 Dino Wars $12 Diplomacy $12 Discovery Stp Columbus $34 Dominus Dragon Force Dragon Lord $12 Dune 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Fantasy Empires $36 Fields of Glory $36 Fighting for Rome $12 Fort Apache $34 Gemfire Genghis Khan $37 $34 Global Conquest $29 Global Domination $36 Global Effect $17 Gobliiins 2 $24 Inindo $37 Koshan Conspiracy $32 Kye Deluxe WIN $26 L'Empereur $37 Laser Squad $32 Lemmings 2: The Tribes S32 Liberty or Death Lost Admiral S19 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scenario Disk $23 Lost Patrol $6 Lost Vikings $20 Maelstrom S38 Master of Orion $45 Medieval Lords Mega Lo Mania Merchant Colony $17 Millenium $19 Millenium $9 MoonBase S24 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $25 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 S37 Nuclear War $9 Objection $26 Objection Enhanced $38 Ogre Operation Combat $12 Overlord $21 Pacific Theater Ops $42 Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General $29 Perfect General Scen 1 $21 Perfect General Scen 2 $23 Perfect General 2 Populous $17 Populous 2 $38 Powermonger Powermonger World War 1 $21 Push Over $32 Railroad Tycoon Classic $22 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 Realms $17 Red Zone $32 Riders of Rohan $19 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms 1 or 2 $42 Rules of Engagement 2 S38 Second Conflict WIN Seven Cities Gold 2 $38 Shadow President S34 ShadowGate WIN Sid Meir's Civil War S58 Siege With Exp Disk S24 Sim Ant $32 Sim Ant WIN S34 Sim City 2000 $43 Simcity $27 Simcity WIN $34 Simearth $34 Simearth WIN $38 Simfarm S41 Simlife $41 Simlife WIN $44 Soldier of Fortune $42 Space Hulk $38 Spaceward Ho! DOS/WIN Special Forces $39 Spoils of War S34 Star Control 2 $36 Star Legions $38 StarMaster $46 Strategic Forces $19 Strike Squad $39 Sub Version $36 Sword of Aragon S28 Task Force 1942 $39 3D Pinball $10 Acquire S9 Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud $10 Armada Villa Crespo CB S10 Backgammon By George WIN $9 Baseball Card Collector $18 Baseball Facts $10 Battle Chess 4000 SVGA $36 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $32 Battle Chess $19 Battle Chess WIN Blackjack Blackjack WIN Bridge 7 Bridgemaster $29 Caesars Palace $9 Caesars Palace WIN $15 Casino Craps $10 Casino Game Pak WIN Casino Master WIN Casinos of the World $29 Checkmate DOS/WIN S36 Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus $9 ChessManiac 5 Billion & 1 $46 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 WIN Classic 5 DOS/WIN $32 Combination Lock $10 Cribage King Gin King $19 Crossword Creator $12 Dealer's Choice $29 Demon Blue $10 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $22 Dr Thorp's Blackjack Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $10 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack 9 Electric Jigsaw $12 Family Crossword Puzzles $28 Gambit Game-Maker $49 Games Master WIN Games People Play $21 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Go Master Dix Ver 5 Go Master Dix Ver 5 WIN $79 Go Master Junior Ver 5 $19 Go Master Junior Ver 5 WIN $19 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grandmaster Chess Hollywood Squares $15 Home Alone 2 Home Casino Spectacular S9 Hoyle's Book Games V4 $29 Ishido $17 Jeopardy 1 or 2 $9 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary $15 Jeopardy Junior $5 Jeopardy Sports Edition $7 Jones Fast Lane $24 Joseki Genius $39 OCT CGW 5 $42 $32 $38 S19 S12 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the add on course disks for extra fun. S36 589 $32 $38 CLUSS44 Skip $26 Address Drow straight BIM $37 SUUNBLU Fade Chlp Useri in care nrnn $37 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs S6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Detectives replaced with same product, Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE PAGE 6 FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #40 "


"SURVEY CGW SOUND CARD SURVEY Mike Weksler co-wrote Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook and is CGW's Technical Editor. Joe McGee is a private computer consultant who specializes in multimedin. by Mike Weksler & Joe McGee In the early days of IBM gaming, one may as well have been hearing impaired. The chirps and beeps of the internal speaker added Lalmost nothing to the gaming experience. It was the silent movie era for computer games. At that point, the introduction of AdLib's FM synthesis was as dramatica leap as from prehistoric cave paintings to the glorious age of portraiture epitomized by Gainesborough and van Dyke. Then came Creative Labs' Sound Blaster, with digitized sound effects to accompany the Adlib FM synthesis. Between the sound effects from Creative Labs and the orchestration provided by Roland's MT-32 (a high-end, large-ticket, multi-tambral sound card for those gamers who were not satisfied with tinny-sounding FM synthesis), computer games jumped from filmdom's Vitaphone and Movietone sound to Dolby in a single generation. For a couple of years, AdLib. Sound Blasterand MT-32 were the Big Three cards in gaming. Now, with the increasing demand for sound from the gaming community and all the ranting about multimedia, PC sound equipment has suddenly become a big market, and manufacturers are hell-bent on tapping it. This past year has seen an explosion in the sound card population that has us teetering on the brink of a THX-style sound revolution. The Adlib Gold (a proposed Sound Blaster Pro killer) came and went, then came back again, wave table synthesis has come of age, and there are more combinations of digital audio and synthesis than there are combinations of word processors and spreadsheers. One of the most significant variables in the sound card equation is the evolution of the 16-bit sound card. It has the capability of digitally d card. It has the capability of digitally recording and playing a 16-bit resolution sound sample at 44.1 KHz—the same as CD audio. The quality varies from product to product, but some cards can play a digitized sample so realistic you'd swear it was an audio CD. Sixteen-bit audio is great for your own audio dabbling, but for the majority of games, 8-bit is the limit. This is due largely to the increase in storage requirements for higher resolution sound. Most games use sound sampled at 8-bit resolution at a rate of either 8, 11 or 22KHz. Another notable milestone in sound card evolution is the inclusion of wave table synthesis. In wave table synthesis, the sounds of actual instruments are digitized and stored on the card. Some of these wave table synthesizers are General MIDI compatible, meaning that they follow an established MIDI standard, while others require a specific software driver to get the sound out of the machine. What You Need This survey was designed to give gamers an idea of what is available and pending in the sound card arena. The focus is on games, with an eye for compatibility, ease of configuration, and developer support. We will emphasize products that have been designed specifically for game enhancement and that hold promise for future game manufacturer support. Anyone who has paid attention to sound cards knows that, for current games, Sound Blaster compatibility for digital audio and the AdLibstandard (Yamaha FM synthesis) for MIDI music are the most important features. This is the \"base\" requirement for a gamer's card, as it is most widely supported by manufacturers and tends to cause the least compatibility headaches. Most of the cards covered are Sound Blaster and AdLib compatible, usually by way of FM synthesis provided by the Yamaha OPL2 chip, the newer OPL3 chip, or software that emulates FM synthesis. Unfortunately, we've yet to hear any emulation of FM synthesis that sounds as clean as the ol' 8-bit Sound Blaster thar we used as a control (comparison) card. With the advent of wave table synthesis, one would expect the tinny-sounding FM synthesis to go the way of AM radio. It should still be supported in that one will be able to run his/her older games in the same manner that AM receivers are still included with new stereo receivers, but wave table synthesis is far superior in sound and, with the low priced cards available, it should move in to stay in the near future. Dealing The Cards AdLib Gold 1000 (AdLib) Why would a gamer buy the Adlib Gold 1000? We don't know. The major problem is its lack of Sound Blastercompatibility; without it, the card will not work with the majority of games currently available. It is only now beginning to gain support from publishers, although this support is not widespread. (Currently, Electronic Arts, MicroProse and Impressions have committed to support.) It has the \"Gold Standard» for digital audio, which sounds clean, but is only 12-bit This is alright for games, but is limited in other applications. Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Shipping to US PR.AK,HI, APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment: 2 Business Day Air US S6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add'I; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea, add. Handling 51 per shipment IBM TRADITIONAL AMIGA GAMES MAC GAMES S6 9 23222222 $32 $12 S6 Pools of Darkness Puzzle Master Railroad Tycoon Reach for the Stars Risk Robo Sport Shanghaii2 Sim Ant Sim City Supreme Simcity Simcity Terrain Editor Space Ace 2 Spirit of Excalibur Starflight 1 Super Tetris Test Drive 2 Test Drive 2:CA Challenge Test Drive 2:Supercars Vette Welltris Where in Europe CSD Where World Carmen SD Wordtris Yeager's AFT $25 S6 $9 S9 $6 'STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT RITES' Captain's Log, Stardate 6238.4. You are being watched. By whom or what is unknown. but strange occurrences are happening and you must discover who it is that is challenging your mind. $38 S30 $27 Klotski: Polish Puzzles WIN $19 Laffer Utilities WIN $21 Lexicross S24 Lotto Gold $29 Lotto Leverage $10 Mental Blocks $15 Monopoly Deluxe DOS/WIN $29 Oligopoly Omar Sharif Bridge WIN Omar Sharif on Bridge $37 On Target $10 Pictionary Pool Shark $15 Positronic Bridge $30 Puzznic Risk WIN $26 Rodeo Games $10 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble Deluxe DOS/WIN $26 Scribler $34 Shanghaii2 $29 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Shogi Master $34 Solitaire Royale $19 Solitaire WIN Solitaire's Journey WIN $38 Solitaires Journey $36 Sorry $12 Space Vegetables $10 Spot $10 Super Jeopardy $27 Super Tetris $29 Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Terminator Chess Tetris Classic Tetris Classic WIN Trump Castle 3 $34 Turn-n-Burn $10 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Video Poker Villa Crespo $12 Video Poker WIN Video Poker by Masque Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Welltris Wheel of Fortune 3 $9 Wheel of Fortune Gold S6 S6 $32 $32 BUDS OR FREE GAME OFFER S6 Amnios Artura $9 Atomino $6 Batman Caped Crusader S6 Batman the Movie $6 Battle Command S6 Blue Max Aces Great War Breach 1 Scenario Disk $3 Bride of the Robot S9 Checkmate $19 Crackdown S9 Darkman Das Boot Submarine Day of the Viper $6 Dragons of Flame $6 Fast Break S6 Flood Gravity S6 Gun Boat HardBall $16 Hawaiian Odyssey $6 Heatwave $6 HoverForce Jack Nicklaus Clip Art Jack Nicklaus Course 1-5 Ea. $6 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $6 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $9 Khalaan Knights of the Crystalion Matrix Marauders $6 Mean 18 Golf Never Mind Night Breed S6 Night Shift $6 Nitro Populous 2 Challenge $16 Populous World Editor Projectyle S6 RVF Honda Red Storm Rising Robocop 2 Search for the King $6 Secret Monkey Island $29 Shark Attack Ultimate Golf Ski or Die Stryx Targhan Tengen's Arcade Hits Test Drive 2:Muscle Cars Time Machine Total Eclipse Treasure Trap UMS 2 $19 Untouchables William Tell Xenophobe Yeager's AFT 2.0 Zone Warrior Zoom $6 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 15th through October 30th or while supplies last. THE ROAD TO WATERLOO 'FIELDS OF GLORY' is an intriguing action game with a miniature feel to it. Command the French, British or Prussian in the roles of Napoleon, Wellington, or Blucher. Choose from 4 historically accurate or 2 fictionalbattles. Use a modem for head to head competition. Fight a single battle or an entire campaign. $36 $6 $6 SPEND $75 S6 $19 $12 $12 $15 4th and Inches 5.25 Airborne Ranger 5.25 Artura 5.25 Big Business 5.25 Backgammon by George Bravo Romeo Delta Gunship 5.25 Obliterator 5.25 Pirates 5.25 S.C. Out The Tinies Xenocide $15 MICROPROS IBM BUDGET 93 SPEND $100 RDIANS OP REEDEN MAC GAMES 3D Pinball 3 in 1 Players's Pack 4th & Inches Allied Forces $12 Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud $10 Armada Villa Crespo CB $10 Back to the Future 3 $12 Backgammon By George Battle of Austerlitz Blue Max Aces Great War Cardinal of the Kremlin Conqueror Multi Tank Crime Does Not Pay Don't Go Alone Double Dragon 3 Dragon Strike $12 Dragons of Flame East vs West Berlin 1948 Gold of the Aztecs $12 Lost Patrol MUDS Oil's Well $12 Over the Net Renegade Legion Interceptor $12 SDI Super Off Road $12 TKO $6 Trump Castle 2 $12 Trump Castle 2 DD 1 or 2 $4 AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drivein movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & sound effects. Blackjack for Windows Covert Action Dark Half Defender of the Crown 5.25 Dragon Force 5.25 Grandmaster Chess Hole on One Mini Golf Deluxe MacArthur's War Operation Combat Panza Battles 5.25 Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon 3.5 Sentinel Worlds 1 Video Poker for Windows War of the Lance $6 $9 4th & Inches MAC $12 4th & Inches Team Const S9 Battle Chess $29 Bridge 7 $31 Dragon's Lair 2:Time Warp $34 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe's $34 Dragon's Lair $34 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $109 Hardball 2 $31 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $27 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 Jack Nicklaurs CD 1-6 Each $15 Lexicross $32 Life and Death $32 Monopoly $29 Oids Out of This World Pick'n Pile $28     4 SPEND $200 $36 $7 $25 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Olfer, prico & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #40 Allied Forces Bridge 7 Cardinal of the Kremlin Dune Lost Admiral Red Storm Rising Warlords 5.25 OCT CGW 6 $36 "


"Chivas DOS. For the same money, one can buy a more widely supported and fully These problems should be ameliorated with the newer versions of the featured card. cards (such as version 4 for the PAS16). In fact, these compatibility problems have been worked out so that one may configure a game to Gravis UltraSound (Advanced Gravis) use a PAS or PAS16 card in native mode or as a Sound Blaster with We tried two versions of the Gravis the same game. UltraSound (GUS) card. The first one We found the installation procedure to be clean and simple, with WURA SOUND had old software drivers and 256K of the exception of diskerte labels that did not match the installation RAM (into which one must load MIDI program's insertion requests. Additionally, we had to go through a patches). It worked great under Windows, real song and dance to get the Windows utilities installed on a network but we found it to be less desirable under version of the operating system. The quality of the digital audio is, in our opinion, much cleaner We also tested a new version of the card than the Sound Blaster 16 products. However, one should note that with a 1MB RAM upgrade and new software drivers. For games that there is no internal MIDI connector, so a wave table daughter card support the card, we found the wave table synthesis and digital audio (mentioned later) cannot be installed. to be quite acceptable. However, in Sound Blaster emulation, we had Overall, we found the Pro AudioStudio to be an impressive card. It less luck. Getting sound from the few games that will work with the sounds terrific and, for the most part, installation is a \"plug-in and GUS emulating a Sound Blaster requires a lot of tinkering. The card play\" affair. Without changing any of the jumpers, it played the lises FM synthesis emulation to provide FM music in a game-a less machine gun sound effect in Wolfenstein 3D just fine while in Sound than optimal solution, as explained in the introduction. Blaster mode (which we found to be a challenge for other sound Due to the need for many TSRS (see glossary of terms), lack of cards). The lower priced alternative for the gamer on a budget would publisher support (less than the AdLib Gold at press time) and poor be to buy the PAS16 and save $50 (sacrificing the voice recognition Sound Blaster emulation, it is hard to recommend this card to anyone hardware on the Studio card). The PAS16 has the OPL3 and 16-bit other than a Windows MIDI musician. Were not saying that for a stereo DAC, although it didn't seem to sound as clean as the Pro given game, the GUS won't work, it's just that for the casual gamer AudioStudio. wanting Sound Blaster compatibility, we found it is not worth the configuration headaches. The 32-voice wave table synthesis is based Sonic Sound (Diamond) on an older Ensoni technology and sounds very good, though not Most people know Diamond for their hot-rod as good as some of the other wave table products surveyed. graphics cards such as the Speedstar 24X. Sonic Sound is one of the new breed of multimedia sound Logitech Soundman 16 (Logitech, Inc.) cards that, in the tradition of TV-advertised food We are often visited by game developers processor products, does many things. The differLOGITECH who want to demo their game on one of our ence in this case is that the Sonic Sound does them computers. Getting a computer configured all well. It has register level compatibility with the correctly so that it runs fickle pre-release soft8-bit Sound Blaster and also emulates OPL2 FM ware can be a real bear. While changing crash22 voice synthesis; in English, this means that it ing sound cards (like a pit mechanic changing emulates 8-bit Sound Blaster music and digital tires at the Indy 500) during one demonstraaudio. MIDI for one's keyboard is handled with tion, the Soundman 16 showed off its greatest an MPU-401 full duplex MIDI port. However, one should note that SOUND strength: it can be quickly installed, configthis card does not have an on-board MIDI interpreter; in other words, ured and run with very little hassle. one would not select the \"General MIDI» option in a game setup This card is born to run games. It doesn't program and have his or her ears filled with killer game tunes. It's Aria clutter itself with extra bundled software, chip must be supported directly. CD-ROM interfaces, or thick manuals to wade through. The drawScott Kim, the Sonic Sound marketing manager at Diamond tells back is that it uses the Media Vision chipset, so if the reader dislikes these chipsets due to problems encountered with Sound Blaster comus that they have a driver that major game developers will be supportpatibility, this may not be his or her card of choice. On the other ing in the near future. SCSI is handled with a Future Domain SCSI-2 hand, more and more companies are supporting the Media Vision host. This means that one can hook up everything from scanners, hard chipset directly. Also, if one already has a CD-ROM host or SCSI drives, and SCSI CD-ROMs to it—the caveat being that if a hard drive, this card is easier to install (there are software configurable drive is hooked up to the card, it cannot be booted because the card jumpers and no SCSI or proprietary CD-ROM hosts to conflict with does not have a boot ROM on it. (It is primarily intended as a existing hardware). Though the documentation is a bit sparse, it CD-ROM host for a multimedia configuration.) There is an upgrade should get the average user up and running with a minimum of available which includes voice recognition, larger wave table ROM, difficulties. and a headset. Having these features as an upgrade gives the card a lower retail price. Any upgrades to the Sound Blaster emulation can Pro AudioStudio/AudioSpectrum 16 (Media Vision) be run from an executable program which may be downloaded from With an OPL3 chip for FM synthesis, an MPUthe Diamond BBS. This executable is not a TSR and need only be 401 MIDI interface, comparibility with all Media run once prior to each use, due to the on-card Digital Signal Processor Vision supported games, and some Sound Blaster (DSi (DSP). compatible games, the Pro AudioStudio (PAS) should give the Sound Blaster 16 some good com This card had hardware jumpers and required a bit more tinkering, petition. One should note however, that the mabut the installation program was first class. The Aria wave table jority of distressing phone calls we receive from synthesis may not sound quite as good as some of the other cards readers (and our own editors) regarding compatimentioned here, but its low retail price and added features make the bility problems are related to the Media Vision Sonic Sound hard to pass up. Cards like this should put wave table 3-in. cards. These problems are usually attributed to synthesis into more gamer's hands and will hopefully be widely incorrect jumpering (i.e., \"I have music, but no supported. In the meantime, there are only a handful of games which sound\") and to older versions of the Pro AudioSpectrum 16 (PAS16). support the Aria chip directly. TO AVOID COCOTUMI SPECTRUM A Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 10.93 Since 1982 LlomputAbility Top Titles at the Lowest Prices! Consumer Electronics Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm, Sat 11am-5pm FAX: (414) 357-7814 P.O. Box 17882 Milwaukee, WI 53217 TIBM SOUND_CARDS CREATIVE Wayne Gretzke 3 ................... 34.95 Warriors of Legend ................ 19.95 When Two Worlds War ............ 34.95 Where... Carmen San Diego. Each 29.95 Where... Carmen Past ............. 29.95 Where...Carmen Space ........... 44.95 Where... Carmen USA Deluxe .... 44.95 Where...Carmen World Deluxe .. 44.95 Wilson Pro Statt Gall ............. 24.95 Wing Commander II ................ .... 47.95 Wing Commander Deluxe ......... 47.95 Wizardry Crusaders Dark Savant 39.95 World Circult Champ Edition ..... 39.95 World Circuit Grand Prix .......... 34.95 World War II Battles of South Pac 34.95 Worlds of Legends .............. 29.95 XWing Mission .............. 39.95/19.95 Yserbius .......... 24.95 Software available only on 3.5\" disk or premium packs. No Individual 5.25\" disks are available CREATIVE LABS. INE. SOUND $215 BLASTER.16 ASP VIDEO BOARDS  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible $165 MEDIA W VISION Presents... The Award-Winning ORCHID Line of Video Boards Fahrenheit 1280 Plus, 1MB VLB version $179 ProDesigner Il/s, 1MB ..... S135 Celcius VLB 1MB (expandable to 2MB) $215 Fahrenheit $205 VLB Version $225 CALL! PRO AUDIO Multingin Tahrenheit VAC AI (16 Buzz Aldrin's Race into Spa $165 A DIAMOND NEW NEW NEW Pro Audio Studio 16 $205 ...S115 $155/$155 $199 Speedstar Pro 1Mg. 24bit, 1280x1024 ... Stealth 24 ISA/VLB ........... Stealth 1MG, 32,000 col, 1024x768 Stealth Pro SVGA ISA, 1280x1024, 16 color IMB / 2MB... Stealth Pro VLB 1MB/2MB. ..S235/5329 S245/S329 MODEMS Number Nine ZOOM FREE Prodigy Starter Kit with purchase of any Zoom Modeml 9GXE, 1230 x 1024 NI, SVGA: LVL 10, 1MB, FREE DELIVERY LVL 11, 2MB, FREE DELIVERY LVL 12.3 MB, FREE DELIVERY.... S429 Aces of the Pacific ................. 44.95 WWII 1946 add on disk ......... 19.95 Aces Over Europe .................. 39.95 AD&D Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 47.95 AD & D Stronghold .......... ... 37.95 AD&D Unlimited Adventures .... 37.95 AD1001/ADIJUNIOR VOL 1......... 34.95 Adventures of Pinocchio . 45.95 Air Bucks 34.95 Air Traffic Controller 34,95 Air Warrior ........ 39.95 Aircrall & Adventure Factory ..... 24.95 Airforce Flight Assignment ....... 39.95 AJ World of Discovery ....... 29.95 Aladdin and His Wonderful Lamp 35.95 Alone in the Dark ................ .34.95 Amazon.. . 39.95 Ambush at Sorina .... 37.95 Archon Ultra 37.95 Ashes of Empire .. 44.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 AT Air Command ................... 34.95 B-17 Flying Fortress .. . 39.95 Barron's Book Notes ......... ... 44,95 Battles of Destiny .................. 34.95 BattleChess 4000/Supe VGA29.95/34.95 Battlefield 2000 37.95 Betrayal at Krondor .. 39.95 Blades of Destiny ...... 39.95 Bloodstone 25.95 Blue Force... 39.95 Body Illustrated 44.95 Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space ....39.95 Campaign .... * ... 34.95 Car & Driver ......................... 37.95 Carrier Strike: South Pacific ....... 39,95 Carriers of War ... 34.95 Carriers of War Construction Kil. 34.95 Castles I or ll ........ 34.95 Challenge of the Five Realms.... 34.95 Champions .................. 34.95 Children's Writing/Publishing 1.539.95 Civilization . 44.95 Classic Adventures ....... Cohort Il... 19.95 Comanchu: Maximum Overkill ... 42.95 Mission Disk #1 or #2 ........... 25.95 Conquered Kingdoms ........ 34.95 Scenario Disk ... .... 24.95 Conquest of Japan ................. 34.95 Creopers .. .... 29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant .... 41.95 Cyber Empires 31.95 Daemonsgate VGA .... 34.95 Dagger of Amonra 39.95 Darklands MPE ... 44.95 Dark Hall...... 34.95 Dark Side of Xeen .... 39.95 Dark Sun ...... 47.95 Daughter of Serpentis ............. 31.95 Day of the Tentacle .............. 34.95 Deja Vul or II, Windows .... 37.95 Discover Space 34.95 Dragon's Lair 3 34.95 Dr. Floyds Desktop Toys ....... Dune Il a Ealgle Eye Mysteries .......... 31.95 Ecoquest ll ................... .29.95 Eight Ball Delure ........... ..39.95 El-Fish/Electronic Aquarium ..... 34.95 Empire Deluxe 34.95 Eric the Unready .................... 34.95 Eye of the Beholder III ............ 42.95 F-15 Strike Eagle III ........ 34.95/49.95 Falcon 3.0 ......................... 44.95 Disk 1. Operation Fighting Tiger24.95 Flashback . .. 31.95 Flight 701 17.95 Flight Assignment: Air Force ..... 39.95 Flight Simulator 4.0 19.95 Football Pro. 39.95 Freddy Pharkas 39.95 Front Page Football ....... . 39.95 Gambit ........... ........... 37.95 Gary Grisby's Pacific War ......... 44.95 Gateway Il Homeworld ....... 34.95 Gettysburg .29.95 Gobblins II 24.95 Government Giveaway .............33.95 Grand Slam Bridge II .............. 31.95 Great Naval Battles ........ 42.95 Scen Builder/Expan ea .. 25.95/20.95 America in the Allantic......... 20.95 Hard Ball ll or Ill............ 29.95/34.95 Harpoon Signature Edition ........ 47.95 Harrier Assult ..34.95 Heaven & Earth .... 29.95 Heroes of the 357th 17.95 High Command ......... 41.95 Hockey League Simulator ll ...... 29.95 Humans INCA ..... . 34.95 Incredible Machine Indy Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis ..... 34.95 Jack and the Beanstalk ............ 35.95 James Pond 2 ................... 37.95 Jump Jet ............................ 39,95 King's Quest 5 Enhanced ........... 39.95 King's Quest 6. ......... 47.95 Lands of Lore .34.95 La Russa Baseball ll ....... 37.95 Legacy. The ........ 39.95 Legacy Realm of Terror ........... 34.95 Legends of Valour ............ ... 37.95 Leisure Suit Larry 5................ 39.95 Lemmings ... 29.95 Oh No! More Lemmings (add-on)21.95 Lemmings II. 34.95 Liberty or Death 34.95 Links 386 Pro ...... .39.95 Lord of the Rings II: Two Towers 34.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom ...... 39.95 Lost Vikings ... 24.95 Lunar Command ....... ..... 34.95 Magic Candle lll ... 37.95 Maniac Mansion 2 (Day Tentacle) 34.95 Mantis/Speech Pack ...... 39.95/19.95 Megatraveler Il or lll ....... 34.95/39.95 Mig 29, Falcon 3.0 Add on ........ 29.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win ......... 34.95 Mystery at the Museum ........... 34.95 National Lampoon's ChessManiac39.95 Nick Price's Trouble Shooting Gol129.95 NFL Pro League Football ......... 44.95 No Greater Glory ................... 39.95 Omar Shariff on Bridge/Win29.95/29.95 Out of this World ........... 34.95 Pacific Theater of Operations .... 39.95 Paladin 2 34.95 Patriot ........ 42.95 Pathway to Power ........ 29.95 Pepper's Adventure in Time 29.95 Perfect General .... 34.95 Pinball for Windows 29.95 Pirates of Gold ..... 39.95 Populous II ..... 37.95 Prince of Persia ll ...... 39.95 Privateer 47.95 Proto Star: War on the Frontier .. 39.95 Quarky Turbo Science ......... 29.95 Quust for Glory 3 ........ 39.95 Red Crystal ..... 34.95 Rags to Riches. 34.95 Railroad Tycoon ... 39.95 Realms of Arkania 34.95 Return of the Phantom ... 34.95 Return to Zork........ . ....... 44.95 Ring World: Patriarch's Revenge 34.95 RoboSport for Windows ..... ..... 24.95 Rock and Bach Studio 34.95 Rome ..... 29.95 Rules of Engagement II 39.95 S.C.OUT ...... 34.95 Sam & Max HII the Road 34.95 Seal Team ... 37.95 Secret Weapons/Lulltwalle 39.95 Expansion Disk 1,2,3 or 4 ....... 19.95 Serpent Isle (U7 part 2) ...... 47.95 Saven Cities of Gold .. Shadowgate for Windows. Shadowlands...... 29.95 Show and Tell for Kids 29.95 Selge/Dogs of War Bundle ..20.95 Sid Meier's Bundle.. Sim Ant DOS/Windows .... 34.95/34.95 Sim City DOS/Windows .... 29.95/34.95 Graphics Set 1 or 2 ............... 13.95 Sim Earth / Windows ....... 29.95/29.95 Sim Farm.... 34.95 Sim Life. 39.95 Simon the Sorcerer .... ... 29.95 Solitaire's Journey5/Win .. 34.95/34.95 Sound Graphics, Aircraft ..... 24.95 Space Hulk ......... . 37.95 Space Quest 5 .................... 39.95 Special Forces ......... Spectre DOS premium .... .. 34.95 Spell Craft .... 34.95 Spellcasting 301.. 34.95 Spelljammer: Pirates Realmpace 37.95 Star Legions ...... 23.95 Star Control ll .............. ... 34.95 Strike Commander ....... ... 47.95 Strike Squad ......... 37.95 Strip Poker 3/data disks 2-629.95/15.95 Studio for Windows 119.95 Sub Version 1.0 34.95 Summoning 37.95 Syndicate ... 36.95 TA Break Pinball ....... 29.95 TA Break Pool 29.95 Tales of Magic: Proph. Shadow ..37.95 Task Force 1942 39.95 Task Force Admirals Pack 44.95 Terminator 2029 39.95 The Prophecy ... 24.95 The Legacy: Realm of Terror .39.95 Tie Fighter 39.95 Tom Landry Football. 29.95 Tony LaRussa Baseball !! 30.95 Tornado ... 47.95 Tornado Limited Edition 56.95 Tristan 29.95 Trouble Shooting Golt 29.95 Ultima VII..... 49.95 Ultima Underworld Il...... 47.95 Ultrabots ........ 37.95 Uninvited for Windows ... 31.95 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword ... 42.95 V for Victory: Market Garden ..... 42.95 V for Victory: Utah Beach ......... 42.95 V for Victory It: Velikiye Luki ..... 42.95 P ATI Technologies V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 for Windows Internal / External .......... $145/ $179 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 for DOS Internal / External ......... $145/$179 ........ 29.95 GRAPHICS ULTRA 24.95 34.95 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal Fax Software, DOS/Windows ... 145 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone$239 Fax Software, DOS/Win S239 / $239 Graphics Ultra Plus No compromise Graphics for Windows & Multimedia Video! 1 MB / 2MB.........$209 /S315 Graphics Ultra Pro 2MB Professional Graphics & Multimedia Video for the Uncompromising User! ......................... $349 -... 29.95 OYSHCRS 800-554-9925 38 $39 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick Eliminator Game Card .... PC MouseStick CH Products: Virtual Pilot / Virtual Pilot Pro$69/$89 Flight Stick.. Hi Speed Adaptor $19 Gamecard 3-Aut/Gamecard 3-PS/ 549 MACH 3 Joystick.. ....................... Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke .. MAXX Pedal. Kratt: Kraft KC3 Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler ....$55 Kraft Thunderstick $27 Thrustmaster: Flight Control...... Weapons Control Mark II........ $99 Rudder Pedals ................... . $119 Thrustmater Pro ............... $119 38  One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. Women Owned Businesses. All Products Sold  Corporate Government & Carry Manufacturers' School POs Welcome. Full Warranties & VISA Documentation C  APO, FPO HI, AK No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian on Credit Cards. orders welcome: 6%.  Most Orders Shipped Min. $6. International within 48 Hours. Orders Shipped First Class  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: S5 per order, not per title. 15%. Min. $15. If mail cost Hardware: 5% Min. SS. exceeds calculated amount. .C.O.D orders welcome, you'll be billed additional with only a $6.00 Charge. Call for Free Catalog  We Ship Latest Version & Items Not Listed Personal or company checks allow 14 working days to clear. Prices fluctuate beyond our control & may change for better or worse. Defective returis must have a Retum Authorization number. Call our 1-800w to obtain a Return Authorization or your retum will not be accepted Shipping & handling are non-refundable. All sales are final. All retums are subject to a restocking fee. ... 24.95 Unutistick...... ... $75 Circle Reader Service #44 "


"Sound Blaster 16/Sound Blaster 16 with Advanced Signal in this survey choked when we tested the Sound Blaster compatibility Processing (Creative Labs) on this game, we figured that we would crash it in no time trying to The Sound Blaster 16 (SB16) promised to be emulate a Sound Blaster Pro. Much to our delight, the SGNXP16 the ultimate sound card for gamers. Bundled worked as advertised-without a hitch. Additionally, it is compatible with useful software, a connector for an optional with Adlib through the OPL3 chip, has an on-board Sound Source wave table synthesis daughter card, MPU-401 DAC for those products which require that hardware, and is compatBLASTER MIDI interface, and a voice recognition package, ible with the Covox Speech Thing. With all of these options, this this card would appear to be the gamer's Holy would also be a great choice for the gamer with a library of older titles Grail of sound cards. In our evaluation, however, that require many different sound devices. Few games support this we found this not to be the case. card in its native mode, but we found that in most cases, it was A variant of Creative Labs' 16-bit card is the compatible with something in the setup menu of a given game. Sound Blaster 16 with Advanced Signal Processing The card has a pin connector to accept either the Creative Labs Wave Blasteror Aztech Lab's own Wave Power. While the Wave Power (SB16 ASP). This card is identical to the standard SB16 except for the inclusion of Advanced Signal Processing, used for digitized audio runs well under Windows, there is a slight hitch in the SGNXP16 compression and decompression. This technology is currently useless which renders the wave table synthesis option useless for DOS gamers lack of an MPU-401 MIDI interface. Without this interfor gamers—it is primarily for the multimedia enthusiast or sound card tinkerer. If the potential sound card consumer is buying only for face, MIDI data will be routed out of the MIDI interface on the back a card's gaming potential, he or she could save $100 and go for the of the card. This is great if the user has his or her own MIDI standard SB16. synthesizer, but it will not support a wave table daughter card in DOS. The daughter card option works fine with current drivers in Windows, We were not impressed with the quality of the digital audio in either however, DOS gamers will be stuck. of the above sound cards when compared to earlier versions of Sound Blaster products. The sound had pops and extra noise that William This oversight will be corrected on the Sound Galaxy Pro 16 Extra, which should be out in Fall '93. A spokesperson for Aztech Labs, Volk, Technical Director at Activision attributes to increased time informed us that this card will have the MPU-401 interface and voice between the end of a played sample and the interrupt. We also noticed that our SB16 ASP card would transmit extraneous computer noise recognition capability, though with less compatibility (Sound Blaster through the speakers. Additionally, the card is known to crash games Pro, Ad Lib, and Windows Sound System only). when played in the Sound Blaster or Sound Blaster \"Compatible\" modes. One would think that a Sound Blaster product would be 100 Soundscape (Ensoniq) percent Sound Blaster compatible, but our experience shows that this While surveying the sound card market over the past is not the case. Eventually, drivers should be written to support the few months, we have been keeping our eyes on a promcard in its native mode, possibly solving the noise and compatibility ising prototype sound card from Ensoniq called problems. The FM music, however, sounds great. Soundscape. Though not currently available, it will be in Based on the above, one would be inclined to purchase a Sound the near future. For now, Ensoniq is licensing the techBlaster Pro for less, which has a stereo DAC and an OPL2 on card, or SOUNDSCAPE nology to other manufacturers. For instance, the Aztech an original Sound Blaster if one can live with monaural sound. They BY INSONIQ Wave Power uses the Ensoniq chipset, although with an are certainly adequate for most games, with the latter being almost 8-bit ROM to store the sound. The Soundscape card will foolproof. Our conclusions at the end of this article offer more details. use 16-bit ROMs (OEMs, however, may opt for 8-bit to keep the One major advantage to the SB16 and SB16 ASP is that they have price down), giving the various tambres a richer sound. The card also an on-board MPU-401 MIDI interface. Using this, one could route has an on-board Motorola 68000 processor to run it's own downMIDI data to either an external MIDI device such as a Roland SC-7 loadable firmware. (Firmware means drivers that are loaded on a card Sound Canvas module, an MT-32 module, or one's General MIDI prior to playing a game to carry out various modes of operation. They keyboard. Additionally, one may route the MIDI data from the OPL3 use a small portion of RAM on the sound card and are used in place chip to an add-on daughter card like Creative Labs' Wave Blaster or of loading a TSR driver into a computer's valuable RAM.) This the Aztech Wave Power (both mentioned later in this article). These approach may extend the life of the card, as upgrades to the firmware modules are alternatives to dedicated wave table cards, and since they would be available directly from Ensoniq (or one of their OEMs) snap onto the SB16 and SB16 ASP, one's entire sound system would when they become available. For gamers, one need only run a brief only require one slot. This method of implementing wave table initialization program to configure the card for either General MIDI synthesis is more suited to one who has already purchased one of the wave table synthesis, MT-32 emulation, or FM emulation. The above Sound Blaster 16 products. In addition to saving a slot, the serup Soundscape may be run as a synthesis sound card only (like a Roland will not require two sets of speakers (or one ser of speakers and a SCC-1 Sound Canvas mentioned later in this article) by disabling the mixing card), for sound effects and music. on-board DAC. This is a good feature for those gamers who already Installation of the SB16 and SB16 ASP is greatly facilitated by ated by own a Sound Blasterora Sound Blaster Pro. The only drawback to this software configurable jumpers, a new software installation routine, approach is that one must give up two precious slots in one's comand good documentation. We were able to configure the cards in a puter; however, the Soundscape may be configured to occupy an 8-bit 486/50 DX2 that also had a SCSI host, an Etherner card, and a slot. Additionally, our prototype Soundscape card is a snap to set up proprietary CD-ROM host. Most of these devices have trouble being ROM host Most of these devices have trouble being with software configurable jumpers. in the same room, let alone the same computer. The on-card MIDI interpreter on this card is another strong feature. It allows the gamer to select General MIDI from his or her game setup Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 (Aztech Labs, Inc.) screen and have the MIDI data play from the card itself, rather than SSAAD SUNDUES The TS CONTES ET STED SAND CAID TAKI SAMAISSSARD SINGLES Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 passing MIDI data to a MIDI keyboard. (SGNXP16) routs compatibility with AdOne drawback to this card is that it has no Yamaha FM synthesis HANAN Lib, Sound Blaster Pro (both stereo digital chip. Instead of an FM chip, the card does FM emulation, which does audio and OPL3), MS Sound System, Covox not sound as good as the real thing, Ensoniq's Joe Corellese explains Speech Thing, and Disney Sound Source. that, \"The decision to use FM emulation over a Yamaha OPL Chip When we first installed this card we used it was made because FM synthesis is a 17 year old technology which with a particularly fussy prerelease version gives inferior sound when compared to wave table synthesis. You'll of Electronic Art's forthcoming Seawolf. Since most of the other cards find that most of the larger game manufacturers are supporting Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"The Book Store CGW Presents.. CONOTECT CHUCK YEAOCKO AIR COMBAT CIVILIZATION Os PASURED BIBLE FREE Global Conquest, The Official Strategy Guide by CGW On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Prima $24.95 Special features: floppy disk with updated (2.0) game version and a new map maker; and full-color player's aid card. A complete tutorial with five programmed scenarios. Strategy tips, detailed tables, and analyses of actual program formulae. A complete modem-gaming reference. The Official Guide To Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon by Russell Sipe COMPUTE BOOKS $12.95 U.S. The best book on Railroad Tycoon. If you love Railroad Tycoon get Russell Sipe's book. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Here are just a few of the things you'll learn: get the answers to puzzling economic forces in the game; learn to defeat each of the tycoons; manipulate the stock market to your advantage; and learn optimal building and survey techniques. Luv Doze Lemmings, Lemmings 2 Hint Disk by Stanislaw Lemming $6.00 CGW's first Hints-On-Disk offers solutions to all 120 Lemmings 2 levels. Please specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disks. The PC Games Bible by Paul Rigby and Robin Matthews Sigma $20.00 CGW's British correspondents describe over 2,000 computer games in short \"Taking A Peek\"-size tidbits. Sid Meier's Civilization, Or Rome on 640k a Day by Johnny L. Wilson and Alan Emrich Prima $18.95 If you're serious about playing Civilization, this is the book you need. -Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Includes 100 charts covering technological advancements; 24 original tables and 22 specific formulae showing how the game works, as well as 17 ways to cheat and more than 20 ways to win. Falcon 3.0 Air Combat Pete Bonanni and Bernard Yee Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 Bonanni provides the insights of a trained Falcon pilot: Yee provides the perspective of an experienced game reviewer; and CGW's own Mike Weksler tells gamers how to maximize their computer systems in this useful book of tactics and campaign management for Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0. Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook by Russell Sipe and Mike Weksler Prima $18.95 U.S. Winning Strategies to all the missions. Campaign games for every player-flyable aircraft (P-51, FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, Phantom II, MiG-21). Valuable performance charts for each aircraft. Extensive information from the designers of YAC. Exclusive interview with Chuck Yeager. The Official Lucasfilm Games Air Combat Strategies by Rusel DeMaria and George Fontaine Prima Publishing $18.95 History, tactics and programming insights are blended together into this compendium of strategies for Larry Holland's best-selling WWII air combat series. The SimEarth Bible by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne-McGraw Hill $14.95 I salute Johnny Wilson for giving us a new kind of book about the earth and the terrestrial planets. -James Lovelock Wing Commander I & II: The Ultimate Strategy Guide by Mike Harrison Prima Publishing $18.95 Filtered through the viewpoint of Lt. Col. Carl T. LaFong, a fictional pilot, Harrison's book assists gamers in mastering the game in a logical, linear fashion. The SimEarth Bible is a winning strategy guide to SimEarth, as well as a fact-filled guide to Earth sciences and theories of the balance of life on the planet. The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook The Harpoon Battlebook by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne McGraw-Hill $19.95 by James DeGoey Prima Publishing $18.95 Each time we read this book we learned something because it explains In addition to providing a solid guide to Harpoon tactics, The the theory behind the game and doesn't just list one-two-three hints. Harpoon Battlebook offers new scenarios, additional information on START Magazine weapons platforms and handy reference tables. STI THE SIMEARTH BIBLE TYCOON THE ORTIGULL GUIDE TO OSO Use order form bound into this magazine to order books. "


"Product Company Jumpers MS-DOS Installation Windows Installation Ease of Configuration MPU-401 MIDI Supports General MIDI No Yes Very Easy Very Easy Very Easy Easy Easy Easy Very Easy Easy SoundBlaster Pro SoundBlaster 16 with ASP SoundBlaster 16 Pro Audio Studio Pro AudioSpectrum 16 AdLib Gold 1000 Logitech Soundman 16 Sound Galaxy NX 16 Pro Sound Galaxy Pro 16 Extra Winstorm Ultrasound Sonic Sound Viva Maestro 16 VR Viva Maestro 16 Wave Blaster Wave Power SCC-1 Sound Canvas SC-7 Sound Canvas Roland Audio Producer Soundscape Creative Lab Creative Lab Creative Lab Media Vision Media Vision AdLib Logitech Aztech Aztech Sigma Adv Gravis Diamond Viva Viva Creative Lab Aztech Roland Roland Roland Ensonia na Adequate Excellent Excellent Adequate Adequate Adequate Good Good n/a Good Adequate Good Good Good Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent n/a Excellent Adequate Excellent Excellent Adequate Adequate Adequate Adequate Good n/a Adequate Adequate Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent n/a Excellent Yes Yes Yes No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Hardware Software Software Software Software Software Software Software n/a Software Hardware Hardware Hardware Hardware n/a n/a Hardware n/a n/a Software No Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware reg'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Yes, other hardware req'd Easy Difficult Difficult Difficult Difficult Easy Yes Yes Yes Easy Easy Easy Yes n/a n/a Yes n/a Yes Yes Yes na n/a Easy Yes Yes MT-32 and General MIDI, but by including FM emulation we offer some backwards compatibility with older software at a lower cost.\" We've been told that possible OEMs of this card will have either an OPL3 daughter card or an OPL3 chip on-board. Viva Maestro 16 VR (Computer Peripherals, Inc.) From the makers of fine modem hardware Maesma LOVA comes Viva Maestro 16 VR (VMI6VR), another Aria OEM wave table audio card. This one is similar to the Diamond card mentioned above, with the exception of on-board hardware voice ** recognition. One can also buy a version of this card without voice recognition for $299. An interesting point regarding this or any Aria card is that several companies are looking into its hardware-supported voice recognition for use in their games. Interplay has a version of Star Trek: 25th Anniversary that runs with the VMIOVR. Additionally, Impressions When Two Worlds War is another example of the increasing support for Aria synthesis and voice recognition. There have also been rumors of development at Trilobyte. Additionally, by using a true DSP, one may obtain upgrades to the firmware from a BBS for such things as MIDI patches, and Sound Blaster FM emulation upgrades. The Viva Maestro 16 VR gave us some problems at first because we already had an Adaptec SCSI host for our hard drive. One problem with these cards is the amount of hardware jumpers for IRQ, MIDI, CD-ROM and Aria's proprietary sound stuff. Additionally, because these are not software configurable jumpers, the cards were very difficult to configure. Clear documentation was its saving grace. require Windows acceleration (or those who are waiting for games with photorealistic 16 million color images at 640x480 resolution). Wave Blaster (Creative Labs) This is a daughter card designed to snap onto the Sound Blaster 16 or the Sound Galaxy NX Pro NX 16. In addition to being a General MIDI E-mu BLASTER wave table synthesizer, it also emulates a Roland MT-32. The Wave Blaster was one of the best sounding wave table synth cards we listened to, short of our Ensoniq Soundscape prototype and the Roland SCC1-Sound Canvas. It sounds fabulous and comes with great software, but getting games to recognize the card while plugged into a SoundBlaster 16 or Sound Galaxy Pro NX 16 is tough. With the former, using the SBMIDI.EXE utility should solve this problem; however, with the latter, one must wait for a new version of the SGPNX16, the Sound Galaxy Pro 16 Extra. For $249, this is the way to go for wave table synthesis if one already owns a sound card with daughter card connectors. Winstorm (Sigma) The Winstorm Multimedia Display Adapter is similar to the above Logitech Soundman 16 in that it is another Media Vision OEM, but is also a 24 bir VESA compatible, accelerated video adaprer. It is primarily marketed to those who are just assembling their new computer (i.e., do not already own a graphics card), or those who are short on motherboard slots. Additionally, some buyers may already have a SCSI host adapter and a video card. Nonetheless, with its ease of installation and software configurable jumpers, we feel that it is still adequate for the needs of today's gamer-especially those who also Wave Power (Aztech Labs, Inc.) an, JawPower Aztech's Wave Power is the first OEM of Ensoniq's Soundscape technology, a General MIDI wave rable daughter card that provides wave table synthesis with their Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16. Additionally, it works great with either one of the Sound Blaster 16 cards. In fact, as mentioned earlier, it actually works better for games with the Sound Blaster 16 because of its MPU401 compatibility. In other words, although the Wave Power works fine for Windows applications with Aztech's own card, it will only work as a General MIDI card if one uses it with one of the Sound Blaster 16 cards. This may be fixed with software available this Fall. Additionally, Aztech will be releasing the Sound Galaxy Pro 16 Extra around the same time which, as mentioned earlier, will have the MPU-401 compatibility. We found the Wave Power to be a fine substitute product for the Wave Blaster; however, we noted that it did not possess the same richness of sound that its cousin, the prototype Soundscape from Ensonig, had. The documentation for this product along with the full implemenPage 82 Computer Gaming World "


"On-Board Wave Table Synthesis FM Synthesis CD-ROM Interface 8-Bit Sound Blaster Compatibility Voice Recognition Developer Price Support None OPL3 Proprietary Good Adapter for Wave Blaster/Wave Power OPL3 Proprietary Adequate Adapter for Wave Blaster/Wave Power OPL3 Proprietary Adequate None OPL3 SCSI Adequate None OPL3 SCSI Adequate None OPL3 SCSI Optional None None OPL3 None Adequate Adapter for Wave Blaster/Wave Power OPL3 SCSI Optional Adequate Adapter for Wave Blaster/Wave Power OPL3 Proprietary, SCSI Optional Adequate None OPL3 Proprietary, SCSI Optional Adequate Older Ensoniq Chipset Emulated SCSI Optional Poor Aria Chipset Emulated Adaptec SCSI-2 Good Aria Chipset Emulated Future Domain SCSI-2 Good Aria Chipset Emulated Future Domain SCSI-2 Good E-mu Chipset n/a None n/a New Ensonig Chipset n/a None n/a Roland Chipset n/a None n/a Roland Chipset n/a None n/a Roland Chipset n/a None New Ensonig Chipset Emulated Proprietary, SCSI Optional Good Optional-software Excellent $199.95 Yes/software Adequate $349.95 Yes/software Adequate $249.00 Yes/software Adequate $349.00 With after market software Adequate $299.00 None Poor $299.95 With after market software Adequate $199.00 With after market software Increasing $259.00 With after market software Increasing $279.00 With after market software Adequate $349.00 With after market software Poor S199.99 Optional-hardware Increasing $269.00 Yes/hardware Increasing $349.00 None Increasing $299.00 n/a n/a $249.95 n/a n/a $199.00 n/a Increasing $499.00 n/a Increasing $399.00 n/a n/a $599.00 n/a Excellent n/a n/a tation of Midisoft's sequencer and its low price make this a good Le Grande Finale choice for one whose wave table synthesis needs require a daughter card. In summary, before purchasing a sound card for games, consider the following: Roland SCC1 \"Sound Canvas\" (Roland) Since most games require a Sound Blasteror 100 percent compatible Without a doubt, this card offers the best wave table product, one would do well using an 8-bit Sound Blaster for digital synthesis of any other in this survey. The richness of effects (PCM sound) and FM synthesis, and an add-on product for tambres is overwhelming. Most impressive was the wave table synthesis. While the Sound Blaster 16 would work, there soundtrack to Electronic Art's forthcoming Seawolf are problems with backwards compatibility. Additionally, since said composed entirely by George \"Fat Man\" Sanger. The games are using digitized 8-bit samples at a rate between 8 and card also is recognized as a General MIDI card when 22KHz, a Sound Blaster Pro, Sound Galaxy Pro 16 Extra, Soundman a game doesn't support the SCC-1 Sound Canvas di16, or Pro AudioSpectrum 16(version 4 or higher) would be adequate. rectly, and can emulate an MT-32. This is definitely This would give the user the sound playback capabilities in stereo, serious music hardware for the serious enthusiast. It's as revolutionary OPLZ FM synthesis, and few compatibility problems. Further, upas our first encounter with the MT-32 back when the only thing grading to General MIDI is as easy as adding a Roland Sound Canvas around was the AdLib. Anyone who can afford it, including the MIDI SCCI, or down the road, one of the substitute products that should musician, needs this card. pop up, like the Soundscape prototype. While this configuration would be great for the gamer with a few slots left in his rig, the Roland SC-7 Module \"Sound Canvas\" (Roland) combination of the Sound Blaster 16 and one of the daughter cards This is the external module version of the SCC-1 above, sans the mentioned above: the Wave Blaster from Creative Labs, or the Wave Power from Aztech Labs would save space by using one slot and one MPU-401 interface. Since it is an external module, it is also suitable for Macs and Amigas. set of speakers. If voice recognition, value-added features, or a lower price are what Roland RAP 10 (Roland) the reader has in mind, then perhaps some of the Aria cards, like the Diamond Sonic Sound or the Computer Peripherals Inc. Viva MaesOur last product in this survey is one that is currently not available, tro 16 VR, or the Gravis UltraSound might be appropriate. but we were able to hear it at a recent trade show. It sounds impressive. Finally, Roland is going to incorporate digital audio into one of Finally, for those who spare no expense for their hobby and are their sound card products. The RAP (Roland Audio Producer) 10, is destined to sound card heaven, there is the line of Roland products. an audio card that we feel would have been the ultimate sound card Yes, we are on the brink of a THX-style breakthrough. Yer, in many for games, but we have learned that Roland has chosen not to include ways, the success or failure of many of the products discussed in this Sound Blaster capability. We feel that this will put off several potential survey will depend upon the marketing angles used by the manufacconsumers who may have many games which are only Sound Blaster murers. We are anire frankly, amazed at all of the available products compatible, including many of the edutainment software packages on and the unique angles with which consumers are being lured. Indeed, the market. This product is definitely targeted for the MIDI musician rather than the casual gamer, but consider that the retail price of $599 with the exception of the Logitech Sound Man 16, and some of the is approximately what it costs for a Sound Blaster 16anda Wave Blaster wave table stand-alone products, all of the products surveyed were from Creative Labs. Given that, if developers support the new Roland bundled excessively with multimedia software products which are digital audio standard, gamers may embrace such a product, but we superfluous for games, software which, if anything, raises the product will take a wait and see attitude. One thing would be certain, the price. Wouldn't it be great if more companies took the light approach, RAP-10 with its Sound Canvas synthesis, would be the ultimate game that is, offered sound card packages just for running games? Then, sound card. maybe we could all afford a symphonic orchestra on a sound card, October 1993 Page 83 "


"COMPANY DIRECTORY AdLib 50 Staniford St. Suite 800 Boston, MA 02114 (800) 463-2686 Diamond 1130 East Arques Dr. Sunnyvale, CA 94086 (408) 736-2000 Advanced Gravis #101 3750 North Fraser Way Burnaby, B.C., Canada V5T 5E9 (604) 431-5020 Ensoniq 155 Great Valley Pkwy Malvern, PA 19355-0735 (215) 647-3930 Logitech, Inc. 6505 Kaiser Drive Freemont, CA 94555 (510) 795-8500 Glossary of Terms ANALOG: Values which range between a set of defined limites. DAC: Digital to Analog Converter. A device which converts a digital value into an analog voltage. DIGITAL: Values which are represented as discrete numerals (zeros and ones) DIGITAL AUDIO: See PCM DIGITIZE: The process of converting an anolog value into digital (numeric) representation of that value. Example: If an anolog input ranged from 0 to a peak of 6.2 volts, a input value of 4.5 volts would be digitized to a numeric 186, under an 8-bit sample resolution, (256 x 4.5 / 6.2). DMA: Direct Memory Access—a feature which allows a device to access RAM independently of the microprocessor, thereby achieving better, more stable performance, and reducing the load on the microprocessor. DSP: Digital Signal Processor—a device which can be used to manipulate digital signals, providing special effects, real-time echo, harmonics, etc. FM Synthesis: Frequency Modulated Synthesis a technique for producing sounds by modulating sine waves to produce harmonAztech Labs, Inc 46707 Fremont Blvd. Fremont, CA 94538 (510) 623-8988 Media Vision 47221 Fremont Blvd. Freemont, CA 94538 (800) 348-7116 Computer Peripherals, Inc (Viva) 667 Rancho Conejo Blvd. Newbury Park, CA 91320 (805) 499-5751 Roland 7200 Dominion Circle Los Angeles, CA 90040-3696 (213) 685-5141 Creative Labs 1901 McCarthy Boulevard Milpitas, CA 95035 (408) 428-6600 ics. Sigma 47900 Bayside Parkway Freemont, CA 94538 (510) 770-0100 SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS $14.50 $ 2.50 Star Glider $14.50 $5.00 Blue Angels IBM, AMIGA. APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM BARGAINS 910 & UNDER IBM/MS-DOS. BARGAINS. UNDER $20 SPECIAL PURCHASE IMPOSSIBLE MISSION 2 $5.00 Sub Battle Simulator $10.00 I Star Trek 5: Final Frontier 520.00 DONT GO ALONE, Accolade EROM. MICROPROSE Microleague Football OUTRUN, Sega $5.00 Microleague Baseball Your Choice $25 each: $14.50 SPACE HARRIER, Sega $ 5,00 F-29 Retaliator $10.00 CUNSHIP 2000 GUNSHIP. Microprose $ 10.00 Solo Flight $14.50 F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER CROSSBOW, Absolute $5.00 Tomahawk 5.25\" H.D. dels only. VCA required! MIND DANCE, Mindscape Xiphos $14.50 SIERRA GAME BUNDLE FOR IBM NIGHT HUNTER, UBI-SOFT S 10.00 MEGAFORTRESS $10.00 Includes: MAGIC JOHNSON BASKETBALL $ 5.00 Carrier Command $14.50 CALIFORNIA GAMES, EPYX 55.00 Sky Chase $14.50 A-10 TANK KILLER, HEART THIRD COURIER, ACCOLADE 55.00 David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 OF CHINA & STELLAR 7 $14.50 WORLD GAMES, EPYX Only $30 Rocket Ranger $14.50 SILENT SERVICE $5.00 Air Strike U.S.A. $14.50 B.A.T., UBI-SOFT $10.00 BATTLECHESS 2 $19.50 Dark Heart of U ru $16.50 SIERRA SPECIALS SIERRA for IBM $19.50 Buck Rogors 1, SSI $20 EACH Buck Rogers 2, SSI YOUR CHOICE $15 each QUEST FOR GLORY 2, CODENAME Heroes Lance, SSI $10.00 POLICE QUEST 2 ICEMAN, HEART OF CHINA, KING'S Dragons of Flamme, SSI $10.00 QUEST 1 -or-4, OIL'S WELL Question II, SSI $10.00 CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT COLONEL'S BEQUEST, LEISURE Hldar, SSI $10.00 FIREHAWK MEDIEVAL LORDS, SSI $10.00 SUIT LARRY 1 -or3. ZELIARD ALLIED FORCES BUNDLE $20.00 RISE OF THE DRAGON, THEXDER. POOL OF RADIANCE, SSI $10.00 MIXED UP MOTHER GOOSE, DAS BOOT STAR COLLECTION for IBM $14.50 SPACE QUEST 1 -or2-or-3. MANHUNTER NEW YORK $14.50 10 GAME BUNDLE CALL FOR OTHER TITLESI X-MEN 2 $19.50 PUNISHER $19.50 from Electronic Zoo DR. DOOMS REVENGE $14.50 LAND, SEA & AIR TRILOGY $14.50 AMAZING SPIDERMAN SUPER SALE $19.50 SUPER CONTRA 514.50 by Microproso. 3 GAMES $20 Includes: Paris-Dakar, Skidoo. TWILIGHT 2000 $14.50 Includes: AIRBORNE RANGER, LIGHTSPEED 20,000 Leagues under the Sea. $14.50 Legend of Djel, Mouldy Old COVERT ACTION PIRATES! & GUNSHIP. FOR IBM Dough, Balloon Lagoon, Mechanic ALLIED FORCES BUNDLE Panic, Plasma Pilot, Space Scape, Hoyle's Book of Games Vol. 2 FROM MICROPROSE $20 & best selling TREASURE TRAPII SOLITAIRE, by Sierra. $15 M.1 TANK PLATOON & GUNSHIP TROIKA 3-pack Includes:28 Solitaire games with ADULT FUN FOR IBM FROM FREE SPIRIT mouse support. Tons of fun!! SEX VIXENS FROM SPACE from Paragon Software for IBM. 314150 $16.90 SEX OLYMPICS (VGA only) ...SALE....... $14.50...... For IBM on 3.5\" disks only. SOLD ONLY TO ADULTS 21 & OVER. Includes: REBEL PLANETS, IYAN & METAL VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE w HEARTS. AT ve Windows 3 compatible with more ema oral different computers.. Apple, VGA mouse & sound card supportill fast paced 1-800-676-6616 Atarl, Amiga, C64128, MAC, mullave arcade action with 100's of levels of Credit Card Orders Only 11 ( $25 minimum & lots more IBWMS-DOS II uditing play. Strategy & quick referes required COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 for U.S.A., SB for Canada, $16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales P.O. BOX 5160 1 tax. To receivo our catalog with 1000's of closeouts for all computer types, SAN LUIS OBISPO send $2 in cash or U.S. postage stamps.. DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOGII CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 544-6616. IRQ: Interrupt ReQuesta mechanism whereby a peripheral can notify the microprocessor of some event. The processor would be iterrupted to perform some service for the peripheral. MIDI: Musical Instrument Digital Interface—a serial-like interface used to pass commands and events between MIDI devices, (instruments, computers, sound modules). MPU-401: Popular MIDI interface standard for musical instruments. OEM: Original equipment manufacturer. May manufacture products under its own name or under a licensing agreement with another company. OPL2: OPerator type L2-a Yamaha FM Synthesis chip (YM3812) OPL3: OPerator type L3a Yamaha FM Synthesis chip (YMF262), backwards compatible with the OPL2, but with twice the capabilities. OPL4: OPerator type 14-a Yamaha FM Synthesis chip backwards compatible with the OPL3 with on-board Wave Table synthesis. In short, FM synthesis and Wave Table synthesis in one chip! (At press time, none of the sound card manufacturers had announced implementing the OPL4 into their sound card products. PCM: Pulse Code Modulation—a technique for producing sounds by modulating digital pulses. Sampling Rate: The frequency at which analog samples are converted to digital values during digitization. The higher the rate the more accurate the sample. Speech is typically sampled at 7000-8000 samples per second, CD quality audio is sampled at about 44,000 samples per second, (44 KHz). SCSI: Small Computer Subsystem Interface—a bus-type connection that can be used to connect computers with peripheral devices; hard disks, CD-ROM drives, scanners, etc. TSR: Terminate and Stay Resident-programs which remain resident in memory, such as hardware \"driver\" software. Excessive TSRs are likely to interfere with games. Wave Table Synthesis: Incorporates digitized samples of instruments stored in ROM. CGW Circle Reader Service #43 Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"To Explore Strange New Worlds. COMING SOON ... STAR TREK: JUDGMENT RITES'M WWI triplanes heading straight for you at Warp 9 speed. Mysterious life. forms reported on dead planets. A primitive race with advanced technology.. It's time to beam down to solve these and other highly illogical mysteries... and hope you come back alive. For more information about Star Trek: Judgment Rites, call 1-800-969-GAME, or see your local retailer. a maneno Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. M. and trademarks of Paramount Pictures. 1991 Paramount Pictures. Star Trek and U.S.S. Enterprise are Circle Reader Service #63 "


"Over There Speaking Of Sports Ak by. Robin. Matthetus: For some light gaming relief, French publisher Titus Software has fired off another of the Crazy Car titles. Volume 3 puts you at the controls of Lamborghini Diablo. It offers lots of action that will appeal only to speed freaks or joystick wagglers. Ocean, the Manchester based company that is known for their games based upon film tie-ins, is coding a Jurassic Park game for the PC. This is apparently based on a little known film about an animal park which all sounds a bit boring. Well, at least prehistoric. Anyway, leaving the 'J' word for the moment, Ocean has just published a golf game for the PC and Amiga. Some people may think this strange, PS perhaps considering that there is already the odd golf title about. Apparently Ocean cond TUTUBE by Robin Matthews MELI 12 222 SI AXHERI 21 BIE Sensible Soccer also allows Cup comperi tions and leagues, and it incorporates special rules for away goals, extra time, penalty shoot-ours plus the option to change and design the team's strip. The PC is a reasonable opponent in the single player mode, but it's in the head-to-head mode that this game almost makes you want to do a Mexican wave! After the very average Nigel Mansell's Racing game, Gremlin Graphics is set to launch another car-based product, Lotus: The Ultimate Challenge. This has a considerable pedigree, at least on other platforms, with Gremlin having previously published Lotus Esprit Turbo Challenge (1990), Lotus Turbo Challenge 2 (1991) and Lotus III (1992). These titles were available on the ST and Amiga, but now the best of each game will be incorporated into their first Lotus PC title. -SEAT yootball, or soccer to you Yanks, has been slowly gaining a strong following in the States over the past decade. With the recent slaughter of England's football team by the US team, and with the next Football World Cup being held there, soccer fandom seems to be reaching critical mass. To celebrate this new-found sport craze, this month's Over There first looks at two new soccer games. Premier Manager is from Gremlin Graphics and is a sports management game. The emphasis here is mostly away from the actual playing field and concentrates on assembling a team of players and settings tactics and style. It is a very \"British» game, especially as it does not place you in the expensive leather managerial shoes of a Premier Division team such as Liverpool or Manchester United, but rather in the scuffed and worn sandals of a part-time manager of a feeder league team such as Woking or Merthyr Tydfil. You then take this band of hopefuls on a course that can lead to glory, through promotion, or you can job hop to better things. One to four players can take part, and there are cup competitions, match highlights, transfer markets and lots of statistics. What this game does, it does very well, and Premier Manager will be enjoyed by football nuts from Woking, Merthyr Tydfil and soccer «brit-ophiles\" everywhere. The second football game is from the other end of the stadium. Sensible Soccer from Renegade is a football action game with no pretensions of management. There have been several previous efforts to write a good soccer action game for the PC, but they have all been poor. Sensible Soccer has done well on other formats and this PC conversion is long bchind schedule. Initial views of the carly version suggests the wait has been worthwhile with real game speed, positive control and an unusual control feature. Most footie games allow you to control and tackle the player nearest the ball, and shoot or pass using key or joystick. Sensible Soccerscores a true winner in its \"after-touch\" system, that is, after you have struck the ball, pulling the joystick will cause the ball to dip and bend. This gives a far greater level of control than in any another football game. International Open Golf Championships siders that the fairways are not crowded enough, and hence on the first tee we have, representing the Manchester Club International Open Golf Championships. Garoud shading (how did we ever manage without it?), three championship courses, 3D panning and four camera angles make the game a cross between Links, David Leadbetters and PGA Tour Golf. If you enjoy sports simulations it's likely that you already have your favorite, but if not, International Open Golf does have its own character and feel, and is certainly very quick on screen re-draw. There is a rumor that Ocean is also about to release another golf game linked with some odd team match, but in the meantime I think I'll sneak back to the Brabazon course and Links 386... ESPRIT RAN SESEO Sconos RAN TOROVCI 261 LETT The above games and any of the other games mentioned in Over There in past issues can be obtained from: Lotus: The Ultimate Challenge Lotus: The Ultimate Challenge will be a one player, full-screen or two player, split-screen simulation. The core of the game will be the beautifully stylish Lotus cars themselves: Elan, Concept Car M200 or the new Esprit S4. Thirteen different scenarios feature snow, forests, deserts, storms, winds and mud. 64 built courses and a construction kit! It will probably be available in the UK as you read this. in As predicted, the enhanced game engine in BlueBytes History Line has been reverse engineered into a souped-up version of its earlier Battle Isle product. Battle Isle '93 is a complete re-write with a storyline based around the Drulls and Skyner Tirans. This time they are furiously searching for Chromos' rare energy crystals. New maps, special units, animated sequences and some great music on top of the new engine should result in a real mean game. Computer Gaming World (not associated with CGW magazine], 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY. Tel: 01144512636306. Tel: 01194)12030300. Strategic Plus Software, 28 D&E The Courtyard, High Street, Hampton Hill, Middlesex. TW12 IPD, Tel 01144819778088, Fax 01144819774822, or on CompuServe on 1000014,3466. Robin Matthews can also be contacted on CompuServe on 76004,3456. cow Computer Gaming World "


"NOW AVAILABLE -ON PCZOOL NINJA OF, THE \"N+h\" DIMENSION V ZAL ZX GREMLIN Og BE Electronic Innovative Design 768 Two Mile Parkway Goodlettsville, Tn. 37072 Phone: 1-(615)-972-8085 Fax: 1-(615)-851-6098 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"INDUSTRY NEWS -A Whole New DIGIT A LA WORLD Det CGW Scouts The New Frontier Of Interactive Entertainment in the early years the computer game industry held the promise that game designcrs would be electronic artists in a \"New Hollywood,\" the equivalent of rock stars mesmerizing millions with their dazzling creations. Well the future is fast becoming now.\" Traditional Hollywood no longer ignores the fledgling computer game industry. Rather, the huge conglomerates seem to want to link their stars to those of software publishers. Why is this? Interactive entertainment looms as a more economical, and potentially more lucrative, means of filling the projected 500 channels of a digital highway than traditional media. Further, studies from both the cable television and computer fields indicate that consumers want to play games. So, what better place for the computer industry and the traditional entertainment industry to congregate than Beverly Hills? This year the Seybold Group elected to hold their annual Digital World conference at the prestigious Beverly Hills Hilton. The conference's agenda made it clear that nels. It is about one channel what the conno one is certain what the delivery system for sumer wants.\" Naturally, such an assumption the digital highway will be. However, both indicates that cable television operators, telecable television companies and telephone communications companies and computer companies are vying to be that infrastructure. manufacturers will need to know what conSo, with nearly everyone having at least one sumers really do want. One such study was phone line and 60 percent of U.S. households presented during the same session as Mr. subscribing to cable, the very idea of interac Horowitz' address. tive games entering homes via telephone and/or television means that there should be a significant number of new gamers that can be reached. Reaching those potential gamers means high potential profits. Naturally, that's where the media is getting excited. 500 Channels One speaker put the future of interactive television into immediate perspective. Ed Horowitz is the Senior Vice President of Viacom International, Inc. He is responsible for the cable company's experiment with interactive cable in Castro Valley, California. He said: \"Technology often raises more questions than it answers.\" For example, technically, we could have 500 channels, but there are not enough archived properties. So, to immediately introduce 500 channels would destroy the economics of television as we know it.\" He also warned, \"Technology always arrives earlier than anticipated, but always takes longer than expected to reach critical mass. Also, technology always costs more than initially desired.\" The quick and dirty translation is that we will have the capacity to put interactive boxes with digital upload/download capability into homes before we are capable of effectively marketing and servicing that potential. Further, it is going to require a significant investment before anyone reaps the potential rewards. Witness the Castro Valley project, which priced its first ser-top boxes at $800-$1,000. Whatever happens, Horowitz is quite correct to remark: \"This is not about 500 chanBruce Sidran Bruce Sidran is Executive Director of MCC/First Cities, a consortium established as a response to Japan's \"Fifth Generation\" computer program. The research that they have accomplished indicates that, «Frankly, consumers are willing to pay for entertainment. It has not been proven that they are willing to pay for airline guides, shopping, etc.\" Though the success of cable's QVC network may contradict Sidran's final point, the research indicates that consumers are looking for: 1) low cost, 2) largest choice, 3) high quality, 4) convenience and 5) time Ed Horowitz Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"Reality Role-Playing. Daryl F. Gates' POLICE QUEST See your favorite retailer or call: 1-800-757-7707 A SIERRA Circle Reader Service #107 "


"Computer Gaming World's Digital Highway Map QVC et.al. THE INFOSTRUCTURE NETWORK A preliminary roadmap for the digital highway as of August 15, 1993 FOX BROADCASTING TURNER BROADCASTING Interactive television test (Denver CO) VIACOM INTERACTIVE NETWORK US WEST usam SEGA Sega SECA AT&T AT&T GENERAL INSTRUMENT LUCASARTS Sega Channel Interactive television test (Castro Valley CA) GENESIS \"JEDI\" THE SIERRA NETWORK ATARI Cablesoft (Interactive TV operating system) SONY SILICON GRAPHICS TIME WARNER PRODIGY JAGUAR MICROSOFT INTEL IBM Interactive television test (Orlando FL) MATSUSHITA 3DO IBM Digital Domain Er watsuma Shorten O mate E BELL ATLANTIC Interactive television test (Virginia Test) NINTENDO ATLANTIC Kaleida ne Venture capitalists Electronic Arts PROJECT REALITY de Apple Computer Computer Gaming World October 1993 "


"KEVIN DESIGNED A GAME WITH 56 TOOLS, 160 PUZZLES, AND THOUSANDS OF POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS. KEVIN'S GOT WAY TOO MUCH TIME ON HIS HANDS. and teeter-totfree form mode so you can create your own puzzles and drive your friends ters to shoot The Even More Incredible Machine. Even more incredible than the original. We're talkin' Computer Game Review's \"Puzzle Game of the Year.\" It's our crazy. Just like Kevin did to you. Kevin's crossed that fine line between latest puzzle contraption game for the obsessive-compulsive lurking within you. It starts off innocently enough. Creating genius and insanity. Why not join him? some hoops, pop some balloons, or fill some buckets. Before you know it, you're spending hours shooting goldfish, pushing cats off cliffs, and feeding little men to alligators. Yes, alligators. And as if that's not enough, there's over 70 new puzzles, 11 new tools, and a even more elaborate contraptions by rig. THE INCREDIBLE DIBUCUN ging conveyer belts, bellows, MACHINE Available at retail for IBM / compatibles, Windows, Macintosh. $19.95 updates for registered owners. Call 1-800-757-7707 Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY IM OR ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSCED TO DYNAMIX, INC.  DYNAMIX, INC WINDOWS IS A TRADEMARK OF MICROSOFT CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #93 "


"savings. In that context, Sidran observed, they want:  Entertainment on demand Multi-player interactive games  Shopping and Transactions  Customized Publishing  Multimedia Teleconferencing  Education  Health Care How will all of this take place? TimeWarner's Orlando experiment plans to use fiber optic technology and Silicon Graphics machines (for both the network servers and set-top boxes) to provide multimedia on de media on demand. According to Geoffrey Holmes, viceholmes, Vicepresident of Technology for Time-Warner, the set-top box for Orlando will feature a RISC-based MIPS chip. The model is for the overall architecture to be a \"network to networks.\" Time-Warner expects eventually to connect to Prodigy, America Online, ZiffNet and similar on-line services. They also plan to offer subscribers a chance to hook printers to the set-top box in order to encourage information surfing (using electronic services to find specific bits of information) and downloading. What this means to gamers is that the prospects for multi-network gaming and even PBEM games using the digital highway is significantly improved. Further, one shouldn't have to subscribe to each individual network in order to play the network games of choice. Rather, one could reasonably expect a «pay as you play» pricing tion in existing computer games by observing structure for multi-player games to emerge that they feel like they're designed on a node when networks have a pool of new cable system «How much fun would a playground television users from which to draw. be if a child had to play the slide first, then, the merry-go-round and so forth, but Will There Be Interactive Movies? couldn't ger on the slide if they didn't have In the computer game industry, there is the right thing.\" considerable skepticism about the potential Gale Anne Hurd (producer of Alien Nation, for interactive film. Experienced designers The Abyss, Cast A Deadly Spell, and Terminaand producers insist that film is a narrative tor 2: Judgment Day) followed up Backes and that computer games branch too much discussion with a precautionary word. She to follow the film model. Experienced Ho to follow the film model. Experienced Hollynoted that the success of marketing promowood veterans were not convinced, however. tions tied to major films is creating a signifiFor example, James Cameron (director of cant pressure with regard to ancillary The Terminator, The Abyss and Terminator 2: The Terminator. The products. This means that more and more of Tudement Day) expressed his belief that any Hollywood's attention is concerned with cowriter creates enough of a world and backwriter promotion. She feels that the convergence of story that it should be fairly easy to shift out video/computer games with the film media of a linear mode and introduce possibilities will lead to a loss of narrative storytelling. for rich interactive experiences. He admitted Alluding to a recent release, she caustically that the interactive writer gives up pacing, but remarked, «Let's do a Nintendo game as a still thought it was possible to direct the movie, but without a story.\" experience with appropriate motivation. As for the practicality of publishing interacJohn Badham (director of War Games, tive film/television, Cameron advocated conShort Circuit, Stakeout, and Sneakers) seemed current production berween feature films and to agree. He observed, \"If the writer is willing interactive products. He commented, \"I've to regear thinking, a whole new art form always been frustrated by the stuff I've had to presents itself.\" throw out; interactivity should give us a Michael Backes (Executive Director of the chance to use it.\" Backes' vision may even be American Film Institute and Technical Artmore important in the world of concurrent ist Supervisor on Jurassic Park) addressed the production. He perceives that future imdownside of the potential new art form, howprovements in the digiral creation of sers (and ever. He questioned the validity of interacextras?) may resurrect the so-called BIG movGUESS WHO IS COMING TO DINNER... "


"arises out of nothing. They arise from choices.\" With interactivity being dependent upon choices, it should become an interesting character-oriented medium. He observed that the basic problem with uniting interactivity and storytelling is that ies (epics). The use of digital sets may even further facilitate the production of interactive film products. Suggestions about concurrent production aroused warnings of computer illiteracy among studio executives, though. Badham told a great anecdote where SuperMac had donated a significant amount of equipment to the Sneakers set. In exchange, the company was supposed to be mentioned by name in the script. They decided that a female character would work for Super Mac. When an early cut of the film was being shown in the studio screening room, an executive stopped the film and complained, «This is a reality-based film. She can't work for Superman!\" Hurd was able to identify with that type of illiteracy. On one of her films, she was required to use an archaic piece of budgeting/scheduling software that wouldn't run on her 486. Instead, she had to find a slower machine in order to submit her production reports. In another discussion, screenwriter Michael Halperin (Falcon Crest, Star Trek: The Next Generation, Airwolf) expressed his belief that interactive film could be a viable medium by stating, \"Adults will be interested in interactive entertainment when the choices in the experience are non-trivial.\" He suggested that story is the key to any entertainment product and asserted that characters are what make a story interesting. The interactive medium should be interesting because, «No character question becomes, \"How can the interaction itself have a moral consequence?\" If there is any hope for the interactive story, it will arise when it becomes a narrative tool where we can put meaningful choices in front of the gamer, just as we do in front of the character. One individual in the audience questioned Halperin as to how an interactive product could possibly present the verisimilitude of real life's infinite choices. To which Halperin answered, \"Infinite choice? There is no such thing. Even in life, there is no such thing. Great art is structured. The creator makes choices and channels the audience into cerrain directions to achieve the most psychological impact.\" The Future Of Interactive Entertainment The future of interactive entertainment may be as dismal as Ray Bradbury's vision in Fahrenheit 451 where lonely wives were selected by lottery to choose what would happen in the day's soap opera or as bright as Badham's \"whole new art form.\" The truth is, however, that it will be the creativity injected more than the technology wielded that will signal the revolutionary or devolutionary changes in computer gaming. John Badham interactivity comes out of the computer metaphor (information finding and manipulation), but storytelling comes out of a different tradition (the search for meaning). So, the and the new frontier of interactive entertainment in upcoming issues of Computer Gaming World. CGW The Shadow of in de kasutan sebesar YOU ALSO GET... 30 HOURS ON-LINE FREE! IMPORT THE CHARACTER YOU'VE BUILT AND SET OUT ON YOUR QUEST WITH REAL PEOPLE FROM AROUND THE COUNTRY... Real people. Real time. Real danger. YSER Look What Sierra Brought Home! Take on enemies with a sophisticated combat system, develop a killer QUEST ITE IS Twinion, the long-awaited single-user sequel to Yserbius, and a chance to go on-line for a month and battle other adventurers from around the country. You'll build your character by completing quests, acquiring spells, and gaining experience. Then you can import your character into a multiplayer environment where you can face the Strategy Plus calls The Shadow of challenge alone or form your own Yserbius \"a champion among multiplayband of heroes. er fantasy games.\"And now the champ Buy your weapons, armor and comes home in a deluxe single-player spells at the local tavern. Then sel edition, offering the same intrigue that out in search of the secret buried has already mesmerized over 50,000 deep in the heart of an ancient volon-line players. Sierra's packed cano. But play as though your life Yserbius with two additional features depends on il-or you could wind no other FRP can offer: The Fates of up someone's dinner. Circle Reader Service #94 inventory, or form monstrous friendships with other adventurers. Explore TOUS ennastore Il T 900 sen ll You See Ww or ce a shadowy kingdom and be back in time for dinner. It's all in a day's play. \"You'll be hooked long after you solve the volcano's mysteries.\" --QuestBusters See your local retailer or call: 800.75767707 Page 93 SIERRA "


"224 MILLION SQUARE FEET OF FORESTS SWAMPS, MOUNTAINS, BLACK MAGIC, AND BLOODBATHS. WELCOME TO KRONDOR "


"Betrayal Dnes PHLE G arn STOPNdranko Krondor Hot BM VE ILLIS Betrayal At Krondor is a nine chapter virtual fantasy universe of magic, adventure, and bloodshed. Digitized actors and scenery combine with our famous 3Space technology to create a labyrinth of worlds within worlds. Spend over 100 hours building your skills, ratings, and strengths as you battle bloodthirsty armies at every turn. Betrayal At Krondor\" is based upon best-selling author Raymond E. Feist's Riftwar Legacy, Experience the betrayal. Welcome to Krondor. vnami PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY TM and are trademarks of, or licensed to Dynamixinc. 1993 Dynamix, INOX Available at retail for IBM/compatibles. Or call 1-800-326-6654. Circle Reader Service #95 "


"REVIEW The African Steam MicroProse's Railroad Tycoon Deluxe by Ed Dille station of destination for the robbed train, then there is a 33% chance that the robbers will be caught and a $50,000 reward tendered to the player's railroad. Players will find that the core of the economic model has remained essentially unchanged, though there are some minor tweaks. For example, if the share price of a competing railroad falls below $5 and stays there for too long, there is a chance that the railroad will be dissolved and disappear entirely from the game. Also, for each declared Ape 5 yans of Railroad Tycoon, the vencrable prime mover locomotive in the world. strategy game by Sid \"Civilization\" Among the other inclusions are the 2-COMeier and MicroProse, will be happy CO-2 GG1 (1950), the BO-BO Amtrack to note that the updated version of the game F40PH (1980), the 4-4-0 Class S3 (1890), is more than just a cosmetic facelift of the the 4-6-0 Class P8 (1900), the 4-6-2 4500 original. Although Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Class (1910), and the CO-CO Class 1020 (RTD) does offer VGA graphics in lieu of (1950). EGA, extended sound board support, and Those who favor the strategic elements of some very nice digitized cut screens, these the original will note that the addition of features in and of themselves would not have South American and African scenarios is sigjustified the asking price. Fortunately, RTD nificant, not only because of the stringent also introduces eleven new engines, two new geographical constraints the player will face, continents, and several new nuances to the but because of the types of economies they economic model. represent. The player will discover that Africa In addition to new maps for South Amer and South America produce export econoica, Africa and the entire USA, there are now mies. Normally, cargo is shipped to a factory new historical periods for the original maps: or harbor where it creates new cargo that can two more for the Eastern and Western USA be shipped elsewhere on the existing rail maps, and one for Europe. In total, there are route, finally ending its journey as revenue in another city. In purely export economies, the player will find that the cargoes arriving at AL factories become \"export goods.\" This type of TYCOONI BELLILL cargo has only one destination a port. As such, in South America and Africa, all rail traffic except mail and passengers is a one way proposition. Further, since the continents are so vast, and the groupings of raw materials are so near the center of each land mass, the player will find that the return trip from the bort to the resources tends to be a long unprofitable haul. As such, developing a suc1, developing a sucnow sixteen different scenarios, each of which cessful long term rail ner under these condiis unique because the changes in time period tions is much more difficult than in either the vary the engines and the incomes one can North American or European economies. expect from cargo. Combined, these features The African economy is further compliwill challenge the mastery of experienced tycated by incessant border warfare among the coons and add much more play value to the different political factions. While the nuances original design. of these military operations are not present in in the model, the player is influenced by their The new engine types will be of more interest to railroad purists than to strategic players. presence nonetheless. These \"Brush Wars\" The 2-4-0 John Bull (1830) was notable for are simulated by special cargo shipments of its pulling power and handling of curves. The troops to the stations in the game. If the 4-4-2 de Glehn Atlantic (1890) was used player fails to make a required shipment, the almost exclusively in France, because French destination station is reduced to a depot and conductors were required to study as meall improvements are destroyed, reflecting the chanics first, and this engine required comunchecked raiding of insurgent forces. Playplex expertise to maintain it. The 4-6-4 ers will find that the economy changes with Hudson (1920) was noteworthy for express the tide of war and that they must travel because its maximum speed exceeded respond quickly to these changes 100 mph, though it was limited to a load of to maintain a prosperous line. about 1000 tons. The 4-8-4 Northern (1930) Train Bandits have been inis a critical addition to the game because, included to spice up play in the their day, these engines were the largest and North American scenarios. Robmost powerful straight passenger locomotives bers will attempt to prey on mail ever built. The DO-DO Centennial (1970) cargoes, as was the style of the day. produced a staggering 6,600 hp for a single If the player has a post office in the unit engine, making it the most powerful bankruptcy, the interest required for subsequent bond offerings rises by 1%. As such, after enough bankruptcies, the player will no longer be able to sell any bonds. The manner of making rail car changes has been simplified. Each car placed on the rail line has a base cost of $5,000. After that, the player may shift the types of cars at will and is only charged additional expense when the total number of cars increases. Finally, types and the distances between resources in all of the scenarios have been changed to make the game more closely approximate the realistic hardships faced by the early entrepreneurs of this field. Railroad 7ycoon Deluxe enhances an already classic game in ways that veteran players will appreciate and novice players will adore. It is a strategy game par excellence, one that can be enjoyed even by those not enamored by railroads. This new version only adds to the charm and immense play value of an already charming and playable original. CGW ni luxe TRAILROAD TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Railroad Tycoon Deluxe $59.95 IBM 386-16MH2, VGA graphics Documentation look up Sid Meier with Bruce C. Shelley Microprose Hunt Valley, MD (410)771-1151 ANORINE Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"WALLS OF RG ME STIGE) WARFARE IN CLASSICAL TIMES UPTEUS RETURNURUL Buy Walls of Rome, Strike Squad or Bloodstone and get a Mindcraft game of your choice FREE! Call for details. 5 OPCIOS kejuru Vrou m2-095416666445199614101496066 2EUSEGALA: SRL 44444444444444444aa99494949) A DI 333 The grandeur that was and modify the Rome is yours to defend or conquer in Mindcraft's troops and maps in Walls of Rome. All the siege techniques of classical antiq myriads of ways. uity are in your hands. Scale the walls with ladders, bombard them with boulders or flaming pitch, or undermine them and watch them collapse. V Unpredictable computer strategies make each battle a new challenge. Armies from a multitude of times and places are under Built-in editor lets you create your own armies, battles your command; fortifications of many types in many and maps. settings are yours to besiege or defend. Stunning graphics, stirring music, Play the ready scenarios, separately or in and lifelike digitized sounds. extended campaigns of conquest and defense, or use the editor to combine 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Circle Reader Service #71 Actual IBM VGA screen photos Call To Order 1-800-525-4933  MINDCRAFT GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG "


"REVIEW A Tale Of Two Worlds A Review Of Impressions' When Two Worlds War by Martin E. Cirulis Tenu NODELIRICE ghter II PILOT SOS Land O PR : Endl. EST: EE rt was the best of worlds. It was the worst domly generate a world from the \"Setup playing. No matter how elegant one's reof worlds. Or maybe it was neither, or War\" menu. Though the game appears comsearch and production infrastructure is, if one Lboth. Impressions' When Two Worlds plex initially, novice gamers will be relieved doesn't keep enough MUs around to guard War (W2WW) is a game of space conquest, to find an easy-to-follow tutorial in the techit, forget it. Of course, the opponent has the or \"spaceploitation.\" Unlike most such nical manual and a help mode that identifies same problem. games, however, it does not involve hundreds the function of any screen \"button\" simply by \"The only other things that the player is of planets spread across a huge galaxy far, far pointing at it. required to build are the four basic facilities: away. It brings spacewar up close and perLabs, Power Plants, Mines and Farms. The \"And In This Corner! ...\" sonal, one world versus another, worldo a former three are required to accumulate reworldo. With this tighter focus, one might In W2WW we are presented with two source points for building and research, while expect it to make a leap in tactical detail and worlds locked in a tactical war to the death. worlds locked in a the latter supports MUs in a basic one-to-one strategic options. As it turns out, W2WW is a Units are individual Starfighters, Jers, Transratio. Although farm resources can accumumixed-bag, delivering on some fronts, but ports, Satellites, Tanks and Submarines, and late and be expended later, it is generally a failing on others. each of these general classes can be modified good idea to have at least the same number of This spacewar scenario involves three arefarms as MUs at any given moment. Facilities nas of combat-one's homeworld, space, and can be bombed by enemy units, so it is best the enemy's world. Oddly enough, these to build the first few close to one's initial base three battlefields are all exactly the same size: for a modicum of protection. a 100 by 100 grid of squares. I'm not sure what the scale of these squares is but they As is the current trend in spacewar games, count as one distance unit for purposes of W2WW emphasizes the development of both movement and combat, regardless of \"tech» ratings ranging from 1-10 for MU which arena one is in. To abuse the enemy, attributes. These tech levels are researched by one must travel across this space grid, usually allocating points created by lab facilities, and carrying units that are non-space capable. can be incorporated into new MU designs or Fuel: 100 MISS RS 125 CUILD TJERO even into old designs, allowing one to upThe game can be played in real time or by grade one's current MUs at a fraction of the turns. Turns allow the player the maximum in 10 attributes ranging from Speed to Fireresource price of building new ones. Like amount of control and awareness, but make power to Carrying Capacity, each of which Spaceward HO!, the unit design system prothe game quite slow and somewhat tedious. can be at one of 10 technological levels. These vides graphics for the various base vehicle In real-time mode, the game is more realistic vehicles are referred to, generically, as Militypes and alters them (though far more subtly and enjoyably frantic, but maybe a little too tary Units (MUS). Each MU is built by and and seriously) as one adds higher tech level much so. Even ar its slowest speed things attached to a base that can be constructed by components. Strangely, the options one purs move a bit too fast on a 386733 to take the player on his homeworld. All production on a vehicle only increase its production cost; advantage of some of the combat options and development takes place on which the game offers. Luckily, the program your world, death and mayhem When Two Worlds War mers at Impressions gave us an intermediate only occur in space and on the stage-real-time with a pause button. I found enemy world.) One must keep TITLE: When Two Worlds War WWENTO this to be the most pleasurable mode of play. MUs in mind at all times bePRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: IBM A typical game runs about 2-4 hours and can cause they are the only victory REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz recommended, VGA be saved at any time. graphics, 7MB hard drive space condition that matters in this PROTECTION: None Games can be played against the computer game, and the rule is simple: If DESIGNER: Ed Grabowski PUBLISHER: Impressions or against another player connected by moat the end of a game year a 7 Melrose Drive SITES dem or serial link. Players can choose any two player has no MUs, that's it. Farmington, CT 06032-9812 (203) 676-9002 of seven worlds stored in the library or ranGame Over. Thank you for Air Rarover SONCE FIE Power :50=1 PEN Range:F-100 Tout& T-10 REMOT:T-STEET PODE:NR-100 Transport: EUILD COST: Lob:11 nines ia Paver: nu STATS: To Progue Fion: FNETIK HIES HIPSO Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"LESS (CS5992 Oct 24 13:05 L overcast 112 072 134 4:041 Ruigan Danat 51 9 poral 03 99 OK 3 Ha Tan 03 4taka 51 99 0 BLOODSTONE use notes Taik P955 Draw Reca 11 flagic Camp Forretni Whispere Sheathe porai draus his Short sword Look Quit An Epic Dwarven Tale oct 24 13:35 L Overcast 12307 099 EN: 039 H. Baiat Dana 1 : 81 99 882 Atalcan use Recar notes Talk P955 Draw Look Magic camp Fornatn Uhisper Sheathe Quit PILTE BREWILDEREN HET Giallalla SE896.24 10:50 L EL RETINOM ma La ENCOFUGUEL Danat 51 Halan 43 99 98 Halica 51 99 OR Roco 11 1agic use notes Te Ik PASS Look Forvatn Drau niseer Quit COCINIO 01 ear 1123KY: 962 Torongo Buy Walls of Rome, Strike Squad or Bloodstone and get a Mindcraft game of your choice FREE! Call for details. EN: 007 PURTRIE KFT wana t 51 99 OK 2 Porai 43 99 OK 3Halan 43 99 OK haka 51 99 OK cont G Greetings, adventurer's. Since you are in need of succor, PI have a proposition TEGRA Enlist the Aid of Amazon Barbarians. Explore the Untamed Lands of Targ. Enter Ancient Temples and Towers. Your Choices are Crucial. The Saga's End Depends on You. A tale of magic and treasure, bloodshed and glory! Bloodstone takes you to the earliest days of dwarven history, when the battles between the dwarves of the north and the south threaten the destruction of their awakening civilization! A young dwarf, orphaned in battle, searches for magical treasures to unite the tribes. With hardy companions, against bloodthirsty foes, you guide the epic quest. You make the decisions that shape the end of the dwarven tale! Circle Reader Service #72 MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual IBM VGA screen photos Call 1-800-525-4933 for details. "


"NISSION IDD Used CBE Offence Insrructions: Fire! X HOLD POSITION FREEZE SINIZ x GROUP.General CUT CON LOS they have no other effect. For instance, adding armor to a vehicle doesn't slow it down or limit the number of other advancements one could add. As a result, one ends up with odd things like a fighter with ten transport bays fighting as well as one without any. \"You Talkin' Ta Me?\" The centerpiece of this game is its interface, and, as seems to be the newest trend in computer spacewar (Maelstrom, Star Legions, etc.), part of the fiction is that the player is in command of a state-of-the-art command console. In this case, it is a slick monster known as the Westock-Waadam Warfare Workstation. This interface allows one to dues change theaters of war, and even, in stop/go mode, halt the flow of time, all easily accessed from one view screen and all the pop-up menus a star commander could want. The player can also customize the interface by setting the first five function keys to call up the menus used most often. irrelevant. There are few things more disappointing than creating a string of ornate strategies in your head and then being forced to accept the fact that the old straight and true is the most effective. As I have said, the game looks great, yet there are crude data structures that show through during play, such as annoying limirs in unir numbers and save slors, or the fact that units land on the enemy world in the exact same grid spot as their base EXCALL LORO COURE UNDERD locations. Another sloppy point is that while the enemy world is initially hidden in the precision of direct control but depths of space, giving a starfighter the \"Paone to pre-set the entire mission. The comtrol Enemy World\" mission will lead right to puter merely asks «Where?\" and \"Do what?\" it. This negates the excitement of finding the for a series of way points, and executes the enemy before they find you! series without requiring any further player for all the glitz, there is a curious emptiness involvement. to this game—a lack of personality, if you The third option, and potentially the most will. Many of its potential strengths were left interesting, is the «Programming\" control. unexploited. Space is a virtual blank slate W2WW comes equipped with a simple, iconwhen a real-time game is ideal for a simple based programming language that allows the solar system model and gravity. In a game player to create detailed flight plans, transcalled When Two Worlds War one would ports and attacks. There are a large number think that there would be a few specific sceof pre-programmed routines in the library narios modeled after various Sci-Fi classics such as \"Bomb Mines\" or \"Patrol\" that one that deal with the same sort of conflict. It can simply use as commands or as building would have taken very little effort to loosely blocks for one's own missions. While intrigumodel a scenario on War of the Worlds, or ing, this mode does have its drawbacks. The even Haldeman's The Forever War. worst is probably the lack of an \"If/ Then\" structure, which is extremely frustrating; even a \"Return when fuel low\" icon would have been a big help. A subtler but more important flaw is that the command language system isn't really needed in order to win the game. As far as I have seen from my wars, any game can be won by using the library missions and a little Direct Control. The game simply isn't detailed enough to require a player to carefully program a unique series of moves into his Mus. LAE COST MIRC ODOS FFHAM END I EnceFighter MIGGION Pparrior SPLightning CIGIONE Hold and linin CUILD CCRCDTI HUO IPUEST I GYSTEM STATGES Driven by mouse, this interface is exceptionally clear and easy to use. Impressions has made it simple to be working on a design for a new MU but jump to a late breaking battle scene and still see who won. Even slicker is the fact that W2WW supports voice recognition for anyone having an Aria sound card hidden in the depths of their PC. Lacking the appropriate hardware, I was unable to test this option, but one can imagine that being able to actually bark commands could only enhance the thrill of command. \"Go Right!...NO! MY RIGHT!» Another interesting innovation is the way the game handles the command of individual MUs. They can be given orders in any of three ways. The most familiar is thc \"Direct Control\" method where the player takes operational control of one MU, guides it to its destinations, and executes its mission by pointing and clicking on the map or the unit. Unfortunately, this method, while allowing one to make surgical strikes, also rivets one's attention on a single unit instead of the whole war-one goes from commander-in-chief to tank jockey in one fell swoop. The second method, the \"Q&A Mission,\" is less direct but allows the player a freer hand to deal with other events. This method allows the same \"I Coulda Been A Contender...» But most disappointing of all is that this game, which promises «ENORMOUS REI have been looking forward to this particuPLAY VALUE!\"on the box is just too easy to lar game since I first saw the big glossy ads win against the computer. I have yet to lose a many months ago, and when I finally got my game, even when I choose the wimpiest world copy, I was even more impressed. The pack and the computer plays the strongest at its aging is slick, the manuals are great, and the highest IQ level. The Al is simply not aggreslook and sound scream quality software. And sive or clever enough. yer I find the more I play this strategic simuFortunately most of these flaws fade a bit in lation, the more disappointed I become. W2WW is a study in contradictions. Great two player mode. A few subtler strategies are care has been taken to give the player as many needed to pull a victory out of the vacuum, play options as possible, but when it comes but there is a tendency for two players to fall down to actual play, most of those options are into a very long, drawn out war of attrition where endurance determines the winner more than subtle play. While still an entertaining package, i believe most hard-core wargamers will be disappointed with this of fering. I appreciate a great interface as much as the next player, but I don't believe it should be the centerpiece of a strategic game while game play itself seems an afterthought. W2WW is not a bad game, but if it were a movie it would be a \"BattleStar Galactica\" when it promised a \"Star Wars.\" CGW STATISTICE FOR IRRTH 20 EUR TOOS Forms: dvantage to Clue. hin TechE Range: coder: ALTER PLANCT START Transport: ENO Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"12. 01 3 CIASCHSAL DEGREERIT 67939 STRIKE SQUAD D E PLANET TO PGT. INTERSTELLAR TRAVEL TD 2015 18000 VYRO PRO HDSSKO DEN MEASUVCR-UP TEST-HOK WLANE HALDIR DEX BUYING EQUIPMENT BIAS 0 BEG BA Buy Walls of Rome, Strike Squad or Bloodstone and get a Mindcraft game of your choice FREE! Call for details TWO-PLAYER PLAY EAT FIRE, BUG-EYED SCUM! :35 HSS A 20 :15 @LEAD HELLO HANDSOME THREE RI THE SIDELE BO <BRES DA THE CONSORTIUM OF WORLDS HAS BEEN OVERRUN BY THE VILE INSECTOID K'KISTIKS. BRUTAL OPPRESSION AND MASS SLAVERY NOW RULE WHERE ONCE THERE WAS PEACE AND HAPPINESS. A DISTRESS CALL FROM THE CONSORTIUM HAS REACHED YOU AND YOUR STRIKE SQUAD-A CREW OF SMUGGLERS, BOUNTY-HUNTERS AND RAPSCALLIONS FROM THE BACKWATERS OF THE UNIVERSE. WITH THE RIGHT SHIP, THE RIGHT TOOLS AND WEAPONS, AND FOR THE RIGHT PAY, THERE'S JUST A CHANCE THAT YOUR STRIKE SQUAD CAN HELP. WILL NOBODY STOP THE K KISTIK SLAVEMASTERS? OR WILL YOU? AFT THIRTY MERCENARIES OF NINE RACES TO CHOOSE FROM. -ALL-NEW HIGHLY INTUITIVE GAME INTERFACE. PULSING SOUNDTRACK AND INSANE DIGITIZED SOUNDS. PLAY ALONE OR WITH A FRIEND-OR AN ENEMY. Circle Reader Service #73 2291 105th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Adual IBM VGA screen photos Call To Order 1-800-525-4933 "


"REVIEW Changing The Rules Impressions' Rules of Engagement 2 by Stanley R. Trevena ESREAMI un TARGET P LATINULARES 191 In 1990, Omnitrend released TACDEF   it. Non-functional buttons Breach 2, a tactical sci-fi war AMEM IDSHIELDS REINFORCE DI 21 AUTO EOR THE EN A E01E and panel areas are now Lgame that cast the player as a 112 ICI TACTIC TARG shaded with color gradients leader of a squad of nine marines. JAMI SHADO to distinguish them from the Breach 2 was a decent game in its TOETUSI POSIT solid-colored active compoown right, but it was never meant LAUNCHI TEHDOTIESCAF 290 nents. Buttons have both a to stand alone. With its release 015 1234 EVADE visual push/pop look and an Omnitrend announced an inno PROXIMITY E 10 000 000 H HALT RANGE S 049 997 audible tone to indicate actiMINES, vative gaming idea under the TOTAL 012 LAUNCH \"O NAV BUARD vation. The harsh contrastname IGS, or Interlocking Game TACFIR 545 STATI DATUBJ ing colors of ROEI have System. The idea was to develop a AUTO COR TYPEN E01 D CAPTURE 1 ENEMY SHIPS been replaced with more series of games that would link IN ACQUISITION II 0:0 101 041 186 O NEUTRALIZE 6 ENEMY SHIPS subtle shades that blend in together to form a gaming unian \"eye-gonomically\" pleasverse of unparalleled depth. ing scheme. In 1991, Omnitrend released FLAGSHIP = CHRONO Rules Of Engagement (ROEI) un00:08:28 Planning cum Mission MCLSWD:PEHT1778 177 der the Mindcraft label. In ROEI ........... 100% PIN Focus TIME X 01 A new game is started in the player assumed the role of VIEW Iseererlin? AUTHEW WILL RE T TI the same way as in ROEI. Fleet Commander of a group of starships. It also linked to Breach 2 so that her First a Fleet Commander is Page page document that details the mission buildwhen a ship-to-ship boarding action took n i ng process. Players of ROEI will not take selected or created, and then a campaign is 1 place, the player had the option of leading the long long to acclimate themselves to the interface, chosen. A click of the \"Make\" button and the boarding party into battle in the Breach 2 as many of the original elements have been naming of the game gets things rolling. In system. With this first link made, the IGS transferred to ROE2. ROE1, the player selected a mission and was assigned a fleet with captains already at the system had arrived. The first thing that players of the original ROE will notice is that the Command and helm. A unique part of the ROE system is a Control Systems Interface has been extenpersonality component built into all beings in sively remodeled. Players of ROEI comthe game (FW, UDP, and Alien). Eighteen plained of confusing button layouts, sharp personality traits determine how well a capcontrasting colors, and a rigid mode-specific rain will perform in a given role and how system of control panels. The new system uses he/she/it will interact with others. This elea series of quad-panels (quarter screen winment has been greatly expanded in ROE2. dows) that can be combined and arranged to The player must now go through an extensive the commander's preference. The system alplanning process to set up a mission. lows for the programming of four configuraEach component of a ship has a value in tions that can be recalled at the click of a Resource Points (RP). These RPs are used in button. ROE1 had five main panels: Naviga allocating resources for a mission. Each wayNow, with the new release of Rules of Ention, Communications, Tactical, Data Repoint requires an allocation of RP's, and the vayement 2 (ROE2), Omnitrend (and their trieval and a Save Game panel. In ROE2, frieval and Save Game panel. In ROF player must select and combine ships to make player must select and new publisher, Impressions) have enhanced these five panels have been split into 26 quadmaximum use of these points. There are 50 the ROE system, vastly improving its interpanels depicting specific functions, and two FW ships provided with the game. Some or face, and leaving the possibility for connecfull-screen panels that combine the functions all of them will be available in each individual tion with Breach 2, with a promise of Breach for Navigation and Data mission. With many missions combined to 3 in the near future. Retrieval. This new system is one of the most noticehent 2 Manual Transmission able improvements to the TITLE: Rules of Engagement 2 gaming system and places PRICE: $49.95 Upon opening the box, players will find complete power over the SYSTEM: three manuals. The Fleet Operations Manual REQUIREMENTS: 286-16Mhz, 386-25Mhz with interface under the 2 MB RAM recommended, is a 164-page detailed document with excelplaver's control. VGA graphics, 8 MB hard lent coverage of all game components includdrive space PROTECTION: ing None extensive appendices In addition, the color and a RULES OF DESIGNER: Thomas Carbone, comprehensive index (unlike ROE1). The scheme and presentation ENGAGEMENT Maurice Molyneaux PUBLISHER: have been updated to 256Impressions Software, Inc. Training Manual is a 22-page tutorial and 222 Third Street, Suite 234 strategy guide for beginners, also with an color VGA, and the interCambridge, MA 02142 excellent index. The Builder Manual is a 45 face now has a 3-D feel to REG   SIEM IBM Images Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"FutureVision Expanding Educational Frontiers Through Technology NOW APPEARING! Me future Vision, in order to form a more perfect union with our corporate, institutional reseller and end-user customers do hereby dedicate ourselves to ensuring your right to: 1. Sassle-free serviet II. A Dedicated educational software specialist 111. Che largest selection of Mac, Windows, DOC, and CD-ROM based education software iv. The best price. v. Complete satisfaction with your product and service. VI. Receive your order when you expect it. VII. Be free from automated telephone attendants YOU'VE SEEN'EM IN COMPUTER SHOPPER... YOU'VE SEEN'EM IN PC SOURCES! HERE FOR AN EXTENDED ENGAGEMENT IN COMPUTER GAMING WORLD FutureVision STARRING THE EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANTS WITH A CAST OF THOUSANDS OF BLOCKBUSTER SOFTWARE TITLES! [__Z0 LOCUL ADVENTURE AD&D Unlimited Adventure ....34.00 Alone in the Dark.............35.50 Betrayal at Kronder...............41.50 Cobra Mission ...................48.00 Dark Side of Xeen.... ......41.50 Darklands.. .38.50 Day of the Tentacle ..34.50 Eric the Unready....................36.50 Eye of the Beholder II.............41.50 Flashback...... ...32.50 Kings Quest VI. ......44.50 Lost Tribe... ..27.50 Pirates Gold ..... 41.50 Police Quest IV.................45.50 Prince of Persia 2..............44.50 Protostar ................. .41.50 Quest for Glory IV ................38.50 Ringworld .................. ..35.50 Space Quest V.......... ..38.50 Star Control 2....................34.50 Ultima Underworld ...............46.50 Ultima VII Part 1 or ..............46.50 SIMULATORS Aces Over Europe ............41.50 ATAC... .....33.50 B-17 Flying Fortress.............38.50 Car & Driver..... ......37.50 Commanche: Maxim. Overkill ..43.50 F-15 Strike Eagle 3.............41.50 Iron Helix... ....49.00 Road & Track..... ...36.50 Strike Commander... .....47.00 Syndicate.......... ..47.00 Tornado. ....49.00 Ultrabots .37.00 X-Wing -39.00 WAR GAMES A-Train ............... .33.50 Caesar ..... .35.50 Civilization MPE........ .....47.00 Conquered Kingdoms ..... ......36.00 Empire Deluxe .. ....36.00 High Command......... ..41.00 Populus II...... 38.00 ...32.00 Powermonger......................32.00 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe..........47.00 Rome ............. ....31.00 Seven Cities of Gold II...........36.00 Sim Life... ......... ..39.50 Star Trek 25th ..... -36.00 Stronghold ............... ..39.50 EDUCATION L Alge-Blaster 3.................31.00 Dinosaur Adventure........31.00 Eagle Eye Mystery.............31.00 Fatty Bear's B-day Surprise...31.00 Foreign Language ..... .....CALL Kid Pix ......... ......35.00 Kid Works 2.... ..35.00 Metrognome Music................31.00 Stickybear Preschool ..........31.00 Supersolvers Midnight Rescue 31.00 Talking Spell-it Plus ............31.00 Think Quick ......... ...31.00 Treehouse .. .00 Writer Rabbit ... ......... ...31.00 CD-ROM Jutland.............................52.00 King's Quest VI......... ..49.00 Legend of Kyrandia......... .49.00 Loom... ...34.00 Mantis Experimental Fighter....45.00 Maria is Missing .....................24.00 Mixed up Mother Goose........24.00 Monkey Island I..................27.00 Peter and the Wolf......... ..22.00 Putt Putt Joins the Parade ...39.00 Right College............... ....27.00 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe ...24.00 Seventh Guest............. ..55.00 Shakespear ...... .16.00 Sherlock Holmes.. 44.00 Space Adventure ... ..29.00 Space Quest IV.... Stellat 7............. ..20.00 Ultima Bundle (1-6)...........59.00 Where in the World CSD.........29.00 Willie Beamish.............. .27.00 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.21.00 ENZO BEM W ...19.00 = SPORTS Frontpage Football..............39.00 Hardball 3 ................ ...34.00 Links 386................... ...36.00 Michael Jordon in Flight........38.00 NFL Challenge ......... ...59.00 Tony La Rusa ..... ..36.00 World Circuit ..32.00 ARCADE Beat the House Gaming Tutor ..32.00 Goblins .... -25.00 Hoyle's Classic...... 31.00 Lemmings .........................34.00 Take a Break Pinball ...........30.00 Take a Break Pool................30.00 CD-ROM Animals ... ....24.00 Arthur's Teacher Trouble......36.00 Battle Chess.......................24.00 Buzz Aldrin's Race-Space .....58.00 Dinosaur Adventure .............29.00 Interactive Storytime I............29.00 ALL PRODUCTS SOLD CARAY MANUFACTURER'S FULL WARRANTIES AND DOCUMENTATION! ORDERING SHIPPING PAYMENT  Phone orders accepted M-F from 8:00am 5:00pm PST  Orders received before 2:00PM will be  No surcharge for Visa or MasterCard orders  Fax orders accepted 24 hours a day 7 days a week shipped same day for product in stock .C.O.D. orders welcome with a $5.00 charge  Ask for a catalog of our complete software selections  $5.00 shipping charge por order.  School, government and corporate purchase orders accepted. CALL YOUR PERSONAL EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANT FAX 1-800-995-4669 1.800.995.4661 INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMERS: Voice-408-370-4650 Fax-408-370-9466 Many other titles available. . Prices subject to change without notice. FutureVision : 644 N Santa Cruz Ave. Suite 12. Los Gatos CA 95030 Circle Reader Service #55 "


"SPACECRAFT DESIGN VESETE SKIP TYPE TRANSPOTT HRSTUTI 38 CSECSL BO1009 PRIVE la l HT THA OBSAULLE 35 D LIFE SUP B COMSEN 39.00 PELENE 39 S SKIELDS ZEUS PENETRATOR M1 PART OLOF 10 BESOURCE PO12615 DSS BAHAEC POINTS FOPHISTICATION 43 MASE POIPITE PREV MINES DECOYS commander is killed in a boarding sequence, the flagship surrenders, the flagship is abandoned, or the flagship hyperjumps out of the system. A campaign will end if the player successfully completes it, the enemy fleet runs out of ships, or the FW runs out of ships or caprains. Should any of the above occur, a game will revert to the last saved game position. Audible cues have been added throug ROE2. A female computer voice, A.N.D.I. (Auto Narrative of Damage and Intelligence), has been added to give verbal status messages to the player. She will usually not speak unless specific settings are changed on the ship or the ship gets in trouble. Incoming messages are also acknowledged by A.N.D.I. She does much to create the suspension of disbelief that gamers value so much. Aboul Cetus Amicus * Alatora THE dium difficulty, many IGS links), and Ill Wind (hard difficulty, several IGS links). All but the Basree Cargo are protected with passwords from the mission builder/editor (to prevent peeking). Passwords are awarded to the player upon successful completion of the ZEUS campaign. : Yes, Master! HAILES TYPE s dobo e da Once in a game the player has a Master Control bar running down the center of the make a campaign, ships that are lost in one screen. This bar will allow the player to select mission will be unavailable in future missions. quad panels and change quad panels to varips are assigned to waypoints, ous system-specific functions, and monitor captains must be assigned to the ships. Here, ship status, commander health, mission time the interpersonal dynamics of the character's limit and game speed controls. The major traits must be carefully examined. Since ships system buttons will pull up selection lists for at a specific waypoint are often logical candiNavigation. Communications. Tactical. dates for battle groups, personalities and Data Retrieval. Docking and Repair and command figures must be carefully selected Emergency Systems. This is another interface or missions may fail due to poor crew plancomponent that has been refined. In ROET, ning. Nothing is more disappointing than when a selection list was available, only a few watching as a ship goes its own way during items were visible, and the player had to scroll battle, or a trigger happy captain tries his through the long list three choices at a time. version of negotiation\" in a delicate diploThe system utilizes pop up selection lists that matic situation. are much larger and can display many items From the Mission Deployment Screen, the at once. Some menus are several layers deep, player has access to a scalable system chart, with additional sub-menus for specific selecship information, captain dossiers, profiles of tions. the hostile forces, and a summary of the Battle is depicted exactly as in ROE1. Ships mission briefing. Several refinements to this are represented as small arrow-like icons with screen have been made and several more are alphanumeric designations. Planers, outplanned. As I write, the third update has been posts, and waypoints appear as colored dots released with the fourth only weeks away. with alphanumeric designations. Various Faster methods of scrolling through the ship field types are represented as shaded areas. selection screens have been targeted for fine \"The player will find that the TACFIR (Tactuning. [Note: The updates are uploaded to tical Fire) and TACMAN (Tactical Maneuthe GAMEPUB forum on CompuServe in vers) quads should grace many a battle screen. the Impressions Library (LIB7). Tom Carbone (CIS id 70300,245), both president and Breach Of Fate programmer for Omnitrend, is very active in this area and is always open to suggestions and As mentioned, links to Breach 2 are availproblems from players. Updates are also available to ROE2. If the IGS link option is actiable from Impressions.] vated from the settings screen, and the Breach 2 program is installed in the RULES2 subdirectory, control during a boarding sequence will be handed over to the Breach 2 program. The transition is seamless and takes the player directly into squad level battle. If the IGS option is disabled, the boarding sequence will be handled automatically by the computer. The player will have no interaction in this sequence and can only watch as two gauges show percentage of ship systems controlled by each side. Unfortunately, Breach 2 is showing its age. The graphics are crude by today's The missions included with the game are standards, and many players with newer much like those in the original. Players will sound cards complain of the silence when entering the IGS Breach 2 link. Others comhave to do battle with the hostile UDP forces, plain that often the linked IGS scenarios can capturing outposts, neutralizing enemy ships, take longer than the ROE2 mission itself. I sccuring resources, escorting ships, etc. Some opted to disable this componenr until the missions will require the player to use many arrival of Breach 3. As with the rest of the ships scattered about several waypoints to game, it is entirely up to the player to decide achieve victory. Four campaigns are included how these boarding sequences are resolved. with ROE2: Basree Cargo (very easy tutorial, A mission is complete when all the mission when all the mission no IGS), Doomsday Operation (medium difobjectives have been accomplished. A mission ficulty, one IGS link), Tour of Duty (mewill end if the flagship is destroyed, the fleet 202-1 ALIEN VESSEL SIMULATOR TULIP TYPEDESTROYEE If this were not enough, the mission builder component of ROE2 has been vastly enhanced. Campaigns can now be constructed in a binary win/lose tree that can contain up to 511 nodes. Players are given toral control of almost all aspects of game design; even animated introductory sequences can be created using a program called PC Animate from Pacific Motion, Inc. Gaming systems like IGS can be more of a lifestyle than a game. With other games, you buy them, play them and shelve them. But a few come along that allow the user to generate scenarios, customize gaming elements, and essentially take control. These are the games that usually find a permanent home on a player's system. The open-ended nature of these programs unleash the creativeness of the player. Often the player can derive as much enjoyment out of the building of missions as in the playing, and the rest of his or her gaming comrades reap the benefits of additional game play. If Maxis is known in the industry for their \"Software Toys,\" Omnitrend should be known as the producer of \"Software T boxes.\" Considering the unlimited possibilities of the ROE2 mission building tools and the amount of activity already happening on the bulletin boards, Rules of Engagement 2 could well become could well become the sleeper hit of this year. Next month: Game strategy and mission building tips for Rules of Engagement 2. CGw COMP FESTI NEXT 10 LASTELE Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"Notebook computers are great except when Whether you fly combat, race a car, PABELLEL SAME FORT it comes to playing simulation and action maneuver a tank or wing along at 100 games. That's because they don't come knots, the PGP's software features will equipped with a game port. Introducing the enhance your play action. Use it to Parallel Game Port from Genovation. The PGP program the joystick's keys and customize turns your notebook into a gamebook by them for specific games. This enables you converting the computer's printer port into a to take control of the game. What's more, \"virtual game port\". With PGP, you also get a PGP eliminates the computer speed depengender changer adapter, which lets you dencies of some game ports. And it's easy to connect a joystick, yoke, pedals or even a install, so you can be up and running in minweapon sytems controller to your notebook or utes. Look for the Parallel Game Port in desktop DOS PC. the software section of The PGP is an indisyour nearest computer pensable accessory for STICK IT TO YOUR NOTEBOOK. dealer. Or call us at today's serious gamer. (800) 822-4333. TecOS ROTERODROMU 2017 TTTTTTI S ITIILLLLL OT GENOVATION Genovation, Inc., 17741 Mitchell North Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 833-3355 FAX (714) 833-0322 Sales: (800) 822-4333 Copyright  1993 Genovation, Inc. All product names are trademarks of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #57 "


"REVIEW In Cyberspace, Everyone Can Hear Your Modem Scream A Review Of Tim Wisseman's VGA Planets 3.0 by Martin E. Cirulis The Solar Federation Clooso starship up and doun Arrows scroll througl your ships Conter> to select 17 IRIDER CLASS ontrary to what game designer Sid Meier has said, computer gamers do have friends. Or at least they enjoy reaching out to crush somebody. For the past few years, fans of spaceploitation\" games have had to switch seats at a single computer to enjoy the benefits of social warfare or, recently, they could network with the enjoyable but basic Spaceward Ho! But true Machiavellian, multi-player, clash-of-empires-type mayhem via modem have been absent, save for those on commercial networks like GEnie or CompuServe. Now, though, thanks to the IL 14:40 Planet ( 1727, 2001) I 2012 Cal H4H IL SI HOPI HLY Hrast HI AD HM SH NOCTURNE CLASS DESTROYER batch of player files that reflect the new state of the universe. Then, the whole process begins again. Economic Opportunity The economics are simple but there are more than a few subtleties involved. Money is generated by the taxation of colonists and native populations, and the selling of supplies generated by factories. To live long and prosper, planets usually require the building of mines, factories and defense bases. The number of facilities each world can build is based on population, which increases at a rate that is directly proportional to the tax rate. Each world has a random amount of four minerals, one of which serves as fuel for starships and is correspondingly valuable. The three other minerals are used in the construction of ships, starbases, torpedoes and fighters. The use of transponder codes for planers and ships allows players to communicate with one another, forming alliances or involving themselves in inter-empire trade. Expansion is limited by available mineral wealth, so worlds known to be rich in minerals usually provoke \"border clashes.\" Since a starbase can only produce one new ship a turn, one's fleet growth is directly proportional to the number VGA Planets Fuel: Engine: SERGROND Weapons: DIZZONU Tubos TVIRTI Number of Torpados: Damage: prod MCFR Colonists: Supplies: 2 Tritanum: Location Waypoint. Distance: J Speed: I R 2 SHES CON ETA Molybdanum Friendly Code: Primary Eng Mission P M and ship classes. Colonial worlds may also have their own native races that can affect any colony placed on them according to their general racial class. The game is really meant to be played in conjunction with a bulletin board system of some kind, but there are provisions for single computer and a form of network play. To begin a game, one person must create a new \"universe,\" which is a simple matter of running a special program that allows one to select which races will be available to choose from, and to ser various starting parameters (richness of the homeworld, quality of mincral deposits, etc.). Players can then connect with the main computer to download their \"turn.\" Each turn comes in a small file containing all the data the players will need to make their moves from their own copy of VGA Planets. When finished, players upload their turn files back to the hosting computer. When everybody has uploaded their files or a predetermined time limit has passed, the host runs a program that compiles all the separate turns into a coherent universe, resolves any conflicts and developments resulting from the players' orders, and then creates a new Fuel nendnd: DUET Ship Weiglit: ELLISEST Max Weight: RTRETORIA efforts of a logger-turned-game programmer from California, there is a spaceploitation game that is relatively easy to learn and manage, available as shareware, and comparable to any of the recent entries into this genre. VGA Planets is a game of exploration, development and warfare that takes place against a huge backdrop of 500 worlds and dozens of starship types. A player can take the ns of starship types. A player can take the role of any of 11 distinct races, all bearing a strong resemblance to those that have appeared in popular Sci-Fi books and movies, and cach having their own special abilities TITLE: VGA Planets 3,0 PRICE: $15 (Shareware registration) SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 286+, VGA graphics, modem PROTECTION: Program-based # OF PLAYERS: DESIGNER/PUBLISHER: Tim Wisseman PO Box 204 North Fork, CA 93643 2-11 Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"TECH LEVELS 1 to 1 TORPEDO SIUNCHETS CONSTRUCTION Factories. Mming Supplies. Deteren and Taxos Forbidden Part Minas: 104 Cost: M acdits GM or surpynt Weapon Power Contitie KILL Supplies 1000 Kilofon's colori  e c Factoring: 190 MAX 2 Cost Mingacredit: I on tupply wait anti-ship : a Colorist Taxos Louer Colonist Taxos You How o Dorongo: 100 MAX: 152  Her Pint Tech Lal kan and are supply unit THE LOnccel TerrATIUM DURANIUM MOLYBDENUM: H OE these Soll 1 Supply Unit Build Mino soll 10 Supply Unuts Build Factory Soll 100 Supply Units Build Datense Post Help of these monster facilities one can build and defend. However, the limit is one starbase per 100 only a good idea, but a necessity. It usually takes two or three worlds to supply a starbase with the materials needed to keep producing ships. Starbases are also responsible for paying the upgrade costs of hull, engine, beam and torpedo technologies. involvement except to cheer and groan. Then, damaged ships can limp back to a starbase for repairs. While tactics-oriented gamers may not glean the optimal satisfaction from these sequences, 1 must confess to a guilty pleasure in watching these replays. In fact, it seems something akin to sitting in the stands at a really good demolition derby. Intelligence Report The game has obvious weaknesses. The interface tends to be a little clunky, and there is no Al to automate the opponents for single player use. The compilation and copy protection process can be nerve wracking at times, and mistakes in these processes are not easily forgiven by the program. Yet, these things are minor when one realizes what a great deal Mr. Wisseman is giving the computer gaming public, charging a mere 15 dollars for a registered copy, when much shoddier shareware products are asking store prices ($30-$40) for registration. (Registered versions of VGA Planets give the player easier access to tech Planets give the player easier access to te levels 7-10, which translates into better weapons, engines and more ship hulls from which ons, engines and more ship hulls from which to choose.) More importantly, Mr. Wisseman seems to be constantly striving to improve his product and respond to the suggestions of players, a lesson in consumer relations that is lost on many of the mainline software companies. I War Machine Actual combat is either ship-co-ship or ship-to-planerary/starbase defense and is pretty basic. Like something out of an episode sic. Like something out of an episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation, a nice replay-after-the-fact feature lets one watch two antagonists blaze away at each other while they close to a nose-to-nose position Once ships meer at a location, combat is resolved automatically and players have no played an earlier version of VGA Planets played an earlier version of VGA Planets and many of the shortcomings I perceived in it man were addressed and improved in this latest effort. This is a commendable effort for such a large game. For every rough edge, there are two or three clever touches that show a love for the subject matter that is lacking in many «professional\" products. S o, anyone who enjoys spaceploitation should give the shareware version of VGA Planets 3.0 a try. It can be located in the libraries of an ever growing number of local BBSs, so it is easy to download for playing a game or two with some friends. Of course, someone like Sid who is, at least facetiously, short on that commodity (i.e., friends), can always scan a few BBSs until a message pops up to inform new blood that there is a new game starting up. There is always room for another cosmic Machiavelli. Cow WAN PREMIUM TEMPLATES NEW! FALCON & MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES\" FALCON COMMANDER OR MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES Sa +F3 TEMPLATE ONLY $24.95!! fino al 3H Exciting new utilities for *Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger and the new *MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0\"!! For one low price you get: + FALCCALC 3.0: Superh campaign intelligence gathering tool. ONLY Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed info on every site, ground forces & all flight paths! Printable fuel consumption, Waypoint timing, Strategic/Tactical reports $19.95 and \"Kneeboard sheet\". FalcCalc even tells you the conditions for victory or deleat!! ORA +F3 TR 13 REQUISITION 1.0: Puts you in command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons. EACH! Customize Squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! *Falcon Commander Utles & MG Commander uites are separate packages compat ble with Falcon Operation Fighting Tiger and 16-29. Deadly Adversary of Falcon retectively + 13 MAPPER 5.0: The famous Red Flag Instant Action and HUD Keyboard Commander Corps keyboard templates end \"Keyboard Confusion and let you concentrate customizing utility! Change default theaters for Red Flag and Instant Action. Customize and on winning. Our high-quality, full-color templates turn any AT101 keyboard into a realistic control \"declutter\" HUD. Set default view scale. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve! New graphical map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, cnemy positions and more! SHOW13 2.0: Allows viewing of screen shots from F3's own secret screenER .. . Template capture program!! New interface makes viewing a snap. New conversion feature saves screen shots to popular GIF or PCX formats. Includes instructions for F3's hidden capture commands! HH Any 3+ Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion KCCMENU 1.0: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use default menu and increase one's gaming pleasure. -CGW or customize to user's preferences. Sub-menus can be created and linked to add other sims CINDITETI T CIV and games. Completely unloads itseli from memory while running a menu selection! Falcon 3.0/3.01 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe B-17 Flying Fortress + BORNSTEIN'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut-wrenching, action Tornado MS Flight Simulator 4.0 packed Red Flag missions from the author of the definitive \"Falcon 3: The Official Combat Strike Eagle III X-Wing Jettighter 1&11 Strategy Book. All type missions with complete briefings! Customizable in Falcon's Red Flag! Gunship 20001&1 Mon-Sat Comanche: Max. Overkill F117A Stealth 8:30-6:30 EST To Order Call: DUCOVER VISA Aces of the Pacific Megafortress CHECK SIX!! BERENDE Template Special: 1-$12.95, Any 2$21.50 Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! Falcon 3.0/MIG 29 A.T.P. 1991 protect 309 68 CY Air Combat 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 All other inspiries for Keyboard Commander Corp.4839 SW 148 Ave. 402. Davie, FL 33330 800-262-61/66 akon C are Utilities and Mc Commander Lilities are trademarks of Key Comander Corp rakanna gistered trademark of Spectrum Operation Tighing Tiger WMG Dely A l akon Dan Mademisol Spectrum to the * High-Quality. 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard * Circle Reader Service #64 September 1993 Page 107 "


"REVIEW A Matter Of : 50 Books With Disks From The Waite Group Press by Randall Black underpinnings Prata describes in princ. three neighbors to keep it alive. Still other A science writer for more than a decade, RanOnce restricted to mainframes, rudimenorganism achieve dynamic stability. The simdall Black has written for such publications as Smithsonian Air tary artificial life or A-Life programs now plest dynamic arrangement is the \"spinner Space, Wildlife Conservation, have entered the domain of the newly powor \"blinker,\" a row of three cells. Each genScience Digest, and OMNI. erful home computer. The grandpappy of cration, the two end cells die but by their Tfa picture is worth a thousand words, how A-Life programs was the Game of Life, in presence not only keep the center cell alive vented by Cambridge mathematician John but also give birth to the two cells that flank valuable is a book that's packaged with its Conway in the 1960s. The rules are simple. the three-cell row. This forms a three-cell row Lown software? That's the idea behind The Waite Group's Playhouse series of popular On a two-dimensional grid of squares, a cell perpendicular to the original. The spinner is surrounded by eight squares. If two or three gets its name from the illusion of rotation science books, each of which comes with a 5.25-inch floppy disk sealed inside the back of those neighboring squares contain other produced as it flips back and forth from three horizontal cells to three vertical cells. cover. The Playhouse series is billed by pub. The spinner is but one of a family of dylisher Michael Waite as part of an effort to namically stable cell colonies possible in Coneventually develop \"technology that will reway's Life, some of them huge pulsating place the book.» Whether or not one agrees escapees from a kaleidoscope that take several with Waite's assertion that books are going to stages to return to their original configuration \"go the way of the buggy whip,\" an examinabefore repeating. Even more fascinating are tion of two of the Playhouse books is a strong \"gliders,\" dynamically stable collections of reminder that, however ideas get transmitted cells that appear to swim across the grid like in the future, we will still need good writers. amoebas in a two-dimensional pond. Even Stephen Prata, author of the Artificial Life Life goes on. more surprising, gliders can be emitted by Playhouse: Evolution at Your Fingertips, serves stable arrangements of cells known as «guns.\" up a rich banquet of heady ideas, painstakcells, the cell will survive until the next geningly laid out and followed by a dessert of All these forms are among a menagerie of eration. Cells with fewer than two neighbors crearures based on the two simple rules of eight computer programs, including two exwill die of loneliness; those with more than cellent versions of John Conway's classic Conway's Life. They are an example of three will die of overcrowding. An empty game, Life. However, if Prata's work can be \"emergent behavior, complex and unexsquare will come to life in the next generation considered an expertly prepared seven-course only if it has exactly three neighbors. That's pected phenomena growing our of a simple only if it has exactly three neighbors. That's mcal, the second book, Nanotechnology PlaySet of rules. Prata notes that emergent behavit. house: Building Machines from Atoms by ior \"makes many A-Life projects seem like However, as Prata explains, from these simChristopher Lampton, counts as little more creating characters for a play, then letting the ple rules, complex and unexpected patterns than an intellectual hors d'oeuvre. As we will characters develop the plot.\" sce, even the ingredients for this light weight emerge depending on the number and posi Artificial Life Playhouse comes with two tion of cells that form the initial population fare turn out to be of questionable origin, and versions of Conway's Life, each with its own any trip back to the kitchen would be not to when the program begins. Some clusters of strengths. Green Life takes Conway's original cells will simply die out while others prolifercongratulate the chef, but to check the date to new heights, furnishing the computerized ate like, well, life. Some «organisms\" attain on the can. critters with a huge wrap-around matrix in stability, such as the simple square of four Prata's work shows that the book-with-disk cells that remains static because each cell has which to frolic, and color coding the age of concept really can work by taking advantage of the synergism of two powerful educational media. An Artificial Life Playhouse Nanotechnology Playhouse excellent writer, Prara gives us a well-researched book that meARTIFICIAL LIFE TITLES: Artificial Life Playhouse, Nanotechnology Playhouse thodically introduces simple conPRICE: $23.95 each NANOTECHNOLOGY PLAYHOUSE SYSTEM: PLAYHOUSE cepts and then builds them into REQUIREMENTS: Artificial Life Playhouse: 1.5 MB hard drive space, 5.25\" complex ideas, drawing on the floppy drive, EGA, VGA or SVGA graphics, Windows 3.0 or later (required only for LIFE 3000), 5.25\" disks can be theories of numerous well-reexchanged for 3.5\" spected scientists. Although the Nanotechnology Playhouse: 3 MB hard drive space, 5.25\" floppy drive, VGA graphics, supports Sound Blaster book could stand alone, it is enAUTHORS: Artificial Life: Stephen Prata, hanced by the bundled shareware Nanotechnology: Christopher Lampton PUBLISHER: Waite Group Press and freeware artificial life proCorte Madera, CA grams that give the reader a hands(800) 368-9369 on appreciation of the theoretical IBM BUCHACHINED FROM TONS Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"We Will Beat ANY Nationally Advertised Price*. We have more titles not listed. Call for the best prices. .............. D BIT WIT SOFTWARE .......................... Hours: 9 am to 9 pm Central Standard Time A Train ........ A Train Construction Set.............. A10 Tank Killer 1.5....... Aces of the Pacific...... Aces of the Pacific: Disk 1 & 2..... Alone in the Dark. Ashes of Empire. Batman Returns. Battlechess 4000.. Battles of Destiny.. Betrayal of Krondor..... Buck Roger's: Countdown to Doomsday ............... Buck Roger's 2: Matrix Cubed. Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space. Caesar .......... Castles 2: Siege & Conquest Civilization .... Comanche Maximum Overkill. Conquered Kingdoms...... Conquest of Japan ...... Conquests of Longbow....... Creepers ............ Dagger of Amon Ra........... Darklands .......... Daughter of Serpents... Discovery: In the Steps of Columbus Dune 2.. Eco-Quest 2: Lost Secrets of Rainforest.... ... Elvira 2: Jaws of Cerberus ........ Empire Deluxe .......... .............................. Eric the Unready...... F15 Strike Eagle 3...... F15 Strike Eagle 3: Limited Edition ... Falcon 3.0... Floor 13.... Front Page Sports Football. Gateway.... Global Conquest.......... Gobliiins .... Great Naval Battles... Great Naval Battles: Disk 1-3 Hardball 3........ Hardball 3: Disk 1 ....... Harrier Assault .... Hong Kong Majong Pro. Humans, The Powermonger ......... Quest for Glory 3: Wages of War. Rampart..... Realms........... Red Baron... Rex Nebular Kingworld Rollerblade Racer.. ............. Rome: Pathway to Power ... Second Front. Secrets of Monkey Island 2 Shadow President ......... Siege ......... Siege: Dogs of War ..... Sierra Award Winners 3Pk. Sierra Family Fun 3pk. SimCity. SimEarth ............... Simlife .............. SpaceQuest 4: Roger Wilco..... Space Quest 5: Next Mutation... Spaceward Ho.............. Specter .......... Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Star Control 2. Star Legions..... Star Trek: 25th Anniversary ..... Strip Poker 3...... Strip Poker 3: Disk 1-5............... Stunt Island...... Summoning, The......... Take A Break: Crosswords. Task Force 1942... Tegel's Mercenaries Terminator 2029. Theater of War. Tony LaRussa's Ult. Value 5 pk..... Trump Castle 3 Ultima 5: Warriors of Destiny ..... Ultima 6: False Prophet ....... Ultima 7: Black Gate........... Ultima 7 Part 2: Serpent Isle... Ultima Underworld: Stygian Abyss... Ultima Underworld 2: Labyrinth of World.......... Utopia V for Victory: Utah Beach. V for Victory 2: Velkiye Luki. V for Victory 3: Winter Garden.. Valhalla.... Veil of Darkness... Western Front.... Wilson Pro Staff Golf.... Wing Commander Deluxe Wing Commander 2 Wizardry 6: Bane of the Cosmic Forge..... Wizardry 7: Crusader's of the Dark Sevant.. Wizardry Trilogy: 1-3........... World Circuit ............ X Wing ........... P.O. Box 115023-343 . Carrollton, Texas 75011 Inca. 800/259-2453 Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis Jack Nicholas Signature Golf..... King's Quest 5: Absence ........ King's Quest 6: Heir Today..... Laser Squad ............. Leather Godesses of Phobos 2. Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Valor. Lemmings Lemmings 2: Tribes ....... Line in the Sand........... Links 386 Pro ...... Links 386 Pro: Disk 1-3.... Lord of the Rings 2: Dark Towers. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Lucas Arts Classic Adv. 4 pk Maelstrom Magic Candle 3. Mega Lo Mania ........... Megafortress Mega Pack...... MiG 29 Fulcrum ........... Might & Magic 4: Clouds of Xeen ............ Monopoly Deluxe.......... New York Times Crossword Puzzles NFL Football......... No Greater Glory Out of this world. Pacific War. Patriot Perfect General.. Perfect General: DDI. Police Quest 3: Kindred............ Populous 2...... Power Game Software 5pk. Joysticks & Game Cards CH Game Card III...... CH Flight Stick.... CH Mach III...... CH Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke............ Quick Shot Game Kit .......... Suncom G-Force Flight Yoke... Thrust Master Joystick... Thrust Master Weapons Control Thrust Master Pro Joystick.. ......... SAW Fax 214/306-9603 $ 126 Sound Cards & Speakers Gravis Ultra Sound..... Koss HD/1 Speakers.............. Koss HD/4 Speakers.... ... Media Vision Thunder Board W/F15............ Media Vision Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Bit Sound Blaster Sound Blaster Pro 8 Bit Sound Blaster Pro 16 Bit Sound Blaster Pro Basic 8 Bit .... 184 220 154 Most items shipped same day. UPS add $4 per order  2 Day Air add $6 per order Policies: All sales final. Check compatibility before you buy. We accept Visa/MC, money orders, personal checks (please allow 2 weeks for check to clear). Detectives replaced with same product. Price, availability & shipping times subject to change. Texas residents add 8.25% sales tax. Does not include closeouts, liquidations, or limited quantities. Circle Reader Service #38 "


"result in the seemingly purposeful design of living things. Drawing on Richard Dawkins' book The Blind Watchmaker, Prata confronts the old saying that, given enough time, a roomful of monkeys with typewriters could omful of monkeys with typewriters could duplicate all of Shakespeare's works. In principle it's true. But Prata points out that, using each cell, from yellow, newly born cells to old, stable green ones. Fast on even a mid-range computer. the program gives those of us who once played Lifeon graph paper an experience akin to playing war games with a mouse instead of dice and a hex map. The visual impact can be mesmerizing, and I have heard of at least one poor chap who has become addicted to Life in the fast lane. The Playhouse also comes equipped with Life 3000, which runs only on Windows and allows the player to change drastically the rules of Conway's Life. Instead of requiring three neighbors to initiate cell birth, Life 3000 will give life to cells with as few as no neighbors or as many as eight. Likewise, the rules for cell death from \"loneliness\" can be modified, creating interesting new universes where life flourishes with robust fecundity or hovers constantly on the edge of extinction. A pretty but slow program called Cyclic Space demonstrates how a random collection of cells that \"ear\" their neighbors, changing prey's color to their own, produces emergent behavior with several discinct stages. Interestingly, the kinds of calculations the program uses lend themselves to \"massively parallel» processing. However, using a 386, my impatience soon overcame my desire to watch the process more than once. Two more programs elucidate the concept of \"cumulative selection,\" which addresses the mystery of how random mutations can speech.... The same computer that would take six quadrillion years to match the target string might take only 124 generations and 0.2 second to reach the target with this method method!» The program WORDEVOL does essentially that, prompting the user for a string of text and then employing cumulative evolution to reproduce it (also calculating how long it would have taken using a simian typing pool). BIOMURPHS is a graphic analog of the same process, generating stick figure mutants and prompting the user to choose one that most closely approximates the desired species.\" Interesting teaching tools, these two programs grow stale rather quickly once they have served to make their point. MicroAnts provides a very rough version of the type of mutation and selection by competition found in Maxis' SimLife but with nothing like the detail, complexity and ease of interface. If MicroAnts has an advantage it is a short learning curve and excellent documentation by Prata. Another program, Gene, shows the interaction of plant and animal populations, including genetic mutations that control animal movements. Unfortunately, controlling parameters involves a clumsy interface requiring the creation of ASCII text files. Anyone who likes these programs is going to love SimLife. Pattern emerges in Cyclic Space. a computer to generate 8,000 random speeches per second, it would take six quadrillion years to create the short fragment, «Some are born great.\" \"Now add cumulative selection to the process.\" writes Prata. \"One way to do this is to start with a random speech and generate 20 offspring, each slightly mutated from the original. Then, apply selection by choosing the one offspring closest to the desired ACCESS Soft A COURSE FOR YO LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS LINKS 1). BOUNTIFUL HYATT NORTH BARTONOREX ? ALL Firestone Akron, Ohio Troon Scottsdale, AZ ACCESS Bountiful Bountiful, UT JACCESS Dorado Beach Puerto Rico Barton Creek Austin, Texas Bayhill Orlando, FI Circle Reader Service #31 "


"dirt. The workers end up complaining about already having too much \"nanostuff\" and one hard hat says, \"My wife told me that if I bring home another bowling ball, she's going to clobber me with it.\" One can only wonder how human workers are paid or why they are even needed in this utopian nanofuture. 1954 Bottom line: Prata has done his homework and readers of his book are getting the latest on the exciting field of artificial life. Nanotechnology Playhouse: Building Machines from Atoms by Christopher Lampton could have been just as good as Prata's work if the author had spent more time researching the topic. Instead, the book is little more than an uncritical compilation of the far-fetched ideas of a single dreamer, Eric Drexler, head of the Foresight Institute in Palo Alto. Drexler also authored the book's foreword and served as a technical reviewer. If we are to believe Drexler's vision, nanomachines will do everything from curing aging to removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to solving the problem of world hunger. The basic line of thinking throughout the book is that machines that are really small can perform feats that are impossible for regular-sized machines. One is reminded of 1930's science fiction in which, not microscopic, but giganric machines solve all of mankind's problems. Each chapter of Lampton's book is introduced and concluded with a few paragraphs of what qualifies as bad science fiction. In one scenario, workmen wonder what to do with a pile of surplus dirt and end up feeding it to nanomachines that can take the dirt's atoms and rearrange them into everything from groceries to bowling balls. The bulldozer operator says he could use a new set of golf clubs and moments later they are created from the The single bundled program is simply a tedious menu of graphics, the most ambitious of which is a Rube Goldberg device constructed of atom-handling gears, belts and a «universal assembler,\" a doohickey that looks like a flexible microscope eyepiece. These nanomachines apparently bond chemically with atoms and then effortlessly relinquish their grip-how we are not told. The net effect is a sound and picture equivalent of hand waving. Near the end of the book, in a section titled \"Is Nanotechnology Possible,» we are finally introduced to some skeptics. We learn that an engineer at the Hewlett-Packard Company has been quoted in Science magazine as calling Drexler a \"flake.\" However, we also learn that Drexler has written a book, \"nearly inaccessible\" to the lay reader, that explains nanotechnology \"in stupefying technical detail.\" Then Lampton writes, «Whether (the book] will be criticized, and how effective that criticism will be, was unknown at the time of this writing. More's the pity because scientists at a number of institutions have made real if less sensational advances by actually creating microscopic gears, axles and even batteries. A book detailing these accomplishments and engaging in level-headed speculation about their future would have been vastly more entertaining and certainly more believable. Nanotechnology Playhouse's Multimedia Demonstration Nanomachines are self-replicating (.c. von Neuman machines), capable of sensing their environment through diffusion,\" and artificially intelligent: engineering feats that have eluded designers at the macro scale. Glaring technical questions simply go unanswered. What do they use for energy? Perhaps nuclear bat do they use for energy? Perhaps nuclear fusion is another engineering problem that's much simpler to solve at the microscopic level. C6W re brings you UR É VERY MOOD! LINKS ami uns COURSES 'If you feel like playing 18 holes on Hawaii's Mauna Kea course on Monday and Arizona's desert spectacle Troon North that night and Akron, Ohio's Firestone course on Tuesday morning, save your airfare and just pull out your LINKS Championship Courses! ACCESS Software has beautifully digitized versions of some of the world's finest golf courses so you can play them on your computer anytime of the day or night! LINKS Golf PINETOIST MAUNA KEA Bewaff Springs a . LINKS Championship Courses are completely compatible with our original LINKS-The Challenge of Goll, the new LINKS 386 Pro, and Microsoft Golf for Windows! ANG CORSE COURSE COURSE CAMBO Mauna Kea Hawaii ACCESS MA Banff Springs Alberta, Canada more , Pinehurst Pinehurst, NC SOFTWARE INCORPORATED 4910 W, Amelia Earhart Dr., SLC, UT 84116 (801)359-2900, (800) 800-4880, FAX (801)596-9128 "


"Letters from Paradise ESPANA Dead Pun Expression I'd just like to say that the slight reduction in puns in the last few issues is long overdue. It isn't enough, though! The pun should be used like a rapier, a quick slashing of wit. By loading every article and every paragraph within that article with some stupid attempt at a pun, you cause not only indigestion, but major distractions from the subject material. I've got a lot of mean things to say about the puns, but I'll reserve them for later (assuming they don't stop). But I have to think the only reason for the massive pun overload is that your writers (or editors) are so arrogant that they assume they are more humorous than every stand-up comedian in the United States. I say this because the sheer number of puns in some issues is greater than that put out by all of those comedians combined. Stick to something you are successful at, reviewing computer games, and leave the comedy to HBO and VH-1! Tim Hunnicutt, Dayton, OH We have alerted the false analogy police and want to set the record straight on the use of puns. Prons are not as useful for stand-up comedians because they are as much visual as aural. CGW's editors use them for two reasons. First, because we love to play with, abuse and misconstrue words all of the time. It is an amusing recreation for those of us who have to handle words all day long. By including puns in the magazine, we are simply following the example of the famous mystery writer, the late John D. MacDonald. He said, \"My purpose is to entertain myself first and other people second.\" Admittedly, we are talking about two very different types of writing, but we think the principle holds ihat when we enjoy what we're doing, it is shared by others. Second, we use puns rather than the type of humor used in stand-up and broadcast media because they are both visual and short. They don't take up much space and they allow us to break up the text or attempt to get our readers' attention with a quick verbal gambit. As one of the great modern novelists, the late Walker Percy, is reputed to have said, \"A good title should be like a good metaphor: It should intrigue without being too baffling or too obvious.» enough room denotes one of two things: 1) I suppose your complaint indicates that we don't poor planning on your part or 2) a deceptive succeed as often as we'd like, but we do try to use practice on your part to sell more issues. You the puns in subheads and titles as a tease rather must have a low opinion of your readers' than a club. intelligence. Before we rest our case, we would like to appeal Marc Baime to the poet, Alexander Pope: Tampa, FL \"A perfect judge will read each work of wit. In general, the editorial staff reaches the floor With the same spirit that its author writ.\" of the Consumer Electronics Show when the The Genesis Of A Thought bulk of the magazine has already reached the printer. We leave a few pages blank in order to And God made Computer Gaming World cover the hottest trends that we see at the show and it was good. and try to do a rundown on at least one style of Paul Martin game. These pages are filled at the usual proofing Bronx, NY Time. Our printer would choke if we left 10+ Yeah, but did He have to make us work so pages blank until the proofing period. Actually, bard in order to get it to the printer each issue? we thought our readers were intelligent enough We're waiting for the seventh day when the to understand that we worked extra hard to editors get to rest. insert several pages of late-breaking news into the magazine rather than waiting until we could Airline Fracture leisurely publish it all a month later. We have lam writing to inform you of a mistake in adjusted our production schedule in order to try your magazine, albeit a small mistake. On to provide more timely reviews in the future, but page 76 of your August, 1993 issue, in an this has nothing to do with scheduled shows article about IFT-Pro, you refer to Airline which operate independently of our production Transport Pilot, by Sublogic, as Air Transport schedule. We are likely to continue to be conPilot. I wanted to let you know that this is fronted with the choice of holding material or incorrect. The correct name is Airline Transprinting a portion of a report. Our current editorial philosophy is to get the news out as soon Ennis Parker as we can. We think that serves our readers best. Atlanta, GA Uncivilized Response Would you believe it was deleted by line item veto? How about that the editor responsible for Is there anything to these rumors of a Civifact checking the title failed his sobriety test? lization update/add-on/expansion? Maybe we grounded the correct title under an Jim Doublas obscure FCC regulation. Yeah, that's the ticket. Jacksonville, FL First Class, in fact. Sid Meier is working diligently on CPU Bach The Magic Word for the 3DO machine. After that, he plans to finish Sid Meier's Civil War. That means it Uh, uh, uh, editor! will be the middle of next year at the earliest You didn't say the magic word! before we could see a new Civilization product. Dennis Nedry Industry, CA Modeming Target Paiktography? Actually, Dennis, we don't I subscribe to CGW and I read the article know exactly what you mean, but it sure gave us on the Empire Deluxe tournament. I'm the a chuckle around the office. one who wrote the note you quoted from after my loss in the first round of the tourney. We Have A Plan It appears on page 109 (August), second to I think you should plan your magazine so the last paragraph. The guy with the best you can do the whole CES rundown in a excuse for losing a game. Yea, well guess what? single issue. The idea that there simply isn't Everybody and his brother wants to play me Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"CORTADDER The release of Strike Commander marks o the completion of two years of intense e software development. Using our RealSpace graphics system the 19 industry's most advanced technology — ORIGIN-has created a flight simulator of uncompromising quality and realism, interwoven with a gripping cinematic story. We could write a book describing each feature, documenting the attention to detail and defining thenmonumental effort this game represents. But since a picture is worth a thou( 1, undercarriage sand words... enough said. Playtester's Guide Now Available! ToOoO Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #79 1992 ORKEIN Systems, Ing. Strike Commander and ReaSpace are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. ORIGIN and We crede worlds ore logistered trade narks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a rebistered traderpark of Electronk Arts "


"by modem. Oh, it doesn't matter what the surprised by the attack and can put themgame is, they figure it's a cinch to beat me. selves at maximum supply, as well as move, Thanks for the national attention on the first turn. This makes it almost imposBenjamin Duval sible to duplicate the historical start of the Largo, FL battle. The game has a solid basic system, Gee, Ben. If you'll send in your picture, we'll good graphics and a few bugs, but as a compublish it with a nice overlay of concentric petitive game or simulation of Operation circles. It would apparently serve the same pur Market Garden, it is lacking. Roger Miller pose. Rancho Cordova, CA Market Hardened Thanks for the additional information. Your I feel the review of Three-Sixty's V for observations certainly underscore how differVictory: Operation Market Garden (CW ently a game system can be perceived when the #109, p. 112) was somewhat lacking. The opponent uses \"real\" intelligence to exploit the game does have the look and feel of a waropportunities allowed rather than \"artificial\" game and I wish it had been evaluated as one. intelligence to muddle through the game. The We have tried to play it with two human reviewer correctly noted that German units conplayers a number of times and found it very trolled by the computer opponent have a tenunbalanced and ahistorical. The German dency to be spineless, even without the limitation player can slow 30 corps to a virtual standstill on movement. and wipe out the British airborne units at his Squad Breeder? leisure. It is not a \"bridge too far\" but many bridges too far. The limited intelligence is not More reviews of wargames, please. Is there limited enough. especially for the German a Squad Leader(Avalon Hillboardgame) type view of Allied units behind Allied lines. The computer game out there anywhere? German units move rapidly around the board Doug Webb in strategic movement, allowing reinforceKnoxville, TN ments to arrive at critical terrain earlier than Right now, the closest thing to Squad Leader historical. Poor roads, weak supply, Allied air is an out-of-print game called Computer Ampower, a fractured command system and unbush (Apple II, SSI) and the on-line game, certainty about Allied units and intentions Sniper! (CompuServe). The good news is that made German movement much slower than Avalon Hill has recently signed Atomic Games portrayed in this game. The Germans are not (developers of the V for Victory series for ThreeSixty Pacific) to design and program a computer version of Squad Leader. Graphic Glut Graphics, graphics, graphics and more graphics. I hate graphics. Why can't games go back to EGA or just okay VGA and not spend half of the production time on graphics. I want good wargames and strategy games. I don't want to play a bunch of graphics. Kevan Antley Houston, TX When games with great graphics sell, software publishers assume that gamers want great graphics. When games with lousy or non-existent graphics don t sell, publishers assume that gamers won i buy them. Computer game series that don't have improved graphics see declining sales with each new release. Further, wholesalers and retail buyers don't usually spend much time with the games, and they largely base buying decisions on their impressions of CES demos. So, there are two big factors pushing publishers to create better graphics. That's why it is doubly important to vote with our dollars and support great game play, whenever we find it, regardless of the graphics. Many of the favorite games of the editors (Battles of Napoleon, Federation II, Legends of Future Past, Pacific War, and Star Saga, to name a few) either have no graphics or sub-standard ones. CGW The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant 67%8+ HENNANT US INQUIRER US INQUIRER US INQUIRER GRANDMOTHER GIVES BIRTH TO EGGPLANT SHAPED UKE RICHARD NIXON TALKING DOG REPLACES OPRAH! US INQUIRER MAN TRANSPLANTS OWN KIDNEY!! ELVIS ALIVE! BAE VANNA SECRETLY MARRIED TO PEE WEE HERMAN LIVING WITH OTZE NELSON GARDENING LINVOLVEMENT DONOHE WORRIED MICHEL JACKSON TO WED HIMSELF. AESE US INQUIRER UFO'S LAND IN VENICE BEACH, CA. I NO ONE NOTICES! ANCIENT/ US INQUIRER REMOTE TRIBE WORSHIPS !! LAVA LAMP!! T COMPANY ROYALTIES BE JIM BULER SUS PTLL CWB ALIENS OPEN NEW CUSINE RESTAURANT ANAGING EDITOR A STORY ABOUT A SOFTWARE COMPANY THAT SHIPS BUG-FREE PROGRAMS ON TIME, WITH TOLLFREE SUPPORT, AND FREE UPGRADES? NAAAH TOO WEIRD.\" Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"SPOILS OF WAR RAGNAROK R.A.W. TQ Spals goes Direct for Recession Proof Pricing and AVAILABILITY! FH ERAN for Colonize and conquer far away lands. You will have to fight long and hard to achieve victory! Naval and Land battles, R and D, tactical option, colonists. AT+ / 1 Meg RAM/ EGA / VGA / Adlib/ HD req'd. War / Management $59.95 $34.95. Includes FREE Map Editor for Extended Gameplay!! ACTION STATIONS! BUY FROM RAW ENTERTAINMENT Satisfaction Guaranteed! Toin the final great J Viking quest to aid the Gods in their final battle Ragnarok!! 200 races, multiple quests with no predetermined storyline, 100's of items. XT+ / 640K/VGA/ Adlib / HD Required. Roleplaying $59.95 $34.95 FIRETEAM 2200 Includes FREE Construction Kit (PC Only) !! Available PC and Amiga (1 Meg) ACTION, STATION 1992-2045 RAW PAGES Guarantee: Return your purchase within 30 days of invoice date, with reason for return and with the product(s) in a resalable condition and we will refund your money INCLUDING the shipping and handling charge for That title! WE WANT YOU TO BE COMPLETELY SATISFIED!! * Refunds only on titles purchased directly from RAW and with enclosure of original invoice. EXTE RA he Naval Surface Combat Tactical Simulator. 1 Covers 1922 1945. 30 scenarios, build and generate scenarios, 180+ ship classes, superb Al and historical accuracy, 160 page manual. XT+ / CGA / 640K / HD recommended. L i-tech combat on distant worlds! Command Il your Fireteam of up to 16 units. 30+ Combat Units, 25 Weapons Systems, Battle Computer, 20 scenarios, modem play between PC and Amiga versions. XT+ / 640K /EGA / Adlib / Modem/ HD required. Wargame $4995 $29.95 Includes Free Construction Kit (PC Only) !! Wargame $49.95 $29.95 Also Available: Terms: Shipping and Handling $3.50 U.S. ($5 Canada) for first title, $1.50 ($2.00 Canada) (All 640K / EGA PC and 1 Meg Amiga.) for each additional title ordered at the same time. Goods sent Priority mail (Airmail Canada). Worlds At War Science Fiction, Wargame S40-95 $29.95 Credit Card Sales: (MC/VISA). Call: 1 800 323 7878 (24 hours). Telephone Orders: Action Stations Scenario / Utility Disk(s) $21.95 $14.95 Colorado residents add sales tax. Checks / Money Orders: State machine I disk size I formar. (Amiga 1 Meg Only) Napoleon 1. Wargame $40.95 $29.95 Also daytime and / or evening phone number. Make check out to RAW Entertainment Inc. 64 Page 8 1/2\" x 11\" Ragnarok Strategy Guide SH95 $9.95 Mail Order_order:Texas residents add sales tax. Goods usually shipped within 3 business days. Bravo Romeo Delta Global Nuclear Wargame $40.95 $29.95 R.A.W. Entertainment Inc.957 NASA Road One Suite 146. Houston Texas. 77058 3098 (713) 286 2 386  R.A.W. Entertainment, Inc. All Prices Relate to Advertised Titles Only Circle Reader Service #89 "


"SOFT KARAOKE FOR WINDOWS KASPAROV'S GAMBIT SOFL Cher COMPUTER Express Turns your PC into a full-fledged home karaoke machine. KARAOKE Lyri Lyrics light up to the right beat right on your monitor. Countless hours of fun for music lovers and professionals Includes five legal ly licensed top Billboard hits Hundreds of other licensed hits avail able separately. Guaranteed to run on Windows 3.1 with your sound board. Compatible with all professional MIDI devices. Plays all standard MIDI files. Access over 128 instruments. Send your registration card and receive 10 FREE extra songs plus a chance to win a FREE microphone! Publisher: TUNE 1000 The World's Chess KASPAROVS Champion, Garry 1 Kasparov, octs as both your personal coach ond your toughest opponent in computer chess Multiple skill levels and opponents. Kosporov will help to improve your chess game with a real-time coaching feature. Actual digitized video and speech of Garry Kasparov will come online in realtime to comment on your moves and the game and suggest alternative strategies. Photorealistic chess boards and Super VGA graphics round out what represents the next generation in computer chess. Library of over 500 famous games. Publisher: Electronic Arts 800-228-7449 EXT. $32 $38 G-FORCE FLIGHT YOKE DUNE CD THE HUMANS CD KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES As the cunning sol dier Paul Atreides you must seize this opportunity to drive your long standing nemesis, the Baron Harkonnen, from Dune. To succeed in your quest, you must prove to the flerce notive war riors who slave for the Harkonnens that you are the great leader foreseen in their prophe cies. Features 256 color VGA Movie like CD quality soundtrack, including professional actors' voices! Humans must learn to cooperate throughout all 160 levels. They can do this by using and shoring tools that are discovered along the way Also, they must learn how to be stacked upon each other's shoulders to get up to heights they cannot reach Cooperation is the key in this world of dinosaurs and enemy tribes. Features oight original sound trocks, colorful animations and three levels of difficulty. Improve your flight sim Vlator's performance High quality. Full color keyboard overlays for Right simulators will   rd into a 3D locking con telpanel Printed on heavy duty, laminated stock and includes al key commands in a log leal layout. Available far FALCON 3.0, FAL CON 3.OMG 29, STRIKE COMMANDER, ATP, XWING, COMANCHE, F15 STRIKE EAGLE II, ACES OF THE PACIFIC, JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS OF THE LUFTWAFFE, B-17 FLYING FORTRESS, GUNSHP 2000, ACES OVER EUROPE, TORNADO and morel Ask about Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighter & Mig 29 Keyboard & Uiley bundel Now you can experience the full realism that today's sophisticated simulation software offers! Functions as a full size aviation yoke with pitch and roll capabilities. For driving software, simply engage the selectable lock and it now functions as a fixed column steer ing wheel. Features rubber suction Cups, 2 switchable fire buttons, throttle control, and spring looded sell.centering yoke. Plugs into a gomeport interface. 1 year warranty 559 Publisher: Suncom $65 $25 Publisher: Virgin Games Publisher: Gometek Publishers Keyboard Commander Corp. 13 SMAS Texel Int. Bare Drive.... Texel Int. Bundle w/PAS 1..... Texel Int. Home Bundle....... Texel Int. w/8-bit AT Adpt...... Texel Int. W/MCA Adapter ..... Texel Int w/PAS-16 & Cable WinSound 16 CD-ROM Kit JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS SPEAKERS NON SON CD-ROM TIMES CD Jones in the Fast Lane........ CD.Just Grandma & Me CD-Jutland CD Key Home Designer Windows ..... CD Kids Dictionary Windows CD King's Quest V.... . CD King's Quest VI... CD-lauro Bowl........ CD Legend of Kryandia...... CD-Leisure Suit Larry I Window CD-lightning CD lord of the Rings CD Lost Treasures Infocom...... CD-lost in Time........... CD MPC Music Mozart........ CD MPC Wizard Diagnostic ......... CD Muntis Expertimentol... CD Map Expert............... CD Mayo Clinic Family Health..... CD Microsoft Golf Windows MPC CD Multimedia Dinosaurs WIN....... CD Multimedia Mozon WIN..... CD Multimedia Stravinsky WIN CD Musical Instruments... CD Photo CD Access Windows..... CD ProPhong 1993... CD Protostor MPC CD Return of Zork. CD Return of the Phantom.... CD-Ring World... CD Scrabble Deluxe.. . CD Secret Weapons Luftwaffo CD Secret of Monkey Island .... CD Sherlock Detective Volume ! CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 2 CD Sherlock Detective Volume 3 CD Space Quest IV....... .. .... CD Spirit of Excalibur .......... CD Sporting News Pro Football CD Star Trek 25th Enhanced CD Street Arles USA... .... CD Ultimal. VI....... CD Ultime Underworld I & I.. CD-Where in World Deluxe.... CD-WinCD Professional 1.1.... CD Wing Il/Ultima Under Wid... CD Wolf Pock. EDUCATION Anolog Plus Joystick... Command Control Pad Flight Stick... Flight Stick Pro Flight Yoke 2000.. GameCard 2.Port Programmable GameCard Ii Automatie................ GameCard II MCA Automatic Intruder 5 Joystick QS. 146 MAXX Rudder Pedals Mach II Joystick .. Maxx Flighi Yoke ll ...... ....... Thrust Master Weapon Mkil..... Thrustmaster ACM Game Card Thrustmaster Flight Control Thrustmaster Pro Flight Ctrl Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Virtual Pilot ACS100 Speaker Pal ............. ACS300 Speaker Pait....... Koss HD-6 MPC Speakers Koss Speaker Pair HD 4 Koss Speckers Amplified HD-1 Lobtec CS 800 Speakers Labtec Speakers CS 150 Labtec Speakers SS-700 .... CD AD&D Eye of the Beholder 3... CD Adventures of Willy Beamish.... CD Animals MPC VERSION CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble...... CD Arts and Entertainment ..... CD Beauty and the Beast MPC CD Berlitz Japan Alive...... CD Berlitz Think & Tolk French... CD Blue Force CD Cose of Cautious Condor CD Chessmaster 3000 Window CD Cinemania Movie Guide WIND... CDClinton CD Compton's Enc. Comp. Upg...... CD-Compton's Interactive Eney..... CD Conan The Cimmerian............. CD Cookbook Heaven...... . CD-Curse of Enchantia ...... CD Dinosaur Adventure...... CD Dinosaurs Multimedia Ency CD-Eco Quest Search for Cetus... CD Elect. Travel California... CD Eric the Unready CD European Racers. CDF 15 Strike Eagle Ill.......... CD Flight Sim: San Francisco CD Flight Sim: Washington D.C. CD Funny... CD Global Explorer........ CD Global Golf CD Goblilins CD Goblins 2... CD-Golf Guide MPC (CA.HI).... CD Grammy Awards... CD Grolier Eneyelopedia Window..... CD Guinness Disk Records MPC ....... CD-Gunship 2000 w/Scenario CDINCA CD Indiana Fate of Atlantis ...... CD Infocom Collection... CD Iron Helix A Tigin. AJ World of Discovery..... Alphabet Blocks for Windows Bailey's Book House ...... Calculus for Windows.. DinoPark Tycoon............. Discover Space. .. Facts in Action GMAT w/Cliff Notes..... GRE w/CUFFS Noles Kid Cod for Windows KidDesk... Longvege Assistant.French 5.0.. Language Assistant Spanish 5.0 Logo Writer ................. Math Rabbit Enhanced .. Mickey's 123's Enhanced Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Millie's Math House .... Mystery at the Museums... Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA.. Pepper's Adventures in Time.. Playroom 2.0 Ready, Set, Read.. . Rock & Bach Studio....... SAT Personal Trainer... SAT W/Cliff Notos..... Science Adventure............ Slater & Charlie...... TreeHouse. Where in Space is Carmen Delux... 1.42 RECREATION AD&D: Eye of the Beholder Ill...... AD&D:Stronghold... ATAC: Secret War Against Drugs.... Aces of Pacific 1946 WWil Miss...... Aces of the Pacific VGA Adventures of Willy Beamish...... Air Bucks 1.2..... . Air Duel...... . .. Air Force Commander ........ Air Warrior SVGA... Aircraft & Scenery Designer Alone in the Dark........ .... ... Amazon The Guardians of Eden..... Ambush at Sorinor.. Ancient Art of War in Skies....... Ashes of Empire... B-17 Flying Fortress . VGA........ Barbie Glamorous Quest..... Bard's Tale Ill.............. ... Battles of Destiny Betrayal et Kondor.. Birds of Prey... Blue Force: The Next of Kin Bridge Master .... Buzz Aldrin's Roce into Space Coeser Caesars Palace Windows Car and Driver ... Carrier Strike........ Carriers at War Carriers at War Construction Carriers of War II... Casile af Dr. Brain VGA.... Castles...... Castles Campaign Disk.. Costles II: Siege & Conquest............. Challenge of the 5 Realms.. .... . Chessmaster 3000 for Windows ..... Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Civilization Civilization Hint Book Civilization Master Player Ed...... Clash of Steel: WWW (939.45 Classic 5 Windows Cobra Mission Cognito for Windows............... Cohort II............. Comancho: Mission Disk I........... Comanche: Mission Diskil... Comanche:Maximum Overkill...... Command HQ Classic Conquered Kingdoms........ Conquered Kingdoms Scenario.... Conquest of Japon...... Conquests of longbow VGA.... Creepers... Crosswords Deluxe .......... Dark Seed.... Darklands Hint Book w/Disk...... Darklands VGA............. Darklands Master Players Ed. Daughter of Serpents.. Day of the Tentacle Hint Book.... Day of the Tentacle: Maniac il Deja Vu I & II Windows...... Dragon Knight ill ........... Dune ............... Dunell. Eco Quest ll Hint Book CD-ROM TILES ONN ANNUN NERUNNER HOME/HOBBIES/FINANCE 616 542 DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS Chinon CDS-435 Internal Drive ..... 335 Chinon CDX-435 External Drive..... DigitalEdge CD Mult. Kit.. 698 Discovery Ext. 8-bit Kit 479 Discovery Int. 16-bit Kit...... 479 Discovery Int. 8-bit Kit..... 419 Edutainment Ext. 16 bit Kit Edutainment Int. 16 bit Kit...... Edutainment Int. 8-bit Kit.... 495 Explorer Upgrade Kit 380 Fusion CD 16 (Internal) 463 Fusion CD 16E (External) Mediu Vision Fusion Double CD 578 NEC CD Express External IBM..... 358 Omni CD Upgrade Kit... PAS-16 Il Multimedia Kit 905 Texel Ext. Bare Drive 486 Texel Ext, w/8 bit AT Adaptor 549 Texel Ext w/MCA Adapter...................604 Texel Ext, w/PAS-16 & Cable..... ..696 Texel Ext. w/Parallelo SCSL.... AutoMap 3.0 AutoMap Upgrade 3.0...... AutoMap Windows Upgrade 3.0. AutoMap for Windows 3.0 Betty Crocker Cookbook Betty Crocker Cookbook Windows.... Bible Study 3.0... DoodleMotion Windows Draft & Print... Expert landscape Windows Financial Calculator Personal..... Financial Calculator Pro Flicks... Home Medical Advisor Windows...... Micro Kitchen Companion .... ..... Micro Kitchen Companion Window...... Modern Bride Planner Windows........ Morg2... Print Shop Deluxe...... Print Shop Deluxe Comic Charo ........ Print Shop Deluxe Windows Quicken for Windows 2.0. Quicken/DOS 6.0............... Your Deck for Windows ..... .. 688 Attack Sub AD&D. Dark Sun Shattered Lands.... AD&D Eye of Beholder Il Book... AD&D:Eye of the Beholder II...............36 532 Circle Reader Service #42 "


"BEAT THE HOUSE ACES OVER EUROPE SIMFARM RETURN TO ZORK Bat The Base Prepare yourself for a casino gaming experience! The uits mote gaming tutor and simulator Includes the 160 poge study guide \"Beat the House Copparion\" Featuring slot machines, black jock, rouletto, video poker and Crops Beginners will learn the rules, rituals and terminology of casino play, Scotoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting lochniques as well as profitable bet ting strategies. One to four people can play ogainst each other, or computer players will the emply soats. Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to Beat The House\" Publisher: Spirit of Discovery $30 From the beaches of Normandy to the war torn ruins of Berlin Fly with the U.S. Army Air Force, the RAF, or the German Luftwaffe. An Occu rate and detailed Great War Planes Simulation Experience the Intensity of aerial combat in the European Theater of WWII as you patrol the front lines, target supply depots and come face to face with moving ground targets and fortified artillery bunkers, Fly more than 20 aircraft in historical campaigns. It's an all new battle covering land, seas and skies Experience all the joys, trials and tribulations of stort SIM Farm ing and running form. You ore the owner of a small plot of lond, ready to start a new farm. All you've got to do is plow fields, sow seeds, harvest crops and sell them of mar ket. Sound easy? Surel Except for soil depletion, crop rotation, droughts, crummy markets and a slowly expanding town that's covering all that good farmland with houses. Grow up to 24 differ ent crops but watch out for hungry pests, Tornadoes, floods and other disasters! The next genero tion of classic Zork adventures mokes ZRK its triumphant debutl An epic adventure in the Great Underground Empire, Amazing interactive adven ture of danger and intrigue. Filled with fascinating puz zles, it features o cast of Hollywood Stars, revolutionary interface, over an hour of spo ken dialogue and an enchanting musical score. Have real interactive conversations with more than 20 characters. Stars include Jason Hervey (\"The Wonder Years\"), Robin Lively [\"Twin Peaks\") and more. State of the art digifized and computer generated graphics, Publisher: Infocom Publisher: Sierra $42 Publisher: Maxis $30 $48 MORE VEGAS GAMES FOR WINDOWS COFFEE BREAK SERIES GATEWAY II LEGACY REALM OF TERROR gas A collection of exciting Windows based casino games for every day computer users. Players can win the big lackpot while tackling Craps, Poker, Black Jack ,  Mechanical Horse Racing. Players can challenge up to four friends or play solely against the com puter. Simple to install and easy to begin playing. Cosing action is but a click of the mouse away, so you can drop into Vegas at moment's notice FREE Hint Book enclosed Experience the chilling reality of 22nd Century Earth. Battle mur derous robots, car nivorous dinosaurs and spear carrying humanoids Rescue a prospec for marooned in robot controlled Hechee starship Can you stop a fanatic cult of terrorists? Journey to new worlds and new adventures and ultimately across the event horizon of a black hole. Features 256 color graphics with spectacular animations A 3D animated first person per spective, role play ing horror adven ture. Set in present day America, it combines stunning graphie technolo gy, amazing audio effects and deep realistic role play ing to create a ter rifying interactive horror movie, Visit a recently inherited con turies old house that has been rumored to have strange things oceutting inside Find and destroy the entity within a settime limit Choose from over 22 exciting products at a great Low pricel Titles include Dr. Wong's Jocks Video Poker (DOS or Windows). De Thorp's Mini Blackjack Baseball Facts, 3D Pinball, Demon Blue, Wockly Winner, Hearts Ninja Robbits, Internationel Ninja Rabbits Casino Crops, Armada, Amarillo Slim's 7 Cord Stud, Think Cross, Ruckus Poker, Ruckus Roulette, Turn n Burn On Target, Spoce Vegetables, Rodeo Games, Canyon Copers and Combination lock Publisher: Villa Crespo Software Publisher: New World Computing 20 Publisher: Legend $36 Publisher: Microprose $42 800-228-7449 324 FAX:508.443-5645 EXT. VOICE:508-443-6126 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 kot* 4 E C FAX:0011-508-443-5845 XI. CompuServe ID:70007, 1534 t a bt Tan  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS &8888990990 RECREATION Eco Quest Il Rainforest Eight Ball Deluxo... . ElFish ............ Empire Deluxe... Eternam... F. 15 Desert Storm Scenario. F-15 Strike Eagle Il Classic... F.15 Strike Eagle Ill... F.19 Stealth Fighter Classic... Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3.0 Operation Fight...... Falcon 3.0 Mig 29/Deadly.......... Family Fun Pok w/Free Costaway Fields of Glory: Waterloo Flash Back.. Flight Assignment ATP. Flight Sim: New York..... Flight Sim: Paris Scenery 5.0 Flight Sim: San Francisco Flight Sim: Washington DC Flight Simulator 5.0...... Football Pro........... Freddy Pharkas... Freddy Phorkos Hint Book Front Page Sports Football G Force Game Modom w/Sierra Network..... Gary Gribes War in Russio... Goblilins... Goblilins Hint Book..... Goblins The Prince Buffoon...... Grand Slam Bridge Il. Great Naval Battle America.... Great Naval Bottles N Atlantic.... Great Naval Battles: Scenario Great Naval Battles:SuperShips... Great War Hardball 18 Hard Ball II Big League Parks HordBall ll Player Disk......... High Command.. . Home Alonel Hong Kong Mah Jong Hoyles Book of Game Classic Human's Like You've Never Seen... Human's: Insult to injury INCA Hint Book..................... Incredible Machine....... Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis ........ Innocent Until Cought, Island of Dr. Brain... Jack Nicklaus Signature Goll Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 Jack Nicklaus Signoire Tout 2 Jet Fighter Il... Jet Fighter Il Tactical Bundle Jump Jet... KGB King's Quest V.VGA.. King's Quest V Hint Book... King's Quest VI.VGA King's Quest VI Hint Book Kings Table... toffer Unities......... Lands of Lore Laura Bow 11. VGA. ....... Laura Bow it Hint Book ... Leather Goddesses of Phobos It RECREATION Legend of Kyrandia... Legend of Kyrandia Hint boo legends of Valour........ Legends of Valour Hint Book Leisure Suit Lorry 1. VGA Leisure Suit Larry V. VGA Leisure Suit Larry V Hint Book Lemmings..... * Lemmings Il... Les Manley Lost in LA... Les Manley in LA. Book Life & Death... Life & Death the Brain........ Links Links 386 Pro Links Pro:Banff Springs ......... Links 386 Pro.Beffrey Course Links 386 Pro:Innsbrook Course Links 386 Pro:Pinghurst Spring Lost Admiral ... Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Lost Treasures of Infocom ... Rags to Riches.. Simlife for Windows Lost Treasures of Infocom II............. Railrood Tycoon Classic ...... Solitaire for Windows Lost Treasut of infocom III........... Railroad Tycoon Deluxe.... Solitaire's Journey Lost Vikings... Railroad Tycoon Master Hint........ Solitaire's Journey Windows ..... Lost in Time... Reach for the Skies......... Space Quest IV-VGA Lucas Arts Classic Collection Realms of Arkania . Space Quest V.. Lure of the Tomptress........ Realms of Arkania Hint Book...... Spoce Quest V Hint Book,.......... Mantis Experimental Fighter Red Baron VGA... SpaceWard Hol for Windows Mantis Speech Pack Red Baron Mission Builder.. . Spectre PC... Master of Orion Red Crystal .......... SpellCosting 301 Spring Break... MechWarrior/BattleTech 1 & .. Red Storm Rising Classic.... Star Controll... Metal & Lace... Return of the Phantom...... Star Trek: 25th Anniv. Hint Bk......... Michael Jordan Flight....... Rex Nebular VGA Star Trek25th Anniversary............ Microsoft Space Simulator Rex Nebular Clue Book w/Disk..... Street Fighter 11 Might & Magic Clouds Xeen Hint........ Rex Nebulor Master Players Ed...... Strike Commander VGA.... Might & Magic Clauds of Xeen...... Rood & Track Grand Prix.... Strike Commander Players Guide .... Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeen..... Rome:Pathway to Power ......... Strike Commander Speech Pock.... Might & Magic Ill......... Rules of Engagement Strip Poker Ill..... Monopoly Deluxe for Windows. S.C. Out......... Strip Poker II 1 Data Disk . More Incredible Machines... Savage Empire: Worlds of Ultimo.... Strip Poker Ill #2 Data Disk NHL Hockey... Scenery Collection California Strip Poker lll #3 Data Disk. National Lampoons:Chess Maniac Scenery Collection USA East Strip Poker III 14 Data Disk ................ Ninja Gaiden l. Scenery Collection USA West Strip Poker Ill #5 Data Disk Origin FX Screen Saver Secret of Monkey Island. VGA Strip Poker III #6 Data Disk ................ Pacific War.. Secret of Monkey Island Il........ Stunt Island Patriot Seven Cities of Gold... . Sub Version 1.0......... . . Perfect General..... 34 Shadow Caser... Summoning... Perfect General Great Battles........ Shadowgate for Windows... Syndicate Perfect Generol WWII Scenario .... Sid Meie Trilogy Take A Break Pinball Windows Pirates! Gold Silent Service Il Classic Task Force 1942........ Police Quest IVGA ...... SimAnt Terminator 2 Chess Wars..... Police Quest lll. VGA...... SimAnt for Windows... Terminator 2029 Police Quest lll Hint Book SimCity Classic Windows... Tesseray for Windows........ Pool Shark SimEarth Tetris Populous SinEarth Windows... Tetris Classic for Windows Populous ll . .. Simlife Tetris Trio Power Politics for Windows. Powermanger Prince of Persia il........ Orders accepted on our toll-free number Mon-Sat 8:30 to 6:30 EST. Same day shipping on inPrince of Persial Strategy Privateer....... stock items. Continental US shipments: UPS Ground Handling Charge $3, Airborne overnight $7. Prophecy International shipments: UPS Express cost based on weight. Canadian, APO, FPO shipments ProtostorWor on the Frontier ....... US Mail cost based on weight. No Sales Tax except for MA add 5%. Personal chocks accepted. Punt Pum Fun Pack allow 5 business days for processing. No CODs. Products covered by manufacturer's warranty Quarterpole. Detectives replaced immediately. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. All Quest for Glory 1 VGA specials and promotions limited while supplies last. Educational government, and corporato purQuest for Glory ....... chase orders welcome. 15% rostocking fee for all non-defective returns Quest for the Silverseed. Circle Reader Service #42 RECREATION RECREATION HENERS "


"Mindcraft: Keeper Of The Magic Candle's Flame COMPANY REPORT CGW Visits Mindcraft's Torrance, CA Headquarters CCT's all Richard Garriott's fault,\" says He tried to make Mindcraft an Affiliated of distribution that their products deserved. Ali Atabek, CEO of expanding MindLabel of EA, but EA's distribution arm Ali took a page out of an earlier playbook and Icraft Software. His pilgrimage into wanted companies with product lines, not made Omnitrend an affiliate label of Mindthe world of computer games began when he single products (they even turned down New craft as Mindcraft finally became an affiliated quit smoking. As an internal programmer at World Computing with its successful Might label of Electronic Arts. Though the deal a large corporation, he had heard about comand Magic during this period). So, Ali came wherein Mindcraft distributed Breach 2 and puter games, so he purchased an Apple II and up with an alternative plan. He would beRules of Engagement only lasted a couple of Lord British's Ultima II in order to take his come an affiliated label of one of EA's affiliyears, it lasted long enough to get Mindcraft's mind off it. As it worked out, he ended up ated labels. He struck a deal with Brett Miles production/distribution cycle going. substituting one addiction for another. of Miles Computing and The Magic Candle was distributed by Electronic Arts DistribuRecalling The Past tion. This was good. TMC won CGW's Ali finished Ultima II and purchased a \"ton Computer Role-Playing Game of the Year of games\" thereafter, but just couldn't find (1989) and Mindcraft was on its way. anything that satisfied him as much as the Or was it? Miles Computing was running creation of the young Lord British. So, being into a cash-flow crisis and couldn't pay their a programmer himself, Ali purchased a book bills. Mindcraft and Miles entered into litigaon 6502 Assembly Language and learned tion. Miles went under, but not before Mindhow to program his Apple II. He started work craft had lost all of the potential sales on his first game, but admits that his family momentum from having the CRPG of the and friends didn't believe anything could Year. come of it. He called the game, Rings of Zilfin, Ali and his partners tried other approaches. and sent a copy to every major software pubThey marketed an action game, The Keys To CEO Ali Atabek examines cover painting lisher. He was absolutely delighted when Maramon, and reached an agreement with for Dominion. Strategic Simulations, Inc. decided to pubMicroProse to handle the distribution under lish it and, at that point, decided that comtheir Medalist distribution program. This When the Omnitrend relationship ended puter game design could become a career. agreement functioned slightly better than the (Omnitrend now has a strategic relationship with Impressions), Mindcraft was publishing Unfortunately, neither Scorpia in particuprevious one, but neither the initial release six titles per year on its own with a staff that nor The Magic Candle II managed the critical lar nor the gaming public in general warmed had grown to around 30 employees. This to Rings of Zilfin. Still, Ali learned a lot of or popular success of the original TMC. Also, lessons from the game's lukewarm perform the company was still small enough (only year, Mindcraft plans to launch eight of its own titles, and its 40 employees are excited ance and formed a fledgling company, Mindthree-to-four people working on the prodabout the company's potential. craft, to create and publish the game which ucts) that both products reached the market would be called The Magic Candle. His wife, later than either Mindcraft or MicroProse Foretelling The Future Ugur Atabek, and longtime partner, Jim had expected. As a result, they had a dated Thomas, formed the company with him. appearance and the designs themselves lacked Mindcraft's emplovees are divided into Electronic Arts showed a bit of interest in the the marketing research to know that mouse project teams that usually have both a project game's design document support was now a neces leader and an analyst. The latter serves in and a contract was signed. sary feature. much the capacity as a producer would at Unfortunately, this was at By this time, Ali and his other companies, but is also responsible for the point when EA was partners realized that their helping to design the game, create maps, losing Joe Ybarra tiny shop could not pubdesign missions and even coordinate testing. (onetime head of Interaclish enough games to proThe project leader is sometimes a programtive Stories at EA, former vide the cash flow they mer, but is always responsible for seeing that President of Infocom and needed to stay alive. They each facet of the game is coming together current developer of looked for a strategic rela smoothly. As a result of this Japanese model TSN's Shadow of Ysertionship with another of production teams, Ali has learned to put bius) and essentially, resoftware company in the complementary teammates together in terms ducing the department to same boat and ended up of interests, personalities and work ethic. one lone and overworked teaming with Omnitrend \"It is impossible, I've found out, to put a producer. EA backed off Software. Omnitrend was programmer on a project for a type of game and Ali found himself another publisher of niche they don't enjoy,\" he says. Hence, anyone Mindcraft marketing director Lawrence with a product and no Norman has an informal style. software and didn't seem wandering the office suite belonging to way to distribute it. to be able to get the kind Mindcraft is apt to feel a bit of excitement and Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"Brian Vodniks oktrings TM Fields of Conquest The BEST Multi-Player Medieval Strategy Game made. PERIOD. Brian Vodnik's  1-6 Players, 199 Territories .. Quality strategy war game that is well worth looting and pillaging to get.\" Computer Gaming World, July '92  7 Troop types and catapults ikings  5 Castle types, 5 Difficulty levels \"...an excellent strategy game that should appeal to strategists of all levels of experience.\" Amazing Computing, Nov. '92 Sields of Conquest Toggle each kingdom between human, computer, and off REAL WINNER! Superior graphics and superb gameplay.\" Chicago Tribune, Sept. 25, '92 Resource management of food, wood, stone, iron  Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics Unlike so many of the lacklustre wargames out there Vikings has a difference-it's actually good.\" Computer Trade Watch, June 22, '92  Huge 800 X 896 pixel map that you actually play on! \"... The intuitive control system is so straightforward that you can get hooked immediately ... addictive and highly enjoyable.\" CU Amiga  Simple point and click interface to an intricate and detailed game SCREENSTAR  Handicapping D Siege of Strathclyde's Mont Cartie! -MeterTerritory 'n 153 Tonet : 14 Owned by Lord Brian Stronghold: Home Cartie (100) Current: Enough Terrain Mountains Stocks : 0 food Growth : 1273 Gorritoo: Men : 470 He Unlimited HOMELANO  crriciency 78 Hall Section 20 cresched Wall Strength : 30 Storn Cartie 18 Crossbowmen 1 STORM RETRENT Zried not inwert. You have 3 arrier with 95 men here 4 EN 10 :X 393 All the details of a territory can be found with a single click of the mouse, Looking at the overview map, we see an even game in progress. Sieging a home castle with only two catapults ... NOT a good idea! Available NOW for Amiga and IBM. Coming soon for Color Macintosh. Bealism Entertainment VIKINGST, Fields of ConquestTM and TRUE 32-BITTM, are Trademarks of Realism Entertainment Realism Entertainment 6N522 Pine Street Bensenville, IL 60106 (708) 595-7487 Circle Reader Service #91  1993 Realism Entertainment All Rights Reserved Worldwide. "


"possessive pride as they pass from office to (Mindcraft's first 256-color SVGA game), office and project team to project team. Peter Patrick Hughes, is something of a loner in his Akemann, the AI programmer on Walls of development approach. Mindcraft makes alRome, the historical sequel to Siege, is so lowances for all of these differing styles. focused on the AI routines that he isn't conAs a result, the future looks very interesting cerned with the way art and design is coming with regard to Mindcraft releases. Dominion together in other ways. He sits isolated from will not only feature state-of-the-art SVGA the rest of the team, working on his algographics, but looks like a very sophisticated rithms until that day when he anticipates map-based strategy game with plenty of ecoreturning to his Ph.D. in mathematics. Jamie nomics and political involvement (diplomacy, trade, war) to keep the pot boiling. Hughes believes his game is more realistic than most in that there is a limited popula Artists Dan Burke, Juan Galceron and Steve tion/production base to the world. ProducBurke (l-r) demo an electronic tablet. tion is based upon population, a resource that military build-up drains. Without populaand Tegel's Mercenaries with Strike Squad (a tion, the player will lose. fast-moving real-time space opera game of small unit action). In addition, they have just Gryphon Masters is the largest product that reached an agreement to distribute the naMindcraft has ever attempted. A CRPG with tion's leading Go game and are working on a an Irish/Celtic feel, it will have a completely sci-fi strategy game with the working title new look to the terrain, and Eddie Del Mechamender (sort of Dune Il meets the BatCastillo's plot combines with Kurt Depner's tle Tech universe). Gryphon Masters' design team includes (1-r) dialogue to create a whole new realm of posEddie Del Castillo, Kurt Depner, Don Likeness, Will these titles propel Mindcraft to the sibilities. When asked what the best part of and Jamie Fristrom. top? We don't know. What we do know is the game was, the team readily replied that it that the staff of Mindcraft believes in their Fristrom, the project leader on Gryphon Maswas its rich world with characters that had products and that their enthusiasm is catchters, a CRPG with a new 3-D look to it that plenty of shades of gray. ing. We also know that Mindcraft is careful Mindcraft calls \"3Dsometric,\" believes in In addition to these games, Mindcraft inenough with the production costs that most grouping the entire team together in a single tends to build upon the success of: Siege with of their titles break even at a sales level far room where they can boisterously brainstorm Walls of Rome (a historical game with much below other companies in the industry. That ideas back and forth, a cerebral weather front improved AI), The Magic Candle with Bloodmeans this company is likely to be around for of stimulus. The designer of Dominion stone (the last game to be set in that world), a long time to come. CGW TURN YOUR DESKTOP INTO A COCKPIT! DON'T DO IT!!! HOME BASE SE Calm down. Breath deeply. CONTROL STAND Relax. th Flightstick Thrusilillasfer Gravis Mastery Joystick flight control-type There's no need to take club to monitor. CGW's first Hint Disk is the solution to your Tribes troubles. With written solutions and screen shots for all 120 levels in Psygnosis' Lemmings 2, this disk will have you well on your way to a complete gold talisman and the salvation of all Lemming-kind. To order your disk, send a check or money order for $6.00 + $.95 for shipping to: Luv Doze Lemmings Disk Offer c/o Computer Gaming World P.O.Box 230 Yorba Linda, CA 92686-9963 IBM 3.5\" disks only. No phone orders, please ADD MORE REALISM TO YOUR SIMS! Clamps firmly to any desk, supporting the joystick out over your lop to more accurately reflect the positioning of a real control stick. It also turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily access the keys without taking your eyes off the \"IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO MY! Send check or money order for $28.95 plus $4.00 (CAN $7.00) for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 DEALERS CALL FOR DISCOUNT (503) 686-1809 Circle Reader Service #59 Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) BLOE n. A powerful vision and a fresh approach to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: RINGWORLD 603 CREATED BY BEST SELLING GAME DESIGNER WACK FUNSTERSI JIM WALLS Actual VGA screens YOU'RE JAKE RYAN, rookie motorcycle officer. Ten years have passed since the unsolved murders of your parents, but a twisted trail of evidence still exists. While patrolling your beat, pieces from the past begin to link with the present. You're treading where you're not wanted and someone wants you to know it! BLUE FORCE... Realize your destiny. Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. Circle Reader Service #103 Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. T designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. OTsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All nights reserved. "


"REVIEW ................................ Ashes, Ashes. All Fall Down Gametek's Ashes of Empire by Paul C. Schuytemà w ith the world changing so fast that Layers of easily-reachable interfaces will and devoid of any intense challenge. even the most diligent cartograhelp in the task of pacifying the CSR's repubA player who is mericulous, who keeps track phers cannot keep up, the task of lics. There are menus for checking supplies of all his supplies, the time and the names and enabling international stability is a daunting and recruits, fractal-generated topographical locations of the various professionals, will one. Every week, a new conflict erupts as maps, movement maps of each province, an have little trouble advancing in this game. people attempt to balance their national pride icon-based system for interacting with the The level of challenge in Ashes rarely escalates, and identity with the need to survive. Noprofessional class, and screens that allow the except for brief moments of military angst where is this conflict more evident than in player to view myriad statistics. and an increased need for speedy play as time Eastern Europe, where United Nations Much of the movement in the game's 2.8 runs out. troops, in their bleach-white transports, can million square miles of terrain is handled only observe and not intervene. through a generic vehicle interface, similar to An example of this is evident when recruitBut what if the UN's role was not merely a flight-sim, but allowing the player to be ing a \"citizen\" to control a building. They observational? What if they had the power to either on foot, driving, flying or operating a usually want something in exchange, such as intervene, to attempt to bring order and submarine. food, medicine or clothes. If the player has democratic peace to the chaos? What could enough supplies, he can click the barter butsomeone do, if given strategic carte blanche 0:51 EOSUITS ton and recruit them instantly. Sometimes and a sizable cache of resources and sent into their demands are paltry, such as a single cask the fray in Eastern Europe or the Commonof wine, so barter is the best course of attack. wealth of Independent States? Other times, they ask for more than it is Gamerek's latest game, Ashes of Empire, prudent to part with, so one may attempt to allows us to explore that option. They have use one of the eight persuasion icons, from charm to threat of force. Only two apcreated a fictional country, the Confederaproaches will work, and a failed attempt retion of Syndicalist Republics (CSR), which is duces the options and takes time. Simply breaking apart at the seams. The player's goals are simple: bring peace and democratic harclicking on cach icon will eventually yield mony to the CSR. their service and control of the building, with Because of its logistical focus and its abstract the only penalty being time spent. This apBack In The CSR representation of the world, Ashes of Empire proach to use either barter or to persuade, and truly breaks new ground. In doing so, howincur a time penalty for failure, is solid in Obviously, the CSR is a country which ever, it reveals major weaknesses. Logistical conception but weak in execution, and echclosely echoes the former USSR and the games of this magnitude are a new breed, and oes some of the major flaws in the game. Commonwealth of Independent States. I'd wager that not many people have enjoyed Picking a persuasion icon is pure guesswork. Once the kingdom of Ossia, the lands were a gaming experience such as Ashes. It's a newThere is no interaction between the player usurped by the totalitarian Syndicalist Party. way to approach a game, and because of that, and the citizen for even an educated guess. Now (the game begins on January 1, 1993), it might turn off some people who are looking Also, there is no penalty, except for time the CSR is crumbling, central authority has for more depth, or refinement of an already spent, in trying every method until one decayed, and each of the five republics are established genre. Still, if a game is truly works. This just doesn't feel right, because an struggling with national identity, economic revolutionary, that hurdle can be overcome. individual who first tries threats, then trickhardship and military confusion. A more important litmus test is whether itery, then friendship, then pleading will have So what kind of game is Ashes of Empire? Is provides a satisfying, rewarding experience. lost all credibility in the real world. eally, since combat makes Sadly, Ashes of Empire comes up short. The Perhaps, though, I am not being fair to up only a small portion of the actual game. Is main action of the game, which consumes Ashes of Empire. Comparing the game to the it a role-playing game? No. The player, alperhaps 75 percent of playing time, is moving myriad of war, adventure and simulators alrhough a commander of the United Commufrom village to village with either an instant ready in the market is comparing apples to nity (UC), isn't really an individual character \"airlift\" or by piloting a vehicle in the sim oranges. To be completely frank, using that with skills and abilities. The player is an indienvironment. When in the vilvidual who commands supplies and relage, the player recruits indisources. Is Ashes an action game? No, though viduals to gain control of buildthe player will have to pilot several combatings, supplies, and to garner the TITLE: Ashes of Empire vehicles from a cockpit perspective. Then names of other important indiSYSTEM: what is it? For lack of a better pigeonhole, itviduals. Unfortunately, even REQUIREMENTS: 2MB RAM, VGA/MCGA graphics, is a logistical game. The player is akin to a though the player is only given 3.5MB hard drive space logistics and diplomatic general, an agent of a limited amount of time to acPROTECTION: None DESIGNER: Mike Singleton the UC who must juggle military might, complish this task in each provPUBLISHER: Gametek diplomatic acumen, and careful planning to ince, the pace is rather plodding 2999 N.E. 191st Street, Suite 800 North Miami Beach, Florida 33180 recruit supporters to the cause and pacify the (305) 935-3995 CSR's provinces. PRICE: $59.95 IBM Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"litmus test, Ashes comes up lacking on chalAshes does falter under some new-release Do You Have Your Papers? lenge and exciting game play. Perhaps, bugs, such as news headlines which flash by though, there are more important issues too fast for the player to read. In addition, The package includes a tutorial video which which can be explored through computer there are no engine sounds to give the feel of moves so quickly, it is likely to scare many entertainment. In my mind, Ashes of Empire flight when piloting any of the aircraft. people off and a lengthy, 160+ page instrucis more akin to Shadow President than any Frankly, crashes are far too common due to tion manual which provides an obtuse inother game I've seen; like D.C. True's game this lack of feedback and an overall lack of structional set to the game. Actually, figuring of global politics, it is a logistical puzzle to be simulation \"feel.\" Fortunately, it is a simple out how things work is more of a trial and solved, and one which elucidates the complex task fort task for those who have crashed to call up error affair, since the rules are more reminisworld in which we live. their reserves and have a vehicle of choice cent of Avalon Hill's Squad Leader delivered automatically. Indeed, players on boardgames than a computer game. A written By working through Ashes of Empire, one foot can even immobilize enemy vehicles and tutorial would have been extremely helpful. can interactively explore the layers upon layclimb aboard. Unfortunately, the bulk of the manual feaers (perhaps an onionskin metaphor is approtures a wealth of background information on priate here) of relationships playing against the CSR's provinces, news headlines, and each other as one arrempts to transform a several short stories which is not essential for dinosaur of a country, the CSR, into a modgame play. It supports the suspended disbelief ern, democratic state. Ethnic rivalries must be of the game world for players, but doesn't diminished by garnering votes and the supreally help the gamer in understanding the port of influential people. Necessary strucmechanics of the game. tures, such as hospitals and warehouses, must be constructed, while barracks and militaryI must tip my hat to designer Mike Singleproduction factories must be destroyed. ton for presenting us with a truly fresh gaming experience. I will hedge my praise slightly More than anything, Ashes of Empire is an by saying that, for the moment, Ashes of Emexercise in winterdependence diplomacy,\" a pire is a touch too esoteric to provide the One programming oddity is fairly enterlogistical tug-of-war between the tangible and general gaming audience with a wholly satisthe intangible as one arrempts to stop and taining, though. Occasionally, when flying in fying experience, and a bit too loose in its eventually reverse the totalitarian inertia of a the auto-travel mode, the landscape flips updesign to satisfy the hard-core. This type of socialist dictatorship gone wrong. On that side down, or the craft rises higher and higher, game needs several generations of developlevel. Ashes of Empire succeeds very well inuntil the entire landscape is just a speck bement before it will cross into the mainstream deed, and provides the player with an interlow. While not adding anything to the game, as a viable, yet important genre. It's about active education and thought puzzle which is the free fall back to the terrain level is visually time, though, that a game like Ashes of Empire highly topical in today's changing world. exciting, took the first important step. CGW COMPUTER Call For Papers GAME DEVELOPERS' The eighth Computer Game YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTIO CONFERENCE  Developers' Conference will be NEW PC TITLES TYPE held April 23-26, 1994 in Santa Clara, California. The CGDC is War Sim A320 Airbus USA Flight Sim the premiere professional conference of the interactive Bat, Midwinter. Cadever, Bloodwych ALL FOR Battle Isle '93 War Sim entertainment industry, bringing together game and War Sim. Daemonsgate RPG educational software developers from all over the world. If Fields of Glory RPG History Line 1914-1918 Strategy Sim. Ishar 2 RPG you're a professional developer with an idea, issue, or insight Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix Racing Sim. Reach for the Skies Flight Sim. that you'd like to share with your colleagues, the Board of RoboCod Arcade Shadow Worlds RPG Strategy Directors wants to hear from you. Sleepwalker Arcade Strategy Street Fighter 2 Arcade Transarctica Strategy Sim. Format: All sessions last one hour. We are currently accepting Whales Voyage Strategy Sim. WWF, T2, The Simpsons ALL THREE for only proposals for lectures (150-300 people, limited audience participation) World of Legends RPG World Wrestling Federation 2 Simulation and seminars (50-75 people, with more give and take). PC EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These Topic Categories: Your talk must be about interactive entertainment high gloss, full color magazines also feature a derno-packed playable cover disk with each issue! or education, and should fit into one of the following categories: design PC Format. PC Review. PC Zone, or PC Plus, each only $10 theory, design practice, technical issues, or business /legal issues. How To Submit a Proposal: Write a detailed, one-page summary of your proposed talk. Specify the Categoryit belongs in, and the Format you'd prefer. You may mail, fax, or E-mailit to one of the addresses shown below. Please get your proposal to us by OCTOBER 15, 1993. For more DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! information about the CGDC, please call Customer Service at (415) 8564263. Fax: (415) 965-0221 U.S. Mail: Internet: ewadams@netcom.com Anne Westfall GEnie: E.ADAMS10 1440 Cedar Place CompuServe: 71170,161 Los Altos, California 94024 SIDELINE SOFTWARE D. ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY 1869 D-Day GABEN BAG A COMP535 GBSOGDCOS Evita 2 18.95 F16 Falcon 14.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Four Crystals of Trazza 21.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fools Errand 16.95 GP Unlimted Road & Track 21.95 Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Harpoon 14.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero Quest 18.95 Hook 16.95 Imperium 18.95 It Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Kiling Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Micropiose Greens 27.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Obitus 18.95 Panza Kick Boxing 10.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pit Fighter 18.95 Populous /Promised Lands 24.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realens 18.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sargon 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Shanghai 2 18.95 Shufflepuck Cale 14.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 Spacewrecked 16.95 Space Crusade 18.95 Special Forces 21.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spot 16.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Stom Masters 18.95 Stunt Car Racer 16.95 Super Off Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 Test Drive 2. all data disks 18.95 The Immortal 19.95 Three Stooges 16.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Basketball 18.95 T.V. Sports Boxnp 18.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Vette 14.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Winter Super Sports 92 16.95 Wild 18.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 Zool 21.95 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same ilem. Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W.571h Court, Fl. Lauderdale, FL 33309 4.D Sports Borong A-Train Action Stations Advanced Destroyer Ashes of the Empire Atac (Microprose) Austerlitz B-17 Bomber (Microprose) Backgammon PC Bard's Tale 3 BAT Battlechess 18.95 26.95 18.95 16.95 21.95 24.95 16.95 24.95 14.95 18.95 14.95 18.95 Bloodwych Carrer Command Centurion Delender of Romne Collossus Bridge 4 Command HO Conan the Cimmaron Conflict Europe Crisis in the Kremlin Defender of the Crown Deluxe Strip Poker Deluxe Strip Poker 2 Drakkhan 16.95 16.95 18.95 16.95 18.95 18.95 14.95 21.95 16.95 16.95 18.95 18.95 Circle Reader Service #97 October 1993 Page 123 "


"Take Advantage of Our $5.00 Off Coupon As Well As Our Super Sales Specials! We Specialize in International Sales! Shop With Confidence! Call Us Now! 0 Voice Recognition Software for SoundBlaster Compatible Cards Take Off With The Gameport! NOTEBOOK GAMEPORT DICE Use Any Joystick With Your Notebook or Desktop Computer! The NOTEBOOK GAMEPORT converts your high performence notebook into a serious flying machine. Connect your yoke or joy. stick and rudder pedals through the Notebook gameport. Four axis gameport, no calibration, Jumpers or manual speed adjustments necessary! By Colorado Spectrum............$42. TOIC ACCOGNITION 10F1BARI 27 IBM DISKS JOUND! COVOX VERECE LES Operate your computer at the speed of sound! The world's most powerful PC based VOICE RECOGNITION program. Adds voice commands to popular educational business and entertainment programs! Scenery Grand Canyon ...........22 Scenery Upgrade: Tokyo Japan 22 Scooter's Magic Castle ..........33 Seawolf .............. Secret of Monkey Island II ... Shadow President Shadowcaster. Sharif on Bridge Shuttle Space Flight . Siege Walls of Rome..... Silent Service 2 Classic .... Sim Ant .................... Sim Ant Windows Sim City. Sim City 2000 Sim City Classic..... Sim City Windows ...... Sim Earth Sim Earth Windows Sim Farm Sim Farm... Sim Life ............... Slater Charlie Go Camping .. Solitaire's Journey ....... Space Quest 5 Spacewerd Hol Speed Reader for Windows Spell It Plus Spellcasting 301 .............. SPROUTI. Star Trek 25th Anniversary .....37 Star Trek Judgement Rights ....37 Star Trek Next Generation ....47 Stonekeep ... Street Fighter II Strike Commander Speech .....22 Strike Squad Strip Poker 3...... Strip Poker Disk 1 thru 6. Stronghold ... Super Jeopardy Super Ships of the Atlantic.. Super Tetris Windows ..........32 .47 ...37 4D Boxing A Train ... A-Train Construction Set. A.T.P.: Flight Commander. A320 Airbus ................. Aces of the Pacific ..............47 Aces of Pacific:WW2 1946 1..22 Aces over Europe ...... Action Station Scenario Disk ....9 AD&D Fantasy Empire ............37 Adventures of Willie Bemish 2.43 Air Dual Flight Simulator ... Alr Warrior .......... WORD By Covox ...........$79. 43 Out of This World ....... P.T.O. ..... .. Perfect General Pilots Power Tools Pirates Gold ........ Police Quest 3 ..... Populous 2 ....... Positronic Bridge Prince of Persia 2 Print Shop Deluxe PrintShop Deluxe Windows wir Syndicate **************........51 NO 9662-666-008  TOUUNOD NOISSIN Ashes of Empire ........... .37 Auto Map......... Automap Road Atlas...... Automap Road Atlas Upgrade..27 Automap Road Atlas Windows.57 Automap Road Atlas Windows Upgrade ...................... AutoWorks . AV8B Harrier Assault ..... B-17 Flying Fortress ...............43 Bart Simpson's Arcade Game 32 Bart Simp. House Weirdness...32 Beat the House ..... 32 Betrayal at Krondor .43 Blood Net Bloodstone .......... Blue Force ..... Body Illustrated Dual...... Bridge 7.0 ........ ....... Bridge Master Windows Caesar ........ Carrier Strike ..... Carriers at War ... Carriers at War 2........... Carriers War: Construction Kit 37 Castle of Dr. Brain ......... Castles 2 Slege & Conquest..32 Celtic Legends ... .......... .32 Center Court Tennis ... .....15 Challenge of the 5 Realms ... ..42 Champions ............... Chess Maniac 5 PC...... Civilization Master Player's ....47 Clash of Steel 43 Coaster ... 27 Cobra Mission ... Cohort II Comanche: Maximum Overkill 47 Comanche Mission Disk 1 ......28 Comanche:Mission Disk 2 ......28 Command Adv. Starship ...... Conquered Kingdoms ............37 Conquered Kingdoms Disk 1...27 Conquest of Longbow ...........43 Creepers .......... ..........32 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 43 Daemonsgate ....... Dark Side of Xeen ...... .45 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands ....50 Daughter of Serpents ............21 Deja Vu 1 & II:Casebook of Ace Harding..... Delta V. Design Your Own Railroad ......37 Discovery:Steps of Columbus .37 Virtual Pilot puts firepower right under your thumbs, gives you advanced aileron and elevator trim controls and extra throttle control for high-powered games. CH Products.....$59. Doom.... Dragon Knight 3...................43 Dune 2: Building of a Dynasty 32 Earth Invasion... EarthQuest. Eco Quest 2 Eco-Saurus Eight Ball Deluxe....... Empire Deluxe ........ Eric the Unready ..... Eternam ........ Eye of the Beholder 1.2.3 Eye of the Beholder 3 Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 Mission ....37 Falcon 3.0 Fighting Tiger ...... Family Fun Pack ................32 Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise 33 Femme Fatale ... Femme Fatale Data Disk 1 ... ..18 Femme Fatale Data Disk 2. Femme Fatale Data Disk 3 Femme Fatale Data Disk 4 Fields of Glory. Flashback Flight 701 .. Flixmix ...............**** Freddy Pharkas Front Page Sports: Football. Gary Grigsby's Pacific War Gary Grigsby's War in Russia. 47 Gateway 2.......... Gateway Il Homeworld Gearworks .......... Global Domination. Gods ... Grammar Gremlins Grand Slam Bridge 2 Graue Wolf Aces of the Deep .42 Great Naval Battles ...............47 Hardball 3 .................... Hardball 3 Stadium Disk ....... Hardball lll Players Disk .........19 Harpoon Challenger SIG. Harpoon Designer Series 2 Headline Harry VGA .... High Command47 Hired Guns ............. Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyle's Book of Games 3 Hoyle's Book of Games 4 Hoyles Classic Card Games ...32 Inca ........ Incredible Machine ........... Indiana Jones IV Atlantis .... IndyCar Racing ..., Innocent Until Caught .... International Golf Island of Dr. Brain Isle of the Dead Italy Scenery Disk .. Jagged Alliance ...... Jet Fighter 2 Bundle Jordan In Flight .. Jump Jet .... Jurrassic Art Kasparov's Gambit. Kid Pix ... Kid Works Kid Works 2... King's Quest 6. 47 King's Ransom Koshan Conspiracy ..... Kronolog The Nazi Paradox.. Lands of Lore .................. Legacy Realm of Terror ..........43 Legal Letter Works ... Leisure Suit Larry 5 ...... Letter Works ............ Life & Death II: The Brain Links 386 Course Disk Belfry .22 Links 386 Pro..... Links Course Banff Springs ....22 Links Course Disk: Bountiful ..22 Links Course: Mauna Kea ......22 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 30 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 ..32 Lost Vikings ...... ... Lucky's Casino... Lunar Command .......... Maelstrom .... MM2 Day of Tentacle ... .....40 Mantis: Experimental Fighter ..43 Mario Teaches Typing Masters of Orion .. Math & Me .................. Math Blaster Plus ............. Math Rabbit Enhanced.......... MegaFortress:Flight Old Dog ..28 Megalomania Metal and Lace Mickey's ABC's 2.0 ........ Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 45 Might & Magic 4: Clouds Xeen 43 Naval Battles:America Atlantic 22 Naval Battles:Scenario Builder 29 NHLP Hockey Not a Clonel Genuine Soundblaster chipset means 100% SoundBlaster compatability. Includes High Performance Speakers, An Ergonomically Designed Joystick & Gameport. Software includes Voxkit Voice Utilities, Talking Parrot. FM Intelligent Organ, Jukebox for Windows 3.1 & Castle Wolfenstein. By Bondwell ..........$99. 22 Aircraft & Scenery Designer ...37 Airport & Facilities Directory ...20 Al's World of Discovery .. Algeblaster Plus ..... Allied Forces Bundle...... Alone in the Dark ....... Alphabet Blocks ...... Amazon .......... Ambush at Sorinor Arborea 32 Archon 93.... Armored Fist .... Sawow Prophecy...... Putt Put Joins the Parade Putt Putt's Fun Pack Quarterpole ..... .... Quest Glory 4 Shad. Darkness 43 Quest for Glory III Ragnarock ......... Rags to Riches Railroad Tycoon Classic .... Take a Break Pinball Windows.32 Terminator 2029 .................43 Terminator 2029 Op. Scour ....22 Terminator Rampage.... Tetris Classic .......... ... Tetris Classic Windows ...... The Blue and The Gray ... The Dig.................................43 The Elder Scrolls The Arena ....43 The Great War 1914-18..........43 37 -33 --43 Weapons Control Mark II A hands on throttle with seven independent controls including radar mode, weapons select, way. point select and counter mesures Fully Progamable........$99. Flight Control -The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as 2 buttonjoy. stick...................... ... .............$69. Flight Control Pro................... $115. Rudder Pedals........ ...........$115. ACM Game Card .. stick...... Thru Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for our Mission Control Communique 24 Page catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) / UPS Blue ($7minimum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: MULUT ANTROL SINTEN WAND Railroad Tycoon Deluxe ..........43 Rampart ............... Reader Rabbit 2 ............. Reading & Me... Realms of Arkania .... Red Baron Red Crystal... Return of the Phantom. Return to Zork.. RingWorld ...... Rules of Engagement 2..... Sales Letter Works .......... Scenery Collection Set A. Scenery Collection: Set B........37 Scenery Enhancement Editor ..27 The Labyrinth.... The Lost Tribe ...................21 Theatre of War .............. ...3 Tom Landry Football Deluxe ... 32 Tony Larussa Baseball 2 ........40 Tony Larussa || AL/NL Stad ....19 Tony Larussa Il Fantasy Draft .16 Tony Larussa Il Player bisk ....16 Tornado ........ .. .. Tristan Pinball ........ .. U.S. Atlas for Windows ... Ultima 7: Forge of Virtue ....... Ultima 7:The Black Gate Ultima Underworld II .. Ultima Pt 1:Stygian Abyss ......50 Ultima VII Silver Seed ....... MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW1093, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! "


"Order Now 800-999-7995 Now Available in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico & Canada! International Order Line (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 5 While Supplies Last! SAVE Walker.......*** Ultrabots Unlimited Adventures ........... USA East Scenery Disk ..........43 USA Wars: Civil War CD...........39 Vior Victory 1: Utah Beach ....47 V for Victory 2: Velikiye Luki ...47 V Victory 4 Gold Juno Sword ..43 Victory 3: Market Garden .......47 War in the Gulf Warlords 2.............. WC II Special Operations 1 ... 25 WC II Special Operations 2 ....27 When Two Worlds War Where Space Carmen Deluxe 50 Where in USA Carmen Deluxe .47 Where in the World Deluxe .....48 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.39 Wing Commander Academy ....32 Wing Commander Deluxe Ed ..50 Wing Commander II .............52 Word Attack Plus .................32 Word Munchers..... World Circuit Grand Prix .........37 World War II Battles of Pacific 37 X-Wing ....... *** X-Wing Mission Disk 1 or 2.....22 For the Best in ADULT CD ROM. Call, Write or Fax Mission Control for a List of the Hottest Titles and Most Competitive prices. You Must be 21+ to Order. 929 $5.00 off your order (over $50) Simply send in coupon with your order! Sol to Pri sred For Sale Items! eller papirs 10/1/93) where mander eadem M ROM HEADQUARTERS ...42 RSS ACCESSORIES 27 . 51/4 or 3.5 Head Cleaner 5 ACS 100 Speakers ACS 150 Speakers..... ACS 300 Speakers. Cleaning Kit 3.5 Drive.. Computer Cleaning Kit ....... Computer Vaccuum Kit ..........14 Disk Drive Head Cleaners ........5 24 9 17 CONTROLLERS Magnetic Scrolls ON Mario is Missing Martian Memorandum Math Blaster Plus Windows 29 Mavis Beacon 2 Windows 24 Mavis Beacon Typing 2.0 19 McGee Bundle Mercenaries Mickey's Memory Challenge 14 MicroLeague Baseball 4 19 Microsoft Flight Simulator 4 29 Mini Vacuum Cleaners 9 Miracle Piano Teacher Monopoly 5.25 Monopoly Deluxe Windows Mouse Wheel Mouse Yoke NY Times Crossword Mac NFL Pro League Football Office Design Omega Joystick Oregon Trail Deluxe Oregon Trail IBM Oregon Trail Mac Origin FX Screen Saver Pacioli 2000 V.2 Panzer Battles Macintosh Paperboy 2 PC Command Control Personnel Readyworks PowerGame Bundle Pro Football Analyst ON Puzzles & Stories Q8161 PC Pack Reading Adventures in Oz 29 Remote Control 5.25 Rex Nebular Road Track's Grand Prix 19 Romance Three Kingdoms II 37 Sailing Simulator III VCA 29 Sargon V Scenery Upgrade Tri-Pack 29 Scrabble Deluxe Windows 29 Secret Island Dr. Quandry 29 Shanghai Il Macintosh 24 Sharif on Bridge Windows Solitaire for Windows Sound Commander Cold Sound, Graphics Upgrade Space Ace 2:Borf's Rev. Space Quest IV VGA 5.25 Special Forces Special Operations 2 5.25 Spoils of War Star Legions Starter Kit Storybook Weaver Strike Commander Super Munchers Girls in Vivid 1 or 2 Cirts of 1. Stephen Hicks 1 or 2 Clobal Explorer Golf Guide: (CA & HI) Edition 19 Great Naval Battles Grobers Encylopedia Curship 2000 .... Hacker Hawaii Girls Hell Cab Hidden Obsessions (M) Hot Hunks Hot Piu 2, 3 or 4. House of Dreams (M) House of Cames Inca. Indiana Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis Insatiable (M) Iron Het Island Cir's Jets & PopsJones in Fast Lane lust Games Jutland ..... Kama Sutra KGB/CIA World Factbook King's Ransom .. King Quest 6 Kings Quest Language Dicovery Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Porn II (M) ....... Library European & American Art.....57 Local Girls Cyberoa GanDER SPL coonl.. A Line in the Sand A.T.A.C. Action Station Air Force Commander Airbucks Aircraft & Advent. Factory 22 Ancient Art of War in Skies 29 Arachnophobia AutoMap Windows Aviator Yoke Bandit Kings Ancient China 29 Barbie's Glamorous Quest 19 Battle Isle Scenario BattleChess 4000 SVCA 32 BattleChess 4000 VGA 29 Bug Bunny's Hare Brain Ady.5 Business Card Maker Dix. 29 Buzz Aldrin Race Into Space 34 California Games 2 ligi Cash Biz Castles 2: Siege Conquest CD Rom Caddie Chessmaster 3000 24 Chessmstr 3000 Windows 29 Cleaning Kit 3.5 Drive Coaches Challenge 5.25 Combat Classics Command HQ Computer Cleaning Kit 19 Computer Starter Kit 5.25 24 Computer Vaccuum Kit 14 Conquest of Longbow VGA 29 Crime Does Not Pay 9 Crusaders of Dark Savant 29 Dark Hall Darkseed Dinosaur Designer Disk Drive Head Cleaners Dragon's Lair 3 Dream House Professional Dune 24 Eagle's Rider Elite Plus 14 Estimating and Invoicing 14 Expert Color Paint Mac Expert Pet Care F15 Strike Eagle 111 FailSafe Computer Guardian 19 Fisher Price: Main Street 12 Flight Stick Flintstones Game 5.25 FS Pro Future Wars CD Rom Gameport 2 MCA Geo Jigsaw Gravis Analog Joystick Great Britain Scenery Greens: Ultimate Golf 29 Gunship 2000 VGA 5.25 34 Guy Spy Halls Montezuma Macintosh 19 Hare Raising/Sound Source 24 Heimdahl Hockey League Simulator 2 22 Icontroller I controller for Laptops Inspector Gadget 5.25 Intruder Joystick Jeopardy 25th Anniversary 9 Jetsons Game 5.25 King's Bounty L'Empereur 5.25 Land, Sea, Air Trilogy 2 24 Leather Godesses Phobos 2 29 Legend of Excaliber Legend of Kyrandia Lemmings 2 LightSpeed Links Course Troon North 9 Lost Treasures Infocorn Mac34 Mach 1 27 ..59 Analog. Plus.............*** Analog Pro Joystick ........ Analog Sabre ....... Aviator Yoke SUPER SPECIALI29 CyberMan ...... .69 Eliminator Game Card... Flight Stick SUPER SPECIALI..39 Flight Stick Pro Coming Soon!..O FX 2000 ..................... G Force Yoke ............ Gameport 2 MCA SALE! ..... Gameport Automatic MCA ......39 Gameport Ill Automatic .........34 Gravis Analog Joystick ...........32 Icontroller SUPER SPECIALI...39 Mini Vacuum Cleaners ... Mouse Mat Single Mouse Wheel ... Mouse Yoke ...... Parallel Game Port .................37 PC Command Control .... 19 PC Joystick Combo Virtual Pilot ..... ..59 101 Sexual Positions 1 or 2..... 7 Guest Adult Movie Almanac () Adult Palate Vol. 1 or Vol. 2 Adult Reference Library Adult Sampler.... Adventures of Seymore Butts (1) 69 Al Beauties. Amanda Stories /MPC America's Premier Shareware. 29 American Business Phonebook. Animals MPC .. . Animation Fantasies (M) ......... Animation Fantasies 2 (M) Arthur's Teacher Trouble....... B17 & Silent Service Combo Bangkok Bare Assets Barney Bear goes to School Barney Bear Goes to Space Basics Electronic Cookbook Battle Chess Enhanced Beauty and the Beast Best of Ytrid () Bule Library Blue Force..... Britannica's Family Choice Business Master Busty Babes 3. Busty Babes Cafe Flesh (M) Case of Cautious Cender Chess Maniac ChessMaster 3000 Classic Book Collection Clip Art Galore Clip Art Heaven Conan the Cimmerian..... Deluxe Scrabble Desktop Publisher's Dream Disk Digital Dancing (1) Digital Dreams -Dream Machine (0) Dupe ... Eco-Quest 1 Eestasy Education Master Electronic Traveler:California Encyclopedia of Clip Art Eric the l eady Erotic Encounters ... ErotiCafe. European Racer -Eye Beholder 1.23 Bundle... Exotic Cels F-15 Strike Eade 3............ F117A Stealth/fi5 Strike Eagle 2. ..40 Family Doctor FAO 1, 2 or 3 Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise ...... Future Wars.. Came Pack 2 Publisher's Paradise Putt Putt Joirs The Parade Putt Dutt's Fun Pack Rebel Assault Reference Library Randire Padlic (M) Rodoey's Fun Screen Secret of Monkey Island Secret Weapons of the Lafbeafle Secrets (10) Stakespeare's Completo Works 29 Shareware Overload Shareware Studio Sherlock Holmes Detective 1 or 2 .47 Sherlock Holmes 101 Sleeping Beauty Smutware ...... So Much Startuare. Software Jukebox Software Vault 2 Software Vault Software Vet Cold Southern Beauties Space Quest 4 Sportslustrated Almanac Storm 12 or 3 ..... Street Allas USA Swimware 1993 Talking Classic Tales Talking Schoolhouses The Animals .................59 Things Change My 1st Time (M) 69 Timetable Business Polities & Media 65 Timetable of Arti/Entertainment.....65 Timetable of History ..... .......59 Timetable of Science & Innovations.69 Tony LaRussa Baseball Too Many Typefaces Total Baseball 193 Ed. Tradi I Love You (M). Tropical Girls Trouble in Wind Twehre Reads to GettysburgU.S. Presidents Litima I thru 6. Litina Underworld 142 Ultima Underworld/Wing Comm. 2 US Atas w/ Automap US History US Wars Korea or Vietnam... Visual Fantasies (M) Volcano ... Where in World Is Carmen Delicte Wad Places Willie Beamish Windowart Windowmaster Windows 1993 Wing Commander & Ultima 6 Wing Commander 2 Deluxe Wing Commander Deluxe .... Women of Venus ......... World Traveler Wrath of the Demos A7 DirtyTalk SOUNDCARDS/CD Ad Lib Gold 1000 Lord of the Rings. Lost Treasures of Infocom 1 or 2 Lotus 1,2,3 Lovely Ladies 2 Majestic Places ... Manual: National Ceographic ... Mantis: Experimental Fighter Mayo Canic Maed up Mother Goose MM 2 Day of Tentacle Moving Fantasies (M) Multimedia Grammy Awards My Private Collection 1 or 2 Mystic of Orient New Wave Hookers (M) Night Trips (H).... Night Watch (1) P.C. SIG Games PC Modic -PC Pix Vol 1, 2 or 3. PC S Version 2... Phoenit 3.0 PhoneDisc Residential USA.... PhoneDisc USA BusinessPhysical Therapy MF 88 19 PC Globe Swap Discovery CD 16 bit Extemal.599 Discovery CD 16 bit Internal..499 Edutainment 16 External.......645 Edutainment 16 Internal .......595 Pro Audio Spectrum 16........189 Sound Blaster 16 ASP .........249 Sound Blaster Pro Basic ......159 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe .....149 Soundman 16.............169 UltraSound SUPER SPECIAL 119 Wave Blaster ................. ....249 Pork Wart THRUSTMASTER Precision Mapping Private Pictures Vol 1 ... Protostar War on the Frontier -Cits Galore -.43 29 Ten Best Ten Best Publishers Choice Terminator 5.25 The Humans Theatre of War 5.25 Time Treks TimeQuest Tom Landry Football Trolls Trump Castle 3 Typhoon of Steel Ultima 7: The Serpent Isle Ultima Underworld II 5.25 UltraSound Veil of Darkness Virtual Pilot Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 What's My Angle Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna WindEase Zoo Keeper .69 14 29 ACM Game Card .. COCKPIT .......CALL FOR PRICING! Flight Control Pro ................. 115 Flight Control System ..... Flight Control Yoke Rudder Pedals ...... 115 Weapons Control ..... Weapons Controller Mark 2. .69 89 Mitsumi CD Rom Drive Internal 350ms with Groliers, SWOL, Chess 3000 and Family Doctor! Special Price $299. MISSION 32 14 14.4 Internal Fax Modem. V.32,V.42 & MNP5. Free bitcom and Bitfax Software Included! $169.95 , "


"REVIEW chronistic Anat Air Battles MicroProse's Air Duel Explores The Impossibilities by Bryan Walker CC Ti's the man, nor the machine,\" was a a leisurely manner. A configuration screen Total Select Enemy Hircrafe OST favorite maxim of General Chuck allows the player to alter the realism and detail Yeager, America's legendary fighter to suit his or her skill level and hardware pilot. In Air Duel, a new British-designed capability. flight simulator being distributed by MicroEven though the terrain of Air Duel isn't Prose, gamers have the opportunity to put exactly spectacular, most aircraft are rendered that bold statement to the test. very well. In fact, only the planes in Red Baron In Air Duel players take to the skies in any and Strike Commander look better. The Harof seven locales flying one of history's greatest rier and Spitfire are particularly sharp, no fighters: the Sopwith Camel, Fokker Dr.1, doubt due to some extra attention from the Spitfire Mk.II, Bf 109E, F-86, MiG-15, F-4Jgame's British designers. The depictions of Phantom II, MiG-21F, Harrier FRS.1, Mi smoke and missiles are the best I've seen so rage III, F-16A and MiG-235. Seventeen far. The out-of-the-aircraft views are nicely capability without being harassed by enemy other \"Non-Player Character\" aircraft also drawn, with each plane having unique artfighters. make appearances in missions spanning work. Some players may not notice the excelBack To The Drawing Board much of air combat's history. Six different lent animation of the aircraft's gyroscopic chapters of aerial combat are depicted in the artificial horizon, but it's top-notch! The inMost gamers will agree that Air Duel offers WWI, WWII, Korea, Vietnam, Syria and troductory sequences and end-of-mission some nice, if not particularly original, feascreens are flat-our gorgeous, with some tures. Unfortunately, many players are going screens comparable to artwork seen in the to discover some problems very shortly after Smithsonian Air Museum. their first game begins. The wide range of external views available for example, the 486/66MHz VLB system during flight include nearly all of the industry I use has always provided ample gaming standards. A \"Head Up\" view, much like power. However, I was surprised to find a Falcon 3.0's \"Padlock View\" is also available relatively low frame rate and \"ratchety\" flight to give players the best situational awareness model in Air Duel. Even turning the detail possible in a dogfight. In addition, vital infordown to the lowest settings provided nomation such as heading, altitude and airspeed where near the smoothness of Falcon 3.0, are constantly displayed at eye level in all Yeager's Air Combator SVGA Air Warrior. Air aircraft, much like a modern jet's real Head Duel was also tested on a 386SX/20MHz, Up Display. This feature, and others, makes with the frame rate dropping considerably. Falkland scenarios, cach with a single mission Air Duel very similar to Yeager's Air Combat. While it may run on the \"minimum\" that allows the player to take either side (for One of the biggest similarities between Air 286/16MHz as MicroProse claims, few a total of 12 different missions). The player Duel and Yeager's Air Combat is the ability to would call the result \"playable.\" also has the option of free-form dogfighting match all aircraft in the game against cach The avionics of the modern jets in Air Duel against up to five computer-controlled other. Using this \"What if\" feature, players are simply generic and unrealistic. The lack planes, or facing another player in head-tocan fly a Spitfire against a BF-109, an -16, a of a Constantly Computed Impact Point, head combat. Unlike many flight sims, playFokker DR1. Mirage Ill and an F-86 in a perhaps the most significant development in ers have the ability to match aircraft of single mission! Flying against five different the history of fighter avionics, is a severe different eras against one another. Sure, most planes from different generations at once handicap. Without a CCIP, using cannons in gamers have downed hundreds of MiGs definitely adds a degree of a close, turning dogfight is an exercise in while flying an F-16, but can they do it with challenge! The \"What If' feaaggravation. The very poor tracer effects a Spitfire? A Fokker? Air Duel gives them the cure allows any type of mix, Air Duel chance to find out. so players are free to make the melees as challenging or easy TITLE: Air Duel Casually Combative $59.95 as they wish. For those in a SYSTEM: Air Duel is a \"casual\" simulator, best suited non-combative mood, the REQUIREMENTS: 286-16MHz, 1MB RAM. VGA/MCGA graphics, to gamers who don't want to read 300-page who don't want to read 300-page \"Free Flight\" feature allows 9MB hard drive space PROTECTION: manuals or struggle with dozens of functions the player to simply take a Documentation look up DESIGNERS: SO YEARS OF TOOTIGATITE to fire a missile. The overpowered flight Ciaran Gultnieks, plane out for a test drive. The Dominic Robinson models are very forgiving, with stalls, spins, Harrier can be an interesting PUBLISHER: MicroProse buffeting, aileron lock and G-LOC nonexchoice for this, since the Hunt Valley, MD istent. The realism of the weapons, particuplayer can experiment with 1410) 771-1151 larly the guns/cannons, is also approached in the aircraft's vertical-takeoff PRICE: IBM lan Martin Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"only compound this problem. Even though air-to-air missiles are present, they consist of older \"tail-chasing» heat-seekers or all-aspect radar-guided versions. Both can be decoyed fairly easily. However, aircraft capable of firing radar-guided missiles enjoy a huge advantage, as they don't have to maneuver to the tail of the enemy jet to obtain missile lock. stands unresolved. Fortunately, we used a null-modem cable and physically linked the machines with success. While the game slowed down noticeably, the two-player option was enjoyable. Fokker: 5, MiGs: 0 What are the odds of a Fokker Dr.1 defeating five MiG-15s at once? Excellent, in Air Duel While claiming that the Artificial Intelligence is highly sophisticated, the designers apparently forgot to teach it ground avoid ance. Simply fly very low or land, then watch the computer-controlled jers plummet to the ground. Until they all hit the ground, the computer's jers will stage an aerial comedy, bumping into or shooting one another. The maneuvers the Al employs are limited, rarely using the vertical and often settling for simply flying in circles. The weak AI also makes the computer-controlled planes vulnerable to missiles, while a human opponent easily avoids them. value is very low. While the player can tweak each mission by choosing targets and actions for the computer-controlled aircraft, this does little to hold interest after one or two sittings. Without another player to duel head-to-head with, Air Duel could wind up being a $60 bookend very quickly. With the many shortcomings of Air Duel, the two-player option could be the game's major saving grace. Unfortunately, I ran into problems there, as well. Despite successfully playing SVGA Air Warrior, Falcon 3.0 and other titles over a modem connection, my opponent and I were frustrated by Air Duel All possible communication options were adjusted with no luck. A call to MicroProse didn't reveal any obvious reason for the inability to connect via modem. However, the representative did note that he had not heard of many similar problems from other players. Perhaps our problem was unique, but it still Lack Of Self Control With the number of different control devices on the market, I was disappointed to find that Air Duel's control options only include a single joystick and/or keyboard. While the game isn't so complicated that it requires the Thrustmaster accessories to be enjoyable, the ability to select different control layouts is becoming something of an industry standard that I was starting to appreciare. Had it been released two years ago (ironically, it was expected several years ago as Activision's Planes of Glory), Air Duel would've been a rousing success. As it now stands, it might appeal to a new flight-sim player, or a compulsive joystick jock that simply must have every new title. Regrettably, it has come all the way from Europe to discover thar \"pretty good,\" \"a lot like\" and \"as good as may not raise many eyebrows. In the current flight simulator market, each new release has to offer something new or better to succeed. Air Duel isn't bad, but it certainly isn't new or better. Cow Dreary Dozen With only 12 missions available, even beginning players can complete them all in one weekend. Lacking a campaign game, flight recorder or mission builder, Air Duel's replay We've Outdone Our Only Competition... Ourselves. Mark II WCS THE MARK II WCS *User Programmable Functions *Allows Joystick Programmability ThrustMaster Get Real HOTAST ThrustMaster Inc. 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Suite E-7 Tigard OR 97223 PHONE(503)639-3200 FAX(503)620-8094 October 1993 Circle Reader Service #102 Page 127 "


"100% Recycled CGW Yes, for $4.00 per issue, you can have your own copies of these CGW classics. Remember, if these copies end up being recycled into billing envelopes or presidential budget packages and you don't have a personal copy, we'll hold you responsible! (Well, you don't expect us to take responsibility do you? And you already know about the government.) COMPUTER COMPUTER #93 (April, 1992) Cover Story: Champions sneak preview. Reviews include: Bloodwych, Falcon 3.0, Lost in L.A., Global Conquest, Millenium, and Eye of the Beholder II. Features include: Winter CES Report (Part II), a replay of a SimAnt battle, a sneak preview of The Next President, and strategies for Romance of the Three Kingdoms 2 and Sid Meier's Civilization, among others. #98 (September, 1992) GAMING WORLD Cover Story: Amazon sneak preview. Reviews include: Omar Sharif on Bridge, A-Train, Wolfenstein 3-D, Dune, Dark Seed, Carrier Strike, Conflict: Korea, Aces of the Pacific and Napoleon I, among others. Features include: golf game news, gaming lite survey, and part II of the 1992 Summer CES report. 10 GAMI WORLD #94 (May, 1992) COMPUTER #99 (October, 1992) Cover Story: Darklands sneak preview. Reviews Cover Story: X-Wing sneak preview. Reviews include: Castle of Dr. Brain, Shuttle, Uncharted Waters, Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary Game, include: Laura Bow II, Gateway, World Series of Super Tetris, Worlds at War, Pacific Storm and V Poker, The Two Towers, Grand Prix Unlimited, for Victory: Utah Beach. Features include: hints for Pitfighter, Waxworks, and Galactic Frontier. The Secret of Monkey Island 2, tactics for Secret Strategies and tactics articles are included for the Weapons of the Luftwaffe, Civilization sneak preview and more. following: Sea Rogue, Lemmings, Aces of the Pacific, The Lost Admiral and Siege. COVOITER #95 (June, 1992) Cover Story: Laura Bow II sneak preview. COMPUTER #100 (November, 1992) Reviews include: Populous II, Twilight 2000, Celtic Collector's Edition Legends, Multi-Player Battle Tech, Birds of Prey Artist Mark Ferrari caricatures the CGW staff on and more. Features include: Software Publishers Association report, strategy for Uncharted Waters, the front cover. Inside, Publisher Russell Sipe Crisis in the Kremlin sneak preview, tactics for The offers a retrospective on 11 years of computer Perfect General, a study in opening moves for gaming. News and other features include: a report L'Empereur, and Evan Brooks' survey of wargames from Korea on Digital World, Part 1 of a series on Jack through the far future. Nicklaus golf course design, an update on virtual reality, an interview with child star/game designer Peter Oliphant, a segment on GAMING WORLD #96 (July, 1992) the GenCon/Origins game convention, and the story on the Cover Story: Grand Prix Unlimited sneak preview. Electronic Arts acquisition of Origin Systems. Reviews include: Reviews include: Planet's Edge, Sea Rogue, The Summoning, Crisis in the Kremlin, The Dark Half, Links 386 Ultima Underworld, World Circuit, Gods. Big Pro, Tetris Classic and more. Three, and MBT: Middle East. Features include: tips on Treasures of the Savage Frontier, strategy COMPUTER #101 (December, 1992) for Castles, an interview with Roberta Williams, Holiday Buying Guide and a report on the Computer Game Developers Conference. In addition to the theme article, this issue features: COMPU #97 (August, 1992) a Software Publishers Association report, Chuck GAMBO WORLD Miller's first Shareware column, Darklands survival Cover Story: Stunt Island sneak preview. Reviews include: Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition, guide, sneak previews of Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Chessmaster 3000, Out of This World, Legends of Space and Empire Deluxe, the second article in Future Past, Magic Candle II, Federation Il and Mark Willet's series on course design, and strategies for Computer Third Reich. Features include: a replay Warlords. Reviews include: John Madden II, Cruise for a Corpse, of Global Conquest, strategies for Populous II, Heaven & Earth, Mantis, Air Force Commander, Team Yankee, Lemmings tips, and more. Cyber Empires and more. GAMING WORLD "


"ro Arte   tra TV COMPUTER #102 (January, 1993) GAMING WORLD B Sights And Sounds Composer Donald Griffin's article on sound support, Mark Willet's third article on Jack Nicklaus course design and Johnny Wilson's sneak preview of Ultra Bots serve as the keystones for this issue's theme. Reviews include: King's Quest VI, Summer Challenge, Quest for Glory III, Air Bucks, Spear of Destiny, Spring Break, Theatre of War, Gunship 2000 and lots more. COMPUTER #108 (July, 1993) GAMING WORLD Computer Game Design Section Features include: Companions of Xanth sneak preview, behind the screens report on Day of the Tentacle, sneak preview of IndyCar Racing, InterMedia '93 report, and Computer Game Developers Conference report (Part I). Reviews include: Michael Jordan in Flight. The Journeyman Project, Maelstrom, Empire, Builder, Shadow President, Aide de Camp, Caesar and plenty more. GAMING WORLD LIT COMPUTER #103 (February, 1993) COMPUTER #109 August, 1993) GAMING WORLD Techno-Wizardry Issue Inside Entertainment Software Theme features emphasize: fractals, behind the Features include: reports on the Consumer screens of Return to Zork, visit to the Battle Tech Electronics Show (Part I) and Computer Game Center, Comdex report, and upcoming products Developers Conference (Part II), a tour of like Syndicate and Alone in the Dark. Issue also Westwood Studios, behind the screens of Sam & 101 Max: Freelance Police, and a sneak preview of features: video poker survey, final article of the Clash of Steel. Reviews consider: Strike Commander, Pax design series for Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf, strategy for Imperia, V for Victory: Operation Market Garden, The 7th Guest, Castles II, and sneak previews of Betrayal at Krondor and and ChessManiac 5 Billion and One, among others. Caesar, as well as reviews on: Robosport, Rex Nebular, KGB, Amazon and Waxworks. COMPTRI #110 (September, 1993) Special Strategy Section #104 (March, 1993) Winter CES Report Features include: Masters of Orion sneak preview, strategy for Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space, Major articles include: Consumer Electronics additional CES coverage, sneak preview of Flight Show report (Part I), EA*Kids preview, surveys of Simulator 5, Evan Brooks' wargame listing for computer football and computer bridge games, 1900-50, and a Spectrum HoloByte company prosneak previews of Iron Helix and Eric the file. Reviews include: Prince of Persia 2, Day of Unready, and Scorpia's tips for Crusaders of the the Tentacle, Syndicate, Harpoon Designers' Series II, Strat-ODark Savant. Reviews consider: Star Control 2, Matic Baseball 4.0, Challenge of the Five Realms and more. Spelljammer, Comanche Maximum Overkill, Ancient Art of War in the Skies, Paladin II, The Summoning and many others. How To Order #105 (April, 1993) AMPUTEE CD-ROM Survey Individual Back Issues $4.00 each Reviews include: Space Quest IV CD-ROM, Alice, Please add .60 cents for shipping Who Killed Sam Rupert?, The Incredible Machine, Use the blank lines on the detachable order form bound in this SimLife, World Circuit, Dune Il and Patriot. magazine to specify the issue numbers you want. Some issue Contains special section on Gary Grigsby's Pacific numbers are in limited supply, so please list one or more alterWar, sneak preview of Tony La Russa Baseball Il nate selections (this will expedite your order in case your and much more. requested issue is sold out). Indexes and Older Back Issues are Available CUN GOES TO WA EAN SEAL Team #106 (May, 1993) COMPUTER GATOR LO Telegaming Features include: SEAL Team sneak preview, Pentium analysis, a game listing of network and private BBS games, strategy guide for Dune Il and the following reviews: Ultima Underworld II, Ringworld, CyberStrike, Shadow of Yserbius, SVGA Air Warrior, Conquered Kingdoms, Special Forces, and AV8B Harrier, as well as additional full-length critiques. CGW Indexes CGW Article Indexes for the years 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, and 1992 are now available. Please send a large selfaddressed stamped envelope and $1.00 per index (specify which years) to: Computer Gaming World, Index Dept., P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. 24 COMPUTER #107 (June, 1993) GAMING WORLD Soorto Santian Sports Section Features include: Hell Cab sneak preview, 18 config files for frustrated gamers, play design strategy for Front Page Sports: Football, and Pre-20th Century Wargame Survey. Reviews include: Tony La Russa Baseball II, Greens, Wilson Pro Staff Golf, Hockey Simulator II, Alone in the Dark, Veil of Darkness, X-Wing and a dozen more. Older Back Issues For a list of older CGW back issues and their prices, please send a large self-addressed envelope to: Computer Gaming World, Archive Dept., P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Please allow four weeks for delivery. Note: to avoid unnecessary delays, do not include a request for both indices and older back issues in the same letter. Please send separate requests. mm-12 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \"I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Everything Old Is New Again by Alan Emrich Art by Rodger MacGowan; 1993 RBM Graphics GOMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD In this issue ... SSI's Clash of Steel by M. Evan Brooks .. 132 Clash of Steel Strategy, Part by Alan Emrich ... 134 QQP's Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Disk #1 by Randall Black ... 142 here is nothing as rewarding or rejuveSpeaking of Empire Deluxe, let me thank nating as going on the summer game everyone who has complimented me on the convention circuit. Game conventions recent publishing of the book Empire Deluxe: like Origins, Gen-Con and the local convenThe Official Strategy Guide. I'll be sure to pass tions in L.A. and Phoenix deliver a full jolting those kudos along to my co-author, Mark dose of the board wargaming experience. Af \"skulker\" Carroll. ter attending the summer games of '93, 1 am ready to fight the good editorial fight on behalf of my brothers-in-(simulated-)arms. New Business The wargame market, both board and comI do have one exciting announcement to puter, seems to be holding steady after a make, and that is the formation of the Comcouple of years of fairly healthy growth, so as mand HQ Player's Club. An independent the ranks of strategy gamers increase, the group operating with the blessings of both trends noted here become more fun to watch. MicroProse and Ozark Softscape, the CHQ In the \"old business» department, Scott Player's Club is comprised of many of that Hamilton made a public debut of his Aide de game's most ardent fans. Because of the proCamp program by sharing a booth with The gramming skills of some of its members, Gamers at Origins '93 in Fort Worth over they've developed (on their own!) a 2.02 verthe July 4th weekend. This board warsion of the game. This upgrades players above game computer PBEM construction set and beyond the current 1.97 version, includcaused considerable buzz among the faithful ing bug fixes (particularly eliminating the grognards attending, most of whom had «dock scan\" bug) plus a few new features and heard about ADC from this magazine. For enhancements. I've seen and played this new them, seeing was believing, and Scott was version of Command HQ, and it has definitely very satisfied with sales at the show. Better renewed my interest in this classic, heartstill for wargamers everywhere is his persistpounding wargame. ence in getting board wargame companies to For more information, contact: join the Aide de Camp bandwagon and put their games on disk using the ADC system. Modem Games, Inc. c/o Information Management Services Announcements, presumably, will be forth2040 Avenue of the Start, Suite 400 coming, although the possibilities of Los Angeles, CA 90067 TSR/SPI games becoming licensed using ADC were described as «a snowball's chance to join the CHQ Player's Club, send them in hell...in July...during a heat wave.\" It $20. Members receive a 3.5\" diskette (unless looks like players will have the vast SPI war5.25\" is specified) with the 2.x version of the games collection left to their own creative game, plus they are placed on the roster to juices. play with other club members. Presumably, Our New World Computing Empire De there will be some sort of club communicaluxe tournament continues apace. However, tions (newsletters, e-mail, etc.) which will be the summer vacation schedules of many parwell worth reading, if for no other reason than ticipants has caused us to delay, for one issue, to follow the development of the Version 3 the results of the next round. With a trip to code for CHQ that these guys are currently L.A. to see New World Computing, Comworking on (which may include a random puter Gaming World, plus various other local map generator, scenario editor and more). attractions (like an excursion to a quaint little Until next time, I'll be sharpening my skills place called Disneyland) in the grand prize at the new version of Command HQ and offering, it's no wonder the competition is so longing to get away with dropping the first fierce! nuke. cow Wargames Survey 1900-1950, Part II by M. Evan Brooks .. 144 Elpin System's Conquer For Windows by Neil Harris..... 150 Three-Sixty's High Command by Terry Lee Coleman 156 SSG's Carriers At War Construction Kit by Bob Proctor .... 160 Software Sorcery's Jutland CD by H. E. Dille ..... 164 Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own free ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX (714-283-3444] or e-mail (Prodigy [EXPT40B), CompuServe (76703,622), The Sierra Network (Box 1048), GEnie and America Online CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send your request every other month if you want to keep your name listed. The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However,  Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing Games being played other than by direct modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers. . Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. The Networks The following are voice contact numbers for many of the on-line network services that connect gamers. For more information, call: America Online: (800) 827-6364; CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990; Novalink Network (formerly Digital Dreams): (800) 274-2814; GEnie: (800) 638-9636; Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME: National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096; Prodigy: (800) 822-6922x556; The Sierra Network: (800) SIERRA-1; and USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Bulletin Board Systems Thunderbolt! BBS in Chicago, IL now offers on-line entertainment with Poker Blackjack, Bingo, Galactic Empire, Zorgon, Quest for Magic, The Arena and Flash Games (\"The Next Generation\" of online gaming). Play RPGs with on-line multi-sided dice! Eric Spanitz, SYSOP. Modem settings 8-N-1, 300/1200/2400. Phone (312) 248-4822. Will you hack and slash your way through a real-time, multi-user dungeon or attempt to conquer an entire galaxy? It's your choice when you call The Batboard TBBS in Columbia, MO. Enjoy the true AD&D action of Legends and the professional e-mail game VGA Planets (with an off-linc VGA interface) or tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including ANSI Pro Football, Char Roulette, BandWarz, role-playing, strat egy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for highest monthly scores, with full access on your first call (and it's free)! Two CD-ROMs on-line, with the latest in quality shareware games! FidoNet echoes (including GAMING), multiline chat, the adult role-playing game Wild Side-visit today for the best in multi-line diversions! We're always open 24 hours at (314) 446-0475 with 14400 bps supported. The Elfspiere Tome is a fantasy role-playing G.M. resource bulletin board featuring role-playing echos, on-line games, fantasy clipart and much more. 1200 9600 bps. Call (415) 595-2387. Opponents wanted for XSHIP, a space conquest strategy game. The game is played via BBS with two to ten players per game. Game turns update as fast as the players take their turns. For more information, call the Battlefield BBS in North Babylon, NY at (516) 669-0522 300/1200/2400 8-N-1. The Vanguard Information Systems BBS in Boston is looking for more gamers for their 70+ on-line games. VIS has two gigs containing over 8,000 files. Call at (617) 267-7168 (up to 14,400 v32bix 8N1). Downloads okay on first call! No fee!! Call the Missile Silo BBS. Contestants wanted for Command HQ, F-29 Retaliator and many others. Tournaments to be held soon. Files, message base and (soon to come) on-line games. Running on Telegard 2.5 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Located in Skokie, L outside of Chicago. Call (708) 581-1735. Mention this ad in CGW for no-hassle access validation. The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (AD&D, GURPS), play-bye-mail games (Diplomacy, ASL), Empires at War (a Napolconic on-linc game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 [2400 8-N-1] Free access. The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky, Command HQ, The Perfect General and Global Conquest (just to name a few!). We have on-line games, message base and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton, NJ at either: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342; 9600 v.32 (908) 706-0305; HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The World of Windows is looking for some great game players like you! Try your skill and compete for monthly prizes. Sports: Drag racing excitement at The Motor City Raceway, a fishing tournament at The Freshwater Fishery, play in the Tournament Golf game or even pick your favorite NFL team and play some Pro-Bowl Football. In RPGS there is the post-apocalyptic horrors in The Land of Devastation, warriors collide in The Pit, explore Sin Baud's Dungeon or conquer the galaxy during Trade Wars 2002. For Strategy games, try our ChessMagic chess tournament, deluxe versions of Scrabble and Blackjack, or solve a murder at the Who-Dun-It Hotel Modem settings are 8-N-1, 300-38400! There is free access and thousands of Windows games to download for off-line enjoyment. Call today at (305) 751-3117. The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn. IL invites you to join their Tradewar 2002 game. Fly your spaceship, battle the Ferrengi and other traders. Download TWRULES.ZIP before starting. Once you start, you may not restart for 4 months. Only 150 players maximum per game. Call (708) 424-6136. Space Station Aragon welcomes all adventure gamers to call (206) 277-5489 in Bellevue, WA. This unique board features free downloads of the latest demos from many major software companies and text files on subjects like Star Trek and Star Wars. Take part in our forums to discuss and get hints on the latest games. Take a break and play one of our adventure doors. Sysops llibard and Tiern. Dune BBS is seeking modem gamers like you! Modem warrior message area and on-line games. Running on remote access 1.1+, Operates 24 hours/day, 7 days/week. Located in the Milwaukee, WI area: (414) 571-0584 at 2400 14.4k: 8,N,1. The Ho-Down BBS wants you to \"test your metal\" in multi-player games of Spaceward. Hol Are you tired of beating 19 smart computer players in a small galaxy Want a real challenge? Try competing against the most deadly, devious, dastardly, dangerous, diabolical, double-crossing dealers of death and destruction this side of Deneb. In other words, against players just like you! Call with modem set at 8-N-1, up to 14400 bps, (206) 577-8868. The Elfspire Tome is a fantasy role-playing GM resource bulletin board featuring role-playing echos, on-line games, fantasy clip art and much more. Baud rates between 1200 9600, call (415) 595-2387. The Mac Commonwealth BBS in metro New Orleans is sponsored by the National Home & School Mac User Group, a nonprofit organization promoting leisure and learning on the Mac. Our multi-line system features over 1 gigabyte of downloadable files, with emphasis on games and educational material. On-line magazines, Usenet newsgroups, OneNet conferences and Internet e-mail. Support file sections for over 60 commercial games! First Class graphic user interface. All lines support 1200 v.32bis 14,400 access. For information on BBS and group activities, send inquiries to NHSMUG, PO Box 640641, Kenner, LA 70064. BBS line 1: (504) 837-7984. The Gaming Connection BBS in Everett, WA specializes in connecting modem-tomodem players. Give it a call at (206) 742-4044,24 hours a day. Join a Gaming Ladder and make new friends to challenge. Empire Deluxe and Harpoon scenarios, plus access to everything (including over 5,000 files) available on the first call! Conventions The 510th Tactical Fighter Wing invites you to attend SIM-CON '93, the premier flight sim event of this year. Scheduled activities for this 2-day event include head-tohead, solo and team competitions featuring Falcon 3.0 and MiG-29. There will be lectures from well known fighter pilots and hands-on instruction on a variety of top computer combat flight sims. Hourly drawings for software and computer flight accessories will be held, and attendees can sit in Thrustmaster's ultimate flight sim cockpit. Registration includes a chance at the grand prize drawing, a day at Air Combat USA. Be there October 9th & 10th, 1993 at the Dunfey Hotel in San Marco, California. Registration is $20. For more information, contact: The 510th TFW.45 N. First Street, Suite 142, San Jose, CA 95113. By Area Code Seeking opponents for Global Conquest. Please call Steffen H. in Wilton, CT at F1205) 702-041. Local opponents sought for The Perfect General, Command HQ, Empire Deluxe and others in the Seattle-to-Arlington area of Washington state. Call voice at (206) 252-4838 and ask for Leonard Coyle. The 24-hour modem number is (206) 742-4044. I'm interested in playing The Perfect General by modem. Please contact Mike Baker in Whitehall, PA at H-215) 820-5765 or W-(215) 821-6723. S eeking modem players or face-to-face opponents in the Denver area for strategic and tactical strategy games including Command HQ, Global Conguest and The Perfect General. Also, will play most old SSI games. Contact Bill Whiteford at H-(303) 757-7247. Opponents wanted for World Circuit and Command HQ. Please, local opponents preferred in the Green Bay, WI area, Call Mark at H-(414) 494-1331. I'm seeking modem warriors in the Omaha, NE arca for Command HQ. 688 Attack Sub, F-29 Retaliator and Card Driver. Call Greg Sewald at H-(402) 597-2837. Seeking pilots to go head-to-head in Falcon 3.01 and/or F-15 III, preferably in the San Francisco area. Call John at H-(415) 468-2021 or my BBS at (415) 468-6713. Opponents wanted for Conquered Kingdoms, Perfect General, Mech Force, Romance of the 3 Kingdoms and others. I own an Amiga and an IBM clone. Please, call mornings at my H-(516) 758-7823 or write to Nick Galante, 246 Fairharbor Drive, Patchogue, NY 11772-3344. Looking for opponents who prefer to be well above the confines of the ground. Will challenge in Falcon 3.01 OFT or F-15 III. Call John \"Eagle\" at H-(501) 394-0139. che 1 Local opponents preferred. I'm willing to duel in any flight sim! (603) 437-3417. Seeking local opponents for Command HQ and Conquered Kingdoms. Contact Joe at H-(708) 782-6272 in the Chicago suburbs. Seeking opponents (especially local) for Command HQ, The Perfect Generaland Bartle Chess. Am I the only person in my area pying these games? (Surely not!) My limited phone budget will allow me to only call local opponents, but I'm always up to a challenge match (particularly in CHQ) if you're willing to call. Contact Charles Mosteller in Greer, South Carolina at H-(803) 895-1058. Please leave a message if I'm not home, I'm looking for local opponents for modem gaming around the Anchorage, AK area. The Perfect Generaland Congwered Kingdoms are my favorites. Please call Jeff at H-1907) 428-3841 anytime. Seeking Empire Deluxe and Perfect General players in the Temecula, CA area. Call Johnny at H-(909) 676-7251. Cow October 1993 Page 131 "


"REVIEW Clashing In On World War 11 SSI's Clash of Steel by M. Evan Brooks 2x70 lash of Steel (COS) is a strategic simuif a mistake is made, the OOPS key will allow In discussing COS with Alan Emrich, I lation of «Hitler's War\" covering both the player to \"undo\" the move. discovered that he is more of a gamesman. He European Theater fronts. Previewed Air power is just as simple access the tarAir power is iust as simple access the tar strives to determine optimal play, while I am by Alan Emrich in CGW #109, he charac, ne characger and hit \"Strike.\" The closest available airmore inclined to attempt a historical play terized it as \"High Command Lite.\" I agree, clement will attempt to carry out a mission, ent will attempt to carry out a mission, pattern. Thus, I recommend an historical pattern. and would add that COS is reminiscent of one which may cause massive damage or be interapproach to victory, both for its inherent of my favorite board wargames Hitler's War cepted, or elements of both. Seapower is a realism and its challenge. (Metagaming/Avalon Hill). more abstract affair with units moving be In effect, I recommend a \"Clockwise CruWhile SSI's own Storm Across Europe covtween sea areas and attempting to gain local sadeconquer Poland in September/Octoered the same subject in a similar format, it's superiority. ber 1939, and then turn on France in interface and gameplay were so awkward as November/December. Begin by taking our to make it all but unplayable. COS is a Clash Revivis? the Benelux (two Panzer formations supplegamer's game-quick-playing, entertaining A few minor bugs and inconsistencies have mented by airpower can easily accomplish and reasonably accurate. An entire campaign crept into the game, but not enough to dethis in a single impulse). Then, drive on Paris. (1939-1845) can be played in as few as six stroy its considerable playability. When playThe only thing that can damage the player is hours. ing a single Allied power, the computer will a short game turn; but if impulses range beoccasionally reach into one's treasury to tween nine and eleven, the Wehrmacht can The Rules Of War spend saved resources on bomber producliterally be shifted nach Osten and be ready to The documentation is SSI-standard. While tion. Also, Sweden has a tendency to raise its invade Russia by April/May 1940. this is less than an endorsement, the game is convoy resource value from two to three. virtually self-teaching and a user can rapidly These few trifling contradictions in the manpick up the stream of play. As for those ual detract little from the game, and correcgamers wanting to know the formulae and tions will in all likelihood find their way into nuances of the program, see Mr. Emrich's a future patch. BE article in this issue. COS should not be missed. While the vicThe graphics are 256-color VGA-well tory conditions are an overly simplisticall-ordone, clear and distinct. The sound is reputed nothing, the myriad of options coupled with to be well done, but for those who like myself a relatively short playing time allows one to have a Pro AudioSpectrum 16, a basic incomtest out his favorite theories of what should patibility exists. I understand that those with and shouldn't work. The bottom line is that a compatible sound card will enjoy an audio COS will remain on my hard drive for a long track that sounds like a Hollywood wartime to come. Optimally, Russia should be conquered in movie. Pressing To Victory a single campaign season. However, it is difficult to achieve, and the German player Getting There From Here (Strategy Notes) should be ready to assume a defensive posture The basic units of COS are corps and arLet's face it-most gamers like to try a with local counterattacks once winter strikes. mies. Each hex is 50 miles across and turns World War II game from the German side. By attacking in 1940, the Germans will find are in two-month increments with variable In recreating history, it is more entertaining the Russians off-balance; the Stalin Line of \"impulses\" allowing a game turn to last beand challenging to try to win as the historical fortifications will still be on the drawing tween two and eleven turns. Generally, winloser. Thus, most of my tips are directed to board and not an obstacle board and not an obstacle to overcome. ter turns are short (and when one is facing the player assuming the German role. The German Offensive must be carefully \"General Winter\" on the Russian steppes, the planned. Leningrad can be conquered by two shorter the berrer), while summer turns allow army groups supplemented with the paraenough maneuver time for massive redeploytroops and two air units. While ments and offensives. TITLE: Clash of Steel the airborne can only affect comPRICE $69.95 Though the game may be played via keybat on the first impulse of a turn, SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 1.7MB hard drive space. board, irs beauty is in its mouse implementathey negare any river advantage VGA graphics tion. The interface may be summed up in one PROTECTION: Documentation look up and often disrupt the defenses. word-smooth! Click on a unit, click on a # OF PLAYERS: Leningrad should easily fall. AlDESIGNER: Martin Scholz destination, and that's it. Alternately, units though Russian forces remain PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. may be moved hex-by-hex. In either case, Sunnyvale, CA near Vologda, they seldom as(408) 737-6800 there is little opportunity for error, and even sume an offensive posture. HAI 1944 Clash of Steel 0-2 Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"Moscow is not much more difficult to capture, with the following caveat: Do not make Army Group Center too strong-three Panzer units and two infantry units should be sufficient to seize Moscow. While this may seem too little, it should capture the capital with its last offensive gasp, and then assume a defensive posture slightly to the east. Army Group South is the decisive front. Stalingrad must be captured to begin the Russian collapse. Therefore, strike south of the Priper Marshes and drive east. While Odessa is a tempting target, it is a trap, leadto swamplands and a morass of defenders. Using the weak German allies (Hungarians and Rumanians), one can often pocket the Odessa defenders. If the German is \"Lucky\" Rumania will remain neutral and not allow a broader front for the inevitable Russian Winter Offensive. While the German player may often not conquer Stalingrad before winter's onset, he should be poised to resume the offensive when the weather improves. Once the weather warms up, Stalingrad can be seized. Then it's simply holding on for dear life and hoping that the Russian hordes do not achieve any major breakthroughs. The Odessa units may break northwest and threaten Warsaw, but so what? As long as Berlin is garrisoned, the Russians will collapse before any offensive bears fruit. Remember, make the right wing strong! The invasion of England can only occur on the ti the first phase of a turn, so don't send out the fleet until the invasion is about to commence. While the fleet may be lost in battle, it will have served its purpose, and a quick capture of London will often obviare the need for an external supply source (mobile harbor). The Italian Fleet can also be used to reinforce the Kriegsmarine in a Mediterranean dash to the North Sea. Shades of Tsushima? Hopefully ma? Hopefully nor! Airborne and air forces from the Continent will buttress the German offensive across the plains of England until a victory is achieved. It should be emphasized that the errata card in the documentation must be carefully scrutinized. While the manual notes that the Commonwealth may be conquered by the German occupation of London and Liverpool, the errata card has added Alexandria to the requirements for Commonwealth surrender. This literally changes the complexion of the game. By making Alexandria an integral victory condition, both sides have a need to reconsider what had been a meaningless diversion of effort. Other concerns: (a) Research: Deciding on what to research and how much to spend are choices that can be endlessly reargued. Alan Emrich prefers a broad approach with lower odds, while I prefer a greater emphasis on one or two areas (generally heavy tank and MLRS or Panzerfausts). (b) Scenarios: There are six start times for the \"campaign game.\" One will notice that the Fall of France 1940 Scenario begins with the Germans stronger than they could ever be if the game had commenced in 1939. As a gamer once noted, if Hitler had played a boardgame of the war, he rolled 's for the first two vears: thereafter the odds evened out. first two years; thereafter the odds evened out. (c) Strategic Bombing: Is it a good idea? Generally, I prefer to build elsewhere. Germany never envisioned a need for strategic bombers, and by the time one has the luxury of being able to afford them, their utility is virtually unnecessary. For further tips on Clash of Steel, see the following article. Cow COMPUTER SPORTS GAMES TASTEST IBM  APPLE II C-64 CD DRIVE ON THE MARKET THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! ID-Ft Wous COSCIAL BUNDLE MAC/PC OPECIAL BUNDLE IBM/MPC Chessmaster 3000 Loom Secret of Monkey Island Stellar 7 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy. Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule 766 tcams included, NFL, WFL, USFL, WLAF & College from 1925 to present  Trade , draft or input teams. Standings and League Leaders FULL COUNT BASEBALL You manage all 26 most recent teams and 52 great past teams 45 man roster Stats compiler. Complete boxscore to screen/ printer . Auto scheduler. Input your own teams, draft or trade players  Wind/Weather Option. You choose starting line-up, batting order, bunt for a hit, steal Standings and League Leaders! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 LANGE HAENER GAMES P.O.BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 Circle Reader Service #65 October 1993 205 With purchase of drive! RCA stereo Jacks Front headphone Jack Personal head phone set Two stereo speakers Double enclosure door Automatic lens cleaner Plays audio COS Fast 200ms access time 330 KB/sec transfer rate Multi-spin technology Photo CD capability MTBF 50,000 hr's Two CD-Roms LOSH BILA Call for a FREE CO-Rom catalog filled with our complete line of CDs & Multimedia accessories! a 1-800-777-3642 O stanty Comptes Circle Reader Service #87 Page 133 "


"STRATEGY goss Not steel _Reic/ms [Rll Trend@les/Ossysclososfeel, Part 1 bu Aloja Bonnber\" Einricl1 which makes sense. For land and air battles. air strikes, and when rolling for the end of the game turn, one has no table to consult to see what the actual probabilities are. Allow me to present this, among other, important tables for Clash of Steel. Each combat table presents four numbers per result. In order, they are: the attackers strength point loss/the defender's strength point loss and the attacker's morale loss percentage/the defender's morale loss percentage. Terms stuch as d(#) indicate a die roll Land Combat Results Table 0 D ack in the ancient days of wargaming (the 1960s), one publication glued the hobby together. The Avalon Hill Gentyal, now approaching its 30 year anniversary, was little more than a professionally printed fanzine in those days. A highlight of each issue was a major article which offered some sort of «pcrfect plan» for one side in a popular wargamc. (Of course, tlhe letters section of the next issue would be filled with additions, exceptions and methods for undoing every so-called «perfect plan). Like their boardgame kin, computer wargames have often lent themselves to developing perfect plans.» This is dtue, primarily, to the limits of the computer opponent's AI; when one figures out how ir plays, it can be countered and defeated almost every time. As wargame Al improves and multi-human player options (particularly modem play) continue to proliferate in computer wargames, the perfect plan Syndrome» should become less of an issue. But until then. Because I have found Clash of Steel to be such an enjoyable wargame to play, I've been inspired to really put it under the microscope. This article presents my findings, complete with strategic tips, for winning game play, and even «perfect plans» for would-be European conquerors. What Do The Die Rolls Mean? For cvcry land, air and sea battle, the computer shows players the random \"die roll\" and the results of that roll, but only for sea battles is the effect of any given die roll explained. At sea, the firing ship hits its targer if the die roll is less than or equal to the ship's strength. However, an undocumented feature secretly adds one to the die rolls of damaged ships, 0 odds >1: 21: 21: 12: 13: 14: 15:| 10+:1 Roll 12/ 02/ 01/ 01/ 01/ 01/0 0/0 0/2 90/5 90/1080/1070/10 60/2050/30 50/30 10/50 22/6 1/ 01/ 00/ oo/ Oo/ oo/ 10/3 90/ 5 7 8/16 62/16 52/22 48/32 38/36 38/36 10/50 3 2/0 1/0 1/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/1 0/3 88/6 70/2052/22 38/30 38/40 28/42 28/50 10/50 4 1/ 0 1 /0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/1 0/2 0/3 1 8 2/9 70/20 58/28 32/30 32/40 22/48 22/50 10/50 5 1/0 1/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/2 0/3 0/3 80/10 66/24 56/30 38/30 30/40 20/50 20/50 10/50 6 1/ 01/ 01/ 11/ 10/ 20/2 0/3 0/3 80/1060/3050/3050/3030/402o/502o/50  10/50 7 1/0 0/0 0/1 0/1 0/2 0/3 0/3 0/3 68/22 54/36 38/30 38/30 18/50 14/50 20/50 0 /50 8 1/0 0/0 0/1 0/2 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 56/34 48/42 28/34 28/44 10/50 10/50 18/50 10/50 9 0/0 0/1 0/1 0/2 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 44/46 42/48 22/46 22/50 10/50 10/50 12/50 10/50 10 0/0 0/1 0/1 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 40/50 40/50 20/50 20/50 10/50 10/50 10/50 10/50 0 Notes: A '2' or '3' loss result for the defender requires the unit to make a morale check to See if it retreals (see p. 31 in the manual). Attackers never check for retreat. A morale check fails if a d(100) is greater than the retreating unit's efficiency. If there is no retreat route or the unit fails a morale check while isolated, the unit is eliminated instead of merely dissolvedPage 134 Computer Gaming World "


"MICHAEL WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION DESIGN 1220 LYNDON STREET #22, SOUTH PASADENA, CA 91030 GREAT POSTER OFFER! AVAILABLE ONLY FROM WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION Might and Magic MICHAEL JAMES WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION DESIGN The Might and Magic poster is 19\" X 25\" and is printed on 100 lb. glossy paper. Might and Magic fans and fantasy art lovers here's PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY! SALES TAX INCLUDED your chance! This beautiful poster is available for only NAME $10.00 (+$2.00 shipping and handling). Also available ADDRESS are signed limited edition posters (a total of 500 in CITY/STATE the series) for only $38.00 (+$2.00 shipping and TELEPHONE ( ) handling). Just send the completed coupon with Posters at $10.00 each = payment to: WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION Limited Edition at $38.00 each = $ 1220 LYNDON ST. #22 Shipping & Handling $2.00 each = SOUTH PASADENA, CA 91030 TOTAL Might and Magic is a registered trademark of New World Computing Inc. APT. ZIP dling). JUSINTERBAUEDON ST. #251030    "


"Air-to-Air Combat Results Table -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 Strength Differential Roll 1/ 01/ 01/ 01/ 01/0 0/0 0/0 90/1080/1070/20 70/2020/70 10/80 10/90 1/0 1/0 1/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 80/10 70/20 60/30 60/40 30/60 20/70/ 10/80 1/0 1/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/1 70/10 60/2060/30 50/50 30/60 20/60 10/70 1/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/1 0/1 60/2050/30 50/30 30/30 30/50 30/50 20/60 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/1 0/ 1 0 /1 50/30 40/40 40/40 40/60 40/40 40/40 30/50 0/0 0/0 0/1 0/1 0/1 1 0/ 0 /1 40/40 30/50/ 30/60 20/70 60/30 50/30 40/40 Italian navies can combine, thus allowing them to form a decisive naval/invasion force at the time and place of their choosing. Generally, this will put England's neck on the chopping block. 4. Axis control of Gibraltar curs off the British Asia convoy PP income. This can add up to a lot of British PPs over time. 5. If the Axis fleet combines and controls the North Atlantic, America's economy is reduced to zero PPs--a disaster of the highest order for the Allies! 6. Finally, if Gibraltar falls to the Axis, the fortress in Malta disappears (although the entire strategic significance of that island is quickly rendered moot if the Axis push across French North Africa and roll the Allies out of Alexandria). A O Notes: Defending airplanes, if within four hexes of the target hex, have a 50% chance of intercepting and initiating air-to-air combat. The strength differential column is obtained by subtracting the interceptor's effective strength from the attacker's and truncating (dropping all the numbers after the decimal point) the result. The bombers are the attacker for purposes of reading this table. The asterisk on the computer results represents the strength point loss indicated on this table. Intervention Battle berween 1 and the number in parenthesis. For example, when a d(100) is mentioned, the computer generates a random number from 1-100. Hier 19 The Two Key Hexes Certain hexes are critical to take (as the Axis) or hold (for the Allies). Assuming the Axis take out Poland and France along hisH and France along historical lines (by the way, beginning the game with the attack on France in 1940 is greatly advantagcous to the Axis in terms of on-board production), the two critical hexes on the board become Gibraltar and Leningrad. The cornerstones of any Axis victory, it seems to me, are the control of these two spaces. Leningrad is crucial during a war with Russia as it is the first of the three cities (Moscow and Stalingrad being the others) that trigger Russian collapse. If Leningrad can be held (and its defensive geographical location greatly facilitates this prospect) the Finns will stay bottled up and the Russians will never surrender. My technique for holding Leningrad is to fortify the two hexes south of it, place infantry units in those fortifications, place my first Army Group HQ in Leningrad proper, and then put my first airplanes behind lake Ladoga to the northeast of the city. Next, I always commit an adequate number of forces to defend the swamps and forests in that area. Taking Leningrad is another matter. Often, seizing it requires at least one German HQ, a strong army unit, one or two air units, the Finnish army unit plus both Finnish corps (arracking in succession on the same impulse), the paratroops (to negate the river effect on the city's south side) plus whatever help the German navy can contribute by way of shore bombardment. Leningrad can be a tough nut to crack, but crack it the Axis must if they ever hope to start the clock on a BOE Russian Surrender and have a chance to win the war. Getting A Piece Of The Rock (Of Gibraltar) The next, and by far more crucial, key hex on the map is Gibraltar. Basically, the entire war can be won by control of this single port war can be won by control of this single port Sadly for the Allies, when playing against a city. I'll leave techniques for attacking and computer, Spain almost always joins the Axis defending Gibraltar up to individual player cause due to diplomatic pressure (as I'll expreference, but let me support my statement plain in Part 2), so Gibraltar's position ofren as to its importance by citing the consebecomes quickly untenable. quences should Gibraltar fall to the Axis: 1. The Allied navy is cut in two. All the The Key Area naval forces in the Mediterranean are trapped In addition to Leningrad and Gibraltar, (they cannot escape through Alexandria by there is one particularly vital area on the map, way of the Suez canal). If the Allies have no and controlling it means being able to call the transport ships in the tune on the war's strategic flanks. That area Mediterranean (which is the usual case), the Air Strike/Shore Bombardment Table Axis can free up every coastal garrison there Strength 1 2 3 4 for other duties, giving them a major man2/0 1/0 0/0 0/0 power boost on the Rus80/0 80/108 0/10 80/10 sian front! 1/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 2. Gibraltar connects 70/10 60/20 60/20 60/30 Europe to Africa, mak0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 ing it a single supply block and allowing for 60/10 60/2050/30 50/40 redeployments across its 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 straits. Thus, the Axis 60/1050/30 40/30 40/40 can reinforce Africa via 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 Gibraltar without ever 40/30 40/30 30/40 30/50 having to risk their 0/0 0/0 0/0 0/0 transports in battle 40/40 30/40 30/50 20/60 against the Allied navy. (Note: Constantinople Notes: Losses for the air units are on the left side of the slash. in Turkey has this same While ships conducting shore bombardment ignore all losses, effect.) striking with a depleted air unit can sometimes result in its own 3. The German and self-destruction. Roll On A WN 8888888888 Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"BERICE CYBERDREAMS\" CYBERRACE A REVOLUTIONARY 3D COMBAT AND RACING SIMULATION DESIGNED BY WORLD-FAMOUS FUTURIST SYD MEAD, WHOSE DESIGN CREDITS INCLUDE BLADE RUNNER, TAON, 2010, AND STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE, EUTATINUIT SOUBE Avallable for the IBM PC and Compatibles (August 1993). Commodore Amiga (March 1994) and Apple Macintosh (March 1994). For further information please contact: North America (818) 348-3711  Europe (071) 328-3267 (U.K.) Cyberdreams and CyberRace are trademarks of Cyberdreams, Inc. 01993 Cyberdreams, Inc. Illustration 01992 Oblagon, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #46 "


"MINISM \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG,1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00: 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia S57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. Circle Reader Service #81 DRACULA In London wily opponent. It is an experience I highly Fighters Vs. Strategic Bombers recommend Each fighter on \"Guard\" duty has a 40% \"The Counterclock Conquest» chance per turn of affecting each enemy bomber. Each bomber affected has a 1/4 Here is the way to almost insure success as chance of being destroyed and a 3/4 the Axis against computer opponents in Clash chance of being turned back for that turn. of Steel. After the fall of Poland, the German army moves like the sweeping hands of a is the Middle East. Between Persia (4 PP) and clock, counter-clockwise, starting in France, southern Russia (11 PP), one can make or and going a full revolution through Spain, break their economy with the capture/loss of Africa, the Middle East, Russia, and then on this strategically vital region. to England. This is the precise path of the The strategic position occupied by the MidGerman schwerpunkt (\"spearhead\") as it addle East is as important as the resources it vances forward to victory. holds. When owned by the Allies, it allows The Axis should take out France as quickly the Soviets and Western Allies to cooperate as possible in 1939-40, accepting a Vichy fully by sending troops back and forth. Thus, Government if offered, and then immedithe Russians can help campaign in the Mediately declaring war on it, occupying Marterranean and the Western Allies can serve on seilles in the process. Early purchases should the Russian Front. (Players haven't lived until include U-boats (at worst, replacing losses, they see Patton in the Ukraine!) When owned but preferably to build up strength in the by the Axis, it generally signals the fall of North Atlantic), HQs and air units. Alexandria and an attack on Russia's southern flank. Therefore, Persia is a vital link in the game's strategic chain. The Axis' «Perfect Plan» By applying all of the notes, tables and tips from above, I've developed a «perfect plan» for the Axis (particularly when playing against a standard computer opponent) and some interesting plans for the Allies to try as well. In truth, role-players and adventure gamers would call this plan a spoiler as it attempts to \"crack\" Clash of Steel and may detract from future enjoyment of the game. After all, once you know the \"perfect plan,\" why bother to Mass up the Wehrmacht (German Army) play? The puzzle has been solved. along the entire Spanish border and march it Well, I say \"Poo!\" to that. For one thing, as rapidly as possible down through to Mathere are enough ways to vary the game and drid (here Spain usually surrenders) and on handicap players versus the AI in Clash of Steel to Gibraltar. By the end of 1940, Spain to keep it interesting for a long, long time. should have fallen and, after Gibraltar joins Also, there is more than one way to skin a cat, it, the counter-clock will run on automatic so players will still be challenged to come up for a while across the long and narrow desert with their own, alternate \"perfect plans.\" Fin front. nally, and above all else, Clash of Steel is about the best multi-human-player-hot-seat comKeep the Russian border garrisoned with at puter wargame that's ever come down the least enough troops to reduce their chances of pike. If any reader can, by hook or crook, get preparing for war (see p. 38 of the manual). Production should then concentrate on a wargaming buddy to come over so that they can play a game of Clash of Steel together, the building up the \"anvil» (i.e., building up a result will be sublime. With the predictable large ground force with which to attack RusAl out the window, both sides will have to sia) and keeping the «hammer\" (the units develop new plans with which to confront a marching through Spain) up to full strength. In particular, be sure to build the paratroops for the assault on Leningrad. However, HQs, armies, air units and tanks will all prove useful, so build some of those, too. After Gibraltar falls, make sure the Allies have no transports in the Mediterranean. If this is the case (and it usually is), strip every garrison army out of the Mediterranean and send them off to Poland to join the \"anvil chorus\" for the coming Russian campaign. Do not attack Russia in 1941! Instead, spend a year preparing the Polish anvil while the Panzers and airplanes roll across Africa. L 1995 BASED ON BRAM STOKER'S ORIGINAL NOVEL For Windows. Excellent graphics, interface, sounds! Count Dracula is somewhere in London. Use your wits to track down the bloodthirsty vampire and put an end to his evil menace. Assume the role of Prof. Van Helsing, the renowned metaphysician or Mina Harker, the alluring young schoolmistress. Learn the secrets of Renfield, the madman. Explore haunted mansions and much more.. SGC Sr. Mentand . .Am $29 cach. Mail check, cash or World Renowned money order to: Rcoulres: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Windows 3.1 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. VGA graphics St. Louis, MO 63131 386 25Mhz or faster Supports Sound Blaster (314) 966-5602 (Evenings Only) Easy to Install Nor avallable in stores. Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back. 202212212 Par er 11 Circle Reader Service #92 Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


")      . CORRUPTION INTO TH , FOLLOW THE TRAIL OF  . MOST POWERFUL CONSPIRACY l        bor  1 It  untth a la+avy ter art that I   o you, TIO THE KGB HAS EVER KNOWN     ,  ( 300  6.600            7   3     (800 500        ,        /   TO       \"   ,       ,  .   . ( arp    2 THY EC SABO CONSPHADI FEATURING DONALD SUTHERLAND        ,4 .  ,     ,   hu,            .          opposeccop, pekt 81      mor  These are the years when only dead men smiled, when Moscow writhed under the glare of Perestroika and your first murder investigation for Dept. Pof the KGB leads you straight into the disintegrating halls of power. DONALD SUTHERLAND is your father and only ally. A former KGB agent, he will shrewdly guide you through CONSPIRACy with state-of-the-art digitized speech and video. Actual TV footage of the Soviet crisis also heightens the very real peril of your assignment. But even SUTHERLAND can go only so far into the KGB. Uncover the conspiracy while you still can... * Extensive hints and help crisis as it FEATURES: * Extensive video of Donald Sutherland as your father gives you hints and help throughout the game. * TV footage of the Soviet crisis as it unfolded. + Movie-like storyline filled with surprising twists and intrigue. GAMES ROM  1993 Virgin Garnet. The All Wheerd. Vir direkt in Photos CONSPIRACY ha trademark of Virgin Games, Inc.  a t Result   Circle Reader Service #105 "


"NU NOT NO NW Allied Strategic Bomlar Attack Hati Bukurs IRIM Eina re Intes MAN MU Na 1944 Remember, after Gibraltar End of Turn Table Once firmly planted in Engfalls, redeployments and reinland, the Axis armies should The row used is based on the current weather in the large) \"Temperate forcements can usually be prevail. Game over. Zone.\" A turn will continue if the die roll is less than the number indicated. brought in as far forward as Tobruk on the very next turn. Some Allied Plans Impulse 1 2 3 4 5 The goal is to capture Alexan6 7 8 9 10+ Clear 7 7 7 7 6 6 5 4 For the Allies, I've develdria and then Syria and the Mud/Snow Mud/Snow 7 7 5 4 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 oped a couple of interesting Middle East. The deadline to strategies that I like to use to complete all of these conFighting Them On The Beaches pull the computer player's tail quests is early 1942. every now and again. They can also be used The Summer Of Once Russia begins to accumulate surrento tweak the nose of a human opponent, der points, use the now humongous German although usually with less effect. Declare war on the May/June turn of 1942. economy to crank up the fleet and prepare to The first is the \"Plan 17 Revivis\" option. If Russia opens hostilities with a preemptive conquer England. Be sure to build the amWith that, I like to attack Germany with the declaration of war, consider pressing Hunphibious port along with all planes and ships. French on the first turn of the 1939 scenario. gary (and, possibly, Bulgaria) to supporting The air force needs to be positioned along the I've been able to capture the Ruhr about half the Axis. Don't involve Rumania until \"the North Sea coast in anticipation of the coming the time, as well as the resources near it. This hammer\" coming up through the Middle naval Armageddon that will ensue when Eng. really messes with the Al's \"mind.» Of course, East is in place. At that point, stretch the land is attacked. I usually have to evacuate back to the MagiRussians as thin as possible to pave the path As long as Gibraltar is still Axis controlled, not line by the Spring, and the French will to victory the Axis Heets (German and Italian) can comtake some early losses, but the strategic effect bine, while the Allied fleers in the Atlantic upon the Axis campaign in the West in 1940 and Mediterranean are separated. Although can be quite unbalancing. the Axis can draw the Allied Atlantic naval To enhance my chances with the French forces into battle at any time by sailing into attacking the Germans in 1939, I will usually the North Sea, and can completely halt the commit at least one British army to the con+ + + + + + + American economy by gaining complete continent and have it garrison Paris or the northtrol of the North Atlantic, one needn't really ernmost hex of the Maginot line. With a focus on either of those strategic options. major Allied commitment of production Instead, one need only worry about sailing this combined fleet on the turn England is scheduled for invasion. le F. Since it will usually be a clear weather turn in the temperate area, one should invade England in the Autumn of '43 (if one does FEE During the opening campaign in Russia, not wait for the entire German navy to arrive) concentrate on two key thrusts: the first being or the Summer of '44. Also, by this time, made by the hammer\" forcing up through much of the German economy will have gone the mountains of Iran into Russia's vital to upgrading units to their fullest potential southern resources (once a city is captured, (where the computer player is usually slow to redeploy units and send reinforcements there improve its forces), so that in individual baton the next turn). The second thrust musttles, these upgraded Axis units will usually come off the \"anvil» force and capture Lenprevail. ingrad. Be sure this \"anvil\" thrust includes the Tips for conquering England: points spent building up the French army and German paratroops, as they will be needed to sending every available Brit) and some luck, breech the rivers and fortifications around the a) shift bombers to Commonwealth pro the Germans can even be prevented from ancient Russian capital. duction; conquering France in 1940. If that happens, b) invade around London first, then grind its a whole new ball game for the Allies: One move that will greatly aid the fall of Russia is to assign the Axis bombers to the on into Liverpool; My other Allied plan is to conquer the Middle East with the Allies early in the war Russian factories. Building one or two addi c) give priority to attacking American land (by the end of 1940 at the latest). When this tional bombers can greatly compound the units in England (since British troops occurs, the British economy is enlarged and Allies' problems in Russia, as they never comreceive the double strength benefit of both allies can shift forces to each other's mit their air units to strategic air defense. their \"Home Guard» rule). fronts. This makes holding Alexandria far Also, surrounding their units before destroyeasier after Gibraltar falls. ing them will take them out of the war for at least a year. Signing Off From Supreme By the winter of'42-43, Leningrad should Headquarters (For Now-) be conquered and Moscow and Stalingrad In part 2 of this in-depth look at Clash of either captured or threatened by Axis forces Steel, I will present some exhaustive tactical hoping to close their giant north/south pintips for conducting air and naval campaigns, cers somewhere between Saratov and Gorki. FEED an examination of economics and production Usually, Russia is ripe for easy conquest in strategies, insights into the diplomatic sys1943 when using the counter-clock conquest tem, plus more tables and formulae. Until plan, and her fare is sealed the moment she then, hunker in the bunker and give my begins to accumulate surrender points. regards to Berlin. CGW . na M MI Me 1996 Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"On final approach to the United States 1320 AIRBUS Developed in cooperation with Lufthansa and Deutsche Aerospace Airbus Trademarks \"AIRBUS\" and \"A320\" registered (applied for). Circle Reader Service #101 "


"REVIEW Photo by Susan Zurawik A Bridge Too Par QQP's Conquered Kingdoms Expansion Disk Offers Little To Celebrate Het ihale Night by 45.20 turns 280 points. UUS TO HE TO MINI Doom» scenario, the front gate of Imperial Castle lies flush with the shoreline, leaving no path from the castle onto land. When the castle was occupied by the computer opponent, Compolean, units appeared inside, but were unable to leave. They stacked up like cord wood on the ramparts. Since it was Compolean's only castle, it was a simple matter to surround it with archers in boats and pick off units as fast as they could be produced. When attacking units attempted entry by the only route left (from boats on the water), they were not allowed to enter the castle. The fortress only fell after being bombarded to the ground. The only challenge in by Randall Black this admittedly novel turkey shoot was having the patience to ship material to the site. In spite of the disappointing scenarios, some of the new ones are fun to play. \"Three QP's first scenario disk for Conquered bers. There is red water in some of the maps, Powers\" offers a compact arrangement of diKingdoms adds 14 scenario maps that and hills are now represented with stacked verse terrain that encourages fast and fierce can be used in the single battle mode. contours reminiscent of The Perfect General, combat among all variety of units. However, If there is an electronic cquivalent of gilding but all of the terrain types still function in it is really quite similar to \"Opposing Lands,\" the lily, this is it. In the tradition of QQP's exactly the same way: stopping or impeding one of the original scenarios. The major difThe Perfect General and The Lost Admiral, movement. ference is that some bridges have been added. Conquered Kingdoms is a gem of a game. That Several of the new maps are large and put means any software designed to augment the long distances between cities, castles and reoriginal Conquered Kingdom's high quality sources. Unfortunately, the implications for should be something special. Scenario Disk #1 a game in which most units move only three isn't. squares per turn, this promotes a marathon If one could report that the expansion disk race among a few types of fast units. not was \"more of the same,\" in the case of an combat. It's possible to play chess on a board excellent game like Conquered Kingdoms, that with more than the standard 64 squares; howwould be good news. Unfortunately, many TESLA RAILROTS ever, the absence of card table-sized chess of the maps provided boards in the living in this package don't rooms of wood pushThe greatest initial disappointment in the share the delicacy of ers reveals that bigger scenario disk is that the new maps don't work the nine original maps is not always better with the Cascatia campaign. Kings, officers nor their careful interand, when it comes to and hard-won bonuses of gold or extra startmingling of elements. strategy games, getting ing pieces make Cascatia interesting, and the If the intricately there is not half the long campaigns are where Conquered Kingmeshed land, sea, hills fun. Although spenddoms gets played most. A call to QQP reand mountains of the ing five turns to get an original maps can be compared to Faberge vealed that failure to make the new maps armada of boats across the sea-correctioneggs, many of the big, chunky designs of the ocean, in \"Sea of Doom» may create greater Cascatia-compatible was an oversight and an new maps could well be described as hastilytension at the prospect of losing the eventual update disk, which is expected to randomly dipped Easter eggs. Vast, unbroken expanses fight, the exercise begins to resemble a crossinsert the new maps into the campaign game, of a single terrain type characterize many of country drive with no prospect of stopping at will soon be available to owners who call or the maps and tend to introduce more redium Stuckey's. write. But given that a dry, long distance trek than challenge. Facile attempts to introduce Some of the maps have the appearance of like map #23, \"Hannibal's Nightmare,\" variety such as changing water color from having been hastily produced. Map 20, blue to red are predictably unsuccessful. Ficould show up, the original mix of scenarios \"Dragon's Claw,\" is marred with bracketlooks better than ever. Scenario Disk #1 does nally, where most of the originals had intershaped lines, blank boxes littering the landhave some bright spots, but considering its esting networks of rivers and scas to allow for scape, and tiny rectangles pointlessly jurting overall quality, it might be best if conquerors rapid transport and naval bombardment, sevfrom the shoreeral of the new scenarios ought to require let these kingdoms rest in peace. Cow armies to don stillsuits from Arrakis since aqueline. A stripe of they don't even include water. runs through this As for appearance, the game's overall aesand other maps. Conquered Kingdoms Expansion Disk #1 thetic is virtually unchanged by the expansion KUPGDOS Although slightly PRICE: $39.95 SYSTEM: disk. On the screen where warriors are deunsightly, these REQUIREMENTS: VGNEGA graphics, 550K hard drive space, mouse picted as sitting around a table and the player little glitches # PLAYERS: 1-2 head to head modem play) can select a scenario via \"point and click,\" PROTECTION: Documentation look up don't affect game DESIGNERS: Bruce Williams Zaccagnino and Thomas Searfoss there is a new button that says \"More Maps.\" play. Others do. PUBLISHER: QQP Pressing the button merely takes the player to 1046 River Avenue in the \"Sea of Flemington, NJ 08822 an identical scene with different map num(908) 368-9369 graphic \"noise\" Conquered Kingdoms Expansion Disk #1 TITLE: IBM Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"YOU WON'T BELIEVE YOUR EYES! 5SAANAPY You've heard about it, you've read about it, now experience the breakthrough of Microsoft's Flight Simulator v.5.0 with the breathtaking photo-realism of Mallard Software's new scenery. Never before seen real-time ray traced images take you over terrain so real you'll be checking for a seat belt. Layers of realistic clouds wisp past your screen just before completely obscuring your vision. Shadows change according to longitudinal and latitudinal position as the seasons and weather change along your course. The new satellite sceneries will take you over our nation's capital, Washington D.C. and the natural vistas of the west coast; Seattle, San Francisco, Los Angeles and San Diego. These images are so detailed and so real, you'll see what it really means to have a bird's eye view. So look for Mallard to bring you the most exciting new products in the coming months that will keep you on the edge of your seat and above all the rest. Mallard. For more information or to order call 1-800-WEB-FEET  1993 Mallard Software, Inc. Circle Reader Service #69 "


"Brooks' Book Of Wargames: 1900-1950, R-Z An Annotated Listing of Games From CGW's Wargames Editor by M. Evan Brooks s surely as the Triple Entente faced the the East. For a more contemporary treatment see Central Powers in The Great War and the Second Front. Allies confronted the Axis during World War II, magazine editors contend against demands ROCK OF STALINGRAD, THE (N-R) of space which exert a devastating zone of control (Ap) Benchmark Software; Stephen Newburg; over the original concept. When we first conceived 1983; O/P of these annotated listings (originally called paik xxx/xxx tographies, a neologism derived from the Greek An early attempt to simulate the World War II epic words for play and writing), we anticipated runBattle of Stalingrad. Command perspective, no ning one four-to-six page listing per quarter. Ungraphics. fortunately for us, but presumably of great fortune for wargamers, the number of releases has grown ROMMEL: BATTLES FOR NORTH AFRICA to such an extent that we can rarely run these ( t ) listings in a single issue. Last issue, we offered the (C/Ap/I; #50,51,64,65) Strategic Studies Group; first portion of the alphabet; this issue we conclude Roger Keating and lan Trout; 1988; $39.95 with games from R to Z. Adv/Land/Op/0-2 RAF: BATTLE OF BRITAIN (N-R) Rommel in the Battlefront system, this simulation (Ap/T) Discovery; Dave Arneson, Dave Wesley offers several famous battles of the African Camand Ross Maker; 1980; O/P paign as well as a \"design-your-own\" option. Beg/Air/Op-Str/1 A simulation of up to 12 fighter aircraft in the ROMMEL: BATTLES FOR TOBRUK (*+) World War II Battle of Britain. (A/Ap/C; #32,37,48,50) Game Designers' Workshop; Frank Chadwick; 1986; O/P REACH FOR THE SKIES (N-R) Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 (1; #79,106) Virgin; Rowan; 1993; XXX A tactical/operational simulation of World War Int/Air/Tac-Op/xxx II's desert battles, this game is very detailed and The Battle of Britain; more of a game than a complex. Supply and air rules are among the most simulation. Opening sequences, with graphics and elaborate ever devised, but sheer unplayability will sound, are superb, the remainder adequate.... deter most players. The graphics deserve special RED BARON (*****) mention, since they look like someone ate a Big , since they look like someone ate a Dis Mac and threw up onto the screen. (A/I/M; #74,75,76,81,83,84) Dynamix; Damon Slye; 1991; $59.95 ROMMEL AT EL ALAMEIN (N-R) Adv/Air/Tac-Op/1 (Ap/ST/1; #52) Simulations Canada; Bill Nichols; The best World War I air simulator ever done. 1988; $60 Graphics, sound, historical accuracy and superb Adv/Land/Op/1-2 game play combine into a complete experience. Operational study of the World War II battle (1 RED BARON MISSION BUILDER (****) July 6 November 1942). Command perspective, (1; #102) Dynamix; Damon Slye & Chris Shen; no graphics. 1992; $29.95 ROMMEL AT GAZALA (**) Int/Air/Tac/1 (Ap/ST/I; #30,40,41) Simulations Canada; A scenario design kit for Red Baron that adds Stephen St. John; 1986; $60 additional planes. Adv/Land/Op/1-2 RISING SUN, THE (N-R) The Battle for Tobruk (26 May 27 June 1942). (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; XXX; Computer-assisted boardgame from a command $35 perspective with no graphics. Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M RUSSIA (****) The Russo-Japanese War (1904-5). An interesting period in naval warfare that has been rarely simu(C/Ap;#39,40,41) Strategic Studies Group; lated. Roger Keating and lan Trout; 1987: $39.95 Adv/Land/Str/1-2 ROAD TO MOSCOW (N-R) A simulation of the entire Eastern Front (1941(C: #40,41) Game Designers' Workshop: Phil Phil 1945) ir is similar to both War in Russia and 1945), it is similar to both War in Russia and Gardocki and Greg Mojher; 1987; O/P Second Front. However, it offers a more impresAdv/Land/Op-Str/1-2 sionistic and less quantitative analysis. Even with A corps level simulation of World War II's War in its age, this product is highly recommended. SANDS OF FIRE (**) (M/I; #74) Three-Sixty; Gordon Walton; 1990; $49.95 Beg/Air/Tac/1 World War II North Africa from the tank commander's cupola, this game offers both arcade and simulation play. One of the more interesting graphic/sound aspects is the gun ejecting an empty shell with a satisfying \"thunk,\" but in many ways, \"thunk\" describes the game play. SEARCH AND DESTROY (*) (C/I; #43) Broderbund; xxx; xxx; O/P Beg/Nav/Tac/1 World War II destroyer simulation, distinguished by nothing of importance. Reminiscent of an arcade-type product with similarities to Destroyer. SECOND FRONT (***+) (I/Am; #65,68,72,73,85) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1990; $59.95 Adv/Land/Op-Str/0-2 The Eastern Front of World War II, covered from start to finish. Different levels allow one to see losses taken down to squad level. Replace commanders, build armies, seize objectives. It's all here, and this is the simulation to have on the Eastern Front-at least until Gary Grigsby's War in Russia: 2nd Edition is completed. SECRET WEAPONS OF THE LUFTWAFFE (****) (**** ) (I/CD; #74,76,77,88,94) LucasArts; Lawrence Holland; 1991; $69.95 Int/Air/Tac-Op/1 LucasArts' action-oriented simulation with emphasis on the Bomber Offensive Over Germany (1943-45). It features B-17s and German fighters such as the Me-262 jet. Offering excellent graphics, the game attempts to portray tactical, operational and strategic levels, and generally succeeds. SECRET WEAPONS OF THE LUFTWAFFE: Expansion Disks (****) I.P-80 II.P-38 III.HE-162 IV.DO-335 (1) LucasArts; Lawrence Holland; 1991-1992; XXX Four additional planes and missions for Secrer Weapons of the Luftwaffe. The \"Best Buy\" is the CD-version, since it comes packed with the main program and all the expansion disks. SHERMAN M4 (**) (1) Lorelei; xxx; xxx; XXX Beg/Land/Tac/1 An arcade-type treatment of Desert Warfare during World War II. Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"ON TARGET OF THE COMPUTER COMVIP WOR YMPUTERING WORLD WORD GAM PACIFIC LINKS 386 underworld INDIANA JONES Stic 3656 COMPUTER GAMING WORLDS URLARI VORLD COMPUTER GAMING WORLD nic Arts Nira Hot ItraBots! HFLASHES nterplays Star Trek 25th Anniversary borinth Worlds FATE of ATLANTIS Tak Frut Don't go unarmed to the software store. For more than 12 years, Computer Gaming World has provided game hunters with the best information in the field. CGW is the magazine for gamers who want more than quick overviews of the latest games. We're loaded with the most complete reviews, new strategies, and the best hints for the discerning hunter. Take aim now with Computer Gaming World and save almost $20 off the newsstand price, Only $28 per year (12 issues). 31 IN WON Lock and load with your Visa or MasterCard and call 1 1-800-827-4450 "


"SIEG IN AFRIKA (N-R) (C/Ap: #4.5,5.1) Simulations Canada; Xxx; 1984; $60 Adv/Land/Op/1-2 The Desert Campaign (1940-1943) covered from a strategic viewpoint. SILENT SERVICE (**) (C/I/A/Ap/Am/I1-GS; #25,26,30,37) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1985: $19.95 Adv/Nav/Tac/1 A tactical simulation of submarine warfare in the South Pacific during World War II. Detailed rules, historical accuracy and layers of complexity made this sim a necessity in every gamer's library when it first appeared, but it has been rendered obsolete by time and superseded by Silent Service II. SILENT SERVICE II (****) (I; #74,76) MicroProse; Arnold Hendrick; 1990; $59.95 Adv/Nav/Tac/1 A remake of Silent Service, this game brings what was a fine simulation up to state-of-the-art in graphics and gameplay. It does not seem to have engendered the rousing reception that its prede cessor received, but it remains the best World War II submarine simulation available. SNIPER (N-R) (#61,63) CompuServe; Steve Estvanik: 1989: XXX Air/Land/Tac/l-multi An on-line version of the famous SPI board game depicting man-to-man combat in WWII. Originally reviewed as an ASCII-only game, it has since been enhanced with a graphic interface. SONAR SEARCH (N-R) (C) Signal Computer Consultants; xxx; 1984; O/P Int/Nav/Tac/1 Early simulation of Battles in the North Atlantic during WWII. One of the first computer wargames to use a keyboard template as a game aid. SPITFIRE ACE (*) (A/C; #4.4) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1984; O/P Beg/Air/Tac/l An early combat simulator that has been severely wrinkled by age. CPTT SPITFIRE '40 (0) (C/Ap; #69) Avalon Hill; xxx; xxx; $35; 0 Inc/Air/Tac/1 World War II flight simulator; poor graphics and poorer execution. It flies like a bus with the maneuverability of a tractor-trailer. STALINGRAD CAMPAIGN (*) (C/I/Ap/ST; #37) Simulations Canada; Bill Nichols; 1987: $60 Adv/Land/Op-Sur/1 An operational/strategic simulation of the 19421943 Russian Campaign, this game fails due to a poor interface, poor documentation, and the inability of the game to deliver any semblance of player participation. STORM ACROSS EUROPE (***) (C/Am/I; #62,65,74,75) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Dan Cermak; 1989; $39.95159.95 Int/Land-Nav/Op-Str/1-3 Similar to the boardgame Hitler's War except that the computer interface is much more awkward. The graphics are primitive and the documentation somewhat sparse. Clash of Steel makes this embarrassingly unplayable. SUB BATTLE SIMULATOR (***) (C/I/A (C/I/Ap; #36,38) Epyx; Gordon Walton; 1986; #36.38) Envx: Gordon Walton O/P Adv/Nav/Tac/1 World War II submarine simulator in either the Atlantic or Pacific theaters. Obsolete, but it did have some interesting features (and some not so interesting, e.g. one's submarine could claw its way across the coast of Spain rather than transiting through the Straits of Gibraltar). SUBMARINE COMMANDER (*) (A) Thorn; xxx; xxx; O/P Beg/Nav/Tac/1 Virtually the first submarine simulator, it was innovative in its time, but now offers next to nothing for the simulation gamer. SURRENDER AT STALINGRAD (*+) (C/A; #37) DKG; Marc Summerlott: 1986; O/P Int/Land/Op/1-2 The World War II Southern Offensive in the East carried on in DKG s inimitable format, i.e. primitive graphics, inadequate user interface and overall slowness of execution. T.A.C. (*) (A/C/Ap/T; #3.4,37) Avalon Hill; Ralph H. Bosson; 1984;$30 Beg/Land/Tac/1-2 A tactical simulation of armored conflict during WWII. Similar to Panzerjagd and just as obsolete. KWEL EHLOOLEN EGUIFFED ZOC 00 OFF LIGH "


"THEIR FINEST HOUR (****) (1; #65,66,67,75,77,82,83) LucasArts; Lawrence Holland; 1989; $59.95 Int/Air/Tac-Op/1 The Battle of Britain done in LucasArts'inimitable style. Multiple planes, a campaign option, and a . Multiple planes, a campaign option, and a scenario designer offer a superb product. THIRD REICH, COMPUTER (*) (Am/ST) Avalon Hill; Thalean Software; 1992; $39.95 Adv/Land/Str/1-2 A computer rendition of the boardgame based upon the 3rd Edition rules. Its AI fails to deliver on several fronts. TANKS AND SQUADS (N-R) (xxx) C&C Software: Al Winfree and Tim Deane; 1982; O/P xxx/2 Ostensiblya \"simulation\" of World War II Eastern Front tactics, it is extremely primitive. TANKTICS (N-R) (A/Ap) Avalon Hill; Chris Crawford; 1981; O/P Int/Land/Tac/1 One of the first computer wargames, Tanktics portrayed hypothetical, World War II GermanRussian armor battles. A computer-moderated boardgame using cassette tape storage, the human player could only command the Germans. TASK FORCE 1942 (***) (1; #101) MicroProse; Lawrence Schick; 1992; $69.95 Adv/Nav/Op-Tac/1 A detailed simulation of 1942 naval operations off Ironbottom Sound. Graphics are well done and game play is in-depth. Yet, switching between stations on a single warship or switching to different warships can be somewhat confusing. Allowing the computer to fight on the tactical level is not the key to success. THEATRE OF WAR (**) (1:97, 102) Thrce-Sixty; Bill Banks: 1992; $49.95 Int/Land-Air/Op (Abstract)/1-2; M A wargame first i.e. first SVGA release. This is its biggest claim to fame; it takes the worst aspects of chess and wargaming and bundles them into a mediocre product. It does have some following as a modem game, however. TIGERS IN THE SNOW (*) (A/C/Ap;#37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Chuck Kroegel and David Landry; 1981; O/P Beg/Land/Op/1-2 An operational simulation of the Battle of the Bulge, its primitive graphics and play mechanics, and its poor user interface have been superseded by more recent efforts. TORPEDO FIRE (N-R) (Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.: John Lyon; 1981; O/P Int/Nav/Tac/2 Submarine warfare in World War II in both the Atlantic and Pacific theaters. A very early effort with no computer opponent. with no com TO THE RHINE (N-R) (Ap/ST/I; #43) Simulations Canada; Stephen St. John; 1987; $60 Adv/Land/Op/1-2 The War in the West, 29 August 11 December 1944. TSKFRC-58 (N-R) (Ap) Jagdstaffel: xxx; 1983; O/P Int/Nav/Tac-Op/xxx A simulation of the World War II Battle of the Philippine Sea. TSUSHIMA (**) (C/Ap) Avalon Hill; Kiya Overseas Industry; 1985; $30 Beg/Nav/Tac/1-2 The Battle of Tsushima during the Russo-Japanese War. Clumsy graphics and user interface, but it is one of only two simulations covering this period. TYPHOON OF STEEL (**) (C/Ap/Am/l; #53,54,64) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1988; $49.95/$59.95 Adv/Land/Tac/0-2 The sequel to Panzer Strike, this covers the remaining theaters of World War II (Pacific, Asia, etc.). Similar to its predecessor with all of its strengths and weaknesses. TOBRUK: THE CLASH OF ARMOUR (*+) (C; #49) DataSofr; Steve R. Williams: 19874 XXX Beg/Land/Tac-Op/1 A tactical/operational \"simulation of the African Campaign covering the Battle of Gazala with a strong arcade element. Rather than complement. ing each other, the simulation and arcade aspects denigrate each other's appeal. THE ONLY THING IT DOESN'T SIMULATE IS EAR POPPING. If it were any more real, your chair would be in a 30° bank. Our new Microsoft Flight Simulator has four planes, each with its own instrument panel created digitally from actual photographs. There are storm clouds and sunsets to fly into. Crashes are scarily real. And you can fly to airports anywhere in the world. For even more detailed flights, there are New York and Paris scenery enhancements. Everything is at your reseller. So, take off. Microsoft SULLE RIGHT FUEL LEFT OBES Circle Reader Service #83 OP 17 Laululumlmm \"New York and Paris surety enhancements coming this fall. Flight Simulator is a trademark of B C A. Arrwick 1993 Mito Copy All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp "


"U.M.S. (**) (ST/I; #43,48,51) Firebird; Ezra Sidran; 1987; $49.95 Int/Land/Op/0-2 A wargame design kit characterized by easy design parameters. However, accuracy is sacrificed for playability, and often playability is sacrificed for graphics. Maritime operations are ignored, so its universality is not complete.\" It will visually impress your friends, though it's clumsy and awkward. U.M.S. II (**) (1; #74,75,87) MicroPlay: Ezra Sidran; 1991; $59.95 Int/Air-Land-Nav/Op-Sur/0-multi A newer version of U.M.S. (see above), with more emphasis on strategic operations. A visual feast and a playability desert. The design-your-own\" disk is marketed separately, and company support for the title is tenuous at best. UNDER FIRE (**) (A/C/Ap/I; #25,27,37,41) Avalon Hill; Ralph Bosson; 1985; $59.95 Adv/Land/Tac/1-2 A tactical simulation of World War II infantry and armor. Open-ended with a versatile map maker and scenario builder, but it does show its age. UNDER SOUTHERN SKIES (*) (Ap; #4.3) Avalon Hill; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; 1984; XXX Beg/Naval/Tactical/1-2 A tactical naval simulation covering the pursuit of the Graf Spee. UP PERISCOPE (***) (C/I; #38,CGF Winter) Action Soft; xxx; 1986; analysis of the battle's importance and outcome would have been appreciated. V FOR VICTORY III: MARKET GARDEN (****) (M/I) Three-Sixty; Atomic Games; 1993; $69.95 Int/Land/Op/1-2 The next expansion in the series, this does a commendable job of simulating the airborne drop in the Netherlands (1944). While alternate drop zones are available, I would have appreciated the option to derermine my own drop zones and run from there. VULCAN (**) (I; #56,64) CCS; R. T. Smith; 1989; $39.95 Int/Land/Op/1-2 Similar to Desert Rats, this simulation covers the Tunisian Campaign in WWII North Africa. Mediocre graphics and game play do little to enhance the program. WAR AT SEA (*) (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; xxx; $30 Int/Sea/Tac/0-2; M The exploits of the WWI German cruiser SMS Emden, using the same designer and overall style of Under Southern Skies. WAR EAGLES (+) (I; #69) Cosmi; Ron Paludan; 1989; O/P Beg/Air/Tac/1 A World War I flight simulator, this was one of the first out on the IBM block. Its graphics are chunky, game play is awkward, and overall, there is nothing to recommend this as anything more than a thinly disguised arcade product. WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET (**) (C/A/I/ST/Am*: #34,75) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roger Damon; 1986; O/P Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 Basically the user-modifiable source code of Roger Damon's previous works (Operation Whirlwind, Field of Fire and Panzer Grenadier), the game's potential to design-your-own scenarios is limited by the failings of the system's mechanics. It is most applicable to the World War II era. A novice may well find its flexibility interesting, although the graphics are dated. WAR IN THE FALKLANDS (N-R) (Ap/I) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; XXX; $35 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M The WWI Battles of the Coronell and Falklands. WAR IN RUSSIA (**) (A/Ap;#4.4,5.1,5.2,29,37,62,65) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1984; OP Adv/Land/Str/1-2 An operational/strategic simulation of the entire Eastern Front (1941-1945), this game is easily learned and played. Sheer size and certain defects in the artificial intelligence present the difficulty. It has been superseded by Grigsby's later efforts. WAR IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC (**) (C/Ap; #36,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1987; O/P Adv/Nav/Op/0-2 World War II in the South Pacific-a logistician's dream (or nightmare!). Complex and interesting, but it attempted to accomplish more than it could deliver. Recommended only to those with a specific interest in the period. For a better treatment, see Gary Grigsby's Pacific War. WARSHIP (**) (A/C/Ap/ST/I; #33,34,37,42) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1986; ON Adv/Nav/Tac/0-2 A tactical simulation of Pacific surface naval engage ments during World War II. The documentation and game play seem to gloss over much-needed details as to what is (or should be) happening, and the graphics are reminiscent of a sex-education movie showing sperm traveling in various directions. Its main appeal is to the true naval aficionado and not to those with only a marginal interest. WARSHIP THAT CHANGED HISTORY, THE (N-R) (Ap/1) General Quarters; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; xxx; $35 Beg/Nav/Tac-Op/0-2; M The voyages of the WWI naval vessels Goeben and Breslau. WESTERN FRONT (***) (Am/I; #88) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1991; $59.95 Adv/Land/Op-Str/0-2 The sequel to Second Front, this covers what most historians refer to as the \"Second Front\" (i.e. the war between Nazi Germany and the Western Allies, 1944-45). WHITE DEATH (**) (Am/I; #66,68) RAW, Al and Joseph Benincasa; 1989; $49.95 Adv/Land/Op/1-2; M The Battle of Velikiye Luki (WWII, East Front). A direct and literal translation from the board game of the same title, it suffers from user unFriendliness. However, if one liked the board game, this will keep White Death in one's library. WINGED SAMURAI (N-R) (Ap/T) Discovery; Dave Wesley and Ross Maker; 1980; O/P Beg/Air/Tac/1 Similar to Flying Tigers, only with worse graphics, if that is possible. WINGS (***) (Am; #67,69,74,76,77,83) Cinemaware; John Cutter; 1990; O/P Beg/Air/Tac-Op/l As a World War I flight simulation, this offered more of a cinematic treatment of acrial operations than a historically correct gestalt. However, it is fun to play, perhaps falling somewhere between \"cotton candy\" and \"beer and pretzels.\" One of the few Amiga products that this reviewer misses on the PC-machines. WINGS OF WAR (*) (C) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Charlie Merrow; 1985; O/P Int/Air/Tac/1-2 World War II air combat; poor graphics and mediocre play render this product obsolete. WOLFPACK (**) (Am/I; #61,62,65,72,73) Broderbund; John Garcia; 1990; $54.95 Int/Nav/Tac/1 Submarine operations in the World War II Atlantic. Superb graphics and the ability to play either German submarine or Allied surface combatants cannot disguise historical inadequacies. CGW O/P Adv/Nav/Tac/1 Similar to Silent Service. Excellent documentation and good game play, but Silent Service II has assumed the mantle of graphics and utility in the contemporary market. U.S.A.A.F. (*****) (A/C/Ap; #26,27,37) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1985; O/P Adv/Air/Str/1-2 An operational/strategic simulation of the Bomber Offensive Over Germany (1943-1945) on a daily basis. Scenarios range from one month to two years, and playing time is almost that long. With German production and industrial devastation the key, it remains a fascinating product. Based upon its commercial success, it would appear that its fans are limited to this reviewer and the designer. V FOR VICTORY I: UTAH BEACH (****) #94,101) Three-Sixty; Atomic Games; 1992; $59.95/69.95 Int/Land/Op/1-2 Perhaps the smoothest conversion of a boardgamestyle wargame to computer format ever done, this covers the Utah Beachhead in the Normandy invasion (June 1944) with multiple scenarios. V FOR VICTORY II: VELIKIYE LUKI (***) (M/I; #101,103,104,105) Three-Sixty; Atomic Games; 1992; $59.95769.95 Int/Land/Op/1-2 The sequel to Utah Beach, this covers an obscure battle on the Eastern Front. While mechanics are similar to its predecessor, a historical and strategic Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"POSITRONIC BRIDGE Artificial Intelligence Based Artificial Intelligence now a reality! Play Screen g The challenge of computer bridge will never be the same with the introduction of Positronic Bridge, the first artificial intelligence based bridge game. Whether you are a beginner or expert, Positronic Bridge with its cutting edge computing technology automatically improves its skill level as you improve yours, so the game always remains a challenge, Included free with the program is the best-selling book \"The Basics of Winning Bridge» that will have you playing bridge in just one hour. You can then improve your bridge skills using the practice mode and help keys. Other features include: \"No Cheat\" gameplay (the computer doesn't look at your cards to make decisions), rubber or duplicate bridge, standard bidding, simple signaling, random deals or preset input, show/hide opponents cards, Bidding Screen Endorsed By Bridge Experts \"You can't outgrow Positronic Bridge. Two thumbs up!\" Mike Lawrence, Berkeley, CA, USA Positronic Bridge will give you the battle of your life. Eric Kokish, Montreal, Canada \"The game you can leach to be as good as you are\" Tony Forrester, London, England Ngun li . READYSOFT ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Werthelm Couri, Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 189 Tel: (416) 731-4175 Fax: (416) 764-8867 Circle Reader Service #90 For IBM PC and Compatibles "


"REVIEW CorelDRAW Conquering Without Risk? Illustration by Bilbert Lage Elpin Systems' Conquer for Windows by Neil Harris C. CONQUER Opdans Help onquer for Windows is almost a great trouble managing my economy was after takthat a first-time wargamer can grasp the esgame. It has hidden terrain, producing too many enemy cities. At that point, the sentials and learn the ropes. tion and multiple maps. Players builds bills for repairing them became too high for Indeed, this game is so similar to Empire new units in cities, choosing which types they my economy to be able to absorb. One would Deluxe that I thought it important to take a want and paying time penalties for building think that the cost of losing would be higher side by side look. At the basic game setting on more sophisticated pieces. It has a halfway than that of winning. On the other hand, Empire Deluxe, there is more to the game-an challenging Al and a modem option for even there may be some historical justification for extra layer of complexity that makes the game more challenge. Yes, it is almost a great game. this. The U.S., after all, has often rebuilt the both more interesting and more difficult. It In fact, it is almost Empire Deluxe. economies of its former enemies. is my opinion that a beginner could grasp that game just about as quickly as Conquer for Any Kind Of Tank You Like, Modem Warfare Windows. Both games have modem play, alAs Long As It's Black There are some interesting features here, though Conquer for Windows adds the ability For an experienced wargamer, Conquer for particularly when playing against other huto play over a LAN, which, though not tested Windows is like fixing a car with only a screwman players. The game uses a simultaneous here, did sound like it had some potential. driver and a hammer: It may be possible, but movement system that makes modem play go Take My Advice, it is most likely that one will wish for more much faster than in other games, including tools. There is a single kind of infantry unit, Empire Deluxe. This tends to turn games into So I Can Beat You a single type of tank, one airplane and one mad scrambles to move all one's attacking At the start of the game, a player owns one ship. That's it. pieces as quickly as possible, after which one city. There is an infantry piece and a tank in waits for the other player to move before the city. The short-term objective is to exstrategically placing the more defensive stacks plore new territory and use its resources to and the reserves. build up one's economy. At this stage, it is The modem option, after some problem vital to maximize the amount of terrain exconfiguring my opponent's junky generic inplored. This requires one to immediately ternal modem, worked more smoothly than switch their city's production from armies to most games I've tried. Players can easily send tanks. Since tanks move twice as fast as armessages to cach other, the game moves along mies, they can uncover twice the amount of quickly, and there's very little waiting, unless potential resources. So, it doesn't take long of course one's opponents are taking time to before the exploration advantage of the tank appreciate the juggernaut just launched outweighs the ability to build infantry against their home cities. quickly. If players do nothing but explore, they'll have more resources in nine turns by Further, terrain effects are minimal. Water Even A Kid Or CEO using a tank. Infantry has the same defensive is only passable by ships and planes. Planes Could Play This capability as a tank, but is only half the value can also go over mountains. Tanks move offensively. Overall, I can't faster than infantry through all terrain, even Despite the exthrough woods. Land spaces all produce the treme simplicity, Conquer for Windows see where infantry has any same amount of food or resources. there is a game TITLE: Conquer for Windows here. As play proPRICE: $69.95 Frankly, however, the economic system gresses through SYSTEM IBM with Windows might as well not be there. The player will REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGA graphics, 4MB RAM the difficulty lev4MB hard drive space, Windows 3.1 enhanced mode have to pay attention to it, but no real els, it does take # OF PLAYERS: 1-4, 2 for head-to-head modem play, 4 on network PROTECTION: Documentation look up thought or planning is actually required. One more skill and DESIGNER: Harold Habeck just sets up the parameters so there is enough care to win. Still, PUBLISHER: Elpin Systems food and mineral resources to handle the the game is so ab45 S. Park Victoria, Suite 401 Milpitas, CA 95035 cities and armies, and uses any excess to build stract and basic (408) 956-0720 more cities and armies. The only time I had Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAME Dungeons &Dragons FANTAS EMPIRES Lead a Kingdom. Conquer an Empire! TM IBM 256-color VGA displays. Create alliances, defeat enemy kingdoms and rule Mystara! Build your own empire as you play the first D&D\" game to feature a computer DUNGEON MASTER, who mediates all elements of game play. Thanks to superior animation, 256-color VGA display and sound effects, the DM virtually comes to life on the screen, Face one to four adversaries, either human or chosen from among twenty computer-controlled opponents. Interact with fantastic races, command dozens of troop types, deploy special forces and construct a variety of buildings. Extensive character interaction, utilizing advanced AI and Neural Network technology throughout the game, provides for diplomatic tactics. When combat occurs, the game switches to one of the most spectacular tactical views yet! FU Available for IBM/COMPATIBLES. To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada) with VISNMC. To receive our complete product catalog, send $1.00 to: SSI, 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201, Sunnyvale, CA 94086. SEL DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D. DUNGEON MASTER FANTASY EMPIRES and the TSA logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR. Inc. 1993 TSR, Inc. 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. PH "


"CONQUER Westve East Player Elle Game State Options telp FORMA value at all except for building a quick defense force. Airplanes are important as the game moves along. After players get their economy in order, they need to find out where the enemy is and prepare a smiting. Airplanes can move over all terrain. They can be stacked eight high in a space, regardless of how many ground units are with them. So, once the offensive starts, they can beef up an army in a big way. They also have the highest attack factor of any unit. The manual explains clearly what the attack and defense values are for each unit, but never explains exactly how combat works. It does say that the odds are based on the attack value of the stack vs. the defense value of the other stack, but doesn't explain how losses are calculated for the attacker. A call to the company and a friendly chat with one of the programmers filled me in. The attack values of all offensive pieces in a stack are combined and compared to the defense values of the defending army. The attacker's and defender's chances of winning are proportional to those values. If the attacker has 10 and the defender has 5, the attacker is twice as likely to win a battle. What the manual doesn't make clear is that this calculation results in the destruction of one unit from the losing force, after which the odds are recomputed and a result calculated until one side is completely eliminated. In this way, units can be lost from the winning side. In a big battle, both sides are very likely to take losses. Week 62110-09,20 pounce quickly and get the jump on the AI. Against a human player, though, one must remain alert. The map makes this difficult. The world is considerably bigger than what fits on the screen, even when using one of Windows' more extravagant screen resolutions. At the later stages of play, one can have battle over the map and the potential for controlling \"To conquer without risk is to triumph without glory.» CREDIT. WIDE WORLD PHOTOS —Corneille, Le Cid The mind's eye is never blind. all fronts simultaneously is decidedly marginal. In fact, even without pitched battles it is all too easy to forget some of the more isolated pieces. They can wait around for several turns before one happens to look in the right place. Reading through the manual—and yes, if I were a regular player and not a reviewer I wouldn't have read it either-one will find a number of features to make game play easier. By using the \"shift\" and \"ale\" keys in combination with game functions one can take better control of the forces. Wouldn't a Windows program ordinarily offer an icon-based or a mouse-controlled way to do that in addition to the hor keys? Close, but no cigar. It burns brightly for account executive John Moore, who writes marketing proposals on his computer, reads his favorite novels on talking books, and refinishes furniture in his spare time. The Battle Goes To The Swift... But Don't Misplace Your Army This combat system and the values for the pieces favor the attacker in most battles. Yes, infantry is better in defense than in offense, but only because they are nearly worthless offensively. Since armor and planes both have attack values one greater than their defense values, it is vital in a pitched battle to be the one to attack. The simultaneous movement system makes this even more important. Since players don't politely wait to take turns, one has to wait for their shot. Against the computer, one can count on a brief pause at the start of the turn in which it is possible to S S COHODER West Player . The «Go Fish\" Of Wargames . T ame asks Options mum Help other blind and visually impaired persons lead fulfilling lives. Support the American Foundation for the Blind's education and literacy initiatives today. Call 1-800-AFB-LIND. In New York, call (212) 620-2147. A serious card player might like to play \"Go Fish» every once in a while to relax and spare his or her neurons. For a wargamer, Conquer for Windows could be that kind of relaxing diversion. It's not complex enough to engage one too deeply, it doesn't take long to play, one can set their own goals, and one doesn't have to go to War College to learn how to play. It might be a good way to get someone started in wargaming, but such a newcomer should keep in mind that there are other games out there that will probably provide more training and amusement, especially in the long run. CGW * DIODE 2 * IDEEEN RA 1 W ELL 10:26) Circle Reader Service #86 Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"«Totally Compatile: Sound Choices!\" The C o linh THE ONS SUIT STEJOS LISTE Digital Multimedia Leader! Sound Galaxy offers true compatibility with Microsoft Sound Galaxy Audio products from Windows Sound System, as well as Sound Blaster Pro, Aztech Labs give you unequaled digital AdLib, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. multimedia advantages. Whether you're With Aztech you also get greater software and CD-ROM talking compatibility, performance, or Drive compatibility including SCSI upgrade than price. When you choose Aztech, cither Creative Labs or Mediavision. In addition to all Sound Galaxy products are designed you've made a sound choice! And this, you get top performance and peace of mind! Adlib. Conox. Disney standards we back it up Your Sound Choice! SOUNE PRO 16 MULTIMEDIA Proven Worldwide! Aztech Labs' commitment to R&D TATLAN UPGRADE KIT With over 700,000 audio promises you products focused toward boards sold internationyour future. Sound Galaxy's # WinePower ally, Sound Galaxy's DECISIONE CORSO cmWave Power Digital SUUNTO award winning line is Wave Table Synthesizer enjoyed throughout the for realistic instrumental world. From the 8-bit sound, and our new BX II Extra to our top of Double Speed CD-ROM the line Sound Galaxy Multimedia Upgrade Look for the Sound Galaxy NX Pro. Double Speed CD-ROM Pro 16 Wave Power, Double Speed Kit, are just a few of our exciting Multimedia Upgrade Kit, Aztech CD-ROM Multimedia Lingrade Kit new products. Whether you're LETFIGUTED XBX II at your local dealer today! offers a proven multimedia solublasting an enemy position or comtion for your needs! posing a symphony you'll enjoy all the outstanding Sound Galaxy Totally Compatible! audio products from Aztech Labs. Only Sound Galaxy products give you the compatiVisit your dealer & insist on Sound bility advantage. Unlike other cards on the market, Galaxy! For more info. call 800-886-8829 Take advantage of the widest selection of 16 bit software on the market: No one gites you greater compatibility! No one! SEEYPPEA AUT. o Win TOP PRODUIT Best Buy O PC TOP PRODUCT AWARD BY WINDOS MAGAZINE (GERMANY) | BEST BUY AWAHD BY PC DIRECT MAGAZINE (FRANCE) MICROSOFT WINDOWS. \"Pioneering the Multimedia Explosion!\" COMPATIBLE Multimedia PC A product of Aztech Labs, Inc. 46707 Fremont Blvd., Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 1993 Aztech Labs, Inc. Aztech, the Aztech logo, and Sound Galaxy are trademarks or registered trademarks of Aztech Labs, Inc. All other names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. Specifications, terms, and services subject to changes without notice. Circle Reader Service #36 "


"VKNG W SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing IBMMad Past 19 . 49. : . 37 37 22 . Pirates Gold! Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness Quest for Glory! Quest for Glory 3 Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork 42 <0 . . IBMM Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima VII Part 2 The Silver Seed Ultima Trilogy Ultima Trilogy II Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld II Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) 42 Sep :::: 12 REALMS OF ARKANIA MICRORROSE Masters of Orion IBMMac) Wing Commander 1 19 . Lucas Arts Adv. Game Bk 12 Secrt Miss 1 & 2 19ea. Harpoon Battle Book 16 Wing Commander 1 Dlx 49. Might & Magic Off. Guide 12 Wing Commander 2 49 . Might & Magic 3 Spec Ops.Dsk. 1 19 . Might & Magic 4 Spec Ops.Dsk 2 19 . Patriot:Olficial Str. Guide 12 Speech Pack Quest for Clues:Bk of Orbs 11 Wing Commander 3 Sep. Quest for Clues: Man Swrds 11 X-Wing 42. Quest for Clues 3 & 4 16ea Railroad Tycoon Rex Nebular Hint Books Ringworld Run 5 Magazine:1-18 5ea Secret Monkey Island 182 10ea Sherlock Holmes AD&D Clue Books 10-12 Sim Earth:Strategy Guide 12 Avatar Adventures Sim Life:Strategy Guide Civilization Star Control 2 Clouds of Xeen Star Trek 25th Anniversary 10 Dagger of Amon Ra Strike Commander Darklands Summoning Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 10 Ultima Official Book Lucasfilm Air Combat 12 Ultima 3-4 9ea Ultima 7 Ultima 7 Part 2 Ultima 7 & Underworld 11 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 11 REALM OF TERRO V for Victory Battle Book 12 Veil of Darkness Wing Commander 1 & 2 Bk 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) 13 31 . Present This Sci-Fi strategy game surpasses any other in its class in both size and scope. If you liked Reach for the Stars, you'll love this. 10 10 IBMMac AD&D Dragonlance Kit AD&D Starter Kit 31. AD&D Unlimited Adv. 38 Bards Tale III Betrayal at Krondor Castles Northern Camp Castles 2 Challenge of 5 Realms Champions of Krynn Conquest of Longbow 42 Curse of Azure Bonds 19 Darklands Darklands MPE Dark Queen of Krynn Darkside of Xeen 44 Dark Sun Grey Isles Camp. Daughter of Serpents Death Knights Krynn 19 Eric the Unready Eye of Beholder Eye of Beholder II Eye of Beholder III Gateway Savage Frontr. Gemfire Gryphon Master Havlar Nov Heimdall Inca Inindo Kings Quest IV Kings Quest V Kings Ouest VI Kings Ransom Legacy Legacy of Necromancer TBA Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Drakka Sep Legends of Valor Lord of the Rings Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings Lure of Temptress Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Martian Dreams Might & Magic III Might & Magic IV LEGACY Realms of Arkania Sir-Tech breaks off from the Wizardry line & brings another great role playing adventure. Great graphics and sound round out the top rate storyline. IBM $37 Alone in the Dark 38 Amazon Batman Returns Blue Force: Next of Kin Crmen SnDiego:Past . 37 Crmen SnDiego:Europe 34 . Crmen SnDiego: Time 34 . Crmen SnDiego:USA 34. Crmen SnDiego:World 34 . Crmen SnDiego:Deluxe 49 Champions Sep Classic Adv. Pak(Lucas) 37. Dagger of Amon Ra 42 42 Day of the Tentacle 37 . Deja Vul & II 31 25 Eco Quest 2 Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas Indy Jones/Fate Atlantis 39 Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy 53 Leisure Suit Larry 1 .32 Leisure Suit Larry 5 42 42 Lost Files Shrick Hlmes 42 . Lost Tresures Infocom 42 42 Lost Tresures Infocom 2 37 37 Maniac Mansion 2 37 . Out of this World IBMMac Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Rocketeer w/Snd Source 42 Savage Empire Sea Rogue Seal Team Uninvited (Windows) Veil of Darkness QONOBRA Hardware .: Future 37 Secret Monkey Island 37 37 Secret Monkey Island 2 39 37 Secret of Silver Blades 19 37 Shadowcaster 43. Shadowgate  25 Shadowgate (Windows) Shadowlands Spellcraft Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frntr 19 Ultima IV Ultima V Legacy You've just inherited a home from your evil ancestors. Explore over 400 rooms of terror in a des perate struggle to stay alive. Excellent graphics and sound F/X. CH-Flightstick CH-Virtual Pilot Gravis Eliminator Card 29 Gravis Joystick Pro 39 Gravis Ultrasound 130 Pilot Control Stand 26 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 199 Pro Audio Spctrm Plus 145 Soundblaster ASP 16 235 Soundblaster Pro Delx 130 ThrstMster Flight Stick 69 Thrstmster Pro 114 ThrstMster Ruddr Pddis 109 Thrustmaster Throttle 79 ThrustMaster TSR'S 12 39 37 IBM $38 37 RETURN PHANTOM September Specials IBM AMI Daughter of Serpents 19 Eye of the Beholder 19 Eye of the Beholder II 19 Leisure Suit Larry 5 Meglomania Paladin 2 Space Quest 4 Spelljammer Summoning Wing Commander Armour Geddon Bad Blood Battletech Powerhits Buck Rogers Buck Rogers 2 Cyberspace Dominion Dune Dune II Flashback Free D.C. Gateway Hard Nova Star Legions Mantis Speech Pack Martian Memorandum Mechwarrior 2 Out of this World Privateer Protostar:War Frontier 42. Rex Nebular MPE Ringworld:Revenge Patr 37 Space Hulks Space Quest 3 Space Quest 4 Space Quest 5 Speljammer Star Control 2 Star Trek 25th Annivers 36 Star Trek:Next GenertionSep Strike Commander Speech Pack Terminator 2029 Ultrabots Return of the Phantom Explore the famed Paris Opera House and it's labyrinth of catacombs in search of the Phantom. Microprose pushes adventure gaming to it's limLatest and Greatest Battles of Destiny Conquered Kingdoms Dune Il F-15 III Front Page Sports Football Mercenaries Pacific War Star Control II Ultima Underworld II V for Victory Series 37 IBM $37 Circle Reader Service #104 "


"For information and release dates 1-(404) 840-7906 To place orders in U.S. and Canada 1-(800) 852-6187 Fax 1-(404) 840-7925 2980 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 3, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Shipping Rates/Hours UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day air: $6.00 2-day air: 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD add: 5.00 Overseas: Call Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Call Prices subject to change so call first! Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-8pm EST (7amStrategy/Simulations/Sports Etc. Pre-WWII IBMMac Megafortress Megapack Red Strm Rising Clasic 22 Shadow President Patriot IBMMac Sci-Fi Sep38 16 . 27ea 32 18 . 37 . Paladin 2 Ambush at Sorinor Blue & the Gray Caesar Centurion Civil War Vol. 1,2 or 3 Cohort 2 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Gettysburg Great War L'Empereur Liberty or Death Man of War No Greater Glory Paladin 2 ... Rampart Red Baron Mission Builder Siege & Dogs of War Warlords 2 Carriers at War Construction Kit Indy 500 16 Jack Nick Sig. Golf 42 Sports IBMMac John Madden Football 2 Jordan Flight IBMMacl Links 386 Pro 4-D Boxing 16 31 Mauna Kea Crs. Dsk. 19 ATP Tennis 31 Pinehurst All Amer. Coll Ftbll 92 37. Belfry Andretti's Racng Chlinge 16 . Microleague Baseball 4 Bill Elliot Nascar NFL Challenge Car and Driver 37. NFL Video Pro Football Complte PGA Tour Golf 31. PGA Tour Golf Front Pg. Sprts Football 42. Tour. Crs. Dsk. Front Pg. Sprts Basbil Sep PGA Tour Golf (WIN) Front Pg. Sprts Bsktbil Sep Tour. Crs. Dsk. Games: Sumim Chling 35 . Pool Shark Games: Winter Chilng 35 Pro League Baseball Grand Prix 37 22 Powerhits: Sports Grand Slam Bridge 2 Stratamatic Baseball Hardball 3 37 . Tony Larussa Ulti. Basbil 19 MLPBA Player Disk 15 . Add-on Disks 15ea. Stadium Disk 18 . Tony Larussa 2 Hockey League Sim2 29. 92 Stats Disk 12 ALINL Stadiums Dsk 18 Fantasy Draft Dsk 12 . Wayne Grizky Hckey2 36 Hockey League Sim 28 Wayne Grizky Hokey 3 37 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit IBMMac Armored Fists Cyber Empires Global Effect Imperium Maelstrom Mantis Speech Pack Mechamander Mercenaries Mercenaries 2 Reach for the Stars 28 28 Robosport (Windows) Rules of Engagement 38. Rules of Engagement 2 38. Spaceward HO! (WIN) 37. Spaceward HO! DOS) 37 Spectre Star Legions Star Legions 2 Theatre of War When Two Worlds War This long awaited sequel is now discounted for the holidays. As an apprentice in the Order of Paladins, you must earn title of Paladin by undertaking perilous quest. This kit allows modification of existing scenarios or the creation of new ones. New scenarios include Wake Island, Guadalcanal, and Tarawa. 19 . IBM $25 42 49 22 . Keyboard Overlays General Pirates Gold! 42 . A-Train 42 42 Construction Kit Air Bucks Battles of Destiny Battlechess Battlechess (Windows) 32 Battlechess 4 K (VGA) 32 Battlechess 4 K (SVGA) 37. Buzz Aldrns Race/Space 42. Lead your crew of bucca. neers across 17th Century Spanish Main in search of adventure, power, and glory. Hunt for magnifien treasure, unravel mysteries, and more. A-10 Tank Killer Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress Chck Yeager Air Combat 10 Commanche:Max Orkill 10 F-15 Strike Eagle 2 F-15 Strike Eagle 3 F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.03.01 Flight Simulator 4.0 Gunship 2000 Jetfighter 1 & 2 Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10 X-Wing eeeeeeeeee 39. World War II IBMMac Victory at Sea 43 43 Aces of the Pacific Western Front WWI:1946 WWII: Battles of Pacific Sep. Aces Over Europe Sep Campaign Dsk. #1 Sep Air Warrior SVGA Modern B-17/Flying Fortress Battle of South Pacific Sep. Battletank Barbarossa 39.. Carriers at War 42 35 A-10 Warthog SepConst. Kit 37 30 A Line in the Sand Carrier Strike ATAC Expansion Dsk #1 Commnche: Max Ovrkill 43. Clash of Steel Expansion Dsk. #1 25 Fleet Commander Expansion Dsk. #2 25 Fleet Med Conflict Korea Grand Fleet Conflict Middle East Great Naval Battles 42. Crisis in the Kremlin Super Ships/Atlantic 19 . F-117A Nighthawk Scenario Builder 25 F-15 Il Classic America/Atlantic America/Atlantic 19 F-15 III Grigsby's War in Russia 48 . Voice Commander High Command 44 Falcon 3.0 Malta Storm 39 . Op. Fighting Tiger MBT Central Germany 39. Falcon MC MBT Kursk 39 . Flight Sim 4.0 New World Order Flight Planner Pacific Theater Opera. Sep Sound & Graphics Pacific War 47 . Rescue 911 Panzer Battles Scenery Design Patton Strikes Back 17 19 Global Effect Red Sky at Morning Sep. Gunship 2000 Rommel North Africa 26 29 Campaign Disk #1 Second Front 22 . Halls of Montezuma Secret Weapons Luftwaf 44. Harpoon v1.3 DO-335 20 . Battleset 2 or 3 HE-162 20 . Battleset 4 P-38 Harpoon Designer Senes32 32 P-80 Harpoon Designer Ser. 2 26 26 Silent Service 2 Classic Harpoon Scenario Editor 25 25 Task Force 1942 39 . Harpoon Pack Sig. Edi. 49 49 V for Victory Series: Harpoon 2 Utah Beach 43 37 Harrier Assault Velikiye Luki 43 43 Jet Fighter 2 Market Garden 43 43 Jump Jet Gold, Juno & Sword 43 43 KGB Casserine Pass Sep Sep M1 Tank Platoon Stalingrad Sep Sep | MacArthur's War IBM $39 ..... IBMMac Civilization Civilization Master Edion 45 45 Command HQ Classic 22. Design Your Own R.R. 38. El-Fish Empire Deluxe Flight Sim. 4.0 Sound and Graphics Global Conquest Goblins Grandest Admiral Grand Slam Bridge 2 Hong Mahjong Pro Hoyles/Classic Incredible Machine Ishido Lemmings More Lemmings Lemmings 2 Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced Sep Perfect General 38 WWII Scenario Disk 22 Gret Battls 20th Cen 25 Perfect General Enh. Sep Populous Populous 2 Powermonger WWI Scenario Dsk Power Politics (WIN) R.R. Tycoon Classic 22 . Reach for the Skies Shuttle SIMAnt SIMCity SIMCity (Windows) SIMCity Supreme . 37 SIMCity Supreme 2 SIMCity 2000 SIMEarth SIMEarth (Windows) SIMFarm SIMLife 42 42 SIMLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island ........ 22. . 57 38 38 . 38 9 CD-ROM IM 7th Guest 57. Lost Treasrs Inlocom 1 47 47 12 Rds to Gettysburg 42 42 Lost Treasrs Infocom 2 37 37 Battle Chess 47 47 M1-Tank Platoon Battie Chess Enhanced 47 47 Magnetic Scrolls Blade Mantis Buzz Aldrin's Rice/Spce 57. North American Indians 42 Challenge 5 Realms Sep. Prince of Persia Chessmaster 3000 57. Secret Monkey Island 47. Conquest of Longbow 42Secrl Weapns Luitwaf 57. Cyberspace Sherlock Holmes Series Dagger of Amon Ra 42 Consulting Det #1 43 43 Dark Sun Consulting Det. #2 43 43 Day of the Tentacle Consulting Det. #3 43 43 Dune Star Trek 25th Anniv. 47 Great Naval Baltles Total Distortion . Iron Helix Ultima 1-6 Bundle 57 Kings Ransom Undrwrid 1/Wing CO 247 Kings Quest 5 Ultima Undwrld 182 53 Kings Quest 6 47 Wing Commander 2 Dix47 Legend of Kyrandia 42. Wng Cmmndr/Ultima 6 57 . Loom Wolfpack 20 X-Wing Fly an X-wing, A-wing, or Y-wing against the Imperjal Empire. Includes combat training, tours of duty. promotions, decorations, replay camera. Must have! .   ...... IBM $42 Sep"


"REVIEW Climbing Too High Can Leave You Winded Three Sixty's High Command by Terry Lee Coleman Y Tigh Command is a redesign of a Wargame publisher Three-Sixty was mal programming it could have been WWII simulation in Europe, origiimpressed with the core design of the game implemented. However, the complexity of Inally released in 1992. Gregg and so arranged a deal wherein they would the game practically forces the player into Carter and Joey Nonnast of Colorado give the product a graphic makeover to get using the tutorials, and one quickly finds Computer Creations designed the original it up to today's consumer standards, and that once mastered, the interface moves the version in the hours after their day jobs, distribute it under their aegis. game along more quickly than those which and produced a respectable game. Being High Command's packaging shows how use our pull-down friends. wargamers and programmers, and not much computer publishers have learned The first tutorial, dealing with the artists, the original version lagged behind about marketing in the past few years. German conquest of Poland, is suitable in a commercial products in its look and feel. Embossed lettering on the box modestlyphilosophical sense, as this event was the claims \"Stunning SVGA Graphics!\" which, beginning of WWII. That this approach once you get to them, are rather impressive. has been used before, most recently by It replicates the feel of Carriers At War with its board wargaming to a Pearl Harbor scenario tutorremarkable degree. What ommand strikes the gamer first is the TITLE: High Command DEESEEG interface, an array of butPRICE: $69.95 tons which would do a Star SYSTEM: IBM REQUIREMENTS: 3865x, 3 MB RAM Trek control board justice. VGA graphics, mouse A GOOSENE A pull-down menu interPROTECTION: Documentation Look up 12 IDCL DESIGNERS: Gregg Carter, 02 face would have given oldJoey Nonnast fashioned gamers less culPUBLISHER: Threr-Sixty ture shock, and with miniCampbell, CA (408) 879-9144 NEREDE Dr Slatlar Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"thed Plage ELDHOONDOA TOU BADENON GEGEON NEEDO POLAG NEEMEER LEGLAMEDARONGERNE WEROSQUET BLINALOFT UN CONXODONZANO CONCE GERMANICO DOO KZADE first, the player will soon know when to give the computer free rein and when to use more \"hands-on management to assure that Turkey is subverted, or that those supplies get to the front in time for the party at Leningrad. While the use of the computer here is not as realistic in terms of how real subordinates work, the scale is appropriate for grand strategic warfare, and when used judiciously, can speed up the game. A player can choose to wear many hats or play solely as the grand strategist, content to run the country in terms of economics and politics, and let his computer generals deal with the battlefield. Of course, any true wargamer will not delegate away the fight, and he will love the ease with which the interface allows for maneuver and combat. Moreover, there are several specialty units, such as marines, DE BA DOO Select site to contine dere DISERAZ WEREDO BRUAR Den 100 noon HDCA ARE ONE attacking aircraft to the combat factor of the defending anti-air. The losses can never be greater than 5%.\" Unless of course, it's Tuesday and the moon is full... Equally mind-boggling is the sequence of play, which would do Pacific War proud. While logical and somewhat realistic, one can't help but wonder if some items could not have been trimmed to facilitate game play. Three-Sixty wisely did not print out a comprehensive sequence of play on the back of the box, as it would have scared off potential buyers. Control freaks who think Civilization was lacking in detail will have a long and fruitful life with High Command. Until one learns to manage the flow of the game, it has the flavor of a tuna salad sandwich: So much layered on it's hard to tell what is really being digested. The most troubling thing is that, even with all the painstaking attention to historical detail, High Command is still more a game than a simulation. Where are the rules for morale, both of individual units and for whole countries? Where is terror bombing? Atomic bombs were not used in Europe, why include them, or if they must be in, why not make the Allies stage commando raids to stop the German heavy water experiments? Why are all defenders automatically entrenched? What about separate rules for building-to-building firefiche Add FDB 383389 N orbent m. Ma strategic air, even stealthy subs, which give High Command a good, historical flavor. The air and naval systems are thankfully more intricate than found in Third Reich, but can be more difficult to assimilare. ial, is testimony to its soundness. All of the In fact, once the average gamer decides tutorials are basically puzzles to be solved, to really bear down, learn more about the but the player who skips them will be illgame, and-gasp-read the documentaprepared for the Campaign Game. tion, he will probably be reaching for the The gameplay itself is reminiscent of the nearest aspirin bottle. The problem is, the classic Avalon Hill board game. Third designers have a noble purpose: To provide Reich, with a bit of ADG's World In Flames all the information for players of High thrown in. Declarations of War, political Command that a comparable variants and impulse movement, are all boardgame would include. The familiar items, and for gamers who were amount of data is not only stagdisappointed by the computer version of gering in and of itself, but the Third Reich, are welcome news indeed! All writing style is right out of \"My of the elements are present for an allall-time favorite novels about encompassing military, economic and politmathematics.\" What explanations ical simulation of WWII in the European of combat systems should include theatre, The maior question is, of course. are tables and charts, which High docs High Command attain the heights for Command has, and examples of which it strives? play, which despite the tutorials, Onc oddity is that the game program is are nowhere to be found. Instead, very obviously divided into military, politiwe get the following: cal and economic simulations, with the «These losses are equal to 1% ability to delegate any or all of these areas times the square root of the ratio man to computer \"subordinates.\" Awkward at of the combat factor for the Berlin, Germany GERGEON SEITE COCHER ta LOS DE Continue then Ready October 1993 Page 157 "


"Mitary Stuss units Te te the Moon Land ant Air Units Naval units Organization Organization Organization 30-39 34-66 06-100 Supra Turns at se in-Supety Our of Supply I Mission Status Anda wunassed In Her Movement Modifir x u KU Mission Status Murston Status Military Icons Production Detection BB DOO 22 EDD Nationality Gru Com Terrain Au Com Select Data Table button or faut Ferte Allocation Movement Couts Fair Weather/Rain Winter/tx Winter pama 1.0/2.0 1.0/2.0 VLO 2020 1.301 1.5/3.0 1.V 2.0 Forest 2040  40 Rough 1.5/2.0 20/4.0 50/60 2.0/4.0 1.5/3.0 4,07 4,0 2.0 LD 20 LU Mariti LLO LO/LO 3000, is nothing short of ludicrous. For chess, or even simple wargames such as Risk!, the AI infantry Brughter Battusip has pre-programmed libraries of Armor Funker Bomber ircraft  \"best moves\" and/or openings to B Mechanced Bomber   support it. Not only is the playETENEEC Marte Destroyer Transport BERBERG ing field 20 times larger in High Autome acrusar Merchant Marine Command, but the computer also has to coordinate a grand strategy AFICI for its military, economic and XB-supply status WOOR political plan (considerably more BARD than the simple allocation of CIE resource points. That the computer plays a passable game at all and bonds). Lack of modem play is a sign is commendable, given that severof the program's age, but is still a minus. al wargamers have been initially What has been done from a programming The answer of course, is that every overwhelmed by the sheer scope standpoint, however, is very impressive. of High Command. game, like every book, has a particular This is the first computer game I have focus. Games such as Third Reich suffered red A variety of options also enhance the played in ages that did not crash even once, from somewhat blurry vision when they the game's longevity. While being allowed to or have any problems with save game files first appeared, but eventually gained great invade Russia without weather is ahistoriand the like. The combat systems are fun, popularity because they had something to cal, it does make for an entertaining blitz and are not that tough to integrate with the say. High Command tries to be a grand game if one is starved for an Axis victory. It other systems once you get the hang of it. sweep of WWII, much like its boardgame is even assumed that the Japanese could in many respects, this is the game I wanted have won the Pacific War, and Allied ecowhen I bought Computer Third Reich, albeit nomic/manpower pools are 19EBEESTA downgraded accordingly. Of all the options available, using Hidden Deployment & Discovery rules is highly recommended, as they tend to help the Clear LECITO computer player and create a wonderfully tense feel for comPOED bat, especially amphibious CERRA assaults. Still, the fact that hidden DOW deployment is such a plus shows Dent High Command to be more a truly good war game, rather than Production Detection Gnd Com .Com Modifiers. ancestors, and suffers from many of the simulation. Consider-WWII same problems they experienced carly on. had the best reconnaissance of Select a Bata Table button or sit The Al has been criticized far and wide, any war up to its time, including mostly by its inability to stop bizarre, ahisair on a scale never seen before or torical human player strategies. The comsince. The ULTRA code was broken by the a bit unnecessarily complicated for what it puter opponent is definitely better on Allies, spies were everywhere, as were partidelivers. The main saving graces are the defense than attack, but it is not bad at all sans. On a grand strategic scale, it would be unique in unique interface that simplifies play, and on the economic levels, and can even spring more easy to know where one's enemy was the variety of options that will keep me the occasional surprise on the diplomatic located than say in a Civil War game. This coming back, at least until a better strategic end. To compare the Al to say, the excelwould be less of a problem for a game of WWII game comes along. For players who lent opponents provided by Chessmaster lower complexity, but is very disturbing in love a marathon, it is certainly worth the a game claiming to be a true simulation and trouble, especially as unwanted detail can possessing over 200 pages of rules! I am be edited out. Now, if we could only do reminded of all those \"monster that with all of our computer games. Cow wargames\" from demised boardgame king SPI, where players snapped up the the Mauer 1941 games because they were awed more by  Top Prices Paid their sheer size than their game play. . Convert titles you've beaten High Command is perilously close to that genre. or grown tired of to CASH or I kept asking myself, is this game DE trade credit (20% more)! really worth all the work: High  IBM AMIGA C64 Command is less innovative than a good amalgam of what came before. Call or send list CCDRENZE Overall, it tries to be too much, even SZRED for a detailed wargame, particularly in Bare Bones Software OP DIE 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 the economics end (which nearly put me to sleep, and I used to sell stocks 1-800-638-1123 Circle Reader Service #37 Page 158 Computer Gaming World 10/60 10/60 20/ LO 40/40 2.0/ 10 Mountain 2.0/10 LO/LO 1.01 XX C Beymeat UUME ell Me Buttons Military Icons Naturality Terrain th-Hex Moment SELL YOU JAMES Larrean TRITJORT SHOWICOMB SPUIT "


"The World's First Photorealistic Interactive CD Sci-Fi Adventure S ET ENERGY O.H22.800 08.03.21ES DATE Warning Oxygen supply is critically low. Winner! INVISION 1993 Multimedia Awards Award of Excellence plus Gold-Best Animation/Graphics Bronze -Best Production Design Bronze-Adult Games Dy level: 12% Estimated time: 00:02:31 Address Book Biochip.Mapping Biochip Pegasus Oxygen an \"...the world of interactive gaming is never going to be the same.\" Mark Rhodes, Multimedia Editor, Micropublishing News CALDA SP AGHETORUD ME Mapping Biochin 6 June 2318, 0651Z. Attention Temporal Protectorate: Travel through time on the price UAB Intense arcade action A rip has been detected in the fabric of time. Only moments remain until all that mankind has accomplished is laid waste. Your objective-journey through time...from prehistoric lands to the distant future, to prevent any compromise in the established continuum. But before the game is over, you must discover who...or what...is the source of this mayhem, and bring it to a halt.  Photorealistic 3D modeled worlds to explore Over 30 minutes of full motion video  Integrated arcade action and puzzles to  No set order in which the goals must be challenge any player accomplished  Intuitive interface featuring easy-to-use  More than one solution to each probinventory and movement controls lem you encounter  Original soundtrack  Also available on Macintosh CD Take a ride through time on the CD Adventure that will alter history. Available at retailers throughout the continuum or by contacting: Quadra Interactive, Inc., P.O. Box 188033, Carlsbad, CA 92009-9793 Circle Reader Service #88 Multi-level challenges Copyright 1992, 1993 Presto Studios, Inc.; MPCversionby Quadralnteractive, Inc. QUADRA INTERACTIVE "


"REVIEW Sound As An Iron Bottom SSG's Carriers at War Construction Kit by Bob Proctor . Marriers at War, an oldic bur goodie from the days of the 8-bit computer, was recommissioned last year by Strategic Studies Group (SSG) for IBM compatibles. As reviewed in issue #101 of CGW, Carriers at War (CAW), like the 8-bit original, is an operational game of naval war in the Pacific during WWII. Ir emphasizes solitaire play, and the computer is a strong, if not perfect, opponent. Pacific theater buffs have waited with great anticipation for a scenario editor that would allow them to devise new strategies and battles with this solid game system. announced. SSG has improved the functionality of the Al by expanding the programming language that the designers use to create it, and has used this smarter, more flexible AI to create new versions and variations of the original scenarios included in CAW. If the word \"programming is intimidating, rest assured; one can enjoy the game without delving into this aspect of the Kit. Even if plavers don't use the Al programming tools, they will still have a state-of-the-art computer warp to face the Japanese carriers. (You opponent and an enormous amount of fresh don't want to play the Japanese side on this game-play in the pre-created scenarios that one!) come with the Kit. 2. Wake Island (12/41) new scenario Variations On A Theme Their first attempt to invade Wake having By Yamamoto failed, the Japanese redouble their effort while the US tries to run in reinforcements. There are nine scenarios included in the One creates this scenario by working Kit, all with a historical version. Here is a list through the tutorial, but if the player of the variations: doesn't want to invest that much time, he 1. Pearl Harbor (12/41) can create it by running a provided proThere are two new varigram named \"MAKEWAKE.\" ations; one portrays the US reaction if there had Carriers at War Construction Kit been warning of the Japanese attack. The TITLE: Carrers at War Construction Kit CARRIERS AT WAT other is a bit crazy, PRICE: $65 SYSTEM: IBM Based on the movie The REQUIREMENTS: EGA or VGA graphics, original Final Countdown, it CAW game, mouse PROTECTION: None sends the modern USS # OF PLAYERS: 1 or 2. same computer only Enterprise, complete DESIGNERS: Roger Keating and lan Trout with F-14 Tomcats, PUBLISHER: Strategic Studies Group (American office) 8343 Monticello Drive back through a timePensacola, FL 32514 WS And here it is... [long drum roll)...the Carriers at War Construction Kit! Unlike many scenario editors that merely let one change or add forces on a pre-set map, the Kit is a programming environment that allows a player to tinker with the computer opponent's artificial intelligence and create original maps. The Kit is a little late, yes, but it's a more ambitious product than was originally Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"3. Coral Sea (5142) A Tour Of The Hangar Deck There are two new variations; one gives the \"To understand the process of changing or US a third carrier (the Enterprise) and the creating a scenario, one must first understand second adds cruisers and destroyers for the C W file structure. Every scenario conmore AA support. sists of a minimum of four files. These are: 4. Midway (6/42) a. the map (with a DOS extension of PCK) Only the historical setup here, although b. the data base (.CAW) with the ship, plane there is still plenty of uncertainty. The and base data Japanese will approach Midway in one of c. the graphics file (.LST) with the images of several different ways, and the US waits in the ships and planes different places to spring its trap. d. the computer's Al program (.AIQ) 5. Guadalcanal (8/42) new scenario The Marines invade and the Navy struggles to keep them supplied. Two variants allow for Japanese responses earlier than the historical setup. 6. Eastern Solomons (8/42) Two new variations here; one gives the IJN an extra carrier and the other uses different approaches and tactics. 7. Santa Cruz (10/42) The AIQ file is referred to as a deck of There are three new variations here: one w variations here: one \"WarCards.» If the scenario has more than \"WarCards. If the scenario has more than helps the lapanese by upgrading the airfield one variation, there will be one deck for each, at Buin and adding a few squadrons, the and all will start with the same four characsecond helps the US by adding the Saraters. For example, the historical program for toga, and the third combines the two. the Coral Sea scenario is CORAL.AIQ and 8. Tarawa (11/43) new scenario variations would be CORA001.AIQ, CORA002.AIQ and so on. All variations use The Marines invade the Gilberts and the the same data base, map and graphics. If one USN has new carriers and BBs for support. wants the USS Enterprise to appear in any The IJN faces the difficult task of ambushvariation, then it must be present in the data ing a superior force. If this seems too diffibase and must be deleted by the War Deck for cult, one can try the variant that adds the those variations where it should not appear super-carrier Shinano! (like the historical one). This critical concept 9. Philippine Sea (6/44) deserves a second example: Say one wants the This was a tough scenario for the Japanese, Yorktown to start the Midway scenario someso two new variations have been added to times damaged and sometimes undamaged help them. The first, called \"Raise The (showing what might have happened if she Dead,\" presumes that Japan does not lose didn't get pasted at the Coral Sea), then one all of her skilled carrier pilots at Midway needs to put both versions of the Yorktown in the data base and always delete one or the other. ACCENT A benefit of this structure is that it is easy to exchange warplans for an existing scenario. Say a friend develops a new plan for the IJN to capture Midway. One could copy the friend's AIQ file onto the hard disk so that TE his variation will appear at the beginning of the game. One can then select it and attempt to find its weaknesses. Now, we need to complete the data base. This means typing in the characteristics of every type of plane and ship class, which is very tedious. The back of the manual contains the data for every major type of ship and aircraft used in the Pacific by the US and Japan. Even though the common types appear in the existing scenarios, we must still type them in. It would be so much easier if there were a table look-up feature so we could select a name from a list and get the default data entered for us, reducing the tedium and the chance of errors. Next, we need to enter the composition of every squadron and task group. Then we assign squadrons to bases and carriers. Finally, we need to add info on victory conditions. At least editing an existing scenario is easy; we can bump up the range on all B-17s, add more aces to a squadron, or make it easier for the US to get a draw. When we get the data base done, it's time to build the graphics file. This contains pictures and animations for all of the plane types and ship classes in the data base. The Kit does not include tools for creating or editing the basic images: this must be done with another program (the manual recommends EA's Deluxe Paint II). Fortunately, we can steal graphics from other scenarios, so creating graphics is easy as long as we stick to existing types. Finally we are ready to create a deck of WarCards. There are three basic types of cards: start-up cards, instructions for land bases, and instructions for task groups (hereafter called TGs). Land bases (which have no need to move) select a new card once a day, while TGs select a new card every hour. Each card applies to a specific force (base or TG) but it is easy to copy and modify cards to give similar instructions to other forces. A special kind of start-up card adjusts neutral elements like game length and weather. Cric. i ecie 34-2 T.PDF PER Let's Create A Scenario (and elsewhere) and that the IJN still has a respectable carrier force in 1944. The second hypothesizes that the Kamikaze program starts earlier and two squadrons are ready and waiting on Iwo Jima. The system is extremely flexible. In each variation the major carrier forces usually have several alternate strategies, and the player can have the computer select a variation at random. It is now possible to go into a scenario without being sure of what forces one will be facing or how they'll be deployed. To really make this work, one should learn how to create even more variations. First, we start by putting in the scenario name, date and the names of the commanders. Then, we need a map. If we're lucky, we can copy one of the existing maps. Otherwise, it's time to crank up the map-drawing module. The map is always an 84 by 72 hex grid at a scale of 20 nautical miles per hex. Using the map editor is easy, but we'll want to calculate the location of land and bases before we start. No help is provided for this. The starting weather position and the forecast are also part of the map file. What happens when a card is selected? That depends on the card. An instruction card contains up to ten actions and is a complete plan all by itself. One could order up CAP with the \"Combat Air Patrol\" action, set search zones with the \"Air Search\" action, and order attacks on enemy sightings using «Base Strike Zone.\" A simple plan like this will suffice for a land base for the whole game if it can use the same plan (card) every day. Every card is identified by an ID number from 1 to 99 which SSG calls a \"thread.\" The number one thread is special because it is used at the beginning of the game (every force October 1993 Page 161 "


"SU TOTAL should have a number one thread). Now They should always have an escape thread in plex technique is the «Thread Reaction\" accomes the clever part. If more than one card the form of a \"TG Movement to a base ortion that lets attack groups switch threads has the same ID number (belongs to the same safe map edge. The power of the WarCard whenever another TG switches. For example, thread), then the computer will select one at system comes from actions that switch from when that invasion force switches to its invarandom. Thus, if the Enterprise-Hornet one thread to another. Simplest, but leastsion thread, a carrier group could also switch group has four cards in thread one, each of flexible, is the \"Time Out,\" which switches to a thread to support it in some way, perhaps which uses \"TG Patrol\" for a different area on a pre-set day and time. An example of running in at high speed and delivering an around Midway, then a human playing the when to use this is when one wants to wait airstrike on an enemy airfield. Since one can Japanese will not know where to expect the until the fourth day of the battle to send an have a TG change threads on many condiUS carriers. invasion force toward its target. One can also tions, there are a lot of ways to use \"Thread switch to a new thread upon the completion Reaction.\" Stacking The Deck of a mission. Recall All Ops! If we want to favor certain strategies, we can CAW still has my vote as the best simulation add a chance value\" from 1 to 50 on each of carrier warfare, and is by far the best for card. The higher the value, the more likely solitaire play. Although it's hard to be sure on this card will be selected. This approach is a reviewer's schedule, the only bugs I have simple, but controlling the odds precisely is seen in three weeks of intensive play are bits not intuitive. Take the simplest example, a of screen flotsam which all go away when that thread of two cards. On one card, we'll leave area of the screen gets redrawn. The CAW the chance value at zero. Now consider the Construction Kit is a solid editor that delivers second card; if we add a chance value of 10, as promised. As a programming environthis plan becomes twice as likely as the first. A value of 15 makes it three times as likely. All other actions that switch threads are ment, it would benefit from easier data entry conditional. \"Area Response\" is used to and better error detection, but we may well and 30 makes it 10 times as likely! The odds sce these improvements, as SSG has commitare only approximate but the lesson is clear; switch if a unit sights an enemy TG in a ted to continued development of this game keep the chance values low, especially when particular area (within 300 miles of a key system. The next upgrade will add data and three or more cards are present. base, for example). \"Effectiveness Lost\" graphics for British and Dutch ships and, I It is normal practice to create several threads switches if one or more TGs are weakened; cxpect, maps for the Southwestern Pacific for each TG. Carrier groups usually patrol this is the primary method for getting out of and Indian is the primary method for getting out of and Indian Oceans. I expect SSG's house and wait to react to the enemy using \"Local Dodge with whatever ships are still afloat. magazine, Run 5, and gamer bulletin boards Response\" actions. They may also support One can also switch when a particular ship will be buzzing with news, programming tips other TGs or launch a strike at an enemy base. either friend or foe, is sunk. The most comand great variant scenarios. CGW THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES also Nintendo, Super Nintendo, and Sega Genesis We want your current used games* 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping WE SELL USED GAMES IBM, Nintendo, Super Nintendo, Sega Genesis All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked Call for current title availibility AMER'S Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4). Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7), Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld. Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds. Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul. Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 (12.95). : SUSHI 52 WE ACCEPT VISA/MasterCard 2 GAMES Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/$7 2nd Day Air *Games must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned of your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 Circle Reader Service #56 Page 162 IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS Mastercard P.O. Box 1083 Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 L Circle Reader Service #58 Computer Gaming World "


"Combat Supplies The WARGAMER'S Computer Company supplies you with the tools you need. weapons, etc. POA includes a choice of specific or random Middle East scenarios/ maps. An optional Map Builder program ($15) allows players to create unique maps. BOGREODA \"...for the grognard or serious student of the modern battlefield, POA becomes virtually mandatory.\" — CGW ($44.95 + $4.00 S/H) POA runs on IBM and compatibles only, with EGA graphics, and 512K minimum RAM. PS Simulations is devoted to wargamers and their needs: the need to be an integral part of the action; the need to control battlefield conditions; the need for accuracy: the need for detail. HPS products satisfy these needs. Point of Attack The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation available. POA is a platoon/section tactical simulation, with over 100 modern weapon systems from eleven countries. The artificial intelligence is incredibly accurate. Wargamers can control air superiority. supplies, communications, SIMULATIONS weather, Mail checks/money orders to: morale, HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 publishers are creating ADC add-on disks for their games, allowing players to jump right into operations, bypassing the symbol set and map input steps. \"ADC is a must have Available product that will only by mail. change the way Please add $4.00 you play warshipping and handling. games.\" CA residents add state CGW sales tax. Please ($79.95 + specify disk spec $4.00 S/H) when ordering. ADC requires at VISA/MC: CALL least 600K RAM (408)554-8381 VGA, for IBM and compatibles only. Mouse optional. HPS Simulations the source for all your Combat Supplies. AHPS Aide De Camp Now you can use your computer as a playing aid for all your wargames. Up to 30,000 hexes per game map, unlimited units, multiple user-defined zoom levels, game-turn replay ability, and easy play-by-mail or modem makes ADC the most exciting new product for board wargamers. ADC does not include rules for any specific games the board game must be purchased separately. Several board game Copyright 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"CD-ROM REVIEW Line Of Battle Software Sorcery Casts A Spell On Naval Wargamers fish hipsas ?hly dan by Ed Dille such a course of action would provoke an arms race with Germany (which it did), Lord \"...It is highly dangerous to consider that Fisher prevailed and naval warfare was revoour ships as a whole are superior or even equal lutionized. Battleships became Kings of the fighting machines.\" Sea for the next 30 years and, although they — Vice Admiral Sir John Jellicoe have since relinquished the title to aircraft July 14, 1914 carriers, remnants of the battleship revolution \"...there seems to be something wrong with remained in service until very recently. our bloody ships today.\" The battle of Jutland, which remains one of Vice Admiral Sir David Beatty the largest set piece naval engagements of all May 31, 1916 time, has long been a popular subject matter among wargamers. In fact, some of the earliIthough Germany's High Seas Fleet est miniatures games centered on it. Because of the sweep and grandeur of Jutland, it is also had been recognized as the primary necessary to coordinate the activities of all the not surprising that most, if not all of the naval threat to England as early as squadrons. This is difficult in battles with a other naval engagements of the period remain 1904, the Royal Navy was ill prepared to lot of squadrons, like Jutland, but in smaller relatively obscure to most gamers. In reality, confront its foe even 10 years later, at the cngagements it is essentially the same as playif it were not for the outcome of battles like outset of the First World War. Despite a ing at the Squadron Commander level. Heligoland Bight, Coronel, Dogger Bank small cadre of naval professionals, Admiral and the Falkland Islands, the stage would not Gamers may play one of the aforemenJellicoe among them, the vast majority of the have been set for the encounter at Jutland. tioned single battles as a stand-alone event or Officer Corps of the Royal Navy was comopt for a campaign that encompasses the posed of aristocracy and gentry who viewed To Arms! entire war. The campaign option is not strathe entire service as nothing more than a tegically based, as in SSI's Great Naval Battles glorified yacht club. Diplomatic missions of Jutland is a game of real-time tactical naval series. Rather, it is a linkage of the existing set showing the flag were viewed as opportunities warfare. Players may opt to play with either piece battles with hypothetical convoy ento bring home baubles from abroad and gunthe Grand or High Seas Fleet as a ship Capgagements in between. The Convoy engagenery practice was discouraged, as it made the rain, Squadron Commander or Commanderments generally involve Light Cruisers, and in-Chief. Rather than posing as difficulty the player's success or failure in them has an settings, a mechanism used in other games, impact on the flow of war supplies. Losses are these selections actually determine the level carried over from one engagement to the next of command and control ability the player and players who are successful in sinking will have in the course of subsequent battles. enemiy shipping receive War Bonds that can As a ship Captain, the player will be able to be used for their own shipbuilding program. directly control only his own ship functions As such, victories in the early part of a camand can have no impact on the decisions of paign have a direct impact on which forces GUN Oloid 02 other ships in the squadron or other squad may eventually be available for the final conGURE 100 rons. flict at Jutland. guna globi On board the ship, the Captain controls GuNgolol course, speed, damage control, gun and torBattle Stations pedo directors and the battle plot. As a All battles begin within visual range of the Squadron Commander, the player may also opposing forces. Players must consider their ships dirty. As such, when open warfare use signal flags to alter the course and speed approach to take advantage of the maximum forced the reconversion of the Royal Navy of other ships in the squadron. Because the ron, because the effective range of their guns while attempting from a Social to a Military entity, it is not Squadron Commander's ship always has the to avoid the similar band of engagement for surprising that confusion and disorder right of independent action, other ships will the enemy. Classic maneuvers such as \"Crossreigned supreme. not automatically mimic the course changes ing the Tee\" (passing in front of the enemy Although the British lacked the foresight to of his own ship to maintain forcolumn to bring all broadsides to bear actually study naval warfare (their Academy mation. Rather, it is necessary to while they are limited to forward or aft was not built until 1912) and preferred insignal each one of these ships instead to copy methods which had succeeded dividually to alter course and in the past, Admiral Fisher did bring vision speed as desired. Further, preset Jutland Collilt $89.95 and foresight to one aspect of the pre-war division formations like columns SYSTEM: IBM CD-ROM period, Naval Architecture. His advocation and line abreast have not been REQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz, 4MB RAM, 25MB hard drive space. of scrapping obsolere portions of the fleet and included in the signal box. If playCD-ROM Extension 2.21 focusing new construction upon heavily arers want to set up these formation PROTECTION: DESIGNER: James R. Jones III mored, big gun ships called Dreadnoughts, tactics it is necessary to do so PUBLISHER: Software Sorcery was controversial at best. Despite debate manually. If one plays at the San Diego, CA within the Admiralty and arguments that Commander-in-Chief level, it is (619) 452-9901 TONGROTE CIUDHS AUTOMATIC O TEVONTYTI ULAUTERTE URSE SUTED TITLE: PRICE: None Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"E LEONE guns only) are as effective as one might anticipate. Players select a ship to target and manually spot the fall of shot until they are achieving hits. It is important to note, however, that it is always a good idea to verify the target before proceeding too far into this process. Friendly fire is possible and selecting the «Target Leading Ship\" option from the menu will select the closest ship, not the closest enemy ship. The ballistics model used by the program is quite excellent, resolving the fall of shot to a e square meter area and determining penerration and damage based on caliber, belt or deck armor and the function of the compartment in the area hit. The only model gamers have seen that provides equivalent accuracy is the one used by Action Stations, the RAW Entertainment release covering WWII ractical combat. Further, when shells impact on the target, the player is rewarded with exciting graphic and sound routines. The «splang\" of metal on metal is clearly heard, pieces fly in the air where appropriate, deck fires and secondary explosions rumble, and smoke fills the air. You can almost smell the cordite. When a ship sinks or a lucky hit causes a magazine explosion, a full size cut screen animation occurs. Players have the option of taking a «photograph\" of these, or any other exciting moment in the game, and saving it in their war records file for later review. range, try clevating the guns one-tenth of a degrec. Captain's Log In addition to the superlative graphic routines that occur during play, the data files on the CD also include a historical data book that incorporates actual photographs from TURILOO Olga the Imperial War Museum and an excellent histography of the war. Unfortunately, onTOROLOGIO line is also the only place where players can access the full version of the game manual. The small flyer that comes inside the CD case is helpful, but far from comprehensive. Usersufficient Upper Memory Blocks ro lock up feedback thus far has been less than positive Jutland in a memory allocation error perito the lack of a printed manual and Software odically. Sorcery is taking steps to rectify the matter, Software Sorcery should not be overly casboth for this and subsequent releases. tigated for the configuration calamities, for One other thing that is important, but nor several reasons. First, this is their initial offerin either documentation, is a key combinaing, and many other companies with infition that allows players to time compress the nitely more experience have committed more game. This feature is important to those of us grievous errors than making a good game who have a limited amount of play time and difficult to play. Second, Jutland is a good resent dead periods in a game. The hidden game, on par with similar offerings by Strakey sequence to invoke time compression is tegic Simulations, Inc. and MicroProse in <shift=left bracket, right bracket ({}). Players terms of mechanics and interface, while exshould ensure that none of their ships are in ceeding both in graphic presentation. Finally, the middle of a turn before invoking this the middle they have taken an active approach to resolvoption option. ing user concerns, posting free patch files and IRQ corrections on CompuServe and ProdINCOMING!!! igy for every problem that has come to their Jutland sets sail in this tumultuous period attention. Software Sorcery seems to have much as the British Grand Fleet did in 1914, discovered that pushing the technological enwith great pomp and circumstance and some velope can be painful as well as rewarding, but hidden weaknesses which soon became apthey are also asking all the right questions and parent. The first thing that players will note give every appearance of being a company is that Jutland, despite its packaging as a with the potential to become a long term CD-ROM, cats up a lot of space on their hard hard player player in the industry. CGW drives. Although the manual states that 20MB are required, at least 25MB must be free during installation to allow for file maFlash Suppression nipulation. Because Jutland operates in real The technical support staff at Software time, Software Sorcery made a design deciSorcery is professional, courteous and very sion to avoid delays due to CD disk access by helpful. They suggest the following placing those files accessed most frequently CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT directly on the hard drive. Their reasoning is files for those with an unstacked hard sound, but the issue is discussed nonetheless drive using a Sony CD unit, Pro Audio because many players buy the CD-ROM format to avoid overcrowding of their hard drive Spectrum 16 and a Microsoft Mouse. and might be unpleasantly surprised by these requirements, which are not listed on the CONFIG.SYS files=25 exterior package. Device=C:\\dos setver.exe Another hidden gotcha' is that Jutland does Device=c:\\dos himem.sys not like disk compression software like DOS=High, UMB Devicehigh=C:\\sony \\mvsound.sys Stacker. Although they are not the first to d:3 0:11 5:1,220, 1,7 M: 0 impose this restriction on players, Strike Com Devicehigh=C:\\sony\\slcd.sys mander being a notable culprit, some players /d:cdrom001 /b: 1100 /m:h/c/v will balk at the need to remove programs, defragment and unstack their drives simply AUTOEXEC. BAT @Echo Off to play the game. Finally, when Jutland says Prompt Spsg it needs 4 MB of RAM, it literally needs set mouse=C:\\msmouse almost the entire 4 MB to run without memC:\\msmouse mouse ory allocation errors occurring in the course Path c:\\windows;c:\\dos Set Temp=C:\\dos of play. Even with advanced memory manc:\\sony\\mscdex /d:cdrom001 /M:8 /E agement software like 386 Maxx Version 7.0, the memory manager and mouse took up The gunnery tables listed in the on-line documentation may be a little misleading to novice players of this type of simulation, as they focus on penetration vs. caliber at certain representative ranges. These ranges are not the maximum or even the maximum effective of the guns listed. Larger caliber guns may inflict hits at 16,000 yards, but the optimum range of engagement in most instances is 8,000-12,000 yards. Also, if one finds that they are hitting the target, but not achieving the desired affect, the likely reason is that they are hitting the belt armor. Belt hits are fine when one is close enough to penetrate the hull and attempt to capsize the targeted ship, but at longer ranges one should strive for deck hits, where the armor is thinner and the chance of penetration greater. To move from belt to deck hits in the optimum engagement October 1993 Page 165 "


"The Rumor Bag ************* by William Randolph Bradlee nyone who reads this column (and the hate mail it generates) regularly knows that I rarely get any respect. So, when I heard from the Alfred E. Packer College of Culinary Sciences and Yellow Journalism, was more than thrilled. Not only did this prestigious institution of higher learning want to give me an honorary doctorate, but they were going to pay all my expenses to the emony. I was almost as excited as I was when I heard that Gary Grigsby was planning to revise Panzer Strike for SSI in much the same way he had redesigned War in the South Pacific and War in Russia. Naturally, I wanted to make sure that this was a legitimate institution. I hadn't heard of too many centers of higher learning in Napoleonville, LA, but I wasn't about to miss my chance to become a Doctor of Humanities. At least, that's what I thought they had called it. I asked for a catalog and received a copy in the mail. Actually, what I roccived was a marchbook with a press release for SDJ'S new Big 3 (Version 3). One side of the cover listed the fact that the new Big 3 would have 12 scenarios and a scenario cditor; mentioned that it would run under Windows, dropped hints about modem play, ambient video and multiple wars (possible World War I and 1986 campaigns; and suggested that a Pacific Theater campaign might be in the offing. The other side asked, \"Could you write a magazine story from this? If you can, you may be ready to enter a tremendously exciting career as a journalist. Call the Alfred E. Packer School of Culinary Studies and Yellow Journalism for more details. 1-800-OLDNEWS.\" Of course, anyone can print a catalog. I wanted to find out more about the faculty at the school. I called the toll-free number and received the unmistakable dulcet tones of a took the Cajun Trailways bus to Napoleonmodem or fax line. I connected my modem ville. Once I reached the combination bus and redialed the number, only to discover I station/gasoline pump/general store, I shook had dialed OLD-PEWS and got a televangelhands with the president of the school and ist's BBS by mistake. Fortunately, I found a got into the institution's faculty limo. The demo for Mage, Inc.'s upcoming Eternia, in good doctor cut the kudzu away from the tires a library of files about Eternity. Eternia is a (the bus was late and he'd had to wait about 3-D scrolling game in 320x200 resolution an hour) and we drove off into the country. and 256 color graphics. The game uses fractal He hacked off thar kudzu like he was trimcompression to speed up the action and, since ming Blackbeard's beard. It reminded me it does not require rendering algorithms, is that Avalon Hill is allegedly working on supposed to unfold to more than 2 gigabytes Computer Blackbeard. of graphic data on the fly. Mage thinks it will As we drove through the heavily wooded run on a 386SX and only require about 15 MB on the hard drive. area of Louisiana and the shadows grew longer, I felt something like a character in the About that time, the televangelist's BBS new fantasy game that the guys at Sim-Tex was trying to take the offering by getting he offering by getting (developers of Masters of Orion for Microdeve billing information from me, so I tried an. Prose) are designing. Certain parts of Louisiother number. This time I connected with ana do seem almost magical and unreal. As a the CRC information service by mistake and result, I was just about to ask the good doctor discovered that they are introducing a new if the school itself was built in a Gothic or information network that is being designed Neoclassical design when we pulled up at the to rival Prodigy, CIS, GEnie, etc. The differold country church which had been conence is that CRIS II is supposed to cost only verted into the school's auditorium. I was $2.00 per hour. beginning to think it wasn't an accident that I quickly downloaded a message about a I'd connected with the relevangelist's BBS. new game that's supposed to come out from At any rate, I gave a marvelous commenceElectronic Publishing. It's a CD game called ment address, all about ethics, integrity and Gahan Wilson's Haunted House and should the avoidance of conflict of interest. I only let appeal to all of us bent, twisted sickos who slip one rumor in the whole address. I inadlike Gahan Wilson's cartoons. vertently told everyone that Mark Baldwin I posted a naughty little note asking if and Bob Rakosky of White Wolf ProducAtomic Games' (developers of the V for Victions are already planning their Christmas tory series) new agreement to develop Avalon release for 1994. I extolled the virtues of this Hill's Squad Leader for the computer would light, wargame construction set and propreclude them from creating the American claimed that its working title was War!I even Civil War game for Three-Sixty Pacific. We waxed profoundly eloquent on the ironic fact don't actually think Three-Sixty will back that many of the horrest Christmas titles have off, but it certainly won't be G for Glory. more to do with war than \"peace on earth Meanwhile, I posted a little note telling At any rate, I must have cut a dramatic wargamers who own Aide de Camp that they figure in front of the stained glass window. can keep themselves busy with new PBEM When I finished, both of the graduates gave kits for some of the Decision Games titles. me a standing ovation. Unfortunately, it was Now, if only Avalon Hill could come to an only then that I discovered that it was not a agreement with HPS so we can play War and Doctor of Humanities degree that I was being Peace over the networks. awarded. The doctorate was in Inanities. I finally gave up on reaching the school via Considering the school was named after the the toll-free number, but I prepared my only convicted cannibal in U.S. history, I sure speech for the graduation, anyway. I flew to am glad they didn't ask me to sample the Baton Rouge via Cattle Call Airways and graduates' commencement cuisine. Cow Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"* ZERO'S & ONE'S ASK FOR PRICE LIST AND TAKE A LOOK AT OUR SALE ITEM (800) 788-2193 Take Break:Pinball 29.95 Yobi Magic Spell Tricks 29.95 35.95 HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: CD 16 Kit (Business) 635.00 Discovry 8 CDRom Kit 399.00 Discovry 16 CDRom Kit 469.00 Edutnmnt 8 CDRom Kit 449.00 Edutnmnt 16 CDRom Kit 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro Dlx 119.95 Video Blaster 299.00 Video Spigot 399.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Kit 499.95 PAS 16 Snd Cd 165.95 Pro Aud Studio 16 189.00 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 899.00 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 495.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO: Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 129.00 TelevEyes VGA-TV 199.00 WIN TV 399.95 SPORTS Car & Driver Front Page Sports Ftbl Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro NFL Pro Football 1992 NFL Video Pro Football Sports Adventure Tony LaRussa Bsbl II Trouble Shooting Golf Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit Grnd Prix World Tour Tennis 41.95 41.95 36.95 39.95 35.95 35.95 47.95 37.95 29.95 35.95 24.95 35.95 31.95 call 41.95 44.95 35.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto Ill Game Card 27.00 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach 11 22.00 Mach III+ 27.00 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HiSpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control Mark II 99.95 U-Prom for WCS Mark! 27.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 COLORADO SPECTRUM Mouse Wheel call Sample Listing of Products B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Veil of Darkness Birds of Prey 31.95 Discovery Columbus 35.95 Wing Commander II 47.95 Campaign 35.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 Wizardary VII:Crsaders 41.95 Comanche Maximm Ovrkl 43.95 Dune 11 35.95 X-Wing 41.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 El Fish 35.95 X-Wing Misson Dsk 19.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Eric The Unready CD ROM Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Flashback 31.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Freddy Pharkas 41.95 7th Guest 52.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Global Effect 19.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbis 41.95 F-15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Goblins 2 24.95 Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Falcon 3.0/Mig 29 call Heimdall 21.95 Clip Art Haven-jewel 16.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Home Alone 2 27.95 Composer's Qst MPC 54.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons call Humans 25.95 Compton Interact. Encyc. 249.95 Fit Sim Scen USA East 41.95 Inca 34.95 Curse of Enchantia 24.95 Flight Sim 5.0 Indy Jones 4 35.95 Daggar of Amon Ra 41.95 High Command 41.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Day of Tenacle Jetfighter Il bundle 41.95 Kyrandia (Legend) Dinosauer Adventures 34.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Legacy:Realm of Terror 36.95 Dune 56.95 Liberty or Death Legends Valour 37.95 Eco-Quest 1 41.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Leis Suit Larry 5 41.95 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 Pacific War 47.95 Lemmings 2 35.95 F-15 Strike Eagle III 47.95 Patriot 43.95 Lost Treas Infocom II 29.95 Fontmaster 2 18.95 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Lost Treas. of Rain Forest 29.95 Games 1993-Jewel 21.95 Perfect General 35.95 Magic Candle 111 37.95 Global Explrer-DeLorme 89.95 Rebel Assault tba Maniac Mansion 14.95 Indy Jones:Fate Atlantis 41.95 Secret Weapons Luftwife 29.95 Mantis 31.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 Special Forces 29.95 Mario Is Missing! 34.95 Iron Helix call Strike Commander 47.95 Mercenaries (Tegel's) 37.95 King's Quest VI 44.95 Task Force 1942 38.95 Might & Magic V 41.95 Jutland 52.95 Theater of War 19.95 Monkey Island 2 25.95 Just Grandma & Me 38.95 Tornado 44.95 Out of This World 36.95 Kodak Photo CD 29.95 V Victory 1, 2 or 3 ea 43.95 Paladin 11 35.95 Legend of Kyrandia 41.95 Piratesl Gold 41.95 Map Expert by Delorme 299.95 ENTERTAINMENT Police Quest 3 39.95 Mayo Clinic (jewel box) 29.95 Prophecy by Sierra 24.95 Midi Music Shop-jewl box 22.95 A-Train 41.95 Populous II MS Cinemania MPC 37.95 54.95 ADD:Unltd Adventure 34.95 Prince of Persia 11 41.95 Monarch Notes 61.95 Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 41.95 Quest for Glory III Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 Adventre Starter-Sierra 19.95 Return of the Phanton 41.95 PC Karoake 77.95 Air Bucks 35.95 Ringworld 35.95 Playing with Language 29.95 Alone in the Dark 35.95 Romance 3 Kingdoms 39.95 Prophone 1993 Ed 129.95 Amazons 38.95 Pub.Paradise-Clip Art Rome:Pathway to Pwr 29.95 22.95 Arcade Hits 24.95 Rules of Engagement il 41.95 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26.95 Armourgeddon 39.95 SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 Rodney's Fun Screen 39.95 Ashes of Empire 34.95 Shadow President 41.95 RoMaterial:Vis/Snd Effect 19.95 Back to Future II 26.95 Shadowlands Shareware Studio V.C 29.95 18.95 Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 Sherlock Hims:Lst Files 42.95 Sherlock Holmes 3 43.95 Batman Returns Siege Space Adventure 2.0 22.95 61.95 Betrayal at Krondor 39.95 Sim Ant 35.95 Space Quest IV 41.95 Blue Force 39.95 Sim City Ultima Underworld I&II 29.95 58.95 Caesar 35.95 Sim Earth 42.95 Who Killed Sam Rupert 24.95 Carmen SD-Space Dluxe 47.95 Sim Life 41.95 Willy Beamish 41.95 Castles II 35.95 Simpson's Arcade 29.95 Wing Commander Il Dix 52.95 Challenge of 5 Realms 39.95 Space Hulk WCmdr 11/Ult Undrwrid 34.95 52.95 Civilization:Master Playr 49.95 Space Quest V 41.95 World Fact Book '92 59.95 Classic Adventure-Lucas 35.95 Spear of Dstiny:Wifnstn 35.95 Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Star Control II Creepers 29.95 WINDOWS Star Trek 25th Anniv. Dagger Amon Ra 41.95 35.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Stunt Island 33.95 Dark Hall 34.95 Audio: Star Trek V.I 34.95 Syndicate 41.95 36.95 Dark Seed Conquered for Windows 44.95 41.95 Darklands Terminator 2029 41.95 MS Goll 42.95 Ultima Underworld II 47.95 Daughter of Serpents 32.95 Origin FX Screen Sur 24.95 Ultima VII Part 2 45.95 Day of Tenacle 34.95 Star Trek Screen Sur 44.95 Ultrabots 36.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Amazon Trail 34.95 Auto Works 44.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Cuckoo Zoo 31.95 Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Discover Space 37 95 Eagle Eye Mysteries 31.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Kid Cad 3-D 29.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 2495 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail Dix 35.95 Peter Pan Print Kit 31.95 Playroom ver 2.0 29.95 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters 34.95 Rock & Bach 34.95 Scooters Magic Castle 31.95 Time Treks 29.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle-Geom 29.95 41.95 MODEMS Prices too Low to Print: Boca, Sportster, Supra, Zoltrix, Zoom and others AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A...TO Z...!  35.95 FLT SIMWAR A Line in Sand 26.95 Aces over Europe 44.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Ambush at Sorinor 35.95 Armored Fist 42.95 ATAC 34.95 MANY SALE ITEMS IN OUR FULL PRICE LIST ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 3315 E RUSSELL RD, #H-177 LAS VEGAS, NV 89120 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Any return subject to 20% restocking fee. Shipping: 1st game $5; addi games add $1 each in Continental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #106 "


"Taking  running, cycling, rowing, stepping and skiing. By setting up its electric eye sensor on any exercise machine and hooking it into a computer, one can enjoy running into cars, pigs and other athletes to earn points while burning calories. The display reacts to exercise speed and turning input from two buttons mounted on velcro straps. When you're done, a stat screen lists elapsed time, points, average mph and distance traveled. The home-grown package is simple to ser up and fun to use, representing an early, innovative foray into the coming \"virtual reality\" programs. IBM ($159.95). Circle Reader Service #3 ID The Belfry Links Championship Course 2.3.4111 pritseviliyo SW L L ISSING Access Software Inc. 4910 West Amelia Earhart Dr. Salt Lake City, UT 84116 (800) 800-4880 THE BELFRY LINKS CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE: The Links gamer can now play a round of \"Jolly good Golf!\" in Access' first European course, The Belfry. Tracing its origins to a potato farm, England's Belfrey course is probably best known for hosting the semi-annual Ryder Cup event. Now, American golfers can have a smashing good time playing one of Britain's best-known courses sans airfare and overpriced hotel. In fact, the cash saved can purchase a new set of clubs or even upgrade your computer system. The fourth Super VGA championship course, The Belfry requires Links, Links 386 Pro or Microsoft Golf. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Outflanked 31 Computer Athlete Alternative Software Creations 11514 Forest Grove St. El Monte, CA 91731 OUTFLANKED: \"Little\" games for Windows are popular, but they often tend towards solitaire games or a clone of some popular board game. A quickie Wargame for Windows, however, has not arrived prior to Outflanked. Sadly, this wargame lacks depth, scenarios and excitement. While those interested in 18th and 19th century battles and grand tactics might be able to make something enjoyable from the included scenario building tools, it's a lot of work for what appears to be positioned in the market as a \"lite\" Windows wargaming alternative. IBM with Windows ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #2 Froggman Software 800 Douglas Rd., Suite 355 Coral Gables, FL 33134-3128 (800) 876-FROG BUDO: THE ART OF NINJA COMBAT: Those from the Cuisinart school of gaming-into high speed slicing and dicing-may enjoy this dastardly simple shareware game gone commercial. The player's stealthy assassin must dispatch club-wielding guards, archers, vicious dogs and exotic enemies like a fire-breathing dragon and a giant. Your weapons include a sword, magic shirkens, and the ability to run, crouch or jump. Killing is easy, but many moons will rise over the bamboo fields before Budo mastery can be achieved. Chop good, hurry slaughter. IBM ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #4. CURSE OF THE CATACOMBS: Those who enjoyed playing Sofidisk Publishing's The Catacomb Abyss (see the shareware column in CGWIssue 106 for a review) should find Curse of the Catacombs a \"virtual\" treat. Developed by Softdisk for Froggman Software, this 3-D action adventure offers more of the same monster bashing, maze crashing excitement of the shareware title. Featuring 16 levels of mazes to explore, two levels of playing difficulty from which to choose (novice and warrior), and the ability to save and restore at will, Curse of the Catacombs grants the player a good value for the investment. While the 16-color EGA graphics are rather primitive (they are VGA/SVGA compatible), and while sound effects are minimal (PC speaker, Ad Lib and Sound Blaster are supported), the enjoyment from play is well balanced by the low retail price. IBM ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #5. DOGNAPPED: Anyone who enjoys light to modest puzzles should avoid ending up in the dog house by missing this valuepriced puppy from Froggman. The concept of Dognapped is a simple one. Aliens from the planet Canis have kidnapped Rusty (the player's faithful pup whom they have mistaken for Earth's ruler). Thus, one's goal is to rescue Rusty from the ruthless robots Budo: The Art of Ninja Combat Computer Athlete 5193 Betonywood Place Dublin, OH 43017 (614) 761-1059 COMPUTER ATHLETE: The lone cyclist was rolling by colorful meadows at 23 mph with the snowcapped mountains looming in the distance when a giant pig came out of nowhere. With the click of two buttons the porker was plowed, garnering the rider an easy 100 points and easing the monotony of an otherwise boring routine. This unique \"virtual reality» package offers a fun arcadestyle graphic representation of five exercises: Hestern hallway ODS REME 100% 0 RINGE Curse of the Catacombs Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"Give Your Joystick a Thrill. in the early 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies, with dozens of legal arenas in the city. But for the leanest, meanest warriors, the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's the hottest day of the summer and you're baking inside a dilapidated warehouse. You — and your opponent wear the latest in MECHA armor. The best fighting armor in the world. T&ACE THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES This won't be any picnic. With the intense heat and action, you'll both end up in less than full body dress. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money action packed, arcade style fun for your PC. But be warned — with its intense violence and voluptuous women, Metal & Lace: Battle Of The Robo Babes is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333. Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. System requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, joystick recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adlib Gold and Speed Master. This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. fo a free demo, call our 24hr. BBS at 310-539-7739. (8N1) NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 18. All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners, MEGATECH Circle Reader Service #66 "


"Fleu RO Dognapped before he is dogmeat. Fortunately, the puzzles are stronger in this strategy puzzler than the storyline. As in the rest of Froggman's titles, graphics are of acceptable quality 16-color EGA and sounds are modest (supporting PC speaker and Ad Lib/Sound Blaster compatible cards). Puzzles vary in difficulty, over the 30 provided levels, testing the player's ability to manipulate crates, moveable mirrors, and force fields while avoiding a myriad of traps. Progress can be saved, and there is no race against the clock to complete each level. Ideally, Dognapped will appeal to the younger player (pre-teens, it's too cutesy for most teenagers), though many adults will enjoy its charm, too. IBM ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #6. STREET BALL: Probably the most enjoyable of these four titles from Froggman, Street Ball offers the player 20 levels of maze-based arcade action. The goal for each level is to collect all the available treasures and escape through the exit to the next level intact. Hazards to be avoided include laser armed robots, energy cannons, zombie spheres, mines and other menacing devices. Play continues as long as sufficient \"street balls» remain (additional balls can be earned along the way). Though the graphics and sound effects are simple, play is thoroughly addictive. Overall, there is a good deal of enjoyment to be had in Street Ball for those with a bent toward action titles. In addition, once all 20 levels have been complered, random play of the previous levels at increased speeds is available. IBM ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #7. Inline Design PO Box 1989 Lakeville, CT 06039-9973 (203) 435-4995 COGITO: Windows gamers may lose their marbles with Inline Design's Cogito, a geometric game of strategy. Offering 120 levels of challenge, Cogito presents the player with a 9 x 9 grid of columns and rows that must be manipulated to restore a ser geometric pattern. As the game begins, a pattern of spheres is presented, and then scrambled by the computer. Afterwards, the player has to manipulate the rows and columns in order to restore the original pattern, planning his or her moves in advance. While not a particularly memorable title, Cogito does offer challenging play, becoming more complex with each level. Information is provided on elapsed time, number of moves needed to scramble the pattern and the number of moves used by the player to restore it again. Successful completion rewards the player with a musical fanfare and the password to the following level. Games may also be saved in progress for later play. IBM with Windows ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #9. WHHHHHHHHHH F Street Ball Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise DULODODBUL CUOLDULCE UDDHIDI Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6655 THE LOST VIKINGS: Helping three fearsome Vikings escape from captivity in time and space to return to their homeland soon becomes a labor of love for puzzle-solvers. Included in this hearty band (who must make their way through the worlds of Prehistoria, Egypt, Wacky World and more) are Stout Olaf who blocks enemies and parachutes with his shield; fighter Baleog who slays with sword or bow; and Erik the Swift who jumps and uses his hard head to ram down walls. All three must cooperate in order to survive through each of the 38 levels provided. With on-screen antics reminiscent of Battle Chess 2000 to amuse and delight everyone, these Nordic seafarerswith-an-attitude need all the help they can get in finding their way home to claim the mantle of valor with the least number of anguished battle cries. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10. Humongous Entertainment 12930 NE 178th St. Woodinville, WA 98072 (206) 487-0505 FATTY BEAR'S BIRTHDAY SURPRISE: Following up Ron Gilbert's (Secret of Monkey Island) delightful Putt Putt games, Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise offers early grade schoolers a chance to share in the adventures of a delightful stuffed animal who comes to life on the eve of young Kayla's birthday in order to bake her a surprise birthday cake and decorate the house. Naturally, misadventures ensue and, in the best traditions of adventure games (albeit with puzzles scaled down for its audience and several diverting pastimes such as composing music and lawn bowling along the way), one must help Fatty Bear find and use objects in order to keep a lid on the mayhem and make Kayla's birthday morning truly memorable. Every click on the screen is a delightful surprise, and the moral of the story along with the strength, caring and dedication of the lead characters makes this a much desired experience for computer connected youths. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #8. Cogito LucasArts Entertainment Company PO Box 10307 San Rafael, CA 94912 (415) 721-3300 IMPERIAL PURSUIT: Apparently none too pleased that the Rebellion blew up his bouncing baby Death Star, the Emperor has launched an immediate counter-attack against the Rebel base at Yavin. Twenty new X-wing missions and four cinematic interThe Lost Vikings Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest delivered prices with great customer service. DLICOVERS Card MasterCard VESA 800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE COMPUTER MONTHLY 26 42\" 20% 30 Might&M Christmas Carol 35 33 Pool Shark K 19 Shadowlandsc225 Ultima Tinderworld 47 386 379 iges Utopiacon (ea) 44 NO SURCHARGE APA SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, NOT PER HOURS: M-F 9 AM-8 PM SAT 10 AM3 PM EST ITEM PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: 908-396-8880 LAOTICE HARDWARE INCLUDEDI|| CD ROM Jones in Fast Lane 37 Win CD 32 Center Court Ten. 12* California 386 Courses ea 19 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26 Studyware for ACT Aesops Fables33 Jutland 33 Just Grandma & Me36 Wing Comm & Miss 45 ma & Me36 Wing Comm & Miss 45 Challnge 5 Realm 33\" Aesops Fables Lord of Rings 2 East USA Scen 39 37 Quarter Pole 29\" GMAT.GRE,SAT 30 5 4\" Jutland 54\" Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 35% Aircraft Encydooda 45 Champions Wing Comm 2 Great Britian Lost File Sherlock 41 37 Quest for Glory 1 22 Studyware Biology 57 42 Wing Comm 2 57 Chemistry Works 38 19 Hawaii Lost Treas Infocom 42 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Kings Quest 5 Quest for Glory 3 39 Calc. Chem.,Econ... 34\" WC 2 Ulti. Undrwld 57 Chessmaster 300029\" Instant Fact Loc. 19 Lost Treasures 2 29\" Rags to Riches Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Land Of Lore 35 Physics, Statistic 25 42 Children Writ & Publ 39 Japan Scenery 19\" Lost Tribe 25 Reach for Skies 19\" Studyware LSAT Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Languages of World99 World Atas 37 Learn to Speak Spn59 Civilization Adults Only Must be 21 New York 29 Audubon Mammals 37 Lunar Command 35\" Reader Rabbit 35\" Syndicate 37\" Leisure Suit Larry 42 Animation Fantasy 65 Civilization MPE 45 29 Paris Lost Vikings Autodesk Explorer 119 29\" Reader Rabbit 2 35\" Take a break X-Word29 Libry of Art:Renaisn 65 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2' 65 Clash of Steel 39 Pilots Pwer Tools 24 Maelstom 39 Barney Bear Goes Ready for Letter 35% Pinball Libry of Art Overview65 Ad Overview 65 Porkware Coaster Rescue Air 911 17 Magic Candle 3 37 to School Ready Set Read 29\" Task Force 1942 37 Library of Future 99 Private Collection 65 Cobra Mission 39% Scenery St A or B 37 Maniac Mansion 1135\" Reading Advin Oz 36 Admiral Edit 43 into Space 39 Priv. Pictures 1 or 265 Loom Comanche Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Mantis E 39 Reading Comp 32 Terminator 2029 39* Batik Designs 45 Lovely Ladies II Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 49 Mission Disk 25% Sound & Graphic 25 Speech Disk 17 Ready Set Read 29\" Tesserae 17\" Battlechess 49 Mac Millian Child Dict49 Storm 1 or 2 65 Comic Bk Creator 17 Tahiti 19 Mario is Missing 35 Realms of Arcadia 35\" Tmnt 2 Cyrchess 35 Beauty & Beast 49 49 Manhole Visual Fantasy 65 Cohort 2 19% West USA Sonry 39 Mario Toach Type 25 Red Baron 39 Tetris Classic 31 Beethoven Ninth 59 Magazine Rack Conquest of Japan 35 45 West Europe 19 Mission Disk Math Blast Mystry 29° 17 Time Riders Amer. 35 Berlitz Think & Talk SOFTWARE Mantis 45° Contraption Zak 25% Freddy Pharkas 398 Math Blastr Plus 29 Retum Of Phanun 33\" Tony LaRussa Base. 17 French 105 Marketing Master 39 A Train Crusader Drk Savnt39% Front Page Sports 39% Math Blaster Wind 36 Rex Nebular 37 Tony LaRussa II 37 Spanish 105 Construction Set 22 Cuckoo Zoo Mavis Beacon 31\" 29 39 34\" Math Rabbit Expansion Disk Ring World 19 Fun School:Fred Frog Bible Library 49 Aces Over Europe 44 Mixed Up Mothr Gse37 Cyber Space 34 29 Robosports Wind 25. Top Class Series ea 16 Mavis Beacon Sam Spy, Teddy Br 17 Bibles & Religon 30 Monar 8 Monarch Notes Aces of the Pacific 426 75 Daemonsgate 35\" G-Force 1966 45% Mega Lo Mania 29 Rock & Bach Studo35\" Tornado Bookshelf 129 Monkey Island Mission Disk 39 25 Darklands 35 38 Games:Summer Ch135 Mental Math Games 37 Rodney Fun Screen31 Transartica Britanica Family Chc75 MS DOS Archives 35 AD&D Collect 2 42 Darkseed 39 Gearworks 2 94 Michl Jordon Fight 37 Rome 29\" Treasure Cove 35 Business Master 32 MM Music: Mozart 33 AD&D Starter Kit 42 Gobblins 1 or 2 22 Micro Cookbook 4. 31 Rule Engagment 239\" Treasur Math Storm 35 Buzz Aldrin Race 59 MM Music: Vivaldi 33 AD&D Unlimited 37 Dark Sun Grand Slam Bridg 11 32 Microsoft Golf 39 Science Adventure 42 Treasure Mountain 35 Carmen World Dixe 65 North Amer Fax Bk 55 Adlbou&Junior #1 349 Daughter of Serpnt 31% Great Naval Battle 43 Midnight Rescue 35 Scooter Magic Castl32 Treehouse Career Opportunities42 North Amer Indians 57 Air Bucks 3456 Design your Railrd. 35 Super Ships Might & Magic 4 40 Scrable Delx 32 Tristan Pinball Cautious Condor 45 Diet Pro DOS/Win25/36 Might & Magc 5 39\" Officers Bookcase 50 Seal Team 37\" Turbo Science CD Game Pack 55 23 Our Solar System Air Duel 336 Millies Math House 31 29 Dinosaur Adventure 34 Gunship 2000 Turtle Tools Sat Weapn Luftwf 29 2995 CD Speedway57 PC Game Room49 Air Warrior SVGA 35 Dog Fight 37% Mixed-Up Fairy Tal 30 20 Ultima 7 Tour of Duty ea. 24 Scenario Disk Challenge 5 Realms 38 Forge of Virtue Peter & Wolf Dr Floyd Desktop 19% Seven Cities Gold 17 45 AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 Hardball 3 Money/Clocks Wrk 19 Shadow President 39 Ultima 7 Part 2 47 CIA World Fact 39 Presdot:ll St Geo 105 Ultima Trilogy Alphabet Blocks 29% 375 Dr. Quandry Monkey Island 1/2 23 Shadowlands 29\" 31 Harrier Assault 34\" CIA World Fact M/M42 Amazon Monopoly Deluxe Dragon Sphere 34 Sierra Action Five 47 Programmers ROM 59 25 Ultima Trilogy 2 Headline Harry 37 Clipart Goliath 30 Ambush Publish it! Dragon Lair 3 39% Health & Diet Pro 26 Mutanoid Challenge31 Sierra Award Winner47 Ultima Underworld 47 Conan Cimerion 36 Ancient Art War Sky 35 Mystery at Museum 35\" Sierra Family Fun 40\" 32 Reference Library 59 Dreadnoughts Part 2 High Command 42° Corel Draw Upgd 139 Rotor Airball Time Ancient Empires Ultrabots 30 31 Rotor/Airball Timé 35 Nigel's World Sierra Starter Bndl 39 Dune 2 36 Hong Kong Mahjong32 Creative Kids 36 San Diego Zoo 19% Uninvited Window 49 Animal Adventure 47% Dungeon Master 29 No Greater Glory. 20° Silent Service 2 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Crossword Cracker 32 Secret Weapons 75 Animation Studio Omar Shariff Bridge 37 34\" Sim Ant U.S.Atas DOS Dynamix Bundle 42 Humans Curse of Enchantia25 Sim City Seventh cu Seventh Guest Armored Fist Operation Neptune 35 37% Eagle Eye Mystery 31% Deathstar Arcade 30 35 V for Victory (ea) Orbits Ashes of Empire 29 Sherlock Holme 35% Sim Ant French 39 Eco Quest 1 or 2 29 Incredible Machine 29 Oregon Trail Deix 34\" Sim City Windows 34 Dictionaries & Lang 30 Vegas Games 35 Sherl Holmes 2 42 A.T.A.C. Eight Ball Delx 35 Indiana Jones 4 37 Origin FX 25 Sim Earth 3 9 Virtual Realty St 2 Don Quixote 33 Sleeping Beauty Automap 37 El Fish 35 Inspector Gadget 35 Out of This World 36 Sim Life Dos Wind 39 45 Vista Pro Dune Sound Works 35 Automap Europe 74 Empire Deluxe 35 Island of Dr. Brain 2995 Sing a Long Wind 31\" Vocabulary Devi Education Master 32 Spare Ottast Outnumbered 32 Space Quest 4 B-17 Flying Fortress 39 37 Entmt Pak Win (ea.)28 Jetfighter 2 39 Pacific Wars Snap Dragon 32 Wacky Funsters 19 Electronic Cookbook75 Space Series-Apollo49 Bailey's Bookhouse29 Bailey's Bookhouse29* Eric the Unready 35 Ady Mission Disk 19 Paladin 2 Snoopy Game Club 29 War in Gulf Elect. Home Library 49 Spirit of Excalibur Bane Cosmic Forge 36 37 Eternam 35\" John Madden 2 31 Paperboy 2 Spalle 27 Solitaire Window 29\" Warrior of Legend 19\" Elcun Traveler:Call 33 veler.cans Slellar 7 37 Barbie Design 16 Eye of Beholder 20 Johnny Quest 2925 Patriot 42% Solitaires Joumey 35 Wayne Gretzky 3 35 Encanta Encycpose Strange Bedfellows 39 Battechoss 4000 SVGA36 Eye Beholder 2 38 Jump Je! 38% PC Study Bible 42 Space Ace 2:Bort 36 Waynes World 29% European Monarchs49 Star Child Battlefield 33 37 Eye of Beholder 3 42 MPE Version Space Adventure Family Doctor 42 What's My Angle Peppers Adventure 29\" 30 59 Battle Toads Star Trek Enhanced49 24 EZ Cosmos 42 Kid Cad 296 29 Perfect General 36 Space Hulk 39 37\" When2Worlds War35\" Font Master Street Atlas 99 Battle of Destiny 35% Ez Language Series Kid Cuts Pirtate's Gold 38 Space Quest 5 39% Where Crmn San Diego Food Analyst 49 Talking Classic Tale75 Beat the House 29. Fr, Grit Sp.Jp, Rs 31 Kd Desk Playroom w/ Sound 31 35\" Spaceward Ho America Past 34 do 29% Fresh Arte 49 TL F 15 11 Talkng Jungle Safari75 Betrayal of Krondor39\" F 15 il 4 4 Kid Pictures 19\" Police Quest 3 399 Spear of Destiny Europe Front Page News 29 Betty Crocker Cook Call Time Mag Almanac 49 Master Edition 49% Kd Pix Pool Shark 19\" Special Forces 29 Space G Force 19% 31% Black Crypt F117a Stealth Time Table Science 59 29% Kid Pix Companion 25 Populous 2 37 Spectre Game Master Time 32 Too Many Typefonts35 Blueforg Falcon 3. 0 45 Kid Works 2 Power Hits Kids 31 Spellbound 31 USA Game Pack 2 39 Ultima 16 49 Body Illustrated Oper Fight Tiger 25 Kids Zoo Movies Spellcasting 301 35 Gettysburg: MM Hist43 Ultima USA Deluxe Ultimate Shareware 59 Bodyworks Mig 29 Data Disk 34* Kings Ransom Sports 25 Spell-it Plus 30 World Deluxe 446 Gofer Winkles Ady 33 US Atlas Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Family Tree Maker 42 45 Sci-Fi 32 Spel Jammer 37\" Wild Science Arcad35 Golden Immortal 28 US Atlas w/Automap49 Buzz Aldnin Farm Creativity Kit 18 Knowledge Advent 42 Battletech-Mech 32 Sports Adventure 33 Ween:Prophecy 34 Great Cities Vol 1 49 US History 39 Campaign Fatty Bear Birthday31 Land Of Lore Prince of Persia 2 39 Star Control 2 35° Wing Comandr 2 474 Guinness Book Rec59 US Presidents 49 Capitalist Pig 38% Fields of Glory 33% Legacy 39 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 World Circuit 34 Guy Spy 32 USA State Fact Bk 45 Car and Driver 37 Flashback 32\" Legacy Necromnar 19 Star Trek AudioClip 34 MPE Edition 445 Ham Call USA Wars:Civil War 49 Carrier Strike 39 Flight Simul A.T.P. 37 Legion's of Krella 37 Print Shop, New 35 Next Generation 38 World Tour Tennis32 Inspector Gadget 37 USA Wars:Korea USA Wars:ko 49 Expansion Disk 19% Flight Simulator 5 41 Lemmings Graphics (ea) 22 Star Trek Screen Sav37 X Wing 2 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 Carriers at War 37\" Air Tic Cn 34% Lemmings 2 35 Print Shp Compion 31 Stickybr Math Tutor 30 Mission Disk 19% Interactive Storytime45 USA Wars: WW II 49 ArctlScen Dsgn 28 Lethal Weapon 35 Privateer 47 Stickybr Pre-School 30 Yobi Spelling Trick 29% Intl Bus & Econ Atlas39 Vo 31% 79 Voyage Planet 1-3ea.69 Cash for Kids Aircraft Ady Factry 25 Liberty or Death Liberty or Death 35\" 35% Prophecy . 25° Intro Games Fr/Sp 79 Wh Stickbr Read Tutor 30 Your Dock White Horse Child 33 Castle 2 #685 Links 25 Prophecy of Shadw 38 Multimedia Mist69 Who Killed Sam Bup25 Castle of Dr. Brain 30 Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 Zodiac Signs # 701 17 Links 386 Pro Protostar 39 Storybook Weaver29° Zoo Keeper Jets & Props 55 Willy Beamish 37 Ceasar 35% Airport Facty Loc 17 Course Disk ea 16 Putt Putt Parade 32 Strike Commander 45\" Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Speech Disk 17 Adv of Eco Island 22 Sound Cards SB Edutanmni 16 57905 MIDI Software CD DRIVES Joysticks Multimedia SB CDROM Intel 369 Strip Poker 3 3 2 Dinosaur World 22 AG LID GOIG 10000 SB Portblaster Ballade 149 129 Toshiba CH Flightstick 37 Aitech Data Disk (ea) 17 ATI Stereo FX Race Thru Space 22 1 39 SB Video Blaster Band in a Box 349 69 Dbl Speed Int 489% ICH Game Card 3 31 Audio Show VGA StreoF/X 1MB 369 SB Video Spigot 41995 369 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. Cadenza 129 Dbl Speed Ext 594 CH Mach 3 31 Pro 256 Covox Voice Bistr 64* SB Waveblaster 234 Cakewalk Texcel America CH Virtual Pilot 65 Pro Color Plus 529 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Roland LAPC-1 399 Cakewak Pro 169 3021 Internal 349 TERMS AND CONDITIONS CH Virtual Pilot Pro 84 ProVGA TV 459 Media Vision RAP.10 45985 3024 Dbl Spd 390 Eliminator Game C0261 Pro PCITY DOS 219 Master Card, Visa, American Express & Cakewalk Window 240 Audio Port SCC-1 GS COPC 375 3024 Business 769 Gravis Analog Pro 39 Encore Discover Accepted. No Surcharge on Pro PC TV Plus 339 Sound Canvas 659 COPC XL Jammer Pro 1159 Gravis Joystick Credit Cards. By mail: P.O.Box3, 32 Pro VGATV + 659 MA-12C ea 105 Pro Audio 16 Laser Music Procos 79 3024 Multimeda 959 Gravis PC GamePad21 VideoSurge 659 Carteret, N.J. 07008. All sales Are Pro Audio Studio 2240 S SPEAKERS Master Tracks Pro 249 5021 Extemal 439 Kidz Mouse 30 Final. NO REFUNDS I Exchange on defective VideoSurge SVHS 729 CS-150 Shielded Pro 16 Multimedia 20 MCS Stereo CS-550 SHielded 5024 Dbl Spd 499 Kralt kc3 Joystick 18 merchandise with the same item only. No TVGRX TV 269 Upgrade Kit 2 35 935 exceptions. All Products are new from Midisoft Studio 5024 Business 899 159 Maxx Flight Yoke 69 w/ 3 band Equilizer 45 Skins & Pads Pro Movie Spectrm 299 manufacturer. All claims and guarantees 5024 Education 829 8 406 Music Bytes Vol 1 65 are from the manufacturer. Call for Pro Movie Audio 33945 CS-1000 15 65024 Multimed1079Quickshot Game C014 Dust Covers Music Mentor Logitech Audioport 134 Altec Lansing 200 219 current prico and availability. OOVERMENT Quickshot Warrior 10 Soundman Grounded Wrist Strap Music Printer Plus 419 Modem & Fax 1 3205 ACS 300 w/subwol 299 AND SCHOOL P.O.'9 WELCOMED. 15 For your Suncom Command19\" Keyboard Skins Sound Blaster 65 Music Time MIDI Interface US Robotic Sportster protection, we will only ship to the Static Pads Piano Works SB Midi Kt Thrustmaster FCS 89 5 9 2400 Int. Midiator 101 Serial 95 address the credit card company has on Play it by Ear 109 FCS Pro Large-System 15 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 PC 14.4 v.42bs162\" file, thereforo shipping to Ak.. Hi.. 8 PC Midi Card Quick Score Deluxe99 Sound Blaster Dex 132 W/S/R Fax 183 Game Card 29\" Wrist Pads 2 PR., P.O. Boxes, APO/FPO extra. 179 95 Stax (Dust Repellent)5 16.496 MQX-32 Weapons 2 Rhythm Ace SB Pro 16 14.4 v.42bis Ext 183 International orders call for shipping 195 20945 PCD-GM Music Songwright 5 Rudder Pedal 109 SB Pro16 ASP Statx Completo charges. N.J. Resident add 6sales tax. 325 W/S/R Fax 213 UPROM Chip Lray for Windows 60l 29\" Cleaning System SB Discovery 161_459 The Miracle 15 | 204 restocking fee for all refused items. 35 48 35\" 25 35 IG Forrage News 29 Talkng Jussic Tale75 Beat the 5 39% 47 35 3395 398 34 Next Gescreen Savo Missioning Tricks 29 CH Gamestick8 7 Dbl Speed Ex 48 96 Circle Reader Service #47 "


"ludes will tell the tale of the Rebel's evasive maneuvers and challenge any young Jedi's reflexes. While the missions on this add-on disk can be as tough as some of those in the original game (the new mission is loaded with Assault Gunboats and Advanced Ties!), there are two included features that might make things a bit easier for players: On-line hints for each mission and a Top Ace pilot that can be used as a top-notch wing man. The Top Ace pilot can also be used to play the missions in the original game in any order, just in case you didn't finish them (Luke! You must complete your training!). IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #11. which the old standbys were never capable. Digitized sound effects are great; music is upbeat and offers a positive accompaniment to play. Featuring eight different pinball variations (based upon classic Sierra and Dynamix games including King's Quest, Space Quest, Leisure Suit Larry, Willy Beamish and Stellar 7), this title employs sophisticated physics and gravity modeling, plus tilt and grudge» effects. Even though TakeA Break! Pinball was delayed in its appearance, the wait was well worth it. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #13 Imperial Pursuit Hleyball heart Game Deense OFERDE epaita bene alp Micro Mysteries 222 Third St., Suite 0234 Cambridge, MA 02142 (617) 225-0500 CRIME CITY: This dreary little English mystery requires a patient sleuth to solve a run-of-the-mill murder in a dull graphic environment. As events would have it, the protagonist's father has been arrested on the charge and it's up to the player to solve the crime and effect his release. Its point and click interface works easily, but finding clues requires a good deal of hunting and pecking. In addition, the British locale for Crime City translates into some strange terms and a pound-based currency. One also can't overcome the static feel of this motionless mystery. IBM ($19.95). Circle Reader Service #14. Baseball for Windows PARER UND Miller Associates 11 Burtis Ave., Suite 200 New Canaan, CT 06840-9890 (800) 654-5472 BASEBALL FOR WINDOWS: Baseball fans who spend most of their computing life under Windows may want to investigate Miller Associates' latest baseball action strategy release. Introduced as the first computer baseball game for Windows, their new title, based upon APBA Baseball, offers the player many gaming amenities. Featured are 256color and 16-color reproductions of actual ballparks, an icon-based interface, built-in micromanagers, advanced injury management capabilities and several playing modes (play against a friend, two computer managers, or \"sit in the stands and watch\" in Spectator Mode). Individual games or whole seasons can be managed; print out full reports and leader boards; and create unlimited lineups, teams, divisions, leagues and organizations. Thankfully, this feature-rich product includes a comprehensive tutorial. IBM with Windows ($69.95, $59.95 for upgrades). Circle Reader Service #12.   Take A Break! Pinball Tsunami Media, Inc. PO Box 790 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (209) 683-8266 BLUE FORCE: Jim Walls, best known for his design work on Sierra's Police Quest series, offers up his latest law enforcement adventure, Blue Force, under the Tsunami Media banner. As the story commences, rookic motorcycle officer Jake Ryan has just joined the force, following in the footsteps of his father. However, little time passes before this cader fresh out of police academy becomes involved in the unsolved case involving the brutal murder of both of his parents, a crime that has remained a mystery for the past 10 years. Including video captured animation, a streamlined interface and full stereo soundtrack, Blue Force offers the player an adventure in true-to-life police situations where following correct police procedure not only keeps young Officer Ryan and his fellow patrolmen alive, but aids the player in the successful completion of the game. Blue Force is available for IBM 386/16MHz compatibles and greater, and for PC CD-ROM (the CD version includes the game's soundtracks in CD-Audio format along with a 35 minute interview with Jim Walls). IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #15. CGW Sierra On-Line/Dynamix PO Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 326-6654 TAKEABREAK! PINBALL: First came a Windows incarnation of a traditional game designed to test one's worth with words, TakeABreak! Crosswords. Now, Dynamix has set the ball in motion under Windows again with a title designed to test the player's prowess with paddles, Take A Break! Pinball. Though it demands a relatively capable steed to enjoy its full potential, providing both music and sound effects in the background during play, this game of pinball is a real Windows gem. (A 386SX or better with 2MB RAM, VGA graphics and Windows 3.1 is required. However, play is more enjoyable on a 386DX or greater with 4MB of RAM or more, 256-color VGA graphics and a sound card.) Pinball action is amazingly true to the mechanical arcade machines, with the addition of unique animated graphics of Crime City Jackson Beach Police 0010 2141 Blue Force Page 172 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGWhas in its possession. M.U.L.E. Electronic Arts, 1983 Atari 8-bit, C-64 M. U. L. E. NETENCETUSTUTETTO The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many Formats Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Many Formats Civilization (MicroProse, 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats Might & Magic (New World Computing 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM, Macintosh M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many Formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many Formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Games, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) C64, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) E Amiga, IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many Formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many Formats Asked to create a Cartels & Cutthroats clone, Dani (neé Dan) Bunten decided to throw away the template. Bunten merged elements of economics (supply/demand manipulation, production/storage, etc.) into a four-player exploration/strategy game in which the players purchase robotic \"mules\" in order to explore/exploit the planetary landscape of fictitious planets. M.U.L.E. was probably the landmark, multi-player game for input without modem assistance. The interface was both straightforward and humorous. The play was exceedingly well-balanced. Pirates MicroProse, 1987 Many Formats LIRATES! MICROPE Sid Meier's Pirates is another game that breaks traditional game design templates. The game features exploration, strategy, resource management, tactical combat and action-resolved combat, all wrapped up in a delightful role-playing package. It can probably stand as the most successful hybrid game in computer game history. October 1993 Page 173 "


"Reader Poll #109 ucasArts Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY The Seventh Guest Virgin Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Quest for Glary III Sierra Star Control II Accolade Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM Les Manly in: Lost in LA. Accolade Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Ans Alone in the Dark Motion SCORE 10.55 9.91 9.80 9.72 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.28 9.20 9.19 Top 100 Games + COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The al Computer Game Magazine 0 OOOOO Type AD ST,AC RP ULAWN w Ultima, Underworld 0 9929  HU WG,ST WG SI Top Role Playing Games GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.45 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.51 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 9.51 Might & Magic lll New World Computing 9.41 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.34 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.25 Eye of the Beholder SS: 9.10 9 Ultima VII. Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 10 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 AD AD ST WG AD 9.06 WG WG SI IEEE WING AC AD.RP AD ADAC RP RP SP Game Company The Seventh Guest Virgin 2 Syndicate Electronic Arts Ultima Underworld Origin Links 386 Pro Access Wing Commander II Origin 6 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix Solitaire's Journey QQP 08 X-Wing LucasArts 09 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 10 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific World Circuit MicroProse 12 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 13 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 14 Dune 11 Virgin The Perfect General QOP 16 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 17 V For Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 19 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 21 Quest for Glory III Sierra 22 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM Star Control II Accolade 24 Ultima Underworld II Origin Eye of the Beholder II SSI 26 Links Access 27 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 28 Warlords SSG 29 Might & Magic III New World Computing 30 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 31 Pacific War SSI 32 Hardball !!! Accolade 33 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Ultima VII Origin 35 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 36 High Command Three-Sixty Pacific 37 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 38 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 39 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 40 Empire Deluxe New World 41 Lemmings Psygnosis 42 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 43 Alone in the Dark T-Motion Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 45 Second Front SSI 46 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 48 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 49 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 50 Eye of the Beholder SSI Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts World Circuit MicroProse Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HaloByte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse Stunt Island Disney 10 F-15 Strike Eagle ill MicroPrase SI Score 10.55 10.46 10.45 10.43 10.14 10.05 10.05 10.04 9.97 9.93 9.93 9.91 9.80 9.75 9.75 9.72 9.63 9.63 9.59 9.59 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.51 9.51 9.47 9.45 9.44 9.41 9.39 9.38 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.32 9.29 9.28 9.27 9.25 9.23 9.21 9.20 9.19 9.19 9.17 9.14 9.14 9.13 9.11 SCORE 10.04 9.93 9.59 9.45 9.39 9.19 9.06 9.04 9.04 9.03 D.VOU AWN WG,ST RP SI WG SP RP RP ST WG AD SP INDICATE Top Strategy Games RP W VOULANGAME Syndicate Solitaire's Journey Dune Il Chessmaster 3000 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro The Lost Admiral The Incredible Machine Mech Warrior The Island of Dr. Brain Hoyle Book of Games, Vol 3 COMPANY Electronic Arts QQP Virgin Software Toolworks Electonic Arts QQP Dynamix Activision Sierra Sierra SCORE 10.46 10.05 9.75 9.32 9.13 9.05 8.98 8.94 8.91 8.78 WG AC,ST AD AD SI WG AC AD ST AD 9 10 RP 9.10 "


"AD WG SI RP Top Wargames RP GAME Conquered Kingdoms V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach V For Victory: Market Garden Warlords Pacific War High Command Empire Deluxe Second Front AD.RP ST SI SI COMPANY QQP Three-Sixty Pacific QQP Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific SSG SSI Three-Sixty Pacific New World SSI SCORE 9.97 9.93 9.75 9.63 9.63 9.44 9.38 9.29 Sierra SSI Electronic Arts Origin Sir-Tech Sierra QQP Disney MicroProse Legend Sierra MicroProse MicroProse Sierra Microprose Sierra Origin QQP Sierra Dynamix SSI AD Si 9.23 10 9.17 com UDER AD,RP SI AD RP WG,ST AD ST WG WG AD ST,SI Top Action Games SSG DAWNSP GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh No! More Lemmings Lemmings 2: The Tribes Out of this World Prince of Persia 2 Spectre Terminator 2029 COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Psygnosis Interplay Broderbund Velocity Bethesda SCORE 10.14 9.59 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.62 8.57 8.36 8.02 7.97 51 The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 53 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 55 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 58 Stunt Island Red Storm Rising Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 62 Silent Service II F-15 Strike Eagle III 64 Quest for Glory 11 Gunship 2000 66 Police Quest 3 67 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 69 Space Quest IV The Incredible Machine Western Front 72 Carriers At War 73 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 74 Mech Warrior Tony Larussa Baseball II 76 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 78 The Island of Dr. Brain 79 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 81 Indianapolis 500 82 Elvira Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 85 Rex Nebular 86 Gateway to the Savage Frontier Great Naval Battles Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 90 Heart of China 91 Veil of Darkness 92 Battlechess Gateway 94 Starflight II 95 Battles of Napoleon 96 Pools of Darkness Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 98 Typhoon of Steel 99 Armada 2525 100 Lemmings 2: The Tribes SI 9.09 9.09 9.06 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.03 9.02 9.02 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 8.94 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.89 8.89 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.74 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.70 8.68 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.62 AC.ST ST AD Dynamix Activision SSI MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Dynamix Access Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend MicroProse SSI SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Dynamix SSI Interplay Legend Electronic Arts SSI SSI Sierra 9 10 Top Sports Games 88 Foto 000 GAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Links Hardbal II Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony Larussa Baseball NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge PGA Tour Golt A-D Boxing COMPANY Access Dynamix Access Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Electronic Arts SCORE 10.43 10.05 9.47 9.37 9.27 8.94 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.37 AD SI RP WG,ST AD AD RP WG,ST ST ST AD RP ST AD RP WG RP AD WG ST AC.ST 9 10 SSI Interstel Psygnosis Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing. Sl=Simulation, ST=Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP-Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"what's hot PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software What You've Been Playing Lately June, 1993 PC Games (MS-DOS) nimo Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with sug gestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out...keep em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #109, August 1993 X-wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, Inc.) Civilization (Micro Prose, Inc.) Syndicate (Electronic Arts) Strike Commander (Origin Systems, Inc.) World Circuit (MicroProse, Inc.) Darkside of Xeen (New World Computing) Ultima 7.5: Serpent's Isle (Origin Systems, Inc.) Empire Deluxe (New World Computing) The 7th Guest (Virgin Games) OVAWN Rink Title and Source X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment Wolfenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen (New World Computing The 7th Guest (Virgin Games) Prince of Persia II (Broderbund Software, Inc.) Strike Commander (Origin Systems, Inc.) Comanche: Maximum Overkill (Novalogic) Hardball III (Accolade, Inc.) 9. Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) 10. Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, Inc.) Ultrabots (NovaLogic) Leisure Suit Larry V (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc.) Links Mauna Kea (Access Software, Inc.) Tony Larussa Baseball II (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Space Hulk (Electronic Arts) 18. Links Banff Springs (Access Software, Inc.) AD&D Eye of the Beholder III (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) 20. Police Quest (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Amiga Games Rank Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Shadow of the Beast II (Psygnosis, Ltd.) Overlord (Virgin Games) Legend of Kyrandia (Virgin Games) AD&D Eye of the Beholder II (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persin (Brderbund Software, Inc.) SimCity Supreme (Maxis Software) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft Corporation) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) PGA Tour Golf (Electronic Arts) CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source The 7th Guest (Virgin Games) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Compton's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Compton's New Media) Corel Art Show (Corel Corporation) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delorine) Cinemania (Microsoft Corporation) Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis (LucasArts Entertainment) Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe (LucasArts Entertainment) Curse of Enchantia (Virgin Games) Battle Chess Enhanced (Interplay Productions) This list is based on units sold by Software Etc. Babbayes, Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 35-1025. na Recipes From The Readers Our short answer query last month asked gamers to act as Game Design Alchemists with the power to extract elements from their favorite games and recombine them to create The Ultimate Gaming Experience. \"1/2 c. Perfect General playability/modem support. 1/2 c. Lost Admiral tough AI. 1/2c. V For Victory -graphics. 1 1/2c. Pacific War detail in exhaustive proportion & e-mail gaming. 3/4 c. Aide de Camp map and unit creation/editing. Title: Grognard Gumbo a.k.a. Sully's Succulent Stew\" Sully, Manchester, CT \"The Perfect Game? Without a doubt, it's M.U.L.E. Commander... Aying through the galaxy mining smithore and firing slices of toast at enemy ships. It'll feature full SVGA bit-mapped graphics, but through new compression techniques will use only 2 megs of disk space (or 3 with the speech pack). And it'll run at 40 frames per second on a 386sx-16. So there. Bob, Anchorage, AK \"Take the first person flight perspective and flight characteristics of Xwing, graphics of Comanche Max Overkill, economics of Elite, strategy of Dune II. and the plot of Star Control II. Some might want to call it Privateer, but I would call it \"The Really Cool Game That Goffe Invented. Goffe, Seattle, WA Take the strategic engine of Napoleon I, the tactical engine of Battles of Napoleon, the Al of The Lost Admiral, the graphics of Fields of Glory and the sound of L'Empereur and mix them together to create the ultimate Wargame. I'd call it Napoleon at War.\" Mitch Willis, Wetumpka, AL \"Dash of Origin Spoonful of Electronic Arts Pinch of MicroProse (include bugs) Jigger of SST Shake vigorously and let settle for 6-24 months. Title: Vapor Wars!!\" N. Williams, Odessa, TX \"Combine all the space adventure games and name it \"Dr. Hawking's Neighborhood.\" Bill Tripodi, Wanaque, NJ rimo No Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"patches The Patch File Tomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of possible configurations has become so huge that Jincompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at the need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a reg\"5 ular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks (e.g., CompuServe or GEnie), but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. (*** indicates new files) Aces of the Pacific 1946 Add-On Disk Update: Single Missions will now be saved correctly, and several fixes have been made to Career Pilots, including the elimination of known Shell System Errors. 3/10/93. ** Air Bucks Version 1.21: Corrects lock-up and mouse compatibility problems. 8/06/93 Ambush at Sorinor Version 1.02: Adds a speed control option for fast machines, replaces several bad mission descriptions, and fixes the Al for VIPs and escorts. 6/17/93 Ancient Art of War in the Skies Update: Version 02 of the game. 3/01/93 Battles of Destiny V1.1 Patch: Enhancements and bug fixes include: Patrol Mode, Map Editor, and two player modem enhancements. 5/06/93 ** Buzz Aldrin Race Into Space Version 1.0b: Fixes a lock-up bug and allows the removal of some files from the hard drive. 7/06/93 Caesar Patch: Allows players to use Impressions' game with disk compression utilities, and corrects the \"culture problem. 5/19/93 ** Carriers at War Construction Kit Patch: Fixes the \"CAP\" bug and a few other minor problems. 7/13/93 Darklands Version 07 Update: Latest version of MicroProse's RPG. 3705/93 Dune II Patch File: Fixes problems with the delivery of items from CHOM, 4/18193 Empire Deluxe Version 3.1: This new version makes a myriad of feature changes and bug fixes to Version 3.0.4/30/93 F15 Strike Eagle III Version 3 Update: Corrects minor errors in earlier versions. 4/25/93 Harpoon Version 1.32A Upgrade: Makes changes to the Harpoon game system. 5/18/93 ** Imperial Pursuit Fix: In the original version, it can be difficult to lockon to a targer with missiles under certain system configurations. This patch should correct this problem. 7/08/93 IndyJones/Atlantis Mac Patch: Corrects the \"desert balloon\" crash bug in the Mac version. 4/15/93 Indy Jones/Atlantis 486 Patch: Allows one to play the game on a 486 without color problems or errors. 5/26/93 Jordan in Flight SVGA Patch: Allows owners of Diamond Stealth, Diamond Stealth 24 and Orchid Fahrenheit 1280 Plus video cards to run the game in SVGA. 5/21/93 Jump Jet Update: Corrects the joystick problems some players are reporting and some other compatibility problems. 5/18/93 Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.09: Includes new drivers for specific video cards, a new Sound Blaster Pro 16 driver, and fixes the Harbour Town Hole 14 lockup. 3/3/93 Mantis Update (IBM): Adds new features and improves gameplay. For disk-based version only. 3/01/93 Pacific War V1.1 Upgrade: The \"official\" SSI upgrade to Gary Grigsby's Pacific War. 4/18/93 ** Patriot Version 1.1: The long-awaited patch to Three-Sixty's Gulf War simulation. 7/27193 ** Pirates Gold Patch: Corrects the \"evil person in the city\" crash, the \"mission from the governor\" crash, and the Vi switch should now function as stated in the README file. 7/19/93 Realms of Arkania Disk 3 Fix: The first print run of this game was missing some data from disk 3. You only need this file if your BLADE directory has 48 files and 3,030,380 bytes in it. 6/23/93 ** Realms of Arkania Update #1: Corrects the \"Skeletarius\" problem among others. 7/01/93 ** Rules of Engagement 2 Version 1.05: Latest version of the Omnitrend/Impressions' space war simulation. 8/01/93 Sumpter to Appomattox Update: Fixes the \"Build» routine and eliminates the memory error that some gamers were having. 3/13/93 ** The Seventh Guest Fix: Updated sound cards drivers, installation program and player program (requiring only 450K memory). 7/28/93 Tom Landry Football V. 1.03 Update (IBM & Mac): Corrects problems with high-speed modem play. 3/06/93 Tony LaRussa II Patch: Fixes bugs in SSI's baseball simulation. 5/21/93 Unlimited Adventures Version 1.1 Patch: In addition to new files for the software, this file contains a supplement to the game's manual. 5/21/93 Unlimited Adventures Design Guide Supplement: A Technical Manual for Adventure Design by Scort Gries and Micro Magic, Inc. The official manual supplement. 5/20/93 ** V For Victory: Velikiye Luki Version 3.1 (Mac): Upgrades the Macintosh version 2.0 to 3.1. 7/09/93 ** V For Victory: Market Garden Version 3.1 (Mac): Upgrades the Macintosh version 3.0 to 3.1.7/08/93 Wilson Pro Staff Golf Update: Corrects mouse driver problems and errors where incorrect driving clubs were selected for certain ranges. 4/21/93 World Circuit Modem Update V1.05: Corrects problems with 2400 baud modems. 4/08/93 X-wing I/O Soundcard Patch: Allows I/O port settings of 210-260. 4/15/93 X-wing Roland Sound Patch: Fixes crash bugs associated with the Roland soundcard on 486 machines. 4/15/93 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted online by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hor\" in computer gaming. TOP TEN RANKED GAMES Week of July 30 10 August 5 RANR SCORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE 1 2 6 7 2656 Wolfenstein-30 2324 X-Wing 1854 Kings Ouest V 1839 Civilization 1566 Wing Commander 2 8 1373 Aces of Pacific 1284 Links 386 Pro 1189 Falcon 3 & 1181 Froni Po Football 1162 Spear of Destiny 9 18 Join The PRODIGY Network Golf Tour LOOK Copy Tools Help Exit BORE Menu Xref Jump Path October 1993 Page 177 "


"Advertisers List From V The 158 ..... 53 Publisher ....... 61 105 . 163 .. 120 ........ 3,23 Te have always strived to give our readers the best coverage in the world of computer gaming. Time and again our readers and the industry have told us we have done so. However, with the coming of the digital highway, the establishment of a viable multimedia playground, and the embryonic sneak preview of a virtual-reality-based entertainment world, we feel that Computer Gaming World cannot serve its readers well and maintain its number one position without a strategic partner. When it comes to computer magazine publishing, the mother of all partners is surely Ziff-Davis Publishing. So, with enthusiasm and great pride we, Computer Gaming World, announce that: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company has acquired Computer Gaming World, the number one computer game magazine, and Kids Computers, the world's first educational computing publication directed at parents. What does this mean for the magazine, for the industry and for you, the readers? It will mean a dramatic improvement for all, I can assure you. Because Ziff-Davis, the leading computer magazine publisher with dominant titles including PC Magazine, PC WEEK, PC Computing, MacUser, Windows Sources and Computer Shopper, didn't buy CGW to tap our comparatively minor resources. On the contrary, the top people at Ziff are more interested in broadening their scope with our expertise and strengthening CGWas the premier information provider for interactive entertainment. J. Scort Briggs, President of Ziff-Davis, said, «Computer Gaming World has, for years, been the premier magazine in the computer game category, and publisher Russell Sipe and editor Johnny Wilson are among the most respected voices within the computer game industry. Computer Gaming World is in an excellent position not only to be an information provider in the new interactive landscape, but also to be a well-connected observer and commentator on the phenomenon. We're delighted that Russell, Johnny and their team will join Ziff-Davis.\" The magazine will maintain its editorial direction, location and staff. We will be an autonomous satellite responsible for our own operation. We gain Ziff's expertise, marketing savvy, distribution power, and financial strength. We will continue our on-line presence in Prodigy's Game Center, and will eventually be involved in the ZiffNet service. In terms of the industry, as CGW grows we will be in a stronger position to cover it. Those in the industry will notice that we can be in more places at one time than before, with a better caliber of photographer to capture the scene (or screen). Editor Johnny Wilson, a man \"jacked in\" to this industry like no other, will have more resources, artists and writers to work with. He may even get his wish for a new computer. Through it all, we'll continue to champion game designers and developers as the wellspring from which this industry flows. In doing so, CGW will introduce a growing audience to the exciting world of computer gaming, adventuring and discovery. Now, what does this mean to you, the reader? You're going to get a better magazine. Bigger doesn't necessarily mean better, but this is one case where it will. You can look forward to more editorial content, more in-depth coverage and surveys, slicker design, and other interesting surprises. I'd like to take this opportunity to thank all of our loyal readers for your interest, involvement and support. With your praise, your criticism and cajoling, you've helped us grow into the number one computer game magazine. We've battled the monsters, climbed the mountain, flown the ultimate mission, blasted off into space, and now we're scanning the heavens for our next horizon. We're glad to have you with us as we progress to the next level. Cow 143 3DI Productions ..... 57 Access 110-111 Accolade.. Activision.... AldeaLabs Apogee Software ..... Aztech Systems...... Bare Bones Software Bitwit............ ...... 109 Broderbund ......... ....... CGW Back Issues .. 128-129 CGW Book Store ................ 81 CGW Subscriptions............... 145 CH Products ....... Chips & Bits ..... 67, 69, 71, 73, 75, 77 Computer Express ........... 116-117 Compsult...... ......... 84 Computability..... CGDC. ..... . . . . . . 123 Creative Labs...... ........ 63 Cyberdreams ...... ...... 137 Disk Count Software............. 171 Dynamix ...... 45, 89, 91, 92-93. 94-95 Electronic Arts .............. 7, 19.49 Electronic Innovative Design ........ Falcon Northwest Flagship Magazine.... Formgen ....... Future Vision..... Gamer's Gold ...... Genovation .......... Gosselin Computer ...... 162 HPS Simulations ......... Homebase Products ......... Impressions ....... Interplay ............... ....... 85 Keyboard Commander ........... 107 Lance Haffner Games ............ 133 Liberty International ....... ..... 169 Logitech............... 14-15, 27 Luv Doze Lemmings ....... 82 Mallard Software ... ........ 143 Maxis. ....... 29 MicroProse ........ ........ 31,33 Microsoft .................. 146-147 Mindcraft Software ........ 97, 99, 101 Mission Control............. 124-125 New World Computing ........... 51 Origin Systems........... 59, 113, 180 Paper Mayhem...... .. 138 Papyrus... ...... 35 Psygnosis ........ ....... 5 QOP ............ 38-39 Quality Computers .... 133 Quadra Interactive........ ...... 159 RAW Entertainment ....... 115 Readysoft ........... 149 Realism Entertainment ....... SDJ Entrprises....... 138 Sideline Software ....... Sierra On-Line......... ...... 179 Sir-Tech. Sir-Tech.............. ........ 9 Spectrum HoloByte.... Strategic Simulations. .... 43, 151 Thalion Publishing .. ....... 141 Thrustmaster ....... ....... 127 Tsunami ........... He.... 121 Viking Software ...... 154-155 Virgin Games....... ....... 139 Winterbauer Design... Zeros & Ones... 167 119 123 ...... 46-47 135 Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! Sierra Discovery Series PRE READING SKILLS A-CAL:S LPHABET In VOICI\" SPACE QUESTV (We Talk! FRONTPAGE SPY The Merte ASIERRA KOLBRILLAT SIERRA 1-800-877-1995 Choose any Two Sierra Games when you switch to Sprint directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers, And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.95 more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! And after enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you'll receive a second Sierra game or one month of free long-distance service.* Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber optic\" clarity that makes both your longdistance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and error free. But unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer... calls each month to whomever they talk to the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide automatic 20 percent discounts on all calls to Sprint's millions of customers, anytime and anywhere. When the most frequently called number in a given month is a Sprint customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDS travel card lets you continue to take advantage of clear calling and savings even when you're away from home. Plus the FONCARD is free, with cards available to every member of your family. Sprint SIERRA \"The Mostsm\" A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called \"The Most\" available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint customers 20 percent on already low rates on their The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all: operator services, Circle Reader Service #98 * Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD only orders Certain restrictions apply. Free month is up to $25 usage on 4th month invoice. To qualify for a second game or free month of long distance the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. ** THE MOST discounts apply to intra-state calls only where authorized. "


"The Power to Change DO HEGB Metamorphosis is the Shadowcaster's Strength... And his Achilles' Heel. s the Shadowcaster, you take on many forms in the battle for survival. You're the resourceful human adventurer, the fierce, six-limbed cat, the versatile, flying dragon and others. But change comes at a price. In one form, you're quick and agile, but small and fragile. In another, you're a nearly indestructible giant, but ponderous and slow. You alter shapes at will — and each form unleashes new powers and reveals new vulnerabilities. OO900 The pace never falters in Shadowcaster, the unique new point-ofview action adventure from ORIGIN. You race through corridors lined with pulsing lights, and into chambers covered with sculpted faces in this smooth-scrolling, fun-filled odyssey. You discover magic, but you won't need to mix reagents or memorize spells. You weave your way through dungeons, caverns, castles and caves, but you won't have time to linger the powerful and wicked lurk at every turn, just waiting for the chance to draw first blood. In the final battle, you challenge a being with powers that match (or surpass!) your own and the irresistable force meets the immovable object. Actual screens may vary. ORIGIN We create worlds. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Designed by Raven TM Software Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Shadowcaster i trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Raven is a trademark Raven Software. Origin and We create worlds are registe trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a re tered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #80 "

