October 1988

Features
Big Zak Attack

8

Lucasfilm's "Zak McCracken" Reviewed / Charles Ardai

Pete Rose Pennant Fever

12

A Sneak Preview of Gamestar's Sports Game

Rose Hustles The Press

13

An Interview with Pete Rose

Red Storm Rising

15

First Impressions of the Long-awaited Simulation / M. Evan Brooks

Star Trek: First Contact

16

Star Trek Adventure Review I / Scorpia

The Fool's Errand

18

A Review of a Puzzling Adventure / Alan Roberts

Scorpion's Mail

21

Hints on Your Favorite Adventure Games / Scorpia

Carrier Command

22

A Review of Rainbird's Futuristic Battle Game / Hosea Battles

Star Trek: The Rebel Universe

28

Star Trek Adventure Review II / Hosea Battles

Michael Jordan and CGW Go One on One

32

Sneak Preview and Interview

Educational Games

35

A Bibliography for Computer Learning Month

Working On Those Knight Moves

41

A Review of Mastertronic's "Knight Games" / David M. Wilson

Fantastic Voyages

42

First in a Series of Company Reports

Rocket Ranger Saves The World

46

A Trip Back in Time / William "Biff Kritzen

CGW Game of the Year Awards

54

The Winners Revealed

Departments
Taking A Peek
Letters
Inside the Industry
Video Gaming World (Katz, Kunkel, Worley)
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame

4
6
10
50
55
55

Number 52

Taking

A

Peek

Activision, Inc.
P.O. Box 3048
Menlo Park, CA 94025
OCEAN RANGER: This is a missionoriented action/strategy game in which
the player commands a fictitious, fast-attack missile craft in a series of modern
naval scenarios. The game offers a
variety of offensive and defensive options in a fast-paced game. C-64/128
($34.95). Circle Reader Service Card #1.

Applications Plus, Inc.
15720 Harmony Way
Apple Valley, MN 55124
CHAMPIONSHIP POKER: The "Play
& Learn to Win" series is not simply
another entertainment program that lets
users have a fantasy casino in their computer rooms. These products offer a
serious tutorial for those who want to
learn to play cut-throat poker with the
odds in their favor and also provide a
challenging simulation for playing
against the computer and testing one's
progress. Apple II, IBM PC and PS/2,
and Macintosh ($34.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #2.

STRATEGIC CRAPS: Another in the
"Play & Learn to Win" series, this
tutorial/simulation teaches the game of
craps in much the same way "Championship Poker" teaches Hold 'Em. Apple II,
IBM PC and PS/2, and Macintosh
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #3.

Artworx Software Company
1844 Penfield Rd.
Penfield, NY 14526
DAILY DOUBLE HORSE RACING:
You can almost hear the hoofbeats
pound the turf in this betting simulation.
Players are required to read a detailed
pseudo-Racing Form that contains race
histories of 180 horses over close to 400
races. This game puts the emphasis on
handicapping rather than racing. C64/128 ($19.95), Macintosh ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #4.
GRAILQUEST: Did Joseph of
Arimathea bring the chalice used by

Jesus to administer the Last Supper with
him when he brought Christianity to the
British Isles? Is it possible to find the artifact King Arthur longed to recover in
order to preserve Britain's well-being?
This literate text-adventure with detailed
black and white illuminations seeks to
answer those questions. Macintosh
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card #5.

Data East
470 Needles Drive
San Jose, CA 95112
LOCK-ON: Fast-scrolling action is the
hallmark of this IBM version of the coinop hit. The arcade-style flight simulation
features 20 different game stages or
levels, allows joystick or keyboard controls, and utilizes even the fastest processors. Also, like any sophisticated modern
fighter, players can use gunfire (cannon)
or lock-on (missile) weapons to defeat
(Continued on page 56)

Letters

Crusader Rabid
The review by Hosea Battles entitled
"Jihad Junction" and describing SSI's
new strategic space conquest game,
Stellar Crusade, is right on target (CGW
#50, p.24). The documentation is useless. I am extremely irate over this one. I
enjoy a good strategy game and have a
respectable game library to reflect this.
Recently, I ordered SSG's Reach for the
Stars 3rd Edition together with SSI's
Stellar Crusade in order to enhance the
space strategy side of my library. SSG's
documentation is excellent. It even supplied a tutorial game (tutorial game option on the disk) that walked you
through your first game. After playing
the tutorial game, I could satisfactorily
play my first RFTS game. Stellar
Crusade was an entirely different matter.
I read the manual from cover to cover,
twice, and still had no idea on how to
begin play. I could boot the game
screen up on my IBM clone with the
three simplistic menus in front of me
and could not, for the life of me, make
heads or tails about what was to be
done next.
I returned the Stellar Crusade game
after devoting many hours in attempting
to decipher it. This is the first strategy
game that I was forced to return. I was
frustrated that I called and wrote SSI to
register my complaints. The person
receiving my phone call hadn't played
SC and could offer no solace. He did,
however, mention that there had been,
at least, ten complaints already. The
irony of this one is that the game is
probably a very good strategy game.
I would like to see an article in your
magazine questioning and reviewing
quality control in today's computer
game market. It is obvious that SSI let
Stellar Crusade out of the oven before it
was fully cooked. It appears that SSI
didn't take the necessary time to review
the manual before delivering the product.
Dr. Stan Ivey
Lakewood, CO
Ed.: Actually, inside sources at SSI
reveal that this was probably a case of
too much review of the manual rather
than too little. Apparently, twelve pages
of text were deleted from the manual in
an attempt to create a document which

looked less imposing. Unfortunately,
most readers feel like the game is unplayable without those twelve pages. If
there is sufficient interest, CGW would
be willing to attempt getting those missing pages out to our readers. In the
meantime, we will be publishing a
strategy article on SC in the near future. Perhaps, this approach will help
unravel some of the confusion. At least,
there is something to be done about
these complaints. We're not as sure
about those in the next letter.
The recent computer wargaming
release by SSI called Stellar Crusade is
yet another example in the long list of
overt statements of racist, neo-Nazi rantings and ravings by that company.
In the manual that is included with the
game, the authors state, in a short glossary of 13 entities that are important to
the game's inner workings, that
"Aborigines" are:
1) a non-human species,
2) not intelligent.
On the other hand, 2 other species are
mentioned explicitly as being "intelligent," in the same glossary.
A problem that has to be openly grappled with in the computer wargaming industry is that a certain zealous contingent of the computer wargaming
developers and the market to which they
sell are the sort of people that turn up
to the Origins wargaming conventions
wearing full Nazi regalia. I understand
that while such dress has been banned
in American wargaming conventions,
this still goes on in Australia among
other places.
Another SSI game, Kampfgruppe, explicitly idolizes the Nazi side of World
War II. Perhaps 90% of the
demonstrated research that went into
that game's creation was research into
the exact German names of weapons,
trucks, and tanks. The Russians, who, in
fact, in sheer numbers performed 80%
of the fighting that eventually defeated
the Nazis in World War II, have their
hardware represented in this game in unadorned numerical form.
I do not believe that your magazine
should allow any mention of SSI computer games at all until the particular
text in the Stellar Crusade manual is
changed and SSI resolves to cease its
pandering to the neo-Nazi zealots out
there that still persist.
Mark Brown
Chelmsford, MA
Ed.: Perhaps, the manual simply used
the term, "aborigine," in the exact sense.
That is, according to Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, an aboriginal in-

habitant especially as contrasted with
an invading or colonizing people or the
original fauna and flora of a geographical area. It sure sounds to us like the
manual is speaking of an indigenous
space creature, not a specific race of
people on this earth. Finally, we resent
the erroneous proposition that wargarners are either neo-Nazis or even,
necessarily, political hawks. As for the
Soviet armor, even the Encyclopedia
Britannica lists all Soviet armored
vehicles except the Joseph Stalin tank
by numerical references. As for the
Stalin tank, gaming convention regularly refers to this series of tanks by JS-1,
JS-II, and JS-III. We will call the people
at SSI a group of neo-Nazi panderers if
you can convince us that the folks at
Britannica Publishing are neo-Nazis. By
the way, does the use of the Nazi symbol in Rocket Ranger make this a neoNazi game?

Stinging Rebuttal
Your review of Deathlord in the April
edition of your magazine was so glaringly inaccurate on many details that I simply had to clear the record and let the
readers hear the other side of the story
and judge for themselves. Quotes from
the article follow, along with my
response.
"There are seven fighter types with no
apparent necessity for so many." Since
when is a good selection a bad thing?
Every "fighter type" is unique and has its
inherent advantages and disadvantages.
"It takes a great deal of time to wade
through all the race and class combinations." Hardly, you pick a race and it
shows the classes that race can be. You
then choose a class you like and you
are done. Where is the difficulty?
"It takes Kishi 'a very long time' to gain
spell levels." Naturally, they are essentially a fighter/cleric class. If they could cast
spells as well as a cleric, who would ever
choose a cleric? The spells are a complement to their fighting skills, not their
main forte.
"Yakuza are relatively worthless since
anyone can perform their functions."
Hardly. Other classes have a slight
(5%+Dex bonus) chance of performing
thieving skills, while Yakuza start higher
and gain in skill. I figured anyone has a
chance of lucking out and opening a
lock, but only Yakuza are good at it.
"The characters you want to back up
cannot be backed up using the backup
utility." In the next paragraph, you say
that they can be backed up by a dif(Continued on page 61)

BIG ZAK ATTACK
Lucasfilm's "Zak McKracken
and the Alien Mindbenders"

W

by Charles Ardai

hat if you lived in a world where the headlines in
those sleazy supermarket tabloids could be
believed? What if you were a reporter for such a
sensationalist rag? That is the situation in Zak McKracken
and the Alien
Mindbenders.
Meeting Elvis,
alive, in the
jungle is a nice
touch and
having twoheaded squirrels, golf-worshipping gurus
and other assorted oddities
of nature cross
your path with
terrifying
regularity allows
the crazy tone
of the tabloids
to come
through. The
game's atmosphere is suitably light and the
puzzles are
never so difficult or so
deadly as to impede your enjoyment of the
story.

What he doesn't immediately know is that a bunch of
aliens have a machine which
makes people stupid operating by means of the world's phone lines. Along the way,
Zak picks up three helpers (the player can switch control
to any of the four characters at any time). Together, they
must save the world from having its mind bent.
That's it for the story, which
is another problem. After setting up a perfectly good
premise, the game drops all
pretense to plot and becomes yet another "find-thepieces-scattered-around-theworld-to-build-a-magicmachine" game. Worst of all,
the pieces you have to find
are different colored crystals,
a plot device that was a cliche
when Starcross (Infocom)
used it. More recently The
Promethean Prophecy
(Simon & Schuster) used
the same old motif. If I never
see another collect-the-crystals adventure, it will be too
soon.

The Play's
The Thing
It hardly
seems
worthwhile to
discuss Zak's
control system
at length. Suffice it to say
that it is not significantly different from
Maniac Mansion's, which is just fine. You
move characters on a graphic window by
selecting text commands from a menu at the
bottom of the screen. If you want to know
more, pick up a copy of CGW #46. The controls are still a little clumsy in moments of
high tension, but the system is a good one.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The story is worth noting, but only briefly: Zak McKracken, a reporter for a tabloid newspaper (a clever

parody called The National Inquisitor is stuffed with hints
and is included with the
game), has a nightmare (also
clever, a Pink Panther-style
bit of opening animation that
may be the best part of the
game) which compels him to
go on a quest.

Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders
IBM, C-64
1
$44.95
David Fox
Lucasfilm Games
San Rafael, CA

When I mentioned this to
David Fox, he said he hadn't
realized that collecting crystals had been done before.
Presumably, he also hadn't
realized that arbitrary puzzles
are no longer considered optimal or even, acceptable.
Back in the days of Wizard
and the Princess, we accepted the idea that saying
"Hocus" would make a bridge
appear over a gorge, even
though the same magic word
had no such effect elsewhere.
Today we demand puzzles
that make sense. Most of the
time Zak delivers—but the
designers have only so much
imagination, and over the
course of the game, it gets
stretched mighty thin.

This leaves far too many
non-puzzles. For example,
you need to open a door, so
you use a yellow crayon to
connect the dots you see on the wall. Why? There are
three buttons on a door on Mars and you must press the
buttons in the order that three witch doctors danced in
Africa in order to open the door. Why? There are too

many convenient coincidences, too many situations in
which the solution is drawing some mystic symbol on the
wall. David Fox justifies this by saying that there's a hint
about drawing on the wall in The Inquisitor. That doesn't
mean, however, that this sort of puzzle makes good interactive fiction.

Most Infinite Jest,
"Brevity," Shakespeare wrote in Hamlet, "is the soul of
wit." This is advice many would do well to take to heart.
Comedy that gets dragged out too long is like a magic
trick performed too slowly. You see the wires; you figure
out the effect; and still it goes on, painfully and interminably. If a joke is right on target, though, it can go on
forever. You want it to. If a joke misses, however, it is best
to get it offstage quickly.
How does this apply to Zak McKracken and the Alien
Mindbenders? For one thing, the game is being sold as
being much longer than its predecessor, Maniac Mansion. Zak is longer, no question about it, but Maniac
Mansion is plenty long itself. Is the extra poundage an improvement? Unfortunately, the whole game tends to be
huge and cumbersome, and not funny or sophisticated
enough to justify its size. Juggling ten balls is not always
funnier than juggling three. That is not to say that Zak is
not a good game. It has moments of brilliance (though
fewer than the generally brilliant Maniac Mansion) connected by passages of good, if unspectacular, material. It
is technically superb, with fluid animation, extensive use
of sound effects, and a comfortable control system. It
even has a few puzzles that are absolutely perfect. It is fun
to play, and, even at its worst, it is entertaining. On the
whole, it's a nice little diversion.
What it is not is a great game. The tragedy is that, after
Maniac Mansion, it should have been.
There are plenty of little problems which can be mentioned later, but the game's central flaw must be discussed right away.
Designer David Fox told me that the public's response
to Maniac Mansion was appreciation mixed with
claustrophobia. Players felt stifled by the mansion's walls
and wanted to be free to move around in an open environment. Always happy to oblige, Fox wrote the latest
game in such a way as to allow players to travel from San
Francisco to London to Miami to Mexico to the Bermuda
Triangle to Mars to Parts Unknown . . .
So far so good, but here's the rub, no matter how big
Zak is, there is only so much space on two sides of two
disks. In the previous game, players got to explore that
house until they were blue in the face. When they were
done, they knew every crevice. It felt like a house (and a
big house at that). The simulation was rich and the environment was fully realized. When players couldn't go in
a direction, it was because a wall prevented them. When
an object couldn't be used, it was because that object
had no function.
In this new effort, necessity limits San Francisco to a
half dozen screens. Why can't characters go down the
block past the bakery? It is impossible because there was
not space on the disk to program in the rest of the city.
The result is a simulation that feels flat, like a movie
town made of propped-up facades or a State tour in Russia. You can only go where the story wants you to go,
and it won't let you forget it.

Now, don't tell me this is what you wanted when you
said that Maniac Mansion made you feel closed in. At
least, that game's limitations made sense. Here, you feel
like a rat being funnelled through a maze of invisible
walls, a puppet in the hands of an arbitrary designer.
Believe me, in Maniac Mansion you were free. In Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders, the illusion of
freedom is as transparent as a sheet of glass.
Personally, I would rather have had a hundred screens
of San Francisco than six each of Mars, Nepal, Cairo and
so forth, especially when there is no reason for the
globetrotting other than showcasing a variety of background graphics.
What it comes down to is that there is so much more
space covered that it is covered less well. As a result, the
game feels artificial, a problem which it never overcomes.

ACounteac
More In Sorrow
ThanIAger
One could harp on other
shortcomings, a dozen
minor frustrations: you
don't select your characters; the characters in the
game aren't distinct from
each other; the story gets
lost several times and is inadequately supported by
"cut scenes;" the promised
"cinematic touches" and
"dramatic camera angles"
are mostly limited to
straight-on, mediumlength shots (much as in
Maniac Mansion); and
the jungle and temple
"mazes" are pointless.
There is no intent to scare
you off. Nevertheless,
before you buy this
product, you should know
what you're getting. You should buy it, nonetheless.
Those few perfect puzzles are worth the price of admission. For example, the airplane sequences come to mind,
as does building a spacesuit for Zak for when he gets to
Mars. Then, too, the humor doesn't always fall flat. The
game can be enjoyed and that's what counts.
If it is not too bold, one could ask that Lucasfilm take
this criticism to heart. No malice is intended. Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders is basically a good
game. It simply could have been better. Therefore, here is
my shopping list for the next Lucasfilm adventure game.
First, until you have unlimited space to work with, pick
one location and stick to it. Second, take your time. If
you don't have any good ideas for puzzles, wait until you
do. Third, go through your games and scrap everything
that's tedious and unimaginative. Being aware of cliches
like the crystals could save consumers from disappointment. Fourth, get better music and more of it. What
would Raiders of the Lost Ark have been without that
fabulous John Williams' soundtrack? Maniac Mansion
was a hard act to follow, but I'll bet you can still design a
better one.

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the Computer
Entertainment Industry

SIERRA ON-LINE
GOES PUBLIC
On August 22, 1988, Sierra
President Ken Williams announced that the company
had filed a registration statement for an initial public offering of common stock.
Though 420,000 of these
shares will be sold by certain
Selling Stockholders, the company should gain working
capital in excess of
$10,780,000 should the assumed initial public offering
price of $11.00 per share be
acceptable to investors. Controlling interest in the corporation is not at issue, since
more than 2,000,000 of the
current shares of common
stock will remain in the hands
of current shareholders. The
proposed NASDAQ symbol is
SIER. The corporation earned
more than 12 million dollars
in net revenue during the fiscal year ending March, 1988,
up from nearly 7 million dollars during the previous fiscal
year.

Broderbund
Software Enters
Joint Venture With
11 Japanese
Software Companies
The eleven Japanese
partners (Pony Canyon Inc.,
MAC Inc. (Humming Bird),
T & E Soft Inc., Xtal Soft
Company, Ltd., Game Arts
Company, Ltd., Kogado
Studio Inc., Telenet Japan
Company, Ltd., BPS Inc.,

Micro Cabin Inc., Riverhill
Soft, Inc., and Nihon
Falcom, Inc.) will provide the
new corporate entity, Kyodai
Software Marketing, Inc.,
with products which have
been successful in Japan.
Kyodai will adapt these for
the IBM and compatibles
market in North America.
Broderbund Software will
use its distribution network in
order to market the products
through existing marketing
channels in the U.S. and
Canada. The new entity plans
to market more than 12 titles,
predominantly entertainment
products, during the first year.
Each product will be identified
by both the original Japanese
publisher and the Kyodai
brand name.

Electronic Arts
Tops $50 Million
Mark—Paves Way
for Profitable
Industry
Electronic Arts has announced that overall sales of
software products in fiscal
1987 (ending March, 1988) increased by 67% and international sales skyrocketed upward more than 400%. This
announced figure of $50 million in net sales revenue is
higher than a previously
published estimate of $43.4
million (Software Industry
Bulletin, 7-11-88, p. 3).
Based on those earlier
figures, the San Mateo based
company had eclipsed closest
rivals Activision

(Mediagenic) and Broderbund by around $7 million in
sales ($36.8 and $36.2 million respectively). Epyx was
the next closest entertainment
software publisher with net
sales of $27 million, followed
by (figures in millions of dollars): Mindscape ($25),
Microprose ($14), Sierra
($11.5), Sir-Tech ($10.1), Accolade ($8.9), and Avalon
Hill Games ($6).
In related news, the
Software Publishers Association data for the first
half of 1988 reflects a healthy
situation for the entertainment software industry. In the
second quarter of 1988, entertainment software sales
moved ahead of Languages/Utilities for second
place in sales dollars. This is
considerably better than the
third place finish in the
second quarter of 1987. Also,
even though entertainment
software finished slightly behind Languages/Utilities when
both quarters of 1988 are
lumped together, the sales totals for these two categories
were considerably closer.

BOARD GAME
COMPANIES
LICENSE
POPULAR TITLES
GDW, publisher of famous
board and role-playing
games, has recently licensed
two more of its popular titles
for publication as computer
products. In addition to the
company's modern naval combat game, Harpoon, which is
now under development at
Three-Sixty Pacific, the
company's most successful
role-playing game has been
licensed. Paragon Software
has signed an exclusive licens-

ing agreement with GDW for
the rights to design Traveller
computer games. Veteran
Traveller campaigners will be
interested in knowing that the
"Spinward Marches," that sparsely settled area in the "Imperium" is the location for the
first computer adventure. The
projected release date for the
first adventure is March,
1989. In addition, Strategic
Studies Group has signed
an option to produce a
Twilight 2000 computer
game. A prototype for the
popular role-playing game
should be shown in the first
half of 1989. Also, several
companies are reported to be
interested in developing a
computer version of the
Team Yankee game.
On other fronts, Flying Buffalo has agreed in principle to
(Continued on page 62)

Sneak Preview

Charlie Hustle! The very
mention of the nickname
given to Pete Rose conjures up images of flying dust and
bodies. It awakens vivid memories
of head-first slides and determined
expressions. Replays of highlight
films filled with grass-staining bellyfirst catches begin their playbacks
in our minds. That's the image
Gamestar must live up to in its
new baseball game, Pete Rose
Pennant Fever.
Fortunately, the game looks like
it is going to do just that. The
graphics, ably programmed by
Jeff Tunnell and his crew at
Dynamix, look realistic in all three IBM
compatible formats (EGA, CGA, and
Tandy) and, except for a slightly annoying flicker, offer beautifully executed
animation. Even in CGA mode, the
colors are bright enough and exciting
enough to command any player's interest. The game's atmosphere is also enhanced by a soundtrack consisting of a
rock riff to go with the splash (title)
screen, one verse of "The Star Spangled
Banner," and a verse of "Take Me Out
To The Ball Game" for the seventh inning stretch.

Catching me
Fever with
Pete Rose

faced with the problem of rushing
the ball, fielding it cleanly, and
firing it into the active base. After
playing this game, a new sense of
understanding will come upon the
fan who hears a television color
commentator note that an infielder moves well to his left or his
right.

With the outfielder, some of
those traumatic memories of
childhood may come back before
the player gets the feel of the
program. Remember how tough it
was to judge a flyball when you
were just learning to play
baseball? Remember those times
when you came up on the ball when it
was clearly going over your head?
Remember those times when you took a
couple of steps backward, just before
you had to come charging forward? Well,
that will happen in Pete Rose Pennant
Feuer, too. At least, it happens until
players get used to the angles provided
by the fielders' viewpoints.

A Sneak Preview of "Pet(
Rose Pennant Fever"

Gameplay offers an initial similarity to
Accolade's successful Hardball! in that
it is for one or two players and the
screen displays a diagram for both the
batter and the pitcher prior to each
pitch, but the similarity doesn't last long.
For one thing, the program (at Pete's insistence) offers each batter a choice of
going for power or contact, rather than
simply going for a bunt or swinging
away. In fact, batters even get a choice
as to which baseline they will attempt to
bunt down. The
pitchers in this
game choose from
either two basic
speeds or their two
specialty pitches
(see below), as well
as location for each
pitch, similar to the
four pitches available in the Accolade hit game.
Pete Rose Pennant Fever is a
viewpoint oriented
game. It is not primarily pitcher versus batter, but relies on the
team concept. Particularly in league play, it will be impossible to
be successful without considering who is playing in what field
and what that player's strengths and weaknesses are. Even in
the basic action game, the player must take on the viewpoint of
the player whose image is flashing.
In a flash, the infielder must decide whether to move to his left
or right. If not, the ball will be past him and the outfielder will be

This is not to say that the classic struggle between pitcher and batter is not important to the game. The age-old "cat
and mouse" game is present in this computer game, as well. In fact, if pitchers
don't mix up their pitches and move the
ball around enough, the computer opponent is quite capable of shellacking
them toward the middle of the game.
The real beauty of the game, however,
comes with the league play option. The
game allows the player to establish an expansion franchise, draft players, and juggle lineups. Position players and outfielders are rated from one to ten in five
different categories (batting ability, running, throwing, catching, and handedness) with one
being the lowest
(or slowest) and
ten being the
highest (or fastest).
Pitchers are rated
in the same way
for speed, control,
and stamina. In addition, each pitcher
is considered to
have two specialty
pitches. These can
be either: curves,
sliders, knuckle
balls, change ups, heaters (super fast balls), or screwballs.
All in all, Pete Rose Pennant Fever offers some old challenges
and some new ones. It is not as cerebral as Earl Weaver
Baseball's manage mode with its authentic database, but it is
not as totally action-oriented as Hardball! and some of the other
arcade games on the market. Indeed, those who are looking for
a unique blend of action and strategy will do well to consider
Pete Rose Pennant Fever and its league play option.

Interview

n

preparation
for our coverage
of Pete Rose Pennant Fever, CGW
had an opportunity
to interview the Cincinnati Reds
manager. Our initial conversation
came on the last
day of his suspension for shoving a
National League
umpire.

I

If you're hitting well
in batting practice,
you're going to do
well in the game.

Rose
Hustles The Press!

CGW: First, some
personal words.
Two of our staff
used to live in Louisville, Kentucky and
would drive over
two hours to see
the Reds play at
Riverfront Stadium.
In fact, one of them
was there when you
tied the club record
for hitting safely in
consecutive games.
Thanks for all of
those years of hustling.
Pete Rose: Thank
you. I was just down in Louisville the
other day. I was at Churchill Downs.
Didn't win, but it was fun.
CGW: Getting down to business, what
distinct impact has your personal experience as player and manager had
upon Pete Rose Pennant Fever?
Pete Rose: Mainly providing direction
on setting a proper line-up; teaching the
guys the difference between swinging
for a home run or a base hit; and talking about the fundamentals of why to
throw where. I've played six out of nine
defensive positions, so I guess I'm
qualified to talk about the differences in
playing each one.
CGW: Have you actually had a chance
to play the computer game, then?
Pete Rose: I played it a while on my
last trip out there. They said I picked it
up pretty fast. I'd sure hope so.
CGW: You made a statement in
Activision's original press release on
the game that suggested statistics were
being overemphasized in baseball. If the
emphasis of the computer game is supposed to be reflective of "on the field" action, why is the general manager approach included?
Pete Rose: The general manager portion reflects a real part of baseball. The
game does take place "on the field," but
a manager would be in trouble without

CGW: And how
are you going to
know this in Pete
Rose Pennant Fever?
Pete Rose: There
is supposed to be a
pre-game "Scouting
Report." That ought
to give you some
idea. As a team
manager, I like to
know what players
are hot or cold,
whether they're on
my team or theirs.
CGW: As a player,
do statistics have an
impact on your confidence or do you
simply try to avoid
paying attention to
them?

a good front office. The reason I said
what I did about statistics is because I
wanted to emphasize that baseball is
about playing today's game, not
yesterday's or last week's.
CGW: Speaking as a manager, then,
what insights other than statistics do you
use in making a managerial decision?
Do you pinch hit on the basis of a
player's performance in batting practice
or what?
Pete Rose: In using a pinch hitter, I
stick with the traditional percentages. I
try to use a right-handed pinch hitter
against a left-handed pitcher and viceversa.
CGW: What about those players who
statistically perform better against
pitchers who throw from the same side
as they bat from?
Pete Rose: I know what you mean,
but I think the only exception to the
basic percentages should be when you
have a guy like Fernando [Valenzuelal]
on the mound. Fernando's best pitch is
his scroogie, so you can take away his
best pitch by sending a leftie up against
him. I also want to pinch hit someone
who is swinging the bat well.
CGW: In yesterday's game or in batting practice?
Pete Rose: Probably batting practice.
Batting practice is a confidence builder.

Pete Rose: I think
you ought to avoid
paying attention to
them, but it's just
not always possible.
Of course, they can be something of a
confidence builder if you're going good.
CGW: If you were a general manager,
what types of tangibles or intangibles
would you use in judging talent?
Pete Rose: I want players that want to
win, players that are a lot like me. On
the Reds, I'm the one who has to live
with the guy, so if I don't like him, he's
usually not in a Reds uniform. In
general, though, you need that GM, because there are simply not enough
hours in the day for you to do both jobs.
CGW: Does the game system in Pete
Rose Pennant Fever offer enough information to be a general manager?
Pete Rose: I think so. They tell me
that you can trade players in the minors
by statistics and ratings. Those ratings
should tell you what kind of player
you're getting.
CGW: We're running out of time, but
we just can't resist asking this—particularly today. What impact will "umpiring" have on the game? Will there be
any bad calls?
Pete Rose: I sure hope not, but if
there are any bad calls, I tell you this, a
manager who touches an umpire is not
going to get the same kind of suspension I got. I shouldn't have done it, but
the suspension was too long!

Sneak Preview

A

t last,

the longawaited
computer simulation of Tom
Clancy's best-selling
novel has arrived.
Since Clancy and
co-author Larry
Bond played out
many of the naval
scenarios by using
the latter's Harpoon
(a miniatures wargame which is soon
to be released in its
own right as an independent computer simulation),
Red Storm Rising is
probably the first
simulation inspired
by a book which
was inspired by a
simulation which in
turn is engendering
another simulation.

numerous
scenarios, each of
which affect the overall war situation.
Successes roll back
the Warsaw Pact
slightly, while successive defeats show
the European map
with a redward expansion which eventually leads to NATO
surrender. As an officer of the defeated
powers, you will be
lucky enough to
spend the next
decade in a Gulag!
This reviewer cannot
yet report the effects
of success!

by M. Evan Brooks

TITLE:
Red Storm Rising
SYSTEM:
C-64/128
# OF PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$44.95
DESIGNERS:
Sid Meier and Arnold Hendrick
PUBLISHER:
Microprose Software
Hunt Valley, MD

A Novel
Experience
Microprose has chosen to simulate the actions of a modern
nuclear attack submarine. While the novel covered World War III
in its "entirety" (with short shrift to the land forces), the game is a
submarine simulation with a campaign game that affects the
progress (?) of World War III.
This reviewer expected an updated Silent Service—good
graphics and decent play, but nothing really "novel." Instead, Red
Storm Rising and Silent Service have the same relationship as a
whale and a minnow (One is a mammal and one is a fish—the
only thing they have in common is that they swim under the
water). Submarine warfare in the modern age is a new world. It is
not necessarily better, but it is definitely different.
The documentation for the game is voluminous (108 pages),
complete, and up to Microprose's traditionally high standards. It
is actually more intimidating in appearance than in actual use,
since more than half of this is historical explanation and designer
notes. Reading the documentation is necessary, but one can do a
quick read, and grasp the basic concepts in an OJT (on-the-job)
function. Also, an overlay has once again been included for the
Commodore versions and this greatly assists the user in ease of
learning and play.
Akin to most Microprose simulations, one chooses a time
period to simulate. In this case, one chooses 1984, 1988 (the actual scenario in the book), 1992 or 1996. Later periods have
more sophisticated weaponry and tactics have to evolve with technology.
After choosing a boat (from one of several classes ranging in
sophistication), one can choose a difficulty level ranging from Introductory to Ultimate. For most, the introductory levels are sufficient to yield a grasp of the mechanics in 2-4 playings and jumping to Ultimate will be a winnable challenge thereafter (at least in
the 1988 scenarios).
Players may choose to battle against a submarine, a wolf pack, a
destroyer, or a naval group. In addition, a chance engagement or
World War III may be selected. The World War III campaign offers

A Showy
Display
Generally, one will
view three displays
on the screen: the
tactical display, the
navigation display,
and the secondary display (contact, threat weapon vectors, etc.).
While a periscope does exist, one will rarely utilize it because the
submarine cannot get closer to the surface than 10' (mainly because a modern nuclear submarine has no reason to surface
other than to surrender).
Orders to the helm are quick and easy. Weaponry ranges from
standard Mark 48 torpedoes to Harpoon and Tomahawk missiles.
Missiles must be launched within 300' of the surface, but reach
the target easier than torpedoes. Torpedoes may be individually
driven into the enemy, but this individualized type of attention is
impossible when one is threatened with torpedoes and missiles
dropping in from all directions.
The worst threat is the enemy submarine. With the same assets
and weaknesses that you have, the enemy rarely travels alone—
better to face a carrier group than a wolfpack! Therefore, as you
target the sub you know about, the other enemy vessels are busy
targeting you.
Identification of enemy vessels must be made by comparing
acoustic signatures (at lower difficulty levels, this is accomplished
by the crew; at the ultimate level, the captain's job is a lonely one
Targeting the enemy requires a choice as to weapons system.
The graphics are more than adequate and give a substantive feel
about what the submarine service is about.

A Tantalizing Observation
Strike Fleet (EA/Lucasfilm) [cf. CGW, #46] was a rendition of
modern surface warfare. There, the submarine was the terror of
the sailor. With Red Storm Rising, one can become that terror
and confront the problems facing the contemporary Silent Service.
NEXT MONTH: A detailed review and tactical discussion of Red
Storm Rising. Since the novel is now required reading for the
Naval War College's Maritime Operations Course and this reviewer
is currently enrolled in that course, we will attempt to secure the
services of several submarine officers for an in-depth review, as
well as opinions from Larry Bond.

Review

The Enterprise
Establishes
"First Contact"
The Latest "Star Trek" Adventure
by Scorpia

A mysterious

superpulse of energy flits across the
galaxy at unheard-of speeds, leaving shaken starships in its path. As it flashes through space, Star
Fleet Command studies the phenomenon, and comes
to a conclusion: the pulse
is a signal. A signal sent
out by unknown aliens,
searching the skies for
other sentient beings. So
the race begins: who will
it be—Federation or Klingon Empire—to make . . .
First Contact?
First Contact, third in the
Star Trek series from
Simon and Schuster,
puts you once again in the
role of Captain James T.
Kirk, commander of the
Enterprise. Kirk's mission,
this time around, is to contact the aliens sending out
the pulse before the Klingons do. The mission is
complicated by the fact
that the source of the pulses seems to be in an unmapped area of space
claimed by the Klingons, although the Federation has
not recognized the claim.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Star Trek: First Contact
Apple II (128K), IBM
1
$39.95
Micromosaics Productions
Simon & Schuster
New York, NY

Matter (The Plot)

As a cover for the actual mission, the
Enterprise is detailed to bring a party of
diplomats to a nearby star system,
Gothica, to attend the coronation of the
planet's king. After dropping off the
diplomats, Kirk can get on with the real business at
hand, locating the aliens.
Right from the start, it's a rough ride (would you expect
anything else?). Ferrying the diplomats to Gothica turns
out to be more than Kirk bargained for, especially when
one of them turns up strangled. Obviously, there is an
impostor on board. Figuring out who it is (and how to
prove it) will help pass the time until the ship reaches its
destination (Warp 1 is not all that speedy).

When the ship arrives at Gothica, Kirk is conveniently
invited to watch the coronation ceremony along with the
diplomats. If you have a bad feeling about this, you're absolutely right. As the prince enters the room, one of the
guards strikes out at him with a knife. Fortunately, it misses, but in the confusion, the royal sceptre (don't leave
the throne without it) is stolen and the would-be assassin
manages to escape.
This puts rather a crimp into the coronation ceremony
and it is called off for the time being. You hardly need to
be told who is asked to help retrieve the missing sceptre:
Captain Kirk to the rescue again. With a little help from
the crew and the contents of a trash basket, the traitor is
soon unmasked. Unfortunately, he doesn't happen to
have the sceptre with him.
Where is it? On its way to Klingon territory, with the
Enterprise in hot pursuit. Klingon territory usually means
Klingon ships, and that's just what turns up. Time for
battle stations and a quick but fierce combat with the
enemy vessel.
The Enterprise pulls through (we hope . . . it is possible to end up dead here), but she is not in the best of
shape. However, just by the merest chance, the ship is
near the very star system it wanted to go to in the first
place, the one from which the pulses originated.
This is the planet Avon (not cosmetics, Shakespeare).
Beaming down, Kirk and crew find themselves surrounded by actors spouting lines from various
Shakespearean plays. This is strange enough, and
things get a little stranger when it turns out that these actors aren't human at all, but androids.
Another little mystery (although an easy one) to solve
and Kirk finally reaches the source of the transmissions.
First contact, at last!
Well, not exactly. Before the aliens will agree to see
them, Kirk and crew have to prove themselves by passing a few tests (as though they haven't been through
enough already). Fortunately, the tests are not too difficult, so Kirk should pass them with flying colors and
really make first contact with the aliens.

Anti-Matter (Criticisms)
In spite of everything that seems to be happening, First
Contact is actually a very easy adventure. Most of the
situations generally require very little effort, a few actions
at most, to resolve them. Even the end game, with its
five puzzles to solve, doesn't take too much effort.
Further, the crew, Spock in particular, are overly helpful most of the time. In many cases, before Kirk even
has a chance to think about a situation, one person or
another chimes in with a helpful hint or suggestion.
Thus the player is practically led by the nose through
much of the game.
This would have been less irritating if Kirk had at least
been given some time to work things out by himself,
and then perhaps one of the crew would say something
if too much time had passed. As it is, Kirk gets so much
help from his officers that they could almost solve all the
problems themselves.
Another disappointment is the lack of variety in the
landing parties. While Kirk can set them up himself, the
manual advises you to let Renner, the transporter officer,

do it. The problem with this is that she always picks the
same people, namely Spock, Scott, McCoy and Denjik
(an alien; more about him in a bit). Since the party members generally do little more than give advice, it would
have been nice to have different officers in the party
from time to time.
The presence of Denjik, an alien discovered on board
early in the game, is quite pointless. After being found
out, he never uses his special talent. In fact, he does
nothing of importance. While he can be asked questions
about a number of things (a sort of walking encyclopedia), much of the information could just as easily
have been provided by other crewmembers. Denjik adds
little, if anything, to the game.
One annoying feature on the IBM is the need to use
the "Look" command in many instances to see who is in
the room with you or what objects may be there. For
some reason, when entering a new location, the people
who are present are sometimes not displayed along with
the room description.
Don't expect to have many informative conversations
with aliens. The really important information will be
volunteered by them, and in most cases questions
beyond that will not yield much that is useful to completing the game.
Plotting is very loose, and seems to have been
designed to make it easier for the player to solve the
problems, rather than to provide any real challenges.
The two assassins, for instance, do not act with any particular degree of intelligence, making them fairly easy to
discover.

The Bridge (Game Controls)
Game play itself is done through a series of screens
and function keys, although commands can also be
typed in from the keyboard. Those who have played Star
Trek: The Kobayashi Alternative will find this familiar, as
it's the same kind of setup. The upper half of the screen
provides text descriptions of locations. The lower half
varies somewhat depending on whether Kirk is aboard
the Enterprise or on a planet, but it will always show his
current location, which directions he can move, elapsed
time, and the transporter setting (if any). The middle of
the screen contains the command line for typed commands.
Function keys are more complex this time around, and
in some cases, typing in a command (especially during
the Klingon battle) may be faster than cycling through
the functions. For instance, F6 on the IBM brings up an
Orders menu, which is further broken down into Bridge
Orders, Crew Orders, Planet Orders, Attack Orders,
Transporter Orders, and Alien Questions. Choosing one
of these (again with a function key) then brings up one
more menu, containing the specific commands.
Other keys allow you to look around, examine objects
and people (a menu comes up for this), use items, add
or drop things in your inventory, give items to someone,
etc. It's important to become familiar with these function
keys, since in many cases they are the only way that Kirk
can do things; the command line is strictly for orders
and questions.
Throughout the game, little conversation windows pop
up whenever someone talks to Kirk. A box appears on
the screen, with the person's name and text inside it.

Each person has his own color and location. For example, Scotty's box is always in red and appears in the
upper left; alien conversations always appear in the top
middle in a sort of purple color; and so on. Sometimes,
these boxes pop up by themselves, as when Uhura announces a message from Star Fleet command or a crew
member has a suggestion to make. At other times, they
show up in response to a question or command from
Kirk.
The game is, thus, mostly text-oriented, although there
are a few graphic pictures in it. These graphics are primitive, and would have better been left out of the adventure. Fortunately, there aren't too many of them, and
they can be turned off.

Engine Room (Game Play)
Using the ship's computer is a handy way to pick up information on planets and people (it even has cross
references, which are must reading), but the most fun
with this is reading about people and events from the
old TV series.
On the IBM, time passes whether you're doing something or not (there is a pause option to freeze the game
if you need it, and the speed can be changed as well).
On the Apple, time passes only in response to actions.
Therefore, when travelling in space, Apple owners will
have to be moving around or otherwise doing something to make the time pass and the ship move.
The Enterprise has 27 levels, and you can go to all of
them, although all the action on the ship takes place on
the bridge, deck 5, and deck 7. The other decks have a
few rooms on them that you can visit, but you won't find
anything of importance in them.
The manual is fairly adequate in explaining the game
and the function keys, although with so many different
functions available (often accessed through sub-menus)
it can be a little confusing at times. A quick reference
card with a recap of the function keys would have been
helpful in keeping track of them all.
The same manual is used for both the IBM and Apple
versions, with differences in commands explained as you
go along. Read this carefully, as some options on one
computer may not be available on the other, while other
options available on both machines may be handled or
accessed differently.
The game disks (both versions) can be copied, and the
manual recommends you do this before starting play.
The IBM version can be put on hard disk, which I recommend, especially if you have only one floppy drive (the
manual gives instructions for a 2 drive system or hard
drive; nothing is said about using 1 drive only on the
IBM). On the Apple, you can use one or two drives.
The game can be saved or restored at almost any time,
either to floppy drive or hard drive. If you're saving to a
floppy disk, you may want to have a couple of extra save
disks ready, or you can write over an existing save if you
run out of room on the disk. Save positions can be
given a name on the IBM and a number on the Apple.
Bottom line: Primarily for beginning to average players,
since advanced players will get through this one in an
afternoon.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

for the second half). Each area has a puzzle to solve.
These are a challenging collection of traditional puzzles.

the fool's
errand
by Alan Roberts

T

he High Priestess has put a curse on the land, hid-

den the fourteen treasures, and plunged the four
kingdoms into war. Your task is to travel through
the land, solving puzzles and . . . I see you're yawning.
You say you've
seen this plot
before? That it
sounds, well,
familiar? Good!
That's the only
familiar thing
about this game.
When the president of Miles
Computing says,
"Fool's Errand is
20% like an adventure game
and 80% unlike
any other computer game," he's
being modest.
You won't have
to "look in compost heap" or
"give tire iron to
minotaur" in this
game. The puzzles you have to
solve are the oldfashioned kind:
mazes (with
secret doors),
anagrams,
crosswords,

Title:
System:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

Fool's Errand
Macintosh
$49.95
Cliff Johnson
Miles Computing
Canoga Park, CA

and coded message puzzles.
There's even a game of three card Thoth to
be played, but you'll have to figure out the
rules as you go along!.

Playing Your Cards Right
(Part One)

The game comes in two parts: completing the Sun's
Map and finding the fourteen treasures. The essential inspiration for Fool's Errand comes from the Tarot deck.
At the start of the game, there are twenty-one areas you
can go to (corresponding to the major arcana). When
you choose an area from the menu, you are presented
with a fragment of the story scroll (which contains hints

Once you've "overcome the enchantment," as they
say, you gain access to more areas. You also are given
new pieces to the Sun's Map. The Sun (the area you
begin the game in) is the last puzzle to be solved. To
proceed on to the second half, you must arrange the
eighty square tiles in the correct order. There is a catch.
finlike your usual jigsaw puzzle, you can't move the
pieces "off the board" until you've found a place for
them. As you progress and get several large blocks put
together, keeping them from overlapping becomes the
major task.

Half-time Entertainment
Once the Sun's Map has been completed, you can
print out the entire story. Up to this point, you have only
been getting fragments of the story. Take the time out
to sit back and read the story (you deserve a break
anyway). Some computer games include fiction as a
method of hiding clues and they are rarely worth (as
literature) the staples holding them together. This one is
a good read. Although the characters flash by like
scenery in a slide show, one can feel a surprising empathy for their plight. Now, back to the business at hand.

Hide and Go Seek (Part Two)
There are plenty of clues as to what and where the
fourteen lost treasures are. There are clues on the map,
in bold type in the story, and on the "Book of Thoth" itself. All you have to do is unscramble them. Once you
enter their names into the book of Thoth, a new icon
pops up on the Show Disk and you can go for the final
confrontation with the High Priestess.

Playing the Fool (Conclusions)
This game grabs your attention like poison oak under
a plaster cast and is just about as easy to put out of
your mind. It is spectacular from the start! You feel like
you're matching wits with the author directly, instead of
playing "hunt the parser." The animation that begins
and ends the game (while brief) is excellent. The
graphics that are used throughout the puzzles are first
rate. Also, for those who dislike arcade sequences, only
one puzzle calls for quick arcade-gamer's reflexes.
find-awor,jgs
The least interesting puzzles
in the game involved button pushing. In these, a message is spelled out if you
get the right combination. This was not too bad when
there were only five buttons (120 combinations), but
eight buttons! Eight buttons means 40,320 possibilities.
Frankly, since the company newsletter said that there
will be sequels to Fool's Errand, it is to be hoped that
there will be no more button puzzles. This is where most
gameplayers will raise the white flag and ask for the hint
book. It should come as no surprise to anyone playing
the game that the hint book is also full of codes and
puzzles.
While I don't recommend this game to everyone, those
who like word games and jigsaw puzzles will find this
game as addictive as Rubik's Cube. If you know someone who "doesn't do games on computers," try this one
out on them. Give them a taste of what they're missing.

Game Hints

S

ummer is behind us at last,
and what a long, hot summer
it was; hardly any new games
came out (sigh). Even Fred was
depressed. Now, we can look forward to all the new releases coming
out for Christmas (yeah!). While
we're waiting for these goodies to arrive, let's take a trip to the back
room and see what the mailbag has
to say about current favorites.

Wasteland
I've been getting a lot of mail on
this one lately, and several questions
have been showing up with great frequency. many people are having a
great deal of trouble reaching the
door located in the teleport room (in
Finster's brain). This one isn't so
much hard as tricky. You can think
your way out of this one, but only
after you've been trapped. Another
popular question concerns the night
terror. A lot of folks have been wasting precious ammo on him. He really is indestructible, so just leave him
alone. Finally, there is the problem
of servo motors when repairing Max.
A number of people have reported
needing more motors than they can
find. Not everyone has this problem,
but the easiest way around it is to
make a new disk 3 and try again. If
that doesn't work, make a couple
more and collect as many servo
motors as you can. Eventually, you
will put enough into Max to make
him work (and if Max isn't fixed, you
can't get to the endgame, so you
really have to do it).

Ultima IV
Many people do not realize the importance of having a complete party
of eight when going into the Abyss.
Without a full party, you won't be
able to complete the game. I've had
several people write to me about
being denied entry at the Codex
Door, and that is the reason why. Unless you have all eight (including
yourself, of course), the game won't
let you in. In fact, note that all eight
must be alive (corpses don't count!).

Which also brings up the matter of
the shepherd, who some folks have
found to be
rather elusive.
Remember that
each town represents one of the
attributes, and
thus provides
one member of
the party (don't
forget to include
yourself there!). If
you think about
it, you'll realize
there is only one
place the
shepherd can
be, and that's
where to look . .
. you just have to
look very carefully.

Scorpion's
Mail

Ultima V
After mentioning in a previous
Mail that it's bad
to take crops
from the fields,
I've been receiving letters asking
if it's ok to take
the crops from
lob's field. The
answer to that
one is "No!."
Even though lolo
may be in your
party, you still
can't take the
food. This may
not be logical,
but that's the
way it is. Also,
people have
been looking in
vain for an airship (balloon)
and/or a ship's
wheel. Despite
the fact that
these objects are
mentioned, they are not in the
game. If you've been trying to find
them, forget about them and go on
to more important things.
(Continued on page 24)

Review

Terrorism
in the 22nd
Century
Rainbird's "Carrier
Command"
by Hosea Battles

SCENE: 2166
SE I I ING: Your commanding officer has just briefed
you on the terrorist takeover of the ACC Omega. There
are only two aircraft
carriers like the Omega
in existence. You command the other, the
ACC Epsilon. The terrorists have threatened
to destroy several
newly emerged volcanic islands with
enough energy to solve
the current fuel crisis.
They have demanded
15 billion dollars
within 72 hours. Your
mission is to stop the
Omega from destroying those islands. If
necessary, you are to
destroy your sister
aircraft carrier.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Thus is the curtain
raised in Carrier Command. The game
comes equipped with a
single-sided disk, stereo cassette with the
Carrier Command
long version of the title song ("It's Just
Atari ST
1
Another Mission"), a 64-page manual, and
$39.95
a computer-specific reference card. AlClare Edgely
though the disk has a copy program to asRichard Pinto
Rainbird Software
sist in making a back-up copy, the
Menlo Park, CA
program uses a biblical off-disk protection
scheme ("Seek and ye shall find"—i.e. turn
to the page and find the word).
Some of the graphics in the game are reminiscent of
the hollow three-dimensional graphics in the original
Starglider (i.e. the damage control screen and side-view
display on the status screen), but most of the action
screens use solid three-dimensional objects with more in
common with Starglider II than the original Starglider.
Normally, the player is presented with a view that displays

a primary viewscreen which is surrounded by icons. Clicking on one of these icons causes the display in the
primary viewscreen to change to different images. Hence,
one might see a view of maps, a launch of aircraft or offshipping of tanks, a display of firing lasers, and more.
One example of the care taken with these graphics is
the construction of "Automatic Command Centres."
These centers are effectively mines, factories, storage
facilities, and defense complexes. The nice graphic touch
is that the program displays the ACC from the beginning
stages (beams and girders) and continues step-by-step
until it is a solid structure.

Victory At Sea (The Game)
To win, players must accomplish one of two tasks:
destroy the enemy aircraft carrier or capture all of the
more than 60 islands. Neither task is simple to accomplish. The enemy commander is very fast and intelligent. Players must build a supply network of islands to
supply weapons, equipment, and fuel. In order to function, the player must maintain an unbroken chain of
friendly islands as his supply line. Therefore, it is obvious
that one useful tactic against the enemy carrier is to cut
his supply lines. Of course, the computer-controlled opponent will be attempting to accomplish the same objective and it is very good at this.
The game offers two choices in play: an action game or
a strategy game. In the purely action game, both the
human player and computer opponent begin with several
islands occupied and a complete supply network. Play
begins with both forces only a short distance apart. This
means that the optimal strategy is to immediately attack
the enemy force. In the strategy game, both forces start
with a few islands. From there, it is necessary to build a
supply network, occupy enemy islands, and destroy the
opposing carrier. The computer opponent begins with a
supply network in place.
In both types of games, there is plenty of arcade-style action. Players may launch amphibious tanks and control
them from the tank's viewpoint or fly advanced fighters a
la Starglider. Even if players choose the strategy game
and use the option which allows a set destination to be
programmed for the planes, tanks or carrier, one will have
to fire the weapons manually (arcade style). The limitation
for the human player is that this means it is impossible to
set a weapon for automatic fire. Therefore, he can only
use one weapon at a time. This is not so with the computer opponent which launches multiple weapons at the
human player by controlling aircraft and missiles at the
same time.
Game control is handled via the mouse and joystick (or
either alone). The joystick seems most efficient when controlling aircraft or tanks, but the mouse seems most efficient for moving from menu to menu. In addition to
these viewpoint sequences, the player must also utilize
the defensive options: decoy flares, turret-mounted laser,
and carrier drones (decoys that give off heat signatures
similar to carriers in order to lure enemy missiles away
from the player's carrier).

Mysterious Island (Tactical Notes)
Occupying islands is no easy task. They have their own
protection. The most difficult islands to take contain
defense complexes. The robot engineers in defense com-

plexes will build Marauders (droid-controlled flying drones
armed with heat-seeking missiles), missile launchers, and
runways. Getting within missile range of a defense island
can destroy the carrier itself. Therefore, the player must
destroy the Marauder squadron. The most efficient way to
do this is to use the carrier-based laser. This will necessitate closing range on the defense island while taking
care to stay out of surface missile range. Once the
Marauders are destroyed, players should have clear air superiority for the aircraft. It is then possible to take out surface missile installations and anti-aircraft batteries at will.
Alert commanders will watch out for any attempts to
rebuild the Marauders by the robot engineers in the
defense complex. This reconstruction process can be
avoided by strafing the ruins from time to time. Finally,
once the defenses have been crushed, the carrier can
launch a tank armed with a "Virus Bomb" to attack the
complex itself. If successful, the entire island will be converted to the player's side. Other islands to conquer include resource islands, factory islands, and stockpile islands.
Players must remember to keep an eye on supplies,
since the game cannot simply be reduced to combat. The
occupied islands must be told what supplies to build and,
at least, one island must be designated as a stockpile island. Players who concentrate on weapons and forget to
provide for fuel or equipment will soon find themselves
unable to continue. It is possible to actually lose all one's
offensive hardware or run out of fuel. Further, players are
advised to place their stockpile island (only one per side is

allowed) relatively close to the front lines so it does not
take long to resupply. Of course, it is equally important to
surround it with several defense islands. The enemy will
usually attack these first, before going after your stockpile
island. This will hold true for your resource and factory islands.
Destroying the enemy carrier is also challenging. The
strategy most successful for this reviewer involved finding
the enemy and sitting outside of his range. Then, launch
an aircraft loaded with air-to-air missiles in the direction of
the enemy carrier. When your aircraft runs into the inevitable combat air patrol, it is easy to place two missiles
in the midst of the enemy aircraft and fire the rest at the
carrier. Naturally, the latter does minimal damage. Then,
one can crash into the carrier in a reckless kamikaze style.
Do this about four times, then center the laser and
prepare to drive straight at the enemy. Send the decoy
drones as a screen in front of the carrier and proceed
directly at the enemy vessel at slow speed. Then, begin
firing the laser as the carrier advances on the enemy. Ignore any attacks on the carrier until the bandit is completely destroyed.

From Here to Eternity (Conclusions)
Carrier Command is essentially an action game with a
strategic wrap. Those who want to be able to both plan a
strategy and implement it tactically will be pleased. Also,
those who want an action game with improved graphics
over the initial Starglider should like this game.

Review

Scorpion's
Mail
(Continued from page 21)

Might
and Magic:
Some folks
have been
wondering how to
read the lettered
and numbered
messages that appear in various

places throughout the game. There
are "keys" to reading them, both of
which can be found (in different locations) in Castle Doom. They are not,
of course, easy to find, but they are
there, so keep looking (making a
map helps).

Questron II
I've had several inquiries on how
to get into the Twilight Tomb. The
key can be found pretty much where
you'd expect it to be, namely somewhere in the second castle.

Bard's Tale I:
The riddle about "Past warscapes
fought by men long dead" is giving
some people trouble. A careful reading of the poem shows that the ends
(Continued on page 27)

A

Scorpion's
Mail
(Continued from page 24)

of the lines rhyme, and there aren't
too many words that rhyme with
"fields". A little thought and the
answer should be apparent (you
don't have to solve this one to win
the game, but you do get something
nice). Also, several players have
been getting ahead of themselves in
this game, by moving on to another
dungeon before finishing the current
one, and then finding themselves
stuck. You really must go completely
through one dungeon before going
on to the next, as each has something you will need in the next one.
Further, there really is only one level
to Kylearan's Tower.

Bard's Tale III:
The Gray Tower in Gelidia has
proved to be a problem for a few
people, particularly the part about
the "broken cross." Careful mapping
shows part of the cross at the top,
and the other part at the bottom of
the level, but no apparent means in.
There is actually a way in, using a
particular spell, but it will only work
from one specific spot. This spot
isn't too far from where you came in.
Also, it is only the three towers and
the area under the slab that are important in the fortress. The second
level has nothing much in it (except
monsters).
That seems to be it for the mailbag
this time. Remember, if you need
help you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable (type: SCORPIA to reach the
Games RT). On The Source: Send
SMail to ST1030. By US Mail
(enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope with your questions if you

live in the United
States and want a
reply): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY
10028.
Until next time,
happy adventuring!

Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

Review

STAR
TREK

TILE REBEL UNIVERSE
by Hosea Battles

C

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

aptain's Log, Stardate 4107.6: The Enterprise
has been ordered to investigate the portion of
the Sagittarius Arm which has been designated
as a "Quarantine Zone" by the Federation. To date,
twenty starships have
been sent to investigate
this phenomenon and, as
a result, all twenty have
turned renegade, pledging
allegiance to the Klingon
Empire. The Federation
has determined that the
zone shall be isolated by
means of a Klein Sphere,
an interstellar barrier
through which no
material object can pass.
The sphere will be erected
as soon as the Enterprise
enters the zone. Our mission is to discover the
cause of this mutiny and
reverse its effects. In addition to Klingon involvement in these mysterious
events, we know that
several Romulan ships
and planets exist in this
Quarantine Zone. The
Romulans have refused to
cooperate with our investigation and the Rebel
Federation Ships have
vowed to stop us, as well.
I f we fail to solve the mystery, the
Star Trek: The Rebel Universe
Atari ST, IBM (CGA)
Klein Sphere will be permanently es1
tablished and the Enterprise will be
$39.95
trapped forever!
Steve Cain
Graham Everett &
Mike Singleton
Simon & Schuster
New York, NY

That is probably the way Captain
Kirk would describe the situation
which players find themselves in as
they begin Star Trek: The Rebel Universe from Simon
& Schuster. In a departure from their previous licensed
releases, this product is a graphic adventure. On the
ST, it is impressive, starting with the opening sequence.
When you first boot the game, you hear the familiar
words associated with the opening of the television

series, a digitized version of Captain Kirk's voice followed
immediately by the theme song. Throughout this game,
there are digitized voices and sound effects from the
television series. Unfortunately, the IBM graphics are
mediocre and the sound is missing. Beyond the issue of
graphics and sound, however, is the fact that the game
has more than 4,000 planets to visit.

Star Fleet Reference Materials
(Documentation)
The game's manual is divided into sections which explain different game functions and offer examples of the
game screens. It also includes a glossary of devices and
planetary systems to be encountered during the game.
Following the "Sample Journey to a Planet" section can
enable players to begin the game with a necessary piece
of equipment which might otherwise be overlooked. A
smaller manual lists the planets to be found in the
game's universe and their coordinates.

"Computer, Report!"
(The Game Interface)
The main game screen is composed of one central
screen surrounded by seven smaller "viewscreens."
When the player clicks on a screen (naturally, the ST
uses its mouse, but the IBM allows for mouse,
keyboard, or joystick), that screen becomes the central
(active) screen. Each of the seven main characters from
the television series (Kirk, Spock, Scotty, McCoy, Uhuru,
Sulu, and Chekov) has a specific function which can be
accessed by clicking on the screen. Captain Kirk's
portrait enables the player to use the captain's log,
save/load a game, evaluate ship's stores, or utilize the
transporter. Spock's portrait provides information on the
status of the ship, enemy vessels (during combat), and
planetary environment or regions of space. Naturally,
Scotty's portrait activates the engineering section,
McCoy's image represents medical functions/status,
Uhuru's picture calls up communications functions,
Sulu's icon involves navigation functions, and Chekov's
visage signals the use of weapons systems.

Recreation Deck
(Game Play)
Movement is important to solving the mystery and
travelling from planet to planet. By clicking on Sulu, the
player can select the ship's destination and set the
speed. Those tempted to travel at Warp 10 will soon discover that this can only be utilized for a short length of
time. The warning should definitely be heeded when
Scotty says, "If 'en we keep this speed, we'll blow up
an'na minit' now!" The Enterprise must be slowed or
the game will end abruptly.
Once a solar system has been entered, the solar system screen may be accessed from Sulu's caricature.
Clicking on a planet elicits a description from Spock. If
the planet is a "Life Supporting" planet, a landing party
may be beamed down. Of course, some of these
planets will aid in solving the mission and others will
hinder the mission. For example, one planet has
"Catastrophe Pods" which attach themselves to the ship

and take five weeks to mature thereupon. Should they
mature, they will burst, consume the ship, and devour
everything in it. There is only way to save the ship.
Note that most of the adventure will take place on
"Life Supporting" planets, but not all systems will have a
"Life Supporting" planet. Once the Enterprise enters
orbit around the planet, the player will hear Sulu's
digitized voice saying, "Now in standard orbit, sir." Now,
the captain's icon can be chosen in order to "enter" the
ship's stores and select equipment for the landing party.
Then, the party may be transported to the surface.
Once planetside, each crewmember will have certain actions they can perform. Only one of these actions will
successfully get the party past the obstacles they will encounter on these planets. These obstacles may be
doors or forcefields. Don't believe everything you hear
about them, however. For example, if Spock analyzes a
door and tells the Captain that it takes a Helix Gun to
open the door, the party can usually get past the door
by using a phaser blast.
Once the player is past the major obstacle, it is usually
possible to find one or two objects which will be needed
to complete the mission. Once these artifacts/objects
have been found, players have the option of "beaming"
the item up or taking the item with the party. Any items
that need to be installed in the Enterprise in order to be
operative will be automatically installed when the party
"beams up."
There are several planets that will aid in solving the
mission. First, the Enterprise can only receive special
help at planets aligned with the Federation. Would-be
Captain Kirks will need to find a Federation Weapons
Dump in order to replenish their supplies of photon torpedoes. In addition, it takes a Federation Energy
Refinery Planet to replenish all or part of the energy
needed for the impulse engines and a Federation
Dilithium Mining Planet is necessary for finding enough
dilithium crystals to operate the warp engines. There is
also a Repair Drone Dock which enables the damage to
the Enterprise to be repaired and a Planetary Supermind which causes all weapons in its system to be
rendered inactive and hence, offers a respite from combat.

Red Alert
(Combat Mechanics)
Combat occurs whenever enemy vessels enter the
same star system as the Enterprise is in. The first indication players have is the sound of the "Red Alert Klaxon"
and a detailed picture of the enemy vessel making an attack run. The annoying alert sound can be toggled off
by clicking on the red bar. Then, clicking on Chekov's
image brings up the combat screens. This is where the
game offers something of the flavor of an arcade game.
To enter combat, players must go to the "tracking grid"
and click on an approaching vessel. The vessel appears
on a combat screen with a crosshair imposed on it. This
is, in fact, the only time players will see vector graphics
in the game, because the enemy ships appear as vector
graphics during the combat routines. When the player
feels like the crosshair is correctly positioned in an optimal location over the enemy vessel, he simply clicks

the mouse button
and the digitized voice
of Chekov tells him
that he is "Locked on
target!"
Should the player
destroy the enemy,
Chekov will say "Got
'Em!" and the enemy
vessel will spin and
fade away. The
phasers have a limited
number of shots
before they have to
recharge and if they
are fired in rapid succession, there are
only four shots possible. Players have 50
photon torpedoes,
but these must be
replenished at a
Federation Weapons
Dump Planet. Also,
remember that, since
the enemy has
shields, it will usually
take several shots to
destroy his vessel.

Command
Briefing
(Strategy
and Hints)
Frankly, those who
get caught up in the
arcade sequences of
combat and simply
maneuver around
spoiling for a fight will
never finish the game
successfully. There are eight different ways to win the
game. This reviewer destroyed Dekian II. Other paths to
victory include: capturing or blackmailing the Klingon
admiral; delivering an antidote to rebel commanders
which makes them loyal Federation officers once again;
destroying the Klingon Psimitter or constructing a
Federation Psimitter; interrupting Klingon communications; or releasing a "peace virus."
The following are some tips which can be effective in
winning the game.
1) Make a checklist of planets using the booklet in the
documentation. Include a section for listing devices
found in a system and at what planet.
2) Some systems can only be reached by following a
specific path. Write down a list of systems you warp to,
in order to retrace your path to a particular system if
you should need to.

3) Make a separate list of Orbital Discontinuum systems, so you can quickly find them when you have to
get rid of Catastrophe Pods.
4) Save the game
often.

all you have to do is go to the Warp/Impulse drive
screen and warp out. You only need to warp out for a
few seconds in order to recharge phasers and rejoin the
battle. Just click on "Stop" in the Warp/Impulse drive
screen. Enemy ships will not warp out after you.

5) When doing battle, remember that
phasers have to
recharge. Use them
sparingly. Use your
four shots, then immediately switch to
Photon Torpedoes.
6) Find the following
items: Hotshot Device
(increases weapons
accuracy), Chaff Emitter (decreases battle damage),
Solar Scan Device (tells how many enemy ships are in a
system), and Cerenkov Crystal (gives more efficient use
of Dilithium Crystals). These items will help you survive
longer.
7) Finally, fight only when necessary! Don't look for a
fight. When you enter a system, immediately go to the
Star Globe screen and set course for another system.
Just don't execute that order immediately. That way,
should you be attacked and find yourself overwhelmed,

Captain's Recommendations
Overall, this can be described as an excellent adventure game for the ST. Though some will claim that it is
simply a "cosmic scavenger hunt," this reviewer feels
that it has enough action and puzzles to satisfy most adventure gamers. For those who are Star Trek fans,
there should be no question about the need to add this
game to your collection.

Sneak Preview 6 Interview

he little finger

b rushed across the
right arrow key,
while the other hand
jammed the shift key.
Michael Jordan brushed
past Larry Bird in a blur,
putting the ball to the
floor with the authority
that comes from being
the league's MVP. Bird
moved to recover position, but it was too late.
The thumb pressed
down on the "Insert/0"
key of the numeric
keypad. Jordan
launched into the air like
Superman leaping a
skyscraper. The thumb
released the "Insert/0"
key, just as Jordan
reached the apex of his
leap and released the
ball toward the basket
for a perfect swish.

Michael Jordan
and CGW Go

That's the way the oneon-one action of Larry
Bird and Michael Jordan Go One on One can
be played with the
keyboard. Of course, the
sequel to the hit arcade
game Dr. J. and Larry
Bird Go One on One
can also be played with
a joystick. In fact, the
game's non-celebrity
designers differ on the
preferred controllers.
Garth Hitchens, who did
most of the programming, prefers the
keyboard. Mark Madland,
who interfaces the
game's graphics and
game concepts, prefers
the joystick. Both require
a sense of rhythm. As in
"real" basketball, timing
is an essential aspect to
this game.
Yet, the new game offers a lot more than its ancestor (which
sold more than 400,000 units and rates as the number one bestselling computer sports game). The new incarnation still provides
such familiar features as the shattering backboard (albeit not as
frequently), but also provides: EGA color, capacity for playing on
both the older (slower) and newer (faster) processors, ability to
handicap the computer opponent for better solitaire play (four difficulty levels), smoother animation with more realistic graphics,
colorful animated crowd scene with personalities from other EA
hits (and a few surprises), a "rockin'" soundtrack by Rob Hubbard,
a "Boss Screen" that pauses the game, two specialized contests
("Slam Dunk" and "3-Point"), and the use of digitized photos with
congratulatory messages from the celebrities when the player
does something well in the specialized contests (the opposite of
Yeager's caustic quips in the Advanced Flight Trainer).

In fact, the one-on-one
game is good, smooth,
and playable, but it may
actually be the specialized contests that sell
this game. The "Slam
Dunk Contest" features
Michael Jordan, complete with knee pad and
sweatband. In fact, this
was the area where Jordan really came to life in
the design sessions. He
even added the "skin
your head" dunk and
some others to the
"dunks" available. In fact,
we know he added those
features because we interviewed him.
CGW: Michael, we saw
you play against the
Lakers at the Forum a
few months ago and and
the crowd cheered like a
bunch of Chicago fans
every time you got your
hands on the ball.
Michael Jordan: Well,
all over the league, they
give me respect. I think
that's because fans enjoying watching a person
play the game the way I
do.
CGW: We sure do.
Now, to start off this interview, we wondered if
you had played the
original Dr. J and Larry
Bird go One on One
computer game?

Michael Jordan: No.
So, I can't talk about the
original game, but the
new one looks like a pretty interesting game. I
never knew that games
existed with such details
and knowledge of the
game. I'm looking forward to getting my own machine and playing it.
CGW: Then, have you ever played any computer games and do
you have any favorites?
Michael Jordan: One of the "Bulls" has a golf game we like to
play.
CGW: Getting down to specifics, how would you defend against
Larry Bird in real life or in the game?
Michael Jordan: Against Larry Bird, I would have to play more
aggressively on the perimeter. I would get up close and make him
drive. I think I'm quick enough to play him pretty good on the
perimeter. I wouldn't let him get the outside shot. I'd take my
chances that way. Against myself, I would try to make myself take
the outside jump shot.

CGW: One of the interesting things about the game seems to
be that both yourself and Larry have a different style of play. It
would seem that this would make the game more interesting than
if you were both outside shooters or both liked to drive to the basket. Would you agree?
Michael Jordan: I think it is very interesting that each person in
the game has a weakness and a strength. Individuals playing the
game can either discover this by playing the game or by watching
Larry and myself play. The fun of it is when one individual can
stay away from the weakness
and stay with the strength or
force the other player to go
with the weakness and stay
away from the strength.
CGW: What is the best way to
defend the turnaround jumper?
Michael Jordan: Just hope
he's not hitting. (laughter) It's
pretty difficult, but you will want
to keep a hand in his face or a
hand in my face. It's pretty hard
to keep a player such as Larry
or myself from shooting the basketball once we get in a position to use a turnaround
jumper. Just try to keep a hand
in his face.
CGW: What are the "keys"
you look for in the defensive
player before you go to the basket?
Michael Jordan: I check his
footwork and see if his feet are
in a fundamentally sound position. I depend on my
knowledge of the game and
quickness to beat him and if
his footwork is sound, it is
much more difficult.
CGW: So, your eyes are on
his feet quite a bit?
Michael Jordan: Yes.
CGW: When playing the computer game, as Michael Jordan,
what do you feel is the best
strategy in going one on one?
Michael Jordan: As myself, I
feel you have to go for the
jump shot, first. Once the jump
shot is going well, that opens up all the rest of my game. I think
driving [to the basket] is my strength and if I can hit my weakness, which is my jump shot, then all the phases of my game will
be wide open.
CGW: Who are the three NBA players who play you toughest
on defense?
Michael Jordan: Joe Dumars of Detroit is number one; Michael
Cooper of the Lakers is second; and T. R. Dunn of Denver is third.
CGW: It has been said that, perhaps, you shoot too much. How
do you respond to that?
Michael Jordan: I think that's just the way that people perceived that one year when I averaged thirty-some points a game

and shot 28-30 times per game. I'm simply trying to fulfil my role
and contribute to my team the best way I can. At the present
time, that means more offense than anything. At the same time, I
think my shooting [number of shots per game] has gone down,
but I'm hitting over 53%, as well. I think those figures offer good
odds and the critics ought to consider those stats and the role I'm
supposed to play on my team, as well.
CGW: It's hard to argue with success, isn't it? Finally, with
regard to Electronic Arts and the production of this game, what
specific elements did you contribute that would not have been
there without your input?
Michael Jordan: First of all,
the shooting percentages and
my favorite shots from different
areas on the court. I told them
all of that. The dunking and all
of the different creative dunks
were developed in one of the
sessions. Certain one-on-one
moves, my weaknesses and
strong points from my
point-fvew,adlhsting
were points I tried to instill in
the game.
CGW: That's the end of our
prepared questions, but we
have one more. Now that the
Lakers have won back-to-back
championships, do you think
they can do it again or are you
going to knock them off?
Michael Jordan: It's possible
that they could do it again. I
think it's more mental than anything. They sure have a good
enough team to do to win the
World Championship, but it's
not physical anymore, it's all
mental. If they can prepare
themselves mentally for the challenge they have to face, they
could do it again. I'm not ruling
that out. I sure hope they don't.
I hope that we can win it next
year, but then, that's the challenge of the whole NBA.

Sneaky Return
to Preview
The "3-Point Contest" features Larry Bird attempting to empty
several bins of basketballs into the bucket from three-point
range during a limited time period.
Both games require the proverbial "split-second" timing, but in
this case, it is literally true. Both contests are animated at 13
frames per second. In the "3-Point Contest," the player must
release the ball within one of those frames (1/13th of a second)
for a perfect shot. In the "Slam Dunk Contest," the perfect shot
must occur within two frames (2/13th of a second) for a perfect
shot.
It is certainly to be expected that Michael Jordan and Larry Bird
Go One on One will find the same basic action-oriented audience
it found before, and then some. This new version of an old
familiar favorite is like getting three new games instead of one.

Computer Learning Month

October is Computer
Learning Month and Computer Gaming World is proud
to be one of the sponsors.
This annotated bibliography
is a supplement to the list
originally published in October, 1987 (#40). For those
who would like a photocopy
of the original list, simply
send a #10 stamped envelope to:
Computer Gaming World's
Educational Games List
P.O. Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566.
We will send it free of charge.

!

The Computer
As Tutor
Our Second Annual
Bibliography of Educational
Games

Stepping Stones
Compu-Teach $39.95
(Apple II, IBM, Macintosh)
Two products are offered in this series.
The first is an introduction to letters, numbers, and words. The second offers early
reading games and addition games. These
are primarily of the "Select the correct
answer" type games.

Tink's Adventure
Mindscape $19.95 (Apple
H, C-64/128, IBM)
This is the first in a series which teaches alphabet recognition, visual patterns, and
simple vocabulary. The format is not exactly
a game, but the look of the screen and the
instant feedback is similar. Other titles are
"Tonk in the Land of Buddy-Bots" and "Tuk
Goes to Town."

Primary Grades

Preschool

Ace Explorer
Mindplay $49.95 (Apple II)

ABC's
Polarware $14.95-$17.95 (Apple II,
C-64/128, IBM)

Along with "Ace Reporter and "Ace Detective," this is one
of a series of graphic text adventures that teach specific types
of reading comprehension. By creatively solving problems in
various stories, these products stimulate both writing and
reading skills.

Part of Polarware's "Electric Crayon" series, this product allows children to use a point and click interface in order to
"paint" pictures and learn the letters of the alphabet. Other
products in the series include "Fun On The Farm" and "This
Land Is Your Land."

Math Blaster Plus
Davidson $49.95 (Apple II, JIGS,
IBM)
Five different learning games based on an outer space
theme offer an incentive for children to master basic mathematical operations. In the "Blasternaut" game, students move
an animated astronaut to the correct answer to a mathematics problem displayed on the screen.

Counting Critters
Mindscape $39.95 (Apple II, IIGS)
In this game, animated "critters" fill the screen, the child/student counts the number of strange creatures, and he/she
enters the correct number. A similar approach is used with
"Knowing Numbers" and 'Shapes and Patterns," companion
products for the same age group. Laboratory packages are
available for teachers.

Once Upon A Time .. .
Compu-Teach $39.95 (Apple II,
JIGS, IBM, Macintosh)
This program enables primary grade children to design and
"publish" their own illustrated storybooks. Three story formats
are included with the package, "Main Street," "Farm," and
'Safari."

First Letters and Words
First Byte (EA) $30.00-$37.50
(Amiga, Apple IIGS, Atari ST, IBM,
Macintosh)

Reader Rabbit
The Learning Company $54.95$64.95 (Apple II, IIGS,
C-64/128, IBM)

Four different games and a talking (speech synthesized)
bear teach letters, keyboard positions, initial consonants,
upper and lower case, and simple vocabulary. 'Who Am I?"
(a guessing game which teaches initial consonants) and
"Dinosaur Surprise" (a game which teaches vocabulary by
completing pictures of dinosaurs) should prove most popular.
"First Shapes" is another title in the series.

Joshua's Reading Machine
Compu-Teach $39.95 (Apple II,
IIGS, IBM, Macintosh)
Joshua the giraffe, a cartoon-like character, is the host of
this reading comprehension program. The program uses nursery rhymes, children's songs, and classical fables to encourage better reading. Early screens are semi-rebus in nature, combining pictures, music, and text. The program
grows with the child by utilizing nine difficulty levels.

Math and Me
Davidson $39.95 (Apple II (128K),
JIGS ($49.95), IBM)
From learning about "Shapes," "Patterns," and "Numbers" to
"Beginning Addition," cute little monkeys lead children
through three different learning games per subject. The
games are established so that the program grows with the
child. The IIGS version uses digitized speech. "Reading and
Me" is available in the same series.

Mixed-Up Mother Goose
Sierra $29.95 (Apple IIGS, IBM)
Designed to be an early childhood adventure game, rather
than an educational product per se, this adventure for
youngsters (age three and older) combines two learning
goals: introducing children to the literature called nursery
rhymes and developing problem-solving skills. If the children
happen to enjoy themselves immensely, so much the better.

Four games in one product gently lead the child through a
200+ word vocabulary consistent with the early reading
program in most schools. The game screens look like arcade
games, but the players progress by means of letter, pattern,
and vocabulary recognition.

Mr. Rogers' Neighborhood: Many
Ways to Say I Love You
Mindscape $29.95 (Apple II, C64/128)

See The U.S.A.
Compu-Teach $49.95 (Apple II
(128K), IBM)

Think of this product as an early childhood creativity tool.
Children use the program to create personalized greeting
cards and learn to get in touch with their feelings.

This game recreates cross-country trips by means of geography quizes. The inclusion of a quiz editor enables the
game to be customized and updated so that it never grows
stale.

Richard Scarry's Best Electronic
Word Book Ever
Mindscape $29.95 (Apple H, C64/128)

The Spy's Adventures in North
America
Polarware $17.95-$19.95 (Apple II,
C-64/128, IBM)

Parents who enjoy reading to their children will probably
recognize the colorful characters from the fecund imagination
of Richard Scarry. The product teaches object recognition,
fosters word/object association, and builds basic vocabulary
through four levels of difficulty.

This is a graphic adventure series that teaches facts about
geography as children chase Dr. X. Torsion over various continents. One advantage of these products is the fact that the
games can be played with up to six different people.

Numbers Count
Polarware $14.95-$17.95 (Apple II
(128K), C-64/128, IBM)

Where in Europe is Carmen Sandiego?
Broderbund $39.95-$44.95 (Apple II
(128K), C-64/128, IBM)

The Count from Sesame Street is the master of ceremonies
for this product in the "Sesame Street Crayon" series. Other
basic concepts in learning are covered in "Letters For You"
and 'Opposites Attract."

The latest in the popular series, this game enables players
to chase clues about Carmen through 34 European
countries. The game even includes a special concise atlas
from Rand McNally.

Review

Working
On
Those
Knight
Moves
by David M. Wilson

T

he white knight fiercely slammed his shield into

his opponent's faceplate. His adversary reeled
backward, uselessly attempting to raise his shield
The white knight's sword clashed against the winded
foe's shield, knocking it momentarily aside. "Yield!" he
demanded. His rival dropped Wearily to his knees. "I
yield, Sir Knight," he conceded.
Swords, battle axes, quarterstaves, and maces are the
short range weapons available for Medieval dueling in
Mastertronic's Knight Games for the C-64/128. Those
inclined to take the ranged weapon approach can
choose between a crossbow or longbow competition.
Whatever the weapon selection, players have the
benefit of competing against either a computer or
human opponent. Frankly, the computer opponent is
tough enough that most players will be looking for
humans to challenge. Nevertheless, the game offers
both options.
Each event depicted offers a radically different background against which the duel takes place, but there is
a definite similarity to the arcade action. Whether the
knight is swinging a broadsword or a quarterstaff, the
character's movement remains the same. This is a
minor drawback, but the game is enough fun that one
can get beyond any dissatisfaction.
The battles do not require a great deal of coordination, but a sense of timing is important. A player can
win an occasional round by simply swinging his
weapon back and forth at a furious pace, but this will
prove to be the exception rather than the rule. In most
fights, it is effective for a player to step back several
times, wait for his opponent to draw back his weapon
to attack, and then, lunge forward and deliver the coup
de grace. While this strategy is often effective, it is highly recommended that it be reserved for that point when
the opponent is weakened and almost defeated (which
players can determine from a strength point display to
the right of the action screen).
Should a player defeat his opponent before the time

allotted to the round is over, he will be given a new opponent. This opponent is fresh and at full strength,
while the player's knight has just been in battle and
may even be wounded to the extent that he cannot
possibly win the battle. This adds a unique realism to the
game. In order to become the "Champion
Knight," the player's
knight will have had
to face well-rested
and unwounded opponents.
Of course, it isn't
quite as realistic
when it works the
other way. If a player
faces a tough opponent and has
knocked him down
to half-strength when
the player character
is "killed," a new
player character can
return as a fresh
knight and battle the
opponent's halfstrength knight. At
least, both knights
fall prey to the same

limitations.
In the archery contests, players are really only shooting against themselves and the
clock. Players simply position the crosshair
on the appropriate target and launch their arrows or bolts toward the bull's-eye.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

Players may choose between three different
PUBLISHER:
difficulty levels. The major factor involved is
the amount of time the player has to fight in
order to become champion. Each advance in
difficulty requires a proportionate advance in stamina
and endurance. There is very little difference in the
computer opponent's skill level (if any).
Knight Games
will probably
prove more
popular with the
younger teen set
because of its
ease of play,
rousing score
(the box calls it
Medieval "Rock
Music" and it
sounds good to
this reviewer's
ears), and the
multitude of
weapon choices
available. Of
course, adult fans of action games will want to try it for
some of the same reasons.
Knight Games is proof positive that budgetware
doesn't have to be garbageware.

Knight Games
C-64/128
1-2
$9.95
Colin Brown,
Phillip Morris, and
Jon Williams
Mastertronic
Costa Mesa, CA

Field Trip

Fantastic Voyages
A Tour Inside the fast-growing
Entertainment Industry
The New Hollywood
Trip Hawkins, founder and CEO of
Electronic Arts, expanded upon his
vision of "The New Hollywood" during the
Spring Symposium of the Software
Publishers Association in March of
1988. He posited a bright future when the
macs market will discover entertainment
software, a new era with a cross-fertilization of creative talent from around the
world, an expanding horizon of huge technical advances in everything from processors, storage, and interface, and a vibrant
community where artists are recognized
and appreciated. "Entertainment is one of
the biggest differences between us and
the apes," the charismatic entrepreneur
reminded the software industry and
promised that a future is coming where
" .. the tail will wag the dog." Hawkins firmly believes that an era will come when the
hardware companies will cater to the
software corporations, instead of viceversa (the present situation).
With such a vision in our minds, the
editorial staff at CGW embarked on a
whirlwind tour of many of the software
companies. We felt a need to see the
work environments of these new entertainment studios; to find out what kinds of artist communities these publishing companies are; and get an idea of where the
industry is headed. This multi-part series
is intended to take our readers "Inside
The Industry" and provide some picture of
what it is like to work for a software
publisher.
At Electronic Arts, the emphasis is
upon community. Everyone from Trip
Hawkins and the corporate vice-presidents on down through the corporate
structure use ubiquitous cubicles for their
office space. Even Trip's own Mercedes
does not have an assigned parking space.
The intended purpose of this "no frills" approach is to create a corporate structure
that is open and accessible.
The company emphasizes the fact that it
is a culture. As a culture, each employee
pledges to uphold the value system. "The
Values," as the corporate ideals are
referred to, include: teamwork, integrity,
vision, innovation, quality, and achieve-

ment. There is even a culture club (no
relation to the popular rock group) to enhance the sense of community with creative methods of employee interaction. Besides the "Doers Profiles" on cubicle walls
(a spoof on the Dewar's Profiles in the
liquor ads where people tell about their
hobbies, interests, and recent activities),
the club sponsors off-site outings as a
means of encouraging interaction. One
producer confided to CGW that where
most programmers seem to live on pizza
and soft drinks, EA was the first software
company he had worked at where there
were lots of people interested in fine food
and beverage. Other employees suggested that they loved the impromptu
company videos. CGW was privileged to
enjoy an in-house video called RoboRuth,
a clever spoof on RoboCop in which their
facilities supervisor was the cyborg
protagonist. In fact, company meetings
are held every Friday and offer a chance
to let off steam, socialize and network, as
well as become enthused about the future. Attendees shouldn't be surprised at
anything that happens, whether it should

be an impromptu awards ceremony or a
nerfball fight.
One of our goals at several of the companies was to meet the folks in the Customer Support Departments. Usually
nestled adjacent to the Testing/Quality Assurance departments, these patient a personable individuals are the ones whose
voices our readers hear when they phone
in for Bard's Tale III hints, disk replacements, or compatibility problems. Paulette
Doudell is the person in charge of customer support for EA. She is a vivacious
individual with a huge cache of entertaining stories. She told CGW of one of her
phone answerers who kept giving hints to
the same individual over and over. In fact,
even after the individual had finished the
game, he kept calling the customer support line to talk with this young lady. The
customer actually proposed marriage to
the EA employee over the phone.
Disk replacement is also a popular
source of humorous material. Disks can
be damaged in the most incredible ways.
For example, the company has replaced

and visual anecdotes about EA's leadership involves a recent earthquake. It
seems that Trip Hawkins felt the earth
rocking and rolling; glanced over the top
of his cubicle; stepped up on his chair;
and proceeded to raise his fist in the air
and shout, "Go, Earth, Go!" Whether fearless or foolish, there was Mr. Hawkins with
the earth shifting beneath his feet and raising his voice to cheer the elements.
That's quite an image!

A Bold New World
Some software companies are huge entities which began with a diversified
product line. Others are largely the outgrowth of one man's vision. New World
Computing began with one product, one
vision, and one programmer. The company, one of Mediagenic's Affiliated
Publishers, is founded on Jon Van
Caneghem's popular creation, Might and
Magic. Now, it is a haven for gamers, a
womb of creativity for board game designers and computer programmers to interact.
The work hours are not structured and
management doesn't have to worry about
getting work out of the employees. In
fact, Ron Spitzer finds himself having to
be as concerned about the employees'
nutritional and rest habits as he is about
business matters and product concerns.
Even after the company Might and Magic
built acquired Task Force Games, the
board game company most noted for
Star Fleet Battles, there is a desire among
the principals at New World that the
workplace stay loose, friendly, and creative.
everything from an Adventure Construction Set damaged in a midwestern flood
to a mutilated Seven Cities of Gold disk
eaten by a dog.
On the business side, Eric Walter is the
Vice-President of Operations. In addition
to overseeing typical accounting procedures, Eric's department makes certain
that the raw materials necessary for
product and packaging are in the pipeline
when needed. Although the company
makes its products for personal computers, the computer that is foundational
for the business end of the company is its
HP 3000 (68 series) which had assisted in
the shipping of more than $150,000,000
in merchandise.
On the technological side, EA has always been excited about new innovation.
One of the most exciting developments
on the horizon is Compact Disk - Interactive. Greg Riker is the lead man for that
concept at Electronic Arts and seems to
have a tremendous handle on what that
technology is going to do in the industry.
Since CD-I is a design specification rather

than a specific machine, any hardware
company could build one. Hence, this
may be the best chance yet for hardware
standardization of an interactive entertainment device. Like many in the industry,
Riker believes Christmas, 1989 is not an
unrealistic delivery point for the first few
CD-I machines and is gearing up his unit
to be ready for that contingency. Although many of the products presumed
under development cannot be revealed,
CGW was impressed with the development system Riker has put together.
Rick Tiberi is the CD-I program organizer at EA. He is in charge of creating
development tools in an object-oriented
programming environment that will eventually allow the team to cut development
time in half. We were impressed by Rick's
"Runtime Interpreter" which actually let his
code run without being compiled. Greg
and Rick are just two of the men who are
trying to make the company slogan, "We
See Farther!" as true today as it was when
the corporation was founded.
We think that one of the most insightful

Like the larger corporations, New World
has had its share of customer support
headaches. In fact, everyone takes turns
on the customer support lines. As for updates, the company found that the
original C-64 version of Might and Magic
had a programming problem that actually
made the game easier to play. Some dedicated gamers wanted an update which
made the game tougher, so the company
offered a update for $1.00. The company
filled a large five gallon bottle with the dollar bills from that offer, allegedly for a company picnic or some other communal activity.
In another similarity to the larger corporations, New World is under the intense pressure to expand its product line.
Might and Magic II was a given, but the
company hired new programmers to work
on a game originally titled Project X and,
later, entitled Space: The Game. With the
company's intent to publish a computer
version of Tunnels & Trolls and
Nukewar!, the space project is on a back
burner. Yet, the important fact is clear.
New World Computing is expanding.

On the day CGW visited New World's
fast growing facility, the company was
eagerly awaiting the delivery of the Task
Force Games inventory and remodeling.
We questioned Spitzer about the logic of
acquiring a board game company. The
company executive admitted that the
potential profits from Task Force are miniscule, but suggested that the company
would serve its parent company well by al-

lowing board game development to be a
"proving ground for systems." Asked
directly about possible computer versions
of Task Force board games, Spitzer
replied that games like BattleWagon, a
game of naval warfare, and Grand Army
of the Republic would make interesting
computer games, but there were absolutely no plans for doing straight board game
to computer game conversions.

From Here To Cinemaware
Bob Jacob is a former software agent. In
that role, he warned designers against
software publishers " . . . who have
adopted a 'wait and see' attitude toward
the Macintosh and the Amiga." (CGW 5.1
(February, 1985), p. 18). He continued to
push the issue by stating in that same article, "There's no time to wait for trends.
You've got to create trends and hope
you're right."
Since writing that article for us, Bob has
gone on to form Cinemaware, a company that embodies the philosophy he
laid out in the pages of COW. Today,
Cinemaware is known for visually and
aurally stimulating the 16-bit world. Nevertheless, the company is not standing still.
True to its name, the company is building
upon its cinematic roots, hiring cross-over
talent, and attempting to prepare for the
next technological challenge.
When CGW visited Cinemaware, we
were told that the programmers had
flexible hours. Even though Bob Jacob
guided our tour through the company's
facility, he was not certain which
employees were going to be "in-house" at
that particular time. Our first stop was an
office where we were introduced to Mike
Knox and Peter Oliphant, who were working on an IBM development system for
graphics. The project is a method of writing one code for all graphics cards.
Curiously enough, in keeping with
Cinemaware's entertainment industry
roots, Peter Oliphant was a child television
star. Those who watched the Dick Van
Dyke Show would remember him as
Ritchie's friend, Freddie.
Our next stop was an office where we
visited with John Cutter and Larry Garner.
John has the distinction of being
Cinemaware's first employee. His name
is listed in the credits of nearly every
Cinemaware release as producer. Larry
will be familiar to Cinemaware fans as
the mastermind behind the video compression schemes utilized by the company. Together, these two are working on
NFL TV Football for the Amiga (which
was described in our Consumer
Electronics Show report in the July issue).
Wayne Brockman is the Apple guru who
does the primary IIGS and Macintosh
work for the company. Currently, Wayne
is working on the company's Disney
license for Duck Tales. One interesting
technique in the preparation of this
product is the use of Hypercard for
storyboarding the story ideas. By storing
digitized video-taped animation cells from
Disney's own camera-ready art, the game
designers can quickly observe a mini(Continued on page 59)

Review

Rocket Ranger
Saves the
World!
n the '50s and early '60s, a dime could buy a passport to
a full Saturday afternoon of adventure, fantasy and terror
(the local Saturday kiddie matinee no doubt struck terror
in the hearts of theater managers and ushers everywhere!).
That tenth of a
dollar would get
you the main feature, previews,
three cartoons
and "The Saturday Afternoon
Serial." These
were the times of
Zorro, Gene
Autry and Commando Cody.

I

TITLE:

Rocket Ranger

The people at
Cinemaware
must have spent
many Saturday
afternoons in the
dark because
they've chosen to
recreate those
memories with
Rocket Ranger.
So, as they used
to say, "Return
with us now to
those golden days of yesteryear," as
Rocket Ranger flies again!

Rocket Ranger is an action/adventure game with the accent on action
and absolutely stunning graphics and
sound. Cinemaware has managed to
capture the feel of the old movie serials and translate it to
the computer in slick fashion. Initially released on the
Amiga, Rocket Ranger uses a joystick and keyboard with a
secondary mouse optional.

clock, master most of the eight action sequences and hope
for a good deal of luck before you'll be able to kiss the girl
and hang up that rocket pack.

GOOSESTEPPERS
KIDNAP PROFESSOR!
The game starts with you at Fort Dix. The Nazis have kidnapped Professor Barnstorff and his daughter, Jane. If the
Germans can get the Professor to Germany, they'll stick him
on a rocket, fly him to the moon, increase the efficiency of
their lunarium processing operation, and conquer the world
faster than you can say, "Heil, Hitler!"
The war room at Ft. Dix features a map of the world with
the Nazi zeppelin fleet superimposed over different
countries. From here, you run your spy network. As the
fleet moves over a country, it bombards it into submission
(turning the country a dark brown on the map). The fleet
then proceeds to the next country on its random "hit list"
and so on. While this is going on, you place icons of your
agents in the countries you want infiltrated. Spies can adopt
a high or low profile, running risks accordingly. When a spy
icon flashes, it has a message to report. This information
may pinpoint a rocket part, give clues, highlight Nazi industry to be eliminated (slowing down the German fleet's efficiency), or show the country as clean. Once the initial
report is in, the spy may either move to another country or
organize resistance in the current location.
If resistance is organized, the Nazi fleet will have to spend
extra months trying to conquer that country. The time purchased by this effort just might mean success in stopping
the German horde. Once the country goes over to your
side, the map colors it a lighter shade of brown, enabling
you to tell at a glance how you are doing in relation to the
Nazis and where you must yet go. If a lunarium base or
rocket part is uncovered, the appropriate icon appears in
the country.
Also, a date in the upper left corner of the display seems
to speed along at an unfair rate. Though spending lots of
time in the war room seems like the perfect way to plot
strategy, you could be arrested for cowardice for staying too
long (twelve months). So, it's off to gather some rocket
parts.
The game comes with a decoder wheel which tells how
much fuel you must load into your rocket pack to get to
your destination. Once loaded, you move to the first of the
action screens, the take-off. You use the joystick to control
your foot speed and take off when everything is in perfect
alignment. This isn't terribly difficult, but it gets harder with
a heavier load of fuel. Once into the air, the screen displays
a map of the world with pins marking your progress across
it (as in serials imitated by Indiana Jones).

The game's premise is that the Nazis actually won World
War II. So, freedom fighters from the future have beamed
equipment back in time to help you prevent the Nazis from
conquering the world. Armed with a rocket pack, radium pistol, wrist radio and decoder wheel, you must find five rocket
parts hidden throughout the world, assemble them, load
500 units of lunarium (rocket fuel), and fly to the moon.
There, you'll do battle with Nazi female stormtroopers and
other assorted nasties.

Once you get to a rocket-part location, you have to fight a
German guard in hand-to-hand combat. The joystick controls the kind of punch you throw and its location. The
sound effects in this sequence are really great! A body
punch really sounds different from a jawbreaker and after a
few punches you really get into the fight.

To help you find the rocket parts, you have five secret
agents that can infiltrate various countries, gather clues and
organize underground resistance to slow down the German
zeppelin fleet. Time is of the essence. You need to beat the

If you choose to try and slow down the Nazi war machine
with a spoiling raid, your opponents will be Me 109s. You
get to use your radium pistol on these boys and they don't
always fly in close formation. The joystick controls vertical

HERO KO'S KRAUT GUARD!

and horizontal movement, while the fire button sends a
steady stream of green death at the enemy. When hit, the
Messerschmitts literally go down in flames, a truly beautiful
sight for sore eyes. Successful raids knock German efficiency down five to ten percent.
If you rescue the professor and his daughter, you face the
Nazi zeppelin and its aerial torpedoes. Dodging torpedoes
while taking out the gondola gunners requires extraordinary
precision. After all, you do know what zeppelins are filled
with . . . hydrogen. Be prepared to watch a replay of the Hindenberg a few times before you get the hang of this.
Your trips around the world will invariably burn up most of
the lunarium you start the game with. This means your
spies must (along with everything else) uncover some other
sources of the stuff. Once fuel depots are discovered, you
need to raid them. In South America, you'll have to crack
an Aztec temple complete with machine gun ports and in
the desert, you must get by anti-aircraft batteries.
An easier way to gather fuel is to have your agent organize
resistance in the country that has the lunarium. They will, in
turn, ship it to you on a monthly basis. This is the safe way
to go, but the shipments are slow and small.
Once the rocket is assembled, it's off to the moon where
beautiful and voluptuous female stormtroopers with guns
await you. There are lots of them and they move fast. Once
past them, it's on to the final showdown and a world free
from Nazi threats.

ALLIES UNVEIL
VICTORIOUS STRATEGY!
Warning: The following dossier is highly classified and
contains specific hints about possible victorious strategies.
Garners should avoid this section until a need to know
arises.
First, pull your agent out of Germany. It is useless trying
to organize resistance there and he is needed elsewhere.
Putting one agent in South America, two or three in
Africa/Middle East, and one in Europe seems most efficient.
Wait for your agents to report. Then, have them organize
resistance in their respective countries. That is usually the
best use of your agents: report and organize. The zeppelin
fleet must be slowed. Since you'll probably only have time
and fuel for three trips out of Fort Dix, use them wisely.
After the first wave of reports comes in and resistance is
being organized, load your tanks with all the fuel at Fort Dix
and go back to the war room. Any wasted effort or poor use
of time in this game will beat you, so efficiency counts.
Once back in the war room, send your agents to new
countries for infiltration and take off. Where you go
depends on what your agents find.
In spite of the game's manipulation, don't try and rescue
the professor and his daughter! The screens are humorous
and the zeppelin fight is fun, but you use too much time.
By the time you return to the war room, the Nazis have
usually conquered four to six countries and you will probably run out of time.
When fighting the Messerschmitts, stay high in the
you fly low you'll be hit by flack and lose a couple of
months, time you don't have to spare.

air. If

You'll probably develop your own style of fisticuffs when it
comes to beating the Nazi guards, but pretty good success
comes by throwing repeated uppercuts, mixed in with an oc-

casional left jab or
body punch. When
the guard covers up,
(Rope-a-dope), wait till
he drops his guard
and then let him have
it.

COMPUTER
DOUBLES
AS TIME
MACHINE!
What is it like to play
this game? It really is
like taking a trip back
to that darkened
theater of your
memories. The visual
screens are like
digitized scenes right
out of those old
serials we used to
watch. When you signal for help on your
wrist radio, you get
the RKO tower,
broadcasting signals
over the airwaves,
just as it did in the
start of every RKO
movie of the period.
Cinemaware is the
perfect company to
have done this
product. Playing
Rocket Ranger is like
living the experience
of the old serials.
This is intensified by the fact that Bob Lindstrom's musical
score matches the action in quality and feel throughout the
game. The gang at Cinemaware really get an A+ in these
departments.
Now, for the down side. This game is tough! Let me
repeat that, tough! That's not necessarily bad, but there is
no save-game feature on Rocket Ranger and it's very easy
to die in this game. The game can be played in about an
hour, but if you die in the latter stages, it's start over from
the beginning time. This can get to be frustrating about the
thirtieth time you play it. We talked with the publisher about
the lack of a save-game feature and were told that their
philosophy is that a game that takes less than an hour to
finish shouldn't have a save-game ability. It makes it too
easy to win. There's some truth to that, but save-game features are standard in today's market. This feature would
help to avoid the frustration that builds in this game as one
has to repeatedly replay the early sequences in their entirety.
If a person did win easily by utilizing the save-game feature,
he could always come back to the game and attempt to win
it without using the save-game option.
Beyond the arcade sequences and the difficulty mastering
all of them, there are several random elements that can
sometimes appear to make victory even more unattainable.
For example, high profile agents in an occupied country
(Continued on page 54)

Video Gaming World

Video Gaming World
ago with its classic coin-op,
Karate Champ. The idea was
to duplicate the wide variety
of hand and foot blows possible within the karate format.
The player-character fought
one opponent at a time
against a non-scrolling background consisting of the
referee and a small crowd of
onlookers.

Video
Gaming
World's
Newswire
Compiled by Joyce Worley
The chip shortage continues to hold the videogame
industry in a vicelike grip. In
some cases, new products
promised for Autumn have
been postponed until next
year. A chip rationing system
set up by Nintendo for thirdparty software manufacturers
will permit each company to
release up to five videogame
titles during the next year.
For most companies, this
means one or two before
Christmas, with the balance
of their designs postponed
until Spring 1989, or even
later. There will still be plenty
of games available for the
holiday buying season, this
year, but some popular titles
are in short supply. So, when
retailers sell out, it may take
time for them to obtain new
stock . . . Konami has
formed a fully-owned subsidiary, Ultra Games. Their
first release for NES is Metal
Gear, to be followed by Skate
or Die! from the Electronic
Arts' computer game. Next
spring's releases are Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles, based
on the comic book of the
same name, and the most
ambitious graphic translation
from a computer game to
date, Cinemaware's
Defender of the Crown, both
for the Nintendo system . . .
Activision is expected to
release Ghostbusters on the
NES in October. In the
game, players start with
$10,000 and an Ectomobile.
Then, they purchase equipment to overcome slimers,
roamers, and, of course, a
giant Marshmallow Man.
Among the tools available for
ghosthunters with the bucks

are Super Traps, Anti-Ghost
Suit, Ghost Vacuum, Ghost
Traps, Sound Generator,
Alarm, Hyper Beams, and
Capture Beams . . . According to Toys-R-Us buyer, Hal
Seidel, Tradewest's Double
Dragon sold out in its first
two weeks on sale. This martial arts title was a runaway
coin-snatcher in Japan and
reached U.S. play-for-pay parlors in April of 1987. It features twin brothers, martialarts champs, fighting
together to rescue a kidnapped girlfriend (isn't there
always a helpless frail in these
contests?), and combat with
knives, whips, bats, rocks, oil
drums, and explosives. The
characters traverse varied city
and country terrain until they
reach the surprising final confrontation against the gang
boss . . . Absolute Entertainment has a new skateboard
game for the 7800, Super
Skateboardin' is a redevelopment of their current Atari
2600 title, Skate Boardin'.
The new game is said to take
advantage of the enhanced
graphics capability of the
Atari 7800, with added complexities. A second offering
for the Atari 7800 is F-18
Hornet, designed by John
Van Ryzin. This fighter-jet

contest with 3-D flight
graphics casts the gamer as
pilot from take off through
training, assaults, bombing
missions, and supply drops
to the ultimate landing on an
aircraft carrier . . . The
famous Wico Red Ball Joystick (compatible with Sega
and Atari videogames, plus
Commodore computers)
was voted garners' favorite by
a margin of 7-to-1 in a
recent survey. At $20-25, it's
still a good buy. An updated
version, the Command Control Super Three-Way Joystick lets the gamer toggle between 8-way and 4-way control, and switch between
three handle styles, for $25.

The Furious
Fists of Sega!
A Trio of
Martial Arts Games
by Bill Kunkel, Joyce
Worley, and Arnie Katz
Somewhere along the line
of the development of martial
arts arcade games, the emphasis passed almost entirely
from the "arts" to the "martial."
Data East started the kicks
and chops flying several years

The sophisticated control
system allowed the user access to an amazing range of
realistic maneuvers, from
spinning reverse kicks to somersaults, chops, and thrusts.
Watching a skilled Karate
Champ player in full cry was
an amazing experience. It
was as though one were observing the on-screen characters engaged in a bare-hands
battle royale as thrilling as a
Bruce Lee movie.
Unfortunately, though
Karate Champ inspired
several clones, it was Data
East's follow-up, Kung Fu,
that became the prototype
for the vast majority of subsequent martial arts games.
Kung Fu was different from
Karate Champ in two crucial
ways: it greatly simplified the
combat system and it introduced multiple opponents.
All three martial arts games
from Sega stress these two
factors and none are interested in seriously simulating
any form of Oriental combat.
Black Belt and Kung Fu Kid
are straight ahead imitators
of Kung Fu, while The Ninja,
strictly speaking, is not a martial arts game at all, but an
action-adventure that uses
shuriken (ninja stars) instead
of bullets, fireballs, or
thunderbolts.
Black Belt is the most traditional martial arts game of
the three. The player-character fights an increasingly
deadly gamut of opponents
in a horizontally scrolling
run-the-gauntlet contest. Combatants are realistically

depicted from a side-view.
Game level, power level,
score, and time elapsed are
displayed at the top of the
screen.
There is even a plot, even if
it is the time-honored one
where your girlfriend has
been kidnapped and you
must beat up a bunch of
weird fighters to get her
back. This epic theme obviously struck the instruction
booklet writers as so literary
that they decided to break
the game into "chapters" instead of "levels."

the role of Wang, who is seeking revenge against Matanda,
billed as "the unnatural evil
one" in the unintentionally
hilarious instructions.
Whether it is Matanda or his
evil that is unnatural is never
really explained, however.
Kung Fu Kid also uses a
horizontally-scrolling side
perspective, but here the
characters are tiny and cartoon-like, rather than realistic.
This is just as well, since the

Black Belt, at least, attempts to distinguish among
the various types of Oriental
combat. Some enemy
fighters are designated "kung
fu" practitioners, while others
employ "jujitsu" techniques.
This is a welcome change in
a genre that generally
regards "karate" and "kung
fu" as synonyms.
Kung Fu Kid has the same
basic "orient"-ation as Black
Belt, but the simple action is
almost overwhelmed by the
incredibly contrived playmechanics. The player takes

The Ninja, as mentioned
above, is a different type of
game entirely. The playercharacter does not engage in
hand-to-hand combat, but
wards off a wide range of attackers with sharp-edged
ninja stars (called "darts" in
the instructions). As the
enemies—wielding swords,
shuriken, sickles, fire breath,

The action moves, literally,
in several directions as the
player attempts to reach and
penetrate Ohkami Castle in
search of the villainous
Gyokuro. Along the way,
there is a grassy field, a cliff
area, prairie, a shrine, river
bank (with a great action
river ride on rolling logs),
town streets, a small town,
Samurai area, a great stone
wall, terrace, and the massive
castle itself (which, in turn, is
subdivided into three sectors).
The Ninja is easily the most
entertaining of Sega's three
martial arts titles. It is disturbing, however, that the
videogame systems as a
whole have so ignored real
karate, kung fu, and judo
simulations. Here's hoping
Sega or Nintendo will address this weakness by
producing (or licensing in
Nintendo's case), Data
East's excellent Karate
Champ.

There are six levels/chapters
with opponent classes divided
into Small and Large
Enemies. The Small Enemies
are: "Chinese Kung Fu Men,"
"Wrestlers," "Jujitsu Men,"
"Eagles," and, unbelievably,
"Black Women." The Big
Enemies have names like
"Ryu," "Gonta," and "Wang."
In their defense, however, the
designers probably did not intend to be offensive. It simply
seems that this booklet was
as badly translated from
Japanese as most Sega
documentation. Someday,
perhaps, Sega will pay someone who speaks English as a
primary language to go over
its instructions.
As with most Kung Fu-style
games, there are only two
types of offensive and two
kinds of defensive moves
available to the player-character: he can punch or kick on
offense and squat or jump
on defense. The rest of the
game consists of the endless
repetition of these moves
against a farrago of strangelooking opponents.

quire superpower and efficiency to help you destroy the
enemies." A lobster?!?

Until then, we must be satisfied with punches, kicks, and
giant lobsters. Lobsters?!?
TITLE:
Metal Gear
SYSTEM:
Nintendo
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Ultra Games

plotline and game devices
are so bizarre any attempt at
realism would be predestined
to failure.
One of this game's "innovations" is the use of a "talisman" as an all-purpose offensive weapon. There are two
types: regular and super, and
these can be used to defeat
certain enemies. If that
doesn't make sense, let's let
the instructions explain it:
Your talisman can be found
hanging in the air when
you're attacking enemies . . .
You are allowed to throw
your talisman 99 times
during the game . . . Now
the talisman will bring down
different numbers of enemies.
If this doesn't make much
sense, it isn't any more logical within the game itself.
The player's talisman can become a Super Talisman
during round 2, because " . .
. a lobster will appear on
screen. When you strike it
down, your talisman will ac-

spears, and bare hands—are
dispatched, they disappear.
Occasionally, they yield up a
scroll in their place. These
scrolls enhance the playercharacter's power in various
ways.
The enemies are the usual
rogues' gallery of ever-deadlier assassins, but The Ninja
offers a new wrinkle: certain
ninjas have the uncanny
ability to imitate rocks! Some
rocks are just stones, but
others transform themselves
into deadly ninja at the playercharacter's approach.
The Ninja does use an interesting visual perspective,
however. It utilizes a scrolling
overhead and slightly rear
view. This point of view works
nicely in terms of following
the action and the realistic
graphics have only one
serious weakness: ugly dotpatterns are overlaid onto the
various locations and give
much of the game a tacky
look.

U

ltra Games promises
to be a major player
in the Nintendo
market for the next year or
so. The roster of coming
releases (see Newswire)
seems imposing. Their first
release, Metal Gear, is something less than a total success, despite its strong concept.
In Metal Gear, the player is
cast as a Rambo-style oneman commando, hot on the
heels of a heel named
Colonel Vermon Ca Taffy
(presumably a play on
"Khadaffi") and his Elite
Scum Squad. Ca Taffy has
developed a new super
weapon, known only as
"Metal Gear," which the
player must locate and
neutralize.
Metal Gear is driven, as its
name implies, by equipment.
The player-character, codenamed Solid Snake, starts
out with nothing but a
Transceiver to send and
receive messages with Commander South (presumably a
play on former . . . well, you

know) at Fox Hound's HQ.
Why he wasn't supplied with
even a handgun is something of a mystery, but the
Transceiver does come in
handy, since Commander
South provides helpful information on the whereabouts
of weapons and enemies, if
the player uses the correct frequency. This information is
transmitted at the start of the
game.
Along the way, all manner
of weapons and equipment
can be collected by Solid
Snake. These are found in
enemy trucks and
storehouses (or simply confiscated from an enemy by
force). Weapons include practically everything from a Beretta M92F (and silencer) to
radio-controlled missiles.
Equipment runs from bomb
blast suits and body armor to
infrared goggles and universal antidote.
The game scrolls in all directions, but Solid Snake can
only move from one screen
to another by means of one
of the roads. In addition to
the angled, overhead display,
the playscreen includes
readouts on Snake's vital
signs, rank (finding and rescuing prisoners nets automatic
promotions), Transceiver callsignal, weapon in use, ammunition remaining, and
equipment in use.
The graphics are acceptable, but there are flaws. For
example, Snake cannot
move behind objects like
jeeps and it is often necessary for him to fumble
around the outside of trucks
looking for the entrance
point. This problem is worsened by the player's poor
control over Snake. Controller pad movement is extremely jerky, making the narrow twists and turns Snake
must travel even tougher to
navigate.
It is also very frustrating to
start out in a game like this
without a weapon of any
kind. Fortunately, Snake
throws a pretty good punch
and the Scum Squad members he encounters early in
the game are such cretins
that they announce, in full

voice, "I'M GETTING
SLEEPY!" while they stand
guard. Even so, a game
should become more difficult
as the player progresses. It
should certainly not begin at
the most challenging point in
the learning curve. Although
Metal Gear does become
progressively more difficult,
the player can compensate
by acquiring more weapons
and equipment. Snake is
never more vulnerable than
when he is without weapons
or protective equipment
during the game's opening
moments.
Snake wields his plundered
weapons, when he eventually
finds some, through a fairly
simple system. The player
just hits the Select button to
use one of Snake's high-tech
gizmos. This freezes all action
on-screen (in fact, all characters temporarily disappear)
and invokes a menu from
which the player chooses
weapons, equipment, or
transceiver. The first two options bring up a sub-menu
with icons representing all
items in that inventory and
the player chooses among
them. Calling up the
transceiver produces a closeup graphic of that worthy
communications device,
along with a printout of any
messages.
Games can be saved using
the laborious Nintendo
Password System. The
user enters a password
(through a point-and-click
process using an on-screen
alpha-numeric keyboard) to
save a game in progress. Lip
to four games can be
recorded in this way.
Metal Gear shows much
promise for future Ultra
Games entries. It attempts to
move beyond the standard
run/jump/shoot format
favored by the vast majority
of NES software publishers. It
also exploits the desire of the
player to acquire newer, deadlier technology through the
course of a game. These
strengths combine to make
Metal Gear a potential superhit that, unfortunately, is
sabotaged by its own weaknesses.
—Bill Kunkel

them until it's too late. That zeppelin fleet just doesn't quit.
When these things happen, it's time to reboot. Believe me,
in game 31 or 32, you don't want to see these things happen. If even a one-time save-game feature had been included, it could eliminate the frustration that the game
fosters. For maximum challenge, one could always play
without using it and have the best of both worlds.

(Continued from page 47)

run the risk of being killed, as they should be. Sometimes,
though, low risk agents also die, even in neutral countries.
Some of this is reasonable, but what about when you lose
two or three agents in the first few months of the game.
When that happens, it's time to reboot and start over. The
lunarium bases and rocket parts are randomly placed in
countries every game and it is imperative that the lunarium
bases be found early. Sometimes, your agents won't find

Can this game be recommended? Yes! It blends action
and strategy nicely and supports an entertaining game with
wonderful graphics and sound. However, because of the
lack of a save-game feature, be prepared to be frustrated
and die often.
Rocket Ranger will take you back in time to the serials of
your memories and release the kid in us all to once more
sail popcorn boxes at a flickering screen.

Announcing

Computer Gaming
World's
1988 Game of the
Year Awards
Pirates
Panzer Strike

Wasteland

Dungeon Master
Empire

Computer Gaming World presented our 1988
Game of the Year Awards over Labor Day
Weekend at the Gateway Convention in
Los Angeles. Next issue will feature a full report
with the winners and photos.

Taking A Peek

the enemy. Atari ST ($44.95) and IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #6.
PLATOON: Just as the film hits the
video-tape stores and pay television
channels, the computer game also
comes to your home screen. This action
game, originally designed by European
software publisher Ocean, follows the
plotline of the film. There are six basic
sections or scenarios, including the
betrayal. The measurement of "morale"
is an innovative feature for an arcade
game. Atari ST ($44.95), C-64/128
($29.95), and IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #7.
VICTORY ROAD: This is a sequel to
Ikari Warriors. The weapons are similar
and the graphics are, too. The villains
have been changed to offer the same
types of gameplay in a different environment. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #8.

DigiTek, Inc.
10415 N. Florida Ave.
Suite 410
Tampa, FL 33612
JOE BLADE: This squat-looking G.I.
Joe must escape Crax Bloodfinger's
stronghold (127 screens) and rescue the
six hostages imprisoned therein. Think
of it as a 16-bit Castle Wolfenstein.
Amiga ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #9.

Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
Redwood City, CA 94063
FINAL ASSAULT: This action game
features the strategy of mountain climbing, even down to the equipment to
choose for weather conditions and type
of slope. The game offers impressive
graphics and a viewpoint through the
climber's sunglasses. Different routes,
marked by familiar ski slope icons, indicate the difficulty levels. Next time someone tells you to "Go climb a rock!," boot
this game. Amiga, Atari ST ($49.95), C64/128 and IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #10.
SPORTING NEWS BASEBALL:
Players can draft teams from authentic
player statistics (both "Hall of Fame" and
modern rosters to choose from), make
managerial decisions, and then, play the
game in action mode in this hybrid action/strategy game. The emphasis is on
action, but the action is influenced by
six separate batting/fielding ratings. C64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #11.
THE GAMES: SUMMER EDITION:
Eight Olympic events for up to eight con-

testants are featured in this action
game. This is not a rehash of Summer
Games, but features: thirteen move sequences and slow motion instant replay
in the "Uneven Parallel Bars," a choice
of 35 different dives in the "Springboard
Diving" competition; and "Velodrome
Sprint Cycling" with ability to "draft" in
the opponent's tail wind, among others.
The outstanding fractal graphic treatment of the stadium and backgrounds
makes the player feel like he's really
there. C-64/128 ($39.95) and IBM
($44.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#12.
TOWER TOPPLER: Players must
avoid mutant molecules, boulders,
robots, and cannonballs in scaling the
sides of eight rotating towers in this
European import. Armed only with a
snowball gun, players try to reach the
tops of the towers in order to set off
their self-destruct mechanism and save
the ocean from their noxious pollution.

C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #13.

Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
CLUBHOUSE SPORTS: Whether it's
the shooting gallery on the boardwalk,
the billiard table in the back room, the
pinball machine at the bowling alley, the
bumper pool table at the pizza joint, the
foosball table at the corner bar, or the
skeeball alley on the midway, this game
emulates the kind of action players are
expecting to find there. The game is
from the same folks that brought Indoor
Sports to the computer. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#14.
THE COLONY: Designed by a
specialist in robotics, this graphic adventure enables players to explore a unique
three-dimensional environment in the
process of solving a series of mysterious

Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
CANADA B4V 2X6
IN HARM'S WAY: This grand tactical
naval game picks up in the Pacific
theatre where Long Lance left off. This
product emphasizes the second and
third years of the war in the Pacific. The
doctrinal approach to naval engagements (where the commander establishes guidelines for a given situation
before the scenario begins) works particularly well in this series and the
scenario editor is to be appreciated, as
well. The fact that some of these actions
take place outside the Solomons further
insures that players can build their own
scenarios. Apple II, Atari ST, C-64/128,
and IBM ($60.00). Circle Reader Service
Card #18.
ROMMEL AT EL ALAMEIN: Three
historical battles (Ruweisat Ridge, Alam
Haifa, and El Alamein) plus carefully considered "What if?" situations for each of
these battles comprise the basis of this
product. The situation picks up almost
to the day after the events depicted in
Rommel At Gazala, the designers' earlier command-oriented study of the
North African campaign in 1942. The
playing aids have changed, but the system is the same. Apple II, Atari ST, IBM
($60.00). Circle Reader Service Card
#19.

Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Dr.
Alameda, CA 94501
disappearances. The game takes place
on a frontier outpost in space and the
player is the detective/marshal who must
solve the mystery. Suspension of disbelief comes rapidly when players begin
to manipulate the environment in a
realistic fashion. Macintosh ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #15.

Omnitrend Software
P.O. Box 733
West Simsbury, CT 06092
PALADIN: Imagine Breach in a fantasy world with better sound effects and
just as much constructability. In fact,
squad leaders from the science fiction
game may be imported into the fantasy
game. Rather than a linear storyline, this
game is a series of individual quests,
such as: rescuing prisoners, obtaining
scrolls, exiting the combat zone, and/or
killing a certain percentage of op-

ponents before the time limit is up.
Amiga and Atari ST ($39.95), but Quest
Disk is extra ($24.95). Circle Reader Service Card #16.

Shadowfax Software
2005 W. Culver Ave.,
Ste. 19
Orange, CA 92668
RICH TAUBER'S BASS CHAMP: A
combination tutorial and tournament
simulation, this product allows players to
participate in timed fishing tournaments
and compete against computerized opponents. It keeps track of earnings and
positions, as well as giving advice. The
advice comes from champion fisherman,
Rich Tauber. The graphics are plain, but
the tournaments are addictive. IBM
($40.00). Circle Reader Service Card
#17.

FALCON A.T.: Although the subject
matter is the same as the IBM version of
Falcon, the F-16 simulator reviewed in
the February issue of CGW, the presentation is different. The new version of
the product is designed to make use of
both the EGA graphics capabilities and
the faster 286 and 386 processors. The
designers have also created new missions, new camera viewpoints, and additional ground targets. IBM with EGA (or
VGA with EGA emulation) and 286/386
processor ($59.95). Circle Reader Service Card #20.

Spinnaker Software
One Kendall Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
SARGON 4: Imagine Sargon III with
sixteen levels of difficulty, an option to
create customized playing pieces, 107
classic chess games to study, more than
100 chess problems to solve, and an improved endgame. That's what the latest

version of this popular chess program
has to offer. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #21.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mt. View, CA 94043
DEMON'S WINTER: The last words
of the fathers of Ildryn were, "If I die this
day, avenge me . . . avenge me .. .
avenge me . . ." In this adventure game
which sports similar mechanics to Shard
of Spring, the player gets the chance to
avenge his/her father's death at the
hands of wicked kobolds. As usual,
however, there are greater dangers.
Apple II ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #22.
DUNGEON MASTERS ASSISTANT: VOLUME 1: ENCOUNTERS:
This utility, designed to be used with
TSR's Advanced Dungeons and
Dragons role-playing game, enables
dungeon masters to perform less book
work and dice rolling in order to set-up
random encounters. If users do not like
the existing data, it is possible to modify
the database and incorporate their own
monsters and encounters to the more
than 1,000 possibilities. Apple II
($29.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#23.
HEROES OF THE LANCE: A quest
for the precious Disks of Mishakal is the
main order of business in this beautifully
ornamented action game. The party of
adventurers comes from the Dragonlance series and the designers have
even incorporated some of the
character's personalities for players to
contend with. The game is fast-moving
and easy to use. CGW Consumer Advisory: The current version has a bug
where the game hangs up when the adventurers try to cross a chasm. The
chasm does not have to be crossed to
win the game, but future versions will
correct the problem. Contact SSI for
details. Atari ST ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #24.

Timeline, Ltd.
P.O. Box 60
Ypsilanti, MI 48197
BATTLE STATIONS!: The familiar
childhood game of Battleship is back in
this computer version of the traditional
game. The graphics aren't fancy, but the
computer opponent is supposed to be
tough. Macintosh (no price). Circle
Reader Service Card #25.

Titus Software Corporation
20432 Corisco St.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
FIRE & FORGET: Players operate
their own "Thunder Master" war
machines in this two player
shoot-'em-up. One player handles the offensive action and the other handles the defensive
action as this action game features a
nearly invincible tank in scenarios ranging from guerrilla warfare to global conflict. Amiga, Atari ST, IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #26.

Fantastic
Voya g es

movie of
game sequences and determine if a
given sequence is
going to work
well or not.

(Continued from page 44)

David Todd
designed an
IBM navigational program for NASA. He
is working on Lords of the Rising Sun for
Cinemaware. This game with its dynamic
graphics laid upon a bird's-eye, threedimensional strategic view (with burning
buildings, troops moving, and weather
changes visually displayed on the map)
should be interesting to both strategy
garners and arcade gamers. Unlike their
earlier games, the arcade sequences can
be toggled off. According to John Cutter,
"We were trying to do an SSI-type game
with Cinemaware sound and graphics."
We were also introduced to David Rierdon, designer of the coin-op game,
Freedom Fighter. Similar to
Dragonslayer, this coin-op game utilized
actual animated film footage for the game
sequences. Rierdon is Cinemaware's oneman task force for CD-I and DV-I (Digital
Video-Interactive). Rierdon is, for those interested in entertainment industry crossfertilization, a former motion picture performer and composer of the popular hit,
Green-Eyed Lady. He is helping the computer company in understanding the importance of player character point of view
in utilizing either digitized or taped images. His thesis is essentially to use a
third person perspective to set-up various
events and a first person perspective
whenever the character engages in combat.
We were also intrigued to note that the
company is divided into two sections. The
largest section is a non-smoking working
environment. The smallest section functions under a separate air-conditioning
system. This is the smoking section and it
houses the artists. Considering the
company's parallels with the motion picture industry, this seems only fitting. After
all, how many feature films have you been
to in recent months where you didn't
read: "Smoking Permitted in Outer Lobby
Only!"

Previews of
Coming Attractions
In Fantastic Voyages I!, CGW will visit
Mediagenic, Strategic Simulations,
Inc., and Origin Systems. Future sequels will include Broderbund, Epyx,
Microprose, Accolade, and Lucasfilm
Games. Don't miss it!

(Continued from page 6
ferent utility. The bottom line is that they
can be backed up, right?
"The save game feature is not much
use in saving your real position and
party.' Press 'Q' anywhere in the game
(even on the 16th level of the dungeon)
and when you come back to it, it will be
exactly as you left it. What more can
you ask for?
"The I,J,K,M keys are used, no support
for arrow keys or joystick." Why use the
arrow keys when J & K serve that function? And for reasons you would have to
be a programmer to understand, the
joystick would make the game very slow.
"People with important clues are often
hidden in out of the way places.' What
would you suggest, that I line them up
at the entrance to the town?
'Experience seems to come only from
killing monsters." This is not true,
anyone who takes part in the battle
(even insofar as curing someone else)
will get a share.
'The game doesn't display experience."
A flag appears to indicate that a player is
ready to go up a level. I consider this to
be superior to having to go back to
town just to check, don't you?
"The full spell name must be typed in,
no shortened version." Just press "?"
and it will give you a list of all the available spells and you can then cursor
down to the one you want and hit return.
'The descent into hell is easier than
some of the other dungeons." Like you
said, some of the others are there just
for the experience and aren't necessary
to the completion of the game. They are
made to challenge upper level players.
"There is nothing new or noteworthy
about the game." Though others have
since copied it, Deathlord was the first
game of its type to allow a party to save
position anywhere and instantly. Play
and execution is swift and efficient, no
more tedious drawn out battles or waiting for excessive disk access. It is the
first game to provide user-defined macro
keys. The overhead dungeon perspective allows players to see what is around
them rather than in a straight line, and
gives the dungeon a lot more detail, and
much more .. .
And these are less than half of the discrepancies that were in that article. This
is a review? It was my understanding

that a review was supposed to point out
the good and bad points of a product
and leave it up to the consumer to
decide if that is what he wants. I resent
this reviewer arbitrarily deciding what
everyone will like and not like and
making a decision for them. As a consumer, I want to hear both sides of the
story and this review makes me wonder
if many others that I have read are
similarly biased. I can't help but wonder
if I have stopped from buying a really
decent game because some reviewer
had an off day.
Al Escudero
Vancouver, B.0
Ed.: We do recognize that lots of work
goes into designing a computer game
and it hurts to have a negative review,
especially if one feels it is unfair. So,
we regularly print responses from designers such as yourself. Just to show that
there are others in agreement with Scorpia, however, we thought the following
letter might be relevant.
Please encourage Scorpia to continue
her run of blunt, matter-of-fact reviews.
I'm very pleased to find a reviewer of
computer games who isn't afraid to call
a spade a spade! I have nothing but disdain for designers who develop generic
junk or the software houses who peddle
them as the "New wave in game
design." EA's Deathlord is a prime example.

to the theme of the magazine, more
original, and even kind of artistic and
dainty!
But really, the letters in 51 read almost
like the ones comic books used to
print—'I really love Smatterman; it's the
most illuminating and phenomenal literature in the Cosmos' kind of thing.
Enough of the namby-pamby "CGWs
so wonderful I wash my body with it'
stuff. Let's have some intelligent reactions to your articles (like the letter from
Mr. Kenney)! I only read half of it, but,
hey, the point is, I appreciated his effort!
I keep hoping we can have a forum for
computer gamers in Computer Gaming
World, a place where we can exchange
ideas and suggestions about games,
and have fun, to boot.
I have enjoyed Scorpia's reviews
(though I'm still curious about what she
looks like). I have enjoyed Johnny
Wilson's writings and my interactions
with him (and, well, now, my second
review for him).
But, most of all, I have enjoyed the
monthly interaction with other computer
gamers that CGW gives me. It is sometimes a solitary pursuit, so it's nice to
know you're there.
But be brave! There's no need to hide
behind a bunch of readers' gushy
phrases! Remember King Lear and
which daughter really loved him.

Bryan A. Walker
Ft. Rucker, AL
Ed.: Uh, Bryan meet Al. Al meet
Bryan. You guys might want to meet at
a certain tavern and hash this one out.
I mean, Fred is back from the grues'
convention and I'm sure there'll be a
roaring fire when the weather gets cold.
Maybe Scorpia can let us know how
this one comes out.

Wimpy Letters Column
Oh, boy, my honor has been besmirched! Since I'm the only one, I think,
who has ever written in and complained
about your magazine—or, at least, one
of the very few whose complaints have
been published—the letters printed in
issue 51 seem like direct attacks on my
honor! Let me say that I love CGW; it's
easily my most favorite magazine that I
get regularly each month (right up there
next to my Dallas Cowboys Weekly
-realintelectualreading,eh?). hm ,I
could've said "right up there next to
Sluts and Slobs, so give me a break,
okay? Anyway, I critique because I want
the magazine to get better—like, for instance, the new CGW Hall of Fame
frame. Still a little busy, but much closer

Dennis Owens
Houston, TX
Ed.: Your letter has inspired us and
we really want to be as brave as you
suggest, but we just haven't quite
reached that point. So, here's this

month's cheerleaders.

And Now, Something
Completely Different
I have been a subscriber since March
of 1986 and want to thank you for
doing such a fine magazine. It is the
best in its field. There would be a great
black hole without CGW.
Jonte Regnell
Sweden
I quite enjoy Computer Gaming World
and know it has saved me literally
hundreds of dollars when purchasing
game software. There's a lot of great
stuff out there, but there's also a whole
lot of junk, and you guys seem the most
objective so I trust your opinions above
all others.
Tomm Munro
Federal Way, WA

Industry News
(Continued from page 10)
a licensing agreement with
New World Computing to
publish a Tunnels & Trolls
computer version. A verbal
agreement has also been
reached for the two companies to cooperate on the
computer version of
Nukewar. In addition, the
product based on FASA's
Battletech license is nearing
completion at Infocom. The
company has taken great
care to be certain that the fiction involved in the computer
products dovetail with the fiction behind the company's
own Battletech products.

Broderbund
Announces
CD-ROM Project
One of the most awesome

reference works of the 1960s
was the popular Whole Earth
Catalog. Now, Broderbund is
combining the use of HyperCard on the Apple Macintosh
and CD-ROM (Compact Disk Read Only Memory) in order
to publish The Electronic
Whole Earth Catalog. Perhaps the most awesome concept in indexing ever, the
catalog will actually allow researchers to listen to excerpts
from over 100 recordings
rather than simply read about
them. The product is expected to be available prior to
the end of 1988, 20 years
after the print version first appeared (1968).

Mindscape
Experiences
$281,000 Loss
Although total sales increased by 28.4% to $5.4 mil-

stock at $9 per share by
going public in June of 1988.

lion in the quarter ending
June, 1988, Mindscape, was
forced to post a $281,000
loss (compared to a $309,000
profit in the same quarter of
the previous year) in its first
quarter as a publicly-held corporation. Despite such
gloomy figures, President and
CEO Roger Buoy was undaunted. The CEO suggested
that the poor results reflected
the seasonality of the
company's sales and suggested that the last half of the
year (historically, the
company's better quarters)
would change the picture for
the 130 employee company.
Mindscape recently offered
1.1 million shares of common

Joel Berez, President of Infocom, has resigned to assume the helm of familyfounded Action Industries, a
manufacturer and wholesaler
of houseware and gift items.
Michael Dornbrook, Vice-President of Marketing for the
Cambridge, MA based company, and Joe Ybarra, new
Vice-President of Product
Development (formerly of
Electronic Arts' Interactive
Stories Division), will share
leadership responsibilities at
Infocom.

Hall of Fame / R.I.D.

Reader Input Device #52
this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation. Some general interest questions are provided, as
well. For each game you have played or article you have
read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the
appropriate number on the card provided opposite page 4.
On

Be it known to all gentle persons that the
games inscribed above are honored for
their high popularity with the people of our
fair land. These august games have been
well spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time and, thereby, have gained
the respect and good will of the powers
that be at CGW. Be it known to all that
read these words that any game found on
this list is a game of renown and worthy
of play by all.

Game Ratings Chart

Those wild and crazy mutants from "Wasteland" continue to hold the high ground on the Action/Adventure
list, while "Dungeon Master" attempts to burrow underneath. "Ultima V"'s strong showing enabled Lord British
to escape capture by "Pirates." Mindscape's "Shadowgate" offers a welcome, if somewhat mysterious, new
face to the top ten as the "Macaventure" series gains

popularity on formats other than the Macintosh.
Attrition continues on the Strategy list. Except for the
older titles which have moved up due to the removal of
out-of-print and 'Hall of Fame' titles, SSG's 'Rommel:
Battles for North Africa" is the only new face in the top
ten. Will this World War II title find a "Breach" in the top
three? Tune in next month.

