March 1986

Number 26

FEATURES
Conflict In Viet Nam
The View From a Playtester

14
M. Evan Brooks

Inside Ultima IV

18

Interview with Lord British

The Halley Project
Tooling Through the Solar System

Silent Service
Designer's Notes

Star Trek: The Kobayashi Alternative
A Review

24
Gregg Williams
28
Sid Meier
36
Scorpia

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

6

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Scorpion's Tale
Playing Tips on SPELLBREAKER

12
Scorpia

Strategically Speaking

22

Game Playing Tips

Atari Playfield
Koronis Rift and The Eidolon

Amiga Preferences
A New Column on the Amiga

30
Gregg Williams
32
Roy Wagner

Commodore Key
Flexidraw, Lode Runner's Rescue,
and Little Computer People

The Learning Game
Story Tree

38
Roy Wagner
40
Bob Proctor

Over There !41
A New Column on British Games

Leslie B. Bunder

Reader Input Device

43

Game Ratings

48

100 Games Rated

Accolade
20863 Stevens Creek Blvd
Cupertino, CA 95014
408-446-5757
FIGHT NIGHT: Arcade style
boxing game. A choice of six
different contenders to battle
for the heavyweight crown. The
player has the option of using
the supplied boxers or creating
his own challenger. Joystick,
one or two players. C-64, Apple. ($29.95 & $34.95). Circle #3
THE DAM BUSTERS: Hi-res
graphics arcade game. The
concept is the actual Ruhr dam
raid of May, 1943 (Operation
Chastise). You must pilot your
Lancaster bomber through ME110 fighters, flak, barrage balloons, etc. You also have responsibility as pilot, gunner,
engineer, navigator and
bombardier. Destruction of the dam

is rewarded with an excellent
graphics sequence. Joystick.
One player. C-64, IBM. ($29.95
& $39.95). Circle Reader Service #4
Activision
2350 Bayshore Frontage Road
Mountain View, CA 94043
800-227-9759
HACKER: An adventure game
with a twist, there are no rules
and no instruction book. The
opening screen simply says
"LOGON PLEASE:". You must
use your deductive skills to
enter an underground tunnel
system and piece together a
secret document. One caveat:
despite the use of the term
"hacker", the game does NOT
involve activities currently associated with that word. It is a
combination text and graphics
adventure. Joystick required.
C-64, Apple, Atari.
Circle #5

Artworx
150 North Main Street
Fairport, NY 14450
800-828-6573
FP II: With Falcon Patrol 2 the
player controls a fighter plane
equipped with the latest missiles to combat the enemy's helicopter-attack squadrons. Features 3-D graphics, sound effects and 16 levels of play.
Joystick only, one player. C-64.
($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #6
SORCERY: Adventure game in
an arcade setting. Detailed
graphics, animation and sound
effects. 17 levels of difficulty.
Joystick only. C-64. ($19.95).
Circle #7

Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
800-638-9292

UNDER FIRE (Extended Capability Disk 1): Two new
maps, six scenarios. Units and
vehicles from the armies of
Germany, England, Italy,
Japan, Soviet Union and the
United States. Note that you
must have the original game of
UNDER FIRE in order to use
this addition to the line. Apple.
Circle #8

Brown-Wagh Publishing
800 Charcot Avenue #10
San Jose, CA 95131
CUBIC TIC TAC TOE: Three
dimensional version of the familiar children's game. Three
difficulty levels. Play against
computer or another player. C64/128, Apple, IBM.
Circle #9
CBS Software
One Fawcett Place
Greenwich, CT 06836
203-622-2500 Circle #10
ERNIE'S BIG SPLASH: A
preschool learning activity
featuring the Muppet characters

to introduce children to cause
and effect and spatial relationships. Our in-house beta tester
(five years old) rated this one
highly. Recommended for ages
four to six. C-64/128. ($14.95)
GROVER'S ANIMAL ADVENTURES: An animated
animal classification activity
developed by the Children's
Television Workshop. Four
animal environments with a
wide array of creatures and
objects to identify and place in
their proper location (air, water
or sky). As with all CBS products, there are suggestions for
related family activities. Ages
four to six. C64/128. ($14.95).
RICHARD SCARRY'S BEST
ELECTRONIC WORD BOOK
EVER: Richard Scarry is a
much-beloved children's book
author and illustrator. This program is a reading readiness adventure, aimed at developing
skills such as word identification, vocabulary building and
word/object association. Lowly

Worm is the guide to six colorful environments (harbor,
railroad yard, etc.) where children identify appropriate objects and associate them with
the printed name. Four levels
of difficulty to challenge varied
skill groups. Ages five and up.
C64/128, Apple. ($19.95).
[Editor's note: The Sesame
Street/CBS Software series is an
excellent group of software
programs for preschoolers. The
graphics are attractive, the
subjects familiar to children,
educational aspects seem solid
and the prices are reasonable.]
Datasoft
19808 Chatsworth Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
THE GOONIES: Hi-res graphics adventure game based on
the recent movie of the same
name. Eight screens inspired by
scenes from the movie. Two
character gameplay. Apple.
Circle #11

ZORRO: Graphics adventure
game as you fence your way
through 20 screens. Your objective is to rescue a pretty
senorita from the evil Sergeant
Garcia. Arcade quality graphics. Apple with 64K. Circle #12
Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Drive
San Mateo, CA 94403
415-571-7171
AUTODUEL: Wins the 1986
CGW trademark award. Four
companies share the pie on this
game.: Texas Instruments,Steve
Jackson Games, Origin Systems,
and Electronic Arts. AUTODUEL is based on the popular
board game CAR WARS. The
scenario is post-nuclear war
America (2030 AD). Auto duels
are a popular form of entertainment (and survival). You
design your own vehicle - with
weapons, armor, engine, etc and take it on the road to fame
and fortune. Based on the subject matter alone this game is
likely to be a big sales winner.
Apple.
Circle Reader Service #13

EUROPE ABLAZE: Designed
by Strategic Studies Group,
distributed by EA. Historical
simulation and strategy game
that recreates the air war over
England and Europe from the
years 1939 to 1945. Three
built-in scenarios, with options
to create an infinite number of
user designed scenarios. The
game is menu-driven, in the
familiar SSG style. Play involves 24 specific aircraft, airbases, radar stations, shipping
lanes, flak units, population
centers, etc. From one to
twelve players, or computer vs
computer, with the computer

willing to take either side.
Major review in our April issue. C64/128, Apple. ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #14

Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Road, Bldg A200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983
800-227-1617 ext 335
BATTLE OF ANTIETAM:
Grand tactical Civil War game
covering the September 17,
1862 battle centered along the
Antietam Creek at Sharpsburg,
Pennsylvania. The Basic Game
has simple rules and options it is possible to begin play almost immediately upon booting
the disk. Intermediate and Advanced have much more complex decision making; such as
hidden units, chain of command, facing, etc. Good historical accuracy for troops and
weapons. Each turn represents
30 minutes and combat is resolved down to the individual
soldier. Preliminary reviews are
favorable, major review soon.
C-64, Apple. ($49.95). Circle #15

U.S.A.A.F.: Detailed strategic
simulation of daylight bombing
of German industry from 19431945. Day-by-day resolution,
the Campaign Game will take
approximately 730 turns! Scenarios of one-month duration
are available for the faint of
heart. Each turn can take from
five to thirty minutes to plan
and execute. Weather is important and good weather leads to
more planning and bombing. 24
aircraft types, rated in nine
categories (climb, speed, durability, etc.). One or two players, or computer vs computer.
Full review in April, with
comparison to EUROPE
ABLAZE. C-64, Apple, Atari.
($59.95)
Circle Reader Service #16

SPELLBREAKER

As told by Scorpia

The Soft Room Cube. This one is
pretty simple, and you only need to use
this cube once. Don't settle for a piece of
the action, take it all.

At last, we've gotten everything
cleared up from the holidays (although
Fred was practically broken-hearted at
having to take down his garland). So just
step on over to your favorite chair, and
relax awhile before you embark on your
quest to (once again) save the world, this
time through the magical lands of Spellbreaker.
This one is a toughie, folks. When Infocom said that the concluding chapter of
the Enchanter trilogy would be hard, they
weren't kidding. On the other hand, that
also means it's been well worth waiting for,

because Infocom hasn't put out a REALLY hard adventure in awhile.
For most of the game, you'll be
spending your time picking up a number of
little white cubes. They all look exactly
alike, so your first task is to figure out a
way of making each cube unique. This
shouldn't be too difficult, especially if you
take a good look at your inventory at the
beginning of the game.
The cubes are magical, of course, and
function as gateways to other places. This
means that most of the time, you are exploring small clusters of rooms, rather than
one giant area. It does help to make mapping easier. However, it also means that
you spend a lot of time going back and
forth through the cubes to solve puzzles.
Another thing to keep in mind here is
that from time to time your spells will not
work. Therefore you will have to memorize
them once more and try again. Tedious,
but necessary. So it's a good idea to save
your position pretty frequently, as there
are some situations where a spell backfire
could mean disaster, since you may not
have time to learn it again, or even cast it
again if you have learned it more than
once.
All the comings and goings through
the cubes makes it rather difficult to present my usual coherent narrative, so for
this column, I will simply deal with the
rooms off each cube individually.
The Earth Room Cube. This is the
first one you find (after you clear up the
fog in Belwit Square). It leads to several
sneaky obstacles, including an over-protective Roc, a sneezy Ogre, and an
avalanche. Explore all the exits from the
cube first, then go back and deal with the
avalanche. When you get to the hut, make
sure you have a chat with the Hermit, who
will give you a clue as to what needs to be
done to pick up the next cube. The snake
is much too large; perhaps in your wanderings you can find a way of putting him
on a diet. As for the idol, if only you could
get its mouth open just a bit more. How
tiresome. Zzzzzzzzzzzzzzz...

The Water Room Cube. You will return to this one several times, as both the
ocean and the Oubliette require two visits
each. The first solution to the Oubliette is
likely to leave you cold, while the second
visit will probably make you feel like Alice
in Wonderland. The ocean is a bit easier;
you only need to pick up something during
your first swim (and remember that your
spell book is NOT waterproof!). For your
second dip, keep in mind that only a fish
can get down to the bottom. Hmm, I wonder why the grouper thinks he's seeing
double? As for the tower, you'll need
something to give you a lift.
The Air Room Cube. Here you come to
a carpet shop (among other places). That
blue carpet sure looks nice; unfortunately,
the merchant wants a little more for it
than you can afford. Maybe you can get
him to bring his price down to a more
reasonable amount. Just remember to
check your inventory before you leave the
store.
The Bone Room Cube. Unless you left
something behind in the Guild Hall, you
don't need to use this one at all.
The String Room Cube. Another onetimer. All you need do here is talk to Belboz (keep those cards handy).
The Light Room Cube. Only one visit
needed, and your actions here should be
pretty obvious.
The Change Room Cube. Now, this
one is a bit sneaky, and the closest thing
to a maze in the game. You have to make
your way through the octagonal rooms,
and you have to be careful that you don't
end up going back the way you came, so
it's essential to map out your progress. As
to how you get through the rooms in the
first place, surely you brought the compass
along with you.
The Void Room Cube I. Here we have
two of the more vexing problems in the
game. Those rocks, for one. You night
think there's no way of ever catching up to
that exasperating brown-eyed rock, but
it's really easier than you might suspect.
The first thing you should do is map out
the whole area (make careful note of that
one diagonal corner; it's there for a reason)
and make it a large map. Then use two

different objects, one to represent you, and
one to represent the brown-eyed rock (a
penny and a dime work nicely). Move the
coins (or whatever) as you and the rock
move in the game. This will give you a
clear idea of how the brown-eyed rock
moves to foil your efforts at reaching it.
Now a little thought should show you how
you can corner it without difficulty.

your inventory; there should be an item
there you've had from the start of the
game, but never used. Do something (nonviolent) with it.

The Void Room Cube II. The other
nasty problem is the vault room. Not getting the vault door open (which can be
done once you've souped-up your magical
abilities), but determining which of twelve
cubes is the real one. This is not so easy,
and is made harder by the fact that once
in the vault, you CANNOT save the game!
Each time you enter the vault, the program chooses one of the twelve cubes at
random to be the 'real' cube. Your difficulties are compounded by the eventual
appearance of the [censored] alarm fairy,
so your time is very limited. Actually, if
you do everything right, and do not waste
moves, you will have just enough time to
determine the right cube and blorple out
before the guards grab you (there is nothing, alas, that you can do about the obnoxious fairy). Jindak is the key to success
here. It will indicate which pile the real
cube is in. It then becomes a matter of
elimination, with repeated use of Jindak
and careful manipulation of the cubes.
Think about it.

Well, Fred is pointing his claw (err,
finger) at the invisible clock, so it's just
about time to close the doors until next
issue. In the meantime, if you need a hand
(or three) with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:

The Black Room Cube (Fred's favorite). An easy one, actually. The convention of Grues is not so terrible as it
may appear. Remember the grouper.
The Fire Room Cube. Without doubt,
the single nastiest problem in the game.
The solution lies in the gold box (make
sure it's empty). You've probably noticed
that whenever you put a cube in the box,
the designs change to something appropriate to that cube. Dolphins for the Water
cube. Moles for the Earth cube. And so on.
So there is some kind of relationship between the cubes and the box. Or at least
the last cube that was in it. Keep that in
mind, and remember that nothing is impossible.
The Sand Room Cube. Talk about
deja vu! You've been to these places before, but from different cubes. And, from
the look of things, at a different time. Here
you must be careful and do the rooms in
the right order. As a matter of fact, these
problems are easy, so long as you remember that all must be as it was (will be?),
down to the last detail. And that blank
scroll is there for a very important reason.
The Magic Room Cube. The gateway
to the end game. At last, you discover
what it's all about, and who that mysterious cloaked figure is. There are two places
here where timing is critical. First you
must act quickly, because you will need
time to recover completely. Second, you
must wait for the right moment to cast
your last spell, and only one moment is the
right one. Be patient, and don't panic.
The Hypercube. You have only two
moves to do something about it, and you
need both of them. The first move is fairly
obvious. As for the second, well, look in

Whew! And so, once again, the world
has been saved. Although, in this case, at
a hefty price. A sad, and yet appropriate,
ending.

On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG. Just
type GR GAM at the MAIN> prompt.
On GEnie: Stop in at the Games
Round Table. Type: Scorpia to get there.
On the Source: Send SMAIL to
ST1030.
And, as usual, there is US Mail.
PLEASE, if you are writing from the
United States, you MUST enclose a selfaddressed, stamped envelope to receive a
reply! Send your questions to:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
See you next issue...happy adventuring!
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

CONFLICT IN VIETNAM: THE VIEW FROM A
PLAYTESTER

by M. Evan Brooks
Come on, all you big strong men,
Uncle Sam needs your help again.
He's got himself in a terrible jam
Way down yonder in Vietnam ...
-- Country Joe & the Fish
This time, can we win?
-- Rambo (1985)

(1967)

plausible alternatives. As the divisional/front commander, you are given the opportunity to see if you
could rewrite history. Be advised that the game,
while easy to learn, is quite difficult to master.
Decisive victories are rare, and usual results are
marginal, but this is accurate. When playing the
computer opponent (as a more difficult opponent
than historical), be willing to accept ignominious
defeat. But at the same time, learn from its tactics
and be thankful that you are not in a position to
add more names to The Wall.
DOCUMENTATION

During the last two months, this writer has had
the pleasure of playtesting Microprose's newest release in the Command Series, CONFLICT IN
VIETNAM (CIV). This article will discuss certain
design parameters, designer decisions, and playtest
results. Additionally some tactical guidance in the
playing of CIV will be provided.
INTRODUCTION

CIV is typical of the Command Series genre -i.e. input is via keyboard or joystick, action is in
real-time, the game may be saved at any time and
options exist for the player to play either side or
switch sides at will. CIV is not a strategic game; it
is operational in scale. There are five battles:
(1) Dien Bien Phu (French vs. Viet Minh; 1954)
(2) Ia Drang Valley (U.S. vs. NVA [North Vietnamese Army]; 1965)
(3) K he Sanh (U.S. vs. NVA; Tet 1968)
(4) Fishhook (U.S. vs. NVA; Cambodia, 1970)
(5) Quang Tri (NVA vs. ARVN [Army Republic of
Vietnam]; 1972).
The scale equals one mile to the hex. The basic
unit is the battalion. As is customary with the
Command Series, each scenario has numerous
variants which modify history, but are usually

The game documentation is voluminous. Ed
Bever, the designer, has written a veritable military
history of the battles covered. However, this is as it
should be. To date, the definitive military text of
the Vietnam Conflict has not been written; therefore, the reader may be somewhat at a loss in
seeking historical expertise. The "Recommended
Readings" cover the field well, although this writer
feels that the more reliable texts are limited to
small unit actions. Larger historical works are too
politically oriented. The documentation covers each
scenario and variant separately, with orders of battle given in the appropriate areas. Please heed the
documentation when it warns the reader to stop at
a certain point, and play the game. The element of
surprise will open the eyes of the most jaded
gamer. This writer feels that the documentation was
done well, but certain concepts must be remembered by the user. In Ia Drang, sub-variants of
Airmobile (historical), Light Infantry and Armored
Cavalry exist. Dr. Bever notes that if the light infantry or armored cav options had been selected by
the political decision-makers, then the cost of Vietnam could have been reduced substantially "...and
thus it would have been economical to deploy more
men". However, US military doctrine has traditionally sought to minimize use of manpower through
firepower-technology. While the cost of light infantry would have permitted more manpower, this
would have been a political decision far beyond the
scope of the game -- it may well have mandated
mobilization of the Reserves, and of course, higher
casualties in the field. The designer is well aware
of these "restrictions"; this writer wishes to emphasize them to the readership.
PLAY TESTING
This writer received several copies of the game
in its transition to a finished product. The majority
of the playtesting was done by a group in New
Jersey, but this writer did spend numerous hours
mainly concentrating on the American scenarios.
On 23 November 1985, this writer assembled a staff
of experienced gamers/veterans to view the game.
Present were: Dr. Bever (the designer); Dr. Raymond Bell (Brigadier General, USAR), former
deputy director of the National Defense University's Wargaming & Simulation Center; Donald
Whelan (Brigadier General, USA, ret.); and Dr.
John Sloan (editor, International Military Encyclopedia). All three of the latter saw combat in Viet-

nam at the field grade level, with Dr. Bell serving
in armor, General Whelan in artillery, and Dr.
Sloan in the engineers.
Actually, the professionals were quite enthralled
with the simulation. The basic concept was well
received, and criticism was limited to generally
items which the standard gamer would not note.
Most of these criticisms are in fact detailed in the
documentation (cf. "Designer's Notes"). For example, the professionals noted that nomenclature of
units was incorrect. In order to make the units
more understandable to the unmilitary civilian, the
designer chose to forego proper military nomenclature. Similarly, the veterans noted that the company/battery was the basic building block; but

"Ballad of the Green Berets" received the nod. This
writer feels that it is the best solution; although
Vietnam was not an SF (Special Forces) war in total
(the Snake-Eaters could not do everything), in the
popular eye, they best represent the Vietnam War.
The most serious dispute was over victory conditions. How does one actually win the war in
Vietnam? With the American emphasis on body
count, the NVA also looked to American casualties
as an indicator. While most military personnel preferred body count as a measure, Microprose's staff
felt that "body count" was simply unmarketable and
ghoulish. Unmarketable, yes; but then again, Vietnam was never intended as a marketing man's
dream. For realism, this writer would have pre-

since once contact was made, building up was quick
and continuous, the effect of utilizing battalions is
not an egregious error. One adjustment that did
occur was the deletion of ARVN Air Cav Troops in
the Fish Hook scenario; Dr. Bever had extrapolated
their TO&E (Tables of Organization and Equipment) from American units. No such units did exist, and they have been deleted from the final
product. Minor "glitches" were noted: in the game
US air on local command had a tendency to cross
borders for attacks. The political ramifications of
such escalations prohibited such missions, and they
have been deleted from the final product.
One of the more interesting disputes was over
the introductory theme. Initial candidates were
"Ballad of the Green Berets" or "The Vietnam Rag".
Neither song did much for this writer or the staff
at Microprose. Discussions with numerous veterans
revealed a dichotomy of opinion. Field grade officers could not really think of a song which represented the period; "grunts" (infantry, usually enlisted) and company grade officers split between
"These Boots are Made for Walking", "Jumpin' Jack
Flash", "Sympathy for the Devil" and other counterculture songs. "Ride of the Valkyrie" (Apocalypse
Now) was seriously considered, but in the end,

ferred body count (KIAs), but one can understand
and sympathize with Microprose's rationale.
As Dr. Bever admits in the documentation, certain of the scenarios are for learning purposes only.
Dien Bien Phu as a historical simulation has the
same appeal as Custer's Last Stand -- you might
enjoy it if you play the winning side or if you are
a dyed-in-leather masochist. Otherwise, the scenario serves as a learning tool for the novice. But
even Dien Bien Phu has a variant, with American
intervention, that plays a tense game. Similarly, the
largest scenario, Khe Sanh, while impressive visually, is not in the same league of playability as the
other scenarios; this scenario covers Tet 1968 from
the DMZ to Khe Sanh to Quang Tri City. In initial
test versions, the game ran almost sixty days. Much
of this time, nothing was happening for the Americans. Although enemy units were infiltrating and
"spotted", the American/ARVN player simply
lacked the mobile resources to offer an effective
counter-force. This lack of mobility is not a designer "glitch"; rather it is a recognition of the fact
that the Third Marine Division along the DMZ was
fixed by orders emanating from the White House,
Continued on pg. 46

Recently Richard Garriott (aka Lord British)
visited the offices of Computer Gaming World. We
were able to ask him a number of questions about
his company, Origin Systems, as well as his latest
game, Ultima IV. Here is what he had to say.

inside

Ultima IV
CGW: How did you get started in the publishing
of computer games?
LB: By accident, actually. When I was in high
school I took the one computer class my school offered, and using the school's one Teletype, system
operated by paper tape no less. At the same time I
learned to play fantasy games such as Dungeons
and Dragons. This was in 1977. Since my school
didn't have any other computer classes, another
student and I managed to get a three year self
study course approved. All we had to do was work
on an approved project and show our work at the
end of each term. My projects were computer fantasy games (back then they were pretty simple).
During high school I wrote 28 small fantasy roleplaying games.; Upon graduation I went to work
for a Computerland store and was exposed to an
Apple II+. Wow! Graphics! Immediately I wrote a
game with perspective-view dungeon graphics. I
called it Akalabeth. The owner of the store convinced me to publish it myself. So I spent $200.00
(a great sum of money at the time) on ziplock
packaging which was the industry standard at the
time. In just a few days I had sold about five of
my first 200 units when the store owner sent a
copy of my game to a publisher called California
Pacific. A few days later I got a call from California Pacific saying that there were tickets waiting
for me at the airport! I then flew to California and
signed a contract and...
CGW: Why do you write as Lord British?
LB: In fact, I was born in Cambridge England.
But that's not where I really come from. When I
first learned fantasy games I was at Oklahoma University for high school summer studies. When I first
arrived at the dorm, other students would come
into my room and say "Hi". Of course I would say
"hello" back and they would blurt out "What?...
Hello!? No one from around here says 'Hello'. You
must be from Britain or something... We'll call you
British!" Well everyone that summer was similarly
dubbed with a nickname, and I began to call all of
my fantasy characters LORD BRITISH.
CGW: To date, you have had three publishers.
Why?

LB: My first two products were published by
Bill Budge's company, California Pacific, which at
that time was about the largest in the industry.
Some months later California Pacific began to have
financial troubles. It was time for me to move on. I
was pleasantly surprised when many other publishers contacted me wanting to produce my next Ultima! The problem was, and still is matter of fact,
that I get very personally involved with my games,
wanting the end product to look and "feel" a specific way. For instance, I wanted a cloth map enclosed in a nice box, rather than just the ziplock
with a disk in it. Not may publishers were willing
to market my game with that much detail. Sierra
On-Line liked my idea and agreed to package Ultima the way I preferred and that's how I agreed to
sign with them. Sierra did very well for me but
they did not seem very "author friendly" to me, and
I never really knew if I was getting a fair shake. So
my brother Robert, Chuck Bueche (another Sierra
author as well as college roommate), and I started
Origin Systems.

CGW': Tell us about Origin Systems.
LB: My brother, Robert, is the president of the
company and is really perfect for the job. He graduated from Rice University with a double major in
Electrical Engineering and Economics. He went to
Stanford for his Masters in Engineering and Economic Systems, and then to The Sloan School of
Management at MIT for a Masters in Business. Initially, our programming staff consisted of only

creatures and an expansive component-based magic
system. You start the game with one player and
build to a party of eight non-player characters
from within the game or from characters you meet
along the way. You can be ambushed at bridges,
while camping, or at inns. The dungeons have detailed rooms with traps, disappearing walls, fire pits
that open suddenly, secret doors and more! There
are new weapons with neat graphic effects, hundreds of individuals in the game capable of interactive dialog and a huge plot that unfolds in great
detail as the game is played.

myself and Chuck Bueche. Chuck has been a good
friend since high school, a fellow fantasy gamer
and has been published through the same companies
as me under the name, "Chuckles".
When we started OSI it was probably the worst
possible time for a new company start-up (even
more so for a software company) since the 1983
computer industry shake-out had just started. Fortunately the name Ultima was familiar to distributors and Ultima III, our first product, was picked
up right away. Today our staff has grown to about
20 plus, including a dozen or so programmers and
translators both out and in-house.
CGW: What about your relationship with Electronic Arts?
LB: Origins Systems is still a pretty small company compared to some, and certain major store
chains like Toys-R-Us and Sears only want to deal
with a few (very few) publishers. That makes it
difficult for us to get our product onto their
shelves. Electronic Arts, now distributing our products, can reach these places and markets. But we
still handle all other aspects of marketing, advertising and development. This agreement has done
very well for both Electronic Arts and ourselves.
CGW: Now, let's talk about Ultima IV. How
does Ultima IV differ from previous Ultimas?
LB: Well, to begin with, the world in Ultima IV
is 16 times larger (256x256 tiles compared to
64x64). There are many new things like terrain
encumbrance, mixed monster parties of up to 16

CGW: The beginning of Ultima IV is unusual,
somewhat reminiscent of a hi-res adventure. How
does this work and what effect does it have on the
game?
LB: Well, Ultima IV is probably one of the only
games where the disk is booted first and the documentation read later. In Ultima IV it is intended
that it be you, the player, traveling in the lands of
Britannia. Since this is a game about the player's
personal virtues, it is very important that one always identifies with the character and feels responsible for that character's deeds and actions with
Britannia. To facilitate this I wrote the introduction
to slowly pull the player into the fantasy, then ask
the player questions about his or herself so that the
computer can put together a profile of how the
player feels he or she is (or would like to be) in
real life. With this profile the computer generates a
custom character that best matches the player's
personality. Further, this will decide who the player
is, the type of character (fighter, mage, etc.), attributes (strength, intelligence, etc.) and where in
Britannia they will start the game. Because of this,
the game will unfold differently for each player.
CGW: Where did the idea for a game about
virtues come from and why did you do it?
LB: Two things. First, about two years ago, I
saw a show on television that talked about the
concept of an Avatar in many Eastern Religions.
The show described how these certain religions believed an Avatar to be a perfect being who had
achieved purity in 16 traits. Well, the dictionary
definition of an Avatar is approximately, "The incarnation of any particular belief or philosophy."
This show set the game design wheels in motion. A
second major factor is more difficult to explain.
You see, when I began writing Ultima's I was 19
years old and just out of high school. I was writing
for the fun of it (as I still am mainly), but that was
all. Now, as I have sort of grown up the ripe old
age of 24 I receive things like fan mail! People
write to me about things they have read into my
games; things that I never even put in there, not to
mention things that are. This has made me sit back
and take a more responsible look at what I am doing. Personally, I do not believe all the flak that
goes around in some circles about the bad effect
fantasy games have on kids, but, no doubt, even
my game has some little effect on some lives.
Therefore, I feel that it is very important that this
effect be a net good rather than a net bad. As an
example, in all of the other Ultima's (and most

other fantasy games), even though a player was
supposed to be a champion of good (versus evil), it
is often needed if not essential for survival, to steal
from the shops. I feel that this is not really necessary and that many other plot twists can be thought
of that have a more positive nature - Ultima IV.
CGW: Why did you settle on the 8 virtues that
you did?
LB: Well, I first wanted to find a group of
virtues that covered as many motivating factors as
possible that overlapped the least. After beating my

LB: Yes, it did. I get a lot of mail with suggestions on improvements and comments of what people liked and disliked. Very often, if I agree with
the comment or criticism, that feature will be expanded or removed. By the way, I do answer my
mail personally, although it may take me awhile to
respond.
CGW: Was it consumer pressure that drove you
to make the games more complex?
LB: No, seriously, my main motive to write is
for the fun of it! (Much to the dismay of my office, I often go on no-work binges!). I rewrite each
Ultima from scratch so that I can add significant
improvements. This also has the unfortunate sideeffect of making each Ultima take longer and
longer to finish. Akalabeth took me only three
months, Ultima I nine months, Ultima II one year,
Ultima III one year and, finally, Ultima IV two
years, to complete.
CGW: Does this mean that it will take you three
years to write Ultima V?
LB: No. Even though Ultima V will be more
work, we now have a larger programming staff at
Origin Systems. Many of the routines which I
would have difficulty with, will be supplemented
by someone else to save time. In addition, since it
will likely still take over a year for a new Ultima
to be released, we are discussing plans in the
meantime to release an Ultima IV: Part II by next
Christmas. A new game, but in the same graphic
system.

head for a few weeks, with no luck, I decided to
use a basic three and found Truth, Love and
Courage to be not only a good set as far as I could
tell, but a historical precedence in a number of
other works. For example, in The Wizard of Oz
the Scarecrow corresponds with Truth; Tin-Man
with Love; and the Lion with Courage. With these
three, there are eight combinations spawning the
eight virtues, but since part of the game is to figure these out, I won't go any further.
CGW: Did you find it harder to design Ultima
IV because you were changing to a different emphasis?
LB: Oh, Yes! Much harder! When you can use
almost any idea that pops into your head in the design of a game, it is pretty easy to hash out a plot.
But, when you are restricted to a previously accepted category, then say only one out of four
ideas fit. If you look closely at the previous Ultima's, you can see that they lack much internal
plot consistencies. The plot elements have little to
do with each other. In Ultima IV, however, virtually everything is interrelated in some fashion, plus
I've added much more!
CGW: Did user input have much effect on Ultima IV's design?

CGW: Is Ultima IV harder to play than previous
Ultima's?
LB: No, in fact it is easier. This is because it has
many menu-like displays, and easy to remember
spells. The game grades itself to the player in the
beginning. The first ten thousand moves only generate four types of monsters. The next ten thousand
moves only eight types. After that the game breaks
loose!
CGW: That's not in the documentation is it?
LB: No, but after playing, you have a feel for it
because there will be monsters you never saw before.
CGW: Some CGW readers bemoan the fact that
you cannot save games in the dungeons. Why is
that?
LB: Well, this is a problem that with each Ultima I have tried to solve but have not succeeded...
yet. The problem is that to save the game while the
character is on the surface I need only to save the
player location, status and surface information to
the disk and to restore it is simple because it will
always be the outside map! In a dungeon or town,
though, I would also have to save the status and
location of each non-player character or NPC, the
status of each trap, the changes in the walls and
much, much more... Then, even worse, the program
would have to restore all of this when you wish to
restart the game. It's a non-trivial problem.

CGW: Tell us about the playtesting procedure
for Ultima IV.
LB: Ultima IV really got a rush playtest. We
wanted to get it out by Christmas and so I, being
the only one who knew the game well, was the only
one to have completed the game prior to publication. We did have a number of other playtesters but
none had the time to finish it but me. Basically, we
were lucky, but since I write a little and play a little during development, Ultima's tend to be relatively bug-free as they go. By the way, OSI does
normally heavy playtest, but we just rushed it on
Ultima IV.
CGW: We've noticed that in Ultima IV, battle
strategy is much more important than before.
LB: Yes, mainly due to two new additions. First,
the fact that monster parties can have many different kinds of creatures, one should analyze opponents more carefully (i.e. take the wizard and then
trounce the skeletons). The terrain encumbrance
forces the player to consider how to best arrange
his character team.
CGW: It seems that enemy parties are keyed to
party size?
LB: To an extent. This is to help keep the game
easy enough for beginner players and tough for
large parties and advanced players.
CGW: Tell us about the dungeon rooms.
LB: The dungeons themselves are only 8x8x8,
which seems small at first but each dungeon contains many 1 1 x11, individually designed rooms.
Each room can contain up to 16 different types of
creatures, traps or other changing features like collapsing bridges or fire pits and a number of secret
passages. These rooms are one of my favorite new
features in this Ultima!
CGW: What inspired the reagents in spells?
LB: In Ultima Ill, I tried to make a magic system that was as authentic as possible. I even did
research in supposedly real magic books to find
ideas. I made up names for the spells from Latin
roots so that they would sound authentic, but what
actually resulted from that was a magic system that
was hard to remember and difficult to use. So, for
Ultima IV I wrote the 26 spell names in English,
allowing the player to type the first letter of the
spell to execute or cast the spell. I wanted to add
back some of the complexity, so I put in reagents
that must be pre-mixed to cast each spell. I tried to
make the combinations logical as well, such as ginseng in healing type spells, and garlic in warding
types, etc.
CGW: How do you develop the plot for an Ultima? And how are they written?
LB: I program in just the way you are not
taught to program in school. Most of the plot's detail is not decided upon until it comes time to put
it in. The first thing I do is to decide what major
features in the graphics I want, what the capabilities are, put them in and work on that. Then I let

the player walk around on the outdoor map. I then
add the towns and the ability to walk in and out.
Next I add monsters to threaten the player, followed by the ability for the player to fight back.
Next I add shops so the player can buy weapons to
better fight... in this manner I slowly add game
elements as they become necessary. Technically,
this is a bad programming technique, because portions may need to be re-written when new features
are added. However, one of the major reasons new
ideas get into an Ultima is because I use things that
naturally fit into the existing code, needing then a
minimum of additional code. This way lots more
can be crammed into less space. In fact, the bridge
trolls that many who have played Ultima IV have
seen, were added about one week before the game's
release, when I finally found a spot to put in the
ten lines of code.
CGW: Can you save more than one game?
LB: Yes, all of the player information is stored
on the "Britannia Disk". If you copy this disk, you
have a back-up at that point.
CGW: Is there a clue book?
LB: About the time of this article's printing, one
should be available.
CGW: Earlier you mentioned that you are
working on Ultima IV: Part 2. What can you tell
us about that product and what can you tell us
about Ultima V?
LB: Not much since I am only in the concept
phase on both of them. The whole plots change on
a weekly basis, but if anyone has any neat ideas,
please write! [Ed.: Richard can be reached at Origin Systems, 340 Harvey Rd., Manchester, NH
03103]. Oh, also some of you may know that for
Ultima IV I included many NPC's submitted by
Ultima players. I will probably do that again, so
keep your ears open!

DREADNOUGHTS
To obtain the highest score you must find and
destroy the WS-8 convoy. You can do that be
steaming your ships south-west straight into the
southern convoy route at the very first moment you
leave Norway. You will encounter the target convoy
on the second day by using your search planes and
by patrolling. Do not be surprised if you notice that
there are battleships and cruisers near the WS-8
convoy. Go ahead and engage them. After they
have been dispatched concentrate your guns on WS8 until it is completely destroyed. By now victory is
yours even if you lose both of your ships. Increase
your score by sinking other convoys and escorts.
Y.M. Lai
Hong Kong
FIGHTER COMMAND

Strategically Speaking

Strategically Speaking covers strategy game tips,
including tips on wargames, sports games, economic
and other "real life" simulations, and classic style
games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are those
of the authors. We try to avoid printing tips that
don't work, but we cannot playtest all, or even
most of them. So, let the player beware.
We pay $5.00 for each Strategically Speaking tip
used. Presently the bulk of tips submitted to CGW
are on wargames. We also need tips on other types
of strategy games as well. Tips can be mailed to
Strategically Speaking c/o Computer Gaming World,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. Try to
keep tips under 250 words if possible.

CRUSADE IN EUROPE
With play balance set on FAIR, the allies run
into difficulty with the crack German units defending the Normandy beachhead in the assault
scenarios. The allied player can generally get an
early breakout by ignoring the British sector entirely (i.e., instructing the British divisions to DEFEND). Then, the allies can overwhelm the two
German static divisions on the Cherbourg peninsula, capture Cherbourg with two U.S. divisions,
wheel around behind the tough German 91st infantry division, and isolate it. Avranches is only 30
miles (five squares) away at this point, and the
German cannot both defend this critical city and
keep a strong defense in the British sector.
Bob Beck
Hanover, NH

A good RAF Commander will use patrols effectively. The Luftwaffe needs to negate them somehow. Here are some tips that may help.
If the British player does not place patrols until
the two minute clock starts running, use single
squadrons from Norway as feints. Set the turn
around point and offset points well out to sea and
away from radar stations. Time over target for the
first feint is 0630 and space the others out about an
hour apart. This will keep the warning "ENEMY
ACTIVITY - RAIDS EXPECTED SOON" and the
two minute clock running constantly.
The British player is forced to keep patrols up
from dawn to dusk, the Luftwaffe can see the endurance of the patrols and plan raids to hit during
the changing of patrols (hopefully catching some
squadrons on the ground refueling.
***

The first time a fighter sweep is intercepted by
the British player he is informed that it is a sweep
and will not intercept with other squadrons. The
Luftwaffe should pick a coastal target for a raid,
send no bombers, but send ME 109s including the
squadron that can dive bomb. Pick the target and
the offset point as if this were a fighter sweep
(which it is). Interceptions of this raid will only
encounter fighters, but the British player is not told
it is a fighter sweep and should assign more intercepts.
Mike Briggs
Ft. Leonard Wood, MO

Tooling Through the Solar System with The Halley
Project
by Gregg Williams
I was there, I tell you. I was about 3 million
kilometers away from Saturn, my ship turned 90
degrees away from the planet to set myself into an
orbit. Once I had my speed set (a leisurely 10,000
km/sec--I was searching for the incredibly elusive
moon, Iapetus), I turned my viewport toward the
planet and saw it! Saturn, looking like a gigantic
crescent moon. And there, nestling in the dark
between the crescent tips of Saturn, was one of its
moons, itself a crescent, a shockingly beautiful echo
of the immense planet behind it--it was magnificent! As my ship sped past, the crescent moon crept
outside the circle of its mother planet and became
just another planet against the unchanging backdrop of the stars. The game for me was almost
over, but I would never forget the beauty of that
unexpected moment (or several others like it),
which had made the long journey worthwhile.

The Halley Project: a Mission in Our Solar
System from Mindscape (created by Tom Snyder
Productions), is a real-time game that takes place in
a simulated solar system. The game runs on the
Commodore 64 and Atari 800 family of computers
(I played the Atari version); for more details, see
the end of the article.
Training for the Halley Project
When you rip open the top-secret diplomatic
pouch, listen to the briefing tape, and read the
mission dossier (The Halley Project's packaging is
very much like Infocom's), you discover that you
have the opportunity to qualify for the top-secret
Halley project by completing ten training missions
of increasing difficulty that test both your knowl-

edge of the solar system and your skill at piloting a
spacecraft.
A training mission comprises one or more legs,
each of which gives you a destination somewhere in
the solar system; each mission starts and ends on
the top-secret research base inside Halley's Comet.
In each leg, you have to navigate your ship to the
destination, then orbit the planet (sometimes around
its dark side) until you hear the homing beacon of
the landing area and activate the ship's automatic
landing system. The simpler missions have two legs
with unambiguous destinations (like "Earth"); later
missions have as many as six legs and vague descriptions ("any planet or moon warmer than
Callisto") that will send you scurrying to an astronomy book or encyclopedia. Since you can save the
game only at the end of each mission, plan to spend
up to an hour on the early missions and as much as
three hours on the later missions.

Editorial Comment
By the time you read this Halley's comet
should be approaching it's best appearance.
Unfortunately, as you probably know, the view
from the Northern Hemisphere will not be
great. Not only is the geometry for good viewing poor, light pollution will have its negative
effect as well.
When Halley last passed our way (in 1910) it
could be seen from downtown New York City.
Today, in some places in the United States, the
moon is all that you can see from downtown.
There is a great tragedy here. Naturally we
are concerned about the destruction of our environment here on earth. We pass laws to protect endangered species and preserve our
wildernesses. But the most majestic display in

Travel
Your Starbird spaceship has two means of transportation. Normal thrust can get you from 0 to
300,000 km/sec in 20 seconds (how's that for acceleration?). Your brakes (which sound like a
braking ostrich in Joust) half your speed each time
you use them.
To travel really long distances, you accelerate to,
then past, the speed of light; this kicks you into
hyperspace, through which you travel at the respectable pace of about 50,000,000 km/sec until
you jump out of it. (A meter on the screen tells
you how far you've travelled.)
In both modes of travel, your thrust is toward
whatever's in your viewport. You can, however,
rotate your spaceship to look in any direction. If
you apply thrust towards a different location, your
ship's trajectory becomes the vector sum of the
component thrusts.
Navigating
It's here that you begin to suspect that your
Starbird was built under government contract by
the lowest bidder. No digital navigation readouts
here. In order to navigate, you find out what constellation is behind your destination, aim your ship

all of nature, the night sky, is being increasingly destroyed as each year goes by. Go out
and take a look at the night sky from your
backyard. How does it compare to the sky you
remember ten years ago? No, your memory is
not trying to compensate, the sky really was
that much darker back then. And ten years
from now it's going to be that much worse!
I for one want my children to be able to see
the Big Dipper when they are old enough to
pick it out among the stars. But that may not be
possible in the future if we do not get on the
ball and begin to insist on sensible lighting laws
which calls for low-sodium street lights, ground
directed lighting (that's where we want the light
anyway), and a re-evaluation of the erroneous
philosophy that makes us want to "light up the
night".
Russell Sipe

toward the constellation, and blast off!
(The Halley Project authors have made several
simplifications to the game. One is that all the
planets in the solar system lie in the same plane.
Another is that the twelve constellations of the zodiac form a band that encircles the solar system.
The game includes a star-map strip that you use to
identify the constellations you see out your viewport. Two other simplifications, the absence of
Saturn's rings and some of Jupiter's and Saturn's
moons, were made because of the limitations of 8bit microcomputers.)
You use your ship's radar screen to determine
the distance and direction to your destination. It's a
versatile little device that shows part or all of the
solar system (depending on joystick movement),
with your ship always at the center of the screen.
Unfortunately, budget cuts in the space program
also resulted in the installation of a medium-priced
radar that leaves out the computer-generated annotation of each dot on the radar screen. So, turning
again to your trusty astronomy book, you deduce
where you want to go by finding the sun on the
radar screen (it's brighter than the other dots) and
counting out the desired number of planets.
Once you find your destination, you adjust the
radar image until the dot representing your destination touches the rim of the display. Then you can
read off the distance to it (in millions of kilometers) and the name of the nearest constellation. You
then align your ship so it's pointing toward the
right constellation, jump into hyperspace, then
jump back out (you hope) close to your destination.
Depending on how skillful you are as a navigator, you may need to make two or more hyperspace
jumps to get within 25 million km of your destination. (25 million km is about the shortest hyperspace jump you can reliably make without overshooting your destination further than from where
you started. Anyway, at just under light speed, you
can travel a million km in about 3.5 seconds. This
is almost as fast and, unlike hyperspace, you can
make in-flight corrections to your destination.)

Landing
When you get sufficiently close to a planet, your
on-board computer identifies the name of the
planet in the center area of your viewport and
gives a running tally of your distance from it. To
land, you must get within 100,000 km of it and
circle the planet until you hear the homing beacon
of the landing area. I found you often had to orbit
as low as several thousand kilometers to find the
beacon, and doing that on the dark side of the
planet (where you can deduce the planet horizon
only by the absence of stars) is no small task!
Once you hear the homing beacon, you must activate your ship's automatic landing system before
you get out of its range--it's very frustrating when
you lose the signal and have to run after it again.

skills. If you crash on a planet, you are hospitalized
for a month (the positions of planets and moons
shift accordingly) and you are released with 5 minutes added to your score (which is a rather severe
penalty).
What is The Halley Project?
Frankly, I don't know yet. Once you qualify for
it by completing all 10 missions (which I did), you
send a registration card in to Mindscape with a secret number revealed to you at the end of your
tenth mission. According to Mindscape, they will
be sending the information needed to start the final
mission, the Halley Project itself, starting in
January, 1986.
Though Mindscape wouldn't reveal any details
of the final mission, my guess is that it will have to
do with the comet directly (after all, the 10 training
missions do not, except in using the comet as the
start and end of a mission). Also, note that that
January date coincides with the beginning of the
comet's maximum visibility in the sky. It's an interesting gimmick, but a frustrating one to most
gamers--even gamers who buy the game later in
1986 will still have to wait "about 5 weeks" for the
final material to be delivered. I won't be surprised
if Mindset gets some threatening letters from irate
customers!
If the final mission is sufficiently interesting, I'll
report on it in the Atari column of CGW as soon as
I can in mid-1986.
Did someone say "Educational"?

Moons
Oh, I didn't tell you about moons, did I? In
many cases, your destination will be a moon. Moons
are just like planets--except (heh, heh) they don't
show up on the radar. To get to a given moon, you
should navigate to the planet the moon circles, then
visually search for the moon, which your viewport
will identify once you are close enough to it. The
further a moon is from a planet, the harder it is to
locate it unless you're in approximately the same
orbit as it is--keep your reference books handy!
Scoring
The authors of this game have devised a clever,
useful way of scoring your performance. Your
score, which you try to minimize, is the number of
seconds (excluding hyperspace jumps) that your
ship is in motion during a mission. Because your
score does not increase while your ship is at rest,
the game encourages planning and efficient flight
plans and minimizes the value of traditional arcade

I haven't said anything about this being an educational game, though it obviously has educational
value. As in most Tom Snyder Productions games,
the education that takes place is so seamlessly a
part of the game that it doesn't call attention to itself. This is not an educational game--rather, it's a
great game that encourages you to pick up some
facts along the way.
The thing I like most about this game (as with
other simulation games) is that it teaches you the
facts of experience, not the facts of book-learning.
I still may not know the name of the fourth moon
of Jupiter, but I do know that, near Pluto, the sun
is so far away that it's hard to see anything; I also
know that the innermost moon of Jupiter whips by
so fast it's hard to land on. By encouraging "doing"
rather than "reading/memorizing" skills, this game
also encourages the development of general problem-solving skills.
(To enrich the learning experience, the mission
dossier for this game includes a short bibliography
of astronomy books and magazines and fiction
about space. It also explains the simplifications
made in this game and give some pointers on find-

ing the constellations used in this game in the sky.)
Conclusions
Obviously, I like this game. The simulation is
accurate enough to be instructive but not so detailed that it is unplayable. I also like the way the
game looks and sounds (the game adds a percussive
soundtrack whenever you get near a planet--a typical Tom Snyder touch).
I also like The Halley Project because it gives
me a whole new universe to explore and because it
has much more depth than the simplistic scenarios
of simple shoot-'em-up arcade games. This game
has enough richness in it to fantasize about--"There
I was, three million kilometers away from Saturn," I
recounted to coworkers, "and the planet is still so
big it fills most of the screen...." In some ways,
describing The Halley Project is like describing
yourself inside a challenging adventure game--you
have to know where you are and how you got there
before you can figure out what to do next.
The game gives good value for the money--I
spent about 20 hours getting through each mission

once, not including the final mission (whatever that
turns out to be). The planets are randomly placed at
the beginning of each mission, and you can replay
each mission as many times as you like.
Until faster-than-light travel is discovered and
used by commercial airlines, this simulation is the
best way I know to drive through the solar system.
And I'm proud of myself--this is one of the few
video games I can finish. Program details: "The
Halley Project," $49.95, from Mindscape, 3444
Dundee Rd., Northbrook IL 60062; includes a single disk with versions of the program for both the
Commodore 64 and Atari 800 series computers. A
new version of this game for the Amiga computer
is promised, price unknown. The Halley Project
was created by a team at Tom Snyder Productions
headed by Omar H. Khudari and Thomas F. F.
Snyder

Gregg Williams is a technical editor for Byte
Magazine as well as our Atari Playfield columnist
during those times when he is not flying around the
solar system.

SILENT
SERVICE
Designer's Notes
by Sid Meier of MicroProse

A long winding path usually leads from the first
wildly ambitious design goals of a computer simulation to the finished product. Occasionally, though,
a project services intact, refined by the rigors of
development but unchanged in its essentials. Fortunately for all concerned, Silent Service proved to be
such a product. In this article, I will discuss the
major design decisions which initially defined
Silent Service and discuss the features which resulted.
Silent Service is a detailed simulation of submarine warfare in the Pacific during World War II.
The player commands a US submarine in actions
that range from a single attack on a convoy to a
war patrol lasting many weeks. Play proceeds in
real-time during the action and accelerated realtime in the times between.
This last feature, the accelerated-real time, was
designed to overcome the difficulty that has beset
most previous computer submarine simulations: the
fact that submarine warfare is so episodic, with
moments of frantic activity following weeks of
routine activity and hours of careful stalking. As a
consequence, designs have tended to simplify and
distort the situation in order to create a more arcade-like feeling. In contrast, our first design decision was to make the simulation as realistic as possible. We were convinced that a realistic simulation
including all the key factors in commanding a submarine would contain more than enough interest,
challenge and excitement.
One key factor was the immense size of the war
theatre, which presented skippers with an endless

number of potential battlefields. We created a mapping system which includes the entire Western Pacific ocean. Engagements may take place anywhere
in this arena. The player can zoom in on any portion of the map until the screen displays an area of
only 8 miles by 5 miles. The computer generates
water depths and bridge and periscope views that
are consistent with the map location.
A second key factor that introduced variation
into submarine warfare was the sheer variety of
tactical situations which faced skippers. Night attacks differed greatly from daylight attacks.
Weather, water depth, and equipment capabilities
each affected the captain's tactics. "Dud" torpedoes,
deep diving pressure hulls, underwater temperature
gradients, and varying visibility conditions all contributed to an infinite variety of tactical situations.
A third key factor that introduces variation is
the fact that equipment on both sides evolved continuously. Silent Service's scenarios encompass the
numerous changes that took place during the war.
For example, prior to 1944 US submarines used 46knot steam-propelled torpedoes, which left a bubble trail on the surface which pointed back towards
the submarine. Only in 1944 were electric torpedoes
which left no trail introduced. The pre-1944 skipper could count on an immediate counterattack and
would generally begin his escape as soon as his torpedoes were fired. With electric torpedoes, a more
deliberate attack was feasible. But by late 1944,
most Japanese escorts had surface radar, which
once again changed attack tactics.
Our second basic design decision was to place
the player directly into the role of submarine cap-

tain. This role requires that a great deal of information be readily accessible. To facilitate the presentation of this information we implemented the
"battle station" concept. Each battle station is represented by a separate screen which displays related
information. The "Maps and "Charts" battle station
contains the maps of various scales along with the
most current information as to the position of enemy ships and escorts. The "Bridge/Binoculars" battle station provides a wide-angle view of enemy
ships and nearby islands or coastlines. The
"Periscope" battle station includes a magnified view
of target ships, the Torpedo Data Computer readout
(range, speed, target course, etc.), and the report
from the target identification party. The "Gauges
and Instruments" battle station displays fuel levels,
battery charge, torpedo status, depth and other vital
information. Finally, the "Damage Control" battle
station indicates which components have suffered
battle damage.
In playing the game, the player utilizes each
battle station in turn to plan and carry out an attack. The Maps and Charts are generally used during the approach to the enemy convoy. From the
bridge, the captain examines the convoy and selects
his target. The deck gun can be fired if the target
is small and unprotected, or a Japanese escort
catches the sub on the surface. The periscope provides bearing and range information as the captain
chooses the optimum moment to fire the torpedoes.
This compartmentalization assures that a great deal
of information is available while allowing the
player to focus on the specific task at hand.

No simulation would be complete without a dangerous, crafty, and relentless enemy. Silent Service
includes a sophisticated simulation of Japanese escort tactics, both their strengths and their weaknesses. Central to this simulation is the concept of
"limited intelligence;" the escorts can only act upon
information which they would actually know. Combined with realistic game mechanics, this rewards
the well planned approach, the best firing position,
and other sound submarine tactics. A sub can only
survive if it makes maximum use of stealth and
surprise.
One of the constants in the design and development environment at MicroProse is our focus on
"real-life simulation" products. That is, products to
which the player responds not only to what he sees
on the screen and reads in the documentation, but
also relies on his own experience, reading, and
knowledge to enhance the game play. Another constant is to leave the game design flexible and modifiable until the very last stages of development.
This allows us to improve and fine-tune the game
in those areas which are clearly identifiable only
near completion, namely user friendliness and
playability. We are confident that Silent Service will
appeal to computer garners who want realism, detail, and depth along with smooth arid fast paced
play.
(Mr. Meier's previous designs include F-15
Strike Eagle, Solo Flight and the Command Series
system used in Crusade in Europe and Decision in
the Desert. All are published by MicroProse Software).

mothership, and which to dismantle for
points as you try to strengthen your ship
for battle against fiercer Guardians in the
higher levels. If KR is a game, it is also a
puzzle--there is so much about your ship,
the Guardians, and modules that you have
to deduct or learn through trial and
(much) error that observation and strategy that arcade skill alone isn't enough to
get you through this game.
I didn't like KR because I spent so
much time in the time-honored "try
something, get killed, restore a saved
game" cycle so familiar to adventure
players. The Guardians are too ruthless
too early in the game for me--I spent almost as much time restoring my last position as I did playing it. Also, I found myself taking notes about everything to get
an edge on this game, and I found it more
work than fun.

Atari Playfield

GREGG WILLIAMS

LUCASFILM'S SECOND WAVE
Lucasfilm's first two games, Ballblazer
and Rescue on Fractalus, were originally
conceived by the Lucasfilm design team as
throw-away exercises; instead, the results
were good enough (by their high standards) for publication, and the Atari and
Commodore 64 communities gained two of
the most unusual and state-of-the-art
games ever made. Consider the fact that
the two new games, Koronis Rift and The
Eidolon, are the first two games that Lucasfilm meant for publication. The result,
interestingly, is two games that give a
"deeper" fantasy than the first two but
that are not as easy to like. Both of the
new games are simulations of alien environments; perhaps we're seeing an example
of the old detail-versus-playability tradeoff. I could wholeheartedly recommend the
first two games to anyone; I don't like
these two, but you may. (Both games are
$39.95 each and are distributed by Epyx
(1043 Kiel Ct., Sunnyvale CA 94089).)

KORONIS RIFT
One of the most amazing technological
feats in Rescue on Fractalus was the calculation and display of a fractal landscape
in real time (fractals are mathematically
derived shapes that look like many irregular shapesmountains, for example--in
nature). Well, Lucasfilm must be determined to get their money's worth out of
that code, because both of the new games

use variations on it--hills and valleys in
Koronis Rift, cave tunnels in The Eidolon-with outstanding results in both cases.
KR (as I'll abbreviate it) is similar to
Fractalus--from a ship orbiting a planet,
you make repeated forays over the planet
and return to the mothership. In Fractalus, you were looking for pilots to rescue;
in KR, you are looking for the hulks of
ships abandoned long ago by a legendary
"confederation of over thirty different
races" called the Ancients. When you find
such a ship (and, by the way, shoot down
all the Guardian saucers protecting it),
you send a robot to loot it for technologically valuable modules.
I have seen the future, and it works:
your ship has six slots that will accept
Ancient module designs--no problems with
compatibility here! Modules are identified
by two symbols: the first indicates its purpose (if you're lucky--you have only a
partial list of module types and often must
discover a module's function), the second,
the race that built it. (In addition, the
color of a symbol also makes a difference.)
Back in the mothership, your Psytek robot
can analyze a module (giving its value and
its efficiency and power ratings), dismantle
it, or store it for later use.
You can play KR to maximize your
score and/or to get to Rift 20 (hah! I
couldn't get past rift 4!) and destroy the
Guardian base. So the game becomes one
of getting modules and knowing which to
install in your ship, which to store in the

I also had some mechanical problems
with KR. In what may have been a deliberate design decision, your ship starts
moving forward when your cursor touches
the top border of your view window--this
makes it virtually impossible to shoot at
Guardians while standing still. Also, the
disk holds only one saved game, and it
does it on the (copy-protected) master
disk. I anticipated problems and made a
copy of the KR disk--it didn't boot, but I
could save games to it. When the unexpected happened--the program messed up
the KR disk and wouldn't accept a saved
game--I substituted the copy and found
that I could play the entire game from the
floppy. My advice is to copy the KR disk
and use it to start the game, then substitute the copy.
Still, I have to say that the graphics
and sound in this game are outstanding,
and the game's premise is imaginative. Its
skill/strategy/study balance is interesting,
but I didn't enjoy interacting with it; you
may. The "depth" of the fantasy is outstanding, second only to that of an interactive adventure, but this game has color
graphics and plays in real time! It's a
unique challenge, but definitely not for
everybody.
THE EIDOLON
AAAAAAAARRRRRGGH! Excuse
me, but I just had to get that out of my
system. I have two 48K Atari 800s and a
48K Atari 400, and I can't play Eidolon!
Why? Because if you look in the fine print,
the packaging says "requires 64K"! This
means that Eidolon is playable only by
owners of the 800XL, the 1200XL, and the
two new Atari XE computers; Atari
400/800 owners, your computer can't run
this game.
If you don't like the puzzle aspects of
KR, you'll really be annoyed (as I was) by
Eidolon--you have to use the same "die
until you learn the rules" strategy as in
KR, but this game doesn't have a savegame feature.
The Eidolon is a mysterious machine
built by a long-dead Victorian scientist.
When you activate it, you're suddenly
transported to a maze of underground
passages. The rules (told as a series of diary entries by its inventor) explain that

you may meet a half dozen or so fanciful
critters, that you can shoot fireballs of four
colors (each with a different effect), that
you may find jewels of three colors, and
that you must overcome a dragon to get to
the next level. The documentation hints at
there being seven levels, with a final challenge past the dragon on level 7. Of course,
the critters guard the jewels (of which you
may need some or all). The documentation
implies that you can simply sidestep some
of them, but I never could get past them
and had to blast them to pieces (honest).
I mean, really, I think this game suffers from a lack of imagination. You get
transported to god-knows-where in this
machine and you basically shoot at everything in sight. Is this a reasonable--let
alone responsible--way to explore a new
world?
I feel sorry for one critter in particular--it looks like a goofy Viking dwarf, and
its eyes bug out and it makes a wonky
sound when you shoot it. As my friend
Rick Grehan said, it could be saying,
"Wow, you're the first person I've seen in
ten thousand years, will you be my friend?
Let's go get a milk shake andow! What'd
I do? Stop that! You're killing me!
AAAACCCKKkkkkkk...."
Two other constraints lead to an interesting strategy twist. You have two resources you don't want to run out of in
this game. The first is time: you have to
finish a level before the clock counts down
to zero; if you don't, the game (and your
hard-earned progress) ends. The second is
energy: contact with both the critters and
the fireballs decreases the energy the Eidolon has; when that drops to zero, you're
taken back to "reality" and get to try the
same level again. This results in an interesting stay-alive strategy: deliberately
killing yourself (you can't always do it)
just to keep the game from ending. Weird.
My overall reaction is much the same
as for KR--great sound and graphics; I
don't care for the game's balance, but you
may. Mapping each level is essential for
people who don't have an uncanny sense of
direction.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
If either of these games interest you,
go out and buy them! They're definitely in
the top 10% of Atari games, and we need
to vote with our dollars to encourage Lucasfilm Games (and Epyx) to create Atari
versions of future games. (Both games are
packaged with both Atari and Commodore-64 versions, and I'm sure you realize that the C64 is the machine that
games are designed for--with Atari translations only if it makes sense economically.) In fact, it wouldn't hurt to write
Epyx expressing interest in seeing more
Atari games.
CGW didn't get in any Atari ST
games this month, so there's nothing to
report on there--maybe next month. Also,
I did receive the copy of Fooblitzky I
bought (it's a multiplayer game with simple graphics, from Infocom). As they
claimed, it is a lot like a mixture of Clue
and Mastermind. I've only had time to
play it once, but it was interesting--I will
definitely cover it in fuller detail next
month. Until then, remember--no matter
where you go, there you are.

AMIGA
PREFERENCES

A New Column

Roy Wagner
Listen to the crowds, the vendor selling, the
referee making his calls, the ball against the floor
and up in air and through the basket --- SWWIISH,
two points! But you're not at a basketball game
away from the security of your computer. No you
are playing One-on-One on your Amiga. Sounds
you have to hear to believe. Graphics you have to
see to know that the Amiga is not just another
computer, but rather the ultimate game machine. (II
functions as an excellent business machine, but
that's a ball in another court.)
The first games to make it to market were from

Activision: Hacker, Mindshadow, and Borrowed
Time. These games had just recently been released
for other computer systems, and now with enhanced graphics were released for the Amiga. All
three are graphic adventures. New Amiga owners,
anxious for any software to play with on their
machines, bought out initial shipments. Users were
pleased with what they saw and heard. But where
were the games from EA (Electronic Arts) that had
been advertised so much even before the Amiga
was available?
Next to appear were three text adventures from
Infocom: Wishbringer (Beginner Level), Spellbreaker (Advanced Level - third in the fantasy trilogy of Enchanter and Sorcerer), and the year's favorite, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (Standard
Level Fun). The text and flavor of the games remained unchanged, but the play was greatly enhanced.
Nearly all Infocom games are designed to the
limited disk capacity of 160K. An Amiga disk
holds 880K and the Amiga comes with 256K of
memory. Thereby an entire Infocom disk, program
and data are loaded into the Amiga. This means no
disk accesses and fast play! Games in progress can
be saved using a thirty character text name and
over thirty games can be saved to the Amiga disk
that contains the game. An Infocom adventure is
always fun, but on the Amiga it is a real pleasure.
But where were the EA games?
The answer came soon. The earlier games released were able to use the initial operating system
release (1.0). With release 1.1 right around-the-corner, EA had been using 1.1 for the final design of
it's production release. This meant the EA titles

could not be released until the users had 1.1. The
corner ended up being a LONG block away for it
was nearly a month from talk of the release of 1.1
to it's actual release. Even then EA sent their initial
titles to the dealers and many were sold before the
users received the official Commodore 1.1 upgrade
package.
The first Electronic Arts software release was
not a game, but Deluxe Paint, a super sophisticated
painting, drawing, coloring and electronic sticker
book. EA released this sensational tool before
Commodore/Amiga's Graphicraft, a similar product.
The delay of the latter was mainly due to a transfer
of the product from it's initial developer Island
Graphics to Aegis. The extensive features of Deluxe
Paint will be hard to equal for any other product
that produces static color graphics. EA and other
companies are also working on animation products.
For games, EA initially released three of it's
award winning classics with enhancements added
for the Amiga.

One-on-One is a one/two player (Julius Erving
and Larry Bird) basketball simulation. As mentioned above, it has tremendous sounds obtained by
digitally sampling real sounds. The game options
are selected from pull-down menus (using the
wrong Amiga mouse button!). The background
graphics are well done. However, as with prior
versions, the player movements and actions handled
with a joystick do not give the feeling that one is
really in control. (EPYX does a much better job
with their control even on a C64 in Summer/Winter

games.) This game with it's many play options is
still fun to play.

Seven Cities of Gold is the simulation of the exploration of North and South America during the
15th Century. It includes sailing the Atlantic, encounters with regional natives, trading for gold,
establishing missions and forts. The Amiga version
is too faithful to prior versions. It appears graphically the same and the sounds are only somewhat
better. My major objection is that the game uses a
separate 880K disk for each map. This is extremely
wasteful and unnecessary! Also instead of using
game port two (the available port), this game requires you to remove the mouse and use that port.
The game plays smoothly. Aside from these minor
grievances it is an excellent teaching tool.
Archon is a cross between chess and fantasy role
playing. One's strategic moves are made upon a
chess like board using various fantastic pieces.
When a piece is "taken", the final taking must be
resolved in battle in an arcade like arena. The conversion of this game was done by two of the creators of the original game (Jon Freeman and Anne
Westfall). The graphics and sound are superb and
subtle. The game plays very nicely on the Amiga, is
interesting, challenging and enjoyable. A very nice
conversion done well for the Amiga.
It's time to put the cover back on our Amiga.
Next time we will hopefully be reviewing new
games making their first appearance on the Amiga.
Until then, listen up, that sound you hear is coming
from your Amiga.

by Scorpia
"Spock, scan for life readings".
"Scanning....no indications of life, Captain".
"Kirk to Transporter Room".
"Renner here, sir".
"Beam us up".
"Energizing...".
Does that bring back fond memories of the days
when the USS Enterprise roamed the far reaches of
the galaxy? Did you ever yearn to sit in the Captain's chair, secretly believing you could do just as
good a job, if not better, than Captain Kirk himself? Well, here's your chance to find out, because
the above dialogue is not from the show, but from
'Star Trek: The Kobayashi Alternative', a new game
published by Simon and Schuster (yes, the book
people).
There have been Star Trek-type games before,
but they were all of the same mold: you flew
around the galaxy, looking for Klingons to blast
into space dust. They were shoot-em-ups, plain and
simple. No landing parties, no contact with strange
alien life forms, no problems to solve. You might
just as well have been in the USS Clunker.
This one is different. The Enterprise is here, in
all her glory, from Sick Bay to Engineering, from
Kirk's Quarters to the Shuttle Deck. The Transporter Room is here, too, and you will be seeing a
lot of it. While there will be some Klingons to
fight, most of your time will be spent in beaming
down and exploring those 'strange new worlds'. Not

by yourself, either; some familiar faces can be
found among the crew: Spock, McCoy, Scotty,
Uhura, Chekov. You can take any or all of them
down with you.
Now, a word of explanation for those of you
who might not have seen 'Star Trek II: The Wrath
of Khan'. In this movie we learn about the
Kobayashi Test, which is given to cadets at Star
Fleet Academy. A pretty silly one, actually, since
all it does is measure how well you die; there is no
way to come out alive (short of rigging the computers, which is what Kirk did, hehe). Of course,
this is all done in simulation; as McCoy might say:
"He's not REALLY dead, Jim".
As I said, pretty silly; it takes more than being
able to die nobly to make a starship captain. And
so: The Kobayashi Alternative, a revised test, to see
if you really have what it takes to sit in the captain's chair. It is a fair test; you have a chance of
coming out alive and successful, providing you use
your head. If you don't....
So, you inquire, what is the test? Funny you
should ask. Did you notice a name missing from the
list of crewmembers above? Like maybe, Mr. Sulu?
He's not on board the Enterprise. Where is he? Ahhhh, THAT is the question of the day. No one
knows. The ship he is temporarily commanding, the
USS Heinlein, has vanished in partially-mapped
space. Your mission, Jim, is to explore that area of
space, contact the inhabitants for information, and

find out what happened to the Heinlein and its
crew. As always, should you or any of your...err,
no, sorry, wrong show!
And now here you are, sitting in your chair on
the bridge, with everyone waiting for your orders.
Somehow, it doesn't seem to be quite so easy as you
had imagined it would be. Where do you start? You
have at least ten planets to visit, and the computer
data on a few of them makes you a little nervous.
Andorgha, for instance. Two Federation ships have
been lost there. Is that what happened to the Heinlein? Maybe, maybe not. Then there's Tshio. Why is
that planet under quarantine? And the inhabitants
of Klusos have been known to fire at a Federation
ship. What about Malakiyy? There is no real data at
all about that one in the ship's computer, making it
a somewhat mysterious place.
Many possibilities here, some of them perhaps
unpleasant. But you have a job to do Captain, so
you'd better decide soon where you're going. No
one is going to help you make that decision, either.
So, read the docs, get all the information you can
from the computer, and warp out.
Now, that's Star Trek. The game is, in many
ways, a faithful recreation of the show. You really
can take the turbo-lift to the different decks, and
visit Sick Bay, Engineering, Security, as well as a
variety of other places. While you may not need to
do this to win the game, the fact that these places
are actually there gives a feeling of completion, a
feeling that yes, by gosh, this IS the Enterprise!
You talk to the crew, too. "Spock, damage report". "Chekov, set course for Hastorang". "Scotty,
how long will repairs take?". And so on. You can
direct crewmembers to go places, perform actions,
or provide information, and they will respond appropriately.
Each of the planets in the game is a world unto
itself; no two are alike. Some, like Hastorang, may
seem at least a bit familiar, but don't let that fool
you. Beneath the surface, there are many surprises.
And a few chuckles, too. The game has a definite
(and occasionally sly) sense of humor to it.
Careful exploration of the worlds, and especially
speaking to the different aliens, is a must, since
this is the only way you can pick up the information you need to track the Heinlein. However, not
every planet has worthwhile data. Some are red
herrings, that seem to be important but really
aren't, and others have no information at all. It's up
to you to figure out which is which.
There are no graphics in the game. The IBM
version has pretty windows, and the Apple version
uses inverse bordering to set off the screen. There
are three parts to the screen: the upper half, where
you see the results of scans, responses from crew
and aliens, and readouts from the computer; a twoline middle section, where you enter your commands; and the bottom third of the screen, which
shows your current position and heading, as well as
status reports on the engines, shields, phasers, and
photon torpedoes.
Continued on pg. 42

Twenty-eight popular B & W and five
color printers, as well as ten interfaces are
supported. Any problems are only a phone
call away. The standard system disk also
includes enhancement programs to add
color to your drawings, transmit/receive
graphics by modem, edit and animate
sprites, and a high resolution plot package
for use from BASIC.
Of the many graphics programs available FLEXIDRAW is certainly the best
supported by it's parent company. Inkwell
Systems is one of the few C64 companies
that notify their registered users of each
new release (currently 5.0) and will upgrade it for a reasonable cost. Inkwell regularly adds companion programs to further
extend the capabilities of it's standard
program. A FLEXIFONT program offers
33 different fonts, a font editor and a program to "capture" custom fonts from other
programs.
THE COMMODORE KEY

Roy Wagner

Said to be coming soon will be a
GRAPHIC INTEGRATOR that will convert picture files from one graphic package
(Koala, Doodle!, Abacus, Micro Illustrator,
Paint Magic) to another and particularly
to FLEXIDRAW format. The output from
several popular word processors can also
be integrated with the drawing. (This program was not yet available for review.)
THE SAGA CONTINUES
(LODE RUNNER'S RESCUE)

DRAW ME A PICTURE
(FLEXIDRAW)
FLEXIDRAW from Inkwell Systems is
a sophisticated, light-pen graphics package. It offers all the features that one
needs to produce and print professional
quality drawings. It offers multiple line
widths for freehand sketching, rubberbanding and point-to-point lines. Arcs,
ellipses, circles and boxes can be automatically generated. Ten fonts in three sizes
are available to label your drawing or to
simply prepare a text only document using
the fancy fonts. Symbol libraries for math
and science, electronic schematics and architectural floor plans are provided. The
light pen or cursor keys can be used for
drawing and/or placing images. An Oops
and Undo feature can stop or remove the
last function performed.
Drawing in FLEXIDRAW is predominantly done in black and white with grey
tones. A separate program, that is included, supports the addition of 16 high
resolution colors. Patterns, from the many
provided or of your own design, can be
used to fill in light or dark areas. Shading,
edge outlining and even picture simplification commands let you further refine
your drawings. Two separate work areas
can be used to transfer (cut & paste) from
other drawings or the two areas can be
combined to double your work area. Images or cut areas can be rotated, flipped or
video reversed.

One of the most successful games in
the world is LODE RUNNER from
Broderbund. In Japan, it is nearly a national pastime, with 15 authorized versions
since it's introduction in 1983. Success
comes from it's simple yet extremely challenging nature and variety of play. The
original version has 150 different screens,
extensive player options, and best of all,
the option to create your OWN screens.
Then came Broderbund's release of
CHAMPIONSHIP LODE RUNNER with
50 screens and COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD's very own disk with 60 screens
produced by it's readers.
Just released from Broderbund is
LODE RUNNER'S RESCUE. This sequel
sends out his brave daughter to rescue him
from imprisonment. The three-dimensional
display is quite different from what we
have seen before in other games. A
labyrinth of 46 mazes must be traveled to
reach Lode Runner's prison cell. These
mazes are displayed from a 45 degree
overview with towers, walls and roving
guards. In place of laser blaster, bricks,
ladders and hand over hand bars; we have
stairs, trapdoors, elevators, jumping and
swimming. Magic mushrooms and cats
provide extra help. Instead of gold, she
must gather keys before going on to the
next level.
When one loses all of one's "lives", the
game begins again at the last level
achieved (not the first screen). This is an
option I would like to see in ALL multiscreen games. This game also has the much
favored option to create your own screens
with an icon screen editor. an excellent
game in all respects.

ANOTHER ONE ON TRACK
(FAST TRACKS)
An auto race track game that I missed
on the last loop was the recent release
from Activision of FAST TRACKS. This
game is based on the concept of slot cars
and plays like the real thing. It comes with
22 predesigned tracks and includes a very
nice "Design a Track" option. Several more
very difficult tracks are available from
Activision by mail.
A joystick is used to control acceleration and braking, and left-right movement
to bump of other cars. Since you are racing
a slot car, you don't steer but only control
your speed on the curves. This is a one
player game in which you race against
three other cars controlled by the computer. You race five laps in order to try to
better times recorded on the scoreboard. If
you do, your name is added to the list.
Race tracks, that you create, can be
sent to friends who don't even have the
game. They can then try to beat your best
times. This game offers a lot of variety and
plays nicely. It comes in a close third to
the Racing Destruction Set from EA and
Pole Position.
KNOCK, KNOCK, WHO'S THERE?
(LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE)
Another new title from Activision,
LITTLE COMPUTER PEOPLE, offers an
innovative new game concept. Essentially
it is an interactive doll house. A mild
mannered game of random adventure in a
closed universe of a house on your computer screen. A resident for this home arrives shortly after the game is first started,
checks out the house to see if it is to it's
likings, and then moves in along with it's
dog. The home provides everything that a
LCP (Little Computer Person) might need;
food, water, bed and bathroom. Entertainment is provided with a record player,
tv, piano, library of books, telephone, and
computer. Using the latter, it is able to
communicate with you. With you it can
play ANAGRAMS or the card games of
WAR or POKER. You are responsible to
keep the LCP supplied with food (for it
and it's dog), water, records, and books. A
different LCP is created for each game
disk. This game is based on familiar concepts that we have seen before, but they
are brought together nicely. The game is
more cute than fun or challenging. The
range of activities are limited and not very
exciting, but can be interesting. The
"game" is ideally suited for children. It
does a good job of teaching about caring
for another.
LUCAS STRIKES AGAIN
Distributed by EPYX, the creative
people at the Lucasfilm Games Division
have come up with games that are definitely impressive. BALLBLAZER, RESCUE ON FRACTALUS, THE EIDOLON,
and KORONIS RIFT all show state of the
art graphics and sound. They all offer advanced arcade concepts and are well documented. To play successfully will require
your understanding of their subtle complexities. A step beyond the average game
and highly recommended.

Scholastic Software has a program called Story
Tree that is the easiest to use of any such program
I've seen yet. It is much simpler than Adventure
Master by CBS. Rather than allow you to type any

the

learnig

game
BOB PROCTOR

The Adventure Game
The adventure game is one of the oldest and
most popular forms of computer game. The classic
Adventure, from which the genre takes its name,
came into being before there was such a thing as a
desktop personal computer. It was the advent of the
home computer that changed Adventure and Zork
and a few others from a treat enjoyed only by a
rare few into a mass entertainment market with
dozens of titles vying for popularity.
Many people still try to distinguish between adventure games and role-playing games. This
distinction is blurring. The classic adventure games,
which are like puzzles, are blending with simulations and with role-playing games, which feature
large amounts of chance, to create games that are
very involving.

Educational Aspects
While the primary object of these games is to
entertain, playing them does require skills that are
useful. Beyond the obvious reading and keyboard
skills, there is organization, planning, analysis and
logic.
Some newer games try to teach specific knowledge in a more direct attempt at education. Examples are Robot Odyssey by The Learning Company,
which requires you to design logic circuits to complete the story, and The Halley Project from
Mindscape.

Rolling Your Own
(STORY TREE)
If all of these benefits can be had by the person
playing the game then they must benefit the person
who creates the game twice as much. At least,
that's the theory behind a new class of games that
let you develop your own interactive stories.

valid command at any time in the manner of the
classic adventure game, this one only lets you make
certain specific choices at certain points in the
story. It does not support the manipulation of objects nor does it support graphics. All you can use
is text so the stories go together very rapidly.
The idea of writing a story to be read several
times -- with different plot twists each reading -is a fairly recent one as far as I know. It is not
limited to computer games; it is also used in the
popular "Choose Your Own Adventure" books. Designing all of the loops and branches the plot can
take requires planning and imagination.
How The Story Goes Together
There are three types of linkages in a Story Tree
story. The simplest is a straight sequence or what
Story Tree calls a "Continue". From screen A, you
always go to screen B.
The second type is "Choice", where the reader
can pick one of up to four alternatives. Each calls
up a different screen; a new one, one seen before,
or even the same one.
The last type of link is "Chance". A screen with
this type of link is always followed by one of two
screens. As the designer, you can set the odds that
determine how often each occurs. For example, a
witness in a mystery might be cooperative 50% of
the time and stubborn the other 50%. Or, an asteroid might pass harmlessly by 90% of the time but
might might strike your ship the other 10%. This
would end the story rather suddenly but it adds a
greater sense of danger to subsequent playings.

Conclusions
Story Tree works very well at the intended age
level -- from ages 9 to 14. The simplicity forces
the story teller to focus on plot, setting, and characterization. There is no temptation to construct
elaborate and difficult puzzles because there is no
way to test for the presence of certain objects or
use any secret words.
The simple format also lends itself well to nonfiction. The Story disk that comes with the program
contains a sample bibliography and a sample report.
One of the best things about Story Tree is that
it's a game without winners and losers. For those
who thrive on competition, Scholastic is sponsoring
a contest. The best story in each of two age brackets -- grades 4-6 and grades 7-9 -- will win an
Apple II computer (which model is not specified).
The deadline is April 30, 1986, so there's still time.
Contact Scholastic Inc., Dept. WW, 730 Broadway,
New York, NY 10003 for details.
Story Tree comes with a reference manual, the
program disk and the story disk. The program is
available for Apple II, Commodore 64 and IBM
PC/PC Jr. List price is $39.95 for the home version, $74.95 for the school version. The latter includes backup copies of both disks and a large 3ring binder for the manual and extra material for
teachers.

music is better as well. The game is produced by
Ocean and runs on the C-64, Amstrad, and
Timex/Sinclair. The price is 10.95 on tape.
Another Commando clone is Who Dares Wins. It
was the first commando type game. A nice little
game, it is available on the C-64/128 at 9.95. WDW
comes from Software House Alligata who have been
noted for their excellent copies of arcade games
well worth getting.

OVER
THERE!
A New Column

The final Commando clone, American G.I.,
comes from System 3. And at 8.50 it is a good
value. It is polished and professional.
The addresses where you can contact these software houses are: Elite Systems, Anchor House,
Anchor Rd., Aldridge, Walsall; Ocean Software,
Ocean House, 6 Central St., Manchester, M2 5NS;
Alligata Software, 1 Orange St. Sheffield, S1 4DW;
System 3 Software, Southbank House, Black Prince
Rd., London, SE1 7SJ. If you contact any of the
above, mention this column and be sure and enclose
a reply coupon if you require further information
before ordering.

STOP PRESS... LATE NEWS...
Cartoon hero Scooby Doo turns up in the 'first
cartoon animated game for the home computer'
from Elite Systems, more news next time.
Leslie B. Bunder

First of all, let me say hello to all you computer
gamers in the United States. My name is Leslie B.
Bunder and I am writing to you from London in
order to keep you up-to-date with all the latest developments in computer games from England. If
you want to express your opinions on this column
or any of the games mentioned, just write to me.
You can reach me at 50 Riverside Close, Cuckoo
Ave., Hanwell, London W7 1BY, United Kingdom
(please include an international reply coupon if you
wish to receive a reply). Prices given for games in
this column include air mail cost. If you send any
money to these companies, send it as an international money order and allow four weeks for delivery.
The big craze in England at the moment is
Rambo/commando type games. There are official
versions of both the arcade game Commando and
Rambo. These games require you to take the role of
a soldier who must single handedly take on a whole
army. All the home computer versions are based on
the arcade game Commando but not to the extent
that they infringe any copyright. If I had to recommend only one it would be the official home
computer version of Commando produced by Elite
Systems for the C-64, Amstrad CPC 464, 664,
6128, Timex/Sinclair 2000 and BBC. The price is a
reasonable 9.95 for all versions and comes on tape.
The next game is Rambo which has some very
nice touches to it. Unlike Commando, you can actually choose the weapons you want to use. Rambo's

Watch out for Firebird Software, the software
arm of British telecom (British equivalent of
AT&T). There first release, Elite, is now available
for the C-64. Elite is a 3-D space travel/trading
game which, to put it mildly, is a 'mega-game'.
Activision has set up a separate software house
in England under the name 'Electric Dreams'. The
promise of Electric Dreams it to produce games
only your imagination could have thought of.
Frankie Goes To Hollywood the pop group are
also a computer game, produced by Ocean. FGTH
features some breathtaking music the like of which
has never been heard on the C-64 before.
The next craze after Commando games will be
ninja type games; more news next time.
A company called U.S. Gold (which specializes
in producing U.K. versions of programs from
Datasoft, Epyx, and others) controls about 25% of
the game market in England.
The film Rocky Horror Picture Show is now an
arcade game and will shortly be turned into a full
length adventure game. Can't wait! It will be produced by CRL Plc.
Friday the 13th has now been brought to life as
a computer game. The producers, Domark, promise
a 'non-violent game'. They can't be serious.
Until next time, have fun playing. And watch
for my special competition in the next issue of

Computer Gaming World.
[Ed. Note: Minutes before going to press, CGW
learned that a British software company has
contacted The Naval Institute desiring to buy the
rights to do a computer game on the best selling
novel, The Hunt For Red October. No further
information is available at this time].

KOBAYASHI (Con.)
The commands you enter on the command line
are always verbal ones directed to a crew member.
To perform an action yourself, you use one of the
special function keys or movement keys. For instance, to move right, you would press the '->' arrow key; to check your inventory (on the Apple),
you would press shift-2. There are function keys
set up for help, inventory, giving an item to someone (always a crewmember), taking an item, using
an item, examining an item, shooting a phaser,
dropping an item, and taking a general look at your
surroundings. A tenth function key brings up a
sub-menu of utilities to save, restore, pause, or
change the speed of the game.
Right about now, you're probably drooling at
the thought of getting your hands on this game.
Well, there are some flies in the ointment. You
know what flies are. Bugs. And I'm sorry to say,
Kobayashi Alternative has its share of them, most
due to sloppy programming and inadequate testing
(because if the testing was done properly, these
problems would not be showing up).
For instance, you have just beamed down, and
realize you left your tricorder back in the transporter room. So you tell Renner to get the tricorder, and beam it down to you. Renner (or anyone else, for that matter), will insist that there is no
tricorder there, even though it is there in plain
view.
Another, more exasperating problem, is the program's refusal to recognize Sulu's name. Whenever

you ask someone (usually an alien) "Have you seen
Sulu", the game responds with: "Alert, you must use
accepted Star Fleet protocol", an indication that it
doesn't understand you. Yet (as I know by certain
devious means), the program is supposed to understand this. Someone slipped up here.
Going east on some planets can cost you your
life. Usually, if you are walking towards something
dangerous (like a sea of liquid helium), the program
will give you a warning. Not when you're heading
eastwards. This one killed me off several times on
various planets.
Suppose you beam down to a planet alone, then
decide you'd like someone, such as Spock, with
you. Spock (or whoever) will beam down...and then
stay at that exact spot, unless ordered to move.
Only when you have formed an official landing
party does everyone move with you.
When the game begins, the shuttlecraft is damaged and useless. You should be able to get it fixed
at a certain planet, but thanks to a bug in the program, that won't be possible.
There are several points in the game when the
transporter stops working. This is part of the story.
Fine. Now, try asking someone about it. "Scott,
what is wrong with the transporter". No response.
None at all. So you try "Scott, fix the transporter",
to which he replies "But Captain, the transporter
isn't damaged!". Great! "Scott, beam us up", and he
says "We're having a little trouble with the transporter, Captain". "Scott, what is wrong with the
transporter". Silence. Sigh.
The documentation is both good and not so
good. The information on the Enterprise and its
crew is excellent. Anyone who had never seen a
single episode of the show would learn all they
needed to know from reading it. However, the docs
for the game itself is another matter.
For instance: you boot up the disk, and the first
thing it asks is if you have two drives. Innocently,
you say yes, and are THEN informed that you
should make a copy of side one of the disk, and
put that in your second drive. NOWHERE is this
mentioned in the docs; you only find out about it
when you boot up.
Then there is the matter of clothing. Some of
the planets have a pretty unpleasant atmosphere,
and you don't want to go beaming down there just
in your uniform. So, how do you get hold of a
spacesuit? Don't look at the docs, you won't find
out that way. What you have to do is call up the
inventory function, where everything you are
wearing or have on you is listed by number. Your
uniform is number one. Pressing the '1' key will
then cycle through various garments.
Also, when you are in transit to a planet, you
can't do anything while you wait to get there. I
thought I would pass the time by calling up computer data, and it took me some time before I realized why I hadn't gotten to my destination. The

Continued on pg. 45

RID #26 (use card at page 5)
On this page a number of games are
listed for evaluation. When evaluating a
game consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?).
For each game you rate, place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number. Leave blank any
game which you have not played enough
to have formed an opinion.
In addition to games, we have listed a
few items about the magazine itself that
we would like you to rate on the same
scale.

KOBAYASHI (Con.)
ship had stopped the second I hit a key. Need I add
that the docs don't mention this either?
Perhaps the biggest frustration with the game is
the fact that the programming flaws make it so
much more difficult. When you find yourself not
getting anywhere, it is very hard to tell if this is
due to 1) a red herring 2) a bug or 3) not phrasing
something properly or asking the right question. I
spent a lot of time trying to get that shuttlecraft
fixed, before I found out that it just wasn't possible.
Still, there is hope. I've passed along to Simon
and Schuster the various problems I've found, and I
have heard that they are working on getting the
program cleaned up (and perhaps even the documentation re-worked). However, as to when this
revised version will be available, I don't know.
So we come down to the bottom line, and here is
where it gets sticky. I can't give an unqualified
recommendation; the programming flaws and serious omissions from the documentation preclude
that. On the other hand, the game itself is well-designed, tricky, and faithful in many ways to the
spirit of Star Trek. It is the inadequate implementation of the design that makes 'The Kobayashi
Alternative' less than what it should have been.
Therefore:
Bottom line: Recommended, with reservations.
Try before you buy.
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Continued from pg. 16
as were the marines in Khe Sanh. Strategic considerations can hamper the best operational commanders, both in gaming and in historical terms. As
playtesting continued, the scenario was cut down in
duration. The latest version appears to run c. 3 1/2
weeks; as the American, the player will still find a
sense of complacency settling in, and then... Suffice
it to say, do not get too relaxed; loss of a key site
(DMZ, Khe Sanh, or Quang Tri City) generates a
decisive defeat, and one never knows where the
enemy will appear. While a decisive win in the scenarios would not have really changed the outcome
of the war, you do have a chance to see the problems faced by the field commanders.
Quang Tri offers the opportunity to have the

ARVN stand up (or fall down) to the NVA. Supported only by American air support, and not
ground troops, can the South Vietnamese resist? A
more traditional type of battle, since the ARVN
did not have the mobile assets that were possessed
by the American Army.
The American scenarios are this writer's favorite
Ia Drang and Fish Hook. The latter covers the
Cambodian incursion. Historically, an empty threat,
but the variants permit different NVA deployments, so that the American and ARVN troops deployed are never really sure what they may find.
Based upon playtester input, a final variant was
inserted to choose a random scenario; one never
knows what is in the Fish Hook until contact is
made and developed. Dry hole or hornet's nest?

PLAY POINTERS
There are certain nuances of CIV that are not
apparent at first play. Here are some suggestions:
(a) If a unit is in the lower row of the screen,
sometimes one cannot access the unit. It is there;
the problem is that the computer does not recognize
the end of the map as the end of the "world", and
will scroll down into imaginary hexes. If faced with
this situation, merely scroll up the screen two or
three hexes and then re-access the subject unit.
(b) The Player As God: if a wargamer has access to
parameters, he will usually exercise them, despite
the sheer ahistoricity of results. Thus, if a player is
a Supreme Commander, he should not be concerned
with employment of battalions. But if the game
offers this option to the player, rare is the aficionado willing to let the system do some of the
work. In CIV, air and artillery power are the essential elements of American strength. Tactical air
(A-10s and helicopter gunships) and strategic air
(B-52 bombers) may be directly utilized by the
player. In CIV, such leadership will generally obtain poor results for the following reason. When one
directs a multiple air/artillery strike against an
NVA unit, the unit causing the enemy to withdraw
will adjust its fire. The remaining units will continue to fire into what is now an empty landscape.
If left on local command, these elements will use
their own discretion to choose and engage targets;
if left to actual player control, the player will
spend much of his time redirecting his artillery and
air support rather than employing his ground troops
in optimal positions. At first impression, this
writer's response was muted (at best). But upon reflection, this limitation is actually inspired. In
Vietnam, a commander could direct his indirect
fire operations; divisional and corps commanders
could exercise direct control over companies. But
could they function effectively? -- usually not. If
you wish to hog all the glory, then feel free to exercise your command at all levels. But realistically,
a good commander should be able to delegate authority. When you restrict artillery and air employment to the minimum necessary, you will find that
your efficiency actually increases -- your local
commanders are generally competent.
(c) The Jump Move: Airmobile battalions move
quickly! They literally jump from the PZ (pickup
zone) to the LZ (landing zone). But helicopters do
not fly at night or in monsoons if at all possible.
Therefore, if (especially in Khe Sanh), a unit is
moved during such a time, it is actually being
moved via ground transport (i.e. truck convoy), and
its efficiency will be heavily impaired. It is not
overly healthy running convoys through enemy-infested jungle. Also, Air Cav Troops (used for recon
purposes) do not jump move. They are small, quick
and ideal for surveying terrain and making initial
contact. Once contact is made, call in the backup
battalions by Jump Move. In Ia Drang and Fish
Hook, victory is dependent on coverage of the terrain. This is accomplished via victory point LZs.
While admittedly artificial, these LZs do compel

complete coverage by American forces. With airmobile battalions exercising jump moves, remember
to leave the air cav troops on sweeps for these
hexes.
(d) Visibility: To achieve any degree of realism, use
limited visibility. It is a real shock for the A
mericans to look at the map after the battle and discover hordes of NVA in their rear. This limited
intelligence factor is the truest aspect of CIV.
(e) Firepower: Since the NVA may usually fire
from a range of two hexes, their strategy is dependent on hitting first, hitting hard, and dissipating
before the American firepower can be brought to
bear. Also, NVA units when retreating can move
two hexes in any direction. Added during playtesting, this prohibits the Americans from fixing the
enemy too easily. As for the Americans, a departure from military doctrine is the best approach.
Doctrine calls for ground troops to fix the enemy
and destroy him, aided by supporting fires
(air/artillery). While this will work, the American
will incur heavy casualties; optimum strategy is to
use the ground troops to fix the enemy, adopt a
defensive posture, and use air/artillery as the implement of destruction. While not doctrine, this was
the approach utilized by the American Army in
Vietnam; intensive infantry assaults were generally
avoided.

(f) Victory Conditions: Read and understand the
victory conditions. Seize key terrain, and check the
terrain to make sure that the enemy has not retaken
it while you were engaged elsewhere. This point
cannot be over-emphasized!
(g) Given the short duration of the scenarios, supply is generally not a factor, especially for the
Americans. Common sense will dictate when to
withdraw units and allow them to recover.

CONCLUSIONS

CIV is a fascinating product. While not a "beer
and pretzels" game (although some of the scenarios
may be played as such), the detail and historicity
coupled with the documentation make this game a
virtual tutorial on the war in Vietnam. Expect to
learn more than you would normally from a mere
"game"; keep an open-mind, and be willing to accept new insights. Playing the NVA was a personally difficult role to accept; on the other hand, the
NVA possesses the initiative in most scenarios, and
the Americans are driven by NVA actions. While
not emotionally satisfying to the average American,
this is the way the war was. The American Army
in Vietnam may be likened to a sledgehammer
striking a pound of mercury. Be aware of your
strengths, and even more aware of your weaknesses.

Adventure games and Electronic Arts were the
dynamite duo this month. As predicted, Ultima IV
was an instant hit at the cash register and in the
computer. Bard's Tale also managed to slip past the
perennial favorite - Wizardry I. The Wiz has faced
many challengers in the past few years and beaten
all of them. Our feeling is Ultima IV has the
staying power to hold the line. It will be the
benchmark of adventure games for quite awhile. On

the strategy side we find Silent Service rising to the
surface to launch a shot at the 1985 Game of the
Year. MicroProse anticipates sales in the area of
200,000 copies, which could make Silent Service the
best-selling computer game of all time. The boys
from down-under, SSG, nail yet another winner in
Europe Ablaze. They don't make many, they take
forever - but they produce fine games.

