September 1991

Features

Number 86

How to Keep Your Hull and Fly Buttoned Up / Dana L. Cadman

An "animated" Willie Beamish Preview

A Street Rod Named Desire

The Thermometer for Pennant Fever

16

California Dreams' Street Rod 2 / Mike Weksler

22

Joining the Hoverforce from Accolade / David M. Wilson

Avalon Hill's Classic Wargame Previewed / Alan Emrich

From Wannabe to the Winner's Circle

All the News That Fits

Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge Races Ahead

32

96
98
102

Slap Shot City

Part II of Our Summer CES Report / Johnny "Scoop" Wilson

Pilot to Navigator: Clear for Approach

94

Scrolling the Light Fantastic

Earl Weaver versus Tony LaRussa

Inside the Third Reich (Computer Game)

91

Tank Tactics for M1 Simulators
10

A Cartoon Case of the Willies

36

EA's NHL Hockey: From Sega to Stanley Cup / Wyatt Lee

104

A New Column Takes Off for Flight Sims / Timothy Trimble

Begin the McGee

Applause! Applause!

Lawrence Productions' "Lapware" Trilogy / Deborah Muldawer

42

108

Announcing Our Top Ad Contest Winners

The Final Four of Computer Basketball

Arcade Astronauts to Cybergenic Rangers 44

Hellacious Hoop Happenings / Dan Spezzano & Wyatt Lee

A Review of Symtus' Splashy Debut Product / Charles Ardai

Mighty Mustang Missions With Yeager

Counsellor's Corner for Medieval Lords

Campaign Missions Builder for EA's Air Combat/Charles Smith

48

To Sire, With Love

An Analysis of SSI's Strategy Game / Tom E. Hughes, Jr.

An Arcade Conquistador?

52

Nuggets From U.S. Gold's The Gold of the Aztecs/P. Olafson

Armor, Armor, Tu Jour Armor...

67

A Woman "Tanks" Brigade Commander / Leah Wesolowski

Dialing a Cosmos in Conflict

69

A Review of Stellar Conquest on Delphi / Leah Wesolowski

Getting Some Serious Kicks

74

U.S. Gold's World Class Soccer / Allen Greenberg

Rommel? Patton? Wimps!

80

QQP Asks "Can You Be The Perfect General?" / Alan Emrich

112
120

Inspecting Castles From Interplay / Peter Olafson

Departments
Taking a Peek
Scorpion's View (Martian Dreams)
Letters From Paradise
Reach Out and Crush Someone (Opponents Wanted)
Game Ratings, Hall of Fame
Reader Input Device, Conversions Received
Scorpion's Tale (Heart of China)
Another Look at Wings of Fury
The Rumor Bag
Over There (European Games Report)
Editorial

6
28
58
62
64-65
78
86
114
122
124
128

Taking a Peek

Broderbund
San Rafael, CA
WHERE IN AMERICA'S PAST IS CARMEN SANDIEGO?: Once again, the
ACME Detective Agency is after its
greatest nemesis, Carmen Sandiego. This
time, crimson Carmen, the V.I.L.E. villainess, has a plucky penchant for past
prizes. Against her hilarious henchmen
(sixteen new nasties appear), players will
ponder the plethora of pages pertaining
to What Happened When in their effort
to recapture that red-coated, raven-haired
rascal, Carmen. The sound and graphics
of these cases are so good, they are best
described as "pre-CD-ROM." Saddle up,
pilgrim. It's time to save America. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Davidson
Torrance, CA
NEW MATH BLASTER PLUS!: Another
marriage of social consciousness and
edutainment, the New Math Blaster
Plus! allows younger players the chance
to play the role of "Blasternaut" (with a
trusted robot friend, Spot) by solving
math problems and thus saving the
planet from marauding Trash Aliens.
This sequel to Math Blaster not only
adds the expected upgrades in sound
and graphics but also includes a new
problem-solving game which was not in
the original program. For children ages
six to twelve, New Math Blaster Plus! offers progressively difficult math problems
covering addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, fractions, decimals and percentages. Many clever features include a
pre-test to set player levels and an award
certificate maker for achievement in

math. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #2.
Free Spirit Software
Kutztown, PA
ABYSS: A slower-paced game based
(loosely) on Pac Man, Abyss has the
player pushing his luck and a puck
(called a Quake-O-Mate) around a narrow pathway full of funky spaces and
populated by evil nasties. The player's onscreen character strives to stop an evil
force which has diabolically removed all
of the guard rails which once surrounded
the pathway. If the character cannot successfully keep away from the nasties and
stop the evil force, rubberized baby rabbits will start to fall off the pathway and
into the abyss like...well, like lemmings.
In other words, the rubber baby bunny
bumpers are gone and the player has to
restore them. Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.
Lance Haffner Games
Nashville, TN
BREAK POINT PRO TENNIS: There's

something about a Lance Haffner game.
These statistics-based sports games are
exercises in strategy and decisionmaking rather than tests of player's
reflexes via arcade action. There are no
flashy graphics, just plenty of options.
Break Point Pro Tennis is a case in
point. Here, players select their options
for their player abilities, styles and net
strategies. After selecting the court type,
the positive and negative ratings of the
players are compared for study, including court ratings, doubles ability and
morale (whether they are psyched positively or negatively). Playing the actual
matches means selecting from menus for
service, returns and net options. Doubles
can be played, and original "players" can
be created to supplement the database
of over 200 rated pros. C-64 ($39.99).
Circle Reader Service #4.
WORLD CLASS TRACK & FIELD: Even
with some rudimentary graphics, watching computerized track & field is about
as much fun as watching the laundry
tumble in the dryer. With 600 athletes

Taking a Peek

from around the world (and from recent
history), players can run single events or
host decathlons. Players can invent their
own athletes to compete and opt to try
some different "strategies" in the various
events to win. Players can control individual athletes or let the computer run
them and just watch and enjoy the competition. C-64 ($39.99). Circle Service #5.
Hi Tech Expressions
584 Broadway
New York, NY 10012
THE BUGS BUNNY CARTOON
WORKSHOP: Although something of a
"poor man's version" of The Disney
Animation Studio, for far less money
and with a much simpler interface, this
package was programmed more "for
kids of all ages." Bugs, Daffy, Elmer,
Tweety, Sylvester, the Coyote and Road
Runner can all be directed with certain actions and amid various backdrops. Each
action makes up a 10-second scene and
these scenes can be strung together to
make entire animated features. An easy
to use "point and click" icon interface
gets one seated quickly in the director's
chair. All that is missing are Mel Blanc's
voice characterizations (along with external sound support) and Tex Avery's
directing talents (which the user must provide). IBM ($49.95). Circle Service #6.
Interplay
Santa Ana, CA
CASTLES: As previewed in issue number 79, this castle building simulator
("SimCastle?") places the player as a
king who must build castles despite attacking Celtic hordes and the perilous
task of influence-wielding when balancing
favors between church, guilds and
nobility. Players can opt for games where
one, three or eight castles must be constructed in order to solidify their
kingdoms. Once again, fill up the breech,
boys. IBM ($59.95). Circle Service #7.
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL
BASEBALL CARD COLLECTOR: While
this isn't a game, we thought our readers
might want to be aware of it. Living up to
a big promise, Baseball Card Collector
was designed to handle all baseball card
sets from all manufacturers, create card
inventories, set values (market and personal) and gives its database users statistics and other information that might
come in handy when playing in a rotisserie league or preparing to visit the local
card show. With report features that can
be printed out and a "Line Drive" bulletin
board from which to download the latest
information and price values, this is a

very impressive database for the myriad
of baseball card collectors in our readership. IBM ($49.95) Circle Service #8.
MicroProse
Hunt Valley, MD
ELITE PLUS: From their "Microplay
Software" line, this sequel to Britain's
award-winning space exploration game of
1986, Elite, continues in the traditions of
space exploration, trading and combat.
Getting a full MicroProse treatment (3-D
polygon-filled graphics, new sounds and
twice as many missions), the game is
much more elaborate than its predecessor in terms of features. Like other
games of this "Han Solo" space genre
(Sundog leaps to mind), the player must
make a name for himself as a space
trader by making wily bargains, repairing
and upgrading his vessel and shooting
straight in space combat. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #9.
F-15 STRIKE EAGLE II: OPERATION
DESERT STORM SCENARIO DISK: With
the most action since CNN covered the

war in the Persian Gulf, players can now
hop into their F-15 Strike Eagle II games
and flatten some Iraqi chemical and
biological weapons sites. New features include Roland sound support (plus improved drivers for other boards) and
night missions (in the Persian Gulf
theater only). Other new combat theaters
include the North Cape (Norway,
Sweden, Finland and the portions of the
Soviet Union above the Arctic Circle) and
Central Europe. IBM ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #10.
Palace Software
London, Great Britain
DEMONIAK: In this text adventure
game, the player takes on a space-opera
role as a heroic adventurer in the company of Doc Cortex (nominally the
cleverest man in the universe). Cortex is
attempting to plug up the hole in the
fabric of time and space which
Demoniak (evil incarnate) and hordes
have come through. Doc must create a
superbomb to seal Demoniak's hole. In(Continued on page 126)

Sneak Preview

Sneak Previews are not designed to
be reviews. They are feature articles
based on "works in progress" which
CGW's editors have deemed worthy
of early coverage. These articles are
not intended to provide the "final
word" on a product, since we expect
to publish appropriate review
coverage when the game is completely finished. Sneak Previews are
designed to inform our readers
about upcoming games and
generate excitement about the "state
of the art" of computer game design
in general.

he

Adventures of Willy Beamish is
an interactive cartoon on the cutting edge of technology. Yet many
people at last summer's Consumer
Electronics Show and many people who
have never seen a computer game
before are not responding to demonstrations and early looks at the game with
the appropriate "Gee Whiz!" attitude. One
wonders what the "problem" is.

T

The alleged "problem" may very well
be that the game and its development
has succeeded too well. The characters
do not simply enter a room awkwardly
and waddle through the limited space allotted to them on the computer's map of
each "room" (location) within the game's
geography. Rather, Dynamix has
created detailed and, many times, special
animations in order to be sure that the
characters not only move more realistically than characters in earlier adventure
games, but also use more "live" areas on
the screen. So, the reason many people
are not seeing the game as special is because The Adventures of Willy Beamish

Sneak Preview

looks a lot like a traditional animated cartoon.

enables the game to be, simultaneously,
an analogue to a television situation comedy, made-for-television movie and
animated cartoon.

This animated cartoon look is not coincidental. Dynamix founder, Jeff Tunnell,
has not only deliberately cultivated the
appearance of an animated cartoon, but
he has hired animators, script writers,
directors and producers of animated cartoons to develop the project. Anyone
who visits the Dynamix offices and observes the animation taking place may very
well think that he or she has entered The
Twilight Zone and stumbled across an
animation studio in some golden
age of animation. Case in point:
One may see several animators
per room, etching frantically
atop their light tables to attain
their equivalent of 12-40 eels per
day, while pen and pencil images of character studies, backgrounds and storyboard tests surround them on the office walls.

The major difference between these
diverse art forms? With situation comedies and film, one can see "dailies,"
rough cuts of the day's filming, but can
accomplish little with film footage that
"just won't do" except to reshoot it. With
animated films, Meryl says there is (at
best) a 16-week cycle from script to
finished (or near-finished) preliminary
footage. In The Adventures of
Willy Beamish, however, the
game is continually being assembled and tweaked on the
company's local area network.
What this means is that one not
only has access to "dailies"
(from the time they begin to
animate pencil tests), but one
has access to up-to-the-minute
changes. More importantly, one
can quickly change that which
doesn't work (compared to
reshooting or reanimating).

Animator credits on Willy represent some of the hottest talent in
the field of animation. Pat Clark,
one of the artists who rendered
character sketches (he gave us
the voluptuous nurse), worked
on The Simpsons during his last
Hollywood assignment. In addition, Sheri Wheeler, who
rendered Willy and most of the
male characters in the game,
has a background which includes
projects at Hanna-Barbera and DIC
(pronounced "deek") studios. Stephan
Martiniere, who also worked at DIC,
rendered Shawn Sharp's backgrounds in
pencil so that Brent Burkett could "ink"
them. Disney alumnus Rene Garcia, best
known for his work on the undersea backgrounds for The Little Mermaid, also pencilled backgrounds for Burkett to ink.

Further, Tony's experience with
prime-time television production
means that, as a screenwriter, he
is not satisfied with placing the
family's father at the dinner
table. Rather, the father has to
make an entrance to "set up"
the scene at the family dinner table. The
sitcom perspective has challenged both
the animators and programmers of Willy
Beamish on several occasions.

Prime Time Profiles
As if this partial list of animator's
credits didn't already give the project a
professional Hollywood feel, a fortuitous
confluence of talent occurred in Eugene,
Oregon (Dynamix's locale) during the
early days of the project when self-imposed Los Angeles exiles Tony and
Meryl Perutz saw an advertisement for
writers in the local paper.

to get away from a creative business that
had ceased to inspire them any longer
and they were just about to reluctantly
return to Southern California as their
idealized Oregonian experiment crashed
about them. Then, they saw the ad.

In addition to their work on scripts and
their various backgrounds in script approval for major Hollywood production
companies, Tony had spent a portion of
his career as a show-biz executive who
projected the production costs of NBC's
entire prime time schedule and Meryl
had spent time overseeing production for
DIC Studios. They had moved to Eugene

The couple not only typed up an impressive resume, but they added a
screenplay treatment of their discovery
of the advertisement, complete with
humorous references to their one-time
preoccupation with ICOM's Shadowgate
(published by Mindscape). The couple's
background enables them to script Willy
with more of a scenarist's eye and

Indeed, the varied writing backgrounds
of the Beamish screenwriters provides
for entertaining dialogue and situations
that appeal to both children and adults.
As in prime time television, there is always a tension between what is really
funny and what might be unacceptable
for a younger audience. The tension exists in this product, particularly, since it
appeals to such a wide-ranging audience.
The result, at its best, is a lot like a Jay
Ward cartoon where the dialogue seems
directed at two levels. The humor is, at
times, very sophomoric and, at times,
very sophisticated. They both play in
Peoria.

Wild and Willy
Jeff Tunnell decided to coordinate The
Adventures of Willy Beamish because
he was tired of the dark, dismal future
depicted in his successful Rise of the
Dragon. Instead of telling a dark, violent
and gloomy story, he wanted to tell a
colorful, light and airy story. It reminds
us of monster-monger Stephen King writ-

Sneak Preview

ing The Eyes of the Dragon because he wanted his young
daughter to know he could write
about something other than nocturnal horrors. Part of Jeffs goal
was to create a game that his
kids, as well as other children,
would want to play. He has apparently succeeded, since Heidi
(Tunnell's young daughter of
single-digit years) plays the current version of the game and
leaves "playtest" notes on her
dad's computer. ("Why is the
clock always the same time?"
and "Even if he gets out of
school early, the mail truck always gets there first.") Likewise,
the Perutzes note that their
youngest son is convinced that
Willy and Tiffany are in love with each
other and that he really cares about the
characters. (They kiddingly note that
they are going to have to explain to him
that brothers and sisters are not "appropriate" love interests, even in a computer game, but they do note that he is
tremendously concerned with how the
characters feel about each other and that
he relates to each character as if they
are distinct individuals.)
Since Dynamix was already using techniques that translated (using a scanner)
pencilled (and later, inked) sketches into
files which could manipulated on the
computer and, since these files were
eventually turned into animated (albeit
with limited animation) sequences, it only
seemed logical for the company to
produce an actual animated feature. Happily, it has come together like one. Tunnell even envisions the day it might become a televised series.
The game has evolved with the design
team's understanding of what a computer game can provide. Jeff originally
expected the interface to be handled
from a first-person perspective, just like
Rise of the Dragon and Heart of China

Willy tries to overcome the
obstacles keeping him from the
championships, the writers have
used the game to parody the
shallowness of materialism (with
the family's reaction to Gordon
[Mr.] Beamish's career reverse
and Leona Humpford's "Cruella
DeVille"-esque ruthlessness as
particularly representative) and
contrasted it with the ethical
dilemma of Gordon accepting a
job counter to his social concerns and Willy learning to help
others (whether animal friends or
entire city populations) instead
of simply "helping himself." Topical subjects like environmental
concerns are handled as a plot
device and sensitive subjects like
romance are handled with the discreet
mystery which most pre-adolescents
would attribute to such concerns (such
as when Leona and Louis Stoole, the
plumber, are playing "adult games" when
Willy tries to sneak by the game room).
Any risque humor is handled with carefully selected double entendres rather than
blatant exposition. It is truly a terraced
game for many audiences.

Meryl and Tony Perutz thought about this
approach seriously, since their previous
experience with computer games was largely limited to the first-person Shadowgate, but they decided that the sitcom
analogy required the game to put the
protagonist on the screen. They preferred
having the character interact with other
characters on the screen to having characters talk directly to the off-screen
player. The change in perspective even
helped the design team to "block" onscreen movement as if directing a stage
play or teleplay. The design team would
direct live actors (members of the
Dynamix staff) through the scenes
and later would watch the pencil tests
to determine if the blocking (on-stage
or on-screen movement) was effective.

And Now, the Rest of the
Story
From a simple theme, originally conceived as somewhat similar to a feature film (The Wiz), the story evolved
from a story about getting to the "Nintari Championships" to a branching
storyline about people and relationships. Although the game still functions around a few days in which

The Adventures of Willy Beamish,
whether its audiences recognize it at the
outset or not, is one of those special
products that advances the state of computer game design. It features new concern for storytelling, is an excellent example of the difference between a studio
approach to a project and the "lone wolf"
approach of computer gaming's early
years, expands the potential audience for
computer games and challenges some of
the tacit assumptions of the genre (with
regard to on-screen movement and the
length of non-interactive scenes, for example). As of press time, The Adventures of Willy Beamish is not quite
finished, but the product has already
taken on a life of its own and captured
the heart of anyone from six to sixty who
has actually had a chance to play any
portion of the game.

Reviews

The Boys of Silicon
A Digitized Doubleheader
s this issue reaches the
newsstands, the dog days of
August are near, the pennant race
in each division is becoming more and
more clear and two new baseball games
are about to compete in the "World
Series of software marketing," the 1991
Christmas season.

Earl Weaver Baseball II
Earl Weaver Baseball II, with its new
VGA graphics, sound board support,
large on-screen ballplayers that fill the
computer screen and new instant replay
angles (complete with a "Director" function to let players determine camera
angles before the game), almost gives
the player the feeling that he/she is covering the game for television and attempting to bring the colorful spectacle to life
on the broadcast screen. It is to the MSDOS world of today what the original
was to the Amiga world, a brilliant and exciting product.
There is considerably more to the improvement of EWBII than its presentation, however. One of the knocks made
against the original program and particularly against the MS-DOS version 1.5
(where the computer manager insisted
on bringing in outfielders as relief
pitchers, even when the team had a fully
staffed bullpen) was that statistical
replays were flawed (see the article on
"Dirty Data" in this issue). Statistics buffs
feel that computer-versus-computer
replays should give results reasonably
close to the actual season's data. Yet, the
EWB data seemed consistently skewed.
Part of the reason for this disparity was
the fact that EWB was the first computer
baseball game to combine physics with
the pure statistics. Many of us believed
that this was a positive factor, lending
more realism to the game and offering
those satisfying touches like astro-turf
singles and "big green monster" doubles.
Further, many statistics buffs want the
capability of doing the number crunching
of an entire season in a hurry, without
worrying about each individual game.
EWBII meets both of these desires. Statistics buffs who want the reality of physical law combined in the outcome of the
game, but couldn't care less about
graphics, can toggle the graphics off and
have a faster game. Statistics buffs who

do not want their games resolved with
the spin and bounce of physics involved
can opt for an even faster game that
takes under two minutes for the computer to resolve.
Naturally, players can still opt for full
graphics, statistics and physics in action
mode, managerial ("manage only")
mode or "play and manage" mode. As in
the original game, action means that the
human player's reflexes control the
results on the on-screen field; "manage
only" means that the human player's
strategy will combine with the statistical
and physical models in the game to determine the results and "play and manage"
will combine both modes to create a
game where the human player can be a
"player manager" and experience the
best of both worlds (sacrificing statistical
reliability in favor of immediate
playability).
The action options in Earl Weaver
Baseball ll have been greatly enhanced.
Now, pitchers can decide on the type of
pitch and pitch location from two ninepoint grids (representing each possible
position of the joystick) and then decide
whether to pitch out, pick off or deliver
the pitch to the plate. Hitters can still
determine whether to bunt or swing

away, as well as
when to run forward
or retrace their steps.

In addition to more
color and larger
figures, the instant
replay capacity of
EWBII has been enhanced by the addition of camera angles.
One can choose between six sets of
camera angles (the standard television establishing shot behind home plate, side
views from behind first base looking
toward third and vice-versa, and from behind all the fielders, looking toward home
plate). If one has no desire to "direct" his
own game, one can use "Director" mode
which will enable the program to choose
the best positions to show the action
from. If one desires to be the director of
the program himself, it is possible to lock
the view from one of the six standard
angles. Then, all pitches are shown from
behind the plate, but all action from the
locked view. Naturally, cameras have the
capacity to zoom in or out. About the
only thing missing from EWBII's replay
capability is the ability to save plays.
However, one can save some plays via a
trick with the locked camera mode (see
the manual section on "Locked Camera
Angles") if one saves the game immediately.
In short, Earl Weaver Baseball II is not
simply an upgrade, it is a complete
redesign. It offers something new and improved for both casual and dedicated
garners, both statistical buffs and action
fanatics. Earl Weaver Baseball II is a
definite contender.

Tony LaRussa Ultimate
Baseball
Like Earl Weaver Baseball II, Tony LaRussa Ultimate Baseball (TLUB) features VGA graphics, large on-screen
ballplayers and full sound support.
Again, like its closest competitor, the
game features both a "play and manage"
and a "manage only" mode (the latter for
pure statistics buffs). However, Tony LaRussa Ultimate Baseball also allows the
human managers to set the difficulty
level of the "play and manage" mode.
They can choose to only pitch and bat, allowing the computer to handle the fielding and base-running for them; pitch, bat
and run so that the computer simply
handles the fielding or attempt everything (fielding, pitching, batting and running).
Rather than using simple grid locations
(Continued on page 20)

Essay

Dark Secrets of the Dirty Data
What They Don't Want You To Know About Baseball Statistics

W

by Win Rogers

hen one plays a computer
baseball game based on a statistical model, the illusion is created
that, with so many numbers to crunch,
these games can give a pretty good picture of how the Oakland Athletics of
today would have fared against Charlie
Finley's As of the early 1970s or against
Connie Mack's Philadelphia Athletics of
1929-31, or how the 1962 Mets would
have done with Lou Gehrig instead of
Mary Thorneberry at first base.

players and teams to the game, since the
data asked for may be hard to find or
nonexistent. One must do extensive historical research, rely on guesswork, or be
dependent on manufacturers' decisions
about what rosters and players are made
available (at a price), and how missing
data elements are filled in or compensated for.
Knowing the limitations of the data that
fuel these games will enable a player to
become a more intelligent game buyer
and will help him/her get the most out of
whichever game is purchased. One may
opt for a game with less statistical baggage than another if it better suits a personal gaming style. Here are some hints
to alert players to the limitations of
baseball statistics. If one knows Total
Baseball and the Bill James Historical
Baseball Abstract, they will come as no
surprise.

However, the more one knows about
statistics and the farther back in history
one goes for teams and players, the
more skeptical one becomes. Even when
simply replaying the 1990 season with
current player disks, the models of
games like MicroLeague Baseball: The
Manager's Challenge and Earl Weaver
Baseball 1.5 are flawed. Some of the
data that drive the simulations are subjective, either in the form of rating scales or
guesstimates when data that are not available must be faked. Most of the rest are
what statisticians call "dirty" or "raw"
data. Baseball researchers are
reconstructing missing data from old
newspaper records and designing more
sophisticated statistical measures, but it
is a never-ending task and uncertainties
will always remain. There is simply no
way to clean up the data enough so that
simulated players from different eras can
meet on anything really resembling a
level playing field.

are a primitive mechanism for reducing
the ill effects of these raw data.

Baseball statistics used by these simulations are "dirty" in that they were
gathered at various times and places
with changing definitions and under differing playing conditions, equipment, rules
and levels of competition. They are "raw"
in that they are based on simple frequency counts (like the number of home runs
a player hits during a season) and ratios
derived from them (like Batting Average
or Earned Run Average). They have not
been adjusted to factor out the effect of
playing half the games in a hitter's park
like Fenway or a pitcher's park like the
Astrodome. They have not been "normalized," that is, put on a scale that
measures how far above or below
average they fall for a particular league
and year (SAT scores are an example of
normalized data). Subjective rating scales

Game designers' extreme emphasis on
statistical accuracy may be misguided.
We can accept "fantasy baseball" for
what it is and enjoy playing simulated
baseball games on the computer. The
fun of matching all-star teams against
each other or replaying classic World
Series matchups is akin to the pleasures
of old-fashioned Hot Stove League meetings around the cracker barrel. One can
enjoy managing a classic team of the
past like the Big Red Machine without
worrying about the accuracy of the
simulation. But the trend toward more
statistical detail can be a nuisance. The
new statistical breakdowns (lefty versus
righty, grounder versus fly ball, etc.) are
only available for the last ten years or so.
The more of them which are included in
simulations, the harder it is to add older

Impure or Biased Simulations
It is obvious that when a statisticsbased game also includes eye-hand arcade action, the results will be affected.
But even if one is simply managing a
team against a friend or against the computer, managerial choices may also skew
the results. Only computer-versus-computer matchups avoid these sources of
distortion. However, the computer
manager has been programmed with assumptions from today's game that may
not be fair to players from other eras.
Some game designers load the dice by including routines to insure that records accumulated over a simulated season will
not vary too much from real-life data. If a
player hits too many home runs in the
first ten games, his home run potential in
later games will drop. But this dilutes the
effect of putting the player up against different competition where we wouldn't expect the same results.

Missing Data
Breakdowns of batting performance versus right-handed and left-handed pitchers
are a good example of unavailable data
for older players. Some games include algorithms that will result in overall
lefty-righty differentials when the data is not

Essay

available, but will not produce realistic
results for individual players such as the
great left-handed screwballer Carl Hubbell, particularly effective against righthanded batters. There can be no universal algorithm for base-running effectiveness, since Caught Stealing data is not
available for most of the first half of the
century.

Guesstimates, Ratings and
Fudging
Some data elements in a player's performance profile are not objective, but instead represent somebody's guesstimate
to replace a missing data element, or a
subjective assessment of the player's
ability in a certain aspect of the game.
Manuals rarely tell us much about how
the numbers are arrived at. Some of
EWB's ratings are apparently based on
formulae involving real statistics, but with
a fudge factor added when the designer
chooses. The fudging can get out of
hand. EWB, for example, secretly gives a
patched-together statistical profile of
Roger Bresnahan, allegedly from 1903
but actually combining his 1903 batting
statistics and his 1907 fielding statistics.

Changes In Definitions and
Rules
It is impossible to have a satisfactory algorithm for a player's ability to lay down
a sacrifice bunt, since the Sacrifice statistic has had different definitions (sometimes including sacrifice flies). American
League and National League pitching
records since 1973 are not directly comparable because of the presence of the
Designated Hitter in the American
League. There is an automatic bias whenever a National League team plays an
American League team in a simulation.

Players, Parks and Playing
Conditions
Every player's performance is affected
in countless ways by his team — how
well they turn the double play behind
him, how many other good hitters there
are in the lineup to keep opposing
pitchers honest — and the field where he
plays half his games. Over time there are
changes in equipment (such as gloves),
playing styles (such as the use of the
bullpen), and playing fields (such as
domed stadiums) that affect player statis-

tics. Even if a baseball simulation can
recreate different stadium dimensions
and create a grass-versus-turf differential,
it cannot tell whether a player's statistics
being fed into the simulation were
achieved on grass in the dead ball era or
primarily on today's artificial turf. One
cannot plug Ty Cobb's .420 batting
average from 1911 into a computer
game, match him against Bob Gibson
with his 1.12 ERA from 1968, and
pretend that the result of this matchup is
an accurate reflection of their relative
abilities — no matter how many times the
simulation is run.
While there will never be a model that
overcomes these difficulties, there are better ways of building a baseball simulation
model. The next generation of games will
probably make more use of normalized
data that factor out park differences, following the trail blazed by Pete Palmer
and the Total Baseball team. They will
probably also have even more statistical
breakdowns that take advantage of the
rich trove of current statistical data and
newly reconstructed data from the past.

The Boys of Silicon
(Continued from page 16)
to handle the pitch locations (as in EWBII), TLUB uses variations
on the theme. To be sure, one aims by moving the joystick or
arrow keys in the grid direction where one wants to pitch, but
the more one presses the joystick or arrow key when pointed a
given direction, the farther the ball will move in that direction.
This gives the player controlling the pitcher more flexibility in
moving the ball around and mixing up his pitches.
In TLUB, batters have more flexibility, as well. They not only
can opt to bunt or swing away, but they can choose to swing
simply to make contact (in order to protect a runner in a "hit
and run" situation or in an attempt to advance a runner via a hit
to the other side of the infield or a fly ball out when there is less
than one out) or to swing for the fences by choosing the power
option.
Further, most baseball games have rosters which are restricted
to a 25-man roster. Tony LaRussa Ultimate Baseball recognizes
the need for competent reserves, so it allows team "owners" to
choose 12 pitchers and 18 position players to use over the
course of a season. Only 25 can be "active," but when players
are injured, the human managers can "activate" some of the
players on the five-man reserve list.
Another nice touch in TLUB is the "Streak Rating." Players can
be rated from A-H in this rating. This notes the fact that some
players inevitably start off the season on fire, but then tail off in
production, while other players start off slowly and become "Mr.
October's. The new rating means that one will get a realistic
view of Ryne Sandberg- and Reggie Jackson-style players (Ryno
usually has a rough first couple of months of the season, Jackson performed better as the season closed). It is an impressive
addition.

Sneak Preview

Let's Reich and Roll
A Sneak Preview of Avalon Hill's Computer Third Reich
Sneak Previews are not
designed to be reviews. They
are feature articles based on
"works in progress" which
CGW's editors have deemed
worthy of early coverage.
These articles are not intended to provide the "final
word" on a product, since we
expect to publish appropriate
review coverage when the
game is completely finished.
Sneak Previews are designed
to inform our readers about
upcoming games and
generate excitement about
the "state of the art" of computer game design in general.

he
r
e
'
s
T

nothing like a game
with a history. Go, Monopoly, even Hangman all have
their own unique histories which
people have learned about over
the years. A few of these games
not only have a history, they're
also about history. Computer
Third Reich from The Avalon
Hill Game Company is one of
those games that has "history" in
both senses of the word.

"In the Beginning..."
I his history of Computer Third
Reich (C3R) is the history of the
1976 Avalon Hill boardgame, The
Rise and Decline of the Third
Reich (3R). Designed by John
Prados and winner of several
major hobby/gaming awards,
Third Reich has withstood the
test of time for board wargamers
by evolving now into its fourth edition (with an "Advanced Third
Reich" boardgame expansion kit
due out later this year). Like Computer Diplomacy, Computer Acquire and Computer Wooden
Ships & Iron Men before it, Computer Third Reich is another successful Avalon Hill boardgame
translated to the world of PCs.
Over its fifteen-year history, Third
Reich has gathered a dedicated
(and extremely hard-core) following of enthusiasts who have long
looked forward to a computerization of this, their favorite war-

by Alan Emrich

Sneak Preview

game. It should be known that this writer
is one of those enthusiasts.

The Nature of the Beast
Both incarnations of Third Reich cover
the land, air and sea warfare in the
European Theater of Operations (ETO)
during World War II (1939-45). Each
game turn represents one season (three
months) of real time and the unit scale is
roughly corps for the European and
American forces, and armies for the
Soviets. With the evolution of its various
editions, Third Reich has become an increasingly detailed (and, of necessity,
complex) wargame which is not suitable
for play by the casual strategist. Nevertheless, the military and economic aspects
of strategic level warfare are presented in
some depth which will truly challenge
(and reward) the players who take the
time necessary to master Third Reich's
inveterate game systems.

Enter Fighting
The maneuver and combat mechanics
for land forces are those of classic hexboard wargaming. Each corps has a symbol to indicate if it is infantry, armor,
paratroop, etc. and two numbers indicating (from left to right) the unit's combat
strength and movement allowance. Movement occurs by units expending one
movement point per land hex entered,
and combat occurs by comparing the
strengths of all attacking and defending
units, reducing these values to a simple
odds ratio and rolling the die to get a
result. This is all pretty standard stuff,
and the computer adds little here that the
paper gamer doesn't manage to do just
fine on his or her own (right down to rolling the dreaded speckled cube of fate).
The computer does provide advantages, however, when dealing with the
more involved "bookkeeping" aspects of
Third Reich, namely keeping track of air
and naval units. Each of these units can
only be used once per game turn (each
side gets a single player turn and, when
they are both completed, one game turn
is recorded), so keeping track of which
air and naval units have sortied and
which are still available is a useful
amenity of Computer Third Reich. The
computer also calculates interceptions
and die roll modifiers with the greatest of
ease and casualties of war instantly become "allowable builds" which, for a
price, can be replaced.

Brother, Can You Spare a
BRP?
Third Reich is a game of economics,

and the Basic Resource Point (BRP) is its
unit of exchange. Each major power has
a "force pool" of available units, some of
which are placed on the map, others of
which can be constructed from the
aforementioned "allowable builds." To
keep one's war machine running, each
major power has an economy measured
in BRPs and subject to the whims of war.
A base level is determined for each
major power (which can grow or shrink
due to either savings or losses through
strategic warfare) to which is added
one's conquests from the previous year.
Thus, each Spring turn, for example, Germany will receive its base of 150 BRPs,
plus conquests of 20 for Poland, 15 for
Belgium, 10 for Norway, etc. This total
will be spent throughout the year to purchase offensive options on the three
"fronts" on the map, for "declarations of
war" against neutral powers and, most importantly, to replace combat losses and
maintain forces in the field. Careful
economic planning is the cornerstone of
success in repeated playings of Third
Reich.
In summary, Third Reich is history and
detail. Detailed rules (admittedly made
much simpler in the computer version,
as the manual only gives the players the
basic information and leaves the details
to the computer programming) for invasions, armored breakthroughs and exploitation, strategic redeployment, supply, etc. add considerable gravity to the
game which are simply not found in such
fare as SSI's Storm Across Europe or
Microplay's Command HQ. A newcomer to Third Reich is recommended
to start with Computer Third Reich by
this computer game journalist, who
agrees with the documentation when it
suggests that in order to learn more
about the details of the game, one
should either purchase The Gamer's
Guide to Third Reich or the boardgame
itself (both published by Avalon Hill).
Third Reich is not an entry-level product
into the hobby, and players must keep in
mind that its mastery is akin to a doctorate in wargaming.

"The Nazis are the enemy.
Wade into them. Spill their
blood. Shoot them in the
belly." —from the opening
monologue of the movie
Patton.
Now, it is time to focus on the differences between the new, computerized version of Third Reich and its venerable
boardgame ancestor. The quote above
suggests that there were only two sides

during WWII. This is also the case in
Computer Third Reich, as the player assumes command of either all Axis or all
Allied forces in Europe. In the
boardgame version, however, multiplayer options were available and added
dimensions of both team play and "every
man for himself" when determining victory. The computerized version of the
game is suitable only for zero to two
players (no modem support is provided,
so players must either "hotseat it" at one
machine or transfer saved game files).
In both versions of the game, however,
there are scenarios for 1939, 1942, 1944
and a campaign game. The campaign
game adds elements of strategic warfare
to the game, but runs about 24 turns
long. Each scenario is about ten turns
long and can be finished in a long evening.

Where's the Michelin Guide
When You Need One?
The troops in the field maneuvered by
the same Michelin road maps which
tourists used before the war started.
Players of computer wargames often
wish they were so lucky. It is almost an
intrinsic flaw in computer wargames that
only a portion of the map can be closely
examined. Computer wargames simply
don't offer the ability to "take a step
back" from the table and see all the
pieces on the board in detail at once.
Naturally, this shortcoming also exists in
Computer Third Reich and, while the
programmers thought to offer varying
views of the map, players of the board
wargame will still be struck by this limitation. It is important to note that computer wargames are not inherently better
or worse than their boardgame cousins.
They are merely presentations in a different medium, and both paper and
electronic versions have their own
strengths and weaknesses. Losing the
"big picture," however, is one of a computer wargame's greatest shortcomings.
(It is interesting to compare the two
games in terms of their artwork. For this
article, an identical setup of both the
board and computer games shows Italy
during 1944.)

Getting Technical
Computer Third Reich is based on the
fourth edition of the boardgame rules,
but players of that game will notice a few
key changes to the mechanics of the
game which were required to "make it all
work" in a computer format. Ground
units, for instance, can only move across
bodies of water when conducting an in-

Sneak Preview

vasion or by Strategic Redeployment
(i.e., there are no more "naval transport"
missions). Stacking on a beachhead
marker is now the same as for every
other hex (i.e., only two units, instead of
six!). In addition to these major changes,
one minor one allowing air movement
through Swiss air space is also a "feature" of Computer Third Reich.

Standing Alone as a Computer Wargame
Computer Third Reich offers some enhancements over the boardgame version.
Deployment Limits (i.e., restrictions) can
be toggled off, allowing players a "free
deployment option" during setup. Although the game is not a graphic wonder
(the graphics are utilitarian at best) and
there was little to boast about in the
sound effects of the beta copy
previewed, the real strength of Computer
Third Reich is, quite simply, its "save
game" feature. It is being carefully
crafted for ease of use in electronic
play-by-mail and will be completely compatible with all release versions of the
game (initially Atari ST and C-64, but the
IBM and Macintosh formats are

promised). The hope is to increase its
utility for the long-isolated wargaming
community at large, something which
must be applauded.
Where Computer Third Reich really
stumbles, however, is not its Spartan
audio-visual devices. Instead, it is the artificial intelligence which leaves something to be desired. Against a novice
player, the Al will leave that person with
more than his hands full (since it is extremely aggressive and the novice player
will probably be placed on the defensive
from the start). Since many players already have several years experience at
the boardgame, however, these grognards will find the maverick style of the
computer's gameplay easy to eventually
triumph over. It seems, for instance, that
an almost standard opening move for the
Allies is to declare war on Belgium and
Italy on the first turn, while the Russians
declare war on Sweden! To say the least,
this creates something of a freewheeling
situation. The computer does not perform a meticulous factoring of odds as
many human Third Reich players have
trained themselves to do. Thus, the artificial opponent often fails to reveal enough

of the strategic and tactical weaknesses
of the human player to be able to exploit
them. In other words, the computer
player would not qualify for the finals of
any Third Reich Tournament.

Rising From the Post-War
Ashes
But programming the algorithms for the
Al of a game as complex as Third Reich
must have been a nightmare, so it is
easy to understand this, the game's
greatest weakness. Most Third Reich
players have found human opponents
over the years anyway, so the trick now
becomes finding one with a copy of Computer Third Reich so that saved games
can be transferred back and forth.
Thalean Software (developers of the
game) have quite an accomplishment on
their hands, even with its flaws. Like Command HQ, this wargame is far, far better
when human, rather than artificial, intelligence is challenged. Apparently, in spite
of omnipresent quibbles regarding artificial opponents, Computer Third Reich offers a fresh start for Avalon Hill's oftmaligned computer game division.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Origin Systems'
Martian Dreams

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

T

ime to drag out the old crystal ball

again. Clink, clink. There we go.
Peering into the depths, I see it
needs another cleaning again. Sigh. And
I just gave it a wipe last week. Wait a
minute, the dust is inside... and it's red!
Martian Dreams is the second Worlds
of Ultima game from Origin. As you
might guess from the title (and the ads),
this time around the Avatar visits Mars.
Not just any old Mars, but Mars as visualized in old-time science fiction stories. It's
something like Jules Verne by way of
H.G. Wells, with a Victorian setting.
This is a rescue mission. A prior expedition took off two days early (sabotage is
suspected), with a load of historic personages on board, including such
notables as Andrew Carnegie, Madame
Curie, Thomas Edison, Sarah Bernhardt,
Teddy Roosevelt and Rasputin.
They landed safely on Mars, but had no
way of getting back. For a while, they
communicated with Earth by sun signals
from giant reflectors. Now, however, the
signals have stopped. So a second expedition is sent out, and the Avatar is on
it.
The game starts in mid-flight, with your
character being interviewed by none
other than Sigmund Freud. How you
answer his nosy questions determines
the sex of your character and your starting attributes. It's a cute variation on the

old gypsy woman with her cards and potions, and fits in well with the time period
With that taken care of, the capsule
lands, and it's time to get to work. The
first order of the day is to talk to the
other members of the expedition. Nellie
Bly (a real person) and Dr. Spector (who
isn't) are the only ones who will travel
with you. The rest, including Nikola
Tesla, Freud, Dr. Blood and the cowboy,
will stay in the spaceship.
After you've chatted with all of them
and checked out the supply situation,
your little party heads off to the landing
site of the first expedition. This, along
with other prominent features of the Martian landscape, is shown clearly on a
paper map that comes with the game.
Here you meet Dibbs, a British soldier.
He joins your group and provides some
helpful information on where everyone is.
In typical human style, the original landing party broke up into smaller groups
and went their separate ways. Dibbs,
ever the optimist, stayed on alone at the
original site waiting for the rescue expedition he figured would come along sooner
or later.

ing him means finding Oxmium, and
you'll do much better if you can breathe
right.
After you've managed that chore,
you're in good shape for what's to come.
Mainly, a lot of walking around. This
game could easily have been named
"Pedestrian Dreams." There are no
handy moongates to ease travel. For a
long time, the only way to get anywhere
is to hoof it. So choose your routes wisely to minimize traveling time whenever
possible.
Getting into Olympus should be high
on your list of things to do. There is
much important information to be
learned there, and several of the inhabitants, especially Edison, will be very
helpful. However, you have to prove to
them first that you aren't crazy.
It seems some of the original party
started thinking they were Martians, and
were kicked out. The folks in Olympus
don't want any more nutcases, so you
have to have character references. The
signatures of the three men out searching for iron ore will do. Their names are
Sherman, Yellin and Duprey.

Having learned all you can from him, a
visit to the trading post run by Buffalo
Bill and Calamity Jane is in order. You
don't have anything yet to trade for their
supplies, but you do hear about a
prospector. This is very important.

Do those sound familiar? Not only do
they sound familiar, these guys look pretty familiar, too. They won't respond to
lolo or Dupre, but do ask Sherman about
Shamino some time. Sherman, by the
way, will join your party.

Martian air is thin, and while you won't
suffocate, you don't function as well as
usual. In order to breathe properly, you
need little rocks called Oxmium. They
provide the oxygen your body requires.
Old Cooter, the prospector, is the source
of most Oxmium, and he's missing. Find-

Once you can get into Olympus, you
start learning about a lot of things pretty
quickly; it's a regular gold mine of information. So is Elysium, where the crazy
humans hang out. It won't be long before
you realize that they are out of their

-

OPINION
minds: Martians have taken over the
bodies.
What would Mars be without Martians,
after all? These denizens have an unhappy history, which you'll discover by talking to them. It's a sad story, although
that doesn't make the takeover of
humans any more pleasant. Somehow,
you're going to have to get the human
minds back into the human bodies.
There's a lot of old equipment around
that needs to be fixed; you'll have to do
something about that, too. This game
could easily have been subtitled "How I
Spent My Summer Vacation Repairing
Martian Machinery." Some of this you
can do yourself (with the proper tools),
and some will have to be done by others.
It's vital to get the power going again.
For one thing, it will allow you to use the
transporters to travel between the four
cities instantaneously. That certainly
beats walking around. Further, some
doors are powered by electricity and
won't open at all until the juice is flowing.

avatar carries a tent (big enough for the
entire party) that can be used any time.
Whenever a character has accumulated
enough experience for the next level, he
or she will dream while sleeping. Three
objects appear (a book, a heart and a
sword); whichever one the character
"touches" will raise the associated attribute by one point. Which object represents which attribute should be obvious.
Sleeping will also restore lost hit points,
but possibly not all; it depends on how injured the character is at the time.
The Martian surface seems fairly accurately depicted (except for the canals,
of course): endless red sand, with craters,
rocks, mountains, hills and ice caps. Unfortunately, the novelty palls after a
while, since the landscape is rather much
the same wherever you go; there isn't a
lot of variety here.

If you've played Ultima VI or Savage
Empire, you'll find that the interface and
engine (as well as the graphics) are pretty much the same as in those games. Inventory is icon-driven, and how much a
character can carry is determined by
strength. Management of objects is impor
tant, as many items are necessary, but
which is not always apparent. With
limited carrying ability, deciding what to
take and what to leave is sometimes difficult. Fortunately, items can be dropped
anywhere, and they will still be around
when you return.
Party members can be set for individual
actions in combat, although I don't
recommend giving a shotgun or other
wide-range weapon to anyone fighting on
his/her own. Other members are likely to
be hit. Anyone not in command mode
should be outfitted with something less
dangerous, such as a rifle, saber or pistol.
Levels are gained during sleep. The

The truth about Martian Dreams is
that it's really an adventure game with a
thin veneer of CRPG. Combat is mostly
gratuitous. While you only get experience
for killing things, fighting has little
relevance here. Almost all the important
activities in the game have nothing to do
with fighting. What you come up against
aren't evil monsters like orcs and ogres;
they're mainly just animals that want you
for dinner.
Attributes, therefore, aren't so important. Dexterity allows you to fight better,
but as most fighting is superfluous, that
doesn't mean much. Strength lets you be
more of a packhorse, which is occasionally handy, but not vital. Intelligence is the
most important. There are certain berries
in the game that confer short-term
psychokinetic powers, and a higher intelligence will keep the powers working
longer. The Avatar is the best person to
use the berries.

Melting part of the polar ice cap to fill
the canals is also necessary. Barge travel
on the canals is the only way to get the
iron ore to Carnegie. It's also the only
way to get into Argyre, where Rasputin
and his followers are holed up. Argyre is
the endgame, so you needn't worry too
much about filling the canals for quite a
while.
That's all I'm going to say about the
plot of the game. There's a good story
here, and you should find out about it on
your own. Watching the tale unfold is
half the fun of playing this one.

At the very least, Origin should consider the Sierra style of movement,
where the character walks automatically
in whatever direction you indicate. It isn't
necessary to keep hitting arrow keys,
spacebars or mouse buttons continuously. Reducing such actions to the absolute
minimum would help relieve some of the
monotony, as well as reduce the strain
on the hardware.

There's a nice Victorian quality about
the game, and being able to talk to some
of the famous people of the past is fun.
The "walking around" tune is very 1890s
and doesn't get on your nerves after the
first ten minutes. Clothing styles are appropriate to the period. Mars, complete
with canals and the ruins of its ancient
civilization, is the way people thought it
would be in those days.
The big problem with Martian Dreams
is all the traveling around. There's so
much running back and forth, even with
the transporters working, that it becomes
tedious after awhile. Many locations require multiple visits, especially for
repairs, and often the only way to and
from these areas is on foot.
Even barge travel is something of a
drag. After pushing the navigation lever
to the direction you want the barge to
go, you have to sit there and keep hitting
the space bar. Each hit moves the barge
one space, and there is no way to make
it move faster. So this method of traveling is no better than going on foot.

That's why Dreams is an adventure
game. The puzzles you solve, the equipment you repair, almost everything you
do, is independent of character stats and
level. If there were no creatures to fight,
you might almost think you were playing
something like King's Quest.
This is not necessarily a bad thing.
There is much in the game of interest,
and certainly plenty to do. It is far better
than slogging through many of the
CRPGs currently available that have nothing in them except hack'n'slash. However, the combat here is so dissociated
from the rest of the story that it sticks
out like a sore thumb and is about as welcome.
Overall, Martian Dreams will appeal
more to those who prefer non-combat activities over battling hordes of endless
monsters. Fighting is certainly there if
you want it, but that's not what this
game is about. Do it in small doses while
you work on saving the humans and the
Martians.
And so the crystal clouds over again
(I'm glad that dust wasn't real). Until
next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved

Industry News

The Software Industry Changes
Shape Again In 1991's SemiAnnual Post-CES Surprise

T

he software industry was shaken by
two major events within mere

weeks of the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show held in January: the
demise of Cinemaware as a publisher
and the hostile takeover of Mediagenic.
After the Summer Consumer Electronics
Show held in June, no one was expecting a major announcement. Yet, once
again, within weeks of the show, a major
announcement stunned the industry.
Electronic Arts had acquired Distinctive Software, Inc.
Since Distinctive was developing or
has developed for a majority of companies in the industry (Accolade,
Broderbund, Electronic Arts and
Konami), one could almost call the acquisition a preemptive strike on the
rest of the industry. In fact, with sources at Accolade indicating that Distinctive will still be doing product for
them (apparently as part of an
out-of-court settlement with regard to some
legal differences over the proprietary
software in the Test Drive series) and

sources at Broderbund indicating that
Distinctive is attempting to buy back
some products on which they have
been working for a while, it seems
clear that the Electronic Arts acquisition will cause some major ripples in
the industry.
From the Electronic Arts perspective, however, this acquisition is simply
part of the overarching company
strategy. According to EA Vice-Presi-

dent Bing Gordon, "Part of EA's
strategy is to take the early videogame
profits and reinvest them in anticipation of 1993 profits." Actually, EA was
considering the acquisition of a publish
er in the entertainment software field,
but after realizing the quality of work
that Distinctive was performing on
Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge,
the EA board of directors decided to
formalize the relationship between the
Canadian developer and the San
Mateo-based publisher. Both publisher
and developer feel that their track
records are mutually solid and
amenable to the type of work each
company performs best. In fact, the
deal was allegedly closed in nearrecord time, a matter of weeks.
As part of the terms of the acquisition, DSI president Don Mattrick will
come on board as vice-president of
strategic planning. He will be working
with long-term EA brain trust member
Bing Gordon in this area. Indeed,
Electronic Arts executives are ef-

Industry News

fusive in using phrases like "increasing
our creative capacity" to describe the
acquisition. As Gordon told CGW:
"Every time in the past that we have
brought people into the company who
have done successful work elsewhere,
it has brought new creative energy into
our in-house product development. It's
a good business decision, but I'm
most excited about the potential for
raising the creativity level of each
team [EA's in-house design teams and
Distinctive's out-of-house team]."
What this means to consumers is
that there will continue to be a major
flow of products from Electronic Arts.
The synergy between the two companies should benefit EA's products in
the long run, since Distinctive had already invested a significant amount of
capital in new technology. This is unusual for a developer, but means that
both companies are anxious to get
together to talk over issues of technology and design with their respective
teams. It also means that Electronic
Arts may bring to market some
products that the developer was doing
independently of other publishers.
Most anxiously awaited, of course, is
the Sports Simulation line of 3-D
sports games (originally scheduled to
be produced for Broderbund). Yet
DSI is working on products in genres
they have not yet published in. The
logistics of integrating DSI into the
parent company will present an interesting transition period, since EA will
actually be able to start considerably
more projects in the next year to
eighteen months than they would have
without the acquisition.

Graphically Portrayed (Adventure)
Adventure game products continue
to be one of the major arenas in entertainment software publishing. Movies,
murder and mayhem might be appropriate categories for this year's
crop. Bethesda Softworks has
licensed the eponymous protagonist of
the movie for The Terminator. Actually, The Terminator features several
variations on a theme. It can be played
as primarily a role-playing adventure if
the player opts to portray Reese or,
conversely, as essentially an arcade adventure should the player opt to take
on the persona of the movie's
dominant force. The game features
two modes (real and practice) of difficulty, as well as an option to toggle
between a long game (where the character begins with, simply, the clothes

tion for adventurers. Puzzles are realitybased rather than depending on the
designer's imagination to come up
with the kinds of bizarre solutions
found in some adventure games. With
all of this going for it, however, one
can very well see that some graphicsoriented garners will be extremely disoriented by the largely EGA game with
a focused VGA wrap.

on his back) or a short game (where
the player is partially equipped). It features action sequences in real time
which take place on a tactical scale
and strategic decision-making on a
map of the city. Character development strictly consists of improving
one's skills and, in the case of the
movie's namesake, system functions.
Another interesting option is the
capacity to play a direct connect version of the game using a null modem.
Bethesda notes that the game is nonlinear and involves plenty of explora-

Another movie game is based on a
film character who no longer graces
the silver screen. Lucasfilm Games is
readying a new graphic adventure
based on their parent company's valuable character, called Indiana Jones
and the Fate of Atlantis. Besides
having a great storyline being serialized by Dark Horse Comics, the
game features a bold and exciting new
design feature. Players can opt (by the
way, they solve a problem early in the
game) to take basically an action
track, a puzzle-solving approach or a
verbal (using dialogue) approach to advancing the game In the new Indiana
Jones game, there is even a sequence
on the submarine where the player will
have to "earn" the interface by discovering what all the controls mean.
Even in keeping up with the "Quest"
tradition, Sierra managed to turn to
the movies for inspiration. Conquests
of the Longbow: Legends of Robin
Hood (or should that be Conquests of
the Longbow?) is to Robin Hood what
Christy Marks' Conquests of Camelot
was to the Arthurian tradition. In addition, Sierra has tapped the composer
of the Miami Vice theme song to orchestrate the third release in the Police
Quest series. Police Quest Ill: The

Industry News

Kindred is, perhaps, the most

cinematic of all the graphic adventures
released by Sierra to this date. The
scriptwriter has done a fascinating job
of using quick cuts and long-range establishing shots (along with the rotoscoping of images captured from live actors) to portray the dark underworld of
the Police Quest milieu.
Naturally, there are plenty of computer games that deal with death. In addition to Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective and J. B. Harold: Murder Club on the Turbo-Graft 16 (discussed in CGW #85), U.S. Gold is
releasing Murder. The game features a
notebook feature reminiscent of
Accolade's earlier Killed Until Dead
game. Players glean information from
a simulated front page of a newspaper
and have up to two hours of real time
to solve the mystery. The company
claims that there are three million permutations to the game, so there is
(practically speaking) near infinite
replayability.
Newspapers also play a vital role in
an educational adventure game due

out as this issue hits the stands. Davidson is releasing a learning adventure
called Headline Harry and the Great
Paper Race. As one can quickly
guess, the player takes on the role of
a reporter who is chasing down
various leads on a major story out of
history or current events. There are always four difficulty levels for the player
to choose from and three possible
stories to "write" by gleaning the correct geographical, historical and informational data, but only one of the
three stories is actually correct. Like
Murder and Magic Candle II, the
game features a built-in notebook feature. If, then, "Harry" can get the right
information into his notebook in five
different games (all of which can be
printed out on his parents' printer), the
player receives the honor of having the
"Story of the Year." In the case of a
player's victory, there is also an option
to print out a nice award certificate.
Sequels also continue to feed the adventure game market. In addition to
the two Sierra sequels noted above,
the company is unveiling the fourth
game in the Leisure Suit Larry series

— Leisure Suit Larry 5: Passionate
Patty Does A Little Undercover
Work. It is only the fourth game, but
the new sounds and graphics added to
the original Leisure Suit Larry may
force that game to be counted as number four (at least, by Sierra's own sequel police, introduced in Space
Quest IV!).
Accolade's Les Manley: Lost in L.A.
not only features the fancy graphics
techniques described last issue, but it
also features a snazzy little story where
Les wanders about Southern California
looking for enough clues to locate the
kidnappers of Helmut, the world's smallest man (as seen in Search for the
King). Production values are much enhanced over the earlier version.
Lucasfilm's The Secret of Monkey
Island II is subtitled LeChuck's
Revenge. Ron Gilbert continues to
simplify his classic interface and this
game features icons to suggest the
items in one's inventory and the option of choosing from three different
levels of puzzle difficulty. The set-up
(Continued on page 37)

A New Column

From the Cockpit

Response to our special issue on flight simulations was so outstanding that we have added a
new bimonthly column. In "From the Cockpit,"
Timothy Trimble will tell our readers about new
flight simulator products and suggest new experiments to try with some older products. As its
maiden flight, "From the Cockpit" will cover...

Shooting an ILS Approach with Microsoft Flight Simulator 4
by Timothy Trimble

Uh, Cessna 374, you are cleared for
ILS approach to runway one six left.
Localizer is 111.30, squak ident 2437,
and report on outer beacon.

A

ctually, most armchair pilots,

being quite comfortable with their
simulated flights in Flight Simulator 4, would have a difficult time digesting this type of information. While FS is
known for its great graphics and scenery,
there is much, much more to offer to
those who are willing to take a shot at
using the cockpit instruments. For example, how many armchair pilots can
say that they know how to fly from LAX
(Los Angeles International) into a thick
cloud cover 1500 feet off the ground and
fly strictly via instruments to VNY (Van
Nuys) for an ILS (Instrument Landing
System) approach? Be honest now!
Actually, the secrets of ILS and instrument flight are not really that much of a
mystery. There are two types of flight
rules that pilots fly by: VFR — Visual
Flight Rules, and IFR — Instrument Flight
Rules. The first is how most FS pilots like
(Continued on page 38)

Industry News

Post-CES Surprise
(Continued from page 35)
for the story line is absolutely hilarious,
so one would expect similar chuckles
to those in the original adventure.
Finally, Kellyn Beck is preparing to
offer yet another adventure game
perspective through Electronic Arts.
Kellyn's project is called Earthling. It
is a hybrid action/adventure in which
the player fights tactical space battles
in order to have his cosmic Robin
Hood survive. The game's
population includes six rather
unique races of aliens and Kellyn promises some unique approaches to graphics.

Perceptions of Reality
(Simulations)
In keeping with tradition,
MicroProse continues to
strengthen their product line by
expanding the scope of their
classic simulation products and
enhancing the sights and
sounds of simulated combat
with state-of-the-art techniques.
This year, F-117A takes off (pardon the pun) where the awardwinning F-19 Stealth Fighter
left off. Players will have the option of playing the game as if it
were little more than an enhanced VGA version of the earlier game or can simulate some
of the more realistic aspects of
the F-117A that have been
learned since the release of the
earlier game. Now, pilots can
face the enemy in nine theaters
of war (all of the F-19 Stealth
Fighter and F-15 Strike Eagle
II theaters, plus Cuba, Colombia
and Iraq). In addition, the game
features a Harpoon-style
database with great graphics
and extremely effective
portrayals of night missions. In
fact, most of the game is concerned with night missions,
since that is actually the time
when most effective use of the
stealth technology can be made.
We were also favorably impressed by the capacity to access the entire three-dimensional world in the viewscreen.
In earlier products, one did not
have access to this kind of
detail. Further, all computer
garners who hated the pure
polygon renderings of smoke

will be pleased to note that smoke in F177A is now sprite-driven. Another fascinating detail was the night-lit fields.
The lights on the landing strip are
timed according to the game clock
and the clock is always running.
Gunship 2000 is, as noted in the
Winter CES report (CGW #81, p. 43),
a complete remake of the earlier
product, emphasizing squadron action
and featuring mission-driven action in
either European or Middle Eastern
theaters of war.

In addition, the company's European
development group has finished work
on Elite Plus for the Microplay label.
This is an update of a space combat/trading game from the early '80s
which used three-dimensional wireframe graphics. Even so, many people
continue to point to the original Elite
and ask why no one is doing a state-ofthe-art version. Now someone has.
The Microplay line-up also includes
a flight simulation product with an ad(Continued on page 115)

A New Column

From the Cockpit
(Continued from page 36)
to fly, by looking at the scenery, roads,
etc. IFR requires that a pilot fly the
aircraft without looking out the windows.
One of the main instruments in the
cockpit for IFR flight is the VOR indicator. A VOR is a Very high frequency
Omnidirectional Range or, in simple
terms, a transmitter on the ground that
sends out signals that indicate magnetic
course in degrees (such as 360 degrees
for North and 180 degrees for South).
The DME (Distance Measuring Equipment) is also quite helpful for IFR flight.
The DME will show distance to the
selected VOR transmitter. If this is still
confusing, do not worry. It will become a
lot clearer once we start the flight.

throttle and pull back on the yoke at 55
knots. Raise the gear, drop the throttle
one notch and enjoy the climb. At 1500
feet, the plane enters the clouds and one
is no longer able to see out the windows.
Flight 182, climb to 6000. At 6000
feet, throttle back to about 70 percent
power and drop the nose for level flight.
Keep the heading of 250 degrees.
Flight 182, turn right to 320 degrees,
maintain current altitude. Keep an eye
on the VOR2 instrument. When the
needle starts moving from the left, this indicates that the plane is nearing the turning point. When the needle is just to the
left of the small circle, it is time to begin
the right turn. At 310 degrees, one
should start to level the turn and should
be completely done with the turn at 320
degrees. The VOR2 needle should now
be in the center of the dial. Set the DME
to VOR2 (Press B). This means that the
plane is currently headed toward the
Fillmore VOR transmitter. This is the
easy part of the flight, so just cruise and
wait to arrive at the VOR.

To show just how simple this can be,
let's load up Flight Simulator 4 and
prepare for an instrument flight. Here are
the settings that should be used:
Position: North — 15377.014
East — 5807.7698
Altitude — 134
Heading — 250
Since this is an IFR flight it would be appropriate to have some weather. Set the
cloud bottoms at 1500 feet and the tops
at 8000 feet. This will place you on the
end of runway 25 at LAX (Los Angeles International). To keep from getting super
busy in the air it is best to set up the instruments before departure. These settings are:
Corn
133.80
113.1
Nav1
Nav2
112.5
VOR1
160 degrees
VOR2 320 degrees.
Now we are ready for departure.

Flight 182, turn right at Fillmore to
52 degrees, descend to 5000. About 5
miles from the Fillmore VOR, the needle
on VOR2 will start to shift to one side.
Just keep the current heading without following the needle. As soon as the plane
passes over the VOR, the VOR instrument will switch from "To" to "Off" and
then to "From," showing that the plane is
now flying away from the Fillmore VOR
transmitter. At this point make a righthand turn to 52 degrees. Once the plane
is level, descend to 5000 feet. Switch the
DME to VOR1. This will now show the distance to the VNY (Van Nuys) VOR. It is
vital for a pilot to keep his/her eyes on
the VOR1 instrument during this phase.

Flight 182, you are cleared for departure on runway 25 right. Apply full

Flight 182, intercept the VNY VOR at
160 degrees and begin descent to Van

Nuys. When the VOR1 needle is just left
of the small circle, make a right hand
turn to 160 degrees. When coming out of
the turn, the needle should be in the center. Now switch the Nav1 radio to 111.3.
This sets the VOR1 instrument to the ILS
approach system at Van Nuys. Reduce
the throttle to about 50 percent. Both the
horizontal and vertical needles are now
active in the VOR1 instrument. If the vertical needle is to the left of center, this
means the plane is to the right of the runway. If the horizontal needle is below the
center, this means the plane is above the
proper glide path to the runway (in other
words, you're too high). This is where it
gets busy. Make the appropriate adjust
ments to the airplane to keep bothneedles in the center of VOR 1. If the plane
still needs to descend faster, reduce the
throttle a few more notches. To slow the
descent, increase the throttle slightly.
Flight 182, you are cleared for ILS approach to Van Nuys runway 16 Right.
Contact tower on outer marker. At
about eight miles from the airport, one
hears a beeper go off and the 0 light on
the marker lights will be lit. This lets
pilots know that they are eight miles out
from the airport and on the right course.
As the plane passes through 3500 feet,
apply two notches of flaps. At 2000 feet,
drop the landing gear and another two
notches of flaps. Keep the needles
centered in VOR1. At 1500 feet, the
plane should break free of the clouds
and have the runway just ahead.
Flight 182, you are cleared for landing on runway 16 Right. For the rest of
the trip, it should be possible to rely on
the view out the cockpit window for the
landing. Then, once the plane is safe and
secure on the runway, it is time to wipe
that "simulated" sweat off one's hands.
Once a pilot gets to the point where
this becomes too easy, it is possible to
throw in some winds and thunderstorms
to change the entire perspective. Another
nice change is to do this flight at night. It
is extremely pleasing to see the approach lights of the airport after breaking
out of the clouds.
Once a pilot becomes sufficiently proficient at ILS approaches, it is simply a
matter of pulling over to the CompuServe "hangar" and swapping stories
with one's fellow armchair pilots. Don't
forget to tell them about that "hairy" approach to Van Nuys.
Until we have clearance to take off
once again in the clear blue skies of Computer Gaming World, this is Timothy
Trimble...From the Cockpit!

Contest Results

Top Ad Winners

Anouced!

L

ast January we
ran our annual
Top Ad contest,
in which we invited our
readers to vote on the
best ads in the magazine. The results are in
and Strategic Simulations Inc. takes top
honors in the full-page
cate-gory with their ad
"Eye of the Beholder."
The top fractional ad
(less than a full page
in size) was California
Dreams' ad "Kiss Your
Asteroid Goodbye."
The win by the "Eye
of the Beholder" ad
just goes to show that
even professionals
can't always predict
what will appeal to
readers. The artwork
for SSI's Eye of the
Beholder game was
rejected by CGWs Publisher as a potential
front-cover illustration.
He felt that, while dramatic, the undead creature in the artwork would have a negative impact on all but AD&Ders. Looks
like he blew it. The ad (using the same
art) far outdistanced its nearest competitor in the scoring.
Second place in the full-page category
went to Origin for their Wing Commander ad. The ad did a good job of
showing what graphic displays in the
game were like (sort of). Actually, we
gave Origin a bit of a bad time about
the phrase "What you see is what you
play" since a number of graphic images
in the ad did not make it into the final
game. Nevertheless, the ad accurately
communicates the high-energy nature of
gameplay.

Third place in the full-page category
went to Virgin Mastertronic for their
Overlord ad: dark, ominous, but with a
lot of screen shots.
In the fractional category it is quite obvious that four-color is the key. All the
four-color fractional ads scored highly,
with California Dreams taking the first
and third spots with their "Kiss Your
Asteroid Goodbye" (Tunnels of Armageddon) and "Hit The Road, Daddy-O"
(Street Rod) ads. Second place went to
Interplay for their "Develop an Appreciation for the Classics" ad which promoted
four of their past "classic" titles.

The reader who came closest
to picking the winners receives
$250 cash and a lifetime subscription to COW. That reader
is Bill Price of Tallahassee, FL. Congratulations, Bill.
Advertisers: get ready for the January
1992 Top Ad contest. CGW readers
prove year in and year out that they are
the cream of the crop when it comes to
being computer game consumers.
Readers: Remember, all that money the
advertisers spend is for the sole purpose
of reaching you and showcasing their
products to you. You're really kind of
powerful when you stop and think about
it. After all the money is spent, and the
work is done, it is your decision to make.
I guess that gives you the right to say:
go ahead, advertiser, make my day!

Review

Oh. Sega. Can You See?
Symtus' Cybergenic Ranger — An IBM Game in Sega's Clothing
by Charles Ardai
Cybergenic Ranger
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$49.95
PUBLISHER:
Symtus
Palacios, TX

ike comic books, sci-fi
movies and Rodney
Dangerfield, video games get no respect. "They're just for
kids," insist detractors, "and bad for them to boot." Some computer gamers say that "they are to sophisticated computer
games what a Quarter Pounder with cheese is to a filet mignon."
Even video garners complain that video games are often cookiecutter products, all too often rehashing old, tired ideas for a
quick buck. To these criticisms, there is only one suitable
response for the lover of video games to deliver: a rousing Bronx
cheer.
Some of us like to eat at McDonald's (at least some of the
time) and while an exclusive diet of fast food would not be very
healthy, the occasional indulgence never hurt anyone. Playing
video games never hurt anyone either. As for the third (and most
valid) complaint, that too many video games are retreads of their
predecessors, one can regret the general trend toward self-imitation while still enjoying an old idea re-done with style, vigor and
panache.
This is a good description of Cybergenic Ranger. In its first
ever entertainment product, Symtus has combined elements
from several recent and classic arcade favorites, presenting them
elegantly with state-of-the-art graphic and sound techniques. The
game's action is fast, varied, plentiful and nicely accented by fillips of all sorts: ghastly RealSound death gurgles, colorful explosions, fanfares on the soundtrack and so forth. The game is
also packed with the sort of hidden secrets, bonuses and "Easter
eggs" that home garners have enjoyed ferreting out since the
days of Atari VCS Adventure (and which, more recently, have
spawned an entire industry of "tip" books for Nintendo games).
The storyline and action are derivative, but so what? The game
is fun, and that is what matters.
To those who would automatically greet a game such as Cybergenic Ranger with a sneer, one might humbly suggest that they
play it before judging it. Few players will be able to fight the lava
monsters of Chrystillia without feeling their fingers start to twitch
against the fire button, or battle the Tasmanian Devil-like whirling
dervish of Protite without cracking a smile. This reviewer couldn't
— and it isn't every game that leaves him twitching and smiling.

The Lone Ranger
As should be obvious from the above description, Cybergenic
Ranger owes a good deal to comic books and sci-fi movies
(though it owes nothing to Rodney Dangerfield). It also owes a
lot to cartoons, to literary science fiction and to the Sega Genesis
school of video game design — Sega rather than Nintendo be-

cause the game is more Altered Beast than it is Super Mario
Brothers.
The story, which is nicely presented in the manual as a twelvepage comic book very much in the style of the old Atari Force inserts that came with some VCS games, tells of a scientist couple
on a mining planet coming up against two threats: Al-endowed
robots turning against their creators, and the Regenerates, a race
of cyborgs invading our universe through a "pseudospace" rift.
The premise pays homage to such classic sf stories as Isaac
Asimov's "Little Lost Robot" and Philip K. Dick's "Second
Variety," while the threat of self-regenerating 'borgs comes right
out of Star Trek: The Next Generation.
Next comes a tip of the hat to Superman: as danger threatens
the lives of the two scientists, they put their infant son, Micah, in
a space capsule and eject him to safety. It should surprise no
one that the boy grows up to be superpowered, though in this
version of the myth it is because, to save his life, the doctors had
to turn Micah into a cyborg himself. (Shades of The Six Million
Dollar Man... allusion hunters, take note.)

Review

When he reaches maturity, Micah resolves to travel to the
wreckage of his father's spaceship and track down the twelve
technology-filled pods his dad scattered around the cosmos just
before falling prey to the Regenerates. One of these pods accompanied Micah to safety, so the player starts the game with its contents; each of the remaining pods gives the player a new weapon
or device when the player manages to find it.
(One deserted spaceship plus seven planets, with the last
planet having three levels, equals ten pods; plus the pod Micah
starts with equals eleven... quick arithmetic should tell players
not to expect to get the twelfth pod in the game. Sure enough,
one doesn't. The game ends with promise of a sequel; in fact,
Symtus is planning at least two.) Micah's first stop, the wreckage
of the Startreader, reveals a scene straight out of Aliens: dead
bodies drifting in zero-G and ship's robots fighting to protect a
crew already long past protecting. There's not much conflict in
this scene, though contact with the corpses is energy-draining
and those robots do put up a fight. The designers build up to the
game's real dangers gradually, giving players a chance in this
first scene to get used to the mechanics of controlling Micah.
The controls are actually quite simple — cursor keys or joystick
for movement and a different button for each device Micah acquires — but the gentle build-up is welcome, as well as making
sense in terms of the story.
The second stop is the moon of Denges, where the player gets
more target practice and Micah gets his first nifty weapon, a salt
shooter. Yes, a salt shooter — perhaps intended for use against
giant slugs. Next, it's off to Antrymite, an ice planet in the tradition of Hoth. It is here that the real fighting begins.
From this point on, the action never lets up, even spilling over
into the spaceflight between planets. Micah fights giant horseflies
on Promuta; a giant viper on Pyrobus; the aforementioned lava
beasts; and robots, robots, robots on the three levels of Artica.
Each enemy has different strengths and weaknesses, as well as
different modes of attack. For instance, the Ultrameks shoot their
hands at Micah, the way the Shogun Warrior dolls of the 1970s
used to. Half the fun of Cybergenic Ranger is figuring out a
strategy to defeat each of the various beasties. Once one has
figured out the proper moves to dispose of a foe, performing
them over and over again is more of an endurance test than a
challenge. Still, there are enough different foes that there is always something to look forward to around the corner.
If planning combat strategies is only half the fun, the other half
has to be enjoying the game's imaginative and detailed visuals —
in fact, this accounts for more than half the fun. The backgrounds get better and better from planet to planet, with parallax
scrolling creating a limited sense of depth and environmental
details (lightning, rain, landscape) affecting the gameplay.
Moving about in front of these backdrops, the various characters are large, colorful and well-drawn. Micah is cut from the typical Space Opera Hero mold while the monsters would not look
out of place either in a Roger Corman low-budget quickie or in a
Saturday morning cartoon. This is quite an accomplishment.
More than most games that try to do so, Cybergenic Ranger
captures a comic book atmosphere. The serviceable but forgettable soundtrack does its bit, too: like MSG on Chinese food, it is
of dubious value on its own, but it highlights everything it
touches.
The result is a video game clearly programmed by people who
love this sort of game, for people who love this sort of game.
The genuine affection for the genre shows at all times, and the
designers' enthusiasm for their project is infectious. The player

gets caught up in their silly and wonderful flight of fancy and is
taken for quite a ride.
Of course, people who don't enjoy video games will not be converted by this one. People who do like video games, however,
and who have a hard time finding good ones for MS-DOS systems, will be well rewarded by picking up Cybergenic Ranger.

Cybergunk
The only problem with the game is that there are things in it
that don't quite make sense. The problem is not the plot; the plot
isn't supposed to make sense. What kind of sense can there be
in giant human hearts flying overhead or sentient patches of fire
scurrying about underfoot?
No, the problematic lack of sense is on another level entirely.
For instance, on the level of controls: the basic control system is
simple enough, but as each new ability is added to Micah's repertoire, the player has to keep in mind an increasing number of
control keys. This is acceptable, though wearying — one finds
oneself in tight spots unsure whether * controls the salt shooter,
the bombs or the missiles, and the on-screen graphics are not always too helpful.
More irritating, however, is the fact that the keys one has to use
are spread out all over the keyboard. By the endgame, one has
to dash among the cursor keys, the space bar, Enter, *, +, /,
and the tilde (-), which controls the dreaded "Shard of Symtus."
Why didn't the designers pick keys that were closer together, or

Review

use the letter that starts a device's name (e.g., "B" for bomb) to
activate that device? It doesn't make sense.
If that's not enough, there are also the function keys to deal
with. Mostly, these are for administrative chores (save, restore,
exit), but F5 is an exception. F5 lets Micah talk to other characters. This is a wonderful addition to an action game, with real
potential to open up the world of the fiction. The problem is that,
except in one crucial instance, the only characters to talk to are
the monsters one is fighting, and monsters rarely have much to
say. Mostly, their remarks are dopey puns, such as when the
flying hearts say "Be my Valentine," or when the hand-shooting
Ultrameks say, "I've got to hand it to you."
One wonders why the Talk command was included, if it was
only to be used once in the entire game. (This reviewer only
found a single encounter where it was useful, in any event.) If it
was needed for this encounter, why didn't the designers then go
back and put in additional uses for it elsewhere? Again, it doesn't
make sense.
Then, too, there is the question of how successful Cybergenic
Ranger is at imitating its models, home and arcade video
games. Hampered by the limitations of the IBM PC, the game is
flatter, smaller and shorter than its equivalents on dedicated
video game systems. Even this way, one has to have a high-den
sity drive for installation, a hard drive with six megabytes of free
memory to play from, a VGA card to get good graphics (the
EGA graphics are weak) and a sound card to get more than
beeps and boops out of the soundtrack. The RealSound effects
will come through without a card, of course, but these are trivial:
gunshots, screams, explosions, brief nuggets of speech.
Trying to create a Sega-style game for the IBM is a little like
trying to cram a pig into knee breeches: there's no good way to
do it, and nothing one does will result in a good fit. Symtus has
done a remarkable job, but it has still ended up with a pig in
knee breeches. MS-DOS garners may not find anything better to
satisfy their arcade hunger, but they could still be disappointed
by what they get.
Why? Because Cybergenic Ranger has flat landscapes on top
of which the events are superimposed (there's no illusion of moving in the worlds, only of moving on game screens); because the
worlds are not as extensive as one would like (one hits the edges
fairly quickly); and because, with the exception of the jet boots
Micah finds on Atrymite, the various gadgets the player uncovers
are weapons that are hard to distinguish from one another.
The game's role-playing element is barely developed. What one
is actually supposed to do in the spaceflight sequences is never
entirely clear. So, when all is said and done, Cybergenic Ranger
basically amounts to a handful of two-dimensional combat
scenes. Don't misunderstand — the scenes are lots of fun. Compared to a good Sega game, though, Cybergenic Ranger sometimes has a second-rate feel.

Hits and Missiles
There is no game without flaws, of course. To say that Cybergenic Ranger is flawed is just to say that one wishes it would be
better. It is less flawed than many games and certainly less
flawed than most of the pure action games available for the IBM.
A true arcade buff may prefer to spend his fifty bucks on two
hundred games of Golden Axe or a hundred each of Smash TV
and Pit Fighter — or put it toward the purchase of a Genesis system. The dedicated MS-DOS gamer who wants a solid action fix,
however, will not find it easy to do better than to put his money
down on Symtus' imperfect but delightful tour-de-force.

Review

Avoiding Feudal Attempts
at European Hegemony
by Tom E. Hughes, Jr.

line effect of this is that one must determine whether it is possible to move the army easily to the province concerned (i.e., if it
is not over a body of water). If so, move it there first, then perform the desired action (this "distance factor" always lessens
one's chance for success). Remember, moving (except across
bodies of water) is a "free" action, and the upshot of this formula
element is to emphasize that success is more readily obtained if
the ruler is present "in person" rather than at a distance.
Elements in [brackets] are explained in the line below the formula. When a Leader is off on a crusade, his default ratings are
all "3s" when it comes to domestic actions.

Ruling the Roost

B

efore one marches wildly off on some fool idealistic

crusade, it is always good to know the odds. In SSI's
Medieval Lords (reviewed in CGW #85, page 52), it can
be futile (feudal?) not to know the odds. The present writer
would like to offer a special thanks to designer Martin Campion
for sharing some insight into the actual formulae and logic used
by the computer in determining the fate of the "empires" that
belong to these Medieval Lords.

Before the Age of Science

When supporting cities, the key elements are the Leader's Rulership rating and the distance from the Leader to the province
being supported. Here are the formulae for the percentage
chance of increasing the strength and loyalty of one's towns and
decreasing the strength and loyalty of the local nobility by one
by performing the Support Town action:
Increasing Town Strength
Rule x 11 - DF + Bs [- (Ts - 2) x 3]
[only applies if Ts > 2]
Increasing Town Loyalty
Char x 13 - DF [+ 5] (-5)
[if province is claimed]
[if the Leader is of a different religion than province concerned}

This article presents several exact formulae used by the
Medieval Lords program. The following abbreviations have been
used to present these formulae:
Bs
= Bureaucracy strength
Ns
= Nobility strength
= Nobility's loyalty
NI
Ts
= Town strength
Pop
= Population of province concerned
Castles = Number of castles in province concerned
Dist
= Distance from army's location to province concerned
DF
= Distance Factor (see paragraph below)
Rule
= Leader's Rulership value
Warlike = Leader's Warlikeness value
Char
= Leader's Charisma value
Gen
= Leader's Generalship value
Rand(#) = Random number from zero to #

Hence, once Town Strength rises above two, it becomes more
difficult to raise the strength in subsequent attempts. Note that
this same formula is used for Subvert Town actions, except that
the "Bs" element of the first formula is changed from a plus to a
minus (i.e., the local bureaucracy hinders, rather than helps).

Many formulae include an "distance factor" element which
reads "DF." More exactly, that formula is: "Distance x (19 - current century [which ranges from 11 to 16]) / 2." The bottom-

When supporting the nobility, key elements are Rulership and
Charisma in order to raise the strength and loyalty respectively.
Here are the formulae for the percentage chance of increasing

Decreasing Noble Strength
(Ns - Ts) x 10
Decreasing Noble Loyalty
Ts x 12 + DF [- Char x 5] (+5)
[or 15 if Leader is absent (off "Crusading")]
(if province not claimed by Leader)

Review

the strength and loyalty of one's nobility and decreasing the
strength and loyalty of the local towns by one by performing the
Support Nobles action:

Increase Bureaucracy
Rule x 11 - DF
Decrease Noble Strength
Bs x 5 + Castles x 5 - DF

Increasing Noble Strength
Rule x 13 - DF
Increasing Noble Loyalty
Char x 13 - DF - Bs x2
Decreasing Town Strength
(Ts - Ns) x 5
Decreasing Town Loyalty
(Ts - Ns) x 10 + DF
Again, here is a situation in which, if a player supports the
weaker element, the stronger element will tend to "get jealous"
and decrease in value.

Decrease Noble Loyalty
Bs x 15 - Char x 2
Basically, one should not attempt to increase the bureaucracy
in a province where the strength of the nobility is critical, as it
will tend to erode the base of one's military might — although, as
a prelude to building towns, increasing the bureaucracy level is a
good starting point. After all, they always have a chance to
lower nobility ratings, while increasing towns only accomplishes
this when the nobles happen to have been "bigger" than the
towns before the Support Town action was taken.

Call to Arms
On Behalf of Quill Pushers
As a general rule, it is wise to raise the bureaucracy level of an
area to about two or three. The Court Province, naturally, can be
raised higher than this in order to efficiently raise an army (this
will be explained in detail later). The purpose of bureaucracy is
to increase the amount of the "King's cut" with regard to the
taxes collected in an area (with the remainder going "down the
privy" to the nobles). The key element is the Leader's Rulership
rating. These formulae give the percentage chance for adjusting
the indicated elements by one when attempting the Support
Bureaucrat action:

At some point, a Leader is going to want a lot of troops at his
back in battle. The trick, of course, is knowing where to get the
most "clank for his ducat." Keep in mind that when raising
nobles and levies, all nobles and levies currently in the army are
dismissed (i.e., they do not accumulate from call to call). Here,
then, are some formulae for raising troops, plus a few handy
pointers which follow:
Raising Household Troops
Available = Ts x (Bs + 1) / 2 x Pop / (33 - Year / 100) +
[Rand(2)]
[If the year > 1300]

I

I

Review

Note: this formula is used when raising Household Troops
in the Court Province only. /n any other province, it is
averaged between that province and the Court Province
based on this formula, unless the non-Court province is able
to provide a larger result.
The Limit of Troops That Can Be Raised in One Turn
Limit = Available (see formula above) x (70 + Char x 2 + Warlike x 2 [+10]) / 100
[if treasury is greater than 50 ducats]
If Limit < 3, Then Limit = Rand(3)
Limit = Limit - Current number of Household Troops in army / 3
Note: the "If limit" test in this equation is provided to offer
assistance to players with small empires so that they have a
chance of raising some Household Troops.
Raising Mercenary Troops
Available = Ts x (Bs + 1) / 2 x Pop / 9 + Rand(4)
Note: This formula is used when raising Mercenaries in the
Court Province only. In any other province, it is averaged between that province and the Court Province (based on this formula), unless the non-Court province is able to provide a
larger result.
Limit = Available (see formula above) x (70 + Char x 2 [+5]) /
100 - Current number of Household Troops in army / 3
[if treasury is greater than 50 ducats]
For Vassals, Nobles and Nomads, the formulae made available
were sketchy, but some clear indicators were present. For raising

Vassals, Noble Loyalty and Distance Factor are the key elements. Thus, try to position the Leader in the center of the loyal
noble heartland of the empire in order to raise Vassals. Raising
Nobles presents a similar situation, except that it depends less
on Noble Loyalty and more on the Leader's Charisma and, to a
lesser extent, Warlikeness.
Nomads are a special case. They seem to depend heavily on
Noble Loyalty, without any "distance factor." In effect, they rally
to the banners in a very effective manner whenever called upon.
For ships, the "shipyard capacities" are pretty straightforward.
The number of 10-ship squadrons that can be raised each action
is:
Ship Construction Per Action Limit
2 x the number of [sea provinces] currently owned (excluding
provinces in revolt)
[Only the computer knows which provinces are "sea provinces." Presumably, they're only the ones that allow a sea move
from them, rather than just all the ones that border on the
ocean.]

An Emissary to See You, Sire
It is hoped that the formulae presented in this article are sufficient to provide even the most insecure "royal advisor" with a
reasonable chance to guide his ruler toward founding the
greatest empire in the entire realm of Medieval Lords. At least,
one has sufficient information to "count the cost" before entering
into battle

Review

Worth a Sacrifice?
U.S. Gold's The Gold of the Aztecs

TITLE:
The Gold of the Aztecs
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM
REVIEWED:
Amiga
COPY PROTECT: Code Wheel
PRICE:
$49.95
Kinetica Software
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:
U.S. Gold Ltd.
San lose, CA

By Peter Olafson

rcade

adventures have been taking a nip from Alice's bottle. They just keep getting bigger: bigger levels, bigger
end-of-level "bosses," richer backdrops and a wider range of
things to grab and use. More and more, they are coming to
resemble action versions of adventure games.

A

The latest such creation to
reach these shores — courtesy of
U.S. Gold's recent distribution
deal with Accolade — is The
Gold of the Aztecs (GOTA). In
spirit, GOTA is a 16-bit version of
that splendid climbing-and-running game of 8-bit yore,
Montezuma's Revenge. In substance, it's another huge, attractive and difficult game brought up
under the
Shadow of the
Beast.
GOTA allows
the player to
control Bret
Conrad, an exSpecial Forces
guy with a lot
of nonregulation hair who
has inherited
the digs of a
great-uncle in
Tijuana and
found a map to
an Aztec tomb
behind a centerfold. What we
have here is the bones of any

number of B-movies — but with a distinctive thrill-ride sensibility.
For example, if Bret takes a little too long in cutting himself
loose from his parachute in the first sequence and cannot treat
with the overweight native greeters in an acceptable amount of
game time, he may be visited by an extremely large, gray and intractable blitter object. It's startling, it's delightful (and well-done),

Review

and it is a warning: Expect the unexpected from The Gold of the
Aztecs.
Uh... an elephant? In the Yucatan? Well, they're suggested in
the docs — apparently the map-maker brought them along to
haul supplies — so this one would be the, perhaps, several-greats
grandchild of elephants. (One often has to wonder with these
games whether the story or the graphics came first.)

Trumpeting the Action
This is not a simple "kill or be stomped by the elephants
game," however. Whereas Bret does come supplied with gun
and machete and can snuff the life out of all creatures great and
small (whether the little beer-bellied natives with blowguns, the
coconut- and skull-chucking monkeys or the snakes in the
grass), he doesn't have to kill them. In fact, scenes often can be
escaped peacefully (contact is not always deadly) and, with a little luck, a player might be able to navigate Bret through the first
region without firing more than one shot. Indeed, the one shot is
only to dispatch the panther which simultaneously guards the
first cache and the way into the second region. One is after
treasure, after all!
It is a rare arcade game that permits nonviolent solutions, and
it is a pleasure to play the sly evader rather than another great
white hunter enforcing population control to shore up his bank
account.
GOTA's dusky tapestry — about 90 percent of it consists of underground scenes — does not scroll, but each level loads into
memory at once, so there is little waiting. Each of the 80-plus
scenes is a set-piece puzzle with one way in and one way out.
However, there are enough stray platforms, ropes and ladders to

Review

suggest other avenues. Of course, they aren't really other
avenues. They are actually dead ends, invariably offering nasty
consequences for the visitor. So, as with most of the games in
this genre, success is in good part a process of elimination: one
plays a bit, finds a trap (and, presumably, dies horribly in it),
plays a bit more, makes it past the trap, finds another one, dies
even more horribly and the cycle continues. In this game, however, one does not simply die, mind you. Once underground,
death means a spectacular fall through quite a few as-yet-unvisited screens, with arms and legs flailing.
Naturally, this could become agony after a while, but GOTA
keeps the fun alive with a variety of thoughtful puzzles. Some
rely on careful jumping (and a willingness to take a leap of
faith), some on a quick trigger finger and accurate aim, others
an eye for detail and inter-connectedness, and others on a reckless disregard for any life not your own.
It's all rather like an Indiana Jones movie minus Indy. (Indeed,
it is mildly reminiscent of the action version of Indiana Jones
and the Last Crusade, another U.S. Gold product.) There are
coming attractions (a scrolling map of the game environment in
the style of Capcom's Ghouls'N Ghosts), a snackbar sweet (a
screen suggestive of Kinetica's next game) and a cartoon (a
cute little animation of natives feeding a goat-headed god. I
waited around for him to tear into one of the feeders as an appetizer, but no such luck.)
Come to think of it, the whole enterprise is billed on the box
rather like one of those 1950s movie spectaculars: 27,000 manhours, 18,000 pieces of graphics, 7,000 frames of animation, 140
hero actions. Those are impressive stats, but when people start
getting empirical about their code, one cannot help but wonder if
there is something amiss at the play end.

Frequent Faller Mileage
Actually, there are a few things mildly amiss with The Gold of
the Aztecs. The joystick and spacebar command a wide variety
of options, but joystick response is a bit sluggish. Occasionally,
one will discover such anomalies as when Bret is jumping and
misses his intended rope, only to successfully grab an invisible
one nearby. The routine that determines whether a character has
a secure footing or should fall is rather unforgiving (though this
could just be the disappointed cry of a frequent-faller).
While the label on the box indicates that the copy protection is
off-disk, AmigaDOS's bewilderment with the two nonDOS disks,
the inability of third-party copiers to make a playable version and
the tormented groaning of disk drives during play suggest otherwise.
What's off-disk is a black-on-black codewheel that must be
aligned and realigned no fewer than four times.
There is one other matter. The character moues funny, sort of
as though he was in the Wehrmacht during World War II. With
more than 7,000 frames of hero animation and more than 140
hero actions, wouldn't you suppose Kinetica could have designed
a hero who didn't goosestep as though he was from the Ministry
of Silly Walks? (Fortunately, he also does a nice shuffling step
that comes in handy at the many precipices.)

Pot o' Gold
Yet, as with any good game, players will learn the ways of The
Gold of the Aztecs because they will want to and the game's
conventions will quickly become second nature. Once this occurs, action gamers simply cannot help but fall for it... and fall...
and fall... and fall.

Letters

Bored at Peace
I've been reading a lot lately about the
decline of computer wargames and I
have several questions. Is there any good
news on the horizon concerning this
genre? Whatever happened to SSG's
proposed Campaigns of Napoleon
game? Is CGW planning on reviewing
UMS II: Nations At War any time soon?
Your insight to these questions would be
greatly appreciated.
Mitch Willis
Wetumpka, AL
Actually, Mitch, the problem isn't the
decline of computer wargames as
much as it is the decline of computer
wargame sales. The technological advances in computer entertainment
software have raised the ante on
production costs to such a high level
that it is difficult to at least break even
on low-volume, niche-market sales like
computer wargames. SSG is indeed
ready to try the waters with a "pure"
wargame with their superb-looking
remake of Carriers At War. this
product happens to perform with the
mediocre volume attributed to most
wargames from 1989-1990, the "pure"
wargame market may never be resuscitated. As for the Napoleonic game,
we talked to Ian Trout about it at the
recent Origins game convention in Baltimore. Ian felt that there was insufficient interest in the era among computer wargamers. He expressed disappointment that the product did not
look viable from a marketing perspective, any more than the "Seven Years
War" design he would love to do. This
year's wargame releases from Avalon
Hill, SSI, SSG and RAW Entertainment will very likely offer the final
chance for computer wargaming to
prove that it is a "real" market for
software publishers.

If

The Emperor's Old Clothes
I keep hearing rumors about an Empire
// with bombers, paratroops, possible
stacking and etc. Would you ask the
Rumor Bag Guy whether this is just wishful thinking or cold hard rumor?
Mike Provant
Oregon City, OR
Our fearless rumormonger got his
head out of his bag long enough to tell
us that Mark Baldwin is not currently
doing any coding on Empire II. He has
been too busy working on The Perfect
General (sneak previewed in this issue)
to work on the design. Also, our RBG
tells us that there is no signed contract

to publish the on-again, off-again sequel to the CGW Hall of Fame game.

Steep Grade Ahead
Let's see more games in development
from start to finish — a sort of game
diary. And let's stop grading your writers'

abilities. It is demeaning and very arbitrary. Most of the game players I know
wouldn't know good prose if it rose up
and bit 'em on the ass. Stop grading
writers' abilities.
Nicholas Peters
Wichita, KS

We are not really "grading" our
writers nor even allowing our readers
to do so. The purpose of the article
ratings has always been to build
enough of a database of reader evaluations to determine whether our occasional experimental or analytical articles are useful to the readership. After
all, if we are not meeting the overall
needs of our readers, we do not have
any reason for publishing. In fact, your
request to see more about games in
development has more weight because
our readers responded so positively to
our "Behind The Screens" look at The
Adventures of Willy Beamish that we
are not only presenting a follow-up
look in this issue, but we have more
feature articles like this lined up for
the future. The bottom line is that we
value the R.I.D. responses very highly.
In fact, we have reduced the number
of questions on the latest Reader Input
Device in order to attempt to get even
more responses and hence, an even
more valuable set of game ratings.

A "DOS" of Our Own
Medicine
As an owner of two systems (Amiga
500 and IBM 286 clone with VGA card
and an AdLib sound card), sometimes
your reviews are confusing to me. When
a new game comes out, I usually have a
tough decision to make in determining
which system to buy for. Both computers
have their pros and cons, so I rely heavily on magazine reviews. Your reviews
tend to be MS-DOS biased and fail to

mention any differences in the machine
versions. Sometimes, you fail to even
mention if it is even available for the
Amiga! Maybe you can rectify this?
Tim Young
Fullerton, CA
Remember the Joseph Heller novel
called Catch 22? It was about WWII
bomber pilots who could only get out
of active duty if they were certified to
be crazy. Yet the air corps
psychiatrists believed that if the pilots
were actually crazy, they would not
want to get out of duty. Hence, no one
could win. CGW experiences a "Catch
22" on the issue of conversions. It is
our editorial policy that no finished
product exists until we actually have a
copy in the office. This protects the
readership against the likelihood of
charging down to their local software
stores and finding out that the product
will not be in for three to six months.
That is why we tried from the beginning to delineate sneak previews as
such and why we have added a note
explaining the purpose of sneak
previews to our most recent feature
previews.
It is not that we are MS-DOS biased.
Rather, it is that we review the
programs as quickly as we can get our
hands on them. Usually, the first one
in our hands is an MS-DOS version
with an Amiga (and sometimes an
Atari ST or Apple IIGS) version expected right behind it. Sometimes,
"right behind it" means months. Since
we will not review a game that we
have not had "hands on" experience
with, this often means that there
would be a delay of several months
before we could even review the MSDOS product were we to wait and
review the MS-DOS product simultaneously with the conversion.
Now, here's the "Catch 22" part. If we
wait until we have the conversions in
hand, our readers complain that we
take too long to review the games. Our
readers (80% MS-DOS) get very unhappy when we do not get the reviews
out promptly. If we do another review
or a strategy article when the conversion comes out (as we did with DragonStrike), we get chided for being out of
date by any of our readers who happened to miss the original article. (This
really happens!) If the conversion actually comes out on time (as they do
on occasion), we may have the review
at the printer when the conversion hits
the shelves. So, when the readers who
own the machine which the conver-

sion is for happen to get their copies of
the magazine, they think we slighted
their machine on purpose. Frankly, we
cannot win. If we list the upcoming
conversions and hope they come out
on time, we will be accused of pandering vaporware if they do not arrive on
time. If the conversion comes out
before the review on the initial version
arrives in our readers' mailboxes, we
are accused of sabotaging their
machines. While this does not rectify
the situation, we hope it will clarify it.

Game Editors Are Easy
I am troubled by what I see as an unwillingness on the part of computer game
magazines to criticize major game publishers for poor performance. My primary
grievance is currently with Lucasfilm
Games for their tardiness in releasing
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe. I consider myself a loyal Lucasfilm gamer
who has purchased several of their
games and intends to buy more. However, I believe that they should be aware
that their consumers are unhappy with
their practices. I understand that Secret
Weapons was to be a Christmas 1990
release but, due to technical problems,
Lucasfilm pushed the release back to
the first quarter of 1991. As March came
and went, the date was pushed back to
the second quarter, and is now, I believe,
hovering around August 1. Because I can
respect a concern for technical problems,
I do not expect Lucasfilm to rush a faulty product onto the market. However,
they have continued to set unrealistic
release dates that come and go and,
more importantly, continue to purchase
full-page advertisements for a software
package which will not be out for months.
I turned to Computer Gaming World
as the most thoughtful and intelligent of
the computer gaming magazines to find
some editorial comment, but was disappointed. After your excellent review of
the design process of the game and interview with Lawrence Holland and Williamson Murray in your December 1990
issue, I expected to see something more
about why the game was delayed and,
yes, perhaps even some criticism. More
general computer magazines have harshly criticized Microsoft, Ashton-Tate,
Word Perfect, Lotus and other companies who fail to release their software
packages as scheduled or whose
products fail to live up to pre-release
claims. Should the standards for game
software publishers be any different? Individual letters to a company, I believe,
have far less impact than an honest
evaluation by a magazine editor who can

Letters

speak for his or her readers. I believe
that Computer Gaming World does its
readers a disservice by printing advertisements for games that will not be released
soon, without also offering them some
editorial criticism of those companies
who offer only advertisements.
I wish Lucasfilm Games success with
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe, but I
also hope that computer gamers will
pause to think before they buy their copy
about the promises broken along the
way to its release. I am sure other companies also fail to meet their release
dates and advertise unreleased games
for months, but that is where CGW can
make a difference. By pointing out these
failures, perhaps your magazine can
prompt other companies to pause before
they advertise uncompleted games and
set unrealistic dates.
Daniel W. Stowell
Gainesville, FL
We would give considerably more
credence to your argument if we could
see any empirical evidence whatsoever
that the Lotus-bashing and Microsoftharanguing in the press had either: a)
improved the products concerned or b)
accelerated the process in which the
products came to market. It may have
sounded dumb at the time, but the immortal words of baseball manager
Yogi Berra ("It ain't over till it's over!")
could easily be applied to software ("It
ain't done till it is!").
As we noted in a recent editorial
(and earlier in this letters column), the
technological ante has been raised on
computer software and this has
brought new problems to the programming and production process.
Software publishers are having difficulty in gauging the amount of time required to accomplish "state of the art"
programming tasks and judging the
amount of human resources necessary
to accomplish them. Hence, they set
release dates based on what "always
worked before" and "according to our
experience" when they are working on
projects like Secret Weapons of the
Luftwaffe, MegaFortress, F-117A and Falcon 3.0 and cannot meet their own
goals. In the meantime, they have contracted to run advertisements four to
six months in advance of when they
thought the games would be finished. If
the companies waited until the games
were already on the shelves to start advertising them, they would probably
lose shelf space in the retail stores
before the demand hit. There are lots
of problems that consumers haven't

considered in this process and we fail
to see how criticizing the process
would help. We perceive that the
delays on future products will be less
noticeable as software publishers have
more experience to guide them on current production standards. In the meantime, don't expect CGW to change its
stance. We simply cannot believe that
unprofessional nagging would accomplish anything on behalf of our
readers or the industry.

Spirit of Freedom
In CGW #84, I personally found the
"Take A Peek" review of Sex Olympics
by Free Spirit to be offensive. While I
realize that CGW is not a Christian
magazine, but is staffed by several Christians, I still feel that reviewing a game
with that type plot flies in the spirit of
Psalm 9:1-2. I also don't feel that this is
an issue of "freedom of speech" versus
"censorship," but just good sense, in that
this magazine is not only read by adults
but also by children.
Mike Stephens
Mesquite, TX

The same week that we received
Mike's letter, our publisher received a
letter asking him to reign in the overt
religious messages being printed in the
magazine by Dr. Wilson. The letter is
too long to print in this column, but
suggested that Wilson placed spiritual
references in the magazine even when
they were irrelevant to the games
being covered. Basically, both correspondents miss the point. The activist agnostic failed to see that it is better to have a reviewer spell out his personal bias than to be blindsided by it.
The offended believer fails to see that a
"Taking a Peek" mention is not a
review. It serves to let readers know
what is available. It is our policy to
print a "Taking A Peek" on any new
entertainment products which we
receive, even if we do not personally
care for them. To do otherwise is a censorship issue. It would mean that we
only tell our readers what we want
them to know. That is no longer journalism. It is self-appointed, self-serving
censorship.

Opponents Wanted

Reach Out and Crush Someone

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 78

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in CGW's
Hall of Fame Have
Been Highly Rated by
our Readers over Time.
They are Worthy of
Play by All.

Review

Earning Stars
and Bars
A Review of Brigade
Commander
by Leah Wesolowski

BrigadeComn

TILE:

SYSTEM:
Amiga
1
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
544.95
COPY PROTECT: None
PUBLISHER:
TTR Development
6701 Seybold 20 Rd., #
Madison, WI

rigade

Commander, TTR's first venture into the field of
entertainment software for the Amiga, is such an impressive first effort that it should probably be decorated! This is
due to the game's versatility, ease of play and its tense, real-time
action. Brigade Commander is a tactical-level, modern-era wargame played in real time, in which the units are platoons that
maneuver around a hex map (akin to those great classics by
boardgame giant Avalon Hill). The game contains a number of
different scenarios, including an extra disk based on Operation:
Desert Storm. To further the game's potential shelf life even
more, a built-in editing program allows players to create and
modify their own scenarios.

B

The sounds of battle are part and parcel of the effective aural
bombardment in Brigade Commander, but players will not find
any fancy graphics to glorify war or desensitize players to the
violence inherent in its practice. For many Amiga owners, this
could be a disappointment, since it is easy to be spoiled by the
Amiga's graphics capabilities. However, anything Brigade Commander lacks in graphics, it more than compensates for in sheer
gaming pleasure.

Formations
There are many types of units available to the player, everything from the horse-drawn cart on land and propeller-driven
aircraft in the skies to modern Chobham-armored tanks and jet

aircraft. These units can be armed with everything from the standard small arms to the latest in high-tech weaponry. There are
supply trucks and choppers to carry extra ammunition or
transport platoons. Support is also available in just about any
form, with the main difference between support units and regular
formations being that the player has little control over how the
support units will respond (if they will respond at all).
Each unit has its own detailed specifications and unique
weaponry. Clicking on an occupied hex brings up a window displaying all of the units present within that hex (ten units can occupy a hex at one time). Clicking on a particular unit within that
window brings up yet another window containing information
relating to that particular unit. From that window, the player can
access plenty of other information, including details concerning
its available weaponry, damage sustained and the unit's current
orders. All this information, and more, is readily available simply
by clicking on the pertinent on-screen buttons. While a noble attempt to simplify information access, the implementation doesn't
quite "click." The problem is that whenever the player brings up
these information windows, he cannot perform any action on any
other window until all the topmost windows have been closed.
Furthermore, those windows are not movable! This "clunkiness"
might be forgivable in a wargame with phased movement, but it
is horrendous in a real-time wargame! Players should, at least, be
allowed to view the ensuing battle going on underneath these windows.

Review

Once the player has created a new map or decided to go with
a map from one of the on-disk scenarios, the next step is to
choose the type of vehicles, arms and infantry. The player may
choose to import and modify an existing specification or create a
new one of his own. The possibilities are only limited by one's imagination. Brigade Commander's unit editor can specify such
things as firepower, range, guidance systems and crew training,
as well as the unit's morale and initiative. In fact, the Brigade
Commander editor is, perhaps, the game's strongest feature. It
is so versatile that players may spend hours just dreaming up
new weapons or entering historical weapon specifications from
military data sheets.
When placing units on the map, the player can also decide
which hexes to assign a point value to, and which side will own
them. This helps to determine the scenario's victory conditions.
A scenario with no valued hexes is what this reviewer likes to call
a "slaughter." Since each unit is assigned a point value relative
to its speed, weaponry and other features, it is the side inflicting
the most damage that wins these slaughter contests.

Going "By the Book"
Brigade Commander is easy to play, but because of its realtime nature, is quite a challenge to master. Fortunately, movement is simple to initiate, with the player able to move a lone
unit or a group of units (up to ten at a time). Attacking enemy
units is also a simple proposition. The player chooses the unit to
prosecute the attack and then the hex where the enemy is located. Clicking on the enemy unit(s) residing within that hex allows the player to attack one or several enemy units at once.
Opportunity fire is handled by the program. When enemy units
come within range of a friendly unit, the game automatically
selects one of the latter's weapons and begins to fire, whether or
not the player has armed it or instructed it to fire. The player
may choose to have that unit fire elsewhere (and with a different
weapon), but does not have to do so.
This reviewer was favorably impressed with one user-friendly feature. In very large battles, where the player has a high concentration of units in one area, it is easy to lose track of exactly which
unit one is directing at the time. Fortunately, position and unit
status windows pop up throughout the game and are located
such that a colored corner of the window points to the appropriate hex. This feature is quite helpful, but would be more
useful if it was implemented more often throughout the game. If
modified to display a red or blue color-coded corner, it could
have been of even greater assistance.

The Art of War Design
Brigade Commander comes with many scenarios, including a
disk of hypothetical Persian Gulf encounters (with accurate weapons specifications). Although some of the game's scenarios are
difficult, the Desert Storm data disk contains (surprise!) mostly
one-sided battles which are very easy to win. (Unless, of course,
the masochistic player wants to play the Iraqi side or the creative
player decides to turn to the program's built-in editor in order to
modify the scenarios and create more balanced conflicts.)
The built-in editor is versatile enough to allow would-be scenario
designers an incredible amount of freedom. It allows the player
to create a map, selecting from numerous land types, water passages, roads, towns, fortifications, mines and even smoke. Although there are a few missing pieces (for instance, no four-way
road intersections) the map builder is easy to understand and
operate.

Once all units and values have been assigned, the final steps
are to name the scenario, set the time of battle along with the
visibility and difficulty levels. Time of battle, of course, has an effect on visibility since a battle fought at 0100 hours would have a
lower visibility level than one fought at high noon. Both visibility
and difficulty levels can be changed each time the scenario is
played.
A final word about the editor is necessary. There is a data field
for players to write a summary about the scenario. This summary would show up each time a scenario is loaded and explain
the situation. This is great except for one thing. In order to write
in that field, one must use a text editor or word processor to create the documentation and then load it into the scenario from
the project menu. This certainly seems to complicate what
should really be a simple matter.

Dream a Little Dream...
As a child, this reviewer played many wargames, and there
never seemed to be enough time between lunch and dinner to
complete a game before dear old Mom would ask that all those
little game pieces be removed from the table. Worse than that
were those times Fido came romping into the room trampling
tanks, soldiers and unit markers all over the place. I remember
wishing then that there could be some sort of solution to all of
that hassle; Brigade Commander is close to that solution for
Amiga owners. With much of the work taken out of wargaming,
along with its real-time movement and its built-in editor, this
game is truly a die-hard wargamer's dream. It is, in this
reviewer's opinion, destined to become a classic for Amiga computer wargamers.

Technical Briefing
Some players of Brigade Commander may have experienced
some technical difficulties, from Out Of Memory errors to complete system lock-ups. This reviewer has learned that a revised
version of the game was completed recently and is now ready to
ship. This new version has corrected the Out of Memory Error
and a few other minor bugs. If the reader would like to take advantage or TTR's free upgrade program, then all one needs to
do is contact TTR directly at: (608) 277-8071 (voice) or (608)
277-8072 (BBS).

Review

Connecting With the
Galactic Network
Stellar Conquest on

Delphi

by Leah Wesolowski
I TITLE:
SYSTEM:
DESIGNER:

I

magine a game where players seek to rule the universe by
conquering planets, blasting opposing forces to bits and tradrig with friendly planets to get points and raise cash. Well, it
doesn't take much to imagine it, because galactic conquest
games have been published since the earliest days of computing
Whether Avalon Hill's Galaxy or Andromeda Conquest or
Strategic Studies Group's Reach for the Stars, game designs
that allow players to become Ming the Merciless have been a
staple for the computer gamer's diet. In Delphi's Stellar Conquest, garners get a second verse that is not quite the same as
the first, since it features the same type of galactic conquest in
an on-line, multi-player setting where one does not have to continually trade the seat in front of the monitor back and forth.
Rather, all players have equal access to the program.

Decoding the Basics
The first-time player is at a serious disadvantage when it comes
to playing Stellar Conquest. The documentation, which must be
downloaded, is sketchy at best and players soon discover that all
commands must be entered precisely to have any effect. Even a
typographical error could cost the player valuable time. For example, typing "sheilds up" will not turn on the shields. (One way
to avoid the typographical nightmare is to use abbreviated commands whenever possible.)
Another example of a typical first-time frustration is learning
how to beam things to or from a planet. The documentation
simply does not give enough detail for the new player to be successful. To beam up ore from a planet, the player must specify
how much ore, the planet's coordinates and the hold number.
For example: "BE U 200 OR fr 1, 1 to H 1." means beam up 200
ore from planet located at 1, 1 to hold number one of the
player's ship. If the player has deviated in any way from this
exact coding, the transfer will not be successful. The above
method can also be used to beam armies (AR) or money (QU)
by simply replacing the "OR" with the correct prefix.
Another serious disadvantage faced by new players is the fact
that they do not begin with de facto allies. Stellar Conquest has
several teams competing against each other for supreme rule.
Those team members get points by destroying ships, making the
new and inexperienced players ripe targets. After playing Stellar
Conquest for a while, the ingenue can ask a team captain to join
a team or if a player is very good, chances are the captains will
ask the player themselves!

Open Communications Channel
One of the most advantageous features of most on-line games
is the ability to chat with other players during course of the
game. Naturally, Stellar Conquest is no exception. If a player

Stellar Conquest
Delphi Telecommunications Network
Andy Green
Phone: (800) 695-4005

wishes to communicate with all of the other players, the player
simply precedes each "broadcast" with a comma. This "transmits" the message over the game's "hailing frequency" for
everyone to see. To communicate privately with another player,
one must be on the same frequency (any "made-up" number) as
the player to be communicated with. However, care must be
taken to see that the enemy is not eavesdropping (i.e., set to the
same made-up number). If opposing players gets the right frequency, the best laid plans of might and Ming may go astray!
Many of the game's 'regulars' are more than willing to help the
new player. Neophytes can use the hailing frequency to seek assistance in learning the commands within the game, to ask for
help in a battle or just to be friendly.

Beam Me Up, Schwartzkopf!
In Stellar Conquest, each planet is classified by a letter. Class
'M' planets (where have we heard this one before?) will grow
civilians when ore is placed on them, while class 'F' planets will
produce ore at varying rates depending upon their Tech Level.
Therefore, one can raise an army by docking at a class 'F'
planet, beaming up the planet's ore and transporting the ore to a
class 'M' planet. Then, as the civilians "grow," they can be enlisted by typing: ENLIST 10 AR FR 1, 1 (which translates into Enlist 10 armies from the planet located at 1,1). This is important
because armies are a necessary commodity for both offense and
defense.
Whether one is using the armies to conquer other planets or
garrison those already conquered, a further activity is necessary.
After one recruits those growing civilian populations, it is necessary to beam up as many armies as the ship will hold in order to
transport the new armies to where they will be most effective.
Note that while a player's ship can only hold 40 armies initially,
players can purchase more holds by docking at a starbase. This,
naturally, enables the ship to hold more armies.
In fact, to upgrade any equipment in Stellar Conquest, the
player must locate a starbase (and have enough Quatloos to
make the purchase). That sounds fine, except for one thing. The
existing starbases in the game this reviewer entered had already
been destroyed by interstellar "Shermans!" No new starbases can
be created as the team captains are limited to one per game.
Starbases, unfortunately, are very easy to destroy.

Mission Replay
Perhaps highlighting some actual events which occurred during
a game of Stellar Conquest will best describe the interface and
some of the game's anomalies. Specifically, here is a scenario experienced by this reviewer:

Review

A spacecraft, the Runaround, is docked above the planet Crue,
making repairs and refueling after having fought its way through
the planet's defenses. The ship breaks orbit after scanning the
surface of the newly conquered planet for anything of value. Find
ing nothing, the Runaround powers up its shields and heads for
another planet a mere two light years away.
Photon torpedoes armed, the Runaround has ten shots at victory over this new planet. The ship doesn't hesitate as it begins
to orbit this new planet, "Shadow." Shields down! Fire, fire, fire!
Coming in to complete the conquest are two of the ship's armies
who quickly eliminate the planet's defences, thereby making it official. The player has now conquered planet Shadow!
Wait! What's that? The computer screen displays the dreaded
words, "Incoming Phaser fire from USS James (+1,-2) does
87.43 of damage!"
Quickly, a player must react!
Warp 1, 2... suddenly the computer protests, "But, Sir! We have
not broken Orbit!"
Cursing madly the player quickly types: "Shields up. Break.
Warp 1, 2; Fire 0, 0; Fire 0, 0; Fire 0, 0." To no avail, however,
for as the player was breaking out of orbit, the USS James had
already fired ten shots at the player's craft. The computer reads,
"Runaround has been destroyed! Press
return to assume command of your ship."

Big Macs in Space
The USS James fired ten shots before
Runaround ever broke orbit. How could
that be? The USS James has learned the
'Way of the Macro.' With a touch of a
key, the player has entered over ten commands before the other player has
entered even a single one. The on-line
computer processes commands in the
order they are received. Therefore, a
player can key in macros to fire several
times at a given point. If the other player
does not have macros — well, let's just say that it is easy for a
macroless player to become dead meat.
Besides keying in macros for combat against other ships the
player can also utilize them for conquering planets, breaking
orbit, powering the shields and enlisting armies. For instance, the
player could have the following command string set to one key:
Orbit 1, 1 ({R}eturn) Fire 1, 1 (R} Fire 1, 1 (R) Fire 1, 1 (RI
shields down (RI BE D 2 AR TO 1, 1 (RI Shields up (RI. In the
above example, the player has orbited, fired three times, toggled
the shields and beamed down two armies to the surface of the
planet. If all went well, the player has conquered the planet. If
not, the player can use the same macro key to enter the sequence once again. If successful the player will receive the message: "Runaround (ship's name) has conquered planet Shadow
1,1 (planet's name)!"

Grids in Space
Stellar Conquest, like many space conquest games, is played
on a grid and players can scan a small area around their ship to
see if there are any planets or other ships nearby. One way to locate another player's ship is to type "Course" and hit return. The
computer will respond with the player's location on the grid and
another set of numbers in parentheses. Usually the number in
parentheses is the location of another player's ship relative to the

player's own ship but from the opponent's point of view. So if
the player is prompted with "course set to 360,387 (-10, 37)"
then the player need only set a course for 10,-37 to move
alongside another player's ship. This is not exactly a reliable way
to locate other ships as the coordinates given are random ships;
often the number given is (0,0), meaning, of course, the player's
own ship.

Wanted: Interplanetary Exterminator!
Another obstacle for the new player is all the bugs that still
exist in Stellar Conquest. Veteran players are relatively immune
to the bites of these programming anomalies and use them to
their advantage, but new players may simply become frustrated
and quit.
One bug situation offers a neat opportunity for boosting one's
shields. If one is involved in combat, one need only type: "SH
DEC -[number]." That is, "Decrease Shields -1,000." or whatever
number chosen — the more negative the number, the higher the
shields go up. The disadvantage to this is that the player is instantly out of fuel and can no longer fire or Warp. One can still
use the thrusters to get around one sector at a time, however.
While the veteran player has adapted well to the game's many
bugs, there are some bugs here that even the best players hate.
For example, upon orbiting a planet, a player can trade with the
planet's inhabitants. From the list of
goods available for sale a player could
choose "Junk." Now, junk sells for zero
or sometimes one Quatloo. If the player
tries to sell junk to a planet, the game
crashes and all the players who were
going about their business lose their
points for that round, forcing everyone to
log back on as if they had not even
played that day. Rumor has it that some
poor sports have crashed the game on
purpose after losing a few battles to
other players. There is no reason for
"junk" to even appear on the list. It is
not a needed commodity and only
causes problems.
Another nasty bug is what this reviewer calls the "See you later,
Alligator" bug. On several occasions, another player, while logging out of Stellar Conquest, has taken this reviewer with him.
One minute, involved in a heavy battle with Drakken; the next
minute, looking at a blank screen. Hmm! Wonder how one gets
that weapon?
There are so many bugs of all types (both friendly and hostile)
in this game that this reviewer has not even attempted to cover
them all. However, despite the bugs, the game is still playable,
even enjoyable. In some ways, the bugs even add a bit of intrigue to the game. Still, there is no question that the game
would be better without them.

The Verdict
While not perfect, Stellar Conquest definitely has something
going for it. It could even become "addictive," if some effort were
spent in fixing some of the problems. Some suggested improvements would include: the ability to create a new starbase after
having the team's original one blown up; being able to communicate with a named player; and giving the teamless player more
power. Even so, Stellar Conquest is worth playing now and
could get even better.

Review

Never Give a
"Soccer" an
TITLE
Open Break
:
World Class Soccer
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM
REVIEWED:
Amiga
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
$39.95
U.S. Gold
PUBLISHER:
DISTRIBUTOR: Accolade
San Jose, CA

U.S. Gold's World Class Soccer
by Allen L. Greenberg

A

mericans visiting outside of the U.S. are constantly struck

by the passion with which most countries' populations
embrace soccer. Soccer's 1990 World Cup tournament,
which took place in Rome, Italy, certainly inspired such passion,
and more, when West (as yet non-united) Germany bested Argentina in the final match, seemingly by an application of dramatics
in addition to skill.
World Class Soccer recreates that 1990 tournament, right
down to the individual athletes. Here is a chance for soccer
fanatics to rewrite the 1990 tournament, substituting their own
skills for the theatrical tricks and tempers which marked
(marred?) the real thing. World Class Soccer is a spirited, fastmoving simulation which is viewed from an overhead scrolling
point of view. The player may control only one athlete on the
screen: the one closest to the ball. Unfortunately, there is no option for switching control to another, more distant team member
until the ball approaches him.

Learning the Fundamentals
The game is played using the joystick, two of which are required for a two-player game on the Amiga, while the IBM version requires the second player to use the keyboard.
During play, a flashing arrow indicates which on-screen figure is

being manipulated. While the ball is under his control the player
may select how hard he wishes to kick it, or he may "chip" the
ball off the ground. Once it is in the air, other players may
"head" the ball by placing the crania of their on-screen athletes
in the right place at the right time.
Tackling, the intimidating repossession of the ball from one athlete by another, can be accomplished in one of several ways.
Two players colliding head-on will result in the higher-rated (in
terms of the game's statistical base) player gaining possession of
the ball. A player may also attempt a sliding tackle in which his
athlete throws himself along the ground at an opponent. This
maneuver makes for some amusing animation, although it does
run the risk of committing a foul.
Foul tackles, of course, result in either a free kick or a penalty.
In either case, the action briefly switches to a side view in which
the player is able to both aim and control the intensity of the
kick. According to the documentation, the player is also supposed to be able to control the direction of a throw-in after the
ball goes out of bounds, but this reviewer was unable to do so.

Scheduling a World Cup Replay
Each game takes place within the framework of international
competition. One may either select playing a one- or two-player

Review

isolated game or determine a country and enter the 1990 World
Cup tournament. In all cases, the player is presented with a list
of 24 countries, each of which were represented by one of the
high-ranking teams at the 1990 tournament.
Each country's team is rated, role-playing style, according to
skill, speed, aggression and strength with a numeric value of one
to five. Within each team are 20 players from which 11 must be
chosen and assigned positions on the field. Each player is rated
in the same categories as the overall team. Speed appears to be
most valuable for forward-running attackers, while aggression appears more valuable in defense. Players with higher strength
ratings are also able to kick the ball further.
As devotees of soccer well know, there has been a tendency of
late to build up a strong line of defense in the field while leaving
only a handful of attackers. An interesting innovation included in
World Class Soccer allows the player to select from a variety of
formations which either reflect this trend or oppose it.
Inexplicably, during the one-player isolated games, the player is
required not only to choose which computer-controlled team he
will play against, but also the computer team's formation, as well
as the assignment of each position. Of course, many team
managers would love to determine their opposing team's lineup
and strategy, but in this case there is a subtle loss of realism. Fortunately, during a tournament, the computer breaks down and
selects its own lineup.
World Class Soccer's greatest problems are caused by its
limited view of the play-field, only about ten percent of which is

displayed at a time. Thus, a long pass becomes a religious experience as the player must pray that somewhere off-screen is a
teammate willing and able to receive it. Defense is extremely difficult as the attacker, on whom the display stays fixed, rushes by
far too quickly to allow a defender to wake up and react appropriately. Even the poor goalkeeper has only a fraction of a
second to move into position.
The solution to this problem is simple and has already appeared in other soccer simulations. A small cut-away "radar"
screen, to keep the player informed about the position and movements of other team-members would have improved U.S. Gold's
soccer program immeasurably. One might also wish for the
ability to "bend" the ball, or otherwise put some spin on it when
shooting or passing.
World Class Soccer does contain some wonderful animation
which features players who dive, slide and tackle in meticulous
detail. The music is inept, but the sound effects are quite adequate. Players will also enjoy the game's witty and informative
manual. Caution: do not attempt to frame the "free" poster included in the package; the program's loading instructions are
cleverly hidden on the reverse side.
In 1994, the United States will host Soccer's World Cup tournament. With the exception of those who harbor a McCarthy-esque
paranoia that pro football might be in danger of being supplanted, U.S. Gold's World Class Soccer should prove an informative and reasonably entertaining way to prepare for the event.

Reader Input Device

Conversions
Received

Blockout (Electronic Arts)
Sega Genesis
PGA Tour Golf
(Electronic Arts) Macintosh
Action Stations
(Internecine) Amiga
Blitzkrieg: Battle at the Ardennes (Internecine) IBM
White Death (Internecine)
IBM
Worlds at War
(Internecine) IBM
SimCity Graphic Sets 1
and 2 (Maxis) Macintosh
King's Bounty (New World
Computing) Amiga
F29 Retaliator (Ocean) IBM
Harpoon Scenario Editor
(Three-Sixty Pacific)
Macintosh
Harpoon Battleset #3: The
Med (Three-Sixty Pacific)
Macintosh

Sneak Preview

"I Am For Peace: But When I
Mark Baldwin's The Perfect
by Alan

T

he nice thing about war as a game

is that nobody really gets hurt and
it's all just an exhilarating mental exercise. Still, The Perfect General makes
no pretense of playing up the "game"
half of the word "wargame." The subject
is surely war but, in the words of Chris
(Balance of Power) Crawford, "The
game is the thing." With an emphasis on
playability, The Perfect General, like
Stratego, Risk! or Axis & Allies, serves
as a great primer for strategic thought
and makes every man a beginner. The
clear thinking required to position one's
tanks on a hill and infantry in the trees
and towns, while tucking one's artillery
safely in the rear does not require a West
Point graduate. The value of these lessons will be taught over and over again,
however, to those who take the time to
try their hand at The Perfect General.

"I'd like to see the government get out of war altogether and leave the
whole field to private industry." —Joseph Heller
In The Perfect General, players "buy"
their initial forces for the scenario chosen
from those available and deploy them
within their "at start" areas of the mapboard. Once deployed, the game commences with a largely "I do my phase,
then you do yours" sequence of play
each turn.
One might agree with Mr. Heller after
looking around The Perfect General.
From the sharp EGA/VGA graphic user
interface to the basics of the map and
pieces, this game has the look and "feel"
of a quality production. Although the battles are all set-piece, abstract affairs (albeit of remarkable strategic challenge),
the terrain looks as nice as any strategist
could hope for.
Abstracted, too, are the unit types
(light, medium and heavy tanks, armored
cars, "bazooka" infantry, etc.) and their
symbols (varying sizes of tanks, beakershaped artillery units and infantry
"flags"), but the diehard wargamer can

easily slip into "suspended disbelief"
and enjoy the purer, chess-like
strategy elements of The Perfect
General. While the terrain and
weather (which is fixed on specific
turns by scenario) effects are handled
in a manner that is clear and realistic
to anyone (particularly seasoned
strategy gamers), the interaction of
units in combat and the arrival of
new units is often times more a
"gameplay" element with nary a nod
to "historical" accuracy.

"Name me an emperor
who was ever struck by a
cannonball." —Charles V
(1500-1588).
Initially, both players plot any artillery fire for their mobile artillery units
(notorious for their wildly scattering
shots and inability to "barrage" a hex
and keep it interdicted throughout the
turn). Next, the artillery fire rains
down with great destructive force,
marking the ground and altering the
terrain for the remainder of the game.
When the smoke clears, both players
will plot their artillery fire (for the
next turn) from their light and heavy
artillery pieces, the difference between
the two being their respective ranges and
the effectiveness of their barrages.
Next, the "attacker" in the scenario (always the red player) fires his units. Then
the "defender" fires his units. When fired
upon, some units will have the opportunity to return fire, should their commanders so desire and manage to hit the
"F" key fast enough (the time delay for
this decision can be adjusted). After this
first direct-fire phase, there are movement phases for both players where they
can move all of their desired units along
the hex grid map (although by merely
selecting a destination for a unit, the computer will cause it to take the quickest,
most direct route so that tediously
moving each piece hex-by-hex is
avoided). During a player's movement,
the enemy may interrupt it (again, by hitting the "F" key) to take a "passing fire"

shot at the currently moving unit. Units
may attempt to overrun enemy units
during movement simply by moving into
their hexagon, but this can be a very
risky proposition. Following movement is
another round of direct fire, then a new
turn commences with any reinforcements
being brought on for both sides.

"You can't say civilization
don't advance... in every
war they kill you a new
way." —Will Rogers (18791935)
Wargames, too, advance and there are
new ways about them as well. The Perfect General, for example, uses either a
simple one-key keyboard interface for almost every game element, which supplements the joystick- or mouse-driven input
a player might prefer. Mastery of The Perfect General's interface takes little time

Sneak Preview

Speak, They Are For War."
—Psalms 120:7

General from New Player QQP
Emrich

scenario or play the long game (with
an increase in starting build points
from which to purchase one's initial
forces). Some other minor modifications include adjusting the game
delay speed (for reaction fire during
the enemy's portions of the turn) and
allowing enemy units to be hidden or
not (i.e., limited in view to realistic
"lines of sight").

"The graveyards are full
of indispensable men."
—Charles de Gaulle
(1890-1970)

away from diving into one's first melee
and is easily retained once learned. An
important principle of war is "simplicity"
and that principle was well applied to the
user interface.

"The executioner is, I hear,
very expert, and my neck is
very slender." —Anne
Boleyn (1507?-1536)
There are many ways to die, but wargames usually only focus on single
methods. In The Perfect General, one
gets to toggle through a multitude of
choices at the beginning of the game.
The choices are many and will alter the
very nature of each and every scenario.
The first choice is whether to play a
single scenario as either the attacker or
defender or to play one game of a "campaign" on a given side. Next, players
may either opt for the standard length

Two major game elements can be
selected which will determine how
much like a chess game or traditional
hex wargame The Perfect General
will play. One toggle is the "always
hit/random hit" button. The "always
hit" option means that a shot capable
of hitting a target will always hit it,
while a random hit has a realistic
chance of hitting based on range and
terrain considerations. The second
toggle is the "full kill/partial kill" button (remember Anne Boleyn's
neck?). A full kill means that any hit
will kill a unit, while a partial kill
means that a hit damages a unit, which
then may or may not kill it. Thus, a
game with "always hit/full kill" becomes
a chess-like game of cat and mouse, with
a completely different flavor than a traditional wargame based on "random
hit/partial kill" which is full of probability
calculations and hope in chance. In war,
the balance of losses (or "attrition") often
determines the outcome of the battle.
How those losses will be accrued determines the nature of every game of The
Perfect General. One thing quickly becomes apparent when considering battle
casualties: every man is indispensable.

"When the flag is flying, all
reason is in the trumpet."
—Ukrainian saying
Glorification of war is not a feature of
The Perfect General. While the maps are

done artfully enough to impress any computer cartographer, they concentrate on
the basic elements of strategic terrain.
When surveying the maps, players can
opt to toggle several useful features. The
victory points awarded each town are particularly good to know, because every
scenario focuses on sole control of towns
and objectives for winning. Casualties
never count for "winning" and "losing."
City names, lines of sight, artillery targets
and even the board hexgrid can be toggled on or off. These toggles are a
remarkable bit of easy information accessing.
The look of the battlefield also changes
as the simulated conflict evolves. The
smoking ruins of shattered vehicles and
other troop formations linger, constantly
reminding players of the ugly costs of
war. The pock marks from artillery fire
remain, along with any landscape they've
scarred, be it field, forest or town. These
artillery devastated areas actually become a new terrain type for the game's
duration.
While the sound support wasn't completely finished in the version we had to
play with, what was there (heard on a
SoundBlaster) was terrific. No Pas de
charge ever sounded, but the hollow
thumps of artillery, the shrill whistle of
the shells and the rumble of their impact
all left a chilling impression. The clanking
of armor and sounds of closely fought
battles in overrun also add a nice dimension to the complete enjoyment of the
game. All in all, it's a very well-done package for the audio-visually oriented computer gamer.

"A good man is always a
beginner." —Martial (ca. 40ca. 104)
A player's call to action in The Perfect
General comes from the plethora of
scenarios. Many "primer" scenarios are
offered for wargame neophytes in
general, as well as novices to The Perfect
General in specific. Each gradually
builds upon the lessons from the pre-

Sneak Preview

vious one, adding more units available
and creating other challenging tactical
situations. Every scenario offers the
player a reference to the mapboard to be
played upon (they are unique in each
scenario), a description of the situation,
plus some general advice on strategy for
winning.
The later scenarios are quite involved
and challenging. Some offer a number of
invasion sites to choose from for initial
unit placement and many offer "neutral"
countries whose forces will join the other
side if their integrity is violated. A couple
of "history-based" (as opposed to "historical") scenarios are provided; one for
Patton's race to Bastogne in December
of 1944 and another for Monty's push
from El Alamein in 1942. While still highly abstracted, one does get a feel for the
history of the battles presented.
Of some promise is the "scenario disk"
push button icon on the scenario selection screen. This makes it apparent that,
if successful, this game will see supplemental scenario disks down the road
somewhere, keeping the game ever fresh
and new. Unfortunately, there is no
"design your own" feature for building
custom scenarios or changing unit
values (as there are in many of the SSG
wargames with their Warplan and Warpaint features). This, unfortunately,
leaves players at the publisher's mercy in
terms of future product support.

"Defeat is worse than
death because you have to
live with defeat." —Bill Musselman
One of the nice features of The Perfect
General is the debriefing at the end of
each game. Players are awarded a
military "rank" based on their performance in the preceding battle. As an interesting tribute to "social consciousness," artillery efficiency and "collateral
damage" are also measured. Hmm... better recycle those fallen trees and broken
tanks, general.
After the scenario debriefing, the game
is logged into the game's annals. Histories are recorded, not only for individual players (including computer
players!), but also for each scenario as to
how the attacking and defending sides
have cumulatively fared. Thus, not only
can a player evaluate one battle, but entire careers and campaign histories!
Several interesting details are presented
and make for a fascinating study. What
an outstanding "throw away" feature for
a wargame!

"I made all my generals out
of mud." —Napoleon (attributed)
Connoisseurs can "feel" the caring that
goes into the area of their expertise. This
reviewer strives to be a connoisseur of
wargames and it is clear to him that
much time, caring and refining went into
the game that eventually became The
Perfect General. Clearly, the mention in
the advertisement stating "this game is
based on a twelve-year-old tournament
series..." rings true. The game systems
are based in simplicity, the scenarios are
obviously well evolved and the
mechanics of play are quite clean. For
those who remember the "golden age" of
board wargaming in the 1960s and
1970s, The Perfect General brings the
memories flooding back and one can envision the miniatures version of this
game upon which years of playtesting
were performed.
It is one thing to design a wargame, it
is an even greater challenge to develop
it. This is even more important in a computer wargame, with all of the technical
aspects inherent in that medium. Enter
Mark (Empire) Baldwin. He has been adding many touches to the evolution of
The Perfect General based on his experiences and theories of better wargame
design. With Mark's strong influences in
visuals and interfaces, added to an already solid game backed by years of
playtesting, one has a rare formula that
combines to make a quality computer
wargaming product. What more could
the computer wargamer of the '90s want?

"The book of Military Administration says: 'As the
voice cannot be heard in
battle, drums and bells are
used. As troops cannot see
each other clearly in battle,
flags and banners are
used." —Sun Tzu, The Art
of War
There is also a time when players cannot be heard in battle, and that is when
they play by modem. The Perfect
General supports modem game play.
While the most popular modem wargame on the market today (Command
HQ) virtually requires a modem for its
constant, real-time action, The Perfect
General is a much more
turn-sequence-oriented game which little lends itself to
modem play. While one's opponent is
purchasing units or plotting artillery, a
player must sit and wait patiently. One

cannot even chit-chat with the opponent
to kill the time, for doing so completely
stops the other player's ability to conduct
his phase by the appearance of an intrusive dialogue box (whereas in Command HQ, a separate "chat line" is
given that doesn't interrupt the other
player's ability to keep playing).

"I hope you have kept the
enemy always in the picture. War-books so often
leave them out." —T. E.
Lawrence ("of Arabia,"
1888-1935) in a letter to Archibald Wavell, 2/9/28.
Even during the fire and movement
phases, where a player can interrupt the
action by pressing the "F" key to fire
upon the enemy, this opportunity to interact occurs sporadically at best. So, the
game is ideal for the player who likes to
ponder his moves, but is rather annoying
to generals who are addicted to a more
real-time (i.e. crisis-centered) environment. The modem feature is nice, and
quite welcome. Wargamers who have always longed for opponents will find them
as near as the telephone, and we hope
that such a feature as "modemability" becomes an industry standard. Still, there's
something a bit clunky about the way it
is coming along in The Perfect General.

"In war there is no substitute for victory. "
—Douglas MacArthur in a
speech to a joint meeting
of Congress, 4/19/51.
In the "lingo" of the strategy gaming
genre, this quote becomes: "In wargames, there is no substitute for victory
conditions." This begs the question, is
The Perfect General the "perfect wargame?" It isn't. Neither does it pretentiously try to be. Instead, Can You Be
The Perfect General? purports to be an
engrossing strategy game, centered on a
theme of tactical armored warfare in the
mid-20th century. It is that, plus all it
claims to be: well-tested, thought-provoking and ideal for play sessions where
replay value is more important than
realism. Those seeking the Kampfgruppe of the 1990s will be disappointed. For those of us who look back
on the "kinder, gentler" wargames of
yesteryear, we will find playing The Perfect General as comfortable as wearing
those torn, faded blue jeans, our oldest
pair of tennis shoes and a five-year old
flannel shirt. Pass the potato chips,
please....

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tate
Warning: Although "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. If the gentle reader
eschews hints, let him beware!

A

t last, we seem to be reaching the

end of summer. Fred's back from
the Grues Convention, and the
cool autumn winds are only a few weeks
away. This is the time of year a lot of
folks take their vacations. How about
you? Wondering where to go? Well, I
hear that the Far East is a pretty interesting place.
Heart Of China is Dynamix's new adventure game, straight from the pages of
the old pulp magazines. Set in and
around the China of 1930, it's a
cinematic romp with captures, escapes,
derring-do and maybe even a little
romance.
Conversation plays a big part in this
game. There's a lot of dialogue, and
choosing the right (or wrong) response is
as much a puzzle as anything else. You
can make things easier or harder for yourself, depending on how you talk to the
people you meet.
The interface is simple. In fact, it's pretty much the same as the one in Rise of
The Dragon. Everything is icon-driven
using the mouse; no typing on the keyboard is necessary.
So you're Lucky Jake Masters, running
a two-bit air service out of Hong Kong.
Jake is an ex-World War I ace, who
never tires of recounting his exploits to
anyone who happens to be around. He's
brash, a little arrogant, somewhat boast-

ful, but underneath he has, of course, the
proverbial heart of gold. He's rather like
Han Solo in Star Wars.

principles. With that accomplished, and
maybe a little shopping trip first, it's off
to Cheng-du to rescue Kate!

Jake's not doing too well. In fact, he's
up to his ears in debt. Come to think of
it, he's not only in debt, but out of business, too. E.A. Lomax, his major creditor,
just foreclosed on the service. Not for the
money; E.A. has ulterior motives.

The fortress is, of course, heavily
guarded, and it's not open to tourists
today. A certain amount of brainwork is
necessary to get in. Well, there's always
the front door. Sometimes the best way
is the boldest way, for the right person.
Then again, maybe sneaking in from the
rear is better. Whichever, Jake better
make up his mind soon.

E.A.'s daughter has just been kidnapped by a Chinese warlord. Kate
Lomax is no spoiled child of wealth.
Spurning high society, she trained as a
nurse and went into the remote interior
to do good works among the natives.
She's definitely not your typical "Little
Miss Moneybags" (kinda reminds you a
little of Princess Leia, doesn't it?).
Anyway, Li Deng has Kate, and ransom
isn't what's on his mind. So E.A. needs a
hero type to rescue her, and Jake is
volunteered. To sweeten the deal, Lomax
kicks in a $100,000 reward for safe
retrieval... with a catch. Every day that
passes, twenty grand goes down the
drain. It's an incentive for Jake to move
fast. Jake decides to move fast.
His first move is to hook up with a
ninja(!) named Chi. Not the easiest guy
to find; for some strange reason, the
cals are reluctant to talk about him.
Can't imagine why. But with a little persistence, Jake eventually meets up with
this remarkable person. After giving Chi
a solid reason to help, all Jake has to do
is convince him to get into an airplane.
Chi (smart man!) has doubts about
flying. He doesn't really believe in
airplanes, when you get right down to it.
Jake needs to give him a sensational
visual demonstration on aerodynamic

Once inside, the first thing Jake notices
is all the guards strolling around. What a
nuisance! Life (not to mention the rescue) would be so much easier if all these
troublemakers had something else to
keep them busy. Perhaps Jake can
come up with a hot idea for this situation.
With the guards occupied elsewhere,
it's a snap to grab Kate and take off. As
soon as Jake deals with the two
poisonous snakes, that is. Nasty little
things. I don't recommend the
barehanded approach for this problem.
Premature death is such a downer.
Hey, Jake is almost done, and he can
practically feel those Lomax bucks in his
pocket already. These rescue jobs aren't
so hard after all, huh? So what if hundreds of bloodthirsty guards are on your
tail? Just pop into the tank and get going.
This is the fun part. If you're not into arcade stuff in adventure games, why, you
just say you want to skip it and win...
and you do! Sure makes life easier on
the nerves, not to mention reflexes. On
the other hand, if you're the type who
wants a bit of challenge, go right ahead
and shoot 'em up!

Game Hints

Whew! Safely at the Yankee Eagle at
last! Now a quick flight back to Hong
Kong, drop off the lady, pick up the
money and... and there's just this tiny lit
tle problem. Seems Jake wasn't quite
fast enough when he took out the
snakes. Kate was nipped and now she's
in serious trouble, like slowly dying from
the poison.

place like this, but a little something from
here and a little something from there all
adds up to a way of getting Jake out of
his current predicament.
The crazy lady under the cell window
isn't at all interested in money (thereby
proving she is nuts!), and it's not likely
that Kate can purchase anything she
wants. However, a fruitful experience can
be of help here. So can the crazy lady.

Not to worry. Chi knows all about this
stuff, and says there's a cure. In Kathmandu, Tibet. That's right, Tibet. It's the
one and only place Kate can get fixed
up. Forget about Hong Kong and quick
cash; a detour is in order here.

With Jake sprung, it's a wild ride to the
airport, with the Nabob's men in hot pursuit. U Deng has his agents around, too
(another man with a long memory).
There's the Yankee Eagle and...
BOOOOM! There was the Yankee
Eagle. Looks like it just blew up. Looks
like poor Chi got blown up, too.

So the Yankee Eagle goes soaring over
the Himalayas, and naturally runs out of
fuel at just the wrong moment. Well, I
guess they didn't have such big gas
tanks in those days. Anyway, Jake
wasn't fooling when he claimed to be an
ace. He brings the plane down without a
crackup, but it goes into a long skid, stopping (where else?) at the very edge of a
deep chasm.
After hastily debarking from the plane,
the trio finds itself in the middle of
nowhere. It's freezing, it's snowing and
Kate don't look too good. Someone's
gonna have to go for help, while the
other stays behind to tend to Kate.
Which one? Ah, that's the question.
Tricky situation here. Who goes and
who stays is pretty important, 'cause if
Kate bites the big one, it's all over. So
keeping her alive is number one priority.
That means whoever remains with her,
better know what he's doing (hint hint).
And don't forget to look in the plane, too.
Rescued (at the last minute, of course)
by villagers from Kathmandu, Jake discovers his troubles aren't over. He and
Chi can't move the plane back by themselves, and the villagers aren't too interested in that kind of work. Especially
since their lives are being made difficult
by Bojon, the local strongman. Looks
like Jake and Chi are gonna have to foment a little revolution here. A hero's
work is never done.
If it were to be done, it's best done
quickly. Chi casually mentions that a
storm is coming, and that will push the
Eagle right over the edge of the chasm.
There's no time for dawdling here. A
quick tour of the village (there's not
much to see), a visit or two to the wise
lama (is there any other kind?) and a
chat with some locals in the neighborhood bar are all in order. Don't forget to
look in on Kate somewhere along the
way, too. And remember, this is be kind
to kids week.

No time for tears now. The bad guys
are closing in! Quick! Off to the Orient Express (good thing it's heading to Paris)!
Ah, a little breathing room at last, and
time for a little romance, too.
This is the big scene for the romance
between Jake and Kate. Are they gonna
hit it off or not? Here's where we find out.
You even get the chance to do it as
either Jake or Kate (choosing the
dialogue and responses).
Things are looking rosy now. The
Bojon's been kicked out, Kate is all
healed up, the plane is safe and it even
has some fuel. But Li Deng (remember
him?) has made Hong Kong too hot for
a return trip, so another destination is in
order. Paris sounds about right.
It's a long jaunt, but Jake figures he
can stop off in Istanbul and fill up.
Shouldn't take long. Quick stopover,
nothing more. Suuuuuuure. Like, did
Jake think the Nabob would forget about
that little escapade with his daughter, the
last time Jake was in town?
These guys have long memories and
they still remember Jake all too well. In
no time at all, our boy is in big trouble.
Very big trouble. Now it's up to Kate to
get him out of it. That's gonna cost some
money, and American dollars aren't legal
tender in this part of the world.
Seems like Kate will have to do a bit of
gambling if she wants to break our hero
out of prison. The shell game is tricky,
but fair. Just keep your eye on the
shells, and ignore the conversation. Save
before you start, restore if you lose, and
save if you win. Keep it up until you've
cleaned the guy out.
Now that she has a little spending cash,
Kate can do the grand tour and see
what's for sale. Probably not a lot, in a

Whichever, and whichever way it goes,
after the hearts and flowers comes the
Big Fight Scene. Yep, one of Li Deng's
agents made it onto the train. Jake will
just have to punch out his lights. This is
another arcade sequence and, like the
one with the tank, you can skip it and
win if you prefer. Perhaps not as satisfying as doing it the hard way, but at least
you can't lose!
Finally, Paris! And there's E.A. himself
waiting at the train station. What happens next? Will Jake and Kate get
hitched, or will our hero just collect his
cash and head out again for the wild blue
yonder? Hey, that's up to you, and how
you played the sweetheart stuff as the
game progressed. There's more than one
ending possible here!
Looks like that wraps things up for
now. In the meantime, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi, visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie,
stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Strategy

TANK SCHOOL 101
by Dana L. Cadman
of NATO and Warsaw Pact land forces.
Both sections are entertaining and useful
in developing strategies for winning the
game.

T

he U.S. Army has been playing

games for five years now. (Hold
your tongues, ye wags and cynics!)
Five years ago, the U.S. Army began
using the Simulation Network (SimNet)
to train soldiers in armored combat. SimNet is a combination of tank, personnel
carrier and helicopter simulators, a communications network and a protocol that
allows one simulator, or several
simulators hundreds of miles apart, to
participate in a training scenario. This allows crews to practice gunnery proficiency and platoon-, company- and battalionsize operations from the controlled environment of the laboratory.
Now, three games for the personal computer, Abrams Battle Tank, M1 Tank
Platoon and Tank, bring some of this excitement to the home. This article will provide a brief comparison of all three commercially available software packages
with unclassified information about the
military's network. Because of the nature
of his employment, the present author
could write more, but then he would
have to kill 85,000+ readers (wicked grin).

By the Books
The documentation for Abrams Battle
Tank includes several pages of statistics
about Soviet and American armored
vehicles and a few sentences about each
vehicle. The manual also offers some tactical advice about how to correctly
deploy the tank.
Even if the game itself were a dog, M1
Tank Platoon would be worth the price
just for the manual. There are three
pages of information about the M1A1
and 41 pages describing the tactics and
design theories of armored vehicles. This
information is followed by 46 pages
describing the weapons and organization

Tank's manual is equally impressive.
Most of the information about the M1
comes from learning the game controls,
but the manual includes 20 pages of information about U.S. and Soviet equipment. The six pages of tactical help ranges from choosing platoon formation to
leading the gun. There is also a section
on the history of tanks and armored warfare. Tank is the only game that comes
with a videotape covering these same
topics.
SimNet comes with several volumes of
instructions and six weeks of military
classroom training. [Ed: Not available in
any retail store!]

From Recruit to Cadet
Abrams Battle Tank wastes no time
getting the player onto the battlefield.
The player can choose from eight
scenarios, ranging from easy to hectic in
degree of difficulty. Once the player has
practiced on these he can choose to
enter the campaign, a random arrangement of the eight scenarios.
M-1 Tank Platoon offers training sessions with both stationary and moving targets. All sessions take place on the Narfenauer Range in West Germany, the
same range used every other summer for
the CAT (Canadian Army Trophy) Shoot
competition. These exercises allow the
player to become familiar with the controls before actually entering combat.
The player can also adjust the battlesight
range and the values in the ballistic computer. A prohibitively expensive add-on
to SimNet is the only other "game" that
lets the user set the values in the ballistic
computer.
Tank also offers stationary and moving
target sessions at the Fort Knox ranges,
giving the operator the same familiarization opportunities as Tank Platoon.
Tank goes one step further by letting the
operator practice combined arms missions with artillery, AA support and CAS
(Close Air Support).
SimNet, of course, allows military
trainees to practice gunnery at Fort
Knox, Narfenauer, Fort Rutger or any
other location that can be mapped by a
satellite.

All five games tested include the ability
to generate smoke for camouflage, even
though there is no visual effect for the
smoke grenades in SimNet as of yet.

Buttoning Up
All five games include intuitive,
easy-to-use controls. Tank was particularly easy
to use, since many of the driver's controls are the same ones used in some
SimNet stations. This is, of course, understandable since Spectrum HoloByte
subcontracted some of the software work
on SimNet.
The three PC games use the function
keys to change views from inside the
tank. Tank was the only game to offer
multiple outside views. M-1 Tank
Platoon and Tank use detailed renderings of the tank controls to convey information to the operator; switches move
and lights change as keys are pressed to
operate controls. Abrams Battle Tank is
more menu-driven and conveys changes
to the operator through generically
designed controls.
Only SimNet allows the commander, as
well as the gunner, to fire the main gun.
Adding further depth, it is also the only
game that includes actual Ml hardware
and allows the operator to experience
maintenance problems such as throwing
a track during a high-speed turn on loose
ground or along slopes.

"Platoon, Ho!"
Abrams Battle Tank operates as a
lone vehicle. The opposing forces appear
to be randomly placed and friendly forces do not interact with the M1A1, other
than to get in the way of targets. Tank
operates within the context of a platoon,
but does not allow the player to command any tanks other than his own.
M-1 Tank Platoon allows for the independent operation of four tanks and randomly chosen support vehicle groups.
Vehicles can also be placed in several
regulation formations. Command can be
switched to any tank at any time. The
battle can be viewed from any position in
any of the four tanks, along with an
aerial view of the battlefield.
SimNet, in its present iteration, allows
the battle to be viewed from the tank, an
aerial view, a stealth vehicle that does
not participate in combat, the nose of an
M830 HEAT round or just about any
place one cares to park himself during
combat. Unlike the home games, SimNet allows multiple views of the battle,
from multiple monitors, simultaneously.

Strategy

tank a more difficult target to acquire
(much less damage).
Tank formations are important and
must be adjusted to the situation. Placing
tanks in a line abreast behind a hill is
good since the entire platoon has cover
and the ability to fire. Marching across an
open field in that formation still gives all
platoon members a chance to shoot, but
all of them can also be shot at. A
diamond or wedge formation may hinder
the fire opportunities of the rear tanks,
but they can hide in the smoke
generated by the lead tanks, reducing
the number of tanks that can be shot at
during terrain-crossing maneuvers.
A column formation is seldom used,
since the lead tank is the only one with a
clear field of fire. Nevertheless, this formation is useful for road marches and crossing bridges. Leaving tanks spread out
during river crossings will cause the tank
on the bridge to easily cross the river
while the other tanks fall behind, breaking up the formation. Staying in formation encourages soldiers with anti-tank
guided weapons (ATGWs) to stay down,
rather than pop up and take a shot at
that thin rear armor of the platoon.
Another instance when breaking up a
formation is good policy occurs when
ample cover is available. One platoon, or
a pair of tanks, can move ahead while
another group provides covering fire.
Once the first group is in place, it can
provide covering fire as the second
group moves past the first. This prevents
the entire group from being exposed at
once.

Pass in Review
Tanktics
For the individual tank there are two tactics:
1. Keep your front to the enemy.
2. Keep moving.
Tank armor is not uniformly distributed.
Sixty to seventy percent of a tank's
armor is in the front where it will protect
the crew from the most powerful hits.
Side armor is thinner and will protect
against glancing shots and most soldierfired anti-tank weapons, but it will not
hold up against a straight-on shot from
another tank. A tank's back armor will
protect the crew from shrapnel and rifle
fi re, but that's about it.
That is why it is wise to keep the main
gun over the front deck. Turning the turret 180 degrees means that the crew in
the turret is safe while enemy fire enters
the engine exhaust grill to take out the

engine (unwise) or the driver is protected
from enemy fire while the rest of the
crew is using the ammunition in the back
of the turret to hide behind (even more
unwise).
A moving target is harder to hit than a
stationary one. The Abrams in all of the
games under consideration come with stabilized gun systems that allow them to
shoot on the move. Most Soviet equipment is incapable of doing the same, so
they are either sitting targets when firing,
or they are non-threats while they
maneuver into position.
The only time when sitting still is good
is when cover is available. Hiding behind
hilltops, stone fences, etc., essentially
adds armor to the tank as any enemy
fire must first penetrate the sod, stone,
etc. to reach the tank. Cover also
reduces the tank's silhouette, making the

All of the games are well-written and
entertaining. SimNet, of course, offers
the most excitement, realism and variety,
but the three PC games do not require
three people to operate all of the controls. The PC games are also much more
affordable. Tank offers the best tank controls and most realistic mission set-ups of
the three games, while M1 Tank Platoon
is the easiest to operate in the aerial view
mode. Abrams Battle Tank is easiest to
learn and provides more entertainment
for those whose tastes lean more toward
arcade games than chess.
Actually, the only thing really missing
from any of these games is probably the
spine-jarring wrench of crossing hills at
30 mph (a blessed omission). Come to
think of it, the entertainment software
publishers do an extremely good job of
reducing the work of armored warfare
into the thrill of simulated combat.

Review

Chrome fever
Street Rod II: The Next Generation
Mike Weksler

TITLE:
Street Rod II: The Next Generation
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
539.95
COPY PROTECT: Document Check
DESIGNERS:
Andrez Canoe, Andrzej Micialkiewics, Wojteck Was
PUBLISHER:
California Dreams
DISTRIBUTOR: Electronic Arts Distribution

e term "hot rod," when used among avid computer
garners, invokes images of ominous tower cases stuffed
with "big block" 486 mother boards, math co-processors,
two-digit RAM and monster hard disks with ultra-high access
time. To others, however, the term "hot rod" means something
else. It reminds us of the days when cars rolling off the lines in
Detroit were called "muscle cars." They had engines that were
measured in cubic inches, high compression ratios and burned
gas by the bucketful. Cars like the Camaro, the Charger, the Corvette, the GTO, the Chevell and the Mustang were already fast in
their stock configuration, but they could really fly with just the
right modifications. For a lot of us (in our younger days), life
revolved around taking an older muscle car and restoring it to its
former glory (with a few modifications), hanging out at the
burger joint, cruising town and drag racing at the local "underground" strip on the outskirts of town.

Cruisin'
Street Rod II: The Next Generation allows the player to relive
his high school days of building a bitchin' set of wheels and then
racing anyone who has eight cylinders under his hood. Like its
big brother Street Rod, Street Rod 11: The Next Generation is
about spending the summer building a hot rod out of a junker
and then taking on all comers. This time around, the player is
transported to the summer of 1969. Perhaps due to inflation, one
starts off with more money — 1,200 bucks. Again, the goal is to
shut down the "King of the Road" and scam his betty, but there
are some noticeable improvements.

Buy 'em, Build 'em, Race 'em
In addition to selecting from some late '60s muscle cars such
as the Charger, the Corvette, the GTO, the Chevell and the Shelby Fastback, among others, one can also select more parts than
in Street Rod. For example, after enough "racin' for pinks," this
reviewer was able to purchase a '68 'Vette, and drop in — among
other goodies — a GMC blower, 4:11 Posi rear end and headers,
which resulted in a top speed of 122 MPH! In order to install the
exhaust system and swap the rear-end gears, one now has the
ability to work under the car. Once the player's "hot rod" is built,
he should cruise for some gas at the "Cheapskate" gas station,
then go hang out at the "Burger Bungalow" and check out the
competition while trollin' for betties.

Blowin' Doors
The racing has also been improved with the addition of two
new places to race: the L.A. aqueduct, and the legendary Mulhol-

land Drive. The aqueduct is particularly challenging in that one
must drive up the embankments to avoid obstacles. This form of
racing didn't prove to be as lucrative for this reviewer as the drag
racing on the regular strip, but it was highly entertaining. Mulholland Drive is also quite a challenge — veer off the road and the
player will wind up going "over the edge" (both literally and
figuratively).
Of course, on Wednesday evenings, anyone worth his pink slip
who can scrape up thirty bucks can participate in "Grudge
Night" at the local drag strip. The player sets a "breakout" time
at the local raceway and then takes on other racers trying to win
without going under his "breakout" time. Winning "Grudge Night"
will definitely help the player's bank account and the "King" will
be around the "Burger Bungalow" more often.

Under the Hood
As would be expected, the graphics and sound have been
upgraded in the new version. The only thing that the player can
do with the engine, however (besides adding parts), is to adjust
the timing. Although there are newer graphics for doing this, it
would have been nice to be able to do more, such as swap a
cam, adjust the lifters, add timing gears, swap pistons to change
the compression ratio, tinker with a carburetor or, at the very
least, change the oil and oil filter. Parents take note: for some
reason, small children seem to go nuts over the car construction
set and, since they can click on so many cool things, it is as
much of a distraction for them as it is for "the big kids."

Crossing the Finish Line
Although there are more cars and parts to select, build and
race, the process of building a car is unchanged from the original
Street Rod, in which the player reads through the classifieds,
selects cars and parts, and then returns back to his garage to get
his hands greasy. The user interface is also unchanged, which
may cause some to perceive Street Rod II: The Next Generation as a case of "more of the same." The product makes up for
this, however, with the new racing features previously mentioned.
After several hours of reliving "hot rod" memories, the player
may end up cruisin' down to his old hangouts on a Wednesday
night. He'll most likely see a new generation of cars lined up at
the local burger joint with hoods open, chrome glistening and
terms like "four bolt main" and "camelback heads" floating in
the air. The player may also be surprised to see fresh rubber
streaking the pavement at the old drag strip, but if he doesn't, he
can always come home and fire up Street Rod II: The Next
Generation!

Review

n today's world, there seems to be plenty of discussion about
the so-called "war on drugs." Some say victory could be won
if law enforcement were able to get considerably tougher,
while others pronounce the battle against substance abuse as a
"no-win" situation. Accolade's Hoverforce portrays a grim future
of ongoing drug wars in a new hybrid action/simulation game.

I

Hoverforce is set against the backdrop of MetaCity in the year
AD 2050. A new narcotic, "Aftershock," is being distributed
throughout the city. Aftershock is extremely destructive to the
brain, in that it tears down all barriers of right and wrong and
causes its victims (users) to become mindless killers, loyal only
to the druglords, their suppliers. Sheriff Stone has formed the
"Red Wasp Unit" as a special task force specifically commissioned to battle the druglords and rid the city of their pervasive influence. The unit's main weapon in their fight is the assault
hovercraft, the Hoverkill 1000.
Once strapped into the seat of the Hoverkill 1000, the player
begins a series of twelve search-and-destroy missions. His goal is,
literally, to blow away everything in sight. Apparently, MetaCity
has no innocent civilians on its streets, so the pilot is free to blast
everything with his series of weapons. This was certainly an oversight on the part of the designers. Who are the interdiction officers protecting if there are no civilians? This oversight detracted
from the realism of the game and belied its simulation "feel."
The simulation atmosphere, by the way, comes from the use of
three-dimensional polygon-filled graphics, standard to driving and
flying simulations. They do serve to give the game a true threedimensional "feel," but pure action garners are likely to complain
that they lack that certain elegance and beauty.

Twisted Arms
The only weapon in the player's initial allotment is a "Bellypumping " machine gun. Hoverkill pilots quickly discover the
need to upgrade weaponry. This aspect of the game, while neces
sary, detracts from the realism of the game. Players pick up
canisters of cash and drugs for evidence and then fly to the
nearest "store" and purchase weapons. It is hard to imagine a
police officer in hot pursuit of a criminal taking the time to stop
at the local munitions store. The idea is absurd. The game could
have been designed so that the officers would return to the station for weapons upgrade. Utilizing the cash and drug canisters
as a basis for determining if the player has earned the weapons
upgrade is fine, but buying the weapons at a store is ridiculous!
The weapons available are machine guns, pulse cannons and
laser-guided slide missiles, and there are three different models of
each weapon. Pilots will need the more expensive weaponry as
they progress because the enemies get tougher. Fortunately,
each successive purchase lowers the upgrade price for the next
model so that, for example, a pilot who has bought the least expensive cannon will not have to pay the full purchase price on
the other two models.
The Hovercraft comes equipped with radar for tracking enemies
(everybody is an enemy in this game, but this is especially helpful for knowing when an enemy ship has managed to sneak behind the good guy's ship), a directional indicator (a simple arrow
which points the direction of the druglord or nearest store location depending on which the player is seeking) and a shield indicator.
Also, even though it is not part of the ship's equipment per se,

Future Narcs
Accolade's Hoverforce
by David M. Wilson

TITLE:
Hoverforce
SYSTEM:
Amiga, IBM
COPY PROTECT: Code Wheel
REVIEWED:
Amiga
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS:
Paul Carruthers
and Ian Downend
PUBLISHER:
Accolade
San Jose, California

Review

the player is treated to the druglord's reaction to his operations.
When the player has the upper hand, the druglord's features appear with a grimace. When he feels that he is winning the battle,
he appears with a joyful grin! This is an attractive way to help
the player judge his or her effectiveness in the game.
Occasionally, enemy fire will shut down part of the Hoverkill's
systems. Enemy fire has a devastating effect on the vehicle's
shield systems. Direct hits can also terminate shield indicators,
radar, and directional indicators. Naturally, these items must be
replaced at the nearest store out of the evidence money that the
officer has appropriated.

Drug Traffic Court
The game offers a multitude of enemies. The easiest to defeat
are the "zombie drug slaves," which resemble robots. These are
easy targets, easily blasted into oblivion by even the lowest level
machine-gun. The "drug traffic controllers" are also easy to
defeat. They are important because they allow the enemies to be
alerted to the player's location. The "cruisers" are an interesting
innovation in that they split into two parts when shot leaving the
player to battle two enemies rather than one. The "mech spiders"
serve as intriguing enemies. These ground-based creations walk
right up to your hovercraft and begin doing damage. Using the
pulse cannon at close range seems to be the best defense
against them.
By far the most vicious opponents are the sleek black saucers
driven by the druglord's bodyguards. These maneuver quickly,
are difficult to track and seem to have the best shielding. The
druglord himself is invincible (as though Miranda were still in effect) until the required amount of evidence for the current level is
collected. Then he is destroyed with little effort.
One of the most amazing things about all the firepower flying
through the skies is that the buildings seem to take no damage
whatsoever. Players can bombard the buildings to their heart's
content, but no destruction will be evident.
Players looking for a challenging game may discover that
Hoverforce is just such a game. Saving after each level is highly
recommended. Then after the player reaches one of the higher
levels, it will be both interesting and useful to go back and replay
the game from the beginning. After gaining additional experience, gameplay will seem much simpler and the player will
be able to collect more cash and evidence on the first few levels
than was possible during the first "tour of duty." This allows an
earlier weapons upgrade and will better prepare the player for
upper level play.
Another trick that proves helpful in this game is to use the function keys to fire the weapons. On upper-level play, pilots will
want to fire their missiles rapidly and the mouse controls are not
quite as efficient as simply using the keyboard. F1 activates
machine gun mode, F2 selects cannons, and F3 powers up the
missiles. Repeatedly punching the proper function key for the
desired weapon seems to be the equivalent of auto-fire for this
game.
Hoverforce has its weaknesses, but the game offers players
just what is promised. It is a real whiz-bang shoot-'em-up! There
is enough destruction to please even the most violent player.
Players who are seeking a fast-paced, challenging arcade action
game are invited to join Sheriff Stone's squad of Future Narcs.

Sneak Preview

Supercharged Simulation
Electronic Arts' Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge

ario Andretti's Racing Challenge proves several points. It
shows that the player does not
have to have control of all of the elements of a simulation in order to get a
realistic sense of the vehicle being simulated. It demonstrates that each of three
different styles of racing has its own
strategies, dangers and thrills. It proves
that a game can still require significant
thought, even if the controls are simple
(accelerate, decelerate, turn left, turn
right or go straight). Finally, it demonstrates that Distinctive Software, Inc.,
the developers who masterfully constructed Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge, still cannot write a joystick routine
that satisfies driving aficionados.

M

In short, Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge puts the T in torque, the S in
speed and the C in competition without
forcing the player to learn the mechanics
of the cars (as in Ferrari Formula I or
Indianapolis 500: The Simulation). This
time, the program emphasizes Performance with a capital P—for power! The
game allows players to graduate from
the tracks of six different types of motor
sports and uses a semi-role-playing
career track to mark the player's
progress. Following Mario's career track
is like starring in every racing movie ever
made. Along the way, Mario guides and
occasionally prods the player toward excellence.
There are six different types of racing in
the game. Each has distinctive race courses, types of qualifying and race lengths
which are, in turn, true to the type of
racing being simulated. In sprint cars and
modifieds, one must qualify for the main

event via preliminary races called
"heats," just as a driver would in actual
competition. Stock cars, prototypes, Indianapolis cars and Formula One racing
have no "heats," so the player qualifies
by time trials. It is a satisfying way to advance the player from the "minor
leagues" of racing to the "majors."

Racing in History
Ascot Park in Gardena, California no
longer exists. like many of the classic
sports shrines of the past, it too fell to
the wrecking ball to make way for new
development. Yet, Ascot was the
springboard for Parnelli Jones, Mario and
others to reach sponsorship at higher
levels of competition. In Mario Andretti's
Racing Challenge, players can challenge Mario at Ascot and other famous
sprint racing tracks. The physical model
underlying the simulation is fairly vivid in
the sprint car segment of the game as
players learn to skid around turns and
make use of every inch of the track in
order to keep up the pace.
Ascot Park is also where the player
begins to get the feel for how the
damage model works in the game. Although the results of skidding one's tires
are not immediately visible on the dirt
track — excessive skidding lowers one's
top speed rather quickly on paved
tracks! — the result of "rubbing" (the
metaphor used by Robert Duvall's character to describe bumping another car or
the track wall in Days of Thunder) is to
lower the top speed rather quickly.
At Ascot, the damage model is relatively forgiving, since the straightaways are
short and one cannot easily reach the

car's actual top speed, anyway. This
reviewer often went full bore at Ascot,
rubbing the walls on every turn and not
worrying about the damage. He was
aware, however, of the fact that the loss
in top speed was occurring and made
sure that he did not drive the same way
in sprint races with longer straightaways.
Since the game automatically fixes one's
car to 100% after each race (without
charging the player's earnings), this was
no problem. One would think that such a
driver might lose his sponsor pretty quickly if he pulled such a reckless stunt in
real life, but it is impossible to simulate
everything in a computer game.

Driving at Daytona
After one has won sufficient funds to
upgrade his vehicle, he can move on to
modifieds (or, if he has earned enough
money, on to stock cars). Modifieds give
the player a wider car to work with and
force him to race over some of the same
tracks as he raced on the sprint car circuit. Since the top speeds are higher and
the cars wider, this is an opportunity for
the player to learn how to hold a tight
line in the corners and maneuver in close
quarters, lessons which will be vital in the
final four types of racing. These are
frustrating lessons to learn, however, and
the present reviewer was very excited
when he was able to move on to stock
cars.
Stock cars, after all, are as American as
apple pie. Good ol' boys and buxom
babes gather around the largely oval
temples of high-speed endurance rituals
and watch the warrior priests of automotive performance dance their ceremony

9

Sneak Preview

of life and death around the track. From
the first time this reviewer felt his car
hurled out of the high-speed curves of
Daytona, he was absolutely hooked on
Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge. It
became obvious that a player had to
hold the right line in a curve or would
lose all of his 200+ miles per hour of
speed (and even risk smashing into the
outside walls of the curve).
Yet, there were still new challenges to
be introduced when the player actually
began racing on the stock car circuit.
More than in the earlier competitions,
one gets the sense that the artificial opponents (the other drivers) in the stock
car races are smart. Drafting (getting behind another car so that one does not
have the same amount of wind resistance as the car in front and can be
pulled by the lead car until one is ready
to make his move) is very important in
the stock car races. One can lead the
race for several laps and think that he is
headed for a pole-to-pole victory. Suddenly, a good ol' boy drafts the player for a
lap or so and makes his move. One will
wonder where that car got all the extra
speed. Of course, the player's own wind

draft gave it to him. So the player will
have to do the same thing on a later lap.
Also, the stock car circuit introduces
more lengthy races to the mix. This
means that having a pit stop strategy for
refueling and possibly changing tires is
absolutely vital. As noted earlier, the
damage model takes off a bit of speed
for all the rubber the player is leaving on
the track. So it is a good idea to put new
rubber on the car when making major pit
stops. This reviewer usually fudges one
lap past the suggested pit stop ("Mario"
suggests the appropriate lap at the beginning of the race). This is because the artificial opponents all pit on the suggested
lap and pit row is crowded (just like it is
during a yellow flag lap of a real race),
making it very possible to have a race-ending collision on pit row. (Astute readers
will wonder how the reviewer knows this
— sensitive readers will not ask.)
By the time players reach the Indianapolis circuit and the Formula I circuit, pit stops are an even more vital part
of the race strategy. Each new circuit becomes more harrowing until one is finally
ready for the endurance tests of Formula

I with its serpentine routes of passage.
Players quickly learn that speed is not
necessarily the key to winning. Although
speed can cover a multitude of evils in
the early circuits, driving skill is what
wins at the higher levels. This is how it
should be.

Winner's Circle
Although one may miss the ability to
"set up" the race car that served as a
vital part of Electronic Arts's earlier
racing games and Distinctive Software, Inc.'s Bill Elliott's NASCAR Challenge for Konami and one may miss the
capacity to perform goofy maneuvers
like turning around and driving against
the traffic (found in Indianapolis 500:
The Simulation), Mario Andretti's
Racing Challenge still green-flags
adrenalin for the action addict and intricate nuances for the knowledgeable enthusiast. It is the first time aficionados
have been able to "feel" the difference in
six different types of racing. Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge proves once
and for all that it takes more than engine
noise and track layouts to make a computer game seem like a real race.

Sneak Preview

n professional hockey, overtime is
only welcome when one's team
—manages to come from behind to tie
the score in the last few seconds of
regulation play. When hockey fans play
NHL Hockey (the latest Sega cartridge
from Electronic Arts), however, they
will be begging for the chance to play
longer and longer, whether it means playing sudden death overtimes or simply
scheduling more games. The play
mechanics, graphic effects, sound bites
and number of options are enough to
make true hockey fans purchase a Sega
system just to play this game. It is, quite
simply, enough of a quality product to
"put the lie" to anyone who says a 16-bit
cartridge game cannot compete with a
16-bit floppy disk-based computer game.
This one takes traditional computer
games into the Stanley Cup final.
NHL
Hockey is a player's game. It
does not try to compete with Wayne
Gretzky Hockey 2 on the "coach only"
or "play and coach" level. After all,
WGH2 does an excellent job of allowing
the player to see complete plays developing via its overhead view of the rink and
its Hockey League Simulator allows
players to perform either "quick and
dirty" statistical replays of full NHL or customized league seasons, seasons based
on full-fledged Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2
game results or a combination of the two
types of game resolutions to simulate a
full season.
Yet many action garners, in particular,
felt that WGH2 offered a pristine perspective, far from the board-crashing, bonecrunching power game of hockey. They
felt that it needed more direct involvement from the player. Now, NHL Hockey features animated figures that look
more human than those in WGH2 and allows players to participate more directly
in face-offs and fights. It offers plenty of
action for garners who like to control the
skating, passing, shooting and fighting
themselves, but it also offers a statistical
base which factors into the on-ice action.
In other words, a wizard at handling the
Sega controller may think he can skate
and stick handle past a defender, but his
speed and puck handling rating will
come into play. An excellent action
gamer may get off more shots on goal
than his opponent, but how accurate
those shots are will depend on the onscreen players' actual statistics (Note:
The license granted to NHL Hockey by
the National Hockey League allows EA
to use real team names, but the player's
association has not approved the use of
player names. Nevertheless, real hockey
fans will recognize that the players on

Pre-Game Report:
EA's NHL Hockey Worthy of Overtime!
by Wyatt Lee

puck by pressing the "B" button on the
controller to actually pass the puck.

each team perform with remarkable faithfulness to the players on actual NHL
teams).

Opening Period (Game
Mechanics)
Play begins with a typical menu where
players can select which team they wish
to control against the computer, whether
two human players will control a given
team together as teammates or whether
the humans will face off head to head
with two different teams (or even, with
the magic of the computer, the same
team). Players can also decide whether
to play three different lengths of periods,
use the game's capacity to change lines
when the ones on the ice become
fatigued or have the game "call" almost
all penalties, no penalties except offsides
or no penalties. This is also where the
player can choose to play any NHL team
(including the Campbell and Wales Conference All Stars or the newest expansion
team, the San Jose Sharks).
Once all the choices are in place, a
checklist allows players to view the roster
positions of both team and note where
any mismatches might occur during the
course of the game. Then it's face-off
time!
The face-off in NHL Hockey is interesting. A large pop-up window shows enlarged versions of the two players taking
the draw and the linesman ready to drop
the puck. Players can adjust their controller to direct the pass to a teammate and
try to time the animated drop of the

The Sega controller is particularly wellsuited to this kind of game. The directional wheel allows one to determine skating,
shooting and passing direction, the "B"
button tells the active player to pass the
puck and the "C" button tells the active
player to shoot the puck. On defense,
the "A" button allows the active player to
attempt to hold his opponent, the "B" button forces the player closest to the puck
to become the active defender and the
"C" button tries to poke check the puck
away from the offensive skater. In fight
sequences, the directional wheel determines whether the player is advancing
into or retreating from a fight. (In fact, it
seemed to us like the player who retreats
from a fight is most likely to get a penalty for instigating the fight.) The "B" button provides for a short, quick punch
and the "C" button calls for a long,
straight knock-out punch. The fight
scenes are extremely well-executed in
graphics, and they contain easy-to-use
fight mechanics.

Between Periods (Tactical
Tips)
On defense, always remember that the
game features true physical momentum
(i.e., if the players are skating one direction, they cannot suddenly travel in the
opposite direction until they expend the
force from the direction they are travelling). This means that one can move the
controller so that his on-screen skaters
are all moving in the direction of the active player. Then, if he presses the "B"
button each time one of his players
nears the offensive player, he is likely to
get several high-speed collisions. If he is
lucky, one of those collisions should
force the puck loose. Even if the offensive player retains control of the puck,
however, just the threat of collisions is
usually enough to cause the puck handler to slow down and cause his teammates to go offside.
On offense, one should rarely send his
puck handler deep into the slot (right in
front of the goal). The goalies in NHL
Hockey are awesome in fending off

Sneak

Preview

breakaway and rebound shots (too
awesome). The best way to beat a goalie
in NHL Hockey is to put one's best offensive player high in the slot and wait until
either one of his teammates or one of
the opposing team members is screening
the goalie. That is a real trade secret for
NHL Hockey aficionados.

up" penalties or "letting the players
decide the game," NHL Hockey's referee
calls a penalty, even when the penalty
box is packed to the gills. Again, this feature may be changed when the published
version comes out, but it is somewhat disconcerting nonetheless.

Shooting From the Point
(Conclusions)

Game Misconduct
(Problems)
Even a game with the championship
qualities of NHL Hockey commits some
flagrant fouls from time to time and this
game is no exception. NHL Hockey, at
least in the pre-release version we looked
at, does not know what to do with a twoline pass. So, if a player has a fast
enough line on the ice to pass the puck
into the offensive zone and can touch up
the puck before the defensive players get
to it, the program will allow one to get
away with a violation (and it becomes a
good offensive strategy for those who are
not purists). Fortunately, the game will
"call" an icing violation if the defensive
player manages to touch the puck before
an offensive player can.

Second, the two players as teammates
option seems somewhat lacking. Even
when this reviewer was trying to pass the
puck to his human teammate, the program seemed to seek out some non-controlled on-ice athlete to pass the puck to.
This meant that the reviewer ended up
controlling the new active player and his
human teammate was left circling in the
slot to no avail.
Finally, the program simply handles
penalties in a binary fashion. Where reallife referees get reputations for "evening

NHL Hockey is so true to the flavor of
hockey from a player's perspective that
it caused CGWs editor to acquire a Sega
Genesis for his home primarily to play
NHL Hockey. Naturally, this astounded
all of us reviewers, since our ham-handed
arbiter of critical thought has expressed
his personal bias against dedicated game
machines often and loudly in the past.
So, if he has the audacity to cut out this
embarrassing personal reference, this
reviewer will slash him repeatedly with a
real hockey stick. If he can't stand the
cold, he needs to get out of the ice rink.
The fact is, no one who loves hockey
should miss this championship effort.
Now, if there were only a cure for Sega
controller thumb, all would be right in the
universe, eh! awe

Review

McGee's World
(McGee Times Three)
by Deborah Muldawer

TITLES:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

McGee, Katie's Farm,
McGee at the Fun Fair
Amiga, Apple IIGS,
Macintosh, IBM/Tandy
$39.95
Lawrence Productions, Inc,
Galesburg, MI

w
ith an angelic smile on his face, the toddler McGee joyfully explores his world. Many possibilities await McGee in
the McGee trilogy. He can wake up his mother, buy hot
dogs, feed chickens or simply romp outside. The possibilities are
numerous. Assisted by a mouse or track ball, the non-reading
child can choose one of four panels at the bottom of the screen.
Although either tool can be used, younger children may prefer
the more easily maneuvered track ball. With a simple click of a
button, each "no words" graphic causes an event to happen.
Some graphics are actions, while others lead to places that offer
more choices. For example, in the kitchen, McGee can choose to
use the telephone or throw the dog a biscuit; exits to the living
room and great outdoors complete the options available in the
kitchen frame. The McGee series is definitely meant for toddlers,
and Lawrence Productions, Inc. provides excellent documentation on how preschoolers can get the most from these programs.
Mom and Dad: Hands Off!

Among its suggestions, Lawrence includes a notice to parents,
asking them to allow their child to use the mouse and choose
panels on his or her own, avoiding the temptation of adult interference. Lawrence also suggests that a child create stories about
the panels, as well as guessing the consequences of choosing
any given panel. He or she may draw maps of the places or
simply describe what the characters are doing at any given time.
Lawrence is careful to point out that there are no dead ends.
Success is automatically insured since all panels do something.
In addition, the preschool child learns to feel comfortable with
the computer, develops motor skills and increases his or her selfesteem. Furthermore, the program, played without parental aid,
fosters a sense of independence. The thorough documentation includes a summary of the McGee series, instructions on booting,
hard disk installation and instructions on exiting the program.

Sensory Input

McGee's world, as "no words" software, depends on graphics,
sound and animation rather than written text to sustain a player's
interest. Fortunately, all of these elements are excellent. The
sound is clear, though greatly enhanced through the use of attached speakers. Speech, as well as animal and nature sounds,
are distributed among the panels. For example, in Katie's Farm,
as Katie and McGee sail a small boat across the water, one can
hear the sound of the water sloshing beneath the pressure of the
tiny vessel's hull. People and animals show minute changes of facial expressions, varying in different places and situations. The
settings are, in general, realistically presented. The objects are
things that appear in virtually every child's life. This adds a feeling of security, and allows the toddler to further identify with
McGee and his adventures. McGee's home looks lived in, especially his toy-filled room. The backyard offers the basic enchantments of tire-swinging and dandelion blowing. Katie's farm is
overrun with traditional farm animals who appear in conventional
roles, complete with standard sounds and actions. McGee at the
Fun Fair captures the personalities of a variety of people. They
are all friendly and seem to exist for the sole purpose of entertaining the main characters and, of course, the pre-school player.
The superb graphics are equalled by their accompanying animation. Minute detail characterizes every panel. The original program, McGee, features a cat who will yawn, open its eyes, arch
its neck and meow plaintively whenever it is awakened. When
Katie and McGee jump into a haystack, the player can see the
straw flying through the air. Actions do not simply happen — all
of the intermediary steps are shown.
Fun at Home

McGee's world is presented through the eyes of a toddler. The
original program, McGee, features the adventures of the earlyrising McGee as he explores his home. The tousled blond boy
can do anything from waking up his mother to blowing dandelion spore. The bathroom can become a miniature expedition,
and scrambling under the rug provides a further use for McGee's
boundless energy. The graphics, animation, sound effects and a

Review

touch of humor enhance all options. For example, when one
chooses the toilet in the bathroom, McGee smiles enchantingly,
closes the door, and leaves the viewer out in the hallway. In a
few seconds, one hears the sound of a toilet flushing, and McGee
emerges. A nice feature in the original McGee, which should be
added to Katie's Farm and Fun Fair, is the ability to choose the
volume level.

Adventures in Farming
The second McGee program, Katie's Farm, combines the intriguing qualities of the original program with the doctrines of imagination and responsibility. In this program, McGee's rambunctious cousin Katie introduces McGee to her farm. The two
friends go fishing, berry-picking and haystack jumping. Katie
animates a scarecrow for McGee, and their giggles resound
throughout the program. Humor predominates this program. As
Katie hands the berries to McGee, he eats them on the spot,
oblivious to the nearby berry basket. McGee watches a cow
being milked, only to get milk squirted all over his face.
However, despite all the laughter, the farm also promotes a feeling of responsibility. Katie gathers eggs, and feeds the cats and
hens. This program also stresses nature. Besides the natural
quality of the farm itself, one of the panels focuses entirely on a
tree filled with clambering squirrels and fledgling birds.

Fair Game
The third offering in the series, McGee at the Fun Fair, introduces a different quality than that of its two predecessors. The

basic adventure consists of McGee and his friend Tony exploring
a fair. This safe, people-oriented environment presents traditional
carnival fare with jugglers, hot dog stands and clowns. The novelties encountered are certainly interesting, but the boys seem
much less personable than in the earlier programs. Their only
reaction to caricatures, clowns, musicians and kites are a series
of "Gees" and "Wows." However, the lack of speech is compensated by the fair's attractions. One three-year-old playing this program was completely enthralled by a juggler rapidly tossing red
balls. She also loved the various playgrounds, watching over and
over as McGee, descending the sliding pole, landed with a neat
bump on his bottom.

Big Fun for Little Kids
Overall, the McGee series is excellent and should appeal to a
preschool market. One advantage of these programs is that
pressing a single panel repeatedly will engender a slightly different response each time. The three programs present a varied
agenda, but they all address a preschool audience. McGee emphasizes daily routine and the pleasures of the home. Katie's
Farm presents a combination of work and play, independence
and security, as well as humor and imagination. McGee at the
Fun Fair shows the thrilling novelties of an amusement park.
These "no words" programs successfully present small adventures in realistic and non-threatening environments. McGee is
charming, personable and friendly, and the three programs
should provide hours of fun and stimulation for preschool
players.

Sports Game Survey

Courtside Criticism on Computer Basketball Games
by Dan Spezzano and Wyatt Lee

F

or those who can't wait until that

magical time when every redblooded college student paints his
face in school colors and cheerleaders no
longer have goosebumps on their shapely legs because their favorite varsity has
moved indoors, there is always the
chance to shoot those buckets on the
computer screen.

Playing the Zones
There have been several basketball
games released over the last couple of
years, but only a few of them play string
music when it comes to bringing the real
flavor of basketball home. One such
product is Cinemaware's TV Sports Basketball (IBM & Amiga, still available
through mail-order sources) which boasts
the ability for four-player action (Amiga
version). Players can take on the computer, challenge a friend or team up on
the same side. The sparkling graphics
and sound make this game very sweet
and it has a fine mixture of both strategy
and arcade action to challenge most basketball fans.
In TV Sports Basketball, one can control any player desired via the role-playing option or, alternately, control
whomever has the ball (at the player's option). We suggest the role-playing option
for beginners, as it is the easiest to become accustomed to. Passing is also a
snap with the computer assistance available.
When passing, a circle appears around
the receiving player's number. If the
circle is green, it's a safe pass; a red

circle means a risky pass; and a white
circle means there is a good chance the
ball will be turned over. For hard-core
players, turn both these options off and
increase the difficulty. This will give the
game a "free" feeling.
isnoluch
sound support, either; sneakers squeak,
baskets whoosh and the crowd really
roars. One particularly annoying thing
about TV Sports Basketball is that the officials tend to call a lot of charging fouls,
although this is a common complaint for
most of the games on the market.
Laker us Celtics from Electronic Arts
(IBM and Sega Genesis) offers statistically modified arcade action. Human
players do control the on-screen athletes,
but no matter how perfect the timing
when taking a shot, it is the real-life
player's shooting percentage that will
usually make the difference. The human
player's action determines shot selection
more than shot execution.
The splendid graphics in the VGA and
Sega versions would make this game a
terrific addition to any basketball fan's
library (CGA owners should beware, however — this game is next to impossible to
play in this graphics mode because it is
so difficult to tell which players are being
controlled) if it were not too easy to play.
It does not offer enough of a pure action
challenge for arcade-style gamers and it
tends to be too high-scoring for statistics
buffs. The Sega version seems to be the
fastest playing of the bunch, and watching Michael Jordan doing a Tomahawk
slam is almost like watching the real

,

Sports Game Survey

thing. Every player's patent moves are
there, from Tom Chambers' "double
clutch slam" to Magic's "fake dish and
lay-up." Yet, some will be frustrated by
the fact that teams do not change baskets at the end of each quarter (memory
constraints, no doubt), defensive
capabilities seem relatively limited and
there is no provision for playing through
one's own league (only the NBA tournament) or drafting customized teams of
one's favorite players.

Hit the Showers
There are some other, older games out
there if one is intent on checking all of
them. For those not concerned with
graphics, there is Lance Haffner's
Courtside College Basketball (formerly
Final Four College Basketball) and Basketball: The Pro Game. Human coaches
determine line-ups, substitutions and
defensive sets, as well as shot selection,
in this pure strategy game.

On the Court

Those who have always wanted to be
college coaches should definitely check
out Basketball Challenge by XOR Corporation. The game features limited
graphics, basically animated arabic
numerals cavorting about the screen,
and statistics files which enable one to
coach a thinly disguised version of an actual college team. Human coaches can
set line-ups, offensive and defensive sets,
as well as make substitutions, call set
plays from the sidelines or even order
one particular player to take the
"money" shot in the closing seconds of a
half or game. Human coaches can basically exploit mismatches and monitor
fatigue in order to gain advantage over
rival coaches in this fascinating strategic
challenge.

Also in the competition is Virgin
Mastertronics' Magic Johnson MVP
Basketball. It features reasonably large
figures and is a faithful conversion of the
popular coin-op game. For pure action
garners, it offers an excellent challenge
and the two-on-two action allows for fastscrolling full court action. If one is looking for a game that includes strategy or
league play, one must look elsewhere. If
one is looking for quick outlet passes,
pick 'n rolls without the distraction of
having too many players on the court
and caricatured slam dunks, this may be
the basketball game of choice.
Perhaps the most challenging pure action game is The Dream Team from
Data East. A game inspired by both the
classic GBA Championship Basketball
game and the real-life three-on-three halfcourt basketball competitions performed
by Dominique Wilkins, Joe Dumars and
Patrick Ewing on behalf of charity, The
Dream Team allows human players to
design and call plays, maneuver the onscreen athletes and take the open shots.
The shot interface is much less forgiving
than it is in the other games, however.
When the human player tells the onscreen athlete to shoot, a power bar
which looks something like a thermometer pops up on the screen. If the
human player lets go of the space bar (if
using the keyboard controls) or fire button #1 (if using joystick controls) at
precisely the moment the "mercury" gets
to the top of the thermometer, the shot
will be good. If the human player is off
even a half-second, the shot will miss. It
does not seem to matter how high the onscreen athlete's shooting percentage is
from various ranges (e.g. Ewing would
normally be deadly under the basket), it
all hinges on the human player's
reflexes. Add to this the fact that fouls
are often called whether the offending
player is even near the other players or
not and one gets a sense of how frustrating this game can be.
Nevertheless, the game features large

on-screen players, digitized speech, colorful graphics, a tournament option (somewhat akin to league play) and an
easy-to-use (if not easy-to-master) interface. It offers much of the action of the sport
without cluttering the game with too
much detail.

Chalk Talk
When it comes to strategy, none of the
games mentioned comes anywhere close
to meeting the need. One is more likely
to find better non-graphic basketball
strategy games (see below). TV Sports
Basketball is fairly competitive, however.
The on-screen athletes, as well as the
coach, are given a ranking on a scale
from one to thirteen. This determines
how many "talent points" can be distributed to each of that player's six
categories: shooting, passing, defense,
rebounding, quickness and jumping.
Fatigue plays a big role in TV Sports Basketball and one will have to keep a constant eye on the various players' conditions during timeouts. This is displayed
visually by the player's stance. If he is
standing upright, he is fine; if slouched
over, he is exhausted. Aside from observing the fatigue factor, little "strategy" element is included in TV Sports Basketball.

Finally, one can also still pick up a
copy of Avalon Hill's venerable NBA
Basketball direct from the company (it
is still in their latest catalog). Garners
who remember the Pure Stat line of
sports programs will know how this largely menu-driven statistics-based game
plays. Human coaches make their selections for line-ups, substitutions and shot
selection, then watch a crude animation
that displays the result of each play.
For now, however, we "hoopsters" must
be content with what is available. Still,
these reviewers would like to see a game
in which the computer will "auto play"
games for advanced league play. In addition to involving more strategy, a complete game should be able to play more
than just man-to-man (a little 2-3 zone or
a box and one would be nice) and a
good routine for calling and handling
fouls should be installed.
There are some bright spots, though,
on the up-and-coming list. APBA has
been preparing to release a basketball
game based upon their popular
boardgame and Bethesda Softworks
(Wayne Gretzky Hockey) is working
with Mirage Graphics (Earl Weaver
Baseball) to create a statistics-based college basketball game. We're anxious to
see both of them.

Campaign Game

"There I Was in My P-51..."
•••

the theater) to the end of the year.
The final period covers 1945. Note
that although "Ramrod" carries a
11/44 date in YAC it fits well in Tour
3 of our campaign.
To play the campaign one will need
two six sided dice (2D6 in role-playing
shorthand). Roll on the "Do You Make
Contact Today?" chart. Roll a die and follow
the instructions. Here are the rules:
1) Use no game "helps". Do not use ControlW or Control-Z.

A Campaign for Chuck Yeager's Air Combat
by Russell Sipe and Charles A. Smith

A

lthough Chuck Yeager's Air Combat

(YAC) is an excellent air combat game
and one that anyone interested in air
combat during WWII, Korea and/or Vietnam
will want to purchase, the game does have a
glaring shortcoming. The campaign game
leaves a lot to be desired. When one starts a
YAC campaign, one works through the exact
same missions played in the regular game.
Although there are some differences in the
campaign game (e.g., one cannot use game
"helps", one has to return to base, the missions are flown more or less in order), the campaign basically is simply playing through all
the regular missions. When a mission is
successfully completed in the campaign, that mission is check marked on the menu. That's all
that happens. There is no victory screen at the
end of the campaign congratulating the player
for a job well done. Well, we want more and
we think players do as well.
So here is the Chuck Yeager Air Combat P-

51 Campaign. The original design by Charles
A. Smith has been modified by Russell Sipe
for the upcoming Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Handbook. The Handbook will contain
campaigns for all the player-flyable aircraft in
YAC (i.e., P-51, FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, F-4,
and MiG-21).
The P-51 Campaign uses a typical role-playing structure to take a character through a
100-mission campaign. Although it attempts
to give a historical feel for combat in the
period in question, this is not an attempt to
create a heavy-duty historical simulation of life
as a P-51 pilot.
The campaign is divided into three periods.
The first, "Introduction of the P-51," covers the
period 4/43 to 4/44 (roughly the period from
the time of the introduction of the P-51 until it
became the #1 aircraft in the 8th Air Force
fighter arsenal). The second period,
"Dominance of the P-51" covers the period
from 5/44 (when the P-51 finally surpassed
the P-47 for number of operational fighters in

2) Eject only when level and over 400 ft in altitude.
3) The player must land at his own base or
safely eject after every mission.
4) Level-crash survival is only possible at
speeds of less than 125mph.
Record missions on the charts provided.
Keep a logbook of the most interesting missions. Then write them up. "There I was..."
Playing YAC as a campaign changes dramatically one's attitude about missions. Whereas
before the tendency may have been to dive in
fearlessly and foolishly, one will now be forced
to use common sense. The player will chose
his fights. Sometimes discretion is the better
part of valor.

Campaign Game

Astute players will notice that the campaign
gets easier as time goes along. In 1943, the
Luftwaffe was powerful and deadly. As time
when on, the Allied war machine pressed the

Luftwaffe hard. Veteran German pilots were
lost through attrition. German pilots became
greener as time marched on. Part of the same
dynamic was the domination of the air war by

the Americans and British. However, although
things got easier, they still were deadly. It will
take skill, courage, intelligence and luck to survive all 100 missions. Good luck!

Industry News

Another Look
WINGS OF FURY

Post-CES
Surprise
(Continued from page 37)

8.38 R.I.D.

RATING
Back in 1987, a computer game
meant an Apple computer game.
One of the most diverting games of
its day was Wings of Fury from
Broderbund. An arcade wargame,
Wings of Fury put the player at the
controls of a U.S. Navy WWII F6F
Hellcat fighter-bomber. Although offering no first-person perspective (i.e.,
"cockpit view" of the action), the
game is a delight to play simply by
watching the action scroll straight left
and right.
Beginning each mission means arming with the right types of ammunition. While always having effective
machine guns (with unlimited ammunition), other ordnance is a choice
between a large supply of bombs, a
few rockets or a single torpedo.
Depending on the mission (island
bombardment, air-to-sea attack or
combat air patrol), choosing the right
weapons makes all the difference.
Dogfighting is a simple "dance of
death" by circling around with enemy
fighters in an attempt to maneuver
onto their tails so that machine guns
have an opportunity to smoke
Zeroes. Still, the most fun is dropping
bombs on enemy buildings, bunkers
and machine gun nests. After a building is destroyed, survivors run to
destroyed AAA batteries and begin to
reoperate them. Thus, each enemy
"guy" had to be carefully gunned
down individually (since the scenario
isn't over until the last guy buys it).
Computer Gaming World Index:
Wings of Fury was featured in issue

51 and was peeked in issue 42.

venture/role-playing wrap. Entitled
Codename: White Shadow, the game
puts the player in the command of an
air squadron in a war against the
druglords. The topical nature of the
subject matter may make this a controversial game, but the concept of
combining strategic decision-making
with the action required in a flight
simulation will certainly garner its own
supporters.
Many of the other flight simulations
that were being demonstrated at Summer CES were products that were
closer to production versions than they
were when last seen, but revealed no
new features. Due out real soon now
are: Lucasfilm's Secret Weapons of
the Luftwaffe (the latest version of
their action/simulations, complete with
the mission planner which adds
strategic factors that were missing
from the earlier games), Spectrum
HoloByte's Falcon 3.0 (with plenty of
chrome and one of the sweetest flight
models we've seen when used with a
math co-processor) and Three-Sixty's
MegaFortress (the first flight simulation that really puts together the crew
elements along with the pilot elements
of a simulation).
One of the big announcements at
Summer CES was by Origin. Chris
Roberts, designer of the phenomenally
successful Wing Commander, unveiled his Strike Commander, a postdisaster air combat game using a
simplified F-16 flight model. Roberts
has taken his graphics techniques of
texture mapping, shading and use of
disguised polygons and created a nearfuture environment of fighter/bomber
combat. The technological requirements are steep (one really needs 2
MB of RAM and a fast 386 to get the
most out of the game) and expanded
memory is required. Bureaucratic bad
guys (remnants of the I.R.S.) and anarchistic foes threaten the peaceful existence of the protagonist and the
game's story has a feel like the
Wingman series of "men's action"
novels.
Data East is also releasing a near-future "simulation" of existing military
hardware. The cockpits of actual tanks
(M-1, Bradley and T-80) are faithfully

rendered with active controls (mousedriven). Air support is a vital factor in
the game and can be used to illuminate the tanker's targets. It is not
a polygon-filled simulation, but when
several computer garners are hooked
together over a local area network
(Novell) and fighting a battle against
the computer, it should have an interesting feel similar to the U.S. Army's
Sim Net.

Time of Decision (Strategy
Games)
Strategy games are always a staple
for the computer gamer and there are
plenty of different styles to choose
from. Maxis, originators of the
"software toy" concept, have created a
more game-like concept in their SimAnt product. Will Wright has done his
usual thorough job in presenting background on the subject matter and
simulating realistic aspects of living
creatures. Matters like caste control (allowing players to control workers,
males, soldiers, repletes and queen
ants) and war between colonies are
simulated. Players can even take an opposite point of view by becoming
spiders and eating the ants.
The company is also talking about
SimCity 2. Players/city managers

Industry News

must make economic decisions and
can advance their civilization by
prioritizing technological choices
which, in turn, are all interrelated with
where the civilization can move next.
The goal of the game is to capture
something of the flow of civilization. It
has, pretty much, a bent toward the dis
coveries and advancement of western
civilization, but eastern civilization is
not ignored. It also does not attempt
to recreate actual history in our world
(unless, of course, one plays the
specific scenario designed to replay
this specific history).
Spectrum HoloByte is experimenting with a geopolitical game that will
probably require CD-ROM to fully implement. In the meantime, their Crisis
in the Kremlin features an unbiased
perspective in which the player can become a Soviet politician. One can allocate resources, make political
decisions and enjoy the dry social
humor of the Soviet member of the
U.S./U.S.S.R. design team.

should be able to terrace their cities,
using various levels for parking, traffic
control and housing; place buildings
on 3-D hillsides; handle realistic issues
like waste management and more. It
looks like it is going to be much more
involved and realistic than the original
product.
Sid Meier has taken a different approach in Civilization. It is a competitive multi-player strategy game with
definite victory conditions and a great
deal of replayability. Players find cities,
explore continents and, eventually, the
world in an Empire-style manner. They

Continuing to use their Soviet resources, the company unveiled Wordtris.
Think of the game as Tetris with letters and a requirement that players
spell out words. It allows for solo, competitive and cooperative play. It looks
like a fascinating word game if they
manage to expand the dictionary
beyond the demonstration version. It
certainly looks the most interesting of
the series since the original.
Data East's UltraBots: Sanction
Earth, described in the last CES

Report has some exciting strategic
aspects to it. The multi-player (Novell
compatible) game features potential
cooperative play and allows players to
build supply lines, use combined arms
tactics and control the flow of the
game from inside a "situation" room.

Getting in Line (Conclusion)
Although some products have
been delayed until the fall, the entertainment software industry really
seems to be reaching a coming of
age. Products have reached a point
where there seem to be almost
universally high production values
and most production teams have a
good rationale for when they are
taking technological risks (not just
performing "stupid computer
tricks"). Indeed, to paraphrase the
song, "the graphics are so bright,
we have to wear shades!"

I
I
I

2

3

j

3
3

3
3
I

Review

With Stones
By Peter Olafson

Castles
TITLE:
IBM (Amiga and Mac versions planned)
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
559.95
COPY PROTECT: One-time look-up
Scott Bennie
DESIGNER:
Interplay Productions
PUBLISHER:
Santa Ana, CA

T

he ant farm is making a comeback via the personal com-

puter. How else to explain the wealth of tiny animated folk
running around in software worlds: the little soldiers of
PowerMonger, the little evangelicals of Populous or the little
road hogs of SimCity? It's like watching insects... with a zoning
board.

stones in a wheelbarrow and one up on a horse who doesn't
seem to be doing anything much. (Hmmm. Must be the boss.)

And so it is with Interplay's recent Castles — a delightful game
of medieval fortress-building, economics, government and warfare in which the little guys are waving hammers and saws more
often than long swords.

No, no, this reviewer forgets. The player is the boss. Based on
the castle-building campaigns in Wales under Edward I in the late
12th and early 13th centuries, Castles gives one the power to
design the castle of his dreams, hire and fire seven types of
workers and two of soldiers, set their wages, assign them work
areas, adjust taxes to pay for all this, deal with messengers and
defend against Celts (in a real-world game) and ogres and the
like (in the fantasy-world game).

Look here: There's a little bloke without his shirt up on the scaffold hammering at an unfinished segment of the outer wall.
Another is down below sending stones up the scaffold in a bucket. Here's a carpenter working on a sawhorse, a fellow carting

That's a most delicate balance, and the challenge of Castles is
to keep the royal fingers on many pulses at once — for no fewer
than eight castles in the full-fledged campaign scenario.
(Continued on page 127)

Industry News

The Rumor Bag
by Denny Ray Culpepper

Last issue, the long-suffering Rumor
Bag Guy was humiliated in a Fort
Worth, Texas hamburger joint by a tall,
menacing Texan who poured a longnecked bottle of beer over his head
and told him he'd better have more
substantial rumors the next time they
met. This installment finds our irrepressible gossip inside a classic mansion
in downtown Fort Worth.

sat in the relative cool of the service
porch at Thistle Hill, remembering ice
men making their deliveries to this
point in the days before air conditioning
and refrigeration. The old mansion had
something of the Georgian character associated with the era of the great cattle
barons. Indeed, this manse had been
built for a young bride, one Mrs. Electra
Waggoner Wharton. Now, after a long
tenure of service as private dwelling and
a home for young women, it stood as a
historical landmark.
.

I

I awaited the entrance of my source
and wondered whether he would have
some new humiliation for this humble
press thug. I thought about the past
glories of the domicile in which I was waiting and realized that many people prefer
the simple past of that particular old
house to the future. Even some computer garners were liable to have some
misgivings about Kesmai's new multiplayer MechWarrior on the GEnie network and whether it would be as good as
the boxed game. Now that I had seen it,
however, and discovered that it would encompass some of the politics between
the houses and would allow prospective
players to join units of other players to
accomplish missions as a group or simply start dueling other players on Solaris, I
knew it was going to work. They're even
trying to get a way to have Solaris battles broadcast over the newsgrid, complete with odds so that 'mech pilots can
place side bets on the outcome of their
fellow players' battles (only in BattleTech
C-Notes, of course!).
In fact, I had heard that the very first
multi-player battle tested on the Kesmai
VAX featured three of Kesmai's finest outfitted in BattleMasters against the VAX's
lone Locust. While Kelton and John were
getting used to moving around, their assistant blasted both legs out from under

the Locust and there
was nothing left for the
"big guys" at Kesmai to
shoot at. They allegedly
turned on their assistant
and scorched his 'mech
until he had to eject.
That'll teach him not to
let the boss win!
My client exited the
—
shadows looming from
the old carriage house and caused me to
jump slightly as he cleared his throat. He
motioned for me to follow him through
the kitchen and around, through a sitting
room from the last century. As the
flames in the fireplace manipulated
shadows across the room like a master
programmer shuffles pixels on a monitor
screen, I mentioned that the shadows
made me feel like I was in the middle of
a Gothic novel. "Wahl," he said, "ah wuz
tryin' to give ya' the raht feel fer the
rumor. Ah wanted to tell ya' that Data
East is producin' a Shadowrun computer game." Frankly, I was surprised. I
hadn't realized that Data East had
licensed the fictional FASA universe
where cyberpunk activity and strange
magical properties have gone awry.
In return, I told him that Dynamix was
pleased enough about the success of
their dark futuristic game, Rise of the
Dragon, that they were not only porting
it to the Macintosh and the Amiga, but
they were also getting ready to announce
a Rise of the Dragon 2. I was relieved
when he leaned against the beautifully
varnished banister and smiled. "Now," he
asked, "tell me somethin' about a company whut isn't one of the big publishers."
I asked him if he remembered the old
SPI boardgame Empires of the Middle
Ages and he reluctantly admitted that he
did, complaining bitterly that it took too
long to play. "Ah," I replied, "but what if
your computer did all the bookkeeping
and you could play a full game during
one relatively short session?" As his face
showed unmistakable signs of concern, I
knew I had him. "It's called Rise of the
West, but it isn't for sale. Well, not unless
TSR decides to let someone publish it.
The guy just wrote it for the Amiga because his friends have one and he hasn't

even tried to sell it. I'm
hoping one of the computer
wargame publishers buys it."
I could tell from his expression that wargames were his
forte, so I told him about
Changeling Software's
Pax Imperium and SSG's
new MS-DOS Carriers At
War. "The first one is a
space conquest game in
search of a publisher. It's
like Reach for the Stars, except the planets in each star
system have realistic rotation and rival players can be
networked together. The
second is a very fancy version of a classic wargame. It
features hot VGA graphics
of ship silhouettes (including a sophisticated version of SSG's 'Warpaint' feature, allowing the user to create the
detailed graphics and animated explosions) and fascinating pictorial representations of airfields and aircraft carrier
decks. It even illustrates events that were
in the original Apple II code, but couldn't
be displayed because of memory constraints on the older machine."
He hitched his pants like you would expect John Wayne to do prior to a gunfight and, fearing a repeat of the fermented shower trick, I quickly told him
that there was going to be a multi-player
Harpoon on GEnie. I shared that even
Don Gilman (who is responsible for ongoing work on the computer version of Harpoon and its attendant products) was impressed.
My contact was impressed, too. He
reached into the pocket of his jacket and
retrieved a long-necked bottle of beer, setting it gently on the bottom step. "Wahl,"
he laughed, grinning like a used car salesman circling for the kill, "ya' surprised
me." (Whew, no hops shower after all!)
"Guess ya'all know whut yore doin' after
all. Ya' shore wouldn't know it from reading thet column of yore's."
I surreptitiously unscrewed the cap of
his intended weapon and silently prayed
that I could accomplish two things: 1)
avoid spilling any of the suds I was about
to pour down his back on the floor of the
grand Texas landmark and 2) get away
before he could tie me up like a
wrangled calf in a rodeo competition and
leave me for the good folks at Texas
Heritage to find. Fortunately, I slipped
away as neatly as a rodeo clown avoids
a brahma bull. As neatly, you might say,
as a rumor monger collects rumors.

Foreign Correspondence

Colony, available now, includes trade,
multiple ship types, an iconic interface
and presentable graphics. Priced £29.99
for the Amiga and ST.

Over There
For My Next Impression...
by Paul Rigby
CGW Overseas Correspondent

The second Impressions game is
Cohort, subtitled "Fighting for Rome," a
computer game that emulates the miniature/board game format that
Impressions' own Rourke's Drift utilized.
This game of tactical combat covers
twenty battle variations over four centuries. Multiple terrain is used (cliffs, hills,
bridges) but not fortified constructions.
Troop types cover the usual three infantry and cavalry types plus archers,
with each figure representing 50 cavalry
or 100 infantry. Troop icons (a maximum of 96 units can be deployed),
which are rated for morale, attack
strength and so on, can be grouped to
enable tactical maneuvers. With eight
directional troop movements and three
speed levels, Cohort retails at £29.99
and is available now for the Amiga and
ST.
"As the security droids ushered you
toward the termination cube, your head
buzzed with a million thoughts — every
one linked to the fact that you are,
surprisingly enough, innocent. The urge
was to run. However, heavily armed
droids and angry looking lasers quickly
dispelled that idea. However, escape was
a priority. You had to find those responsible for your present predicament, to
clear your name and present the guilty to
justice."
This ST text/graphic adventure, created
using the STAC adventure system
designed by Acesoft for Zenobi
Software, accepts the usual commands
with RAMSAVE/LOAD and the option to
alter the size of the current font. Available now for £4.99 from Zenobi Software,
26 Spotland Tops, Cutgate, Rochdale,
Lancashire, OL12 7NX.
Logical, from Rainbow Arts, is based
on a very simple idea: colored marbles
fall into rotatable four-hole receptacles.
The player's job is to try and collect four
of one color in each receptacle. It is very
much like Connect Four, the classic family game, in fact. These receptacles are
connected by channels all over the
screen. The player must rotate the receptacles in 90-degree angles and collect the
matching marbles that fall into the playing area with increasing speed. Logical is
a 100-level game with four different backgrounds. A construction set for creating
one's own custom levels completes this
mind-teasing program. Available on PC,
Amiga and ST for £19.99 and C64 for
£14.99 [disk], £9.99 [tape].

Foreign Correspondence

Rainbow Arts is also releasing Mad
TV, a business simulation for PC, Amiga
and ST. Archie has fallen in love with
Betty Botterblom, the unattractive
television announcer. While he walks
about the Mad TV station looking for
Betty, he is mistaken for Manfred L. Fenbein, the new program director. This mixup suits our Archie as he can now see
Betty all day. However, to maintain this
platonic relationship, the player will have
to insure success at the job lest another
take the place of the player (and Archie!). So, one must transform the normal, serious TV station with horrible
ratings into a wild and crazy station with
colorful programming. Players search for
the hottest news, finalize contracts for TV
spots, produce programs and series, rent
studios, sabotage their rivals and (as the
saying goes) much, much more! Mad TV
retails for £24.99, the PC version supports AdLib.
Upcoming from Virgin Mastertronic is
Realms, an epic wargame set in a feudal

world which is split into feuding factions
and populated by a mix of exotic
peoples (orcs, elves and dwarves). You
must raise money, via taxation, to em-

bark upon wars against your neighbours
that include pitched battles between armies and sieges upon cities. Written by
UK software developer Graftgold, the
Realms play area uses a battleground
that looks similar to the Populous/Powermonger play area. Armies are made up
of eight units containing, in turn, eight
troops. Realms is due for a September
release on PC, Amiga and ST.
Strategy fans looking for something different may be interested in the latest
release from Krisalis. Hill Street Blues,
taken from the popular TV show, puts
the player in the seat of Captain Frank
Furillo. As the Captain, the player must
keep his popularity up while pushing the
crime rate down by supervising his team
of professionals and thus protecting the
city from pick-pockets, drug dealers,
armed robbers, muggers and so on. Arresting them isn't good enough, though;
convictions are required. One can send
officers to a scene of a crime via car or
on foot; take manual control of a police
officer; use the police radio frequencies;
examine police records; set roadblocks;
arrest suspects and, occasionally, shoot
suspects. Players are provided with a

map of the precinct in order to plan
strategy. With day and night cycles, court
evidence, an icon-driven interface,
digitized pictures and novel sound effects, Hill Street Blues is a potentially exciting product for action/strategy gamers
with the PC, Amiga or ST (£24.99).
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:

Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11 2DD
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80
Fax: 01144-543-466-579
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ.
Telephone: 01144-268-590-766 Fax:
01144-268-590-076
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international
operator.

Taking a Peek

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 8)

terestingly, the player need not stay in
the role of one hero throughout the
game, but can carry on as one of the
other heroes at any point during the
game. Written by comic book writer Alan
Grant, his alternating gothic imagination
and whimsical humor show throughout
this plot of gigantic proportions. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
PC Globe, Inc.
Tempe, AZ
BUSHBUCK CHARMS, VIKING SHIPS &
DODO EGGS: This delightful bit of
"edutainment" has players off on a
global scavenger hunt for some very odd
items, indeed. Still, each is of cultural significance and players will not only learn
the geography of the world in which we
live, but discover fascinating bits about
its diverse cultures as well. There are villains in search of these artifacts, so
players must be fast and efficient in their
searches. To make things even more interesting, random events and clues occur
to keep the game moving along briskly.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
GEO JIGSAW: Sometimes, all of the
pieces fall into place, but this time it is
the player who must make them do so.
This package breaks down into a dozen
different thematic puzzles about the earth
(in anywhere from six to 294 pieces,
depending on the difficulty level desired).
Thus, anyone from a child to a master
puzzle assembler can be kept challenged. It is particularly cute to see the
moving animations from the pictures continue their assignments, even after the
puzzle is cut into pieces! IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.
GEO PUZZLE USA: No U.S. social
studies teacher should be without this!
With three levels of difficulty for each of
its different "games," Geo Puzzle USA
uses the states as puzzle pieces, features
quizzes on map facts, has a state trivia
quiz and allows players to solve other
pleasant puzzles. Typical of PC Globe,
Inc., the game features lots of atlasquality information about the states, their
populations, income, etc. We especially
liked being quizzed about state nicknames! Apple IIGS ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.
GEO QUIZ: Something akin to Trivial
Pursuit meets an atlas, Geo Quiz will
challenge and teach the non-geographically inclined among us. Players will be
given ten countries and (by their pregame selection) select either their names

or capital's names. These selections can
be either multiple choice or "fill in the
blank" (as we teachers say). Time limits
and a limited number of hints are available to keep the game challenging. Point
scores are also kept. In addition, basic
atlas information on each country is available as a type of "zoom in" feature.
Apple IIGS ($49.95). Circle Service #15.
Saddleback Graphics
Santa Ana, CA
MY PAINT: A paint program just for
kids. Well, that's not entirely true. This
thirty-something-year-old reviewer
couldn't stop playing with it either and
his five-year old son, James, is constantly hogging daddy's computer to use My
Paint. With 28 pictures, a dozen colors
and four paintbrush variations, this package is definitely designed with little kids
in mind. Since this package got home,
my son insists, "I know how to use the
computer." "I guess so," says daddy with
a grin. IBM, Amiga, CDTV. Circle Reader
Service #16.
Strategic Simulation, Inc. (SSI)
Sunnyvale, CA
CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST: A wargame
in the classic sense, this computerized
conflict simulator borrows heavily from
its cardboard cousins. A 1973 and a
hypothetical "1990s" scenario (presupposing a hostile Egypt) are included and
either one or two players (at the same
computer) may command either the
Arab or Israeli forces respectively. Similar
in scale to Red Lightning, Conflict: Mid-

dle East features a nice keyboard/mouse

interface and quick play turnaround
(thanks to the fairly low unit density). Airpower is handled well (albeit abstractly)
and each turn represents 12 hours of real
time. Politics have been removed from
this pure military simulation. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #17.
TransMedia, Inc.
27404 Drake Road #200
Farmington Hills, MI 48331
(313) 553-9100
OBJECTION!: It's hard to imagine
lawyers going for something which
rewards arcade-fast reflexes, but then Objection! is a different kind of software
package. While not a game per se, Objection! puts the player in the role of
defense attorney. As witnesses are called
to the stand, the player must quickly
decide if a question asked is proper or object (by hitting the correct key) as fast as
possible and on the proper grounds. Following this, the player is quizzed on the
testimony given. After all, comprehension is the hallmark of a gifted lawyer as
well as having a quick analytical mind.
This EGA barrister training tool is highly
thought-provoking and has left us at
CGW quite intrigued. A consumer version with more sound support and featuring simpler difficulty levels will be available soon. The price given is for the
professional version, complete with two
criminal cases and a quality notebook
full of valuable documentation. IBM
($89.00 + $5.00 for shipping). Circle
Reader Service #18.

Review

Stick With Stones
(Continued from page 120)

perhaps too simple. It is not. This is not some disassociated subgame; the king's actions have a direct effect on forces at hand,
castle finances and the way the world sees him, and sometimes
that means he can't afford to do the right thing, or that the right
thing is not the judicious, "politically correct" thing.
There's a charming variety to these encounters, and few of
them are one-shot deals, meaning that decisions have consequences that rarely just vanish and so effectively become sub-plots
within the game. One will find himself hungrily awaiting the next
month's messenger to see just how well last month's strategy
has worked.
The other sub-game is combat; after all, what is a castle for if
not to hold a hostile outside world at arm's length? These days
the Celts are in Boston and it's usually the Lakers' duty to take
them on. Back then, the Celts were reluctant neighbors of a
castle-building king. They don't want anyone here. They want to
fill in your moat — do have your soldiers dig one in a spare moment, as it'll buy time — undermine your castle walls and towers
and send the player galloping back to wherever he came from
(SimExile?). Sometimes they'll come for a little chat, but more
often they'll come on a maturing rage, and one will have to fight.

Much of the actual construction is carried out to a wonderfully
clockwork-like tune from the now-popular bank-camera view —
save the overhead screen on which you create your castle
blueprint from walls, gates and two types of towers.
Complicated as the balancing act may be, the game mechanics
are easy to handle with a mouse, joystick or keyboard. One can
get a status report on a castle segment simply by clicking on it,
and then adding features, modifying the height and thickness or
changing the assigned workforce. (Often one will want to know
why no one's working on it; scaffolding is limited and construction must obey rules of sound architectural design.)
If a player can't see it to click on it — as will often happen when
raising walls of the inner keep — the castle view can be flipped
180 degrees, and one can always bounce back into the overhead
design mode to assign workers if that won't work.
How does it look? Quite honestly, it looks like a castle's going
up inside your computer. One can see scaffolds being erected, little buckets going up the scaffolds, piles of raw stone rising and
diminishing beside them, dust clouds rising when one of the
walls comes tumbling down and, occasionally, cattle wandering
beneath them. (What's next? Skyscraper? Hope so!) The surrounding countryside is lush as only England can be in the fall,
and the weather-beaten grey walls have just a suggestion of...
ah... offal having been tossed from the tower arrow slits.
Now, building the castle is great fun, but this module, by itself,
would grow repetitive without some further distraction or challenge. Wisely, designer Scott Bennie has added two others.
One is the use of messengers. That's optional, but this reviewer
suggests players give it a try, for while it takes the action away
from the construction site, it adds a decided atmosphere to the
game. These scenes take place on static screens with the same
on-fire lushness that graced The Lord of the Rings; one will find
the king receiving allies, chess-playing churchmen, conniving
members of the court, angry Celts — all of whom he greets with
the same look of kingly anticipation and to whom he must
respond with one of three options.
The idea here (and elsewhere) is to keep happy each wing of
society — nobles, church and people. This sounds simple, and

Regrettably, combat is rather a weak point in Castles. There's
little more to do than set up the troops in the appropriate section
of the castle, wait for the enemy to come into view and then let
the two sides have at it. (There's no way to hold troops in
abeyance.) If the size of one's forces — just archers and infantry
— has kept pace with your castle building team, there should be
little trouble.
If there is trouble, well, one does have the ability to direct the
objectives of individual units — a function typically used to direct
archers to pick off enemy troops who've made it past the buffer
of the infantry.
However, the options are pretty cut and dried. It might have
been nice to allow a choice of armor or weapons or plans of attack and defense in the fashion of, say, Centurion.
Speed may also prove a problem for people with slower systems. A system speed of 10 MHz or faster is recommended for
Castles, but at 12 MHz (with VGA) this reviewer found the program a little slow to respond and the scrolling a bit bumpy. (It
won't scroll over certain sections of the map at all.) It's entirely
playable, but rather awkward scrolling back to the castle from
the battlefield (which is usually somewhat removed) to resume
construction. Note that entering "design" mode may help a bit,
as it always exits to the castle proper, regardless of the point at
which the mode was entered.
The manual is the usual excellent work — covering all the big
points in the main sections and many of the smaller, buried ones
in a tutorial (written in a lively period style as a roundtable discussion). It's also nice that one can select a female character. (The
Queen's a dead ringer for the King, however — right down to the
beard — evidently the result of memory constraints.) The copy
protection is almost transparent, tossing up one question when
the "set-up" menu is run to choose graphics mode and sound
card, then leaving the player alone until the setup is run again.
The best thing this reviewer can say about Castles is that he
was genuinely sorry when the last stone was lifted into place and
the game ended. I wanted it to go on — to see the castle created
in action, with a drawbridge and portcullis going up and down,
courtiers and tradesmen walking in and out, plain people settling
down outside the walls. (Sigh.)
Castles fairly begs for a sequel.

Editorial

Reopening

S

tate of the Magazine: In any art
form, a critic has several tasks to accomplish: to offer historical perspective; to lend, if possible, some meaningful application to real life; to broaden the perspective of his/her audience and the boundaries of
the art form itself; to note similarities in style
and meaning in other art forms and to assist
individual members of the audience in determining whether the individual work of art (or
even the genre itself) will meet that person's
needs or desires.
At CGW, we have recently introduced some
new features that should assist in some of
these tasks. Astute readers may have already
noticed the small columns entitled "Another
Look" in the last couple of issues. These
columns are intended either to refresh our
readers' memories or to introduce them to
some quality games from the past which may
be either hard to find or largely ignored as
later programs with "sexier" graphics or fuller
sound support have been released.
Alert readers may also have noticed more
coverage of educational games. Our
demographics, gleaned from both reader
response cards and inquiries made to the
Computer Learning Foundation, pointed
out what we should have realized all along.
Since our readers are largely young adult
professionals, they are also, often, parents
who want to introduce their children to the
wonderful world of both educational and entertainment products on the computer. So, features on children's games and educational
products will appear more frequently.
Perceptive readers will also have noticed,
once again, some features on cartridge
games. Those who are very perceptive will
realize that there are advertisements for
cartridge games in this issue and those who
are very, very perceptive will note that this
issue is tied for the largest number of pages in
COW history. This means, for those who are
not that perceptive, that the new features are
in addition to the quality computer game
coverage our readers have come to expect.
Finally, we will be introducing several deserving titles into the Hall of Fame over the next
few months. Games qualify for admission to
the Hall of Fame when: 1) the readers have
rated the game highly over a long and sustained period of time; 2) the editorial staff
believes that the product contributed something worthy to the art form and 3) the editors
deem the game to still be worth playing, in
spite of graphic advances and technological
leaps since it was published.
Bard's Tale I introduced encounter windows
with three-point animation. Chessmaster (both
2000 and 2100) consistently won in
head-to-head competitions against its earlier rivals.
Dungeon Master pioneered first-person
perspective role-playing with extremely highresolution graphics. Earl Weaver Baseball
combined physical laws, statistics and action
in a breakthrough sports simulation. Empire

Ha of Fame
proved that a wargame could have simple
rules and an elegant interface and still keep
wargamers coming back for more.
F-19 Stealth Fighter showed that a simulation could have enough depth to satisfy the
demands of strategy garners without sacrificing fast-moving graphics and heart-pounding combat action. Gettysburg introduced an
entire series of historical replays of American
Civil War battles and showed how computer
programs could enhance the feeling of command perspective. Gunship proved that one
could fly a realistic flight model of a combat
helicopter and still enjoy it. It is amazing that
this original C-64 program still stands at the
top of its class in playability and authenticity.
Kampfgruppe was the wargame aficionado's
dream come true, almost. It was the computer
gamer's equivalent to the boardgame classic
Panzer Blitz and was one of the most popular
computer wargames ever, but it allowed some
horrendous anomalies with regard to stacking.
Mech Brigade was a modern armor equivalent of Kampfgruppe and, as such, was recognized as an outstanding wargame achievement because it fixed many of the anomalies
that existed in Kampfgruppe, though it was
never the commercial success its ancestor was.
Might & Magic preceded Dungeon Master
and offered a first-person view, as well. With a
less powerful machine to work with, M&M
broke new ground in dungeoneering with its
first-person 3-D perspective and was arguably
the biggest fantasy role-playing game ever to
that point. M.U.L.E. proved it was possible to
have a lively multi-player game in front of a
computer console. Pirates showed how history and computer gaming can blend to make
legends as role-playing and action combined
in this classic design. Starflight was one of
the first computer role-playing games to combine ethical decision-making and distinctive
alien personality-types into a scientific role-playing game.
Ultima III concluded the first of Lord
British's now-famous trilogies and showed the
potential of the Ultima series with improved
graphics, more realistic characters and a more
fleshed-out story line. Ultima IV moved
beyond this promise with its emphasis on
ethics and characterization.
War in Russia was the first "monster" wargame on the computer. Large-scale wargames
were commonplace in the boardgame hobby,
but this classic game proved it was possible
on the computer, as well. Finally, Wizardry
was the genre-making role-playing game that
showed what kind of dungeoneering was possible on the computer. The name Wizardry is
synonymous with computer role-playing.

This issue, Their Finest Hour joins the roll
call of great computer games. With aerial combat action in detailed bit-mapped graphics of a
simulation and playback controls that offer a
cinematic perspective, Lucasfilm Games has
enabled thousands of garners to relive the Battle of Britain. Welcome, honored veteran!

