Number 29

Jun/Jul 1986
FEATURES
Battlegroup Mech Brigade
Twice More With Feeling

Psi 5 Trading Company
A Review

Macintosh Window
A New Column

Battle of the Atlantic
A Review

Universe II
Playtester Overview (The Perils of Playtesting)

Island of Kesmai
Telecommunication Gaming

10
Jay Selover
16
Johnny Wilson
18
Frank Boosman
22
William Harrington
24
Mark Bausman
30
Patricia Fitzgibbons

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

5

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Scorpion's Tale
Borrowed Time Tips

Sports Scoreboard
Golf Gaines

12
Scorpia
32
Rick Teverbaugh

Over There !34
British Games

Strategically Speaking

Leslie Bunder
36

Strategy Game Tips

Micro Reviews

37

Countdown to Shutdown
Moebius
Norway 1985
Clash of Wills
Adventures In Flesh
The Black Death
Make Millions

Reader Input Device

47

Game Ratings

48

100 Games Rated

Activision
Drawer 7287
Mountain View, CA 94039
800-227-9759
GAMEMAKER: By Garry
Kitchen. NOT a game, rather
a collection of design tools
that allow you to create your
own game. Included are modules to create graphics and
animation, music and sound
effects. All commands needed
to generate a game program
are accessible via joystick.
Can be used to create games,
animated commercials and
cartoons. C64/128, Apple.
Circle Reader # 2.
ALTER EGO (Female): The
distaff version of Dr. Favaro's
fine role-playing simulation
(the Male version was peeked
in CGW #27). Identical in

format to the Male program,
but with (obviously) different
life choices to make. Dr.
Favaro visited CGW recently
and we were impressed with
the depth of research that
went into these programs.
They are unique, fascinating,
thought-provoking and enjoyable to play. Be aware that
there is a parental discretion
advisory for the games, based
on the sexually explicit material covered. The sexual material is NOT gratuitous, it is
handled in a mature and realistic manner. C64, Apple,
IBM, Mac. Circle Reader # 3
THE MUSIC STUDIO: A tool
kit for comprehensive music
composition, ranging from a
simple tune played on the
computer to an elaborate fif-

teen-channel, three-verse
score which can be channeled
through an electronic keyboard (such as the Casio
CZ101) for maximum audio
performance. An extremely
powerful micro-based music
composition program.
C64/128, Atari 800 ($34.95),
IBM, Amiga, ST ($59.95).
Circle Reader # 4 .
Avalon Hill
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
301-254-9200
SPITFIRE 40: A combination
flight simulator and game,
based on the classic British
fighter. The instrument panel
is an exact replica of the
Mark I Spitfire and the computer plane handles like the
real thing. Your flight log is

saved to disk and the simulator becomes more realistic
(and Germans more difficult
to kill) as your flight time
increases. The second portion
of the program is a solitaire
or multi-player game. Your
mission is to shoot down as
many enemy planes as possible before you run out of
lives or ammunition. C64/128
($35). Circle Reader # 5 .
Bobco
200 7th Avenue, Suite 111
Santa Cruz, CA 95062
WORLD GEOGRAPHY: Educational game designed to
teach information about 175
countries in the world. The
graphics are excellent but the
educational value is somewhat
limited. The same five questions are asked about each
country (capital, currency,
etc). Bonus questions deal
with identifying country flags.
C64. Circle Reader # 6 .

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
415-571-7171
MIND MIRROR: Created by
Dr. Timothy "Relic of the
60's" Leary! Yep, the Guru of
LSD himself. The game is
described as a "mental awareness" program. Possibly for
those of us who are unaware
of our mental. The most interesting aspect of the program is the Life Simulations
section. You are presented
with a series of situations and
asked to respond to each one
through the eyes of your
subject. Successful navigation
through a series of such situations allows access to the
subject's Home Zone and a
new series of situations. The
situations are irreverent and
thought-provoking. The general goal of MM is similar to
Alter Ego, but the execution
falls short of Alter Ego's. It is

quite funny and would be a
welcome addition to a sophisticate's party. IBM. ($34.95).
Circle Reader # 7.
Epyx
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
408-745-0700
WORLD'S GREATEST
BASEBALL GAME: An enhanced version of a previously
released game. This model allows you to recruit and manage your own All-Star team
against any of 75 various
teams. Includes improved
graphics, the ability to trade
players from team to team,
stats from selected All-Star
and World Series teams and a
scoreboard with trivia questions between innings. The
managerial options are a bit
limited but this is a nice addition to the roster of statbased baseball games.
C64/128, Apple, IBM. ($24.95
to $34.95). Circle Reader # 8 .

Firebird Licensees Inc
PO Box 49
Ramsey, NJ 07446
201-934-7373
SUPER SILVER DISK series:
A raft of inexpensive imports
from England. Each disk
contains two arcade and/or
graphic adventure games.
Ones we've received include
Gerry the Germ, Microcosm,
Rasputin, Chicken Chase,
Booty, Cylu, Underwurlde,
Sabre Wulf, Willow Pattern
and Chimera. C64/128.
($13.95). Circle Reader # 9.
Gessler Educational Software
900 Broadway
New York, NY 10003-1291
212-673-3113
MICRO-SCRABBLE: Plus de
20,000 mots. Avec Ms vous
allez pouvoir jouer seul ou en
famille au Scrabble, en utilisant votre micro-ordinateur
pour simuler de 1 a 4 joueurs.
If you can read the above
then you will likely be very
interested in this game, which
is Scrabble in French. The
instructions are in both English and French. C64. Circle
Reader #10.
GBA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL: TWO ON TWO: A
computer basketball simulation which emphasizes teamwork. You have control of
two players and can play
practice sessions, games
against a friend, one player vs
computer, two players versus
computer or league competition with the 23 teams included on the disk. C64/128.
($34.95). Circle Reader #11.
Kinemation
Four Winds Road
PO Box 3076
Peterborough, NH 03458
800-535-5665
INTRIGUE: A humorous illustrated text adventure. To
solve the mystery, you talk
with the characters and search
around Washington, DC.
There are thousands of variations so the game is different
each time, with three difficulty levels. One to four people can play. Comes with a
money-back guarantee (nice
touch). C64/128, Apple.
($29.95). Circle Reader #12.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
312-480-7667
INFILTRATOR: Animated
graphic adventure by Chris
Gray. You are a helicopter
ace who must fly through
enemy air space and reach
strategic targets. Three missions with increasing difficulty. Includes a realistic helicopter flight simulation and
military ground missions.
Good graphics. C64/128.
($29.95). Circle Reader #13.
SHADOWFIRE: Real-time
graphics adventure. Icons for
giving commands to your
team of six Enigma agents.
Good use of window techniques and a nice touch of
humor to the generic adventure scenario. C64/128. Circle
Reader #14.
A VIEW TO A KILL: A
James Bond interactive fiction
adventure. Full sentence
parser. If you like James
Bond, if you like text adventures, then give this one a try.
Apple 64K. Circle Reader #15
STEPHEN KING, THE MIST:
An interactive fiction, text
adventure based on the popular horror thriller by Stephen
King. A fog has descended on
the familiar city of Bridgton.
You must fight the beasties of
the Mist and discover the secrets of the Arrowhead project. Apple 64K. Circle
Reader #16.
RadarSoft US
A.C.K. Inc.
655 John Muir Drive, E411
San Francisco, CA 94132
415-239-5357
ENDLESS: Arcade adventure.
Your mission is take your super powerful helicopter on a
mission to destroy a creature
from a distant galaxy that has
invaded Earth. 500 screens.
C64/128. ($39.50). Circle
Reader #17.
FLOYD THE DROID: Icon
driven arcade adventure. Your
mission is to clean out the
sewers of six major cities,
aided by Floyd . You must
deal with the rats, alligators
and hoodlums dwelling in the
sewers. C64/128. ($39.50).
Circle Reader #18.

Twice More With Feeling
by Jay Selover
Gary Grigsby seems to do everything in threes.
After designing the highly acclaimed Guadalcanal
Campaign, he produced two more games in the
same mold (Bomb Alley and North Atlantic '86).
Now, he has followed up his Kampfgruppe design
with two additional titles; Mech Brigade and Battlegroup. Kampfgruppe has been one of the most
highly praised computer wargames yet, and has
consistently nested at the top of the Computer
Gaming World "Reader Input Ratings". Its two
progeny may not explore too much new ground in
game design, but they do allow aficionado of other
military specialties access to Gary's excellent design.
For those who have not played the original
Kampfgruppe, it is a tactical/operational recreation
of combat on the East Front during World War II.
It is tactical in that each man and vehicle is accounted for. But it is operational in that the player
thinks in terms of platoons and companies. The
typical scenario in Kampfgruppe covers about an
hour of fighting and each player commands somewhere from a reinforced battalion to a regiment.
The unit of maneuver for each side is a platoon (of
either vehicles or men), with the computer keeping
track of the current strength of each unit (how
many men or vehicles have been lost). Platoons are
organized into companies, and companies into battalions. Each superior organization has a headquarters unit which is critical in keeping the subordinate units moving and doing what you want them
to do. The game comes with several pre-designed
scenarios, but a large part of the allure of the game
is its "design your own scenario" feature. This allows you to make a new random map for each
game, or to even construct one square by square if
you have the patience. Each side then "purchases"
its units based on a "points per unit" system and a
set allowance of points for each scenario.
The units are all German and Russian (it is an
East Front game, after all), and cover many of the
fighting vehicles of the two countries. Depending
on the time frame of the scenario, you could be
equipped with little Pzkw III's or hefty King
Tigers. The game play involves both sides plotting
their orders for each unit before each two minute
turn. The computer then takes over and executes

Battlegroup

the turn, moving each unit towards its destination
and firing each unit with a fire order.
If it seems like I'm taking a lot of space describing Kampfgruppe it is because most of it
transfers directly to the two following games. The
scale of the units and map are the same, the game
mechanics are the same, and the general course of
play is the same. So how do they differ? Well, let's
go chronologically and consider Mech Brigade first.
Mech Brigade is the most different of the three
games because it covers current era conflict while
both of the others deal with World War II. Despite
the similarities in the designs between Kampfgruppe
and Mech Brigade, they play with a very different
feel. The addition of anti-tank guided missiles
(ATGM's), combat helicopters, and all the other
trappings of modern combat make Mech Brigade a
much more dangerous place to take a Sunday stroll.
Mech Brigade simulates a near-future conflict
between NATO and the Warsaw Pact in Germany.
The four scenarios supplied with the game cover a
Soviet rout of forces in the Fulda gap, an assault on
Wurzburg, a NATO assault near Karlsruhe, and a
meeting engagement to the north near Hamburg.
The units in the game include most of the current
arsenal of the U.S., West Germany, Great Britain,
and the Soviet Union. Actually the Russian units
could be representing almost any Warsaw Pact army
because of the basic unity of equipment within that
command (even though the Russian allies tend to
get the old stuff). In contrast, the player on the
NATO side will be one particular nationality and
can be assigned only those units used by his country. Even more than the differences between the

American M-1 Abrams, the German Leopard II,
and the British Challenger; it is interesting to note
the differences between the various infantry com-

bat vehicles. Beyond the basics of tanks and troop
transport, the game includes a detailed inventory of
the other vehicles in a modern army. There are the
proper ATGM launchers, light recon vehicles,
command vehicles, self-propelled mortars and artillery, and mobile anti-aircraft weapons (both
missile launchers and guns). Oh yes, there are also
helicopters. The Soviet Hind-D is included along
with the American Cobra and Apache, and their
British and German equivalents.
Although the map scale in Mech Brigade is the
same as that of Kampfgruppe, damage is done at
much longer range (visibility permitting). Other aspects of the anticipated combat that differ from
World War II (albeit subtly) are present as well. For
instance, Soviet formations tend to be grouped into
battalions for more centralized control, while the
NATO allies tend to work with a more companylevel command structure. Also, the ability of artillery to fire smoke rounds has been now been included. Although smoke was an element of World
War II combat and its absence in Kampfgruppe was
a fault, it is really mandatory in planning a modern
assault. Now, you do have a good reason to purchase a few extra artillery units if you are going on
offense in a major assault.
In Mech Brigade, you basically have Kampfgruppe brought forward fifty years. The game is
still built the same and still rewards sound operational planning. You still need to consider combined arms concepts, but you now have some very
different types of arms to consider. You still need
to plan your defensive deployment with an eye to
channeling the attacker and establish "killing zones",
but you will have to adjust your engagement ranges
and take into account a probable blanket of smoke
rounds. And, you still need to keep your wits about
you at all times; at least this much has not changed
at all!
While Mech Brigade brings Kampfgruppe forward in time, Battlegroup brings it 500 miles west.
The latest entry from Mr. Grigsby covers very
much the same time frame as Kampfgruppe, but
now pits the Germans against the western allies: the
U.S. and Great Britain. Just as the title of the game
is a translation of the earlier title, the game itself is
basically a translation. The system, mechanics, and
design are straight from Kampfgruppe; and here
even the "feel" of the combat is still very World
War II-ish. So where is Battlegroup new? Basically

Continued on pg. 43

Ah, here you are again! Nice tan you have there;
vacationing in the Amazon must agree with you!
Hmm, what's that? It wasn't a vacation? Well,
excuuuuse me (some people...)! Anyway, your favorite chair is waiting, and Fred has your usual
poured and ready, so take it easy while you can,
because you don't have much time to relax; in fact
right now, you're living on...borrowed time.
Sam Harlow, private eye, circa 1934. Working
out of a shabby office with an entrance off an alleyway. So maybe you're not Pinkerton's, and
maybe business hasn't been too good lately (you
still owe your ex-wife an alimony payment); so
what? Right now you're working on a hot case, and
if you can pull it off, you'll nail "Boss" Farnham to
the wall and send him up the river for a long, long,
time. Unless, of course, his gunmen get to you
first.
Well Sam, better get a move on; you won't solve
this one by sitting at your desk and daydreaming.
And while that phone call is only gonna tell you
what you already know, namely that Farnham
wants you dead, you might as well listen to it.
Nothing like a little death threat to start off the
day.
Hey, looks like that threat wasn't a joke. A couple of thugs are strolling up the alley, and they're
not here to ask you the time of day. Move fast,
Sam (no, NOT back up to your office, you'll never
make it). Whew, bullets are flying! Better get to
cover, Sam; the Surgeon General has determined
that hot lead is dangerous to your health.

Ok, that's two down, but there's more where
they came from, so keep those legs in motion. All
right, you've made it to the Dublin Rose, and here
comes Mavis with some info for you. It's a good
idea to keep those names she mentions in mind; it
helps to know who you should be asking questions
about. Hmm, it seems something spooked Mavis,
and no wonder: the place is lousy with hoods.
Then again, maybe you can learn some interesting stuff here. Ask a few questions. Gee, no one is
very talkative. You'll have to get tough, Sam. A little exhibition or two just might loosen someone's
tongue.

However, that's not gonna help for long. One
thing about this caper: if you stay too long in any
one spot, you make a great target of yourself. So
keep moving. Oooops, looks like you've reached a
dead end here. Too bad you can't get that window
open. Well, a private eye isn't above a little vandalism in a good cause (like saving his life).

So, you leave the Rose and who should come
along but your secretary Iris, and not with any
good news, either. Your "ex" has been kidnapped
by someone. Sigh. Guess it's just gonna be one of
those days, Sam. You better hop over to Rita's
apartment and see what you can find out.

Trouble is, your "friends" are still on your tail
And here they come across the cable. Now, it
wouldn't be fair play to shoot them (remember,
you're the good guy!), but if you had something
s h a rp ....

Well, Rita doesn't appear to be much of a
housekeeper; there's dust all over the place. Uh
Sam, did you hear a noise behind you? BONK!
Whoops, too late! You're gonna have to be more
careful in the future, fella. Provided there IS a fu-

ture for you. At the moment, you're not in such a
great position there, hanging from the pipes with
your hands tied.

Now let's see if we can find our boy Mongo; you
probably know where to go.

No time for dilly-dallying; take a good look
around from your new vantage point and you might
see a thing or two that will help you out of this
predicament. The stuff is easier to get than you
might think; don't try anything fancy, just be simple and direct.

Yep, there he is, all right! Good thing he hasn't
noticed you, you can get the drop on him. My my,
I think you just managed to come up with the evidence that will put him away for awhile (and let's
hope you have ALL the evidence!). He isn't happy
about this, naturally, but fortunately he gives you
some hot news.

All right, now that you're on your feet again,
give the apartment a good looking over. There isn't
much in the living room, but the kitchen might
have an item of interest. Ouch! You did it again,
huh, Sam? Your hands are in pretty sad shape now;
I think you ought to get some medical attention.
There should be a doctor somewhere in this city.

However, you haven't gotten much further in
your attempts to find Rita. Maybe a visit to "Boss"
Farnham himself might help to clear things up.
Then again, maybe it won't, but you really should
go see him. At least one thing he has to say (and
not necessarily to you) is pretty important.

While you wait for the medico, make the most
of the time you have. Don't be afraid to be nosy.
Say, isn't that other door open a little? There's
nothing wrong with a bit of eavesdropping, and
you just got an earful! Let's not wait for the doctor
after all, there are more important things to be
done.
Hmmm, this certainly isn't one of the better
parts of town, but then you aren't here for the
sight-seeing. Get that door open. Well, well, if it
isn't Mavis. You can't leave her like that, of course,
but you better check out the place before you set
her free. Make sure you listen to what she has to
say, too.
Now's a good time to look over your inventory.
Except for your gun, you can dump anything
you've already used; no sense carrying around excess baggage. On the other hand, make sure you
keep with you everything you haven't used yet.

Well, you didn't learn too much, after all. You
still don't know where Rita is, but on the other
hand, there aren't too many places left to check out
(by the way, you HAVE been stopping off here
and there to ask questions, haven't you??). In fact,
if you've been mapping the town, there's really
only one spot she could be (no, NOT the police station!). Of course, there's a small obstacle in your
way, but if you listened carefully, it should be no
problem at all.
Hey, not too bad, Sam. You've rescued Rita and
Wainwright and sent another crook to jail. You're
getting closer to doing the same to Farnham, but
you don't have quite enough evidence yet. Let's
see, how about a visit to Charlie's place? You
haven't had a chat with him yet.
First you have to get past Rocco, but that's easy.
However, Charlie isn't too thrilled to see you, and
any second now he'll call in his tame bruiser to
throw you out. You don't want that to happen, so

think fast. How can you keep Rocco from coming
in (remember the Dixie Arms!)?
Ok, Rocco is stopped for the moment, but that
won't last long. You also have to keep Charlie under control while you snoop around. Then get out
quick, because Rocco will be after you. You'll have
to deal with him once more before you can escape
safely, but the means are at hand, and you should
be able to handle him.
You have almost everything you need now, although an item or two still needs to be picked up.
You know what the key is for, and where to use it,
so move along and see what's there. Bet you
weren't expecting a poem, huh? Heh! Yet its
meaning is pretty obvious (Mongo might just as
well have written it in plain English).
Time's a-wasting Sam, and Farnham's gunmen
are still on your tail. So dig up that last bit of
proof and....err, well, speak of the devil! Looks like
they have you boxed in now. Thugs are all over the
place. Run for it, Sam! Gulp, they're catching up to
you. Somehow, you're gonna have to lose them, and
you can't run forever. Just remember, this is no
time to be squeamish.

Whew, that one was too close for comfort! But
you're safe now, and you finally have everything
you need to convict Farnham. It's a simple matter
to have him arrested (make sure you have ALL the
evidence), and the case is solved. Not a bad day's
work, Sam!
Well, I see your glass is empty, and the invisible
clock on the wall says it's just about that time again
(you didn't know it could talk? How else could you
tell time with an invisible clock?). Before you go,
remember that if you need a hand with most adventure games, you can get in touch with me in the
following ways:
Delphi: Visit the GameSIG, under the Groups
and Clubs menu. GEnie: Stop in at the Games
Roundtable (type: Scorpia to get there). Source:
Send SMAIL to ST1030.
And, as always, there is US Mail. Remember to
include a self-addressed, stamped envelope with
your questions if you live in the US:
Scorpia P.O. Box 338 Gracie Station New York,
NY 10028
That's it until next time. Happy Adventuring!

Psi 5
Trading
Company
by Johnny Wilson

NAME:
Psi-5 Trading Co.
SYSTEM:
C-64/128; Apple
#PLAYERS:
1
AUTHOR:
Mike Lorenzen
$35
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Accolade
20863 Stevens Creek Blvd., 8-5/E
Cupertino, CA 95014

"Blustan, you overgrown lizard, I need a definite
'friend' or 'foe' designation on Ship Q immediately.
It's been in range long enough for Boris to have reduced it to beta particles 90 seconds ago. ...Boris! Q
is a bogey and we have a lock! What do you mean
the power's low on that GX75 Cannon? Get me
that vaccdroid in engineering. ...Engineering, get
the lead out of your alloy and put the juice to that
cannon! I don't care if you are still under warranty.
New droids melt to slag the same as old ones.
...Repair, acknowledge. ...Repair, acknowledge. I
think that lazy Ryblo's taken another break. You'd
think that Alphan brandy was more important than
Reactor 1!"

That's the way you feel when you command a
vessel of the Psi-5 Trading Co., Accolade's entry
into the space combat game market. The real-time
nature of your decision-making can force you to
hit 'pause' and catch your breath. The personalities
of your crew members have a direct bearing on
how your ship will fare when the inevitable pirate
fleet descends upon your well-armed cargo ship.
One of the most satisfying aspects of Psi-5 is
the way that the composition of the crew affects
the success of the mission. The player is given six
choices for each crew position (department). The
six candidates are displayed on the screen a la
Hollywood Squares (the T.V. show). When the cur-

the statistics of past performance, examine the
current priorities and target disposition, cancel
commands, reprioritize or command. Scanning provides a list of other ships, locks onto them, and also
informs the player of targeting data and cargo status. Navigation allows for risk evaluation, commands for evasive maneuvers, course and speed selection and provides data on the estimated time of
arrival. The Engineering display shows present
power output and priority disposition and allows
for reprioritizing. The Repair display shows what is
currently damaged and allows the assignment of robodroids to repair damage and prioritization of repair projects.
The game is both challenging and fast-moving.
It is extremely absorbing as one crisis after another
bombards the player. It certainly isn't the kind of
game where a person can unload stress, however,
since the command position in the game is extremely stressful.

sor is placed over the caricature and the fire button
is pressed, a resume screen appears. Since the documentation does not summarize this data, a chart
for each position is included with this article.

After the crew is selected and finalized, play
proceeds via a split screen. The upper left hand
corner of the screen offers a view screen which
projects fore and aft views exterior to the ship. The
upper right hand corner portrays a animated caricature of the crew member with which the player
(captain) is communicating. The entire bottom half
of the screen is used for status displays.
Across the top of the display portion of the
screen is a joystick actuated menu which enables
the player to command each of the five sections.
Toggling any of the department labels provides a
separate display for each of the five crew responsibilities. In the Weapons display, one can examine

With the name Psi-5 Trading Co., I was expecting to play a game where market dynamics and
negotiation were extremely important. In Psi-5, the
perishable cargo provides the rationale and victory
determination for the game, but isn't really integral
to game play. To be sure, the cargo support system
must be kept in good repair or the cargo will spoil
(ending the game in failure), but this is really more
of a space war simulation than an economic simulation.

Psi-5 is a strategy game with personality. The
player/captain is able to put his/her thumbprint of
leadership skill and command personality into the
playing of the game. For example, a player doesn't
want a character with little initiative in charge of
either Repair or Scanning as he would have to
spend too much valuable time directing those functions and time would be lost. It is terrible to have
the Repair officer take a break every time a specific assignment is accomplished, even though a
dozen other systems may be damaged. It is also disheartening to have a Scanning Officer who needs to
be ordered to get a lock on enemy ships. These
things can happen without the right crew balance.
Psi-5 offers a real sense of the command console
of a space ship (I know, because I have seen ALL
the Star Trek episodes, hehe). The real-time nature
of the game with the attendant demands of prioritizing communications and making snap decision in
crisis management certainly gives one a "Red Alert"
feeling. However, do not be mislead, it is not an
arcade game.
Psi-5 blends 'fog of war', tactical options, and
smooth playability into an exciting challenge and a
stirring space adventure.

MACINTOSH WINDOW

Frank C. Boosman

Anew Column!

Welcome to the Macintosh Window! I hope that the title of
this column will reflect its purpose as well as the potential of the
Macintosh: a window into a new perspective on gaming. The power
of the Macintosh, both its 68000 and its system software--and its
large installed base of users (well over 500,000 at last count) has
inspired a new wave of sophisticated, intelligent games that appeal
to like-minded garners.
If you own a Macintosh, you probably didn't buy it to play
games, but you should know how lucky you are: some of the most
innovative designs these days are being done for the Macintosh,
and often for the Macintosh first--or only.
I want to cover the very best in games for the Macintosh in
this column. In corning months, look for commentary on: Orbiter,
the new space shuttle simulation from Spectrum Holobyte; Dark
Castle, an animated adventure game from Silicon Beach; MacGolf,
a new 3-D golf game from Practical Computer Applications, and
more. If there is something you want to see in this column, or you
have comments or questions about what I have written, please feel
free to contact me at any of the addresses listed at the end of this
column. Having said that, enough for the commentary--onto the
games!
If you have played role-playing games, you know the fantastic
ability of the computer to let you imagine yourself in another place
and time. With the help of software, you can transport yourself
to... the New World of 1492, and become Columbus... Britain of
the Middle Ages, and become King Arthur... or any one of a
thousand other personages, real or imaginary. In this column,
though, we will look at two games which allow you to play a railroad engineer and... Henry Kissinger.

Let's Play Global Thermonuclear War
Learning to play the game is simple. After choosing a level
(beginner, expert, or nightmare) and a side to play (USA or
USSR), you are presented with the world map and menu of options. BOP shades each country on the map in different ways to
represent different information; at the beginning of the game, the
shading is used to indicate whether any major events took place
during the previous year, and if so, in which countries. Other types
of information available in this manner include: which nations are
in danger of a coup d'etat, how much each superpower is dispensing in foreign aid, where insurgency is active, and more. You can
(and must) use this information to plan your strategy.
After a quick survey of the map, you will want to find out
what your opponent--say, the Soviet Union, in this case--has
been up to. A menu option allows you to cycle through all of the
actions your opponent has taken. They will probably have done a
few innocuous things, such as sending foreign aid to Vietnam. You
probably won't challenge them over these actions, but inevitably,
they will do something that will upset you. Let's say they have
sent military aid to Nicaragua, and you aren't going to stand for
it. Clicking on the Question button will get you more information:

A Rivalry Between Giants
Henry Kissinger? The Henry Kissinger of White House Years,
the diplomat and creator of foreign policy? Yes. Chris Crawford,
whose successes include Scram, a nuclear power plant simulation,
and Eastern Front, a World War II wargame, has now given us the
ability to implement the international strategy of our choice in
Balance of Power (BOP), an incredible new game of superpower
rivalries for the Macintosh.
To tell the truth, you don't play Henry Kissinger in BOP. You
play the President of the United States or the Premier of the Soviet Union for an eight-year term, from 1986 to 1994. Your goal is
to "increase your nation's geopolitical prestige," as Crawford puts
it. You do this by foiling your computer or human opponent's international political plans and succeeding in your own. You have
all the tools you need to do this: for background information, you
can read local newspaper headlines in foreign countries, compare
statistics, display historical graphs, and more. When it comes time
to implement your plans, you have at your disposal military and
civilian aid, troops, diplomatic pressure, and even the CIA--who
come in handy when you want to overthrow an unfriendly government.
If you actually play the leader of a superpower, why did I
mention Kissinger? Because the role you will play is really more
akin to that of a Secretary of State. No President has the time or
energy to keep abreast of every development in every corner of the
world, but you'll have to if you want to win the game. To make
your task easier, Crawford has reduced the number of nations from
the actual 180+ to 66, combining or eliminating small or internationally insignificant nations. BOP greets you with a map of your
world, rendered in excellent detail and taking up almost all of the
Macintosh's screen. To deal with a particular country--to get information on it or take an action for or against it--you simply
click within its border.

how committed are they to this policy? Maybe they don't seem too
serious about it--so Challenge them! At any point, either party
can give in; the longer before this happens, the more prestige the
side that Backs Down loses. If neither side gives in, and an accidental nuclear war isn't started, the player who first started the
confrontation will have the option of backing down or proceeding
to DefCon 1--nuclear war. If Def Con 1 is chosen, the game ends,
but not without a humorous and thought-provoking final display.
I urge you to see this display for yourself, on a friend's computer if
necessary.
The idea behind the game is, as Crawford has said, the importance of consistency. I discussed Henry Kissinger before;
Crawford garnered many of his ideas for BOP during a reading of
White House Years, including the most important: consistent relationships. A player who abandons friendly nations will soon find
himself or herself in a heap of trouble: the computer opponent will
be emboldened to try new aggressions, and nations still friendly
will think twice about their alliances with such a wimp of a superpower. Consistent relationships should be maintained at nearly
any cost.

Continued on pg. 45

BATTLE OF THE ATLANTIC
by William H. Harrington

Type:
Wargame
System:
Apple II; IBM
#Players:
1-2
Designer:
L. Howie
Publisher: Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada B4V 2X6

The end came, finally, on 7 May 1945 when the
last Fuhrer of the Third Reich, Admiral Donitz,
ordered the surviving remnants of the German
Kriegsmarine to hoist a black flag and surrender.
Yet only three years before they had nearly turned
the Atlantic Ocean into a Nazi lake. In those dark
days England's Winston Churchill called this fateful
struggle for England's survival the "Battle of The
Atlantic."
Simulations Canada has created in Battle of The
Atlantic (BOA), a sophisticated and highly playable
simulation of this decisive World War II naval conflict. The "feel" is superb and the excitement first
rate. The game is either one or two player with the
computer capable of playing either side. At your
command are all the naval and air forces of the
Axis and Allied Powers, from U-Boat wolf packs
to Allied convoys and escorts. BOA is an Operational Level game, with the players ordering and
deploying both naval, air and amphibious task
forces and responding to combat opportunities as
they arise. Players do not resolve individual battles,
perform logistical functions or schedule submarine
patrol rotations, activities that Theater Commanders
would not normally involve themselves in.
The latest Apple version of BOA (2.4) includes
faster combat resolution, an improved solitaire
player and better all around compatibility. Oh yes,
the upgrade for existing owners is free from the
gang in Nova Scotia, just return your original disk.
Simulations Canada's support is first rate. You
might think of Simulations Canada as the "Infocom"
of strategy gaming. BOA, as all of Simulations
Canada's games, is text only. During the course of
play a constant stream of reports over a two week
period informs the players of the results of combat
patrols, intelligence - accurate or not, convoy in-

terceptions and various amphibious operations including the German invasion of Norway and the
allied landings for Operation Torch in North
Africa. As the reports come in the folks at Simulations Canada have even included the distinct clatter
of teletype machines. Sort of like having you own
"Enigma" code machine at fleet headquarters in
Kiel clattering away outside you office.
At the conclusion of each game-turn players
may examine an almost exhaustive number of reports including such items as task force missions,
damage reports and weather. The time frame is
1940 to 1944. The game system uses an "area" system of unit deployment rather then the traditional
"hex" grid system. The result is a game system that
flows easily and allows the gamer to concentrate on
strategy rather then game mechanics. While simple
to learn the system conceals considerable sophistication. Don't rely on the documentation to reveal
all the detail that Newberg and company have included in BOA. As Steve Newberg recently said,
"We'd like the gamer to be surprised." Rest assured
you will be!
At the beginning of the game, players may select
one of several scenarios that end the game in December of any year prior to 1944 or elect to carry
the game to it's final conclusion in May of '44. In
addition to an "historical" scenario that faithfully
models the combat capabilities and historical background of the period several very interesting options are available to explore "what ifs" including
an enhanced German Fleet complete with aircraft
carriers, a scenario I like to call the "Lindberg" option based on a "Neutral" America and even a scenario old Admiral Donitz, himself, would have
loved, a neutral America AND an enhanced German Fleet! Of course a game can be saved in
progress for later play, a necessity as game play in
BOA can easily span an entire weekend.
Orders in BOA show off the gaming system to
it's best advantage. Rather than tracing task force
movement through a conventional hex grid players
simply select the ocean area destinations, another
area the task force must pass through (useful for
sneaking German surface raiders through the Denmark Straits for instance) and a different return
route if desired. The computer will even determine
the length of time a task force or naval unit can
patrol given its range and course! Should enemy
task forces or targets become available there's even
an option to order interceptions by all adjacent
friendly units! Just hope that your intelligence
didn't mistake a destroyer for a Battle Cruiser.
Task Forces can screen naval areas against enemy forces (useful for supporting amphibious
landings for instance) or conduct normal combat
patrols. British vessels may escort convoys or conduct anti-submarine patrols.

Tactical options include evasion, shadowing
enemy units or engagement. Once battle is joined
however it's nail biting time. Combat reports may
be confused or fragmentary. Even enemy radio
transmissions may be picked up! And sometimes
only an ominous silence. Strategy in BOA revolves
around the "Fleet in Being". The concept that even
a much smaller naval force can challenge and perhaps even neutralize a much larger enemy fleet.
Don't expect a grand "Jutland" style naval battle
to work here. Rather the conflict is BOA will most
likely become a protracted and deadly war of attrition. Neither the Allied or Axis forces have
"enough" resources. America's entry into the war
can eventually unleash awesome industrial might if
Britain's beleaguered Merchant Marine can survive
the relentless U-Boat attacks of '41 & '42. As in
the actual battle replacements will become available
to the combatants throughout the game, damaged
vessels must be repaired and new strategies employed to adapt to the changing situation.
Historically Donitz believed that if Germany's
U-Boats, battle cruisers and aircraft could sink
300,000 tons of shipping a month England would
be starved into submission and America made
powerless to intervene in the European conflict. He
come close, very, very close!

Universe H: An Overview
Or: The Perils of Playtesting

Name:
System:
#Players:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

Universe II
IBM and compatibles
$70
William Leslie III
Omnitrend
P.O. Box 3
West Simsbury, CT 06092

In addition to an overview of Universe II this article reveals some of the perils that can plague a
playtester.- Ed.
A few years ago I discovered a game called
Universe for my Atari 800 and immediately became
a fan. I built a ship with the best components and
had more money than I knew what to do with, but
I never found the Hyper Space Booster. After time
I moved on to other games.
When I heard that Omnitrend was about to begin
playtesting on Universe II, I contacted them and got

on the playtest list for the IBM version of the
game. A few weeks later version one arrived at my
door.
Universe II picks up after the Hyper Space
Booster has been found at the planet of Diftalpa.
Funny, I was there many times and never saw hide
nor hair of it. I guess you just have to have the
right kind of radio to be a hero. Anyway, the Local
Group is still bent on destruction and most of the
planets have chosen to join either the Federated
Worlds or the United Democratic Planets. The
player assumes the role of a free trader from Vromus Prime. Actually, the trader bit is just a cover
for his spying activities on behalf of the Federated
Worlds. As in Universe, once the player has accumulated some capital he may shed the trader role
and become a miner or pirate.
Omnitrend designed this game for the MacIntosh
so it doesn't use color or sound and plays on that
checkerboard background associated with the GEM
operating system. It uses pull-down menus that allow the player to select options by pointing and
clicking a mouse or simply by typing the character.
Once you get to know the command sequence you
can run through a series of options pretty quickly.
The menu options and all other printing are displayed in a re-defined character set that is suppose
to look like a technical computer print-out. The
letters turned out looking very similar to each other
and I had a hard time trying to tell them apart. It is
very discouraging to start a playtest and find that
you can't even read the menu options. Well, part of
a playtest is to see what happens when you press
the wrong key and boy did I get a lot of wrong key
testing done before I learned the shapes.
In the old Universe the best way to play the
game was to start out as a trader, make the Axia to
Zeath run four or five times, upgrade to a mining
ship and mine Ore I until you had a ton of money,
then become a pirate or start mining the inhabited
planets until you found the hyper space booster or
quit playing. Universe II has made things a little
harder. Now, you start with an Agoura class starship located in deep space in the Hope system. The
ship has all low-level components and a base crew
of five inexperienced but hard-working souls. You
should still make the Axia to Zeath run but you
won't find any B. Doshniva clothing on the buy
board and no product that guarantees a 400% return

when you boarded an enemy vessel. Now crewmen
have a name, grade, and skill type. You still must
feed them every day and now you must also pay
them whenever you make drydock. Crewmen may
be astrogators, pilots, marines, miners, or gunners
and their skill level may be upgraded by sending
them to school. If you should decide to become a
pirate (don't try it with this game, the "A" disk is
protected) your marines will have to board enemy
vessels and fight the opposing crew for control of
the bridge. This boarding action is a mini-tactical
game all its own in which you send orders to your
Marines to direct movement and fire. The objective
is to kill all enemy marines or to control 30% of the
bridge consoles. The Marines will be wearing exosuits which absorb incoming fire and will be returning fire with portable weapons. I must admit,
on investment. To be a successful trader in this
game you will have to concentrate more on price
than on product.
This version of Universe has included two aspects which help to offset the more difficult trading environment. Number one is a component
called a Ramscoop. The Ramscoop will allow you to
collect Ore IV directly from the atmosphere of
gaseous planets. Since the Agoura has a small
mining section, Ramscooping and buying are the
only two ways to get more Ore IV. The second item
is the fact that your spy boss, Admiral Bresheliah
will actually pay you when you complete missions
for him. Trading, carrying passengers, and completing missions should earn enough money that
you may soon consider changing occupations.
To change occupations you will need 300,000 to
400,000 credits and some trained crewmen. It is a
good idea to hire the type of crewman you will
need early in the game and then send them to
school to upgrade their skills. If you intend to become a pirate it is very important to have a well
trained Gunner in your crew and a few upgraded
Marines to capture the bridge of an enemy vessel.
One of the things which make changing occupations
so expensive is the fact that you usually must
change your ship. The Agoura can not be used for
mining because it's mining section is to small for
anything but a Ramscoop. It also does not make a
good pirate vessel because the drives and weapons
sections are to small. As you may have guessed, in
Universe II each ship is predesigned with a certain
amount of space in each section and you may
trade-in your old ship for a new one. Almost all
the designs will allow trading, but mining and pirating seem to be mutually exclusive.
Two areas which underwent a big change between Universe and Universe II were the crew and
Starport sections. In the old Universe the crew was
simply an abstract number that required a certain
amount of supplies each day and got killed off

this is one of the more interesting parts of this
game and something to look forward to when you
become a pirate. The exact o p posite is true of the
new Starport section. I never was much of an adventure game player and when I saw that the Starport had turned into a mini-adventure game I was
disappointed. I just don't like typing directions or
talking to computer generated characters. Of
course, its a little difficult to do much spying if
you don't have an adventure setting where you can
talk to other characters, read things, and generally
move about from place to place. For an admitted
non-adventure game player this was the hardest
section to playtest. I never knew if I was typing
something wrong or there was a program bug when
the desired result wasn't obtained. The first time I
played the Starport section I nearly tore my hair
out trying to figure out how to get out of the alcove after talking to Admiral Bresheliah. A simple
press of the button solved the problem.
This section is made even more difficult by the
fact that game displays do not repeat the entire
portion of information messages. This make it necessary for the player to remember what was displayed the first time he saw the message. For in-

stance, when your lander brings you safely to the
landing area of the Starport, a message appears
which tells you there is a gra vsled waiting for you.
You enter the sled and it carries you to the platform of the Starport. From there you go exploring.
When you return to the platform the message does
not say that there is a gra v sled waiting so you must
remember that a Gra v sled is there and that you
must enter it to be taken back to your lander.
Working with the Starport section wasn't my the
only problem in playtesting Universe II. Omnitrend
is on the East Coast and I'm in California so new
versions of the game got to me almost a week after
they got to the other playtesters. It is discouraging
to spend a few weeks working the game and making detailed notes on bugs and changes only to have
a new version arrive before I could send off my
report. Most of the bugs I found were already fixed
before I even reported them. I did report one
problem which only I had and it was not fixed in
the final IBM version of the game. The problem
centered around the disk swapping routines Omnitrend used when it was necessary to change a
floppy disk. When the program needed a disk
change it would issue a message like "Insert Disk
'C' into drive B" and then wait for you to press 'C'
for continue. When I swapped disks and pressed

'C', instead of going on, the program reissued the
message and waited for me. The program would not
see the disk and I could not get it to go on. The
problem did not occur all the time, that would
make it to easy to fix, and seemed to be related to
the fact that my IBM was using a monochrome
monitor with a Paradise Modular Graphics card.
The people at Omnitrend tell me that they have had
no reports of anyone having trouble swapping disks
so my problem must be pretty isolated.
The final payoff in any playtest is the day the
market version of the game arrives and the
playtester has a chance to see what his input has
done. I haven't had enough time to get very far
into the game but I'm looking forward to many
happy hours of spying, trading, mining, and pirating all for the good and glory of the Local Group.
Tom Carbone of Omnitrend hinted that Universe
III may soon be on the drawing board and that another science fiction game is currently being
worked on. I like to think about the people at Omnitrend and their success with Universe because it
reminds me that you do not have to be an SSI,
Broderbund, or Avalon Hill to make it in the computer game industry. All you need is a good game
and the desire to bring some happiness into other
peoples lives.

TELEGAMING COLUMN #12

Island of Kesmai
Patricia Fitzgibbons

The hottest topic in online gaming today is
multi-player (MP) games. The telecommunications
services that have MP games plan to offer more;
networks that don't have MP games are scrambling
to develop them. From the time the first MP game
was introduced online, it was inevitable that subscribers would begin to abandon even the best single-player games in favor of the social, interactive
atmosphere available in multi-player programs.
Several consumer information networks currently
offer MP games: Plato has its Empire; GEnie has
Stellar Warrior. But the leader of the pack in the
MP games area is clearly CompuServe. With a
dozen MP games online (including MegaWars, SeaWAR, YGI!, and Casino), and several more in the
planning or testing stages (Air Traffic Controller,
Terrestrial, and British Legends), CompuServe is
clearly committed to this exciting form of telegaming. And its newest, state-of-the-art MP game
is Island of Kesmai.
Developed by the same team -- John Taylor, a
computer programmer, and Kelton Flinn, a mathematician -- that created the very popular
MegaWars III space conquest game, Island of
Kesmai (IOK) is a fantasy role-playing adventure
for up to fifty simultaneous players. Introduced on
CompuServe in December, 1985, IOK was an immediate hit. In fact, many devoted "MegaWarriors"
neglected their starships and planets to join the new
dungeon quest. It's easy to see why. IOK is one of
those rare games that is simple to learn but almost
impossible to master.
The command summary for IOK is 4 pages long,
and the full manual is about 160 pages. A lot of
meat there. Nevertheless, the novice player can
easily begin with nothing but his new character and
a willingness to type HELP. As in a typical D&Dtype game, the 10K player starts out by choosing
an alter ego. In this case, the program runs a character generator with choices of sex (male or female), country of origin (Illyria, Mu, Lemuria,
Leng, Draznia, Hovath, Mnar, or Barbarian), and
profession (fighter, martial artist, thief, wizard, or
thaumaturge). The stats for a good beginning
character might look like this:

Gender: Male
Strength: 16
Dexterity: 12
Intelligence : 9
Wisdom: 11
Constitution: 17
Charisma: 8

Country: Mu
Adds I
Adds 0

Max. Hits: 26
Max. Stamina: 3

The game's authors recommend that new players
select the fighter class -- it's easier for a fighter to
stay alive during initial explorations. Once the
character is given a name, he's ready to adventure.
IOK uses a type of pseudo-graphics that is best
viewed by a terminal with cursor addressing. The
game can certainly be played in "glass TTY" mode,
but the program runs faster and looks better when
cursor control is used (VT100, VT52, and so on). A
typical dungeon room is displayed like this:

In this scene, the ">" represents your player
character, the "A" a monster, the "B" a character
run by another player, the "@@" a spider web, and
the "$" an item on the floor -- perhaps valuable
treasure. The brackets are walls, and broken lines
or slashes are doorways.
A player may choose to investigate the dungeon
alone (in which case he'll surely run across other
players), or as a member of a team. Some of the
teams make regularly scheduled forays into the
Kesmai dungeon (seeking the dread dragon) or remain above ground exploring the town, forests,
seas, and outlying islands. Novices may join teams
for mutual protection against unfriendly creatures
and even other players (in IOK, lawful players are
fair game for characters of neutral or evil alignment). A beginning player would do well to tag
along with members of the "Knights of Sosaria" or
"The Adventurers' Guild" teams. Team players
identify themselves by appending the initials of
their team name to their own handle (e.g.,
"Beowulf...KOS").

Because this is a role-playing game, characters'
skills and stats increase over time. Experience
points mount up as battles are won, and abilities
with weapons grow with training. In addition, the
program keeps track of a character's "karma,"
which may decrease under certain circumstances
(for example, when a lawful character kills an innocent shopkeeper in the town). Although most
players begin the game as fighters or wizards, many
switch to the thaumaturge class. The top characters
on the game's high scores list are usually thaumaturges, those mysterious fighting spellcasters who
use a combination of brute force and magic to
overcome their foes.
Game commands may be simple or complicated.
A player can generally stick with single words such
as NORTH, DOWN, and LOOK, or he can go for
speed and precision by using compound command
strings such as, OPEN BOTTLE AND DRINK. Or,
TAKE GOLD FROM COUNTER AND PUT IT
INTO SACK. Veteran players have developed their
own pre-set macros (especially for casting spells)
that they can rapidly punch in during combat.
What is the "goal" of IOK? How does one "win"?
Well, there is that fierce dragon lying in wait. But
most players approach IOK as a endless quest consisting of character development, exploration of a
fantasy "world," and competition with online
friends. I asked one particularly avid player why
she sometimes spends 40 hours a week in IOK. Her
response: "It has a lot of realism, and it is consistent
with its own rules. It's easy to play either alone or
in groups. And besides, it's just a lot of fun!"
Part of that fun shows through when the players
leave the game to engage in ongoing discussions via
the IOK message board of CompuServe's MultiPlayer Games Forum. With tongue firmly in cheek,
one player recently told another how to deal with
an orc. After making sure that he is carrying a
bottle of deadly naphta, the player must then: "Take
bottle from sack. Open bottle. Throw bottle at orc.
Cook for three rounds or until fork-tender. Serve
with a nice green salad and crusty rolls."
If a new player cannot find a friendly advisor in
the game, he may ask for tips on the forum's message board. Pleas for assistance are answered almost
instantly. Here is an example of a novice's help request, and one of the four replies he received
within an hour of posting his message:

#: 53081 S6/Island of Kesmai
08-Mar-86 19:53:46
Sb #MASTER PHONG
Fm: Domino 76204,13
To: All
Being new and all, I am having a hard time finding Master
Phong. Would anyone mind giving me a few clues? I'm
powerful enough to begin training, but I cannot find him.
Any advice or clues would be appreciated.

#: 53083 S6/Island of Kesmai
08-Mar-86 20:13:39
Sb: #53081-#MASTER PHONG
Fm: Allnone 74015,1565
To: Domino 76204,13
You need to visit the other islands. If you start at the
entrance to the pawn shop, and go directly east, past the
ruins and the bay, you'll come to a footpath and a bridge.
Follow the path across the bridge, and stay on it. It will
lead you in the right direction.

With this kind of player support and interaction,
10K can't help but succeed.
Even telegamers who have become jaded with
D&D-type programs perk up when they're adventuring with a party of real people. The best MP
games allow players to interact and cooperate as
well as compete with one another. IOK is a prime
example of this facility. Despite the conventional
D&D structure of the game, its crude "graphics,"
and the undeniable expense of playing online, Island of Kesmai is the prototype of MP games to
come.
Until next time, you may write to me online:
CompuServe 76703,657; The Source BCE124; Delphi PFITZGIBBONS; GEnie PFITZGIBBONS; or
via U.S. Mail to: Patricia Fitzgibbons, 195 Claremont Avenue #115, Long Beach, CA 90803.
Copyright (c) 1986, Patricia Fitzgibbons. All
rights reserved.

SPORTS SCOREBOARD

Rick Teverbaugh

Now I like golf just as much as the next guy. When it comes to
computer golf, I suppose I'm a bit more than a casual fan. Looking
at my shelf of sports games reveals six different links adaptations:
Championship Golf (Hayden, one course); Pro Golf Challenge
(formerly Hi-Res Computer Golf, Avant-garde, four courses);
Maxi-Golf (Adventure International, 9 holes); Professional Tour
Golf (SSI, 4 courses); Tournament Golf (Avalon Hill, two courses),
Finally there's the golf game for the Nintendo Game System, a
graphically stunning game that has only one drawback, you can't
hit your way out of the trees.
That means, counting the one course I created on Maxi Golf, I
have 14 courses or 234 holes from which to sharpen my golf talents. I've said all that to say all this, why would I then rejoice at,
not one, not two, but three golf games appearing at my doorstep
during the past two months? Well, the reason is that each has its
own strengths and its own reasons for existence. To that end I will
cover each of the three in some detail.
The three are Golf's Best from One Step Software, Leader
Board from Access, and Hole-In-One Golf from Artworx. Golf's
Best is available for the Apple, while the other two are for Commodore owners.
Golf's Best comes with the Pinehurst course, which is a great
challenge for even the most experienced golfer.
Golf's Best is easily the most complex golf game I have seen.
(Note: As of this writing I have not seen Gamestar's new Championship Golf for the IBM which, I am told by the in-house staff at
CGW, is both complex and graphically stunning). There are no
arcade or action/reaction type features in Golf's Best. It is all
judgment. You need to allow for the height of your shot and the
slope of the terrain, as well as the distance in selecting your club.
Once a club is selected you then need to pick a full, half or quarter
swing. All of these choices are available through easy-to-remember
on-screen prompts.
The selection of direction is made by using clock time for direction. When you pick a time, say 9:58, a line will go out from the
ball to show where that setting would aim your ball. And aim is
the proper word for shots don't always go straight toward the intended destination. Often there will be little variations and on
occasion there will be more noticeable hooks and slices.
For the most part, the screen display is broken into two parts.
The upper two-thirds shows the hole you're playing. As you get
closer to the pin, you get a more detailed view of just the area
between you and the hole. The lower one-third gives you all the
available options (including trying for a hook or slice to steer
around trouble) as well as a symbolic look at what selections
you've already made. Once the shot is put into motion, that lower
third becomes a side view of your golfer, his swing and the trajectory of the ball.
Although the game is strong, there are three weaknesses worth
mentioning. The first is the absence of a wind factor, the second
some rather primitive graphics when the entire hole is displayed
and, third, putting is frustrating. All three problems will be addressed when the game comes out again with a second course, this
time St. Andrews Links in Scotland.
I will do an update on that version and on the new course
when it comes out. Until then, Golf's Best comes highly recom-

mended from this duffer.
Where Golf's Best played well overall until you reached the
green, Leader Board's fun is just beginning when you reach that
coveted area. Leader Board has the most realistic putting feel of
any golf game I've ever tried. When the ball finally makes it into
the cup, the sound of that success is also amazingly realistic.
The length of a white line will tell you how much the wind is
blowing or (if you're on the green) how steep the slope. A second
blue line will tell you the direction.
Club choice has to be done by estimate as there are now
range-finders as there are with Golf's Best. Once the club is selected, it is mostly up to your instincts and reactions to get the
shot headed in the right direction at the right speed.
While all of Golf's Best commands are entered through the
keyboard, all commands are entered via joystick in Leader Board.
The action button initiates the shot. If you desire a less than fullstrength shot, let up on the button at some point during the
backswing. Then, as the golfer swings into the ball, hit the button
again as close to the time the club reaches the ball as possible for a
straight flight.
The graphics are gorgeous, but there are some problems. The
only hazards on any of the included four 18-hole courses are your
own bad reactions and water. There are no trees and no sand. Not
many computer golf games have figured out a way to do justice
with trees anyway, so that part isn't a big setback. But I miss the
sand. Maybe it goes by the sandbox days of my childhood, I don't
know. I'll have to ask my analyst, when he gets down at the
country club.
Finally, we have Hole-In-One. First, let me say that the game
sells for $9.99. Keeping that in mind, there are certain things you
expect. One is that the documentation will be lacking in several
respects. And it is. The second is that there won't be a lot of included courses. And there aren't. But there is a utility to create
your own courses and save them to blank disks.
What you wouldn't expect out of a $9.95 program is a game
system that enables you to do something that no other golf game
attempts and that is to undercut the ball and actually get a
backup when it lands.
Like Leader Board, Hole-In-One accepts commands from the
joystick. The first step is to maneuver the club to one of 44 positions around the ball to select the direction. Then you pick the
club. The third choice concerns whether to hit the ball soft,
medium, hard or very hard. The harder the hit, the more difficult
it will be to control.
Once the strength is selected, a line will begin to move up and
down alongside a large golf ball at the top of the screen. It is there
that you'll control when the ball will have normal roll, extended
roll or a bite that could cause the ball to back up. Then the
crudely drawn golfer in the upper left hand corner will begin his
swing. You need to push the button when the club is near his feet
for a straight swing. Pushing too early will cause a slice and too
late will result in a hook.
Putting is easier. There all you need do is pick the strength of
the swing, line it up and then, if you want a straight shot, push
the button a final time when the wavy line is straight. There are
no slopes on any greens. But all the other hazards are there.
Hole-In-One is being readied for the Atari ST. Also Artworx
has available a four-course data disk for those who wants an additional challenge. The Commodore version will also be available is
a package that includes a game disk and a six-course data disk for
$19.95. Still a bargain and a good place to start for those just
trying to get their feet wet in computer golf.
By the way, Artworx has an equestrian game in the works, as
well as one for volleyball and wrestling. Excuse me though, I believe it's time for my foursome to tee off.

OVER THERE!

Leslie B. Bunder
Game Software From England
News, Views and Gossip
Paperboy' the smash hit arcade game is now set for release on
the home computer from Elite Systems. 'Paperboy', you may
remember involves you travelling on your bike delivering
newspapers whilst avoiding various obstructions which hamper you
as you move. The game is available on disc at $15.95 and is a very
good conversion of the arcade machine.
Another arcade conversion from Elite Systems is 'Ghosts 'n
Goblins' the smash hit brought out by Capcom who brought out
'Commando'. The game is available on disc for the Commodore 64
at $15.95, it is also being released for the Commodore C16 and
Plus 4 on cassette only for $8.95.
'R.M.S. Titanic' is a new game from Electric Dreams Software.
The object of the game is to explore the wreck of the Titanic,
search for the treasure that lies within in and also devise a plan to
raise the entire ship. It runs on the Commodore 64 but I haven't
got a price for it.
Holy Mackerel!! 'Batman' has now been released as a computer
game by Ocean. The game features some very stunning 3-D
graphics as you play the role of Batman who must rescue Robin,
unless Robin is saved he faces death. Alas, the game has not been
converted to Commodore 64, but it runs on the Sinclair/Timex
Spectrum and Amstrad CPC, 464, 664, and 6128. The game is on
tape and costs $9.95.
Five arcade games from Konami have now been converted to
run on the Commodore 64. The games are 'Hyper Sports', 'Ping
Pong', 'Mikie', 'Cosmic Bakery' and 'Yie Ar King Fu'. All the
games retain the feel of the original arcade game and are of a very
high quality especially 'Yie Ar King Fu' and 'Hyper Sports' which
stand out from the others. The price if $9.95 and is on tape only.
Imagine is the the Software House who has released them.
If you own a Commodore C16 or Plus 4 and are looking for a
sports simulation similar to 'Winter Olympics', the 'Winter
Events' from Anco is the game you want as it features some
breathtaking graphics. The price is $7.95 and is on tape only.
News reaches me from Activision (UK) that they will not be
releasing anymore games for the Atari 8 bit machines, instead they
are concentrating on the 16 bit ST Range.
The cult tv character Dr. Who turns up in his first computer
game from Micropower. You play the role of Doctor Who, who has
been sent by the Time Lords to the planet of Jijan where the
Master, an old enemy of the Doctor is building a 'time instant
reply unit'. You must stop The Master from doing this. The game
is quite vast, over 120 screens and features some quite colourful
graphics. The price of the game which runs on the Commodore 64
is $14.95 which is for the disc version.
P.S.S. a English Software House who specialize in strategic
games have just released several new games for the Commodore
64. 'Theater Europe' allows you to act out the next war in Europe.
You can either control NATO or the Warsaw Pact while the
computer plays against you. 'Battle Of Britain' is a 3 level game
where you are in control of fighter command during the summer of
1940. 'Battle Of Midway' has you in command of the US Pacific
fleets 6 months after the attack by the Japanese on Pearl Harbour.
These games cost $10.95 and are on tape only.
Nearly 4 years ago, 'The Hobbit' based on J.R.R. Tolkien's
book was released as an adventure by Melbourne House, now 'Lord
Of The Rings' the follow up has been released. The game follows
very closely on the book and is priced at $19.95 for the
Commodore 64 disc version.
To be released very shortly for the Commodore 64 is 'Popeye'
based on the actual cartoon hero. The game comes from
Macmillan. No price as yet.
A Software House called Americana are bringing out a budget
range of American Software to retail at just $2.99 on tape. The
games are 'Slamball', 'New York City', 'Breakdance', 'Shamus',
'Scooter', and 'Ollies Follies'.

Last year as the film 'A View To A Kill' came out, so did the
computer game based on the film by Software House Domark. This
year, Domark are set to release another computer game based on
another Bond film, this time the film is 'Live And Let Die'. The
game will bon on disc for the Commodore 64 and priced at
$13.99. Remember many years ago when there was a game in the
arcades called 'Moon Cresta', well a Software House called
Incentive have finally got round to producing a official
Commodore 64 version of the game. The computer version retains
all the atmosphere and speed that made 'Moon Cresta' into one of
the best ever zapping games. The game is out on disc for $10.95.
Watch out for 'Gunfight' from Ultimate running on the
Commodore 64. Your aim is to maintain law and order in Black
Rock and rid the town of some of the meanest and toughest
gunslingers in the Wild West. The game features some very
colourful and highly detailed graphics. Price is $15.95 for the disc
version.
'Saboteur' from Durell is one of the best martial arts games
around. You play the role of a mercenary trained in the martial
arts who is employed to infiltrate a central security building which
is disguised as a warehouse. The object is to steal a disk that
contains the names of some rebel leaders working against your
employer. The game is out on the Commodore 64, but only on tape
at $9.95.
'Southern Belle' by Mewson and running on the Commodore
64 is a simulation of a train journey from London to Brighton. The
simulation is very realistic as you journey across the country and
pass through different towns. Very enjoyable and worth getting if
you're a steam engine fan. No price as yet.
The arcade hit 'Green Beret' has just been released by Imagine
for the Commodore 64. The game is on tape only and is $9.95.
Game of The Month
BIGGLES, is a multipart arcade/strategy game linked to
specific sequences of events in the film of the same name. Each of
the individual game parts must be completed to achieve the final
objective - but it's not a simple as it sounds! Whenever you reach
a certain critical stage, you're likely to find yourself hurtled
through time into a totally different scenario, needing totally
different playing skills, to continue your quest.
The first part of the game has three distinct elements.
1. Pilot your biplane, avoiding ground and air attack to locate
and photograph the enemy's secret weapon. Watch out for von
Stahlein on your tail!
2. Dodge the enemy to find your way through treacherous
trenches and a secret network of caves, defending yourself with
pistol and grenades, to the weapon test site.
3. Escape the police helicopter, SAS hit squads, and armed
police in a death-defying rooftop chase to collect the
photographs of the secret weapon.
The second part of the game is a complete strategic adventure.
This involves you piloting your modern-day police helicopter
across the Western Front to destroy the secret weapon and
eventually rescue your friends who are trapped behind enemy
lines.
'Biggles' offers alot of variety and features some impressive
graphics and sound.
The game is available for the Commodore 64 on disc for
$14.95. Versions for the Amiga and Atari ST will be released in the
coming months.
The is game of the month, if not game of the year. Check it
out. 'Biggles' has been bought out by Mirrorsoft.
The Competition
Those very nice people at Mirrorsoft have very kindly given
me 2 copies of 'Biggles' to give away in a easy to enter
competition.
'Biggles' as you may have just read is my 'Game Of The
Month' so it is well worth your while to enter, where else can you

get one of the latest English games for nothing?
All you have to do, to win a copy of 'Biggles' from Mirrorsoft
is answer the following question.
Who is the author of the Biggles books?
Write your answer on a postcard and send it to the following:
Biggles Competition, 50 Riverside Close, Cuckoo Ave.,
Manwell, London W7 1BY, United Kingdom.
The first 2 correct answers received will win the game for the
Commodore 64, so get your postcards sent off quickly.
Don't forget to include your name and full address so if you
win, you'll get the prize. Good Luck!

Software House Index
Elite Systems, Anchor House, Anchor Road, Aldridge, Walsall,
United Kingdom. Imagine, 6 Central Street, Manchester, M2 5NS,
United Kingdom. Anco, 85 Tile Kiln Lane, Bexley, Kent, United
Kingdom. Mirrorsoft, Purnell Book Centre, Paulton, Bristol, BS18
5LQ, United Kingdom. Electric Dreams, 31 Carlton Crescent,
Southampton, United Kingdom. Ocean, 6 Central Street,
Manchester M2 5NS, United Kingdom. Durell, Castle Lodge,
Castle Green, Taunton, Somerset, TA1 4AB, United Kingdom.
Ultimate, The Green, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, LE6
5JU, United Kingdom. P.S.S., 452 Stoney Stanton Road,
Coventry, CV6 5DG, United Kingdom. Micropower, Northwood
House, Worth Street, Leeds, LS7 2AA, United Kingdom. Hewson,
Hewson House, 56b Milton Trading Estate, Milton, Abingdon,
Oxon, United Kingdom. Macmillion, 4 Little Essex Street, London,
WC2R 3LF, United Kingdom. Incentive, 54 London Street,
Reading RG1 4SQ, United Kingdom

STRATEGICALLY SPEAKING

task forces. Just wait until the next time you save a game in
progress, then add up the score. The computer will get to the
Japanese turn and just see that all their seaplanes are over one of
the American Task Forces. This is a handy bit of knowledge.
Larry Brown Atwater OH

Strategically Speaking covers strategy game tips, including tips
on wargames, sports games, economic and other simulations, as
well as classic style games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are those of the authors.
We try to avoid printing tips that don't work, but we cannot
playtest all, or even most of them. So, let the player beware.
We pay $5.00 for each SS tip printed. Tips can be mailed to
Strategically Speaking c/o CGW, PO Box 4566, Anaheim, CA
92803-4566. Try to keep tips under 250 words if possible.

AUTODUEL
(Origin Systems)
After creating a character, take a bus straight to the Atlantic
City Casino. Poker offers the best odds, bet $100 at first then
gradually increase as you have more money until you get around
$40,000. Then you can create a car that will survive on the roads.
Next, to build prestige and driving skills, take several courier tasks
at a time between cities. In the beginning, these will pay only
small amounts but you will eventually get better courier jobs as
you build up prestige. Avoid duels on these courier jobs. Use oil
jets to escape.
Save your character frequently onto another disk by selecting
the "Old Driver" option. Then save the current character from
"Side B" onto a separate disk. When it prompts you for your new
driver, use that same disk or just leave Side B in. Experiment with
as many different car designs as possible. Get ideas from Uncle
Albert's Catalog and AADA Vehicle Guide which you can order or
buy in a gaming shop.
If you are all shot up and caught in a city with no garage - (1)
go to a truck stop, (2) ask for a bus. When it asks you if you want
to leave your car on the street, press the ESC key for "none" and
the bus will take you and your crippled car to the selected city
without a potentially fatal drive on your own four wheels.
Always check for rumors but check them out by bus since they
will sometimes lead you all over the map before you finally reach
the original source. Later in the game, you can build up
workmanship by playing vigilante which also gets you alot of
money for salvage. Lead your opponents to crashes into corners
and finish them off from around the corner or from a distance.
Keith Comfort Bellaire TX

CARRIER FORCE
(Strategic Simulations)
The computer will give you a much better chance of
intercepting Japanese air strikes with air missions that are already
in the air. So reinforce such missions; but not with over 15 fighters
since the game will not give the larger fighter missions any extra
knock out power. Also in this simulation, the computer cheats.
Always assume that the Japanese know where you are with your

WAR IN RUSSIA: LVL 3 HISTORICAL
(Strategic Simulations)
I found that after going on defense in the south, the computer
will leave an opening where you should be able to send 1 Corp to
both Stalingrad and Baka. Stalingrad can be taken without fight,
Corp (supplies) will be able to take Baka thus cutting supply in
the whole south. Eventually you can take the Stalingrad unit, even
though out of supply and cut RR and even take out other supply
cities. For some reason, the computer will pull out of Stalingrad
leaving it open.
The units around Sevastapol will also come out to fight if you
get close. Send strong armor units and you will destroy these and
take the city. The whole Russian attack will be cut in half. Units
will be unable to attack or move. In the middle you should be able
to take Moscow once the South is nullified. Then just play defense.
I obtained Decisive victories the 1st and 2nd time I played War in
Russia by accomplishing the above. Also Murmansk can be taken
by ground unit with air support. Archangel can be taken by an out
of supply unit. Computer will move unit out of the city eventually.
Have a unit ready to move in. I found the computer very slow in
reacting to the Stalingrad unit thus enabling you to cut RR and
take supply cities. If you send 2 units to Stalingrad area, you can
do even more damage, even though they are out of supply. Then
just sit back, play defense and you will gain a victory. Note: In
infantry corps, keep at least 1 armor division in the corp. This
helps on defense and offense.
Dennis Mccafferty Olmsted Falls OH

CARRIER FORCE
(Strategic Simulations)
I found that in all the scenarios, that if you send a strong
surface fleet and engage the transports of the Japanese, 9 out of 10
times you will obtain an Allied victory, most often a decisive one.
In Midway you will pay for this with the loss of at least two of
your carriers. But if you can damage or sink one or two of his fleet
carriers the victory is yours. Take your surface fleet (5 Cruisers
and 6-8 Destroyers) and go for his transports. You will sink 80%
and probably a good portion of screening fleet. In one game of
Midway I sunk 90% of his transports and then engaged his main
fleet. I lost all my ships except one carrier and two cruisers, but I
sank two fleet carriers, all but two transports, damaged every BB,
and sank other miscellaneous warships in the surface action. My
entire surface fleet that was engaged. It will be bloody, but you
will stop the Japanese cold. You will probably sink during the
game an average of three fleet carriers and one or both light
carriers. You will find this to be true in the other three scenarios
as well. At Level one & two this will be harder but if done right
you can obtain the same results by committing your units to
surface action with his transports.
Dennis Mccafferty Olmsted Falls OH

COUNTDOWN TO SHUTDOWN

Name:
Countdown to Shutdown
System:
C-64, Apple II (64K)
$29.95(C64),$39.95(Apple)
Price:
# Players: 1
Designer:
Creative Sparks
Publisher: Activision, Inc.
2350 Bayshore Frontage
Mountain View CA 94043
(415) 960-0410

The game's black cover with its title in
warning-light red in one corner sets the
mood of the game: understated but urgent.
You have eight robots of varying abilities
that you can direct, one at a time, through
an eight-level, 2000-room "underground
energy plant"; the object is to get its overheating core (which is on the bottom level,
of course) cooled off before it reaches
10,000 degrees. Your robots have eight
characteristics, each of which influences
what it's best at: some robots move faster
than others; some are good at fixing
jammed doors, others at fixing other
robots, and so on.
Through the use of remote cameras in
every room, you can see most of the room;
all of it, if you switch to the alternate
camera in the room. Each room has one to
four doors, sometimes an elevator that
connects you with only one other level. If
you examine a room carefully, you will
usually find a useful object. These range
from damper-fields (which you must have
to cool down the core) to radiation shields
to medkits (which allow you to repair
other robots) to transmats (curious devices
that teleport you a set number of levels up
or down--one way only!). Each robot can
carry only eight items, though two robots
may (awkwardly) trade items as well. At
any point, you can switch from one robot
to another, leaving the former wherever it
is and taking control of the latter.
Of course, if this were easy, they
wouldn't call it a crisis, would they? Certain things stand in your way. One is complete ignorance of the plant's layout-what rooms are connected, where the elevators are, what objects are scattered
about. Also, the plant is filled with radiation that will eventually turn a robot into
an twitching moron. Most rooms have as
many as three hostile inhabitants that try
to dismantle any robot they can touch;
that's why robots start out with pistols.
All this combines to make a rather rich
game. Within the limits set by the game,
you can play however you feel best: you
can run from room to room, shooting ev-

erything in sight; you can send one robot
out and run it until it breaks down; you
can do a careful exploration of each level,
making a map as you go. Countdown gives
you occasional visual surprises and a few
arcade skills to master (like how best to
shoot the "anti-radiation plasma blobs,"
which look like small icebergs that roam
after your robot), but the real fun is going
on inside your head. This game is really
about pitting yourself against a formidable
task, about exploring, surviving, and
overcoming hostile territory.
Countdown was first designed on a
Commodore 64 and was translated to the
Apple II (with 64K of memory and a joystick) by T.L. Gale and Ivan Manley, of
Synergistic Software. I'm glad to report
that this game survived the translation to
the graphically more primitive Apple II-nice work, guys.
However, Countdown is not without its
quirks. You can't, for example, turn the
sound off (a simple feature that's been
standard on Apple II software for years).
Each room can contain only one item; if
you drop two items, you can pick the second item up, but the first is gone. Twice
(both times after using a pulse grenade),
the game refused to respond to any of the
keyboard commands, thus effectively ending the game. I think that's a bug, not a
"feature." The work-around to that is to
save the game to disk often, especially before using an object you haven't used before.
Also, be wary of pulse grenades--they
will disable your robot, even if it is several
rooms away from the place where you
dropped it. If the room you're in has enemy inhabitants, they keep moving; but if
you switch to another robot, then switch
back to the first one, the inhabitants are
gone. I can't quite explain this behavior,
but I can live with it.
Overall, I like the Apple version of
Countdown, and I'm sure the C-64 version
is even more enjoyable. If you ever get the
game completely solved, you can play a
randomized version that will keep you
busy for a while longer.
Gregg Williams

MOEBIUS

Moebius
Name:
Apple II series
System:
1
#Players:
Greg Malone
Author:
Publisher: Origin Systems Inc.
340 Harvey Rd.
Manchester, NH 03103

Moebius is a fantasy role-playing game
that combines a world similar to Ultima
with a combat system similar to Karateka
and the older DataMost game:
Swashbuckler.

"Twas in the Year of the Yak that the
disciple Kaiman abandoned the one true
path of Moebius the Windwalker and stole
the Orb of Celestial Harmony". Kaiman
fled through the three ascending RealmsEarth, Water, Air, and set up base in the
Realm of Fire. Your quest is to pursue
Kaiman through the four Realms and
rescue the Orb, thus preventing the destruction of the universe, and bringing to a
halt the earthquakes, rains, and droughts
that currently plaque the Realms. In each
Realm you must free the imprisoned Holy
Ones and restore them in their Shrines.
Those who succeed will be awarded with
prayers and magic artifacts that will help
them in their quest. The magic artifacts
(charms) must be 'divined' to determine
their true nature, but you will be taught
the ways to succeed.
As you travel through the Realms you
will find magical maps that will provide
you with various views of buildings,
shrines or other sites as well as the general
layout of the Realms. This system enables
you to not have to worry about mapping
your travels and lets you free to enjoy the
other aspects.
You, as a Disciple, have four basic attributes; Body (hit points), Mind (Spell-

casting ability), Dexterity, and Karma.
The first three should be self-explanatory
but let me explain Karma. If you fall victim to a thief, beast, or assassins this attribute is lowered. It can be increased by
various feats of valor. Not having a positive Karma will degrade your fighting
ability and the ability to get information
or help from the villagers. Sword-wielding
characters can also frighten the villagers
into refusing to help.
In your travels you will visit villages,
castles and Shrines. Ninja-like assassins
will seek to prevent you from fulfilling
your quest as well as sword-wielding
Guards. When you do encounter an enemy
or Evil Monk you will immediately be
switches to the combat system. In the
combat system you can fight with either
your bare hands or a sword. However, you
cannot choose which weapon once you are
in the combat system, this requires preplanning. With either weapon you have six
attack and one blocking position. (At the
beginning of the game you are able to
sharpen your fighting abilities in practice
rounds.)
You must constantly keep in mind
that food and water will need replenishment, bamboo will grow to block you path,
and earthquakes will cause rockslides
across these same paths. Your sword will
play an important part in your travels so
always keep it sharpened and make sure
you are not caught in a forest without a
sword to cut yourself out (Swords can
shatter if you use them too carelessly).
Sometimes guards will stun you, steal
your food and water, then run to some far
corner. If you don't retrieve these items
quickly or find replacements in a hurry
you will die quickly. It was exasperating in
the beginning but I found a pattern as to
where these guards go to hide. Once you
recognize the pattern you can typically
recover your lost items expeditiously.
Dying due to lack of food or water is a
common occurrence for the beginner.
However, there are Towers where you
can be assured of a fight. If you win the
combat, there is a good likelihood that the
prize will be food. For water there are
springs and fountains. You just need to be
cognizant of their location and proximity
to your present position.
Moebius is sort of an outgrowth or
continuation of the best parts of Ultima
with special emphasis on graphic detail
around a central Zen-like theme. The addition of a fully animated combat system
was frosting for the cake. Enjoy!
Jim McPherson

NORWAY 1985

Name:
Norway 1985
System: ,Apple, C-64
# Players: 1-2
Price:
$35
Author:
Roger Keating
Publisher: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Have you ever been told your blind
date had an interesting personality? Well,
you know you're in for a surprise, right?
Roger Keating has given us the unexpected in Norway 1985 (N85); at least, I
didn't expect it. This fourth installment in
the "When Superpowers Collide" series
moves considerably back away from the
complexity which built through the first
three games. The result is a game which is
easier to play (although no less easy to
master).
N85 portrays a hypothetical battle
between NATO and Soviet troops in Norway in the winter of 1985. [Ed. Note: the
fact that N85 was a year late in coming
out makes for a rather awkward situation:
the hypothetical future is now (or even
past)]. The Norway scenario is tied in with
the "story" of "When Superpowers Collide"
by presuming a Soviet occupation of Norway during the larger conflict. The game is
played on a 39-by-28 hex grid which represents a generalized section of central
Norway. Terrain types include clear, forest, light and heavy rough, mountains,
lakes, rivers, towns, and cities (lakes,
mountains, and airbases are all new to the
system). One hex represents three miles;
movement allowances and artillery ranges
have been adjusted from the one mile per
hex in Germany 1985. The units are battalions of ski troops, and ski mortar troops
(for NATO) and mechanized infantry, ski
troops, artillery, and Katushka rockets (for
the Soviets).
Here is one of the surprising items
about the game. There are considerably

fewer unit types than in the previous scenarios. When you get into the rule book,
you will begin to see some of the other '
changes from the rest of the system. Gone
are defensive mode, support mode, headquarters, efficiency ratings of individual
units, divisional integrity, and air cavalry.
Reorganization is automatic (that is, units
which are beat up will automatically break
off and hide to regain strength). There are
some new things added to the system in
the game, but we are still waiting for the
mines and nuclear contamination which
has had a spot reserved in the rules since
Germany 1985.
While it is easy to be initially disappointed with N85 (after seeing the complexity of the prior series entries), one
must keep in mind the situation that is
being simulated. Roger Keating still had
available to him all of the rules of the
system, but he purposely left many out.
Why? Because the game as designed is
accurate to the possibilities of arctic combat. The design premise here is a forbidding terrain where vehicles freeze up and
ski troops really are more mobile than
mechanized infantry. In a situation where
Soviet garrisons will be hit in quick raids,
divisional integrity is a non-entity and
battalions live and die by their own capabilities. Why can all but mechanized infantry cross and even occupy rivers and
lakes? They are all frozen solid!
Beyond the situation being simulated,
N85 is very much like its older brothers.
The box contains the disk, a player's aid
card, a four page "special rules" booklet,
and the rule book from Germany 1985.
Most of the rules are unchanged from that
original "Superpowers" game. Each player
in turn moves and executes combat with
his individual units. Each unit is moved in
turn and executes all movement and attacks during its "Movement Phase". Combat involves a complex series of calculations which are explained in an appendix.
It is nice to be able to get an idea of which
factors are most crucial in combat by referencing this information.
N85 contains one basic scenario which
can be modified by augmenting the forces
of either or both sides. NATO ski troops
begin scattered around the map. Their
objective is to occupy as many town, city,
and airbase hexes for as long as possible.
The Soviets begin with the inferior force,
but reinforcements arrive at various map
edges throughout the game. Their goal is
to hold the objective hexes as well as destroy as many of the raiders as possible.
In spite of the simpler mechanics and
fewer unit types, N85 presents an engrossing tactical combat situation. Both
sides will have plenty to keep them busy
(especially when the "hidden units" option
is used). As such, N85 may actually be a
more appropriate "first game" in the series
for someone to buy than any of the first
three. If you have been thoroughly immersed in the "Superpower" series, you will
have to adjust your expectations before
getting into the game. If you can do this,
you will find a good game here.
Jay Selover
Continued on pg. 41

N,
a

CLASH OF WILLS

Clash of Wills
Name:
Atari, C64
System:
1-3
#Players:
$39.95
Price:
Publisher: Digital Kamp Group
1737 Walnut Grove
Decatur, IL 62526
Clash of Wills is DKG's re-creation of
the war in Europe (1940-1945) -- both
Eastern and Western Fronts. As such, the
simulation is ambitious, covering a vast
scope and adding production in as well.
The map ranges in Europe from France
east to mid-Russia and from Great Britain
south to Egypt in 40-km squares. Turns
are monthly, with options for three or less
active players (in solitaire mode, the player
assumes command of Germany).
The documentation is inadequate, at
best. Weather is noted as three types -"clear...and mud"; proofreading would

have revealed the omission of snow as a
weather type. Even more important, the
effects of weather are discussed only in a
cursory fashion, and one is left to discover
what impact, if any, the weather changes
will have.
Production is covered in a quarterpage. While the designer stresses the importance of aircraft, no quantitative suggestions are made (during play, this reviewer built the Axis up to 70 planes, assuming this would be sufficient; the
American entry quickly built the Allied
Air Forces up over 300 planes, thereby
eliminating the Axis air). Also, Germany
assumes a full war-time economy ab initio;
historically, Germany did not do so until
July 1944. This allowed the reviewer to
build up an SS Panzer Army before the
invasion of Russia.
The map and character set are reminiscent of Chris Crawford's Eastern Front.
However, instead of joystick, the designers
opted for keyboard input -- a decision
which will slow down most garners considerably. Also, movement is limited to N-SE-W only. Once orders are given, the map
switches to an overview of the entire map
and resolves the turn on a grand scale.
While this resolution by pixels is primitive,
one can grow to appreciate its nature; the
amorphous Russian front will be seen as a
vast panorama. However, resolution is objectionably slow.
Strategic movement occurs before tactical movement. One may utilize strategic
movement in any area free of enemy zones
of control. Therefore, a three-hex wide

break in Russian lines will permit the
German Army to penetrate 920 kilometers
in a one-month period. Such a breakthrough (which this reviewer achieved) can
well doom Russia before the end of December 1941. It would make more sense to
limit strategic movement to already-occupied territory, and not allow it as a device
for exploitation.
The armies draw supply from any
friendly city, port or industrial center.
This can permit the German Army to seize
Moscow and utilize it as a supply source in
the following turn, although the Army
may be totally isolated from the Fatherland.
Tactical play is rather straight-forward, and once one is accustomed to the
system, it can be fun. However, the Italian
army can literally defeat the British in
Africa before the Afrika Korps can arrive.
This reviewer utilized the Italians alone
and seized Alexandria and Suez. Of course,
many German reinforcements were needed
to prevent British reinforcement and battles in Africa, but it was strictly as a mopup and garrison duty. Similarly, the
Balkan Campaign is a push-over; attacking in mid-Winter, this reviewer noted little resistance, and completed the Balkan
conquest by February 1941.
Does Russia attack Germany if Germany does not do so first? The documentation is silent, and most players will never
have the opportunity to discover the answer. The reason is that the assault on the
Soviet colossus can begin in April 1941 -once the breakthrough is achieved, the So-

viet may be eliminated before 1942. A
massive German army of occupation
should be left along the east border,
stretching the width of the map in order to
prevent Soviet reinforcements.
Because the Axis may not cross the
Channel, the remainder of the game consists of waiting for the Allied invasion. If
the Russian Campaign has been properly
handled, the Axis should have a surplus of
units to man the beaches (this reviewer
used a three-deep defense, consisting of
infantry, armor and SS panzer). Dieppetype assaults were made by the Allies in
Belgium and Normandy between August
1942 and June 1943, but they were repulsed handily. Festung Europa is a reality! Although Allied bombing causes massive industrial damage, by this point, the
player does not need any production. His
invincibility and victory are assured.
This reviewer has mixed feelings about
the product. The scope of the simulation is
laudable; its execution is not. Its failures
could well have been corrected with some
additional development. The designers did
not choose to do so, and the net result is a
game with a potential for greatness, but a
realization of minimal adequacy, at best.
M. Evan Brooks

ADVENTURES IN FLESH

capsule's onboard computer, which is an
invaluable asset to exploration (and communicates with the user in the style of a
famous TV show's automobile computer).
One can get lost, or consumed by a white
blood cell, in which case the computer
panics. Fortunately the capsule is armed.
One can exit the body by getting excreted
Although entirely a prose adventure program, the descriptions of the insides of the
human body are authentic and give the
player the feel of being really there. The
medical diagnoses are also authentic; the
clues to the diagnoses are rather obvious,
however.
Adventures In Flesh is appropriate for
junior high and up. Adults will find the
game engaging, if unsophisticated compared to the best prose adventures. Its
shortcomings as an adventure program are
well offset by its attention to anatomic
detail and informative approach to a score
of real medical problems. When the hardcore adventure gamer gets an ulcer from
too many hours of sleuthing, he or she will
be able to visualize just what's going on in
that sick duodenum! [Circle Reader Service
#77]
J. Robert Beck

THE BLACK DEATH

Name:
Adventures In Flesh
Systems:
Apple II+, Atari, C64
# Players: 1
Price:
$49.95
Publisher: Krell Software Corp.
1320 Stony Brook Rd.
Stony Brook, NY 11790
(516)-751-5139

Name:
The Black Death
Systems:
Apple II+, Atari, C64
Players:
1 to 6
Price:
$24.95
Publisher: Krell Software Corp.
1320 Stony Brook Rd.
Stony Brook, NY 11790
(516)-751-5139

This text adventure program evokes
memories of Isaac Asimov's classic book
Fantastic Voyage, which was made into a
popular movie in the late 1960s. In this
game the player is placed inside an "inner
space" capsule and miniaturized to the size
of a bacterium, then injected into the body
of a mythical patient with up to ten different disorders. The objective of the game
is to pilot the capsule through the bloodstream, digestive system, and assorted
other bodily regions to each area of the
patient. At each area the player is to decipher clues, discover symptoms, and make
the appropriate diagnosis. The user communicates with the program using simple
two word commands, such as "Explore
Liver" or "Go Artery." At each turn the
program prompts with allowable commands for that point (e.g., DOWN,
WEST, EXPLORE). Most commands can
be abbreviated to one letter. Scoring is
based on the number of correct diagnoses.
The sketchy documentation does include a
list of 23 possible diagnoses, their location
and associated symptoms.
Along the way the program does some
teaching. For example, at the entrance to
the liver along the portal vein, the program describes some of the functional
physiology. Also, the program teaches indirectly by forcing the player to use the
normal routes of travel in the body.
The game has some clever features
that keep the interest level up. It is possible, by chance, to temporarily disable the

The plague, or Black Death, ravaged
Europe in the late middle Ages and the
early Renaissance. The Black Death capitalizes on this hideous piece of history with
a package design incorporating a death's
head grin. There the similarity ceases, as
The Black Death is a simulation program
that illustrates a typical (albeit highly fatal) epidemic, with the victims represented
by numbers on a grid. The program allows
the players to select variable starting
points of the infection, probabilities of
contagious spread, recovery and hazards of
vaccination and therapy. Also, the number of periods of illness before the disease
is reported to the public health authorities
may be varied, and the number of treatments and inoculations per player per turn
may be manipulated. The simulation then
runs, and at each turn the program updates the number of people alive, dead,
sick and recovered. For each sick person
the program computes the stage of the
disease. After this updating the player(s)
can choose to inoculate or treat a fixed
number of individuals, whereupon the program runs through another cycle. The
simulation concludes after a certain number of turns, or after it becomes clear that
no more infections are possible.
The program is challenging, as the
players decide what cooperative strategy
to use to combat the epidemic. In the default scenario provided with the game, one
player is doomed to watch two-thirds of
the population die. As more players assist

in fighting the epidemic, the chance of
saving most of the populace increases
greatly. The graphics are rudimentary, but
on a color monitor there is the option of
displaying a low resolution color picture of
the population disease status that closely
approximates the type of map used by
actual epidemiologists.
As a simulation the program is effective. With real-life data it faithfully recreates the spread and conquering of an epidemic. Using the variable probabilities, the
players can simulate both fatal and nonfatal infections. On the other hand, the
program's error checking leaves something
to be desired: using the Apple II version,
the number of allowable vaccinations and
treatments occasionally got confused,
leading to a negative number of remaining
treatments and thus an infinite supply.
The status line occasionally gives wrong
information, also in the area of numbers of
remaining treatments and vaccinations.
THE BLACK DEATH would be of interest to high school and college students
studying epidemiology, as part of a general
or population biology course. As a game
it's a good example of a cooperative
strategy problem. The graphics and action
won't sustain interest, but the opportunity
to tackle a classic problem in probability
and epidemiology should appeal to students in these and related fields.
J. Robert Beck

MAKE MILLIONS
Name:
System:
#Players:
Price:
Publisher:

Make Millions
Macintosh (128K)
1
$49.95
The Scarborough System
Tarrytown NY

The game's title is correct: before the
game ends, you will have to parlay
$250,000 into $7,000,000 or more by playing the stock market and managing five
vertically-integrated companies. This is a
task that will probably take weeks or
months to complete, one that will be at
times as appealing as filing the long 1040
income-tax form. Not much fun, huh?
"Why bother?" you may ask. Because this
game is touched with the same wit and
spark that characterizes many other Tom
Snyder Productions games.
The scenario is this: you have been
called back to the island of Wiki-Wiki by
a summons from your father, founder of a
string of the five Aloha companies that
manufacture, package, and sell guitars.
When you arrive, your father has vanished, but his employees expect you to run
the businesses he has left. All you know is
that the secret of your father's disappearance is in the office safe, which is opened
by five keys. Here's the catch: to get a key,
you must hold over 50% of an Aloha company's stock--and you must do that in the
face of a conglomerate called Humungus,
Inc., who's trying to do the same.
The game divides into several phases.
You start with $250,000 (enough to buy
12% of one company) and no stock in
anything, so the first few hours of play
consist of playing the Wiki-Wiki stock
market, which includes the five Aloha

Continued on pg. 44

Battlegroup

in the non-German units to be used and in the
typical terrain and scenarios.
Even if you already own Kampfgruppe, there is
still perhaps enough difference in the new American and British units to justify buying Battlegroup.
The new units are definitely NOT like the Russians. You get everything from the early Grants and
Crusaders through to the Pershings that could finally stand toe to toe with the Germans. Allied
tank destroyers arrive on the scene in the 1945 scenarios and include the M18 Hellcat, the M-36
Jackson, and the British Achilles and Archer. There
are also the standard complement of halftracks,
bren carriers, self-propelled artillery, and armored
cars. there is also a complete collection of Allied
infantry, anti-tank guns, heavy machine guns, and
mortars. Of course, the Germans are equally well
equipped, although we have seen most of these
units before in Kampfgruppe.
If there is any down side with Battlegroup, it is
that Gary has taken a step back to Kampfgruppe in
two points which worked much better when they
were revised in Mech Brigade. First, Battlegroup is
again a smoke-free war; artillery units again can
not fire smoke rounds. Also, the morale rules again
make it far too likely that a platoon which suffers
any losses will rout. It is one of the most exasperating experiences in playing this game to see a
platoon of five tanks suddenly abandon their carefully prepared defensive positions and rout when
they suffer their first casualty.
Although the "make your own scenario" capabilities in Battlegroup are the same as in Kampfgruppe, and many people will spend most of their
gaming hours on hypothetical scenarios; the game
does include four historical scenarios which present
some very interesting situations. "Kasserine" presents a German assault on the untested Americans
in Tunisia in February of 1943. We then move to
Sicily for "Salerno", where a German pursuit attempts to force the Americans back from their
beachhead. "Caen" recreates the ill-fated British attempt to break through the German lines near Caen
in July 1944 (Operation Goodwood). Finally,
"Celles" gives us the British sealing off the deepest
German penetration in the Battle Of The Bulge.
They have all been well designed to highlight the

unique features of each of these battles. Another
nice thing about the historical scenarios is that the
terrain does not have the generic "sameness" of the
computer generated maps in the "design your own"
part of the game. This comment is true also in
Mech Brigade; the specially constructed maps of the
historical scenarios present some very interesting
problems in how to best situate your forces.
One of the most important rules in doing any
derivative design is "If it's not broken, don't fix it!"
Well, there just wasn't very much that was "broken"
in Kampfgruppe, and so it is perfectly natural that
there has not been much "fixing" in the two subsequent releases. The feel of the play in Mech
Brigade and the modern units make this one almost
a whole new game. Battlegroup is much more similar to its older brother, but will still appeal to West
Front gamers.

stocks, five other stocks, and gold. Once
you have enough money to buy 30% of an
Aloha company, you move to a
"manufacturing company management"
phase, where you try to make your company more profitable by adjusting the
price and volume of the one product that
company manufactures.
From here on out, the game is a combination of the stock-market and management phases. So far, with a net worth
of about $320,000, I've bought Aloha
Woodshop, improved it, then sold it and
bought even more shares of Aloha Guitar.
I suppose my best strategy is to continue
doing this until I get enough money to buy
30% of two Aloha companies at the same
time. Trouble looms ahead, though-- Humungus already controls Aloha Music
Stores.
The authors of Make Millions (MM),
G. Richard Fryling, Dr. Arthur Lewbel (an
economist), and Tom Snyder have used
the graphics capabilities of the Macintosh
to keep this game from bogging down in
too much "number crunching." In fact,
most of your activity will consist of using
the mouse instead of the keyboard. For
example, the screen for your office shows
(among other things) a telephone, a newspaper, a memo board, a Macintosh, a
clock, and a potted plant (which wilts if
you don't water it). If you select the telephone when it rings, a window opens to
show, say, a stockbroker who recommends
a stock for you to buy. If you select the
newspaper on your desk, you can read a 3page weekly newspaper that includes a
news headline, the new prices of gold and
all the stocks, and a page of national indicators. The memo board, when selected,
expands to become a stack of "While You
Were Out" messages.
As in real life, time plays an important
role. The basic unit of time is the week. In
MM, the clock is always running (it runs
between 1 minute and 1 hour of game time
per real-time second, and you can adjust
the rate), and you must make all your
moves before 5 p.m. Friday. Although I
have not yet run out of time, I may have a
problem once I get three or four companies
and a portfolio to manage. One of the
pull-down menus has selections named
"Lock Door" and "Disconnect Phone,"
which leads me to believe I may eventually
need them!
Because MM requires weeks to months
to finish, I classify it as a "campaign"
game, one that requires more planning
than arcade reflexes and that allows you to
immerse yourself in a role for a fairly long
period of time. Because of this, working
toward winning this game is a lot like
increasing your character's level in
Wizardry; it's something you must carefully and prudently plan.
How did I like MM? I can't say I'm
addicted to it--planning your moves often
feels like real-world work--but I do get
considerable satisfaction from making
progress, and I feel I'm learning more
about how to be a manager. In short, this
is the most creative (and, at the same
time, faithful in spirit to real life) business
simulation I've ever seen on a computer. If
you like business simulations, you're certain to enjoy MM.
Gregg Williams

MACINTOSH WINDOW (Cont.)

MCC allows you to design train sets about one screen wide and
two screens high; a scroll bar is provided to let you see all of your
layout. Track and train windows allow you to drag pieces onto
your layout in much the same way you drag tabs out of the "tab
wells" in MacWrite's rulers. Plenty of tools are provided to get the
pieces just the way you want; you can rotate, flip, hide, duplicate,
and combine them.
Decouplers (which unhook cars), switches (which change the
direction of trains), and signals (which stop trains), help the budding engineer in his or her quest to become the next--well, I was
going to say Casey Jones, but you won't have to go down with
your train. In fact, you can crash your electronic engines and
watch from a safe vantage point; repairing them is as close as a
menu selection. MCC is great fun, and it's $39.95 from Fortnum
Software.
Keeping In Touch
No game is perfect, of course; I felt the interface could have
been improved in places, and better use made of memory beyond
128K. I also felt frustrated at first: the computer plays a mean
game, even at the Beginner level. I think Crawford should have
included a "Preschool" level, where the most naive of players could
have a chance of winning, even if only to find out that winning is
possible.
Putting these relatively minor objections aside, though, BOP
stands in a prestigious circle: that of the most innovative computer
games of all time. If there were Academy Awards for computer
games, BOP would get my votes for Best Picture and Best Director of 1985. I don't want to see a rush of clones, but I do hope that
other game designers feel inspired by the obvious thoughtfulness
and creativity Chris Crawford put into his simulation. BOP is
published by Mindscape and retails for $49.95.

I'm A Workin' On The Railroad
While in Germany a few years ago, I became fascinated with
the idea of owning a model railroad set. Since I didn't have much
space, the best choice seemed like Marklin's tiny Z-gauge trains.
Unfortunately, at well over $50.00 per engine, it looked as if a
railroad set was out of my reach--but not any more. Now I can
layout track, design scenery, and run trains to my heart's delight
with Maclnooga Choo-Choo (MCC), "electronic train set software"
for the Macintosh.

I encourage your comments; you, the reader, can help me to
make this column as good as it can be. You can write to me at:
4568 Georgia St. #2, San Diego, CA 92116. Or you can reach me
at the following electronic addresses:
MCI Mail: fboosman
BIX : frankb
Until next month, keep playing those games!

RID #29 (use card at pg. 5)
On this page a number of
games are listed for evaluation.
When evaluating a game consider
such things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?);
LIFE (does the game wear
well?).
For each game you rate, place
a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate
number. Leave blank any game
which you have not played
enough to have formed an opinion.

Ultima IV's reign as fantasy king turns out to be a
quickie as Phantasie II pops to the top of the charts.
However, the number of responses was relatively low and
we suspect the next RID will see Lord British back in the
saddle. This RID also indicates an interesting trend by
Strategic Simulations. Long dominant in the strategy ratings, SSI is wise to market trends and has spent considerable resources in the fantasy realm. The result? Three entries in the Top 10. An impressive showing for a company
relatively new to the genre.

On the strategy side the news isn't quite as good for
SSI as NAM plummets quite a distance. The jury is still
out on Viet Nam as a gaming subject. Conflict in Viet
Nam, by MicroProse, hasn't been out long enough to draw
many reader responses. Avalon Hill should be pleased with
the showing of Under Fire. It gained in ratings this issue,
and currently sports the best score ever by an AH entry.
Not surprising really, it's a fine game. We would like to see
more games of this quality from the company that introduced virtually all garners to the hobby.

