"SOLISANE ZD ZIFF-DAVIS The #1 Computer Game Magazine compures Gaming Attack Sub 2 Jane's 688 Exclusive JANUARY 1997. NO.150 $3.99 USA, S4.99 Canada Exclusive Hands-on Report! STAR WARS 3 Incredible New Star Wars Games Rebellion, Jedi Knight and X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter The Ultimate Gaming PC Build Your Dream Machine With Our Picks For The Best PC Components Die, Robot Dark Reign * Activision's New C&C Killer Ruthless Strategies: For 4 Sci-Fi-Games: MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES CRUSADER: No REGRET STAR CONTROL 3 DEADLOCK. "


"WE KNOW HOW YOU ARE GOING TO DIE "


"they never attack In hora Whici a ums. his ey by the lightning ha CC11 «The Vanguard of a terrifying new dile the level of immersive technology.\" no carly prospeo secret rife the to appe of Doo! were bad trou order 10 \"...by far the most addictive, multiplayer action game we've ever played.\" Icvcls. COMPUTER CAMINO WORLD Quake's grcatest addition feature some forw which PCMA O AZINE If you STOISTA be disappointed the arious as it Death cver was in Doom, but much harder. In fact, if \"Quake overwhelms the senses. USA TODAY world is ca man so slowly. But, thank... wiemy departner \"Quake is the biggest, baddest, bloodiest and most atmospheric 3-D action game ever conceived.\". PC GAMER on the dipper levou The antepay, Total Manila ing than robot-shooting, which, let's tal \"Quake is the most satisfying first-person action game of all time.\" BOOT MAOAZINE Terra Total cmpli ackla that you can target an enemy robust and fire an it because these can be sold when you get back verted into valuable credits. www.idsoftware.com Distributed by GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com Quake\"  id Software, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Published by Id Software, Inc. Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. "


"full registered version now available. 4 . C ine Sari "


"CIRCLE READER SERVICE #275 "


"Awild in the World's Most Exotic Race The World's Hottest Production X4 Vehicles Hummer Land Rover Defender 90 Jeep Wrangler Chevrolet K-1500 Z71 Home TEST DRIVE OFF-ROAD "


"Ride Off-Road Vehicles! True-to-life driving physics for each vehicle plus 9 camera views. Powerful 3D engine keeps the action moving at blazing speed! 12 tracks test your off-road skills, Negotiate wicked terrain including dirt, rocks, sand and snow. Four ways to race: SINGLE RACE. FULL-SEASON. CLASS LEAGUES and MIXED LEAGUES. Engage in wild MULTIPLAYER ACTION via network, modem or split screen racing. Come experience all the power and speed of offeroad pacing against your friends! lot Soundtrack featuring TVT Recording Artist ravity Kills. Available on the Playstation game console and PC CD ROM Playstation game console Download the DEMO today at http://www.accolade.com To order direct calle: 1-800-295-7749 PC CD-ROM 2 HELDE Test Drive is a trademark of Accolade, Inc 1996 Accolade Inc. All rights reserved. Developed by El Systems. The Land Rover Name and Logo are trademarks of Rover Group Limited vid under license Hummer and Hurtivos are the registered trademarks of AM General Corporation JEEP and Jeep grille design are registered trademarks of Chrysler Corporation, U.S.A. and are used under license O CHRYSLER CORPORATION 1996 Chevrolet K-1500 ZT1 and Body Design we trademarks of Chevrolet Motor Dirision, General Motors Corporation, used under license to Accolade, Inc. Licensed by Sony Computer Entertainment Amet se with the PlayStation game console, PlayStation and the Bay Station s are trademarks of Sooy Computer Entertainment Inc. The ratings icon is a Fored trademark of the Theractive Digital Software Association. THIS SOFTWARE IS COMPATIBLE WITH PLAYSTATION GAME CONSOLES WITH THE NTSC U/C DESIGNATION. PlayStation CIRCLE READER SERVICE #360 "


"FOR A FREE DEMONSTRATION OF OUR 3-D GAMING EXPERIENCE, SLAM THIS MAGAZINE INTO YOUR FACE. "


"INTRODUCING THE ULTIMATE, NO-COMPROMISE, GAMER PC. At NEC, our gaming PCs have just taken on a whole new dimension. The third, to be exact. With two dedicated 3-D graphic accelerators, the NEC Power Player 200 MHz Pentium Processor sucks you right into Diamond Monster 3-D and ATI 3-D Rage the action. graphic accelerators And don't worry, 32 MB RAM/3.2 Gigabyte HD NEC MultiSpin 6x4 you'll be armed with CD-ROM changer everything a serious gamer could ask for. A 200 MHz Pentium processor, 6 MB of video memory, and a 50-watt Advent surround sound system with subwoofer. We've also thrown in a Gravis gamepad, Thrustmaster joystick, and Logitech 3-button Mouseman mouse. As well as a bunch of today's hottest games, all reconfigured to take advantage of our unique 3-D technology. You can even head out into cyberspace and play in real time against anyone else on the net. For more information, call 1-800-NEC-INFO. Or, LAYER for a slightly more conventional demonstration, visit your local retailer. Available at Circuit City, Comp USA, Future Shop and Fry's. POWE SEE, HEAR AND FEEL THE DIFFERENCE.\" NEC (inside) Visit our web site at http://www.nec.com C1006 Packard Bad NEC re. Powerpa, sa tadamark of Packard Bol Ne, ne. See, Hear and Feel the Derence is a trademark and Maris a registered trademak of NEC Technologes. Inc. The Intel Inside logo and Petun are registered trademarks and the Pertum Processor logo is a trademark of Intel Corporation Key #20036 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #260 pentium "


"The #1 Computer Game Magazine FEATURES computer Gamiri World 50 COVER STORY Star Wars! he Force is stronger than ever! Associate Editor Elliott \"Come To The Dark Side» Chin boards the Death Star to investigate the latest on LucasArts' upcoming trilogy of Star Wars games Star Wars Rebellion, Jedi Knight, and X-Wing vs TIE Fighter. Will 1997 be the best year yet for this great franchise? SCIENCE FICTION STRATEGY GUIDE aving trouble colonizing that planet? 68 Crusader: No Regret Can't get your mech into fighting shape? Do a mind meld with the 76 Star Control 3 CGW editors as we take you through four of 88 MechWarrior 2: the hottest sci-fi based games of the year, Mercenaries with tips and strategies to get you out of those tough spots. 98 Deadlock HARDWARE 117 The Ultimate Gaming Machine Part 2 magine having $9,000 to spend. Then imagine spending it to assemble the best gaming system on the planet. What would you buy? Check out contributing technowizard Loyd Case's component-by-component shopping list for the ultimate gaming rig. 138 Review: Eagle Max joystick 140 Review: Jazz Speakers' JS-800 and JS-900 JANUARY 1997 "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS! 171 Rocket Jockey 239 X-Fighters 248 688 Attack Sub 2 272 Dark Reign REVIEWS ADVENTURE/ROLE-PLAYING 145 Harvester 156 Albion 162 Toonstruck 168 9 WICE SRAS SILI STRATEGY & TIPS 147 Daggerfall 152 Scorpia's Adventure/ RPG Tips 174 Star Control 3 Hypermelee 181 Quake Deathmatches 244 Apache 264 Shattered Steel 270 Third Reich 284 War Wind 290 Wooden Ships and Iron Men 296 Gene Wars 302 Tigers on the Prowl 2 306 Battleground: Waterloo Strategy Guide ACTION 182 Road Rash 184 Monster Truck Madness 186 Deadly Tide 188 Manic Karts 190 Slamscape 192 3D Ultra Pinball Creep Night Battle the game CLASSICS/PUZZLES 196 Baku Baku 198 Scrabble COLUMNS 113 Hardware ............Loyd Case shows you how to tweak your system for better gaming. 145 Adventure/RPG.............Scorpia reviews Harvester, and she's not happy. 171 Action ................... Peter Olafson previews Rocket Jockey. 193 Classics/Puzzles ............... Charles Ardai looks at Internet game shows. 203 Sports .....Dennis \"Ironman\" McCauley takes on Microsoft. 239 Simulations .................... Denny Atkin takes flight with Dynamix's X-Fighters. 267 Strategy/War .......... Terry Coleman reviews Third Reich. 354 Martin Cirulis .............What's the deal with design hype? SPORTS 208 Madden NFL 97 214 Full Court Press 228 Solid Ice Hockey 232 NFL Quarterback Club 97 SIMULATION 256 Hind 262 Shattered Steel DEPARTMENTS 12 Just the FAQS Answers to frequently asked questions 20 Editorial Johnny Wilson ponders gaming copyright issues 26 Letters Our readers speak out 32READ.ME Computer gaming news 45 Game Track A look at what's cool and coming your way 350 Hall of Fame Great games of all time 351 Patches Game files to kill bugs dead 352 Top 100 Subscribers rate the top games STRATEGYIWARGAMES 280 War Wind 286 Wooden Ships and Iron Men 294 Gene Wars 298 Tigers on the Prowl 2 The 1996 CGW Article Index ... see page 316 JANUARY 1997 "


"3. Abort training missions .:. ... Aborting Command and conquer -.:... Aborting Warcraft 2 :> Initiate full-scale war. ...Initiating Dark. Reign "


"Il of a > Advanced Unit AI__ Give specific orders to each unit. Determine each unit's behavior in combat. Preset pathways and waypoints. Place a unit on sentry duty or send it on a hit-and-run mission. > Battleground Realism Sighting and attack calculations take into account true line-ofsight. Realistically modeled terrain dynamically affects unit movement.. Terrain deforms when hit with weapon fire.. 0721 Revolutionary Features Design your own missions. Create alliances with up to Weight players by sharing. resources and intelligence. Also includes gigantic playing maps. never-before-seen units, and dozens of other features. DARK REIGN THE FUTURE OF WAR Coming. This Winte ACTIVISION http://www.activision.com Activision is a registered trademarks and Dark Reign. The Future of Mac e rademark of Activision, Inc. D 1996 Activision. Sine. Am rights ruserved All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respects veronics CIRCLE READER SERVICE #366 "


"This is not a game. NAV FMC ANS-L FIRE WARN INSTER CAMOK IND HOP SPOJAT HOLOOG SELF 2TOTY 2 . 11.300 . 1013 292 10 Ein S. 10000 M 1996 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks and Where do you want to go today! is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. BF Goodrich is a registered trademark of the B.E. Goodrich Company. "


"Is it a game when your stomach lurches in the course of performing a Cuban eight? Is it a game when beads of sweat appear on your forchcad while flying under London's Tower Bridge to digitally sampled sound? No. This is not a game. This Microsoft is Microsoft Flight Simulator for Windows 95, the latest upgrade to the most realistic PC flight simulation available anywhere. Experienced sim pilots will relish logging time in their new Bocing 737-400 and acrobatic Extra 300S, extending the range of experience beyond Microsoft 28 Simulator.com.es Windows 95 As Azals Gets 2 the four planes already in the fleet. A heightened level of realistic flight dynamics has been achieved. as verificd by Flight Safety International, the world's NI SPEED . Jo leading pilot training organization. Buzz Las Vegas by night and Martha's Vineyard at dawn with a degree of photo-realism that only satellite imaging makes possible. Soar over New York. Paris, Tokyo and other cities with more detailed 3D 33. CRZ rendering. Improved performance delivers smoother out-the-window views and more immediate response to cockpit controls. Challenges have been added to test your skills under daunting weather conditions, over new terrain, in varied aircraft. Fly in the face of Mother Nature as you shoot an instrument approach into the fog. Climb over the Alps through rapidly shifting winds, turbulence and changing visibility. Blow the skirts up on the Statue of Liberty. To find out even more about Microsoft Flight Simulator for Windows 95, visit our Web (03) site at www.microsoft.com/games/fltsim/ Microsoft Where do you want to go today?\" Expansion Pack with southern California scenery, challenges and adventures available soon. Expansion Pack "


"JUST THE FAQS The Commuter Game Magazine computer Gaming here should I focus my guns on the Net? What's on the CD-ROM and how do I use it? What's coming up next month? PUBLISHER Dale Strang THE LAST EXPRESS EDITORIAL Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Managing Editor Ken Brown Features Editor Denny Alkin Reviews Editor Terry Coleman Technical Editor Dave Salvator CD-ROM Editor Jill M. Anderson Associate Editors Jeff Green Elliott Chin On-Line Editor/AOL Kate Hedstrom Assistant Editor Allen Greenberg Editorial Assistant Charlotte Panther Editorial Intern James Burns Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games) Charles Ardai (Interactive Fiction) Loyd Case (Technology) Martin Cirulis (Science Fiction) Peter Olafson (Action Games) Paul Schuytema (Game Design) Rusel DeMaria (Online Editor-at-Large) Founder Russell Sipe OG ONDESIGN Graphic Artist Dan Fitzpatrick Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues PRODUCTION Production Director Carlos Lugo Assistant Production Mgr. Martin Walthall Electronic Prepress Michele Kellogg Tami Gargus What's Up Online? All hired guns are not created equal. Get full dossiers on the LANCEMATES IN MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES, and don't waste precious C-bills. You'll also see an exclusive behind-the-scenes look at the making of THE LAST EXPRESS, Jordan Mechner's first game since Prince of Persia 2. If golf sounds just a little too relaxed for the Speak your mind in excitement seekers in our midst, test your our Question of the mettle in a 'mech with 7th Level's G.NOME, Month: What consti or POWER DOLLS by Megatech Software. If tutes \"adult content\" you lust for good-humored adventure, watch in a game? Do you the puns fly in Sierra's LEISURE SUIT LARRY http://www want more games with 7-not suited for children or the weak of .zdnet.com mature themes? How heart! Or for the more dramatically inclined, gaming should game compa. SegaSoft's OBSIDIAN promises to be an nies handle it? adventure in obscurity and darkness. Fans Plus: sneak previews, reviews, strategies of the Apache Helicopter sim, by Interactive and more. Magic, strap yourself into the cockpit and enjoy the sequel, HIND What's On The CD? (reviewed in this issue). If the serious drought in good role playing Hind is the best comgames has you thirsting for some classic bat helicopter from the adventures, you'll be pleased to know that Eastern Bloc. These and Bethesda Softworks has answered the call many more playable with DAGGERFALL. For those who prefer a real demos and teasers of games to come, are all istic setting for your gaming experience, try on the disc out the next heir in the superb LINKS lineup, Links LS. In this CGW exclusive, you can How Do I Use It? play nine holes, with or against the pros, at If you have Windows 95, installation is the beautifully rendered Latrobe Golf Course. simple: The CD is Autoplay enabled-just lock-n-load. Otherwise, from Windows 3.x, select Run from the DAGPEREAU Program Manager menu, and type The Elder Scrolls: \"D:\\RUN-ME\" (where D Chapter 11 is the letter of your CD. ROM drive) to run it straight from the CD. Then type \"D:\\INSTALL\" INSTALL WIN 95 to create a CGW program group on your Windows desktop. If you have installed previous HOW TO CONTACT THE EDITORS Address questions and feedback to CG Editorial, 135 Main St, 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Or you may contact us via: Phone: (415) 357-4900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357-4977 CompuServe: (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Web site: http://www.zd.com/gaming ADVERTISING SALES Associate Publisher Lee Uniacke (415) 357-4915 East Coast District Sales Manager Laura Salerno (212) 503-48510 East Coast Sales Assistant Audrey DeJesus (212) 503-3926 North West Territory Sales Manager Cathy Conway (415) 357-4925 South West Territory Sales Manager Pat Walsh (714) 851-2556 Senior Account Executive Marci Yamaguchi (415) 357-4920 Advertising Coordinator Linda Philapil (415) 357-4930 Sales Assistant Linda Fan (415) 357-5425 HOW TO CONTACT ADVERTISING SALES Address inquiries to CGW Advertising, 135 Main St, 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105, or call (415) 3575425, fax (415) 357-4999. SUBSCRIPTION INQUIRIES/ADDRESS CHANGES For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information. call (303) 665-8930 or fax (303) 604 7455 within the US and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-7445 or fax (303) 604-0540, or write to Computer Gaming, PO Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322 3131. The subscription rate is $27.94 for one year (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add S16 for postage. Aimail sub scriptions are $78 per year. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. BACK ISSUES For back issues send 57 per esse (58 outside the United States) by check of money onder to Back Issues Dept. 2A Davis Publishing Co., PO Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131 RECOR JANUARY 1997 "


":. Top 10 reasons Si Ster mauphe #1. When she says, \"Say Your Prayers Sucka\" She Realy Means It! S . Dress Hz Always there to administer innt mit #2 Offers express E-ticket rides to the Pearly Gates #3 Always there to administer Jast rites . press for Success #4 \"Superior Mutha\" rotary cannon guarantees 100% contribution rate ... #5 Takes the whole celibacy thing seriously (thank Gods #6 Never once did an infomercial for Also Available Labs For The starving third-world children PlayStation #7 Her rosary doubles as a kill counter some Console!! #8 Fills you full of holiness #9 Non-denominational: happily exterminates all God's children Take A Stroll In The Park #10 Doesn't sell flowers at the airport or bring signs to football gates  Play With Fire ? \"The mother of all blood-fests... with more gore than ever before!\" Game Fan NEW W 12 mission-based, blood-soaked worlds demanding non-stop violence and mental marauding. im Insane weapons of mass terror including \"Bloodbath Tidal Waves,\" \"Multiplexing, Molotov Cocktails,\" \"Seismic Tantrums,\" \"Radioactive Green Fog,\" and more. NEWS Gruesomely-detailed, incredibly diverse environments full of brutal obstacles and surprises. in Radical 3/4 view with zoom allows pinpoint character control. w NEW GIVE! GENEROUSLY TM RE LORDELE MATURE ia Ster manje www.interplay.com www.reloaded.com TUBE BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. Gremlin Crime: Extortion Weapon: Superior Mutho Special Weapon: Animal Maghatism/ALE 1996-Gremlin Interactive Limited. All rights reserve Bolonded is a trademark of Interplay Productos, Alghts reserved Interplay is the sole publis and distributorricensed and developed by Green Interactive, Eld. All other trademark Cygtits are the property of Weir respective holder CIRCLE READER SERVICE.#198 PC UUS PlayStation "


"JUST THE MOS JUST THE FAQS versions of the CG ROM, this disc will use the program group already on your desktop. as this may overwrite your existing program How Do I Play The Demos? To view the demos, first click on Editors' Hot Picks or Product Demos. Next, click on your favorite genre: Action, Adventure, Simulations, Sports or Strategy. Then click on the title of interest. Each demo has its own instructions for installation. ore 11 How Do I Get The CG-ROM? Newsstand issues come in two flavors: with and without the CD. Each type is clearly marked. If you can't find the version you want in the store you frequent, encourage your retailer to carry it (or subscribe to ensure that you get a CD every month). To subscribe, simply call (303) 665-8930, and specify that you want the CD-ROM version. LINKS LS How Do I Get The Patch Files? Click on Patches under the CGW Features, and then read the text window which has instructions on copying the files to your hard drive. You can also access the patches from a DOS prompt by typing \"D:\\PATCHES\" (where D: is the letter of your CD-ROM drive) and copying them directly from there to your hard drive. We strongly recommend that you back up any previously saved games before installing a patch, DAGGERFALL Disclosure As a matter of record, CGW voluntarily maintains a list of companies in which SoftBank, the parent company of Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., has an interest. It is available online at http://www.zdnet.com/ gaming/disclaim.html and is updated when we become aware of such investments. GAMES AND GOODIES ON THE CG-ROM DEMOS AND STUFF PLATFORM DIRECTORY EXECUTABLE Daggerfall G-Nome Hind Leisure Suit Larry 7 Links LS 95/DOS 95 95/DOS Dos/Win/95 95/Win DOS Win M.A.X. Magic The Gathering: Battlemage Obsidian Power Dolls Rex Blade Solid Ice Spider Man Westworld 2000 Quake Cheats & Hacks: November Quake Cheats & Hacks: December Paintshop Pro Meddle Quakeme 95 DOS/95 DOS DOS DOS demosidagdemo install.exe demosignome setup.exe demoshinddemo Hinstall.exe sierra autoplay.exe demosllinks Win95: setup.exe, Win3.x: Install.exe demos max install.exe demoslmagic magic.mov demoslobsidian install.exe pdolls install.exe demostrexblade install.bat demoslicedemo install.exe sixdemo setup.exe ww setup.exe via CD interface via CD interface demos quakelpsp311 and psp41.zip file demoslquakelmeddle 16 .zip file demoslquakelquakeme2 .zip file and quakme22 demoslquakelwinpak12 .zip file demoslquakelqcc .zip file demos quakelbsp44a .zip file 95 n/a nla Win/95 DOS Win Winpack Quake C Compiler Breeze Level Editor Win DOS Win CG JANUARY 1997 "


"BEEN SEARCHING FOR A GREAT ACTION GAME WITH A REAL STORY? BUNGIE WWW.BUNGIE.COM For a limited time, get the award-winning Marathon 2 for just $29 through our secure web store, plus have a chance to win free t-shirts, just for paying a visit! CIRCLE READER SERVICE #75 "


"JUST THE FAQS COMING NEXT MONTH n February Loyd Case will build a Ferrari rig on a Yugo budget in the third part of our Ultimate Game Machine series. THE 11001 GAMING GT CHEATS ULTIMATE GAME MACHINE an't beat 'em? Cheat 'em! Clobber your opponents with cheats for nearly every kind of game. Our comprehensive cheat guide for singleand multiplayer games will put you way over the top. Also watch for our exclusive Sneak Preview of SOLE SURVIVOR, Westwood's hot new COMMAND AND CONQUER-like Internet game. HOW DO WE RATE? Hot Reviews For January Destiny Eradicator Syndicate Wars Steel Panthers II Flashpoint Korea NCAA Basketball US Navy Fighters 97 You Don't Know Jack 2 Heroes of Might & Magic II Flight Simulator for Win 95 Outstanding: The rare game that gets it all right. The graph ics, sound, and gameplay come together to form a Transcendent Gaming Experience. Our strongest buying recommendation Very Good: A high-quality game that succeeds in many areas. May have minor prob lems, but is still worth your money, especially if you're interested in the subject matter or genre. Average: A mixed bag. Can be a game that reaches for the stars, but falls short in several ways. Can also be a game that does what it does well. but lacks flair or originality. Weak: A game with serious prob. lems. Usually buggy, seriously lacking in play value, or just a poorly conceived game designyou should think long and hard before buying it. Abysmal: The rare game that gets it all wrong This is reserved for those products so buggy, ill-conceived or value. less that you won der why they were ever released in the first place. Strategies Close Combat Toonstruck Hind (All articles subject to change if we develop a jones for a new release.) CG JANUARY 1997 "


"DEADLOCK Ihell Computer Game Magazine World \"...richly developed backgrounds of the alien races and the thoroughly refined technology tree give this game a personality all its own.\" Caming Rule The Galaxy -Computer Gaming World Planetary Warfare Strikes The Net In DEADLOCK «...Sim City on steroids.\" -Computer Life IFE GAMER EDITORS ACCOLADE Play by: INTERNET LAN MODEM SERIAL SOLO CHOICE \"...exquisitely well-balanced... deep, rich and pretty to look at... one of the best conquer-the-planet strategy games in years... a strategy gamer's feast.\" -PC Gamer. \"Multi-player, city building, land exploring, alien busting fun.\" -Strategy Plus Deadlock... truly shines as a multiplayer experience.\" -Computer Gaming World PLANETARY CONQUEST MULTI-PLAYER, CITY BUILDING, LAND EXPLORING, ALIEN BUSTING TUN STRATEGT PLUS TEEN Stay SERIAL 1701 DE 13N33N AGES 13+ Deadlock is a trademark of Accolade, Inc.  Accolade. All Rights Reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #292 "


"paranormal puzzles SOMERS A sophisticated shooter laced with dark humor, Killing Time\" is a fright-fest for the true aficionado gallows humor of first-person corridor mayhem. ARE CON You're trapped locked in an island mansion crawling with the undead. Clear heads with a penchant for puzzle solving must prevail. STUDIO 3 DO TLUNGTIME TOUGH. ALE LATINE PENDING CONTADIY "


"supernatural storyline Use your brains and shotgun blasts to shatter the spell that has kept the island in a horrific limbo. THIS O ONE'S MURDER Afraid? Don't be. Visit your favorite retail haunt or to order direct, dial 1-800-336-3506, or summon us on the Web: www.3DO.com/studio3do Windows 95 T Power Macintosh EGGHEAD MEDIA PLAY loc  BE 73949 THAT'S 103 300. Studio 300, the 300 togos and Killing Time are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of the 300 Company All other trademarks or registered trademarks are the properties of their respective owners. Q1995, 1996 The 300 Company. All rights reserved. STUDIO EXACTLY 3 DO CIRCLE READER SERVICE #1249 "


"JOHNNY WILSON edito i Custom Levels And Scenarios Under Siege Copyright Wars Could Cost Gamers The Right To Build Their Own attack on copyright threatens your creative rights, too! 2 e were all set to master our CG-ROM, and we were very excited. The cover bag advertised a DARK FORCES editor that gamers could use to create levels for the best-selling action game. We had permission from the author of the editor and we didn't think anything could stop us. But a legal expert did just that. He pointed out that we not only needed the permission of the author of the software that allowed you to create the new levels and characters, but we needed LucasArts' permission, as well. We protested, \"How is that any different than when a magazine publishes a macro for a specialized kind of spreadsheet or a template/wizard for a word proces sor?\" The expert on intellectual property informed us that because the editor was going to allow our readers to modify copyrighted Star Wars characters and environments, We would be considered accom plices should any of those using the editor ever be brought to court. Since Lucas-Arts was unwilling to give us permission to publish the editor, we opted to change our CG ROM rather than go to court Our legal eagle felt that the orig. inal publisher stood to lose out. For example, if a gamer hacked Darth Vader and put him in the Death Star smoking a doobie or had the commander of the Death Star appearing in drag, LucasArts could claim that their intellectual properties were being devalued. After all, how could anyone fear a stoned Darth Vader or an enemy commander in a dress? Part of the mystique would be gone. We felt that the legal opinion was overly cautious, and wondered among ourselves whether we had been too cowardly in not publishing the editor. So what happened in the next two months? Not one, but two legal actions would underscore the issue. The GT Interactive suits over Sierra's TOTAL MELTDOWN and Micro Star's Nuke It took place over almost exactly the same issue. GTI felt that the existence of those two add-on products devalued the franchise because the levels were not well enough designed and because their intellectual property in charac terization, look, and monsters was being used without compensation. Ken Williams of Sierra contended that selling levels built with an edi tor that is given with a game is tan tamount to selling digital art created with a paint program. Williams' argument is fairly are far more interesting than those which don't allow such customiza. tion. You may never build a new scenario, hack a character's look, or design a new game map, but it you are like most of us, you like the idea that you might do one of those \"when you get enough time.\" Also, if you're like us, you appreciate the fact that someone else may have designed something new and interesting that you can download to expand the game you pur. interesting because it touches on chased. Yet the possibility that some issues faced by Electronic construction sets or editors will Arts in the early days of computer become standard features in comgames. In the days when most games were 2D instead of 3D, In fact, copyright is under siege. most game art was designed using period. Phone companies, con Electronic Arts' DELUXE PAINT line of sumer electronics manufacturers, products. Game companies used educational institutions, and some DELUXE PAINT and its offspring as well-meaning activist groups are toolsets in building games. If EA actively trying to exclude computer had received royalties from every transmission and/or manipulation game that used DELUXE PAINT, it of copyrighted materials from both would be to the games industry ongoing discussions regarding the what Microsoft is to the computer establishment of uniform state laws industry as a whole. Yet it did not on copyright and a new national Early decisions concluded that EA Copyright Protection Act. They are was sufficiently reimbursed for its also using their sizable lobbyist actions when companies pur. clout to attempt to discourage the chased the DELUXE PAINT products Clinton administration from particias software tools. pating in the Geneva Conference For gamers, such legal actions for Transmission Rights. are ominous. We think that prod The telephone companies and ucts which allow gamers to cus consumer electronics manufacturtomize and expand/redesign gamesers would like for copyrights on CG CG JANUARY 1997 "


"STAR CONTROL 3 THE FATEX KOUSANDORIS.ES IN YOUR HANDS... AGAIN. PC GAMER EDITORS CHOICE \"...epic...the story will draw you in... a blast to play.\" PC Gamer \"...the ultimate space adventure...great story, funny characters and huge amounts of gameplay.\" \"...one of the most widely anticipated games.\" Strategy Plus \"...one of the best titles of the year.\" Gamespot Computer Gaming World AT STORES NOW! ACCOLADE KIDS TO ADULIS Check out Star Control 3 at www.accolade.com Star Control 3 is a trademark of Accolade, Inc.  Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. Created by Legend Entertainment and based upon characters created and used under license from Paul Reiche Ill and Fred Ford. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #42 "


"JOHNNY WILSON CSS ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY CHAIRMAN AND CEO Eric Hippeau Consumer Media Group President J. Scott Brigos Vice President J. Thomas Cottingham Director of Electronic Publishing Beth Cataldo Executive Director, Research Randy Cohen Business Manager Cynthia Mason Creative Services Manager Terri Rawson Assistant to the President Francesca Koe digital materials to simply go away. Why? So that the former will not have to police transmissions of dig ital information and so that the lat ter don't have to deal with issues related to individual copying and proliferation of intellectual proper ties (ie, video and computer game piracy). The stakes are high. With Brazil, Argentina, Singapore, Malaysia, and China adding fiber optic lines at a very fast rate, illicit transmission of copyrighted prop. erty could mushroom globally. The opponents of including digitally transmitted and manipulated intellectual properties within the protection of new copyright legisla tion suggest that encryption is a better tool in discouraging copy Ziff-Davis Publishing President, U.S. Publications Ronni Sonnenberg President, Interactive Media And Development Group Jeffrey Ballone President, International Media Group JB. Holston til President, Computer Intelligence/Infocorp Bob Brown President, Training & Support Publishing Group William Rosenthal Vice President, Chief Financial Office Timothy O'Brien Vice President, General Counsel, And Secretary J Malcolm Morris Vice President, Human Resources Rayna Brown Vice President, Planning Daryl R. Olte Vice President, Production Roger Herrmann Vice President, Controller Mark Moyer Treasurer Thomas L. Wright ( Encryption will mean you won't be able to modify maps, create new weapons, or develop new missions and scenarios. 2 ular athletic teams, create new weapons and resources, and develop new missions and scenarios. Companies who have just begun to provide editors and construction sets for their games will be forced to remove them or lose any semblance of protection for their properties. They will have to restrict access to all parts of the code by whatever frustrating encryption scheme they can devise, and they will be forced to crack down on well-meaning hackers who make unauthorized editors and utilities Cicero once said, \"Silent leges inter arma.\" Literally, that would mean, \"Between arms (i.e., during war), the laws are silent.\" Metaphorically, it means, \"Without any jurisdiction, victims of injustice have no place to appeal for justice.\" A computer game industry with no hope of copyright protection will be unable to sustain itself in the long run, and computer gamers will lose out on customiz. able games in the short run. The attack on copyright is an attack on your creative rights, too! So if you value the editors and construction sets that enable you to really turn their games into your games, you need to stand up for them. Make sure your con gresspersons know that you support the Clinton administration's participation in the upcoming Geneva Conference. Also, e-mail your support for participation in this conference to the White House. Finally, make sure that whenever you register your com. puter games with the manufacturer you commend them when they include customizing options and complain to them when they don't. Like many privileges in life, the opportunity to customize games is dependent upon communicating your feelings. If you snooze on this one, you could lose for a long time to come. U.S. Publications Group President, U.S. Publications Ronni Sonnenberg President, Business Media Group Claude Sheer President, Consumer Media Group J. Scott Briggs Senior Vice President, Circulation Baird Davis Executive Vice President, Business Media Group Don Byrnes Assistant to the Chairman Tom McGrade Vice President, Marketing Services Jim Manning Vice President, Central Advertising Sales Bob Bader Vice President, Product Testing Mark Van Name Vice President, Circulation Services James E. Ramaley Vice President Al DiGuido Vice President Daniel Farber Vice President Michael Miller Vice President Paul Somerson Executive Director, Licensing Gertrud Borchardt Director of ZD Labs Bob Kane Director, Benchmark Operation Bill Catchings Ziff-Davis Magazine Network Vice President Managing Director Joe Gillesple Executive Director Alicia Saribalis Marketing Director Mike Perkowski Directors Ken Beach, Michael Bird, Jelf Bruce, Kelly Lowman. Melinda Maginn, Debbie Moss, Julie Tuttle Director of Public Relations Gregory Jarboe PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Division. Copyright  1996 Ziff Davis Publishing Division. All Rights Reserved. Material in this publication may not be reproduced in any form without permission. If you want to quote from an article, write to Chantal Tucker, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5802. or fax (212) 503-5420 For price quotes on reprints, please contact Zitt.Davis reprints at (800) 825 4237. Computer Gaming World is not affiliated with IDG. We periodically make lists of our cus fomers available to carefully screened mailers of quality goods and services. If you to receive such mailings. let us know by writing us al Computer Gaming World, PO, Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322 7167 right violation than legislation. Such a solution is both naive and annoying. It is naive since every computer gamer who has been around for more than a few years knows that no encryption scheme is perfect. For every code, there is a cracker. It is annoying because companies deprived of legal pro tection for their intellectual proper ties will have to protect their code in such a way that gamers won't be able to modify maps and levels, edit databases for classic and pop. $ 0 FT BANK ZD ZIFF-DAVIS Audit Bureau of Circulations ABC Member AUDITED CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Diant Mother Warn You About Playing With Gal kars? Available for IBM CD ROM wherever great games are sold. For More Information see our Website http://users.aol.com/ahgames/avalon.html or call us @ 1-800-999-3222 WAR you'll Never See The Light Of Day Again! All The Avalon Hill Game Company W DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road Baltimore, MD 21214 (410) 254-9200  FAX (410) 254-0991 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #281 "


"REAL MST OF A RKANIA "


"THE FINAL CHAPTER THE WAIT IS NEARLY OVER The award-winning Realms of Arkania series pulls out all the stops with Shadows over Riva THIS IS ITL The stunning climax to the award-winning Realms of Arkania Northlands Trilogy. AMBITIOUS ORIGINAL STORY Something sinister is happening in the seaside city of Riva, When brave and honoured warriors refuse to fight for the city's good, the Orcish offense takes on a new deadly significance. What preys upon them will consume the city mind, body and soul. Taking you beyond your wildest expectations, Shadows over Riva leads you through the twists and turns of one of the most innovative and ambitious stories written. BROUGHT TO LIFE BY THE MASTERS THEMSELVES With over 30 international awards to their credit, the original, talented team that brought you the award-winning Star Trail has created this exceptional masterpiece. Full 360° 3D technology lets you explore twisting alleys, rugged terrain and underwater regions with \"you are there\" realism, Fully digitized music, speech and soundtrack. More than 50 fully animated monsters and over 350 weapons, magic items and spells to kill them! Two difficulty modes to suit you. Strip layers of detail away for easier play. Intelligent automap and diary follow you in your journey. Fully animated, 3D isometric phased-time combat with flexible options for manual or automated fights. ORLEDE Yazinds AUX UOn Harben \"Yards of detail and depth is precisely what sets the Arkania games apart from the competition, PC Gamer Magazine, Cover Story, Nov. Issue www.sir-tech.com To order, visit your retailer, or call: (800) 447-1230. Ask for operator 75. P.O. Box 245, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-0245 Tel: (315) 393-6633 Fax: (315) 393-1525 E-mail: webmaster@sir-tech.com LES'A BOBSLED SIRTECH attic CIRCLE READER SERVICE #122 Realms of Arkanla is a registered trademark of Sir-tech Soltware, Inc. Shadows over Riva application software copyright  by Attic Entertainment Software GmbH and Fantasy Productions GmbH. The Das Schwartze Augo game universe copyright  1984-96 by Schmidt Spiel-Freizeit GmbH. All Rights Reserved. "


"LETTERS LETTER OF THE MONTH their names appear in red. There are times when these characters are lumted down by gefur Compuas de SOLITARY ALIGNMENT It seems that with each new issue of CCW I'm seeing more and more coverage about the joys of online gaming. I wonder if I speak for the silent majority when I confess that it will probably be a long, long time before I attempt to play an online game. In faimess, maybe it's just because I don't understand well enough yet how they work, and I'm hoping you can help me out here. When I play a PC game, want to be able to progress my way through it at my own pace: reading a well written manual, learning the interface, figuring out strategies, solving situations and enjoving the rewards for doing so. If I leave a game for any period of time, I want the comfort of knowing that when I return to the game, everything will be Sklass Fighting exactly as I left it. If I log onto an online game where others ahead of me already know all the tricks (or even just a few of the tricks), wouldn't l be | quickly and repeatedly killed? Do I have to find a group of players who are at the same skill level as me? Even if I do, what if I only play for two hours but they play for 24 hours straight? Dol have to play for endless hours in order to become king of the castle? It's this timing thing that confuses me. For instance, if I log onto a real-time strategy game that, for other players, is already in progress, won't the resources already be used up? Even if they started just five minutes ahead of me, how would you ever make up the tactical advantage that they would already have gained? Or if the game is turn-based, what if I only want to play for two hours per day, but my opponents want to play for six or eight? I fI log onto an RPG that's already in progress, how do I find anything to do? What if I go on a quest to slay a dragon, but someone else out there gets to the dragon just five minutes before me? Is the dragon somehow magically there for both of us to kill or do have to kick my toe in the dirt, go \"ah slucks,\" and wander off to find something else to do? Whatever the particular game objective may be, if other players are always beating me to it because of faster eye-hand coordination, more game experience, or lack of sleep. I suspect I'll soon be back in my cave playing happily by myself against a well programmed Al that's intelligent, but fun to defeat Ken Pritchard via the Intemet INTERNET ATTACK actions. Other games build safe areas for new pilots, adventurers, explorers or competitors to get used to the game. Some games, like Air WARRIOR, give you an off-line tutorial where you can play it out of the box: As for role-playing games specifically, the worlds are dynamic. The good news is that you probably won't have to deal with the dragon decision. In GEMSTONE III, for example, sysops as characters or experienced characters will often take you on a guided tour and make sure that you get into the center of the action. The same is true in the text game LEGENDS OF FUTURE PAST and the sciencefiction trading game FEDERATION II. In MODUS OPERANDI, a mystery game, your fear is right on target. There, whoever finds the item or person first gets the points and it is hard for a new player to get started. However, these worlds are dynamic. They aren't the same when you come back to them. With regard to strategy games, these are played by mutual consent ut a given start time with a given set of rules. Games such as HARPOON ONLINE on the ARIES network, SNIPER! on CompuSene, OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN On MPG-Net, CHAOS OVERLORDS ON MPlayer or PANZER GENERAL ONLINE ON TEN usually have a conference room where you can meet opponents and establish ground rules before beginning a game. 177 Great se names The fastesi Modems The Best Cane Nels WarCraft Il Dark Portal Tactics bines tung You're usking the same questions that a lot of folks are asking. First off, many online games do have vultures,\" experienced players who hang around the spots where new players pop into the games and kill the new plavers. In MERIDIAN 59, the new online role-playing world from 3DO, characters who kill other players are marked by having Firing Line UNDER CONSTRUCTION My friends and I love DUNGEONS AND DRACONS and various other role-playing games. We make games of our own all the time, but we never play them. We all agree that if we could put them on our PCs that we would play them. So, could you please send me some information on which game creation system would be the best for making RPGs and strategy games, where to get it, how much it costs and whether an amateur can use it? K. M. Rodgers Rialto, CA We prefer you e-mail us at one of these addresses: CompuServe: 76703,622 Intemel: 76703.622@compuserve.com or write to: CCW, Letter To The Editor 135 Main Street, 14th Floor San Francisco, CA 94105 We reserve the right to edit all letters for space or clarity. We've recened several such inquiries in recent weeks. For building pen-und-paper «ichventures, the new JANUARY 1997 "


"LOWON Gas, low on ammo, and OVER THE REICH ... What do you do, What do you do? IND Here's your chance to be Squadron Commander in the Allied Air Forces or Luftwaffe...raining destruction on the German military and industrial base or defending against the incessant barrage of raids that are paralyzing the fatherland during WW2. You command a squadron of up to 16 fighter pilots among 19 different aircraft types in any or all of the 55 missions included with OVER THE REICH or serve a complete tour of duty. Just a few of OVER THE REICH features include: Role-Playing, Flight Simulation, and Strategy where each pilot has unique characteristics affecting combat performance. Variety of missions including: fighter sweeps, airfield raids, bomber escort, interdiction, close air support, V-2 rocket site raids AND lots more! Rare Video clips of actual war footage highlight takeoff, kills, ground attacks, etc....and killer sound! Five levels of difficulty -tactical smarts are more important than reflexes! Play Solo, Two Player Hot-Seat, E-mail, Network, or True Simultaneous Internet Play (Pentium/Power Mac Recommended). K. BIG TIME Quer the TCRZIEN SOFTWARE INC. Ready Rock 'n on your 4 or Col Makash I The Avalon Hill Game Company GAMES OF STICATEGY DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road  Baltimore, MD 21214 Phone: 410-254-9200  Fax: 410-254-0991 http://users.aol.com/ahgames/avalon.html CIRCLE READER SERVICE #168 "


"3 OUT OF 4 GAME CHARACTERS SURVEYED would rather crush and destroy you while playing on a PC with ATI 3D XPRESSION+ PC2TV. DIAMOND 30 XPRESSION+ PC2TY MATROX MYSTIQUE Price S199 SUPERIOR 3D PERFORMANCE! BADSFRESS O PORT 23x OTAMOND STEALTH 3D 7000XL 14% 1x MAINOX MYSTIQUE UNACCELERATED 3D GRAPHICS MICROSOFT DIRECT3D. FILL RATE TEST And that's just because that one last game goon hasn't seen what this sucker can do, How the ATI 3D XPRESSION+PC2TV\" lets you plug your PC into your TV (in addition to your monitor) for the ultimate big-screen spine-chiller that blows away those game consoles once and for all. Or how ATI's new 3D accelerator technology breathes life Outpul to TV into everything on your screen. With 1600x1200 (NI) 30 Texturing (Bi-linear) face-blasting speed, butter-smooth Smooth Video Staling $199 (2MB) detail and 65,000 crazy colors. All because we build more features right onto the board than Matrox, Diamond or anyone else. Really cool stuff like Gouraud shading, bi-linear filtering, perspective-correct texture mapping and fog effects. Which, as we all know, means scarier realism and faster response than dad's Porsche flat out on the freeway. You also get total game acceleration in 3D and 2D with Direct3D and DirectDraw support for Windows 95, fast DOS performance and jaggy-free, full-screen, full-motion TV-quality MPEG video playback. Plus you get the ATI Software Superpak with the hottest 3D games and 3D Web Browser software absolutely free. So why die an ordinary death when it's so much more fun getting dusted with the new ATI 3D XPRESSION+ PC2TV graphics accelerator upgrade. Available in 2MB or 302 4MB versions. See it now at your dealer. Call us at 905 882-2600 (press 2 for faxback). Or check out all the details at www.atitech.ca. OneC24V XEMESSO MB or liai 3D XPRESSION + PC2ry w hole Balleri A ndy "


"Also in systems from IBM, NEC, Sony, and Acer Now YOU SEE IT. A DATI Technologies Inc., 1996. ATI, 3D XPRESSION+ PC2TV and NOW YOU SEE IT are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of ATI Technologies Inc. All other company and/or product names are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers. 1. Test conducted using Microsoft Direct3D Fill Rate test in bi-linear. 2. Matrox Mystique does not support bi-linear texturing in hardware. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #106 "


"LETTERS ADGD OLUN profiles should indicate if cach CORE RULES network user needs their own sel is ideal copy of the game. (available I think you spend too much direct from time writing about games that TSR). For aren't available yet. It should building achenbe really special to get tures on the advance notice! It's become computer, you will need to order an routine lo scoop software that is old copy of UNLIMITED ADVENTURES months away from release, some from SSI (essentially, the editing tools times never to be released. While it's for their ADD series) or an old fun to get tantalizing snips on them, copy of THE BARD'S TALE 3-4 page articles are not useful. A lot CONSTRUCTION SET from Interplay of computer users wait until the (the editing tools for BARD'S TALE III inevitable patches are released and WASTELAND). Both can be used before they buy games, yet you refer by amateurs. If you merely want to try to games that are just maturing as if your hand at text achentures, search they were last week's pizza in the for ADVENTURE GAME fridge. This kind of premature review CONSTRUCTION KIT on the Internet. and disposal just feeds the likewise Many gamers are still building text premature release of games. Much games using this system and distributof their size is graphics and sound. ing them free on the Internet. Those who want to build their own released without any real serious arcade games may try their hands at KLIK 'N PLAY from Maxis. Those who department says so. want to build their own flight sims Hey! Most gamers are still using should check out Pucur SIM 486s, and most games still work fine TOOLKIT from Eidos. Also, those who on them. If a game is really gonna want to try their hand at strategy be a killer, then they should write it games should use the scenario editors in assembly and quit telling everyin STEEL PANTHERS (I and II), as well one to buy a new system every six as AGE OF RIFLES. months. Finally, although I still love CGW, WHAT'S WRONG WITH THAT? Thate you for taking away my I think your reviewers often spend monthly reader's poll card! Give it too much time criticizing graphics. back to us! OK, so some people lied No one wants to play games with on the cards. Do it like the Olympics CGA graphics anymore, but no one and take away the high and low makes 'em that way, and graphics scores. Don't drift away from what only enhance what a good game has made CGW interesting and survive already simulated in the player's this long. I still miss \"Taking A Peek.\" brain. As to Network play, although Walt Huber Internet play may eventually change Atwater, CA this, most gamers still don't have access to LAN or IPX networks. Other than that, Mr. Dole, how'd While Network ability no doubt you like the election? The truth is that makes working in a networked we wouldn'write about graphics and office more fun, it's mcaningless for upcoming games if our readers didn't 95% of PC gamers. Modem play demend it. They also want to know does make a difference. But game about the most powerful machines available and the most amazing prothe most mature. Sometimes you grams with which to show off those can be a little harsh (esp. on RPGs), machines. As for \"Taking A Peek,\" it but I know you're never candy-coatstill exists as \"On The Shelf.\" We ing a poor game. changed the name because the I received issue #148 two weeks demise of 6502 programming ago. On the 150 best games of all reduced overall gamer awareness of time, I didn't notice until the third Peek and Poke commands. For once, time I read it that you rated we retired a pun before it became HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE totally obscure. We also believe that CALAXY as #42. You didn't comment the current CGW Poll is more statisthere on the connection to the tically reliable than the former Ultimate Answer to Life, the method. However, we are always lis Universe, and Everything. I'm a big tening and your criticism does fuel fan of the books (and the text advendiscussion. As for your contention ture, I had an Apple II for many that the nehworking coverage was years), and I got a big laugh out of irrelevant. Check out the following your placement. counterpoint. Keep up the fantastic work. Matt Picioccio BUILT HIS OWN via the Intemet Thank you, thank you, thank you for your September '96 Network KOREAN WARP Perhaps the most intriguing news to the options out there, and also got in your August issue was the state ricl of any excuse I had for linking my server (that I'm \"borrowing\" from my dad's office, and that I use for my PC. Try it someday) and my notebook via 1 AN. My dad also let me install one in another computer he brought home, and now, finally got to play DUKE, WARCRAFT 2. QUAKE and THINKING BIG MicroProse plans to model the venerable DOOM with 1,000,000 square miles of terrain in Falcon two or three players. With 4.0. Korea wishes it was that big. your help, my network installed without a hitch, and now ment that the designers of Falcon I'm gaming like I've never gamed 4.0 plan to «model a million square before. miles of Korcan terrain.\" Since the Thomas Edgar combined area of North and South via the Internet Korea is just under 86,000 square miles, it would be interesting to YOU ARE CORRECT, SIR know how they plan to do that. I've been a big fan of your magaBrian A. Libby zine since I saw my first ish, 1/113 Paribault, MN (Dec. '93). I've had a subscription to your magazine for two years now, Hmm! The numbers seemed right and I consider it to be the best mag when we calculated them with that on the market by far, and definitely early Pentium chip CG JANUARY 1997 "


"MATRIN FORGET THE PLAYOFFS. FORGET THE CAR OF YOUR DREAMS.E FORGET SIX FIGURES.ENTER THE MOST GRAPHIC EXPERIENCE EVER CREATED. OR DESTROYED. PLAVE IT THINKS. THEREFORE I PIE. Tovag 12 ALL UNTILE http://www.playmatestoys.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #134 Cronted by Shiny Entertainment Inc. O 1996 Shiny Entertainment Inc. MDK is a trademark of Shiny Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Artwork and design  1996 Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. PIE is a registered trademark of Playmates Interactive Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved "


"READ.ME Westwood's Plan To Conquer The World The Makers Of COMMAND & CONQUER Prepare New Assault With Two New C&C Games And A LANDS OF LORE Sequel estwood Studios has lots in store for the coming year, so we put an extra hamster on the wheel of our VW Van and scurried east to Las Vegas to check on the company's progress. (The worst thing about the trip, other than no gam Tank or the fast-but-scrawny Recon Bike in our deathmatches. Theoretically, dozens of peo ple can play in a single game, and if you don't have enough human players, the computer can always spawn several Al units and play with you. You can choose from a num. ber of new C&C maps, with power-up crates peppered about the level. Thankfully, the conFILET OF SOLE There are many ways to die in C&C: SOLE SURVIVOR. Fortunately, there are as many ways to kill. COMMAND CONICOWERO ONE SURVIVOR monopolize the power-ups. The interface for playing was very familiar, as both the look and hot key commands are straight ports from the C&C engine. The graphics are SVGA and the C&C shroud is still in effect (and one of the power-ups will reshroud the map). C&C: SOLE SURVIVOR will be an Internet-only game playable over Westwood Chat. However, tents and the placements of the crates are randomized, so no one can memorize the map and ere are some of the hottest prod. Lucts on the market, as well as the ones that frankly ain't so hot. Reviews for most are coming soon. bling: no time to stop at the in n-Out Burger.) By the time you read this, you could be knee-deep in C&C: RED ALERT, but what do you do when you're done beating back Stalin? The next COMMAND & CONQUER game out will be SOLE SURVIVOR, a pure Internet game that has promising potential. We were able to play an early version of the game and before we knew it, we were both hooked. Unlike the other C&C games, you don't command an army, but only a single unit. The point of the game is to be the last unit surviving, hence the game's title. You can pick any one vehicle from COMMAND & CONQUER, though we gravitated to the lumbering-but-powerful Mammoth ON THE SHELF CIRCLE OF BLOOD Paris, city of lights and love. George Stobbart sits at a Bistro sipping his cafe au lait, and watching the world go by. Sound peaceful? When a maniacal clown with a briefcase dashes away from the Bistro moments before the place explodes, you know you're in for an interesting experience. As Stobbart, you'll play detective, trying to unravel the mys tery behind the clown and the bombing. When you discover a manuscript of the ancient Knights Templar, the mystery takes on a deeper significance. The puzzles in CIRCLE OF BLOOD are CG JANUARY 1997 "


"READ.ME the livi YEAHI TAP 141# aematot neither a pricing plan nor the next beta testing has been announced yet. Even at this admittedly early stage, SOLE SURVIVOR looks and plays very nicely. Playing only a single unit is a change of pace, but it's definitely every bit as fun. Of course, the C&C game everyone is waiting for is COMMAND & CONQUER 2: TIBERIAN Sun. We did manage to weasel a few morsels of information from Westwood. C&C2 will have a totally new engine and will return to the GDI versus NOD storyline, taking place a number of years after COMMAND & CONQUER. Westwood is currently in the early stages of develop ment for this game, which they plan to release near Christmas, 1997. We're waiting for this game as eagerly as you are, and we'll reveal more details as they surface. Westwood is also getting ready to release the next installment of its epic RPG, LANDS OF LORE: GUARDIANS OF DESTINY. After three years of work, it looks like it's finally going to ship during the first quarter of 1997. As in the first game, LOL2 is more of an adventure/RPG hybrid than a straight-up RPG, with a greater emphasis on exploration and [ caceae AWAITING ORDERS SOLE SURVIVOR lets you choose among several familiar C&C units, and then seek new meat on the Internet. puzzle solving than on charac ter generation and advance. ment. You assume the role of Luther, son of Scotia, the evil Sorceress from LOL1. As the story opens, Scotia has put a curse on you that makes you change shapes at random, to a small lizard and a giant ogre. You'll need to master the power of this curse before you can go on to defeat the dead god Belial who threatens The Lands. We spent a few hours with the game, and can tell you that with beautiful first-person 3D SVGA graphics, a massive world rang ing from underground caves to jungle thickets, and novel and exciting magic and combat, this has the potential to be one of the big RPGs of the year. Finally, there's BLADE RUNNER Westwood isn't saying much about this one yet, but what we do know is that it takes place in the same universe of the film, but you will not be playing the Harrison Ford character. We looked at some early screens as well as storyboards for later levels; Westwood is definitely cap. turing the dark atmosphere of the film. We'll keep you posted as we learn more.--Elliott Chin and Jeff Green LORE PLAY Prepare to save The Lands again in Westwood's upcoming LANDS OF LORE: GUARDIANS OF DESTINY. standard fare, and while not as outright funny as TOONSTRUCK, the game maintains its own level of humor. What really makes this a good adventure game is the beautiful animation by Don Bluth Studios alumni, and a strong (not sappy, as in most other animated games) plot to boot. -T. Nguyen Virgin/Revolution Studios, (800)874-4607 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 301 were too many \"overrun\" attacks in the real battle of Jutland. Our tactical advice? Stay away. -T. Carter interactive Magic, (800) 789-7534 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 302 to muster much in the way of either realism or enjoyment. The graphics are far below industry standards, to the point where they distract considerably from game play. The 3D perspective is certainly innovative, but I have to question its usefulness for a strategy game, particularly when viewing the map and understanding terrain is so important. The combat aspects of the game are weak, especially in real-time mode, and many of the de generic \"quickie\" battles are hopelessly one sided. There appears to be little distinction between the computer's strategy in different eras, which can lead to some interesting results, although I don't think there COLD Tasaj DESTINY This Civ clone has an abundance of detail, and purports to examine both economic growth and expansion throughout human histo ry. Unfortunately, Destiny fails FLASHPOINT: KOREA FLASHPOINT: KOREA is the first add-on for Jane's Combat Simulations' benchmark title, AH64D LONGBOW. Along with a welcome change of scenery for the new campaign and single missions, FPK boasts improvements that make it far more than a mere mission disk, including a realistic simulation of the copilot/gunner position, better avionics modeling, and improved Al for your wingman and the enemy. continued on page 40 >> JANUARY 1997 "


"GO WHERE NO MAN HAS EVER COME QUI ALIVE. NOTICE WE SAID \"MAN.\" IF THE GAME GRAPHICS DON'T BLOW YOU AWAY. ONE OF THESE WILL OMETIMES, HAVING A Sometimes, you also need guts. Or a brain. Or quick feet. Other times, you need all of the above plus TREASURE SEEKING, PUZZLE SOLVING, ALLIGATOR WRESTLING. AND STILL TIME FURA FIGHT grenades, a shotgun and a matching pain of nine millimeters. Such is your fate when you control Lara Croft, heroine heartthrob of Tomb Raider . ..........(28) .......... CRE PayStation DESIGN INC. FIDOS INTERACTIVE, CORE, TOMB RAIDER, LARA CROFT AND HER LIKENESS ARE TRADEMARKS OF EIDOS, PLC  1996 EIDOS. EIDOS HINT LINE 1-900-288-4263 COST OF CALL $0.95/MINUTE MUST BE 18 YEARS HAVE PARENT'S PERMISSION/TOUCH-TONE PHONE REQUIRED "


"NOTHING LIKE A LITTLE SWIM BEFORE FENDING OFF A PACK OF WOLVES KILLER BODY JUST ISN'T ENOUGH. NOT EVERYONE SEES ABRIGHT LIGHT JUST BEFORE DYING (LUCKY STIFFS.) Lara has her sights on a few ancient artifacts, and she's not going to let anything or anybody get in her way. Alligators. Wolves. Thugs. They're all tempting fate once in Lara's path. But hey, what's a little temptation? Especially when everything looks this good. In the game, we mean. Check out Tomb Raider at www.tombraider.com EIDOS INTERACTIVE CIRCLE READER SERVICE #276 "


"READ.ME The Quakelet Boom 4 Companies Ride The Boomstick Wave With QUAKE's Engine ince QUAKE'S release, there's been a whole lotta shakin' goin' on in the suburbs of Dallas, TX. Three new game companies formed within rocket-launching range of rivals id Software (DOOM QUAKE) and Apogee/ 3D Realms (DUKE NUKEM enhance Quake, as well as research next-generation technology John Cash and Sandy Peterson showed CGW a slew of QUAKE 2 play things undergoing testing. Many were inspired by the QUAKE C mods circulating among Quake aficiona dos, such as the grappling hook, D QUAKE-WORLD, as well as samples of his research into next-generation, first-person 3D technology. He hopes to make future games even more immersive games with outdoor environments, atmospheric effects and volumetric clouds. QUAKE 2 is scheduled for release mid-1997, or whenever it's ready. ld's next generation technology probably won't become available to the public until the end of 1998. uoti / OLOHO fight from the first-person.\" Romero wants to take action games to the next level\" by blending in elements from both RPGs and fighting games. He hopes to provide a strong storyline, and team the player with two computer-controlled buddies: \"There will be no more 'single play' by yourself.\" In addition, Romero envisions supplementing the ranged combat popularized by Doom/QUAKE with the hand to hand combat of VIRTUA FIGHTER. He hopes to reward players' increasing skill with special moves, such as multiple jumps and combination attacks. I ON's highest hopes rest on Hall's 3D RPG, which Hall describes as a 30. ION Storm!: Strategy, Action And RPG Titles JON Storm! is the official name for John Romero and Tom Hall's new venture. ION has strategy, action, PHOTO by Beth Romero Interestingly, the snot nosed STEREOSCOPIC VISION John Carmack's monitors show the seeds of the next-generation of realupstarts time first-person action gaming. moving in on their turf aren't snot-nosed at Cluster bombs, guided missiles, all-They're alumni from one or both plastique and flashlights. Among companies. those unique to id are the \"Frisbee We decided to get a closer look at o' Death,\" the ominous \"Hellcube,\" what's boiling up from QUAKE's rubble and the voracious \"Black Hole.\" In QUAKE 2, you can also expect to Id Software: Quake 2 see major improvements to the espite John Romero's depar game's physics, especially the recoil ture and Jay Wilbur's retire. and blasts effects. Repeated poundment, it's business as usual at id ing, for example, from your 12 Software, the notorious creators of gauge boomstick will \"walk\" the WOLFENSTEIN 3D, Doom, and QUAKE. besieged target backwards over a For 1997, id will continue to ledge. Particularly gratifying were E chunks that spray away from the source of the blast. instead of in an omni directional geyser. John Carmack showed CGW the NEW GROUND Careening over this landscape, one of latest ver Carmack's new experiments, is an impressive treat. sion of La View IONIC MEN Ex-idling John Romero (left) stands before the house that Doom built. Tom Hall has worked for both id and 3D Realms before joining Romero to make games using the QUAKE engine. and RPG projects in development. Todd Porter, who recently left 7th LEVEL, will work on what Romero describes as \"a real-time strategy, first-person action, weird hybrid of a game, completely hectic and totally hot.\" Romero hopes to \"have it in 3D with a completely simple interface, but with layers of complexity. I want the player to say this is a crucial fire fight and then (be able to) zip over into that Hummer on that hill and very shocking turbulent story, a rollercoaster of emotion\" that incorporates elements from FINAL FANTASY, BATTLEFIELD EARTH, HitchHiker's Guide to the Galaxy, and MARIO 64. Hall explains that it's tentatively \"centered around a city where all dimensions connect. When the inhabitants see something purple flying by they don't care.\" The player will be accompanied by two part n ers, like in SECRET OF MANA and SECRET OF EVERMORE console games JANUARY 1997 "


"More dynamic than any driving game! More explosive than any action sim! More flammable than polyester! They killed your sister. Now they're out to get the U.S. of A. They've messed with the wrong man. Customize 25 muscle cars with over 20 lethal weapons! 30 Nitro-burning missions! Super-realistic dynamics based on actual vehicle physics! Drive freely through unrestricted environments! Multi-vigilante action over LAN or hood-to-hood combat via modem! US state ACTIVISION CIRCLE READER SERVICE #367 Coming Soon on Windows 95 CD-ROM http://www.activision.com Activision is a registered trademark and Intertoto 76 is a trademark of Activision, Inc. O 1996 Activision, Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective owners. All rights reserved. "


"READ.ME CSERESSA ing your way to the end level. As if the 3x3x3 onslaught weren't enough, Hipnotic man aged to imple ment rotating objects in spite of naysayers' claims. So, real ENTER THE DRAGON When the Dragon appears, it's time to beat feet or burn. EOS istic mechanical HE'S THE BOSS Armagon, a part-alien, part-mech monstrosity, will be devices such as drawbridges, pack brings a collection of new the last thing you see in Hipnotic's RIFT-if you survive that long. trapdoors, and rolling threats goodies and ghouls to the party. ala Raiders of the Lost Ark will Some of the new weapons will be Hipnotic Interactive: sight. BFG, anyone? likely appear in the final version, familiar to QUAKE C hackers: multiple The Rift Hipnotic also adds three power which should hit retail shelves in rockets and cluster grenades. Hipnotic's birth caused quite a stir ups that bring new twists to game early 1997 Rogue's additions include deadlier in the action game development play: the Empathy Shield, the After Hipnotic finishes THE RIFT, lava.laced ammunition and a device community in Texas. Several memWetsuit, and the that launches devas bers of 3D Realms-creators of DUKE Horn of Conjuring. Stating lightning balls. NUKEM 3D-defected to form Three new New power-ups includ. Hipnotic soon after QUAKE's release hellspawn are now ing a power shield and Their first project is the development present: The anti-gravity belt help of a 15-level QUAKE add-on pack, fit Gremlin is a corpse you survive. tingly entitled THE RIFT. devouring nuisance Rogue's assorted THE Rift introduces three new with the pesky habit contraptions include Weapons. The Laser Cannon and of stealing your massive swinging pen Proximity Bombs will be somewhat weapons and using dulum blades and familiar to QUAKE C hackers. However, them against you. quaint river boats. the Mjolnir is the weapon to behold! The Scourge is a Riding the boats, you Charge this massive Norse hammer giant scorpion may avoid getting with enough energy cells, and armed with dual zapped by electric eels smash it into the ground. The result: nailguns and a ROGUES These ruffians are creating a QUAKE pack that'll but could become a siting spray of lightening will fan out stinger-tipped tail: just kill you, with swinging pendulum blades, electric ting duck for snipers. A and smite nearby targets, which in its ability to strafe eels, a Wraith and a Dragon. particular menace is turn will spew forth more lightening makes it a dangerthe airborne Wraith. that smites more targets, laying ous foe. The cyborg-boss Armagon they will use the Quake engine to Disappointed by the mild-mannered waste to practically everything in is your nightmarish reward for claw create an all-new game of their own Scrag in QUAKE, Rogue created the design. Wraith with a Vore-like homing attack and Power Shield armor. Rogue Entertainment: The crown jewel is the flying Quake Add-On Pack Dragon which Quake sorely lacked. couple strides down the hall Like a true badass boss, the from id is Rogue Entertain Dragon is almost unstoppable: If it ment, which was formed in doesn't instantly flambe you with December 1994 when its founders its napalm breath, it'll whack the split from Cygnus Studios after comgrey matter out of your skull with pleting Apogee's RAPTOR. Roque its spiked tail. jumped into the first-person 3D fray Rogue's add-on pack will become with Strife, an RPG using the DOOM available sometime in early 1997 engine, and is now developing a yet Rogue plans to follow up with its THE GREAT UNWASHED Hipnotic challenged their former boss at unnamed add-on pack for QUAKE. own game based on the QUAKE 3D Realms to wash this truck it THE RIFT outsells his next title. Like THE RIFT, Roque's add-on engine.-. Long Get it good and dirty, boys, but don't throw away your buckets. buot 14 010H CG JANUARY 1997 "


"BIGGER IS BETTER MARIA Bigger tires. Bigger competition. Bigger thrills. Bigger mid-spitting, bone-jarring, ground-pounding racing. This is Monster Truck Madness. Strap yourself into a 1,500-horsepower tower of American pig iron, punch it when the light turns green, and you're in for the biggest race of your life. Drag. Circuit. Rally. Race any way you want. At any level. Over any kind of terrain. On or off the track. You can even force-feed your buddies mud pies over the Internet. So go Go Go to Microsoft www.microsoft.com/games/monster/ for a free test drive. And see how you measure up. Microsoft MONSTER O TRUCKO PRE MADNESS Down & Dirty Racing! Where do you want to go today?' 1996 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved, Microsoft and Where do you want to go today? are registered trademarks and Monster Truck Madness is a trademarks of Microsoft Corporation 1996 Terminal Reality, Inc. All rights reserved. All other products and "


"READ.ME PRINCE OF PERSIA Creator Back On Track ith THE LAST EXPRESS, Jordan has been murdered. You board anyways, assumMechner wraps up a four-year ing your friend's identity, and set about to uncover labor-of-love. The designer of two the mystery over the course of the three-day trip. of the best PC action games ever The game plays out in real time,\" with conver made, PRINCE OF PERSIA 1 and 2, Mechner has sations and character interactions happening all been working on his most ambitious project yet, a over the train-regardless of whether you're there CD-ROM adventure game called THE LAST EXPRESS. or not. Each of the game's 30-odd characters has The game is now nearing completion, and an independent \"life\" inside the game; a complex Broderbund is slating it for release this March. background, behavior, tastes, sympathies, motives Set aboard the Orient Express in July, 1914, and so on. Some of these behaviors have direct influence on the outcome of the game, others do not, yet each char. acter has a reason for being on the train and for acting as they do. Depending on how you play, you can take multiple pathways to multiple outcomes. And yet, the game, as technical director Robert Cook points out, \"is linear. It's on a train on a charted course. Narrative, too. The character logic is controlling DA the flow, but allowing for the player's freedom at the same time.\" CHARACTER ACTING Jordan Mechner directs actors dur. Researching the actual Orient ing the filming of THE LAST EXPRESS. Express was no easy task. Books THE LAST EXPRESS involves high adventure as the about the train were only marginally helpful, and train crosses Europe from Paris to Constantinople. the idea of actually finding a car from the original You play an American urgently summoned by a train seemed impossible. But when Mechner friend to join him on the train at the Gare de l'Est, placed an ad in a European train buff magazine, in Paris. When you arrive, you find that your friend he hit the jackpot when two old employees of the Gare de l'Est responded. As Mechner described it, \"These two old men told us to meet them at the Gare de l'Est, go to Track number 3, turn left, see a glass door...and enter a door marked 'No Admittance. It really was like a game,\" Mechner laughed. \"Patrick Ladislav (the 3D art director) and I went down these long dark corridors, and then we were in a dark room facing two ancient men surrounded by boxes. it turned out that the two men had salvaged tons of train records that were about to be thrown out-among them, all the essential ingredients for bringing the 1914 Orient Express back to life: train layouts and blueprints, timetables and manuals, original menus, tickets and more. The employees were also able to serve as \"historical debuggers\" able to provide more answers to detailed ques. tions that came up while making the game, and they were able to help Mechner track down an actual sleeping car from the 1914 Orient Express that was literally rotting at a train yard in Athens. Mechner's team photographed and videotaped every inch of this last remaining car and, along with all the other newly discovered objects, set about to create a 3D digital version of the train. The people on the train are rotoscoped-filmed with live actors and then redrawn frame by frame into 2D cartoon-like characters. The decision to do this was made long in advance, partly because the line drawing appearance of the characters reflect >>continued from page 33 ON THE SHELF WARM INVALID TYPE 2 1 LOAL LAUNCH SHERLOCK HOLMES: CASE OF THE ROSE TATTOO The fog rolls inexorably from the Thames, a perfect camouflage for the seamy underside of Victorian London. Cabs splatter mud on unfortunale passersby, bobbies patrol the streets, and the eerie glow of gaslight gives an almost supernatural cast to the surroundings. We've all grown up with Sherlock Holmes and his faithful companion, Dr. Watson. CASE OF THE Rose Tattoo is hardly revolutionary, but it does tap into the Great Detective's charm enough to elicit a smile here, a chuckle there. Like its predecessor, the CASE OF THE SERRATED SCALPEL, this game tries too hard to be an interactive movie. Some may find the lab experMissions are more complex than in LONGBOW because of Korea's terrain and the increased interaction with friendly forces. Enemy units are less static, reacting to your presence by attack ing, fleeing, or calling in air support. The result. ing environment feels much more alive.-R. Kim Jane's/Origin, (800) 245-4525 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 303 iments tedious and the acting less than stellar, but the plot twists, which begin with Mycroft Holmes (Sherlock's smarter brother) being injured in a mysterious accident, are often worth the occasional tedium. The game is indeed afoot.-T. Coleman Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 PC and Win 95 CD-ROM Reader Service # 305 CC JANUARY 1997 "


"READ.ME TOONCAR All of these characters were originally filmed before being re-drawn for a cartoon-like, 2D look. ed the style of the Art Deco over the past four years? period and early European \"Keeping the excitement alive comic books of the same era. was not a problem,\" he says. For the film shoot, Mechner \"You get some burn-out, but with a background in filmmak after seeing the first renders of ing, undertook a project as a new area, or the first film...or ambitious as a feature film. The any of other thrilling moments actual shoot took place in 1994, tend to rejuvenate you. You two years into the proneed one of those ject. Mechner describes every few weeks.\" the shoot as being like a Was it worth it?\" military operation; it for more on have no regrets. But 1 went on for 19 days, fol. this story and might not be saying lowed by two years of a Preview of that in six months.\" post-production work. The Last Ex. -Alex Ullermann, press, see Was it difficult to keep CGW's Web Rusel DeMaria and his enthusiasm alive site. Jeff Green On The ViRGE Of Something Better ith over three million VIRGE allowing 1024x768 resolution with 24. chips in the market, S3 has bit color on boards with 4MB of RAM. almost single handedly The ViRGE/DX uses DRAM memory legitimized the market for 3D graphics and is pin-compatible with the first-genaccelerators. Unfortunately, while the eration ViRGE chip, so manufacturers initial ViRGE can easily update and VIRGEIX their current chips offered a designs. The rich feature set VIRGE/GX can use they were on faster SDRAM or the low end of SGRAM memory, the 3D perfor but requires manumance facturers to design a scale-on new board, so you'll faster systems likely see boards some developers referred to them as based on the DX part first. Prices \"hardware decelerators.\" should be in the same range as current S3 aims to up the performance ante ViRGE boards. with the upcoming ViRGE/DX and Both chips are software-compatible VIRGE/GX chips. The company claims with the original ViRGE part, so existing a three-fold performance increase over titles should see a good performance the original ViRGE with the new chips, boost with them. Because many PC which would put them in the same makers use $3-based graphics--includleague as the current kings of the hill i ng Compaq, Dell, HP, and Packard 3Dfx's Voodoo and Rendition's Vérité. Bell-game developers will be more A faster 170MHz RAMDAC will allow likely to add 3D support to their games, higher resolutions and refresh rates, SO and that's good news for gamers. you'll be able to take advantage of all Watch for hands-on testing of the new that texture memory when running 2D VIRGE chips in an upcoming issue of applications as wellCGW.Denny Atkin MASTERPILOT Master Pilot is a replica of an aircraft instrument panel's MultiFunction Display, with functional buttons and room for game-specific templates where the display would usually sit. The aim of this device is to eliminate the need to use the key board in flight sims, The 32 buttons and the throttle control do indeed work well, for the 30 supported games. Unfortunately, the device is programmable only by replacing a cartridge, so you'll have to wait for QuickShot to issue a cart supporting your favorite new sim. Non-volatile memory and new configs available for download on the web would have been a better idea. Also, functions are seemingly randomly placed, with \"Afterburner\" on the left on sim and on the right on the next. This inconsisten cy keeps you looking at the game template, obviating most of the advantage over just using the keyboard. If QuickShot would revamp this device with programmability and more consistent templates, it could easily be a \"Hot\" buy. -D. Atkin QuickShot, (408) 263-4005 IBM PC Reader Service # 307 STEEL PANTHERS II: MODERN BATTLES To be blunt, STEEL PANTHERS II is a Panzer freak's dream. Not only do you get the increased lethality of modern weaponry, you may also reenact some of the largest-and wildest-armored melees in history. Morale is just as important as hardware in the oddly-named Chinese Farm, as the professionalism of the Israeli army is put to TIE FIGHTER JANUARY 1997 CG "


"READ.ME READ.ME PLAYING LATELY? Online Gaming For Less SBALL-225 SUBSY 40319 with AOL's recent changes to that online game providers are losing its pricing plan, gamers may out. Cullen Couch, Marketing well notice a substantial Communications Manager for Aries drop in their monthly bills. Instead of Online Games, a subsidiary of Kesmai paying additional surcharges to individ Corporation, disagrees. He believes that ual online gaming services, gamers can the new pricing plan is going to attract now have unlimited access to providers, via AOL, for an allinclusive monthly charge of $19.99. AOL is also offer ing a lower rate package for lighter uses and a \"bring your own access\" rate for people who already have FREE FLIGHT You can now play AIR WARRIOR for no extra cost under AOL's new pricing plan. an alternative Internet connection more people to Aries: \"The more eye. The new pricing plan comes as a balls we get on our products the better.\" result of AOL's changing revenue model. In the long term, online game As the company gears itself more providers hope the deal will prove to be towards advertising, it is essential for an effective marketing strategy for the them to draw in a wider range of cus online gaming market. And it certainly tomers. But how will this affect the sounds like good news for gamers-just online gaming services, some of whom imagine how many more hours of gamCurrently charge by the hour? From a ing you'll be able to fit into your budget short-term perspective, it may appear now.-C. Panther ere are the games readers are actually blowing the most time with, as opposed to the reader's overall \"quality READERS' ranking\" in the Top 100. The Top 5 keep their hold on hard drives this month, with Civ II, DUKE NUKEM 3D and WARCRAFT Il maintaining Top 3 positions for the sixth consecutive month. QUAKE makes its debut on the chart in seventh place. While STEEL PANTHERS and PANZER GENERAL slip to the bottom of the chart. You'll no longer find the CGW Poll Card bound into the maga. zine, but check your mail box: We mail a survey to 2,000 random ly-chosen subscribers each month, and we use the results to calculate the Top 100 and Playing Lately each month. Last Months Month On Chart 1. Civilization II (MicroProse) 1 8 2. Duke Nukem 3D (3D Realms) 2 9 3. WarCraft II (Blizzard) 4. Command and Conquer LE (Virgin/Westwood) 14 5. MechWarrior 2 (Activision) 5 13 6. Doom II (id Software) 7 10 7. Quake (id Software) 8. Heroes of Might and Magic (New World Computing) 8 13 9. Steel Panthers (SSI) 613 10. Panzer General (SSI) 9 .22 kabinets Been recorded SSI, (800) 245-4525 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 309 ON THE SHELF the ultimate test against a determined force of Arab armor. Those used to the static mines of STEEL. PANTHERS will have to change their tactics when meeting up with Claymores in the jun gles of Vietnam, where Air Cav units bring a whole new dimension to the game engine. Would-be Schwartzkopfs can have a field day in Desert Storm, or tackle hypothetical campaigns in the Middle East, China or Europe (for those needing a NATO vs. Warsaw Pact fix). It's hard to say for sure, but the Al seems tougher than the original (it could just be the annoying Viet Cong and those waves of Chinese in Korea). And while the interface will never be as seamless as PANZER GENERAL, SSI has done a fine job of smoothing out the learning curve, even including a decent tutorial scenario. In a year that's been rich for wargames, SSI shows why they OCCUpy the top of the historical heap.-T. Coleman SYNDICATE WARS Corporate warfare takes on a more literal meaning in this spectacular sequel to the cult favorite SYNDICATE. The great game. play that made SYNDICATE a hit remains, but the sequel has been overhauled with a tremendous 3D engine, creative missions, and even a decent plot. Whether you choose the ruthless Eurocorp Syndicate or the righteous Church of the New Epoch, you'll embark on new missions, with that gorgeous 3D engine adding to an immer. sive game world. The only drawback is the mis. sion difficulty, and some minor annoyances have also carried over from the first game. For big explosion and Independence Day fans, check out what happens to a building when a friendly SDI Laser Satellite goes berserk.-T. Nguyen Bullfrog/EA (800) 245-4525 PC CD-ROM Reader Service # 310 STRANDS JANUARY 1997 "


"Get SUCKED IN with the awesome power of ATT 3D RAGE II. HYPER Pod MECH WARRIODE MECH WARRIORZ WIRL WIRL Vintersiz DESTINY M1A2 HIND BUG wioowe MONES BLAST CHAMBER CONFIRMED VRCreator BAKU BAKU SONIG GD MELT APACHE TERRACIDE DEATH DROME DIVIDE: ENEMIE'S WITHIN Assault EXTS G-NOME Warning! KALEIDOSCOPE The all new ATI 3D RAGE\" II chip is blasting a new path of ferociously fast performance on today's hottest new 2D, 3D and Direct3D\"games. With absolute bleeding edge 3D realism and amazing real-time response. You get ATI 3D RAGE II on ATI 3D graphics upgrades with features like PC2TV which lets you use your big screen TV as your monitor. Plus it's built right into the hottest new Pentium systems from top manufacturers. For the latest blast of facts on these and other Direct3D, DirectX\"and ATI 3D enhanced games, infiltrate our web site at www.atitech.ca/3dalley. Or call us at 905 882-2600 (press 2 for faxback), ATI 3D graphics upgrades are at Computer City, Egghead and Micro Center. i 30 XPRESSION+PO 30 XPRESSION NOW YOU SEE IT. DATI Technologies Inc., 1996. ATI, 3D RAGE, 3D XPRESSION+, 3D XPRESSION+PC2TV and NOW YOU SEE IT are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of ATI Technologies Inc. All other company and/or product names are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers CIRCLE READER SERVICE #372 "


"NEW! Smart Games Word Puzzles 1 Now Available! MAC & PC VERSIONS Smart Games Challenge 1 \"Run out and get this disk!\" \"4 out of 4 Stars!\" -Games Magazine -New York Daily News \"A Puzzle-meister's delight!\" -Computer Gaming World MART GAMES of Everybody's raving about the best-selling Smart Games Challenge 7. It's fun for your brain, not your trigger finger. Now available for both MAC and PC, it features over 300 games that stretch your mind. From wordplay wonders and strategy sticklers to perception puzzlers, Smart Games Challenge 1 is brain-powered fun! SMART GAMES WORD PUZZLES Play With Your Brain! OXD New! Smart Games Word Puzzles 7 gives you even more ways to play with your brain! Four mind-bending puzzle categories, with hundreds of levels of brain-busting fun. Word Hunter treks through time, literature, sports, and movies as it reinvents word-searching puzzles for the computer age. Crossed Words is a wild new species of word game-you not only solve the puzzle, you actually create it! Scanagrams pits you against the cleverest, funniest anagrams ever. With Word Melt you morph one word into another word by strategically changing one, two, three, or more letters at a time. Let the fun begin! 1996 Smart Games, Inc. All rights reserved. e a Smart Games Challenge 1 CAR JAM Move the red car out of the lot, ASAP. It's a real fender-bending mind-bender! GIGACO tar DONO S VIDD tesis CD CEU... SUSUISTOTELIN TUTTIGE STEUZM . UMUROS ARTICLE OVOLENKUNG WAZIRI Le c oncorso LETEC Smart Games Word Puzzles 1 SCANAGRAMS Unscramble thematically linked words and phrases. DOGO CULK! Smart Games, Smart Games Challenge 1. Smart Games Word Puzzles 1. and the excited nerd image are trademarks and properties of Smart Games, Inc. Bununla G FRIDO URETTELATIVELGTINCIDIG DHOLD Smart Games Word Puzzles 1 CROSSED WORDS Create the crossword puzzle while you try to solve it! Distributed by: 1991RandomSoft A Division of Random House, Inc Download a FREE DEMO: http://www.smartgames.com SMART GAMES CIRCLE READER SERVICE #379 "


"GAME TRACK FIRST LOOK PIPELINE ere's your first look at games in development. These games aren't even playable yet, but we thought you'd want to see how they're coming along. Spring 97 Army Men emember those plastic the way each movement resolves into a tradiarmy men of green, tan, tional plastic figure pose. It's almost like Toy and gray that beckoned Story, sans the plastic bases seen in the ani Af you from the back covers mated film. We also like the Moviefone Newsof comic books, filled toy racks at your style newsreel between some maps. This local grocery store, and inevitably ended footage was shot using the same plastic mod. up being chewed into oblivion by the els that are in the game, but the black and family dog? In 3DO's upcoming ARMY white footage has undergone a torture test so Men, they come to life. that it looks like vintage film. ARMY Men is an entry-level real-time The maps offer 15 levels of fully defined strategy game where four different types terrain objects to be placed on bayou, desert, alpine, or tropical maps, and all maps have palette shifts and light sourcing for night battles. Though the scenar. ios won't be linked via a dynamic campaign, they offer a solid variety. Some will emphasize offense and defense, while others will provide particular problems for artillery, flamethrower units, commando units, or engineers (rebuilding a BAYOU BRUISERS A valiant green tank bridge, sabotaging a bridge, taces off against a dastardly tan aggressor on one of the bayou maps for Army Men. or building a fort). Most interesting may well be the of military forces (roughly equivalent to scenario where you start with a limited num. Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines) fight ber of troops and have to liberate additional through 60 to 80 scenarios to determine forces from a prisoner of war stockade in whether the good guys or the bad guys order to be able to win the battle. win. The maps provide overhead 3D iso ARMY Men also supports two-player combat metric views of the action and the anima: via modem, LAN, or the Internet.-J. Wilson tion is superb. Every figure is ren dered in 3D Studio Max with a 110 frame animated walk and move: ment sequence These will be reduced to around 10 key frames per anim, as opposed to the 4-8 frames of action in most games. Perhaps most intriguing is 3197 ABC College Football OT Sports 12196 Achtung: Spitfire! Avalon Hill 4/97 Age of Rifles Campaigns SS! 1/97 Agents of Justice MicroProse Aide De Camp 2 HPS Simulations Spring 97 Battle Sport Acclaim 2/97 Battleground: Middle East Talonsoit 2/97 Battles of Alexander Interactive Magic Spring 97 Betrayal at Antara Sierra Spring 97 Blade Runner Virgin/Westwood Summer 97 Blood Apogee Spring 97 Blue Heat Cyberdreams 3/97 Callahan's Crosstime Saloon Legend 01/97 City of Lost Children Psygnosis 2/97 Cloak Sierra 3/97 Dark Earth Mindscape Spring 97 Descent to Undermountain Interplay 12/96 Destruction Derby II Psygnosis 12/96 Diablo Blizzard 12/96 Discworld II: Reality Bytes Psygnosis 12/96 Dungeon Keeper Bullfrog 2/97 Ecstatica Il Psygnosis 2197 European Air War MicroProse Summer 97 Flying Corps Empire 1/97 Flying Nightmares 2 Domark 12/96 FPS Football Pro 97 Sierra 12/96 Grand Slam 97 Virgin Spring 97 Hardball 6 Accolade 4/97 Heroes of Might and Magic II New World 1296 History of the World Avalon Hill 2/97 iF22 Interactive Magic Spring 97 IM1A2 Abrams Interactive Magic 12/96 Jack Nicklaus Golf 97 Accolade Jedi Knight: Dark Forces Il LucasArts 3197 Jetfighter Ill Mission Studios Take 2 12/96 Lands of Lore:Guardians of Destiny Westwood Virgin 397 Magic: The Gathering Acclaim Marvel Mindscape Spring 97 Master of Orion II MicroProse 12196 M.A.X. Interplay 1/97 MicroLeague Baseball 6.0 MicroLeague Spring 97 NBA Live 97 EA Sports 01/97 NFL Legends Accolade 1/97 Pacific General SSI Summer 97 Reach for the Stars II SSG/Microsoft Spring 97 Rebel Moon Rising Fenris Wolf 7/97 Rebellion LucasArts 3/97 Red Baron Il Sierra 4/97 Sabre Ace Virgin 3/97 Shadow Warrior 3D Realms/FormGen Winter 96 Shivers 2 Sierra SimGolf Maxis 12/96 Spider Man: Venom Factor Byron Preiss Star Craft Blizzard 6/97 Star Fleet Academy Interplay Stars! Empire 1/97 Test Drive Off-Road Accolade 2197 TFX: X-22 Ocean 3/97 Theme Hospital Bullfrog/EA Ultima On-Line Origin Spring 97 Unreal Epic Spring 97 VR Baseball VR Sports Spring 97 VR Golf VR Sports X 01/97 X-COM: The Apocalypse MicroProse Spring 97 X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter LucasArts 1/97 Zapatilism LavaMind 1/97 12/96 3/97 2197 2197 JANUARY 1997 CG "


"GAME TRACK ISLAND IN THE SCUD Acclaim's STRATOSPHERE pits flying fortresses against each other in real-time combat. CANNON 1000 Not Bad 100 Arc QUQlearn from your style of play. Second, GALACTIC CONQUEST IS being designed to be replayable with circa 60 different alien artifacts, which can affect the outcome of the game, being randomly available within any given game. Third, each of the alien races has a different personality, ergonomically designed ships that look and act differently for each race, and a different means of communicating and conducting diplomacy. The P'tash communicate via color, the T'ganth speak with a split-lip mouth, the some of the gameplay in utes per mission. Campaigns will STRATOSPHERE. You can build up to differ by house because of strate100 different items (defensive, gies specific to the house tradition offensive, and energy-related) on and weapons which are specific to your flying city. Also, the higher each given house. The game is your rank becomes, the bigger being built with campaign add-ons your fortress can become. in mind, à la COMMAND & CONQUER Stratosphere Naturally, there are trade-offs and WARCRAFT II.-J. Wilson magine a real-time strategy game between size and maneuverability, where, instead of sending out your so you may not opt for the Galactic Conquest units to manage resources and biggest fortress all the time. \"ive distinctly different races comI take objectives for you, you took a STRATOSPHERE will feature a mis pete for control of a galaxy in flying fortress with all of your sion-based campaign with game. GALACTIC CONQUEST (working title) resources available from point to play of approximately 20 to 60 min from 3D0. Although games of point. In this 1-4 player netgalactic conquest workable game from are a dime a dozen, Acclaim, you command the this one has plenty flying fortress, one bulwark of distinctive fea of a balkanized neo-feudal tures. Where the tra system. Each of these ditional cosmic con balkanized realms has a quest game takes specially built around a tra. dozens of hours to dition. Most of these speget from colony to cialties relate to different conquest, GALACTIC sciences, but some are part CONQUEST is being of a techno-mage tradition p rxster (OXX designed as a four and add that sense of the hour game for up to fantastic to the game. five players via LAN Imagine a flying SHIP SHAPE These sketches for a Terran war. or Internet. It will SIMCITY with weapons: ship reflect some of the design detail underalso have Al oppo that would be close to lying the vessels in GALACTIC CONQUEST. nents who actually MILTON P'TASHING OF TEETH Who's afraid of an alien aggressor who communicates by changing color? Gamers in GALACTIC CONQUEST should be. TIRATION M FRIESTE INNAN ME MENU NO:5 ERCIRE MAGONITE TERRAN BATTLESHIP ARE Izmani communicate through move. ment, the Terrans use computers, and the Huminos speak English. The game features some of the most original alien art we've seen in a game to date; even the interface looks slightly different, depending on which race you are controlling in the game.-J. Wilson SCUL 150 CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Create Danas D The New World Just Got Better Conquest of the New World Deluxe Edition takes the award-winning Strategy game and adds all the elements you asked for to create the Definitive Gaming experience. a must Lor Strategists' Newsweek \"Strategy fans will BE in seventh heaven Computer Gaming World \"Conquest of the New Worlo is a classic PC Magazine 29. ExpaNDEO INTERACTIVE diplomacy per with the mother Country and opponents Da d custom Game Editor lets you new preset the world with populations, armies and colonies Da Extraordinary new natural new wonders, resources, and gems a advanced Game scenarios new let you start a game with pre-developeo colonies da Up to 6 can play over a network as Englano, France, hollano, Portugal, Spain or the natives De head to heao ano e-mail play Easy to use on-screen tutorial DELUXE EDITION Conquest e che New World 2 DELUKE EDITION Conquest New World available on PC Co-Rom KIDS TO ADULTS Developed By BY GAMERS, POR GAMERS. Interplay Productions 16816 Von Karman Ave, Irvine CA 92606 AUTOKEILYER Wwwinterplay.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #169 AGES 6+ 1996 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Conquest of the New World and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All other copyrights and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"GAME TRACK HANDS ON hese are the products in development we've actually spent some time with. They represent some of the most interesting titles in the Pipeline, and they are complete enough to actually tell how they're going to play. Most should be released soon. Rebel Moon Rising MMX). The controls are of your standard twitch and-splatter mouselkeyboard variant, though \"mouse-looking\" is not yet implemented. RMR ne of the first games we've seen designed to take advantage of Intel's MMX instruction set, REBEL MOON RISING (RMR) is the follow on to REBEL Moon, a game currently bundled with the 3D Blaster board. The Win 95.native RMR is a mission-based, first-person 3D shooter whose CPU-based engine benefits from MMX. Unlike some 3D shooters, RMR actually has a back story that figures into the game. The moon has been colonized for high-yield, low-gravity agriculture. Though under international control from Earth, the units on the moon decide to declare their independence. You're a rebel com mando trying to defend lunar installations in the various levels against the terran assault forces. Fenris Wolf describes RMR as kind of a hybrid between DUKE NUKEM 3D and MECHWARRIOR 2. Rather than just run through and shoot anything that moves, you have other objectives. There are four different mission types: Commando, Search and Destroy, Defense, and Rescue. The overall feel of RMR is solid, though the graphics do feel a little dated, with one notable exception: all gunfire is accented by RMR's dynamic lighting engine (possibly courtesy of cler, usually hidden somewhere on the level. Seven weapons, getting progressively more per. nicious, help you reduce enemy forces to smoldering piles. 107 Does MMX spruce up RMR? Well, using a 2D only graphics board and running at a 512x384 resolution (true color) on an Intel P55C (a 200 MHz Pentium with MMX), we saw frame rates stay at around 20 frames per second (fps), whereas running RMR without MMX drops the frame rate to about 9 fps. What RMR's \"2.5D\" engine lacks in visual panache, the game makes up for in the differ ent mission types. It should be interesting for action gamers who seek meaning to their death and destruction. RMR will first ship bundled with Intel's P55C Pentium OverDrive chip in January, and the retail version with modem/network/Internet multiplayer capabilities will ship in May-Dave Salvator Fenris Wolf, (612) 484-8988 Win 95 CD-ROM 1:30 148 1de 100 30.196 also has a map overview mode where you can see the level map and take down bad guys simultaneously. Some elements, like switches, are somewhat difficult to identity, though two demos as well as two training missions will help get you acclimated. Because your adventures take place on the moon, you'll need to either recharge your air supply or find an oxygen recy  Magic: The Gathering-BattleMage bility in that gamers can copy their armies of creatures and spell libraries to disk and use them on a friend's computer.-J. Wilson Acclaim, (516) 656-5000 Win 95 CD-ROM ATTLEMAGE, Acclaim's real-time strate gy game based on the Magic: The Gathering universe, has the feel of a duel between archmages. One to four gamers can face off against each other in Duel Mode, and solitaire gamers can compete in an ongoing Campaign Mode. In the game, planeswalkers (wizards) conjure creatures and invoke spells to send after their rivals. The planeswalkers do not move, but the conjured crea tures wing, speed, and lumber toward their rivals, as do the effects of the offensive spells, providing a sense of action at all times. Planeswalkers can battle over 30 or more terrain types, each reflect ing its own type of mana and rewarding those that use its specialty spells. In the campaign mode, planeswalkers try to defeat their six different rivals and collect enough new spells and artifacts to be able to control the entire map. Not to be confused with the computer conver sion of the card game itself (from MicroProse and Sid Meier), MTG: BATTLEMAGE feels like the duel that the collectible card game is supposed to simulate, yet the terms are different from those of the card games. Instead of decks, players use troves, tomes, libraries, and armories as the depositories for their spells, artifacts, and creatures. Plus there are hidden artifacts (somewhat like the rare cards in the collectible card game) and utilities for customizing your own spell and creature combinations. Also, the designers have wisely allowed for porta: JANUARY 1997 "


"DON'T GO SCHIZO. 60 Verk THE PREMIER ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT NETWORK www.bezerk.com INTRODUCING beZerk, the premier online entertainment network. It's the most interactive, in-your-face entertainment on the Net by far-and it's totally So, go beZerk and play YOU DON'T KNOW JACK the netshow, the irreverent quiz show party game online. YOU DON'T KNOW It promises wild, irreverent fun, regardless of your personalities. JACK You must have Windows 95 to play YOU DON'T KNOW JACK the netshow. BERKELEY Jellyvision SYSTEMS YOU DONT KNOW JACK trademark of selyasion Inc. All text and sound 1995 milon, in The selon logo is a rogistered trademark D stinc, Softw, screen Kraphic od packa 0.1996 Berkeley Systems Inc. The Deeley System stered trade and Bezerk is servicemark of Demary Systems, Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsor Corp thenet HOW CIRCLE READER SERVICE #48 "


"The Newest Star Wa A few short months from now, in a very familiar galaxy the trilogy gamers have waited for will finally arrive. LucasArts will bring a new generation of Star Wars games to this world, and you'll find you're no longer alone in the universe. This multiplayer trio should should keep Rebels and Imperials alike satisfied while Lucas fermenis the next film trilogy. Star Wars Rebellion, a grand stralegy game, makes you absolute ruler of the Empire or Alliance, Jedi Knight, of course, is the sequel to Dark Forces: Wing vs TIE Fighter is vying for the title of ultimate multiplayer space sim. So, suit up and climb aboard the Millennium Falcon for the ride of your life. Star Wars is back, and the Force is stronger than ever. FEPAREDES 22203130 SI JANUARY -1997 "


"STAR WARS GAMES. COVER STORY s Trilogy Rebellion Striking Back At The Empire REBELLION Gives You Full Reign Over The Star Wars Universe 3. a Ga BE 31 by Elliott Chin BLES he chance to step into the Star Wars universe has long held a special lure. Yet, in previous THE VIEW FROM UP HERE From this command console you'll view galactic sectors and their planets, find your feets, characters and Star Wars games, we've only had a small troops, and hear C3PO and R2D2 (or Imperial bots) help you sitt impact on the universe. Imagine what you through all your galactic data. could do in the Star Wars universe if you weren't a lowly fighter pilot, but rather Emperor Palpatine or Alliance leader Mon plays more like two games. One element is a grand strategic Mothma. You could crush the Rebel Alliance module which is closest in scope and gameplay to MASTER OF for good, or restore peace and freedom to the Orion, where you manage a galactic civilization (without the galaxy with a swift Alliance victory. Thousands research element). There's also 3D real-time tactical space comof gamers and Star Wars fans have been crying out for a game of bat. In both the strategic and tactical portions of the game, your such grand design for years, and finally, LucasArts is about to enemy is moving his pieces simultaneously with you in real time. answer them with the first Star Wars strategy game: REBELLION. CGW recently visited LucasArts for the first test drive of STAR Prelude to Rebellion WARS: REBELLION, and what we saw looks very promising. The scope of REBELLION is massive. The game stretches across the REBELLION is a real-time strategy game, though not in the same entire Star Wars galaxy, from the icy planet of Hoth to the Imperial vein as COMMAND & CONQUER OF WARCRAFT II. REBELLION actually Seat at Coruscant. There are three galaxy sizes--100 planets, 150 planets, and 200 planets-a parameter which you set before each game. Coolhand, REBELLION's developers (their previous credit is HARPOON 2), refer to it as \"a game about characters, fleets and planet resources.\" The game is open-ended, and there is no campaign per se. Instead, you're given a set of victory conditions and the entire game involves you amassing enough power and resources to ultimately achieve those victory goals. When play begins, you start with a limited number of worlds already in your command, a pre-set fleet, and a few characters. Depending on which side you choose, your starting conditions will vary. As the Empire, A NEW SAGA REBELLION takes place in between A New Hope (the first movie) and The Empire Strikes you begin with a greater number of worlds Back, after the Empire has been handed a humiliating defeat with the destruction of the Death Star and a larger fleet, but your worlds are less JANUARY 1997 CG "


"SURRENDER IS NO Command & Conquer: Red Alert is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. O 1995, 1996 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"AN OPTION THE EXPLOSIVE NEW STRATEGY GAME FROM THE CREATORS OF MILLION-SELLER COMMAND & CONQUER Super VGA Graphics* intensify realism and excitement Multiplay features include Internet Head-to-Head* and 8 player IPX Fight over land, sea and air. Thirty new units and structures to choose from including MIGS, spies, destroyers, submarines and more destroyers, submissi ne Now battle maps are twice as large Over forty missions to play and dozens of multiplayer maps Two CDs-one for you and one to lend to your favorite victim Create and trade battle maps with new terrain editor COMVAND CONQUER Là Em Hà All the power. None of the responsibility. Three game difficulty settings Dozens of close-ups and action movies Internet access tonight!* Play against competitors across the world with Westwood Chat** \"Windows 95 version only **Requires existing Internet access VILANO ELLER KEE SI HELET Available now for Windows & DOS CD-ROM 134 Westwood Weered www.westwood.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #86 "


"COVER STORY STAR WARS GAMES loyal and less productive. If you choose the Rebel side, you start with fewer ships and fewer worlds, but other worlds will be more inclined to side with you. You also have a mobile headquarters which you can move from system to system as you see fit. Each side must meet three victory conditions to win the game. The Empire must capture Luke Skywalker and Mon Mothma, and destroy the Rebel base. The Alliance wins once it captures Darth Vadar, the SOSSWonne x i Day Dvanje Emperor and takes the Imperial capital at EMPIRE VS ALLIANCE REBELLION is perfect for head Coruscant. to-head play, and it will support two-player play over a You must direct link, modem or LAN. satisfy all three victo ry conditions simultaneously if you wish to win, and you can always launch counterattacks to deprive your opponent of achieved victory conditions. If the Empire captures Luke and the Rebel base, you could reclaim the base and rescue Luke, thus stealing victory from their grasp. Theoretically, you could win the game by ignoring con quest and making a beeline to the three victory goals, but what's more likely is that you will end up conquering planets, building resources and creating armadas to give you the necessary firepower and reach to achieve your goals with confidence. E sal IMPERIAL MARCH This window shows the systems in your selected sector and the fleets in orbit around the selected planet from here you move ships, conduct bombardments, and assign and deploy troops and characters. Jedi Knights ne of the key elements of REBELLION IS the use of characters. There are over 60 personalities in the game, drawn from the three Star Wars movies, Timothy Zahn books, and comic books. In terms of gameplay, they operate in a much broader scope than the heroes from games such as MASTER OF ORION. For one, you have to find most characters on your own, by exploring planets. To enhance replayability, the designers haven't placed characters on the worlds they inhabited in the books and movies (so you wouldn't find Lando on Bespin all the time). The personalities also aren't static in their loyalty; some can be swayed to the Dark Side and vice versa. The characters are also integral components of the game, not just doctored stat modifiers. All missions in the game can only be performed with characters, or special forces. However, characters are always better equipped to succeed in missions than special forces. There are at least 12 missions available for your charac ters to perform, including espionage, reconnaissance, diplomacy, assassination, abduction, and sabotage. Characters and their missions are actually vital to your overall success. You take direct hits in loyalty whenever you lose a fleet battle, so you'll use your characters instead of compromising your fleet. (You might conduct a special sabotage mission to take out the Death Star rather than committing a massive fleet to that foolish endeavor.) Characters can work together in missions, so you can group Luke, Chewbacca, Han, Leia and Lando together and send them into the heart of the Empire to abduct the Emperor. In grouped missions, you can assign different characters to different tasks, so that Luke can act as a decoy to draw out Darth Vadar, while Han and Chewbacca infiltrate the Death Star and kidnap Palpatine, In addition to performing their missions, characters also provide bonuses in combat-Vice Admiral Thrawn will improve capital ships in his fleet, and Wedge will confer his piloting skills onto the other fighter pilots in his group. The characters all have pasts and personalities which factor into the game. Luke, for example, will eventually attempt to leave your service to seek out Yoda and become a Jedi Knight. There's a bounty on Han Solo's head, and occasionally Boba Fett will find him and capture him. Of course, if this does happen, you can mount an expedition to rescue him. Many characters are linked, so that if Han ever were captured, Luke would go after him anyway. Other characters who are linked include Han and Chewbacca, Leia and Luke and, of course, Darth Vadar and Luke. JANUARY 1997 "


"@ @ XIX * This space Javailable for immediate occupancy. The darkness of ancient Egypt and evil alien forces, possessing horrifying powers, have taken possession of the ancient city of Karnak. And these landlords are exacting extremely high rents. Like an arm and a leg...or worse. Airdropped into first person and third person landscapes, you must swim, crawl and otherwise run like hell through 30-plus levels of gameplay. Unique Stacked Sector Technology« allows you complete 360° freedom of gameplay. With just a machete to begin with, search for 6 other weapons like hand grenades, a flame thrower, an M60 machine gun and a magical cobra staff. Dynamic lighting allows for stunning visual effects. Cross bridges, crawl through tunnels and swim through underwater grottos. Your only salvation is the guiding Spirit of the Great Pharaoh Ramses. He's the only one in this godforsaken neighborhood who wants to help you get a forwarding address. So welcome to the nightmare of Ramses' tomb. And enjoy your stay. It may last forever. POWERSLAVE PE 13 A MATURE PC CD-ROM Fully networkable up to 4 players. http://www.playmatestoys.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #252 611 Anton Blvd. Suite 500 Costa Mesa, CA 92626 (714) 428 2100 Lobotomy and Powerslave are trademarks of Lobotomy Software, Inc.  Lobotomy Software, Inc. All rights reserved. PIE is a trademark of Playmates Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Artwork and design  Playmates Interactive Entertainment, Inc. "


"COVER STORY STAR WARS GAIVIES BOBA FETT? WHERE? One of the random events in the game is Han's capture at the hands of the bounty hunter, Boba Fett Other events both random and planned, also affect gameplay. Raw materials are basic resources which must be converted to refined materials. Everything in the game with the exception of char. acters) requires refined materials for construction. To extract raw materials from a planet, you need one mine for each raw material point. Then, to convert the raw materials to refined materials, you need one refinery per mine. Your raw and refined materials are then moved to a galactic pool from which all your planets draw when they construct facilities and ships. However, the number of mines and refineries you build is depen. dent on the planet's energy count, so you will have to strategically manage your facilities and materials. If your planet had 10 raw materi al points, and you built 10 mines, you'd have no energy available for refineries or construction yards. Since materials are pooled, you can create planets that solely extract raw materials, other planets that are filled with refineries for processing materials, and still other planets that serve only as construction yards. Your initial planets all have pre-built facilities, but captured and colonized planets will not. The first order of business once you've taken a planet is placing a construction yard there. The other facility types are: mine, refinery, unit training facility, shipyard and planet defense. What you build after the construction yard depends on what you want the planet to specialize in; if you want to start building ships, you will con struct a shipyard. If you want to boost refined material production, you might build a mine and refinery first. The only restriction is the energy output of each planet. Imperial Resources To achieve the power necessary for a final victory, you need to build a great fleet. To do that, you need enough shipyards and resources, and to gain that, you have to control a galaxy's worth of planets. Every planet has three vital statistics: loyalty, energy, and raw materials. Both energy and raw materials exist in finite numbers. The energy of a planet controls how many structures can be built in that system. Whether it's a shipyard, an ion cannon, a troop training facility, mine or refinery, the structure will take one energy point from the planet's total. So a planet with 10 energy points can support 10 facilities. Admiral Thrawn's War Room FERRARI The tactical module is currently taking a back seat to the your ships so you won't have to micromanage in COMMAND & strategic model, which is nearly complete, but we did, CONQUER fashion. manage to play a little combat. First, there will be an \"action\" key, which, when pressed, will You don't have complete freedom over your movements, since make your ship engage the closest target. More importantly, your 2D controller (the mouse) can't pinpoint a place on the z-axis. though, you can assign formations and missions to your ships. You Movement is thus target-or can group a number of capital waypoint-specific. You can 12 mm ships or fighters and have them click on targets, assign your form a spherical formation for fleet a formation and mission, defense, a cylindrical formation for and your ships will then move offense, or more traditional naval in 3D space toward the enemy formations such as line-abreast and fleet. You can also move your ahead. There is also a pickets-forships via waypoints which are ward formation which places your scattered throughout the cube I lo fighters ahead of your capital ships on all three axis. So if you as a shield. wanted to maneuver your ship Alternatively, you can assign a to an area and then have it mission to a group of ships and the attack, you would click on the computer will then pick the formawaypoints you wanted him to tion best suited to the task. Some traverse and then have him SHIP TO SHIP Tactical battle occurs in a 3D cube, which requires a of the missions include: the hamengage the enemy vessel. mer, where your ships attack the few adjustments for gamers used to traditional 2D battlefields. Keep Because combat will tend in mind, this is an early look at the tactical module. The final verenemy from above; the anvil, where to get frenzied, LucasArts is they attack from below; hit and sion, which could look very different, will have textures on the ships providing you much more flex. fade; frontal assault; and altacks and more visual features ibility in issuing commands to from the left and right. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"TY THE FUTURE, YOU DON'T REBUILD. YOU RELOAD, So this game is hot! It takes the best and combines them into one neat package.\" Computer Games Strategy Plus The lighting and motion effects are first rate, you can jump into this game immediately. -Computer Gaming World 050 adrenaline-pounding missions plus 15 multiplayer missions Lock and load with over 25 armaments including: guided missiles, fuel-air mortars and plasma cannons! 4999 URTO 16 PLAYER ARCHY DEATHNUTCHES, TEA MISSIONS PLUS HEAD-TO-HEAD ODENRERE COHOR MACPLAY Battle over 30 robotic alien predators rendered in real time 3D animation Join the ranks of over 100,000 pilots and blast your way to www.interplay.com for the interactive preview.  BioWare Corp. All rights reserved. Shattered Steel MacPlay and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Lipansod and distributed exclusively by Interplay Productions BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS. CIRCLE READER SERVICE 450 "


"COVER STORY STAR WARS GAMES Fartin trol a planet with a powerful army and fleet, though it will diminish loy alty on a planet, making it more susceptible to uprising and defection. Such a strategy of control through terror also stretches the Empire thin and requires an enormous industrial machine. KOV V-10 Gama Sida CHURNING OUT THE DEATH STARS This Window shows your sector planets and the selected planet's manufacturing window, where you build facilities, ships and troops. Notice that the sector windows also show planet loyalties and energy. War Machine Capturing planets is your intermediate step to control of the galaxy. You can take most neutral planets by sending diplomatic missions to them to sway their loyalty, or simply assault and conquer them with troops. Uninhabited planets are easy pickings, since all you need do is simply establish one facility or station one garrison there and it automatically becomes a loyal subject. The other types of planels (Rebel and Imperial-controlled) can only be taken by force. If a planet is guarded by an enemy fleet, you will have to clear away all enemy ships in tactical space combat. Before every tactical combat, though, the computer will ask if you want to play the combat yourself, or let the computer resolve it quickly. Sometimes, simply because of the sheer number of battles you will have to wage, having the computer abstract the battles for you will be the wisest move. Other times, especially in key battles, you will take control yourself. If you win in tactical combat, your fleet then must destroy all planetary defenses and shields. Sometimes this is easier said then done, as you can build planetary shields, and a preponderance of shields will negate bombardment. In these cases, you will need to send characters to sabo. tage the shields before your ship can conduct bombardments and drop troops onto the planet. Once you've defeated all enemy troops and estab. lish your own garrison, control will switch to your side. And at that time, you'll have to send a diplomatic cleanup crew in your wake to mop up the damage to loyalty and bring the planet into line. Fomenting Rebellion Perhaps the most important planetary statistic is loyalty. Loyalty is a measure of a planet's allegiance to the Empire or Alliance. It affects a planet's manufacturing capabilities and production and is a dynamic number that can fluctuate as the game progresses. When you com mand a majority of loyalty and have a garrison or facility on a planet, it switches to your control. As long as you command 60 percent loyal ty from a planet, it will work efficiently for you. However, if your loyalty dips below this number, you could face an uprising and illegal smug gling on the planet. Smuggling eats into your resources because the planet actually starts contributing a percentage of its raw and refined materials to the enemy side. When an uprising occurs, the local populace will attack your garrisons. Once all garrisons are defeated, the planet will become hostile and could switch sides. Obviously, gaining loyalty is a huge part of the game, and as the Alliance, it is vital that you reach every planet and gain its loyalty. Various factors can affect this number. On the negative side, bombard. ing a planet, losing a fleet battle or destroying planets with a Death Star (if you are the Empire) will lower loyalty towards you on a given planet. However, garrisoning a planet with troops, stationing facilities on a planet or setting up your HQ there (if you are the Rebels), will improve loyalty. Also, sending characters on diplomatic missions to a planet can improve its loyalty. Only special forces (a group of units in the game comprised of spies, diplomats and commandos) and char. acters can perform diplomatic missions, but you will have to be careful, as your characters are susceptible to capture while on missions. If you're playing the Empire, you can circumvent loyalty to an extent. Planetary control is calculated by totaling a planet's loyalty, the military presence, and diplomatic missions sent there. You can con The Galactic Sum of Parts LucasArts looks on track to provide gamers with a galaxy rich with strategic challenges, innovative combat and all the personality of the Star Wars mythology. Add to this the exhilaration that comes from meting out punishment with a Death Star or directing a rescue effort with Luke and Han and you could have a dream come true for Star Wars fans everywhere. If LucasArts stays true to the design and deliv. ers on the promise of this early version, then gamers will at last have the power to write the final chapter in the Star Wars saga. FATHER AND SON Many characters are linked in the game; when Darth and Luke meet in a system, they will automatically engage each other. Depending on the outcome one or both of them could end up injured or captured. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"On August 30th.. GERENTS Reserve s your copy of Daggerfall Today! Details at Electronics Boutique, Software Etc. and Babbages ...computer role playing will be changed forever! CGERET ambition DE ELDER SCROLIS CHAP 2 \"The many excellencies of The Elder Scrolls: Daggerfall mean that Bethesda is going to be the company defining the future of CRPG-ing on computers for some time to come. Wait for this one with bated breath.\" -Strategy Plus \"This is the game that hardcore FRPG fans have been waiting for since the beginning ... Daggerfall will introduce players to a mirror land inside their computer that looks and feels like real-life ....\" -Trent Ward, PC Gamer Announcing The Elder Scrolls: Daggerfall, Bethesda's latest installment in the Elder Scrolls Series and the sequel to the award-winning TES:Arena. TES: Daggerfall is one of the most ambitious computer games ever devised. This is no dungeon hack, no bit of fluff with medieval trappings. Daggerfall's world is twice the size of Great Britain, filled with people, adventures, and scenery as real as reality. This is a world designed to allow you to play the game any way you want. Be the Hero or the Villain... or anything in between. TES: Daggerfall is all your favorite movies and books wrapped up in one package-with hundreds and hundreds of hours of playtime. Prepare to Actual IBM screens shown experience your new obsession. POWERED BY curte DE ELDER SCROLLS Chapter Two BETHESDA SOFTWORKS 1370 Piccard Drive, Suite 120, Rockville, MD 20850 BBS: 301 990-7552  Fax: 301 926-8010. Website: http://www.bethsoft.com Daggertall The Elder Scrolls.x\"Gine\" and Bad Dog are trademarks of Media Technology Limited. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Copyright 1994-1996 Media Technology Limited. All Rights Reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #383 Bad dog don't cast that spell! CONTRATO AT ESRB o Get a Free Daggerfall Figurine! CGW Cut out the corner of this ad and send it along with your name, address and phone number respondents will receive a figurine. to Bethesda Softworks. The first 100 FREE Daggertall "


"COVER STORY STAR WARS GANES Jedi Knight Feel the Force The Dark Side Returns In LucasArts' DARK FORCES Sequel The Power of the Dark Side JEDI's story unfolds via full motion video cut scenes shot with live actors. You play the role of Kyle Katarn, the mercenary from DARK FORCES, as he trains to become a Jedi Knight. Your ultimate goal is to avenge your by V. Long father's death and ful ucasArts' DARK FORCES was a great first-perfill his quest to stop son action game, but even its biggest fans Jerec, the leader of argued that DARK FORCES could have been the Dark Jedi. better...much better. In creating JEDI KNIGHT, Although you fight the the 3D sequel to DARK FORCES, it's clear that Dark Jedi, you can still LucasArts intended to create a winner. embrace the Dark Side. The develop At the time of CGW's visit, the Jedi project ment of different Force powers and the had reached an exciting point where the choice between the Light and Dark Sides game's elements were beginning to come are what truly distinguishes Jedi's game. together. What we saw there and describe here play. By completing levels, you gain expe. is not necessarily what will appear in the final rience points for acquiring and growing product, but certainly indicates a big step into the dimension Force powers. These points also deterbeyond \"playing the game,\" into one of \"living the game.\" mine the amount of mana-health or energy-available for using a Force BOBA FETT'S BACK?! power. LucasArts tells us that Whatever Force powers you saw our favorite bounty in the Star Wars movies will be hunter won't be appearincluded in Jedi. Basic Force powing in JEDI KNIGHT. But ers can boost speed, as well as hope springs eternal increase jumping and healing abilities. Light Force powers can create forcefields and invisibility. The best known are probably the Dark Force powers, which enable players to psychokinetically throw objects, hurl lightning bolts, and even strangle opponents from afar (and yes, the gagging victims even dangle inches off the ground). The Jedi team hopes to visually enhance the Force powers with particle effects. For example, a Force Push will shoot a column of particles from the hand to push against the target. Whichever path you take, you'll need all the Force power you can summon when you encounter the seven Dark Jedi. Jerec, their leader, seeks to take the immense power of the THE GREAT OUTDOORS One very refreshing change from the standard first-perValley of the Jedi, an ancient Jedi burial ground. Each one son 3D \"corridor crawls\" is the ability to take a deep breath of fresh air..or the represents a distinct archetypal personality as in Akira lack thereof. Kurosawa's Seven Samurai. Morgan WesGos Jan Drs Byla Katara Sarias BOC Jerec JANUARY 1997 "


"STAR WARS GAMES COVER STORY Although the Dark Jedi obviously outnum. \"mere\" light saber to attack and topple an ber you, fear not that you face them alone. In AT-ST Walker. The saber is capable of six JEDI, Rahn is your mentor, much like Obi-Wan precise strikes: left and right overhead, Ben Kenobi was Luke Skywalker's. He appears sideslash, and upward cuts. The Force can every now and then, and when he does, you'd help you use the saber to deflect even better pay attention to what he tells you. blaster shots. Chin notes that defeating the Dark Jedi will require a light saber... In Stunning 3D and lots of Force For the real action, the characters and levels are rendered in true 3D texture. Bring Your Own Saber mapped polygons with MIP-mapThose disappointed by DARK FORCES'S ping and dynamic shadowing. For eye. lack of multiplayer can now rejoice. JEDI popping graphics, LucasArts will support 3D supports multiplayer via DirectPlay for at graphics accelerators via Direct3D. least 8 players. Members on the proCharacter animations are impressively gramming team say that multiplayer persmooth because JEDI uses unlimited frames formance over the Internet will be supeof animation: depending on the computer's rior to QUAKE. There will be combat, power, extra frames are interpolated between team, and capture-the-flag modes. key frames. JEDI promises to revitalize, if not revo In addition to the first person viewpoint, lutionize, multiplayer combat. Players players can also opt for the third-person can ride speeder bikes and flying vehiperspective, which helps for puzzle solvcles into multiplayer mayhem. The light ing. Also helpful in exploring the intrisaber is a completely unique melee cately crafted levels is the crouch feature weapon, and the Force powers, such as from DARK FORCES. the Force Grip, inject completely new Large open spaces, such as bottomless meaning to grabbing your opponents by engine bays and vast outdoor cliffs, abound their jugulars. By far the most interesting in Jedi's environment. Even underwater aspect of multiplayer JEDI is that your areas will look spectacular because of character's abilities are determined by translucency and lighting effects (think MARIO what you've accomplished during solo 64). The environment is also immersively SPAM IN A CAN. Taking down an AT-ST is quite play for JEDI. Yes, this means Jedi has interactive: stray shots will destroy various a trick, but rest assured that the Imperial the save game feature which was sorely objects; and you can drive speeder bikes Troopers inside are not amused lacking in DARK FORCES. and flying vehicles. Populating the scenic environment are bounty hunters, Imperial COGs in the Machine Stormtroopers, and various monsters-including some that fly or The controls will be similar to QUAKE's, except that the freelook fea. swim. Also thrown into the fray are innocent \"pedestrians.\" Chin dis t ure will be always be active. If desired, the controls can be redefined. courages players from wantonly killing innocent bystanders, \"JEDI The programmers are also considering the ability to make macros. KNIGHT is not a kill-fest. Blood, guts, gore, and gibs is not what JEDI Players can easily create custom graphics and levels. Although KNIGHT is about.\" Among the weapons at your disposal are blaster pis. LucasArts probably won't release the development tools, it encourtols, laser rifles, and thermal detonators. Realistically modeled recoil ages others to make their own utilities. effects add to the visceral feel of JEDI. In addition, players can modify the behavior of nearly every discrete For accomplished Jedi, the light saber will be the preferred weapon element via a scripting language called \"COG.\" Huebner notes, \"COG despite its limited range. We witnessed one brave programmer use a is a full implementation of C syntax with expandable verbs, and is more flexible.\" Because COG is an interpreted language, all you need is a text editor to change monster behavior, add new weapons, and even enable new Force powers...you can literally redefine the universe. During our tour of the Jedi facilities, we heard more than one pro grammer exclaim, \"You can do anything with this engine.\" When Jedi Ships early in the second quarter of this year, you'll need at least a Pentium 60 with 16 MB and Windows 95 to feel the Force. Maw. PIG Care THE GANG You play the role of Kyle Katam, whose goal is to stop Jerec from taking the legendary Valley of the Jedi and its immense power JANUARY 1997 CG "


"COVER STORY  STAR WARS GAMES X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter Aces Of The Stars Dogfighting Gets Personal In X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER 100% URSI 2009 003 ALI I FUSELAGE 650700 UP YOUR SIX The HUD has been improved to show your target's bearing and current action, allowing you to see when and what he's firing at you and check his maneuvering by Elliott Chin IE FIGHTER, and to a lesser extent X-WING, were great space sims with a major omission: they lacked that special thrill that comes with battling against human opponents. However, this restriction will soon be thrown out the airlock with LucasArts' upcoming X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER. X vs TIE is aimed squarely at multiplayer action; it has no solo campaign. However, if you do want to fly alone, there will be single player \"battles,\" which are short collections of mis. sions strung together with a traditional Rebel vs. Empire storyline. These battles will also be playable multiplayer, and are designed for up to four-on-four play, with players picking teams and playing for the Empire or Rebellion. In single player, you can take your pick of roles (you could be the bomber in the Y-Wing or fly escort in an X-Wing); in multiplayer, different players assume each role. These roles will change according to each mission. giving players variety in the craft they fly and the roles they play. There will also be multi player tournaments, comPICTURE PERFECT In addition to the gorgeous posed of skill-based misgraphics, the game will offer dynamic entry for sions. One mission could be games in progress and let you jump into other a race, another could be a ships in the dogfight after you die, though you dogfight, and another could be an obstacle course. will inherit whatever damage it has suffered Points are tallied up at the end of each mission, and the player with the most points at the tournament's end is declared the best pilot. X vs. TIE will also offer quick and dirty dogfights, races, and single missions for quick action. In total, there will be around 70 missions available. For you competitive pilots, there will be a built-in ranking system. The 25 ranks are based on amassed points. These points are determined by the quality of your opponents. If you beat a high-ranked player or a good Al opponent, you get more points than if you take out a rookie. The Best Fighter Yet Aside from the jump to multiplayer gaming, X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER differs from its predecessors in its graphics engine and in key areas of gameplay. The graphics are now breathtakingly rendered at 640x480 resolution in 16-bit color, with gorgeous textures and fantastic detail. Gameplay is also being balanced so that weak ships, like the shieldless TIE Fighter, won't be grossly outmatched by the more powerful X-Wings. The firing rate of all ships has been sped up, and movement has changed. Now, your turning rate is a function of your throttle and current speed. The faster you go, the harder it is to turn and take out the bogey on your tail. Redirecting energy from engines to other subsystems will hinder your maneuverability. During multiplayer dogfights, you don't want to type while being blasted, so LucasArts is adding hot keys for simple chat messages and commands. Typing P will target human players, and hitting another hot-key will broadcast a help message to your allies. The game will have pop-up menus to convey data about your wingmen so you need n't spend time typing to ask for information. There is no doubt that X-WING VS. TIE FIGHTER is one of the most hotly anticipated games of the year. Even in its beta stage it plays better than TIE FIGHTER, and it has a good mix of missions. If the final game is as smooth as the beta version, X-WING VS TIE FIGHTER could very well displace QUAKE, DUKE, and WARCRAFT II and become the nel work game of choice CG JANUARY 1997 "


"STONEKEEP MECHWARRIOR2 wine commanDER QUAKE Win 95 is cool, but sucks with DOS games! Games run best on the Operating Even your parents could do it! System they were designed for! System Commander's automatic installation will have your PC ready to add OSes in less than 5 minYou've got great DOS games, utes. And unlike some utilities, it uses less than but you really want to try that new Now you can run more than one 1 MB of hard disk space and no RAM! operating system on your PC! Win 95 game. You want it all. But, Get it and play it! if you upgrade to Win 95, it will As you install new OSes, System really hose your DOS games. With Commander automatically copies key files and System Commander you can play each game the way it was meant to adds the new OS to its menu. It manages unique copies of AUTOEXEC.BAT. 'be played...on the Os it was CONFIG.SYS and COMMAND.COM for each designed for. installation of DOS, Windows 95 or any other System Commander allows you operating system. to boot both DOS (3.3 or later) and MANDER Win 95 on the same PC. When you System Commander is only $99.95 and comes with an unconditional 60 day money turn on your machine, System back guarantee. Mention this ad and get Commander gives you a menu. Pick the Os you FREE* overnight shipping. Call today and play your want and with the touch of a button System brains out tomorrow! Commander does the rest. WINDOWS DOS UNIX COMPUSA EGGHEAD. GB Available in the utilities section of most major software stores. V Communications, Inc. 4320 Stevens Creek Blvd, #120-CGW2 San Jose, CA 95129 800-648-8266 www.v-com.com Circle Reader Service #384  When ordered before noon PST. No Saturday delivery. Standard shipping outside US. CA res, add $7.25 sales tax. Offer subject to change without notice. All logos and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies. VISA/MC/Amex  "


"Untitated JAH MABILE MORE BUTTONS! MORE PROGRAMMING! MORE POWER! Success Is not measured by reaching game over Shed no tears for the loser. Show no mercy for whatever stands in your way. Hold no sympathy for the weaker opponent. Get ACT Laboratory's programmable Joysticks and gamepads. Take unlimited control. PROQRAMMARLE PC ARCADE  The digital arcade stick for all your PC games FEAGLENANT BE PRO BMPC HYPERPROORN HOWRRAME ER PROGRAMMABLED Available a Electronics Boutique, Software Etc., Babbages, GR Computer, Good Guys, Medla Play http://www.actlab.com/gamegear email: hyper@actlab.com 1-800-980-9997 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #191 senetlab.com Laboratory Ltd. "


"Lock On Anda Blast 'Em Strategies & Tactics For Four Great Science Fiction Games in the world of science-fiction gaming, you'll fight battles that have never been fought. The new technologies and new sit uations presented in these games require new tactics, even for the experienced gamer. Although you may be an ace vir tual tank driver, you'll find that combat in MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES is so radically different that entirely new tactics are in order. It's one thing to conquer your neighbors in CIVILIZATION, since you know they're not that much different than you. It's quite another in DEADLOCK, where their species-specific abilities can make them deadly unpredictable. So dive into the strategy guides that follow before you embark on your next interstellar journey because in space, no one should hear you scream. 12 ills JANUARY 1997 "


"IN THE PAST, WE EXCEEDED YOUR 'EXPECTATIONS. SOON. WE'LL CHANGE YOUR ENTIRE DESTINY. 'Weewoo STUDIO w w w , w e s t w o o d, c o m ands of Lore: Guardians of Destiny is a registered trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc.  1996 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"LANDS OF LORE GUARDIANS OF DESTINY CIRCLE READER SERVICE #167 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY Silencer Training Victory Through Mayhem In CRUSADER: NO REGRET by Thierry Nguyen Back on Earth, you had a cozy, albeit annoying, arms dealer. Well, the Moon isn't as posh as Earth. You will learn the true meaning of \"living off the land\" as you scrounge all of your ammunition and weapons off of your dead comrades. Because your ammo has to be kay soldier, you made it to the Moon. Of course, if you try waltzing in through that first room without a battle plan, you'll be a red smear on the wall instead of a red scare. That's why we're here: to turn you into a lethal killing machine-one with no regret. The bulk of this guide is devoted to general tactics. Fighting on the Moon is quite different from fighting on Earth, and I figured that you soldiers need the valuable advice. With these tactics, plus some of your own engi neering, you should be able to get through most of the missions. As a small bonus, I have run into detailed intelligence reports on missions eight and nine. I've heard many sol. diers griping about the difficulty of these two missions, and I've provided solutions to the most problematic seg. ments of these two levels. SA MECHANICAL MINION Robots can be used to your advantage. Since they have unlimited ammo, use them for breaking open containers and for clearing a path. THIS IS HOW WE DANCE First off, you need to familiarize yourself with the interface. Quite a few mistakes can be traced back to the soldier in question pushing the wrong buttons at the wrong time. Get your interface down cold, and your skill will improve drastically. I can hear some of you grumbling about which interface to use. Some say using the mouse for aiming and the keyboard for everything else is king. Others say the gamepad is the commando's choice. For those of you who want to take advantage of the joystick support, I have one thing to say: joysticks were made for flying, not for maneuvering a man through corridors. I like to stay with the keyboard. I use the layout hard-wired in my head from Doom, but the number pad is a good interface, with major keys laid out neatly and accessibly. Blac WATCH YOUR AIM Now we get to the fun part: weapons training. You're now going to learn what weapons to use, when, and how. Pay attention-you don't want to be caught sleeping here! Now, contrary to what you might think, you don' want to use those three fancy new guns all the time. In fact, you should save them for specific types of enemies, as general use would be a huge waste. Your general weapons should be the more mundane bullet shooters. G REE DON'T TRY THIS AT HOME If you use the old No REMORSE cheat, JASSICA16, you'll be greeted with this ugly scenario. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"For the few, the proud, the courageous and uncompromising bastards rathe die than lose presenting the new Firebird WWW.!r (vis.com Firebird 2 is the top of the line joystick. It's for those of you who stop at nothing to conquer your enemy. It's loaded with features like 13 programmable buttons for dynamic keyboard control and an 8-way programmable hat switch. So you never have to take your hands off the stick, or your eyes off the action. We also designed the handle so you can play hours on end without any discomfort. Other than the psychological damage you might incur from all the death and havoc you'll wreak on your competition. Get Firebird 2 and start playing games the way they were meant to be played. Get it at your favorite store or call us at 1-800-257-0061. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #350 GRAVIS gaming for the 21st century Our Advanced Gravi. Cugir Technology Ltd. All this reserved. Charles and bird ar rademarks of Aid waced C . All trademarks opply of their respectivy "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY in point for reinforcements. Of course, you want to make sure that you preempt any reinforcements, so, if the pad isn't blinking, slap a disruptor on it, where it can greet any newcomers with a nasty surprise. If you do need to use the pad, be sure to pick up your disruptor first. Finally, you have other potentially useful explosives. You can use the mine as a substitute for the disruptor if you don't have it handy, although that's about the extent of its usefulness. The det pac is useful for blowing up doors and obstacles in your way. Also, if you see floating or stationary mines, use the wonderful mine detonator to clear a path for you. vage. MAGIC EIGHT For mission eight (where you need to shoot down the troop transport), many soldiers complain that they reach the top floor of the base without knowing where to go, and end up running KNEE DEEP IN THE DEAD Weapons like the XP-5 make a nice mess, but out of time and losing the mission. You have a few minutes to they also fry your enemy so badly there's nothing left to scavenge. Use a find the console and shoot the marine transport down. As soon bullet weapon on these guys if you want to pick up ammo from their bodies. as you emerge from the elevator, run eastward, making sure to shoot cameras and the tripwire on your way. When you get out of taken off mostly intact corpses, you'll need to use mundane weapons that little passage, run northward to the computer console near the for the kill. Those fancy new arms don't leave anything behind to sal p it. If you didn't trip the red alert, you should be able to use the console to activate the light bridge. You should be using either your RP-32 or your AC-88. The RP-32 is Then make a mad dash to that light bridge, and yet another dash the gun you start out with, and it will be valuable early on. Many sol across it. When you reach the other side, make a final run for the diers use it, so its ammunition supply line is good, and it deals out northern wall (try to avoid the electric walls). Hopefully, you'll reach decent damage. The AC-88 is what you get when you make an auto the right control panel, and you can just zap those incoming marines matic shotgun: very nice damage combined with a great firing rate. goodbye. That takes care of the time limit; now you just have to worry Once you grab one and have some ammo to feed it, you can start about getting yourself out of the level. But that should be no problem using it as your primary weapon, employing your RP-32 as backup for a soldier with your training. So, when do you use the new weapons? Feel free to take out civilians or machinery with them. If you have the energy, the XP-5 is great SELF-DESTRUCTION against just about every robot, while the BK-16 (freezegun) and the Mission nine isn't so hard, because you have a greater time limit LNR-81 (vaporizer) are about equal in power-though the nod goes to (15 minutes), but people are confused as to how to do it. First, travel the LNR-81 due to its superior range and firing rate. Use your ARK:7 east. Once you reach the large room, go south in order to gain or GL-303 to destroy power generators or cameras with the splash damage UTILITY BELT Some of you will probably need a primer on your new toys and how to use them properly. First, your Spider Bombs and the new Spider Mine. They're both good weapons, and the only difference between the two is that the bomb is controlled by you, while the mine is self-guiding. If you're unsure of your bomb control skills, use the mine The VIR Imager is essential equipment; use it as much as you can until you learn to instinctively recognize clues that will help you spot all the tripwires waiting for you. However, it eats up energy, so learn to watch for patterns as you spot each successive tripwire. Soon, you may get a feel for where a tripwire might be. At that point you can stop using the VIR Imager at all times and conserve that energy for when you really need it. When you see a teleporter, you might want to use a disruptor on it. If you can't use the teleporter, chances are that it's a beamAPTI O so HASTA LA VISTA, BABY You can use your new, more powerful weapons on the police and robots, who don't leave anything of worth behind anyway. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"WEIGHT MEN IN IN IN LITTLE JUS EXCITE YOU DO OVERWEIG PINK TUTUSE CLOWNS YOUR ARE SADISTI. OF A GOOD TIME, IDEA OF AG DO YOU THI KINDA SEXY? \"U THINK SHEEP SHEEP ARE THEY'RE *Y? ESPECIALLY ALLY WHEN PRE DOLLED UP AND FORM-P ED UP IN HEELS FORM-FITTING LA NG LATEX? "


"oonstruck is a new twist on twisted. No computer gamer will want to be deprived of this depravity. Not when they can watch Spike the Clown torture balloon animals. See Seedy, the tu-tu clad bartender, fooledo do a little butt bowling. And HEY W YOUR GAME TOONS prevent an all-out war between the cartoon forces of good and evil. Toonstruck blends live action (starring Christopher Lloyd) with wild animation for some of the most bizarre puzzlebased adventure gameplay ever. Toonstruck is dark, weird and has more twists and turns than your lower intestine. So go ahead. Punch out a clown. Flush fish. "


"Toon geuck \"...hilarious cartoon quality animation and an absolutely bizarre world make Toonstruck an adventure game unlike any we've seen. The allEIRDO. AS ARRIVED. TRUCK. over-the-board humor is delicious,\" says COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. \"The twisted realms of this adult cartoon adventure (has)...all the elements of a great game: beautiful graphics, challenging puzzles, outrageous humor and good ol' star power,\" says 1996 Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Toonstruck is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. PC GAMES. Finally, \"A must see\" from COMPUTER GAME REVIEW. We are sure you'll agree. Weirdo. burst INTERACTIVE entertainment Toonstruck CIRCLE READER SERVICE #239 www.vie.com PC CD-ROM "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY POWER HUNGRY Always try to hit power generators early, because chances are they're powering a shield for a turret or a camera. SELF-DESTRUCT This is the actual computer core; just walk up and \"use\" it to negate the 15-minute time limit in level eight. When you get down the stairs, proceed north until you run into a mas sive, door-like object. This is your mission objective: simply \"use\" the computer core, and the self-destruct sequence ends. After stopping the self-destruct sequence, prepare to finish this level and then hop onto the last level to save the Moon. access to the elevator platform. Continue east until you hit a laser field. Enter the room that requires the yellow key, and immediately roll to one side to avoid the rockets poised at the door. Kill everyone in the room, then use the computer to the far west (it's in its own alcove) to shut off the laser field. If you triggered the force field for this room, just use the panel on the west wall (it's behind a planet, near the foot locker) and walk out. You're near the objective, but also at the complicated part. First, proceed north on the catwalk. If you try to go east down the stairs, you'll likely trigger the laser field, which must be deactivated. As you go north, you'll see the floor panel that triggers another laser field; jump over it to save some hassle. If you do end up triggering that field, the switch to deactivate it is to the east, on a little catwalk. Now, continue to follow that catwalk until you get to another console; this one will deactivate the laser field on the stairs. After deactivating the laser field, carefully make your way back to the stairs. As you go down the stairs, be sure to jump over the step with the hand sign, or you'll re-trigger the laser field you just deactivated. END OF THE ROAD Okay soldier, that's it for this round. Hopefully you've learned and refined the tactics mentioned above, and now know how to solve the two hardest puzzles in the game (besides killing the boss, but that's a different story...). Now, get going! Armstrong may have landed on the Moon, but no one can stop you from coming back to clean up the mess. Silencer and Pagan s in the original CRUSADER, there's an Easter Egg room here packed with goodies. It's near the end of mission six (destroying the Di-Cor refinery). Here's how to get there: Once you reach the Di-Cor refinery, instead of dropping the Fusion-Pac, jump across the conveyor belts to the other side. Then walk south (just follow the path) until you reach a small, isolated area near a vending machine. Take a few steps northwest of the vending machine, and a secret door should open, revealing a teleporter. Walk into this teleporter, and you'll be teleported to the No Regret Easter Egg. Walk up the middle hallway to reach the tables full of goodies. Feel free to loot the place. Then, for fun, walk up the hallway on the right. A door will open up, and you'll be treated to a scene starring the Silencer, an Ultima 8-esque Pagan, and Tony Zurovec (the designer). Don't worry, this isn't like the No Remorse Easter Egg; after viewing it you can jump back into the teleporter and finish the level properly. If you want to jump there easily, without all the complicated stepping and searching, start the game with the command \"regret -Warp 6 -egg 20,\" and you'll instantly warp there. You may also want to try No Regret's cheat code, LOOSECANNON 16. Also, try typing JASSICA 16 and you'll be treated to yet another (less amusing) Easter Egg. WHERE'S THE BUNNY? The easter egg room is located at the end of mission six, where you'll be treated to a special scene and some prize goodies. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Intense Underwater Action ... Better Hold Your Breath! ARCHIMEDEAN DYNAST li CREDI 2 49.00 Stunning Hi-color, Hi-res graphics with 65,000 colors Atmospheric surround Sound Detailed storyline with real-time battles in SVGA vector graphics Realistic underwater motion simulation with currents Impressive arsenal of weapons Interact with hundreds of characters Advanced dialog system Available October 196 FOR PC CD-ROM Humanity ends where the deep begins ... Bure Byte CHECK OUT WWW.BLUEBYTE.COM FOR YOUR MISSION INSTRUCTIONS Call 1-800-933-Byte for further information. Blue Byte Software, Inc./33 South Roselle Road / Suite 201 / Schaumburg, IL 60193 / Voice: (847) 534-7950 / Fax: (847) 534-7951 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #171 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY Taking Control Save STAR CONTROL 3's Galaxy And Make New Friends With These Handy Hints by Elliott Chin Spoiler Alert These tips practically give away the story of STAR CONTROL 3, so if you really want to enjoy the game, only use these hints as a last resort. STAR CONTROL 3's ending is a big letdown, so it's the journey and not the ending that's the real fun of the game. FLEASE DONT ATTAQX USI Wollel you whatever you want to now laying STAR CONTROL 3 is like putting on the giant shoes of Captain Kirk for a full season of Star Trek. You'll explore strange new worlds, meet new civilizations, and boldly go where no other science fiction game has WE CANT STAND PAIN Once the Spathi join the Crux, threaten them gone before-into the realm of wacky humor, and they will give you helpful Crux secrets. colony management, and frenzied hypermelee. Of course, even Captain Kirk had a little THE HUNDRED-DAY BORE help in the form of the passionate Doctor McCoy and the logical The first hundred days of your command are fairly uneventful. Make Vulcan, Mr. Spock. It's only fair, then, that you have a little help on sure you destroy all Daktaklakpak ships you encounter. Once you've your five year voyage, too. destroyed all the Daktaklakpak you meet, your tech team will decipher their language. Don't worry, you'll meet more later to test your new Dak interpreter. When you do, tell them you will hunt for Precursor and Eternal One artifacts for them, and they will let you live. At the same time, the VUX will mount repeated raids on the Mycon homeworld every 31 days. You'll find out later how they're achieving this seemingly impossible feat, but for now, answer all Mycon distress calls and destroy any VUX raiders you run into. After you stop three attacks, the raids will stop. You'll want to explore this quadrant in search of the five Kessari Quadrant races Warning Intruder beating suficient reasoning power to qually as a renkiert olgarnem delected occupying a portion of and the six Crux races. After you've met the five of the six Crux races living in the Kessari Quadrant, Eltanin will collapse. Go there to investigate, but be prepared to face a Crux battle fleet. They will appear soon DON'T CALL THEM DAKS This will only make them violent. Destroy all Daktaklakpak, because after with a great armada composed of each planet they guard has a Precursor artifact. ships from all six Crux races, ready to declare war on the League. Kestatli quadrant space CG JANUARY 1997 "


"You're Fighting to protect good and Restore the Rightful King to power. The Neverhoog registered tradem 1996 Dreamworks Interactive LLC All rights reserved. The Neverhoed Til Bad News is you're the guy on the right. \"Clever, an utterly different vision and experience from all the lookalike games...' --NEWSDAY Neverhood the The good news is you're a lot smarter than the guy on the left. Good thing, considering you'll have to solve more than 60 puzzles in order to succeed in the twisted, clay-animated world of Neverhood. You'll help Klaymen avoid pitfalls, collect clues, and kick a little clay butt. All to defeat the evil Klogg DREAMWORKS and bring the Neverhood back to normal. At least, as INTERACTIVE normal as it ever gets. [www.DreamWorksGames.com Vevorhood Impark on a clay adventure that breaks the word "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY SPINELESS SPATHI Soon after the war starts, the Crux will start bullying the Spathi, who will eventually succumb to the threats and defect. Let them defect. You can make the Spathi's cowardice work for you; threaten to kill them once they join the Crux and they will divulge Crux secrets to stave off your attacks. They can tell you where to find the missing Ultron pieces, reveal the Doog and Clairconctlar debts, give you insight into the Harika disease, and tell you what the Dak have done with the Mmrnmrhm Mother Ark. Oh bol the color de la for the G O U geen DUH, US DOOG Ask the Spathi about the Doog debt and then buy out each Doog colony. They'll give you an anti-matter containment grid and join the League. POWER CHESS THE HOPELESS UTWIG When the Utwig report their Ultron stolen (by the VUX), visit the THE BETTER PART OF VALOR To escape this first Crux armada at Pkunk, who will point you to Erato 6, where you will find VUX rene. Eltanin, go there as soon as it collapses and then immediately jump gades and a broken Ultron. Return to the Pkunk and they will tell you to another star system. Your tech team will still report their findings, to find the Ivory Sheath, Marble Flange, and Crystal Plate to repair the but you'll leave before the Crux ships arrive. Ultron. The Pkunk will point you to the Plate, the Spathi will find the Flange for you, and the Daktaklakpak know where the Sheath is on Caduceus 1). However, the Ultron won't be fully repaired until you find the very last piece, which the VUX will give you only after you've found their genetic material and joined them with \"POWER CHESS is the M ore powerful than any human the Vyro-Ingo (this happens very late first innovation in chess opponent. The Power Chess King in the game). programs in more than is truly innovative remembering a decade.\" Larry Christiansen, what you played and adapting to stay THE FUNGUS KNOWN AS MYCON International Grandmaster one step ahead. Two-time U.S. Champion Once your tech team discovers Three-time U.S. Open Champion More human than any computer that the Deep Children are sentient, SAHIB opponent. The Power Chess Queen is go to the Mycon and demand to a unique, speaking Tutor reviewing speak to a Deep Child. They'll put each game against the King and one in orbit at Janus 1, and it will preparing you for the next. join you, provided you concede that Together they combine computer it is sentient. Then revisit the Mycon intelligence with life-like personality and tell them they must stop minda first for computer chess and wiping the Deep Children. They will for humans too. refuse and join the Crux. Much later in the game, after you've re-evolved the Precursor, the Precursor will ask you whether you think the Deep SIERRA Children should be free or subordi nate to the Mycon. If you want to free the Deep Children, the Visit us at www.sierra.com, call 1-800-757-7707 or see your local software dealer. Precursor will tell you that you can 1996 Sierra On-Line, Inc., and/or designate trademarks of or licensed to Sierra On-Lino, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. use the Plasma Regrover to do so. Labdilla sad DOS TO ADULTS AGES CIRCLE READER SERVICE #82 "


"  DI S CLOSUR E THE YEAR IS 2020, AND THE EARTH'S OZONE LAYER IS CRUMBLING. AS MANKIND HANGS ON THE BRINK OF EXTINCTION, A SUB-SPACE PROBE NAMED HUYGEN MAY HAVE DISCOVERED ONE LAST GLIMMER OF HOPE. NOW THE FIGHT TO SAVE THE EARTH WILL TAKE YOU TO A MOON MORE THAN A MILLION MILES FROM THE NEAREST SUN. TOD FOR WINDOWS 3. I AND WINDOWS 95 EXPECT A marks and restored trademark's on the propel the respective owners MADE IN CANADA DON'T WARM WELCOME. 'HUYGEN'S DISCLOSURE FEATURES THESE EXCITING MICROFORUM INNOVATIONS: DIMENSION TECHNOLOGY SCALEABLE CHARACTERS REFLECT ACTUAL PERSPECTIVE WHEN MOVING FROM FOREGROUND TO BACKGROUND GROUP ACTIVATED INTELLIGENCE MODE (GAIM) USER'S TEAMMATES FEATURE INDEPENDENT INTELLIGENCE, ALLOWING THEM TO REACT BASED ON THE SURROUNDING ENVIRONMENT ON OD FOR A LIMITED TIME ONLY! Huygen's Disclosure Limited Edition Available direct from Microforum, this special edition of Huygen's Disclosure includes:  A special Limited Edition box  The complete Huygen's Disclosure game  A collection of cheats, hints and tactics for the game  A collectible Huygen's Disclosure T-Shirt  Original Huygen's Disclosure game artwork Call 1-800-685-3863 to order Visa, MC accepted. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #251 elicnc Only $4995 FOR MORE INFO ABOUT MICROFORUN OR TO ORDER DIRECT, CALL: 1-800-685-3863 Tel: (416)656-9594 Fox: (416)656-0548 INTERNET : http://www.microforum.com Email: moil@microforum.com "


"01:00:13:06 01:00:14:17 How did we come up with the exciting new features found in Destruction Derby 2? By accident. 01:00:16:21 01:00:18:03 KIDS TO ADULTS CONTENT RATED BY ROM PSYGNOSIS DESTRUCTION = UFRBY: www.psygnosis.com Destruction DerbyTM 2 is the perfect combo of balls-to-the-wall racing and 3D wreckage. Seven new tracks are longer, wider, faster, plus four destruction bowls. Cars roll, cars flip, cars fly off the track. There's more deadly debris to deal with tires, doors, hoods get jettisoned and serve as incoming missiles. There's all new fire, new explosions, and improved suspensions for more realistic handling. Destruction Derby 2. Designed exclusively for the true connoisseur of crash. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #287 1996 Psygnosis Ltd. All rights reserved. Destruction Derby 2 and Psygnosis and the Psyanosis logo are trademarks of Psypnosis Lid. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY SUBPLOT DELUGE One hundred days after the war starts, the third star system will collapse at Picus. If you investigate, you'll find some Orz at the sight, who will tell you that the Syreen are mindcontrolling the League. You can confront the Syreen, but remember that the Orz are lying and that the Syreen are only trying to help. If you kick them out, though, remember to ask them to rejoin after the war ends, because at that time the Orz will try to mind-attack the League and only the Syreen We be do ill Be sending the Member Mother Ark Control Unr. Xchaggero be perform al microsurgery needed Xchaggers be best at being micro! will be able to defend you. Soon, the Pkunk will start entering a funk. It is being caused by a crashed Precursor ship on the Exquivan home. WE BEXCHAGGER Make sure when you cure the Harika you also save the Xchaggers, because you'll need world of Anshar 3. Before you them to perform microsurgery on the Mmrmrhm. can explore that site and retrieve the item that is plaguing the Pkunk, you'll need the After this talk, all you need to do is go to the orbit screen in any Syreen to temporarily make your tech team mindless so the Mycon system, or talk to a Mycon colony, and use the artifact. The Exquivan will let you explore the planet surface. You'll find the Deep Children will thus be freed and join the League. They are in Precursor data pack there with the true name of the Eternal Ones. all game terms identical to the Mycon. DAK-DAK-DAK-A-GAK CHMMR BIFURCATION Take the Precursor data pack and use it against the Dak as a bargain. Sometime during the first hundred days of the war, the ing tool to find out about the Celestial Un-Devolver on Bergeren 2. Then, Daktaklakpak will tear the Chmmr race apart with their bifurcator, a give the data pack to the Daktaklakpak in return for the Variance Key. device that separates the Chmmr into their two component parts, which you will take to Bergeren 2 and use to re-evolve the Precursor. Of the Chenjesu and the Mmrnmrhm. Once that's done, all your Avatars will be abandoned and all your Chmmr crewmen gone. To rejoin the Chenjesu and Mmrnmrhm, you need to ask the Syreen to reawaken the Chenjesu part, retrieve the Mmrnmrhm Mother Ark piece from Calypso 1, have the Mmrnmrhm pieces repaired by the Xchaggers, and then get the Sun Device from the Lk to accelerate the rejoining process. The Clairconctlar and Spathi will give you clues about the Mother Ark and the Owa will give you a vessel to explore Calypso 1, which is a Rainbow World and usually inacces sible due to its radiation levels. P eete dont cruthy wel ILL DO ANYTHING THE EXQUIVAN NOTHINGNESS A few weeks after the war, you'll be told to find the Exquivan, an enigmatic Kessari race. They are very strange, and will attack you at first. Defeat them, but continue talking to them. You will need their help when you have to save the Pkunk from their doldrums. They will also offer you insight into the Clairconctlar shame and will eventually join you after the Precursors reveal that the Exquivan's nothingness of mind will not save them from the Eternal Ones. DONT CRUSHIFY US Use the Etemal One True Name to get the K'tang Missile and blow away the King's armor. He'll then cough up some Ploxis ships. JANUARY 1997 "


"The countdown has begun. Only you can stop the invasion. THE ARRIVAL CD-ROM ADVENTURE COMING MARCH 1997 For your FREE CD-ROM demo call 1.800.258.3800 or reach us at http://www.thearrival.com ENERATON LIVE. INTERACTIVE An Enteraktion/HavokWare Production  1996 Enteraktion, Inc. All Rights Reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #242 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY course, you'll need to find a Precursor, but your tech team will tell you who they are, so you know where to look (think Xchagger host). You also need to trade the true name of the Eternal Ones to other Daktaklakpak ships to gain the K'tang King Missile. Take the missile to Argus 5, detonate it, and bully the real K'tang King. He'll give you the Ploxis ships at Pauguk and the code to turn the Daktaklakpak into service drones. You need these Ploxis ships to sneak into the Ploxis headquarters at High Point 1. 1701-A NCC -1 BREAKING THE CRUX To cure the Harika, you'll need to talk to the Spathi, the Dak, the K'tang, and the Harika themselves. You'll find that the Xchagger plague is actually a sentient race on Zosma 6 who you'll want to bring into the League. Send a tech team to examine them, go get a few comatose Harika bodies from the Harika, and then get a hive ship from the Where Is Everybody? The first thing to do when the game starts, aside from setting up a few colonies in the Helios system, is to find the lost League races. The Spathi are the closest to your location, while the farthest are the Utwig and Chmmr. Here is a list of the League races and their homeworlds. ENEMY ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE THAT LEARNS AND ADAPTS TO YOUR BATTLE STYLE League Races Spathi VUX. Syreen Pkunk Ur-Quan Mycon... Chmmr .. Utwig Goshen 4 Salacia 2 Astarte 1 Arcadia 6 Velpunia 6 .. Janus 8 . Hypnus 2 . Formalhaut 5 Muhlifain 7 Crux Races Clairconctiar ............Cronos 7, Enkidu 7 Doog ........ Adapa 1, Cerberus 1, Chloris 1, Izanami 2, Melpomene 4, Proserpina 1 Harika ...Gienah 1, Typhon 3 K'tang ... ... .Argus 5 Ploxis Rebel Base ........ ... Xipe 1 27.* Kessari Races Exquivan Lk. Owa Owa ...... Vyro-Ingo Xchagger ..Anshar 3 .Haven (Quasi Portal G) Mnemosyne 1 ..Izanagi 5 .Zosma 6 Rainbow Worlds Alula 1 Calypso 1 Euterupe 1 Ganesha 1 Indra 1 Kentaurus 1 Moria 1 Penates 1 Rodia 1 \"Finally a game that lets us boldly go where we've wanted to go the whole time.\" computer gaming world CIRCLE READER SERVICE #63 CG JANUARY 1997 "


"They call this the City of Angels. DUK milf BEER & ALE Non Largest brakes in its field! CHEVROLET but names can be deceiving. NOIR Femme fatales, fedora-wearing henchmen and corrupt city officials-just a few of the unsavory characters you'll encounter in the urban underbelly of 1940 Los Angeles. Journey through unsolved cases ranging honorowun and edition from wartime espionage to the underground lairs of Chinatown and seductive 2 excesses of Hollywood-all brought to life in dramatic black and whiteas you search to discover the truth behind the disappearance of fellow P.I., Jack Slayton. TM Order NOIR direct NOIR ORDER ON-LINE www.cyberdreams.com ORDER BY PHONE (818) 225-1049 A SHADOWY THRILLER Now available for PC and Macintosh TEEN CYBERLAMS DAS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #258 Cyberdreams Inc., 23586 Calabasas Road, Suite 102, Calabasas, California 91302 Noir is a trademark of Cyberdreams, Inc. Cyberdreams is a registered trademark of Cyberdreams, Inc. "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY Xchaggers. A few days later, you'll cure the Harika and save the Xchagger people. Cure both Harika planets and they will join you. To free the Clairconctlar, you need to talk to the Spathi, K'tang, and Exquivan. You'll learn that the Crux is holding the Clair Queen captive on Warp Station Klashog (Enkidu 4c). Go there, retrieve a Conc Rock from the dig site, and show it to the Clairconctlar. You can give it to them if you'd like. Once you visit the Lk, they'll tell you that the Clairconctlar will follow you if you break the Rock. Go to the Clairconctlar, threaten to break the Conc Rock, and then flee to Enkidu 4c. When they arrive, they'll see their Queen and be released from their servitude. You'll find the Lk on the other side of Quasi Space Portal G, located in the Azazel system. They won't trust you until you retrieve the Red Spiral Rail artifact for them from the heavily guarded planet Antaeus 1. Once you earn the Lk's trust, they'll give you the Sun Device for rejoining the Chmmr. TRANSLUCENT TEXTURE MASTERS OF THE RAINBOW WORLDS To explore the Rainbow Worlds, you need to talk to the Owa. First, visit a  Managing Colonies FOR tis vital that you build enough colonies to provide you fuel for traveling the stars, landing pods for creating colonies, and dig sites and ships for combat. The first rule of thumb is to specialize your colonies. Have a few colonies (usually the Ur-Quan, Chmmr. and Utwig) make ships and have all the other colonies make fuel. For the fuel colonies, move the slider to zero value for ships and research, and max out fuel. You should also have two or three colonies solely creating landing pods. Always have your mine, factory, and refinery slider bars at full. If you need to move resources to ship-building planets, you can always get excess resource units from those planets that aren't making any ships because they will usually have a surplus. Don't worry, colonies will continue to replenish their RUS, so take as much as you like. You also don't want to spread your colonies too thin. If one of the race's star systems has more than one bountiful world, create additional colonies there. Since an alien race lives there, you are bound to visit that system anyway, and since you don't expend fuel within a system, you won't have to waste fuel going to the additional colony for supplies. Make sure you do visit each colony within a star system, since you have to physically orbit each colony to gain the fuel supplies there. UNPRECEDENTED CLOAKING EFFECTS 319 11ANNEL ...a STAR TREK sim worthy of a place beside the Wing Commander and Star Wars games.\". ..:: PC gamer & Par. Pic CIRCLE READER SERVICE #63 JANUARY 1997 W "


"DON'T LOOK BACK. YOU'RE ALREADY IN OVER YOUR HEAD! Ancient legend and underwater adventure come together in a brain-twisting high tech mystery... SACRED MIRROR O KOFUN The futuristic bridge of the ship is your command center From lure your communicate and launch your explorations, www.enteractive.com Visit our website for cow puzzles and prizes! Angel Sbark wet subs stand readily for your adventure T10 West 40th Street, Suite 2100 New York, NY 10018 212-221-6559 To place an order call: Enteractive 800-433-4464 michez Eurome The waters and islands of Micronesia conceal puzzling LUTURE Dr: Luca Capuccbrilliant Wiologist and export in JONCEPT ruins and the sunken wrecks of World War II naval battles, IDP underwater eosystems. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #127  Enteractive, Inc. All rights reserved. Enteractive and the Enteractive logo are trademarks of Enteractive, Inc. The Sacred Mirror of KOFUN. KOFUN and Future Concept logo are trademarks of Future Concept. Jean-Michel Cousteau's logo is a trademark of Jean-Michel Cousteau Productions. Co-produced in France by Future Concept, a subsidiary of IDP and Jean Michel Cousteau Productions, with the cooperation of the National Center of Cinematography and The French Ministry of Industry Developed by IDP. "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY PlayStation ci developed and published by BY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS. and MASTERING THE MELEE For strategies in hypermelee, turn to this month's Action Column. THE FIRST AND ONLY STAR TREK ACTION FLIGHT SIM Rainbow World and battle an Owa fleet. Then ask the Harika for the Owa homeworld location. Meet the Owa reef master and relate to him the tragic leaths of his people. He'll give you an explorer for searching the Rainbow Worlds, an anti-matter scoop for collecting the anti-matter on the Rainbow surfaces, and a password to get past each Rainbow World's Owa guardians. Use the Owa explorer to excavate a data pack on Alula 1 that reveals the Daktaklakpak origin and the purpose of the Celestial Un-Devolver. Late in the game, you can join the Vyro Ingo and the VUX. First, get the \"VyroIngo to join the League by saying the Ploxis have insulted them. Your tech teams will discover DNA matrixes for both races. Talk to the Lk about the two matrixes and they will tell you that they should be joined. Go to Salacia with a Vyro-Ingo ship, detach that single ship, and send it to meet a VUX ship. The two vessels will join, and the VUX will suddenly be nice and give you the last piece of the Ultron. COMING THIS SPRING for Win 95/DOS, Macintosh and PlayStation Game Console STAR TREK STARFLECT ACADEMY THE FINAL HOUR To end the war, go to the Ploxis Rebel Base at Quasi Space Portal F (the Xipe system). Retrieve the frozen rebels and take at least one crewed Ploxis ship to High Point 1 (the Chmmr will give you the coordinates to the planet). Once there, jettison the anti-matter containment grid (which should be 100 percent full from the Rainbow Worlds' anti-malter). Then fight the Ploxis Precursor ship to end the war. Days later, the Orz will attack (remember to have the Syreen on your side) and then the Eternal One's Heralds will arrive. Destroy them with Ulwig ships and then retrieve the Sentience Thresher from their leader. You will need to create an efficient Sentience Collector in order to sate the appetites of the Eternal Ones. To do that, you need the Sentience Thresher, the Sentience Collator your tech team will find it after you find the Ploxis Rebel Base), the Sentience Notation Device (the Precursor gives it to you), and the Ebon Hinge (can be excavated at Muhlifain 2). Combine them to form the Sentience Collector and then fill it up with at least 13 sentiences. Provided you finish all their story lines, up to 17 races will be available as donors (seven simply can't). You'll have several weeks to collect the different artifacts and sentiences, but once you do, you'll feed the ethereal Eternal Ones, stave off galactic destruction, and make the universe safe once again for peace-loving sen: tients all across the Milky Way. LIBRE RP BERO Atetan Satu TV http://www.interplay.com Starfleet Academy Software  Interplay Productions, Trademarks and 1996 Paramount Productions. All rights reserved. Star Trek Starfleet Academy and related marks are trademarks of Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. MacPlay and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. PlayStation and the PlayStation Jogo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and copyrights are properties of their respective owners. All rights reserved. JANUARY 1997 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #63 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY Battle Mechs Mercenary Killing: A How-To Guide by Greg Fortune limbing into an 80-ton, fourstory walking tank with PRO enough firepower to level a SLAS city, you peer down at the enormous jointed legs, pan. ning up to examine the turret packed with long-range missiles and high-power lasers. You're going out looking for trouble, because trouble is what pays the bills. Before the day is done you'll either emerge from the battle victorious or die atop the smoldering wreck age of your Mech. Welcome to the 31st century. What does it take to survive in the hostile environment of MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES? Skill, coordination, strategy, and lots of practice. This guide isn't designed to give you packaged solutions. You won't find charts, graphs, tables, or cheat codes, because I hope you never need them. The goal here is to pro vide you with some concepts and techniques that will help you AGAINST THE WALL Let the terrain take some abuse for you. This guy's gonna improve your Mech piloting skills. While winning isn't every: take some damage before he forces you out into the open. thing, it beats getting your tail blown off every time. ing, if you can't execute the maneuvers quickly and precisely, your CONTROL YOURSELF expensive Mech is still going to end up a pile of slag. One of the most important aspects of successful Mech combat is The most effective control setup I've found combines a set of rudcontrol. No matter how good you are at attack and defense strategiz. der pedals and a throttle controller with a standard keyboard and three-button mouse. Configure the pedals to steer the chassis and the mouse to control the twisting and tilting of the turret. The mouse buttons can be configured to control firing, grouping, and selecting weapons. The throttle takes care of chassis speed and just about everything else. If you have a joystick, you may want to stick it aside until you boot a flight sim; it can't offer the precise control of the mouse. With this setup you shouldn't need to take your hands off the controls from the time you launch until the mission is complete. There are many systems built into a Mech, and the Hills: idea is to have as many controls instantly available as possible. It's hard enough being in battle with the odds stacked against you. The last thing you need is to have to take your hands off of your primary controller and your eyes off of the screen to enter commands with the key. board. If you play jumping from device to device like that, MICHAEL JACKSON MOVES Try spread patterns with the slower weapons to make you are either one heck of a typist or dead a lot. Check evasion a bit more difficult. the accompanying sidebar, \"Control Fetish,\" for more details about control options. IPPC Heat 1 JANUARY 1997 "


"SI M CITY 2000 NETWORK EDITION 1. The world's most popular simulation finally gets some competition. Player 1 Player 2 Player 3 is the server that brings the players togetherbefore trying to bring them to their knees in a mad scramble for power. surveys the city looking for suggestions he can make to the group on how best to beautify their burgeoning burg. is in the midst of heated negotiations with Player 1 that could bring some much-needed revenue to her district. Player 4 checks out the new stadium and power plant he shrewdly got approved at the city's last real-time town meeting. SIM CITY 2000 NETWORK EDITION After years as the only city simulator in town, SimCity 2000 now has some worthy competitors. Namely, you and three friends, competing for resources and revenue over the Internet or a LAN. Or two of you can go head-to-head over a modem. It's the SimCity 2000 Network Edition—now ready to compete for your free time. When you're building a mega-metropolis, two heads (or three or four) are better than one. So import saved SimCity 2000 cities or start a new urban sprawl. Chat live with your connected commissioners. Wheel and deal for property and vote in town meetings. Or forget back-scratching and try back-stabbing-in a shameless grab for political MAXI'S power. The Network Edition. Not just multi-layered. It's multi-playered. http://www.maxis.com Available for Windows 95.  1996 Maxis, Inc. All rights reserved. SimCity 2000 and Maxis are registered trademarks of Maxis, Inc. For product or ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 800-33-MAXIS. Visit the Maxis Web page at http://www.maxis.com. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #255 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY H EINE (9 0.00TL If you have a throttle, this tactic should be easy 10127 ho cerPPC to implement. If you don't, spend some time fig. uring out how to optimally configure your key board throttle configuration. One technique that might help is using the forward/reverse toggle to change your speed. As you're running, kick your Mech into reverse. Before you stop completely, slam it forward again and you'll accelerate to your previous speed. This works particularly well against PPCs at a distance. With all of the Mech design variations in this game, you may be wondering which are the best and worst designs, and which weapons to load on them. Instead of giving you a guide to the hot Mech/weapon combos, though, my advice is \"know thine enemy.\" Although some of the designs are deathtraps, I encourage you to play a couple of missions in them anyway. Yes, drive the deathtraps. You SMOOTH BEATS PRETTY If your graphics card can't take the heat, turn off some of the will gain a much deeper knowledge of a Mech options to get a better frame rate. The game will still look great, and you'll have a much betdesign if you try to use it as opposed to just ter chance of survival. blowing it up. Only by experiencing the weaknesses firsthand will you truly understand how to disassemble a Mech design most effectively BASIC STRATEGIES on the battlefield. Just be sure to make liberal use of the \"Save Your tactics should vary greatly based upon the speed, weight, and game feature when driving a substandard Mech! weapon systems of your chosen Mech. Remember to use terrain to gain an advantage, especially if you have jump jets and your opponent JUMPING MECH FLASH doesn't. If you have longrange weapons, you'll want to make the best Jump jets, when used properly, allow a Mech to quickly make highof them. Try to position yourself so the landscape will slow your oppo. speed maneuvers in unexpected directions. They are also very useful nent's progress toward you, increasing the number of opportunities you'll have B TIPUS in to get a shot in. A series of small hills SRM4 100 SRM4 100 or similar terrain works well-just be sure to aim for the top of the hill and fire while your target is still progressing up the slope, so that the enemy Mech gets hit as soon as it reaches the top. The classic strategy when closing on a target is to point your chassis about 45 degrees off of your target and twist your torso so that your weapons are brought to bear. In MERCENARIES, enemy Al Mechs can now lead you with theirs shots as well, so we have to add a new wrinkle to this strategy for it Heat to be effective: speed variations. If you can keep your speed fairly variable, you'll keep a lot of enemy fire from hitRebalido ting you. This is because the enemy Al leads based on your current speed and direction, and if that speed SPY IN THE SKY Satellite uplinks can be useful in the city, but the view is usually too narrow to help changes you've nullified that calcula. much out in the open. tion. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"THESE REMARKAB L E ADVENTURES BEGAN A LONG TIME AGO IN A GALAXY FAR, FAR AWAY. (THE PRICE, HOWEVER, IS QUITE DOWN TO EARTH.) LUCASARTS ENTITAINMENT COMPANY PRESENTS FIGHTER ARCHIVES LUCASARTS ARCHIVES ECB VOL.II STAR WARS COLLECTI02 ASTATS 5 Incredible STAR WARS CD-ROMs You don't have to be Yoda to comprehend the wisdom of this deal. Four classic Star Wars games: TIE Fighter Collector's CD-ROM SPECIALIDITION Includes the worldwide exclusive CD, Rebel AssaultTM, Rebel Assault IITM, and Dark ForcesTM Super Sampler Edition with 3 playable levels. MAKING MAGIC: A Behind-The-Scenes Plus, an insider's look at the theatrical release of the Star Wars Trilogy Special Edition. Look at the Making of the Star Wars Trilogy Special Edition. Five incredible titles for MS-DOS & Windows 95. All for one incredible price. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #119 TM &  1996 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. http://www.lucasarts.com STB01 "


"MAX MECHANIZED ASSAULT & EXPLORATION LATaking gameplay to the M.A.X. 1 Strategy Plu \"C&C with a Ph.D! -PC Zon Interplay Productions 16815 Von Karman Avenue, Irvine, CA 92606 Website: www. interplay.com "


"REATE. CRUSH. CONTROL. Simultaneous or turn-based gameplay plus adjustable turn length and game speed will challenge both real-time and turn-based strategy gamers 8619 CRI S TAL F eed Any combination of up to four human or computer opponents can wage war. Battle over a network or clash head-to-head via modem Stunning \"top down\" view SVGA graphics and battle units rendered from 3D models pack an astounding visual punch Play as one of eight Factions, choose from over 50 land, sea, and air units, upgrade armor, speed, and range TEEN Play mission and campaign games or create your own custom game where you start a colony from scratch AGES 13. CONTEMT RATIO DY ESRB BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. Available For PC CD-ROM  Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. M.A.X.Mechanized Assault & Exploration and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #79 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY R: 1.0 LITTLE> CUAC20 10 cerMLAS cerMLAS SSRM 162 SSRM6 162 CHAS CAMLAS cerMLAS cerllAS CEMAS cerLLAS Speed: 85 kph Alt: 0.00 m As the enemy turns towards you, hit your vertical jump jets again; complete a short burst forward, another 180 degree twist, and another short for ward blast. Now you're behind them again, usually with all of your weapons systems cycled and ready to go again. Pay attention not to where the enemy turret is pointing but to the direction in which the chassis is heading. Try to anticipate where he'll be when you finish your jump and maneuver yourself accordingly. Use your jump jets sparingly, and when you get down lo about one-quarter power on your jets, use the rest to get the heck out of there if the enemy is still standing. A word of warning: mess up and you may find yourself standing toe to toe with a really ticked off Dire Woll-not a fun place to be. Heat Enerty 2 290m LIGHTS OUT Blew a fuse in your IR system? Now we'll find out if you can fight in the dark BACK OFF, MAN In a Mech loaded with PPCs or LRMs, leverage the range of those weapons as much as possible. If you can get into an area SWM Seeks Lancemate when someone launches a pair of linked SRM 6's at you and you need to get out of the way in a hurry. Here's a couple of my favorite jump jel-based maneuvers and when I use 'em. \"The Monkey on Your Back\" is a fun little maneuver I came up with while honing my DFA (Death From Above) skills, and it is now one of my favorite strategies against slow, heavy Mechs. You can do the drive-by version of this maneuver, but I really enjoy the aerial variant. The goal of this maneuver is to jump over the enemy's Mech, twist in the air, and land behind it with all of your weapons charged and point: ing up his tail pipe. Then you proceed to free the target Mech's internal systems from the confines of its torso by blowing them out through its chest. Sound like fun? This is how I do it: As usual, I close the distance at high speed and a 45 degree angle off of the target, to make my enemy's job of leading me a little more difficult. Large Mechs usually have some pretty heavy long-range weaponry, so get close pretty quickly. You'll also want to have your jump jets ready for the next step. Once you are within a couple hundred meters of your enemy, hit your vertical jump jets so that you have just enough altitude to clear the top of your enemy. As you begin to pass over your target, reduce your throttle to low power, use your turning jets to spin 180 degrees, and apply a little forward jet when the turn is complete. If all goes well, you'll jump over the top of your enemy and land directly behind it with all of your weapons pointed at that lovely, soft back armor. You don't want to be too close, because the next step is to unload all of your groups, one after the other, into your target before it has a chance to turn around. The P key will fire all weapons in a group and cycle to the next by default, but I've re-mapped that function to a convenient hat position on my CH Pro Throttle for easy access. nlike your starmates in MECHWARRIOR 2 and GBL, all of MERCENARIES' Lancemates aren't created equal. Some of them are very good: some of them I wouldn't let shine my Mech's footpads. Regardless of how good the guy on your left may seem, you have to watch them all closely. Even an A+ pilot can screw up, and you should be ready to give them new orders at any time. The good news is that they don't tend to get stuck behind rocks and buildings anymore, so your management tasks are much easier. Aerotech pilots are another new wrinkle in the game. They can be very effective in taking out turrets, tanks, and armored transports. They can also be useful against enemy Mechs, but don't send them after a Mech without ground support. Unescorted Aerotechs tend to get blown out of the sky by enemy Mechs unless you have another Mech there for your enemy to deal with; you'll go through a lot of Aerotechs if you send them in solo. Don't send Aerotech pilots in after tall, stationary targets. They use the same Al as your Lancemates, which causes them to get right up next to an object before trying to go around. I had one Aerotech pilot put his nose on a tower and unload his missile racks into it, causing massive splash damage to his craft, death to him, and gales of incredulous laughter to pour from my cockpit. That was a big rookie mistake from a guy who cost 90,000 C-bills a month. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Trading can be hazardous. 01996, ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Privateer, Origin and Wo create worlds are registered trademark of Origin Systems, Inc. The Darkening and the Origin logo are trademarks of Origin Systems, Inc. All rights reserved "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY & 10 ETOMALLE SS1985 49 CENAS GSM 90 CSS 49 COLAS CESMAS cert: 15 CALAS CUACZO 10 CLAS cerMAS cerHLAS ceriLAS CIAS Even the slowest Mech will overtake you in a hurry if you are running in reverse, unless you have jump jets. Bursts of speed from your jets can help you keep your distance while you hit your enemy with long-range weapons and stay out of laser and SRM range. Eventually you'll have to engage in a more conventional fight, but by then your target has proba. bly sustained massive damage and you have a distinct advantage. Alt: POWERING DOWN These tactics won't work in every situation, but they do Heat demonstrate that, with a little thought, you can combine basic strategies and Mech special abilities to create d/dT maneuvers that will surprise and impress your opponents and teammates alike. The goal here is to learn your Mech and expand your skills so that piloting it is as natural as walking down the street. To reach this point, you'll have to LAST CHANCE It's a good idea to keep a laser in your cockpit or center torso, spend hours upon hours practicing, but the practice is just in case you lose everything else. anything but tedious, and has its own rewards along the way. Your defeats will be experiences to learn from, and where there is a lot of wide open space behind you, turn your your victories will have that sweetness that only comes from a Mech to face the target and as it approaches, fire your weapons long, hard battle that is well fought. May your plasma burn hot and and shift into full reverse. your enemies grow cold. Control Fetish ontrollers are a very personal choice. Some gamers live by the mouse, others won't go anywhere without their joy stick in hand. Here's this Mech pilot's take on the various controller schemes available in the MechWarrior 2 series. Joystick: If you're willing to spend some time getting used to it the joystick can be a very effective controller. The main advantage is that the number of buttons available under the thumb of your stick hand-especially on multi-button joysticks like the CH Fighter Stick and Thrustmaster F-16 FLCS-helps keep your hands in place Instead of forcing you to spend time hunting for keyboard commands. The auto-centering is a bit awkward, though, and it makes precise targeting a lot more difficult. If you do use the Joystick, be sure to calibrate it frequently Keyboard: While it's true that you can control every function of your Mech from the keyboard, this isn't the recommended way to go. For most people it's the equivalent of a \"kick me\" sign in the middle of their back. I played using the keyboard when I first got MechWarrior 2, and I thought I was doing fairly well. Once 1 started using joysticks and mice ! realized how much the keyboard was getting in my way. Now I only use the keyboard to type MERCS and press Enter. Mouse: Assigning the turret controls to the mouse gives you the ultimate in precision turret control. It's fast, accurate, and doesn't take long to get the hang of. Leading your target properly is the most basic skill one needs to master to be competitive, and using the mouse helps develop that skill faster than anything else I've used. Throttle: If you can get your hands on a programmable throttle, do so. The CH Pro Throttle I use has four programmable buttons and four fully programmable fourway hat switches. That's 20 functions available under my fingertips at all times. I use the buttons for switching between chain and groupfire modes, selecting nav points, overriding heat shutdown, and toggling forward and backward. The hats control jump jets, target selections, view modes, and zooming. Having split-second access to all of these controls makes all the difference in the world. Pedals: I use rudder pedals to steer the chassis, because it is intuitive to use your feet to control the direction in which you're walking. Pedals also let you change direction without taking your hands off of the mouse and throttle. The player using all four limbs to defeat his enemy obviously has an advantage over those fighting with just their hands. CG JANUARY 1997 "


".but profit has its advantages. VATEER 2    D A R      G\", PATATER 22 TIME TO GET BACK TO BUSINESS. BAWAL ORIGIN We create worlds www.ea.com/origin CIRCLE READER SERVICE #231 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY Breaking The Deadlock Commander Carter Lays Out The Perfect Strategy For Taking Gallius IV by Tim Carter your facilities is crucial to winning, especially if land space is limited. Also, check your morale as the game progresses. If you have extra culture, use the cushion to raise taxes as high as possible. Fortify all your zones as soon as possible. This makes your territory Select Landing Sites EADLOCK is one of a growing number of games designed from the beginning around multiplayer combat, a game that offers a credible human alternative to often pathetic computer Al. Of course, playing against other humans does have a downside: someone else knows when you lose, and may be apt to rub it in. The solution? Don't lose. At least, don't lose very often. As you'd expect, the path to success lies with a solid strategy. Overconfident gamers beware, however. Even the best-laid plans can come to pieces at the hands of a crafty opponent-and they can fall apart with amazing speed when you're facing two or more opponents. Tarth colony loader, please select your landing ito. D OK Cancel Advice READY, TARTH, GO! The Tarth are one of the best races to play. They manifest their special abilities immediately, as their units are simply physically tougher. Deadlocks Planetary Conquest Ele Map Floors Domy TE CHOOSE YOUR PLOT The first order of business in DEADLOCK is choosing the right landing site. You want a site that gives you a fair buffer from others, but also places you close to other territories and the seas for expansion and resources (for details, see the sidebar \"Plotting for Victory\"). As for races, I greatly prefer the Humans or the Tarth. They are the fastest out of the gate, and many games are too short for the natural advantages of other races to have an effect. The humans get financial bonuses, which can be converted into military power late in the game. The Tarth are just naturally stronger, with more formidable units that make military Success easier. Many gamers seem to prefer the Cyth because of their fixed morale. However, the Cyth operate at a great disadvantage, as the fixed number of unhappy Cyth greatly slow early production and expansion, and maintaining high morale with other races really isn't all that difficult. Because of this, I like to pick a landing site near the Cyth or other weak races, and away from Tarth-unless you want to fight right from the start. 400OC0030900023 Pin Owned by Unknown ART, SCHMART Speaking of morale, get those culture producing facilities built early, especially in important zones, and then have them upgrade until morale becomes an issue. Plan to overpopulate every zone you can as the morale loss suffered will easily be compensated by a decently staffed museum. The extra production you gain from fully staffing ARTS AND CRAFTS You don't need to play the Cyth to get good morale. Staff your culture centers and build lots of art objects, and then tax your citizenry as high as possible. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"WAGES WAR VAILABLE | TIE BUSINESS.OF BATTLE FO: TAKE ON THE ROLE OF TROOP TACTICIAN AND SHREWD ENTREPRENEUR AS YOU LEAD A PROFIT-HUNGRY BAND OF HIGHLY-TRAINED MERCENARIES ON A SERIES OF GUT-WRENCHING MISSIONS. SUCCESS WON'T BE EASY BECAUSE IN WAGES OF WAR, YOU CAN KICK ASS ON THE BATTLEFIELD BUT IF YOU DON'T TURN A PROFIT, YOU'RE OUT OF BUSINESS! the Cost!! Get ME Backups MPSR2 NE IODOS SEN  Powerful \"Assault Ware\" Al the best turn-based combat system yet developed  Super-realistic troop movement  Hours of endless gameplay  Over 50 unique mercenaries Over 40 deadly weapons Tons of accurately researched equipment Available at your local retailer. To order direct call: 1-800-251-9563 Outside U.S. call: 415-261-3227 Designed for NEW WSORT PUMPUTING GAME Microsoft Windows 95 High stakes business simulation  Superb SVGA color 310) Lew World Computinn Shelo 30. the New World Computing and Studio 300 logs and Whoes of War are trademarks and/or registered tradentairs of The 300 Company The 300 Comany. All rights reserved. All other traderinks belong to their respective holders. New World Computing is a division of the 300 compty. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #137 1900 "


"SCI-FI STRATEGY Plotting For Victory bviously, your initial landing site should allow quick growth, access to all of the necessary resources, and if the map has one or more islands-access to the sea. As important as terrain, though, is your to proximity to and relationship with opposing forces. For instance, never choose a starting site in the middle of the map, regardless of how good the terrain is. This will leave you open to attack from all sides, and will require a much greater expenditure in garrison units and fortifications. Also, if you know your opponents, try to put at least one player between you and the opponent you fear the most. If you consider yourself fearless, put as much space as possible between yourself and the most aggressive player. Avoid at all costs that unique kind of gamer who values a good attack over all else. They usually lose, but they can take you down with them if you're not careful. At the same time, consider the overall balance of power on the ground when choosing a site, particularly if you are one of the last to choose. Try not to allow one opponent to get an island or easily defensible territory all to himself, thus leaving the rest of you to fight it out while he consolidates and builds his empire. THE WAR COLLEGE The basic elements of military strategy are pretty obvious, and won't waste too much time on them. Build the biggest, best-armed forces possible, then go on the rampage. Use combined arms-especially those powerful missiles-wherever possible, and try to capture enemy territory intact. You might want to try slash-and-burn attacks if you know you can't defend a zone, but you want to put the brakes on an opponent's economy. Having said this, how do aspiring planetary conquerors get ahead in the world? In games against multiple human opponents, rapid and unpredictable-or at least unexpected-action can be very effective. A war of attrition is not only boring, it's easy to plan against. If you grad. ually grow stronger than everyone else, you can expect to watch them gradually line up against you. On the other hand, if you can launch a series of attacks that get you what you need before anyone else can react, or at least before they can react effectively, you will obviously be much better off. The simplest way to accomplish this is through technology. Getting to the Holocaust Cannon or Supernova Warheads first can give you a devastating advantage over your opponents. Alternatively-and a lot more interestingly-with the right economic planning, you can buy yourself a superior military force. The key to using the Skirineen is having enough morale to survive the odd scandal, and having the cash to buy a serious force in a hurry. Obviously, the higher your taxes, the better your buying power will be. Maximize your trade from idle air and port facilities. The best way to get a lot of cash in a hurry is through the sale of resources. Buying an army serves two purposes: you get decent units quickly and you should be able to catch your opponents unaware. The value of surprise cannot be overestimated against a human opponent, given the time limits for turns and the high level of micromanagement needed to make a big empire work properly. a difficult conquest, and allows you to reinforce a threatened zone before it can be overrun. Rather than garrisoning all of your colony, try building a powerful rapid-reaction force, locating it centrally, and then responding as necessary. Send the rest of your units on to the attack. Let's face it-DEADLOCK isn't CIVILIZATION. The key isn't natural growth, but military conquest-the faster the better. Keep in mind, however, that you will frequently have to work as part of an alliance, and that too much success too early may bring the wrath of all the other players down upon your head. Anyone who has played Diplomacy will know what I mean. In fact, a few games of Diplomacy might serve DEADLOCK players well as knowing how to manage the growth of your empire without disturbing allies and knowing when to stab them in the back-is important here. R . PAX Dedek Parquet Ein Mo Repata Dolomacy Teen OV S 10181 Muole in Bright Grandland Morala le currently 100% Morala will becoina: HODIFIERS Over population Starvation: Takation: M ANY Presence Culture and Art Culture at Maximum O Advice 3 DIOR NUKES FOR SALE Buying from the Skirineen REASONABLE can quickly lead to military superiority. If you FORCE keep your morale high enough and have Finally, don't over enough money, you can buy an instant and commit to foolish large army and surprise your foes. battles, no matter how much your allies insist. Units are expensive and can die quickly in the face of superior forces or fortifications. Always give your units retreat orders at high damage levels, since it's better to live to fight another day. On the defensive side, this isn't necessarily the case. It goes with out saying that if an ally is getting ahead of you, you may want to encourage him to overstep his power by attacking a particularly tough zone. After all, you're all engaged in a battle for the planet, but only one of you can win. If you play your cards right, that will be you. IN THE ZONE Choosing your landing site is your first strategic move. Here, the Tarth are far enough away from the enemy, but close to forests and mountains and only one territory away from the sea. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Sierra makes stuff for all kinds of game players. Ecco the entire manual memorizer (the perpetually perplexed linkene multi-tasker the bleary-eyed Night owl the I the rookie Surfer Unish Score braggart | Isticky-fingered pre-schelet (the technical wizard Ithe system bomber||Screen-Saver collector the config.sys Wrecker the Isteel-nerved mouse crusher Illustrations by Kevin Pope. the Ithe eye-candy addict | overconfident puzzle solver the covert office gamer the equipment junkie So which kind are you? CIRCLE READER SERVICE #202 "


"JIH http://www.sierra.com/rama RAMA When Arthur C. Clarke, one of the greatest visionaries of all time and author of 2001: A Space Odyssey combined forces with Gentry Lee to write the book RAMA II, it was bound to be an extraordinary experience. No less so is the game based on their sci-fi masterwork. Aboard a great interstellar ship, you'll find a world so vast, that exploring its complex secrets and mysteries will stretch both the limits of time and your mind. At first you will wonder: what goes on here? who can be trusted? where is the danger? But, as you decrypt the language of octospiders and avians, and survey the riddles of this 30-mile long spaceship. you will be drawn in to play the role of savior. Not for The Weak-Willed or The Faint of Heart. But, definitely for The Adventurous WIN 95 DOS Devotee of Sci-fi. 00 00 100.00.00.20 500 00 00 LEISURE SUIT LARRY Attention Party Animals: He's back. He's balding. He's as desperate as ever. Yes, from the wacked-out mind of Al Lowe, comes the latest miss-adventure of Leisure Suit Larry, Love For Sall. In this politically incor3 rect bikini-watch, you're given the dubious task of helping Larry cavort his way through salty puzzles and brain teasers in quest of the ultimate, uh, well, uh, you figure it out. Guaranteed to peg your laugh meter. But then what would you expect from a CD game with Scratch 'n' Sniff? WIN 95 WIN DOS LARRU game mets M GIVARS SI ERRA\" http://www.sierra.com/Isl7 "


"| PHANTASMAGORIA II Sierra Adventure Games: Ideal for Roberta Williams' Phantasmagoria terrified and captivated more than a million horror and mystery lovers as one of the unqualified successes of the past year. Now the terror is back, intensified and more controversial than ever in an all new story A Puzzle of Flesh!\"A game that will appeal to The Steel-Nerved, this richly woven tapestry of psychological horror pulls no punches. The scenes are often all too graphic, the fear you'll feel will be all too real. Fortunately, the designers have thoughtfully provided a password-protected way to set the level of intensity, should this game be a little too much for some members of RD your family. Or, perhaps, even you. WIN 95 DOS MAC the late-Night Fricht Freak the Impossible to impress and the incurable jokester http://www.sierra.com/phantas2 Buy 2 Sierra CDs and Get a 3rd free and enter to Win a $5,000 home theater PC See mail-in cards or call 1-800-757-7707 to order direct. 1996 Sierra On-Line. Inc. and or designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #202 "


"Static TV I as) Ball Carrier Sierra Sports Games: Made with http://www.sierra.com/fb97 the LOGO-Weaving Fan FRONT PAGE SPORTS: FOOTBALL PRO\"97 When COMPUTER GAMING WORLD says you're the \"Sports Game of the Year\" three years in a row, you better come back with something spec tacular for year 4. Done. The '97 version of Football Pro adds network and modem play, so if you're one of the keenly Competitive, you can get even with The Insufferable Braggarts, no matter where they live. The fantastic motion-captured graphics are better than ever, too. Same goes for the exclusive CAMSI system that lets you scope out furns ! the action from any spot in the stadium. Add in all the NFL teams, players and current stats and it looks like a \"four-peat» could be on the way this season. Officially licensed product of the NFL and NFL Players. Copyright 1996 Players Inc. Team names, nicknames, logos and ather india are trademarks of the teams Indicated. Super Bowl and the NFL are registered trademarks of the National Football League / 1996 NFLP. WIN 95 ACD PLAYERS GAME CIGCKTIME LEFT 6:13 AM ONLUNE CHAT I the nut for accuracy PLAYERS Jantra : OK guys, I'm still not catching a thing. What color Iure uhould I use? DEPTH SOUNDER Dershman Jabrady Klaaster Watteber: Try the pro tips, 1650 2666 Traviswonder: Try spoons. Dershman: Traviswonder Wes. Spoons won't work in these parts. Sprackin Traulswonder dueber and TROPHY BASS 2 LAKE VIEW Kleaster: Where are you catching all those lunkers Sprachini send kuhisper complain aboabre CONTROL FORWARD GOBE http://www.sierra.com/tbass2 brott the over-Zealous competitor in Mind  SI TROPHE BASS 2 FRONT PAGE SPORTS: TROPHY BASS\" 2 Are you The Fishing Fanatic on your block? Well, even the most maniacal can't be on the lake all the time. But now you can sit at the keyboard PHY BASS 2 and do your fishing with Trophy Bass 2. You get to chew over the weather, water temperature, the season, and time of day to choose the right tackle. Then, pick your spot on one of 10 bass packed lakes, and make just the right moves to cast where bubba's hiding out. Here's another exclusive angles You can go on-line to challenge other cyberan glers head-to-head in a bass tourney. WIN 95 WIN 'S I E RR A "


"NASCAR RACING 2 What do you get when you take the most popular racing game ever made (the one PC GAMER called \"the best racing sim ever made,\" and the only one licensed by NASCAR) and tell the pit crew to do a major overhaul? You get a game with 96 cars and 16 Nascar Winston Cup circuit tracks. You get 8-driver network play, a faster frame rate, and a new arcade mode that helps you start driving faster. Another most cool addition: simulated spotter and crew chief communications so you'll know who's on your tail and when it's time for new rubber. Is there a better game for The Avid Lover of Realism and Racing? Negatory. Egg Rock 8 9 10 NASCARO Racing 2 is officially licensed by NASCAR. The name and likeness and marks of the #3 GM Goodwrench Service stock car and the Dale Earnhardt name are licensed with Dale Earnhardt, Inc. The right to use the name, likeness and image of the Hendrick Motorsports Car #5. Kellogg's Racing and Terry Labonte are granted under license from Hendrick Motorsports. Tide and Tide the Logo are registered trademarks of Procter & Gamble and may not be used without written consent of Procter & Gamble, Procter & Gamble has licensed these rights to Papyrus Design Group's name, Name and likeness of the 10 Tide car is used under license with LCR Inc. The right to use name, likeness and image of Hendrick Motorsports car #24 DuPont Automotive Finishes and Jeff Gordon are granted under license from JG Motorsports, Inc. The name of Johnny Benson, the name, marks and race car design of Bahari Racing's 30 car WH NASCAR including the trademark of Pennzoil Company, are used under license with Bahari Racing and Johnny Benson. 1902 NASCAR Racing is also available for Mac and the PlayStation DOS game console. 5 http://www.sierra.com/nascar2 Hmoto hot ME It youre going to dress ble to the that youd Mark Stroke Hole 7 Par 3 Distatice hit: 0 inches erte te Mak sud FRONT PAGE SPORTS : GOLF What What does swinging a golf club have in common with clicking a mouse? If you ask us: nada. That's why we invented TrueSwing\". You pull the mouse back for your backswing, then thrust it forward for your shot. Now we're talking golf. We're also talking down-tothe-inch realism on the world-class courses you'll play and the 3D animated golfers you'll watch. And, thanks to network play, you can hit the links with up to 255 of your closest friends. Anything else? Yes. This game was designed by Vance Cook, the genius PENTSA WES behind the original Links 386. So, basically, it's the golf game to get if you're The Settle-ForNothing-But-TheBest kind of gamer. WIN 95 TOIMUB A4 http://www.sierra.com/golf Buy 2 Sierra CDs and G free and enter to Win a $5,000 home theater PC See mail-in cards or call 1-800-757-7707 to order direct. 1996 Sierra On-Line. Inow and or designate trademarks of or Ikensed to Sierra On-Line. Inc. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #202 "


"16 16 A TTERI **185 ? http://www.sierra.com/lords2 45 The original Lords of the Realm was named \"Best Historical Simulation\" by PC GAMER. Now they say this all new sequel, \"combines the best of two worlds,\" referring to the real time battles and the turnbased strategy game that is Lords II. In other words, you can lay siege to your opponents with catapults, flaming arrows, pikes, maces, and the ever popular boiling oil. But, first, you need to come up with a LORDS: brilliant strategy for managing your lands and serfs. Build up a strong kingdom and it's plunder time. Play up to three others head-to-head via modems and networks, then watch those head-to-heads roll. WIN 95 DOS CYBERGLADIATORS What's 12-feet tall, weighs 31/2 tons, is made from toxic waste and military wreckage, and is capable of kicking your sorry butt into next Tuesday? Duh. They're cyberGladiators the most aggressive, unpleasant, and downright vicious opponents ever to appear on a PC monitor. You can interrupt and change moves on the fly (a first). Plus you can kick your opponent's head HYDERTILIADIATOR: off and watch his lifeforce ooze away (another first in computer gaming, and in civilization in general). Ideal for The Manly-Man. Not recommended for TEEN anybody who goes by the nickname \"Wuss\" WIN 95 D SIERRA http://www.sierra.com/cyberg "


"HUNTER/HUNTED\" Take a deadly arsenal, a computer, a couple of life forms, and then put the whole works on bovine steroids and you've got the idea behind the furiously paced Hunter/Hunted. You can be the \"hunter,\" a twohorned monster having a serious bad-hair day, or the \"hunted,\" a human who does not think it is fun to be placed in a life-and-death battle simply for the amusement of a race of super-aliens. You'll encounter flesh-eating tunnels and booby-trapped sewers in the first PC game that lets you fight head-tohead with a split screen so you can keep a blood-shot eye on your nemesis. WIN 95 HUNTER 58 :271334 $92) **86 945 0358 http://www.sierra.com/hunter Sierra Action & Battle Games: They're What to Get LONDON 0 RAM) the Weekday Warrior the Testosterone endowed and the coffeed-up Speed Clicker Buy 2 Sierra CDs and Get a 3rd free and entor to win a go home theater pc See mail-in cards or call 1-800-757-7707 to order direct, O 1996 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and or designate trademarks at, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #202 "


"IB http://www.sierra.com/antara 2 ANTARA BETRAYAL UN ANTARA» In our realm's (role-playing computer games) glorious medieval period (about three years ago), a great lord known as the Empirical Scribe (editor) of a journal of a eminent repute (COMPUTER GAMING WORLD) bestowed a great honor (\"Hall of Fame\") upon the forebearer (Betrayal at Krondor) of the newly conceived Betrayal in Antara. And so, from these royal roots, comes a rich, complex brew of secrecy, magic and combat. More than 50 spells are placed at your diabolical disposal, as you hinder the corrupt agenda of the Antaran empire. For The Magical, Tactical Wizard in your realm. Mere mortals need not apply. WIN 95 WIN BIRTHRIGHT There are certain things one approaches very carefully: dragons, swords, spells, treachery, and taking a legendary ADVANCED DUNGEON & DRAGONS game like BIRTHRIGHT and putting it on a CD. So let's just say we treated BIRTHRIGHT with more respect and authenticity to the TSRT way than you might expect from a computer game. This first game in the BIRTHRIGHT trilogy gives you the opportunity to share the realms of Anuire with other players over the Internet and networks. Discover what happens when fantasy role-playing meets strategy and war-and when the magic of BIRTHRIGHT meets your computer. BIRTNRIGHT and ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS are trademarks of TSR, Inc. and used under license. WIN 95 DOS MAC DISSE Michael Angelie HP: 17(20) AC:12 Terence Gryphon HP:6. Take 3 points damage! Your swing nisses ACO AT Mariae Roesone HP:18(29) AC: 10 Delivered 5 points damage ATOS http://www.sierra.com/birthright SIERRA\" "


"Here, finally, is a computer-based chess game made to satisfy The Computer-Based Chess Game Skeptic. Why? Because Power Chess doesn't just beat you to a pulp like a microchip Grandmaster. Instead, it uses artificial intelligence to actually figure out how good you are. Then the computer plays just a few rating points beyond you to keep you challenged and sharpen your game. There's also a personal coach who will analyze your moves and give expert suggestions in clear, non-computery, spoken English. Now, what are you going to do with your new chess skills? How about taking them on-line to beat other Power Chess players (preferably, to a pulp). WIN 95 POWER CHESS Sierra Adventure & Chess: Welcome Additions to the CD Collection of ADULT the thinker the High I.Q. Wizard and V3 the Guy Born 6 centuries too late http://www.sierra.com/powerchess Buy 2 Sierra CDs and Get rd free and enter to Win a $5,000 home theater PC See mais cards or call 1-800-757-7707 to order direct. D 1996 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and desperate trademarks of, or licensed lo Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #202 "


"Sierra for the Home and Family: Perfect for HT PAYEEZE The Budding Genius | Ithe Multi-Tasking Mom and the Do-It-Yourself Dad is now bahan THE TIME WARP OF DR. BRAIN\" Are you one of those Research-Things-To-Death-Before-YouBuy people? Well, last year, a magazine that reports on consumer matters and who would sue us in an instant if we used their name, said that Dr. Brain is the best software you can buy for your kids. And what would they say to our latest installment? We bet they'd like the way Dr. Brain lets you travel through time. But mostly, they'd be impressed by the ten new 3D puzzle areas, over 600 new puzzles, and the three levels of difficulty that make Dr. Brain fun and challenging for all ages-including yours. WIN 95 WIN MAC HIERD HODES SIERRA'S SCHOOL HOUSEM/EAGER TO LEARN Here are two CDs from the people who brought you Dr. Brain (us) for The Soon-To-BePrecocious in your house, Eager To Learn gives your pre-schoolers a valuable head start by helping them learn to count, recognize letters and numbers, and do simple math problems. With Sierra's School House, your school-age kids will get extra attention in math, science and English from 2nd all the way through 5th grade. Either way, they won't mind learning with these \"games,\" because they'll have fun and get to be creative. MATE WIN 95 WIN MAC SI ERRA\" http://www.sierra.com/drbrain4 "


"SELECT DOCUMENT TYPE SIERRAHOME: 4. «MUST-HAVE» PRODUCTS AT 1 INCREDIBLE PRICE. STATIONERY LAES CARDS ALENDARS CERTIFICATES BANNERS CRAFTS NIW OPEN GANCIL HELP 1. Print Artist 4.0 starts you out with hundreds of cards, signs, stationery, and designs you can modify. Wap lated Burthday W Mr Chicken Breasts with Creen Pepcorn Sauce ir V O Y A G E MICHERU Where Du Wieler 2. More than a recipe collection, MasterCook Deluxe helps you work out nutrition, menus and your shopping list. LAPPY STOLYOUT 300 HODREENOUGOUIS HAPPY BIRTHDAY SPENCER FATHER DAY 3 http://www.slerra.com/printart 3. Plant your dream garden with Land Designer 3D, then let the computer show you how it will look through the years. LOl821 Hoteles SIERRAHOME You know those software collections they make for businesses? Well we've brought that same idea home, by taking the best software for families and putting it all together in one first-rate, reasonably-priced, indispensable package. Here's what you get: Print Artist 4.0, acclaimed by PC MAGAZINE and FAMILY PC as the best allSierra liome around home publishing software for invitations, cards, signs and more; MasterCook Deluxe, with 1,600 rather tasty kitchen-tested recipes and nutritional data; LandDesigner 3D a detailed reference on plants and vegetables that lets you create gardens you can walk through in remarkably realistic 3D; and Collier's Encyclopedia, the most serious, informationpacked CD reference available, and an WIN 95 WIN invaluable resource for students and adults. ID MTORY LI 4 d . unden Western 4. Colliers Encyclopedia isn't a toy or a \"sound bite\" collection. It's a serious, authoritative reference. Buy 2 Sierra CDs and Get a 3rd free and enter to Win a $5,000 home theater PC See mail-in cards or call 1-800-757-7707 to order direct. 1996 Sierra On-Line, Inc and or designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #202 "


"Sielpa Arcade & Family Games: For the Guy with lots of Quarters and the Cyber. Gambler HOYLE CASINO HOYLE Here's a game that will hit the jackpot for The Riverboat Gambler, The Slick-Talking Dude, and The Incredible Cheapskate in all of us. It features the games you'd find in casinos: poker, blackjack, roulette, craps, slots, and more. But, it also includes a cast of witty, sharp-tongued, animated characters for you to play against. If you're up to human competition, you can go on-line and match your luck with real gamblers from around the globe. Thankfully, no actual money changes hands, so you'll never have to explain things to your spouse in the a.m. WIN 95 WIN Sierra On-Line is an official licensee of Hoyle a division of Brown & Bigelow, Inc. http://www.sierra.com/hoyle/classic 3D ULTRA PINBALL\": CREEP NIGHT\" If you're one of The Over Stim Deprived, do we have a game for you. Following on the incredibly hot heels of last year's best-selling 3D Ultra Pinball comes this all-new edition, with three separate tables brimming with moving zombies, skeletons, gargoyles and ball-stealing ghosts. (Bet you've never seen that in a quarter-gobbling table.) And here's something you don't see in other PC pinball games: Sierra's physics-based ball movement, extra wide tables, and superfast play action. Exciting? Exciting! We're getting wired just telling you about it. WIN 95 WIN MAC http://www.sierra.com/3dupb2 SIERRA GOOD AS GOLD OUR PROMISE COMES WITH EVERY SIERRA PRODUCT Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back. Free technical support. Auto-update downloader built in. S I E R R A Buy 2 Sierra CDs and Get a 3rd free (D 1996 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and of designale trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #202 "


"LOYD CASE TECHNOLOGY tech Performance PC Tuning vachi A Faster System May Be A Few Tweaks Away Tuning his month had the chance to build a gamer's dream machine, which is a nice solution if you can afford it. In the real world, though, most of us don't have $9.000 to create our vision of the perfect hot rod, so we have to make some compromises. With a little help from a few friends, I've assembled some suggestions for tuning up your own machine to get the best performance. Some of these involve spending some hard-earned cash, but others simply require a little patient tweaking of your system. your system can improve performance, and i yield more frames per second. th memory compression prograis. using any of these techmologies (see the Even the ones that work can adversely CGW Web site for more). As I've noted affect the performance of DOS games. in past columns, the quality of the drivers Let's talk about types of memory fora is often much more important than hardmoment. In the past, all you had to worry ware details, especially when you considabout was speed: Should I get 80,70,00 er that graphics cards often use the sainc 60 nanosecond (ns) memory? (A accelerator chip. nanosecond is onc-billionth of a second.) Then came Extended Data Out (EDO) OVERCLOCKING: DON'T TRY DRAM, which requires newer mother THIS AT HOME board core logic to work. Lately, there's A number of users have discovered been a lot of hoopla, mostly in ads, about that it's possible to set jumpers on many Synchronous DRAM (SDRAM). motherboards to run their processors Your system may support SDRAM, faster than their rated speed. In other even if you're not running it currently words, by changing a couple of jumpers, Systems using Intel's 430VX mother a Pentium 133 can be run at, say, 150 board chip set can use SDRAM. Its MHz. This trick is called \"overclocking.\" access time is pretty typical, 60 ns, but and my suggestion is: avoid it. When SDRAM offers a higher clock rate (100 CPU chips come off the fabrication line, MHz), while other memory technologies they're all together on a single wafer of usually run at 66 MHZ. In theory, silicon. Vendors test the processors at difSDRAM should yield faster performance ferent speeds, then sort them into approsince it runs at clock rates closer to that of priate bins. All companies allow for a the CPU. In practice, it's not so obvious slight margin of error. You may be lucky Using the Winbench 96 benchmark, I and get a chip that can be clocked higher found the differences between EDO without any problems -then again, you DRAM and SDRAM ranged from three might not. The problems might be obvipercent faster in CPUMark performanceous (the system doesn't boot) or insidious to four percent slower in Graphics (mysterious lockups or program crashes). Winmark performance. These data are Also, overclocking generates more heat, actually within the margin of error for which can have an adverse effect, possiWinbench, so if your board supports bly shortening the life span of the chip. As SDRAM, con't pay a premium for il, the disclaimer goes, unless you're a because you won't get much payback. Irained professional, don't try this at What about graphics memory? home. Memory used in graphics adapters offers an even more stunning array of confusing BIG WHEELS KEEP ON TURNIN' acronyms than system RAM: SCRAM. Here are some things you can do to RDRAM, VRAM, MDRAM, WRAM. hclp speed up your disk. Onc obvious tip Despite all the marketing hype, you can that's often overlooked is to simply defragusually find excellent, fast graphics cards m ent your hard disk periodically. Files THANKS FOR THE MEMORIES An area of performance often overlooked is memory. Modem operating systems like Windows 95, Windows NTor OS/2 like lots of RAM-the more the better, within reason. A PI66 with 32 MB of RAM might actually run better than a P200 with only 16 MB. If you're running DOS games under Windows 95 from the desktop, not as an MS-DOS exclusive application, you should think about upgrading to 32 MB of memory. Most of the more recent DOS games require at least 8 MB of memory, and a lot of them want 16. Given that Win 95 needs about 12 MB, then you're looking at 28 MB-12 for Win 95 and 16 for the game. The alternative is to reboot to exclusive MSDOS mode. Whatever you do, don't get one of For detailed info on CGW's 3D graphic accelerator tests, hit the Web at www.zd.com/gaming. JANUARY 1997 CG "


"LOYD CASE 19010NH)31 live on a disk as discrete pieces, called clusters, which may not be contiguous (meaning that they all may not be adjacent to each other). Also, as files are created and deleted, gaps between clusters will be created. Over time, your disk will seem to be running slower and slower. Running Win 95's Disk Defragmenter utility brings all the files together, rearranging them so that all files are stored contiguously. Here's a useful trick if you have two separate hard disks, and are running Win 95. If Windows 95 is on drive C, tell it to put the swap space on drive D (as an example). You can change this setting by bringing up Control Panel, selecting the System icon, clicking the Performance tab, and then pressing the Virtual Memory button. Click on \"Let me specify my own virtual memory settings.\" You can then pick the drive from the pulldown list. Note: make sure that the drive you sclect has at least 30+ MB of free space. CPU utilization, whereas SCSI CDROMs don't. Here's where a little extra investment can pay off in terms of performance. On top of that, SCSI CD-ROMs are finally starting to drop in price, with 6x and 8x SCSI drives dropping below $200. Yes, you'll need a SCSI host adapter, but if it's only for the CD-ROM, you can find decent ones for well under $100. If you're running from Win 95, make sure your CD-ROM cache is at its highest setting. Right-click on the My Computer icon, and select Properties, then select the Performance tab. Click on the File System button, and sct Supplemental Cache size as high as it goes assuming you have at least 16 MB of RAM-and set the CD-ROM drive lype to «quad speed or higher.\" advice: never, ever mess with PCI interrupts unless you know what you're doing. The area in the BIOS offering the biggest potential for performance increases is the area of memory timing. For example, the Pentium Pro system we built for this year's ultimate gaming rig allows you to set the memory speed to 50 ns. There isn't much in the way of true 50 ns DRAM out there, but the parity EDO DRAM we used seems to support it. Tiveaking memory timings isn'i dangerous, but it can cause lockups, system halls, and even the dreaded \"blue screen o death\" in Windows 95. If you're tweaking memory timings and get erratic behavior in your system, restore the default as 211 FINAL THOUGHTS Spending a little time tuning your system can smooth overall performance, and may vield more frames per second. You may suddenly discover that processor or motherboard upgrade wasn't as urgent as you thought. At worst, you'll develop a little more familiarity with the inner workings of that virtual world engine on your desktop. Who knows, maybe your ultimate rig will be faster than ours. for more detailed information on upgrades, watch for Loyd Case's Ultimate Game Machine, Part IV in March. BIOS TWEAKING One little-understood area that offers some potential for better performance is the ROM BIOS. You may have gotten into your BIOS setup program, usually by pressing a specified key during boot-up, to set up a new hard disk. Not all BIOSes offer a lot of adjustment, but some versions of the AMI and Award BIOSes are tweakers' heaven. Be warned, thougl: messing with the BIOS is dangerous it's possible that the system can get into a state where it won't boot. One word of CD-ROM PERFORMANCE One of the most underrated performance metrics for CD drives is CPU utilization. What good is an 8x drive if, while transferring data, it cats up so much of your processor's time that the game stalls? EIDE CD-ROM drives often have luigh TIPS Dedicated Game Ports and the Microsoft Sidewinder Gamepad Microsoft's new Sidewinder gamepad looks really cool, but it has a potentially dangerous flaw. The Sidewinder works only from within Windows 95, and installs special drivers for its operation. Unfortunately, the Sidewinder becomes very cranky when more than one game port is present. This can happen when, for example, you have a Plug-and-Play (PnP) sound card installed and a dedicated game card, such as the CH Gamecard or the Thrustmaster ACM card. You need to make sure that the game port on the sound card is disabled in Windows 95. Go to the Device Manager in Control Panel and deselect \"original configuration\" for the game port on the sound card. Cards like Creative Labs' PnP cards also come with a configuration utility-make sure you disable the game port there, too. If you don't, Windows 95 may refuse to start, and then might even need to be reinstalled. Matrox Cards and the 3D Checkbox If you've fooled around with the neat little utilities that Matrox ships with its cards for configuring resolution, color depth, and so on, you may have noticed a little checkbox labeled 3D. Don't check it-it's there for certain kinds of 3D acceleration used for CAD programs and other similar applications, not for 3D games. If you do check it, your Windows performance will degrade substantially, and there will be no benefit for 3D games. If you're playing 3D games in Windows 95 written with Microsoft's Direct3D, they'll take care of turning on 3D acceleration automatically. Verite Version of Quake 1.06 Available If you've gotten one of the new cards with the Rendition Verité 3D accelerator, then you've probably been playing VQUAKE, the Rendition-accelerated version of Quake. There's now a version of VQUAKE available that works with QUAKE 1.06. It's better tuned and runs more efficiently than the original VQUAKE, SO you won't notice any difference on benchmarks, but it runs more fluidly overall, and the mysterious hesitations that would occasionally occur with the 1.01 version are mostly gone. You can get the updated version from Rendition at: www.rendition.com/quake.html CG JANUARY 1997 "


"WICKEDLY FAST 3D, WINDOWS & VIDEO MATROX MYSTIQUE Direct3D lunnel Test From the company that consistently delivers high performance graphics accelerators, comes the next wave of graphics innovation for your home PC. ATI 30 Xpression + PC2TV Matrox Mystique Matrox Mystique's state-of-the-art technology combines the new MGA-1064SG 64-bit graphics chip, an integrated high speed 170 MHZ RAMDAC and powerful SGRAM memory for mind altering performance. Diamond Stealth 3D 2000 XL From now on your Windows 95 applications Scores in frames per secs will explode onto your screen at over 44 million Winmarks and at resolutions as high as 1600 x 1200. You'll also play back TV quality MPEG and AVI video clips at a smooth 30 frames/sec. TROX 40 new low price of $179 (ESP) And unlike many of the competition's 3D decelerators, Mystique delivers true 3D game power with the highest frame rates possible and a unique set of 3D features not available with other products. You'll also get blazing fast DOS game acceleration with Mystique's superior 32-bit VGA engine, THE Wida By adding on the Matrox Rainbow Runner series of upgrades, you'll discover an exciting new universe of digital video and make obsolescence nightmares a thing of the past (Q1 '97). You'll be able to send video over the internet, play PC games on a big screen TV, decode MPEG video in hardware and watch TV on the PC! Explore all the possibilities at incredibly low prices. Satisfy your desire for the fastest, most complete 3D, Windows and video accelerator available. Discover the plug and play world of the Matrox Mystique. Starting at only $179 (ESP 2 MB, PCI bus). FREE SOFTWARE BUNDLE (AVAILABLE WITH RETAIL VERSION ONLY) MECHWARRIOR 2 DESTRUCTION ACTIVISION DERBY SCURCH MPEG PSYGNOSIS TULET VREAM GOMIREA BEST. MIGO CENTER    1-800-362-9349 http://www.matrox.com/mga Matrox Graphics Inc.1025 St. Regis Blvd.Dorval, Quebec, Canada, HSP 2T4 Tel: 514-969-6320 Fax: 514-969-6363 In Quebec, call: 514-969-6330 THE COMPTE DEPARTEVINE DION SWIRL CRITERION All Duct 30 tests conducted by Matrox Graphics Inc. on a Gateway P5 166 configured with Intel P5.166Mhz, 16MB of EDO RAM with 256K cache. Motrox Mystique, Diamond Stealth 30 2000XL and All 30 XPRESSION PCTV were configured with 2 MB of memory for the PCI bus using driver releases 3.16.4.03.00 2101 and 3.0 respectively for Windows 95. Direct 3D tests donc using Tunnel from the DirectX 20 SOK Damond Stcall 30 2000XL All30 Xpression.CZIV tests were conducted at 512 x 304 m 16 bit while Motrox Mystique tests were conducted at 640 x 400 161 based on our shaded, perspective correct textured, part super, pre cukut dithered rendered polygons CIRCLE READER SERVICE #259 "


"Wow! A Free Set of Yamaha Headphones! Retail Value Up To $29.95. With Purchase of M15, System 35 or System 45 Only. Limited Time Mail-in Offer Ends 1/31/97. You've got a CD-ROM drive, a wavetable sound card and you've got computer speakers with the power and fidelity of a 1963 transistor radio. You've got to get Yamaha YSTM Multimedia Speakers. It doesn't matter if you're conquering virtual alien hordes or calming your nerves with a Vivaldi CD while balancing the check book. Yamaha YST multimedia speakers release the stunning audio performance that's already right there in your computer. Try playing an audio CD in your CD ROM drive to hear how your speakers really stack up. If you had Yamaha YST speakers you'd hear smooth, crisp, clean sound. And you'd have plenty of power-with ratings from 5 watts per speaker to 45 watts of total amplifier power. Active Servo Thanks to Yamaha active servo technology the speakers, amplifier, and enclosure actually interact to deliver deep, tight, satisfying bass. Technology The kind of bass that brings energy and excitement to music and computer games. And for the ultimate in bass power and performance you've got to have a subwoofer. For a complete satellite/subwoofer system choose the System 35 or System 45. Or add the MSW10 subwoofer to your existing speakers to bring them to life. And if you look at the bottom of this page, you'll find a computer retailer who's got Yamaha multimedia THE WAY YOUR COMPUTER speakers. You've got to go get them. SHOULD SOUND. YAMAHA YST-M7 Multimedia Speakers YST-MSW10 Sub-woofer System 45 Multimedia Speakers Yamaha multimedia speakers MSRP from $69.95 $249.95 at these fine retailers. OFFICE COMPUSA MIRO GNTER Try's OfficeMax BEST COMPUTER STAPLES DEPOT To receive product literature, call (800) 823-6414 Ext. 503.  Yamaha Corporation of America, Computer Related Products, 6600 Orangethorpe Avenue, Buena Park, CA 90620 All rights reserved. Yamaha, YST, and the Yamaha logo are registered trademarks of Yamaha Corporation of America CIRCLE READER SERVICE #135 "


"PART 2 THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE The Ultimate Gaming PC Or What Will. Nine Grand Get You In The Real World? BY LOYD CASE Y or me, the defining moment in the film Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade is the scene where the last Knights Templar guarding the Holy Grail gazes down at the ashes of one of the villains who had drunk from the wrong cup, and intones, \"He chose... poorly.» Every time we buy a new piece of hardware, or even a whole system, we're faced with choices, and many times, those choices are compromises. What if we didn't have to compromise? What if we could build a system from scratch that uses nothing but best-of-breed components? We asked these questions in last year's edition of the Ultimate Game s Machine, and the answer was a Pentium 133 with lots of bells and whistles. Now it's a year later, and the Pentium 133 is the entry level. The good news is that computer components don't follow the national inflation rate, so this year's system is actually less expensive than last year. JANUARY 19 CG "


"POOL Conquest Necu World let Virtual Pool from MacPlay bus all the angles and shots of the real game--and then some. Features 4 great pool games, full-motionvideo library, realistic physics and geometry, easy multiplayer modes, realistic 3-D perspective and graphics plus a musical jukebor. Fire bundred years ago, Europe's conquering beroes pursued dreams of a new world. MacPlay's Conquest of the New World is a strategy game wbere jon command explorers, selllers and mercenary soldiers as Ibey discover a new world and build the ultimate nation. The Ultimate a Pool Simulator MACFLAY MACE YOU DON'T KNOW Is that th JACK volunie You Don'Know jack, Volume 2, is tix bilarious sequel to the original award-winning game. This Juck comes complete will 800 all-new questions, new question types, celebrity guest appearances, new features and more. From Berkeley Systems. In Zork Nemesis, you're beckoned to the Forbidden Lands, a cursed world occupied only by the tortured spirits trapped there. Travel throngb 5 mind-bending worlds to discover the ancient secret of alcbemy Ilul will free the trapped souls from evil's grip. From Activision. ZORK NEMESIS to Trevoroot guiz show party como . EXHILARATING FLIGHT COMBATIEN TEN FREE MacSoft's Terminal Velocity offers frust 3-D texture-mapped graphics, full 360-degree fight movement and 7 weapons of extraordinary destruction as you fight your way througb 9 unique planets with an all'esome array of air-to-air and air-to-ground combat actiont. Monty Python HOLY GRAIL The best CD-ROM game of 932 A.D.Monty Python and the Quest for the Holy Grail from 7th Level, Inc. It will take you on a romp through King Arthur's England, uncovering clues, solving puzzles and playing wholesome games like \"Burn the Witch\" and \"Spank the Virgin.\" terminal Velocity For Macintosh 1103 her CD RONGUE TANTV7 COMMANDER Westwood Studios' Command and Conquer takes you into a gritty, bigh-tech world where the art of electronic intelligence and covert surveillance reigns supreme. Where guerrilla strategies and sarvige combat are the norm. Muster forces and lacerate your enemies to the bone. Tank Commander by Eidos Interactive slams you into the cockpit of an MI Abrams tank as you test your split-second-decision skills against enemy tanks in over 25 fully textured missions. Destroy 1-72, Leopard and Challenger tanks with over 7 weapons. DMARK NASTO wing com RICE NE SREEDER Witb its incredibly realistic flight models, 3-D photo-realistic landscapes and the use of real-world pbysics, Flight Unlimited re-creates the most accurate sensation of aerobatic fhring ever experienced on tbe Macintosh. For best results, play before lunch. Origin Systems' Wing Commander IV is one of the latest space-combat games for the Mac. Take on the role of Colonel Blair, played by Mark Hamill in breathtaking space batlles and beart-pounding drama, as you fight your way through the most spectacular Wing Commander yet. UNLIMITED. MAD Get ready for the biggest adrenaline rush of the holiday season. We're talking new games for the Mac: We're also talking sweaty palms. Heart-pounding exhilaration. Stomach-inthe-throat thrills--the works. And here's the best part with thousands of titles to choose from, you may never come down from that gaming high. Piqued your interest? Good. 19.pple Computer, Inc. All rights reserved e Me Apple logo Mac. Macintosh to Mac (by and we Msantul are read trademark /Agte compusa do "


"smell of chestnuts burning? Or just your neurological receptors going into overdrive? Mac OS So now you're probably wondering how to get your twitching fingers on these games. Just visit stores like CompUSA, Staples, Micro Center and Fry's Electronics. Or, flip through any Mac mail-order catalogs. Or, hop on the Net. But no matter where you go to find them, remember to look for the smiling Mac OS logo. (All great software wears this face.) If you're ready to take your adrenal glands on the ultimate ride, visit www.macsoftware.apple.com. And learn more about games for your Macintosh and how to find them. Of course, if you want to, you can always use a phone call 800-500-4862. Amat share are the ford trademark of Apple make the other products are trademarks or registered ulemarks of the repeate con "


"ven if you had an unlimited purse, there are still lots of choices to make. You can't even go by magazine reviews, because different magazines often contradict each other. In my case, applied 15 years of performance tuning, hardware experience and good old gut-level instinct to come up with this year's ultimate rig. You may quibble with some of the choices I made, and there may be products available now which I couldn't test when I wrote this, but overall I know you'll be pleased with this system's performance and peripherals. But enough talk, let's see the system. KIT ERITO TIL The Brains of the Operation There's no competition here, yet. Intel's 200 MHz Pentium Pro is the current king of the heap for X86 compatible processors. In most cases, the Pentium Pro is at least as fast, if not faster, in 16-bit performance than a Pentium 200 (see last month's Tech column). In 32-bit apps, it's not even a contestand most games these days are 32-bit applications. A few games, such as DUKE NUKEM 3D, make heavy use of 8 and 16 bit operations, which is not the Pro's strong suit, but even then, Duke's performance on a Pentium Pro should satisfy even hard-core Dukeheads. And for those of you in the QUAKE camp, the Pro's superior floating point perfor mance makes game play at 640 x 400 smooth instead of jerky. The Pro got a bad rap early on for a couple of reasons. For one, Intel released the 150 MHz Pentium Pro, which didn't clock as fast as the high end of the Pentium family at the time, the Pentium 166. In addition, the sole core logic chip-set-which lets the CPU talk to the PC motherboard-was supplied by Intel, and had a couple of major performance-draining bugs. That's all over now. The 200 MHz chip is as fast as the Pentium Pro line comes, and the best chip-set currently is the Natoma 440FX chip-set, also from Intel, that fixes many of the problems of the older Orion glue logic. Natoma supports EDO DRAM, PCI concurrency and a host of other neat features that help speed data through the system. It's even capable of support. ing two Pentium Pros, but we decided that would be overkill-there aren't any commercial games that support multiple processors. One very handy tool is a piece of software, FastVid, that turns on key Pentium features to accelerate graphics data, particularly DOS VGA and SVGA data. Without FastVid, you have a very fast computer that has okay graphics. With FastVid, you have a very fast computer that also is a game graphics hot rod—if the graphics card can handle it. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"PART 2 THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE LWSCSI fee Ad Olsen D. Dese MOTO T2X BIBIU     LOUD :coli Bill !Lili  SIE FavourWNIntel 200 MHZ Pentium Pro processor 2 AIR PONPI motherboard with Natoma chip-set 3 64 MB of EDO DRAM 4 Quantum Atlas II ultra-wide SCSI 4.4 GB hard drive 5 Plextor 12x SCSI CD-ROM drive Matrox Millenium graphics accelerator 7 Orchid Righteous 3D accelerator (3Dfx Voodoo) 8 Creative Labs AWE-32 PnP sound card g Yamaha SW6OXG Waveforce wavetable card 10 CH GameCard 3 joystick card 11 3COM Etherlink XL network card JANUARY 1997 CC 121 "


"BATTLE 12 TEAMS FOR THE LEAGUE CHAMPIONSHIP. SLASH, BODY CHECK AND HACK YOUR WAY THROUGH THE KILLING SEASON. EACH TEAM S DROME ARENA HAS ITS OWN LETHAL COMBINATION OF WEAPONS, RAMPS, POWER-UPS AND AMPUTATING OBSTACLES. IN THE SPORT OF THE FUTURE SCORE WITH THE \"ROK\" OR YOUR OPPONENT'S SEVERED HEAD. YOUR EQUIPMENT IS SPECIALLY DESIGNED FOR SCORING AND BUTCHERING, ENGAGE IN 4-PLAYER NETWORK ACTION THAT FEATURES THE SPEED OF HOCKEY AND THE SAVAGERY OF COMBAT. BE THE MVP OR BE DOA. SOUNDELUX WIZ DEVELOPED BY WIZBANG! IN COLLABORATION WITH ACTIVISION. PERBLANE COMPATIBLE WITH HAY ACCELERATOR CARDS ACTIVISION IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK AND HYPERBLADE IS A TRADEMARK OR ACTIVISION. INC. 1996 ACTIVISION. ING WIZWANG! IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF WIZBANG! SOFTWARE PRODUCTIONS, INC. ALL OTHER TRADEMARKS AND TRADE NAMS ARE THE PROPERTIES OF THEIR RESPECTIVE OWNERS. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED "


"THERE ARE TEAM CORONERS. THE DROME IS NOW OPEN. TYPER ACTIVISION. AVAILABLE ON MS-DOS/WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM. PLAY THE DEMO ON THIS MONTH'S COVER CD DOWNLOAD IT AT HTTP://WWW.ACTIVISION.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #96 "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 2 Motherboard, Disk Controller and Accouterments One of the key issues with the creation of any new system is balancing the compo We nents. A really fast processor can be seri ously hobbled by inadequate memory or a very slow disk. We went for the fastest disk we could find, which meant SCSI-not just plain, vanilla fast SCSI, but ultra-wide SCSI, capable of moving data along the SCSI bus at 40 MB/sec. While ultra SCSI is a bit of overkill for a system with only a single hard disk, this is, after all, the ultimate game PC. For the motherboard, 3 we picked the Advanced Integration Research (AIR) P6NPI. In addition to the Natoma chip-set, this board has 4 PCI slots and 4 ISA slots (one pair shared) and an onboard Adaptec ultrawide SCSI controller. This board adopts the new ATX form factor, which makes for much less cable clutter in the system-parallel, serial and mouse ports are attached to the back of the board-and better cooling since processor is placed closer to the cooling fan. It does require an ATX-style case and power supply. We chose an In Win IQ-500 full tower case (fewer bleeding knuckles that way) and a PC Power and Cooling Standard ATX power supply. The In Win case has some nice features-especially the slide-out mother. board tray, which makes installation much easier. PC Power and Cooling is the undisputed leader in high-quality PC power supplies. Of course, with a Pentium Pro, you'd want to have enough DRAM. So we went with 64 MB of true parity EDO DRAM. 3 The Pentium Pro processor itself has 256 KB of onboard cache that runs as fast as the processor. Mass Storage We wanted the fastest possible hard disk for this system. After much digging, we found that Quantum was preparing to ship its Atlas II ultra-wide SCSI 4.4 GB drive. 4 This disk rotates at 7200 RPM and has an access time of 8 milliseconds-among the fastest around. The Quantum also has a very high bit density, cramming the 4.4 GB onto five platters, possible because of a technology called magnetoresistive heads, or MR for short. Because of the high density of bits on the platters, data can stream off the disk very fast, indeed. The Atlas II is well matched with the AIR motherboard's onboard SCSI hardware. We wanted a CD-ROM drive that's equally well. matched, so we chose Plextor's new 12x SCSI CD-ROM drive. 5 It boasts an access time of 105 milliseconds and a staggering 1.8 MB/sec max transfer rate, while offering caddyless tray loading. Finally, you need good backup for any system with this much hard disk space. On the other hand, most gamers don't have gigabytes of mission-critical data, so something like a high-capacity tape drive isn't really necessary. We gamers are, however, an impatient lot, so being able to save and restore backups quickly is important. At first, we considered lomega's Zip drive, but the low capacity and slowness put us off. We settled on the new Syquest EZ-Flyer 230, the SCSI version, of course. The EZ-Flyer sports hard disk-like performance, along with 230 MB for each 3.5-in. cartridge. The cartridges themselves retail for a mere $29.95, cheaper than some high-capacity tapes. CBench: DOS Graphics Performance Winbench 96: CPU Performance Winbench 96: Disk and CD-ROM Performance CGW Killer Rig CGW Killer Rig Micron Home MPC Falcon NW Mach V CGW Killer Rig Micron Home MPC Falcon NW Mach V 550.0 Micron Home MPC Falcon NW Mach V 250 600 1500r 1300.0 209.6 1250.0 500 200 1200 111010 1090.0 1030.0 400 364.0 3650 368.0 363.0 360.0 150 900 865.0 139.2 1333 300 100 600 200 49.6 50 40.7 38.2 300F 100 Cbench SVGA Cbench VGA CPUMarka2 CPUMark 16 Disk Winmark CD-Rom Winmark Frames per second CPU WinMarks Disk WinMarks *The Micron Home MPC and Falcon Northwest Mach V scored the highest ratings in last month's Ultimate Game Machine roundup, earning 5-stars and 4.5 stars respectively. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"This drive's capacity is unlimited. (The offer, however, is not.) While technology is making the world smaller, it's also making your applications and files larger. The perfect situation for the EZFlyer\" 230MB. Since it's an actual hard drive, it's faster MAILIN REBATE. than most removables. Which means you can run applications straight off the 230. Plus, you can keep adding cartridges, giving you the flexibility of unlimited capacity. SyQuest Apparently, space is no longer the final frontier. Purchase a SyQuest EZFlyer 230 drive by Jan. 31, 1997, and receive a $55 mall-in rebate. Use this card as a rebate coupon. For each SyQuest drive you purchase, you must include the following items: This rebate coupon Original sales receipt dated Nov. 1 through Jan. 31, 1997. No photocopies Completed registration card included with the drive. UPC label from box. Serial number from box. Self addressed, stamped envelope. Mail To: $55.00 Rebate c/o 0&L Services, Inc. P.O. Box 1508 Delaware, OH 43015 Only 2 rebates per household. Please allow 8-10 weeks for rebate fulfillment. Must be postmarked within 30 days of purchase and received by 3/15/97. Void where taxed. prohibited or restricted by law. Not to be used in conjunction with any other offer. CGW-1/97 10% SyQxcut Technology AVAILABLE AT COMPUSA, BEST BUY, COMPUTER CITY, EGGHEAD, OTHER LEADING RETAILERS AND MAIL ORDER COMPANIES. 1-800-245-2278 OR www.syquest.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #118 "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 2 Graphics: Something Old And Something New Last year we used the Matrox Millenium as the graphics card for the ultimate gaming machine. This year, we're sticking with the Millenium, 6 which is still at or near the top of the heap in Windows performance and posts very good DOS game bench marks as well. There are cards faster in one area or another, but there isn't a better-balanced graphics card on the market, especially matched with our choice of monitor. The Viewsonic PT-810 uses something Viewsonic calls Sonictron, which is their version of Trinitron technology. The PT-810 has a very sharp image and is also capable of 77 Hz refresh rate at 1600 x 1200 resolution-a perfect match for the Matrox card's capabilities. It's hard to beat CIVILIZATION 2 played at 1600 x 1200 on a 21-in. monitor. Calling All Control Freaks he subject of controllers always results in a heated dis. cussion among gamers. The choice of joysticks or gamepads seems to be one of the most personal ones any game player can make. This year, we went unabashedly for the high end. For flight controls, we chose the Thrustmaster F-22 Pro control stick 1 paired with their TQS throttle quadrant. 2 We stuck with the CH Pro Pedals 3 preferring the closer spacing and overall feel of the CH pedals to the Thrustmaster RCS. However, there's always a need for a joystick that you can just plug in and go for quick games so the CH F16 Combat stick is still a solid alternative to the F-22's need for extensive program downloads. Finally, gamepads. Though great for certain kinds of action games, the action and feel of various gamepads seems to be all over the map. After some delibera tion, we decided on the Gravis GRIP 4 system, whose gamepad controllers offer very good basic functionality. The GRIP's MultiPort \"hub\" can take up to four of these controllers and has pass through connectors for two joysticks as well. Gravis has just shipped its GamePad Pro, a PlayStation-like controller, which can also be used with the GRIP system of course, if you're into racing games, you need to have a real steering wheel joysticks just don't cut it. We went back to Thrustmaster again, for their Formula T2 driving wheel 5 and foot pedal combo. Topping all of this off is a good mouse and keyboard. The Microsoft Natural Keyboard is just the thing for those heavy gamers that risk carpal tunnel syndrome. The mouse we chose is the Logitech Cordless Mouseman 96, which uses radio frequencies instead of the more common infrared for remote control, and eliminates at least a bit of the cable clutter so common to gamers' desktops. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"PC CD ROM WINDOWS 95 ARE YOU THE CRACK PILOT THE POPULATION IS DYING FOR. SRFACE TENSIO RATING PENDING EN PHILIPS CONTENT RATED BY ESRB 2. CIPGLE READER SERVICE 1279 COMPRO GAMES "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 2 But what about 3D? The Millenium's 3D capabilities are pretty rock your world, though they command a lofty $700 price tag. bare bones, at least compared with the current crop of 3D accelSince most sound card joystick ports tend to be twitchy, we erators. That's why we mated it to the Orchid Righteous 3D, 7 added CH's GameCard 3 speed-compensated joystick port which uses the 3Dfx Voodoo chip-set, and works well with the card. 10 This card has higher quality components for reading in Millenium. The Voodoo has garnered wide industry support for its values from your joystick, and keeps thermal drift (calibration high performance 3D technology, and is ideal for our ultimate rig. degradation) to a minimum. It comes with CH's TestAll utility, which is useful for verifying calibration settings, and you can The Sound and the Fury reset the card with new speed settings in DOS by reinitializing their driver. No gaming rig would be complete with out sound cards and a hot speaker setup. The Most Like last year, we went with Creative Lab's AWE-32 Plugand-Play. 8 The AWE's Dangerous Prey MIDI sounds are a little weak, so we Last year, multiplayer games emerged as added a Yamaha SW60XG Waveforce the hot feature every game needed to be stand-alone wavetable card. 9 The considered complete. Of course, any Yamaha card uses an 18-bit DAC (digital-to-analog converter) to computer claiming to be an ultimate render the 4 MB of wavetable ROM, and sounds superb. You can game rig couldn't be complete without route the AWE-32's line-level output to the line-in on the appropriate ways to connect to other sys SW60XG, and control it using Yamaha's mixer applet, thereby tems for mutual mayhem. preserving the 18-bit output from the SW60XG's DAC. Despite the increasing importance of Internet gaming, nothing Of course, you wouldn't want to pipe these cards through a beats the visceral experience of getting together with a bunch of pair of $40 speakers. Last year we suggested a complete audio friends, networking all the computers together, and having at it. There system with speakers and separate receiver. Since then there are a growing number of network gaming groups forming around the have been some pretty hot speaker setups for computers, with country. The minimum requirement is to have a good networking better quality drivers and cleaner amplifiers. This year we went card. One of the best around is the 3COM Etherlink XL 10/100, in for the CrystaLake Multimedia 700 speakers. These speakers will which can actually connect at 100 Mbit/sec, but will also mate up with networks supporting a more mundane 10 Quake: Winbench 96:Graphics Time Refresh at 640 X 400 Performance at 10x7 x 8 Mbit/sec. No local gaming 50r group will likely spring for 46.0 the $600-$1500 for a 100 26.8 43.0 42.3 Mbit hub, but 10 Mbit hubs are now below $100, and 40 twisted pair network cabling is much easier to 20 configure than coax. (For a complete guide on assem. 16.4 16.2 bling a game network, see the Sept. '96 issue of 15 CGW.) For those times when you yearn to mix it up with 101 real humans, but can't get your friends together, you need a good modem. Diamond Multimedia's Suprasonic 336V+ is an excellent Plug-and-Play Falcon Micron Home CGW Falcon NW Micron CGW Killer external modem, supportNW Mach V MPC Killer Rig Mach V Home MPC Rig ing connect speeds up to Frames per second Graphic Win Marks 33.6 kbps. All you need *The Micron Home MPC and Falcon Northwest Mach V scored the highest ratings in last then is a Kali license, or month's Ultimate Game Machine roundup, earning 5-stars and 4.5 stars respectively. hook up with one of the 30 25  CG JANUARY 1997 "


"REMEMBER WHEN PLAYING IN THE SAND WAS SAFE..... ITHOSE DAYS ARE OVER! 1. Can you destroy the evil Set Empire and capture the Sandships of the Gods before his armies do? Or will you be left stranded on your dying planet? Soar through pyramid cities blasting enemy soldiers and civilians in a barrage of missiles and biotech weapons, Dogfight through the twisted desert rock formations and push your stealth fighter craft to the limit, Pilot your A.V.C, (Advanced Vector Craft) armed with up to ten lethal weapons, engines & shields Develop your own killer strategies using 7sophisticated preprogrammed flight maneuvers Pilot your way through day and night time missions, laying waste to entire cities, blowing up dams and destroying enemy convoys * Fly through a fully interactive 3D world complete with light source shading/animating texture maps, horrendous explosions and **state-of-the-art terrain graphics/ 5* Over 20 different missions with campaign play and fully animated 3D mission briefings * SANDIWARKOKS LATINS PENDING Available on PC CD-ROM COMELET GremlinB GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. WWW.INTERPLAY.COM 1996 Gremlin Interactivo La All rights reserved. SandWarriors and Interplay are trademarks of interplay Productions. All rights reserved, Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive. Ltd. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #61 "


"To those million fans who are addicted to Command & Conquer. We just uppedyour dosage. COMMAN CONOUER TM FOR WINDOWS 95 "


"Command & Conquer Gold Edition for Windows 95! ALL-NEW GOLD EDITION FEATURES Super VGA Graphics intensify realism and excitement Internet Head-to-Head play Play against competitors across the world, with Westwood Chat* New Command & Conquer Theme Pack includes screen savers, icons and desktop patterns COMPTE GANU COMMAND CONOER Incoming! This Winter! Mas como For Windows. Westwood Command & Conquer is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. , 1996 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. S T U DIOS WWW.Westwood.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #226  Requires existing Internet access "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 2 The Shopping List Web Address Street Price $550 $900 $516 $1,100 $29 $305 Phone Number (408) 428-0800 (408) 428-0800 (408) 428-0800 (408) 894-4000 $235 Component AIR PONPI Motherboard 200 MHz P6/256 KB L2 cache 64 MB Parity EDO DRAM Quantum Atlas II 4 GB Ultra Wide HD 3.5-in. floppy drive Plextor 12x CD drive (w/tray) Syquest EZ-Flyer 230 MB removable Two EZ Flyer cartridges Matrox Millenium 4 MB Graphics card Orchid Righteous 3D Viewsonic PT-810 21-in. monitor In Win IW-Q500 tower case PC Power & Cooling 250W ATX P/S Suprasonic 33.6 external modem Etherlink XL 10/100 LAN card AWE-32 PnP Sound Card Yamaha SW60XG MIDI Synth card Thrustmaster ACM game card Thrustmaster F22 Pro joystick Thrustmaster TQS Throttle CH Pro Pedals Gravis GRIP System CrystaLake Speakers Microsoft Natural Keyboard Logitech Cordless Mouseman 96 Thrustmaster Formula T2 Wheel Microsoft Windows 95 $60 $280 $299 $1,800 $139 $89 $260 $139 www.airwebs.com www.airwebs.com www.airwebs.com www.quantum.com (commonly available) www.plextor.com Www.syquest.com www.syquest.com Www.matrox.com www.orchid.com www.viewsonic.com www.in-win.com (Not available) www.diamond.com www.3com.com www.creativelabs.com www.yamaha.com www.thrustmaster.com www.thrustmaster.com www.thrustmaster.com www.chproducts.com www.gravis.com www.crystalake.com www.microsoft.com www.logitech.com www.thrustmaster.com www.microsoft.com $225 (408) 980-1838 (510) 226-4000 (510) 226-4000 (800) 361-1408 (888) 545-5733 (909) 869-7318 (818) 333-1986 (800) 722-6555 (360) 604-1400 (408) 764-5000 (408) 428-6600 (800) 823-6414 (503) 615-3200 (503) 615-3200 (503) 615-3200 (619) 598-2518 (800) 257-0061 (503) 222-2603 (206) 882-8080 (510) 795-8500 (503) 615-3200 (206) 882-8080 $180 $35 $130 $140 $89 $99 $700 $95 $75 $109 $189 Total $8,826 multiplayer gaming services, and you're now connected to a huge uni: verse of would-be targets. The Greater Whole But how does it perform once it's all together? Check out our perfor mance table-the benchmarks tell the story. The CPUMarks are pretty much the highest we've seen, the disk Winmark is a staggering 1300 and the CD-ROM Winmark almost reaches 1100. More importantly, DOS games cook along too, as evidenced by Quake running quite smoothly at 640 x 400. The Orchid Righteous 3D runs like greased lightning on the P6 setup, posting very high scores on the D3Dtest. Some Assembly Required Once you have this huge pile of boxes in your house, the next step is to put it together. While we can't give you a tutorial on computer assembly, here are a few hints. Make sure you have a good surface that minimizes static electricity. If possible, a bare concrete floor and a grounded table is the best sur face, but barring that, you need to make sure you ground yourself fre. quently by touching the computer's chassis often. You can get an inexpensive wrist grounding strap for a few bucks at Radio Shack. There are three tools that are invaluable in computer assembly. The first is a power screwdriver-the long, skinny kind, not the one that looks like a power drill. The second is a pair of small surgeon's for ceps, for extracting and inserting jumpers in awkward places. The third is a set of spring loaded claws that allow you to retrieve screws and other tiny objects that may have fallen into awkward locations. Wrapping It Up Building a computer like this is no task for the faint-hearted. It's not so much the assembly that's difficult, but the time it takes to track down and identify best-of-breed components. Even if you can afford the $8,900 cost of entry, that's a lot of money in one fell swoop for something that will be obsolete shortly. Still, like the guys who build hot rods in their garages, there's something deeply satisfying about building your own machine, and knowing it's the best damn system money can buy-at least this month. JANUARY 1997 "


"4MB Order Reactor Direct! 1-800-692-8069 of Graphics Memory Unleosho 3D Graphics Melidowni! BIASIS BEFORE FTE Graphics options for ~30 fps Fast action and stunning realism that's the promise of new 3D games and edutainment software. But if your Super Star Fighter jerks along instead of zooming and your \"terrifying' monsters are glaringly pixelated face it. You're not having much fun. Don't just play it...Live it! With a Reactor 3D graphics accelerator on your PC, expect a whole new interactive experience! Plus IndyCar Iland HellBender FREE! 300 73993 016357 900 3996 180 IndyCar with SVGA Graphics IndyCar with Reactor Graphics Notice the jagged lines and edges and the flat, dull colors. Where's_Now you're racing! See the detail on next cor. Watch those rearview the crowd? What are those blocky things in the background? Are mirrors That's real 3D! Notice the crowd in the stands and the you really into this race? mountains in the background. And how about that sky! Want to know more? Call 800-763-0242 or reach us on the Internet at http://www.intergraph.com/ics/reactor. t t aa trakmarku Micro INTERGRAPH PERIUDI Metaph and the litawapeles are intrakatan Hesse batakutarkoi Carpenterrada p els are muskler sehen de lases the Indiente de the publicate la acurate as of its publication de su h e aplicate dedicate and definancieros grup rmandat below wateule de and a , Al. W my . CIRCLE READER SERVICE #74 "


"IN THE WAR OF THE GAMING MACHINES, THERE WILL BE NEW ENEMIES THAT DO NOT KNOW HOW TO PLAY THE GAME... \"I guess the thing that strikes people first about the MACH V is how bleedin' fast it is.\" -PC Gamer \"In terms of raw performance, the MACH V easily bested the other systems in our roundup. It surpassed the other systems in every benchmark.\" -Computer Gaming World «Ssssmmokin'! The MACH V just might be the only computer hardware you'll need. This system is that good. Boot 92%rating \"Best Hardware of the Year» [19951 -Computer Game Review \"It's top-notch performance is key, but you'll also appreciate the MACH V's little extras.\" -PC Garnes Rating: A urhe MACH V may cost a bit more than other systems, but hard.core gamers will find it worth the investment.\" PC Magazine 4/4 stars FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS \"The system's performance was nothing short of excellent, chewing through every benchmarking program thrown at it, scoring an overall average of 20% better performance than a similarly equipped Gateway 2000\" -Next Generation "


"---AND FALCONS WILL FLY OVER THEIR BROKEN HULLS. GET FAST OR GET OUT OF THE WAY TL E FALCON MACHV GAMING PC 3 Graphics processor ver5 megabytes of testàlmernory8dedicatelu.com sig speed graphics 38.6 Kbps internet ready Dolby Surround Sound 3Dfx Voodao Maccelerated 3D graphics GS, GM. & XG MIDI standards 676 wavetable instruments Ultra Widescsi data channels SENO compatibility hassles The bighest quality gaming peripherals Supports the hottest new technologies USB, SDRAM, GDY supports the ha 2007, MMX and one. And each system is.custom built to meet your needs by Falcon's veteran technicians no assembly lines or re-package systems CALL TOLL FREE: 1-888-FALCON-1 or 1-800-258-6778 http://www.falcon-nw.com Custom built PCs starting at $2,995 for game playing, graphics, game design-or even getting some work done Trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Optional equlpment pictured. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #257 "


"THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE PART 2 Consulting The Ouija Board his year's Ultimate Game Machine was the ultimate rig we could build at the time. Last year's system was a Pentium 133, but by the time the issue was out, the Pentium 166 and Pentium Pro had already begun ship ping. Likewise, there are new technologies on the radar that will render obsolete even this year's ultimate system. Unless you're really driven to skate on the bleeding edge, obsolete isn't necessarily bad, because it also means that the technology has usually improved. So a Pentium Pro 200 will be rendered obsolete by Intel's upcoming Klamath processor, but that doesn't make it a lousy system-it's still damned fast. Connectivity Another huge area of growth will be online, multiplayer games. Face it, folks: 28.8 modems really don't cut it for online play. Expect 56 Kbps modems to be shipping by the spring in quantity. Some of the phone companies are already experimenting with ADSL (Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line), which allow very high speed into the home and reasonably high speed back out. Cable modems may finally become viable, although that's somewhat questionable, given the lack of standards. ISDN will still be a player, but the single biggest block to ISDN acceptance is the crazy-quilt tariffs charged by the different phone companies nationwide. One sleeper technology is ATM. Already, 155 Mbit/sec ATM cards are available, but ATM lines into the home are too expensive right now for the average consumer. Controllers The analog game port may finally breathe it's last sometime in 1997. USB (Universal Serial Bus) is already beginning to show up on newer systems, such as Toshiba's Infinia systems. The advantage of USB is that a single port can allow daisy chaining of multiple periph. erals. You could have your keyboard, mouse, joystick, rudder pedals and throttle all on a single USB chain. Force feedback technology will finally arrive on the market, with CH's force feedback joystick and Thrustmaster's force feedback steer. ing wheel adding a little more verisimilitude to the gaming experience. Processors In the near term MMX is the buzz MMX is basically a set of matrix math instructions built into the P55C Pentium processor and the Klamath update to the Pentium Proline. MMX can have a significant impact on the performance of certain graphics and audio applications. However, one thing is important to note: MMX will have a greater impact on the low end than the high end. A user who invests in high-fidelity audio cards and the hottest 3D accelerator may not benefit from MMX as much as someone with a Sound Blaster 16 and a low-cost 2D accelerator. Still, it's an exciting technology with some interesting possibilities The P55C Pentium processor will bring another performance enhancement to the table: a bigger Level 1 cache-32 KB instead of 16 KB-which will almost certainly improve performance across the board. The Klamath line will finally separate the Level 2 cache from the CPU, allowing for snap-in cache modules of varying sizes. Klamath may also have a bigger Level 1 cache, and will also be avail. able with clock rates exceeding 200 MHz. Further down the road, there will be the Merced (P7) and other successors in the Intel line. Both Cyrix and AMD have new CPUs in the works-the M2 and the K6, respectively, that they claim will deliver Pentium Pro-class performance, and will have MMX instructions as well. Unfortunately, these chips weren't available at press time, but we'll evaluate them soon and let you know what we find. Storage Technology The big news will be DVD, the next-generation digital media after CD-ROMS. DVD discs will look similar to CDs, but they'll be able to store 4.7 gigabytes of data or more per side, which should make game developers go berserk with more graphics and sound. Already delayed, DVD will probably arrive in a big way in 1997, though don't expect a preponderance of DVD-based titles for a while. That's okay, because DVD drives will read standard CDs, though early reports sug: gest disappointing performance reading standard CD-ROMs. DVD may also finally herald full acceptance of MPEG-2 video compression on desktop computers, since MPEG-2 will be used as the compres. sion scheme of choice for consumer DVD movie players. Hard disks will continue to plummet in price-per-megabyte ratios, but the ravenous appetite for disk space will still have us buying big. ger and bigger disks. Ultra SCSI will become the replacement for fast SCSI, and a new standard, ultra-ATA may start replacing EIDE for low cost drives. The 1.44 MB floppy may finally fall by the wayside, with either the 120 MB, backward compatible optical floppy or lomega's Zip drive taking the leadership role for \"SneakerNet\" storage. Graphics The big news in graphics will be the arrival of Intel's AGP (advanced graphics port) on motherboards later this year. AGP will offer a very fast pixel pipe, allowing for data transfers as fast as the processor will allow. Unlike PCI, AGP is a true local bus, tied directly to the processor bus. Expect Intel's 3D graphics hardware, based on Lockheed Martin's Real 3D engine, to arrive in fairly short order after AGP hits the streets. Other graphics vendors are planning significant enhancements to current 3D accelerator technology. Some new highend graphics hardware will likely be based on the Microsoft Talisman 3D reference architecture. The good news is that VGA will finally give up the ghost (we hope). Onward and Upward All in all, it will be another busy year for the computer industry. Trying to keep up with it is a dizzying proposition. That's what we're here for, though, to help guide you through the technological minefields and find Solutions that will help you create your own ultimate gaming platform. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"If you play only one real RPG this year, it will have to be... Fallout A GURPS Postnuclear Adventure \"Fallout has everything necessary to be the best roleplaying game of all time\" Next Generation RATING PENDING MACPLAY Coming Soon for Win 95/DOS, and Mac VIRTUALI STRHE   C. ONE BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. www.Interplay.com 1996 Interplay Productions. Follout: A GURPS Postnuclear Adventure and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved GURPS is a registered trademark of Steve Jackson Games Incorporated. Used under license by Interplay. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #354 "


"Decent Stick Offers On The TECHN 0 0 GY by Dave Salvator 1ay sI kystrokcs. Ifgc NXXcal) that of the throttle, toll yoti cal] enable the throttle and program flic view Despite its shortcomings, the Eagle s brin quite a lit to the party for about $70, or flight sincwhics or flyONS na lbudget, this stick (tuldly nhability edu lic stick attacles to y()tar joystick port, to jass keylard strokcs frontlic live sho to choose bets en using int this AMAZIR HAIR chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your realistic as it can be without a motion simu a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight 51-1185 "


"29 SENATORS MURDERED. A SABOTEUR LOOSE IN THE CITY. MARTIAL LAW DECLARED. FLOODS, FIRES AND RIOTS. (JUST ANOTHER DAY IN ROME, 205 A.D.) KIDS TO ADULTS OF BUY ROM WINDOWS 95/3.1 AND MACINTOSH CONTENT IN AT ESRB CyxSites Inc WWW.cybersiles.com GT Interactive Software Preview SPQR for yourself at www.gtinteractive.com/-SPOR POUR Totally immersive and faster than the hit web game, SPQR takes you inside an historically accurate reconstruction of Imperial Rome. Only catch is, there's a plot afoot to destroy it. As a gifted inventor's apprentice, you must discover the true identity of the saboteur. You'll call upon your knowledge and skill to navigate a labyrinth of politics, murder and deceil. Succeed, and the Empire is saved. Fail, and it's turn out the lights. Don't feel pressured or anything, though. THE EMPIRE'S DARKEST HOUR CIRCLE READER SERVICE #204 S.P.O.R.S.P.O.R. The Empire's Darkest Hour and CyberSitegTM are trademarks ol CyberSiles, Inc. 1996 CyberSites, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Created by CyberSites, Inc. Published and distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computor, Inc. All trademarks are property of their respective companios, SP Q R "


"REVIEW JAZZ SPEAKERS' JS-300 AND JS-900 Listen Up 19010NH)31 Good Sounds Despite Somewhat Silly \"3D\" Features by Dave Salvator enhancement, but aren't really \"3D\" per se. Considering that sound card makers have 3D audio processors in the works, and Microsoft has shipped its Direct3D Sound API, speaker-based field wideners may soon be of little use. But that feature asicle, this combination of Jazz speakers performs reasonably well. o get great sound out of your PC, you need a clean-sounding sound card and a wavelable synthesizer with a good General MIDI patchset. But if you run them through a pair of crapola speakers, the overall effect will be disappointing. As with a home audio system, your largest investment should probably be your speakers. Jazz. Inc. has been in the multimedia speaker game for some time, so we tried out their JS-300 satellites with their JS-900 woofer. The JS-300s feature three \"3D\" stereo field enhancement settings using a technology from NEC. The 3D enhancement can be disabled, and has three different settings when enabled: Theater, Music, Game. Simple volume, bass/treble, and balance clials, along with headphone and microphone jacks and a mute button, round out the front panel controls. During gameplay, we turned the JS-300's \"3D\" effect on, and tried the Game setting. The net effect seemed to be a slight widening of the sterco field and a gain boost in some of the midrange frequencies. We also listened to some CDs to try out the other \"3D\" settings (Music and Theater), and here we got roughly the same result. One annoyances with the volume knob at about 50 percent maximum gain, we noticed a fair amount of ambient hiss coming from the JS-300s when they were sitting idle. All told, the JS-300s deliver pretty good performance for both gaming audio and music. The 3D features do add a slight Price: $100 for JS-300 satellites, $90 for JS900 woofer (approx. street prices) Manufacturer: Jazz, PROS: Good basic overall sound, beefy bass with some tweaking. CONS: \"3D\" effects don't help improve overall sound. Some effects don't help RATED Inc. (818) 336-2689 www.jazzspeakers.com Reader Service #: 317 HELL JUST CVT ALOE NA TIER. The VR Surfer...the only wireless 3D eyewear compatible with your PC and TV, yet costs under $100. Gaming and interactive entertainment with depthdefying visuals put you in the action. You can also build your own 3D reality. Easy plug and play kit with free software lets you develop 3D content using popular graphics programs. $99.95 introductory price includes: Lightweight, wireless BD eyewear utilizing liguid crystal shuttering technology (LCD) Infrared (IR) transmitter 3D demo video CD-ROM with Windows-based application software, Stereo VR MUX-IT\", and BD Backdrops. Descent ll: Destination Quartzon, 3D Pong and 3D Doodle Long Life (1,000 hr.) 6V alkaline battery PC and TV cables Experience Stereo 3D with the VR Surfer: In your face, incredibly believable 3D effects popping off the screen with images so real you'll think all hell broke loose! Available at local retailers or call toll free 1-888-VR SURFER to order your VR Surfer today, or visit our website at http://www.vrex.com To order, please give order code #I1CW. Major credit cards accepted. Shipping and handling additional (plus sales tax where applicable). 30-day retum & 90-day warranty OVRex Inc. All rights reserved. VR Surfer is a trademark of Vrex, Inc., the world leader in 3D stereoscopic Imaging. Patent pending Descent Destination Quartzon is a trademark of Interplay Productions. All other trademarks are properties of their respective owners. "


"Dungeons & Dragons CORSOME REAL Napoleon had a brilliant strategic mind. Imagine what he could have done with a body like this. REAL TIME STRATEGY GAMING MODEM & NETWORK PLAY ED FROM LICENSES Introducing Blood & Magic.M The first ever REAL TIME AD&D strategy game. Enchanted forests. A land of floating islands. in horrifyingly clear detail. You're in the FORGOTTEN REALMS WORLD, It is by your wits that you build armies, withstand but in regions never before seen. Five entirely new advancing legions, transform your Acolytes and realms. Each with its own landscape and hidden exploit the landscape to your purpose. It's a world treasures. Its own perils. of strategy. Of fantasy. A place you have never You have command of up to 30 unique characters. been before. Of armies brought to life with stunning animations, And it definitely isn't Waterloo. 5 Realms (30 total missions), each with its own unique landscape & exotic magical items to manipulate Fantastic weapons, treasure chests, magical potions and violent spells await your discovery Seard Idegles Bloodregne The We willogies Command 30 unique AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS characters and monsters from wyverns to wizards MACPLAY 62-2011 YOR INEMA MACINTHE GAMES BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. Download the interactive preview at www://interplay.dragonplay.com 01996 Tachyon Studios. All rights reserved. INTERPLAY and MACPLAY are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Licensed and distributed by Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. BLOOD & MAGIC, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, FORGOTTEN REALMS, and the TSR logo are trademarks of TSR Inc. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #91 Available on PC and Macintosh CO ROM "


"REFERENCE GUIDE TO MENTAL DISORDERS G @ BUY 2 GAMES AND GET A THIRD ONE FREE* GAME THERAPY CD-ROM GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com For details on how to get your free game see your local participating retailer or call 1-800-432-3493 ext. M606 \"Buy any 2 tities on these pages plus the following (not shown): Gender Wars, Kingdom O' Magio, Vikings: The Strategy of Ultimate Conquest, Just Me and My Mom and Just Me and My Dad and get any title free (plus $6.95 shipping & handling) from the following list: Amok, Bedlam, XS, ZPC, Scorcher, Kingdom O' Maglo, SPQR, \"9\", Imperium Galactica, Vikings: The Strategy of Ultimate Conquest, Gender Wars, Just Me and My Dad , Locus, Ice & Fire. Offer expires January 31st, 1997. Availability dates subject to change. Void where prohibited. Offer open to residents of Continental U.S. Not all games available on all platforms or operating systems. For game ratings, please contact the ESRB at 1-800-771-3772. XS 01.080 (Sun Ouverturuct Ltd. At Ryts Reserved 901006 Tbecameractive, ne Al R espeed. Created and published by becarteractive. Ic. Bedam glorsed on Mrapa Tochrdlopes Memedali 01908 Vrage Techmoges More LB. Al Rgts Reserved. ze CIOM Zorbe LLC. AlRyts Criction 016 O Vich Schwae cop. Al Rats Reserved. Duced by Dota Paty SPOR 01608) butus, re. NRgts Reserved. Onurd by pastes, ic. Paen 01983 Pan Sofward Corporation Al RgsRadoved. Picised by Schwa hc Huete Orbes Raven S ko Cocotton ART "


"DELUSIONS Delusions of inflation of worth, power, knowledge, identity or special relationship to a deity or famous person. (e.g., all powerful sorceress, assassins, ancient Romans, commanders of inter-galactic space ships) FEETIC  Impeplum daloolise Now Available Available October 196 Available November '96 Available November '96 A pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others. Elaborate weaponry is often involved. ANTISOCIAL PERSONALITY DISORDER: HIEVEN Scorcher BERLAM III Now Available Available November 196 Now Available Available October '96 Now Available Repetitive behaviors or mental acts (e.g., performing magic, killing) that the person feels driven to perform in response to an obsession. FINAL EQI THY FLESH CONSUMER G3 An Mi mua nhà Now Available Available October '96 Now Available Now Available Ferra, Pow W w wote LLC Gece was 01920 30 SSOMA L I S Rene Persones Scherre Dom 09 .Saue A Ruts Howd Fra Doom O 09). She 91980 Scarpe A Rots Reserved. Cendapaty Sad NICK OWE Swerp. C. Agris Posered. Owed putty Scenere imprum S Al Aug is de Don 1938 Sao i Ale Ale by G . Score Con Al c oy Company CIRCLE READER SERVICE #293 "


"Prehistoric Fight your way through time. Or you're history. Nine Distinct Worlds Battle through nine time eras: Prehistoric, Roman Times, Feudal lapan, Medieval. Conquistador, Western. Modern Wars, The Future and the ultimate showdown against The Virus itself. Roman Times Feudal Japan Medieval 45 Deadly Weapons Master dozens of lethal weapons from Prehistoric clubs to Wild West guns to futuristic lasers. Conquislador Over 80 Fierce Enemies Defeat more than 80 real-time polygonal 3-0 enemies from past and future battlefields. Modern Wars Western Incredible Environments Journey through stunning realms as characters are seamlessly integrated with gorgeous prerendered backgrounds. The Future The Virus TIME COMMANDO Check out the demo at http://www.activision.com or http://www.mcafee.com/mforhome/ou visit us on America Online at Keyword \"Activision\" or on CompuServe at Keyword \"Go Activision Now available on MS-DOS/Windows 95 CD-ROM and Sony PlayStation. on ACTIVISION ADELINE PlayStation Action Mored trademark of Activision Inc. Adelina Saltar International and Time Commands are trademarks of Adeline Software International. 1995 Adelina Saltware International. Ni rights reserved. Licensed by Sony Computer Entertainment America for use with the PlayStation game console PlayStation and PlayStation Loos are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Published and distributed by Action Inc. Al other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective holders, CIRCLE READER SERVICE #38 "


"SCORPIA ADVENTURE/RPG Bad To The Bone ad venturi nus, fui karte undertakla tion Alle HARVESTER IS So Lousy, It Isn't Even Worth The Hype Harvester ARVESTER arrives with a slightly sinister pedigree and a lot of hype. You may have heard about, or seen ads relating to its \"controversial\" nature. In actuality, that is just so much taradiddle. While the game is hardly worth bothering about, the attendant publicity makes some coverage necessary, so here it is. Our hero, Steve Mason, wakes up in what is apparently the year 1953, with little or no memory. Yep, we start off with the tired old amnesia gambit, and it's all downhill from there. Steve has a mom who is forever baking cookies, and a kid brother forever parked in front of the TV, watching Range Ryder blast an endless succession of hapless American Indians into bloody puddles. Steve's dad is secludparades around as 'controversial' when it's really just silly and unpleasant. ant. CANT TALK; BLEEDING This is the kind of fun you'll have while playing HARVESTER. Come to think of it, this might be more fun than the game itself. HARVESTER ed behind a locked door with a mysterious illness. Wandering around the town of Harvest, Steve becomes acquainted with the inhabi tants, many of whom have distinctly unpleasant personalities. The closest to normal are Edna, the widow who runs the local diner, and Stephanie, the girl Steve is supposed to be marrying soon. Stephanie, it tums out, is in the same predicament as Steve: she has no memory either. She's also the only one who doesn't urge Steve CRYSTAL BALL  Along with the upcoming BETRAYAL AT ANTARA, Sierra is hard at work on another big RPG title, BIRTHRIGHT. THE GORGON'S ALLIANCE, their first game based on the Advanced Dungeons and Dragons Birthright world licensed from TSR. Along with standard role-playing elements, the game, according to Sierra, will also feature both real-time and turn-based strategy (gamers can choose one or the other), along with Internet, LAN, and modem play. Sounds ambitious-now let's hope they can follow through Last month we reported on Activision's \"upcoming\" graphic version of PLANETFALL. The company has subsequently announced that it's been put \"on hold.\" Price: $49.95 System Requirements: IBM-compatible 486DX33 or better processor, MS-DOS 5.0, 8 MB RAM (16 MB recommended), 2x CD-ROM (4x recommended) VESA-compatible SVGA video card: Sound Blaster-compatible and other major sound cards. Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Developers: DigiFX Interactive and Merit Studios Publishers: Merit Studios Dallas, Texas (214) 385-2353 Reader Service #: 318 LESZIGETI BIRTH TO SIERRA Sierra's upcoming BIRTHRIGHT will combine RPG, strategy, and combat elements in singleand multiplayer settings JANUARY 1997 CG "


"YOU DON'T NEED GUTS TO PLAY THIS GAME, YOU JUST GOTTA KNOW WHERE TO PUT 'EM. EL ISM Want to play doctor? Here's your chance to diagnose, treat and, hopefully, discharge a healthy, living patient. CD ROM Today calls Emergency Room \"a fast-paced, realistic medical adventure.\" Be prepared to face over 400 possible casesfrom hangnails to gunshot wounds. All brought to life by over 30 minutes of digital video, a Hollywood cast and 1,500 photo-realistic 3-D graphics. Lives are hanging in the balance, so rush to your local E E E software dealer. Code Blue. Or visit www.pc.ibm.com/multimedia. = IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. 1996 IBM Corp. All rights reserved. KIA OY CIRCLE READER SERVICE #363 "


"SCORPIA Daggerfall Update Bechesda S3d and Interplay make Descent II scream. Soferte The O nl. Chair ADVENTURE/RPG Prepare to experience Your new obsession. LESER LUL: 6 ast month's issue featured my review of DAGGERFALL, but for several reasons an update is necessary. In particular, a report is needed on how well the patches are holding up, and, perhaps most important, I must make a correction to a major error in my previous article. In the review I said that if a primary or major skill reached 100 percent, the character would stop gaining levels. That is not true. You can continue to gain levels after a skill maxes out at 100. The mistake came about because the official hint book explicitly stated level gains would stop, and-silly me, I believed it and passed that along (with some rather strong comments) in the review Sometime late, I was talking about this with someone who told me he thought he had seen a message some where online that indicated the cap had been removed. He couldn't recall what the message had said, or where he had seen it. Still, it was enough to make me nervous, as by then I had come across some other discrepancies in the book. The only way to be sure was to test it out myself. I created a custom character, parked him in the Fighters Guild, and began tedious rounds of spellcasting to force his primary magic skill to 100. After that I Alien furies close in. You wheel, circle, fire desperately. You wonder: How many levels of hell are there? With S3d on board, it's time to start counting. TRUE THE S3d technology makes started working on a second magic skill, and, sure enough, not too many increases later he gained another level. So there was no doubt that the cap had been taken off. While it was good to know the artificial limit had been removed, it wasn't so good that I had passed on erroneous information in the original article. Even though one expects the official hint book to be accurate on a matter this important, I should have checked it out first. My apologies to all for misleading you. Patch Work Moving to the patches, I have been through the game completely now a second time, and play has certainly been improved by the updates. The first one (v175) cleared up the problem had been having with the game continued on page 149 >>> games, Internet 3D, and Windows applications come alive. So get extreme. 'Get Descent\" ll from Interplay and demand software and hardware with the $3d logo. Now at stores everywhere, to join the \"Lodge,\" which is the Order of the Harvest Moon. No one can really say much about it, except that it's the most important thing in town. For the game to progress, Steve has to join the organization. SEEK EIND DEMAND: These tasks begin with simple vandalisn and conclude with torching the town diner. Except for the vandalism, all these acts lead one way or another to the deaths of several people. Are we having fun yet? Having proved himself, Steve now goes through Lodge initiation. Up to this point, there has been little actual violence on screen. That changes here, as the Lodge is three levels full of hostile people and critters, which Steve has to fight his way through using whatever weapons he can find. It is this section of the game that lias the majority of the unpleasant graphics. At the end of his journey through the Lodge, Steve is in the Chapel of Love, Onboard OH BOY Here's where the \"game\" begins. First he has to obtain an application from the postmaster, who happens to be a closet arsonist. Steve manages that by stealing police evidence and trading it for the application. Then he has to prove his worthiness by completing several tasks assigned by the Lodge's sergeant at arms. 53 Incorporated Designed for 1995 $3 Incorporated. All rights reserved. $3 is a registered trademark. S3d, the S3d logo and seek find. demand.\" are trademarks of S3 Incorporated in the United States and other countries Microsoft Windows, and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation, Descent and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. Microsoft Windows 95 JANUARY 1997 CG "


"AMBER TM Journeys Beyond Death Is Not The End An adventure game of supernatural beauty & haunting elegance for Win '95 Journey into the unknown. Unravel mysteries hidden within compelling stories of heart-rending tragedy, mind-numbing obsession, and child-like innocence. Pendah dan setelah HUE FOREST PDA DUIC UN MI SIMULATIONS ENTERTAINMENT CORPORATION CIRCLE READER SERVICE #390 "


"SCORPIA Daggerfall Update S3d and Mindscape make MegaRace 2 scream. 9d813LNING You. The finish line. And seven nasty >continued from page 147 crashing at random times, particularly during saves, along with some bugs in the code. The second patch (v177), released much sooner than anticipated, fixed the incompatibility problem with Cyrixbased CPUs, as well as a few bugs. Bethesda, incidentally, tells me Cyrix will be engineering some changes in their chip to prevent similar problems with any other software. The third patch (v179) contained more bug fixes, and, yes, a fourth is imminent; it should be out by the time you read this. All the patches are cumulative, incorporating previous fixes, so you only need the most recent patch file. You may also need the special FIXSAVE utility, since it's known that sometimes data becomes corrupted and this can't be repaired by a patch. FIXSAVE and the most recent patch (whatever it may be at the time) can be obtained from Bethesda's Web site, www.bethsoft.com, as well as from many of the online services. For all that, you may still have problems. Two friends of mine are playing DAGGERFALL with the patches installed, yet the game crashes on them with a certain degree of frequency, and one has had other weird things happen from time to time as well. It turns out they are both playing under Windows 95. My suspicion is that DAGGERFALL and Win 95 don't get along too well, in spite of the patches to date. I base this on the reports from my friends, messages I've seen online, and my own experience running strictly from DOS ( don't have Win 95 installed on my system). My suggestion is to play the game from DOS only, if at all possible, with the latest patch and with FIXSAVE on hand just in case. It certainly worked for me (though I never needed to use FIXSAVE at any time during play) Obviously, any game that requires four patches in its first month on the shelves is not in good shape, and this points up all the more just how premature DAGGERFALL's release was. Yet there is no getting around the fact that the game is playable nonetheless, at least for some of us. Second Time Around Having been through the game fully twice, and partway with two other characters (for the Thieves Guild and the Dark Brotherhood), I can say it is certainly better to join several guilds than to concentrate on only one. Variety is the key to keeping the game fresh, and the legitimate organizations are the best for this purpose. The Mages, Fighters, and various temples offer a good mix of dungeon crawls and day jobs (anything that doesn't send you into a dungeon). An occasional street quest can continued on page 151 > drivers determined to keep you from getting there. With S3d\" on board, megarace it's a race with reality S3d technology brings games, Internet 3D. and Windows applications to life. So get extreme. Get software and hardware with the S3d logo. Now at stores everywhere, SEEK. DEMAND. along with Stephanie. Now comes the explanation (and be forewarned that I'm onbraid giving the story away here): except for the two teenagers, none of this is real. Steve and Stephanie are enjoying\" the very latest in VR technology, courtesy of the Order, whose purpose is to turn people into serial killers. Rcally. Steve has to make a choice here. He can kill Stephanie (who will really die) and return to the real world. Or he can «marry\" Stephanie, and they will appear to live out a full life in Harvest while the techs disconnect life support and kill them both in a matter of minutes. These are the game's only endings. S3 Incorporated Designed for I LOST MY HEAD This has to hurt. Almost as much as the $50 it would cost you to play the game. 1996 S3 Incorporated. All rights reserved. $3 is a registered trademark. S3d, the S3d logo, and seek find. demand.\" are trademarks of $3 Incorporated in the United States and other countries. Microsoft Windows, and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation Mindscape is a registered trademark and its logo and MegaRace are trademarks of Mindscape, Inc. Microsoft Windows 95 JANUARY 1997 CG "


"IS YOUR PC LESS THAN CONVINCING? REAL SOUNDS. Sound Blaster audio cards include awesome wavepuno Graphics table synthesis providing the most realistic PC sound in the universe. REAL GRAPHICS. Graphics and video products deliver faster performance, higher resolutions, more colors and full motion video playback and capture. REAL SPEED. Sound Blaster multimedia kits give you high speed CD-ROM performance with wave-table 9-976 EHSDPA sound and the software BLASTER you really want top sellers from current hot lists. REAL FREE SOFTWARE. To join our new on-line membership club and receive $200 worth of free t software, go to the \"Creative RIIULAALA Connection\" at www.soundblaster.com/ Do it today. And learn more about upgrades so real, they're unreal. GET REAL. CREATIVE www.soundblaster.com Copyright1946 Creative Technology Lid. Sound Blaster Sound Blaster Discovery CD and the Creative Laborate restercuma Technology Ed Sound Blaster AWE, Graphics Blaster and Internet Blaster bedrademark of Ecative Technology Lid Allr a bei spective holders. All specifications are subject to change without prior notice CIRCLE READER SERVICE #78 "


"SCORPIA S3d and GTE make FX Fighter Turbo scream. ADVENTURE/RPG * * * trian, the voiceovers distinctly amateurish, the puzzles unimaginalive, and the ending quite unsatisfying. This mediocre product and that's being charitable-would certainly sink from the shelves without a trace except for the SHOOT FIRST Steve Mason, hero, prowls through the game inclusion of some looking for things to kill. blatantly offensive material and several nasty pictures. STUPID IS AS STUPID DOES So that's what we have here: an undisMy general impression while playing tinguished game trying desperately to sell HARVESTER was of something concocted itself on the basis of nothing better than by a couple of bright but immature high cheap shock value, parading around as school students trying to gross out their \"controversial,\" when it's really just silly cklers. The game has little merit, as either and unpleasant. Any way you look at it, an adventure or a story. The premise is HARVESTER isn't worth anyone's time or ludicrous, the graphics are mostly pedesmoney. E You've battled aliens. But this one, Linna, she's new. And before you can blink, she launches into your face with a deadly combo that makes you question whether you'll live to see the sun rise. With S3d on board, perception becomes TURBO reality. S3d technology brings games, Internet 3D, and Windows applications to life. So get extreme. Get software and hardware with the S3d logo. Now at stores everywhere. Daggerfall Update >>>continued from page 149 Neither the Thieves nor the also help to perk things up a bit. Brotherhood offer much in the way of The Thieves Guild seems to be all neat benefits, and there didn't seem to day jobs. They start you off with fetch be much reason to join either group, and-carry (\"take this there and bring unless you happen to enjoy being on something back\"), then move you up the opposite\" side of the law. to actual thefts at higher ranks (\"go to Belonging to either of these has no this building or shop and steal this parmaterial effect on the game proper, so ticular item\"). I got my thief up to rank very likely, if you don't get caught in the five in the guild, and the assignments act, you can go on to win as a thief or didn't vary much but the pay certainly assassin. became better One thing I felt lacking in the side The Dark Brotherhood turned out to quests (and which I'd like to see in the be something of a disappointment. At next game) is some tangible result the lower ranks, they give only dungeon from completing, or not completing, a assignments and don't even pay for the quest-not necessarily affecting the work. It wasn't until my assassin main line, but just something somereached Executioner rank that some where in the game that occurs because gold was forthcoming and day jobs of your having done/not done a particustarted showing up. These were always lar task. of the go to a certain building in a Overall, DAGGERFALL has been much certain town and kill someone\" type; improved by the patches to date. While the \"someone\" made it easy by the game is still far from being 100 appearing almost immediately and percent, it can certainly be played and attacking my character. At least so far enjoyed in its current state without too as I got here, there seemed no room much frustration. for any finesse or sneaky stuff. SEEK. FIND. DEMAND. 53 Incorporated Designed for 1996 S3 Incorporated. All rights reserved. $3 is a registered trademark. S3d, the S3d logo and seek. find. demand. are trademarks of S3 Incorporated in the United States and other countries. Microsoft Windows and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. The GTE logo is a trademark of GTE Corporation. FX Fighter Turbo is a trademark of GTE Vantage Inc. Microsoft Windows 95 JANUARY 1997 CG "


"SCORPIA'S MAIL ADVENTUREZRPG All The Clues Fit To Print Scorpia's Pen May Be Mightier Than Your Sword t's that time of ycar again: Prod's putting up his shrunken head garland, the Christmas tree monster is standing in the corner, and everyone is waiting for Santa Claws (ahem, Claus) to come by with all sorts of gaming goodies to warm up those cold winter nights In the meantime, though, we still have to deal with the mail on some older (and not-so-old) products. CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT: A classic returns, and so do the questions. The reissue by Sir-Tech has introduced the wonders (and wiles) of Wizardry to a whole new set of garners. For instance, the problem of the Serpent Mountains has proved difficult for some. You need a particular item, and you can only get that item from the top of Dane Tower. Waving it around in the right place at the right time just might open things up for you. DAGGERFALL: 'There are a couple of points in the game where you have to talk to people on your own to keep the main story line going, you won't receive any happy little love notes from a courier. One of these is Direnni Tower you don't have to go running right there after you know about the place. The other is getting to see Mynisera about the missing letter you have to talk to someone not very far from her first. In both cases, you can take your time in activating the quests; they'll wait until you get to them (especially handy if you want to take some time out to build up your character a bit). GABRIEL KNIGHT 2: Many gamers have trouble with Neuschwanstein still blinking (not finished) on the map, even though they've been through it with Grace many times (probably too many). One thing a lot of people miss (and it's easy to do) is the fact that they have to look twice at the fancy basin in the bedroom. Remember to play the lape, too. I HAVE NO MOUTII AND I MUST SCREAM: Some folks playing the Corrister scenario tend to be a bit bloodthirsty. There is no need to kill anyone during this section, and it's much better all around that you don't. If you're feeling heartless, take your beck out on something else (or was that take something out on the beel? either way, a very close look is a good idea). NORMALITY: Giving that Waffle statue in Mint Mall a coat of yellow paint is involved, but not really difficult. You can't, however, do it yourself; you'll need to trick someone else into doing it for you. First you have to get him out of the way (a doggone tricky task), then you heat things up a bit. The rest is automatic. THE PANDORA DIRECTIVE Dealing with the alien thing at Roswell is tough, and time is of the essence. You have to get rid of it before you can do anything else in here; this is not the moment for sight-seeing. Everything for this segment takes place on the entry level of the main complex; you don't use the elevators. The only rooms you need to visit are the kitchen, the two storage rooms, the dorms, and the generator room. Be prepared to restore once or twice anyway until you figure out exactly what needs to be done. RIPPER: 'That clocks puzzle in the Wofford house has given some adventurers fits. First, you have to figure out which country each clock represents. Then they all need to be set to the same time. Which time? Ah, that's the question. Perhaps there's another clock around somewhere that could provide a clue for this. Don't let it stop you. STONEKEEP: Having a hard time seeing the lacrie Queen? You need some flowers for this, and only one kind will do. By any other name, it would be the same. And besides that, you may find yourself going in circles, too. Reach Scorpia at: AOL: Scorpia's Lair (keyword: scorpia) Delphi: GameSIG (Groups and Clubs menu) GEnie: Games Round Table (type: Scorpia) Internet: scorpia@aol.com >U.S. Mail (with a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia P.O. Box 338 Gracie Station New York, NY 10028 CG JANUARY 1997 "


"S3d and Diamond Multimedia make your system scream. Fast forward to the future of 3D multimedia. Supersonic graphics. All the power 3D has to offer for business and entertainment on your PC, right here-right now. Stealth 3D2000 DIAMOND from Diamond Multimedia does it all with the S3d\" chip on board. Use Diamond's Stealth 3D 2000 together with S3d logo software. They'll make your system scream. Sonos 410 PUR SEEK. FIND. DEMAND. roaria s pon DI DOLcd ou CS 10 S 53 Incorporated. Microsoft Windows, and the Windows logo are cogistered trademarks of Microsoll Corporation Dlarncnd Multimedia and Stealth 3D are trademarks of Diamond Multimedia system hit our web site for the real stuff: seek.s3.com Soledwo wioden und Auedo id or se wopen Jouto IV EN Designed for PUBWP pulloos Microsoft Windows 95 $3d is compatible with Windows 95, Windows 3.1, Windows NT, and OS/2. "


"Dângeons & Dragons When the award-winning Descent game engine landed in AD&D game's most famous world, the FORGOTTEN REALMS ... 2 ...it left in its wake the most revolutionary nerICI DA DUARLAY A SOUCTOS Il the wizards and magicians in the Realms could never have predicted what happened A that mystical night in the dungeons of Undermountain. After all of their spells, conjuring, and attempts to see the future, the future literally crashed down upon them. With deadly force. It left an indelible mark. It affected their vision. Their movement. Their way of life and death. It changed their history as well as their future. Introducing DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN\", the most revolutionary new AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS action RPG game in centuries. Based on the hugely successful Descent engine, the dark inhabitants of Undermountain's stone belly now experience 3D vision and 360° movement. Perhaps it was the strange visitor from the future. Perhaps just the trauma. But multiple characters are now developing in the cracks and under the rocks of ancient caves. All of this, along with multiple player options has forever changed the face of the AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS world. What came down from the hereafter that fateful night, is certain to continue down into history. And down. And down. And down. IESGENT TO UNDERMOUNAIN Download the interactive preview at www://Interplay.dragonplay.com 01996 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Decent 1996 Parallax Software. All rights reserved. DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, FORGOTTEN REALMS, and the TSR logo are trademarks of TSR Inc. Al rights reserved. INTERPLAY is a trademark of Interplay Productions. Al nghts reserved. "


"FORGOT RALING FORGOMES REALINS UNDER MOUNTAIN THE RUINS OF NIVINDOWMEONE THE RU UNDERMON LENJEL 2  PLAYBAC RPG game to date. IE&GENT 10 DERMOUN Dungeons & Dragons THE AWARD WINNING DESCENT ENGINE MEETS THE MOST FAMOUS AD&D WORLD, THE FORGOTTEN REALMS FULL 3D, 360° FIRST PERSON ACTION BASED ON THE HUGELY SUCCESSFUL DESCENT\" ENGINE s Mole Playing Astian Way NDERMOUNIRAIN to M ere 3 CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT IN OVER 20 DIFFERENT MAGICRIDDEN DUNGEON LEVELS FIRST AD&D ACTION RPG WITH UP TO 4 PLAYER MODEM/NETWORK OPTION. For iOS 3D Role Playing Action With Up to 4 Players BOKEP LAPING 30 A (1 LON COM Internet RP Available on PC CO Rom BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #123 "


"***** REVIEW. ALBION DIFFICULTY LEVEL ADVENTURE/RPG Space Quests ALBION Explores Role-Playing With Old-Fashioned Style by Petra Schlunk bers (up to six in all), including an Iskai is very casy to use once you are familiar ow that DACCERFALL and warrior and mage. While ALBION does with it. There are many objects to find, DIABLO are finally here, not let you roll your own characters, and it's okay to pick up what you sce, as long-suffering role-players character development proceeds long as you don't steal something from finally have something to through gaining experience levels, using stores. One nice feature is that it's sink their teeth into. After skills such as spell casting, and training, impossible to drop necessary objects. digesting those two, seri ALBION uses a first-person perspecUnfortunately, gold is in short supply ous RPG fans may also tive with an automap in dungeons and throughout the game. You can run want to check out Blue many towns. The automap in towns around outside towns killing monsters Byte Software's debut into marks places of note, and clicking on to collect items to sell, but that is a role-playing games, these marks will take the party to that problematic process, partly because ALBION, which has none of the hype of location. In the many large and multicombat is lengthy and partly because the bigger games but is actually quite leveled dungeons, of course, no such you don't get a lot of money from sellgood. Mislabeled by ing objects. Still, some as a scienceit pays to take fiction game, time to do this, ALBION is instead a especially at the lengthy fantasy rolebeginning of the playing game remigame. niscent of older One difficulty ULTIMA games. of collecting items (even gold) CRASH LANDING! is that characters You play a pilot can only carry so named Tom much, depending Driscoll who is on a on their strength, large spaceship, the and if they are Toronto, in the year carrying more, 2227. Tom must the party will not explore the ship FLOWER POWER Wandering around a large town shows off Albion's exotic flora and an be able to move. before taking one of Therefore, sell or example of one of the new races, the Iskai, that you will encounter. its shuttles down to drop what you a ncw, apparently barren planct convenience exists. When traveling can whenever possible. For traveling, it Albion that is fated for resource overland and inside exploitation. Unfortunately, something buildings, the perShopping Tips goes wrong and Tom crashes to the spective is threeplanet's surface. quarter overhead, LBION lets you sell weapons, armor, potions, Tom is rescued by some alicns, the and no maps hasten and other items you find, but selling items at Iskai, who nurse him back to health. your travels. \"Traveling shops requires some discrimination. All items Although he thought Albion was a life overland is particularyou sell end up in the store's inventory less desert rock, Tom soon discovers ly onerous since there which has limited space. While this is good in that you can that the planet is actually rich with life. is little to find and it buy back items later, it's bad in that you can't sell everything The story proceeds from here, with takes a long time to you have. Sell only the most expensive and expendable) Tom visiting several areas of Albion. In get from one place to items, dropping the cheap ones, and you should be fine. each area there is a quest to complete another. In addition, be sure to examine all the articles in the before Tom can move on in his overall The game's inter shops you visit, as you will frequently discover valuable quest to find the Toronto. During Tom's face is somewhat magic items and powerful weapons or armor to buy! travels he will pick up other party mempainful to learn, but it ALBON Price: $50.00 System Requirements: 486 or better processor, MSDOS 5.0 or higher (or Windows 95), 8 MB RAM, 3 MB hard disk space, 2x CD-ROM drive, VGA 256-color graphics, Microsoftcompatible mouse; supports most major sound cards. Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Publisher: Blue Byte Software Schaumburg, IL (847) 534-7950 Reader Service #: 320 CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Play FREE! Download Today meridian.3do.com/trial/ Zandrarnas MERIDIAN\"59 is waiting. It's waiting for you to log on to the first next generation role playing game on the Internet. It's waiting for you to succumb to the addiction of its uncertain, medieval time. Thousands of crafty players await you online each a brave explorer living a second life in this 1 ext Time Someone Tells You To Get A Life, Tell Them You've Got One. Meridian 59. Online Zandrerdas continually evolving, wonderful dimension. Fantastic monsters, clever characters, and special events arrive and surprise with every passing day. Each to confront, challenge and confound you. The perilous quest lies ahead! See you in the game. Visit your favorite retailer or to order direct, dial 1-800-336-3506. MERIDIAN SO Bria: Lend Blade Requires SLIP/PPP Internet connection. Retail product includes 30 day free play time. 300, the 300 logos, Studio 300 and Meridian 59 are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of The 3D0 Company Netscape Navigator and the Netscape Navigator Included logo are trademarks of Netscape Communications Corporation. All other trademarks and/or registered trademarks are the properties of their respective owners 1996 The 300 Company. All rights reserved PC the Internet Quest Kegins ! TEEN TOR BEST EGGHEAD. COMPA THE COMPTE B TT STUDIO 3 DO CIRCLE READER SERVICE #107 "


"REVIEW  ADVENTURE/RPG CLOSE COMBAT There are a lot of interesting characters in the world of ALBION. When conversing with an NPC you can choose from a list of topics to ask about, or you can give or show the character items in your inventory ALBION features a great deal of text, both through conversations and in various automated sequences at critical junctures. This may be disheartening for some, but I enjoyed it. Most of the text is not critical (skimming works well) and generally serves the function of fleshing out the alien world and its inhabitants for the gamer. Of course, you will not only meet pleasant and interesting characters but also come across a lot of monsters, particularly in the game's many dungeons. This means that you'll spend a lot of time in ALBION's turn-based combat system. Combat takes place on a grid, and you can give orders to cach of your CHILL OUT Against Demons and Fears, cast Frost Avalanche-the game's best spell-to injure and paralyze your foes. pays to be well stocked with food, since it is required for healing and magic point regeneration when you rest. Unfortunately, your party can only rest when it's tired, which isn't necessarily when everyone needs healing! This makes potions extremely valuable, as these replenish hit points and magic points. Plant Trees for America Trees provide food, shelter, and I nesting sites for songbirds. Trees increase property values, and make our homes and neighborhoods more livable. Trees help conserve energy. They cool our homes and entire cities in the summer, and slow cold winter winds. Shade trees and windbreaks can cut home utility bills 15-35%. Trees clear the air we breathe. They provide life-giving oxygen while they remove particulates from the air and reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide. the Arbor Day Foundation. Your trees will be shipped postpaid at the right time for planting in your area, February through May in the spring or October through mid December in the fall. The six to twelve inch trees are guaranteed to grow, or they will be replaced free. To become a member and to receive your free trees, send a $10 membership contribution to Ten Blue Spruces, National Arbor Day Foundation, 100 Arbor Avenue, Nebraska City, NE 68410. Join today, and plant your Trees for America! need more trees to protect our farm fields and our rivers and streams. To provide wood for our homes and a thousand products we use every day. America needs more trees The United States has lost a third of its forest cover in the last 200 years. Our towns should have twice as many street trees as they have today. We need more trees around our homes and throughout our communities. We 10 Free Trees Ten Colorado blue spruces, or other conifers selected to grow in your area will be given to each person who joins A The National Arbor Day Foundation "


"Ved:4132.6/13-6000 (T. JUST MIGHT GIVE YOU A 21 10028 BABOB GOD COMPLEX... PSD  Negotiate face-to-face with alien species in stunning 3D motion-captured video and digitized speech. Fragile Allegiance gives you ultimate control and power in building a galactic empire. Managing Encounter 6 diverse alien cultures in a randomly generated universe. QB950 0930800 every detail — from. FRAGILE providing a stable ALLEGIANCE atmosphere to Research and develop an incredible array of spacecraft, weaponry, mining techniques, and intelligence systems. securing adequate power, and constructing a ALLEGIAR Compete with up to 8 human players via network or modem. profitable mining operation-will require impressive resource skills. Whether you build alliances, stay neutral, or go to war, you must keep everything under control. Your control. ENT Define your gaming experience with custom options including game length, universe size, alien hostility, and micro or macro management style. FRAGILE Developed By ALLEGIANCE KUIDS 10 ADULTS Gremlin AGES BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. www.interplay.com Available on PC CD-ROM 1996 Gremlin Interoctive, lid. All Rights Reserved. Interplay and frugile Allegiante are hodernorks of Interploy Productions. All Rights Reserved. Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor Licensed from and developed by Gremlin Interactive, Lid. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #355 "


"REVIEW ALBION OFFICIAL RULES NO PURCHASE OR ONLINE USE NECESSARY. OPEN TO RESIDENTS OF THE U.S. 1. To enter via the Intemet, you must be an AT&T WorldNet Service men ber utilizing AT&T WorldNet Service. To enter online visit the A81 WorldNet Service sample page on the AT&T Website at http://www.att.com/artinet or the AT&T WorldNet Service home page : http://www.worldnet.att.net or the MALL home page at Ittp://www.mall.com from 11/!/96 through 2/24/97. Click on the \"Sweepstakes\" button. Complete the official entry form by filling in your name, address, telephone number and e-mail ID and click on the Center Sweepstakes\" button. Your name will be entered in the daily Sweepstakes and in the Grand Prize drawing at the end of the promotion Online entries must be received by 11:59 p.m. EST each day in order to be eligible for that day's drawing. Limit one online entry per person per day. Normal Internet access and usage changes imposed by AT&T WorldNet Service will apply. Local, long distance or 800# access charge to reach AT&T WorldNet Service may also apply. If you are not an AT&T WorldNet Service member and wish to subscribe, visit the AT&T WorldNet Service home page at http://www.att.com/worldnet or the iMALL home page at http://www.mall.com and follow frostructions. Or, if you are not an AT&T WorldNet Service member and you do not wish to subscribe, you may enter by mailing a plain 3 x 5 piece of paper on which you have printed your name, complete address, zip code, telephone number, e-mail address (if applicable) and the words AT&T WorldNet \"Internet for Everyone Sweepstakes to: AT&T WORLDNET INTERNET FOR EVERYONE SWEEPSTAKES. P.O. Box 7296, Melville, NY 11775-7296. There will be daily drawings between 11/1/96 and 2/14/97 from among all online/paper entries received for each day and one Grand Prize drawing at the end of the promotion from among all entries received. Enter as often as you wish by mail, but each paper entry must be mailed separately be postmarked on the day in which you wish to be entered and received no later than one week after postmark date. All paper entries received will be entered in the daily draw ing for the day they are postmarked. As for Sunday entrants, please note \"SUNDAY ENTRANT and the date on outside of envelope. Mechanically reproduced paper entries will not be accepted. Sweepstakes ends 2/14/97. ARE WE THERE YET? Outdoor travel in Albion takes a long time, but is visually rewarding. 2. Grand Prize (1): 5250,000 awarded as an annuity over 30 years at $8.333.33 per year (Present value 5125.000 as of 11/1/96): Daily Prizes (1050 10 awarded each day): 10 different prizes awarded daily. To see which prices are being awarded for that day, click onto the home page : http:// worldnet.attnet or http://www.att.com/worldnet of http://www.imall.com or, to send for a list of prizes that will be awarded each day, write to: Prizes, P.O.Box 7084, Melville, NY 11775-7084. Winners will be selected in a random drawing from among all eligible entries received. Drawings will be conducted by National Judging institute, Inc., an independent judging organization whose decisions are final on all mat. ters relating to this sweepstakes. Odds of winning are dependent upon the number of entries received. Limit one daily prize per person per day. All prizes will be awarded and winners will be notified by e-mail or regular mail. In the event the Grand Prize is won by a minor, it will be awarded in the name of a parent or legal guardian. Prizes are notransferable and no Substitutions are allowed except by sponsors who reserve the right to sub stitute a price of equal or greater value if advertised prize is unavailable. By entering the sweepstakes. each participant releases the Sponsors and their agents from all responsibility or liability for damages, losses or injury resulting from acceptance or use of any prize. By entering the sweepstakes, entrant recognizes and agrees that the registration information provided by entrant may be made available to AT&T and its cosponsors: use of such information will be governed by the respective company privacy policy, if applicable. Taxes, if any, related to the prize, are the responsibility of the individual winner. Grand Prize winner may be required to verify address of Brecute and return an affidavit of eligibility and liability/publicity release within 14 days of notification attempt or the price may be forfeited and an alternate winner selected. Entry constitutes permission to use winners names and likenesses for promotional purposes without further compensa tion except where prohibited by law. No responsibility is assumed for fost, damaged, incomplete, misdirected, illegible, postage-door late entries or mail. Sponsors and their agencies are not responsible for technical, hard. ware, software or telephone malfunctions of any kind, lost or unavailable network connections, or failed, incorrect, incomplete, inaccurate, garbled or delayed electronic communications caused by the sender or by any of the equipment of programming associated with or utilized in this sweep stakes or by any human error which may occur in the processing of the entries in this sweepstakes. Sponsors resene the night at their sole discretion, to cancel terminate or suspend the online portion of the promo tion if it becomes technically corrupted. BRAVE NEW WORLD While ALBION has some problems, including areas that are too long or large (the outdoors and some dungeons), slow and lengthy combat, and a paucity of necessary gold, it offers a lot to role-playing enthusiasts. The game's story line is rich, with a nicely fleshed-out world to explore. The characters joining your party are interesting and useful to have around, for a variety of reasons. The VCA graphics and sound are fair-certainly not state-of-the-art, but workable. Other than a rare bug that did not allow ALBION to run on one of my computers due to a video-card conflict, the game runs virtually trouble-free. I found this lengthy game enjoyable to play and recommend it to lovers of role-playing games when another dry spell hits. vare, schwares characters before starting a round. You can also get into any character's backpack and use as many potions for healing or restoring magic points as you desire. In combat you can move around on the grid, attack monsters, cast spells, or flee. The best spell by far is Frost Avalanche, which eventually (spells become more powerful through use) can freeze all opponents for several turns and do damage at the same time. After successful combat, you pick up your lool, and characters gain experience points and maybe levels as well. Characters do not dic in combat if they lose all their hit points. As long as one party member survives, such characters can be restored through potions or resting. As another safety feature, ALBION offers 100 save game positions, more than enough for even the most compulsive game saver. The worst thing about combat is that it can take a long time (as long as 30 minutes), especially when you are casting a lot of spells. Puzzles in the game may take a variety of forms. These include questioning NPCs repeatedly, finding hidden buttons, using pits to reach new areas, pulling levers to remove traps, and so forth. Timing can also play a part in solving puzzles. For example, there are places where doors won't open unless you stand on a pressure plate for several seconds. or failed, incontecend by the sender 3. Sweepstakes open to residents of the U.S. except employees and their families of AT&T WorldNet Service. MALL Breath Asure their affiliates, coSponsors. partner companies, subsidiaries, contractors, advertising agen cies, and Don Jagoda Associates, Inc. This offer is void wherever prohibited or restricted by national state or any governmental laws. Subject to all federal state and local laws. 4. For a list of major winners, send a stamped, self-addressed envelope to: AT&T WORLDNET INTERNET FOR EVERYONE SWEEPSTAKES WINNERS, PO BOX 7030. Melville, NY 11775-7030 or click onto the AT&T WorldNet Service home page at http://www.worldnet.att.net 5. Sponsors are AT&T, Basking Ridge, NU 07920, IMALL, Studio City, CA 91604, Breath Asure, Calabasas, CA 91302 WorldNet Service ATGT APPEAL: ALBION offers an old-fashioned, lengthy jaunt through a new role-playing world and should entertain true RPG fans. PROS: A strong story line, numerous saved game positions, interesting spells, and a good combination of skill-based and experience-based character development. CONS: Overly large areas, lengthy combat, and the real possibility of moving too far ahead in the story for the current strength of your party. INTERNET For EVERYONE Hundreds of Daily Prizes Sweepstakes Win $250.000! RATED * Enter now at: HTTP WWW.ATT.COM WORLDNET HTTP://WWW.MALL.COM    CG JANUARY 1997 "


"AT&T Win $250,000. Watch your friends grovet. Enter the AT&T WorldNets\" Service \"Internet for Everyone Sweepstakes\" and you could win the cash or one of hundreds of daily prizes. Your friends could be bowing and scraping in no time. To enter, simply visit one of the web addresses below, hit the \"sweepstakes\" button and follow the prompts. And if you don't have AT&T WorldNet Service, look for AT&T WorldNet software bundled with other leading software packages at your local retailer. Or, return the attached card. Or just call. of Service 1 800 WORLDNET, ext. 126 NorldNet To enter the sweepstakes, visit www.att.com/worldnet or www.worldnet, att.net or www.imall.com AT&T No purchase necessary. Sweepstakes ends 2/14/97. For official rules and alternate entry, write to AT&T WorldNet Rules, P.O. Box 7084, Melville, NY 11775-7084. Grand Prize to be awarded in annual installments over 30 years. See complete sweepstakes rules on opposite page. "


"***** REVIEW  TOONSTRUCK A Perfect Toon DIFFICULTY LEVEL ADVENTURE/RPG Virgin's TOONSTRUCK IS A Wild And Wooly Comic Adventure Delight by Petra Schlunk t's been a long time since this reviewer has laughed out loud while playing a game. Computers and punch lines, it seems, often have a hard time mixing. But Virgin's new animated adventure, TOONSTRUCK, has me singing a different toon. This whacked-out game, which puts human cartoon Christopher Lloyd into a crazy animated universe, is a howling success-probably the funniest adventure game to grace our computer screens since LucasArts' classic DAY OF THE TENTACLE. DRAWING BLANKS When the game begins, we are introPURPLE HAZE Human cartoon Christopher Lloyd finally meets his match in the animated duced to haggard, absent-minded carworld of TOONSTRUCK. toonist Drew Blanc (Lloyd), the creator of the highly successful «Fluffy Fluffy Bum sucked into the cartoon world of Cutopia, Cutopia counter the nasty plots of Count Bun Show.\" I lis day has started badly with a place where everyone is so cute and Nefarious, ruler of the nearby Malevoa missed dentist appointment, and now nice and wonderful you'll positively want lands. Nefarious has constructed a he's late for a meeting with his boss. to vomit. Here he comes face-to-face with Malevolator that zaps cute toons and Rushing in belatedly, he learns that the his favorite cartoon creation, a sarcastic their neighborhoods, tuming them into boss has done a little \"creative thinking purple toon named Flux Wildlly, who joins cvil, nasty toons and slums. The king and has decided that the \"Fluffy Fluffy him as he sets out to look for a way back wants Drew to help his engineer conBun Bun Show,\" featuring a disgustingly to the real worll. struct a counter-Malevolator, a Cutifier, cute bunny of the same name, needs To get home, Drew consults the King that will reverse these effects. This is the Price: $59.95 System some new life even more clisgustingly of Cutopia (a giant smiley face on a robe) point at which you, as Drew, enter the Requirements: 486-66 cute little bunnies. And Drew has just 24 who assures his escape only if he will help action of the game. (Pentium recommendhours to come up ed), MS-DOS 5.0 or higher, 8 MB RAM (16 with the new artTOON TALK MB recommended), 30 work. Traveling through the cartoon lands of MB hard drive space, Sometime in Cutopia, Zanydu, and the Malevolands is 256K SVGA video card (1 MB recommended), the mickelle of the Autorka quite a treat. Everything you see and 2x CD-ROM drive (4x night, while Drew experience in the game is as if you were recommended) is still drawing watching an old Warner Bros. cartoon. In mouse: 16-bit stereo sound card (recomblanks, his televieach area of the game, peppy and evocamended) sion suddenly live cartoon music plays in the backProtection: None (CD lights up with the ground, and standard cartoon sound must be in drive) Designer: Burst \"Fluffy Fluffy Bun effects highlight many of the animations. Publisher: Virgin Bun Show,\" and With humor that ranges from cutesy to Interactive ANIMAL MAGNETISM You'll need to collect more than the usual before he knows risqué, TOONSTRUCK keeps the laughs Irvine, CA adventure game bag of tricks as you guide Drew and Flux (800) 874.4607 what's happening. coming nonstop. Among the many charthrough TOONSTRUCK's myriad puzzles. Reader Service #: 319 he finds himself acters you'll meet on your travels is an TO-MATC CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Die. Die. Die. FREE Ultra rare ORACON MASTER Die In Every Dragon Dice CD-ROM Survival comes down to two things, the role of strategy. And the roll of the die. DRAGON DICE Al w DRAGON DIOTE Dhallenging and PDRAGON De spell power ww INTRODUCING DRAGON DICE ON CD-ROM. Not since the invention of the broadsword has there been a more realistic way to experience the pace of battle. The new CD-ROM version of TSR's blockbuster hil, DRAGON DICE, takes you on a dangerously realistic journey into one of the most challenging and popular fantasy dice games ever. This animated DRAGON DICE adventure, begins in cons past, when the strength of the sword or the spell power of a sorcerer was the only difference between a glorious life, and a vicious, terrible death. You'll have to use all 128 of the games built-in computer dice to build your own dice armies, to scout enemies, and to avoid traps. Plus, each DRAGON DICE CD-ROM comes with a limited and collectible, TSR sanctioned DRAGON MASTER dic. It's the most true-to-life dice battle of strategy you've ever encountered. But beware, because only the extremely talented, or the unbelievably lucky will survive. 4 BASED ON TSR'S BLOCKBUSTER STRATEGY HIT, DRACON DICE. CUSTOMIZE ENDLESS ARMIES FROM EVERY DIE AVAILABLE FOR TSR'S ORIGINAL DRACON DICE (ALL 128) SINGLE PLAYER OR A 4 PLAYER NETWORK MODE DRAWS YOU INTO THE RICH HISTORY AND STORYLINE OF AN ANCIENT AD&D LINIVERSE BEALITIFLIL ARTWORK AND DICE-TO-CHARACTER ANIMATION BRING THE POPULAR DICE GAME TO LIFE, CREATING A RICH GAME PLAYING EXPERIENCE Coming soon for Windows 95 Download the interactive preview at www.interplay.dragonplay.com Check out TSR'S DRAGON DICE game available now. DRAGON DICEN and 1986 TSA, Inc. Used by replay Productos de location TSR . INTERPLAY is a trademark of toplayPodactors Al rights reserved. 200 and the TSA logo we trademarks of TSA, Inc. Wrdows 958 satradumak of Microsoft Corporation. All rights resered. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #263 BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" "


"REVIEW  TOONSTRUCK ADVENTUREJRPG Irish-Scottish bartender-ashamrock in a kilt whose speech alternates between an Irish brogue and a Scottish burr; a Valley Girl costume-shop owner who quotes from Camus; and a flexing, musclebound bulldog who walks around insulting lesser physical specimens in the style of the old «I lans und lranz» routine from TV's Saturday Night Live. Oh yeah, there's also a 0D busty, latex-clad dominatrix slicep named Polly in case you were wondering whether this was a kid's game or not. Conversations throughout TOONSTRUCK are hilarious, and the TEARS OF A CLOWN Meet Spike, evil clown and eye-poker. This is just one of the bad guys voices behind the characters are you'll have to confront as you work your way toward defeating the evil Count Nefarious. brilliant. The game features a host of stars providing voice work, including are solved, appropriately enough, by leaves Drew in the foul dungeon in Tim Curry, of Rocky Horror fanc, as thinking about how you'd expect things to Count Ncfarious' castle, a place that he Count Ncfarious; Dom DeLuise as work in a cartoon world. Of course, aimmust escape before he can make his way Fingers the arcade owner; and Dan ing your brain in that direction sounds back to the real world. Castellaneta (the voice of Homer easier than it sometimes is, especially if Simpson) as Flux Wildly. your brain is geared toward how things THAT'S ALL, FOLKS Conversations are presented both in work in real life\" (which isn't true of all TOONSTRUCK is a hilarious, first-rate audio and as text (though you'd never romp through a goofy cartoon world. With want to play this with the sound down), with the wild animations, sound effects, many puzzles, humorous conversations and the interface for conducting them is and genuine cartoon feel that accompany and characters, unexpected plot devices, extremely simple to use. Conversational your experimentation and successful solumasterful voice work, and more, this options are represented as graphics that tions to puzzles. game is well worth playing by anyone you can click on to move things along \"Thankfully, Drew Blanc and Flux who appreciates a good laugh. Give the One of the standard conversation graphiWildly can do a lot of silly things that not game's developers, Burst, a lot of credit. At ics is an ice cube (for «breaking the ice only don't result in death nothing seems a time when many adventure games are with a character) that allows the conversato actually kill you, but there are a lot of trying to outdo each other with violence tion to follow general lines. The ice cube saved game positions, just in case..) but and ponderous, Myst-like story lines, melts slowly as the conversation flows and also make TOONSTRUCK fun to play. TOONSTRUCK is a real breath of fresh air, a ends up as a little puddle of water when Drew can even \"use\" Flux to help him Saturday morning cartoon for your comall general topics have been exhausted. solve some of the puzzles he encounters. puter screen. With a dominatrix sheep While object manipulation is the basis DYNAMITE GAMEPLAY of many puzzles in the game, TOONOf course, because this is an adventure STRUCK has a wide variety of puzzle types APPEAL: TOONSTRUCK is a funny, game, you'll find many things to examine that will keep you happily occupied for engaging cartoon adventure that will grab, and manipulate as you make your quite some time, including wordplay, amuse adventure gamers and cartoon fans alike. way back to the real world. You can place logic, and arcade-type puzzles. At key items in your inventory (once you retrieve junctures in the game, after you've solved PROS: Comical characters and conversations, an entertaining story, and the convenient \"bollomless bag\" from the certain important puzzles, the action excellent voice work make this humorRoyal Engineer) and use them on one segues with a \"Meanwhilc...,\" and a short ous game an all-out delight to play. another and on characters and other cartoon sequence reveals what is happen CONS: Almost items in the game. No cartoon would be ing elsewhere in the toon world. Many none, but gamers with delicate sensicomplete without a lot of explosive slapstrange things will happen to the world as bilities should be stick, so there's also a shop in Zanydu that Drew and Flux search for the missing aware that some of sells novelty items with nasty surprises that Cutifier parts. And gamers should the humor is risque. This is not will serve you well in your adventures. beware the game is not over once the a kid's game. Many of the puzzles in 'TOONSTRUCK Cutifier is fixed! Aplot twist at this point CG JANUARY 1997 "


"IT: 511 The good news is, you've just inherited an island resort from your dead uncle. The bad news is, your uncle was one twisted son of a bitch. XBR +22 EXPLORE ( INSANITY TRES GT Interactive Software GT Interactive, in conjunction with Tribeca Interactive, presents 9 Execute de Robert DeNiro Jane-Rosenthal wah the winter n Cheras Isadora, Christopher Reeve las Thurstony Last James Belushi as Sally Steven Tyler : Joe Perry Aerosmith as The Toxic Twins. Presented My Buzz Havss Pater Rosenthal Art Detelin by Mark Ryden. CO-AO , andisyon OTHER AND MACs tiethe All Rih Rends Mi d A metic All the rock CIRCLE READER SERVICE #213 SAU "


" AND THE CHOSEN ONE SHALL BEAR THE MARK "


"There are THE APOCALYPSE HAS BEGUN All seven seals, have been broken. Every evil that plagued the earth has become incarnate, disturbing the balancing force between good and evil, man and spirit. FRIGHTENINGLY DETAILED D ENVIRONMENT VITH INTERACTIVE OBJECTS AND PREDATORY DEMONS Not only have you stumbled blindly into a nightmare, you've set the stage for the Apocalypse. And now, only one can stop it. He who bears the mark. The chosen one. You. Presenting a terrifying 3D adventure unlike anything you've experienced before. Realms of the Haunting. The forces of darkness are gathering for the final showdown. ROOM UPON ROOM OF QUESTS, PUZZLES, BATTLES AND CHALLENGES. OVER 600 INTERACTIVE OBJECTS INCLUDING MORE THAN 155 POSSIBLE INVENTORY ITEMS MAPS, WEAPONS, AND MAGICAL OBJECTS. USER-DEFINED CONTROLS ALLOW CUSTOMIZATION OF ADVENTURE AND COMBAT LEVELS. FULL MOTION VIDEO, COMPLEX AND INTELLIGENT PLOT BRANCHING AND MULTIPLE ENDINGS * SOPHISTICATED CHARACTER INTERACTION WITH A REAL-TIME, FIRST-PERSON, 360° 3-D ENVIRONMENT. etiba Norske Realms, ne Haun ing Realmsi rile Hauning RUSTEMOSEL Haung Realms is THE BTTLEGROUND BETWEEN ULTIMATE GOOD & EVIL. Interplan LANING IN Gremlin AVAILABLE FOR PC CD-ROM BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" 01996 Cremlin Interactive Ltd. All rights reserved. Realms of the launung and Interplay are trademarks of Interplaay Productions. All rights reserved. Interplay is the sole publisher and distributor. Licensed from and developed by Cremlin Interactive Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #269 "


"*** REVIEW . 9 DIFFICULTY LEVEL ADVENTURE/RPG P Strange Interlude Sier Long On Weirdness, Short On Gameplay, 9 Is A Unique But Brief Diversion by Robert Coffey detailed SVGA graphics that have ike the pump organ that is its become de riguer for artsy-fartsy advencenterpiece, 9 is a game that turc games since Myst. But the world of 9 pulls out all the stops, distin is its own fascinating animal, an off-kilter SIGHT-READING MADE LOOPY guished by richly detailed, weird melange of camival kitsch, 50s-cra adverTranslating the code on the tikis into art; an original story line, and tising art, South Pacific tribalism, and music is at the heart of 9's gameplay name talent like Christopher plain old-fashioned weirdness. I was parReeve, Cher, and James Belushi. ticularly fond of the portrait of a huge piece of Thurston Last's great invention. But while the title of this MYSTmultiple-eyed flesh potato reading to a Otherwise, the big-name voice acting on-acid effort refers to muses of cute little girl. does the job in an efficient if unspectacucreativity, it also lets lar manner. If you know about how many there's one place hours it should take to comwhere 9 stands plete the game. For all its head and shoulders originality, 9 is hampered by above the rest, it's in exceptionally brief playing the terrifically time, a brevity abetted in entertaining and large part by the unchallenginspired end ing nature of its puzzles. scquence that rewards those who OH, FOR A MUSE OF FIRE finish the game. The game begins with your Think Busby inheritance of the Last Resort, GET ME A SWATTER! Salty, caretaker of the Last Resort, is as unwelcome as Berkeley gone a decideelly bizarre getaway the recent work of actor Jim Belushi, who provides his voice. berserk. If the same designed to generate inspiraexpenditure of taltion for creative types, formerly owned by Despite the striking originality in art ent so evident in the ending had gone into your late, eccentric uncle, Thurston last direction, 9 offers nothing new in terms of the puzzles, I would be a rcal winner. (Christopher Reeve). Upon arriving to puzzles. There are the mandatory locked claim your inheritance, you realize some doors as well as a sequencing puzzle, a thing has gone terribly wrong. In order to steam engine that needs starting, and a APPEAL: Adventure gamers who savor a visually rich walk on the save the resort you must deal with the nine rhythmic round of follow the leader. weird side. muses that reside there, rebuild the Muse Pretty standard stuff, and none of it offers >PROS: Original plot; intriguing, oneMachine (built by Uncle Thurston to much of a challenge. of-a-kind art; one of the most rewardamplify creative energy), and defeat the Two arcade-style games break up the ing and inspired ending sequences in recent memory. cvil Toxic Twins, who are twisting your puzzle solving. While both are fun and fit CONS: uncle's legacy to serve their own nefarious the overall spirit of 9, gamers looking for a Nonchallenging purposes. Failure means the end of music. more standard adventure game experi puzzles; exceptionbeauty, and art ---certainly a more novel ence may find them frustrating and a ally short game premise than the countless end of the time; arcade detriment to gameplay. The Shoot-a-Rat sequences could world/mankind your life\" threats that drive game is particularly difficult, and can dis frustrate some so many games. rupt the flow of the game as it repeatedly gamers; James Belushi. The Last Resort is rendered in the lush, thwarts your efforts to recover the final Price: $54.95 System Requirements: 486-66 or better, Windows 95, 16 MB RAM, 15 MB hard drive space, SVGA 256-color graphics, 2x CD-ROM drive, mouse; Sound Blasteror 100%-compatible sound card, Quicktime 2.1 for Windows (included): Macintosh version also available. Protection: None (CDROM must be in drive) Designer: Tribeca Interactive Publisher: GT Interactive New York, NY (212) 726-6500 Reader Service #: 321 RATFI "


"Unlock the legend of the Knights Templar. And discover a secret too frightening to unveil. CIRCLE BLOOD \"With its lush, detailed animation, Circle Of Blood resembles the classic arcade game Dragon's Lair. But it seems this time the game will play as good as it looks.\" CD-ROM TODAY High resolution animations hand drawn with painstaking detail by Don Bluth Studios alumni (All Dogs Go To Heaven and An American Tail) American George Stobbart happens into a Parisian cafe one afternoon because he wants a cup of coffee. But after a clown delivers a plastic explosive that blows the place to smithereens, all George Stobbart wants are some answers. Features a cinematic musical score from the talents of soundtrack producer Barrington Phelong (Truly, Madly, Deeply and Nostradamus) Buried deep beneath the bodies and the rubble of that explosion lies a fourteenth century medieval order called The Knights Templar. Only you can unlock the secret of this intriguing historical adventure and stop the vicious conspiracy that threatens to reshape the world. Available for Windows 95/DOS CD-ROM and MAC CD-ROM OFBLOOD KIDS TO ADULTS CIRCLE READER SERVICE #117 Mieresor Windows 95 INTERACTIVE entertainment RESOLUTON 1996 REVOLUTION SOFTWARE LTD. All Rights Reserved. Circle of blood is a trademark of Revolution Software Ltd, Published by Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Microsoft Windows and the Windows Logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation ESTATE "


"ajoker doesn't aus with a full deck. Just cause he's a i mean he plays 0115 Ante up to Crystal Dynamics' fastest, endorphin-based 30 action game. Your team of fellow speed-mongers includes Nikki, Fargus and Sid an acrobatic Wizard, a slightly twisted jester and his maniacal puppet-on-a-stick. Blur through unbelievably spacious levels of their deranged 3D kingdom while shape-changing into a fire-blasting dragon or raging rhino. Just sit down and get taken for a ride, it's pure rocket fuel. PANDOMO PandeMONUM  B-csoma min TABELIT CRYSTA DYNAMICS SEGA Check out our new website at http://www.crystald.com Risica stal jar te behet cality standard Sta\". Bu fasts and accessories with his sal die aarthi heyrt spaltza bat fap fatin prin. Sepand Dr Ropa las ant tratate si TUPEST, UL. Playa trademartel Sony Topter lateral lit. Crystal Bat, bebrystal buits lupi Pudential ha Patanilgaand bette r interset brystal Basit brystal B . Aright reserved. Fal -00-771-1772 hr hiuslatlarda CIRCLE READER SERVICE #121 B PlayStation SOON Available on PC CD-ROM "


"PETER OLAFSON ACTION ac tin liksi mon 5. Wacky SportsAction Games Action Gladiators Do It With Rockets Between Their Legs I can SUSTER count myself among the lack of grounding in the real aps Remaining 4 Gates Remaining 1 tolerant. I do not honk world. A real sport isn't simimmediately when a red ply a game: it is people and light turns green. I do places and history. When not make a scene when you play computer bascball, someone cuts into line you're not swinging a bat or at the movies. The pitching a ball. A hundred puppy makes a puddle years of swung bats and on the floor, and I'm pitched balls are hanging cool with it. invisible in the air about But that same tolerance typically ebbs you. By contrast, invented 00:18 when I'm faced with action games based sports have no history to ROCKET-STEER Turning the rocket isn't easy, but you on, for want of a better description, non them, can use cables to latch onto pylons—and clothesline traditional sports.\" I can think of exactly Perhaps there's hope, your opponents. two made-up sports-action games that though, both for me and for I've liked over the years. BRUTAL SPORTS the genre. A few weeks ago, FOOTBALL's medieval incarnation of I got my hands on a beta of ROCKET seem to have taken their inspiration from pigskin was brought home by its over-theJOCKEY (from Rocket Science and those postwar magazine covers touting a top violence. And SPEEDBALL 2: BRUTAL SegaSoft) that kept me up late two nights \"better future through science.\" It's glaciaDELUXE had this amazing structural running. Before I remembered that I torial combat between contestants integrity. It was built of stone, and you couldn't stand this sort of game, I was mounted on rocket-powered bikes. You could almost believe it was a sport having too much fun to stop roar around an enclosed space with the But most of the others just serve as object of keeping your seat while helping bookends for the games around them. I AMERICAN (BIKER) GLADIATORS everyone else lose theirs. suspect it has something to do with their The designers for ROCKET JOCKEY Easier said than done. The bike is a bit tough to control — it's a rocket, after Sega is bringing two all and leaning this way or that only of its best driving X 9°47\" 774 13/15 turns this imperfectly guided missile games over to the PC. 304570 at a shallow angle. Hence, the game Early Windows 95 veris forgiving when you crash into side sions of SEGA RALLY walls, fences, and towers on the playand DAYTONA USA sugfield, an action that typically deflects gest they'll be almost you back into the fray. identical to the Saturn To make maneuvering in this originals. (DAYTONA'S cumbersome vehicle easier, you're kept intact the ability 4.4 1996 given the ability to fire a steering to race in the wrong EASY LEFT The intense off-road racing of cable to the left or right of your direction and the SEGA RALLY CHAMPIONSHIP will be coming to PCs vehicle (think Batman on a goofy music.) some time in early January speederbike). The shorter the cable that connects you to an object, the tighter the turning think of exactly two made-up sports-action games that I've liked over the years. TOTAL TIME INSIDE ACTION JANUARY 1997 CG "


"A NEW DIMENSION IN RACING. "


"Take the race or your life &board & futuristic cyber cycle. It moves sideways, backwards, upside down and over obstacles. Choose from six different tracks. SPINE-SNAPPING HAIRPIN TURNS. HAIR-RAISING LOOP-TO-LOOPS. ALLAT MIN D-NUMBING SPEEDS THROUGH THE SEWERS OF NEW YORK IN THE YEAR 2020 AD. Scorcher PC CD-ROM TEEN GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com Scorcher 1996 Scavenger, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Created and published Scavenger, Inc. Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. All trademarks are the property of their respective companies. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #364 "


"PETER OLAFSON ACTION radius. Another click releases the cable so you can move on. The cable usually anchors on the scenery. With practice, you'll be able to target the bombs and rockets strewn about the landscape...and rival rocketeers. You can either clothesline them by firing a straight cable across their path, or hook onto them and drag them along in a punishing circle before dumping them in a distant corner. And that's just the \"war\" scenario. There's also a rocket-jockey slalom and a challenging game of rocket soccer. Hopefully the final version will have some team interaction. OK, this title still might lack that requisite sense of history that I mentioned to qualify as sports. That quality only time can provide. But we're talking actionsports, and in this case, the action definitely is fun. Besides, I'm a tolerant fellow. I can adjust. PS other ships will do as well as these two against the Daktaklakpak. Don't use the computer to fight the Daktaklakpak Star Control 3 because it will choose the Chmmr Hypermelee Tips Avatar, which is terribly ineffective If you haven't tried the Hypermelee against the Dak ships. action in STAR CONTROL 3, it's a blast. Against the Vux, it is best to You can have the computer fight use the Pkunk Fury. The Vux are Hypermelees for you, but then you'd the only race with the special be a little girlie man, and what's ability to start Hypermelee right UTWIG JUGGERNAUT The Utwig ship, the worse, the computer doesn't always next to their opponents. Even Jugger, is perfect against the Owa ships fight intelligently. It's far better to take though the Intruder is a painfully (shown here) and Heralds. Their fourthe helm and do the dirty work your slow ship, this special ability pronged guns don't deplete energy, so you means the can fire with impunity at your enemies. Vux are automatically back and fry the bogey. within range when Generally speaking, though the Hypermelee starts Chmmr Avatar is probably the single and can begin most powerful vessel, it really shouldn't carving into your always be your vessel of first choice. It ship with their is rather slow, and won't be able to powerful lasers catch up to Pkunk Furies, Daktaklakpak before you even ships, or other quick vessels. Those have a chance to vessels will be hard pressed to damage move away. If you you because of your defense satellites, use the Pkunk but you will only achieve a frustrating CHMMR AND GET SOME The Chmmr Avatar has the most Fury, you can standoff that could last for minutes. speed away powerful beam weapon in Hypermelee, but it's too slow to Use the Avatar when you know you are instantly, before catch quick ships. fighting slower ships like Vux Intruders, the Vux get a K'tang ships, or Doog vessels. The bead on you, and best ship to use by default is the Urself. Besides, it's incredibly fun and then maneuver behind them and Quan Dreadnought, which loses in very addictive, and, with these tips, easier unleash your steaming pellets. Most few battles. than you think. other ships are too slow to escape the Against the Heralds at the end, use The balance of power in Hypermelee initial onslaught. Utwig Juggers. Absorb their initial barrage is similar to the old Paper-RockAgainst the K'tang, the Doog's of missiles with your shields, let them Scissors game. When you encounter rapid-fire homing missiles are perfect. exhaust their energy, and then fire away the Daktaklakpak, always fight them In fact, once you acquire Doog vessels, at the origin of the missiles. You can get with your Precursor vessel or Doog they are a very good pick for nearly off a few good shots before they regenerships. Your Precursor ship has a hom any battle since their primary weapon ate enough energy for another missile ing defense system that will tear apart will home in on an enemy vessel no attack; at that time, power up your a Dak ship before it can lock its matter its position. You don't even shields again. Repeating this process will mandibles onto you, while a Doog ship have to turn around to shoot a ship lead to a swift victory. Juggers are also has a primary homing missile gun that behind you: the Doog's auto-aiming ideal against the Owa ships, does practically the same thing. No missiles will simply shoot out from the CG JANUARY 1997 "


"«WHAT WE SAW STUNNED JADED EVEN US EDITORIAL TYPES\" PC GAMES* TIMELAPSE, TITANIC AND NCAA CHAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL. YOU'VE NEVER SEEN ANYTHING LIKE THEM, UNTIL NOW. "


"JOURNEY TO ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS, DISCOVER AN ALIEN RACE AND SHATTER THE THEORIES OF MODERN SCIENCE. 1996 GTE Entertainment. All rights reserved. The GTE logo is a trademark of GTE Corporation Timelapse and GTE Entertainment are trademarks of GTE Vantage Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective holders. For more information call: 1-800-GTE-TODAY, PC&MAC CD-ROM S19 IN "


"Journey through five SGI-rendered faithfully recreated 3D environments and unravel the secrets of Easter Island, Egypt, Atlantis and the Mayan and Anasazi worlds. Embark on a compelling, puzzlesolving adventure with stunning full-screen photo-realistic ray traced graphics as you travel through time and space. \"What we saw stunned even us jaded editorial types.\" PC Games Enjoy over 40 hours of challenging gameplay with multiple endings as you attempt to reach your ultimate destination... Atlantis. \"There are a lot of gorgeous MYST-style adventures, but this is the best of them all.\" Computer Games Strategy Plus TIMELA ANCIENT CIVAVIOUS THINK TO A LANTI \"...Timelapse's carefully crafted story line makes it a game worth completing.\" Newsweek A Graphical Adventure Free demo disk www.im.gte.com GTE Entertainment CIRCLE READER SERVICE #115 "


"Outwit spies, retrieve stolen documents and change history.. before 90 tons of ice stops you. dd \"One of the best new games for Fall 1996.\" — Computer Gaming World A \"Nothing short of awesome.\" Next Generation ar w R529993 TAHL 6 DIF St My 2 De OP \"Incredibly detailed re-creation.\" Newsweek OM WIT Microsoft "


"It's the Titanic's fateful night and you play at British agent the key ligttre entangled in a race against time to change the course of 20th century history. Aclvuced 360\" movement puts you on board an historically accurate SG1 rendition of the Titanic as you search for clues and secret documents in fully explorable 3D environments. A story of intrigue and disaster unfolds as you interact with over 25 fully animated characters who remember your responses and act accordlingly as vou criss-cross their paths. TITANIC A Graphical Adventure Free Demo Disk www.im.gte.com GTE Entertainment CIRCLE READER SERVICE #240 "


"EN LT SMELTEST 200 RAH Network and modem options let you challenge your friends for season or tournament play. Advanced artificial intelligence lets you grow players from freshman to senior year. Extensive recruiting feature let's you rebuild your team after each season of play. 64 Division I Teams \"This is as close as you can get to college hoops without putting on the uniform Extensive Recruiting yourself.\" Computer Game Review 3D SGI Graphics \"...NCAA Championship Basketball combines arcade style 5-on-5 hoops play with a sophisticated sim of Division I coaching life.\" PC Games SULUAN Network and Modem to Modem Play March Madnesssm NCAA TEST EAMPIONSHIP BASKETBALL 9 National Champion 2 CD-ROM Win tickets to the Final Four Visit our website for info. http://www.im.gte.com NCAA GTE Entertain CIRCLE READER SERVICE #244 "


"THE QUAKE PAGE Shadow Botting v NO11) Play DeathMatch Alone With Testy Little QUAKE Bots, Or Play QUAKE At Work With A Stealth Boss Key by V. Long WP PE UAKE DeathMatches are bystander out of VIKTUA so amazing that they're Cop. When mixed with worth playing even by monsters or live yourself. That's right, you Death Match opponents n experience rancois Victim bots really test \"multiplayer\" mayhem your skill at selectively TILLS RE: even on a lonc, unconhitting targets. No nected computer..with doubt, bots add entirely out suffering a millisecond new dimensions to of Internet lag! Using «multiplayer\" QUAKE. ingenious Quake C mods, You can even add bots to DON'T SHOOT ME If you enable the Victim bot, innocent known as «bots,\" you can human DeathMatches bystanders will always seem to get in your way, but killing them simulate human players on your own to liven up the gameplay machine. Although they'll never fully in your usual splatterwill cost you frags. replace live opponents, bots are quite fests. // boss-key hack challenging, especially if you spawn a alias vol_00\"volume 0 ; alias bunch and crank up their skill level. QUAKE CYA vol_Ob vol_b; echo Silence\" My current favorite is Steven Polge's Who says the holidays are over? alias vol_0\"volume 0 ; alias vol_s Reaper bot; it's a fearsome foe that excels With this \"boss key\" hack, you can vol 1 ; alias vol_b vol_0; alias at \"circle-strafing,\" particularly at SKILL QUAKE in the office with impunity vol_Ob vol_00; echo Silence\" 3. Simply create a C:/QUAKE/REAPER whicther you play solo or pummel coalias vol_1 \"volume 0.3 ; alias subdirectory, put the Reaper's workers. Plus, no QUAKE C is required vol_s vol 2 ; alias vol b vol_1; PROCS.DAT there, and start QUAKE by here. alias vol_Ob vol_00; echo Low typing QUAKE-CAME REAPER In Windows 95, Alt-Tab switches volume\" Another popular bot is Cameron applications but does nothing to alias vol_2 \"volume 0.7 ; alias Newham's Eliminator, which uses \"waysquelch the sounds of mayhem. Now vol_s vol_3 ; alias vol_b vol_2; points\" for navigating levels with uncanny there's a fix, courtesy of Janis «Disastry\" alias vol_Ob vol_00: echo intelligence: however, it's not as tidy to Jagars. Here's how to use 'Tab to instantMedium volume\" install as the Reaper ly toggle between silence and your alias vol 3 \"volume 1 ; alias vols The most humorous is Tang Master's selected volume level. When the boss vol_0 ; alias vol_b vol_3 ; alias Victim bot, which runs like an innocent appears, hit Tab then All-Tab. When vol_Ob vol 00 ; echo Loud\" the boss goes away, hit Altvolume 0.3 Tab then Tab. This hack alias vol_s vol_2 also lets you quickly adjust alias vol_b vol_1 sound volume via Page Up alias vol_Ob vol_00 and quit silently via FIO bind PGUP vols then Y. bind TAB vol_Ob Go into the C:/QUAKE/ alias squit \"volume 0; wait ; quit\" IDI subdirectory, and copy bind F10 squit CONFIG.CFG as AUTOEXEC.CFG. Then HOT BOTS Spawn a few bots to elevate the multiplayer use a text editor to append That's all we have this month, but stay the following 14 lines to tuned for more QUAKE goodies. Same pandemonium in DeathMatch. The bots act like human AUTOEXEC.CFC. QUAKE time. Same QUAKE page. players and go for each other if you aren't around. Check out this month's Quake goodies and files from previous months on the CD. SOOMSTICI BROWN BOT CHECK ON LAVENDER_BOT' DOOMSTICK GRE_BOT CHEWED ON DMDOT DOGMSTI JANUARY 1997 CG "


"***** REVIEW  ROAD RASH J ACTION DIFFICULTY LEVEL A Gnarly Ride Bike Racing With Violence And Tasteless Humor by Gordon Goble Player Wwe hat woull you call Being a newbie biker, you start with cxactly 3D, but they do run the gamut a procuct that's nuthin' but a stinkin' Rat Bike (as the from seasicle drives to congested cities to tasteless, full of game personalities would say). As you superhighways, with scenery that includes grunge and vio pick up victories and earn money, you'll squishable photo-realistic pedestrians and lence, but also fun? want to visit Olleys Skoot-A-Rama to all manner of transportation and structure. You'd call it ROAD upgrade your wheels moving up through The most fun is playing it multiplayer. RASH, EA's hodge various sport and superbikes. podge of cliscon The bigger and badder the nected (and at bike, the harder it is to contimes morally trol, but you have to do it bankrupt) ingredients thrown together to because the competition will accompany what is an otherwise enjoybe getting better, too. able motorcycle racing game. Off the track, ROAD Rash offers up mid-quality THRASHING YOUR videos of drunken brawling Harley stereoFRIENDS types, and cartoon stills of other intoxicat It takes more than a good ed bums vomiting in dirty toilets and pecdriver on a good bike to rule ing in equally dirty urinals. this roost. You see, these If you can dig past this clirt, however, scumbags play dirty, flailing MEAN STREETS Much of the fun consists of simple you will find a simple, but fun, motorcycle away with chains, bats, boots, arcade racing on different tracks while trying to punch, racing game. ROAD RASH puts you in the or just a good old-fashioned kick, and beat your opponents off their bikes. boots of a motorcycle punk to win illegal backhand as you try to pass. street races. You'll have your pick from Naturally, you have to fight fire with fire, But a limit of five total circuits and the several unsavory alter-egos, such as ex-com and if the truth be known, it's a blast very simple driving model make for a Milwaukec Jon or rabies-infected whacking some poor schmuck over his questionable long-term proposition. Add «Rhonda the Rash,\" and then you're on noggin until he loses control in front of an in a hardware conflict between the game, your merry way. oncoming vehicle. Sound Blaster 16 sound cards, and Pirst stop is the local biker hangout Der Action occurs in a rear clase view, with Microsoft's Direct Draw that consistently Panzer Klub, where you'll set control, an impressively appointed instrument kicked me back to the Win 95 desktop graphic, and sound options and sign up panel across the base of the screen. The without warning, and ROAD RASH for the next race. You can also sclumnouze bike leans into tums and skicls in fast cor becomes even less intriguing. Still, ROAD with your ners, but it's RASH is fun, though it could have been a peers, sup basic arcade better game with a little more motorcycle posedly pick Restroomwith minimal flavor and a lot less tastelessness. ing up track Lood Gome Return to the game real-life hanSave Game APPEAL: Young Gen Xers with a and style Save Game As. cling. The taste for two-wheeled street combat. hints in the Game Mode Graphles Opllons big challenge PROS: Great grungy bands, great process. The Player Level is avoiding a grungy music, nice graphics, good Player Name trouble? track. The fighting on cycles can be constant barSelect Character highly entertaining. Jukebox Well, the rage of obstaSound Mix CONS: Too much racing's not cles and Configure Input periphery, too little very combeating the game. Disjointed plex and the  out of feel to the product hints are THIS IS COOL? This disgusting scene is typical of the your rivals). as a whole; annoy ing software/hardfluff surrounding RoxD RASH. Most bikers are portrayed lame, so why ware problems. bother? as idiots and grungy slackers. tracks aren't RORD RASH Price: $49.95 System Requirements: IBMcompatible Pentium 75, 16 MB RAM, 25 MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 2x CDROM drive: supports Direct Sound-compatible sound card # of Players: 1-8 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designers: Papyrus Design Group Publisher: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 Reader Service #: 322 Done Go Home \"The RATED CG JANUARY 1997 "


"HUNT From the co-designer of X Wing & Tie Fighter & the designer of the Super Star Wars game trilogy 50 twisting, turning actionpacked sub-missions rife with combat and puzzlesolving objectives Dramatic graphics stunningly rendered in cutting-edge \"Anime\" style animation First person, side-scrolling action in 2 1/2-D combat environments teeming with drug lords, cyborgs and the vilest perpetrator of all Written by world-renowned author Orson Scott Card (Ender's Game, Speaker for the Dead) this intense plotwithin-a-plot storyline comes alive with sizzling dialogue and continuous interactivity between characters High-tech crime fighting including DNA analyzation Cinematic soundtrack with original music and actionenhancing sound effects OR BE HUNTED. It's 2095. You're Neo-Hunter Rick Gage a human bloodhound hired to track down the killers of a powerful senator. Use your sharp wit and even sharper shooting to navigate the dangerous metropolis of future San Francisco in an action-thriller that embroils you in an underworld of corruption and greed. It's a race against time to track down the powers orchestrating the collapse of the new HUNTES millennium. All before the hunter becomes the hunted. UTM wan Incota Fort *** Hotel INTERACTIVE TEEN BONU Microsoft Windows ESRE  Virgin Interactive Entertoinment, Inc. All ights reserved. Virgin is a rogistered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd. Microsoft Windows and the Windows Logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #238 "


"**** REVIEW  MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS  DIFFICULTY LEVEL + Off The Beaten Track Microsoft's Muddy Mother Of Arcade Racing by Mark Clarkson Microsoft icrosoft's game strategy water splashing, audiseems to be to concencnce checring-but trate on titles that move the sound quality is fast and look good under disappointing. Windows 95. MONSTER There are three difTRUCK MADNESS ferent difficulty levels (MTM) does both, at to choose from. On least if you've got a fairly beginner, your speed fast Pentium. Dropped is kept so low that you behind the wheel of a can take turns with teetering monster truck, you have to do out tipping over, your muddy worst on a variety of off-road though you lack the tracks. MTM offers a selection of 12 trucks muscle to jump over KEEP ON TRUCKIN' You can race with up to seven other (Irawn from the real world of monster large-sized gaps. On human or computer players over three types of tracks, slipping truck racing, and the names Bigfoot, Bear intermediate, you can and sliding across gorgeous terrain in a silly but fun arcadeFoot, and Snake Bite should be familiar to run your truck up to style monster truck racer. anyone who's spent an evening watching full speed. On the 4x4s careening over heaps of crumpled professional setting, all bets are off the pensions. Soft suspensions damp accelerCalaxy 500s on ESPN. computer's trucks cut comers, take advanation, but also soak up the bounces better. MTM lets you test your monster truck tage of all the shortcuts, and drive to win. I did manage to test the LAN and mettle on three types of circuits: drag, cirThere's a garage, but it offers nothing modem play, which both worked fine. In cuit, and cross-country rally. Driving the like the complexity of such hard-core racfact, my eight-year-old daughter and I trucks is straightforward, although I coulding sims as INDYCAR RACING II. You can occupied a happy hour or two playing tag n't set the game up to use my CH pedals adjust the cut of your tire tread from shal on our local arca network--something PC or to make use of the additional buttons low to decp, tweak your acceleration, and off-road racers might want to try their foot on my CH F-16 Combat Stick. choose from soft, medium, or hard sus pedals on. If you have the time for a few The graphics are great, espequick races, and an appreciation for arcade cially on my 3D accelerated racers in classic console style, then fire up Diamond Stealth card MTM for some good, muddy fun. (MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS uses Direct3D and can take APPEAL: MTM is for those of you advantage of 3D hardware accelwho want to experience the kidneypounding fun of monster truck racing, eration). Tires leave tracks in the and who aren't expecting a serious mud and grass, and send clouds simulation. of dust and dirt into the air. PROS: Great graphics, good basic Large game objects, such as fun, very easy to trees and buildings are indestrucget into. tible, but you can snap other TONKA TOYS Your indestructible trucks tip, sway, CONS: Limited garage tweaking, items like cacti and road signs, bounce, and roll all over the tracks like toy trucks. disappointing into pieces by driving over them. You can roll several times and still drive off withsound quality, low All the right sounds are here out a scratch. If you land on your roof, the game on sim depth. trucks crashing into each other, will just flip you right over. Down & Dirty Racing Price: $44.95 System Requirements: IBMcompatible Pentium 60, 8 MB RAM, 2x CD-ROM drive, SVGA graphics, 20 MB hard drive space, Windows 95, mouse; supports most major sound cards. # of Players: 1-8 Protection: Key code for first installation (CD must also be in drive to play) Designer: Terminal Reality Publisher: Microsoft Redmond, VA (206) 882-8080 Reader Service #: 323 184 CG JANUARY 1997 "


"OSERE Most people enjoy the inferiority of their best friends. -Lord Chesterfield Microsoft Compete head-to-head. Surrender nothing. SIDEWINDER. game pad The Microsoft SideWinder\" game pad makes it a fair fight for you and up to three of your best friends. Hook up to any of your Windows 95-based games and all four (or three, or two) of you get the same fully functional, lightningfast game control and multibutton maneuvers. So no matten how many are plugged in, the competition's still quick and exciting. It's a perfect fit for hands of all sizes, letting you keep a solid grip and making it easier to use any of the buttons or triggers to vanquish your opponents. Record complicated, hard-to-remember multibutton moves and map them to a single button for swift execution of lethal maneuvers. Remember, the more Sidewinder game pads you own, the more friends you can take advantage of'. A little friendly competition never hurt anyone, right? Microsoft Where do you want to go today? www.microsoft.com/sidewinder/ 01996 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft, Where do you want to go today? and Windows are registered trademarks and Sidewinder is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. "


"***** REVIEW DEADLY TIDE ACTION DIFFICULTY LEVEL Dead In The Water Microsoft's Shooter Deserves To Stay Underneath The Waves by Scott A. May SITE YEN on Microsoft you've fought aliens in ALL THAT GLITTERS... space, on liostile planets. DEADLY TIDE's greatest attribute is and even on city streets. also its biggest shortcoming. All scenes Now take a deep breath are pre-rendered will gorgeously and pursue them under detailed 3D graphics, created by the water in Microsoft's same Hollywood team responsible for DEADLY TIDE, a first-perbackgrounds used in SeaQuest and son shooter that's long on Star Trek: The Next Generation. atmosphere but short on Visually, the game is stunning with briljust about everything else liant light source shading and diffused In the year 2500, Earth plays host to a race filtering. Add some ambient bubble of alien invaders, who have quictly set up effects and you truly feel submerged in an shop ceep within our oceans. Until now, underwater realm. their exact purpose has been a mystery. Unfortunately, all this pre-rendering Recent attacks on shipping have promptbumps the game size up to four CDs and cd counterstrikes by the Earth Oceans Alliance (EOA) to rid the world of this threat.Urgency is cranked up a notch when it's discovered that the aliens are Price: $54.95 slowly raising the System ocean levels, with Requirements: the intent of Pentium 75 or better, ENJOY THE SHOW The beautiful pre-rendered graphics and lush 8 MB RAM, 17 MB drowning their cut-scenes of DEADLY Tide look almost as good as Star Trek: TNG hard disk space, SVGA landlubbing or SeaQuest. Maybe they should do a VCR version. graphics, Windows 95, opponents. 4x CD-ROM drive, mouse; supports As you may have guessed, you're the requires constant disc access. On slower Win95-compatible Earth's only hope, sent into action with systems, this can result in display pauses sound cards and joy. the I lydra, a high-tech hydrofighter protoand choppy animation. Luckily, you can sticks (Microsoft SideWinder 3D Pro type. The action takes place in a variety of smooth things out ly selecting one of recommended). settings-all underwater-ranging from three graphic settings, with only slight Protection: None (CD sunken ships and alien strongholds to degradations in overall quality. must be in drive) Designers: Rainbow craggy topographics. Cameplay consists While pre-rendered graphics offer Studios and TRG3 almost entirely of deep-sea exploration, as greater detail, they severely limit your freePublisher: Microsoft you locate clues to defeat your foes, while dom of movement. With few exceptions, Redmond, WA (206) 882-8080 constantly fending off wave after wave of you have absolutely no control over the Reader Service #: 324 | attacking alien vessels. path you take. You simply trudge along a WATERLOGGED While launching Microsoft's latest Windows 95 gaming wave, DEADLY TIDE sets gameplay back several years. predefined path, as if pulled by an invisible tow linc, rotating your HUD-based crosshairs to blast oncoming alien hordes. Disorientation is common, as you spin around to target opponents without knowing where the computer is spinning you. In other words, your role here is submissive, not assertive. And boy, is this repetitive. The five different alien ships always attack in swarms, from all sides; annihilate one wave and another appears out of thin water. And so on, ad nauseam. In DEADLY TIDE, if you've seen one battle, you've seen them all. Hopefully, Microsoft's next title will play more like a game and less like a tedious movie. DEADLY TIDE APPEAL: Fans of frantic, arcadestyle shoot-em-ups will find plenty to keep their trigger fingers twitching. PROS: Genuinely murky, claustrophobic atmosphere, lush blue-green backgrounds and ambient sound effects. CONS: Combat controls are also murky, pre-rendered flight paths offer limited directional freedom, and gameplay is highly repetitious. CG 186 JANUARY 1997 "


"AS OF NOW, AIRLINE FOOD IS NO LONGER THE MOST DEADLY THING IN THE SKY. Designed for TEEN 2. T Microso11 Windows 95 INTERACTIVE entertainment CONTAT MATEDDY ESRA LOOKS LIKE SALISBURY cannons and air-to-ground missiles will insure you AGILE STEAK HAS FINALLY MET wreak havoc on anything and everything in your path. WARRIOR ITS MATCH. Introducing All in unlimited access, on-the-fly 3-D environments. Agile Warrior: F-111X for Agile Warrior: F-111X. Windows 95. A game that's We love to destroy so intense you'll discover And it shows. testosterone in places you never knew you had it. From the cockpit of one of the most advanced weapons in the sky, you'll fly numerous deadly missions while enjoying realistic explosions, blasting sound effects and the outlandishly advanced cutting-edge graphics you can only get with Windows 95. Meanwhile, on the ground below, your arsenal of laser-guided INTRODUCING AGILE WARRIOR: F-111X\" munitions, napalm canisters, cluster bombs, 20mm FOR WINDOWS 95. www.vie.com Agile Warrior: F-111X19951996 Virgin Inforactive Entertainment, Inc. and Black Ops Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises. Lid. Microsoft Windows and the Windows Logo aro registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation CIRCLE READER SERVICE #369 "


"***** REVIEW  MANIC KARTS NOTIDH Dr Go-Kart, Go! DIFFICULTY LEVEL Manic KARTS Mostly Lives Up To Its Name by Gordon Goble you might not have GLOBAL GO-KART got to adhere to acknowledged racing guessed it from the subAs a MANIC Kakter, your task is to lines -smooth the corners by setting up a ject matter, but Virgin's compete with seven other drivers in a sinwide berth before cutting in tight and natMANIC KARTS is actually a gle race or a full season of events held at part sim-part arcade look various locations around the globe. From to further that real-life resemblance, your at the bum-on-the-ground your behind-the-kart chase perspective, competitors are actually there to win the world of go-karting, as you'll be bumping, blocking, cutting cor damn thing, not roll over like losers. seen through a collection ners, and avoiding the omnipresent walls Sometimes you'll be immersed in a of fantasy courses that and obstacles on the road to victory. The series of Doom-like corridors where it's all simply could not exist in view is intense, literally overflowing with you can do to keep out of the dead ends. the real world. It's an electrifying experi graphics, not to mention a ton of time, There are plenty of environments to drive ence, if only for the raw speed of the speed, and positional information. through. You may find yourself sloshing game and the staggering handling of the As you win races and earn prize money, through waterways and snow banks, or machinery, but it driving on log or dirt roads. MANIC isn't the \"sim\" the KARTS is a single-planed \"flat\" box cover would game, so sadly you won't be specdhave you believe ing over hills and dales or down into valleys. KART DÉJ VU SUPERKARTS veterans should Wait a second. note that those bouncing powerDidn't we hear this ups, cash bags, and oil slicks popuall before? Why yes, lating the original have not made it way back when CT here. Also, you won't be going Interactive released from Easy to Pro anymore; now SUPERKAKTS in you'll graduate from a 50cc carly 1995. It turns machine up to a full-body 250cc out MANIG is simply KART BLANCHE MANIC KARTS, though just a repackaging of the old powerhouse. But, gecz, whatever a marginally modi SUPERKARTS, is still a fun go-kart racing game with a good mix of arcade happened to progressive damage fied revision of the speed and sim handling. and smoking engines? And what's old CT product. with that annoying digi-music, Fortunately, SUPERKARTS was a real it's best to spend your dough on perfor anyway? In the end, though, MANIC kick in the pants, and so is this follow-up. mance enhancements such as cutting KARTS is the next best thing to finding Is it enough of an upgrade to entice edge tire compounds, engine \"tuning.\" SUPERKARTS in the discount bin. SUPER KARTS Owners back to their wal and larger fuel tanks, so you can spend lets? Not exactly. Aside from some new more time racing and less time in the APPEAL: Anyone who feels an arcade racing game shouldn't necestracks and minor tweaking, the game feels pseudo-pits. As the season progresses, sarily mean a bad driving model. very much the same. But for newcomers you'll notice the winning drivers (stats are PROS: Responsiveness to burnto the fast track, MANIC is worth a look. displayed at the culmination of each just like the real thing. Lots of interIn SUPERKARTS tradition, MANIC event) slowly building better karts, often active graphics, no more Super Mario KARTS looks to be designed by two sepathrough very different strategies. -like power-ups. rate camps: one that pushed for a straightMANIC KARTS is an intriguing game, CONS: \"lat\" tracks, only a mildahead sim, and one for a wacky arcade because as arcade-like as the circuits look, ly updated reworkgame. And though there'll undoubtedly with cute interactive elements like water, ing of the year-old be arguments that it should've gone this sand, traffic barriers and cones, and even SUPERKARTS. And it's still only go-kart way or that, the end result is a nifty little bouncing beach balls, there's some realracing. marriage between the two. life driving required. Most notably, you've Manic Karts Price: $34.95 System Requirements: IBM-compatible 486 DX33. 8 MB RAM, 1 MB hard drive space, DOS 6.x or higher, VGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM drive: supports Sound Blaster-compatible sound cards, joystick, joypad, Thrustmaster T1 Steering Wheel, and VR headset # of Players: 1-4 (IPX network) Protection: None Designers: Manic Media Publisher: Virgin Interactive Irvine, CA (800) 874-4607 Reader Service #: 325 CG JANUARY 1997 "


"PREPARE TO BE PUNISHED . MERCENARIES THE ALL-NEW SEQUEL TO MEGHWARRIOR 2 aume F959 FAUNEUE MS-DOS AND WINDOWS 95.CD-ROM ACTIVISION. F059 MS-DOS AND WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM THUNDELOX HTTP://WWW.ACTIVISION.COM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #41 Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc.  1996 Activision, Inc, MechWarrrior, BattleTech, Battle Mech and 'Mech are registered trademarks and Mechwarrior 2: Mercenaries is a trademark of FASA CORPORATION.  1996 FASA CORPORATION. All rights reserved. All other trademarks and trade names are the properties of their respective holders. "


"***** REVIEW  SLAMSCAPE NOTI) V LI Don't Want My MTV! DIFFICULTY LEVEL If God Lives Underwater, He'll Swim Away From This Unhip Scene by Robert Coffey weapons available, and only two of those LAMSCAPE really strives to be pack any kind of punch. The ineffectivehip. From the soundtrack ness and scarcity of weapons forces you to and videos by alternative spend a lot of time avoiding adversaries rockers God Lives instead of taking them on. Underwater, to the online You can only avoid them for so long manual that tries too hard to until they seek you out, and that's where master Gen X lingo, SLAMSCAPE really starts getting aggravatSLAMSCAPE unabashedly ing. Wile your weapons just push enetries to win over the skateJUMPING JACKS A lot of time in mies around, they can kill you easily board and Green Day SLAMSCAPE is spent jumping for power Power nodes, which normally shield your crowd. Unfortunately for MTV and ups like these torps and the fastblast Slamjct, are always being stolen by a conViacom, they've come up with a game booster way up on that cooling tower. stant parade of node snaggers. Without about as cool and ill-conceived as a Bay any decent weapons or shields, death is a City Rollers reunion. There are only four levels plus a bonus condition you'd better get used to. level, each with four id-orbs. Every level is ISN'T IT IRONIC? built around a theme executed with a IT'S NOT WORTHY You and 16 other victims have become sense of irony so clumsy it makes Alanis The final nail in the coffin for SLAMthe subjects of a hideous, potentially Morrisette seem a master of nuance in SCAPE is the lack of a save game. Granted, brain-melting experiment. Now you must comparison. Some of the threats are level there is a psuedo-save game feature that pilot a Slamjet across four different levels specific, like the killer beach umbrellas registers your progress between each to save yourself and your fellow guinca flying around in the Endless Bummer level, but you can't save your game while pigs, freeing their trapped psyches, which level; others, like the Shreddy Bears playing through a level. For instance, after have taken the form of glowing id-orbs. (Slamjet-tearing stuffed monsters), simply a few hours of play I'd finally captured Not the most compelling premise behind change appearance to blend in with the three id-orbs, but real life called. I wanted a game, but then I don't think QUAKE ON surroundings. It's an attempt at humor to save so I could pick up where I left off, DUKE NUKEM are going to be winning that generally falls flat. but I couldn't. I'd have to start over. The any Peabody Awards this year either. SLAMSCAPE is chock-full of fast-paced, worst example was having the game crash jet-driven action, with your just as I rescued the final orb after more Slamjet speeding, jumping, than an hour of trying. So if you're looking banging, and especially skid for some fun action, look elsewhere. & ding around the different arenas. A joystick does an ade APPEAL: Arcade gamers with lots of free time and Gandhi-like patience. quate job of steering the Slamjet, but control is difficult PROS: God Lives Underwater music videos without the annoyance of MTV simply due to the way the vehipersonality Kennedy. cle handles. Your Slamjet spins >CONS: Forced humor; high difficulty and slides uncontrollably with and inability to every collision, turn, or attempt save game make for irritating, repeted stop, making split-second FUN, YEAH SLAMSCAPE's four levels feature incredibly itive gameplay that timing and precision mancustrong enemies, which you counter with weak leaves gamers little vers nearly impossible. room for error or weapons, sloppy controls, and no save feature within enjoyment. Overall, gameplay is pretty a level. shallow. There are only four SLAM Scope Price: $54.95 System Requirements: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 8 MB RAM, 2 MB RAM local bus graphics, 2x CD-ROM drive; supports Direct Sound-compatible sound cards. Protection: None (CDROM must be in drive) Designer: Fred Allen, Todd Squires, Todd Papaleo Publisher: Viacom New Media New York, NY (800) 469-2539 Reader Service #: 326 RAT CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Vicious, interplanetary species have invaded. And our only defense is you. SCORCHED PLANET The fate of mankind rests upon your shoulders and you only have two weapons: a lank that morphs into a lighter plane and your own intelligence. Lucky you have that morphing thing. SEARGHED GATTADE Designed for TEEN *Unbelievably intense gameplay across 18 distinct levels, demanding hair trigger shooting skills and razor-sharp strategic decisions Incredible on-the-fly 3-D environments immerse you in the action State-of-the-art Weapons to annihilate enemy creatures Full 360 freedom of movement with heightened a 3-D directional sound Allows up to 8 players over a Local Area Network CRiterion Studios INTERACTIVE entertainment Microsoft Windows 95 CONTENT RATED BY ESBB www.vie.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #376 1996 Criterien Software Lid. All rights reserved. Criterion Studios und Criterion Software are trademarks of Canon Inc. Scorched Planet is Trademark of Critenon SatwareVirgin Is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd. Microsoft Windows and the Windows Logo are reolstered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. All other warm.tks belong to their respective companies. "


"**** REVIEW  3D ULTRA PINBALL CREEP NIGHT NOITV DIFFICULTY LEVEL Multiball Fright CREEP NIGHT Will Give Your Flipper Fingers The Creepy Crawlies by Charlotte Panther characters save them from becoming monotonous. inball players, prepare to be in the Castle, for example, a spooked. CREEP NICHT, mysterious wraith will try to the latest escapade in steal your ball. You'll knock out Sierra's 3D ULTRA PINBALL zombies, chase ghastly goblins series, is filled with a host of through mysterious passage ghoulish characters just ways, and attempt to fire balls wailing to slink out of the into a volatile vortex. In the shadows and pounce upon Tower, a giant squid tempts KOORL 30.000.COOLTE their next victim: you. you to play catch with him, Carrulous ghouls are popwhile rats care you to follow BEAUTY AND THE BEAST Avoiding nasties like this ping up everywhere, and all you have to them into dark corners. The table's multi-armed squid is made that much more defend yourself against the monsters are a Dungeon is riddled with spi fun by CREEP NIGHT's great graphics and spooky couple of flippers and a few silver balls. ders scuttling around the floors, ambiant sounds. 100) while skeletons hide in every cupboard. support for up to four players. There's even a ghostly appariIf your machine meets the minimum tion waiting to gobble up your system requirements only, expect some ball. speed deficiency and clunkiness, particuEach table offers a variety larly if you're playing with a double-speed of ways to score points and CD-ROM drive. And be prepared for the advance your journey. Players fact that, as with all Sierra games of late, can accumulate Premium you'll receive no documentation. Points by hitting targets scatThese moans aside, CREEP NICHT'is ARE LA tered around the board. an entertaining game with plenty of scope Collect 20, and become cligifor replayability. Beginners will have fun WRATHFUL WRAITH Avoid the specter and aim for ble for Goblin Goodies: extra practicing on any one of the three tables, the Castle gate in one of CREEP NIGHT's three-themed balls, bonus points, passage while those well versed in the art of pinpinball tables. between tables, and multi ball will still find the harder level suitably GOBLIN GOODIES balls. It's your one-stop Undead shop! challenging. So, go ahead and play...if Price: $44.95 System CREEP NICHT lets you test your pinball you dare. Requirements: IBM skills in any one of three scary settings, APPARITION EYE-CANDY compatible 486-33 the Castle, Tower, or Dungeon-and Attractive hi-res graphics are enhanced APPEAL: For both beginning and MHz (Pentium 75 or shoot for points, much like any other pinbetter recommended). experienced pinball fans wanting by an abundance of ghostly animation. some ghoulish fun with their flipper 8 MB RAM (16 MB ball game. Alternatively, you can try to Spooky background music, teamed with a action. recommended), 2 MB complete all of the challenges on cach of constant clamoring of ghastly voices offerhard drive space (25 PROS: Great selection of chalMB recommended). the three tables, acquiring keys leading to ing advice, contribute beautifully to the lenges, brisk multi-ball play, and 640x480 graphics with cach succeeding level. Conquer each overall ambiance of the game. Text at the table-warping options; nightmarish 256 colors, 2x CD animation and a gruesome cast of table, and you may return to the Castle to bottom of the screen reflects what the ROM (4x recommendcharacters. ed): supports prove your heroic powers in one final gruesome voices are saying, and indicates CONS: Some clunkiness when playWindows-compatible challenge against evil. your score. ing with minimum sound cards with DAC. Admittedly, the plotline is a bit thin (as \"The game offers various game prefer system require # of Players: 1-4 most puzzle game \"back stories\" are). Still, Protection: None (CD ments; online help ences, including two skill levels; a choice manual only-no must be in drive) on every table, you must accomplish at of three or five balls per game; a highlightdocumentation Publisher: Sierra least five challenges to move on. And ing option that points out important tar included with Bellevue, WA while the scenarios in each setting are (800) 757-7707 game. Needs more gets on the table; three gravity choices than three tables. Reader Service #: 327 | similar, dozens of weird and wonderful affecting how the ball will hit a target; and SAVAND . CG JANUARY 1997 "


"CHARLES ARDAI CLASSICS & PUZZLES Online Puzzle Contests (son c Yoyodyne and Riddler.com Are On The Cutting Edge Of Mainstream Internet Entertainment For RIDDL OU DON'T KNOW JACK, Berkeley Systems' superSUCCESSful game show parody, is a terrific party game. The prollem is that in order to appreciate this fact you need to have a party. Everyone at the party must then gather around one screen and lay hands on a keyboard. And whoevcr wins only wins points, rather than actual prizes. On the whole, a not entirely satisfy ing state of affairs. All of these problems would be solved if Y the mass market, Internet game shows represent the future of online entertainment. LL mga RIDDLE ME THIS, RIDDLE ME THAT Interactive Imagination's Riddler.com site (http://www.riddler.com) looks like a cross between a toy chest and a department store. There are lots of games, each sporting a slick logo and cartoon-like graphics, and there are lots of prizes, each with a value in \"riddlets\" and CONNIVING CONUNDRUM, BATMAN! Sometimes \"CAPS,\" the currencies Riddler.com gets too clever for its own good, but it is a of the realm. Entering a slick, energetic Web site. game means giving up some of your store of riddlets, and winning operate is so abstrusc that Immanuel Kant a game replenishes your account. couldn't have untangled it), it's in the Everyone gets 2,500 riddlets just for signing knowing that prizes exist to be won, and in up at the site, and free riddlets are available the playing of the games themselves. The for those who lose it all. stakes feel high and the opponents are real Collect riddlets and you can trace human beings whom you don't know. If them in for CAPS, which in turn can be that's not enough to waken a sense of redeemed for particular prizes. Each CAP competition in you, nothing is. carries a sponsor's name and logo, informThe two main types of game Riddler ing you of whose largesse you should be offers are trivia games and crossword puzgrateful for. AT&T CAPS can be zle games. The latter were still being tested redeemed for a nine-day trip to Alaska-if as of this writing, sometimes they work and you have something like 600,000 of them. Sometimes they don't. When they do, the Microsoft CAPS buy you a Kodak cam idea is to fill letters into a crossword puzzle era. It's a little like selling Crit (for those of grid and then submit your answers to win you old enough to remember): you carn CAPS. There is a one-player version points toward the purchase of nifty prizes. (Gridlock) that is rather tame, and there is all the while knowing that the best you a three-player version (Checkered Flag) in can realistically hope to collect is a base which you race two opponents (selected at ball cap or 'T-shirt. random from the crowd that has chosen to No matter. The fun here isn't in the visit the site when you want to play) to fill actual winning of prizes (for one thing, the in answers before they do. Having a fast explanation of how CAPS and riddlets modem helps, as does typing quickly. your home, you played against two players in their homes, and did so in a public competition that offered real rewards. An online version of You Don't Know JACK appears to be in development, judg. ing by Berkeley's latest magazine ads, and I am told that at least one major special effects house has been commissioned to create an online Jack clone. This probably means that by next summer four or five such games will be open for business on the Web. But you don't have to wait in the meantime. Two companies have been offering online game shows and contests for some time now, and they'll be glad to satisfy your craving when it strikes. What's more, they offer prizes that will definitely pique your interest, such as weekend getaways, tickets to shows, cash, etc. JANUARY 1997 CG "


"CHARLES ARDAI CLASSICS & PUZZLES DVM ware Tanto Se Gaver pytOAL CAMERA Tweede We wantea One-player trivia games include grabs me...often.\" Has he ever won any (\"What prince has to kiss Snow White?\") Mental Floss, in which you must answer thing?\"Nope.\") to obscure (\"In this 1926 movic, John either five, seven, or nine questions out of Barrymore planted an average of one kiss ten correctly in categories such as Unreal PYNCH HITTER every 53 seconds for nearly three hours\"). Estate or Name That 'Toon; and Brainmail. Many of the same game types are availgenerally getting harder as you progress in which is similar except that the questions able from Yoyodyne (http://www.yoyo. a round of play. Questions arrive by e-mail come to you by e-mail. (You still have to com), a game site named after the slightly once a week and you have a deadline for visit the Web site to type in your answers.) sinister toy company in Thomas sending your answers in. The contestant The questions struck me as awfully Pynchon's novels. The difference is that with the most correct answers at the final simple in ten rounds or so, only one was most of Yoyodyne's games are played by eround wins. When tie breakers are needa stumper-but they're not boring mail rather than on the Web. Exceptions: cd, tic breakers are used. Things you might need to know: Pearl the type of Web-based scavenger hunt One obvious advantage that Yoyodyne Harbor was bombed in 1941, C.S. has over Riddler is that Yoyodyne's Lewis' story about corresponding games are available to people who with the devil is called The 90 29.9.& don't have access to the Screwtape Letters, and there once Webthere are still twice as was a cartoon version of Rambo. many people in the world who The crowning jewel on the Yoyodyne Games have an Internet e-mail address as site, though, is the JACK-like there are who use the Web, and three-player trivia game King of more than twice as many people the Hill. You wait in a chat room use e-mail than use the sort of cutuntil there are three of you to pit ting-edge Web browser most against one another, then race Riddler games require. Another is with the others to type in answers that Yoyodyne's prize system is to questions about everything more comprehensible, making the from pop culture to geography AND NOW, A NET BLURB FROM OUR SPONSOR From prizes appear to be more attainAnswers the first time I played Arrid Extra Dry to obscure grunge bands from MTV, you'll able. (And they're good prizes: included The Man Who Knew find a variety of games on Yoyodyne from your favorite weekend getaways, CD collecToo Much and \"Welcome Back, vendor-with less obtrusive ads than on Riddler.com. tions, tickets to shows, cash.) Kotter;\" the second time, \"Tina More generally, Yoyodyne's tone Tumer\" and \"the Cobi Desert.\" Between Riddler calls Bloodhound here is called is more appealing than Riddler's. Riddler rounds you get to talk to your fellow conCar Chase, and Yoyodyne's less-interac was launched by a bunch of recent Ivy testants, of which there generally seem tive Crossword Madness predated either League grads, and it shows in the site's to be an ample supply. (At seven A.M.on of Riddler's crossword games. However, blustery, smug stabs at humor Yoyodyne is a Tuesday, I found someone who wrote, Yoyodyne's real strength lies in its spon the brainchild of game design veteran «I'm supposed to be doing a phylogeny sored e-mail trivia contests. Seth Godin (designer behind the chart for zoology.\" How often does he At any one time, Yoyodyne has several TELARIUM adventure games of yore), and wander by the site? \"Whenever insomnia such contests running, 'Today, for a seasoned, confident professionalism instance, you shines through. Passing through the could play Riddler site is like being jostled in a hipster Riddler's \"no pressure\" game for mem Get A Little bar; hearing from Yoyodyne is like hearing bers and non-members. It's just a version Closer 4, from an old friend. of Windows SOLITAIRE, and there's no rea sponsored by The energy Riddler exudes is not to be Spelling counts. There may occasion son to pay phone charges by the minute Arrid discounted, though, and they certainly ally be some room for error, but you and Internet access provider fees by the deodorant, deserve kudos for pushing the envelope. shouldn't assume there is. hour to play solitaire. or The Social games like King of the Hill give  If in a multiplayer game you're When Riddler's huge ad pages start ATGT E people a rcason to come back to the Web guessing between two choices that you downloading. Just scroll to the bottom of mail Trivia every day, something the Web has pretty conclude have equal odds of being cor the screen and click on the not-yet-loaded Game, sponmuch lacked until now. Talk all you want rect, choose the shorter one, since at link centered at the bottom. This way you sored by about fancy sims and multiplayer advenleast that way you increase your odds of can get to the games without having to guess who. ture games having visited Riddler, I am being the first to \"buzz in.\" wait through 20 ads for the \"AT&T College Questions convinced that, at least for the mass mar Don't bother trying Klondike, Network\" in one day. range from ket, Internet game shows represent the simple future of online entertainment CG JANUARY 1997 "


"In 2096 Having a Bomb Strapped to You is a Sport...Want to play? The Reactors Drop the crystal in an opponent's reactor to drain his Kill-Clock The Power-Ups Hi-Jumps Crystal Bombs Mercuries. May Boots & more 000 C 101835 The Kickers Kicking these rotates the chamber 90 degrees The Crystal Drop it in your reactor to increase your time Compete to the death against up to 3 players over the network. POBLAST CHAMBER 0 54 The 3-D Rotatable Deathmatch Your arena is a rotating chamber... Turn it left. Turn it right. Turn the wall into a floor. Your goal is survival... In this multiplayer deathnatch, it's every man for himself. Your opponent is tine... Because when your clock hits zero you're cooked. Now available on MS-DOS CD-ROM PlayStation Game Console 'and Sega Saturn\". . AMTC ACTIVISION PC CD-ROM Visit us at http://www.activision.com or on America Online at Keyword \"Activision\" or on CompuServe at Keyword \"Go Activision\" Activision is a registered trademark and Bust Chamber is a trademark of Activision Inc. 1996 Activision, Inc. All rights reserved. PlayStation and the PlayStation logos are trademarks of Sony Contouder Entertainment Lic Seo and Soga Saturn are trademarks of SEGA ENTERPRISES. LTD. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #94 "


"***** REVIEW  BAKU BAKU DIFFICULTY LEVEL Baku By Popular Demand LEX CLASSICS & PUZZLES Baku Baku Animal Gonie Option Help TETRIS's Spirit Resurfaces In A Puzzle Game That Will Drive You Bananas by Charlotte Panther TIME TO FLOSS ALREADY? BAKU may seem simple, but lose a match, and it's an unwelcome dinner date with this ferocious feline. phen BAKU BAKU hit the CGW office in its original Sega Saturn format, CGW staffers went wild. Deadlines were missed, spouses were neglected, and children were ignored as our addicted gamers played BAKU tournaments until the early hours of the moming. When we heard the news that Sega LEX Baku Baku Animal Game Option Help SISENES CA esteemed role of Zookeeper, so that you are forced to frantically match up hordes of clamoring pets-mice, rabbits, dogs, monkeys, and pandas --with their favorite chow, represented by appropriate color groups. As the blocks drop into the playing field, the aim is to align as many similar food blocks as possible, vertically or horizontally, before dropping in the appropriate ravenous animal for a feast. For each block you remove, the block above will drop down to replace it. The skill lies in setting up a chain reaction. If you plan ahead (keeping a close eye on the top of the screen to see what kind of blocks will drop next) you can strategically place your pets to ensure that as you remove blocks from the board, the animals above will drop right into a spread of their favorite munchies. Not only does this help you keep your playing field empty, it also presents a nasty surprise for your opponent. Clear three or more blocks at a time, and your rival will be bombarded in return; set off a couple of chain reactions, and pretty soon you'll bury your opponent. But watch out the our opponent. But watch out the number at the top of the screen indicates how many blocks your opponent will let loose on you. Fill up your own playing field and you'll meet an untimely end in the jaws of a lion. If all this sounds simple, it is. But unlike most of the puzzle games inevitably compared to TETRIS, BAKU BAKU is the real deal, because it uses its simplicity to lure you into game after game after game... amusing and addictive puzzle game, provided you have the necessary hardware to run it properly. We tried the PC version on a number of different machines with varying results. On some machines (particularly 486s), playing in full-screen mode resulted in diminished speed and highly pixclated graphics. It's hard to believe, but to get an experience comparable to the Sega Saturn original version, we had to play BAKU BAKU on a Pentium 133 with 16 MB of RAM and a 6x CDROM. On anything less than, say, a Pentium 100, you are likely to find the game an underwhelming experience. Despite these porting problems, however, BAKU BAKU remains a challenging puzzle and an enjoyable distraction that stretches from five minutes during your lunch hour to \"just one more game well after midnight. & 094 NON Slas BRO SBS 44. laSN4S BONO. 699 21 21 LET'S GO SHOPPING Arranging your food blocks requires quick thinking and strategic planning, especially against a live, aggressive human opponent. Price: $29.99 System Requirements: 486 DX2-66 (Pentium 133 or better recommended), Windows 95, 8 MB RAM, 6 MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM (4x recommended): supports Sound Blaster 16 and compatible sound cards. # of Players: 1-2 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Publisher: Sega Redwood City, CA (888) SEGASALES Reader Service #: 328 was bringing out a PC version, we were filled with a mixture of delight and fear: delight that we could now each enjoy this wonderful puzzle in the comfort of our own desktop; fear that the addiction might cost us our jobs, break up our marriages in short, destroy our lives. APPEAL: TETRIS fans looking for a new spin on a classic game. PROS: Deceptively challenging and addictive gameplay; easy learning curve; unique, amusing characters; the true successor to TETRIS. CONS: This port isn't quite up to the Saturn version and may leave you puzzled as to the loss of speed and grainy graphics on any but the top PC machines. FEED ME! BAKU BAKU is competitive TETRIS with a unique spin. An animal-obsessed princess has you trying out for the ORBITING SATURN If you're experiencing BAKU BAKU for the first time on the PC, you'll find it an CG JANUARY 1997 "


"ROPINBALL \"THE ULTIMATE, MOST REALISTIC COMPUTER PINBALL GAME I'VE EVER PLAYED.\" Rick Stetta Five Time World Pinball Champion THE PINBALL GAME SO REAL 13 With a flick of your finger, you slam the silver orb north, where it explodes in a storm of lights and awesome sound effects. No sweat, you think. But  as five more screaming balls descend toward your faithful flippers, you realize, this isn't a game for amateurs. In fact, with an ingenious regiment of ramps, loops, orbits, targets, sink holes, lights, and more, it's the most realistic pinball game ever to come to the computer. Pit your skills against the ultimate pinball machine of the future. Experience Pro-Pinball today. And just think of all the money you'll save !!! THIS IS THE ONLY THING Jackpot YOU'LL MISS Four different action packed games: Space Station Frenzy, Bike Race Challenge, Fast Frenzy and the Ultimate Showdown. Play six balls simultaneously. Six different table views to choose from www.interplay.com KIDS TO ADULTS MACPLAY Designed for 9 empire Internet Mac OS Microsoft Windows 95 AB Du 10 PlayStation BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" CIRCLE READER SERVICE #58 1926 Entertainment International (UK) Limited. All rights reserved. Empire Interactive, Pro-Pinell and the Wed (used in conjunction with Pro-Pintall) are trademarks of Entertainment International Interplay and MacPlay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Microsoft Windows and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation Mac and the Mac OS logo are trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc, used under license. Seps and Sega Salum are trademarks of Saga Enterprises. Lid. All rights reserved PlayStation and the PlayStation logo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners "


"***** REVIEW SCRABBLE DIFFICULTY LEVEL Lost For Words? Scrabble Leaps To The Net With A Daunting Computer Opponent CLASSICS & PUZZLES by Charlotte Panther UPSIOUrode letter buluated Charlotte Score: 87 LastPLAY: 22 DW Mave Score: 87 FALL 36 TOILE wuel M<DZ 0 0 Z WAF <>03 o WT, NOS ancy yourself as a Scrabble champ? Think you could hold your own among world-class players? You may be able to whip your granny, or even best a few of your colleagues at work, but it's doubtful you'll find Maven, SCRABBLE's computer opponent, any sort of pushover. For anyone who's been hiding under a stone for the last 60 years, Scrabble is a crossword game for up to four people. The idea is to strategically place interconnecting words on the board, in order to achieve the highest possible score. This CD-ROM version maintains the essence of the original Scrabble, but what else does this new multimedia version have to offer? Shuffic TREUADA PAX IF YOU CAN'T BEAT 'EM Then cheat 'em: SCRABBLE'S Hint feature points out your next best move. YEAH, IT'S AMBROUZOWITZ, BUT I SPELL IT S.M.I.T.H. George Carlin SCRABBLE Altogether, though, Hasbro Interactive has done an excellent job of bringing Scrabble to the computer. The userfriendly interface, which replicates the original Scrabble board extremely well, should appeal to hard-core Scrabble players and learners alike. Modem, Internet, and network play add to the game's strength. And SCRABBLE certainly offers replayability. According to Maven's creator, percentages show that at Champion level, even world-class players lose to the computer more times than they win. So keep practicing! MIND make, while arrows on the board indicate where to place each word. This is a great tool for those who are looking to improve their game. It led me to some useful words that I've managed to utilize in subsequent matches. And it comes in really handy during those moments towards the end of the game, when you're scrambling to use up those last few letters. Amazingly, there are 94 two-letter words that you can officially use in the game. Other options allow you to set time limits, request penalties for incorrect words, control the speed at which Maven plays, choose different backdrops, and select background music (toggle it offthe music is pretly annoying when you're trying to concentrate). You can also play by modem or network, although this isn't quite the Internet-playable revelation that Hasbro's MONOPOLY was a year ago. My main complaint is with the dictionary: whoever compiled it obviously has a pretty broad definition of the English language. If you don't usually play by the official Scrabble dictionary, it's likely you'll be frustrated by Maven's choice of words, some of which are pretty farfetched. The first and foremost advantage of playing computer SCRABBLE is that you have a tireless opponent available when ever you want to play. Maven plays at five levels ranging from Novice to Champion. I consider myself a fairly good Scrabble player and I found myself able to beat the Price: $39.99 computer at Advanced level, but at Expert System Requirements: level that Maven was pretty dam sneaky. 486/66, Windows 3.1 That's not to say that you don't have or better, 8 MB RAM, some advantages. You can call upon cer5 MB available hard drive space, SVGA tain forces to assist\" you while playing graphics, 2x CD-ROM against the mighty Maven. Pull-down drive, mouse: 9600 menus allow you to access such features baud or better modem for modem play. as the Word Lister, a function that will list. # of Players: 1-4 say, all the Q words that don't require a U. (modem/network) or all the JQXZ words; the Vowel Dump Protection: None (CD must be in drive) function introduces you to a list of vowelPublisher: Hasbro intensive words. Interactive And then there's the \"hint\" (or more Beverly, MA (508) 921-3700 aptly, the \"cheat\") function, which reveals Reader Service #: 329 | a list of the three best moves you could APPEAL: For anyone wanting a challenging word game. >PROS: It's really Scrabble, helped by multiplayer options and a tough computer opponent; great graphics. CONS: The sound is annoying at best, and even the Oxford Dictionary folks might have trouble with how the Queen's English is stretched here. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Sure, there are cheaper PC and Mac game controllers. But if you're ready to get serious, you need the high-quality, buill-to-play-rough peripherals from CH Products. en you're ready to get serious, you're ready. du joysticks, throttles, flight yokes, rudder pedals. and other controllers are born in the USA, and made to take the heat of any battle, race or game you throw their war. So put on your game face, get down to your computer dealer and grab the game controllers made for serious players. FlightStick Pro (PC & Mac) FlightStick Force FX CH Gamepad (PC & Mac) CH Pedals (PC & Mac*) Pro Pedals F-18 Fighter Stick (PC & Mac*) F-16 CombatStick F-16 FlightStick Pro Throttle (PC & Mac*) Ch Throttle Virtual Pilot Pro (PC & Mac*) Virtual Pilot Gamecard 3 Automatic *Coming soon. Visit our web site! http://www.chproducts.com/ CH PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083 Phone 619 598 2518 . Fax 619 598 2524 http://www.chproducts.com/ America OnLine: Keyword: CH Products CompuServe: Go GAMEDPUB PRODUCTS Available at: American ADO Inc.. American TV. Best Buy Bits & PC's .Circuit City Computer City  Computer Express Comp USA. Computerware. Egghead Electronics Boutique  Elek Tek Fry's Electronics  The Good Guys. Incredible Universe. Inlotel Ingram Micro .J & R Computer World Jetstream Lechmere  Media Play. Micro Center. Montgomery Wards Electric Avenue. Nobody Beats the Wiz. Oltice Max  PC Connection, Inc. PC Tronic. Ricom Electronics Ltd. . Sears. Software & More . Software Plus Ltd.  Susteen. Ultimate Electronics. United CD-ROM. Wal-Mart CIRCLE READER SERVICE #60 "


"TIME COMMANDO HOUR EARL STAR TREK DEEP SPACE NINE HARBINGER POHLERPLAY 96 VIACO ACTIVISION NEWS WANDRE NEW Strategy Game 5089404 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M NHL Powerplay '96 Hockey Sports 5089701 WIN '95 486/66, 8mb, MJ.K Star Trek Deep Space Nine: Harbinger Adventure 5072608 DOS 486/66 or MAC 68040, 8mb, M The 11th Hour Interactive Game 5054309 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M Time Commando Arcade Style 5089602 DOS 486/66, 8mb.MK GREAT 95 CD-ROM DEAL NEW Home Personal 5090006 NEW Children's Ed. 5086707 Medical Ref. 5083803 Clip-Art Library 5084801 Home Phone DOS 386 or MAC 68030,4mb, M Masterclips 35,000 Premium Image Collection WIN3.1 386,4mb, MKP Alien Legacy DOS 386/25,4mb, M Dr. Ruth's Encyclopedia of Sex WIN3.1 486.4mb.M Adventure 5037403 5058102 Adventure Home/Personal 5027602 Children's Ed. 5078407 Highlights Interactive WIN3.1 486/33 or MAC 68030 8m, M A.D.A.M.: The Inside Story '97 WIN3.1 486/66 or MAC 68040.8mb, M Shivers WIN3.1 486/33, 8mb, M The Yukon Trail WIN3.1 386 or MAC 68030, 4mb, M Navy Strike DOS 486/66, 4mb, M,J,K Caesar 11 DOS 486.8mb.M Fantasy General DOS 386/40, 8mb, M Angel Devoid DOS 486/66 or MAC LCII, 8mb, M Warhammer: Shadow Of The Horned Rat Strategy Game 5083506 WIN3.1 486/66, 8mb, M Let's Pretend III: Many Lands Many Playgrounds Children's Ed. 5086608 WIN3.1 486/33 or MAC 68030, 8mb, M Pool Champion Arcade Style 5060306 WIN3.1 486/66, 8mb, M Pitfall: The Mayan Adventure Arcade Style 5076005 WIN '95 486/33, 8mb, M Zone Raiders Arcade Game 5058904 DOS 486/50.8mb. J. K Screamer Arcade Style 5058805 DOS 486/66, 8mb, K Hoyle Blackjack Strategy Game 5079504 WIN3.1 486/33, 4mb, M Picture Perfect Golf Sports 5054200 DOS 386, 4mb, M Flight Sim. 5051909 PLANTASMAGORIA Strategy Game 5068606 Role Playing JE 5067301 KGB Adventure 5065404 Role Playing 5065008 SPYCRAFT Shannara DOS 486/33.4mb, M Police Quest: SWAT WIN3.1 486/33, 8mb, M Adventure 5062500 COMMAND CONDUER INDYCARLI INDYCARLO ALIYEON. restone pe Medical Ref. 5060603 Nine Month Miracle WIN3.1 386/33 or MAC LCII, 8mb, M Phantasmagoria Interactive Guide 5004502 DOS/WIN3.1 486/66 or MAC LCIII, 8mb, M Spycraft: The Great Game Adventure 5063201 DOS 486/66 or MAC 68030.8mb, M Adventure 5059704 Torin's Passage DOS/WIN3.1 486, 8mb, M 7th Guest DOS 386 or MAC LCIII, 4mb, M Interact. Game 5004700 Gen. Reference 5041702 Arcade Style 5076104 Children's Ed. 5037502 Cyberspeed WIN '95 486, 8mb, M Nascar Racing DOS 386/40,8mb, M, JK Driving Sim. 5001300 NEW Adventure 5082201 Arcade Style 5075304 Earthworm Jim WIN '95 486/33, 8mb, M Command And Conquer Strategy Game 5050208 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M Indycar Racing 11 Driving Sim. 5083308 DOS 486/66, 8mb or MAC PMAC, 16mb.M Computer Tutor. 5081302 Arcade Style 5074703 Children's Ed. 5081005 Strategy Game 5053202 Computer Tutor. 5073200 808 Great Letters WIN3.1 386, 4mb, M The Lost Mind Of Dr. Brain WIN3.1 486 or MAC LCIII, 4mb, M UW The Elk Moon Murder DOS 486/66 or MAC 040/66, 8mb, M WIN95 Success With Windows '95 WIN '95 486, 8mb, M Nickelodeon: Director's Lab WIN3.1 486, 8mb, M Urban Runner WIN3.1 486/66,8mb, M Virusnet WIN3.1 386,2mb, M Gryphon Bricks WIN3.1 386 or MAC Classic, 4mb, M Cyberstorm WIN '95 486/66.8mb, M Mechwarrior 2 DOS 486 or MAC 68040, 8mb, MJ NEW Invention Studio NEW WIN3.1 486/50, 8mb, M Adventure 5082300 Internet Guide 5053004 Adventure 5075205 Utilities 5080106 Arcade Style 5052501 Stategy Game 5080007 Children's Ed. 5072905 Cyberia 2 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M Java Programmer's Library WIN3.1 386, 4mb, M The Daedalus Encounter WIN '95 486/66, Bmb, M Are You Afraid Of The Dark? DOS 386/33 or MAC LC, 4mb, M Quest For Glory Anthology DOS/WIN3.1 386, 4mb, M Nick Jr. Play Math WIN3.1 485/33 or MAC 68030, 8mb, M.K Life's Greatest Mysteries WIN3.1 386/33 or MAC LCII,8mb, M Typing Tutorial 5052402 Hoyle Classic Games WIN3.1 486/33, 8mb, M 1001 Really Cool Web Sites WIN3.1 386 or MAC Classic, 4mb, M.K Mortal Kombat III DOS 486/33, 8mb M.J.K Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing 4.0 WIN3.138633, 8mb, MK The Unexplained WIN3.1 486150.8mb, M Resume Maker Deluxe CD WIN3.1 386/33, 8mb, M.K. P Aces Collector's Edition WIN3.1 486, 4mb, M, J, K Strategy Game 5079900 Adventure 5072806 Historical 5079801 Arcade Style 5043609 Children's Ed. 5072707 Home Personal 5050703 Children's Ed. 5086806 General Rel. 5060504 Flight Sim 5037908 Hexen WIN3. 1 486/33 or MAC 68040, 8mb M. J Arcade Style 5056403 Chessmaster 5000 WIN '95 486/66, 8mb, M Strategy Game S083605 How To Select CD-ROMs For Your System. Each selection includes the following important information: minimum system required, minimum CPU required, minimum amount of RAM required and required peripherals (M=mouse, J=joystick, K=keyboard, P=printer). For all titles, the minimum system requirements for mended (unless otherwise indicated) are: Hardware: SVGA monitor (256 colors), sound card, 40mb hard drive, double speed CD-ROM drive Operating System: DOS 5.0. Windows 3.1, Macintosh System 7.0. For faster service, use your credit card and call us toll-free 24 hours a day. OLUMBK 1-800-792-1000 Glosbe Dept. BLL Dept. HOUSE CD-ROM DIRECT "


"EMS **** heyat Yoursel Toa Menewa! AVIS... 80TF-HEAS Fixes Windows Problems Automatically and much more! LEAVIS STUPY O Only Complete Uninstaller 103 Internet Management & Full Virus Protection WinDelete ZORK NEMESIS DUKE NUKEM First Aid 95 VI THE SUSTI T STIO X VIACON ACTIVISION NEW WUNDE Windelete Utilities WIN3.1 386, 8mb, M 5084504 Duke Nukem 3-D Arcade Style 5077607 DOS 486, 8mb M Beavis And Butthead in Virtual Stupidity Adventure 5075007 WIN 95 486/33, 8mb, M Zork Nemesis Adventure DOS 486/66, 8mb or MAC PMAC 16mb, M 5065602 First Aid '95 Deluxe Utilities 5066402 WIN3.1 386,4mb, M TAKE ANY CD-ROMS FOR PLUS 1 MORE AT GREAT SAVINGS! (See details below.) NCAA ASIAND BASKETBALL Du OO NEWS 3 NEW WINSS Tritryst NEW Azrael's Tear Final Doom Arcade Style 5083209 Connections Adventure 5071501 TerraNova: Strike Force Centauri Arcade Style 5066600 26WDOS 486, 4mb, M,J,K WIN3.1 486/33 or MAC 68040.8mb, M DOS Pentium, 8mb, M Silent Thunder: NEW SU-27 Flanker Flight Sim. Manic Karts 5083902 Arcade Style NEW 5088109 WAR A-10 Tank Killer 2 Flight Sim. 5080908 DOS 486/66, 8mb, M,J,K ES DOS 486/33, 8mb, M.J.K WIN '95 486/66, 8mb. M. J Berlitz Live Spanish Language Tutor 5043401 WIN3.1 386 or MAC Classic, 4mb, M Mixed Up Mother Goose Deluxe Children's Ed. 5042304 WIN3.1 386 or MAC LCIII,8mb, M F or ages 3-6 Muppdf WISS Command Aces Of The Deep Strategy Game 5080809 REASURE WIN '95 486/33, 8mb, M DSCHAMPIONSEL Trivial Pursuit Strategy Game 5027404 WIN3.1 386 or MAC LCIII, 4mb, M . Arcade Style Earthsiege 2 DINOTOPIA 5080700 WIN '95 486, 8mb, M, JK The Ultimate Doom Arcade Style 5044409 DOS 386/33, 4mb, M ACIMIO Dinotopia Gabriel Knight: Doom II Arcade Style 5021506 Adventure 5063003 The Beast Within NCAA Championship Muppet Treasure Island DOS 386/33, 4mb or MAC LCII, 8mb, M.J.K DOS 486/66, 8mb, M Adventure 5050405 WIN3.1 486/33 or Basketball Adventure 5085303 Corel Gallery Clip Art Library 5010301 MAC 68040, 8mb, M Sports 5089503 WIN3 1 486/66 or WIN3.1 386, 4mb or MAC LCII, 2mb, M, K, P DOS 486/66, 8m, J.K MAC 68040,8mb M Mission Critical Adventure 5062807 Strategy Game 5075106 DOS 486/33, 4mb, M WIN 95 486/33, 8mb, M Jumpstart Kindergarten Children's Ed. 5027701 NEW World Beer Hunter Gen. Interest 5087408 Adventure 5089909 DOS/WIN3.1 386, 1 mb or MAC LCIII, 4mb, M WIN3.1 486/66 or MAC 68030, 4mb, M DOS 486/66, 8mb, M The Oregon Trail II Children's Ed. 5078308 Heretic Arcade Style 5066709 95 Internet Mania Internet Guide 5074802 WIN3.1 486.4mb of MAC 68030.5mb, M DOS 486,4mb, MJ WIN '95 486/33, 8mb, M Columbia House CD-ROM Direct Bloomington, IN 47404-1498 A whole new way to get the most exciting CD-ROMs Divat Dept. BLL. 3109 Canterbury Court, games, reference, edutainment and more all at great prices! Just write in the numbers Yes, please enroll me under the terms outlined in this advertisement. As a member, I need buy just of the 2 CD-ROMs you want for $9.95 each, plus shipping and handling. In exchange, 4 more CD-ROMs at your regular prices within the next 2 years you agree to buy 4 more CD-ROMs in the next 2 years, at our regular prices (currently Send my CD-ROM selections for: (check one only) PC (1) Macintosh (3) as low as $29.95, plus shipping and handling) and you may cancel membership at any Write in the selection #'s below time after doing so. What's more, you can get one more CD-ROM right now for the low Send me these 2 CD-ROMs for just $9.95 each price of $19.95 and have less to buy later (see complete details in coupon). plus $1.75 each shipping/handling (total $23.40). Buy your first selection now and have less to buy later! Free CD-ROM magazine sent approximately every 4-6 weeks (up to 13 times a Also send my first selection for $19.95 plus $1.75 shipping/handling which I'm adding to my $23.40 year) reviewing our Featured Selection plus scores of alternate choices, including many payment (total $45.10). I then need to buy only 3 more (instead of 4) in 2 years lower priced CD-ROMs. And you may also receive Special Selection mailings up to four times a year. (That's up to 17 buying opportunities a year!) Please check how paying: My check is enclosed. (BYM/BYO) Buy only what you want! If you want the Featured Selection, do nothing it will Charge my introductory CD-ROMs and future CD-ROM Direct purchases to: (BYN/BYR) be sent automatically. If you'd prefer an alternative selection, or none at all, just mail the MasterCard Diners Club AMEX VISA Discover response card always provided by the date specified. You'll always have 14 days to decide; if not, you may return the selection at our expense. Account Number Exp. Date Signature My main CD-ROM Interest is: (check one) (Note: You are always free to choose from any category) Money-Saving Bonus Plan. If you continue your membership after fulfilling your Entertainment O Education Edutainment Productivity obligation, you'll be eligible for our generous bonus plan. It enables you to enjoy great sav. (includes children's titles) ings on the CD-ROMs you want for as long as you decide to remain a member! Name Phone ( 10-Day Risk-Free Trial. We'll send details of how Columbia House CD-ROM Direct works along with your introductory package. If you're not satisfied, return everything within Address Apt 10 days at our expense for a full refund and no further obligation. City State Zip Act now, membership in CD-ROM Direct may be limited, Important! Did you remember to choose PC or Mac? Will your selections run on your system? Note: Columbia House reserves the right to request additional information, to limit membership or reject any Check us out online! For more titles...to order...or for more information. application, or to cancel any membership. Offer limited to residents of the contiguous United States. Residents of Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, U.S. territories, APO and FPO addresses plonso write for separate offer S97.CDR-961GS 100 1997 The Columbia House Company http://www.columbiahouse.com/cdrom Applicable laites par la loro o al creclesies "


"Wake Up and Smell The Pigskin, You Douche Bag! BONE-CRUSHING FOOTBALL ACTION! Incredibly Lay To Un Great for Football Nokes and The Hard CoreGamers Sensational 3D Graphics, Sound & Vale Hard-Nosed, Head-to-Hand Competidon Powerful Strategies and Options Play \"Bad-Ass» Football. TOUCHDOWN! Buy TOUCHDOWN today and play the only game that spits blood, rips guts and puts you right in the action. TOUCHDOWN is the most realistic 3D football game available. Pick your favorite team, choose from over 300 plays, hear bone-crushing hits and see unbelievable plays unfold right before your eyes. Score TOUCHDOWN at your nearest retail store or call Toll-Free: 888-833-1228 inten Intermark 4600 Campus Drive, Newport Beach. CA 92660 Phone: 714-833-1220 Fax:714-833-1204 www.intermk.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #391 "


"DENNIS MCCAULEY  SPORTS sponopop usul ving The Impact Rookie Will Gates' Power Moves Dominate The PC Sports World? Welcome, Microsoft, and beware. Sports gamers are the toughest crowd there is. swing fter every seaBASKETBILL going to feel the heat. MS just brings too son the major Now, I know what some of you are think much financial and distribution clout to the sports honor i ng. For all their experience pushing CUls, table not to be taken seriously. But will Gates their best new Web browsers, and word processors, can and Company's foray into gaming be a long, player as Microsoft really have an impact on the sports ball-control drive or a quick kick, a lark to fill Rookie of the 09GPU, the time until Windows Gare Dolorow eb Year. This 97 ships? After all, who prestigious remembers another coraward signiporate monolith that shall fies that the remain nameless (but recipient hit the ground running, making whose initials are l-B-M) the biggest splash among his fellow new and its short-lived entry guys. There's nothing more exciting, in fact, into the sports market than watching a talented freshman take an DENNIS EVEN with 1995's rendition of unsuspecting league by storm. Such playPRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL? ers go by a new buzzword these days: ENN Microsoft's opening impact rookie. Of course, art imitates life, tap in its sports gaming Sta icot God Hab... 34 527PM so sports gaming now has its own impact line is NBA FULL rookie. He's big, tough, and comes from a LET'S SWING MS GOLF 3 will initially ship with just two COURT PRESS, a goodcourses-Banff Springs and Harbour Town. highly competitive Washington program. looking, smooth-playing Redmond. Washington, that is MicroWindows 95 product soft HQ. Yep, the smiling, happy people gaming scene? C'mon. Can a steamroller that is turning heads cespite a few signifithat brought Windows 95 to your desktop have an impact on an ant hill? Can Junior cant flaws (see review this issue). FULL have jumped into sports sims with both Scau have an impact on a halfbacks dental COURT PRESS has captured enough of the cleats. So what do you want to play today? work? Any market Microsoft jumps into is NBA experience to ensure that it can run the floor with its only The latest word from Accolade on types design their own 18-hole courses. real competition, EAS LEGENDS 97 FOOTBALL is this: either they're One nice touch we just heard about is that NBA LIVE series. going to ship it by the Super Bowl, or Jack Nicklaus' own designers have created FCP uses attractive they're going to hang onto it until the start a set of custom greens and sand traps for motion-captured of next season. They intimated that they're you to include in your courses. player graphics and leaning in the latter direction. the lively patter of Speaking of Accolade, the company is TOROLL Scattle Supersonics hard at work on JACK NICKLAUS 4, the new announcer Kevin version of their acclaimed golf series, for a Calabro to put the first-quarter release. Along with multiplayer tiser into the action. LAN, modem, and Internet support, the Regular readers know game will also include a new course archithat I'm skeptical of tect that will let industrious and creative games using play-byplay voiceovers, but ON DECK CURLINERALE JANUARY 1997 CG 203 "


"DENNIS MCCAULEY VEF SPORTS South Korea Ireland when Calabro comes out with, \"They were on him like the villagers after Karloff,\" even I have to crack up So what's clriving Microsoft's entry into sports gaming? The same thing that brings strange boelfellows like Jerry Jones and Deion Sanders together money. Lots of it. Cames make up 50 percent of the con sumer software market, and sports titles claim their share of that rather large pie. With the September release of FULL COURT PRESS, followed closely by MS SOCCER and MS GOLF 3.0, it's clear that Microsoft is staking their claim on territory dominated by the likes of Sicrra, Electronic Arts, and Accolade. In fact, Ed Tries, general manager of MS'Cames Group, mentioned EA as onc company that has particularly impressed him for their long history of successful sports titles. Fries, a Microsoft veteran who worked his way through college writing code for Atari 8000s, is no stranger to the gaming scene. I spoke with him recently about Microsoft's PC sports kickoff, and while he couldn't reveal future plans, he did indicate that this fall's trio of sports titles is just the tip of the iceberg. \"You can expect us to focus on the major sports,\" he said, measuring his words carcfully. So does that translate to MS BASEBALL come the spring? Fries remained mum, but, hey, we can only hope. After 1996's run of highly touted but ultimately disappointing base ball siis, knowing that the likes of Microsoft are breathing down their necks could motivate the other game companies to finally get it right. On the other hand, adding an MS football entry next fall would bulk up an already overcrowced pigskin lineup STAT ME UP With their arrival on the sports gaming scene, Microsoft's focus becomes a critical issue for gamers. Will MS use its spreadsheet expertise to corner the market on statistical accuracy, or will they shoot mainly for action, graphics, and excitement? The answer LEG WORK Microsoft's next foray into the sporting world will probably lies somebe soccer, which has a near-identical interface to where in between. Fries FULL COURT PRESS indicated the primary objective was to make MS games fun to play in order to appeal in fact are Win 95 products. Surprised? to the broadest possible audience, while at Don't be. It's clear that MS is banking on the same time keeping them as realistic as providing you with both your gaming platpossible. form and the games to play there as well. It requires only a few run-throughs to Maybe even the controller, too, since its see that FULL COURT PRESS comes close new Sidewinder gamepad is priced favorto fulfilling Fries' expectations. It's fun, ably ($45) against competing products. loaded with NBA flavor, and reasonably What's crazy is that they may just pull it realistic. The pre-release copy of MS off. Soccer that I saw was rather less impresWhile the quality of their initial wave of sive than FULL COURT PRESS. The intersports titles is uneven, they've provided face seemed nearly identical to FCP's, but something to satisfy a variety of gaming the flavor wasn't nearly as robust. While tastes, and their price points are extremely MS SOCCER features realistic coaching competitive, with most titles available on strategy and a lineup of user-customizable the street for around $40. Ed Fries also international teams, my carly prediction is noted that by taking full advantage of Win that with FIFA 97, EAs grasp on the soc 95's dial-up networking, all MS sports cer gaming crown remains safe titles would offer Internet play. at least for this year. So what does all this mean for you, the sports gamer? While some cynics may Colf, the dean of Microsoft sports view Microsoft's foray into sports gaming games, is teeing off with a new version to with disdain, the specter of the competicomplete Cates' three-pronged attack on tion they provide may give some developthe sports gaming scene. GOLF 3.0 fea ers a long overdue wake-up call. Came tures improved graphics; course fly-bys; companies will now realize that they must match, skins, and team best-ball play; as build their sports titles better and cheaper well as a user-friendly golf tutor to help than in years past to compete with Teain perfect your swing. Offered with only two Cates. courses, Banff Springs and Harbour To Microsoft, then, welcome-and Town, CouF 3.0 faces stiff competition beware. Sports gamers are the toughest from the likes of LINKS LS, as well as the crowd there is. Be good to them, and upcoming VR GOLF, FRONT PAGE they'll reward you with customer loyalty SPORTS: GOLF, and JACK NICKLAUS 4. and word-of-net recommendations. On the other hand, leave them high and dry, DOMINATE ME with poorly designed games and buggy If you hadn't noticed, all of Microsoft's code, and they'll be on you like the vilsports releases -all their gaming releases, lagers after Karloff.& TIPS! Having trouble finding worthy human opponents for NHL 97, NBA LIVE, and your other EA Sports titles? The company now has their Multiplayer Matchup Service up and running on their web site at www.ea.com/matchup .html. The service lets you add your name to the database and search by area code and game for modem and net opponents. JANUARY 1997 "


"Over 2,000,000 served. Have you had your break today? «Sports Game of the Year»PC Gamer «5 out of 5»Multimedia World \"Game of the Year»Games Magazine Over 2 million pool players have taken their break with Virtual Pool\", the best-selling pool simulation ever. Virtual Pool is so real it will improve your actual pool playing. It has all the angles and all the shots of the real game. Take a lesson from a pro, learn trick shots or take a historic multimedia tour of the sport. Then immerse yourself in the pure fun of Virtual Pool, where four different games, computer opponents, network play and highspeed graphics will have you racking up hours of fun and entertainment. If you love pool, take your break today. VIRTUAL POOL VIRTUA POO POOL SEGA SATURN LILLE PlayStation The Unimate 30 patim MACFL TES Four new platforms now available: Macintosh, Windows 95, Sega Saturn and Sony PlayStation, The ultimate pool simulation with all the physical action including friction, speed, collision and roll. Real-time, 360°, 3-D environment with four great pool games including 8-ball, 9-ball, straight pool and rotation. BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" MACPLAY CO ROM DOS VERSION Celeris Mac OS Microsoft Who SEGA SATURN PlayStation ESTAS 1996 Celeris, Inc. All rights reserved. Virtual Pool, Interplay and Macl'lay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. Exclusively licensed and distributed by Interplay Productions. Microsoft, Windows and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Macintosh is a registered trademark of, and the Accelerated for lower Macintosh sticker and Power Macintosh are trade marks of, Apple Computer, Inc. Mac and the Mac OS logo are trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc., used under license. Sega and Sega Saturn are trademarks of SEGA ENTERPRISES, LTD. PlayStation and the MayStation logo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #64 "


"DEITA DEL Service DELLA DEL Sri ATET Bens ATT ELARUN ACARDI AWESOME REVIEWS. IT'S LIKE WINNING THE CUP WITH A SLAPSHOT FROM THE BLUELINE. "


"\"NHL POWERPLAY  IS WITHOUT A DOUBT THE BEST HOCKEY GAME EVER MADE FOR ANY SYSTEM ON ANY PLANET!!! THE INCREDIBLE LOOK AND PLAY LEAVE YOU NO CHOICE BUT TO GO OUT AND BUY THE GAME\"\" -GAME PLAYERS FLA 0 1ST COLT 1 1838 183 Aue \"POWERPLAY HAMMERS FACEOFF OPPOSITION... RARELY DOES A VIDEO GAME DELIVER THE ESSENCE OF THE SPORT...POWERPLAY'S GRAPHICS AND GAMEPLAY SKATE AWAY WITH THE CUP.\" -GAMEPRO \"POWERPLAY'S GAMEPLAY IS SECOND TO NONE» -COMPUTER GAMING WORLD BALA \"THE GAME THAT STOLE THE TORCH FROM EA'S NHL SERIES AND BROUGHT THE SPORT OF HOCKEY INTO THE 32-BIT AGE\" NEXT GENERATION \"THE STRONGEST COMBINATION OF KILLER GRAPHICS AND SOLID GAMEPLAY TO DATE.\" -CYBER SPORTS NHL. Check us at www.vie.com E L POWERPLAY\"96 Toy PlayStation ANS VOSS POWERPLAY\"96 E 9 10 POWORPLIV 6 POLUERPLAY 06 POWERPLAY'96 -O DE Raystation LOOA SATURN is depicted 01996 VIRGIN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT.Inc. and RADICAL ENTERTAINMENT lights reserved. NHL is a r e d trademark and Powerplay ba trademark of the National Hockey League. All rights reserved. AI NHL 1090s and marks and team logos and herein are the pot of the Mall and the respecthe tears and may not be reproduced without the prior written consent of MNL Enterprises, LP. 1996 NHL. Officicensed product of the National Hockey League. Al NHILPA, National Hockey League Players Association and the logos of the NS. PAwo rogistered trademarks of the NLP and are used under license by Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc. Official licensed product of the National Hockey League Players' Association. Copyright NHLPA 1906. Virpin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Lid CIRCLE READER SERVICE #183 "


"***** REVIEW  JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL 97 TP 4th And Never SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Now Past Its Prime, MADDEN FOOTBALL Should Consider Retirement SMURTS by Terry Coleman ohn Madden was a coach's coach. He lacked the cerebral countenance of Tom Landry, the Mt. Rushmore jaw of Don Sluula, or the hurricane-proof hair of Jimmy Johnson. But this great, big man was larger than life, whether he was berating officials for a missed call, or telling all-world possession receiver fred Biletnikoff to smear on some banned sticky substance. At 50, Madden still looked like he could strap on a helmet and teach his defensive lineman a few tricks. But after winning a Super Bowl in 1977, he grew tired of the NFL'S commercialism, of free agency, and probably of Al Davis' medelling as well. So Madden went into broadcast journalism, where he reinvented the genre, showing that you could have personality and precise knowledge of the game. FANTASY FOOTBALL MADDEN 97's arcade-oriented emphasis results in football action at its most unrealistic. MADDEN 97 HEY, I MADE A GAME! It was inevitable that this personality would find its way into a game. While JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL debuted on a number of platforms, it found a home on the Sega Cenesis, whicre it almost singlehandedly launched the 16-bit platform. In its day, JOHN MADDEN football was even more of a phenomenon than NBA LIVE is today. But this action king rested on its laurels, as champions often do, and watched as its best designers and artists went elsewhere via free agency. And subsequent versions have used Madden as little more than a figurehead, with MADDEN 97 being the worst of the bunch. The game starts off impressively enough, as the camera angle languidly pans over a historic stadium, and the sonorous, professional tones of Pat Summerall send chills up your spine as he sets the action. Leslie Visser updates you on whether Jim Kelly's hangnail will keep him out of today's game, and of course there's Madelen: \"What a great hit! He just went up and boom! Just nailed him! Look at that grass sticking out of his helmet; this is real football!\" Um, John, aren't we playing on artificial turf today? Much of the commentary is inappropriate. This is bound to happen with prerecordcd sound bites, although games such as ABC MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL don't have this problem. But the questionable commentary will be the least of your worries. REAL FANTASY FOOTBALL All action-oriented sports games-even good ones like NBA The Other Teams Price: $59.95 System Requirements: Pentium 60 or better, MS-DOS 5 or higher (Win 95 supported, but not very well), 8 MB RAM, 40 MB hard drive space, 1 MB Vesa-compatible SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM drive, mouse; supports Sound Blaster and compatible sound cards. Protection: None (CD must be in drive) # of Players: 1-2 (LAN, IPX, modem) Designer: Stormfront Studios Publisher: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA 94403 (415) 571-7171 Reader Service #: 330 A 3-83 EN PASSAW SCREEN PUNT NECK nce upon a time, the Madden franchise was the only game in town. Now, it's no match for the animation of Front Page Football Pro 97 (left), the clean look and robust interface of ABC Monday Night Football (right), or the gameplay of either. Stands Shotgun The W FOR Rulad CG JANUARY 1997 "


"You know that point where you've reached the zenith and you're just about to escape the silky bonds of reality and soar into rapture? GATEWAY2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" "


"Playing with the Destination Big Screen PC from Gateway 2000 is sort "


"s S of like that ... only better, GATEWAY2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" 8 8 8 8 4 6 8 5 7 1 ihsige www.gw2k.com/destination PENTIUM.PRO PROCESSO "


"RGAT EWA Y 2 0 0 0 DESTINATION Big Big Screen PC D5-133 D6-180 D6-200 Intel 133MHz Pentium Processor 32MB Synchronous DRAM 256K Pipelined Burst Cache Destination\" 31\" VGA Monitor STB2MB VRAM Graphics Accelerator w/ Cable-Ready TV Tuner 2.5GB 11ms EIDE Hard Drive 8X CD-ROM/3.5\" Diskette Drives 16-Bit Ensonig Wavetable Sound Card TelePath 33.6 Data /14.4 Fax Modem 7-Bay Charcoal-Colored PC Case Wireless Keyboard w/ Integrated EZ Pad Pointing Device Wireless Field Mouse Remote Four-Channel RF Receiver Microsoft Windows 95 Destination Software Collection Gateway Gold Service and Support for Big Screen PCs DISH Network Satellite System Offer $2999 As Low Ast+ $84/mo. Intel 180MHz Pentium Pro Processor 32MB EDO DRAM = 256K Internal Cache Destination 31\" VGA Monitor STB 2MB VRAM Graphics Accelerator w/ Cable-Ready TV Tuner 2.5GB Ilms EIDE Hard Drive 12X CD-ROM/3.5\" Diskette Drives 16-Bit Ensonig Wavetable Sound Card harman/kardon High-Fidelity Sound System TelePath 33.6 Data /14.4 Fax Modem 7-Bay Charcoal-Colored PC Case Wireless Keyboard w/ Integrated EZ Pad Pointing Device Wireless Field Mouse Remote Four-Channel RF Receiver MS Windows 95 Destination Software Collection Gateway Gold Service and Support** for Big Screen PCS DISH Network Satellite System Offer $3999 As Low Ast $112/mo. Intel 200MHz Pentium Pro Processor 64MB EDO DRAM 256K Internal Cache Destination 31\" VGA Monitor STB 2MB VRAM Graphics Accelerator w/ Cable-Ready TV Tuner 3.8GB 11ms EIDE Hard Drive 12X CD-ROM/3.5\" Diskette Drives 16-Bit Ensoniq Wavetable Sound Card harman/kardon High-Fidelity Sound System TelePath 33.6 Data/14.4 Fax Modem 7-Bay Charcoal-Colored PC Case Wireless Keyboard w/ Integrated EZ Pad Pointing Device Wireless Field Mouse Remote Four-Channel RF Receiver MS Windows 95 Destination Software Collection Gateway Gold Premium Service and Support** for Big Screen PCs DISH Network Satellite System Offeri $4499 As Low Ast $125/mo. *Maximum data transfer rate dependent on certain variables including particular modems with which you are communicating, telephone lines, communications software and communications protocols. ** The Destination 31\" monitor is covered by a one-year warranty. Call or write for a free copy. harman/kardon High-Fidelity Sound System Seven-piece Dolby Pro Logic Surround Sound speaker system including AVR-10 audio/video receiver with remote, subwoofer, center channel, and four satellites for the ultimate multimedia audio experience. $699 For a limited time, Destination system purchases include a coupon for one DISH Network Satellite system (satellite receiver, 18-inch antenna with single LNBF, infrared remote control) at no charge with the purchase of a one-year subscription to a qualifying programming package from DISH Network for $300. Taxes, delivery and installation not included. Satellite system service covers 48 contiguous states and is supported by DISH Network. Residential use only. I GATEWAY 2000 \"You've got a friend in the business.\" QAYS inside NO PAYMENTS Ask for details! 8 8 8 8 4 6 8 5 7 1 PENTIUM.PRO www.gw2k.com/destination 01996 Gateway 2000, Inc. GATEWAY 20XX), \"G\"logo, TelePath, Field Mouse and \"You've got a friend in the business\" slogan are registered trademarks, and Destination, Gateway Gold, and EZ Pad are trademarks of Gateway 20 , Inc. The Intel Inside Logo, Intel and Pentium are registered trademarks of Intel Corporation. All other brands and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies. Many Gateway 2000 products are custom engineered to Gateway 2000 specifications, which may vary from the retail version of the software and/or hardware in functionality, performance or compatibility. All prices and configurations are subject to change without notice or obligation. Prices do not include shipping or applicable sales tax. \"Financing available on approved credit issued and administered by MBNA America Bank, N.A. Payments based on 48-month term at 14.9% Annual Percentage Rate. "


"JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL 97  REVIEW chase, something is terribly wrong. SPORTS OUT OF CONTROL If you try looking through the manual for some answers, you may get even more confused. You see, accord ing to EA Sports, gamepads are really \"joysticks,\" which may come as some surprise to those who enjoy simHAIL MARY PASS When in doubt, throw the bomb. Regardless ulations. EA's \"joystick of who's covering, the receiver wins all the close ones. gender» confusion, if you will, may have something to do with If this is the best they can do, perhaps it's their poor gamepad support, which is time that they retired the franchise, rather squirrelly at best. If you finally manage to than insulting the many MADDEN get your gamepad calibrated, you are likeFOOTBALL fans, not to mention coach ly to lose control every time you take a Madlen himself. 10 Most Annoying Problems With Madden Football 97 helper LIVE-overemphasize offensc, based on the theory that it's more fun to score than play defense. When MADDEN FOOTBALL was in its prime, you could overlook the fact that every game had scores like 41-38. because it still felt like football. Now, how ever, they've \"simplificd the learning Curve\" so much that any knowledge you have about football means nothing: the game comes down to how quick your trigger finger is, and little else. There's no need to read defenses, as in FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL PRO. You can't design and save your own plays, as in nearly every other football game. The audible system lets you set up to four different plays for offense and defense, but it's way behind the clegant, robust audibles of ABC MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL When you get in trouble on offense, the best thing to do is to throw the ball deep. If you don't catch the ball outright, the defensive player more often than not pops the ball up, rather than batting the pass down to the ground. And in the ensuing struggle between the defensive and offensive players, it's almost always the latter who gets the reception. Interceptions are low, touchdowns are high. When I put Deion Sanders or Rod Woodson on the opposition's best receiver, I figure I'll get at least a standoff — except maybe against Jerry Rice. But when thirdand even fourthstring receivers get 10 and 12 catches (sometimes in a single half!) against two of the best comerbacks who ever strapped on shoulder pads, you know you've crossed over into never-never land. MADDEN FOOTBALL didn't use to be like this; if anything, the defense was too tough. Now, pushing the button at anywhere near the right time\" renders even the \"Mad Dog Blitz\" toothless, regardless of the offensive formation you choose, or the quality of the personnel you have on the field. This is football? The player ratings usually a MADDEN FOOTBALL strength — are confusing at best. Dan Marino, probably the gimpics great QB since Namath, routinely rms for 50 to 60 yards in a game. Some linemen are fast, but when 300-pound defensive tackles catch running backs like Barry Sanders from bchind after a 40-yard 1. The game has several different playbooks, but you can't make up and save your own plays. 2. We get Football 101 from Madden, rather than tips on how to play the game. 3. If you have one of the new Cyrix chips, MADDEN 97 thinks it's a 486, and refuses to let you play the game. 4. Cheesy sound-the 16-bit console music sounded better years ago. Moreover, unless you have your sound card drivers in your autoexec bat or config.sys files, MADDEN'S sound setup routine can't find your hardware. 5. Even with the patch, the game locks up constantly in Win 95 (the Win 95 logo is prominently displayed on the box). EA's solution is to tell you to run the game in DOS! 6. Trying to play live over a modem is an exercise in frustration. Win 95 Direct Play might have helped, but see above. 7. The PlayStation version is better, even though EA spent over two years on MADDEN 97 for the PC. Most--not all-of the features available now in the PlayStation version are promised for PC MADDEN 98! 8. Defensive Al is weak, and the computer compensates by making improbable tackles, often illegall y from out-of-bounds. 9. A typical game has journeymen running backs getting 300 yards, and second-string QBs throwi ng for 500 or more yards. 10. It's disheartening to block a field goal and hear the announcer call out, \"It's good!\" timeout, make a player substitution, or access almost any other menu. And playing an action football game via mouse and keyboard that's a 15-yard penalty, MADDEN 97 doesn't have career leagues like FRONT PACE FOOTBALL PRO; the multiplayer options don't work half as well as ABC MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL; even the running game feels less like football than UNNECESSARY ROUCHINESS 96. So why would anyone want this game? It's hard to believe that EA spent two years designing something that's so out of date. APPEAL: For those who must have every football game released, or who have to have their Madden fix regardless of the consequences. PROS: Simple learning curve; voices of Pat Summerall, Leslie Visser, and John Madden; decent graphics. CONS: Multiplayer problems; weak gamepad support; poor Al; limited gameplay compared to earlier MADDENS. A sad decline for a oncegreat franchise. RAV JANUARY 1997 "


"***** REVIEW  NBA FULL COURT PRESS T SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL MicroShow Time Microsoft Shoots And Scores With Action Hoops Game by Scott A. May Microsoft NBA Full Court Press LEX laying basketball on a personal computer is a lot like going on a blind date: you never know what to expect. They cither look good or have a great personality, but rarely both. If it's a coaching sim, there's often little or no actual gameplay. If it's a fast-action arcade shoot-out, intelligence is usually benched in favor of graphic pizzazz. Imagine having the best of both worlds in a single game. What a concept. EA Sports made the first real strides towards this goal with their excellent NBA LIVE series. Now Microsoft, of all companies, steals the rebound with NBA FULL COURT PRESS, a one-sizefits-all basketball title that doesn't exactly shatter the backboard, but scores big points for trying Designed for Windows 95 by Australian designers Beam Software, the game offers full-court, five-on-five action, featuring current rosters from all 29 NBA teams. Four play modes are available, including single game, season, playoffs, and prac24 19:57 Microsoft HANG TIME Authentic play attributes translate into signature moves on the court. Here, the Bulls' Scottie Pippin takes flight for an easy score, Batul  Oress tice. Up to four people can compete via modem or network link, while as many as 10 players can get in on the action using the game's built-in Internet link. LIFE OF RILEY Since we've already divided the genre into two (often conflicting) viewpoints, Na let's examine the game as a coaching coaching simulation, where it really shines. Your first pre-game stop is the Power Zippet An inside aubaids low post play designed to take advantage of mismatch with center as well n opening up potential three point shot for small forward and shooting guard. Price: $44.95 System Requirements: 486DX-66 or better, Windows 95, 8 MB RAM (16 MB recommended), 20 MB hard disk space, SVGA display, 2x CD-ROM drive or faster, mouse (gamepad or joystick recommended); Win 95-compatible sound cards, 14.4 Kbps modem for remote play, network card for LAN play. # of Players: 1 to 4 Protection: CD key Designer: Beam Software Publisher: Microsoft Corp. Redmond, WA (206) 882-8080 Reader Service #: 331 NBA pool. One-on-one player comparisons are extremely detailed, revealing potential match-ups in 28 categories, from points per game to which college they attended. Use this to restructure an existing organization, or create up to four fantasy Dream Teams, sporting names like The Impact, Titans, Thunder, or Barracudas. The Player Editor is another important tool for fantasy drafts and team tweaking Here you can modify player names, numbers, and that all-important attribute-hairstyle. More importantly, this section lets you view and adjust 25 ratings for each player, including shooting range and ability, jumping, steals, fouls, speed, strength, and fatigue. Coupled with the games three basic skill sellings-rookic, veteran, and allstar -this gives you tremendous control of the game's overall difficulty and player handicapping. Because rating values can range from 1 to 99, this also ensures longterm challenge and replayability. Between Paint guard) dbbles up right side. 1 passes ta center on the right low post who looks for shot 1 cuts to top of key and sets pick for small Pou Spur Draw and Kick you review the league ranking for your favorite team, rated in overall, offensive, and defensive performance as well as rebounds and steals. Editing the team roster allow you to compare and replace playcrs from the entire continue CRIB SHEETS Make sure to scout your opponents, then view diagrams and descriptive notes to take advantage of mismatches. Then add the play to your top-five list of favorites. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"TIRED OF THE SAME OLD LINKS? CHANGE COURSE. SIM GOLF     THEN CHANGE IT AGAIN. AND AGAIN. SimGolf\" with the new Course Architect-gives you the power to create endless courses, as heartbreaking or handicap-friendly as you like. Go ahead, dig yourself new fairways, bunkers and lakes. Choose from hundreds of objects to make one-of-a-kind courses. (Think Sahara-size sandtraps. And watery golf ball graves.) Video tips from legendary course architect Robert Trent Jones, Jr. help you FI CS465666 turn your blueprints into greens. You can even play -or customize-two Jones masterpieces, Rancho La Quinta and The Prince Course. Then tee off on your new links. Or round up a foursome to play your custom course on the Internet. SimGolf. It's the ultimate 18 holes (some assembly required). Use the powerful Course Architect to cusOnce you've designed your ideal course, tee tamize courses. Make them flat or hilly place off for high-stakes skins, stroke or match play SIMGOLF. COMPETE ON COURSES YOU CREATE. holes and hazards, and it's tee time. SOBRIS MAXIS Available for Windows 95, 1996 Maxis, Inc. All rights reserved. SumGolf and Course Architect are trademarks and Maxis is a registered trademark of Mads, Inc. Rancho La Quinta is a trademark of T.D. Dusert Development Limited Partnership. All other trademarks or registered trademarks are the properties of their respective owners. For product or ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 800-33-MAXIS. Visit the Maxis Web site at http://www.madis.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #76 "


"ON CD Just When You Thought it was TO P Safe 14001pong yoca. pum papel paesagg to Go Back into the Water... . Puicas Get ready to plunge into competition RYON NOO103 96610 with Gooch Grundy's X-Decathlon, the decidedly demente Olympic-style tournament that helps keep the ever-burning que for mediocrity alive. With a cast of zany characters, ten outrageo events and dozens of hilarious interviews and animated clips, Goo Grundy's X-Decathlon torches athletic tradition and finally giv armchair athletes their day on the podium. dtpunog. P ode cocos puosade Keep the dream alive as you compete in ten outrageous events Go for victory by yourself or against a friend in split-screen competition  Take the competition into cyber-space an battle against on-line opponents  Play as any one of six bizarre characters, from a psychic jungle woman to an allen with a serious superiority comple ) LVS 9W YO S PAR SORSPOONLAR Gooch FOR MORE INFO ABOUT MICROFORUM OR TO ORDER DIRECT, CALL: 1-800-685-3863 Tel. 416) 656-9594 Fax: (416)656-0548 INTERNET: http://www.microforum.com Microforum CIRCLE READER SERVICE #77 "


"NBA FULL COURT PRESS REVIEW SPORTS motion-captured moves. Many of the animations are extraordinarily detailed, involving subtle wrist flips, clbow bends, and hip gyrations. Overall, the players all have the same generic look about them-much like department store mannequins-rendered in solid 3D and outlined in black. Watch for the Bulls Dennis Rodman, whose hair changes color when least expected. Player controllers include mouse, keyboard, and joystick, although a four-button gamepad is definitely preferred. Not surprisingly, Microsoft's new Sidewinder gamepad performed the best of all controllers tested, with the Gravis GamePad coming in a close second. Keys and buttons can be configured to your preference, controlling actions such as passes, fakes, shots, rebounds, blocks, and steals. You can let the computer automatically switch the player under your control, switch HEN YOU'RE BLASTING games you can indulge in player trades. Like most sports titles, though, trades are only meaningful or realistically competitive when conducted between knowledgeable human coaches. In-game coaching decisions are also abundant, including drag-and-drop substitutions, opponent match-ups, and pop-up clisplays of each player's current stats and fatigue/injury levels. Here you can also fine-tune your coaching strategies, such as offensive and defensive styles (automatic, aggressive, normal, or conservative), substitution method (automatic or manual), and defensive pressure (automatic, high, low, or normal). Last, but far from least, is the playbook selection menu, featuring 98 fully diagrammed offensive plays, culled from the repertoires of real NBA coaches. This aspect of the game is especially well done. Double-clicking on a play diagram opens a window with detailed descriptions of what the play is intended to accomplish and each step of its execution. If nothing else, this feature should prove to be an invaluable tool for anyone who desires to learn more about the game and its tactics. Too bad more sports games aren't this instructive. Each team can fashion a topfive list of special plays-open to constant revision -which are implemented during the game by pressing the corresponding number key. If no play is called, one is randomly selected from the current list. Unfortunately, there's no provision for actually editing the playbook or creating your own routines. DOWN VALLEN S PINNING OUT ONTROL A T 2 0 0 MPH, OR RAGING THE CLOCK FOR YOUR LIFE, WHO NEEDS INTERRUPTIONS? (QUICKSOUND\") WE GOT SKILLS Scason play can be set for 32, 56, or 82 games, with user-defined playoff rounds. Manage one or more teams by highlighting its logo, then take to the court or have the computer simulate the outcome. You can also go straight to the playoffs, creating your own playoff brackets for both the eastem and westem conferences. Players hit the court in a rich environment of the usual bells and whistles: reactive crowd noise, realistically modeled team courts, and play-by-play commentary by Kevin Calabro, voice of the Seattle Supersonics. Player animations are very good, reportedly based on more than 250 Why kill yourself just to pump up the bass or silence your enemies? With QuickSound, you'll never have to sacrifice performanceor quit your game-to adjust your PC sound. You get instant control of volume, tone, mix, mute and more, with the touch of a button. Pure power at your fingertips. Because it's true what they say: quitters are losers. QUICKMUTE Labtec featuring a mute button for simple, one-touch silence Labtec Enterprises, Inc. 3801 NE 109th, Sulte J. Vancouver, WA 98682 Visit your retailer or go to www.labtec.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #262 JANUARY 1997 CG "


"Look out for the world's most challenging golf tournament. BRITISH OPEN CHAMPIONSHIP LOOKING GLASS soome Stage GOLF EN RU COMING SOON THE OPEN TECHNOLOGIES www.lglass.com CHAMPIONSHIP COMING SOON From the creators of Flight Unlimited 19% Looking Glass Technologies, Inc. All Rights Resenel British Open Championship Golf and Lookingclass are registered trademarks of looking Glass Technologies, Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners CIRCLE READER SERVICE #65 "


"NBA FULL COURT PRESS REVIEW Microsoft NBA Full Court Press SLEX sports pages SPORTS schedules players toams 995/96 idea as long as you're not the only one showing interest. Multiplayer modem games tested perfectly, however, with only slight transmission pauses at 28.8 Kbps. Overall, despite some intrinsic arcade foibles, NBA FULL COURT PRESS is very impressive. Coaching enthusiasts will definitely enjoy the arena-full of options, which are so intelligently presented that even die-hard arcade fans may be tempted to switch courts. standings DEN CHA CHA Gms Pis/G 57 19.2 21 5.4 53 3.2 60 2.8 41 2.6 73 6.2 FG% .434 446 467 .406 .343 .343 .512 3P% 392 341 .000 .394 .303 leaders FT% 930 .743 .773 .722 bracket 512 .333 491 20 2.8 Abdul-Rauf, Mahmoud TL Adams, Michael Addison, Rafael Alexander, Cory Allen, Jerome Alston, Derrick Amaechi, John Amaya, Ashraf Anderson, Greg Anderson, Kenny Anderson, Nick Anderson, Willie Anthony, Greg Armstrong, 8. J. 480 .000 MIN PHI CLE VAN SA CHA ORL NY VAN .359 54 54 6.3 6.3 46 1.2 69 15.2 77 14.7 76 9.8 69 14.0 82 12.3 .418 .442 436 415 468 391 .283 .332 473 651 .240 .769 .692 .810 .771 839 start up coaching play game help options quit FULL PRESSED COURT Check the Sports Pages for copious stats, schedules, and standings during season play. APPEAL: Win 95 gamers longing for a combination of arcade-style roundball action and detailed coaching sim. PROS: Options galore! Impressive playbook selection, stat breakdowns, and team management; Web, LAN, and modem play a big plus. CONS: You'll need a beefy system to enjoy full performance. Control is a bit sloppy, and there's no playbook editor. The Al-especially for player tradescould be better. test. The connection works, but despite repeated tries during the course of this review, the online roster remained empty Like other Web-ready games, it's a great could be better. RATED POWER CHESS mamually, or focus your efforts entirely on the center, forvard, or guard positions Game speed flows reasonably well on average systems, but it can really turn herky-jerky on slow machines. Effective solutions include turning off nonessential details like crowd noise, music, commentary, and the scoreboard display. If that doesn't smooth player animations, four screen resolutions are available, ranging from a slightly fuzzy 640x480 to an ultracrisp 1280x1024. You can also run the game from a window rather than fullscreen, which should speed things up. Like most games of this type, on-court action is a matter of hits and misses. Players are sometimes hesitant in their reactions, causing shots to go unchallenged and loose balls to dribble out of bounds while everyone stands idly by. This is most frustrating during rebounds; often the ball bounces several times on the court before someone pick it up. There are also little annoyances, like the poorly defined net graphics or having to retrieve your own free throws. The refs are invisible--sometimes literally, as they tend to miss obvious defensive penalties. For the record, you also have control over officiating style and specific penalty calls. The built-in Web interface links players to a common Internet site where you can join a game in progress or host a new con\"Power Chess may be the finest innovation in serious chess products ever to hit the streets. No kidding.\" Cindy Yans Computer Games Strategy Plus SAHIR M ore powerful than any human Topponent. More human than any computer opponent. When you play the Power Chess King, it's like playing a human. When he's winning, he takes chances. When he's losing, he practically squirms. When you hear the Power Chess Queen speak, it's like learning from a master. Brilliant, intuituve, eloquent. When you play Power Chess, you're playing the most innovative, friendly and ingenious chess program available. 2! UDS TO ADULTI S TERRA AGES 6 Visit us at www.sierra.com, call 1-800-757-7707 or see your local software dealer.  1996 Sierra On-Line, Ine, and/or TM designato trademarks of or licensed to Sierra On Line, Ine Believue, WA 98007 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #82 "


"P War.co Sa U GEEN MATH ACCENTS. 2 Brian Fargo Protiled  The Future of Gaming Sneak Peek at Stallileet Academy "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION By Gamers, For Gamers.    ike many of the pioneering computer game companies, Interplay Productions began with one man coding in his bedroom. Brian Fargo loved to play computer games and he loved to build them, whether they were the early text-based games or the groundbreaking games that came later. Brian's viewpoint has always been, \"How is this a better experience for the gamer?\"     Q: Brian, in your opinion, what are some of Interplay's breakthrough products? Fargo: I liked The Bard's Tale series. We gave gamers a first-person perspective they hadn't had before, even if it was in that little upper left-hand corner window, and we gave them three-point animation instead of static monsters. I liked Wasteland for its elaborate map, its skill-based design and NPC (non-player character) code. Wasteland was also the first game to offer moral dilemmas. With BattleChess, we were trying to create an animated version comparable to one of those Franklin Mint collectors sets. With Castles, we wanted to combine some of the dynamic, planning aspects of say a SimCity with a sense of medieval roleplaying. Descent tapped into the 3D revolution. And with Starfleet Academy, M.A.X., and Fallout we're continuing to stay on the \"bleeding edge.\" I'm proud of all of those. Q: Interplay has always used a lot of licensed properties? Why? Fargo: I use one guideline in licensing products: \"Is the world rich enough that I want to play in it?\" I wanted to do a Lord of the Rings game from the time I first read it. We made Neuromancer because it was a world that we thought computer gamers could relate to. Of course, our prize licensed properties would have to be the original Star Trek and AD&D licenses. Q: Why do you think your Star Trek games have been so successful when others have gotten mixed results with the license? Fargo: From the beginning, with our Star Trek games we focused purely on the game elements first, then took consideration for the license. After fleshing out the inner workings, we moved to simulate not just the universe but also our interpretations of it. Gamers feel like they're right beside Kirk and Spock. When it became practical, we started using voice-overs from the original cast. We knew gamers wanted to feel like they were right there with the Enterprise crew. Now, with Star Trek: Starfleet Academy, we're pushing the 3D and special effects technology, but the story and gameplay still came first. Q: Why do you emphasize \"By Gamers. For Gamers\" as a motto? Fargo: If we don't want to play a game, we don't publish it. To build an Interplay game, you have to convince me and a host of other dedicated gamers that we want to play it. We started the MacPlay line because we had Mac gamers who felt that no one was taking the time to port products from the Mac perspective. When we started work on Stonekeep, we added all the special visual and audio effects we wanted to heighten the gaming experience. The VR Sports series grows out of the same desire to put gamers in the game. Q: So, what's the future? Fargo: Whatever makes games better. Multiplayer gaming, creating entire rich universes that are fully interactive, redefining gaming genres. We're going to keep building games we want to play. "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION Built By: Gamers... inter Play he easiest way to see the difference Interplay's \"By Gamers. For Gamers\" philosophy makes is to look at the kinds of games that Interplay's in-house design teams are building for themselves to play. Of course, it's also the best way for gamers to find out about the exciting products that are on their way from Interplay. Let's take a look at Interplay's next generation of hot games. Getting the MAX. for Strategy Gamers Mechanized Assault and Exploration. That's the underlying meaning of M.A.X., an upcoming strategy game set in the far future. M.A.X.imum mayhem, M.A.X.imum destruction, and M.A.X.imum combat await gamers who are willing to face the M.A.X.imum challenge. Eight clans compete for sole control of newly discovered planets. b In M.A.X., you play a M.A.X. commander sent to a new world to build a colony, collect resources, and so on while eliminating other clans' M.A.X. units and their colonies. M.A.X. offers over 60 customizable units, a unique blending of real-time and turn-based play, and various scenarios including customized and campaign games. M.A.X. supports multiplayer gaming. If you want a real good-time strategy game, look for M.A.X. to hit the shelves this month. \"Definitely one to watch for\"-Gamespot in M.A.X. you'll push yourself to the limit to survive the ultimate showdown in strategic warfare DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN: New AD&D Action and Role-Playing Get out of your ship and take a risk! DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN uses the same 3D engine made famous in DESCENT, but doesn't let you hide in the interior of a ship. DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN puts you in the Forgotten Realms (TSR) universe and challenges you to survive. It also features some special effects using transparencies that some said couldn't be done. DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN combines role-playing elements such as stanDESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN, featuring dard AD&D character generation with real-time action in the dungeons 38 monsters, is true to the AD&D character below the city Waterdeep. It also features Kelben \"Blackstaff' Aronson, the development model famous Waterdeep mage. The player is sent on quests that culminate in the defeat of an evil spider goddess. This game allows up to four gamers to play at the same time. While DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN should be on the shelves any day, players can anticipate the imminent arrival of its online version as well. VR BASEBALL: LA Sure Home Run for the '97 Season SPORTS From any angle, VR BASEBALL '97 looks hot. This Win 95 baseball sim is the only game which lets you play in a real-time 360 degree environment with realistic 3-D stadiums and polygon players that move very smoothly. This high tech baseball game is hardware accelerated creating an immersive, ultra realistic, gaming environment. You can actually play the game from any position or angle you choose. It's amazing. VR BASEBALL is fully licensed and includes the complete 1996 season stats, the latest team rosters (over 700 players!) as well as all the major league teams, logos, updated uniforms and stadiums...even Atlanta's new Olympic stadium. Imagine being able to play as any one of your major league favorites in a first person perspective. VR BASEBALL '97 is coming at you this Spring. "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION For Gameus Starfleet Academy: The First and Only Multiplayer Startrek Action/Flight Simulator Are there Trekkies at Interplay? The proof is STAR TREK: STARFLEET ACADEMY, not only a starship flight simulator wrapped in a gripping storyline, but a dream game for most of us. You play a cadet training to become a starship commander. En route, you will engage in 29 missions while commanding a variety of starships. If you play your cards right, there's even a final mission where you get to command the USS Enterprise! You will fight over two dozen enemy vessels, including the Klingon Bird of Prey. Between missions, your actions at the academy affect how the story unfolds and the ending of the game. The academy is more than a test of mettle, or even bravery-it is a test of character. in ter play STARFLEET ACADEMY features great cutting-edge technology. Translucent texture-mapping is used for cloaking effects, new Al adapts to the player's combat style, and the game's engine allows the highly detailed starships to move at breathtaking speeds. Take command of Starfleet's best starships, including the Enterprise itself STARFLEET ACADEMY offers multiplayer support and includes performances and interactions with three members of the original Star Trek cast: William Shatner as Kirk, George Takai as Sulu, and Walter Koenig as Chekov. Be prepared to enlist in STARFLEET ACADEMY this April. There is also word of a fourth Interplay Star Trek product (VULCAN FURY), an adventure game that should warp to store shelves late in 1997. FALLOUT-A True RPG to Look Forward to The ultimate test of any gamer's survival skill, FALLOUT. A GURPS POST NUCLEAR ADVENTURE, the unofficial sequel to Wasteland, is a different kind of role-playing game. Using pen-and-paper gaming's most versatile rules set, this adventure puts your character in a fallout Shelter called the Vault. The Vault houses the descendants of the few survivors of a nuclear holocaust. Now, nearly 80 years since the holocaust, the Vault's water recycler has failed. Water rationing has begun, and someone must venture outside to find a replacement microchip needed to repair the water recycler. Guess who gets to go? FALLOUT combines incredible new technologies and SVGA graphic detailing. One of the innovative technologies used is the Talking Head Claymation character, where the character's facial expressions tell a story all their own. You should be able measure FALLOUT'S release on your Geiger counter in the next few months. FALLOUT has everything hardcore RPGers want with unparalleled depth OF LIGHT AND DARKNESSJust How Real Is Surreal? Tired of the predictable? Looking for a game experience that's both surreal and aesthetically pleasing? OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS is a nonlinear adventure game in which you play a young man attending a showing of a mysterious French artist with his date. His date finds a surrealistic painting, which she is literally pulled into. You follow her and must find a way to rescue her and rejoin the world \"outside.\" This game features a stunning 3D world and the work of Gil Bruvel, an awardwinning artist whose exhibitions are held around the world. For the first time, an artist of this caliber has been commissioned to create art specifically for a computer game. The surreal beauty Bruvel is creating for OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS is valued at over $10 million if they were sold as paintings. This adventure game will cast others into shadow by the end of 1997. A stunningly beautiful 3D rendered world featuring the art of award winning master, Gil Bruvel "


"ARAGUTTALE C TT SPELA U ADVERTISING SECTION Partners in The \"By Gamers, ven Interplay's developer and affiliate relationships were established because the gamers at Interplay liked playing the games from these partnering ventures. Let's look at some of the \"By Gamers. For Gamers\" offerings being built by these partnering companies. inter Play Shiny Entertainment Goes Wild with Wild 9's Recently acquired by Interplay, Shiny Entertainment is famous for creating Earthworm Jim, first a video game, then a cartoon television series, and now available on home video. Shiny also owns the trademarks to the Animotion process that takes drawn cartoon sketches and places them into interactive software. From pencil to processor in a few short strokes! Shiny Entertainment is working on WILD 9's for the Sony PlayStation and SEGA Saturn. WILD 9's is a futuristic game that revolves around the Annapolis Cluster. The Cluster is home to thousands of planets and the arena for a galactic war between the game's heroes (a young earthling and a gang of eight alien teenagers) and the evil entity Karn, Shiny whose army, led by Colonel Curtz (ever see Apocalypse Now?), has been systematical Entertainment is developing ly destroying planets in the Cluster. WILD 9's, the story of a gang of youngsters out to win a galactic war. Shiny is also working on MDK (Murder Death Kill), that Interplay will distribute outside of North America. This science-fiction action game features missions through eight alien cities that roam around on platforms, destroying everything on Earth. It's a game packed with high-speed, accurately rendered real-time graphics; loads of monsters, several weapon choices, and multiple endings depending on your performance. Be sure to keep close tabs on MDK. TOOL .VIRTUAL Lining Ue a Straight Shot Celeris, a leading developer of surveillance and tracking software for the military, has partnered again with Interplay to develop the award-winning VIRTUAL POOL and is now working on VIRTUAL POOL '98. VIRTUAL POOL '98 was designed by physicists and mathematicians to provide the most realistic pool simulation ever. Featuring a seamless interface, realistic shots, and multiple perspectives during play, VIRTUAL POOL '98 is so realistic that it's guaranteed to improve your game. Fight Evil. Conquer the Universe, Play Golfa A father's death and a son's nightmares-it sounds like the U.K.'s Gremlin Interactive borrowed a page out of Shakespeare. Yet REALMS OF THE HAUNTING is a very different kind of story. This futuristic horror adventure features realtime combat and places you in the Hamlet-like role of a young man whose nightmares following his father's death lead him to the village of Hellston in Cornwall. He discovers that he is the one propheREALMS OF THE HAUNTING sied to find an important artifact that features a frighteningly detailed 3D environment can control the nature of the unialive with predatory demons verse. Multiple graphic modes including stun ning 640x480 SVGA full screen resolution This game's action elements combine with its musical score to create an immersive, tension-filled atmosphere. REALMS OF THE HAUNTING features rich graphic detail, numerous evil entities, puzzles, battles, and nearly two hours of cinematic sequences. Keep an eye over your shoulder as this Gremlin's HAUNTING should appear within the next month or two. "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION For Gamers Philosophy As well as being the home of many alleged haunts, the U.K. is also known as the birthplace of golf. VR GOLF'97, another outcome of the Interplay/Gremlin relationship is an amazingly realistic golf simulator that lets the gamer play golf in a realtime 360 degree world. You can view your lie from any angle and strike the ball in any direction. VR GOLF brings a fresh perspective to golf with its dramatic sweeping camera views that you can shift on the fly. These cameras really showcase the four courses that come with this game including Kiawah Island's scenic \"Ocean Course.\" interplay VR GOLF '97 seems to have it all; licensed courses, course disk compatibility, pro and amateur tours, fast course set up, customized club selection, a simple user interface and multi-player capabilities. Plus all the specialty shots, like draw and fade, found in real golf. You'll find playing a round with this game very enjoyable. Look for VR GOLF' 97 in stores this Spring. VR GOLF comes loaded with 4 courses, including Kiawah Island and is the only Reloaded is the sequel to the true real-time 360 degree golf game award-winning Gremlin PlayStation title, LOADED. RELOADED takes this arcade game several light years further. Featuring revamped original characters (such as Mamma and Butch), new characters, and CHEB, the reincarnation of FUB, RELOADED includes more levels, more puzzles, and a stronger story line than LOADED. Don't face your computer unarmed. RELOADED is available now in all discriminating software outlets-cocked, locked, and ready to rock. Blog your way through RELOADED's 12 blood-soaked worlds with incredible lighting effects and non-stop gameplay What if the tabloids are right about \"ancient astronauts\"? Gremlin's SANDWARRIORS turns that premise into an arcade flight simulator that blends the iconography of ancient Egypt with futuristic technology. SANDWARRIORS features 20 ship types, 10 different weapon types, and 20 different missions. SANDWARRIORS will make its stand on store shelves in late spring. There is no second place in FRAGILE ALLEGIANCE, a multiplayer space strategy game where your goal is the complete annihilation of your opponents. Set in the far future, where you are commissioned to build and develop an asteroidbased mining colony, FRAGILE ALLEGIANCE includes missions, combat scenarios, and real-time gameplay. FRAGILE ALLEGIANCE supports multiplayer gameplay and offers an in-game e-mail system that allows gamers to send messages to their friends and foes. Establish your FRAGILE ALLEGIANCE starting in January DOGO @0880 How enterprising are you? HARDWAR IS Research Gremlin's futuristic strate and develop an array of hitech weapons, buildings and spacecraft to build gy game crossed with a galactic empire in FRAGILE ALLEGIANCE a flight simulator that allows you to find out. In a very nonlinear story line, you find yourself as a mercenary exiled to the planet Titan after the destruction of Earth. Your objective is to build a ship using theft, money earned from missions, or through your own explorations. You must also uncover clues leading to Hardware information that will get you off the planet, and you must then escape from True real-time gameplay in Titan. The escape begins in summer. random interactive missions "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTION More From Interplay... Eurest DESCENT. II: The Infinite Abyss... How Deep Can You Go? interplay Let's head into a Parallax universe, where we can find the developers of the DESCENT engine. After developing last year's DESCENT II, Parallax has gone even deeper in creating their latest challenge: DESCENT II: THE INFINITE Abyss. But brace yourself, this game is even faster than DESCENT II. THE INFINITE Abyss features 22 new levels (infested by new robots) in which you'll race through sewers, rat mazes, and other such locales where DESCENT players feel at home. Look for 12 new robots to accompany this latest DESCENT. An exciting plus is that INFINITE ABYss players can create their own levels and robots. Included with the product is a new multiplayer game, Horde. Look for DESCENT II: THE INFINITE ABYss in the depths of your favorite software stores right now. DESCENT II: THE INFINITE ABYSS Can you escape 22 new levels and 12 new robot enemies in DESCENT II: THE INFINITE ABYSS? SHATTERED STEEL Strikes With a Vengeance In the Wild West, the marshals wore six-guns. In the far future, they'll use robots. Canada's Bioware Corporation (which is also working on a role-playing game set in TSR's Forgotten Realms universe) has teamed up with Interplay to put you on the cosmic frontier in SHATTERED STEEL. Planet runners are loaded with blazing firepower including 150mm Gatling Guns, guided missles and tactical Nukes In SHATTERED STEEL, you play a mercenary investigating a communications breakdown in a mining camp on Lanios 3. You discover aliens are destroying the camp and its inhabitants, and you must stop them! Featuring 50 nonlinear missions taking place on two different worlds, the game challenges the player with over 20 different types of robotic alien predators. With 25 weapons at your disposal, including plasma cannons and tactical nukes, the explosive combat in SHATTERED STEEL can shatter your nerves, if you don't stay cool. SHATTERED STEEL supports 16-player action and includes a scenario builder for customizing multiplayer games. You can pick up your piece of SHATTERED STEEL in stores now! Look for an add-on disk that forges new missions, new robots, and new weapons in the next few months. Are You Willing to Die By The Sword? Interplay discovered Treyarch Invention and its promising new title DIE BY THE SWORD. In the spirit of Bilestoad, DIE BY THE SWORD looks to be the ultimate in hand-to-hand combat games. With the use of VSIM Motion Control technology, the full range of human motion can be simulated during combat, allowing players to realistically interact with their environment while battling opponents. Combat has realistic effects as swords react with swords when they clash and players take realistic damage during combat. Players can create custom moves to enhance their hand-to-hand combat skills. Over 25 computer opponents can be battled in solitaire games, while multiplayer support allows up to four players to battle things out in a winnertake-all competition. Your waiting opponents want you to DIE BY THE SWORD this summer. VSIM Motion Control allows players to fully control every element of their character's movements "


"SPECIAL ADVERTISING SECTIO \"REGEG STOY and its Partners in Gaming Aha As Interplay Moves CASTLES III And Expands Into The Future STONEKTIF With the case closed on what Interplay has up its sleeve for gamers both in and out of house, it's time to set our sights on the distant future. Interplay's future offerings to gamers include sequels to its successful past and future games. Among the titles for which sequels are planned are STONEKEEP, CASTLES II, EARTHWORM JIM, GURPS, M.A.X., and SHATTERED STEEL, the latter three discussed in these pages. Plus all new orginals bring incredible technology packed with state-of-the-art new engines and new innovations in game design that will have gamers coming back for more. interplay ENGAGE Interplay: Ready to ENGAGE If the future is multiplayer online gaming, then Interplay is there already. Interplay is working with ENGAGE Games Online to provide a game community where gamers can meet games online online to play the kinds of quality games that interplay has been making for years. One particularly cool thing about ENGAGE Games Online is that gamers will be able to get onto it from any of the major online networks that they currently use (such as AOL and Prodigy). On the network, gamers will be able to play against one another in real time while sending messages to keep the contests lively. Among the many Interplay products sceduled to appear on ENGAGE are an online version of the best-selling DESCENT, CASTLES II, DRAGON DICE (an AD&D product), DESCENT TO UNDERMOUNTAIN, and SHATTERED STEEL. ENGAGE also has the exclusive rights to bring WARCRAFT Il to online gamers! Engage is available on the internet at engagegames.com. Parting Thoughts \"By Gamers, for Gamers\" is more than just a motto; it's Interplay's guiding star. The people at Interplay like the same computer games that we all do, and those are the kinds of games this company is dedicated to making. The enthusiasm Interplay brings to creating new gaming experiences is no less electric than the computers used to make them. Interplay's passion for playing games is exceeded only by its passion for delivering the goods to those who play them. That is the reason that Interplay devotes so much energy to the immersive details that make for rewarding gameplay. Interplay lives by its motto: \"By Gamers. For Gamers.\" For More Information Headquarters: 16815 Von Karman Irvine, CA 92606 www.interplay.com Europe: Harleyford Manor Harleyford Henley Road Marlow Buckinghamshire SL7 2DX England E-mail: europe@ interplay.com Asia: Engage: Hiro-o Plaza, 17922 Fitch Ave. 6th floor Irvine, CA 92614 5-6-6 Hiro-o www.gamesonline.com Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150 Japan www.interplay.com/japan/ "


"***** REVIEW SOLID ICE DIFFICULTY LEVEL SPORTS INTERMEDIATE Brains 1, Beauty SOLID-ICE SOLID ICE Scores With Intelligent Hockey Gameplay, But Graphics Get A Penalty by Gordon Goble mation center down below, is a seemingly and even more varied than that of Virgin's undersized ice surface that claims merely NHL POWERPLAY 96 alk about your lousy timing. three-fifths of the total screen space. In --and that's saying something. You'll also Coinciding with the debut of your-face il certainly isn't, with just a solinotice that shot and goal totals, penalties, FA Sports colossal NHL tary side-to-side panning perspective and fatigue are authentically portrayed. In Hockey 97, quite possibly the showcasing players that aren't nearly big short, there's a good game here struggling best-looking sports title of all enough for numbers or team crests. to break free of its confines. time, comes Montreal-based As play begins to unfold, a couple of Strategy First uses the giant rinkside game developer Strategy First words will immediately spring to interface to plunk every possible bit of with its own take on hockey. mind-namely\"disjointed\" and \"confusinformation in front of you. There's the It's called Solid Ice, and in ing.\" I've tried my best to analyze just what typical stuff, such as team logos, score, many ways it's the antithesis makes SOLID ICE a hard game to play, and game clock, but there are also welof the EA game. Solid Ice is built around and have come to the decision that a poncome innovations, including a penalty the idea that quality artificial intelligence cerous frame rate is the big culprit. Players clock with space for four penalties and a are here, then detailed stat and data section for each and suddenly every player currently on the ice. they're over SOLID ICE's numerous editors let you there, and alter just about every element in the pucks seem to game. Here you'll find a NASCAR temporarily dis RACING-like paint program for customizappear from ing logos and color schemes, a player ediview. tor for skill alterations, and a lineup editor But a poor that'll get Lemieux and Jagr on the same frame rate is not five-man unit. Soud ICE is licensed by responsible for the NHL Players' Association but not the sticks and bodNational Hockey League, so you'll be ics that poke dealing with the real players but not the Price: $24.99 through nets, real teams and logos--all the more reason System gelatinous to change 'em! Requirements: 486 HEAVY FOG Hockey aficionados will appreciate Solid Ice's intelligent DX2-66 or better, MSscrums of playA fascinating but llawed look at PC DOS 5.0 or higher (or gameplay, but the muddled, 2D graphics will unfortunately obscure ers that lack any hockey, SOLID ICE should be noted for Windows 95). 7 MB the action. visual clarity, the things it does right. Hearty recomRAM (12 MB for Windows 95). 26 MB and a general mendations, however, will have to wait hard disk space, and varied gameplay are what PC puck\"Sogginess\" surrounding much of the until next time.& VESA-compliant video sters want. And they are, they are! But action. It's like being in a weird dream card (w/1 MB VRAM somehow these wonderful ideals became for SVGA graphics), 2x state, one that will begin to clear up only if APPEAL: Serious, patient hockey CD-ROM, Microsoftcamouflaged in muddled graphics on you've got the patience to stick with it fans with a preference for hockey's compatible mouse: their way to the screen, and that's too bad strategy and subtlety. Sound Blaster-combecause the program does hold a lot of MY BRAIN HURTS PROS: Playmaking variety, great inpatible sound card. game stat delivery, editors galore, # of Players: 1-2 promise. You've just got to peck through If you do, you'll come to appreciate artificial intelligence that's actually Protection: None (CD the cracks to see it. some of the more positive aspects of the intelligent. must be in drive) game. You'll eventually understand that CONS: Awkward Designer: Strategy WHAT THE PUCK? First player animationsgazillions of individgraphics that seriPublisher: Empire ously obstruct When you first take to the SOLD ICE ual moves that you just won't see anyInteractive gameplay, low-tech rink, you'll notice immediately that the where else--are behind that turtle of a Germantown, MD interfaces, tiny 2D (301) 916-9302 (301) 916-9302 game is far from 3D. What you will see. frame rate. Beyond the fog, you'll see that rink. Reader Service #: 332 aside from a monstrous scoreboard/inforplayer and team Al is probably as strong Hot 1E Eric Desjardins s 3313 9 : 59 2059 Adam Deadmarsh GOOI RATED CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Kicks Bass., NTROLA Fly Fishing The realistic sights, sounds, psychology and art of fly fishing come to life on CD-ROM, in this PC-CD ROM challenging multi WINDOWS 95 level skill game. KIDS TO ADULTS CONTENT RATED BY ESRB Tired of catching bass? Ready for a challenging fishing sim? Welcome to the relaxing and challenging world of fly fishing on your PC. The Art of Fly Fishing Volume 1 recreates this skillful sport using live videotaped footage. Fish three of the United Kingdom's finest trout and salmon rivers: the Blackwater, Spey and Test. With the soothing sounds of nature and the intricacies of choosing the right equipment and flies, this fishing simulation puts you right in the water. The Art of Fly Fishing is not just a fun fishing simulation; it also contains an extensive library of information to help you learn more about the fish, their habitat and their behavior. Choose your fishing spot based on conditions including time of day, season, temperature and water currents. Once you've chosen the right conditions, a variety of flies and rods will help you land the fish of your dreams, provided your casting skill is up to par. After you've practiced, invite up to 5 friends to enter into a fishing competition where the winner receives a cash prize and the opportunity to upgrade his equipment. The Art of Fly Fishing; the only fly fishing simulation for your PC. To order, see your local retailer or call 1-800-340-7888 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #280 PHILIPS  Arc Development. Published by Gametek, Inc. Distributed by Philips Media. All rights reserved "


"Only $49.95. Call (800) 757-7707 Please mention Special Offer NC1616 We've taken NASCA even more heart W NASCAR Both the cars and the tracks are painstakingly detailed right down to the authentic decals and billboards Realistic rearview mirror action lets you see who's coming up behind you. The competition's intense as you race to overtake NASCAR champion Dale Earnhardt Our ALUBE 77 mph Spotter and crew chief audio lets you know where the competition is as you race door-todoor with up to 39 other cars. Authentic NASCAR dashboard lets you keep track of your RPMs, fuel and other critical information 10043 NASCAR. Racing is also available for the Mac and the PlayStation... SIERRA PAPYRUS We're talking authentic-check out this legall 01996 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. NASCAR Racing 2 is officially licensed by NASCAR. Papyrus and Papyrus logo are trag Penske Racing South, Inc. Geoll Bodine's name and the likeness of the 17 car including the OVC trademark are used under license with GEB, Incorporated. The name of and likeness of Dave Marcis and the name, marks and race car desion of the 071 Mare right to use the name, likeness and image of Hendrick Motorsports car 124 DuPont Automotive Finishes and Jell Gordon are granted under license from JG Motorsports, Inc. The name of Johnny Benson, the name, marks and race car design or Bahan RACI logo are registered trademarks of Proctor and Gamble and may not be reproduced without the written consent of Proctor and Gamble. Proctor and Gamble have licensed these rights to Papyrus Design Group's name. Name and likeness of the OTO Tide car and Eagle are trademarks of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., reproduced by permission. Pontiac Pontiac Arrowhead Emblem, and Grand Prix are trademarks of General Motors Corporation used under license by Papyrus Design Group, Inc. NAPAIS URG of Roush Racing. Livonia. Ml. The Family Channel trademarks, PRIMESTAR trademarks, Roush Racing and Ted Musgrave's name andor likeness used by authority of Roush Racing, Livonia, M. "


"Racing and added ounding action. PC Gamer called NASCAR. Racing \"...simply the best racing sim ever created.\" Here's what makes NASCAR. Racing 2 even better: Compete in the 1996 season with real NASCAR drivers  Fast and easy Arcade Mode lets novices jump in and teams on 16 NASCAR tracks and start driving immediately Crew chief and spotter audio alert you to track, Faster graphics in SVGA conditions  Officially licensed by NASCAR DALE FARHHARDT MULTIPLAYER  U PONT Connect Setup Return Network play lets you race door-to-door and headto-head with up to 7 other players. A Load Save Delete Return Change tires, suspension and more to customize your car to your driving style. Learn all about 7-time NASCAR Champion Dale Earnhardt, as well as your other favorite drivers. I NASCAR DETAIL SHOP CECIQUE EM Rue One Hace Length : 102 UNOT Oppement Strength .. a Driving Mode Sune Entry List sisearen fece Teekend. Bei PRIMESTAR HOM W rected Set F A . PRIMISEST PRIMESC Twitter for w you can personalize your car by creating your vn unique designs and sponsorships in the ASCAR 2 paintkit. Get the big picture, as you race against Rusty Wallace and other top NASCAR drivers. Choose all your race options, then compete in real NASCAR events like the NAPA 500 of Atlanta. See your local software dealer or for a taste of the action, download our demo from http://www.sierra.com/games/NASCAR27 Design Group, Inc. PlayStation and the PlayStation logos are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Rusty Wallaces name and the likeness of the 12 car, including the Ford Motorsport logo are registered trademarks used under license with are used under the license with Marcis Auto Racing. The name of Bobby Labonte, the name and anarks of the Interstate Batteries Company, and the name, marks and race car design of Joe Globs Racing are used under license with Joe Gibos Racing. The ing the trademark of Pennzol Company are used under license with Baharl Racing and Johnoy Benson. The name and likeness and marks al #3 GM Goodwench Service stock car and Dale Earnhardt, are licensed with Dale Earnhardi, Inc. Tide and Tide the so with LCR. Inc. Chevrolet the Bow Tie emblem, Monte Carlo, and related body design are trademarks of the Chevrolet Motor Division, General Motors Corporation and used under license by Papyrus Design Group, Inc. Goodyear (and winged foot design) from NAPA. The Atlanta Motor Speedway is a registered trademark, the mark and track likeness are used under license from the Atlanta Motor Speedway. The Valvoline trademarks, Roush Racing and Mark Martin's name and/or likeness used by authority CIRCLE READER SERVICE #234 "


"***** REVIEW NFL QUARTERBACK CLUB '97 SPORTS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Smash-Mouth Football INISTORIC -CHOOSC SIH 16-SCROLL TEXT QB CLUB '97/s A Real Blitz by Scott A. May STEELERS 95, provided you football as electronic entertainhave ample RAM ment has always been somethe Steelers. Take over at the and don't plan on thing of a dichotomy. Arguably start of the 3rd quarter and see doing much mula near-perfect blend of strate If you can prevent the Cowboys titasking gy and action, the sport draws from winning their sth Super All 30 NFL Bowl Ring and 1st ever Super fans that typically fall into two teams and person Bowl victory against che camps: coaches and players. Sreelers. nel are representArmchair generals staunchly ed here, based on believe that play management AL COWBOYS their 96-97 preis the name of the game. scason rosters, Action enthusiasts respond with a grunt SIMULATION ENTER-PLAY SIN SPACE-CLEAR WINS including the new and head-slap. Personally, either by princiBaltimore Ravens. ple or sheer intimidation, I usually agree SITUATIONAL AWARENESS Taking over a classic matchup, like Teams are rated in with the latter group. After all, toss out the last year's Super Bowl, with just minutes to go is a neat idea. But seven perforcoaches and their playbooks and you can why didn't they also give us the option of replaying these great mance categories: still play a damn good game of football. games in their entirety? passing, running. The reverse is certainly not true. blocking, tackling PC football titles, in particular, tend to politics here just down-and-dirty gameblitzing, coverage, and special teams. be victims of their own ambitions, desperplay with myriad options to keep things Likewise, players are rated in three cateately trying to be everything to everyone interesting gories, according to position: QBs (accuWith few exceptions -notably Dynamix's If you'd rather play rough-and-tumble racy, range, and scrambling), fulllsacks FRONT PAGE SPORTS: FOOTBALL arcade football as opposed to a spread (agility, speed, and strength), and so on. series—the results are generally unsatis sheet-with-shoulder-pads statistical Individual ratings are most tapped for factory. Console-based games, on the sim-Acclaim has just the ticket with player trades, which the program handles other hand, focus on action in the trenchNEL QUARTERBACK CLUB '97, an almost well but unrealistically. 'Trade Steve Young es. No playbook editors or front-office pixel-by-pixel port of its console-born hit. even-up to the Jets for a third-string lineman? No problem here, but not bloody ES BUILDING A CONTENDER likely. I lowever nonsensical, unlimited Interestingly, while the player trades help breathe a bit of fantasy Satum version of QB CLUB '97 life into the game. proved somewhat anemic, the NFL Play modle offers a choice of prePlayStation rendition is an season, season, playoff, and Pro Bowl underrated champ. Luckily, games, using either the original or traded Iguana chose the PlayStation rosters. Both season and playoff modes as its benchmark when porting continue through to the Super Bowl. QB CLUB '97 over to the PC. Quick Play mode randomly selects two The translation to DOS is teams for a single-game contest. The third excellent, although you'll need play mode, Simulation, injects a lot of flaGRAPHIC CUT BLOCKS Even on the hottest PC, a super system to match the vor into the game. Here you can reenact there are a few rough visual edges. You can toggle original's smooth delivery and historic contests, entering the game at graphic quality for performance, from 320x200 up to concise control. The game critical junctures. For example, take con1024x768 even runs well within Windows trol of the Steelers in the third quarter of Price: $39.99 System Requirements: IBMcompatible 486DX2-66 or better, DOS 5.0 or greater (Windows 95 compatible), 8 MB RAM, 23 MB hard disk space, 1 MB VESAcompatible SVGA card, 2x CD-ROM drive; supports keyboard, mouse, 2and 4-button gamepads, Gravis GRIP, and Sound Blaster-compatible sound cards. # of Players: 1-6 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: Iguana Entertainment Publisher: Acclaim Entertainment Glen Cove, NY (516) 656-5000 Reader Service #: 333 JANUARY 1997 "


"MIDWAY YOU? 1996 port, wie la pro will concelot NBA Propos Haberl reperi rea din y e SHAWN KEMP 49\" -SCOTTIE PIPPEN 48\" ane Arts rden taight Gobierno est to th PENNY HARDAWAY 47\" DENNIS RODMAN 46\" ALONZO MOURNING 45\" -HAKEEM OLAJUWON 41\" a da DAVID ROBINSON 36\" JASON KIDD 33\" DAN MAJERLE 30\" los DIKEMBE MUTOMBO 26\" CHUCK PERSON 20\" whole orhi LUKE LONGLEY 15\" -TERRY MILLS 10\" Think you're ready for the NBA? Now's your chance with NBA Hang Time. It's a 2-on-2 non-stop, all-out hoopfest with the hottest MIRNE names in the league. Choose from over 150 of the NBA's best induding Hill. Miller, Malone and Johnson. Or use the Create A Player option to play as yourself (slightly improved, of course). Give yourself dangerous moves like monster jams, perfect three's, or laser-guided passes even Starks or Drexler would envy. So go on. Go head to head with the pros. And show them what your vertical's made of. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #261 MIDWAY IT'S GAME TIME. "


"Once upon a time, in an enchanted kingdom, there lived a big bosomed lady and some gerbils. "


"Enter a severely fractured fairy tale. Discworld II: Mortality Bytes is the graphic adventure with cheek. Over 100 hours of hilarious gameplay immerse you in a bizarre realm where dozens of bawdy characters face life without Death. Yes, Death has gone on holiday. And the hapless magician ! Diseworld Il features the voice of Eric Idle, former star of Monty-something-or-other. Rincewind must find a way to restore order in the world. You'll be dazzled by 25,000 cells of hand-drawn animation. You'll be delighted by the fiendishly clever puzzles. You'll be deeply offended by the vocal stylings of Eric Idle. Discworld II: Mortality Bytes. It's magical. It's enchanting. It's sick. DISCWORLD II DISCWORLD II MORTALITY BYTES! www.psygnosis.com TEEN PERFECT EB AGES 13 COSTAT RATED AT ESRB PSYGNOSIS ENTERTAINMENT ROM Discworld II 1996 Perfect Entertainment Limited all rights reserved. Published under exclusive license by Psygnosis L. Psygnosis and the Psygnosis logo are trademarks of Psygnosis Ltd. The ratings icon is a trademark of the Interactive Digital Software Association Any and all original and/or distinctive characters, features likenesses and element appearing in the Discworld series on which this product is based are trademarks and Terry and lyn Pratchett. \"Discworld' is a trademark registered by Terry Pratchett CIRCLE READER SERVICE #288 "


"REVIEW  NFL QUARTERBACK CLUB '97 SPORTS 1995's Super Bowl and see if you can beginning players. defeat the Cowboys. Following the coin toss a feature surThere are 50 specific simulations availprisingly absent from the console able, including fantasy games such as a versions and a quick visual tour of the cream matchup between the 1995 and fully rendered stadium, the game begins. 1977 Cowboy teams. If that's not enough, Approximately 1,000 offensive and defenyou can also create and save up to five sive variations are claimed to be available custom simulations, applying up to 14 through the side-scrolling playbook. Play setup options. calling is a simple three-step process: Each game mode allows up to six playchoose the formation, yardage (short, ers to compete, either on the same or medium, or long), and actual play design. opposing teams. The game supports a key blocking assignments, line sbills, and wide variety of controllers, including key receiver routes are all clearly labeled. Also board, mouse, two-and four-button joy included are so-called signature plays of a sticks, and the Cravis CRiP adapter. Both few clozen top quarterbacks, although keyboard and mouse controls are awk most seem to be variations of the generic ward at best, and because the game was long bomb. On defense, you can handoriginally designed with four-button con pick your coverage or let the computer sole controllers in mind, a two-button joytake its best guess by simply choosing Smart D. Up to four audibles RST GANGG Data can be assigned for both offense and defense Play execution, controller responsiveness, and graphical quality are dramatically affected by your harcare setup. Slow machines equipped with weak video cards will suffer from choppy H11 BLEDSOE animation and frustrating # 92 WHITE control delays. Thankfully, Iguana offers several options to improve performance on older systems, including a SNOW JOB Adverse weather affects both mobility and visibility, keeping choice of seven display resoQBs in the pocket longer, to the delight of blitzing linebackers. lutions, adjustable on the fly from a low of 320x200 up to 1024x768. Low-res displays stick severely limits both play calling and will greatly improve animation and conon-field executions. The game definitely t rol at the expense of graphics, which will favors Gravis controllers, cither the GRiP be rather chunky Hi-res gives the on-field or GamePad varieties, graphics a more polished sheen, but if your hardware can't handle it, you'll expeYOU'RE IN THE PROS NOW, ROOKIE rience dreadful frame skipping and slugPre-game options include penalties gisl control. You can also adjust texture(on/off), weather (rain, snow, hol, cold) mapping and turn off extraneous graphic field type (grass or turf), quarter length (5, effects to help smooth things out. 10, or 15 minutes), anul difficulty (rookic, pro.or all-pro). Acclaim boasts flexible INSTANT REPLAY REVISITED computer Al that will leam and react to Once game performance is tweaked to your play-calling style. This feature, plus your satisfaction, the actual on-field cach player's individual abilities, increases action is fairly fluid. Despite a certain according to skill level. The rookie level degree of unavoidable graphic blockiness, culs you a lot of slack, while all-pro cliffi in which players sometimes seem mekled culty can be painfully unforgiving for together, the animation is quite expressive, using motion-capturing technology. Line blocks open visible holes for backs to juke and dive through, while hands play a critical role in blocking and pass receiving/deflection. The pace is just right, especially for proper execution of timing patterns. Although such details aren't always discernible in the heat of play, they are clearly visible in instant replay, which is one of the best I've seen. Individual player attributes can playa big factor, particularly at all-pro skill levels. Power backs such as Jerome Bettis are more likely to plow through the line, while finesse runners like Marcus Allen are more nimble in their cuts. Likewise, teams with a monstrous defensive line are more likely to block passes or disrupt the backfield. This is always a difficult arca to assess, in terms of realism and individual cffort, but for the most part, the designers have done an admirable job. Among the game's handful of sore points are the lack of player injuries and sometimes spolly officiating. Rookie-level computer Al can also be comically unrcalistic, producing game scores in the high 50s, even with five-minute quarters, against statistically superior opponents. Like most arcade-style games in this category, this title fares best when played against other warm blooded competitors. There are certainly some chinks in this game's armor, but then again, the perfect football game has yet to be built. Overall, play-oriented fans shoull find NFL. OB CLUB '97 one of the best implementations of hands-on football action yet on the PC. APPEAL: Any football fan who's longed for console-style gridiron action on the PC. PROS: The best on-field player controls of any PC football game, complemented with tons of great options. The action hit MADDEN 97 should have been. >CONS: No player injuries, strange officiating, screwy trading Al, and high scoring, even for an action game. Not quite up to the PlayStation version, despite the high hardware require ments. RATED NU CC JANUARY 1997 "


"ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED wydis Wang ord 395 out «Can I challenge Arnold Palmer and my buddy in Tibet to a skins game on Maui in heavy fog at 3 AM?\" nan I golf in 16.7 million colors? Can I play against Arnold Palmer at Latrobe? Can I play against my friend in bet? Can either of them beat me? Can I take a 3-D tour of the U Kapalua Plantation Clubhouse? Can I play match play? Best ball? Skins? Can I add in my own sounds? Can position a camera over the ocean? Can I place a camera right in front of the ball? Won't that break the camera lens? Can I still play all the links Championship Courses? Can I add feg? Can I play with WIN 95? Can I get 1600X1200 resolution? Can I mak a higharching wedge shot back up on the green? Can watch Arnie react to a good shot? A bad shot? Can I resize the end windows? Can I see the tees break off? Can I choose from different golfers? Both male and female? Can I use the mowing stripes to read the contour of the green? Can I take a Virtual Reality tour of Arnie's workshop? Can I golf in Hawaii, Pennsylvania and Chicago on the same day? Can I get a 3AM tee time? Can I hear the birds and waves in 3D stereo? Can I hit my ball 1/2 mile out of bounds? Can I play from there? Can I watch aerial fly-bys of every hole? Can I choose from more than 15 add-on courses? Can I watch an instant replay of my swing? Are there multiple camera views? Can I challenge an artificially-intelligent computer opponent? Can I retract the control panel? Can I call toll-free for support? Can I take multimedia tours of Kapalua and Latrobe? Can I save a round in progress, go to dinner, and finish it later? Can I send and receive text messages during a round on the modem? If I lived on the course could I find my house? Is Links LS the most realistic golf simulation ever? 66 Yes. PELICAN HL. 4 The NEW Links LS add-on courses Links Links Links 5 reline 5 Courelacury Consel LINKSCLS The NEW Links 5-Course Libraries Vol. 1, 2 & 3: Playable with Links LS, Links Pro CD, Microsoft Golf, & Links Pro CD Macintosh www.accesssoftware.com. Code: 010-CGW For a FREE Links LS Trial-Size version CD, call 1.800.800.4880 Call 1.800.800.4880 for a FREE Pandora Directive Demo CD CIRCLE READER SERVICE #248 "


"How the future is played |«The classic game of naval strategy is afloat, refitted and battle-ready for '97\" Gamesmania Web Site Nel ODOS BIRATEGI HARPOON97 HARPOON t MAGICO 50 new missions with SVGA graphics for a total of over 250 scenarios. Available in Windows.1 and Windows 95. BOCORROR Four theaters of play: Greenland & Iceland/ North Atlantic/Indian Ocean & Persian Gulf/ Mediterranean. Introductory quick start-makes Harpoon Classic 97 accessible to everyone! Gateway to Harpoon Online with FREE trial included. \"Just when you thought the Cold War was over, Interactive Magic introduces the classic naval warfare simulator in a new and more exciting way.\" The Department of War Web Site From the critically acclaimed designers of Harpoon \"War Game of the Year\" and \"Hall of Fame.\" Computer Gaming World \"Top 40 Best Games of All Time.\" PC Gamer  Offer good for new members only limit one licetral per household You 15 hours of treenline play must bewed within 30 days of your insign on Audio Visual copyright 1988 ty S p oon computer code portions copyright 1920.93 by TheSuty Pacolo. Hapon computer code portions copyright 1994 by Albane textive Software, Inc and Applied Computing Services, Inc. Harpoona tegistered trademark of any Bond and Chris Carbon Alethettemarks are the property of the respective owners 124,19% Alsance Interactive, Inc. All rights reserved \"Best PC War Game.\" Game Players INTERACTIVE P.O. Box 13 491 . Research Triangle Park : NC 27709 . www.imagicgames.com more information a II CIRCLE READER SERVICE #170 1 . 8 8 8 2 3 2 5 8 3 6 "


"DENNY ATKIN  SIMULATION/SPACE sim uel tio mit The High Sierra that Cares Dynamix Prepares To Snatch Back The Flight Sim Crown RED BARON II and PRO Pion. Before we got into those, though, producer Graeme Bayless asked me if I'd like to talk to his brother Scot about his latest project, ACES: X-FICHIERS. A rhetorical question, I assumed. As Scot Bayless described X-FIGHTERS, realized it sounded a lot like a hybrid of the very lxst features of ACES OVER EUROPE and At its basic level, XFICHIERS will look a lot like a modern ACES OVER EUROPE. Mustangs, Thunderbolts, P-38s, and other planes will battle it out with Messerschmitts and Focke-Wulls. But the real fun starts when you start playing what if.\" During World War II, the Allies back-burnered new ife is full of odd coincidences. The night before I left to see the latest sims in development at Sierra's Dynamix division, I was having a spirited discussion with some mcmbers of CompuServe's Flight Sim Forum about my decision not to include SECRET WEAPONS OF THE LUFIWAFFE (SWOTL) in my November list of top 15 sims of all time. Some didn't agree with my decision to give the nod to SWOTL's predecessor, THEIR FINEST HOUR: THE BATTLE OF BRITAIN (a decision reached because most of the things that made SWOTL special were pioneered in TFH). One thing we did all agree on was that we'd like to see a moder version of SWOTL. But with Larry Holland knce-deep in ultra-profitable Star Wars games, that doesn't seem likely any time soon. At least...not from LucasArts. 1 IF Bayless can pull X-FIGHTERS off, people may finally retire their ancient LucasArts sims. SON OF SWOTL Aces: X-FIGHTERS will feature experimental aircraft such as the Dornier Do-335 Arrow. BROTHERS IN ARMS Online arguments still rattling through my head, I arrived in scenic Eugene, Oregon, to get a look at the progress of SWOTL, held together by the hot now simulation engine developed for RED BARON II. This was starting to sound good. technologies such as jet engines, pouring their resources instead into producing proven designs in mass quantities. But cidal tendencies will be able to take F-8 Crusaders up against Eurofighter 2000s. ON THE RADAR  Jane's ADVANCED TACTICAL FIGHTERS will get the US NAVY FIGHTERS 97 treatment. Look for a Windows 95 version of the simulation to appear sometime this spring. The likely title is ATF GOD, and it will include the planes and missions from both ATF and the Nato FIGHTERS expansion disc. The Jane's team is looking to eventually integrate the sim's multiplayer capabilities with those built into USNF 97, so those of you with suiThis integration may not make it into the first release, though, because it appears ATF GOLD will feature a multiplayer campaign module that will make tying in with USNF 97 a bit more complicated. Designer Paul Grace wouldn't give any details, but he promises that these new multiplayer features will be unique, and \"a helluva lot of fun.\" JANUARY 1997 "


"5. To THE LOST GAMES. THE RELAT Hors. The Book. THE LIMITED EDITION COLLECTIBLES. Other Hindu Jewish Protestant Catholic ZAG "


" PI v omenijos van www.idsoftware.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #241 Distributed by www.gtinteractive.com GT Interactive Software Id Anthology 1996 Id Software, Inc. Published by Id Software, Inc. Distributed by GT Interactive Sollware Corp. All trademarks are the property of their respective companies. "


"DENNY ATKIN Hebaran II POD SIMULATION SPACE what if the U.S. had instead decided to use jet technology to defeat the Third Rcich? On the Axis side, Hitler delayed the Me-262 jet by ordering ils modification into a fighter-bomber. By the time the jet was ready to enter service, the Axis infrastructure was so damaged that only a small percentage of the Me-262s produced entered combat. Hundreds sat engineless and useless because the Allies had destroyed the factories that made ball bearings needed for the Me-262's engines. But what if the Luftwaffe had fielded the Mc-262 and other advanced designs a year earlier in the war? These are the kinds of questions the XFICHIERS tcam hopes you'll be able to answer when playing their sim. Like HOE and see how they would have fared. Look for planes that were just about to go into service near the end of the war, such as the P-80 Shooting Star and Domier 335 Arrow. You'll also be able to take to the skies in experimental planes such as the General Motors XP75 (a plane built from STEEPLE CHASE The rolling hills of Europe give RED BARON II a spare parts from more realistic look than SILENT THUNDER, the first game that other aircraft used the improved 3-Space engine. designs) and Northrop's wacky XP-56, a tail-less, sweptwhich now looks like a definite April wing, pusher-prop interceptor. The final release. The team is determined not to let aircraft list hasn't been decided yet, but the sim slip past that date. To this end, look for plenty of ocl designs that have they're carefully watching features that never before been seen in sims. could slip the release date-notably 3D The X-FICHIERS team also has ambi card support and multiplayer -and tious plans for the game's multiplayer they're prepared to omit them from the modes. It's way too carly to tell exactly initial release if necessary. (Producer what will be possible by the time the proGraeme Bayless assured me, however, gram is released, but the team is hoping to that if they don't make it into the initial support squadron-level multiplayer release, they will be available soon after.) action. Since the game was previewed in these As this is written, X-FIGHTERS is still in pages last year, the interface has been the earliest stages of development. The given a complete facelift. Instead of wanteam is shooting for release in late dering around a virtual base, you'll instead 1997 not an unrcalistic date when you choose missions and view the battlefield consider they're building on the RED using an interface very similar to that in BARON II simulation engine. the original RED BARON. Although the preliminary interface was classy, this one LATE TO THE BATTLE makes it much easier to jump right into Speaking of RED BARON II, work is prothe action. gressing nicely on that World War I sim, Since our preview, the already impresMAIN MENU Sindri Camanin Cobiect rurawa Ara review P erence Omit Game INTERFACE LIFT The virtual flight headquarters metaphor present in early alpha versions has been replaced with an interface reminiscent of the original RED BARON. SWOTL, X-FIGHTERS will give you a chance to take aircraft that were still in the prototype or design stage into battle TIPS.  Getting blown away in Interactive Magic's APACHE? Here are some cheats that will turn your standard Army-issue chopper into Air Wolf Type in the either of the following case-sensitive login names to set up your super-copter: Flamdwyn Aiobhell gives you infinite weapons. Lyn Wins gives you infinite weapons, invulnerability, and the helicopter model cheats, The model cheats are: Alt-T: Overtorque toggle. Ctrl-T: Terrain-following toggle, Alt-V: No fuel Shift-V: Refuel. Shift-Ctrl-Alt-Tab (with overtorque off): Speed warp. Each successive press of this key combo will cycle warp from 0 through 9. There are also a number of key combinations for fine-tuning the visual environment. Alt-F1: Flat-shaded polygons. Alt-F2: Gouraud-shaded polygons. Alt-F3. Gouraud-shaded and texture-mapped polygons Alt-F4: Toggle shadows (only on clear days). All-1 through 7. Change visual range. Alt-8: Graduated horizon. Alt-9: Gouraud toggle All-O: Texture-map toggle. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"SIMCOPTER WHEN SIMCITY 2000 CALLS 911 L AISIM COPTER 0:45 pm: Fight five-alarm fire. 8:56 pm: Collar criminals. 9:02 pm: Save shipwrecked Sims. When you're flying Uthe first game to go above and beijond SimCity 2000every job is an extreme rush. SimCopter\" sends you on high-anxiety missions into 30 pre-built SimCitu 2000 cities. You can even import our Own SimCiu 2000 cities for homemade emergencies. And you'll see lour cities as never before: up close in hyper-realistic 3-0. Each new adventure heightens your challenge, and your blood pressure. Rise up the ranks and reap lour reward: a new copter with all the extras, and several extra near-death experiences. SimCity 2000 not required. MAXI Nerves of steel recommended. Available for Windows 95.  Maxls, Inc. All rights reserved. SimCopter is a Irademark and SimCitu 2000 and Maxis are registered trademarks of Maxis, Inc. All other trademarks or registered trademarks are the properties of their respective owners. For product or ordering information, contact cour local retailer or call 800-33NAXIS. Visit the Maxis Web site at http://www.maxis.com. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #173 "


"DENNY ATKIN SIMULATION/SPACE NAST21 G ( 93 1346 LON VOLTADE sive flight models have been further and then perform a mission. You can also improved 3-Space graphics engine creatimproved. This isn't surprising, since modify missions, challenge enemy aces to ed by Dynamix. Like FLIGHT SIMULATOR, they're being developed by Gary one-on-one duels, or fly computer-selectyou can simply fly around cross-country Stottlemeyer, the man who virtually ed single missions and enjoy the scenery, and like ATP, you defined the realistic PC flight model with Look for lots of other nice touches, can fly scheduled hops between various his work on Spectrum I loloByte's such as allied aircraft that fire flares when airports. But the most impressive feature FALCON 3.0. The most impressive aspect they recognize you coming in for a ren by far is Pro Pilot's flight training. If all is how the planes handle damage. Lose dezvous. One very good bit of news: your flying has been virtual and you're part of one of your fabric-covered wings Sierra has heard the cries of frustration anxious to learn more about the real pilotand the plane pulls realistically to that with its move to online manuals, and you ing experience, this is the sim for you. side. Lose a portion of your horizontal stacan look forward to RED BARON II ship Much of the space on the game's two CDs will be taken up by tutorials that teach you real flying and navigation techniques. Although the instruction and time logged isn't \"official,\" it is accurate enough that you'll be well prepared if you ever decide to actually work on a license. After viewing a video on a topic such as constant altitude turns, you'll be able to actually try the mancuver in the air while being coached by an Al flight instructor As your flying skills progress, you'll be able to move from the LOW 12655290 VACUUM Cessna 172 to a Bonanza, then to T? COORDINATOR the Baron and King Air twins, and finally to a Citation et. WE BOTH SHTE Of course, if you already have the right stuff, you can skip the BAY BUZZ San Francisco is one of 28 fully modeled cities in Pro Pilor; the entire U.S. landscape is tutorials and just fly around. The available for cross-country flying. entire U.S. is available for exploration, with over 27 million accurate altitude maps based on U.S. bilizer and you'll find altitude control ping with a thick paper manual packed Ceological Service digital elevation maps becomes a real problem. with historical background on the planes, (so yes, you can make the Grand Canyon One aspect of the sim that hasn't pilots, and aerial battlefield. The manual's run). In addition, every active airport in changed is the dynamic battle environ being written by Dennis Kilgore, who was the U.S. is in place, with proper radio frement. RED BARON Il features a \"living\" historian and manual author for ACES OF quencies and instrument landing aids battlefield that fully simulates everything \"THE DEEP available. There are 28 fully modeled going on in the air and on the ground for cities, and you'll find generic cities in a roughly 15-mile radius around your air FLIGHT SCHOOL other populated areas. craft. In addition to your own targets, The other sim in development at Look for a full range of instrument sysyou'll also encounter enemy and allied Dynamix, Pro Pilot, is slated to ship tems to be modeled, from manifold presplancs on missions of their own. Nothing about a month after RED BARON. 'Ilvis sure to an optional Clobal Positioning is scripted here you shouldn't ever civilian simulation puts you in the cockpit System receiver. Each plane has an accuencounter two missions that are exactly of a variety of general aviation aircraft, and rate instrument panel. Vicws both in and the same. is set to give Microsoft's FLICIT out of the plane are top-notch, a far cry Most campaign missions will require SIMULATOR which is getting very long in from the ECA ugliness of SubLogic sims you to fly to a spot (you'll use a map on the tooth-a real run for the money. or the textured mess of PLICIT your kneeboard and landmarks visible PRO Pitor builds on the civilian simu SIMULATOR outside the plane to navigate), rendezvous lator experience of Sublogic (which was Look for a full-blown preview of PRO with another clement(friendly or enemy), acquired last year by Sierra) and the PILOT in an upcoming issue of CGWC 99890110930 ROF 28XDA 1200 TANK V CARA THROT ME JANUARY 1997 "


"A-LO CUBA! ERIC \"HELLCATS\" PARKER CREATED BY Available now for Windows 95 THE MOST REALISTIC FLIGHT SIMULATOR. EVER. ACTIVISION One of the fastest flight sim frame rates State-of-the-art AI guarantees high replayability www.activision.com The most advanced physics model of any flight sim 8-player over a LAN and modem-to-modem air combat OG PARSOFT PSI INTERACTIVE Activision 1 a reerstered trademark of Activision Inc. A 10 Cubal is a trademark ol Parsoft Interactive. O 1996 Parsoft Interactive. Ali nghts reserved. Published Allorher trademarks and trade names are and debuted by Activision, Inc. the properties of their respective owners. FUL in CIRCLE READER SERVICE #98 Bang 594 "


"THE SEQUEL TO Heroes of Might and Magic, TAKE A The king is dead, a civil war rages throughout the countryside, and the people are clamoring for a new leader. Whether you choose to play on the side of 10 IS T A B Whether you choose to play on the side of good or evil, you can control the greater kingdom if you can muster the courage and skill to take it. long-awaited sequel is a feature-by-feature enhancement of everything that made the A A T T THE I H of everything that made the E original Heroes an all-time original Heroes an all-time DAK strategy classic. Scores of new hero and monster types, alliance formation for team play, enlarged combat maps, increased multi-player options, and R O YAL a lexible World Builder\" module a flexible \"World Builder\" module are just a few of the reasons why Heroes II will be a prized addition to your CD-ROM treasure trove. THRONE k Form alliances with friends or the computer. HEROES elle Multiplayer action for 2-6 players via Internet, modem, or network. of Might and Magic CERAS # Expanded \"interactive\" battlefields. * More of everything! Over 60 scenarios, 65 heroes, and 66 monsters. Dozens of new skills, spells and artifacts. of Includes powerful \"World Builder\" game editor. * Available for Windows 95 and DOS. NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC BP "


"THE 1995 STRATEGY GAME OF THE YEAR com Computer Gaming World EROES of Might and Magic THE SUCCESSION WARS PO For more information call 1-800-251-9563 or check out http://www.nwcomputing.com COMPUTING STUDIO 3 DO New Word Computing, the New World Computing logo and even at dad tegic are trademarks and arogistered trademand of the 3DO COM 1996 The 300 Company, Aligots reserved all other trademarks belong to their Racuche Dockers lieve World Computing and The UD Company CIRCLE READER SERVICE #142 RO.Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW  688 ATTACK SUB 2 Deeply Qualified SIMULATION/SPACE Jane's New Sub Sim Is Better Than Mil Spec by Denny Atkin Under Construction FONTON CENE CSNEAK In 3D GPREVIEW ubmarines: the silent service. Wrapped in secrecy throughout the Cold War, the Navy's submerged force is still one of the most classified operations this side of the National Security Agency. However, as the Cold War has waned and the armed services have begun to feel the need for public support in an era of budget cuts, they've opened up a bit about the roles of even their more secret weapons. At the same time, many private companies that have depended on the military for their livelihood have branched out in an effort to make up for waning defense contracts. And as unlikely as it seems together these changes are leading to the development of one leck of a PC simulation. Jane's 688 ATTACK SUB 2 combines the knowledge base of the Jane's information library, the game-design experience of Electronic Arts, the simulation-development knowledge of an experienced Depot Cerergercese 10. A. GAMOSTLL IN DEVELOPMENT KID ENDGAME A Russian submarine falls victim to an ADCAP (ADvanced CAPability) torpedo. The 3D view is one of the few unrealistic concessions to playability. ly to be the most realistic submarine simulation you can play without getting a security clearance. MUTFPR VEHOVETTE AON DOMO CENSE SOUND FOUNDATIONS While the project is being helmed by FAs Paul Grace (whose credits include the original 688 ATTACK SUB, SEAWOLF; and Jane's ATF and NATO FIGHTERS), the development work is actually being done by Connecticut-based Sonalysts, Inc. This company has been doing work for the military and industry since 1973 on projects ranging from naval warfare simulations to tactical decision aids dealing with sonar analysis. In recent years, Sonalysts has branched out into a variety of other endeavors, ranging from putting their sonar expertise to work in creating Fish Startle (cevice that scares fish away from construction sites, power plants, and other dangerous areas) to running fullblewun film and recording studios. Now the company has teamed with EA to create a nuclear attack sub simulation. Most of the members of the project team at Sonalysts have backgrounds in creating simulations for the military. We were able to look at unclassified builds of some of these when visiting Sonalists headquarters, and the Target Motion Analysis sim used by the Navy looks very much like TMA screen in 688 ATTACK SUB 2. However, the one in the game actually looks better than the monochrome, wireframe military sim. The milil ary's olviously not as concerned with flash and dazzle as the typical gamer... Guiding the development team is Sonalysts' Capt. Terry Jones (USN, Ret.). Joncs has served as captain of both SSN (muclear attack) and SSBN (ballistic missile) submarines, and is bringing that experience to the design of the simulation's scenarios. Although some concess ions are being made in the name of gameplay -such as the inclusion of external 3D views and the lack of uneventful cruises -the team's background should help 688 ATUNCK SUB 2 set new standards for realism. In fact, carly versions were perhaps a bit too close to the real thing for the Navy's comfort. When the Pentagon was PAUSE POSITIVE I.D. The stadimeter lets you identify ship classes by comparing a ship's silhouette and masthead height with a stored database. defense contractor, and the real-world submarine experience of a retired nuclear submarine captain. The result is very likeCG JANUARY 1997 "


"688 ATTACK SUB 2. SNEAK PREVIEW -I'm Afraid I Can't Discuss That... provided with the first draft of the game's procedural help files, they asked Sonalists to drop some of the detail, as there was a bit more information about submarine operations there then they wanted available in a computer game. SIMULATION/SPACE BATTLE STATIONS Typical of modem submarinc games, you'll be able to operate each of the boal's stations. These include the sonar, fire control, navigation, radio/ESM/comms, and TMA stations, as well as ship control and, of course, the periscope. Five types of sonar are fully modeled, including narrowand broad-band, active intercept, active, and Demon (the waterfall display). Actual sampled recordings from an SSN are used for the sonar and other sounds within the game. One of the more interesting systems modeled is just starting to go into service now on actual submarines. The stacimeter uses a video camera mounted on the boat's periscope to grab an image of a potential target. You input the masthead height of the ship, then compare its silhouette with those stored in the stadimeter. Using this information, you can easily identify the class of ship you're targeting. One station you won't find on a real submarine, but which is integral to the game, is the viewscreen. This \"magic\" device has four camera views that let you zoom in on any object in the sim and get a 3D view. Of course, it's not a realistic capability, but who wants to miss the chance to watch a torpedo home in on its target? The sub modeled is a latehe Navy was kind enough to arrange a visit aboard a real Los Angeles-class attack sub during my visit to Sonalysts. Trekking over with a couple of EA staffers and Sonalysts' subject matter expert Captain Terry Jones to the nearby submarine base in Groton, Connecticut, I was to get a first-hand look at the USS Alexandria, SSN 757 I knew this wasn't going to be a typical tour when I was asked not to photograph the sub's exterior, because its masts were visible. It turns out that much is still classified about the submarine service. Has the 688 class ever seen combat? Other than the already publicly acknowledged Tomahawk missile launches during the Gulf War, they can't comment on operations. What are the performance specifications? They can only say that it can go at least 800 feet\" and \"at least 25 THE REAL THING The USS Alexandria, SSN 757, preknots.\" What kind of counter pares to submerge. measures does the sub use in combat? \"A variety of devices...\" Not to give the impression that the folks aboard the ship weren't cooperative-they treat guests very graciously, going out of their way to show off the ship and answer any unclassified questions. But submariners are definitely still part of a \"silent service,\" with most of the operational details closely held secrets. If you've ever visited a cramped World War II submarine at a museum, you might think the modem Alexandria spacious. That is, until you remember that there are 138 people sharing the space on the boat, and that it often goes over a month-or months-without surfacing. The crew's mess is probably smaller than your grandmother's dining room. One small washer and a dryer handle laundry for the entire ship. As we toured the ship, I saw that the Sonalysts team had done their homework modeling the sonar waterfall displays, fire-control panels, and control room. Many control panels are covered up BATTLE STATIONS The ship's control room is when visitors are aboard, but what we laid out just like the real thing. were able to see was an interesting mix of technology ranging from a modern NEC computer monitor displaying an error about a failed SCSI boot device, to dials to levers and dials that would look at home on a 1950s-era submarine. Despite the sophistication of today's subs, the dangerous environment they work in makes the use of proven technology wise. So although \"fly by wire\" technologies could very likely be fairly easily adapted to allow all a sub's maneuvering to be conducted from a single station, even today's most modern subs still alter their speed by signaling crewmembers in the engine room. We left the submarine with an even greater admiration for the men who protect America's interest at sea. To spend weeks, even months, cooped up in such close quarters, working six hours and taking 12 off, takes amazing dedication, stamina, and patience. If you want to truly live the submarine experience when playing 688 Attack Sub 2, try cramming about 28 people in your computer nook while you play. BME JANUARY 1997 CG "


"DEATH IS IN THE AIR. * O * A * M "


"WHEN YOU'RE A WEAPONS MANUFACTURER. PEACE CAN PUT YOU OUT OF BUSINESS. SO TO GET PROFITS BACK UP. YOU'VE GOT TO INCITE AND SURVIVE THE MOST GRUELING BATTLES ON LAND AND UNDERWATER. PLENTY OF DIFFERENT MISSIONS. EACH WITH A COMPLETELY NEW STORYLINE. OBJECTIVE. AND OPPONENTS: YOUR SLAMBIRD COMES WITH DIFFERENT FEATURES OPTIMIZED FOR BOTH LAND AND UNDERWATER ENVIRONMENTS. STAVENGER GE GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com PC CD-ROM SAN Amoko 1996 Scary.he A cts forved. Created and putished by Saar . Inc. Distributed by GT Heractive Schaare Cop. Al trademars are the property of the respective companies CIRCLE READER SERVICE #374 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW  688 ATTACK SUB 2 SULLTED LITO SIMULATION/SPACE CLB C U ACTS M43 BUSCA TUTTRATTINI KASVION Cu Curusta Care Cum te Shows mer 19. A. 10 test. Ae. EISIEN DONEC Uber Constructon AITMAlcchnician. Then in NON-QUAL PUKES combat you can analyze the When a submariner first comes aboard, sonar returns yourself and let he has to earn his dolphins--the pin that the computer handle TMA. signifies he's qualified in submarine operaSonalysts has implementtions. Until that point, he's considered a od enemy Al based on \"non-qual puke.\" 688 ATTACK SUB will routines developed for their include extremely detailed online help naval training experience. covering all aspects of sub operations (this As you get better, enemy was the section that had to be toned down Al will buff up in order to to please the Pentagon), so you should be provide a greater threat able to earn your virtual dolphins fairly Because the Al adjusts to quickly. Of course, the sim will also be your level of success, it LOCAL MOTION The Target Motion Analysis station helps you should be challenging, but ATOS identify a ship's bearing, course, and speed. never overwhelmingly impossible to beat. model Los Angeles-class boat equipped with four torpedo tubes and 12 vertical MISSION ORDERS launch tubes. At your disposal you'll find In addition to a number of single MK 48 ADCAP torpedoes, as well as missions and 10 training scenarios, 688 Harpoon and Tomahawk missiles. ATTACK SUB 2 fcatures 14 campaign Targeting all of these devices is realisticalscenarios. You'll start in the Caribbean, ly complicated, but you can get an assist where you'll undertake missions near REAR VIEW Checking for targets behind the from your crew if you like Cuba and Colombia. Some of these ship using the towed array: five sonar You can run the entire sub single-hand have a 'Tom Clancy book feel, such as modes are realistically modeled. cdly, but the only station you really must one where you're tasked with dropping opcrate is fire control. Al crewmembers a seal team near a drug lord's boat. Your packed with reference information from can run each of the other stations, analyz second tour will be in the Mediter Jane's lighting Ships ing sonar returns, identifying targets, and rancan/Adriatic, where you'll conduct If you played the original 688 ATTACK operations off Bosnia and Libya. lrom SUB or SEAWOLF, don't look for the same there it's off to the coast of Iran, and finally kind of gaming experience here. You to the North Pacific, where you'll face won't find chases through deep-water your most difficult tasks, battling elements chasms or subs that can do 60 knots here. of a confrontational Russian force Thic late alpha version I examined indicatThe sim includes a mission editor ed that 688 ATTACK SUB 2 will sport which uses a NOM topography database imprecedented levels of authenticity. of all the world's oceans and seas to let You should be able to plunge into the you create missions in any region. game and see for yourself sometime A wide variety of ground, sca, and air in March. units are available, so you can build engagements against subs, task forces, DOBNO BOO SCOPING IT OUT The periscope is more difficult to use in and land targets. PIMO PMO PMO PMO rough seas, when waves will often wash over your view. And you're not limited to playing alone. Multiplayer EN plotting solutions on enemy ships. As your scenarios are supported, crew gains experience, they'll move with up to eight players on a through four levels of Al which allow them network, each captaining a to perform their duties faster and more different sub. You can play accurately. At the end of each tour, you'll suby vs. sul, or create misbe given the opportunity to trade in\" expe' sions in the mission editor. rienced crew members. For instance, if You might task one group of you're a whizat sonar but you stink at submarines with escorting a ARSENAL OF DOOM With 12 vertical and four horizontal using the TMA station, you might trade in convoy that another is trying launch tubes, a Los Angeles-class attack sub is a force your top-level sonar operator for a better to destroy, for instance, to be reckoned with. DOMO PAUSE TURUCUSUT IN F E NO ooooo OCESS SEEN S ECUENTEVEN ATZORAN CG JANUARY 1997 "


"The reason lightning, in the same place is that the same place isn't there doesnt strike twice the second time. Willie Tyler Digital precision. Deadly accuracy. SIDEN INDER 3D Pro Imagine scorching your enemies with razor-sharp precision. With the world's first digital-optical joystick, the Sidewinder 3D Pro, you'll balance complex moves with maximum control to get the ultimate in responsive game play. You won't have to recalibrate, even after hours of play. And every handle rotation instantly changes your viewpoint, Digital Overdrive lets the joystick communicate more efficiently with your Windows 95-based games. All the better to singe your competition. Microsoft Where do you want to go today?_www.microsoft.com/sidewinder/ 1996 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks and Where do you want to go today? and Sidewinder are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation, "


"SEGASOFT SEGASOFT\" Developed by Developed by 1996 sepusori ne. All rights res 1996 SegaSoft Inc. All rights reserved Obsidian 1996 Rocket Science Games, Inc. All rights reserved. Segasoft and the SegaSoft logo are trademarks of Segaser "


"YOUR RULES DO NOT APPLY HERE FOR A FREE WINDOWS 95 DEMO OR TO ORDER OBSIDIAN DIRECT. CALL .888.SEGASOFT WWW.SEGASOFTCOM OBSIDIAN\". A HALLUCINOGENIC CD-ROM MYSTERY. cket Science, the Rocket Science logo, and Obsidian are trademarks of Rocket Science Games, Inc, Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Macintosh is a trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #267 a trademark of Apple Computer. me. 2 RP Mac OS ERRE "


"***** REVIEW HIND DIFFICULTY LEVEL Deadly Blades Russia's Notorious Chopper Proves A Worthy APACHE Adversary SIMULATIONISPACE by John Nolan ou're blitzing along 30 meters above the Kazakstan turf with the HUD showing 300 kilo meters per hour. The steady whopping of the rotor blades is urgently interrupted by the Russian-accented voice of your Weapons Systems Officer: \"Zed Ess Yew 23 Treeple Al\" Simultaneously the gun pipper slews hard right in the HUD and you bank the big gunship to follow it. Rolling out with the pipper centered in the HUD, you see big, deadly fireflies arcing up at you from the rebel ZSU-23. Dumping a handful of collective lets the tracers pass harmlessly overhead. Finally in range, a quick threesecond burst from the turret gun solves the problem. As you center the waypoint caret to get back on course, you crop down even lower. That was a bit close. Welcome to HIND, comrade; it's going to be a long enlistment! Korea, and Afghanistan. The campaign missions take place in these theaters as well. Each of the three campaigns is a multilevel, multimission scenario where your overall success depends on the outcome of interlinked combat SPECIAL DELIVERY These crack airbome assault troops hate to missions. There walk; sight on the waypoint or they won't get out of the Hind! are approximately 20 missions in each campaign. With this HIND SIGHT variety depth, it will take you quite a while HIND's Preferences menu is a key facto exhaust all the possibilities. tor for getting the most out of the game. If dueling with the computer becomes Here you can adjust visual detail to get routine, the lure of multiplayer combat the best performance from your system. awaits. You can link computers via Maximum detail includes Couraud shadmodem, serial cable, or network. Two ing, texture-mapping, light sourcing, and player options include Combat, Single maximum visual range. Of course, the Mission, and PilotAWSO. Combat is a usable level of dctail depends on your head-to-head ducl in Korea. Single computer. 'Too much detail on a slow Mission operates as a flight of two Hinds computer results in a jerky, non-flyable on a single mission in any combal zone; it presentation, especially in realistic flight also allows Hind-versus-Apache combat mode. Reducing in-flight sound effects in Korea. Pilot/WSO pairs you up in both may allow a higher visual complexity. seats of a Hind to fly any single mission in \"Tested on a 486/100 with 16 MB and a any combat area. Stealth 2200 video card, HiND played HIND supports play over an IPX net smoothly just above midway on the detail work for up to 16 players. There are two slider, using full in-flight sound. Graphics network games available: Death Match still look good at this setting. AP-133 with and Capture the Flag. Death Match can 16 MB of RAM and a Stealth 3D card had be played as a free-for-all or with teams. absolutely no difficulty running maximum with simple survival as the goal. Capture visual complexity. While the graphics look the Flag requires you to destroy the excellent at this setting, they're somewhat enemy IIQ. HIND is designed to easily dated in comparison with other recent couple with APACHE, allowing dissimilar sims. Both Win 95 and DOS executables air combat in any of the multiplayer are included; they're essentially identical modes. Interactive Magic says that both in features and performance. helicopter sims will also link with the Budding chopper pilots have a choice company's upcoming F-16 simulation. of three flight models. Novice is the arcade mode, and requires minimal skill GUNSHIP DEPLOYMENT To create HIND, Digital Integration followed the successful blueprint from last Price: $49.95 System year's APACHE flight sim. There's a Requirements: 486 Quickstart option that jumps you right DX/66, 8 MB RAM (16 into action in Arcade or luvulnerable MB for Win 95 version), 15 MB hard modes. It's a great way to gain basic famildrive space (50 MB iarity with the sim, thanks to simplified recommended), local controls and unlimited ammo. bus SVGA graphics, 2x After you tire of blasting everything that CD-ROM drive, DOS 5.0 or higher, sup 5.0 or higher, sup moves, you can progress to the Training ports most major arca. Here you'll learn to handle the Mil sound cards Mi-24V Hind E using a more realistic # of Players: 1-16 (IPX network) flight model. Tiventy missions will thorProtection: None (CD oughly indoctrinate you in assault helimust be in drive) copter operations and effective weapons Designer: Digital Integration employment. If you desire further flight Publisher: Interactive experience before beginning a campaign, Magic, Research Triangle Park, NC there are self-contained combat missions. (800) 298-0872 There are 10 missions in each of three difReader Service #: 334ferent theaters of operation: Kazakstan, CC JANUARY 1997 "


"YOU ARRIVE, A STRANGER ! 33Haidd VIONO S 370 no 5 IN A STRANGE LAND.CONFUSED, DISORIENTED, YOU MAKE YOUR WAY THROUGH THE Z TWISTED, SURREAL WORLD IN SEARCH OF YOUR PARTNER, MAX. ALL YOU CARRY WITH YOU IS THE KNOWLEDGE YOU'VE GROWN TO ACCEPT AS THE TRUTH. BUT YOU'RE ABOUT TO DISCOVER THAT WHAT THE TRUTH IS DEPENDS ON WHAT WORLD YOU'RE IN AND IN A THIS WORLD. THINGS DONT NECESSARILY WORK THE WAY YOU MIGHT EXPECT THEM TO THE CHARACTERS DONT EXACTLY ACT THE WAY THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO THE LAWS OF PHYSICS HAVE SOMEHOW BECOME WARPED. WHAT IS UP AND WHAT IS DOWN IS MERELY A MATTER OF OPINION. HERE, AFTER EVERY PERPLE OPINION. HERE. AFTER EVERY PERPLEXING PUZZLE YOU SOLVE, O ANOTHER LURKS AROUND THE CORNER. ANDAS YOU UNRAVEL EACH ELUSIVE MYSTERY AN EVEN BIGGER ONE BEGINS TO UNFOLD. THE QUESTION IS WILL YOU BE ABLE TO PUT THE PUZZLE TOGETHER AND MAKE THE RIGHT CHOICE WHEN THE TIME COMES? O OBSIDIA CIRCLE READER SERVICE #267 "


"Think \"you've mastered all these games? QUAKE XenoSphere fie Dedert Economics Iemtay BOX QPO OF TONALESTAANUNKA BURNEN STANKS! REPAIR SELL MAP PLANILARY (ONUS Big Red Racing COMMAND CONGUER AVA Terminal Velocity WARCRAFT www.m player.com "


"So do they \"I'm the Mad Dog Quake master. You're fresh New York, New York Fresno, California meat.\" (i alle Butte, Montana TRENCH IGHTER Houston, Texas \"Prepare to be eliminated.\" The Doctor Toronto, Canada \"No one can Command and Conquer me. No one' The Eliminator Santa Cruz, California BIG GUNS Your favorite games just got tougher to beat. Because Seattle, Washington we've added a random, unpredictable, nasty little thing called opponents. Welcome to Mplayer. The new Internet-based game service that lets you take on real, live players from all over the U.S. and Canada, in the latest, hottest games. We're talking about Quake. Command & Conquer. Deadlock. And more with new games added all the time. With Mplayer, live opposition is only the beginning. Because you get to talk to these opponents in real time using your own voice. You also get the fastest live action of any online game service, with no delays between player moves. And Mplayer gives you a place to hang out between games, where you'll find tournaments, contests, awards, expert advice, and lots more. Want to check out Mplayer? Visit our Web site at www.mplayer.com to download our software. If you'd rather have a CD, go to our Web site or call 1-888-MPLAYER. And get ready for the kind of opponents you won't find in a shrink-wrapped box. Wahha Play? PLAYER www.mplayer.com 1996 Mpath Interactive, Inc. All rights reserved Mplayer, the Mplayer logo and Wanna play are trademarks of Mpath Interactive, Inc. All other nomes are prop erty of their respective componies. www.mplayer.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #362 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #382 "


"REVIEW HIND 3) VAS/NOTIV1NWIS to operate. The Realistic mode is a good simulation of helicopter handling. Control cross-coupling is a major part of this moclel, requiring you to adjust other controls if you make a change in any single control. Stable mode basically deletes cross-coupling and a few advanced effects Multiplayer Overhaul IND's computer Al is fine, but nothing beats the thrill of turning your buddy into a smoking heap of spare helicopter parts. Owners of the original DOS version of APACHE may have been frustrated by that game's problems with network and modem play. If you have this version, you can visit the l-Magic Web site at http://www.imagicgames.com and pick up a patch. Go to the Technical Support section and download APCHPCH2.EXE. This will allow your game to link with HIND or the newer APACHE Win 95 for head-to-head play. HIND and the updated APACHE already have this improved two-player and network capability. The interface is quite simple, and worked flawlessly when we used it in modem play. Detailed setup and troubleshooting instructions are included in the manual, but it's almost a no-brainer to configure. My old college roommate and I, both ex-USAF fixedwing jockeys, spent a few hours tying up the phone lines with Hind and Apache. We tried all the options, flying as Hind wingmen on single missions, as a Pilot/WSO combination, and in head-to-head combat. Of course, the heavy favorite was the combat option. The other two choices just don't provide the adrenal rush of trying to wipe out your human opponent. The one drawback of the two-player mode was the inability to adjust your gunship's weapons load-out. The Apache has a definite advantage over the Hind in agility and technology. On the other hand, the Hind has heavy armor and air-to-air missiles. Unfortunately, our Hinds never had the R60 air-to-air missiles on board. The two-player capability makes the game. If you don't already have a dedicated phone line for your computer, it's time to order one. It'll keep your significant other from trying to strangle you with the phone cord! from the Realistic model. It's not that difficult to fly in Realistic mode, but landings will require some practice and skill due to the crosscoupling. Rcalistic is the way to go; accept the challenge Enemy intelligence is also adjustable. When set to a higher difficulty, the enemy reacts to your presence carlier, becomes highly aggresNIGHT RIDER The FLIR view lets you home in on your sive, and shoots with much target, even in the dead of night. greater accuracy. At the lowest setting, the enemy is a dolt and you'll (when not deploying or evacuating triumph casily. At midpoint, you'll have troops), and the ability to issue commands your hands full staying alive. At the maxito your wingman or the whole formation mum rating, you're going to feel like a in both single and multiplayer modes. fresh T-bone steak dropped into a pool of Although Hind feels in some ways like piranhas. Start just below the mid setting the 1995 game it's based on, the addition so you don't get discouraged too soon! of ground troops makes it a simulation cxperience that's unique in today's market. APACHE REDUX? (When he's not skimming the mountains By now veterans of Interactive Magic's in ex-Soviet hardware, Jolm Nolum is a carlier APACHE sim (just re-released in a pilot for a major U.S. airline. Many years Windows 95 version) are wondering if ago, his flying time as pilot broke into the they haven't been here and done this. five-digit numbers.) & HIND is not a revolutionary new helicopter simulation. It's an evolutionary sequel to APACHE, albeit one with enough distinctive features to make it an excellent sim in its own right The game format, graphics, and most missions are similar to its predecessor, although newly added troop-carrying, reconnaissance, and WINDOW SEAT The WSO cockpit provides an excellent bombing missions add view, as well as access to the helmet-mounted sight. varicly to the mix. APACHE veterans will find that the lum APPEAL: Sim enthusiasts looking bering Hind flies quite differently from the for a war that's up close and personal; APACHE addicts looking for a new fix. nimble Amy helicopter. But perhaps the biggest difference in this game comes PROS: Good flight modeling; ground troops add needed variety and realism from its use of intelligent ground troops. to the rotary-wing genre. Reliable and In addition to the usual tanks, bridges, and fun modem play. other man-made targets, you'll encounter CONS: Many groups of individual humans--some of missions are very similar to those whom turn to point shoulder-launched found in APACHE; SAMs at your helicopter. somewhat dated Other nice touches include facilities graphics engine. for reloading weapons during a mission CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Gaming so real it'll make you tense, anxious and screaming for more. Monster 3D ASIO Monster 3D 30\" DIAMOND to kill Are you ready to be chewed up, spit out and totally price that'll make your head spin. Monster 3D sets a satisfied? Then brace yourself because the Diamond new standard in 3D graphics performance with lightningMonster 3D has arrived and it's about to blow your PC fast, full-screen 3D rendering and outrageous special away with the ultimate in arcade-quality performance. effects, giving you gaming so real, it hurts. And, it is Based on the state-of-the-art 3Dfx Voodoo 3D accelerator, the fastest performing Microsoft Windows 95 Direct3D Monster 3D's advanced PCI-bus architecture works with accelerator available, with equally high-performance 3D in Without Monster 3D Acceleration your existing graphics card to transform your ordinary MS-DOS and Windows 3.1x. Plus, Monster 3DXL* comes computer into a monstrous gaming machine. All for a bundled with Whiplash. Hyperblade, VR Soccer\"'96, Descent\" II: Destination Quartzon 3D, MechWarrior 2, 3D Features Tomb Raider, EF 2000. Scorched Planet, plus Microsoft's  Texture modulation  Animated textures  Perspective-correction  Anti-aliasing Game Sampler 2 for WIN '95 which contains a variety texture mapping  Gouraud shading of Direct 3D and DirectDraw game samples that'll leave With Monster 3D Acceleration  Z-buffering  Sub-pixel correction  Level-of-detail MIP mapping Per-pixel alpha blending effects you begging for mercy, Better run for cover, because  Bi-linear and advanced  Industry-standard OS and APIs texture filtering the Monster 3D is coming to get you. To find out more. Texture compositing and visit our website at http://www.diamondmm.com or morphing call 1-800-4-MULTIMEDIA DIAMOND www.diamondmm.com MULTIMEDIA VISUAL SYSTEMS DIVISION *Bundled games come with tall version of Monster 3DXL only. 01995 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc, 2880 Junction Avenue, San Jose, CA 95134.1922 Windows is a registered trademark of Mcrosoft Corporation Monster 3D is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc.Nisual Systems Division Al other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders CIRCLE READER SERVICE #385 "


"***** REVIEW  SHATTERED STEEL Bug Lite DIFFICULTY LEVEL SHATTERED STEEL Simplifies Mechanized Mercenary Mayhem SIMULATION/SPACE by Thierry Nguyen 503 U ith the popularity of giant-robot warfare among computer gamers, you start to wonder when we'll see MechWarrior: The Movie, or news that General Dynamics is launching production of the first M2000AI Herc battalion for the U.S. Army. While it's unlikely we'll ever see giant robots on the battlefield, they're invading our PCs in droves. The latest effort, Interplays SHATTERED STEEL, is targeted squarcly at the giant robot pilot recruit who's looking for a little less simulation and a lot more hyper-action, 2500 2 DELE YOU'RE A SCORPIO? Scorpitrons are some of the uglier Tergs, but this ain't a beauty contest. SHATTERED 2 variations of the same vehicle you're in you have to determine the best ways to defeat enemies such as giant robotic spiders and scorpions. These guys definitely don't fight the same way you do. As the game progresses, you will gradually gain information about the Tergs, an alien menace worth developing further in future installments of the game. CLASH OF THE TITANS Your 27-ton Shiva (your biggest Runner) must take on this massive Mantis in the final mission. Price: $49.95 System Requirements: IBMcompatible 486-66 or better (Pentium 75 or better recommended). 8 MB RAM (16 MB RAM recommended), 20 MB hard drive space, VGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM (4x CDROM recommended): 16-bit sound card # of Players: 1-16 (IPX network) Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designer: Bioware Publisher: Interplay Irvine, CA (800) 468-3775 (800) 468-3775 Reader Service #: 336 EVIL INSECTOID INVASION In SHATTERED STEEL, you're a mercenary contracted by a corporation to investigate a routine disturbance. Landing on the planet's surface, you're greeted by a swarm of giant, robotic insects instead of the tanks and robots you were expecting, With the truth revealed, you embark on a campaign to liberate two planets from a foul alicn menace, dubbed the Tergs in honor of their discoverer. It's a relief to find aliens as the main enemy in SHATTERED STEEL. Instead of enemy i SHATTERED SIREL. Instead of fighting humans or maniacal Als piloting VOXEL VIOLENCE SHATTERED STEEL's most striking feature is its beautiful graphics engine. All the robots and buildings are gorgeously texture-mapped and strikingly lit. 'Their movement is quite fluid the game is much smoother at 640x480 resolution with texture-mapping enabled than its competitor, MECHWARRIOR 2: MERCENARIES A uniquc addition to this genre is Voxel-rendered terrain. The landscape is filled with rolling hills and deep trenches, and you can use these terrain features to your advantage. Run behind a hill to mask your Runner from enemy fire, or lure an enemy into a trench and use your superior position to pummel them from above. Terrain-utilization tactics take on even better definition once you find out you can alter the terrain via mortars or nukes. Terrain is also used to advantage in SHATTERED STEELS multiplayer modes. In addition to the typical Anarchy (deathmatch) and team games, there's also a full 20-mission campaign designed specifically for multiplay. Two opposing teams face cach other, and each side has a specific goal in each mission. It's good to see the multiplayer scenarios treated as more than just a chance to blast your friends mindlessly Amidst the great robotic insect graphics, rolling terrain, and network play lies an interface simpler than that found in SHATTERED STEEL's giant robot brethren. Gameplay seems to favor the keyboard/ mouse combo, using the keyboard for body movement and the mouse for head movement. Joystick input is also available, but I didn't find it as effective as the keyboard/mouse. An unfortunate control omission is the lack of a variable throttle. You always move at full speed, and it boils CG CC JANUARY 1997 "


"Windows ming soon for REACH OUT AND TORCH SOMEONE. FA-18 HORNET SFAL HORNET 2.0 The hottest flight simulator game is now torching up your Windows 95 PC. It's F/A-18 Hornet. With incredible 3-D graphics and realistic instrumentation, it'll push you to the outer limits then bring you screaming back to earth. In fact, F/A-18 Hornet closely simulates the Navy's own attack-fighter aircraft. There's 28 different Persian Gulf combat missions to test your skills where you can blow up @i URATOR PDA DUIA UNUMI SIMULATIONS everything from ammunition depots using the M61 Vulcan cannon to Mig fighters with an AIM9 Sidewinder. So pick up the award winning www.graphsim.com/graphsim F/A-18 Hornet today. It's the best way to get close to someone. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #57 "


"REVIEW SHATTERED STEEL 3) VAS/NOIIVINWIS toothpicks, at least there were trees.) Also, while you do have wingmen and allies, you have no control over them. They just move around and do their own thing, Perhaps the least «simulation-like» aspect of the game is the ability to pick up and replace weapons on the battlefield, just like the powerups in DOOM. major, and rather strange, bug. While SHATTERED STEEL is a DOS game, the first version wouldn't run properly under MS-DOS, and had to be launched from a Windows 95 DOS prompt. If you try to play under MS-DOS, you will likely get a CD-ROM read crror when you load the Holoprojector for a briefing. The problem DALA TI QUIRKS AND WHO GOES THERE? In multiplayer missions, your radar and the name QUIBBLES of the Runner are the signs of whether he is a friend or a foe. You'll need the down to cither moving forward or not help of the power-ups, moving you can't \"cut throttle\" to 50 perthough, in some of the cent, for instance. game's tougher missions. The game is of a simpler breed than Unfortunately, single-player GO YOUR OWN WAY Wingmen and allies have decent the likes of MECHWARRIOR 2 or missions are of very uneven Al, which is a good thing, since you can't control them. EARTHSIECE 2. While the terrain has hills quality, ranking from ridlicuand trenches to mess around with, that's lously easy to nigh impossible. The imposhas been traced to the DOS CD driver, all they are: hills and trenches. There are sible oncs usually have you defending an and a patch was created to correct it. no trees or bodies of water here. (Even if object, which is hard to do when 20 or E ven with the patch, though, there are CHOST BEAR'S LEGACY's trees looked like more \"Tergs come swarming at you. You still some quirks when running under 7 usually need DOS, so you'd better plan on having Tips On Arming And Using Your Runner to learn a Windows 95 on your system if you want to \"trick\" to play this game. he preferred winning a Quirks aside, SHATTERED STEEL is a primary specific mis decent first effort with enough unique fcaweapons are sion. Also, tures to make it worth a look for fans of the the Gatling while the genre. The game's longevity should be guns. Lasers are fine, but game helped by a mission builder module soon unless your energy appears to to be released by Bioware, and there's a recharge is on maximum, offer branch possibility of a mission disc as well -either those 50 shots run out ing missions, of which has the potential to address the fast. The Gatling guns are the only real inaccessibility of some single-player mislimited to 750 shots, but if difference is sions. But if Interplay wants to provide seriyou follow Corporal Hicks' difficulty or ous competition for the MECHWARRIOR advice from Aliens and fire TILL THEY GLOW The nuke is a devastating which new series, the company needs to provide more in short, controlled bursts, weapon, creating a large crater filled with fire and freedom and variety in the overall game weapons you the guns should be adeall that other Terg-killing stuff. may get. APPEAL: Wannabe giant robot quate for the mission. If Some pilots who care more about action you do run out of ammo, chances are giant pits in the landscape and trap threads are than lore. you can scrounge for an energy enemies in them. merely PROS: Beautiful graphics and realweapon out on the field. Finally, an effective combat tactic, detours, and istic terrain, great multiplayer missions, creative Guided missiles and mortars are the when using the keyboard for movement you quickly alien opponents. best secondary weapons. Guided misand the mouse for head control. is to end up back >CONS: Uneven siles (IR or Radar) can take care of any aim your head to the side with the on the same mission difficulty, air units, letting you concentrate on the mouse and circle your enemy while fir mission track. only runs reliability ground grunts. The mortars are great ing inward. The initial under Windows 95 despite being an if you aim correctly, you can make release of this MS-DOS game. game had a RATED * CG CG JANUARY 1997 "


"DEiHLSUN SUFil3S' presents SUERE DE TIRES LING ENGINE GEAR FUEL SUntim ORAL ROLAN ALATI NOREER HIE 45 EXPERIMENTAL RACINI BOLAN WALI OSEBA ATE L FEUE WIDE M . a se 200 Ece G X-Car High-Speed Racing Technology! Race one of 16 prototype X-Cars. The latest experimental racing vehicles! Test drive your prototype and customize every aspect of your car's performance using cutting-edge racing technology.  Experience brilliant hinh res (SVGA) graphics at sustained frame rates. X-Car is the most beautiful and fastest racing game on the market! Includes a library of real racing circuits and fantasy tracks. You can race Lime Rock, the streets of Seattle or around Mayan temples! Generate real telemetry data on high speed oval, skid pad or handling tracks to customize your car for optimum performance. The first true hard core racing simulation with an Arcade Mode for those who just want to experience the pure fun of racing FAST! Includes Network and Modem support for multi-player racing! LATIME PEAMINE SAH POWERED BY Actual IBM screens shown Xine Bod dog, bring back that car! BETHESDA SOFTWORKS 1370 Piccard Drive, Suite 120, Rockville, MD 20850 BBS: 301 990-7552  Fax: 301 926-8010 Website: http://www.bethsoft.com Xcar, XnGine. Bad Dog logo and Bethesda Softworks are trademarks of Media Technology Limited.  1996 Media Technology Limited. All Rights Reserved. All other trademarks, logos or graphics are the property of their respective owners. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #389 "


"ADMIRAL SEA BA T T LES COMMAND JULLEET ADMIRAT Game Features: 3D Rendered Cut Scenes Windows 95 DirectX Game Multiplayer modem, network, and Internet play Redi ODREMELJE Full musical score and integrated sound effects MIDA poration Free Demo: www.megamed.com Megamedia USA Tel.: 408-428-9920 Fax: 408-428-9924 Developed by Meridian 93. Megamedia is a Registered Trademark of Megamedia Corporation. All other trademarks are those of their respective companies. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #71 "


"TERRY COLEMAN STRATEGY/WARGAMES strat pen ma s ee. pplic Greybeard Goebbels COLL The Latest THIRD REICH Conversion Is Hardly Der Reich Stuff by Terry Coleman and 28 In the early '70s, board wargame sales were quickly building into a multimillion-dollar business. Tactical games were all the rage, with Jim Dunnigan's Panzerblitz (one of the only strategy boardgames to top a quarter million units in sales) spawning dozens of imitators. In 1974 (the same eventful year that brought us Dungeons Dragons), there emerged a most unlikely hero who bucked this trend with a complex grand strategic game. John Prados-who now makes his living writing best-selling books on the CIA's secret wars-has always been fascinated with the political and economic aspects of modem warfare. While his games on Vietnam (Year of the Rat) and the Civil War (The Campaigns of Robert E. Lee) were filled with great ideas, they were often so tedious as to cloud any insights into the conflicts they covered. With Thuird Reich, however, Prados' eccentricities were channeled into productive design systems by the Avalon Hill clevelopment team, East Prussia (Ger) which, led by Don Greenwood, was simply the best set of game polishers\" of their era. Whether viewed on cardboard or computer Exchange: Defender Lost All, Attacker Lost 4 screen, Third Reich is a profoundly on complex and yet POLISH KNOCKWURST Poland is a puzzle. To solve it, use your air curiously abstract units to soften the opposition, then open a path to Warsaw for ed view of the your armor to break through. Note how the Soviet units are ready European theater to move into Poland from the East, just as they did historically. of WWII from 1939 to 1945-a sort of military/geopolitithe superiority of armor, and from the cal/grand strategic amalgamation that paratroops, units of such Herculean could keep Clausewitz himself busy for a power that you feel they could have taken long, long time. You must spend Basic Crete --or for that matter, Norway-virResource Points-BRPs, affectionately tually unsupported. known as \"burps\" — for everything from The units themselves, however, are gearing up your economy to building cookie-cutter. German units are 4-6s, units to declaring war on an enemy What naval units are 9s, and so on, with little little tactical flavor there is comes from variation, the rationale being that technoNo one familiar with the boardgame will be happy with the compromises made to the original design. 2/22 BRIEFINGS If you're still looking for a lastminute gaming gift, you might consider Dixie from Columbia Games. It's-brace yourself-a card game, but it's the fastest-playing Civil War battle game you'll see this year. Dixie is only slightly more involved than playing Magic: THE GATHERING, and the rules are more internally consistent. There are cards for creeks, ridges, and other dominant terrain, with special rules for hidden fords, enfilade, and morale. The leaders and units depicted run from the inept Don Carlos Buell to Ulysses S. Grant and the legendary Stonewall Brigade. For about $20 (for two decks, one Rebel and one Union, at $10 apiece) you can be reenacting Shiloh, Bull Run, or Gettysburg with a friend in half an hour. Columbia Games, P.O. Box 3457, Blaine, WA, 98231, (800) 363-3631, www.columbiagames.com JANUARY 1997 "


"TERRY COLEMAN BRIEFINGS STRATEGY/ WARGAMES RISE AND DECLINE the next unit, much less begin combat. In Add-on packs are a dime Given what usually passes a game that requires as much strategic a dozen these days, but for clepth in computer stratethinking as 'THIRD REICH, you don't need gy games, Third Reich obvithere are a couple worth TUE WARCRAFTS this kind of tedium. The graphics, quite your time this winter sea ously had the potential to fill a frankly, are a big step backward for AH, son. W!ZONE is not BEYOND niche. However, the first after the blue velvet seas of WOODEN THE DARK PORTAL, but it does attempt to corral this runaway SHIPS AND IRON MEN; even when they have Blizzard's blessing, car on the computer-the are compared to the 20-year-old Third along with 50 new WARAtari ST/Amiga version of Reich boardgame, it's hard to see much CRAFT II scenarios. Trafalgar Third Reich (1990) — was a improvement and Island Hop (complete with oil slicks!) are a nice train wreck. The abysmal Al change of pace, and Constantinople will appeal to any was bad enough, but the ORGANIZATIONAL HELL last-stand enthusiast. Wizardworks, PC-CD, $29.95, design couldn't begin to hanAn old wargame joke says that in Hell, (800) 229-2714, www.wizworks.com dle even the simplest conlawyers get what they deserve, because SO MEER'S CIVILIZATION II SCENARIOS, on the other hand, cepts of the storied board they have to interpret Third Reich rules at were designed by MicroProse (specifically Mick Uhl), game, even when you played the point of a pitchfork-which means and are pretty solid throughout. The ancient scenarios via e-mail against another that they invariably get stuck in more ways leave RISE AND RULE OF THE ANCIENT WORLD in the dust, human opponent. Dis than one. The main problem with the and there are some new items, such as enhanced appointed gamers turned to boardgame is that it's the perfect example spices, for the Renaissance. I could have lived without other complex fare such as of Pracos' kitchen sink design style: since the Gulf War scenarios, but that's a minor quibble. If Pacific WAR; but to this day, nearly every idea the designer had made it you don't like all of the historical restrictions, just refer there has been no strategic into the game, there are exceptions to back to Loyd Case's Civ II strategy piece in the last game that captured the feel of every rule. One nice thing about having issue of CGW, and hack your way to dominance of new WWII in Europe quite the THIRD REICH on the computer is that Civ worlds. MicroProse, PC-CD, $29.95, (510) 522 same as Third Reich. your opponent can't tell you, after 20 1164, www.microprose.com So, once again, Avalon Hill hours of play, \"Well, you played a nice has tried to bring this storied game, but I win because you violated rule logical improvements were roughly even game to the computer, rca21.47C back on turn 3-sorry.\" on both sides as the war progressed-a bit sonably thinking that the new technology But even with the computer prohibitof a stretch, even as an abstraction. Land available on the combat comes in two flavors: typical hexPC could handle based compare odds and roll dice; and the complexities of the game sysattrition, where you compare combat Germany strengths and roll one die to resolve an tem. For better entire front. If you think this sounds simthan three years, ple, think again. There are armor breakmore than 50 pcoFrance ( 9 throughs, naval interceptions, air intercepple worked on tions and counter-interceptions, strategic tamning this bcast. movement, strategic warfare, round after At times, you feel round of counterattacks, and those sneaky as though it was paratroops. The sequence of play alone worth it, but you RUS would make a good intro for War and Price: $44.95 can't help feeling Required: 486 or bet Peace. this game would ter, 8 MB RAM, 10 MB Although the game had its initial FRENCH PASTRY Don't be crazy enough for a two-front war in have been much hard drive space, VGA 1939. Attrition is the way to go until you have conquered Poland better received graphics, 2x CD-ROM. detractors (including yours truly), there # of Players: 1-2 (hotand the Low Countries for their BRPs. were few indeed who didn't at least Iwo years ago. seat & e-mail) respect the depth of the design. As newer You see, playing Designers: Jamie Nash editions came out some of the sillier THIRD REICH involves stepping into a ing any rules violations, learning the game and David Hiller aspects of gameplay (such as the game time warp. The interface would have Original Boardgame is pure hell. In AH's heyday. they used to Design: John Prados always coming down to a 2-1 odds attack looked dated next to CLASH OF STEEL, publish games with \"basic\" rules and an Publisher: The Avalon much less PANZER GENERAL or BATILEat either London or Berlin) were modi\"advanced battle manual\" so that you Hill Game Company Baltimore, MD ficd, so that Prados' magnum opus was could ease yourself into the game. With (800) 999-3222 clevated to all-time classic status. cardboard counter-like units, you must THIRD REICH, the two-rulebook approach Reader Service #: 340 deselect them before you can move on to gives you one lengthy tome that describes De NEICH PC Switzerland 1939 To CG JANUARY 1997 "


"THE MOST MULTIPLAYER GAMES ON THE INTERNET JABC stop playing with Yourself! start playing with the world ATONAenter the arena at www.earthlink.net/thearena WARCRAFT II DESCENT ROLEMASTER: MAGESTORM CASTLES : SIEGE AND CONQUEST O SPLATTERBALL VIRTUAL POOL AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH CASINO POKER LEGENDS OF KESI.JAL THE ARENA IS BROUGHT TO YOU BY EARTHLINK NETWORK, INC., PROVIDER OF THE COOLEST, EASIEST INTERNET ACCESS ON EARTH. CALL TODAY TO SIGN UP AND RECEIVE YOUR FREE EARTHLINK NETWORK TOTALACCESS PACKAGE Earth Link Network WITH ENERYTHING YOU NEED TO GET ON THE INTERNET IN MINUTES. SMAAT LUL: W QUIRO DO WHAT YOU WANT.\" 800-395-8425 01998 EartLink Network, Inc. Trademarks are property of their ruspective owners. The Arena is a registered trademark of EarthLink Network Inc. All rights Reserved CIRCLE READER SERVICE #233 PRIZES CHAT ON-LINE TOURNAMENTS ONE USERNAME ONE PASSWORD ONE ACCOUNT "


"TERRY COLEMAN Gamer's Guide to Third Reich is a steal at $8, available directly from Avalon Hill. The Gamer's Guide to STRATEGYZ WARGAMES THIRD REICH  Unlike the boardgame version, there are no partisans, which makes it easier to win as the Axis player. Unless the Russians are building paratroops (which they really can't afford), this means you have less need to garrison areas in the rear  If the British player is being really aggressive in the Mediterranean, it might leave a chink in England's armor All British units are eliminated immediately when Vichy France is created (after Paris falls), so there's no Dunkirk. And naval units that intercept from different ports are treated as separate battles. So if the English are counting on the Gibraltar fleet to save them from invasion, it might not work, because you can handle them piecemeal. If you have even a 1-1 shot at London-take it! If you can't seem to get anywhere in Third Reich, one of the best ways to start is the Gamer's Guide to Third Reich. Although written for the boardgame version, this has several excellent articles, including how best to conduct a \"southern strategy\" through the Mediterranean and North Africa, that are still applicable to strategic play in computer THIRD REICH. Unlike today's often overpriced strategy guides, the The on NC the complex game rules, and another lengthy tome that describes the complex computer game rules. If by some miracle you masticate this incredible amount of pulp and distill it to Spain. The design team could have helped you through the process of deciding when to declare an Offensive option, and when to declare Attrition, with specific examples; there's certainly plenty of room on the CD to include screen shots with text explanations, if nothing else. Ci into y Belgium BRP 10 But the Al, while not the embarrassment of the Atari/Amiga version, will still offer little challenge to any but the most novice THIRD REICH player. The game is just too complex for the Al to cover half the threats posed by a human general. And while dic-hard THIRD REICH fans may be able to play the game via e-mail, they won't like struggling with the interface. And no one familiar with the game will be happy with the compromises made to the original design. Where are the partisans, or the wonderful what-if variants? In the end, 'THIRD REICH is another unhappy clone that can't match up to the original. If you want to see how a classic boardgame should be converted to the computer, look no farther than AH'S WOODEN SHIPS AND IRON MEN, and pass this unhappy conflict by en France SE. Okhy Switzerland PASSIVITY IS PASSÉ The Al too often chooses Attrition, meaning an earlier Fall of France-and maybe an early invasion of Britain. UNCOMFORTABLY NUMB After figuring out the bizarre bridgehead rules-it's often better to retreat through a bridgehead you tackle strategic warfare, only to find more abstractions. Everyone but the Poles seems to have paratroops; the Germans have no strategic bombers; the Allies have no submarines; there are no Luftwaffe jets at the end of the war. And even the cool chrome, such as Lend-Lease and transtheater strategic movement, is more relevant to some erudite Pradosian model of WWII than to the real thing. But there are lessons to learn here. The rush of the blitzkrieg comes from only armor units having a Zone of Control into adjacent hexes. After an initial string of Axis victorics, the cconomic might of the United States comes in on the Allied side, giving them the initiative with the infamous flip-flop\" of two Allicd turns in a row (tends to help your D-Day preparations). Despite the near-total lack of tactical flavor, this is recognizable as WWII, even to players who've cut their gaming teeth on PANZER GENERAL. into something remotely fathomable, there is no tutorial built into the game to help you along. There is to be fair, a nice introduction to the game's concepts by Marcus Watney (a longtime gaming author). There are also some suggested setups for units provided by AH. But anyone who has played the game before will recognize how mediocre these setups are, and they won't help newcomers to THIRD REICH understand why you might want to spend 15 Basic Resource Points to make a Declaration of War on Turkey, as opposed APPEAL: For those desiring hardcore wargaming with some of the depth, and none of the amenities. PROS: Depth of strategy, some insights into the grand strategies of WWII in Europe. You can finally finish a campaign scenario of Third Reich in a single lifetime CONS: Design compromises, a poor interface, and weak graphics combine with the overmatched Al to produce a computer game much less than the sum of its boardgame parts. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"DEATH'S GREATEST HITS! TERPADU DESCENT TERMINA VELOCIT NECRO THE ULTIMATE DOOM MEGA NUKEM RACE 3D LDDDWMDa. DEATHWAKE THE ULTIMATE COLLECTION OF KILLER SHAREWARE At retailers everywhere! ABAD ADVISORY MATURE 1996 Mindscape, Inc. All rights reserved. All copyright, trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Call 1-800-771EURO 3772 for information on ESRB Game Ratings. To order, visit your retailer or call 1-800-234-3088. www.mindscapegames.com AQES 170 MINDSCAPE ENTERTAINMENT CIRCLE READER SERVICE #132 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW  DARK REIGN STRATEGYZ WARGAMES The Future Of Warfare Activision's DARK REIGN Takes You Beyond Today's Real-Time Wargame by Patrick C. Miller ORDERS Santry Hunter Killer Random Marassment Escort Suldde Protect HQ Tenacity Autonomy NS teigence Avalabis CSNEAK GPREVIEW GAME STILL IN DEVELOPMENT ow that Activision's DARK REICN has provided me with a glimpse of war in the future, I'm starting to have second thoughts about that cryogenic capsule reserved under my name. Imagine fighting enemy troops who can morph into trces and pick off your soldiers one by one, or wlw can assume the appearance of friendlies to steal your technology and sabotage your war machinc. In the future, tunneling vehicles enable the opposition to pop up unexpectedly anywhicre behind your lines. Matter transport devices can instantly endanger areas you thought were safe. Then there's the hidcous \"hostage taker» vehicle. It scoops up your soldiers, automatically lobotomizes them, straps on explosives, and hurls them back at your troops. 002 MORE THAN A CLONE Activision's DARK REIGN has a look similar to COMMAND & CONQUER, but offers quite a few enhancements, including increased realism. THE WAR BETWEEN THE PLANETS A real-time action-strategy game, DARK REICN has a premisc revolving around an missions from either sicle in any order they choose. The disadvantage is that although the game will feature high-quality cutscenes similar to those in Activision's MECHWARRIOR 2 series, Borrud says there will be fewer in comparison to C&C because of the clifficulty of incorporating them in a logical manner. Even so, he notes that gamers will have the option of playing in a lincar fashion that progresses by levels of clifficulty. intragalactic civil war, centuries into the future, being waged between the Imperium, a dictatorial mega-government, and the l'reedom Guard, a band of revolutionaries that wants to end the Imperium's tyrannical reign (see sidebar). The game is currently under development and scheduled for release later in the first quarter of 1997. DARK REICN clearly takes aim at the market dominated by COMMAND & CONQUER and WARCRAFT II. It's difficult not to compare DARK REICN to C&C but there are several significant differences, the most notable of which is the increased level of realism. This includes true line of sight, fog of war, elevated terrain, and terrain effects on both movement and combat. Unlike C&C, DARK REICN's missions arc nonlinear, which offers the advantage of enabling gamers to play more than 30 TERRA FIRMA AND FAUNA Combat takes place on moons and planets scattered throughout the galaxy, on seven different map types, including desert, jungle, volcanic, and ice terrain. Terrain effects are realistically modeled. Some unils, such as hover tanks, can cross terrain that's impassable for tracked or wheeled vehicles. Movement slows when vehicles pass over steep or rigged terrain. TEARING UP THE TERRAIN Among DARK REIGN's nice features are terrain effects; these vehicles will have a slow time trying to climb out of this gorge. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"DARK REIGN  SNEAK PREVIEW Units can also hide in forests, in valleys, or behind hills to conduct ambushes. True line of sight and fog of war will be implemented in the game's final design, according to Activision. Each battle begins with an unexplored map. As units move around the map, their line of sight shown as a highlighted circle around the unit reveals terrain details, as well as sighted enemy units and structures. However, enemy dispositions disappear from the map unless they're in sight of a friendly unit. This system also allows for more realistic indirect fire from artillery units. Thic game is being designed to run under DOS and Windows 95 using highresolution 640x480 SVGA graphics. Multiplayer capabilities will include up to eight players by local area network (LAN) and head-to-head play by modem. LANto-LAN connections are also supported, and up to four players will be able to battle each other over the Internet. Activision plans to make new scenarios available through its Web site and allow players to STRATEGY / WARGAMES campaigns but also must maintain a water supply and stockpile Element 115, the galaxy's currency and primary energy source. Command and control is also modeled by simulating the difficulty associated with coordinating a large force. As players acquire buildings and expand their MULTIPLAY'S NEXT LEVEL DARK REIGN will support forces, production slows eight-player LAN matches, head-to-head modem play. and units take more time to and four-player Internet matches. respond to orders. \"This lielps balance a huge upload their own scenarios created with army against a small, tight force, \" Borrud the game's editor. explains. \"A larger army will usually overwhelm a smaller one, but it won't necesMULTIPLAYER MAYHEM sarily be casy.\" \"We know the real joy for people in There are 34 combat unils, cach strategy gaming is going out there and with differing capabilities. Scout units killing their friends, so we want to give can see further than others and morph them as much opportunity as possible to into inanimate scenery. Body snatchdo that,\" Borrud laughs. «It's potentially the most important part of the game, not just LAN, but also Internet play. We want Dark Reign it to be a very exciting multiplayer experiConstruction Kit cnce. Diplomacy will be a huge clement of the multiplayer game.\" he mission construction kit to be included At the start of a multiplayer game, playis one of the most powerful parts of the crs can choose to be enemics, allics, or game, Borrud says. \"It basically allows you neutral. Alliances are much more to draw maps any way you can imagine. It involved in DARK REIGN, as allies can give will be much easier than current map editors because cach other units and transfer resources there will be a lot more control. You can create your own between one another. missions, vary the computer Al, and set victory condiOne aspect of current multiplayer strat tions to determine how a game is won or lost. We're egy gaming that Borrud hopes to avoid is giving people the tools to do whatever we did to create a lack of variables that tends to lock play the game so that they can design their own single-player ers into doing the same thing every time or multiplayer missions.\" once they've mastered the game. \"We're trying to keep a lot of variables in the game that allow people to change their strategies and try different tactics,\" he says. \"We also want to build up the computer Al to participate in multiplayer games to the point where you don't realize a computer is controlling the enemy.\" GETTING THE POINT DARK REIGN allows you to set up multiple way points for your units and move your units in formations. SCENARD Adam McUrl EDIT MAP MASS ATTACK As armies get larger, their reaction time slows, modeling the reallife difficulty of commanding large forces, and giving the little guys a chance. MANAGED WARFARE Scenario types range from battles of attrition to ambushes to spy missions bchind enemy lines. As with other games in this genre, resource management plays a crucial role. Players not only manage personnel and coordinate TOOLS OF THE TRADE DARK REIGN will include an incredibly powerful scenario editor that gives you nearly as many options for map design as the designers have. JANUARY 1997 CG "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. COMPUTER GAMES POB 234 DEPT 10809 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Orders/Questions: cbisales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@sover.net WINDOWS YOU SWITCH \"MAGIC: THE GATHERING' This top selling trading card game is now, for the first time. an interactive multiplayer online computer game. It's an addictive fantasy game featuring wizards exploration, adventure and role playing. CD $46 JOYSWITCH \"CIRCLE OF BLOOD\" An American happens into a Parisian cale. After a clown CIRCLE blows the place blows the place II BLOOD HJ to smithereens to smithereens he wants 9 answers. He finds a 14th century order called The Knights Templar. Unlock the secret of this intriguing adventure and the vicious conspiracy that threatens to reshape the world. CD $43 LOON LABYRINTI Board the Looi Machine for a pi ball adventur with championsh playfield desig expert fip contra authentic light illi mination, Gre mythology therr spectacular sou and 2 kinds of bar ground music s JOYSWITCH' Now you can jump from joystick to Joystick, game to game with the speed and ease of turning a switch. No more reaching behind your computer to swap joystick cables on the game port. Joyswitch does it all. $38 STGomerne 'MASTER OF ORION IT In the deepest reaches of outer space, a Xenophobia race lurks in the dark ness planning their revenge. Use multi-player feature by challenging friends over modem, network or compete in the hot seat. CO $46 \"THRUST MASTER GRAND PRIX 1' Gives you the competitive edge with variable throttle and braking at your fingertips and lightning fast thumb activated shifting. Securely clamps to your desktop. Total steering range is 180 degrees of travel $74 \"HIND' The Hind will contain a free for all arcade mode so new simulation enthusiasts can jump into the cockpit & quickly enter combat action. For veteran players, Hind contains a detailed mission planner!CD $44 'F-22 LIGHTNIN Il' Highly detalle simulation froi Lockheed Marti Realistic cock instrumentatio accurate pitch ar roll rates, detaile texture mappe 3D ground and a targets. Multi-pai ning cameras 1 view action froi every angle. $1 LASTER OF ORIONT WALA AT ANTARES LIGHTNINGI ANTARA ANTARA An ADMIRAL DIABLO 'IM1A2 ABRAMS The player commands a platoon of four tanks, or an entire company team with other vehicles, artillery. helicopters and artillery attached all from a variety of external views and a multi zoom map view. CD $45 \"BETRAYAL IN ANTARA An empire over time has fallen pry to corruption and decay. Today a well-meaning Emperor faces a crumbling infrastructure where bribery, intrigue, nepotism, deceit and assassination run rampant. $48 \"DIABLO' As a young boy, you return to your village to find it razed and your family dead. Exploration of the countryside reveals that a similar fate has befallen all the neighboring towns. except for one. CD $46 'ADMIRAL-SE BATTLES' naval conque simulation gart the combines tt best of 18th cei tury naval wa fare strategy wi challengin board ple boasting a il musical SCO and integrate sound effects. Coming Soon! B!Z7489 IBM HARDWARE IBM ACTION IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM BUNDLES IBM RPG IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATIO $17 $42 $46 $48 CH F16 Combatstick $58 Aeon Flux 344 7th Guest 2 W95 8 44 3D Ultr Poll Crp Nght $42 2 0 Wargame Classics 520 Anvil of Dawn CH F16 Fighterstick $96 Area 51 W95 $46 Ace Ventura 3D Ultra Pinball $40 Aces Collection $25 Arch Mage W95 $48 CH Force FX $159 Blood 3D $45 Advntres on Lego Isle $35 Agle Warrior F111 W95 533 Air Attack Pak Arena Deluxe $47 CH Game Card 3 Auto $25 Crusader No Remorse $26 Albion $39 Astro Rock $19 Archives 2 Star Wars 848 Betrayal in Antara 548 CH PC Gamepad $18 Crusader: No Regret $34 Azraels Tear $39 Beavs Birthd Lill Thgs $19 Atari 2600 AP W95 $25 Curse of Azure Bonds S16 CH Pro Pedals $74 Cyber Gladiators W95 $45 Beavis Butthd Vint St $31 Bvs & Bithd Cile Drks $19 Attack Stack Cyber Judas $19 CH Pro Throttle $98 Dark Forces $48 Birthright W95 Bvs & Bith Wnr Takes $19 Best of Sonic Collctn $35 Dark Queen of Krynn 519 CH Virtual Pilot Pro $69 Dark Frces 2 Jedi W95 $48 Circle of Blood $43 Crystal Caliburn $27 Defntve Wargme Coll 2 $34 Dark Sun 2 Graphics Blaster 202 $99 Dark Vengeance $45 City of Lost Children $44 Earthworm Jim 182 $34 Ecstatica Bundle $19 Dark Sun Online W95 $15 Graphics Blaster 302 5142 Die Hard Trilogy $46 Curse of Monkey Isle 548 Ecco the Dolphin $38 Fntsy Gnrl Strat Bnd! $34 Diablo $46 Gravis Blackhawk $29 Doom 2 W95 $45 Dark Earth W95 $46 Full Tilt Pinball 2 $24 Heroes M & M Bundle $39 Die By the Sword $18 Gravis Gelp Controllr $84 Duke Nukem 3D $39 Discworld 2 $44 Full Tilt Pinbil W95 $24 ID Anthology $99 Disciples of Steel $15 Gravis Grip Pad 2 Pak $24 Duke Nukem 3D Atomc 546 Ecstatica 2 Hive 2 $38 Intrply All Nght 2 $30 Dungeon Master 2 $25 Gravis PC Game Pad $19 Duke Nukm 3D Plut Pk $25 Gabriel Knight 2 $40 Hyper 3D Pinball $34 Kilrathi Saga Elder Scrolls 2 $59 Gravis PC Gmepad Pro $27 Eradicator Interstate 76 W95 5 48 Jungle Pinball $30 Kings Quest Anthology $25 Forgotten Realms Gravis Phoenix Joystk $83 Final Doom Into the Shadows $48 Looney Labyrinth Pball 529 Legend Kyrandia Series 525 Iron & Blood $42 1Omga Zp Orv 100M $199 Firefight $38 Leisure Suit Larry 7 $48 MS Retrn of Arcde W95529 Leisure St Larry Anth $25 Lands of Lore $25 Joyswitch $38 Gun Metal Lighthouse Mnty Pythns Wste Time $32 Lost Adventures $29 Lands of Lore 2 $48 Lgitech WingMn Werior $85 Hexen Death Kings $25 Nemesis Mortal Kombat 3 W95 $32 Megapak 5 $32 Meridian 59 W95 Logitech Wing Man Extr 945 Hexen W95 Outlaws W95 $47 Pinball Arcade $28 Might & Magic Trilogy $19 Pools of Darkness $19 MS Sdwdr Pr W/Hilbdr $88 Mortificator W95 5 44 Pandora Directive $46 Pinball Construction Kit 534 Mile High Club $26 Ravenlott Strand $25 SUPRA 33.6 FM Int $119 Perfect Weapon W95 542 Phantasmagoria 2 $54 Pinball Fantasy Dlx $29 Origin Pak $29 Ravnitt 2 Stn Prop $25 Space Orb 360 Powerslave W95 $38 Plague Pinball Illusions $29 Pinball Gold Pak $19 Rims Ark Shadow Riva $45 TM Driving Control T2 $108 Prey $50 Police Oust 5 SWAT $47 Pinball World $33 Pner Gen Stil Gd Bodi $19 Sacred Pools $48 TM F16 TOS $108 Quake $55 Rama $48 Rebel Assault 2 $25 Police Ouest Anthotay $25 Secret Silver Blades $19 TM F22 Pro $124 SKYNET Return to Krondor $45 Road Rash W95 $42 PowerHits Battitch $16 Serpent's Kiss $42 TM FLC F16 System $108 Star Trek Genrtns W95 $18 Riddle Master Lu $19 Rocket Jockey $42 Prince Persia Collect $19 Star Trail $36 TM Flight Contr Pro $99 Terminator Futr Shock $44 Shannara $42 Scorched Planet W95 $34 Quest for Glory Anth $25 Star Trek TNG Collect $69 TM Game Card $25 Terra Nova $20 Star Trek Judg Rt Coll $38 Tempest 2000 Rapid Fire Pak $29 Star Trek TNG Fl Unity $46 TM Rudder Contr Sys $98 The Fallen $44 The Dig Total Pinball 30 $19 SU-27 Strat Gde Bndle $30 Stone keep TM Wit Pinball Cntrl $32 Time Commando $40 TimeLapse Anc Civil 346 Vector Man $39 Space Quest Anthology $25 Terracide $42 TM X-Fighter Jystck $45 Ultimate Doom W95 $37 Titanic Joy Out Time $44 Virtua City PD 542 Star Control Collctn $19 Ultima 7 Series $15 TM XL Action Control $24 War Gods W95 $45 Tme Wrp Dr Brain W95 $33 Virtua Fighter W95 $42 Take Ten $19 Ultima 8 Pagan $15 Thurstmster Phazer Pad 547 Witchaven $25 Tomb Raider $42 WWF-In Your House $40 The Archives 1 $27 Ultima 9 Ascension $52 Thrustmaster GP1 574 Witchaven 2 $26 Toonstruck $48 Worms $34 Turning Point $24 Ultima Undrwid 1 & 2 $15 VFX1 Virt Realty HG 5802 XS $46 Under Killing Moon $19 Worms Reinforcements $34 Ultimate Gamers Pak $35 Unlimited Adventures $19 Verbal Commander $119 Zombievile $44 Zork.Nemesis 553 XMen Chlden Atm W95 542 Warcraft Battle Chest $55 Wizardry Gold W95 $32 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH COD 58. Price availability may change. Hardware orders may require addir tional shipping and handling charges. Detectives replaced with same product. All sales final. Call for details Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order placed and the per item charge is Per Order Per Shipment charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. Per Item 1943 Euro Air War $44 A-10 Cuba W95 ATF Gold S46 A10 Tank Kilir 2 W95 $48 ACS Marine Fighters $25 ACS Navy Fightes Gld $34 AH 64D Longbow $51 AH64 Flash Pnt Korea $25 ATF Nato Fighters $22 Accelerator W95 $44 Across Desert 1941 948 Across the Rhine $29 Air Cmbt Nyy Ftrs 97 $45 Air Combat Pacific Gold $34 Air Warrior 2 W95 $44 Airpower $19 Archimedean Dynsty 541 Armored Fist 2 $49 Battle of the Ironclads $46 Comanche 3 549 Command Aces W95 $25 Complete Grt Nu Bts $32 Conquest of the Skies $48 Daytona USA $39 Descent Bundle $26 Descnt 2: Intnte Abyss $48 Destruction Derby $26 Destruction Derby 2 $47 EarthSiege 2 W95 $40 F-22 Lightning 2 $49 F16 Fightng Falcon $48 FA 18 Hornet $45 Falcon 3 SD1 Fght Tor $12 Falcon 3 SD2 Mig 29 59 Falcon 3.0 $16 Falcon 4.0 $52 Falcon Gold $52 Standard Priority Federal U.S. Mail U.S. Mail Express 7-10 Dayt 20 na 20 $1.00 $2.00 $2.00 $0.75 $1.00 $2.00 $0.75 $1.00 Fighter Duel 2 W95 Fighter Duel Pro Net Flight Sim Toolkit Flying Corp Flying Nightmares 2 Formula 1 W95 Great Naval Battles 4 Harrier 2020 Hellbender W95 Hind Helicopter Indy Car Reng 2 W955 Jet Fighter 3 M1A2 Abrams W95 S Mchwirr 2 Ad-On W95 MechWarrior 2 W95 S Mechwerior Mercnries Msoft Flight Sim W959 Mnstr Trck Manss W95 Msolt FS 5 Europe 2 Msoft FS5 Boeing Coll Msoft FS5 Flight Shop S Msoft FS5 Grt Airlines $ Msoft FS5 Obct Dsgnr $ Nascar Racing 2 Naser Reng W Trck Pcks Rally Championship Sail 95 Scorcher Shattered Steel Ship of the Line W95 Silent Hunter Sint Hunt Patris 1-2eas SimCopter W95 Super EF 2000 W959 Super Motocross W95 $ TEX EF2000 TNN Motor Sprts Hdcres $44 Mall To Federal press $4.00 $4.00 47 Ders $2.00 $2.00 1826.DO 7.14 De $2.00 $2.00 $600 "


"Call NOW to Order! Source 10809 www.cdimag.comchips.html Chips & Bits, Inc. Online at www.cdmag.com/chips.html 800-699-4263 BUITZIRIES LIP \"CH PRODUCTS F-16 FIGHTER STICK' Features the most realistic Falcon jet stick grip ever! When used in conjunc tion with the Pro Throttle all 20 buttons become programmable for a total of 40 functions. 3 year warranty! $96 PFA SOCCER 9T has players from 12 international leagues, with over 4200 players and ratings. Choose from 4 different skill modes and 2 dillesent game styles. Play against the computer, or chal lenge opponents over modem or network $39 'THE LAST BLITZKRIEG' will put you in the heat of Hitler's last chance at victory in the West. Detailed battles, new land combat system, operational artificial intelligence, replay feature for reliving battles. CD$41 'THE SACRED MIRROR OF KOFUN' A daring undersea mission is cut short by an urgent S.O.S. Events lead you to cerie underwater reefs, shipwrecks tropical islands and into the intrigues of an international cast of characters. $39 EPORTS FALSE GAME 20 \"F/A-18 HORNET There's 28 different Persian Gulf combat missions to test your skills, you can blow up every thing from ammunition depots using the M61 Vulcan cannon to Mig fighters with an AlM9 Sidewinder! CD$45 'M.A.X.' A strate gy game that combines fully customized assault units with devastatingly real graphics and tactical multi-player action. Explore new worlds, as your brain is wired directly into the command & control center $48 'CH PRODUCTS FORCE FIX JOYSTICK' A force feedback joystick feeding vibration and motion back through the han dla via integrated game software allowing the user to feel the texture of a road or the jolt of hitting and obstacle. $159 STEEL PANTHERS 2' Fight tank vs tank in this contemporary tactical squad level game. Leada single platoon or up to an entire battalion while you battle the enemy in various conflicts form the 1950s on, including Korea, Vietnam and Desert Storm. You can even experience what World War III would have been like by creating your own \"what if situation CD 543 @ RAVAGE 1 Xias \"AGE OF SAIL 1775-1820 Delivers an excellent blend of exciting Real Time 3-D perspective naval combat along with pageantry and grandeur of those beautifully rendered sailing vessels from the Tall Ships era! CD $42 \"3D SPEX From the minute you put these on you're engulfed in 3D game field where wicked realism rules. Bring a whole new level of excitement to PC games, adding to your competitive edge with depth clues unavailable to the naked eye, plus exceptional comfort for hours of gaming enjoyment. $79 'THRUSTMASTER F-22 PRO With a powder coated metal base, glass filled ABS handle, metal gimbal mechanism, and heavy gauge spring tension, the F-22 PRO gives you the edge you need in advanced tactical warfare. $124 \"RAVAGE DC.X Greetings from Washington, DC This game offers non-stop air, ground and hand lo-hand combat with multiple play ing options including rail, panoramic, panocubic modes, and nonlinear 3D game play. $39 IBM SIMULATION IBM STRATETGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WARGAMES IBM WARGAMES FREE $19 Hardline $48 $42 $4B Test Drive: Off Road $42 The Condemned W95 $48 The Darkening 549 Thunder Truck Rally 547 Tie Fight Coll $28 Tom Clancy's SSN 345 Trophy Bass 2 $48 VMX Racing W95544 Viper Oper Rd Sct W95 $34 Wing Commander 3 $31 Wing Commndr 5 W95 $55 Wing Commndr 4 W95 $42 Wipe Out XL $47 World Rally Fever 544 Wrld Circ Gran Prix 2 544 X-Car Exprend Ron $44 X-Wing Collector X-Wng V Tie Fghtr W95554 iF-22 $44 Road Sumtr Appomat 2529 Road to Moscow W95 943 Stalingrad Steel Panthers $37 Steel Panthers Cmpon 515 Steel Pnthrs 2 W95 $43 TACOPS Tank Resistance 2024 $39 Third Reich Tigers on Prowl Map $23 Tigers on the Prowl $29 Tigers on the Prowl 2 $29 V Victory Bundle $28 V Victory Market Grdn $15 V Victory Veliky Luki 515 War College $31 Wargame CS3 Rifles $43 Zukov's Cmpaigns W95$37 Zulu War $29 $42 $25 IBM SPORTS 7th Legion Aden Magic $39 Admiral Sea Battles $39 Advancd Civilization $39 Alterlife $46 Age of Empires Age of Sail Agents of Justice Ares $42 Battlecruiser 3000 $36 Blood & Magic $46 Caesar 2 W95 $41 Capitalism Cave Wars Celtic Tales $34 Civilization 2 $42 Civilization 2 Scen S29 Civilization $19 C & C Red Alrt W95 $48 Colonization Comm Cong Covrt Ops $22 Comm Cong Red Alert $48 Command & Conquer $47 Command & Conquer 2$48 Command & Conq W95548 Complete Carriers War $42 Cong of New World Dix $48 Constructor W95 $44 Dark Earth Strty W95 $45 Dark Reign Future War $40 Deadlock Destiny W95 $45 Dominion Dungeon Keeper 545 Emperor of Fadng Suns $44 Empire 2 W95 $24 Empire Dix Mstr Ed $22 Enemy Nations W95 $42 Fallen Haven W95 547 Forbes Corp Rder Gme $45 Free Enterprise $45 Galactic Mirage W95 541 MILITARY BOOKS Grandest Fleet $19 $34 Heroes M&M W95 $34 Heroes Might & Magic $34 Heroes of M&M2 534 History of World $40 Imperialism Imperium Galactica $46 Into the Vold Jaggd Alinc Odly Game $44 Jagged Alliance $25 Jutland $19 Lords of the Realm 2 $48 Lost Admiral 2 $39 MAX 548 Machiavelli the Prince $19 Magic Gathing Stratgy 544 Master of Magic $35 Master of Orion $19 Master of Orion 2 $46 Mighty Machines W95 $32 Mission Force Pax Imperia 2 W95 $48 Railroad Tycoon $18 Reach for Stars W95 544 Rebellion W95 Risk W95 $41 Rogarioan Agenda $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 4$34 Settlers 2 $39 Shattered Nations $46 SimCity 2000 Collectn $51 SimCity 2000 W95 $51 SimCity 2000 W95 Net $51 Simisle 535 SimPark W95/W3 $34 SimTower $31 SimTown Space Marines $44 Spaceward Ho! 4 W95 $24 Star Control 3 547 Star General $43 GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $80 Return of the Phantom 3.5, Elements 3.5, Falcon 3 Mig 29 add on disk 3.5, Origamo 3.5, ESPN Sports Shorts CD. SPEND $160 Grandest Fleet 3.5, Riddle Master Lu CD, Jutland Co, Solitaire's Journey 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 Star Nations $46 Game Maker 3.0 $36 Starcraft W95 $46 Golden Nugget W95 $29 Starship Troopers $46 Hoyle Casino Coll W95 $30 Steel Legions 542 Hayle-Blackjack W95 $15 Syndicate Wars W95 546 Hoyle-Poker W95 5 15 Transport Tycoon $24 Hoyle-Solitaire W95 $15 Wages of War W95 $29 Hoyles Cisc Crd Gm $26 Warcralt 2 $46 Incredible Mach 3 $36 Warcraft 2 Add On $29 Jeopardy Platinum $28 Warhmmr Shad Hen Rt $28 Klik & Play $29 Warlords 2 $19 Magic Gathering W95 $46 Warlords 2 Dix Monopoly 540 Warwind $43 Monty Pythn Holy Grl $39 Wooden Ship Iron Men $39 Muppet Treast Island $37 Wrld Circ GP2 Manager $29 Origamo $14 X-Com Apocalypse $45 Othello $28 X-Com Terr frm Deep 541 Paparazzi $19 X-Com UFO Defense $19 Power Chess W95 $38 $43 Power Poker $15 Puzzls of Tribyte W95 $19 IBM TRADITIONAL SciFi Chan Trvia Game $44 Scrabble Avatar Princ Conflict $38 Shanghali Grt Mm W95 $26 Avary Cardazas Casino $24 Shanghali Grt Moments $26 Battleship W95 S41 Simpsnis Vrtl Sprolld $42 Bridge Dlx 2 Om Shl $32 Solitaire Dix W95 $25 Bridge Olympiad 516 Solitaires Journey $16 Card Players Paradise $31 TV Guide Crossword $12 Casino Champion $24 Trivial Pursuit $25 Casino Deluxe 2 $25 USCF Chess $40 Celebrity Poker $28 Ultimate Yahtzee $28 Chess Wars $38 Universal Neverlack $19 Chessmastr Online W95515 Vegas Games 95 W95 $19 Chessmates $33 Virtual Pool 540 Chessmstr 5000 W95 $35 Virtual Pool W95 $40 Clue Virtual Snooker $19 Connections $34 Virtual Vegas $13 Dealers Chee Collect $22 Wheel of Fortune Plat $22 Dinosaur W95 You Don't Jck Ost Pck $20 Dragon Dice $44 You Don't Know Jack 2 542 Extreme Pinball $29 You Dont Know Jack $30 Game Guru $24 You Dnt Kw Jack Spit $40 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #6A Aegis Afrika Korps $42 Alde de Camp Allied General $28 American Civil War $45 Battle of Bulge $42 Battlegrnd Gettysburg $32 Battleground Antietam $41 Battleground Ardennes $25 Battleground Bulge $28 Battleground Mid East $42 Battleground Shiloh $39 Battleground Waterloo $42 Blitzkrieg CincPac Midway $26 Civil War Mst Plyr $38 Close Combat W95538 Defend the Alamo 519 Definitive Gettysburg $44 Fantasy General $43 Fifth Fleet Fifth Fit Scen Mod 1 $19 Flight Cmmd 2 MB $19 Gene Wars $34 Great Battles Alexndr $44 Harpoon 2 Deluxe $25 Harpoon 97 W95 $44 Harpoon Classic $19 Last Blitzkrieg $41 Operation Crusader $39 Over the Reich $39 PTO 2 $34 Pacific General W95 $45 Panthers Shad Camp ea$15 Panthers Shadows Map $15 Panthers in Shadows $42 Panzer General $19 Panzer General 2 $42 Panzer General Online S15 Perfect Gen 2 w/Scen $30 Point of Attack $24 RE Lee CW Gen W95 $48 $48 $48 IBM HINT BOOKS $46 FIFA Soccer 97 $45 Frnt Po Gil Addon W95 $24 Fron Page Football 97 $48 Front Page Golf W95 $48 Gone Fishin $25 Grand Slam '97 W95 $44 Hardball 6 $42 Hyper Blade 540 Links LS Links Pro Courses ea $19 Links Pro 386 $19 MS Golf 3.0 W95 $37 Madden Football 97 $48 NBA Full Crt Prss W95 $40 NBA Live 97 $45 NFL QB Club 97 541 NHL Hockey 97 5 46 PBA Bowling 2 $35 SimGolf $40 Ten Pin Alley W95 $40 American Civil War 1 $16 Armies of Agincourt $16 Armies of the Crusades $16 Armies of Alex Great $16 Army of Northern Virg $16 Army of the Potomac $16 British Army N America $16 Flags of Third Reich 1 $16 Grman Medieval Armies $16 Israeli Army Mid East $16 Korean War 1950-53 $16 Louis XIV's Army $16 Luftwatte Field Divs $16 Medieval Euro Armies $16 Napoleons Germ Allies $16 Napoleons Grand Cav $16 Romn Army Caesr-Trin $16 Royal Air Force 516 Washingtons Army 1 $16 Wellingtons Hvy Cav $16 $40 Betrayal in Antara $16 Blood & Magic $16 Civilization 2 $16 Comm Cong Red Alert $13 Dark Forces 2 $16 Diablo $16 Elder Scrolls 2 $13 Heroes of M&M2 S16 Leisure Suit Larry 7 $16 Master of Onion 2 $16 Star Control 3 $16 Starcraft $16 Wrerit 2:Bynd Drk Portl$13 8 $29 "


"THINK ONLY THE STRONG SURVIVE? THINK AGAIN! AND AGAIN. AND AGAIN. AND AGAIN. Introducing DEUS, the 3D role-playing game that requires both brains and brawn.  Your Identity: 22nd century bounty hunter Your Goal: save the scientific community on the planet Alcibiade from terrorists Your Obstacles: 40 predators; 5 lunatic terrorists; mind-bending puzzles; your own life parameters (health, energy, food) Your Strategy: Kill. eat. Kill. sleep. Kill. tend wounds. Kill... Your Weapons: anything from spears to rocket launchers Your Bonus: 2 play modes role playing and arcade Don't joke about his height or he'll bash in your kneecaps. On second thought, maybe you shouldn't have skinned her bables. Website: http://www.readysoft.com Amputation, just what the doctor ordered. If he only had a heart, then you could rip it out. NWwwa READYSOFT 01996 Silmarils. All rights reserved. DEUS is a trademark of Société Silmarils. Distributed by ReadySoft Incorporated. 66 Silmarils CIRCLE READER SERVICE #388 "


"DARK REIGN  SNEAK PREVIEW Dark Reign History 101 he story line for Dark Reign begins in the year 2250, imposing strict water rationing. Resentment over the Imperium's when Earth's population has swelled to 30 billion. policies and ruthless tactics leads to widespread civil war. A revoluDespite advanced technology and scientists' best efforts, tionary force known as the Freedom Guard emerges to challenge the planet's resources and environment are stretched to the Imperium, and a vicious war erupts. the breaking point. As the gap between the \"haves and have-nots\" Thrust into the middle of this war is a breakaway faction known widens, criminal elements seize control of large portions of many as the Boleans, a highly advanced civilization based on the teachcities. An alliance of major nations is formed in 2314 to bring crime ings of Alpheus Bole that fled Earth centuries before. Bole was a under control. The solution to send the worst criminals to a penal brilliant, charismatic scientist who discovered a method to convert colony on lo, Jupiter's moon, is so successful that by 2400, one mil matter using Element 115. When Bole's ship was damaged by JDA lion criminals a year are banished to moon-based space colonies. forces centuries earlier, it was thought that he and his knowledge The agency running this operation, the Jovian Detention were lost forever. However, during the Imperium-Freedom Guard Administration, amasses the world's largest army, giving it enough civil war, a probe returns from that region of space and reveals that political clout to eventually absorb the government from which it Bole could still be alive. As DARK REIGN begins, you assume comhad been created. mand of a Bolean expedition to return to Earth space and find Bole Years later, after the JDA becomes the Imperium and colonizes and his lost technology, even if you have to battle through both the the galaxy, it maintains tight control over its galactic domain by Imperium and the Freedom Guard to get them. STRATEGYZ WARGAMES ers sneak into enemy territory and take on the enemy's appearance to serve as silent assassins. Units can be assigned movement way points and be ordered to perform certain functions at different points along their route. Formation moves will also be possible. Players can adjust the amount of autonomy and tenacity that their units display. For example, vehicles and infantry units can be set to suffer a certain amount of damage before they automatically retreat to hospitals and repair shops. types will be lightly detailed and animated. As in C&C, buildings can be repaired and sold, but selling a building will be a much slower process. \"You're not going to be able to wait until the last second to cecide,\" he notes. After playing with an early version of DARK REICN, I was impressed. The list of fcatures planned for DARK REIGN, the numbxer of variables, the level of control, and the improved realist give strategy gamers hope for the near future. If Activision can successfully pull all these pieces together, the company's first foray into real-time action-strategy gaming could very well set a new standard in the genre. A brand new game every morth before you get tired of the old one! ONE TIME CHARGE! ONE TIME BUILD 'EM AND BOMB 'EM As in C&C each side has distinct strengths and weaknesses. \"One side has a more superior air power and the other has a more superior ground force,\" Borrud explains. Both sides will have common building types for utilities and resource gathering. However, there will also be specialty buildings that are unique to the freedom Cuard and the Imperium. These include tunneler and matter transport facilities and the \"black ops\" center that can create spies and saboteurs. Each side will have unique clcfensive systems to deal with air power and land attacks. Hospitals will be available to heal infantry, and repair bays have the ability to fix damaged vehicles. In addition, field medics and mechanics will be present on the battlefield. Borud says that each of the 32 building ONLY Here is what happens when you become a GOMC member:  Receive a new game for Windows based systems on a CD each month JOIN TODAY BY SENDING  12 new games each year for less than BY SENDING you would normally spend for one game US YOUR NAME, ADDRESS, PHONE  New games at pre-market prices NUMBER ALONG WITH YOUR prior to publication CHECK/MONEY ORDER OR CREDIT  MONEY BACK GUARANTEE: CARD NUMBER WITH EXP. DATE. If not satisfied after receipt of first AMERICAN EXPRESS AND game, return game within 30 days for DISCOVER ACCEPTED, OR PHONE a full refund. OR FAX YOUR ORDER WE WILL BILL YOU! Astron Publishing, Inc.'s Game Of The Month Club GOMC 1101 17th Street, N.W., Ste. 408, Washington, D.C. 20036 Tel: 202-331-9789 Fax: 202-872-0286 Toll Free: 800-982-2578 email to dagreene@wbonepub.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #298 "


"THE FUTURE OF PRAWAWALI O HUS. 113 DABAZAN GUL TIPEIL CIERIER BEHICLE ISSU * ***** HY MEN. 1940 MATERIRE CACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS 7th LEVEL. "


"Warcraft defined the past. Command & Conquer gave you the present. Now, DOMINION challenges you to the future with fiery real-time strategic combat, resolutions up to 1280 X 1024, and an unprecedented 95,000 frames of real-time 3-D animation. It's 2224. Say good bye to the tactics that served you well in previous campaigns. Your new reality: battleground strategies vacy by planet, and the military-based AI anticipates your every move. Invent new maneuvers with dogeat-dog Commanders. Sabotage enemy bases with computer viruses, and teleport Men and Materials across-world. Isn't technology great? MAWR mond Download the interactive demo at: www.gamespot.com www.7thlevel.com Every 10th download can win the complete game. nnnnnn TRENERISI DOMINZON Tho DOMINION demo may be registered via e-mail. Every 10th registration of the first 100,000 received, gets a mail-in rebate coupon for the retail cost of DOMINION. Limit one rogistration per person. Offer only valid in North America. Rebato will be paid in U.S. funds. Void Where prohibited. 01996 7th Level, Inc. 7th Level is a registered trademark of 7th Lovel, Inc. All other products are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective owners. All rights reserved. 7th Level, Inc., Richardson, TX 76081 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #102 "


"**** REVIEW. WAR WIND DIFFICULTY LEVEL STRATEGY / WARGAMES The Winds of Change New Real-Time Battlefields Await In WAR WIND by Martin E. Cirulis WARWIND n this industranscendental Shama'li, are initially distry, it's tant from the conflict, but Tha'roon inevitable: paranoia (as well as their own agenda to whenever unify the races) draws them in. Each of there's a hit the four campaigns reflects the congame, a cerns of the respective races: Tha'roon spate of imibattle to regain their empire, the Eaggra tators is sure for freedom, the Obblinox for an empire to follow of their own, and the Shama'li to see While most that precious knowledge is not conof these are going to sumed by the war. be soulless clones, designed only to cash VARIATIONS ON A THEME in on a gamer's desire WAR WHAT? Any similarity to WARCRAFT helps, of course, but At the most basic level, WW can be to get more of what looked at as WARCRAFT 2.5. The designWAR Wino has enough strengths to stand on its own merit. they like, some will ers took most people's comments on the be valid attempts to reinterpret the form intricate relationship to each other and award-winning Orc-Human brawl fest and come up with something fresher and the gameworld itself. There is enough and implemented the better ones in WAR more interesting than the same game, detail here for an RPG, and the back WIND. The playing fields are larger, there different graphics.\" Luckily, the latter is ground provides enough material for four are more races to play, the large varicly of what we find in the latest offering from campaigns, one for each race. This is one units are very distinct in both look and SSI, WAR WIND (WW). There's no denyof the rare cases where the plot for a sci-fi combat values for each race, magic spells ing this real-time wargame owes much of game hasn't made me wince. are more interesting, and there are even its basic design to the success of Briefly, the situation on Yavaun is one high-tech cybernetic improvements to WARCRAFT II, but the designers have of open rebellion. The planet's dark over keep in mind. Aside from this, it is still gone that extra step to make WW a game lords, the Tha'roon, are losing control of about building towns and fighting with litworth playing in its own right. Though the things after thousands of game suffers from a little different for difyears of dominance. ferent's sake\" syndrome, there is a rich sciThese amoral tech-masfi texture and enough depth in gameplay ters first suffer the open that most comparisons to its famous forerevolt of their worker class, bear will be favorable. the species of sentient plants known as the WEIRD WAR III Eaggra. Then, as they use WW takes place on the troubled world their warrior class, the of Yavaun, where four sentient, non hulking Obblinox, more human races are striving for dominance, and more brutally to supNow, your average clone game would just press the rebellion, these throw four races onto the planet and indentured soldiers finally THAT'S IT? Though the combat model has stealth units maybe give them some clichéd advan revolt themselves. The and scouts, WAR WIND is limited in its vehicles and nontages and disadvantages just to be fancy. fourth power on Yavaun, ground combat, with only a few sea transports. In WW, though, the four races have an the mysterious and very Price: $54.99 System Requirements: IBMcompatible Pentium 60, Windows 95, 16 MB RAM, 5 MB hard drive space, SVGA graphics, 2x CD-ROM drive; supports Windows 95 sound cards. # of Players: 1-8 Protection: None (CD must be in drive) Designers: DreamForge Publisher: SSI Sunnyvale, CA (800) 245-4525 Reader Service #: 337 hulking Obh JANUARY 1997 "


"LAUGH IN THE FACE OF DANGER.. ALIEN . ALIEN INCIDENT PC-CD ROM INCIDENT K DPR On alloween the te og do they are. Tiina linata inted plan, PHILIPS ...OR CHUCKLE, chortle or even guffaw as you embark on your quest to solve the \"Alien Incident\". If you enjoy \"classic\" graphic adventure games where an intuitive interface and a sense of humor are the key ingredients to fun, then this is your kind of game. It's Halloween night and you've just witnessed your uncle being abducted by aliens after his wormhole spawner invention sprung a leak. It's up to you, Benjamin Richards, to unravel the mystery of where they've taken your uncle. With simple mouse clicks explore spooky mansions, dark and mysterious forests, underwater caverns, creepy cemeteries, a challenging maze and the aliens' mothership itself. Hundreds of puzzles and clues provide you with hours of immersive gameplay. Meet interesting people such as Yodel the tree dweller, plus dozens of other strange and bizarre characters in a humorous game that's easy enough even for adults to play! K ZD PRO Designed for kids 8 years and older. KidPro offers wholesome entertainment and challenging gameplay without excessive violence. PHIUPS KIDS TO ADULTS PHILIPS To order, see your local retailer or call 1-800-883-3767.  Housemarque Games, Inc. Published by Gametek, Inc. Distributed by Philips Media. All rights reserved CONTENT RATED BY CIRCLE READER SERVICE #277 "


"ANDERSON, I NEED A VOLUNTEER. THAT TANK UP THE ROAD? SOMEONE'S GOTTA TAKE IT OUT. I NEED SOMEONE I CAN COUNT ON. SOMEONE WIO'S MAN ENOUGH TO RUN THROUGH MACHINE GUN FIRE TO GET THE JOB DONE. AND ANDERSON, THERE COULD BE A MEDAL IN IT FOR YA. "


"Anderson, Chuck. Sergeant. Leads 2nd Platoon's Recon team. Probably gotta wife back home. Damn good soldier. You give him an order and he figures out the best way to get the job done. So what's he doing cowering behind that bombed-out farmhouse? Saving his own butt. That's what you should expect if you order him to do something crazy. In Close Combat everything reacts like it does on the battlefield, from 12:1 the ripping canvas hiss of the German MG42 machine gun to the screams of the men it hits. It all goes down right in front of you. In real time. So there's no time to thumb through en la the manual. You work your mouse like LSI Americans vs. Germans: Which, side you bonne take? a weapon. Point and click and boom, COTT the shooting starts the second your 04 men step off Omaha Beach and it don't let up 'til they've taken Saint-Lô. Troops, terrain, situations if you want wach vs. Windows 95: Which side you gonna take? to get any more accurate, you'll have to shave your head. Wanna go head to head with other military geniuses? All you  need is a TCP/IP connection. And guts. Download the trial version and start your basic training today. To experience Close Combat visit your nearest recruiter or head straight for the battlefield Microsoft at http://www.microsoft.com/games/kickbutt/ Microsoft Where do you want to go today?\" 1996 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks and Where do you want to go today? Is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Mat is a trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. 1996 Atomic Games, Inc. All rights reserved. Atomic, Alec Gumes and the Atomic Games logo are trademarks of Atomic Games, Inc COMPUTER GAMES ***** STRATEGY PLUS MUASE COMBAT Tala d of an who act la ratsalden "


"REVIEW  WAR WIND STRATEGYZ WARGAMES Village Building ...Yavaun Style realistic fog-of-war system. Finally somebody has realized that commanders usuhile most of us are getting pretally have general maps of any given area ty skilled at building bases in before they go in. WW simulates this by real-time games these days, \"graying out\" the unexplored regions, WAR WIND has some subtleties showing major terrain but little detail and that are not readily apparent. Knowing about no enemy units. As your units explorc, the them can benefit the aware, especially when they details are revealed per usual, but at least find themselves playing real opponents with preyou have a relevant amount of informaconceptions from other games. The most importion from the start instead of blundering tant advantage in WW construction routines is around in the dark that a building does not have to be complete in order to function. Labs only a quarter complete MEN AT WORK Unlike in WARCRAFT and C&C ONE TO GROW ON will still take in units and allow them to research. buildings can function before they're finished. The WW, while not truly original, still has Other buildings, such as recruiting centers, will paint might still be drying, but this Shama'li buildwhat it takes to carve a niche for itself, also begin to function while mostly incomplete, ing is ready for visitors. especially if SSI supports it. It would be a so be aware of this and use it to your benefit. shame to see the best sci-fi computer Also, while the offensive wall is a poor One final tip is that trucks make excellent game milieu in years go into a one-shot replacement for cannon towers, they can be escape vehicles in case all else fails. Should your game. With the multiple campaigns there used to funnel enemy units into killing zones for base look like it is going to fall, load up some is plenty of gameplay for the buck here, your defending units. Create a funnel of least workers and your precious Leader into a couple and while the quest\" missions are fairly resistance with these electric fences and place a of trucks and get the heck out of Dodge. Find a uninspired, the sheer variety of opponents vicious ranged fighting group at the bottom, and nice spot out in the boonies and try to get back and modifiable units keeps things fresh for you can just watch the bodies pile up. on your feet before you are discovered again. a long time. The multiplayer suite is for eight players, and very nice, once you get past the scemingly imposing multiplayer tle SVGA guys, so if that sort of thing cyborgs and ninja wizards. game wizard. At this time there are some doesn't interest you, you may as well walk At least the simplified infrastructure serious hiccups in the modem routines, on by allows for a more complex combat model.but the game is designed for use with Some things are simplified in this Instead of the simple division between Mplayer, and I suspect it will quickly gathgame. Resource gathering has been melee and ranged units that we've seen er fans from the old Ores 'n' Humans lot reduced to one generic \"resource\" that is previously, WW pieces are rated for types once a technical patch is available. collected from forests and crystals. Also of combat, and players can develop and WAR WIND may not be the freshest absent is any kind of real naval game (just react to more realistic combined arms tacbreath of air in the industry, but it does transports and armed transports) or air tics. Camouflage and disguise capability make a very good show for itself, and it is power. Also, fighting units and workers are for some units means sneak attacks are a storm that should be respected. If you recruited from the basic worker unit, as finally possible in a non-cloaking way. are at all looking for some smart, real-time opposed to being \"built,\" a step find This actually makes a scout a relevant gaming, touch down on Yavaun and pick more realistic for a fantasy game and less unit. Another excellent touch is the first aside. They're waiting for you. predictable. I am cisappointed that the designers limitAPPEAL: Fans of WARCRAFT II looking for some more real-time wargamed the game's air coming in a new setting. bat and vehicles. With PROS: A cleverly detailed world, the use of technology with originality, a better-than-usual and magic in this combat model, excellent fog-of-war implementation, great variety of units, game, there was a real and unique campaigns. opportunity to bridge CONS: Game speed needs to be the gap between turned down to get WARCRAFT and the most out of COMMAND AND combat options. Not very modemCONQUER with friendly at the unwieldy but powerful FREEDOM MARCH Happily, each race has its own unique moment. Cyborgs machines fighting side campaign with a distinct story line and missions. Here, the should be able to RATED Eaggra are fighting to free themselves from Tha'roon slavery. build planes. by side with killer CG JANUARY 1997 "


"There is life after World War II. After playing STEEL PANTHERS\" and enjoying its incredible WWII armored warfare, you're dying for more. Your prayers have been answered with STEEL PANTHERS II. Fight campaigns in recent wars such as Korean, Sinai, Vietnam and Desert Storm. Enact hypothetical battles like NATO vs Warsaw Pact. Or create your own with the random scenario generator and editor. This is SSI and Gary Grigsby at their very best. Detailed historical accuracy. All the right tanks, helicopters, jet fighters and missile sites. SVGA graphics. Intense animation. Digitized photos and sound effects. Modern video combat footage. If war is hell, this is wargaming heaven. ( STEEL To order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAY with Visa/MC (North America only). PC DOS CD-ROM DB ID ADULTS 256-color SVGA displays Www.ssionline.com STEEL PANTHERS is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc. 1996 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #208 "


"***** REVIEW  WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN DIFFICULTY LEVEL Battle Stations! CHOICE Take The Helm In The Best Age Of Sail Wargame Yet STRATEGYZ WARGAMES by Bob Proctor THRIFT valon Hill has numerous classic board games to its credit, several of which have been converted to the computer. Some of these conversions have been mediocre (ADVANCED CIVILIZATION), while others (1830) have been outstanding. WOODEN SHIPS AND IRON MEN (WSIM), the latest classic Conversion, definitely falls into the latter category. In this case, Avalon Hill has taken a proven game system, increased the realism, and given it a point-and-click interface that makes it very easy to play. WSIM provides a rare experience in gaming. You command only a single vesALL HANDS ON DECK From WOODEN SHIPS' main menu, you can play one of the 18 sel, but it is one that has many complex scenarios, try the 1813 American campaign, or engage in multiplayer battles by hotstrengths and weaknesses, giving you a seat or e-mail. game that is indeed as intricate as chess, where maneuvers and tactics ensue. The boardgame uses hexagon-based move limited to sailing close-hauled at 67 computer version preserves this gaming ment, so that there are six directions, with degrees of the wind. Maybe we can hope philosophy, focusing on single-ship a ship being able to move into any five for such improvements in a sequel. actions in two-thirds of the scenarios. (you can't sail directly into the wind). This With one exception, all of the scenarios has been increased to eight directions and THE WHEEL'S KICK, THE WIND'S SONG, are taken from the boardgame. Missing seven possible courses in the computer AND THE WHITE SAILS SHAKING are the larger battles: Ushant (63 ships), version. Speed is controlled by the Playing WSIM is a delight. The 3D Price: $59.95 The Saints (67 ships), and Chesapeake amount of sail you set: either l'ull, Plain, perspective and a well-designed interface System Requirements: IBM-compatible 486Bay (43 ships). Trafalgar is the largest sce or Battle. When you combine seven pos make you feel like you really are com33, 8 MB RAM, 11 MB nario present but has been cut down from sible courses with three speeds, you get manding these miniature ships. The key hard drive space, SVGA 60 ships to 23 and represents only half the more than double the number of move to everything is the command sidebar, graphics, 2x CD-ROM action-Nelson's column against about a ment choices available in the boardgame, which reappears over the battle map drive, Microsoft-compatible mouse; sup third of the l'rench-Spanish fleet. Thoughm aking mancuvering much more interwhen each tur ends. It clisplays an ports Sound Blaster commanding 30+ ships could be esting. incredible wealth of information, includcompatible sound unwieldy (especially when the Al doesn't While this is a big improvement, it is ing your current ship, her state of damage, cards. # of Players: 1-2 keep the ships in line), WSIM doesn't too bad that WSIM didn't add even more wind strength, and, to the right, the sail (e-mail, hotseat) even give you the option to command realism by increasing the directions to 16, she's carrying. You can change sail by Protection: None (CD or even trying to offer full 360-degree more if you are up to the task, since it can clicking on the sails on the command bar, must be in drive) Designer: Stanley only support up to 25 ships per side per movement and a model that calculated provided you have crew assigned there. Associates, Joe scenario. speed through water based on a rating for Using the steering wheel in the center Balkoski the ship and the amount of sail set. Then of the command sidebar to steer is fairly Original Boardgame Design: S. Craig Taylor ALL I ASK IS A TALL SHIP you would have the ability to distinguish intuitive; you move forward by default, so Publisher: Avalon Hill AND A STAR TO STEER HER BY between ships that could \"point\" well you only need to handle the wheel when Baltimore, MD The increase in realism comes from (truly sail within 45 degrees of the wind) you want to turn. Each spoke of the wheel (800) 999-3222 Reader Service #: 338 | improving the sailing model. The and more awkward vessels that would be represents a different maneuver. When CG JANUARY 1997 "


"WAR WIND Conflict is the Great Teacher. And the lesson is in real-time! he ancient, alien world of Yavaun teeters on the brink of anarchy. For centuries, 4 diverse races have tolerated a precarious balance of power. But a new order is in the wind... one born of blood and fire! This real-time strategy game lets you carry your 8 favorite units from scenario to scenario. Advanced combat options include stealth movement and bio-mechanically enhanced units. Play solitaire or choose multiplayer and head-to-head play via network and modem. TEEN Online tutorial and popup windows help you learn the game quickly. BAH LILLE 256-COLOR SVGA DISPLAYS. WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM L DREAMFORGE 7 Developed by DreamForge Intertainment. WAR WIND is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc., a Mindscape Company. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 1996 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved, A MINDSCAPE COMPANY www.warwind.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #237 "


"MULTI-PLAYER.REAL-TIME. WITHOUT A YOV'RE RAVIDEL HE'S PACKNG A Hurloon MinoTAUR. GIANT STRENGTH. A FIREBALL. THE WALL OF STONE, REVERSE DAMAGE, A HILL GIANT, AND SHATTER. "


"STRATEGIC WARFARE... MASTER PLAN, DUST. SAMDRUU HE'S PACKING A SERRA ANGEL, HOLY STRENGTH. Tsunalni. THE WALL OF AIR. ARMAGEDDON. THE SHIVAN DRAGON. AND REGENERATION. This is the next dimension of Magic: The Gathering Draw on a mystic armory of 220 spells to invoke a supernatural legion of creatures and powers! In the vortex of warfare every unique spell reacts differently to every other spell. Prepare yourself for another level of strategy! Duel rapid-fire, real-time with up to 4 players over a PC network or two players on PlayStation\" and Sega Saturn via split-screen technology! Or wage a necromantic campaign against Battlemage Ravidel and an alliance of wizards in the vast uncharted world of Corondor. Welcome to the ultimate War of the Wizards! The Gathering BATTLE A G E\" BASED ON THE FANTASY ADVENTURE WORLD OF MAGIC: THE GATHERING: PLAYSTATION WINDOWS 95 SEGA saturn A<claim RATINS PEADING OF THE COAST Magic: The Gathering, Deckmaster, and all expansion names are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast Inc Pa. Pend. All Righty Reserved: Battlomago is a registered trademark of Acclain Entertainment, Inc. PlayStation and then tono re trademarks o! Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Sega and Soca Saturn aro trademarks of SEGA ENTERPRISES. LTD. All rights reserved. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 1996 Microsoft Corporation. Acciaim is a division and o n trademark of Acclaim Entertainment Inc. &. 1800 Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. All rights resurved. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #152 entertainmenince www.acclaimnation.com "


"REVIEW. WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN Hints From The Tactical Officer STRATEGYZ WARGAMES Total Crew 70 aking fire-shooting at the end of a shipdoes more damage, and it may prevent the enemy from returning fire, since the cannon all point to the side. When you have more than one ship, try to keep them in a line. This gives every ship an unobstructed field of fire on both sides and helps to block fire at the vulnerable ends of the ship. This is called the «line of battle\" and is why major warships of this period were called \"ships of the line.\" Another important tactic from the Age of Sail-once again aptly demonstrated in the game-is \"weather gauge.\" This means being upwind of your opponent, preventing your foe from sailing directly toward you. You can sail right at him and with good speed. This allows you to control the range at which the action takes place. The main value of Boarding SARGPGIT 10% boat speed is that it Guns in lets you take the weather gauge away from your opponent. Out of Action Smaller ships can be dismasted if they try to carry Full Sail in VICTORY a heavy breeze: larger ships can suffer the SHIP'S STATUS This status screen for HMS Victory shows same fate in a gale. no damage. Check the status of your opponents frequently; Check for an increase if you've created a weakness in the enemy ship, exploit it. in wind strength every turn if you've got Full Sail set and anything-much less do significant reduce sail immediately-unless you're damage-firing from a ship with Full fleeing for your life or feeling very Sail set in a normal breeze. lucky! Check your opponent's damage freBattle Sail represents the smallest quently, you can easily get a critical hit amount of sail area. It is preferred in and not know it. For example, a hit on battle because it minimizes the damage the steering gear may prevent his done to rigging and reduces the ship's changing course for a turn or more, rolling to produce a more stable gun allowing you to get a decisive stern platform. You'll never hit rake. WSIM... 10 you order a move, each change to the ship's path is highlighted on the water. When things look good, just click to make the turn. After each turn, there is a short delay before you can tum again. If you received orders. WSIM offers 18 different scenarios in Revolutionary and Napoleonic battle, with ships from Britain, France, Spain, and the USA. There is also an interesting campaign that lets you captain an American warship on a cruise of several months during the summer of 1813. You make no decisions about navigation or logistics, just combat. Events are reported in a log book. When a sail is sighted, you choose whether to approach or avoid, and if you approach and identify the vessel, you must then decide to fight or escape. Most of your contacts will be small, lightly armed transports. Since the American cruisers are generally faster than any enemy ship their size or larger, this is pretly easy until accumulated damage begins to hamper ship's speed. A typical campaign is 10 to 20 battles, but most engagements will be very quick, and the entire campaign can be finished in one sitting of two to four hours. Once you've finished the scenarios and campaigns, you can create your own battles with the included scenario editor AND A QUIET SLEEP AND A SWEET DREAM WHEN THE LONG TRICK'S OVER WSIM passes my tests for a great wargame. Unlike in some other wargames, the realism and complexity of combat make me want to return to each historical battle and play both sides to test different strategies and tactics. It's rare that you get a game this good that leaves you wanting more, but WOODEN SHIPS AND IRON MEN is exactly that. It's an almost perfect conversion, capturing all the strengths of the boardgame while making it easier, accessible, and even more fun to play. & S 12 READY CANNON WOODEN SHIPS' combat is detailed, but also very easy to learn, thanks to the handy command sidebar. Here, a 130-gun Spanish ship is about to fire at HMS Victory, though the latter will return some raking fire. APPEAL: For any fan of Age of Sail naval combat. PROS: WSIM goes beyond even the classic boardgame in realism and depth of gameplay. Great interface and documentation, with an interest ing campaign. CONS: Could use some more scenarios; lacks network play, doesn't support really large engagements. have 10 percent or more of the crew assigned to sails, you can make successive 45-degree tums. To avoid collision with your own ships, you can see the projected paths of other ships that have already RATED CG JANUARY 1997 "


"ENET:Zne LE PC CD ROM & WINDOWS 95 A CyberJunkie's Ultimate Fantasy Come True.... Cross the boundary that separates dreams from reality. Enter the virtual world of Net: Zone, an adventure game with a world full of bizarre computer programs, artificial life forms, and floating platforms. Discover the CYCORP virtual reality interface linking you to the cyberspace world of the Genecys Zone. Attach the neural device to your head, and let your mind interface directly with the Zone....the secrets of CYCORP and the mystery of your father's disappearance are waiting... To order, interface with your local retailer or call 1-800-883-3767 KIDS TO ADULTS ENET:Zne COMPRO GAMES  Compro Games Ltd. All Rights Reserved PHILIPS Website: http://www.philipsmedia.com CONTENT RATED BY ESRB CIRCLE READER SERVICE #278  Gametek, Inc. All Rights Reserved "


"ARMAND G. BRIONES, M.D. PLASTIC SURGEON 1558 10th St., Anywhereville, US 9040100) 555-45 SEGASOFT Developed by : 01996 SegaSoft Inc. All rights reserved. SegaSoft and the SegaSoft logo are trademarks of SegaSoft Inc. Rocket Science, the Roc "


"PATIENT 33-S: Received multiple treatments for injuries sustained while participating in \"Rocket War! Reconstructive surgery corrected most facial bones destroyed by repeated encounters with rockets, cement walls and pylons. Skin grafts from buttocks region replaced epidermal tissue burned off by jet exhaust. PATIENT 4-0: Treated for severe lacerations received when he was knocked off his rocket by competitor's cable while \"Rocket Racing\" Rhinoplasty and ear reconstruction were also necessary, as patient's face was smashed repeatedly against the ground and walls while traveling in excess of 100 mph. PATIENT 98-B: Treated for massive head trauma suffered after ramming his rocket into an exploding ball while playing \"Rocket Ball\" The accident completely welded his eye sockets shut and tore 90% of the skin off his face. Needless to say, this was no ordinary \"lift and tuck\" Rocket Jockey ROCKETS AND JOCKEYS. A BAD COMBINATION. FOR A FREE WINDOWS 95 DEMO OR TO ORDER ROCKET JOCKEY DIRECT, CALL 1.888. SEGASOFT WWW.SEGASOFT.COM ence logo, Rocket Jockey and the Rocket Jockey logo are trademarks of Rocket Science Games, Inc. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #351 "


"***** REVIEW  GENE WARS DIFFICULTY LEVEL Lost In Space Bullfrog's Real-Time '50s-Style Sci-Fi Wargame STRATEGYZ WARGAMES by Mark Clarkson ABS long, long time ago, in a while the CD galaxy far, far away, four dismusic is a wontinct alien races were derful knock-off of engaged in a bloody grudge Forbidden Planet, O 2000 war of, ahem, stellar pro with all the bings, portions: the totally laid boings, and warback and stoney bling synthesizers. Bohemians, the cold-fish The voice characSaurians, the sullen terizations are Schnozzoids, and an espe great, helping to cially offensive race called the Earthlings. give each different Before long, though, a mysterious and mace a distinct perridiculously powerful race called the sonality. My Ethereals cropped in on the battling fac favorite, the THE TRUTH IS OUT THERE GENE WARS is a wacky real-time game tions to put a stop to a war that was rav Bohemians, are so with a '50s sci-fi feel, complete with great aliens with distinct peraging the cosmic ecosystem. These tree laid-back (and sonalities, classic flying saucers, and cigar-shaped rockets. hugging aliens decided to turn all mem stoned) that I can bers of the warring races into meek and harclly picture them getting off their newly discovered creatures, which you happy vegetables via their patented couches, let alone taking part in a war. can then synthesize, and can also heal Adami Process other members of the team. Rangers exert The former enemy races were then YOUR AWAY TEAM influence over creatures, encouraging sentenced to work together to reforest, You command teams of up to five spe them to breed, eat, or attack. Rangers and repopulate, and recolonize this sector's cialists as you attempt to establish geneticists carry stun guns for use against war-ravaged planets. For extra motivation, colonies, re-seed planels, and kick oppos hostile animals. the Ethereals announced that the very ing alien butt...when the Ethereals aren't No C&C clone would be complete best colonization team would be spared looking, of course. Engineers build, repair, without a resource to mine, and CENE from the Adami Process. So cach race's and upgrade your planctary structures. Wars has COOP-a catch-all substance team is now damned determined to be Botanists gather seeds and plant new useful both as a building material and as the best environmentalist in the forests. Ceneticists analyze the DNA of stock for growing synthetic life-forins. galaxy--even if that means Every new building, upgrade, and creaPrice: $39.95 trampling over every tree, ture costs COOP, which you obtain by Systembush, flower, and enemy extracting minerals from the ground and Requirements: IBMcompatible 486/66, camp that gets in the way. by recycling plants and dead animals at 1290 8MB RAM, 42 MB CENE WARS, Bullfrog's Recycling Plants. hard drive space, latest creation, is a realBases consist of the usual melange of SVGA graphics, 2x CDROM drive, MS DOS time strategy game that specially structures. Pulpers process plant 5.0 or Windows 95, plays like a hybrid which is matter and produce moldings necessary mouse; supports most one part COMMAND & for upgrading your structures. Landing major sound cards. # of Players: 1-4 CONQUER and another pads let you acquire new team members (network) part from a Monty Python or send current team members off the Protection: None (CD production of Forbidden planet. Technology centers allow you to must be in drive) Designer: Bullfrog Planet. The graphics, feaGENETICS 101 A large part of GENE WARS' gameplay build other high-tech structures such as Publisher: Electronic turing cigar-shaped rocket force fields, stun cannons, and Ethereal involves sending your botanist and rangers to survey the ships and chrome-plated detectors. San Mateo, CA land, uncover the map's fog, and research the five ani. (800) 245-4525 flying saucers, are straight mals so you can cross-breed a powerful mutant army. The single most crucial structure to Reader Service #: 339 out of '50s sci-fi movies, your eventual success is the Cene Pod 0 40 Arts CG JANUARY 1997 "


"You've been waiting for this sequel, He's been waiting for you. MASTER O ORIONIS BATTLE A   le W ITHIN Hoy nay service (poca Troty Track TARD Demos Offer 17 Exchange Decoration Trendar Adodalya The secot nolar to come together for at on the important moment in history : EROPROSE In your strategic quest for galactic supremacy, the Antarians eagerly await to exact their vengeance. Play it solitaire. Play it with friends over LAN. Playa hot seat game or via modem. play it.\" Visit your local retailer or call 24 hours: 1-800-695-GAME (U.S. and Canada). CIRCLE READER SERVICE #192 www.microprose.com Available on PC CD-ROM 1996 MicroProse Software, Inc. MASTER OF ORION and BATTLE AT ANTARES are trademarks and MICROPROSE is a registered trademark of MicroProse Software, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Call 1-800-771-3772 for information on Game Ratings "


"REVIEW  GENE WARS Tips For The Manual-less O 1074 STRATEGYZ WARGAMES I'M AN ENGINEER, NOT A DOCTOR The engineer, shown building a power plant, is your basic construction unit. Have him build enough Gene Pods for you so that you can simultaneously upgrade and produce mutant creatures. ever begin an upgrade to your gene pod without first building a backup. Gene pod upgrades take forever, and you'll be unable to produce new creatures for base defense if attacked. You begin the game with four of each specialist, of which up to five can be on the planet at a time. The more a specialist performs his given specialty, the better he gets at it. The idea is to rotate your specialists to build up all their experience levels. I prefer to concentrate on a few favorites, who consequently gain more experience more quickly. If you decide to go this route, save often in case you lose a precious specialist With enough experience, Schnozzoids become invisible. Invisible Schnozzoids are especially adept at sneaking past generally less-observant human opponents. Hide a Ranger near his base to intensify your creatures' attacks. A botanist can grow any plant from any seed. Gather seeds from less desirable plants, or from your opponents' plants, then turn them into whatever crops you desire. You don't have to choose a balanced team. You can drop four engineers to build a base really quickly, then use the landing pad to exchange them for other specialists. Remember that you can still win a level, even if the Ethereals are totally infuriated at you. For example, consider dropping in a team with three engineers and a couple of geneticists. Run the team to the enemy base and have your engineers destroy his structures, while the geneticists stun attacking animals and heal wounds. There's no reforestation, but if the win is more important than the points and the approval, go for it. If you do play dirty, make sure you do it while the Ethereals are away. If they catch your engineer blowing up enemy bases, or your botanist chain-sawing forests, they'll shoot or abduct your specialists. and its upgrades. It is here that my P-83 overdrive VLB system, on my Pmules, birds, frogs, and hideous 133 machine, running as a DOS game in cross-bred genctic mutants will pop Windows 95, it screams. Specialists and out like so many slices of toast. animals both flit madly across the screen like gnats on a crystal meth tweak. That's a TRYING ON A NEW PAIR problem, especially since things move so OF GENES fast you can hardly draw a bead on a movBioengineered animals play a big ing target for selection purposes. part in your planetary rebeautifica Despite the interface oversights, GENE tion projects, providing labor and Wars has a lot going for it and might be a military protection in addition to subtle, enjoyable game were it not for one planetary biomass. You begin with huge gaping flaw: a pathetic, skimpy, only the genetic recipe for the mule, wholly inadequate manual. What is the a strong but recalcitrant animal that difference between the Gene Pod and the can be used to harvest plants and Gene Lab? What are the special abilities haul dead comrades to the recycler. of hybrid creatures? What structures are With their strong kick, mules are also useful for colony defense and attack. O 2000 As you progress, your geneticist will track down and research other animals: crabs, frogs, birds, and firebreathing dinos. Each species has its particular specialty, be it speed, carpentry skill, or pure CASPER THE FRIENDLY ALIEN The tree-hugging Ethereals botanist-cating, forestare powerful aliens who ensure that you don't do more burning power. damage to the galaxy's environment; luckily they only stop Given the right by periodically. mood and a little coaxing from your ranger, crcaturcs will available and what is the upgrade path to mate outside of their own species, get them? Exactly which shade of brown producing hybrids like Dinomules, represents arid ground? Bullfrog isn't Crabobirds, and Birdofrogs. Such telling. It's too bad, really, because if it hybrids have genuine value. For weren't for the lack of a manual, gamers example, while a mule can harvest might have had a fighting chance to savor plants and a crab can help your the humor and originality of Bullfrog's cngincer upgrade structures, a wacky '50s-style space romp. Crabomule can do both. MISFIRES, GLITCHES, AND GAPING HOLES While the CENE WARS interface is generally delightful, there are some major oversights, including a lack of adequate hot keys. You can't pop directly to selected areas of the map (as in WARCRAFT II or C&C) or assign a group of creatures to a key for easy selection (like in C&C). Worse, there is no speed control. While GENE WARS bogs a little on APPEAL: Real-time war fans looking for a break from WARCRAFT and C&C; those who appreciate humor and a different style of real-time gaming. PROS: Beautiful graphics, great sound, and a sense of humor. CONS: Without a useful manual, you're reduced to fumbling around, hoping to stumble onto the right way to play. Interface oversights add to the frustration. RAI CG JANUARY 1997 "


"They came to play. Www.gamespot.com And they wanted it all. So we created GameSpot. The one place online with everything  could vnt near a gamer could want. Interactive reviews. Downloadable demos. GIAIME S Game secrets. For more PC games than they could ever hope to play. All in one place, updated daily. We gave them what they wanted. Now we can't get rid of them, vous  CIRCLE READER SERVICE #250 A "


"**** REVIEW TIGERS ON THE PROWL 2.0 DIFFICULTY LEVEL STRATEGYZWARGAMES L.This Isn't Your Uncle Vanya's T-34/76 LMB/ENTER: SELECT NEXT HEX CHB/[-]: REMOUE LAS If You Felt STEEL PANTHERS Was Too Light, Then TIGERS 2.0 Is Your Game by James Cobb 000S example, the status of an infantry platoon. Then you can immediately go to it on the map by clicking on its menu box, and issue orders for said unit or its entire company. This instant access to data does away with wrestling with the game mechanics and allows you to actually play the game. HEX #: 2008 Li Clear DELAY= 0 98799819 01000 ooooooooo TURN 3/26 NEW CLAWS, SAME FUR TIGERS has been upgraded to PANTHERS IN THE SHADOWS Standards, including graphics. But let's be honest, folks: no one plays HPS games for the way they look. D ou say that STEEL PANTHERS whetted your appetite for WWII tactical games, but you want more depth in under standing how things really were on the Steppes in 1941-1945? Well, you're in luck. The second version of HIPS TIGERS ON THE PROWL. will give you all the detail you can handle, as well as a playable nail-biter of a game. So open up that hatch and find out what a detailed war simulation is. Like its predecessor, TIGERS 2.0 is a squad/platoon simulation of 1939-1945 Eastern Front action at a one minute/tum, 100 meters/hiex scale. It handles all possible combat factors in minute detail: vehicle size, weapons, armor, and capabilities: Price: $59.95 + $4 S&H supply; morale: communications; and System training. Play consists of issuing combat Requirements: 486 or and movement orders through a series of better, 4 MB RAM, 10 MB hard drive space, drop-and-drag menus followed by simulVGA graphics taneous resolution. # of Players: 1-2 The major improvement of TICERS 2.0 (e-mail) Protection: Document over its predecessor is its improved interlook-up face. Instead of clicking all over the map Designer: Scott to check unit status and give orders, there Hamilton Publisher: HPS is a staff menu of eight items: personnel, Simulations intelligence, ops/movement, supply tarP.O. Box 3245 geting, comm/delay, fire support, air liaiSanta Clara, CA 95055 (408) 554-8381 son, and engineering. \"These menus are Reader Service #: 341 | grids where you can instantly sce, for MORE THAN A RETREAD And the game isn't just a dry, realistic exercise--it's a joy to play once you've circumvented the steep learning curve. To win, you must master actual tactics such as overwatch fire, use of defilades, proper recon tactics, and correct artillery deployment. The AI knows its stuff and will punislu players who just shove units around. Although STEEL PANTHERS rewards combined arms tactics to a degree, the number of variables in TCERS 2.0 adds more possibilities for deviations from intelligent play to backfire. For instance, sending a tank company dashing forward will not only put it in a trap, but the ensuing communication and morale difficulties as it moves farther from its headquarters will make extraction difficult, precious minutes will pass before orders are received, and the troops' morale may not be such that they will follow their leaders when the word to move out is received. As a result, you must formulate a sound tactical plan and carry it through to the end. Tigers 2.0 is an invigorating challenge. The enjoyment is only enhanced by the myriad of new play features in TCERS 2.0. \"Shoot and Scoot\" allows units to fire and then move before they can be acquired by the enemy, assuming they are trained in the technique. The chances of ill-trained troops going to ground is shown as \"Stop Under Fire.\" Morale now includes \"Wavering,\" a state of functioning between degraded performance and outright routing. If a unit is under fire and CG JANUARY 1997 "


"THE ULTIMATE SPACE EPIC ... WINDOWS 95  s Go 'THE PRICE OF FREEDOM WINDOWS 95 Computer Gaming World GMBIEHOBETE COMME ORIGIN EXPLODES ONTO WINDOWS 95. www.ea.com/origin. Also available Wing Commander: The Kilrathi Saga Includes Wing Commander I, II and III now fully optimized Windows 95 native. ORIGIN We create worlds An Electronic Arts Company 1996 ORIGIN Systems, Inc: All rights reserved. Origin and Wing Commander aro registered trademarks, and The Kilrathi Suga and The Price of Freedom are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arit is a registered trademark of Electronic Aris Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation, CIRCLE. READER SERVICE 146 "


"BP, Der DIE BHARD T 'R' i 'Lo ' GY 1 TM VENGEANCE Distributed by: INTERACTIVE HOME ENTERTAINMENT http://www.foxinteractive.com Compatible with Konami's Justifier\" gun accessory! 1996 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. \"Die Hard Trilogy\" 1996 Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment. Inc All Rights Reserved. \"Twentieth Century Fox\" \"Fox\" and their associated logos are the property of Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. JUSTIFIER is a trademark of Konami Co., Ltd. ) 1996 Konami of America, Inc. All Rights Reserved, "


"THREE GAMES, ALL RAVES! T VIDEO GAME OF THE MONTH «...a must play...gaming experience!\" --Axcess «...absolutely mind blowing!\" «So great...every PlayStation owner o n God's earth should buy it!\" balans Video Games Magazine \"...features three of the hottest engines ever to be seen on PlayStation!\" \"All the mayhem and action you've come to expect from the movies!\" |--Electronic Gaming Monthly «...each has enough length and innovation to be a game in itself.\" -Game Fan \"\"Three games in one! What else could you ask for?» --EGM «The best 32-bit movie-themed game of '96!\" -Miami Herald THE COMPETITION CAN REAO 'EM AND KEEP! For DIE HARD TRILOGY Game Hints, Tips and Tricks Presented by FOX INTERACTIVE of Los Angeles, California Call 1-900-CALL4FOX $.80/min-Touchtone phone-If you are under 18, have your parents permission before making this call. WINDOWS '95 CD-ROM MATURE MATURE ANIMATED VIOLENCE ANIMATED BLOOD For information on this product's rating, please call 1-800-771-3772 ACE 17. PlayStation CONTENT RAMBUT SEGA SATURN IM CIRCLE READER SERVICE #268 "


"REVIEW  TIGERS ON THE PROWL 2.0 11-a,1,a/PERSONNEL OFFICER: PICK A UNIT TO GOTO' OR AN OPTION. FI/AMB TO EXI is losing morale, it may scek better cover independently, returning to your control only when it feels safe. Infantry movement is enhanced by \"Mid-move Jump,\" where a unit may dismount from its carrier before the carrier stops. TF Ist Bn 2nd On 3rd en -IIS OPTIONS HIGHLIGHT RED UNITS ON MAP CHANGE A UNIT'S HEAPON CHANGE A UNIT'S QUANTITY LAST TURN STATS/SUMMARY DONE (FI/RMB) HQ's PZ 111 TANK ma' a cor A Co PETI PETIT PITII PE III TANKTANK TANK 474J0730147413073047429 STRATEGYZ WARGAMES B Co PROS TALK LOGISTICS Even though it's really tactics that we all love, you'll still appreciate the very functional, if Spartan, orders interface, where you can group formations, set firing ranges, and change weapons if applicable. THE WHOLE EARTH CATALOG However, the beauty of TIGERS 2.0 lies in its wealth of units: 772 kinds ranging from every variation of vehicle to every grade of infantry to the Soviet \"anti-tank clogs\" (\"No, Rover! Find CERMAN tanks!\"). Aside from the major antagonists, the Finnish, Polish, Italian, Hungarian, and Rumanian armies are represented, Thus, using the scenario editor and the four pre-made maps or HIPS\" AIDE DE CAMP, any kind of engagement Mechanics Of A Skirmish with any combination of variants can be constructed. The downside of all this is TicERs 2.0's graphics and sound. The maps are functional, if bland, but the unit icons pale beside STEEL PANTHERS. The IBM internal speaker sounds serve mainly to assure the program is still running. When a player gets into a battle, these elements are soon forgotten. Although the Al is good, there is nothing like playing a human. The PBEM feature is easy. Indicate an PBEM game at the beginning and it's stored as PBMFILE.OPS. If you play several PBEM games at once, you'll need a \"holding\" subdirectory All of HIPS products are \"works in progress.\" With Version 2.03, Tigers 2 is bugless, yet designer Scott Hamilton is always listening to gamers, refining and cxpanding his work. Campaign disks are on the way, and a post-1945 add-on to TIGERS II, BROKEN ALLIANCE has been released. Sooner or later, all serious WWII gamers will play TIGERS 2.0; you're better off doing it sooner. DVD UPON DETALATE KR) 3600 SPEED MITIM DIDDO ESTO UE NO ES DETAIL his exercise represents a German The first two turns went well for the mopping-up exercise in 1941. A Germans; Russian fire was ineffectual and company of PzKw If tanks, rein movement went as ordered. However, the mortar forced by a company of panzer fired all 12 of its smoke rounds in the second grenadiers in half-tracks, attacks a company of artillery phase and would have to be moved in T-34/76s dug in on a hill. The Germans have order to target Russian positions with HE. superior morale and training but their tanks are the fourth turn signaled disaster. The comvery interior to the Soviets! The German 37mm mand platoon of the PzKw Ill company, having armor piercing advanced with its shells penetrate the outfit. was T-34's 41mm side destroyed in sight armor only at 700 of the flanking plameters while the toon. This plaRussian 76mm can toon's morale sank pierce the German from 89 to 66. The frontal 32mm lack of a company armor at well over HQ meant that the 1000 meters. command delay Because of the became 11 turns difference in armor SMOKE GETS IN YOUR EYES And hopefully in your oppo instead of the norand weapons, the nent's eyes, too. When your morale drops, as the mal six. Other plaRussians must be Germans' did here, don't be stubborn; cover your tracks, toons began to flanked. I set the fall back, and regroup. take losses as the fire range of a German AP shells panzer platoon to 500 meters to ensure no prebounced off the Russian armor. mature firing. I then moved it hex-by-hex around On the fifth turn, the Russians discovered the the hill, taking advantage of terrain contours so flanking platoon and destroyed one of its four it could get in a shot during the \"Ambush/ tanks. Having grave morale problems, the Defensive\" phase and avoid simultaneous return Germans popped smoke automatically and ran. fire in the \"Direct Fire\" phase. The other armor The moral to this is it takes more than skill and units were given objective movement orders spirit to overcome thick armor, small silhouettes, straight up the hill to distract the Russians. The and high muzzle velocity. Once again, HPS infantry advanced as a company in a line while shows that it has some of the best Al in the the mortar fired smoke. business-and the computer doesn't cheat. FOAPPEAL: For anyone needing a hefty dose of realism, but without the time to play, say, PACIFIC WAR. PROS: The most realistic WWII tactical game on the market gets even better with improved Al and interface. Great scenarios, wonderful morale system. CONS: Even with the upgrade, graphics are workmanlike at best, while sound is poor. The learning curve is still very intimidating, even for veteran gamers. RATED* CG JANUARY 1997 "


"ACTIVISION'S TOP TEN US TOP TEN GAMES BUY 2 AND GET 2 FREE!* ) OF 1996 *BUY TWO TOP TEN ACTIVISION GAMES, GET ONE TOP TEN GAME AND ONE CLASSIC GAME FREE. ACTIVISION. Battia fuchi Imand. I 1996 FASA Corporation "


"BUY 2 GAMES, GE Top Ten Games MECIWARI MEGHWARRIOR 2 MECHWARRIOR 2 TIME GOMMAND EXPANSION P MERCENARIES GHOST OCAR'S LEOACY HYPER |  MERCHET ACTIVISION MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries The devastating sequel features money-making battles, a random mission generator, and MercNet multiplayer missions MechWarrior 2 Strap yourself into the #1 bestselling combat simulator and wage 31st century Mech vs. 'Mech warfare. ACTIVISION MechWarrior 2: Expansion Pack Immerse yourself in yet another MechWarrior career with 12 new Mechs, all-new weapons and 12 new Ghost Bear missions.  HyperBlade Leap into the extreme 3-D sport of the future where hockey and lighting action collide. ACTIBION. Time Commando Action-adventure meets de time travel nine time era seething with over 80 ruth enemies from the past and future. QE. --Mupper BROSURE STANU AIC_CUBA! SHANGH ZORK 14 Pishing but 11 EMISIS SPYCRAFT ACTIVISION ACTYBICK. ACIYEK Zork Nemesis Explore five fantastically-detailed 3-D realms featuring stunning graphics that set a new standard in computer adventure. ALIMION Spycraft: The Great Game Infiltrate a web of rogue spies to stop an assassination in this authentic spy thriller Muppet Treasure Island Set sail on an epic adventure of exploration, learning and laughter Featuring Tim Curry and your favorite Muppets from the movie! A-10 Cuba! Experience the most realistic 3-D combat-light Simulation everin the true tradition of Hellcats. ACTIVISION Shanghai: Great Moments It's the classic tile-matchir fascination featuring four and over 400 animated tile even more addicting game *How the Offer Works: 1) Buy Two Activision Top Ten Games. 2) Get One Free Activision Top Ten Game. 3) Get One Free Activision Classic Game. BUY 2 AND GET 2 FREE!*) ACTIVISION'S TOP TEN GAMES OF 1996 "


"LIMITED TIME OFFER! Classic Games ZORK   INTERACTIVE FICTION FROM RO RETURN TO ZORK COMEDY FANTASY SCI-FI. ANTHOLOGY RENTE COLLECTION III BANGLES 2 GAMES FREE! 2.32 SE35 Return to Zork The award-winning underground adventure features fascinating puzzles, Hollywood actors, and a revolutionary interface. The Zork Anthology Five original Zork text adventures: Zork 1. Zork II, Zork III, Beyond Zork and Zork Zero. ACIMBION Infocom: The Comedy Collection Four classic text adventures Include Ballyhoo, Bureaucracy and Hollywood Hijinx.  Infocom: The Fantasy Collection Featuring five enrapturing classics including Sorcerer, Enchanter and Wishbringer. . Infocom: The Sci-Fi Collection Five timeless classics including The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy and Stationfall. ENTERACTIVE FICTION FROM DO SINETRACPVRCTION DOCGIN RIVER RAID KABOOM PITFALL ARNOUL PRIVATE EYE COMBAT MYSTERY ADVENTURE ACTION PACK 2 COLLECTION COLLECTION SEAK ACTIVISIONS ATARI2800 ACTION GARROL SPACE LOL wa INDURO SKNING MNOX FREEWAY A NIONT DRIVER  19 A to your PC ALIVOM 10 Games for your computer ACIMVISION Infocom: The Mystery Collection Five classics include the everpopular Suspect, Deadline and The Lurking Horror Infocom: The Adventure Collection Six riveting adventures include Border Zone, Cutthroats and Plundered Hearts. CD-ROM Activision's Atari 2600 Action Pack 1 Fifteen games for your PC include Pitfall!, Kaboom! and River Raid. Activision's Atari 2600 Action Pack 2 This fifteen-game blast to the past features Enduro and Megamania. CO-ROM 12 TO Activision's Atari 2600 Action Pack 3 Volume 3 of Activision favorites Includes Breakout , Space Wars and Night Driver How to Get Your TWO Free Games: Rules Activision games must be purchased and receipt dated between November 15, 1996 and January 31, 1997.0ifer valid on MS-DOS/Windows 95 games only. Requests must be postinarked by February 15, 1997. Alow 2 3 weeks for delivery. Offer not valid on other products and cannot be combined with any other offers. Only UPCs from qualifying Activision titles from Activision's Top Ten Games of 1996 will be accepted. Only the original store receipt(s) will be accepted. If purchases were made on two receipts, both receipts must be enclosed with Activision purchases cir cled. UPCs and receipts will not be returned. Offer limited to one per family, address, household, group or organization. Offer avallable only to registered owners of Activision products purchased. Not responsible for late, misdirect ed, incomplete or illegible requests. Offer good only in the U.S. and Canada Canadian orders only: Bank checks and money order funds must be drawn from a U.S. bank. Void where prohibited, taxed or otherwise restricted. Redemption of free classic games subject to availability. Activision reserves the right to substitute a classic title of equal or greater value in the event of unavailability. 1) Complete the reply card attached and indicate which two free games you would like to receive, along with your name and address, 2) Include the original dated store receipt(s) for two qualifying games from Activision's Top Ten Games of 1996; 3) The UPC symbols from both games, 4) And a check or money order for $6.00 U.S. for shipping and handling ($14.25 in Canada, Alaska and Hawaii) payable to Activision 5) Mail to: Activision's Top Ten, P.O. Box 119, Buffalo, NY 14207 ACTIVISION CIRCLE READER SERVICE #371 "


"STRATEGY  BATTLEGROUND: WATERLOO STRATEGY/ WARGAMES On Napoleonic Warfare How Clausewitz Can Help You Win At Waterloo by Patrick C. Miller arl von Clausewitz is best known for writing On War, a work widely quoted and studied in military and political circles for the strategic principles of warfare it articulates. He was not only a military theorist but also a soldier who served as an officer with the Prussian and Russian armies throughout much of the Napoleonic Wars. During the Hundred Days Campaign in 1815 that climaxed with the battle of Waterloo, Clausewitz was chief of staff to General Johann von Thielmann, commander of the Prussian III Corps that fought at Ligny and Wavre. Unfortunately, the more current translations of On Wardeal primarily with the portions of Clausewitz's writing that remain relevant, omitting sections on tactical warfare in the early 19th century. Although this information might be of little interest to contemporary strategists, it is YOU'RE SO SQUARE The Al overreacts to cavalry's presence by forming its infantry into squares, creating a target-rich environment. It's unlikely that a skilled human opponent will make the same mistake. very useful to war gamers playing TalonSoft's BATTLEGROUND: WATERLOO. Whether you play the French or the Allies and whcther you're up against a computcror human opponent, Clausewitz's observations on the deployment and use of troops provide useful tactical guide lines. Without effective tactics, the most brilliant strategy won't secure a victory at Waterloo. Here are some of Clausewitz's thoughts on Napoleonic tactical combat and how they can be applied to the game. To leam which units a leader commands, select the leader and then, from the pulldown Display menu, select Show Organization (or click on the toolbox icon). This highlights the bases of all units under that leader's command. You can also right click on a selected leader or a unit to view information on its organizational hierarchy: O SoQUOQID1402 NLINE CARA ORGANIZATION MORALE \"...belligerents do not cease to be men, and individuals can never be converted into machines having no will of their own...It is, therefore, quite impossible to calculate beforehand all that is to take place.\" \"An order of battle, that is, a method of drawing up the troops before and during the battle, must be established for the whole campaign.\" GUNS UP FRONT Here, artillery batteries follow up the French success in driving Allied infantry off Wellington's famous ridge at Waterloo. Using the line-ofsight tool can help you find the best spot to post your artillery An essential aspect of Waterloo is understanding the organization and command structures of Napoleonic armies. Ignoring these invites disorder, leading to increased casualtics and morale failures. Morale is the intangible element of Waterloo that often leads to unpredictable results. There is no way to prevent morale failures, but you can reduce the chances that they'll occur by using your leaders and paying attention to the conditions JANUARY 1997 "


"NEXT TIME YOU FIRE UP YOUR PC, DO IT WITH DEADLY FORCE. ESERTA 1525 COMPAQ PRESARIS You've just been named Guardian of Virtua City an urban killing zone overrun by sharpshooting criminals packing heavy weaponry and holding hostages. The law and a six shooter are on your side. The odds will never be. Introducing Virtua Squad, Sega's brilliant PC version of its smash arcade shooter Virtua Cop. With non-stop action, it now explodes across your desktop with all the criminal ferocity of its arcade partner in crime. Tweaked with unsurpassed fast twitch response and dynamic 3D environments, the rapid-fire gameplay will leave you drenched in the unyielding onslaught of polygon-based thugs. Think fast or prepare to eat lead. (888) SEGA-SALES http:// www.sega.com/segapc/ HRANA 155 G935 TBK SI SVE SEGA HE 28. TEEN MARINE Entertainment Sega is registered in the U.S. Patent of Trademark Office. Sega Entertainment and Virtua Squad are trademarks of SEGA. 1996 SEGA, P.O.Box 8097, Redwood City, CA 94063. All rights reserved. ACES 13+ CONTENT ATLETY Games PCs Play CIRCLE READER SERVICE #201 "


"40 ENEMY WEAPONS SCREAM DEATH DOWN THE BLACK CORRIDORS! HAUNTING LIGHT SOURCING AND SCALING! FE MEN DE LOCK, DODGE, TURN, FIRE! The light at the end of the tunnel is a heat-seeking thermonuclear missile. TUNNEL SENSORS GUARD AGAINST SURPRISE ATTACKS! NUCLEAR TUNNEL EXPLOSIONS GET REAL DANGEROUS, REAL FAST! KIDS TO ADULTS Copyright 1996 Ocean Softwaro Lid. Licensed to Ocean of America. Inc. Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited. All rights reserved. PlayStation and the logo are trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. Soga and Sega Saturn are trademarks of SEGA ENTERPRISES LTD. All rights reserved. Acclaim is a division and registered trademark of Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. &O 1996 Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Screen shots shown were taken from the PlayStation version of the videogame. CONTENT RATED BY "


"underground. faster than fear you have become one with your war machine. flesh sears. metal warps. darkness enfolds you. the tunnel has swallowed you whole. it is alive with the instruments of death. even the walls want to kill you. the speed hurts. trigger finger blisters. no turning back. welcome to your tomb. TUNNEL BY \"...packed with unbelievable special effects and intense, edge-of-your-seat gameplay.« PS Extreme \"One of the most visually stimulating games to come out for a 32-bit system.« EGM playstation\" sega saturn\" dos cd-rom Aklaim entertainment. in c. www.acclaimnation.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #233 "


"STRATEGY  BATTLEGROUND: WATERLOO STRATEGYI WARGAMES that reduce unit morale. Always try to keep uits from the same regiments, brigades, divisions and corps together and spread leaders among the units under their command. Units without leaders stacked in their hexes, that arc fatigued or disordered and that are low on ammunilion or have been fired into from the flank, are more likely to fail morale checks. SKIRMISHING \"If we can maintain an equal fight with...skirmishers, and that there is no reason for hastening...we should do wrong to hurry forward other forces; we should weary out the enemy with this kind of fight as much as possible.\" Although artillery's primary advantage is its long reach, the closer it is, the more effective it becomes. Don't use your batteries as static weapons and don't waste precious ammunition firing at far-off targets Blasting infantry squares and columns or cavalry from medium to short range provides better results. Use the lineof-sight feature to determine which hexes offer the best fickels of fire and move artillery into those hexes. Napoleon once cleared the streets of Paris \"with a whiff of grapeshot,\" and ever after, massed artillery to defend important objectives. After bombarcling the enemy, always move some batteries forward to support your attack. Timely artillery support is often the difference between an attack breaking through or bogging down. ARTILLERY \"The battle is commenced by artillery. Artillery is used in large masses brought together at single points. Twenty or thirty guns defend the principle point in one great battery, or batter the point in the enemy's line which it is intended to attack.\" When attacking, use skimmishers to screen advancing infantry and cavaly formations, to probe enemy defenses and to soften up enemy formations with harassing fire prior to launching an attack. On the defensive, skinishers serve best as a buffer between forned friendly units and enemy skirmishers. They are also excellent for defending wooded areas and buildings. Rifle-anned Allied skirmishers have a sixAdapting Tactics To The Situation ROM ITSAM 0. WINNING COMBINATION Infantry, cavalry and artillery must work together to create and exploit opportunities for one another. Note how the cavalry has forced Allied infantry into square, giving skirmishers and artillery an excellent target. FORM LINE HERE To bolster a threatened flank, the Allied infantry moves up quickly in column and then deploys into line. the artillery backs the line while skirmishers keep the French legere at bay. MALIS TODO LABIOS OCTAGON DODOTINOIADOS olemaan TORRA 10 TRIS. DECIDEDLY RESERVED Near the end of a hard-fought battle in which both sides are exhausted and disordered, even a small reserve of high-quality, relatively fresh troops can accomplish a great deal. SEPARATION ANXIETY When there's not enough light infantry available for skirmishing, another option is to detach a company from a line battalion to fill in. Skirmishers work well for defending buildings and wooded areas. 310 CC JANUARY 1997 "


"Losineks. Microsoft Monster Truck Madness . Cloud Co unoy Tes Winning Tips and te Strategies Straight from the Source D JULGUN ie Kn Microsoft Press Down & Dirty Racing! Microsoft Press Vince Matthews Be cool and in control as you challenge car-crushing tourneys and rallies for the checkered flag, repel alien invaders beneath the waves, gain victory \"in the hedgerows of Hell,\" take to the sky in a 737, or face relentless space combat Microsoft Monster Truck Madness\": Inside Moves 1-57231-530-X $16.99 ($22.99 Canada) Close Combat: Inside Moves 1-57231-308-0 $16.95 ($22.95 Canada) Microsoft Deadly Tide: Inside Moves 1-57231-306-4 $16.95 ($22.95 Canada) Microsoft Hellbender\": Inside Moves 1-57231-363-3 $16.95 $22.95 Canada) Microsoft Flight Simulator for Windows 95: Inside Moves 1-57231-362-5 $16.95 ($22.95 Canada) action. The Microsoft Press Inside Moves series arms you with hints, strategies, and secrets—some straight from the developersthat aren't available anywhere else. Microsoft Press Available in quality bookstores and computer stores worldwide. To locate your nearest source for Microsoft Press products, reach us at 1-800-MSPRESS in the U.S., or www.microsoft.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #258 Microsoft "


"YOU'RE SCRAP METAL 1996 Alights reserved. All products are Eject from your HAWC, steal another. Bot-jacking is relatively legal here. Wage war in everything from icy fundra to blistering desert. We suggest wearing layers. marks and cu och their respective owners Storm the enemy guard towers; try to avoid being turned into a red sinewy pile. A c T U A Destroy the enemy's HAWC delivery system and cut down on the number of missiles headed your way. Communicate with wingmen via radio; share amusing anecdotes about global warfare. SH E EN Best Buy  CompUSA. Computer City. Software Etc. "


"G-NOME THE LIMGH OF MAN AND MACHINE G-NOME pushes real-time 3-D action over the edge. On the other side, you'll find tactical weapons of war treaded ossault tanks, swift hovercraft and mossive multi-legged HAWCS. Scramble though more than 20 intense missions. Realistic 3-D graphics slum you into the action. Gameplay doesit end when your vehicle is destroyed. Eject from one HAWCSteal wnother and infiltrate enemy lines. Capture a Meson-Pulse Cannon and turn your enemy to scrap metal. And they call This fun and games, .Command more than 20 HAWCS (Heavy-Armor Weapons Chassis). Survey the battlefield from your virtual cockpit with holographic targeting and damage displays.  Experience the original soundtrack by Emmy award-winning composer Chris Boardman using the superior DirectSound\"audio. Join in 8-player network battles. 7th LEVEL. 1-800-556-0307 Download the G-NOME demo at www.7thlevel.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #1208 "


"STRATEGY  BATTLEGROUND: WATERLOO INFANTRY hex range, making them useful for picking olf artillery crews. Skirmishers in the open are extremely vulnerable to cavalry attacks. Don't advance skirmishers too far ahead of your formed units. Also remember that placing more than 250 skirmishers in a hex cancels their defensive benefit from fire. STRATEGY / WARGAMES \"If the enemy brings so many troops into the combat as to overpower our line of skirmishers, or if we cannot delay any longer, we bring forward a full line of infantry, which deploys itself at 100 or 200 paces from the enemy, and either opens fire or advances to the attack.\" Of the two forms of combat in which infantry can engage, fire is preferable to melee. True, it's difficult to force enemy infantry out of buildings or woods without melee, and its use is sometimes nccessary to drive back pesky skirmishers or to overrum artillery But because melee always disorders and quickly fatigues your troops, it should be used only when you have the upper hand or as a last resort. Disorder is often your greatest enemy because it reduces your infantry's combat effectiveness, makes it more vulnerable and increases morale failures. To avoid disorder, infantry should maneuver in column and fight in line. Placing units in column and line formation in the same hex or moving cavalry through an infantry hex will clisorder the infantry. Deploy units from column into line just outside effective musketry range (two hexes). Carefully check the terrain around infantry units in line before moving them. Hedges and embankments will throw them into disorder. Remember that Prussian and liench infantry receive a bonus for melec in column while British and British-trained infantry in extended line receive a firing bonus. F inally, don't be overawed by the WHO'S IN CHARGE? Knowing which leaders command which units is a key part of keeping troops operating at top efficiency. Highlighted bases show the units this leader commands and the text tells how he fits into the army's organization. Don't fight futuristic creatures with a prehistoric weapon. **** KICK ASS! PRODUCT) Available at: Aafes, Babbages, CompUSA, Computer City, Fry's Electronics, Incredible Universe Software Etc and Tops City "


"BATTLEGROUND: WATERLOO . STRATEGY power of cavalry. Against unsupported defense, but units in square can be quickly decimated by infantry and artillery firc If your infantry is supported by cavalry and artillery, sometimes it's best to take your lumps from enemy cavalry and then counterattack. A few well-clirected volleys at close range can turn a cavalry attack into a costly venture for your opponent. that your losses will exceed your gains leaving you with no reliable cavalry when you need it most. Committing cavalry to the attack is casy, but extracting it can be difficult. Cavalry is at its best when used against disordered and fatigued enemy umits, and it's far more effective when used in concert with supporting artillery and infantry. Before launching a cavalry charge, make certain that you have clear terrain all the way to the target hex Crossing embankments or hedges will clisorder your cavalry and greatly reduce their effectiveness. infantry. To determine the type of terrain within a hex and around its edges, hold down the right mouse button on the terrain information box in the lower left corner of the screen. Hedges, walls, gates, woods and buildings provide varying degrees of defensive advantages against fire and melee. You can also use hills and ridges, as Wellington did, to screen your troops from enemy view and protect them from artillery bombardment. In summary, to follow the \"Clausewitz Plan,\" you should first mass artillery at the point of attack to soften the enemy line. Then advance Skirmishers to deliver fire and further weaken enemy units. Follow up with formed infantry, advancing either to contact the enemy in column or deploying in line to fire. Keep Cavalry close by to exploit disorder and weakness in the enemy's ranks. Finally, maintain a reserve of fresh troops to seal the victory Properly employed, Clausewitz's tactical principles provide a sound base on which to build a winning strategy. & STRATEGY / WARGAMES CAVALRY \"...should not be launched boldly to the attack until disorder prevails in the enemy's ranks that we may hope for success by his hasty retreat.\" TERRAIN \"... influences may be felt in the very smallest feature of the ground, but it can also dominate enormous areas.\" With its ability to charge and melee multiple hexes in a single turn, cavalry can cut a wide swath of destruction and quickly change the course of a battle. Therefore, it is tempting to place cavalry in the front lines, ready to charge any target of opportunity. While this tactic may meet with some success, it's more likely \"The Waterloo battleficld contains a deceptively wide variety of terrain. Hedges and road embankments will slow unit movement and disorder cavalry and Introducing Space Orb 360 — the 3 game controller for Quake» For PC games like Quake there's no controller better. In fact, comparing the new Space OrbM 360 RealLife 3D game controller to the joystick, keyboard or mouse is like comparing an arthritic old geezer to an Olympic athlete. The unique PowerSensor ball is the key. It practically translates your brain waves into on-screen motion. Push, pull and twist it to get fluid 360° motion in any and every direction for otherwise impossible combo moves. Use it also to play Duke Nukem, Descent, and Doom. You will be stunned at what a technological leap this is. And even more stunned when you see the leap in your scores. Check out the SpaceOrb 360 Web site at www.spacetec.com for awesome reviews, the latest news, industry buzz and what current users are saying about it! 0360 016, Spacetec IMC As 3D as your own life. Maybe more. "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD European Power! The 1996 Article Index Gaming A Complete Index Of CGW Reviews, Previews, Features And Strategy Articles From 1996 OniDUCAN Gaming Blades Bullets The CGW All-Stars OMDUAN Gaming Tlie 1996 Five-Star Gamle ludex Cons: Some gamers won't like the neces sary micro-management. Other Articles: Big Game Hunt, Feature, Aug. 96, p. 96. SHILOH cmilten camino Rule The Galaxy AGE OF RIFLES Reviewed: November 96, p. 284 Publisher: SSI AGE Game Type: Wargame RIFLE Pros: Captures the flair and fun of the era without compromising the history: over 40 different scenarios; robust editor: wonderful campaigns, excellent AL. A winner through and through. Cons: Some PBEM bugs, merely adequate manual; stacking restrictions limit some scenarios. Other Articles: The Grand Age of Warfare, Feature, Apr. 96, p. 58; Game Track, Feb. 9. p. 44; Big Game Hunt, Feature, Aug. 96, p. 96: Holiday Hot 100, Dec. 96. p. 209. CHESSMASTER 5000 Reviewed: September 96, p. 159 Publisher: Mindscape Game Type: Chess (Classics) Pros: Wonderful tutorials, luscious graphics CHESSMASTER and the best array of computer opponents in the business, plus multiplayer support. Cons: The MIDI music is lackluster. It would be nice to see a realistic rating system. Other Articles: Big Game Hunt, Feature, Aug. 96. p. 74; Internet Attack! Feature, Oct.96, p. 88; Holiday Hot 100, Dec. 96, p. 144. 5000 Gamin HOL Lans AH 64D LONGBOW Reviewed: July 96, p. 164 Publisher: Jane's Combat Simulations/EA Game Type: Simulations Pros: Accurate, accessible, attractive, and action-packed. The benchmark by which LONGBOW future helicopter sims will be compared. Cons: Multiplayer fans will have to wait for an add-on; huge hard drive footprint, yet another helicopter sim with no foliage. Other Articles: 1996 Flight Sims Aim High, Feature, Mar. 96, p. 56: Strategy, Sept. 96, p. 192; Holiday Hot 100, Dec. 96, p. 152. CIVILIZATION II CIVILIZATION TI Reviewed: June 96, p. 174 Publisher: MicroProse Game Type: Strategy Pros: Highly addictive, makes original Civ even better, scads of replay value, different enough to warrant buying. Cons: No multiplayer mode; no way for computer to concede if you get way ahead early in the game. Other Articles: On the Shelf, May 96, p. 32; Strategy, Aug. 96, p. 194. PROSE 1996 ARTICLE HARI INDEX BATTLEGROUND: SHILOH Reviewed: October 96, p. 274 Publisher: Talonsoft Game Type: Wargame Pros: Challenging Al, fascinating scenarios, perfect music, inter esting terrain and new gunboats make this the best BG yet. CONNECTIONS Reviewed: April 96, p. 157 Publisher: Discovery Channel Multimedia Game Type: Puzzle Pros: Perfectly captures the sense of wonder from the original TV series. The multimedia clips and acting are nice, and James 316 JANUARY 1997 "


"Article Index INDY CAR RACING II w ITSAMINDOGOD The Best New Burke is, well, James Burke. A wonderful Panor Ch WIND challenge-the best pure puzzle game yet for the computer. Cons: Even with the hints, there aren't many obvious solutions to the tough puz. zles. Those wishing for a real adventure game may be slightly disappointed, but if you accept Connections for what it is, there isn't much else to dislike. CARLI Reviewed: February 96. p. 74 Publisher: Papyrus Game Type: Simulation Pros: Crisp graphics with a better frame rate than NASCAR Racing, as well as cataclysmic collisions. Major improvements to opponent Al and car handling from the original IndyCar. Cons: Road courses are nearly impossible without a wheel-andpedal controller unit. Increased authenticity and difficulty may frustrate rookies. Is it too real? comme Gaming F221 Shootout FANTASY GENERAL FANTASY GENERAL Reviewed: June 96, p. 178 Publisher: SSI Game Type: Strategy Pros: Tons of cool units, great Al, nearly endless replay value; a strategy game that will make your brain work overtime. Cons: The straightforward magic system may disappoint those expecting the depth of Master of Magic's arcane lore. The lack of scenario descriptions is annoying as well. Other Articles: Hands On, Mar. 96, p.45. Committee Gaming INTERNETE ATTACKIE MONOPOLY CD-ROM Reviewed: February 96, p. 164 MONUPOL Publisher: Virgin/Westwood Game Type: Classic Pros: It really is Monopoly. Cool anima. tion, the ability to build your own Al players; networking and Internet play are a big plus. Cons: It really is Monopoly...and may not be exciting enough for those weaned on modern computer games. Other Articles: Hints & Tips, Oct. 96, p. 204. CK I come Cam PINBALL WORLD GABRIEL KNIGHT 2 Reviewed: February 96. p.50 Publisher: Sierra On-Line Game Type: Adventure Pros: Great story, extravagant back grounds, exceptional acting, and a nearperfect soundtrack makes this a graphic adventure benchmark. Cons: Some puzzles may be obscure enough to seem unfair. Other Articles: Scorpia's Hints & Tips, Mar. 96, p. 102; Premier Awards, June 96. p. 56. niin Compute Gaming Reviewed: May 96, p. 160 Publisher: 21st Century Entertainment Game Type: Action Pros: Everything is done right; this is the best pinball simulator on the market. Cons: No table-warping, sub-games or strategy elements. This is for the pinball purist. STARFLEET ACADEMY GRAND PRIX II Reviewed: October 96, p. 246 GRANDPRD Publisher: MicroProse Game Type: Simulation Pros: Beautiful textured graphics with fully functional rear-view mirrors, great AL with a human quality, excellent depiction of wheel spin, curbs that actually tilt the car, and many strong features brought up from World Circuit. Cons: Drivers are based on the 1994 season, replay is far too short and comes with a bare minimum of camera angles, victory celebration is totally lame. It'll take a truly scorching processor to get all the graphics on, frame rate smooth and game speed up to par. Other Articles: Hands On July 96, p.44. Won QUAKE Reviewed: October 96. p. 174 Publisher: id Software Game Type: Action Pros: Pure action shooter; cool 3D architecture and creatures; outstandingly moody atmosphere; multiplayer mayhem second to none. Cons: Requires a muscular Pentium; the non-interactive environ. ment is a letdown after Duke Nukem 3D. The soundtrack is lousy compared to Doom's Other Articles: Game Track, Feb. 96, p. 44; Cover Story, July p. 46; Action Column, July 96, p. 103; Big Game Hunt, Aug. 96, p. 48; Multiplayer Strategies, Sept. 96, p. 66: Quake Deathmatch Strategy, Sept. 96, p. 142. Also, monthly in The Quake Page: Oct. 96, p. 178; Nov. 96, p. 212, Dec. 96. p. 314. 1996 ARTICLE INDEX JANUARY 1997 CG "


"Game of the Year. WARURAFTS TUDES ONTTORRENGSE #1 Selling PC Game, Jan-April 1996 PC Data Report  Game of the Year, PC Gamer Multiplayer Game of the Year, PC Gamer  Golden Triad Award, Computer Game Review Game of the Year, Computer Gaming World Readers' Choice . Best On-line Game, C/NET 8 Players Head to Head Battle over land, sea and air Custom Map Builder included Rule as Orc or Human "


"Bigger. Bolder. Bloodier. AWARCRAFTS UVONT THE Tom PORTU EXPANSION SET The Expansion Set. HAZ ENTERTAINMENT 800-953-SNOW www.blizzard.com 2 New Story Lines! 24 New Scenarios! Over 50 Custom Maps! CIRCLE READER SERVICE #265 "


"Article Index COMPUTER GAMING WORLD European Feature Story Issue Page Power! Feature Articles ComputerThe Next Gaming-15 Years Gamide 63 Look Back Rom CGUTS 30 A versary June 66 Computer cami, Blaues Bullets May 100 Hot Gift Ideas For Your Favorita Gamer NOSSOS TA Lock, Load, and Log On Rule The Galaxy 3D Accelerator Cards July 55 3D Accelerator Cards November 147 15th Anniversary Feature: The Next 15 Years November 135 150 Best (and 50 Worst) Games Of All Time November Battleground: Gettysburg Strategy April Build Your Own Game Net September 87 Burning Rubber: Racing Sim Round-up February CGW Premier Awards CivNet Review March Dark Earth Sneak Preview June Deadlock Sneak Preview EF 2000 Review January F-22 Shootout September 50 Fall Forecast: 100 New Games August Flight Sim Round-Up March Gabriel Knight 2 Review February 50 Hind Sneak Preview March 62 Holiday Hot 100 Gift Ideas December Indy Car Il Review February Laptop Survey: Road Warriors April 78 Lucky 7 Strategies for 7 Hot Games January Modem Blowout October 111 Network Gaming September Online Gaming October Quake Sneak Preview July Red Baron 11 April Science Fiction Game Strategies January Sound Cards Round-Up June Sports Spectacular: Sports Games Round-up July Starcheal Academy: Wing Commander IV. Chronomaster, and MW2: Ghost Bear's Legacy strategies Star Trek: Starfleet Academy December The Best Ways to Die in a PC Game November 107 The Bradbury Chronicles: Interview with Ray Bradbury January 83 The Funniest Games of All Time November 113 The Greatest Heroes of All Time November 120 The Greatest PC Game Sleepers November 116 The Hardest Computer Games of All Time November 118 The Most Disappointing Endings of All Time November 128 The Most Influential Industry Leaders November 110 The Most Innovative Games of All Time November 102 The Most Nefarious Villains of All Time November 121 The Most Rewarding Endings of All Time November 127 The Most Vaporous Vaporware of All Time November 130 The Next 15 Years November 134 The Top 150 Games of All Time November 64 The Ultimate Game Machine: Part 1 December 67 The Ultimate Gaming Machine: Part II January 178 The Ultimate Gaming Machine: Part III February 82 The Worst Back Stories in PC Games November 114 The Worst Peripherals of All Time November 124 Wargame Survey: The Grand Age of Warfare April Gaming 52 3-D.IS HER CADEMY Key Key AC Key PA AD CH DE Game Type Action Adventure Classics/Puzzles Other Role-Playing Simulation Sports Strategy Various Wargame on 1996 ARTICLE INDEX Article Type Column Cheats & Hacks Department Feature Game Track Hardware Hall of Fame Now Playing On the Shelf GT Article Type Premier Awards Read Me Review Scorpia's Hints Scorpia's Mail Scorpia Review Sneak Preview Strategy Tips and Hints Not Applicable SI HD SP TE 58 HOF NP OTS ST WG CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Article Index Game Name Game Article Type Type Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Name, Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Article Type Type Gaming The Best IDOS New WG Tootouda 3 SO INTERNET ATACK! Ga me I n d e x Anvil of Dawn Feb. 107 NA New World RPG SR Anvil of Dawn April 126 NA New World RPG SM 3D Ultra Pinball Jan 250 NA Sierra ACRE Anvil of Dawn June 58 NA New World RPG PA 3 in 1 Football July 72 NA Lance Haffner SP FE Anvil of Dawn June 105 NA New World RPG SM May 48 NA GT Interactive AD GT Anvil of Dawn Aug. 116 NA New World RPG SM Dec 35 NA G T Interactive AD OTS Arch Mage: WOTW Oct. 78 NA Viacom RPG FE 11th Hour March 128 * Virgin AD RE Ascendancy Jan. 316 1/2 Broderbund STRE 1942: PAW Gold Jan. 284 NA MicroProse Sico Assault Rig Aug. 150*1/2 Psygnosis ACRE 1943: Euro Air WarMar 55 NA MicroProse SI FEATI 3D PC2TV Nov. 150 ***1/2 ATI Tech. HD RE ABC's Monday Night Battleground: Football Aug. 84 NA OT Sports Ardennes Jan. 310 *** TalonSoft WGRE ABC's Monday Night Battleground: Football Sept. 178 NA OT Sports SPSP Gettysburg Mar. 214 **** TalonSoft ABC's Monday Night Battleground: Football Dec. 352 *** OT Sports SPRE Gettysburg April 60 NA TalonSoft ABC College Football Sept. 40 NA OT Sports SP GT Battleground: Absolute Zero April 148 ***1/2 Spectrum H. ACRE Gettysburg April 72 NA TalonSoft Abuse Joly 136 . Origin ACRE Battleground: Aces of the Deep April 184 NA Sierra WG CO Shiloh Aug 96 NA TalonSoft Activision's Comm. Battleground: 64 Pack Mar. 32 NA Activision AC OTS Shiloh Oct. 274 **** TalonSoft Advanced Clvilization Feb. 210 Avalon Hill WG RE Battleground: Advanced Tactical Waterloo 207 NA TalonSoft WG CO Fighters Mar 54 NA Electronic Arts si FE Battleground: Battleground: Advanced Tactical Waterloo July 34 NA TalonSoft WG OTS Fighters May 36 NA Electronic Arts si OTS Battleground: Advanced Tactical Waterloo Aug. 182 ****1/2 TalonSoft WG RE Fighters June 150 *** Electronic Arts SI RE Back to Baghdad Sept. 32 NA Military Sims. SI OTS Advanced Tactical Back to Baghdad Oct. 254 \" Military Sims. SIRE Fighters Sept. 78 NA Electronic Arts SI FE Back to Baghdad Nov. 270 NA Military Sims. SI S T Afterlife April 186 NA LucasArts ST SP Bad Day on Midway May 125 **** Inscape AD RE Afterlife Sept. 208 *.. LucasArts STRE Bad Mojo April 34 NA Pulse AD OTS Agents of Justice Aug. 91 NA MicroProse STFE Bad Mojo June 106 **** Pulse ADRE Age of Rifles Feb. 44 NA SSI WG GT Baku Baku Dec. 43 NA Sega CP OTS Age of Rifles April 60 NA SSI WG FE Baseball for Windows July 78 NA Miller Assoc. SPFE Age of Rifles Aug. 96 NASSI WG FE Battle Arena Toshinden Aug. 40 NA Playmates AC OTS Age of Rifles Nov. 284 . SSI WG RE Battle Arena Toshinden Oct. 184 1/2 Playmates AC RE AH 3 Thunderstrike July 127 NA JVC WG CO Baltle Chess Sept. 232 NA Interplay CP HOF AH 64D Longbow July 164 ***** Jane's SIRE Battle Isle 2220 July 32 NA Blue Byte WG OTS AH 640 Longbow Sept. 192 NA Jane's SIST Battleship Aug. 74 NA Hasbro CPFE Aide de Camp June 169 NA HPS WG CO Baltleship Oct. 88 NA Hasbro CPFE Air Attack Oct. 93 NA VR-1 SI FE Battles in Time Mar. 222 . Amer. Laser WG RE Air Power Feb. 32 NA M indscapeW G HO Battles of Napoleon April 67 NA SSI FE Air Warrior Feb. 181 NA Kesmai Battles of Napoleon April 183 NA SSI WG CO Air Warrior Aug. 69 NA Kesmai SIFE Battletech: Solaris Aug. 69 NA Kesmai SIFE Air Warrior Oct. 93 NA Kesmai SIFE Battletech: Solaris Oct. 94 NA Kesmai SI FE Alien Odyssey Jan. 260 **1/2 Argonaut AC RE Beavis and Butthead Nov. 222 *** Viacom ACRE Aliens April 138 . Mindscape AD RE Betrayal at Antara May 48 NA Sierra RPG GT Allied General Feb. 40 NASSI WG RM Betrayal at Antara Aug. 58 NA Sierra RPG FE Allied General Mar. 210 SSI WG RE Betrayal at Krondor Feb. 256 NA Dynamix RPG HOF Allied General April 183 NA SSI Betrayal at Krondon Sept. 232 NA Dynamix RPG HOF Alone in the Dark Mar. 256 NA Motion AD HOF Big Red Racing July 138 Domark ACRE Alone in the Dark Aug. 214 NA 1.Motion AD HOF Black Knight Feb. 200 FormGen SIRE Al Unser Jr. Racing Feb. 62 NA Mindscape AC FE Blood & Magic Aug. 42 NA Interplay ST GT American Civil War April 59 NA Interact. Magic WG FE Brainstorm Oct. 204 NA 204 NA Simon Schuster CPTH American Civil War Aug. 40 NA Interact. Magic WG OTS Breach 3 Jan. 324 . Impressions WG RE American Civil War Sept. 212 *** Interact. Magic WG RE Bruce Jenner's American Civil War Nov. 280 NA Interact. Magic WG CO Decathlon July 92 NA Interact. Magic SPFE Angel Devoid June 116 . Mindscape RPG RE Bruce Jenner's om Computers STARFLEET WG CO Compute 1996 ARTICLE INDEX comune JANUARY 1997 321 "


"ORUMETII TRIES TIESVE PROBLEMS WITH HANDGJIS , THEIB MUCH MORE QUITE BULE TULEMINEERELTOKIUMEAE B ELEESOIE MORE An all new episode with new levels new weapons and new aliens to splat, from the original creators. Full version of Duke Nukem 3D-required l you don't already have the full version of Duke Nukem 3D. crawl out from under yourrock and buy the Duke Nukem 3D Atomic Edition CEGOVEENINE JUKE NUKENS AREA PLUTONIUM PAK DUKE NUK. PLUT. PAK NO. 64-11909DNP-GT  Explore 11 new levels, several based on current hit movies See all new enemies get their butts kicked by Duke's steeltoed boots  Smell steaming entrails as Duke's new microwave cannon fries and explodes those alien bastards Hear aliens squeal as Duke aborts their entire race in one of two hilarious and controversial new cinematic scenes  Learn more about Duke's philosophy as he cracks dozens of new one-liners (Duke Talk)  Exciting new special effects, including deadly lightning and new features such as simulated multiplayer games (against up to 7 other Dukes) on a single computer  Other Duke-approved stuff: Duke Win95 themes, 5 Duke Screen savers, 6 Duke jigsaw puzzles and Image Carousel Developed by REALMS www.3drealms.com Distributed by GT Interactive Software 16 EAST 40TH ST, NEW YORK, NY 10016 www.gtinteractive.com www.ten.net  3D Realms Entertainment. All Rights Reserved. Distributed exclusively by GT Interactive Software Corp. Total Entertainment Network. TEN and the TEN logo are trademarks of T.E. Network, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"OPIA tu \" With off WW THE TOP-SELLING PC GAME OF 1996 Visit Duke on the Web at www.gtinteractive.com/duke CIRCLE READER SERVICE #373 "


"Article Index COMPUTER GAMING WORLD European Game Article Type Type Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Article Type Type \"Power! Caminy RE contutan Gaming Blades. Bulets FE Bilirua WG RE Cyberia 2 July 40 NA Xatrix AC OTS Cyberia 2 Aug. 154 ** Virgin ACRE Cyber Judas Aug. 34 NA Merit Studios ST OTS Cyber Judas Oct. 277 **** Merit Studios STRE Cyber Mage Mar. 138 ***1/2 Origin ACRE CyberSpeed Feb. 70 NA Mindscape SI FE Cylindrix Oct. 190 * Goldtree ACRE D Sept. 130 . Acclaim RPG Dame Was Loaded, The July 123 . Philips RPG RE Dark Earth June 68 NA Mindscape RPG SP Dark Earth Aug. 60 NA Mindscape RPG FE Dark Eye April 132 Inscape ADRE DarkSeed II April 123 NA Cyberdreams RPG SR DarkSeed Il June 105 NA Cyberdreams RPG SM DarkSeed II Aug. 116 NA Cyberdreams RPG SM Dark Sun Oct. 76 NA SSI AD FE Day of the Tentacle Mar. 242 NA LucasArts AD HOF Day of the Tentacle Oct. 312 NA LucasArts AD HOF Daytona USA Aug. 50 NA Sega ACFE D-Day Jan. 322 \" Avalon Hill RE Deadlock May 58 NA Accolade ST SP Deadlock Nov. 35 NA Accolade ST OTS Deadlock Dec. 392 *** Accolade STRE Deadly Tide Dec. 35 NA Microsoft AC OTS Death Keep Aug. 34 NA SSI AC OTS Death Keep Oct. 196 . SSI ACRE Deathkings: Citadel July 38 NA id AC OTS Deep Space 9 Aug. 130 **1/2 Viacom ADRE Defcon 5 April 39 NA Vic Tokai ACOTS Descent II May 36 NA Interplay AC OTS Descent II June 126 Interplay Descent UndermountainOct. 85 NA Interplay AC FE Descent UndermountainDec. 318 NA Interplay AC SP Destruction Derby Feb. 68 NA Psygnosis AC Destruction Derby June 134 ***1/2 Psygnosis ACRE Devo Adventures Nov. 40 NA Inscape AD OTS Diablo July 42 NA Blizzard RPG OTS Diablo Aug. 60 NA Blizzard RPG FE Diablo Aug.72 NA Blizzard RPG FE Diablo Aug. 118 NA Blizzard RPG SP Diablo Oct. 76 NA Blizzard RPG FE Diamond Mind Baseball July 78 NA Diamond Mind SPFE Die By the Sword Oct. 186 NA Interplay AC SP Dinotopia Aug. 41 NA Turner AD OTS Dinotopia Sept. 121 NA Turner Discworld Feb. 112 NA Psygnosis AD SM Discworld April 126 NA Psygnosis AD SM Discworld June 105 NA Psygnosis AD SM Doom April 220 NA id AC HOF Baling Rule The Galaxy Decathlon Sept. 186 112 Interact. Magic SPR E Caesar II Jan. 304 Sierra STRE Caesar 11 April 200 NA Sierra ST ST Callahan's Crosstime Saloon June 46 NA Legend AD GT Callahan's Crosstime Saloon Aug. 54 NA Legend AD FE Capitalism Feb. 222 **** Interact. Magic STRE Card Players Paradise Mar. 163 NA CP CO Carriers at War April 183 NA SSG WG CO Castle Infinity A ug 70 NA Starwave AD FE Chaos Overlord Feb. 45 NA New World ST GT Chaos Overlord July 40 NA New World ST OTS Chaos Overlord Aug. 188 ***1/2 New World STRE ChessMaster Oct. 312 NA Mindscape CP HOF Chessmaster 5000Aug 74 NA Mindscape CPFE Chessmaster 5000 Sept. 159 **** Mindscape RE Chessmaster 5000 Oct. 88 NA Mindscape CP Chronicles of Sword Aug. 111 NA Psygnosis AD SR Chronomaster April 128 ****1/2 Capstone ADRE Chronomaster M ay 80 NA Capstone AD ST City of Lost Children Aug. 54 NA Psygnosis AD FE Civilization 11 May 32 NA MicroProse ST OTS Civilization II June 174 . MicroProse STRE Civilization II Aug. 194 NA MicroProse ST ST Civilization 11 Nov. 277 NA MicroProse ST CO Civilization 11 Dec 400 NA MicroProse ST ST Civil War April 59 NA Empire WG FE CivNet Feb. 37 NA MicroProse ST RM CiVNet Mar. 66 MicroProse STRE CivNet Sept. 84 NA MicroProse ST FE Clandestiny Nov. 48 NA Trilobyte OT GT Close Combat Sept. 33 NA Microsolt AC OTS Close Combat Oct 268 ***1/2 Microsoft AC Command & Conquer Jan. 104 NA Virgin ST ST Command & Conquer Mar. 44 NA Virgin ST GT Command & Conquer June 64 NA Virgin ST PA Command & Conquer Sept. 82 NA Virgin STFE Command & Conquer Oct. 98 NA Virgin ST FE C&C: Covert Ops April 34 NA Virgin ST OTS C&C: Covert Ops June 182 ** Virgin STRE C&C: Red Alert Dec. 48 NA Virgin ST HO Confirmed kill O ct. 93 NA Eidos SI FE Congo Mar. 130 **172 Viacom RE Connections April 157***** Discovery CP RE Conquerer A.D. 1086 Jan 40 NA Sierra ST NP Conquerer A.D. 1086 Feb. 214 ** 112 Sierra STRE Conquest of New World July 178 ***1/2 Interplay WG RE Corel Chess N ov. 230 *** Corel CPRE Cross World July 143 NA GameTek CP c0 Crusader: No Remorse Jan. 144 NA Origin AC ST Crusader: No Remorse June 60 NA Origin ACPA Crusader: No Regret Aug. 48 NA Origin AC FE Crusader: No Regret Sept. 133 NA Origin ACCO Crusader: No Regret Nov. 38 NA Origin A C OTS Crusader: No Regret Dec. 320 ****1/2 Origin ACRE CRY SYS Feb. 45 NA Sierra AC GT Custer's Last Comm. April 64 NA Incredible Sims WG FE Cyberbykes f eb. 72 NA Gametek SI FE G RE RE samt Key Key CO Key AC AD CP PA CH DE Game Type Action Adventure Classics/Puzzles Other Role-Playing Simulation Sports Strategy OT Article Type Column Cheats & Hacks Department Feature Game Track Hardware Hall of Fame Now Playing On the Shelt t. 1996 ARTICLE Far INDEX FE GT Article Type Premier Awards Read Me Review Scorpia's Hints Scorpia's Mail Scorpia Review Sneak Preview Strategy Tips and Hints Not Applicable HD SP ST VA HOF NP OTS Various Wargame WG JANUARY 1997 "


"Next time you crash your PC, do it end over end. -0.0072.ph 2014 B&/D& Choi You're drafting car 58 down the 12 I see barato ultimate adrenaline rush. Juiced with 4-wheel drifts, powerslides, drafting and end over ends, it'll suck you in, SEGA front straight when he loses his ainmen, rear end under braking. Gorres Exploding from your uline your heart and spit blind spot, car 64 pitches violently, reducing your you out at 200 mph. It's Daytona USA specially crumble zone to an accordion and sending you in a enhanced for Windows 95 and it's only from FV Sega Entertainment. 39740 DAVONA USA SCA 121 29/30 screaming powerslide Ace Amorimma to an up close and Everything else is personal with 5 tons of just sucking exhaust. immovable concrete. Welcome to Driver's Ed — http://www.sega.com/segapc/ (888) SEGA-SALES Daytona style, where unrivaled fast twitch KIDS TO ADULTS q\" response, searing frame rates and 3D Sega is registered in the U.S. Patent of Trademark Office, Sega Entertainment and Sega Sports are trademarks of SEGA. Daytona USA is a registered trademark of International Speedway Corporation and is used under license from Daytona Properties. Windows 95 is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation.  1996 SEGA, P.O.Box 8097. Redwood City, CA 94063. All rights reserved. polygon graphics leave you soaked in the BAD CIRCLE READER SERVICE #179 "


"Think of the most fun you've ever had playing a PC game. A GrIP System is: Multiport 4-player digital interface 2 eight-button game pads with thumb pad. 6 lire buttons, 2 flippers Two fifteen pin connectors Automatic calibration Windows 95 DirectInput compatibility Easy installation to any PC \"Way ahead of any other product ontering the market. Computer Game Review 3/96 \"Multi-player capabilities that were once only found in video game consoles. PC Gamer Magazine 5/96 \"Sports game lans will have to own this system.* PC Entertainment Magazine \"Changing the face of action gaming on the PC. Computer Gaming World 4/96 GRAVIS { gaming for the 21st century "


"multiply by four presenting the new GRIP\"GAME SYSTEM GrIP\"is the first digital gaming system to bring multiplayer multibulton arcade action to the PC. So now you can play all of your favorite games with vour friends. Or enemies. You gotta get GrIP. And start playing games the way they were meant to be played. Look for GrIP and the Grip game bundles, The Ultimate Team Sports Set\", and The Ultimate Fighting Machine\" at your favorite store. Or call us at 1-800-257-0061. 29 @ SET WWW.!r a vis.com 0.1998 Atacad Gayi Computer Technology Lad. All rights res are trademarks of Advanced Orvhs. All other trademark te the property T do Cam Si w o CIRCLE READER SERVICE #352 "


"Article In de x COMPUTER GAMING WORLD European Power! Game Article Type Type Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Article Type Type Compten I Gaming Siin..9 comia I Gaming Blades Bullets Sierra computa Fighter Duel il Mar. 56 NA Jaeger Software SI FE Fire Fight Oct. 192 *** Electronic Arts ACRE Flight Commander 11 April 184 NA Avalon Hill WG CO Flight Unlimited June 66 NA Looking Glass SI PA Fly Fishing July 92 NA Gametek SPFE Flying Corps Nov. 264 NA Empire SI SP Flying Nightmares 2 Mar. 54 NA Domark SI FE Foxhunt May 46 NA Activision AD OTS FPS Baseball Pro 96 July 79 NA Sierra SPSP FPS Baseball Pro 96 Aug. 84 NA Sierra SPFE FPS Baseball Pro 96 Sept. 33 NA Sierra SPOTS FPS Baseball Pro 96 Oct 220 *1/2 Sierra SPRE FPS Football Pro Mar. 242 NA Sierra SP HOF FPS Football Pro Oct. 90 NA Sierra SPFE FPS Football Pro 96 Mar. 176 **** SPCO FPS Football Pro 96 July 152 NA Sierra SPST Frankenstein: Eyes of the Monster Jan. 222 . Amazing Media RPG RE Frank Thomas Baseball Oct. 232 . Acclaim SPRE Full Count Baseball July 76 NA Lance Haffner SPFE Full Tilt! Pinball Jan. 253 NA Maxis ACRE Gabriel Knight 2 Feb. 50 **** Sierra ADRE Gabriel Knight 2 Mar. 102 NA Sierra AD SM Gabriel Knight 2 April 126 NA Sierra AD SM Gabriel Knight 2 June 56 NA Sierra AD PA Gabriel Knight 2 June 105 NA Sierra AD SM Gabriel Knight 2 Aug. 116 NA Sierra AD SM Gabriel Knight 2 Gabriel Knight 2 Oct 142 NA Sierra AD SM Gadget Jan. 236 . Synergy Inc. RPG RE Galactic Civ's. 11 April 196*** Stardock STRE Galapagos Feb. 44 NA Anark AD GT Gateway Destination Dec. 70 ***1/2 Gateway 2000 HD FE Gearheads June 44 NA Philips Media CPRE Gender Wars Nov. 207 *** GT Interactive ACRE Genghis Khan II April 183 NA Koei W G CO Grand Prix ll July 44 NA MicroProse S1 HO Grand Prix II Oct. 246 ***** MicroProse SIRE Grand Prix Manager Mar. 36 NA Spectrum H. SPOTS Grand Prix Manager April 166 Spectrum H. SPR E Great Naval Battles Mar. 224 *1/2 SSI WG RE HIZone May 46 NA Wizard Works AC OTS Hardball 5 Jan. 274 ***1/2 Accolade SPRE Harpoon Oct. 98 NA Kesmai WG FE Havoc June 44 NA Reality Bytes AC OTS Hellbender Dec. 326 \"** Microsoft ACRE Heroes of M&M Jan. 116 NA New World ST ST Heroes of M&M May 46 NA New World ST OTS Heroes of M&M June 64 NA New World ST PA Heroes of M&M Aug. 91 NA New World ST FE samlinge Rule The Galaxy Doom Dec. 422 NA D A CHOF Druid Mar. 114 112 Sir Tech ADRE Duke Nukem 3D April 47 NA Apogee AC HO Duke Nukem 3D July 130 ****1/2 Apogee ACRE Duke Nukem 3D Sept. 71 NA Apogee AC FE Dungeon Keeper Aug. 60 NA Electronic Arts RPG FE Dungeon Master Dec. 422 NA F TL Software RPG HOF EarthSiege 2 May 40 NA Sierra SHOT EarthSiege 2 July 170 ***1/2 Sierra S IRE Earthworm Jim Mar. 158 **** Activision ACRE Eastern Mind Mar. 33 NA Sony AD OTS Ecstatica 2 Aug. 49 NA Psygnosis AC FE Ecstatica 2 Dec. 309 NA Psygnosis ACSP EF 2000 Jan. 44 ***1/2 Ocean EF 2000 May 199 NA Ocean SI CO EF 2000 June 62 NA Ocean SIPA EF 2000 TactCom Oct 239 NA Ocean SI CO Elder Scrolls: Daggerfall Aug 58 NA Bethesda RPG FE Elder Scrolls: Daggerfall Oct. 53 NA Bethesda RPG HO Elder Scrolls: Daggertall Nov. 34 NA Bethesda RPG OTS RPG OTS Elder Scrolls: Daggerfall Dec. 281 1 2 Bethesda RP CO Elder Scrolls: Daggerfall Dec. 296 NA Bethesda RPTH Elk Moon Murder Oct. 144 Activision RPG RE Empire 11 Jan. 165 NA New World WG ST Empire il April 60 NA New World WG FE Endortun Mar. 166 1/2 Time Warner CPRE Entomorph Jan. 201 NA S SI RPG SR Entomorph Feb. 112 NASSI RPG SM Entomorph April 126 NA SSI RPG SM Entomorph Oct. 142 NASSI RPGSM Escher interactive Sept. 168 *** Byron Preiss CP RE ESPN Extreme Games April 35 NA Sony SPOTS European Airwar Aug. 76 NA Micro Prose SI FE Extreme Pinball Jan. 254 NA Electronic Arts AC RE Eye of the Beholder II June 105 NA SSI A D SM Eye of the Beholder II Aug. 116 NA S SI AD SM F-16 Fighting Falcon Feb. 44 NA Interact Magic Si RM F-22 Lightning 11 July 42 NA NovaLogic SI OTS F-22 Lightning It Aug. 76 NA Novalogic SI FE F 22 Lightning II Sept. 51 NA NovaLogic SI FE F-22 Lightning Dec. 382 NovaLogic S1 F/A-18 Hornet 2.0 Aug 77 NA Graphic Sim's. SI FE FIA-18 Hornet 3.0 Nov. 52 NA Graphic Sim's. SI HO Falcon 4.0 Aug. 76 NA MicroProse SLFE Oct. 35 NA Spectrum H. SI OTS Falcon NW Dec. 68 ***1/2 Falcon NW HD FE Fantasy General Mar. 45 NASS W G HO Fantasy General June 178 **** SSI WG RE Fast Attack June 162 Sierra SIRE Fields of Glory April 67 NA Spectrum H. WG FE FIFA Soccer 96 July 92 NA Electronic Arts SPFE Fighter Duel Jan. 284 NA Philips SI CO Fighter Duel Jan. 290 ** Philips SIR E Fighter Duel July 161 NA Philips SICO stiina 3-DUS HER RE het Falcon 4.0 Key Key AC AD Key CO CH CP DE OT FE Game Type Action Adventure Classics/Puzzles Other Role-Playing Simulation Sports Strategy Various Wargame 1996 ARTICLE TAR INDEX Article Type Column Cheats & Hacks Department Feature Game Track Hardware Hall of Fame Now Playing On the Shell GT Article Type Premier Awards Read Me Review Scorpia's Hints Scorpia's Mail Scorpia Review Sneak Preview Strategy Tips and Hints Not Applicable ST HD HOF NP OTS VA TH WG BADEM CC JANUARY 1997 "


"Article Index Game Article Type Type Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Name Game Name Game Article Type Type Issue Page Rating Publisher Z OUT comuta Gaming Bhootout. EN INTERNET NA ATTACK TED Om du LAR Famiye Heroes of M&M II Nov. 46 NA New World ST HO Hexen Jan 336 NA R aven AD CO Hexen Feb. 151 NA Raven AD CO Hind Mar. 62 NA Interact. Magic Si SP Hind Dec 34 NA Interact. Magic Si OTS Hi Octane Feb. 70 NA Bullfrog AC FE History of the World April 46 NA Avalon Hill GT The Hive Feb. 144.. Trimark AC RE Hoyle Solitaire Dec. 333 NA Sierra On-Line CP CO Hyper 3D Pinball Mar 37 NA Virgin AC OTS Ice Breaker Feb. 40 NA 20th Century RM 1F-22 Lightning Sept. 52 NA MicroProse SI FE I Have No Mouth... Mar. 118 ****1/2 Cyberdreams AD RE THave No Mouth... May 111 NA Cyberdreams AD SM I Have No Mouth... June 58 NA Cyberdreams AD PA THave No Mouth... June 105 NA Cyberdreams AD SM Have No Mouth... Aug. 116 NA Cyberdreams AD SM IM1A2 Abrams Dec. 366 NA Interact. Magic si SP Indiana Jones Desktop Adventures Aug. 128 . LucasArts AD RE Indy Car !! Feb. 74 ***** Papyrus S R E Into the Shadows July 42 NA GT Interactive AC GT Into the Shadows Aug. 49 NA GT Interactive AC FE Iron & Blood Oct. 184 NA Take 2/Acclaim ACSP Island Casino April 42 NA GT Interactive CPOTS Jack Nicklaus Golf Oct. 217 NA Accolade SPCO Jack the Ripper Gametek ADRE Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Oct. 98 NA Sir-Tech ST FE Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Dec. 396 **** Sir Tech STRE Jagged Alliance: OG Online Nov. 38 NA Sir-Tech ST OTS Jedi Knight July 42 NA LucasArts AC GT Jedi Knight Oct. 48 NA LucasArts AC GT Jedi Knight II: Dark Forces Aug 48 NA LucasArts AC FE Jet Fighter III Jan. 286 NA M ission Studios Si CO Jet Fighter III Mar. 54 NA Mission Studios SI FE Jet Fighter III Sept. 56 NA Mission Studios SI ON SUDIOS SI FE John Madden 97 July 75 NA Electronic Arts SPFE John Madden 97 Aug. 86 NA Electronic Arts SP FE Jurassic Park Dec.46 NADreamWorks AD SP Knight Moves Feb. 166 *** Spectrum H. CPRE Lands of Lore Feb. 112 NR Virgin RPG SM Lands of Lore Oct. 142 NA Virgin RPG SM Lands of Lore II Aug. 58 NA Virgin Virgin RPG FE Leisure Suit Larry 7 May 48 NA Sierra AD GT Leisure Suit Larry 7 Aug. 54 NA Sierra Sierra AD FE Lemmings Paintball Oct. 210 **** Psygnosis CPRE Links LS Oct. 39 NA Access SPOTS Links LS Nov. 240 ****1/2 Access SPRE Links Pro CD July 88 NA Access SPFE Light House Dec 38 NA Sierra AD OTS Lion April 39 NA Sanct. Woods RPG OT Locus April 154 GT Interactive AC RE M1A2 Abrams Aug 77 NA Interact. Magic SI FE Magic: The Gathering April 46 NA Acclaim RPG GT Marathon 2 The Durandal Mar. 154 ****1/2 Bungie ACRE Martian Chronicles Jan. 228 Byron Preiss RPG RE Master of Antares Jan. 298 NA MicroProse ST SP Master of Orion April 220 NA MicroProse ST HOF Master of Orion Aug. 90 NA MicroProse STFE Master of Orion II Oct. 49 NA MicroProse ST HO Master of Orion II Oct. MicroProse Maurice Ashley Chess May 167 NA Davidson CPCO MDK Aug. 50 NA Shiny Shiny AC FE MechWarrior 2 Jan. 92 NA Activision SIST MechWarrior 2 Jan. 340 NA Activision SI CO MechWarrior 2 May 74 NA Activision MechWarrior 2 June 62 NA Activision MechWarrior 2 Aug 78 NA Activision SI FE MechWarrior 2 Sept. 74 NA Activision SI SP MechWarrior 2 Oct. 94 NA Activision SI FE MW 2 Expansion Pack Feb. 202 **** Activision SIRE M W 2: Mercenaries Deo. 380 ***1/2 Activision SIRE MW 2: Pentium Edition Mar. 36 NA Activision SI OTS MechWarrior 3 Aug. 34 NA Activision SI RM Meridian 59 July 44 NA Archetype RPG GT Meridian 59 Aug. 3D0 RPG FE Meridian 59 Oct. NA 3D0 RPG FE Might and MagicVI Nov. 45 NA New World ST GT Mind Grind Dec. 336 ** Microforum CPRE Mission Critical May 120 ****1/2 Legend Mission Critical Sept. 124 NA Legend Legend Mission Force: Cyberstorm Mar. 44 NA Sierra Mission Force: Cyberstorm May 212 NA Sierra Mission Force: Cyberstorm Sept. 38 NA Sierra Mission Force: Cyberstorm Oct. 284 ***1/2 Sierra Monopoly Feb. 164 ***** Westwood CPRE Monopoly Oct. 204 NA Westwood TH Monster Truck Mad. Sept. 46 NA Microsoft AC GT Monster Truck Mad. Dec. 43 NA Microsoft AC OTS Monty Python Aug. 74 NA 7th Level Monty Python Aug. 157 NA 7th Level CP CO Monty Python's C omplete Waste June 46 NA 7th Level CPOTS Mortal Kombat 3 Jan. 138 NA GT Interactive ACST Mortal Kombat 3 Jan. 242 \" GT Interactive AC RE Mummy Dec. 306 Interplay NASCAR 2 Nov. 45 NA Sierra SI HO NASCAR 2 Dec. 376 NA Sierra SI SP NASCAR Racing League Sept. 173 NA Papyrus SPCO Navy Strike Feb. 32 NA Empire HO NBA Full Court Press Aug. 86 NA Microsoft SPFE NBA Full Court Press Sept. 42 NA Microsoft SPHO NBA Live 96 Mar. 171 NA Electronic Arts SP NBA Live 96 June 60 NA Electronic Arts SPCO NBA Live 96 July81 NA Electronic Arts SP SP NBA Live 97 Oct. 217 NA Electronic Arts SP NCAA Basketball Feb. 46 NA GTE Interactive SP NCAA Basketball Aug. 86 NA GTE Interactive SPFE So Worst 5 Computers 5 Gaminy STARFLEET ACADEMY CP FE 1996 ARTICLE INDEX JANUARY 1997 CG "


"So Much Action, Smash through Blast enemy helicop Attack enemy fight enemy lines with 60 ters, tanks and troops ers, demolish enemy tons of armored steel with a full arsenal of headquarters and and 120mm cannon rockets, missiles and take the controls dire in 19a2 Abrams\": fire in iM1A2 Abrams. 20mm cannons. Do it of all the great fightFrom the creators of all as you race across ers of WWII in Air M1 Tank Platoon, the treetops in Hind\", Warrior II. Also includcomes the tank simulathe helicopter simula ed is a gateway to tion called \"One of the tion from the develop internet gaming with year's hottest games\" ers of Apache\", Best 20 free hours from by PC Gamer. Sim of the Year* CompuServe M1A2 01996 Interactive Magic. All Rights Reserved. M1 Tank Platoon is a registered trademark of MicroProse, Inc. Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corp. iM1A2 Abrams, Hind, Apache, American Civil War From Sumter to Appomattox, and Destiny are trademarks of Interactive Magic Harpoon is a registered trademark of Larry Bond and Chris Carlson.  \"Voted \"Best Sim of the Year\"-PC Gamer Interactive Magic, P.O. Box 13491, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, 800-298-0872 "


"So Little Time Pulverize Union Fire harpoon and tomDominate the or Confederate lines as ahawk missiles at enemy world as you build a you decide the fate of battleships and carriers nation through military the Nation. Called \"The as you command the and scientific discovonly strategic Civil War Navy's most powerful ery, Destiny\" is the game worth buying, ships. It's Harpoon multi-player strategy by Computer Gaming Classic 97, from the game where you civWorld, American Civil award winning designilize and conquer War includes a multiers of Harpoon Classic, the world, from the media history of the voted \"Wargame of the Stone Age to the Civil War. Year\" by PC Gamer. Space Age. ivt WAR HARPOON 97 DESTINY Simulation and Strategy Gaming NTERACTIVE MAGICU Get all the details at www.imagicgames.com CIRCLE READER SERVICE #172  1996 Interactive Magic "


"NAV STAR GENERAL The Sky Is No Longer 'The Limit. 15 STAR SERTES Go witere no gamer has gone before BEYOND PANZER GENERAL: Volume 4 in SSI's award-winning 5-STAR SERIES, STAR GENERAL\" is light-years ahead of its proud ancestor! Feel the power of an incredibly enhanced PANZER GENERAL game engine. A Two-Level Combat Sustem that accommodates space combat AND surface combat. Resource management conquer enemy planets and develop them for your needs. See the beauty of over .90 fully rendered 3D starships, 100+ ground units and multiple planet types. Command. a multi-planetary force as you struggle to repel the advances of six alien races. Engage in a variety of wars as any of 7 different races. And be prepared to put in some time! The scope of STAR GENERAL is as vast as space itself with well over 100 hours of game play. The sky is no longer the limit. So light up the heavens in a cosmic battle for the right to be called STAR GENERAL! MULTI-PLAYER OPTION FOR WINDOWS 95! Combo CD-ROM WWW.Slargeneral.com WINDOWS 95 & DOS TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAYERS STAR GENERAL Is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc.. a Mindscape Company. 1996 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corp. Developed by Catware. O PROCEE22-010 COS A *O-> _ L A MINDSCAPE COMPANY CIRCLE READER SERVICE #236 "


"Article Index Game Article Type Type Game Article Type Type Game NameS Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher TWO comotie Game ortante Gaming nootout INTERNET ATTACK Need for Speed, The Feb. 64 NA Electronic Arts AC FE Need for Speed. The Sept. 68 NA Electronic Arts AC FE Nemesis June 48 NA Sir-Tech AD GT Neverhood Chronicles Nov. 200 NA DreamWworks AD SP Neverhood Chronicles Dec. 304 ** DreamWorks ADRE NFL Legends July 74 NA Accolade SPSP NFL Legends Aug. 84 NA Accolade SP FE NFL Pro Football Jan. 280 ***1/2 18M SPRE NFL Pro Football 72 NA 18M SPFE NHL Hockey 96 Jan. 266 ***1/2 Electronic Arts SPRE NHL Hockey 96 Wuly 85 NA Electronic Arts SPFE NHL Hockey 97 Aug. 84 NA Electronic Arts SPFE NHL Hockey 97 Dec. 344 ***1/2 Electronic Arts SPRE NHL Power Play 96 May 176 NA Virgin SP SP NHL Power Play 96 July 84 NA Virgin SPFE NHL Power Play 96 Oct. 230 *** Virgin SPRE Nine Dragons Nov. 227 ****1/2 Nine Dragons CPRE Normality Oct. 40 NA Interplay AD OTS Normalily Nov. 175 NA Interplay AD SR Nuke it Oct. 37 NA Micro Star A C OTS Obsidian Sept. 41 NA Rocket Science AD GT Olympic Summer Games July 92 NA Eidos SP FE Orion Burger Feb. 44 NA Sanct. Woods AD GT Outlaws Sept. 41 NA LucasArts ACGT Over the Reich May 48 NA Avalon Hill WG GT Over the Reich Aug. 95 NA Avalon Hill WG FE Over the Reich Aug, 179 NA Avalon Hill WGCO Pandora Directive Mar. 110 NA Access Software RPG SP Pandora Directive O ct. 137 NA Access Software RPG SR Pandora Directive Nov. 180 NA Access Software RPG SM Panzer General April 184 NA SSI WG CO Panzer General Nov. 277 NA S SI WGCO Panzer General Online Dec. 387 ****1/2 SSI WG CO Perfect Weapon Oct. 183 NA ASC Games ACSP PGA Tour 96 July 86 NA Electronic Arts SPFE Phantasmagoria 2 Aug. 56 NA Sierra AD FE Philip Marlowe. P Aug. 34 NA Byron Preiss AD OTS Philip Marlowe: P1 Oct. 152 *** Byron Preiss AD RE Pinball Musions Jan. 250 NA Digital Illusions AC RE Pinball World May 160 ***** 21st Century AC RE Planetary Raiders Aug. 173 NA CI SI CO Pool Champion Mar 188 **** Mindscape SPRE Power: The Game April 194 ***1/2 IBM S T RE PO S.W.A.T. Feb. 40 NA Sierra AC RM Pretty Good Solitaire Dec. 334 NA Tom Warfield CP CO Prisoner of ice Jan. 206 NA -Motion RPG SR Prisoner of Ice Feb. 114 NA -Motion RPG SM Prisoner of Ice April 126 NA I-Motion RPG SM S utan Prisoner of ice June 104 NA Motion RPG SM Privateer 2 Aug. 83 NA Origin SI FE Privateer 2 Oct. 244 NA Origin SI SP Psychic Detective June 32 NA Electronic Arts AD OTS Psychic Detective July 120 ** Electronic Arts ADRE Psycho Pinball Jan. 251 NA Philips ACRE Puzzle Power July 143 NA Centron CPCO Puzzle Shop Feb. 159 NA Oracle CP  PYST Nov. 196 NA Parroty AD SP QIN Mar. 46 NA Time Warner AD HO Quake Feb. 44 NA id AC GT Quake July 46 NA id AC SP Quake July 103 NA   Quake Aug. 48 NA AC FE Quake Sept. 66 NA id AC FE Quake Oct. 174 ***** id ACRE Quake Oct. 178 NA id AC CH Quake Nov. 212 NA id AC CH Quake Dec. 314 NA id ACTH Quake DeathMatch Sept. 142 NA id ACST Ravenloft II Feb. 114 NA SSI RPG SM Ravenloft II Oct. 142 NASSI RPG SM The Raven Project April 144 *** Mindscape ACRE Rayman April 35 NA UBI Soft AC OTS The Realm Aug. 69 NA Sierra RPG FE The Realm Oct. 76 NA Sierra RPG FE Realm of Arkania Aug. 60 NA Sir-Tech RPG FE Rebel Assault 11 Feb. 148 *** LucasArts ACRE Red Alert Aug 91 NA Virgin ST FE Red Baron 11 Mar 55 NA Sierra SI FE Red Baron 11 April 52 NA Sierra S SP Red Storm Rising April 184 NA MicroProse WGCO Remember the Alamo April 64 NA Incredible Sims WG FE Return Fire Dec. 330 ***1/2 GT Interactive ACRE Return of the Arcade May 54 NA Microsoft ACHO Return to Krondor July 43 NA 7th Level RPG GT Return to Krondor Aug. 58 NA 7th Level RPG FE Return to Zork Feb. 114 NA Activision AD SM Riddle of Master Lu Jan. 216 ****1/2 Sanct. Woods RPG RE Riddle of Master Lu May 136 NA Sanct. Woods RPG TH Ripper April 47 NA Take 2 RPG HO Ripper June 99 NA Take 2 RPG SR Ripper July 109 NA Take 2 RPG SR Ripper Aug. 116 NA Take 2 RPG SM Ripper Oct. 142 NA Take 2 RPG SM Rise 2: Resurrection Oct. 186 \" Acclaim ACRE Rise & Rule O 1 Ancient Empires June 40 NA Sierra ST OTS Rise & Rule Of Ancient Empires July 184 Sierra STRE Risk Aug.74 NA Hasbro CP FE Risk Oct. 88 NA Hasbro CPFE Road Warrior Feb. 72 NA Gametek AC FE Road Warrior May 156 1/2 Gametek ACRE Robert E. Lee April 59 NA Sierra WG FE Robert E. Lee Nov. 284 **** Sierra WG RE Rolemaster: Magestorm Oct. 76 NA Interworld RPG FE Romance of the a so Wersti The min Icimies Gaming STARFLEET ACADEMY Key AC Key CO Key PA CH DE FE 5 Game Type Action Adventure Classics Puzzles Other Role Playing Simulation Sports Strategy Various Wargame Article Type Column Cheats & Hacks Department Feature Game Track Hardware Hall of Fame Now Playing On the Shelf Article Type Premier Awards Read Me Review Scorpia's Hints Scorpia's Mail Scorpia Review Sneak Preview Strategy Tips and Hints Not Applicable HD 1996 ARTICLE INDEX HOF NP OTS TH VA WG NA JANUARY 1997 CG "


"Article Index COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JEuropean Power! Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Article Type Type Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Article Type Type Computa, Gaming COMUN Gaming Biatles. Buliats :53:3333:33 1333 o RE Three Kingdoms IV Feb 218 **. Koel WG RE Sabre Ace D ec. 357 NA Eagle SI CO Saturday Night Live Goes Political June 139 NA Berkeley CP CO Science Fiction Encyclopedia Mar. 40 NA Grolier OT OTS Sci Fi Channel Trivia Nov. 232 ** Byron Preiss CPRE Scrabble Aug. 74 NA Hasbro CP FE Scrawny Set Mar. 168 Set Enterprises CP RE Screamer Feb. 62 NA Virgin AC FE Screamer Mar. 160 \" Virgin AC RE Settlers II Nov. 314 ** Blue Byte STRE Shadows Over Riva July 43 NA Sir Tech RPG HO Shandoan Oct. 45 NA Interplay AD OTS Shannara Feb. 40 NA Legend AD RM Shannara Aug. 116 NA Legend AD SM Shattered Steel Aug. 42 NA Interplay AC HO Shattered Steel Dec. 40 NA Interplay ACOTS Shell Shock July 127 NA U.S. Gold WGCO Shell Shock Oct. 40 NA U.S. Gold WG OTS Shell Shock Nov. 218 *** Eidos WG RE Shivers Feb. 36 NA Sierra OT HO Sid Meier's Civilization Jan. 34 NA MicroProse ST BB Silent Hunter June 158 ** Sierra SIRE Silent Thunder: A-10 Jan. 35 NA Dyamix BB Silent Thunder: A 10 June 154 Sierra S1 RE SIM Copler SIM Copter Oct. 168 NA Maxis SP Sim Golf July 86 NA Maxis FE SkyNet Oct. 161 NA Bethesda ACCO Smart Games #1 July 146 ***1/2 Smart Games CP RE Smart Games #1 Oct. 204 NA Smart Games CP TH Space Bar, The Aug. 56 NA Rocket Science AD FE Space Bucks May 218 **1/2 Sierra STRE Sports Illustrated Micro. Baseball Aug. 163 NA Microleague SPCO Spycraft July 116 ***1/2 Activision ADRE Star Control 3 Oct. 51 NA Accolade AD HO Star Control 3 Dec. 300 *** Accolade ADRE Star Crall Aug. 72 NA Blizzard ST FE Star Craft Aug. 90 NA Blizzard ST FE Star Craft Oct. 96 NA Blizzard FE Star General June 46 NASSI S T GT Star General Aug. 90 NA FE Star General Sept. 197 NA SSI ST CO Star Rangers Jan. 40 NA Interact. Magic Si BB Star Raiders Feb. 194 NA Interact. Magic SIRE Star Trek: Final Unity Feb. 112 NA Spectrum H. RPG SM Star Trek: Final Unity. April 126 NA Spectrum H. RPG SM Star Trek: Starfleet Academy Aug. 78 NA Interplay SI FE Star Trek: Starfleet Academy Dec. 52 NA Interplay SI FE Steel Panthers Jan. 172 NA SSI WG ST Steel Panthers Jan. 296 NA SSI WG CO Steel Panthers Feb. 228 NA WG ST Steel Panthers June 56 NA SS WG PA Steel Panthers II Aug 95 NA S SI WG FE Steel Panthers Campaign Disc Oct. 38 NA SSI WG OTS Steel Panthers Campaign Disc Nov. 310 **** SSI WG RE Stephen Spielberg's D irector Chair Nov. 48 NA Knowledge Adv. ST GT Stonekeep Jan. 41 NA Interplay RPG BB Stonekeep Feb. 122 **** Interplay RPG RE Stonekeep May 129 NA Interplay RPG ST Stonekeep Aug. 116 NA Interplay RPG SM Stonekeep Oct. 142 NA Interplay RPG SM S.T.O.R.M. Nov. 226 **1/2 American Solt. ACRE Strat-O-Matic Baseball CD ROM 1 Nov. 252 Strat-O-Matic SPRE Strife May 143 NA Velocity ACCO Strife Aug. 146 Velocity ACRE SU-27 Feb. 186 **** Mindscape SIRE SU-27 Mar. 196 NA Mindscape SIST SU-27 May 200 NA Mindscape SubSpace Oct. 83 NA Virgin AC FE Superheroes April 46 NA MicroProse Super Street Fighter 11 April 152 Capcom ACRE Sword of Shannara Mar. 97 NA Legend TacOps Aug. 186 1/2 Arsenal Tang Chi Feb. 33 NA Capcom OTHO TekWar Jan. 239** Capstone ACRE Ten Pin Alley Oct. 49 NA American Soft. SPHO Terminator: Future Shock Feb. 40 NA Bethesda AC RM Terminator: Future Shock Mar. 146 ***1/2 Bethesda ACRE Terra Nova Feb. 142 NA Virgin A C SP Terra Nova April 33 NA Virgin OTS Terra Nova June 130 **** Virgin Terror T.R.A.X. Mar. 40 NA 3 Prong Plug AD OTS TFX Lightning Strike Aug. 76 NA Ocean SI FE TEX Lightning Strike Sept. 56 NA Ocean SI FE The Dig Jan. 40 NA LucasArts AD NP The Dig Feb. 133 *** LucasArts ADRE Thexder Feb. 36 NA Sierra ACHO Third Reich Mar. 44 NA Avalon Hill WG GT Third Reich Aug. 96 NA Avalon Hill WG FE Mar. 40 NA MicroProse WG OTS This Means War April 190 **1/2 MicroProse WG RE Thunderscape Feb. 114 NA SSI RPG SM TIE Fighter July 200 NA LucasArts AC HOF TIE Fighter Collect CD Mar. 40 NA LucasArts AC OTS Tigers on the Prowl April 184 NA HPS W G CO Time Commando June 123 NA Activision   Time Commando Dec. 322 ***1/2 Activision AC Titanic April 46 NA G TE AD HO Computer Familys Rule The Galaxy RE come SSI RE Key Key Key CO AD CH RM DE 1996 ARTICLE DARI INDEX FE Game Type Action Adventure Classics Puzzles Other Role-Playing Simulation Sports Strategy Various Wargame Article Type Column Cheats & Hacks Department Feature Game Track Hardware Hall of Fame Now Playing On the Shell Article Type Premier Awards Read Me Review Scorpia's Hints Scorpia's Mail Scorpia Review Sneak Preview Strategy Tips and Hints Not Applicable GT HD HOF SI SP ST NP VA WG OTS EES CADEMI CG JANUARY 1997 "


"DE Article Index Game Article Type Type Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher Game Article Type Type Game Name Issue Page Rating Publisher 55 al OHN Gaming 100tou. Gaming INTERNET ATTACK 5 Oudu AC Titanic Aug 56 NA GTE AD FE WarCraft 11 Sept. 81 NA Blizzard ST FE Tomb Raider Aug. 49 NA Eidos AC FE WarCraft II Tomb Raider Oct. 164 NA Eidos EAC SP Expansion Set Expansion Set Sept. 205 ****12 Blizzard STRE ST Tony La Russa 3 July 78 NA Stormfront SPFE WarCraft Il Tony La Russa 3 Aug. 33 NA Stormfront SPOTS Expansion Set Oct. 290 NA Blizzard Tony La Russa 3 Sept. 182 **** Stormfront SPR E WarCraft II Toonstruck Mar. 44 NA Virgin ADGT Expansion Set Nov. 318 NA Blizzard ST ST Toonstruck Sept. 46 NA Virgin AD HO Warhammer Mar. 218 **** Mindscape STRE Top Gun: Fire at Will Jan. 286 NA Spectrum H. SI CO War in Russia May 242 NA SSL WG HOF Top Gun: Fire at Will Mar. 55 NA Spectrum H. SI FE Warlords 11 April 183 NA SSG WG CO Top Gun: Fire at Will May 202 Spectrum H. SIRE Warlords II Deluxe Jan. 326 ***1/2 SSG WG RE Torin's Passage Feb. 130 *** Sierra RPG RE War Wind Aug. 91 NA SSI STFE Total Control Football Oct. 90 NA Philips SPFE War Wind Nov. 48 NASSI ST HO Total Distortion Mar. 32 NA Pop Rocket ST OTS Wasteland May 242 NA Interplay RPG HOF Total Mayhem Mar. 45 NA Domark AC HO Wayne Gretzky Hockey Mar. 186 ** Time Warner SPRE Total Mayhem Aug. 142 ACRE Wayne Gretzky Hockey July 85 NA Time Warner SPFE Total Meltdown Nov. 38 NA Sierra ACRM Wetlands Jan. 41 NA New World AC BB Total Pinball 3D June 48 NA 21st Century ACHO Wetlands Feb. 146 . New World AC RE Touche Feb. 45 NA U.S. Gold ADGT Whiplash June 44 NA Interplay SPOTS Tracer Oct. 208 ** 7th Level CPRE Wing Commander June 202 NA Origin Systems AC PA Treasure Quest July 33 NA Sirius C P OTS Wing Commander 11 June 202 NA Origin Systems AC PA Treasure Quest Sept. 164 Sirius CPRE Wing Commander IV April 178 ****1/2 Origin Systems ACRE Triple Play 97 Oct. 35 NA Electronic Arts SPOTS Wing Commander IV May 64 NA Origin Systems SIST Triple Play 97 Nov. 248 **** Electronic Arts SPRE Wing Commander V Aug. 39 NA Origin Systems AC RM TriTryst April 160 ** Virgin RE Wipeout Feb. 68 NA Psygnosis AC FE Trophy Bass Feb 174 **** Sierra SPRE Witchhaven II Aug. 33 NA Capstone AC OTS Trophy Bass II Aug. 86 NA Sierra SP FE Witchhaven II Sept. 136 ** Capstone AC RE U-Boat II Aug. 176 . Deadly Games SI RE Wolfenstein 3D Aug. 214 NA id AC HOF Ultima VI Mar. 365 NA Origin Systems RPG HOF Wooden Ships Ultima VII Oct. 142 NA Origin Systems RPG SM And Iron Men April 64 NA Avalon Hill WG FE Ultima VIII Feb. 112 NA Origin Systems RPG SR World Hockey 95 July 85 NA Merit Studios SPFE Ultimate Football 95 July 75 NA MicroProse SPFE WIZone 34 NA WizardWorks AC OTS Ultima Online Oct. 75 NA Origin Systems RPG FEX.COM July 200 NA MicroProse ST HOF Ultima Online Oct 131 NA Origin Systems RPG COX-COM: Apocalypse Aug. 91 NA MicroProse STFE Unnecessary Xenophage Oct. 198 **1/2 FormGen ACRE Roughness 96 Jan. 34 NA Accolade SP BB X-Wing Vs. TIE Fighter Aug. 78 NA LucasArts Unnecessary X-Wing Vs. TIE Fighter Sept. 40 NA LucasArts Roughness 96 Mar. 180 Accolade SPRE You Don't Know Jack Jan. 40 NA.. Berkeley U.S. Navy Fighters Jan. 286 NA Electronic Arts S C O You Don't Know Jack Feb. 162 \"**1/2 Berkeley CPRE U.S. Navy Fighters 97 Oct. 239 NA Electronic Arts SICO You Don't Know Jack June 66 NA Berkeley Vikings July 190 GT Interactive STRE You Don't Know Jack Virtua Cop Aug. 139 NA Sega ACCO Question Pack June 37 NA Berkeley CPOTS Virtua Fighter PC Aug. 49 NA Sega AC FE You Don't Know Jack Virtua Fighter PC Oct. 183 **** Sega ACRE Sports Aug. 74 NA Berkeley CPFE Virtual Chess May 168 NA 1-Motion CPCO You Don't Know Jack Virtual Karts Feb. 64 NA MicroProse AC FE XL Oct. 203 NA Berkeley Virtual Snooker July 33 NA Interplay CP OTSZ Mar. 45 NA Virgin ST HO Voyeur 11 June 50 NA Philips Media AD GT Z Nov. 300 ***1/2 Virgin STRE VR Soccer 96 Aug. 168 VR Sports SPRE Zone Raiders Feb. 72 NA Virgin AC FE Warbirds Mar. 193 NA ICI SICO Zone Raiders Mar. 152 *** Virgin War College, The Aug. 41 NA GameTek WG OTS Zork Nemesis June 33 NA Activision OTS War College, The Sept. 216 . GameTek WG RE Zork Nemesis Aug. 124 *** Activision AD RE WarCraft II Feb. 33 NA Blizzard ST HO Zulu War! Oct. 263 . Incredible Sims WG RE WarCraft II Mar. 206 ****1/2 Blizzard STRE Zulu War! Nov. 280 NA Incredible Sims WG CO WarCraft In Aug. 32 NA Blizzard S T OTS TES Gaming STARFLEET ACADEMY 2s sos Computer AC ARTICLE INDEX JANUARY 1997 CC 335 "


"Article Index COMPUTER GAMING WORLD European Power! Product Name Issue Page Manufacturer Rating Section Product Name Issue Page Manufacturer Rating Section NA NA FE **1/2 sami! NA FE NA **** 1/2 NA NA SP NA FE NARE MNO cojies Garning Rieses Bullets NA NA FE NA TITUI Emm www  w RE NA FE OTS NEC Power Player Aug. 66 NEC NEC Power Player 2020 Dec. 78 NEC Number Nine Reality 332FX 3D Card Nov. 148 Number Nine NuReality Vivid 3D Speakers Mar. 78 NuReality NuSound Plug & Play June 76 Orchid Orchid Righteous 3D Nov. 157 Orchid P 166 Mach V July 102 Falcon PCI 3D Blaster Aug. 111 Creative Labs Permedia July 63 3D Labs Pinball Wizard May 162 Thrustmaster PlayStation May 182 Sony PowerVR July 63 NEC/Videologic Pro Play Golf Mar 86 Thrustmaster RPA 2 July 63 Yamaha Satellite PRO 410 CDT April 86 Toshiba Sidewinder Oct. 189 Microsoft Solo S5-120XL April 89 Gateway Sound Blaster AWE32 Plug & Play June 74 Creative Labs Sound Force Speakers Nov. 170 Quickshot Soundworks Mar. 77 Cambridge SpaceOrb Aug. 66 Spacetec SpaceOrb Oct. 127 Spacetec Sportster VI Oct. 121 U.S. Robotics SSI Cineplex System Mar. 78 SSI Products STB Lightspeed 128 Nov. 152 STB Stealth 3D Aug. 106 Diamond SupraSonic 336V+ Oct. 121 Diamond Terminator 64/3D Aug. 106 Hercules T idalWave 32 Oct. 129 Crystal Computer Toshiba 3701 Mar 40 Toshiba Toshiba Infinia 7200 Dec. 80 Toshiba UltraSound PNP June 78 Advanced Gravis Verbal Commander Nov. 170 K2 Interactive Verite July 63 Rendition Videologic Grafixstar 600 Nov. 152 Videologic Virge July 63 S3 Virge Feb. 32 S3 Voodoo July 62 3DFX WaveForce June 80 Yamaha WaveForce XG Jan. 30 Yamaha Wing Man Warrior July 92 Logitech Zephyr 166 Mar. 37 Zephyr Zephyr Onyx April 110 Zephyr Zephyr Onyx Speed Demon Dec. 82 Zephyr NA NA FE NA FE NA NACO NA Hardware Index 3 D Blaster Mar. 80 Creative Labs **112 RE 3D Rage July 64 ATI Accura 28.8 Oct. 116 Hayes NA FE ACS 500 Mar. 76 Altec Lansing NA CO Addonics 6X CD ROM June 44 Addonics NA Aerospace Speakers Mar. 76 Interact Accessories NA Blaster Gamepad Oct 189 Creative Labs NA CD Note 900P April 82 MPC NAFE CH Pro Throttle M ay 42 CH Products NA OTS Compaq Presario 8712 Dec. 67 Compaq ***1/2 FE CrystaLake 650 Speakers June 42 CrystaLake NA OTS CrystaLake Series 140 June 80 CrystaLake NA FE Dell Dimension XPS Jan. 185 Dell Demon Destroyer Gun Feb. 37 Tac Systems Destination System April 34 Gateway NA RM Destination System Aug. 104 Gateway **1/2 RE Diamond Monster 3D Nov. 157 Diamond Diamond Stealth May 52 Diamond NA GT Diamond Stealth 3D Nov. 148 Diamond ***1/2 RE Driving Wheel Aug 64 Thrustmaster NA Dynamite 128 Aug. 39 Hercules Computer NA Edge 3D Card June 42 Diamond NARM Edge Multimedia Accelerator Jan. 342 Diamond Extensa April 80 Texas Instruments NA F-16 Combat Stick Feb. 40 CH Products NA F-16 FLCS Special Ed. June 40 Thrust Master AM Falcon NW Mach y Jan. 190 Falcon NA FE Flashpoint LT June 44 Buslogic NA OTS Force FIX Aug. 64 CH Products FE Force FIX Nov. 257 CH Products CO GameCard Il A pril 86 JC Design Gaming Assassin Aug. 64 FPG NA FE Gateway P5-133XL Jan. 179 Gateway NA FE Gateway P5-200CDR July 33 Gateway OTS Gravis GHIP April 112 Advanced Gravis ***1/2 RE Gravis Grip June 67 Advanced Gravis NA PA Gravis GTIP Oct. 188 Advanced Gravis NA FE HeadOn DSVD Mar. 33 Eiger Labs NA OTS HeadOn DSVD April 114 Eiger Labs *112 RE HeadOn DSVD Oct 116 Eiger Labs NA FE Hercules Dynamite 128 Video Card Nov. 150 Hercules Hercules Terminator 3D Card Nov. 148 Hercules RE Innova Book 350CD April 80 Canon NA FE Interwave Sound Chip Feb 36 Interwave NA RM Labtech LCS 2612 Mar. 77 Labtech NA Micron Home MPC Dec. 74 Micron FE Modem Blaster 28.8 Feb 36 Creative Labs NA Modem Blaster 28.8 Oct. 114 Creative Labs FE Matrox Mystique July 63 Matrox NA Matrox Mystique Oct 128 Matrox Matrox Mystique Nov. 147 Matrox ***1/2 RE NEC M500 Monitor April 112 NEC NEC MultiSpin 4X4 Mar. 84 NEC NEC Power Player Jan. 179 NEC FE COMOTION canning Rule The Galaxy NA NA FE RE RE NA ***112 ***1/2 NA ***112 NA NA OTS NA FE NA Comilla Garamo ***1/2 3-DUS NA NA **1/2 NA NA FE NA  ***1/2 FE CO Key Key AC Key CO CH or Awards PA NA DE 5 FE RE Game Type Action Adventure Classics/Puzzles Other Role-Playing Simulation Sports Strategy Various Wargame Article Type Column Cheats & Hacks Department Feature Game Track Hardware Hall of Fame Now Playing On the Shelf 1996 ARTICLE TAR INDEX GT Article Type Premier Awards Read Me Review Scorpia's Hints Scorpia's Mail Scorpia Review Sneak Preview Strategy Tips and Hints Not Applicable HD HOF NP OTS NA WG NA GADE CG JANUARY 1997 "


"computer Gaming FREE PRODUCT INFORMATION IT'S AS EASY AS 1,2,3 1. Fill in your name and address and check off 2 Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to 3. The literature will be mailed to you from your answers to the seven research questions. the ads or articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge. CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Vold after April 30, 1997 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How often do you usually buy computer games? Name CGW 1/97-4 you completed? Check one only) (Check one only 01. Some high school or less 01. Once a week 02. Graduated High School 02. Once every two to three weeks 03. Some College or Technical school 03. Once a month Title Telephone 04. Graduated College 04. Once every two to three months 05. Post Graduate school 05. Once every four to six months 05. DOn a year 2. Computer currently owned is: (Check all that apply 6. Where are you most likely to purchase games? Company Name 01. IBM compatible (Intel standard) (Check all that apply) 02. Macintosh 01. Independent computer store 04. Computer store chain 03. Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 05. Direct from vendor 04. Dedicated game machine 03. Mass merchandising store 06. Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is your (and others in household) favorite type 3. If Intel, what level? (Check one only) of game? (Check one in each column) 01. Power PC Yourself Other 1 Other 2 02. Pentium (586) 01. Strategy City State Zip 03. 466 02. War Titary 04. 386 03 Role Playing 05. 286 04. Brain Teasers 05. Card 4. Please send me a one-year (12-issue) subscription to Computer Gaming World for $27.94 4. Do you own (or plan to buy in next 6 months) 06. Sport a CD-ROM? (Check one only) (U.S price); all other countries add $16.00 for additional postage. 07. Action/Arcade 01. Own 08. Educational 02. Plan to buy (6 months) n In a Hurry? Fax This Card To: 609-829-0692 Artunture J "


"FOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Pro Product Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 433 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE Commuter PO BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626 Iulullluulululululululul "


"ADVERTISER INDEX 259 195 173 366 122,123 ASR 216 342 69 350 . 185 253 . 48 260 4.5 246,247 146 199 279 349 FREE R.S.# COMPANY 268 20th Century Fox Home Ent. 120 7th Level, Inc. 102 7th Level, Inc. 248 Access Software 152 Acclaim 233 Acclaim 292 Accolade 290 Accolade 42 Accolade 360 Accolade 191 ACT Laboratory Ltd. 98 Activision 94 Activision 371 Activision Activision 96 Activision 367 Activision 41 Activision 38 Activision 245 ActSoft, Inc. Advanced Gravis 352 Advanced Gravis Apple Computer Astron Publishing AT&T ATI Technologies 372 ATI Technologies Berkeley Systems 383 Bethesda Softworks Bethesda Softworks Blizzard Entertainment Blue Byte Systems Bullfrog Productions Bungie Software CH Products Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Columbia House Creative Labs, Inc. Crystal Dynamics Cyberdreams Diamond Multimedia Dreamworks Interactive EarthLink Eidos cmpire Interactive Entertainment Enteractive Falcon Northwest Camer's Cold Gateway 2000 Graphic Simulations Corp. Graphic Simulations Corp. CT Interactive Software CT Interactive Software CT Interactive Software 374 GT Interactive Software 261 CT Interactive Software 213 CT Interactive Software 275 GT Interactive Software 364 CT Interactive Software 204 CT Interactive Software 274 CTE Entertainment 244 CTE Entertainment CTE Entertainment 240 CTE Entertainment 363 IBM 172 Interactive Magic 170 Interactive Magic Intergraph Computer Systems 391 Intermark Corp. 91 Interplay Productions, Inc. 169 Interplay Productions, Inc. 123 Interplay Productions, Inc. 263 Interplay Productions, Inc. 354 Interplay Productions, Inc. 355 Interplay Productions, Inc. 59 Interplay Productions, Inc. 79 Interplay Productions, Inc. FREE PRODUCT PAGE R.S.# COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE Die Hard 300.30) 58 Interplay Productions, Inc. Pro Pinball 197 C-NOME 312,313 269 Interplay Productions, Inc. Realms of the Haunting 166,167 Dominion 278.279 198 Interplay Productions, Inc. Reloaded 13 Links LS 237 Interplay Productions, Inc. Sandwarriors 129 Magic: The Gathering 288,289 50 Interplay Productions, Inc. Shattered Steel Tunnel BI 308,309 63 Interplay Productions, Inc. Starfleet Academy 83,85,87 Deadlock Interplay Productions, Inc. Virtual Pool 205 Jack Nicklaus C5-C7 262 Labtec Enterprises, Inc. Quick Sound Star Control 3 242 Live Entertainment The Arrival Test Drive 65 Looking Glass Technologies British Open Golf 10 in 1 Programmable Controllers 64 119 LucasArts Entertainment Co. Star Wars Archives A-10 Cuba 245 Matrox Graphics, Inc. Matrox Mystique Blast Chamber Maxis Sim City 2000 Buy 2 Cet 2 303-305 Maxis Sim Copter Dark Reign Maxis SimGolf Hyperblade Megamedia Corporation Admiral Sea Battles Interstate 76 Microforum Huygen's Disclosure MechWarrior Mercenaries 189 Microforum X-Decathlon Time Commando 144 Microprose Civilization 11 295 Mail Order Products Microsoft Close Combat 282,283 Firebird 2 Microsoft Flight Simulator 10,11 Grip 326,327 Microsoft Monster Truck Madness MacPlay Games 118,119 Microsoft Sidewinder Gamepad Computer Came of the Month Club 277 Microsoft Sidewinder Joystick WorldNet Service 160,161 Microsoft Inside Moves Series 3D Proturbo 28,29 132 Mindscape Deathware 271 3D Xpression + 358 Mission Control Software Mail Order Products 348 beZerk 362 MPath Interactive MPlayer 258,259 Daggerfall NEC Power Player X-Car 265 142 New World Computing Heroes of Might & Magic II Warcraft II 318,319 137 New World Computing Wages of War 99 Archimedean Dynasty 39 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Crusader CS Syndicate Wars 340,341 ORICIN Systems, Inc. Wing Commander IV 299 Marathon 2 ORICIN Systems, Inc. Privateer 2 95,97 Family Ad 277 Philips Media Alien Incident 281 Board Games 343 278 Philips Media Net Zone 291 Budget Software 347 Philips Media Surface Tension Mail Order Adult 280 Philips Media The Art of Flyfishing Role Playing Games 345 134 Playmates Interactive Entertainment MDK www.cdmag.com/chips.html 274,275 252 Playmates Interactive Entertainment Powerslave CD-ROM 200.201 287 Psygnosis, Inc. Destruction Derby 2 Family Ad 150 288 Psygnosis, Inc. Discworld 2 234 235 Pandamonium 170 112 R & ames . Used Game Software NOIR 379 RandomSoft/Smart Games, Inc. Smart Games Monster 3D 261 ReadySoft, Inc Deus 276 The Neverhood S3, Inc. S3D Accelleration Chip 147,149,151,153 Arena 269 179 Sega of America Daytona 325 Tomb Raider 34,35 267 SegaSoft Obsidian 254.255.257 Flying Corps 192A-D SegaSoft Rocket Jockey 292,293 Sacred Mirror of Kofun 86 234 Sierra On-Line Nascar 2 230,231 Falcon MACHV 134,135 Sierra On-Line Power Chess 78.219 Mail Order Products 344 202 Sierra On-Line Sierra Holiday 101-112 Destination 209-212 Sir-Tech Shadows over Riva 24.25 Amber Journeys Beyond Spacelec IMC Corp. SpaceOrb 360 314,315 F/A-18 Hornet 2.0 263 250 Spot Media Game Spot 297 Duke Nukem 3D 322,323 236 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Star General id Anthology 240.241 208 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Steel Panthers II 285 2 for 1 Promotion 142,143 Strategic Simulations, Inc. Warwind Amok 250,251 Syquest EZ Drive 230 125 NBA Hangtime 233 36+ Take 2 Interactive Software Mission Studios Jet lighter III 272A-B Ninc 124 The 3DO Company Killing Time 18,19 Quake CZ-C4,1 107 The 3DO Company Meridian 59 Scorcher 172,173 The Avalon Hill Came Company Cave Wars SPOR 139 168 The Avalon Hill Game Company Over the Reich CTE 175 161 Thunderseat Technologies Thunderseat NCAA Basketball 180 40 United CD ROM M.O. Products Timelapse 176,177 384 V Communicatins System Commander Titanic 178,179 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Agile Warrior Emergency Room 146 Virgin Internctive Entertainment Circle of Blood 169 Family Ad 330,331 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquer: Win '95 130,131 Harpoon Classic '97 238 86 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquer Red Alert 52,53 The Reactor 133 167 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Lands of Lorc: Guardians of Destiny 66,67 Touchdown 202 238 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Nco Hunter Blood & Magic 141 183 Virgin Interactive Entertainment NHL Powerplay 96 206,207 Conquest Deluxe 47 376 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Scorched Planet 191 Descent to Undermountain 154,155 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Toonstruck 71,72,73 Dragon Dice 163 VREX, Inc VR Surfer 140 Fallout Win '95 Yamaha Corp. of America YST Multimedia Speakers 116 Fragile Allegiance Interplay Advertorial 220-227 MAX 92,93 344 84 44 388 351 122 148 332 293 237 287 165 281 115 369 117 226 74 183 137 159 JANUARY 1997 "


"SYNDICATE Play either side in over LO missions Over 20 slick, high-tech weapons EQUIPMENT Fully destructible 3-) worlds "


"MULTIPLAYER Network/Modem THIS IS A HOSTILE TAKEOVER Real-time rotating map during gameplay Kill your competitors, steal their secrets, headhunt their best men, and mow down everyone who stands in your way. Ruthless Assassination ... Expert Espionage ... Aggressive Expansion ... Corporate Sabotage ... So, what's your definition of a business plan? PRODUCTIONS LTD www.bullfrog.co.uk CIRCLE READER SERVICE #139  1996, Bullfrog Products, Ltd. Syndicate Wars is a trademark and the Bullfrog logo is a registered trademark of Bullfrog Productions, Lid. "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORID Mail Order Man Save Time and Money Ordering Games by Phone Local Stores don't always have the garnes your looking for or the expert advice you need. Take a few minutes to stop the Courteous and experienced salespeople in the pages of Computer Gaming World's Mail Order Mall Want -A-O-Tt $37.95 NHL 97 $38.95 More Games 21) & Over More 21 & Over Light House $35.95 Bundles/ Madden 97 $39.95 Interactive Mech Warrior 2 $29.95 Bacchus Six Pack $31.95 Fantasçenes $34.95 Mech Warrior 2: Mercenaries $38.95 Deep Throat Girls 1 4 $36.95 Hot Leather $31.95 Megarace 2 Dirty Debutantes 6 pack $38.95 $34.95 | TN    Intimate Possibility $38.95 Mortal Kombat 3 $31.95 New Machine 6 pk. Latex $36.95 1 or 2 $35.95 Nascar Deluxe $35.95 Net krotique $29.95 $38.95 Platinum Six Pack Hot Games Need for Speed SE $36.95 Nightwatch III $31.95 Romsoft 3 pk Mpeg $29.95 Outpost 69 11th Hour Nemesis $36.95 $39.95 $29.95 Romsoft6 Pk Vor 2 $38.95 Pandora's Poker Palace $39.95 Age of Ritles $36.95 95 Sexy Six Pack $38.95 Perfect General 2 AH-64 Longbow $32.95 $36.95 Peeping Pete Seymore Six Pack $38.95 Porno Poker $34.95 Anvil of Down Quake $38.95 Up & Cummers Six Pack $36.95 ATE Rebel Assault 1&2 Sex T.V. Vol. 2 $37.95 $37.95 $34.95 VCA Six Pack (Plug it In) $38.95 Road Rush Sex Worm Battle Cruiser $38.95 $37.95 $32.95 S.W.A.T. Seymore Butts 2 Beavis & Butthead $37.95 $37.95 Virtual Stupidity Shivers $27.95 Sorority House $34.95 C&C: Covert Operations $24.95 Silent Steel $28.95 Interactives $34.95 Sorority Sex Kittens Civilization 2 $38.95 Spy Craft $26.95 *ss Troids $36.95 Space Sirens 2 $34.95 College Slam $19.95 Star Control 3 $38.95 $26.95 Time Warp Carmen $34.95 $36.95 Command & Conquer Steel Panthers $29.95 Cat Fight Vampire's Kiss $32.95 $37.95 Deadlock Stonekeep $31.95 Chameleons $28.95 Virgins 1,2 or 3 $27.95 Duke Nukem 3D $34.95 Syndicate 2 $38.95 Club 21 $32.95 Virtual Director $28.95 Dungeon Master 2 $26.95 Time Commando $38.95 Club Catarina $31.95 Virtual Golden Eye $32.95 Full Throttle $31.95 Warcraft 2 $36.95 Crystal Fantasies $28.95 Virtual Las Vegas 2 $31.95 Grand Prix 2 Warcraft 2 Expansion $23.95 Syberxperience $49.95 $36.95 Virtual Sex 2 Heroes of Might & Magic $38.95 Wing Commander 4 $38.95 Dirty Debutantes 2 $31.95 Virtual Sex Shoot $36.95 Hind $38.95 WWF Wrestlemania $22.95 Diva X $37.95 $38.95 Virtual Valerie 2 Indy Car Racing 2 $29.95 Zork Nemesis S28.95 Dream Machine 2 $38.95 Virtually Yours 1 or 2 $29.95 Leisure Suit Larry Collection$28.95 HUNDREDS OF TITLES IN STOCK MUST BE 21 TO ORDER ADULT CDS CATALOGS & DEALER'S LISTINGS AVAILABLE 1-800-560-6234 $28.95 21 & Over $31.95 $37.95 ORDER NOW! = C.O.D. 2 CIRCLE READER SERVICE #245 "


"Board Games CHIPS & BITS INC. 800-699-4263 Sovereign Visit our NEW Online Catalog! www.cdmag.com/chips.html Source 10812 POB 234 Dept 10812 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Orders/Questions: cbisales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@sover.net WARHAMMER Napoleon Danube Axis Allies NAPOLEON ON THE DANUBE An exciting, fastpaced game recreating the epic battle of Wagram fought on the Marchfeld. Use the traditional move/combat Napoleonic-type system, while preserving the easy of play. $19 CAESAR This CAESAR gune focuses on the great tattles of M Julius Cars and includes fighting units of preImperial Rome full color maps, major battle of the civil wars, nudes of forfeited camps. combined arms tactics and much more. $38 \"WARHAMMER 40,000\" You fight deadly futuristic confid with all the essential elements including detailed miniatures of the 2 rival annies, the heroic Imperial Space Marines and the Brutal Space Orks. $50 *AXIS & ALLIES\" Decide the fate of a nation and the destiny of the world. The Balkans have fallen, Pearl Harbor has been attacked, Wake Island is in Japanese hands and Rommel has the British on the run! $33 War Decision France Rebels & Redcoats April's Harvest YES. THE the The Beef SMIN ANG AT 1132 \"WAR OF 1812 Simulating the war, this game shecis light on the problems facing both sides, dealing with all the essential elements of that conflict Including the militia, indians, supplies in winter and dramatic naval battles $22 'DECISION IN FRANCE gives players chance explore the strategies of the campaigns in Normandy and Northern France in a game of moderate complexity structured with simple and elegant rules. $15 \"APRIL'S HARVEST: THE BATTLE OF SHILOH specialized scenarios allow players to isolate the action of the second day and the afternoon of the 1st, just in time to see the Hornet's Nest Action $24 REB&S & REDCOATS IF This game covers 12 American War of Independence battles and accurately recreates battlefield conditions with a move-light-rally play simulation of grand tactics of the American Revolution $25 CRUSADES Gd. *1830 THE GAME OF RAILROADS AND ROBBER BARONS Recreate the development of the railroad system. Build an empire, managing your company for the long term or foot companies for maximum quick profits. $20 R050 URALLY \"ROBO RALLY On a distant planet that serves as the Em-pire's grid widget factory. the various control computers went about their daily routine. These sophisticated computers were fully equipped with standard intelligence modules to handle any situation, but when the computers get bored you'll see what happens. $33 'EMPIRES IN ARMS' is a game covering the major elements of diplomacy and warfare during the Napoleonic Wars of 18051815. You are the absolute monarch of a major European power. $27 ETMEN \"CRUSADES II' covers a wide variety of battles from the 12th and 15th centuries. Each battle is a complete game itself taking from 1-1/2 to 3 hours to play. $28 BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES BOARD GAMES $19 $19 $23 $19 $19 $19 cross 5 Aprils $22 $15 ANCIENT FANTASY MEDIEVAL NAPOLEONIC SCIENCE FICTION STRATEGY Battles Anc. World $21 Challenge Lion Lord $25 Age of Chivalry 2 $27 Battle Dresden 1813 $25 2038 $34 Advanced Civilization 525 lexanders Generals $33 Dark Blades $25 Crossows & Cannons 2 $33 Eagle Empire Borodino $29 Alpha Omega $19 Air Baron Ancient Empires Drag Dice Feral $6 Crusades II $28 Eagles Empire Friedin $26 Awful Green Things $17 Blackbeard Ancients $25 Dragn Dice Mage Stem $12 Cry Havoc $25 Emperors of Europe $33 Battlespace $19 Britannia 519 Barbarians Dragon Masters $42 Cry Havoc: Castle $3 Empires in Arms Battletoch $19 Civilization $29 Battles of Alexander $33 Dungeon $16 Cry Havoc: Village Field Command $30 Blood Berets $29 Colonial Diplomacy $42 Caesar Civil Wars $38 Hobbit Adventure Cry Havoc:Fortid City $12 Jena $38 Car Wars Deluxe $21 Deluxe Diplomacy $42 Emperors First Battls $25 Leviathan $16 Cry Havok Holy Land $3 La Bata Mat St Jn Dk 562 Citytech $25 Diplomacy $19 Hannibal $32 Magic Realm Henry V $28 La Bata d'Albuera $27 Critter Tek $12 Enemy in Sight $12 Slege of Jerusalem Titan Ironsides $28 La Bata de QuatreBras $31 Fed & Empr Spec Ops $9 Feudal $18 Tahiti $22 Warhammer Fantasy $50 Richard the Lionheart $30 Napoleon Waterloo Cmp $27 Federation & Empre Dlx $38 History of the World $27 CIVIL WAR Warhammer Quest $50 Samurai $37 Napoleon at Austerlitz $18 Fury of Clansmen $29 Kingmaker 864 Year of Decision $29 Wizards Quest $17 Samurai Blades $22 Napoleon on Danube $19 Gateway to the Stars $22 Lords of Sierra Madre $34 $23 Xanth $21 Siege Napoleon's Battles $23 Hacker 2 $16 New World $17 prils Harvest LEISURE / FAMILY Viking Raiders $25 Napoleon's First Battle $24 Interstellar Wars $19 Pax Britannica $18 Firmy Heartland Alibi 59 MODERN Napoleon's Last Battle $25 Kill Zone Republic of Rome $29 Blue & Gray $25 Assassin 2nd Fleet $24 Napoleons Ital Camp $22 Merchant of Venus $25 Stocks & Bonds $19 Campaigns Civil War $19 Blind Justice 3rd Fleet $27 The Emperor Returns $28 More Cosmic Encntrs $26 Tournament Terrace 529 Civil War $19 Candidate $19 6th Fleet $23 Victory at Waterloo $21 Necromunda We the People $29 Gettysburg $15 Escape from Colditz $35 Across the Suez $13 War & Peace Ogre Miniatures $13 VIETNAM / KOREA Gettysburg 3 Days July $39 Facts in Five $16 Aegean Strike $19 RAILROAD Roadkill $19 Battles Forgotten War $36 Hallowed Ground $42 Gangland Central America $19 1856 Star Fleet Battes $25 Platoon $15 Here Come the Rebels $23 Gangsters Crisis Korea 1995 Australian Rails $20 SFB Star Fit Missions $11 Rolling Thunder $22 In Their Quiet Fields $22 Grand Prix Crisis Sinai 1973 British Rails SFB Tacties Manual $11 Silver Bayonette $15 In Their Quiet Fids 2 $25 Greed $13 Firepower Colorado Rails SilentDeath Dix $42 WORLD WARI ronclads $32 Heapony Flashpoint: Golan 529 Empire Builder SilentDeath Rulebook $15 Aces High $24 Lee Takes Command $22 Power Lunch Flight Leader Eurorails $25 Silent Death Sunrunners $10 Aces High Amer. Aces $24 No Better Place Die $24 Restaurant $22 Harpoon Box Set $41 Express Space Hulk Aces of Aces Pwrse $19 Raid on Richmond $21 Robo Rally Harpoon Data Annex $18 Freight Train Space Marine $50 Fight For Skies $21 Roads to Gettysburo $24 Roborly Armd & Dngrs $25 Harpoon Rulebook $15 Great Western Railway $36 Starforce Terra $19 Great War at Sea 1 $32 Sam Grant Settlers of Catan $30 Light Division India Rails Starship Captain $26 Knights of the Air $19 Strwall's Lst Bttle $25 Sherlok H Adv Gasight $16 Main Battle Tank $24 Iron Dragon $25 Starship Troopers $29 Landships $27 Stonewall Jackson Way $27 Sherlock H Westend $20 Mid-East Peace Rocky Mnt Rails $13 Stellar Conquest $19 March to Victory $40 Stonewall in Valley $29 Sherlock Holmes $20 NATO $13 Tracks to Telluride $42 WH 40K Battles $16 Richtofen's War $19 Three Days Gettysburo 549 Sherlock H Card Game $16 Speed of Heat $36 Trainsport Austria $17 WH 40K Epic Hive War 529 Wings War of the Rebellion $28 Spices of the World $18 Tac Air U.S. Rails $13 Warhammer 40K $50 World War One Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH, COD 58. Price/availability may change. Hardware orders may require addi tional shipping and handling charges. Defectives replaced with same product. All sales final. Call for details Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order placed and the \"per itern charge is is per Order charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you CIRCLE READER SERVICE #256 WORLD WAR II 1944 Second Front $29 ASL Mod Jatkosota $10 ASL Mod Kampfepe 2 $27 ASL Mod Leatherneck $9 ASL Solo Rules $29 Advanced Squad Ldr $38 Advanced Third Reich $38 Afrika Korps $18 Air Bridge to Victory $17 Anzio Army Group Center $24 Avalanche: Invsn Itly $27 Axis & Allies Axis & Allies Cntrl Pwrs $30 Axis & Allies Max Ady $10 Axis & Allies Mid Est $16 Axis & Ally WW2 Exp $14 Balkan Front $26 Battle over Britain $21 Blitzkrieg in South $29 Britain Stands Alone $23 Campaign to Stalingra 529 Carrier War $25 Command Sea Plys HB $5 Command Sea Referee 59 D-Day 516 Decision in France $15 Eastern Front 2nd Ed $49 Empire of Rising Sun $41 EuroFront $29 Fire in the East $58 For Whom Bell Tolls $54 Lost Victory Luftwaffe Mustangs $17 Over the Reich WORLD WAR II Pacific War Panzerblitz $19 Piercing the Reich $29 Raid on St Nazaire Rise of Luftwaffe Rommel at Bay $22 Rommel in the Desert $27 Run Silent, Run Deep $24 Squad Leader $23 Third Reich Up Front Victory in Europe $14 Victory in Normandy S11 Victory in West Fence $26 War at Sea 2 Kit 513 World in Flames Dix S90 GENERAL WAR Air Superiority Alamo Battle of Alma Black Death Blood & Iron Camp Fredrick the Great $24 Geronimo High Ground Kolin Fredek Defeat Lion of the North 529 Quebec 1759 Roarks Dritt Russia At War Texas Revolution The '45 The Kings War Thirty Years War Quad $27 Thund in Guns Zorndort $14 29 33 $16 $37 $19 $17 $13 $11 $50 $17 $27 $25 $18 $30 $11 $18 $19 Federal Express Mail To Card Mal To The World St US M 7-10 Days $1.00 Priority US 2-3 Days $200 Federal Express Dar $2.00 $2.00 375 CGW1981 $1.00 $200 $200 "


"THE MARKETPLACE R&G GAMES DON 522 $26 $29 CALL TO SUBSCRIBE TODAY! MISS THE NEXT COMPUTER LIFE! PO BOX 5008 Glendale Hts, IL 60139 We Buy & Sell New & Used IBM Games & Hintbooks Top Dollar paid for newer games. Check or 10% more for credit usually processed in just 1-2 days. Cal for prices before sending games. More games in stock cal for prices ***Used Games*** Rebel Assault 2 CD 7 Guest CD $19 Shivers CD 11h Hour CD $29 Sident Hunter CD AH640 Longbow CD $28 Silent Thunder CD Angel Devoid CD $21 Space Quest 6 CD Anvil of Dawn CD $21 Spycraft CD Apache CD $22 SU 27 Flanker CD Bad Mojo CD $32 Star Trek Final Unity CD Caesar 2 CD $29 Stonekocp CD Command&Conquer CD $29 Terra Nova CD Conqueror 1086 CD $22 Time Commando CD Crusader no Regret CD $32 Top Gun CD Crusader No Remorse CD $22 Torin Passage CD Dark Forces CD $28 Under A Killing Moon CD D CD $26 US Navy Fighters CD Deadock CD $29 Warcraft 2 CD Doom 2 CD $28 Wichaven 2 CD EF2000 CD $24 Wing Commander 3 CD Earthsiege CD $18 Wing Commander 4 CD Earthsiege 2 CD $26 Wizardry Gold CD Fit Pg Sp Footbal 96 CD 522 X-Wing Col CD Full Throttle CD $22 Zork Nemesis CD Fury 3 CD $20 ****New Games **** Gabriel Kright 2 CD $29 Afterlifo CD Hexen CD $26 Civization 2 CD The Hive CD $19 Command & Conquer CD Hyper 3D Pinbal CD $29 Crusader no Regret CD Need for Speed CD $24 Final Doom CD NHL 96 CD $27 Lighthouse CD Pandora's Directive CD $32 Timo Commando CD $39 Police Quest 5 CD $29 Warcraft 2 CD $39 Call 1-800-525-GAME Canada 630-980-9995 Fax 630-980-9996 Free UPS Shipping with purchase of $75 or more Visa/MC/Discovot/An Express, Cashier Check Money Order Accepted 9am-9pm CST Mon-Fri Shipping UPS $5, Airborne $11 Al games must have original boxes, disks or CD & manuals (NO COPIES) in good condition, working, Scratch 8 virus free. Any unacceplable games will be returned at your expense $5 ups per box Prices subject to change 8 availability Computer life INTERNET Every month COMPUTER LIFE is packed with answers, clear-cut information, practical tips and how-to's everything you need to wring more power and pleasure from your machine. To stay on top of it all you've got to subscribe to it. So call today. It's a better deal at a better price FREE software, too — when you subscribe to COMPUTER LIFE! Bun Fast Get Sie $39 FREE BONUS SOFTWARE WHEN YOU CALL! CALL 1-800-926-15 All you DD is call to subscribe. DON'T miss the FREE softw CIRCLE READER SERVICE #112 GAMER'S GOLD WE HAVE OVER 2,000 TITLES! WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES To Sell Us Games or Make Inquiries Call: 1-800-514-2637 19 27 27 19 12-5 Mon-Fri CST In Canada, call 605-339-2060 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 (include your return address & FAX no.) 34 34 11th Hour-CD $ 25 Fade to Black-CD $ 19 Shivers-CD 7th Guest-CD Fantasy General-CD 27 Silent Hunter-CD A10 Tank Killer 2-CD 29 Fila Soccer '96-CD 25 Sim City 2000-CD Afterlife-CD 34 Front Page Footbll '96 25 Some 3.5\" avallable AH-64D Longbow.CD 34 Full Throttle-CD 22 Space Bucks-CD Allied General-CD FX Fighter-CD 15 Space Quest 6-CD American Civil War-CD 33 Gabriel Knight 2-CD 35 Spycraft-CD Anvil of Dawn-CD Hardball 5-CD Star Control 3-CD Apache-CD Heroes of Might & Mgic 26 Star Trek Final Unity Ascendancy-CD Hexen-CD 22 Steel Panthers-CD ATF-CD Hint Books-Call $4 & up Stone keep-CD Bad Mojo-CD Indy Car Rcing 2-CD SU-27 Flanker-CD Ballleground: Gllysbrg Jagged Alliance: Odly 30 Terminator: Futre Shek Breach 3-CD 15 Links 386-CD 17 Terra Nova-CD Caesar 2-CD 29 Lords of Midnight-CD 10 The Dig-CD Clv Net-CD Mechwarrior 2-CD 29 Tie Fghter Coll Ed.-CD Civilizallon 2-CD Mission Force: Cybr Sto 34 Time Commando-CD Close Combal-CD Mortal Kombat 3-CD 25 Tony LaRussa BB 3-CD Commnd & Cnguer-CD Mysl-CD 22 Top Gun-CD Conquest New World 27 Nascar Racing-CD 29 Torin's Passage-CD Conqueror AD 1086-CD 24 Need for Speed-CD 30 Treasure Quest-CD Crusader No Rmrse-CD 27 NFL Quartrock Club 22 Trophy Bass-CD Cyberla 2-CD 36 NHL 196-CD Virtual Karts-CD Cybermage-CD 27 Pandora Directive-CD 34 Virtual Pool-CD Dark Forces-CD 25 Panic in the Park-CD 16 Warcraft 2-CD Deadlock-CD 32 Panzer General-CD 19 Warhammer-CD Descent-CD 19 Perfect General 2-CD 22 Wing Commnder 3-CD Descent 2-CD 34 PGA Tour Golf '96-CD 27 Wing Commnder 4-CD Duke Nukem 3D-CD 29 Phantasmagoria-CD 22 Wooden Ships, In Men Earthsiege 2-CD 32 Police Quest 5 Swal-CD 29 X-Com 2: Trror of Deep Earthworm Jim-CD Rebel Assault 2-CD Z-CD EF2000-CD Ripper-CD 35 Zork Nemesis-CD Elder Scrolls 2-CD Robert E.Lee Civil War 29 CALL FOR MORE TITLES F22 Lightning II-CD 32 Shannara-CD 27 CURRENTLY IN STOCK! 25 WE SELL USED IBM GAMES Call for current title availibility 1-800-377-8578 10-9 Mon-Sat, 12-5 Sun CST Most items shipped same day. $5 Reg./$9 2nd Day Air VISA/MasterCard/Discover/Money Orders/Cashiers Check 25 28 35 1008 W.41st Street  Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 "


"Role Playing Games CHIPS & BITS INC. 800-699-4263 Source Source 10827 POB 234 Dept 10827 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Orders/Questions: cbisales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@sover.net Visit our NEW Online Catalog! www.cdmag.com/chips.html CONSEIRACY CALL Of CTHULHU \"MAGIC THE GATHERING HOMELANDS GE The Gathering \"CONSPIRACY X In a world of dark secrets the only certain ty is nothing is what it seems The president may not be human. The sign carrying paranoid on the street ranting mind control satellites may be right $20 *CTHULHU RISING' This booster pack contains 67 new cards, as well as a mix of cards from the starter decks. You will find new locations in the South Pacilic, the legendary R'lyeh and Cthulhu himself. $2.50 CALL OF CTHULHU Find an expanded H. P. Lovecraft background. See new illustrations and gain new skills with expanded Weapons data unlocked from all three supernatural chaotic Eras. $18 Cthulhu generations, the forgotten world of Homelands awalts discovery with many people cultures, and crea tures in a realm of complex alle gances and sinis 1er plots $1.50 Rising Booster: STEVE JACKSON S GURPS NA ROLEPLAYING GAME \"GURPS The most flexible roleplaying system ever. You can adventure in any world you can imagine. Al rules carefully organized and indexed and cross-refer neced. You can create exactly the character you want to play. $20 RneQuest *RUNEQUEST Players create adventurers who are unique belonging to a distinct culture. shaped by the crafts. trades and skills of their parents, while exploring an ancient world rich in magic $19 'STAR WARS This roleplaying game plunges you into the breakneck thrills and pulsepounding excitement of the greatest space fantasy of all time! Face overwhelming odds. impossible challenges. May the Force be with $21 SHADOWRUN In the world of 2053 megacorporations want something done, but they don't want to dirty their hands. Your existence is not listed in any database and the demand for your services is high. $20 BASIC SIT you. Monstros Mas Dungeons & Dragons WAMPEN ROBOTECH *ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS-MONSTROUS MANUAL contains more than six hundred monsters, including several new creatures from the Monstrous Compendium some never seen before. $20 \"HEAVY GEAR A complete casy to USA, yel realistic RPG system which uses the classic six sided die to resolve conflicts Complete tactical system that can either be played on its own or interact smoothly with the roleplaying game. $25 \"VAMPIRE: THE DARK AGES Takes you to the nights when kine truly had reason to be afraid of the dark The Kindred of this bygone age ride the dark as lords & play their games with the heads of Europa. $24 \"ROBOTECH\" The Robotech RPG series will go beyond simply emulating the T.V. show. You will be able to create the intervening 9 years between the destruction 01 the SDF-1 and 2 and the launching of the SDF-3 $11 FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG FANTASY RPG HORROR RPG HORROR RPG SCI-FI RPG SCI-FI RPG 311 59 513 AD&D 2ND EDITION RULES AD&D Core Rules CD $54 Combat & Tactics $17 DM Guide $16 DM High Lvl Campon $17 Monstrous Manual $20 Players Handbook $20 Skills & Powers $17 Spells & Magic $19 AD&D ACCESSORIES Complete Elves $15 Den of Thieves $14 Dungeons Mystery $15 Encyclopedia Magicas $20 Player Packs $16 1 Tyrant $15 Monst Comp Annual 3 S18 Priest Spell Cards $17 Sages & Specialists $17 Shaman Tome of Magic $17 Wizard Spell Cmp 1 $21 World Bidr Guide $17 AD&D ADVENTURES Dragon Mountain $25 Eye to Eye Gates Firestorm Peak $17 Rod of Seven Parts $27 The Silver Key $7 AD&D BIRTHRIGHT Domain Sourcebooks $7 Book of Magecraft $17 Havens Great Bay $17 Legends HeroKings $17 Naval Battle Syst $10 Rjurik Highlands $17 Warlock Stonecrowns 59 AD&D DARK SUN Dark Sun Cmpon $25 Delilers & Preservers $14 Mind Lords Last Sea $17 Psonic Artifacts $17 Thti-kreen of Athas $13 Windrids Jagged Clits 513 AD&D FORGOTTEN RLMS City of Splendors $20 Drow of Underdark $13 Elminster Ecology $20 Falths & Avatars S18 Forgotten Rims mpon $25 Heroes Larebook $17 Menzaberranzan $25 Netheril Empire Magic $25 Night Below Cmpon $25 Pages from Mages $13 Ruins Undermnt 2 $21 Ruins Zhentil Keep $21 Ruins Undermath $21 Spellbound in Realms $21 The North $21 Undermin Trilogy $6 Vilhon Reach $14 Volo Guide Dalelands $13 Volo Guide North $9 Volo Guide Sword Coast $9 Warriors & Priests $18 Wizards & Rogues $13 AD&D MONSTROUS COMP Annual 94 S15 Annual 95 $15 Greyhawk Creatures 59 Mystara Monst Comp 515 Planescape Mon Cmp 2515 Ravenloft Comp 182 $17 AD&D PLANESCAPE Campaign Setting $25 Guide Astral Plane $13 Harbinger House $11 Hellbound $21 Planewalker's Handbooks17 AD&D RAVENLOFT Guide to Transylvania $11 Nightmare Lands $17 Ravenloft Box Set $10 Ravenloft Cmpon Set $25 Requiem: Grim Harvest $25 ARS MAGICA Adventure Value Pack $16 Ars Magica 3rd Ed $20 Medieval Handbook $16 Mythic Europe $15 Wizard's Grimoire $15 DICE POLY MEGATUBES Opaque Set Pearlescent Set Transparent Set Twinkle Set $6 DRAGONLANCE FIFTH AGE Dragonlance 5th Age $21 Heroes of Steel $15 Last Tower Rastlin $17 EARTHDAWN Earthdawn Earthdawn Companion $15 Gamemasters Pack $11 Horrors 515  $15 Shattered Pattern $9 Sky Point Vivane Camp $21 Terror in Skies The Adept's Way $15 PENDRAGON Beyond Wall Pendragon$10 Blood & Lust $14 Land of Giants $18 Pendragon 4th Ed. $19 Perilous Forest Savage Mountain $14 ROLEMASTER Arms Law $15 Character Cmpgn Law 513 Companion 7 $13 Elemental Companion $14 Rolemaster 3-in-1 $54 Sea Law $16 Spell Law $13 War Law Mass Combat $22 RUNEQUEST Dorastor $18 Glorantha $18 Gloranthan Bestiary 59 Lords of Terror $12 RuneQuest 4th Ed. $19 Shadows on Borderland514 Troll Gods $16 Troll Realms $10 SKYREALMS OF JORUNE Gire of Sillipus $12 Innocents of Gauss $10 Jorune Frein Ramian $10 Scholari Pack $14 Skyrealms Jorune $17 Sobayid Atlas WARHAMMER FANTASY Apocrypha Now! $11 Doomstones1 $18 Enemy Within 1 $11 Warhammer Fantasy 519 CALL OF CTHULHU Arkham Unveiled $16 Call of Cthulhu 918 Creatures Dreamlands $14 Cthulhu Livo $15 Dark Designs $16 Fatal Experiments $16 Sacraments of Evil $16 Utatti Astet $18 Walker in Wastes $17 Ye Book Monstres il $10 CHANGELING Autumn People $11 Changeling $21 Changeling Screen $15 Immortal Eyes S13 Kithbook: Trolls Nobles Shining Host $12 Player's Guide $19 CHILL Accessory Pack Chill Companion Voodoo Sourcebook $12 MAGE Book of Madness $13 Book of Shadows $15 Chantry Book Chaos Factor $13 Halls of Arcanum $11 Hidden Lore 2nd Ed. $13 Loom of Fate $10 Mage 2nd Ed. $21 Storytellers Screen $8 Techino New Wild Ordr $10 Techno Progentors $10 Technocracy Iteratn X $10 NEPHILIM Character Dossier $8 Chronicles Awaken $14 Gamemasters Vell $12 Nephilim $18 Secret Societies $14 VAMPIRE Book of Kindred Book of Nod Clan Books S10 Dice Hunters Hunted $10 Play Guide Sabbat $13 The Dark Ages $24 Vampire 2nd Ed. $24 Vampire Player Guide $19 WEREWOLF Axis Mundi BK Spirits $15 Tnbe Books $10 Dice $5 Freak Legions $12 GM Screen $10 Players Guide Storytellers Handbook S15 Umbra Velvet Shadow $13 Werewolf WORLD OF DARKNESS Dark Destiny $13 Midnight Circus $13 World of Darkness $16 WRAITH Dark Reflect Spectre $10 Dice Haunts $13 Player's Guide The Risen $11 Wraith $24 CONSPIRACY X Aegis Handbook $17 Black Book $14 Conspiracy X $20 Forsaken Rites GM Screen $13 CYBERPUNK 2020 Chromebook 4 $9 Cyberpunk 2020 $17 Listen Up Prim Screwhd 59 Rache B's Gde to Net 514 GURPS Autoduel $15 Compendium $18 Goblins $18 Robots $14 Vehicles $16 HEAVY GEAR Badlands Sourcebook $17 GM Starter Kit $25 Heavy Gear $25 Technical Manual $15 Woodlands Map Pack $9 MACROSS 2 Macross 2 $11 Sourcebook 1 Spacecraft Decks MECHWARRIOR Living Legends $10 Mechwarrior Companion $12 Mechwarrior RIFTS Mercenaries $14 Ritts Rifts Hardbound $28 Sourcek 4 Manhunter 517 Wild Bk 11 Coalitn War $18 ROBOTECH Invid Invasion Robotech Sentinels Zentaedi SHADOWRUN Awakenings 513 Companion Shadowrun 2nd Ed. $20 Shadowtech $13 Virtual Realities 2.0 $15 STAR WARS Alliance Int Reprt $13 Classic Adv 3 $15 Galaxy Guide 12 $13 Heros & Rogues $16 Live-Action Adv $15 Mini Battles Start Set $28 StarWars Revised $25 TRAVELLER Aliens Archives 518 Central Supply Catalog 518 First Survey $18 Milieu 0 Third Imprium$18 Starships $18 CARD GAMES 55 $15 $24 $9 $25 bla Battletech Dr Who Great Dalmuti Illuminati Magic the Gathering Monty Python Holy Mythos Limited Ed. Star Trek The Next Gen. Star Wars $10 Federal Express 1 Day Mail To Candi 7 Days Malta The World 7-14 Das Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH, COD 58. Price/availability may change. Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges. Detectives replaced with same product. All sales final. Call for details. Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order placed and the per item e Per Order charge is eftem charges Per Shipment er oder charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment\" charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #97 suandud Priority Federal U.S. Mat U.S. Mar Express 7.10 Days 2-3 Days 2 Day $200 $0.75 $200 $075 $1.00 $200 W Pertem $200 5200 56 DO "


"NEW Strife Demo* Ask for the free with your order United CD ROM Visit Our HOT Website at www.unitedcdrom.com young 1080 008 6 408 33 4 OVER 10,000 TITLES IN STOCK DAILY! SAME DAY SHIPPING! FREE SOFTWARE with every purchase!* Call us right now at 1-800-UNITED4 for great prices on your favorite games reviewed in this month's RATED issue of Computer Gaming World CALL US NOW FOR A FREE CATALOG! SAMPE ARES  EDALENT Scorche COMMAND & CONQUER RED ALERT: In this C&C alternative history of WWII, the Nazis never come to power & WWII is a battle between the Allied & Soviet forces. TOONSTRUCK: Starting Christopher Lloyd. Your boss has it in for you & you've lost all self respect doing work even o half-witted monkey would balk ot. DEATH DROME: Eight players ride special runners, battle in gigantic arenas & shoot & kill opponents to move to the next level. Reach your kill goal in all eight arenos & gain your freedom. 19: Journey to the world of Thurston last. You must rebuild the Muse Machine, 2 CIRCLE OF BLOOD: You must discover the identity of a smil harness the power of the Muses & restore the resort to its original grandeur. 50538 ing assassin, recover a manuscript written by the leg. Amok: With the best graphics, fastest gameplay & most diverse replayability Amok endary Knights Templar & uncover its mystical secrets. in its genre, this 3D shooter puts you in control of a hi-tech battle mech. 51304 4 New Great Games SCORCHER: Screaming through a white-knuckled world of shodows & danger. Scorcher $ Toonstruck SA Red Alert $ you must pit your skills against a pack of high-speed rivals where ultimately 51974 45118 53328 only one will survive. Death Drome $ A C ircle of Blood $9 AREA 51: As a soldier in the elite S.L.A.A.R. forces, you must penetrate alien Area 51 $ 53126 53126 53137 53137 Sy forces at Area 51 & eliminate the threat of the deadly alien infection that has 49652 Virgin spread through the base. FINAL DOOM: The last of Final Doom $1 MONTREAL CANADIENS: Relive every exciting moment that made you a fon 6 Montreal New York the legendary DOOM 51305 of one of the most successful franchises in hockey history. Celebrate Great Canadiens Rangers products features 2 new each one of the 24 Stanley Cup wins. 54514 32 level episodes-The New York RANGERS: As you relive 69 years of Ranger End of the Undead & The Acid Drenched Hallways. Chicago Detroit Detro history, you'll find the only thing missing from this CD Your Blackhawks Redwings The hottest ROM are the insanely loud & loyal fans. games at the CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS: Celebrate all 3 Stanley Cup Wins, lowest prices at Toronto Boston including the 1938 team that won with 9 American-born 245 Mapleleafs Bruins United CD ROM! players. Incredible hockey moments for the true fon 54512 54513 GT Interactive Software CIRCLE DEATHERE TI BLOOD  New York Ranger Teams!   Choise 54515 54511 PICTURE PERFECT $33 SACRED MIRROR OF KOFUN: Set in exotic Micronesia, you must Golf & More gather cleverly woven clues in an intriguing mystery. Experiences ming yiely. Laperience Sacred three fully explorable 3D virtual environments. Mirror PICTURE PERFECT GOLF SUGARLOAF: Experience the thrill of 54122 playing the world's finest courses. Features thousands of real Sugarloaf $0 photographs. The most realistic golfing experience available. 54397 3-IN-1 GOLF BUNDLE: Includes Picture Perfect Golf Harbour 3-in-1 Goll $9 5 Town Golf Links, Picture Perfect Golf The Coeur d'Alene & a 54651 3 5 video entitled 10 Fundamentals of the Modern Golf Swing. Lyrig Interactive ADAM THE INSIDE STORY 97 by A.D.A.M. Some great info with al new features your online doctor answers al of you health questions or conned to the ADAM Medica Sngatloaf 1919 A.D.A.M.92 Directory. Gues THE INSIDE STORY 53102 $33 53102 THE Music In ME by Readysoft Save Julia, this century's hottest pop star. Master 41 hidden musical instru ments & travel through Africa, Japan, Chicago & the SofiRock Cafo. LOONY LABYRINTI CRYSTAL CALIBURN BUNDLE by Starplay Championship playfield design, expert flipper control, full nudge & tilt, three flippers & three multi-balls 54558 NEW! QUICKSHOT MASTER PILOT: A Absolute flight game console that will control turn your PC into a virtual cock. Quickshot pit. Designed after the multi-function 549465 A displays in in many of today's high performance fighters Warrior 5 WARRIOR 5. Features ergonomic new design. 28 auto-centering operating mode, Biogrip, 2 positive response fire buttons, X. & y. trims & more. Quickshot AOPINBALL S ofiy Labyrina 53202 $36 $4558 $27 While supplies last Shipping charges apply to free offers ORDER AS LATE AS DEC. 23° FOR CHRISTMAS DELIVERY none AC LATE AC Dec 220 EOD ( Orders received as late as 9:30 pm (CST) for 2nd day air. Call for other deadline times. Special Holiday Hours: MF 8am-Midnight; Sat 8am-5pm; Sun llam-6pm. Special offers, item availability and prices may vary according to format and are subject to change without notice. CONTACT US! All prices in US dollars. Not responsible for inadverteni errors. CompuServe: 76043,1605 Fax back 1-217-352-8123 Au MAJOR CREDIT CARDS America On-Line: UNITEDCD Fax orders 1-217-352-9749 VISA ... DUCOVER BBS 1-217-352-9654 Int'l orders 1-217-352-8737 CODE WO1 ACCEPTED 800 United CD ROM Drive, Urbana, IL 61802 USA CIRCLE READER SERVICE #40 SIMULEYES by Stereographics Transforms your computer into a stunningly environment for 3D game and multimedia software. True stereo 3D system brings lifelike depth and clarity to your computer screen. 54053 $99 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. Source 10810 POB 234 DEPT 10810 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Orders/Questions: cbisales@sover.net Customer Service: cbiserv@sover.net 800-699-4263 Shop our Online Catalog at www.cdmag.com/chips.html SOFTWARE CLEARANCE! HURRY HURRY HURRY WHILE SUPPLIES LAST! DAWN PATROL Immerse yourself in the age of aerial combat, when pilot skill and intuitive aerial tactics meant the difference between victory and defeat. Climb into the cockpit and transport yourself back to the time when the death defying Aces were masters of the skies. $12 STAR TREK:JUDGEMENT RITES Captain's logo slardate 6238.4. You have no doubt that you are being watched. By whom or what is not determined. How can your sensors suddenly report life forms on a dead planet? Beam down to mysterious worlds and encounter strange adversaries that are not logical. $14 BATTLES OF DESTINY Conquer the world. Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state-of-the-art global conquest simu. lation. Unleash you awesome power against the computer or other players. It's simple to play but only a true master will reign. $12 Insane Closeout Reductions! IBM ACTION IBM ARCADE IBM REFERENCE IBM SIMULATION IBM STRATEGY IBM WARGAMES $10 $19 $19 $19 Rotox Soccer Kid Vaxine Wild Streets $19 $15 $15 $15 $10 Backlash Captain Quazar W95 Cyber Mago Fade to Black Magic Carpet Gold Operation Carnage Quake Shareware System Shock Tek War Terra Nova Total Ruin 11 ESPN Inter Soccer Everywhere USA Gde Flying Warbirds Let's Draw Caricaturo NFL Yearbook Nine Worlds Print Artist 4.0 World Atlas $10 $15 $12 $16 $15 $19 $6 $19 $12 $12 $12 $12 $19 IBM BUNDLES $14 $10 Renegade Sea Wolf Seal Team Star Crusader MD Strike Commander Tank Tank Commander Net Ultrabots Wing Comm 2 Deluxe Wipe Out Wolf Pack World Circuit Zono Raiders $19 $15 $10 $19 $19 $6 $15 $15 $20 $10 $19 $12 $15 $19 $19 $19 IBM ROLE-PLAYING $15 $19 IBM ADVENTURE $16 $19 $16 IBM SPORTS $4 $12 $15 Conquered Kingdoms $19 Detroit $15 Empire Dix Scenario 1 Fort Apache $16 Grandest Fleet $14 Jutland $19 Koshan Conspiracy Machiavelli the Prince $19 Master of Orion Perfect General $12 Pirates Gold $19 Railroad Tycoon $18 Realms Rules of Engagement $12 Sabre Team $12 Sort City $10 SimCity 2000 SD1 $12 Star Legions Syndicate Plus $15 Theme Park $15 This Moans War $19 Unnatural Selection $19 Warlords $9 Warlords 2 $19 X-Com UFO Defense $19 IBM TRADITIONAL $19 $9 $10 $19 $19 $15 20 Wargame Classics $20 Ecstatica Bundle Five Ft Ton Pk 1 $19 Five Ft Ten Pk 2 $19 Jet Pack $19 Might & Magic Trilogy $19 Mystery Collection $19 Pinball Gold Pak $19 Panzer Gen Strt Gd Bndi $19 Power Hits Battitch $16 Prince Persia Collect $19 Sierra Family Pack $10 Sierra Gamer Pack $10 Sierra Kids Pack $10 Star Control Collection $19 Take Ten $19 Top 50 Games $16 Treasures Pack $15 IBM EDUCATIONAL $19 $12 Defend the Alamo Fifth Eskadra Fifth Fit Scen Mod 1 Fleet Med Flight Cmmd 2 MB Gary Grigsby PW Update Gry Grgsby's Wr Russia Harpoon 2 Harpoon Classic Harpoon DS 2 High Command Iron Cross Line in the Sand Marianas Turkey Shoot Pacitie Storm Solomon Panzer General Panzer General Online Rebel Chrg Chicamagua Red Sky Morning Task Force 1942 Tigers Prowl Camp 2 Typhoon of Steel UMS 2 Planet Editor V Victory Market Grdn V Victory Utah Bch V Victory Velk Lki Wargamo CS2 SD13 Wargame CS2 SD4 Wargame CS2 SDS Wargame CS2 SD7 Waterloo $16 $16 $19 $19 $19 $15 $15 $19 $5 $9 $15 $19 Champions of Krynn Curse of Azure Bonds Cyberjudas Dark Queen of Krynn Dark Sun 2 Dark Sun Online W95 Disciples of Steel Dragon Lore Knights Xent NR18 UG MegaTraveller Zhodani Might & Magic 3 Pools of Darkness Secret Silver Blades Sentinel Worlds Shadow Sorcerer Star Trek TNG: A Final Unity Tales Magic Prop Shad Thunderscape Ultima 7 Series Ultima 8 Pagan Ultima Underworld 2 Unlimited Adventures $15 $14 $16 $9 $9 $14 $16 $7 $12 $19 $19 $9 $6 $6 $3 $19 $9 $15 $15 $19 $15 $12 $3 $12 $15 $15 $19 $19 $19 $15 $6 $15 7th Gst 2:11th Hour Domo Alone in the Dark Bioforge Blackthorne Chaos Continuum Day of Tentacle Entombed Fortrss Dr Radial Fourplay Win Gabriel Knight 1 Inca 2 Knights Xent NR18 UG Lost Fis Shrik Hims Morph Man Norves of Steel Noctropolis Nomad Prophecy Psychotron Relentless Return of the Phantom Rex Nebular Riddle Master Lu Savage Warriors Simon the Sorcerer Spellcasting 101 Star Trek 25th Anniv Star Trek Judgment Rts Swap Tom & Jerry Under Killing Moon Wetlands Where's Waldo Wolf Hunt Be Hunted $15 $16 $15 $16 $16 $15 $12 $16 $19 $19 $19 $19 $19 $16 $9 $9 $19 $17 $6 $9 IBM HINT BOOKS $15 IBM SIMULATION $15 $16 $12 $19 $10 $16 Destination Mars Dinosolt Typing Tutor Dyno Quest Eager To Learn EcoQuest EcoQuest Mario's Fundamentals Personal SAT Trainer Quarky Quaysoo Turbo Sierra Schl Hse Englsh Sierra Schl Hso Math Sierra Schi Hse Science Supersovlers Toonworks Word Attack Plus APBA Sidolino Sports Avalanche Interactive Blood Bowl Brott Hull Hockey 95 ESPN Sports Shorts Hardball 3 Play Disk Internat Sports Chal Jack Nicklaus Jack Nicklaus ClipArt Jack Nicklaus SE C1 Jack Nicklaus SE C2 Jack Nicklaus Tour Col Links Pro Coursos 1-14 on Links Pro 8 Castle Pines Links Pro 10 Prairie Links Pro 11 Devils Isl Links Pro 13 Troon North Links Pro 386 Golf Live Action FB Microleage Porsonal Golf NFL Coaches Club NFL Video Football PGA Tour Golf Gold Power Hit Sports Pro Football Analyst Serious Soccer Sideline Sports Sport Accolade Grt 2 Sporting Triangle Tie Break Tennis Tom Landry Football Tony LaRsa BB2 TD 93 Tony LaRussa BB Unnecess Roughness 95 Unnecessary Roughness Wayne Gretzky Hock 3 World Hockey 95 $9 $9 $9 $12 $6 $14 $16 $19 $19 $9 $19 $8 $12 $14 $19 $6 $6 $9 $9 $9 $12 $14 $6 $19 $12 $15 3D II Arcado Action Kit Bridgo Olympiad CD Romix 2 Prime Casino Gambler Kit Chossmastr Online W95 Dr. Thorpe Mini BJ Elements GamePack 2 Mind Grind On Target Origamo Paparazzi Pool Master Power Poker Prof Zany Giveaways Prol Zanys Jokes Puzzle Gallery Puzzles of Tribyte W95 SNL 20th Anniversary Solitaires Journey TV Guide Crossword Take Break Crosswords Take Your Best ShotCD Ultima Trivia Universal Neverlock Vegas Games 95 W95 Video Gamo Solut 2 Virtual Reality Studio 2 Virtual Snooker Virtual Vegas 98989893 $19 IBM MEDIA $9 $6 $19 $12 $12 $6 $19 $10 $12 $9 $16 $12 $16 $19 $16 IBM ARCADE $14 Adventures Willie Beamish $6 Alone in the Dark $12 Blackthrne Official Strat Guide $9 Champions of Krynn Civilization Network Conquest of Robin Hood Curse Azure Bands EcoQuest Empire Deluxe Gold Rush Inca 2 Indy Jones Graphic Adv. In the First Degree Inherit the Earth Lode Runner Lords of Rings Manhunter San Francisco Matrix Cubed Microsoft Golf Microsoft Space Simulator $12 Power Monger Realms of Arkania Rebel Assault Insiders Guide $12 Return to Zork $12 Roleplyers Game Companion $19 Socret Silver Blades 59 Sherlock Holmes Consling Det. $9 SimEarth $12 Sky Realms of Jorune Spaceward Ho! $10 Star Crusader $12 Star React Master of Orion $12 Strike Commander Aces of the Deep Air Cmbt Pacific 1942 Air Warrior Airpower Assignment Miami Assault Rigs Cyber Race Dawn Patrol Delta V Evasive Action Falcon 3 SD1 Fght Tor Falcon 3 SD2 Mig 29 Falcon 3.0 Fighter Wing Flight Sim Toolkit Fly the Grand Canyon Great Nav Batt Scene Great Naval Battles 3 Gray Wall Gunship Hi Octane Indy Car Racing Lawn Mower Man Lightspeed Maximum Overkill MD2 Mechwarrior 2 Notech MetalTech:ES Speech Precision Approach Privateer Real Weather Pilot Red Baron/A10 Tnk Klr $12 59 $12 $12 $14 $16 $19 $19 IBM SCREEN SAVERS $16 IE Ep 10 w/Perfect General 59 IE Ep 11 w/Walls of Rome $9 IE Ep 12 w/Heirs to Throne $9 IE Ep 13 w/Magic Candle 3 $9 IE Ep 14 w Origamo IE Ep 15 w/Battles S Pacific 59 IE Ep 16 w/Conquord Kngdms $9 IE Ep 17 w/Grandest Fleet IE Ep 18 w/Lost Admiral IE Ep 19 IE Ep 2 w/Bloodstono IE Ep 20 IE Ep 21 IE Ep 22 IE Ep 3 w/Star Logions IE Ep 4 w/Morconaries IE Ep 5 w/Magic Candle 2 IE Ep 6 w/Striko Squad $9 IE Ep 7 w/Siege IE Ep 8 w/Lost Admiral $9 IE Ep 9 w/Conquered Kingdms $9 $19 $19 $19 $9 $19 $16 5th Dimension Airborne Ranger Astro Rock Beavs Btthd Litl Thgs Bvs & Bithd War Takes Creepers Crime Patrol Drug Wars Gorg Lode Runner Metal & Laco NR18 UG Microcosm Never Mind Royal Flush Pinball Sink or Swim Sleepwalker $19 $19 $9 $15 $14 $19 $9 $9 $15 $19 $12 $15 Lawn Mower Man Scroon Svr S9 Screen Toyz Latrina ScreenToyz Stitch ScreenToyz TNT Tad $6 $19 $13 IBM WARGAMES $5 IBM STRATEGY $19 $9 $6 $19 $16 S12 $19 Battles of Destiny Civilization Conquor Windows Conquered King SD1 Aegis Banzai Batt Napoleon SD6 Charge Light Brigado DDay Begin of End $14 $ 9 $16 $15 1997 CHIPS & BITS, INC Standard Priority U.S. Mal US Mail 7.10 Days 2.3 Days Federal Express 2 Day Federal Express 10 Mail To Me To CAMA The World 47 D 714 DV Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks, MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH. COD S8. Price/availability may change. Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges. Defectives replaced with same product. All sales final. Call for details Shipping and handling charges calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. The \"per order charge is charged once per order placed and the per item\" charge is bar hiamant als Per Order charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment\" charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you Per item CIRCLE READER SERVICE #221 CGW197BUDGET $0.75 $0.75 $1.00 $2.00 $2.00 $200 $600 "


"FREE! A DUTTI CD-ROM! DIGIZINE! Computer Experience digital erotica. World's first interactive adult magazine puts hours of fascinating erotic exploration at your fingertips. Packed with \"show and tell\" reviews, erotic demos of new adult games, sexy photos, TRY ONE FOR FREE! Just call 800.999.7995 or mail coupon below to get yours now. Shipping & handling $7.95 H YES! Send my FREE i copy of IQ Digizine NOW! Name Daytime phone (including area code) Mailing address Gdy State Zip Must include $7.95 shipping & handling Payment Mastercard Visa Discover therk/money order YOU'LL GET BIG BONUSES WHEN YOU SUBSCRIBE FREE SOFTWARE Card Exp. Date 00/00 Signature (Required) Il certify om 21 years of age or older) Dote of Birth (Required) Mail to: 10, Dept. CGW1296, 551 Valley Road, Montclair, NJ 07043 www.iqmag.com FROM THE MAGAZINE THAT'S PUSHING THE LIMITS AND PUSHING BACK THE PRICE TO LOCK IN DIE SAVINOS Mission Control HOT ADULT SOFTWARE WWW.MISSIONCD.COM FREE DISK, CALL 1800 926 1578 THE Starring Virtual Victor You control Victor's every move. Satisfy the Sirens...or die trying! ONLY S49 Duke Screw 'em-38DD He's everything Duke Nuke'Em NEW always wanted to be. More levels than any other adult game! ONLY $49 Check These Out! 2069: SexOdyssey 44 Outpost 69 The Black Book 29 Rodney Rubber Buttman's BBBabes 44 Samurai Pervert Crystal Fantasy 27 Seymore Butts 2 CyberPhotographer 36 Space Sirens 2 CyberXperience 4CDs 54 Sushi Bar Girls Dream Machine 2 44 Tabloid Beauties Diva X Rebecca 39 Virtual Sex 2 Girlie Game 39 Virtual Sex Shoot Hollywood Bdy Dbl 29 Virtual Valerie 2 36 ORDER TODAY! CALL TOLL FREE 800-999-1995 OR 201-783-3600 FAX 201-783-3686 Send Orders To: MISSION CONTROL 7 Oak Place, CGW1296, Montclair, NJ 07042  Mastercard, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Shipping: $7 Must be 21+ to order. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #358 "


"ORDER ORDER 800-273-7910 NOW! Check out our HOT online catalog! www.cdmag.com/adultsonly.html PO BOX 14 DEPT 10811 HANCOCK, VT 05748 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 SOURCE 10811 INTERACTIVE MOTION STILLS $49 NO GOVE \"ULTRA VIXEN Journey through space and time. with the hypersexy super heroine of the 21st century. As her time-warped lover, you direct her in each time portal. This is critical to harnessing her ultimate weapon, her devastating super climax. USe it to destroy the portals and save the earth. $49 \"ROOM FOR RENT' Enter the realm of neurospace. Visit these lovely girls while you attempt to rent a room from them. Watch them lounge around the pool. You will never look at renting a room the same way again. CD $32 339 $35 $24 Adult Image Library $19 Adult Piet Libr 4 $19 Amateur Models $22 Asian Pearls 3 $25 Bankok Beauties $19 Beautiful Nudes $19 Blond Brunts Redhd $25 Busty Babes 4 $39 Celebrity Nudes Domin-A Trix 2 $24 Elite American Models 1919 Elite College Girls 2 $24 Erotic Playground $22 Japanese Pearts Latin Lust $29 Legs Lace & Lingerie $24 Ropes & Chains $19 Secret Treas Japan $17 Tabloid Beauties Thal Bondage $26 Tokyo Glamour Girls $29 Treasures of Spice 59 $25 ROOM FOR RENT $38 $24 $36 $24 $16 $26 $39 524 \"Hollywood Body Double' You will be in total control over Shelly Michellel and her beautiful costars in a dozen fullscreen erotic loca tions where your imagination can run wild. You choose the camera angle, close-up lenses, and be escorted to Shelly Michelle's private penthouse where the steamy action really begins. CD $44 $44 SUPER A JIT C PAK! GAY S25 $20 $20 $20 $17 AI N Loa Beel 1 Bike Bang Buyfriends Bays Next Door Boys of Paris Chi Chi TV Hunks David Manhunt Manpower Men In Motion Men In Uniform $36 $20 $18 'ALL NIGHT LONG' Over a thousand all original never before published images. All full screen, all full color, all different images Beautiful women and couples engaging in explicit sex captured on the sets of over 50 adult motion pictures, Viewer with thumbnail menu & slide show feature! CD $16 $16 $24 $32 \"ROMSOFT 6 PACK Double Down, Doors of Passion 2. Sensuous Girls in 3D, Massive Melons, Touch Me. Feel Me and Private Screenings are what you'll get in this sexy 6 pack! 6 CO'S $39 \"FANTASCENES Create countless personal visual fantasies with five of the most beautiful women in the world! You control the capabilities in this disc of explicit, passionate eroti cism. CD $39 $46 $25 $36 $16 2069 Oriental Sex Odys $56 Alleycats Anal Rom 2 Asians in Wonderland $46 AssTrolds $40 Buster Cherry $45 Circus Club 21 Crystal Fantasy $29 Cyber Photographer $34 CyberStrip Poker $36 CyberXperience Diva X Ariana Diva X Rebecca Dream Machine 2 549 Dream Machine Eros 2 Eros 3 $24 Fantasy After Dark $35 Fun House $39 Glitfriend Donna Girlfriend Tracy Heidi's House $36 Hot Slots Interact Seymore B12 549 Interactive Sex Thrpy $46 Internat Strip Poker $22 Japan Interactive $44 Latex $44 Love Pyramid $29 Mind Teazzer 2 Mystik Mistress $36 Net Erotique Neurodancer 539 Nightwatch Int 2 $39 Nightwatch Int3 Oriental Ecst Exposed $39 Outpost 69 $40 Pandora's Poker Palace $35 Penetration $19 Penthouse IA 5 $49 Penthouse IA 6 $52 Poker Party $45 Porn Mania Porno Poker $44 Porntris $24 Private Investigator $49 Private Pisr Park 2 $49 Private Prison Rodney Rubber Show $40 Samurai Pervert 2 $64 Scissors N' Stones $24 Sex Castle $29 Sex TV 2 $35 Sorority Sex Kitt 542 Space Sirens 2 $29 Spy Club Strip Fighter $40 Strip Poker Pro Strip Poker Pro 2 Texas Table Dance $24 Time Warp Ultra Slots Ultra Vixen VCA 6-Pack VCA's Sex $29 Vampire's Kiss $36 Venus Playhouse $35 Virti Las Vegas Nite 2 $39 Virtual Golden Eye 544 Virtual Sex 2 $39 Virtual Sex Shoot Virtual Valerie 2 Virtual Victor Virtual Vixens $24 Virtually Yours 2 Winner Takes All $39 Zoom $36 VHS ANIME 101 Orient Delts 2 $19 101 Sex Positions 2 $24 Adult Superstars $26 Adventure Kid $22 Amateur Models 4 $28 Amorous Asia Girt2 $19 Anal Asian 2 $25 Asia X Asian Heat Asian Invasion $19 Asian Paradise $39 Babes illustratd 2 $25 Baby's Got Butt Bacchus Six Pack $45 Bad Girls 2 Best of Vivid Black Book $34 Blond Justice 3 $16 Bonnie and Clyde Borderline Buttmns Bub Butt Bbes $45 Casting Call 2 Cat House $24 Centerfolds Cyrirts $24 Cheating $24 Christy in the Wild $14 Cinesex $24 Cirque du Sex $19 College Girls 2 Cyberpeep Lisa $49 Deep Throat Grls 4 $28 Deep Thrt Grls 4Pk 552 Demon School Condl $20 Dirty Debutantes $24 Dirty Debutnt 6 Pk 344 Dirty Western 2 Erotic Dreams 2 Extreme Gail Fantascenes Anal $49 Flame $23 Geisha's Secrets Ghostly Desires $44 Girls on Girls Glamor Girls 3 Hawall Heidi's Girls Exposed 519 Hist Of Blue Movie $15 Hot Dog Girls Florida $14 In Defense of Savanah $16 Jade Palace $29 La Blue Girl 4 Mystique Orient 2 $24 Now Machine 6 Pk 2 $44 Oriental X-Press $22 Pink Lady Detective $24 Platinum Six Pack $42 Racquelle in Wild $24 Romsoft Six Pack Ronsoft Sa Pk2 99 Samurai Pervert 549 Secret Garden 2 Seduction of Suki $19 Select a Pet 2 $29 Sex 2 Sexual Healing $16 Sexual Instinct $26 Sexy Nurses 2 Sexy Six Pack $44 Seymore Butts Swings $18 Seymore Su Pack 39 Seymt Bts Rides Again 518 Silent Strangers $24 Southern Beauties 2 $32 Superstr Japan Porn 2 $39 Tokyo Nightlife $48 Tokyo Nymphs $16 Virgins Vol 3 Woman to Woman $26 $16 $22 $29 $29 Adventure Kid 1 $24 Angel of Darkness 3 $24 Countdown $24 Demon Beast Invasion $24 Dragon Knight Dragon Pink Elven Bride End Of Summer $16 $24 leidi $44 $45 $24 House First Loves La Blue Girt 5 La Blue Gil Gift BX $98 Magical Twilight $24 New Angel $24 Rel Rei $29 Twin Dolls $27 Urotskdjl 4 Ep 2 $24 Weather Report Girl 1 $20 $36 REPOSITAN \"HEIDI'S HOUSE is the most stimulating CD game ever played and is automatically designed to change each time you play it. offering dozens of combinations for hours of fun. CD $36 \"NET EROTIQUE The future of sex is here! Hitch a ride on the information super highway to Europe with one Rezultat goal in mind. Video dialing for new Sexcapades with the most gorgeous women ever to travel over the hot wire. Log on and experience the lust and possibility this medium can provide. CD $24 VHS MOTION $36 $19 $15 $34 \"VCA INTERACTIVE 6 PACK contains 'Sorority Sex Kittens, Outrageous Orgies where there is power in numbers. \"Bush Pilots. 'Technorotica, 'True Legends-Only the Very Best,' and John Leslie's Chameleons. All 6 cd's come with Hybrid PC-MAC Motion Picture Sound. $45 \"CYBER PHOTOGRAPHER' After entering the MacDaddy cyberstudio choose from 3 different models. Choose lighting, camera lens, music and start on your photographic adventure snapping a roll of 36 exposure film. When you finish choosing your favorite pictures print out a calendar, birthday card or Christmas card! CD $34 'VIRTUAL LAS VEGAS NIGHT II where everything is just getting better: 3D hotel casino, sexier show giris, more games (Black Jack. Machine Poker, Hot Slots, and Wheel of Fantasies and a whole lot more of surprises), we are talking FUN! Double FUN! Triple FUN! Search for Ultimate Sexual Fantasies. $39 $24 $25 Bad Girls $15 Blonde Next Door S15 Casting Couch S15 E-Three Extra Testicle $15 F..and Lots of It $15 First Time Lesbians $15 Hanky Panky $15 Innocence Lost $15 Lesbian Nymphos $15 Max the Naughty Dog $22 New Babysitter $15 Once Upon a Secretry $15 Pink Lagoon Sex in Publc Pices $15 Valley Vixens $12 World Bigst Gng Bng 2 $35 Young Lust $15 542 $15 ROK $39 $3b ** $39 Buy 2 Adult Titles From the List Below and get the One of Equal or Lesser Value FREE! Amateur Photo Gallery, Crystal Fantasies, Tabloid Beauties, Phone Sex, Net Erotique, Swingers Worldwide, Sexy Sports Trivia, Glamor Girls & Eruption. Request must be made at time of purchase. Quantities limited. Offer subject to change or cancellation at any time. Effective Dec 15. Jan 30 1997. 'STRIP POKER PROFESSIONAL VOL 2 combines the action of 5 Card Draw Poker with some very different table stakes. Erla, Claire, Sherry and Lana are 4 gorgeous opponents who are willing & able to bett all for the chance to beat the pants off you! CO $36 Standard U.S. Mail 7.10 Days $1.00 Priority U.S. Mail 2-3 Days $200 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks, MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH. COD 58. Price/availability may change. Hardware orders may require additional shipping and handling charges. Defectives replaced with same product. All sales final. Call for details Shipping and handing charges calculated on a per ordet, per shipment, and per item basis. The per order charge is charged once per order placed and the \"per item\" charge is charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment charge is charged once for each shipment we make to you. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #353 Federal Express 1 DI $400 Federal Federal Express 2 Day $200 $2.00 $2.00 Mall To Canada 47 D $2.00 $200 Per Order Per Shipment Per item The World 7.16 VIN $200 $200 $6.00 CGW197A1 $0.75 $1.00 $200 "


"HALL OF FAME elcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for untold hours. HIGHLIGHTS EARL WEAVER BASEBALL EMPIRE Electronic Arts, 1986 Baseball Interstel, 1978 he original EARL. WEAVER BASEBALL stands ack before the dawn of modern comput out as the quintessential sports game, er civilization, Walter Bright's original surpassed by only FRONT PAGE SPORTS version of this grand strategic conFOOTBALL, and many fans would argue quest game mixed exploration and even that comparison. The Amiga version brought strategy with a simple economic system for unit digitized sounds, graphics that would not be surpassed on the construction. But this simple diversion held the Most Addictive Game IBM for many years to come, and animation that mirrored real crown almost unchallenged before the advent of Sid Meier's CIVILIZATION, kinesiology-years before other games turned to rotoscoping techniques for because of its simple yet elegant mechanics, deceptive depth of play, and modeling players' on-field movements. unending replayability. After proliferating on college and corporate mainBecause Earl Weaver was involved in the design, the computer managers frames all through the 1970s, EMPIRE found new life on the personal comactually have a clue of when to bring in that pinch hitter, when to bunt, and puter when ex.NASA programmer Mark Baldwin was approached by when to walk your best hitters. The first baseball game to use a physical Interstel to create an Atari ST version. model for resolving plays-a system less robust but much more successful Ostensibly a game of planetary conquest, complete with a sci-fi wrapping than the later FRONT PAGE SPORTS BASEBALL-EARL WEAVER BASEBALL managed in the documentation, EMPIRE was really a delightful multiplayer version of to offer reasonable statistical accuracy without resorting to traditional stat. strategic-level WWII-era warfare. The production level determined economic based mathematical models. In fact, the game played equally well in both level, which in turn, determined the potential number of military units availaction and management-only modes, a feat never repeated despite today's able. Sure, it was a simple idea, but it worked brilliantly. As a multiplayer much better technology. game, it could be played by «hot seat\" (CGW deadlines were constantly in EARL WEAVER also had incredible flexibility in drafting and editing players, danger due to office games) and by PBEM. Not a direct port of the main and it was the first game to allow customization of stadiums and team uniframe game, Baldwin's version added greater roles for destroyers and new forms. Unfortunately, the long-awaited sequel to the original game was a intelligence algorithms, among other additions. Bob Rakosky joined Baldwin disappointment. But whatever the failings of its descendants, the original in the early '90s to recreate the system as EMPIRE DELUXE, which offered EARL WEAVER BASEBALL will forever be remembered as a watershed design in improved graphics, interface mechanics, and multiplayer options. sports simulations that raised the entire genre with its tide. Modern Inductees ALONE IN THE DARK MASTER OF ORION Inductees Prior to 1989 (I-Motion, 1992) (MicroProse, 1993) BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR RAILROAD TYCOON BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) (Dynamix, 1993) (MicroProse, 1990) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) DAY OF THE TENTACLE RED BARON DUNGEON MASTER (FTL SOFTWARE, 1987) (LucasArts, 1993) (Dynamix, 1990) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) DOOM SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) (id Software, 1993) (MicroProse, 1991) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) FALCON 3.0 THEIR FINEST HOUR GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) (LucasArts, 1989) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL PRO THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) (Dynamix, 1993) (LucasArts, 1990) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) GUNSHIP TIE FIGHTER M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) (MicroProse, 1989) (LucasArts, 1994) PIRATES (MicroProse, 1987) HARPOON ULTIMA VI SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) (Origin Systems, 1990) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) KING'S QUEST V ULTIMA UNDERWORLD THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) (Sierra On-Line, 1990) (Origin Systems, 1992) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) LEMMINGS WING COMMANDER 1 & 11 ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) (Psygnosis, 1991) (Origin Systems, 1990-91) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) LINKS 386 Pro WOLFENSTEIN 3-D WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) (Access Software, 1992) (id Software, 1992) WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) M-1 TANK PLATOON X-COM ZORK (Infocom, 1981) (MicroProse, 1989) (MicroProse, 1994) CG JANUARY 1997 "


"PATCHES omputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for buggy programs have become a necessary evil, and will be until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. New patches are in red. sick too often? Take a pit stop with this latest patch Advanced Tactical Fighters V1.14: Many additions and changes give better weapons performance, enhance radar, and improve joystick support. Tigers on the Prowl V2.02: Fixes many minor problems plus the involuntary dismount bug. Check for new patches on this month's disk. Heroes of Might and Magic for Win 95 V1.1: Anomalies with the cursor and in the Map Editor are magically cleaned up. AH-64D Longbow V.1.08F: Updated flight dynamics, easier hovering and auto-rotation come to the hot helicopter simulation, along with new rotor/engine sounds. Warcraft 2 V1.2: Orcs and Humans alike will appreciate the new multiplayer options, including the shareware version of Kali and IPX network code optimized for better performance. The Exorcism spell problem is cast out, and you may now have more than 255 PUD files in the WAR2 directory. A good patch to have before trying any of the add-on packs. Jagged Alliance Deadly Games V1.12 Update: Mercs now speak up when they are spo. ken to. The F9 key will update the number of enemies in \"sector\" view, and modem dialing has been fixed to include asterisks and long phone numbers. | ZDNet Battleground: Waterloo V1.02: This new battle plan corrects errant PBEM replies and solves other random crashes. These patches can usually be downloaded from the major online networks (CompuServe, AOL, ZDNet) and Computer Gaming World's Web site (http://www .zdnet.com/gaming) but can also be obtained from individual software publishers' Web sites or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. Civilization II V2.41 Update: It prevents crashes with auto-set tlers, help, and Civilopedia screens, in addition to many other tweaks. This patch will reportedly work with and supersede all previous patches. Wizardry Gold V1.1a: Problems with saves in the earlier patch? This takes care of that as well as difficulties with level increase s when skills reach 100. Finally, it also allows you to set combat and non-combat text speeds separately. Jane's Longbow Patch: Your Longbow will now crash less due to DOSI4GW video hardware and memory settings conflicts. Combat is smoother, now that the shift +1. no longer gets stuck. Command & Conquer V1.22: Updates versions 1.07, 1.18, 1.19, and 1.20 to current version, adding Windows 95 modem play, USR 14,400/28,800 UART speed, and fixing Diamond Viper palette color problem. Madden Football 97 1.1: Fixes the QB/RB/TE freezing or run. ning in place after the snap, and will enable you to update rosters. Doesn't help the Al or poor gamepad support, though. Conquest of the New World V1.1 Update: This international patch contains the latest fixes for the German and French versions, as well as English Panthers in the Shadows Map List Utility: Allows you to print out a list of maps, with the map description linked to the actual file name: Quake V1.01: The fragfest extravaganza now sports new multiEF2000 V2.4: A new executable for the Premier Award-winning sim that doesn't add any new features, just fixes bugs. Publisher Web Sites Many patches are available directly from the publishers, at the following sites: Accolade: http://www.accolade.com Activision: http://www.activision.com Apogee/3D Realms: http://www.apogee1.com Atomic Games: http://atomic.com Bethesda: http://www.bethsoft.com Blizzard: http://www.blizzard.com Bullfrog: http://www.ea.com/bullfrog.html Domark: http://www.domark.com EA: http://www.ea.com EA Sports: http://www.easports.com Epic MegaGames: http://www.epicgames.com Id Software: http://www.idsoftware.com Interactive Magic: http://www.imagicgames.com Interplay: http://www.interplay.com LucasArts: http://www.lucasarts.com MicroProse/Spectrum HoloByte: http://www.microprose.com Microsoft: http://www.microsoft.com Mindscape: http://www.mindscape.com New World Computing: http://www.nwcomputing.com Ocean: http://www.ef2000.com Origin: http://www.ea.com/origin Papyrus: http://www.sierra.com/papyrus Philips: http://www.aimla.com/games Sierra On-Line: http://www.sierra.com Spectrum HoloByte: http://www.microprose.com SSI: http://www.ssionline.com Take 2: http://www.take2games.com/main.html Virgin: http://www.vie.com Descent II Video Upgrade: Here you'll find new drivers for the S3 Virge 3D Accelerator Video Chip only. Star Trek Judgment Rites V 1.01 Update (Mac only): Mac users with 32 MB of real RAM or Macs with two monitors will find this patch more helpful than Mr. Scott during a Klingon attack. Fighter Duel V1.92: In addition to new aircraft in your hangar, you receive some minor fixes and addi tional joystick support Steel Panthers V.1.2: This armor upgrade cleans up the map editor, squashes a few bugs and polishes the AL. Grand Prix Manager V1.02: Tired of cars that jump from under the bridge at the crossover in Suzuka, or drivers that get hurt or SVGA Air Warrior V1.16b: Dismisses a bug in the macro engine. JANUARY 1997 "


"THE COMPUTER GAMING POLL  A MONTHLY SURVEY OF CGW SUBSCRIBERS ach month, 2,000 CGW subscribers are selected at random to rate 100 computer games. The results of that poll are combined with the results of previous months to yield a cumulative average for the best plays in gaming. If you receive a ballot, please return it with your ratings so that other gamers and game publishers can benefit from your experience. SCORE 8.37 SCORE 8.64 8.26 8.17 8.14 N 3 4 = TOP ACTION GAMES GAME COMPANY Duke Nukem 3D Apogee Crusader: No Remorse EA/Origin Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin The Need for Speed SE Quake id Software Dark Forces LucasArts Doom 11 id Software The Need for Speed EA Descent II Interplay EWJ 1&2: Whole Can O' Worms Playmates EA TOP ADVENTURE GAMES GAME COMPANY Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra Pandora Directive Access Spycraft Activision Full Throttle LucasArts Zork Nemesis Activision Star Control 3 Accolade Under a Killing Moon Access Phantasmagoria Sierra The Dig LucasArts Relentless 8.30 7.80 7.56 7.44 7.39 n 5 7.95 o n 7.37 7.81 7.78 7.66 7.53 7 8 9 10 m E to 7.27 7.12 7.08 7.47 10 EA GAME TOP CLASSIC/PUZZLE GAMES GAME COMPANY You Don't Know Jack Berkeley System Incredible Toons Sierra Incredible Machine 2 Sierra Monopoly Westwood/Virgin Lemmings Paintball Psygnosis Gearheads Philips 3 SCORE 8.05 7.28 7.11 6.84 5.98 5.72 oon AWN EA TOP SIMULATION/SPACE COMBAT GAMES COMPANY SCORE Wing Commander IV EA/Origin 8.57 2 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 8.49 MechWarrior 2 Activision 8.37 AH-64 Longbow 8.28 Wing Commander 3 EA/Origin 8.27 6 Silent Hunter SSI 8.00 EF2000 Ocean 8.00 8 U.S. Marine Fighters 7.97 Advanced Tactical Fighters EA 10 NASCAR Racing Papyrus 7.76 Goen III 7.85 WARCRAFT LINKSL LS 2 TOP SPORTS GAMES GAME COMPANY Links LS Access NHL Hockey 96 EA Sports Tripleplay 97 EA Sports FPS Football Pro 96 Sierra NBA Live 96 EA Sports NBA Live 95 EA Sports PGA Tour Golf 486 EA Sports Madden 97 EA Sports Tony Larussa 3 96 Stormfront Studios NHL Powerplay Virgin SCORE 8.67 7.85 7.79 7.74 7.70 7.62 7.47 7.46 7.44 7.43 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME COMPANY Warcraft II Expansion Blizzard Warcraft II Blizzard Civilization 11 MicroProse C&C: Covert Operations Westwood Virgin Command & Conquer Westwood/Virgin Heroes of Might & Magic New World Computing Master of Magic MicroProse Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech Warlords II Deluxe SSG 5 SCORE 9.07 8.98 8.85 8.56 8.47 8.08 8.01 7.87 7.85 6 7 8 9 10 9 10 7.75 TOP ROLE-PLAYING GAMES GAME COMPANY Daggerfall Bethesda Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing Anvil of Dawn New World Computing Stonekeep Interplay Ravenloft: Stone Prophet SSI Wolf Sanctuary Woods SSI SCORE 7.95 7.65 7.35 7.06 6.85 6.21 SCORE 8.65 8.52 8.38 TOP WARGAMES GAME COMPANY Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI Steel Panthers Panzer General SSI Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft Battleground: Gettysburg TalonSoft Age of Rifles SSI Flight Commander 2 Avalon Hill Perfect General II QQP Allied General SSI 8.07 CD Covo AWN 7.70 7.44 7.14 7.07 7.04 6.83 10 CG JANUARY 1997 "


"TOP 100 GAMES * 1 51 3 53 * 56 * 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 15 16 67 68 EA AC 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 GAME COMPANY TYPE SCORE Warcraft II Expansion Blizzard ST9.07 Warcraft Il Blizzard ST 8.98 Civilization 11 MicroProse ST 8.85 Links LS Access SP 8.67 Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI WG 8.65 Duke Nukem 3D Apogee AC 8.64 Wing Commander IV EA/Origin SI 8.57 C&C: Covert Operations Virgin/Westwood ST 8.56 Steel Panthers SSI WG 8.52 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse SI 8.49 Command & Conquer Virgin/Westwood ST 8.47 Panzer General SSI | WG, 8,38 MechWarrior 2 Activision SI 8.37 Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra AD 8.37 Pandora Directive Access AD 8.30 AH-64 Longbow EA SI 8.28 Wing Commander 3 EA/Origin SI 8.27 Crusader: No Remorse EA/Origin AC 8.26 Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin AC 8.17 The Need for Speed SE 8.14 Heroes of Might & Magic New World Computing ST 8.08 Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft WG 8.07 You Don't Know Jack Berkeley Systems CP 8.05 Master of Magic MicroProse ST 8.01 Silent Hunter SSI SI 8.00 EF2000 Ocean SI8.00 U.S. Marine Fighters SI 7.97 Daggerfall Bethesda 7.95 Quake id Software 7.95 Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech ST 7.87 Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech ST 7.85 Advanced Tactical Fighters EA SI 7.85 NHL Hockey 96 EA Sports SP 7.85 Dark Forces LucasArts AC 7.81 Spycraft Activision AD 7.80 Tripleplay 97 EA Sports SP 7.79 Doom 11 id Software AC 7.78 NASCAR Racing Papyrus SI 7.76 Warlords Il Deluxe SSG ST 7.75 FPS Football Pro 96 Sierra SP 7.74 Warcraft Blizzard ST 7.74 Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft WG 7.70 NBA Live 96 EA Sports SP 7.70 Fantasy General SSI ST 7.68 The Need for Speed 7.66 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing RP 7.65 NBA Live 95 EA Sports 7.62 Missionforce Cyberstorm Sierra ST 7.58 Full Throttle LucasArts AD 7.56 U.S. Navy Fighters EA EAST Si 7.56 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 GAME COMPANY CivNet MicroProse Descent 11 Interplay PGA Tour Golf 486 EA Sports EWJ 1&2: Whole Can O' Worms Playmates Madden 97 EA Sports Zork Nemesis Activision Tony Larussa 3 96 Stormfront Studios Battleground: Gettysburg TalonSoft NHL Powerplay Virgin Time Commando Activision FPS Football 95 Sierra Star Control 3 Accolade X-Com: Terror from the Deep MicroProse Under a Killing Moon Access Magic Carpet 2 Bullfrog Anvil of Dawn New World Computing Hexen id/Raven Sim City CD-ROM Maxis Virtua Fighter PC Sega Incredible Toons Sierra Phantasmagoria Sierra Terra Nova: Strike Force Centauri Looking Glass Virtual Pool Interplay Wings of Glory Origin Flight Unlimited Looking Glass Hyper 3D Pinball Virgin Hardball 5 Accolade Age of Rifles SSI The Dig LucasArts Incredible Machine 2 Caesar II Sierra System Shock EA/Origin Relentless Star Trek: TNG, Final Unity Spectrum HoloByte 1942 Pacific Air War Gold Micro Prose Flight Commander 2 Avalon Hill Stonekeep Interplay Perfect General 11 QQP Warhammer Mindscape Aces of the Deep Sierra Heretic id/Raven Virgin Settlers 11 Blue Byte Deadlock Accolade Legends of Kyrandia 3 Westwood/Virgin Earthsiege 2 Sierra Apache Interactive Magic Ravenloft: Stone Prophet SSI Monopoly Westwood/Virgin Allied General SSI TYPE SCORE ST 7.53 AC 7.53 SP 7.47 AC 7.47 SP 7.46 AD 7.44 SP 7.44 WG 7.44 SP 7.43 AC 7.42 SP 7.41 AD 7.39 7.38 AD 7.37 7.35 RP 7.35 AC 7.34 ST 7.31 AC 7.31 CP 7.28 AD 7.27 AC 7.25 SP 7.23 SI 7.22 SI 7.20 AC 7.17 SP 7.17 WG 7.14 AD 7.12 CP 7.11 ST 7.10 AC 7.08 AD 7.08 AD 7.08 SI 7.07 WG 7.07 RP 7.06 WG 7.04 ST 7.04 SI 7.03 AC 7.02 ST 7.01 ST 7.00 ST6.94 AD 6.93 SI 6.92 SI 6.90 RP 6.85 CP 6.84 WG 6.83 EA 27 * 28 RP 78 79 Sierra 31 80 81 82 EA 34 35 85 36 37 38 39 40 87 88 90 91 92 44 94 EA 46 47 48 49 9 6 97 98 99 100 Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above.*= Top game of type. Red = New Game, AD = Adventure, RP = Role-Playing, SI = Simulation/Space Combat, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports, CP = Classic/Puzzle. Games are retired after two years and become eligible for the Hall of Fame. JANUARY 1997 CG "


"MARTIN CIRULIS what (hwor, AME What's The man en Whats The Deal With... Design Hype? can explain such gems as Mode from Corel? Or many of the other FMV disasters from various start-up compa nies? Games (except for those that fill gambling coffers, that is) are so often associated only with children, in this culture, that the assumption must be that creating them is child's play. I know that many times this take on game creation is due to geniuses in ne thing that has always bugged me are the guys who plan to save the world without really knowing how things work. Specifically, in our case, designers who pop up and claim they are going to \"revolutionize gaming\"--when what they really should say is, \"I am so out of touch with the market that I have no idea I am churn ing out derivative crap.\" Now, granted, a lot of the blame for these claims lies with writers and edi tors who know as little about games as the designers they are writing about. If you doubt this, see Wired's Web site for the back issue where they went on and on about the incredibly hip Rocket Science, failing to reveal that they knew squat about design or the computer game industry. If the reporter had a clue, one look at CADILLACS & DINOSAURS or that awful space trucking game LOADSTAR Should have been enough to raise suspicion about the company's design direction. Of course, you have to expect that kind of thing in the \"mainstream\" magazines, even ones supposedly on the cutting edge of all things comput er-ish, because their interest in and knowledge of gaming begins and ends with breakout titles like Myst or DOOM. They are far more interested in the sales numbers, or how cute it is that the designers still dine on beer and peanut butter when they can afford caviar. Rarely is anything written about what makes the cash cow a good game. But even in our hallowed halls of CGW, our desire to see some thing new often blinds us to the fact you have to master the form before you can fool with it. How many times has the phrase \"It's not JUST a game!\" gone by without a note of challenge? As if the word \"JUST\" wasn't a slap in the face to every decent designer. \"Not JUST a game\" annoys me the same way that Saturn commercials do: for all the endless posturing, your damn car bet ter have six wheels and nuclear engines. In the relatively short history of computer gaming, there have only been a handful of games that offered \"more,\" notably Chris Crawford's BALANCE OF POWER and the SIMEARTH/SIM-LIFE pairings from Maxis. Apart from the exceptions, \"not just a game,\" when paired with a new company, translates to me as: \"We can't be bothered to actually understand the industry and we really think games are kind of stupid, but we looked at the profit margin on Myst and decided that it shouldn't be too hard to impress the geeks.\" I realize that might sound a b it harsh, but how else does one CC Claims of «Not JUST a game!' annoy me the same way that Saturn commercials do. breaking designers, fine-but you're not going to get a lot of acknowledg. ment when your first offerings are a side-scroller with 3D effects and a 3D fighting robot game. C'mon, a fighting robot game? ONE MUST FALL 2 ring any bells, boys? RISE OF THE ROBOTS? Rise 2: RESURRECTION? There must have been some project closer to your heart, beg. ging to be made long before that. I guess what I am trying to say is that game design isn't easy. Game the ory is its own small, respected branch of Mathematics. Hell, I still have night mares about my Stats 305 final. And even apart from the science of balancing probabilities, it is a fine art to combine various elements into something that is: a) even remotely original, and b) actually entertaining/interesting/rele. vant. The second requirement is not quite so noble, but it's one that designers like Derek Smart and even a real talent like Crawford seem to have forgotten while pursuing loftier goals. The whole VGA PLANETS saga shows, if nothing else, that if you build a good game, they will come. And all the pretty graphics and marketing bumbling in the world will not distract them. So for those who want to surpass the field without mastering it, I have but one response. \"Not JUST a game!\"? You should be so bloody lucky & marketing, as opposed to the guys actually doing the work. I find it hard to believe that the designers of HUNTER/HUNTED and CYBERGLADIATORS really think they are part of the rebel underground at Sierra (see Sierra's Fall '96 INTERACTION magazine). I mean, if you want to strut around like groundComputer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.97 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167 Canadian GST registration number is 89371 0442 RT. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. CG JANUARY 1997 "


"Jack is Back! The Course Designer From Tee to Green DECIMA This is the Course Designer that created all 5 Nicklaus-designed courses in the game! Challenge golfing legend Jack Nicklaus The Golfer of the Century on one of his own signature courses! Use the Designer to re-create your favorite course! Import, modify, and play courses from previous Nicklaus games! Play with friends across the room or around the world via serial, modem, LAN, and the Internet! introducing Jack Nicklaus 4 Featuring Colleton River Plantation, Country Club of the South, Muirfield Village, Cabo del Sol, and Winding Springs. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #290 "


"The Course Designer 11: i OFERTE Carol I hade B tas Input the basic details of a course from a real scorecard-the \"Wizard\" automatically routes each hole. Click and drag on its shape Choose from a variety of templates, or create your own shapes. Changing terrain is as easy as click-and-drag. The result: a new bunker 15 f 1 * 1* AAN \"Is it live or is it...?\" Our Course Designer is so true-to-life, it's hard to tell the differencel This image is of the 3rd Green at Country Club of the South. The left half of the image is from the Course Designer; the right half of the image is an actual photo March 1X NORG Y . 12 Choose from over 100 different types of trees, bushes, rocks, and other objects! The Hole View of the new bunker. "


"The Approach Shot From Tee to Green The Tee Shot Pop-up displays are optionalleave them off for the purest golfing experience. New \"Intensity Control reproduces the dynamics that shape the shot. \"Club up and swing easy\" for control or a low trajectory: \"swing hard\" when you want spin and distance. Every shot flies, bounces, and rolls true to the game, with the best ball physics model in existence. Courses are accurate to within 6 inches! 4-bit color lets ou view your ound at resolu lons and color Eepths as high s your system vill support Multiplayer play is fully supported, including recorded rounds, shared keyboard, serial, modem, LAN and Internet play. Play all of the best golf formats: stroke play, match play, skins, shootout, gross tournament, net tournament and \"side games\" like \"Bingo, Bango, Bongo\". Replay shots from unlimited camera angles, from ground level, or up to 300 feet in the air! The fastest screen redraw times on the PC allow the camera to automatically switch to the landing in full-screen, from varying viewpoints! Weather can change in the middle of the round, and natural wind variations and every possible turf condition add to the challenge! Around The Green With beautiful, high-speed graphics, a true physics model, more realistic swing meters, better putting, and unlimited camera positions, Jack Nicklaus 4 is truly the game every golfer has anticipated! Call 1-800-245-7744 to order direct Look for the Jack Nicklaus 4 eparate hipping playable demos in select Our new nd putting approach magazines or online at neters Daximize more realistic. http://www.accolade.com ontrol Mow lines on round the For hints and tips on Accolade products, the green help reen. you read the call Accolade Direct 1-900-454-HINT. $0.99/minute. If you are under 18, contour. please get your parents' permission before making this call. For enhanced gameplay, this optional grid floats down and drapes itself over the green, clearly showing all PLUS high and low spots. WINDOWS 95 Sick Nicklaus 4, Accolade, and the Solo Plus logos are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. 01996 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. All other trademarks are of their spective owners. Screenshots from pre-Alpha version of the game. Actual screen shots may vary. CIRCLE READER SERVICE #290 Jack Nicklaus 7 ACCOLADE "


"4 The most brutal and addictive gameplay around.\" 19 devastating weapons — freeze, shatter, broil, vaporize and incinerate your adversaries. PC GAMER EDITORS CHOICE PC Gamer 10 multi-leveled environments packed with incredible detail, death and destruction. *** (out of 5) Computer Gaming World GIRCLE READER SERVICE #385 The explosive sequel to Crusader: No Remorse ISS 1996 Action Game of the Year Run, dive and roll with 21 fast-action maneuvers. See visible damage from every shot fired. Computer Games Strategy Plus, Computer Gaming World, PC Entertainment CAUSPHET CRUSADER 'N O R E G TEEN Download the demo at www.ea.com/origin 1996 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Crusader: No Regrel and Crusader. No Remorse are trademarks and Origin is a registered trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. All rights reserved. O BRE RIGIN "

